



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wednesday, April 12. 
I will pursue my melancholy story. 
Being thus hurried to the chariot, it would have
been to no purpose to have refused entering into it,
had he not, in my fright, lifted me in, as he did: 
And it instantly drove away a full gallop, and stopt
not till it brought us to St. Albans; which was just as
the day shut in. 
I thought I should have fainted several times by
the way. With lifted-up hands and eyes, God
protect me, said I often to myself! —Can it be I, that
am here! —My eyes running over, and my heart
ready to burst with sighs as involuntary as my flight. 
How different, how inexpressibly different, the gay
wretch; visibly triumphing (as I could not but construe
his almost rapturous joy) in the success of his
arts! But overflowing with complimental flourishes,
yet respectfully distant his address, all the way we
flew; for that, rather than galloping, was the motion
of the horses; which took, as I believe, a round-about
way, to prevent being traced. 
I have reason to think, there were other horsemen
at his devotion; three or four different persons, above
the rank of servants, galloping by us, now-and-then,
on each side of the chariot: But he took no notice of
them; and I had too much grief, mingled with indignation,
notwithstanding all his blandishments, to
ask any questions about them, or any thing else. 
Think, my dear, what were my thoughts, on
alighting from the chariot; having no attendant of my
own sex; no cloaths but what I had on, and those
little suited for such a journey as I had already taken,
and was still further to take: Neither hood nor hat, 

nor any thing but a handkerchief about my neck and
shoulders: Fatigued to death: My mind still more
fatigued than my body: And in such a foam the
horses, that every one in the inn we put up at
guess'd (they could not do otherwise) that I was a
young giddy creature, who had run away from her
friends. This it was easy to see, by their whispering
and gaping; more of the people of the house also
coming in to view us, as it were, by turns, than was
necessary for the attendance. 
The gentlewoman of the inn, whom he sent in to
me, shewed me another apartment; and, seeing me
ready to faint, brought me hartshorn and water; and
then, upon my desiring to be left alone for half an
hour, retired: For I found my heart ready to burst,
on revolving every thing in my thoughts: And the
moment she was gone, fastening the door, I threw
myself into an old great chair, and gave way to a violent
flood of tears; which a little relieved me. 
Mr. Lovelace, sooner than I wished, sent up the
gentlewoman, who pressed me, in his name, to admit
my Brother, or to come down to him: For he had
told her, I was his Sister; and that he had brought me,
against my will, and without warning, from a friend's
house, where I had been all the winter, in order to
prevent my marrying against the consent of my
friends; to whom he was now conducting me; and
that, having given me no time for a travellig-dress,
I was greatly offended at him. 
So, my dear, your frank, your open-hearted friend,
was forced to countenance this tale; which, indeed,
suited me the better, because I was unable, for some
time, to talk, speak, or look up; and so my dejection,
and grief, and silence, might very well pass before
the gentlewoman and her niece who attended me,
as a fit of sullenness. 
The room I was in being a bed-chamber, I chose
to go down, at his repeated message, attended by 

the gentlewoman of the inn, to that in which he was. 
He approached me with great respect, yet not exceeding
a brotherly politeness, where a brother is polite; 
and, calling me his dearest sister, asked after the state
of my mind; and hoped I would forgive him; for
never brother half so well loved a sister, as he me. 
A wretch! —How naturally did he fall into the
character, altho' I was so much of mine! 
Unthinking creatures have some comfort in the
shortness of their views; in their unapprehensiveness; 
and that they penetrate not beyond the present moment: 
In short, that they are unthinking! —But, for
a person of my thoughtful disposition, who has been
accustomed to look forward, as well to the possible, as
to the probable, what comfort can I have in my reflections? 
But let me give you the particulars of our conversation,
a little before and after our supper-time, joining
both in one. 
When we were alone, he besought me [I cannot
say but with all the tokens of a passionate and respectful
tenderness] to be better reconciled to myself,
and to him: He repeated all the vows of honour, and
inviolable affection, that he ever made me: He promised to be wholly governed by me in every future
step: He asked me to give him leave to propose, Whether
I chose to set out next day to either of his aunts? 
I was silent. I knew not what to say, nor what
to do. 
Whether I chose to have private lodgings procured
me, in either of those ladies neighbourhood, as were
once my thoughts? 
I was still silent. 
Whether I chose to go to either of Lord M.'s seats; 
that of Berks, or that in the county we were in? 
In lodgings, I said, any-where, where he was not
to be. 

He had promised This, he own'd; and he would
religiously keep to his word, as soon as he found all
danger of pursuit over; and that I was settled to my
mind. —But, if the place were indifferent to me, London
was the safest, and the most private: And his
relations should all visit me there, the moment I
thought fit to admit them. His cousin Charlotte,
particularly, should attend me, as my companion, if
I would accept of her, as soon as she was able to go
abroad. —Mean time, would I go to his aunt Lawrance's
(his aunt Sadleir was a melancholy woman)? 
I should be the most welcome guest she ever received. 
I told him, I wished not to go (immediately, however,
and in the frame I was in, and likely not to be
out of) to any of his relations: That my reputation
was concerned, to have him absent from me: —That,
if I were in some private lodging (the meaner the less to
be suspected, as it would be known, that I went away
by his means; and he would be supposed to have provided
me handsome accommodations), it would be most
suitable both to my mind and my situation: That this
might be best, I should think, in the country for me; 
in town for him. —And no matter how soon he was
known to be there. 
If he might deliver his opinion, he said, since I declined
going to any of his relations, London was the
only place in the world to be private in. Every newcomer
in a country-town or village excited a curiosity: 
A person of my figure (and many compliments
he made me) would excite more. Even messages and
letters, where none used to be brought, would occasion
inquiry. He had not provided a lodging anywhere,
supposing I would choose to go either to London,
where accommodations of that sort might be
fixed upon in an hour's time; or to his aunt's; or
to Lord M.'s Hertfordshire seat, where was housekeeper
an excellent woman, Mrs. Greme, such another
as my Norton. 

To be sure, I said, if I were pursued, it would be
in their first passion; and some one of his relations
houses would be the place they would expect to find
me at. —I knew not what to do! 
My pleasure should determine him, he said, be
it what it would. Only that I were safe, was all he
was solicitous about. He had lodgings in town; but
he did not offer to propose them. He knew, I would
have more objection to go to them, than I could have
to go to Lord M.'s, or to his aunt's.— 
No doubt of it, I reply'd, with an indignation in
my manner, that made him run over with professions,
that he was far from proposing them, or wishing for
my acceptance of them. And again he repeated, That
my honour and safety were all he was solicitous
about; assuring me, that my will should be a law to
him, in every particular. 
I was too peevish, and too much afflicted, and,
indeed, too much incensed against him, to take well
any thing he said. 
I thought myself, I said, extremely unhappy. I
knew not what to determine upon: My reputation
now, no doubt, utterly ruin'd: Destitute of cloaths,
fit to be seen by any-body: My very indigence, as I
might call it, proclaiming my folly to every one who
saw me: who would suppose, that I had been taken
at advantage, or had given an undue one; and had
no power over either my will, or my actions: That
I could not but think I had been dealt artfully with: 
That he had seem'd to have taken, what he might suppose,
the just measure of my weakness, founded on my
youth and inexperience: That I could not forgive myself
for meeting him: That my heart bled for the
distresses of my father and mother, on this occasion: 
That I would give the world, and all my hopes in it,
to have been still in my father's house, whatever had
been my usage: That, let him protest and vow what 

he would, I saw something low and selfish in his love,
that he could study to put a young creature upon
making such a sacrifice of her duty and conscience: 
When a person actuated by a generous love, must
seek to oblige the object of it, in every thing essential
to her honour, and to her peace of mind. 
He was very attentive to all I said; never offering
to interrupt me once. His answer to every article,
almost methodically, shew'd his memory. 
What I had said, he told me, had made him very
grave: And he would answer accordingly. 
He was grieved at his heart, that he had so little
share in my favour or confidence, as he had the mortification
to find, by what I had said, he had. 
As to my reputation, he must be very sincere with
me: That could not suffer half so much by the step
I so much regretted to have taken, as by the confinement,
and equally foolish and unjust treatment, I had
met with from my relations: That every mouth was
full of blame of them, of my brother and sister particularly; 
and of wonder at my patience: That he must
repeat, what he had written to me, he believed, more
than once, That my friends themselves expected, that
I should take a proper opportunity to free myself from
their persecutions; why else did they confine me? 
That my exalted character would still bear me out,
with those who knew me; who knew my brother's
and sister's motives; and who knew the wretch they
were for compelling me to have. 
With regard to cloaths; Who, as matters were circumstanced,
could expect, that I should be able to
bring away any others, than those I had on at the time? 
For present use or wear, all the Ladies of his family
would take a pride to supply me: For future, the
product of the best looms, not only in England, but
throughout the world, were at my command. 

If I wanted money, as no doubt I must, he should
be proud to supply me: Would to God, he might presume
to hope, there were but one interest between us!— 
And then he would fain have had me to accept of
100l. bank note; which, unawares to me, he put
into my hand: But which, you may be sure, I refused
with warmth. 
He was inexpressibly grieved and surprised, he said,
to hear me say, he had acted artfully by me. He
came provided, according to my confirm'd appointment
[A wretch! to upbraid me thus!], to redeem
me from my persecutors; and little expected a change
of sentiment, and that he should have so much difficulty
to prevail upon me, as he had met with: That
perhaps I might think his offer to go into the garden
with me, and to face my assembled relations, was a
piece of art only: But that if I did, I wronged him: 
For, to this hour, seeing my excessive uneasiness, he
wish'd with all his soul, he had been permitted to
accompany me in. It was always his maxim to brave
a threatened danger—Threateners, where they have an
opportunity to put in force their threats, were seldom
to be feared. —But had he been assured of a private
stab, or of as many death's wounds, as there were
persons in my family (made desperate as he should
have been by my return), he would have attended me
into the house. 
So, my dear, what I have to do, is to hold myself
inexcusable for meeting such a determined and audacious
spirit; that's all! —I have hardly any question
now, that he would have contrived some way or
other to have got me away, had I met him at a midnight
hour, as once or twice I had thoughts to do. — 
And that would have been more terrible still! 
He concluded this part of his talk, with saying, That
he doubted not, but that, had he attended me in, he
should have come off, in every-one's opinion, so well,
that he should have had general leave to renew his
visits. 

He went on: —He must be so bold as to tell me,
he said, that he should have paid a visit of this kind,
but indeed accompany'd by several of his trusty
friends, had I not met him—And that very afternoon
too—for he could not tamely let the dreadful
Wednesday come, without some effort to change their
determinations. 
What, my dear, was to be done with such a man! 
That therefore, for my sake, as well as for his
own, he had reason to wish a disease so desperate had
been attempted to be overcome by as desperate a remedy. 
We all know, said he, that great ends are
sometimes brought about by the very means by which
they are endeavour'd to be frustrated. 
My present situation, I am sure, thought I, affords
a sad evidence of this truth! 
I was silent all this time. My blame was indeed
turned inward. Sometimes, too, I was half-frighted at
his audaciousness: At others, had the less inclination
to interrupt him, being excessively fatigued, and my
spirits sunk to nothing, with the view even of the
best prospects with such a creature. 
This gave him opportunity to proceed; And that
he did; assuming a still more serious air. 
As to what further remained for him to say, in answer
to what I had said, he hoped I would pardon
him; but, upon his soul, he was concerned, infinitely
concerned, he repeated, his colour and his voice
rising, that it was necessary for him to observe, how
much I chose rather to have run the risque of being
Solmes's wife, than to have it in my power to reward
a man, who, I must forgive him, had been as much
insulted on my account, as I had been on his—who
had watched my commands, and (pardon me, madam)
every changeable motion of your pen, all hours,
in all weathers, and with a chearfulness and ardor,
that nothing but the most faithful and obsequious passion
could inspire.— 

I now, Miss, began to revive into a little more
warmth of attention.— 
And all, madam, for what? [How I stared!] — 
Only to prevail upon you to free yourself from ungenerous
and base oppression— 
Sir, Sir! indignantly said I— 
Hear me but out, dearest madam! —My heart is
full—I must speak what I have to say—To be told
[for your words are yet in my ears, and at my heart!],
that you would give the world, and all your hopes in it,
to have been still in your cruel and gloomy father's
house— 
Not a word, Sir, against my papa! —I will not
bear that— 
Whatever had been your usage: —And you have a
credulity, madam, against all probability, if you believe
you should have avoided being Solmes's wife: 
That I have put you upon sacrificing your duty and
conscience—Yet, dearest creature! see you not the
contradiction that your warmth of temper has surprized
you into, when the reluctance you shewed to
the last to leave your persecutors, has cleared your
conscience from the least reproach of this sort.— 
O Sir! Sir! are you so critical then? Are you so
light in your anger, as to dwell upon words!— 
And indeed, my dear, I have since thought, that
his anger was not owing to that sudden impetus, which
cannot be easily bridled; but rather, was a sort of
manageable anger, let loose to intimidate me. 
Forgive me, madam—I have just done. —Have I
not, in your own opinion, hazarded my life to redeem
you from oppression? —Yet is not my reward,
after all, precarious? —For, madam, have you not
condition'd with me [and most sacredly, hard as the
condition is, will I observe it], that all my hope must
be remote: That you are determined to have it in
your power to favour or reject me totally, as you
please?— 

See, my dear! In every respect my condition
changed for the worse! Is it in my power to take
your advice, if I should think it ever so right to take
it?— 
And have you not furthermore declared, proceeded
he, that you will engage to renounce me for ever, if
your friends insist upon that cruel renunciation, as the
terms of being reconciled to you? 
But, nevertheless, madam, all the merit of having
saved you from an odious compulsion, shall be mine. I
glory in it, tho' I were to lose you for ever—As I see I
am but too likely to do, from your present displeasure; 
and especially, if your friends insist upon the
terms you are ready to comply with. 
That you are your own mistress, thro' my means, is,
I repeat, my boast. —As such, I humbly implore your
favour—And that only upon the conditions I have
yielded to hope for it. —As I do now thus humbly [the
proud wretch falling on one knee] your forgiveness,
for so long detaining your ear, and for all the plain-dealing
that my undesigning heart would not be denied
to utter by my lips. 
O Sir, pray rise! —Let the obliged kneel, if one
of us must kneel! —But, nevertheless, proceed not
in this strain, I beseech you. You have had a great
deal of trouble about me: But had you let me know
in time, that you expected to be rewarded for it at
the price of my duty, I should have spared you
much of it. 
Far be it from me, Sir, to depreciate merit so
extraordinary. But let me say, that had it not been
for the forbidden correspondence I was teazed by you
into [and which I had not continued (every letter for
many letters, intended to be the last), but because I
thought you a sufferer from my friends], I had not been
either confined or maltreated: Nor would my brother's
low-meant violence have had a foundation to
work upon. 

I am far from thinking my case would have been so
very desperate as you imagine, had I stay'd. My father
loved me at bottom: He would not see me before; 
and I wanted only to see him, and to be heard; 
and a delay of his sentence was the least thing I expected
from the trial I was to stand. 
You are boasting of your merits, Sir; let merit be
your boast: Nothing else can attract me. If personal
considerations had principal weight with me, either in
Solmes's disfavour, or in your favour, I should despise
myself: If you value yourself upon them, in preference
to the person of the poor Solmes, I shall despise
you! 
You may glory in your fancied merits, in getting
me away: But the cause of your glory, I tell you
plainly, is my shame. 
Make to yourself a title to my regard, which I
can better approve of; or else you will not have so
much merit with me, as you have with yourself. 
But here, like the first pair, I, at least, driven out
of my paradise, are we recriminating. No more shall
you need to tell me of your sufferings, and your merits!
—your All hours, and All weathers! For I will bear
them in memory, as long as I live; and, if it be impossible
for me to reward them, be ever ready to own
the obligation. All that I desire of you, now, is, to
leave it to myself to seek for some private abode: To
take the chariot with you to London, or elsewhere: 
And, if I have any further occasion for your assistance
and protection, I will signify it to you, and be
still further obliged to you. 
You are warm, my dearest life! —But indeed there
is no occasion for it. Had I any views unworthy of
my faithful love for you, I should not have been so
honest in my declarations. 
Then he began again to vow the sincerity of his
intentions. 

But I took him up short: I am willing to believe you,
Sir. It would be insupportable but to suppose there
were a necessity for such solemn declarations [At this he
seemed to collect himself, as I may say, into a little
more circumspection]. If I thought there were, I
would not sit with you here, in a public inn, I assure
you, altho' cheated hither, as far as I know, by methods
[You must excuse me, Sir!] that, the very
suspicion that it may be so, gives me too much vexation,
for me to have patience either with you or with
myself. —But no more of this just now: Let me but
know, I beseech you, good Sir, bowing [I was very
angry!], if you intend to leave me; or if I have only
escaped from one confinement to another?— 
Cheated hither, as far as you know, madam! Let
you know (and with that air too, charming though
grievous to my heart!) if you have only escaped from
one confinement to another! —Amazing! perfectly
amazing! —And can there be a necessity for me to
answer this? —You are absolutely your own mistress. 
—It were very strange, if you were not. The moment
you are in a place of safety, I will leave you. — 
One condition only, give me leave to beg your consent
to: It is this: That you will be pleased, now you are
so intirely in your own power, to renew a promise voluntarily
made before; voluntarily, or I would not now
presume to request it; for altho' I would not be thought
capable of growing upon concession, yet I cannot bear
to think of losing the ground your goodness had given
me room to hope I had gained; ‘That, make up
how you please with your relations, you will never
marry any other man, while I am living and single
unless I should be so wicked as to give new cause
for high displeasure.’ 
I hesitate not to confirm this promise, Sir, upon
your own condition. In what manner do you expect
me to confirm it?— 

Only, Madam, by your word. 
Then I never will. 
He had the assurance [I was now in his power] to
salute me, as a sealing of my promise, as he called it. 
His motion was so sudden, that I was not aware of it. 
It would have looked affected to be very angry; yet
I could not be pleased, considering this as a leading
freedom, from a spirit so audacious and incroaching; 
and he might see, that I was not. 
He passed all that by with an air peculiar to himself
—Enough! enough, dearest madam! —And let
me beg of you but to conquer this dreadful uneasiness,
which gives me to apprehend but too-too much for
my jealous love to bear: And it shall be my whole
endeavour to deserve your favour, and to make you
the happiest woman in the world; as I shall be the
happiest of men. 
I broke from him to write to you my preceding
letter; but refused to send it by his servant, as I told
you. The gentlewoman of the inn help'd me to a
messenger, who was to carry what you should give him
to Lord M.'s seat in Hertfordshire, directed for Mrs.
Greme the housekeeper there. And early in the
morning, for fear of pursuit, we were to set out that
way: And there he proposed to exchange the chariot-and-six
for a chaise-and-pair of his own, which happened
to be at that seat, as it would be a less-noticed
conveyance. 
I looked over my little stock of money; and found
it to be no more than seven guineas and some silver: 
The rest of my stock was but fifty guineas, and that
five more than I thought it was, when my sister challenged
me as to the sum I had by me (a) : And
those I left in my escritoire, little thinking to be prevailed
upon to go away with him. 
Indeed my case abounds with a shocking variety of
indelicate circumstances. Among the rest, I was 

forced to account to him, who knew I could have no
cloaths but what I had on, how I came to have linen
with you [for he could not but know I sent for it]; 
lest he should imagine I had an early design to go
away with him, and made that a part of the preparation. 
He most heartily wished, he said, for my mind's
sake, that your mamma would have afforded me her
protection; and delivered himself, upon this subject,
with equal freedom and concern. 
There are, my dear Miss Howe, a multitude of
punctilios and decorums, which a young creature must
dispense with, who, in such a situation, makes a man
the intimate attendant of her person. I could now,
I think, give twenty reasons stronger than any I have
heretofore mentioned, why women of the least delicacy
should never think of incurring the danger and disgrace
of taking the step I have been drawn in to take, but
with horror and aversion; and why they should look
upon the man who shall tempt them to it, as the
vilest and most selfish of seducers. 
* *
Before five o'clock (Tuesday morning) the maid-servant
came up to tell me, my brother was ready, and
that breakfast also waited for me in the parlour. I went
down with a heart as heavy as my eyes, and received
great acknowlegements and compliments from him
on being so soon dress'd, and ready, as he interpreted
it, to continue our journey. 
He had the thought which I had not [For what had
I to do with thinking, who had it not, when I stood
most in need of it?], to purchase for me a velvet
hood, and a handsome short cloak, trimm'd with
silver, without saying any thing to me. He must reward
himself, the artful incroacher said, before the
landlady and her maids and niece, for his forethought,
and would salute his pretty sullen sister! —He took 

his reward; and, as he said, a tear with it. While
he assured me [still before them, a vile wretch!], that
I had nothing to fear from meeting with parents, who
so dearly loved me. —How could I be complaisant,
my dear, to such a man as this?— 
As soon as the chariot drove on, he asked me,
whether I had any objection to go to Lord M.'s Hertfordshire
seat? His Lordship, he said, was at his
Berkshire one. 
I told him, I chose not to go, as yet, to any of
his relations; for that would indicate a plain defiance
to my own—My choice was, to go to a private
lodging, and for him to be at a distance from me; at
least, till I heard how things were taken by my
friends—For that altho' I had but little hopes of a
reconciliation, as it was; yet if they knew I was in
his protection, or in that of any of his friends (which
would be looked upon as the same thing), there would
not be room for any at all. 
I should govern him as I pleased, he solemnly assured
me, in every thing. But he still thought London was
the best place for me; and if I were once safe there,
and in a lodging to my liking, he would go to M. Hall. 
But, as I approved not of London, he would urge it
no further. 
He proposed, and I consented, to put up at an inn
in the neighbourhood of The Lawn (as he called Lord
M.'s seat in this county), since I chose not to go
thither. And here I got two hours to myself; which
I told him I should pass in writing another letter to
you [meaning my narrative, which I had begun at
St. Albans, fatigued as I was], and in one to my
sister, to apprize the family (whether they were solicitous
about it or not), that I was well; and to beg
that my cloaths, some particular books, and the fifty
guineas I had left in my escritoire, might be sent me. 
He asked, If I had considered whither to have them
collected? 

Indeed not I, I told him, I was a stranger to— 
So was he, he interrupted me; but it struck him
by chance—[Wicked story-teller!] 
But, added he, I will tell you, madam, how it
shall be managed—If you don't choose to go to
London, it is, nevertheless, best, that your relations
should think you there; for then they will absolutely
despair of finding you. If you write, be pleased to
direct, To be left for you, at Mr. Osgood's, near
Soho-square; who is a man of reputation, and they
will go very safe: And this will effectually amuse
them. 
Amuse them, my dear! —Amuse whom? —My father!
—my uncles! —But it must be so! —All his
expedients ready, you see!— 
I had no objection to this: And I have written accordingly. 
But what answer I shall have, or whether
any, that is what gives me no small anxiety. 
This, however, is one consolation, that, if I have
an answer, and altho' my brother should be the writer,
it cannot be more severe than the treatment I have of
late received from him and my sister. 
Mr. Lovelace staid out about an hour and half; and
then came in; impatiently sending up to me no less
than four times, to express his desire of my company. 
But I sent him word as often, that I was busy; and,
at last, that I should be so, till dinner was ready. So
he hasten'd that, as I heard him now-and-then, with
a hearty curse upon the cook and waiters. 
This is another of his perfections. I ventured
afterwards to check him for his free words, as we sat
at dinner. 
Having heard him swear at his servant, when below
whom, nevertheless, he owns to be a good one; It is
a sad life, said I, these innkeepers live, Mr. Lovelace. 
No; pretty well, I believe. —But why, madam,
think you, that fellows, who eat and drink at other 

mens cost, or they are sorry whelps of innkeepers,
should be intitled to pity? 
Because of the soldiers they are obliged to quarter; 
who are generally, I believe, wretched profligates. 
Bless me! said I, how I heard one of them swear and
curse, just now, at a modest meek man, as I judge
by his low voice, and gentle answers! —Well do they
make it a proverb—Like a trooper! 
He bit his lip; arose; turned upon his heel; stept
to the glass; and looked confidently abashed, if I may so
say—Ay, Madam, said he, these troopers are sad
swearing fellows. I think their officers should chastise
them for it. 
I am sure they deserve chastisement, reply'd I— 
For swearing is a most unmanly vice, and cursing as
poor and low a one; since it proclaims the profligate's
want of power, and his wickedness at the same time:
for, could such a one punish as he speaks, he would
be a fiend! 
Charmingly observed, by my soul, madam! —The
next trooper I hear swear and curse, I'll tell him what
an unmanly, and what a poor whelp he is. 
Mrs. Greme came to pay her duty to me, as Mr.
Lovelace called it; and was very urgent with me to
go to her Lord's house; letting me know what handsome
things she had heard her Lord, and his two
nieces, and all the family, say of me; and what
wishes, for several months past, they had put up for
the honour she now hoped soon would be done them
all. 
This gave me some satisfaction, as it confirmed
from the mouth of a very good sort of woman, all
that Mr. Lovelace had told me. 
Upon inquiry about a private lodging, she recommended
me to a sister-in-law of hers, eight miles from
thence—Where I now am. And what pleased me
the better, was, that Mr. Lovelace [of whom I could
see she was infinitely observant] obliged her, of his 

own motion, to accompany me in the chaise; himself
riding on horseback, with his two servants, and one
of Lord M.'s. And here we arrived about four
o'clock. 
But, as I told you in my former, the lodgings are
inconvenient, and Mr. Lovelace found great fault with
them; telling Mrs. Greme, who had said, they were
not worthy of us, that they came not up even to her
description of them; that, as the house was a mile
from a town, it was not proper for him to be so far
distant from me, lest any thing should happen: And
yet the apartments were not separate and distinct
enough for me to like, he was sure. 
This must be agreeable enough from him, you'll
believe. 
Mrs. Greme and I had a good deal of talk in the
chaise about him: She was very easy and free in her
answers to all I asked; and has a very serious turn, I
find. 
I led her on to say to the following effect; some
part of it not unlike what his uncle's dismissed bailiff
had said before; by which I find that all the servants
opinion of him is alike. 
‘That Mr. Lovelace was a generous man: That it
was hard to say, whether the servants of her Lord's
family lov'd or fear'd him most: That her Lord had
a very great affection for him: That his two noble
aunts were no less fond of him: That his two
cousins Montague were as good-natured young Ladies
as ever lived: That his uncle and aunts had
proposed several Ladies to him, before he made his
addresses to me; and even since; despairing to
move me, and my friends, in his favour—But that
he had no thoughts of marrying at all, she had heard
him say, if it were not to me: That as well her Lord,
as his sisters, were a good deal concerned at the
contempts, and ill-usage, he received from my family: 
But admired my character, and wish'd to 

have him married to me, altho' I were not to have
a shilling, in preference to any other person, from
the opinion that they had of the influence I should
have over him: That, to be sure, she said, Mr.
Lovelace was a wild gentleman: But that was a distemper
which would cure itself: That her Lord delighted
in his company, whenever he could get it: But
that they often fell out; and his Lordship was always
forced to submit: Indeed, was half-afraid of him,
she believ'd—For he would do as he pleased. She
mingled a thousand pities often, that he acted not
up to the talents lent him—Yet would have it, that
he had fine qualities to found a reformation upon; 
and, when the happy day came, would make amends
for all: And of this all his friends were so assured,
that they wished for nothing so earnestly, as for his
marriage.’ 
This, indifferent as it is, is better than my brother
says of him. 
The people of the house here are very honest-looking
industrious folks: Mrs. Sorlings is the gentlewoman's
name. The farm seems well-stock'd, and
thriving. She is a widow; has two sons, men grown,
who vie with each other which shall take most pains
in promoting the common good; and they are both of
them, I already see, more respectful to two modest
young women, their sisters, than my brother was to
his sister. I believe I must stay here longer than at
first I thought I should. 
I should have mentioned, that, before I set out for
this place, I received your kind letter. Every thing is
kind from so dear a friend. I own you might well be
surprised; [I was myself; as by this time you will
have seen]—after I had determin'd, too, so strongly
against going away. 
I have not the better opinion of Mr. Lovelace for
his extravagant volubility. He is too full of professions: 
He says too many fine things of me, and to me: 

True respect, true value, I think, lies not in words: 
Words cannot express it: The silent awe, the humble,
the doubting eye, and even the hesitating voice, better
shew it by much, than, as Shakespeare says, 

—The rattling tongue
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
The man, to be sure, is, at times, all upon the
ecstatic, one of his phrases; but, to my shame and
confusion, I know too well what to attribute it to, in
a great measure—To his triumph, my dear, in one
word; it needs no further explanation; and, to give
it that word, perhaps, equally exposes my vanity, and
condemns my folly. 
We have been alarmed with notions of a pursuit,
sounded upon a letter from his intelligencer. 
How do different circumstances sanctify or condemn
an action! —What care ought we to take not
to confound the distinctions of right and wrong, when
self comes into the question! I condemn'd in him
the corrupting of a servant of my papa's; and now I
am glad to give a kind of indirect approbation of it,
by inquiring what he hears, by that or any other way,
of the manner in which my relations took my flight. 
A preconcerted, forward, and artful flight, to be sure,
it must appear to them—That's a sad thing! —Yet
how, as I am situated, can I put them right? 
Most heavily, he says, they take it; but shew not
so much grief as rage. —And he can hardly have patience
to hear of the virulence and menaces of my
brother against himself—Then a merit is made to me
of his forbearance. 
What a satisfaction am I robbed of, my dearest
friend, by this rash action? I can now, too late, judge
of the difference there is in being an offended rather
than an offending person! —What would I give to
have it once more in my power to say I suffer'd
wrong, rather than did wrong? That others were more 

wanting in their kindness to me, than I in duty (where
duty is owing) to them?— 
Fie upon me! for meeting the seducer! —Let all
end as happily as it now may, I have laid up for myself
remorse for my whole life. 
What more concerns me is, that every time I see
this man, I am still at a greater loss than before what
to make of him. I watch every turn of his countenance: 
And I think I see very deep lines in it. He
looks with more meaning, I verily think, than he used
to look; yet not more serious; not less gay—I don't
know how he looks—But with more confidence a
great deal than formerly; and yet he never wanted
that. 
But here is the thing: I behold him with fear now,
as knowing the power my indiscretion has given him
over me. And well may he look more elate, when
he sees me deprived of all the self-supposed significance,
which adorns and exalts a person who has been
accustomed to respect; and who now, by a conscious
inferiority, allows herself to be overcome, and in a
state of obligation, as I may say, to her new protector. 
I shall send this, as my former, by a poor man, who
travels every day with pedlary matters, who will leave
it at Mrs. Knollys's, as you direct. 
If you hear any thing of my father and mother,
and of their health, and how my friends were affected
by my unhappy step, pray be so good as to write me a
few lines by the messenger, if his waiting for them
can be known to you. 
I am afraid to ask you, Whether, upon reading
that part of my narrative already in your hands, you
think any sort of extenuation lies for 
Your unhappy
Clarissa Harlowe. 