



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Wednesday Night, Aug. 30. 
It was lucky enough that our two servants met at
Hannah's (a) , which gave them so good an opportunity
of exchanging their Letters time enough
for each to return to his master early in the day. 
Thou dost well to boast of thy capacity for managing
Servants, and to set up for correcting our Poets
in their characters of this class of people (b) , when,
like a madman, thou canst beat their teeth out, and
attempt to shoot them thro' the head, for not bringing
to thee what they had no power to obtain. 
You well observe (c)  that you would have made a
thorough-paced Lawyer. The whole of the conversation-piece
between you and the Colonel, affords a
convincing proof that there is a black and a white
side to every cause: But what must the Conscience
of a partial whitener of his own cause, or blackener
of another's, tell him, while he is throwing dust in
the eyes of his judges, and all the time knows his own
guilt? 
The Colonel, I see, is far from being a faultless
man: But while he sought not to carry his point by
breach of faith, he has an excuse which thou hast 

not. But with respect to him, and to us all, I can
now, with detestation of some of my own actions,
see, that the taking advantage of another person's
good opinion of us, to injure (perhaps to ruin) that
other, is the most ungenerous wickedness that can be
committed. 
Man acting thus by man, we should not be at a
loss to give such actions a name: But is it not doubly
and trebly aggravated, when such advantage is taken
of an unexperienced and innocent young creature,
whom we pretend to love above all the women in the
world; and when we seal our pretences by the most
solemn vows and protestations of inviolable honour,
that we can invent? 
I see that this gentleman is the best match thou
ever couldest have had, upon all accounts: His spirit
such another impetuous one as thy own; soon taking
fire; vindictive; and only differing in This, that
the cause he engages in is a just one. But, commend
me to honest brutal Mowbray, who, before he knew
the cause, offers his sword in thy behalf against a man
who had taken the injured side, and whom he had
never seen before. 
As soon as I had run thro' your Letters, and the
copy of that of the incendiary Brand's (by the latter
of which I saw to what cause a great deal of this last
implacableness of the Harlowe family is owing) I
took coach to Smith's, altho' I had been come from
thence but about an hour, and had taken leave of the
Lady for the night. 
I sent down for Mrs. Lovick, and desired her, in
the first place, to acquaint the Lady (who was busied
in her closet) that I had Letters from Berks: In which
I was informed, that the interview between Col.
Morden and Mr. Lovelace had ended without ill consequences; 
that the Colonel intended to write to her
very soon, and was interesting himself mean while in
her favour, with her relations; that I hoped, that 

this agreeable news would be a means of giving her
good rest; and I would wait upon her in the morning
by the time she should return from prayers with
all the particulars. 
She sent me word, that she should be glad to see
me in the morning; and was highly obliged to me
for the good news I had sent her up. 
I then, in the back-shop, re'd to Mrs. Lovick and
to Mrs. Smith, the copy of Brand's Letter, and asked
them, If they could guess at the man's informant? 
They were not at a loss; Mrs. Smith having seen the
same fellow Brand who had talked with her, as I
mentioned in a former (a) , come out of a Milaner's
shop over-against them; which Milaner, she said, had
also been lately very inquisitive about the Lady. 
I wanted no further hint; but, bidding them take
no notice to the Lady of what I had re'd, I shot over
the way, and asking for the mistress of the house, she
came to me. 
Retiring with her, at her invitation, into her parlour,
I desired to know, if she were acquainted with
a young country Clergyman of the name of Brand. 
She hesitatingly, seeing me in some emotion, owned,
that she had some small knowlege of the gentleman. 
Just then came in her husband, who is it seems
a petty officer in the Excise (and not an ill-behaved
man) who owned a fuller knowlege of him. 
I have the Copy of a Letter, said I, from this
Brand, in which he has taken great liberties with my
character, and with That of the most unblameable
Lady in the world, which he grounds upon informations
that you, Madam, have given him. And then
I re'd to them several passages in his Letter; and
asked, What foundation she had for giving that fellow
such impressions of either of us? 
They knew not what to answer: But at last said,
that he had told them how wickedly the young Lady 

had run away from her parents: What worthy and
rich people they were: In that favour he stood with
them; and that they had employed him to enquire
after her behaviour, visitors, &c. 
They said, ‘That indeed they knew very little of
the young Lady; but that [Curse upon their censoriousness!]
it was but too natural to think, that
where a Lady had given way to a delusion, and
taken so wrong a step, she would not stop there: 
That the most Sacred Places and Things were but
too often made cloaks for bad actions: That Mr.
Brand had been informed (perhaps by some enemy
of mine) that I was a man of very free principles,
and an intimado, as he calls it, of the man who had
ruined her. And that their cousin Barker, a Manteaumaker,
who lodged up one pair of stairs' (and
who, at their desire, came down and confirmed what
they said) ‘had often from her window, seen me
with the Lady in her chamber, and both talking
very earnestly together: And that Mr. Brand being
unable to account for her admitting my visits, and
knowing I was but a new acquaintance of hers,
and an old one of Mr. Lovelace, thought himself
obliged to lay these matters before her friends.’ 
This was the sum and substance of their tale. O
how I cursed the Censoriousness of this plaguy Triumvirate! 
A Parson, a Milaner, and a Manteaumaker! 
The two latter, not more by business led to
adorn the persons, than generally by scandal to destroy
the reputations, of those they have a mind to exercise
their talents upon! 
The two women took great pains to persuade me,
that they themselves were people of Conscience: — 
Of consequence, I told them, too much addicted, I
feared, to censure other people who pretended not to
their strictness; for that I had ever found Censoriousness,
Narrowness, and Uncharitableness, to prevail
too much with those who affected to be thought
more pious than their neighbours. 

They answered, That that was not their Case; 
and that they had since enquired into the Lady's character
and manner of life, and were very much concerned
to think any-thing they had said should be
made use of against her: And as they heard from
Mrs. Smith, that she was not likely to live long,
they should be sorry she should go out of the world
a sufferer by their means, or with an ill opinion of
them, tho' strangers to her. The husband offered to
write, if I pleased, to Mr. Brand, in vindication of
the Lady; and the two women said, they should be
glad to wait upon her in person, to beg her pardon
for any-thing she had reason to take amiss from them; 
because they were now convinced that there was not
such another young Lady in the world. 
I told them, That the least said of the affair to
the Lady, in her present circumstances, was best. 
That she was an heavenly creature, and fond of taking
all occasions to find excuses for her relations on
their implacableness to her: That therefore I should
take some notice to her of the uncharitable and weak
surmises which gave birth to so vile a scandal: But
that I would have him, Mr. Walton (for that is the
husband's name) write to his acquaintance Brand as
soon as possible, as he had offered—And so I left
them. 
&dotup;As to what sayest of thy charming Cousin,
let me know, if thou hast any meaning in it. I
have not the vanity to think myself deserving of
such a Lady as Miss Montague: And should not
therefore care to expose myself to her scorn, and
to thy derision. But were I assured I might avoid
both these, I would soon acquaint thee, that I
should think no pains nor assiduity too much to obtain
a share in the good graces of such a Lady. 
&dotup;But I know thee too well to depend upon anything
thou sayest on this subject. Thou lovest to
make thy friends the object of ridicule to Ladies; 

and imaginest, from the vanity (and in this respect,
I will say, littleness) of thine own heart, that thou
shinest the brighter for the foil. 
&dotup;Thus didst thou once play off the rough Mowbray
with Miss Hatton, till the poor fellow knew
not how to go either backward or forward.&dotup; 