



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, April 14. 
I will now give you the particulars of a conversation
that has just passed between Mr. Lovelace
and me; which I must call agreeable. 
It began with his telling me, that he had just riceived
intelligence, that my friends were of a sudden
come to a resolution, to lay aside all thoughts of pursuing
me, or of getting me back: And that therefore,
he attended me, to know my pleasure; and what I
would do, or have him do? 
I told him, that I would have him leave me directly; 
and that, when it was known to every-body,
that I was absolutely independent of him, it would
pass, that I had left my father's house, because of my
brother's ill-usage of me: Which was a plea that I
might make with justice, and to the excuse of my
father, as well as of myself. 
He mildly reply'd, that if he could be certain, that
my relations would adhere to this their new resolution,
he could have no objection, since such was my
pleasure: But that, as he was well assured, that they
had taken it only from apprehensions, that a more
active one might involve my brother (who had breath'd
nothing but revenge) in some fatal misfortune, there
was too much reason to believe, that they would resume
their former purpose, the moment they should
think they safely might. 
This, Madam, said he, is a risque I cannot run. 
You would think it strange, if I could. And yet, as
soon as I knew they had so given out, I thought it
proper to apprize you of it, and to take your commands
upon it. 
Let me hear, said I, willing to try if he had any
particular view, what you think most adviseable? 

'Tis very easy to say That, if I durst—If I might
not offend you—If it were not to break conditions
that shall be inviolable with me. 
Say then, Sir, what you would say. I can approve
or disapprove, as I think fit. 
To wave, Madam, what I would say till I have
more courage to speak out. [More courage—Mr.
Lovelace more courage, my dear!]—I will only propose
what I think will be most agreeable to you. — 
Suppose, if you choose not to go to Lady Betty's,
that you take a turn cross the country to Windsor? 
Why to Windsor? 
Because it is a pleasant place: Because it lies in the
way either to Berkshire, to Oxford, or to London— 
Berkshire, where Lord M. is at present: Oxford, in
the neighbourhood of which lives Lady Betty. London,
whither you may retire at your pleasure: Or, if
you will have it so, whither I may go, you staying at
Windsor; and yet be within an easy distance of you,
if any thing should happen, or if your friends should
change their pacific resolution. 
This displeased me not. But I said, My only objection
was, the distance from Miss Howe, of whom
I should be glad to be always within two or three
hours reach by a messenger, if possible. 
If I had thoughts of any other place than Windsor,
or nearer to Miss Howe, he wanted but my commands,
and would seek for proper accommodations: 
But, fix as I pleased, farther or nearer, he had servants,
and they had nothing else to do, but to obey
me. 
A grateful thing then he named to me—To send for
my Hannah, as soon as I should be fixed; unless I
would choose one of the young gentlewomen here to
attend me, both of whom, as I had acknowleged,
were very obliging; and he knew I had generosity
enough to make it worth either of their whiles. 

This of Hannah, he might see, I took very well. 
I said, I had thoughts of sending for her, as soon as I
got to more convenient lodgings. As to these young
gentlewomen, it were pity to break in upon that usefulness
which the whole family were of to each other: 
Each having her proper part, and performing it with
an agreeable alacrity: Insomuch that I liked them
all so well, that I could even pass my days among
them, were he to leave me; by which means the
lodgings would be more convenient to me than now
they were. 
He need not repeat his objections to this place, he
said: But as to going to Windsor, or where-ever else
I thought fit, or as to his personal attendance, or
leaving me, he would assure me (he very agreeably
said), that I could propose nothing in which I thought
my reputation, and even my punctilio, concerned, that
he would not chearfully come into. And since I was
so much taken up with my pen, he would instantly
order his horse to be got ready, and would set out. 
Not to be off of my caution, Have you any acquaintance
at Windsor? said I. —Know you of any
convenient lodgings there? 
Except with the forest, reply'd he, where I have
often hunted, I know the least of Windsor, of any
place so noted, and so pleasant. Indeed, I have not
a single acquaintance there. 
Upon the whole, I told him, that I thought his
proposal of Windsor not amiss; and that I would remove
thither, if I could get a lodging only for myself,
and an upper-chamber for Hannah; for that my
stock of money was but small, as was easy to be conceived; 
and I should be very loth to be obliged to
any-body. I added, that the sooner I removed the better; 
for that then he could have no objection to go to
London, or Berkshire, as he pleased: And I should
let every-body know my independence. 

He again proposed himself, in very polite terms,
for my banker. But I, as civilly, declined his offers. 
This conversation was to be, all of it, in the main,
agreeable. He asked, whether I would choose to
lodge in the town of Windsor, or out of it? 
As near the castle, I said, as possible, for the convenience
of going constantly to the public worship: 
An opportunity I had been too long deprived of. 
He should be very glad, he told me, if he could
procure me accommodations in any one of the canons
houses; which he imagined would be more
agreeable to me than any other, on many accounts. 
And as he could depend upon my promise, Never to
have any other man but himself, on the condition he
had so chearfully subscribed to, he should be easy; 
since it was now his part, in earnest, to set about recommending
himself to my favour, by the only way
he knew it could be done. Adding, with a very serious
air—I am but a young man, Madam; but I
have run a long course: Let not your purity of mind
incline you to despise me for the acknowlegement: 
It is high time to be weary of it, and to reform; since,
like Solomon, I can say, There is nothing New
under the sun. But that it is my belief, that a life of
virtue can afford such pleasures, on reflection, as will
be for ever-blooming, for ever New! 
I was agreeably surprised. I looked at him, I believe,
as if I doubted my ears and my eyes! —His
features and aspect, however, became his words. 
I express'd my satisfaction in terms so agreeable to
him, that he said, He found a delight in this early
dawning of a better day to him, and in my approbation,
which he had never received from the success of
the most favour'd of his pursuits. 
Surely, my dear, the man must be in earnest. He
could not have said this; he could not have thought
it, had he not. What followed made me still readier
to believe him. 

In the midst of my wild vagaries, said he, I have
ever preserv'd a reverence for religion, and for religious
men. I always called another cause, when any
of my libertine companions, in pursuance of Lord
Shaftesbury's test (which is a part of the rake's creed,
and what I may call The whetstone of infidelity), endeavour'd
to turn the sacred subject into ridicule. On
this very account I have been called, by good men of
the clergy, who nevertheless would have it, that I
was a practical rake, The decent rake: And indeed I
had too much pride in my shame, to disown the name. 
This, Madam, I am the readier to confess, as it
may give you hope, that the generous task of my reformation,
which I flatter myself you will have the
goodness to undertake, will not be so difficult a one as
you may have imagin'd; for it has afforded me some
pleasure in my retired hours, when a temporary remorse
has struck me for any thing I have done amiss,
that I should one day take delight in another course of
life: For, without one can, I dare say, no durable
good is to be expected from the endeavour. —Your example,
Madam, must do all, must confirm all (a) . 
The divine grace, or favour, Mr. Lovelace, must
do All, and confirm All. You know not how much
you please me, that I can talk to you in this dialect. 
And I then thought of his generosity to his pretty
rustic; and of his kindness to his tenants. 
Yet, Madam, be pleased to remember one thing: 
Reformation cannot be a sudden work. I have infinite
vivacity: It is that which runs away with me. 
Judge, dearest Madam, by what I am going to confess,
that I have a prodigious way to journey on, before
a good person will think me tolerable; since,
tho' I have read in some of our Perfectionists enough
to make a better man than myself, either run into 

madness or despair, about the grace you mention; 
yet I cannot enter into the meaning of the word, nor
into the modus of its operation. Let me not then be
checked, when I mention your example for my visible
reliance; and instead of using such words, till I can
better understand them, suppose all the rest included
in the profession of that reliance. 
I told him, that, altho' I was somewhat concern'd
at his expression, and surpris'd at so much darkness,
as, for want of another word, I would call it, in a
man of his talents and learning; yet I was pleas'd
with his ingenuity. I wish'd him to encourage this
way of thinking: I told him, that his observation, that
no durable good was to be expected from any new
course, where there was not a delight taken in it, was
just: But that the delight would follow by use. 
And twenty things of this sort I even preach'd to
him; taking care, however, not to be tedious, nor
to let my expanded heart give him a contracted or impatient
brow. And, indeed, he took visible pleasure
in what I said, and even hung upon the subject, when
I, to try him, seem'd to be ready to drop it, once or
twice: And proceeded to give me a most agreeable
instance, that he could, at times, think both deeply
and seriously. —Thus it was. 
He was wounded dangerously, once, in a duel, he
said, in the left arm, baring it, to shew me the scar: 
That this (notwithstanding a great effusion of blood,
it being upon an artery) was follow'd by a violent fever,
which at last fixed upon his spirits; and that so
obstinately, that neither did he desire life, nor his
friends expect it: That, for a month together, his
heart, as he thought, was so totally changed, that he
despised his former courses, and particularly that rashness,
which had brought him to the state he was in,
and his antagonist (who, however, was the aggressor)
into a much worse: That, in this space, he had
thoughts, which, at times, gives him pleasure to reflect 

upon: And altho' these promising prospects
changed, as he recovered health and spirits; yet he
parted with them, with so much reluctance, that he
could not help shewing it, in a copy of verses, truly
blank ones, he said; some of which he repeated, and
(advantaged by the grace which he gives to every
thing he repeats) I thought them very tolerable ones; 
the sentiments, however, much graver than I expected
from him. 
He has promised me a copy of the lines; and then
I shall judge better of their merit; and so shall you. 
The tendency of them was, “That, since sickness
only gave him a proper train of thinking, and that
his restored health brought with it a return of his
evil habits, he was ready to renounce the gifts of
nature for those of contemplation.” 
He farther declared, that altho' all these good motions
went off (as he had own'd) on his recovery, yet
he had better hopes now, from the influence of my
example, and from the reward before him, if he persevered: 
And that he was the more hopeful that he
should, as his present resolution was made in a full
tide of health and spirits; and when he had nothing to
wish for, but perseverance, to intitle himself to my
favour. 
I will not throw cold water, Mr. Lovelace, said I,
on a rising flame: But look to it! For I shall endeavour
to keep you up to this spirit: I shall measure
your value of me by this test: And I would have you
bear those charming lines of Mr. Rowe for ever in
your mind; you, who have, by your own confession,
so much to repent of; and as the scar, indeed, you
shew'd me, will, in one instance, remind you to your
dying day. 
The lines, my dear, are from that poet's Ulysses. 
You have heard me often admire them; and I repeated
them to him: 


Habitual evils change not on a sudden;
But many days must pass, and many sorrows;
Conscious remorse and anguish must be felt,
To curb desire, to break the stubborn will,
And work a second nature in the soul,
Ere virtue can resume the place she lost:
'Tis else Dissimulation—
He had often read these lines, he said; but never
tasted them before. —By his soul (the unmortified creature
swore) and as he hoped to be saved, he was now
in earnest, in his good resolutions. He had said, before
I repeated these lines from Rowe, that habitual
evils could not be changed on a sudden: But he hoped,
he should not be thought a dissembler, if he were not
enabled to hold his good purposes; since ingratitude
and dissimulation were vices that of all others he abhorred. 
May you ever abhor them! said I. They are the
most odious of all vices. 
I hope, my dear Miss Howe, I shall not have occasion,
in my future letters, to contradict these promising
appearances. Should I have nothing on his
side to combat with, I shall be very far from being
happy, from the sense of my fault, and the indignation
of all my relations. So shall not fail of condign
punishment for it, from my inward remorse, on account
of my forfeited character. But the least ray of
hope could not dart in upon me, without my being
willing to lay hold of the very first opportunity to
communicate it to you, who take so generous a share
in all my concerns. 
Nevertheless, you may depend upon it, my dear,
that these agreeable assurances, and hopes of his begun
reformation, shall not make me forget my caution. 
Not that I think, at worst, any more than you, that
he dare to harbour a thought injurious to my honour: 
But he is very various, and there is an apparent, and 

even an acknowleg'd unfixedness in his temper, which,
at times, gives me some uneasiness. I am resolved
therefore to keep him at distance from my person and
my thoughts, as much as I can: For whether all men
are, or are not, incroachers, I am sure Mr. Lovelace
is one. 
Hence it is, that I have always cast about, and will
continue to cast about, what ends he may have in
view from this proposal, or from that report: In a
word, tho' hopeful of the best, I will always be fearful
of the worst, in every thing that admits of doubt. 
For it is better, in such a situation as mine, to apprehend
without cause, than to subject myself to surprize
for want of forethought. 
Mr. Lovelace is gone to Windsor, having left two
servants to attend me. He purposes to be back tomorrow. 
I have written to my aunt Hervey, to supplicate
her interest in my behalf, for my cloaths, books, and
money; signifying to her, “That, could I be restored
to the favour of my family, and be allowed a negative
only, as to any man who might be proposed
to me, and be used like a daughter, a niece, and
a sister, I would still stand by my offer to live
single, and submit, as I ought, to a negative, from
my father.” Intimating nevertheless, “That it
were perhaps better, after the usage I have received
from my brother and sister, that I might be allowed
to be distant from them, as well for their sakes as
my own,” [meaning, as I suppose it will be taken,
at my Dairy-house]—offering “to take my father's
directions, as to the manner I should live in, the
servants I should have, and in every thing that
should shew the dutiful subordination that I was
willing to conform to.” 
My aunt will know by my letter to my sister how
to direct to me, if she be permitted to favour me with
a line. 

I am equally earnest with her in this letter, as I was
with my sister in That I wrote to her, to obtain for me
a speedy reconciliation, that I may not be further precipitated; 
intimating, “That, by a timely lenity, all
may pass for a misunderstanding only, which, otherwise,
will be thought equally disgraceful to them,
and to me; appealing to her for the necessity I was
under to do what I did.” 
Here I close for the present, with the assurance that
I am 
Your ever-obliged and affectionate
Clarissa Harlowe. 