


Signor Jeronymo della Porretta, To Sir
Charles Grandison. 


Bologna, Monday, Sept. 15. N. S.
Your kind Letters from Lyons, my dearest
friend, rejoiced us extremely. Clementina languished
to hear from you. How was it possible for
you to write with so much warmth of affection to her,
yet with so much delicacy, that a rival could not take
exceptions at it? 
She writes to you. It is not for me, it is not for 

any of us, I think, to say one word to the principal
subject of her Letter. She shewed it to me, and to
her mother, only. 
Dear creature! Could she be prevailed upon! — 
But how can you be asked to support the family-wishes? 
Yet if you think them just, I know you will. 
You know not Self, when justice and the service of
your friend stand in opposition to it. All that I am
afraid of is, that we shall be too precipitate for the
dear creature's head. 
Would to God, you could have been my Brother! 
That was the first desire of my heart! —But you will
see by her Letter (the least flighty that she has written
of a long time) that she has no thought of that:
And she declares to us, that she wishes you happily
married to an Englishwoman. Would to Heaven,
we might plead your example to her! 
I will certainly attend you in your England! —If
one thing, that we all wish, could happen, you would
have the whole family, as far as I know. We think,
we talk, of nobody but you. We look out for Englishmen,
to do them honour for your sake. 
Mrs. Beaumont is with us. Surely she is your near
relation! She advises caution; but thinks that our
present measures are not wrong ones, as we never can
give into my sister's wishes to quit the world. Dear
Grandison! love not Mrs. Beaumont the less for her
opinion in our favour. 
Mr. Lowther writes to you: I say nothing, therefore,
of that worthy man. 
I am wished to write more enforcingly to you, on a
certain important subject: But I say, I cannot, dare
not, will not. 
Dear Grandison, love still your Jeronymo! Your
friendship makes life worthy of my wish. It has
been a consolation to me, when every other failed,
and all around me was darkness, and the shadow of
death. You will often be troubled with Letters 

from me. My beloved, my dearest friend, my Grandison,
adieu! 
Jeronymo della Porretta. 

