



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Tuesday, Nine o'Clock. 
I write, because you enjoin me to do so. Love you
still! —How can I help it, if I would? You may
believe how I stand aghast, your Letter communicating
the first news—Good God of Heaven and Earth! — 
But what shall I say? —I am all impatience for particulars. 
Lord have mercy upon me! —But can it be? 
My Mother will indeed be astonished! —How can
I tell it her! —It was but last night (upon some jealousies
put into her head by your foolish Uncle) that
I assured her, and this upon the strength of your own
assurances, that neither man nor devil would be able
to induce you to take a step that was in the least derogatory
to the most punctilious honour. 
But, once more, Can it be? What woman, at this
rate! —But, God preserve you! 

Let nothing escape you in your Letters. Direct
them for me however to Mrs. Knollys's, till further
notice. 
* *
Observe, my dear, that I don't blame You by
all this—Your Relations only are in fault! —Yet how
you came to change your mind is the surprising thing. 
How to break it to my Mother, I know not. Yet,
if she hear it first from any other, and find I knew it
before, she will believe it to be by my connivance! — 
Yet, as I hope to live, I know not how to break it
to her. 
But this is teazing you. —I am sure, without intention. 
Let me now repeat my former advice—If you are
not married by this time, be sure delay not the Ceremony. 
Since things are as they are, I wish it were
thought that you were privately married before you
went away. If these men plead Authority to our
pain, when we are theirs—why should we not, in such
a case as this, make some good out of the hated word,
for our reputation, when we are induced to violate a
more natural one? 
Your Brother and Sister [That vexes me almost as
much as any-thing!] have now their ends. Now, I
suppose, will go forward alterations of Wills, and
such-like spiteful doings. 
* *
Miss Lloyd and Miss Biddulph this moment send
up their names. They are out of breath, Kitty says,
to speak to me—Easy to guess their errand! —I must
see my Mother, before I see them. I have no way
but to shew her your Letter, to clear myself. I shall
not be able to say a word, till she has run herself out
of her first breath. —Forgive me, my dear—Surprize
makes me write thus. If your messenger did not
wait, and were not those young Ladies below, I
would write it over again, for fear of afflicting you. 

I send what you write for. If there be any-thing
else you want that is in my power, command without
reserve 
Your ever-affectionate
Anna Howe. 