



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 
[Referred to in Vol. V. p. 291.] 

Thursday Night. 
He had found me out at Hamstead: Strangely
found me out; for I am still at a loss to know
by what means. 
I was loth, in my billet of the 9th (a) , to tell you
so, for fear of giving you apprehensions for me; and
besides, I hoped then to have a shorter and happier
issue to account to you for, thro' your assistance, than
I met with. 
She then gives a Narrative of all that passed at Hamstead
between herself, Mr. Lovelace, Capt. Tomlinson,
and the women there, to the same effect with
that so amply given by Mr. Lovelace. 
Mr. Lovelace, finding all he could say, and all
Capt. Tomlinson could urge, ineffectual, to prevail
upon me to forgive an outrage so flagrantly premeditated,
rested all his hopes on a visit which was to be
paid me by Lady Betty Lawrance and Miss Montague. 
In my uncertain situation, my prospects all so dark,
I knew not to whom I might be obliged to have recourse
in the last resort: And as those Ladies had the
best of characters, insomuch that I had reason to regret,
that I had not from the first thrown myself upon 

their protection (when I had forfeited that of my own
friends) I thought I would not shun an interview with
them, tho' I was too indifferent to their Kinsman to
seek it, as I doubted not, that one end of their visit
would be to reconcile me to him. 
On Monday the 12th of June, these pretended Ladies
came to Hamstead; and I was presented to them,
and they to me, by their Kinsman. 
They were richly dressed, and stuck out with
jewels; the pretended Lady Betty's were particularly
very fine. 
They came in a coach-and-four, hired, as was
confessed, while their own was repairing in town: A
pretence made, I now perceive, that I should not guess
at the imposture by the want of the real Lady's
Arms upon it. Lady Betty was attended by her woman,
whom she called Morrison; a modest country-looking
person. 
I had heard, that Lady Betty was a fine woman,
and that Miss Montague was a beautiful young Lady,
genteel, and graceful, and full of vivacity—Such were
these impostors; and having never seen either of them,
I had not the least suspicion, that they were not the
Ladies they personated; and being put a little out of
countenance by the richness of their dresses, I could
not help (fool that I was!) to apologize for my own. 
The pretended Lady Betty then told me, that her
Nephew had acquainted them with the situation of
affairs between us. And altho' she could not but say,
that she was very glad that he had not put such a slight
upon his Lordship and them, as report had given them
cause to apprehend (the reasons for which report,
however, she much approved of); yet it had been
matter of great concern to her, and to her Niece
Montague, and would to the whole family, to find
so great a misunderstanding subsisting between us, as,
if not made up, might distance all their hopes. 
She could easily tell who was in fault, she said. 

And gave him a look both of anger and disdain; asking
him, How it was possible for him to give an offence
of such a nature to so charming a Lady [so she
called me] as should occasion a resentment so strong? 
He pretended to be awed into shame and silence. 
My dearest Niece, said she, and took my hand (I
must call you Neice, as well from Love, as to humour
your Uncle's laudable Expedient) permit me to
be, not an advocate, but a mediatrix for him; and
not for his sake, so much as for my own, my Charlotte's,
and all our family's. The indignity he has
offered to you, may be of too tender a nature to be
enquired into. But as he declares, that it was not a
premeditated offence; whether, my dear [for I was
going to rise upon it in my temper] it were or not; 
and as he declares his sorrow for it (and never did
creature express a deeper sorrow for any offence than
he); and as it is a reparable one; let Us, for this
one time, forgive him; and thereby lay an obligation
upon this man of errors—Let US, I say, my dear: 
For, Sir [turning to him] an offence against such a
peerless Lady as This, must be an offence against
Me, against your Cousin here, and against all the Virtuous
of our Sex. 
See, my dear, what a creature he had picked out! 
Could you have thought there was a woman in the
world who could thus express herself, and yet be vile? 
But she had her principal instructions from him, and
those written down too, as I have reason to think: 
For I have recollected since, that I once saw this
Lady Betty (who often rose from her seat, and took
a turn to the other end of the room with such emotion
as if the joy of her heart would not let her sit
still) take out a paper from her Stays, and look into
it, and put it there again. She might oftener, and I
not observe it; for I little thought that there could
be such impostors in the world. 
I could not forbear paying great attention to what 

she said. I found my tears ready to start; I drew
out my handkerchief, and was silent. I had not been
so indulgently treated a great while by a person of
character and distinction [such I thought her]; and
durst not trust to the accent of my voice. 
The pretended Miss Montague joined in on this occasion; 
and drawing her chair close to me, took my
other hand, and besought me to forgive her Cousin; 
and consent to rank myself as one of the principals of
a family, that had long, very long, coveted the honour
of my alliance. 
I am ashamed to repeat to you, my dear, now I
know what wretches they are, the tender, the obligeing,
and the respectful things I said to them. 
The wretch himself then came forward. He threw
himself at my feet. How was I beset! —The women
grasping one my right hand, the other my left: The
pretended Miss Montague pressing to her lips more
than once the hand she held: The wicked man on
his knees, imploring my forgiveness; and setting before
me my happy and my unhappy prospects, as I
should forgive or not forgive him. All that he
thought would affect me in his former pleas, and
those of Capt. Tomlinson, he repeated. He vowed,
he promised, he bespoke the pretended Ladies to answer
for him; and they engaged their Honours in his
behalf. 
Indeed, my dear, I was distressed, perfectly distressed. 
I was sorry that I had given way to this
visit. For I knew not how, in tenderness to relations
(as I thought them) so worthy, to treat so freely
as he deserved, a man nearly allied to them: So that
my arguments, and my resolutions, were deprived of
their greatest force. 
I pleaded, however, my application to you. I
expected every hour, I told them, an Answer from
you to a Letter I had written, which would decide
my future destiny. 

They offered to apply to you themselves in person,
in their own behalf, as they politely termed it. 
They besought me to write to you to hasten your
Answer. 
I said, I was sure, that you would write the moment
that the event of an application to be made to a
third person enabled you to write. But as to the success
of their requests in behalf of their Kinsman,
That depended not upon the expected Answer; for
that, I begged their pardon, was out of the question. 
I wished him well. I wished him happy. But I was
convinced, that I neither could make him so, nor he
me. 
Then! how the wretch promised! —How he vowed! 
—How he entreated! —And how the Women
pleaded! —And they engaged themselves, and the Honour
of their whole family, for his just, his kind, his
tender behaviour to me. 
In short, my dear, I was so hard set, that I was
obliged to come to a more favourable compromise
with them, than I had intended. I would wait for
your Answer to my Letter, I said: And if that made
doubtful or difficult the change of measures I had resolved
upon, and the scheme of life I had formed, I
would then consider of the matter; and, if they
would permit me, lay all before them, and take their
advice upon it, in conjunction with yours, as if the
one were my own Aunt, and the other were my own
Cousin. 
They shed tears upon this—Of joy they called them: 
—But since, I believe, to their credit, bad as they
are, that they were tears of temporary remorse; for
the pretended Miss Montague turned about, and, as
I remember, said, There was no standing it. 
But Mr. Lovelace was not so easily satisfied. He
was fixed upon his villainous measures perhaps; and
so might not be sorry to have a pretence against me. 
He bit his lip—He had been but too much used, he 

said, to such indifference, such coldness, in the very
midst of his happiest prospects. —I had on twenty occasions
shewn him, to his infinite regret, that any favour
I was to confer upon him was to be the result of
—There he stopt—And not of my choice. 
This had like to have set all back again. I was exceedingly
offended. But the pretended Ladies interposed. 
The elder severely took him to task. He
ought, she told him, to be satisfied with what I had
said. She desired no other condition. And what, Sir,
said she, with an Air of Authority, would you commit
errors, and expect to be rewarded for them? 
They then engaged me in a more agreeable conversation
—The pretended Lady declared, that she, Lord
M. and Lady Sarah, would directly and personally interest
themselves to bring about a general Reconciliation
between the two families, and this either in open
or private concert with my Uncle Harlowe, as should
be thought fit. Animosities on one side had been carried
a great way, she said; and too little care had
been shewn on the other to mollify or heal. My Father
should see that they could treat him as a Brother
and a Friend; and my Brother and Sister should be
convinced, that there was no room either for the Jealousy
or Envy they had conceived from motives too
unworthy to be avowed. 
Could I help, my dear, being pleased with them?— 
Permit me here to break off. The task grows too
heavy, at present, for the heart of 
Your Clarissa Harlowe. 