



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
In Continuation. 

Never was there such a pair of scribbling Lovers
as we;—yet perhaps whom it so much concerns
to keep from each other what each writes. She won't
have any-thing else to do. I would, if she'd let me. 
I am not reformed enough for a Husband. —Patience
is a virtue, Lord M. says. Slow and sure, is another
of his sentences. If I had not a great deal of that 

virtue, I should not have waited the Harlowes own time
of ripening into execution my plots upon Themselves,
and upon their Goddess-Daughter. 
My Beloved has been writing to her saucy friend,
I believe, all that has befallen her, and what has passed
between us hitherto. She will possibly have fine subjects
for her pen, if she be as minute as I am. 
I would not be so barbarous, as to permit old Antony
to set Mrs. Howe against her, did I not dread the
consequences of the correspondence between the two
young Ladies. So lively the one, so vigilant, so prudent
both, who would not wish to outwit such girls, and
to be able to twirl them round his finger? 
My Charmer has written to her Sister for her
Cloaths, for some Gold, and for some of her Books. 
What Books can tell her more than she knows? But
I can. So she had better study me. 
She may write. She must be obliged to me at last,
with all her pride. Miss Howe indeed will be ready
enough to supply her; but I question, whether she
can do it without her Mother, who is as covetous as
the grave. And my agent's agent, old Antony, has
already given the Mother a hint which will make her
jealous of pecuniaries. 
Besides, if Miss Howe has money by her, I can
put her Mother upon borrowing it of her: Nor blame
me, Jack, for contrivances that have their foundation
in generosity. Thou knowest my spirit; and that I
should be proud to lay an obligation upon my Charmer
to the amount of half, nay, to the whole of my Estate. 
Lord M. has more for me than I can ever wish for. 
My predominant passion is Girl, not Gold; nor value
I This, but as it helps me to That, and gives me independence. 
I was forced to put it into the sweet novice's head,
as well for my sake as for hers (lest we should be traceable
by her direction) whither to direct the sending of
her cloaths, if they incline to do her that small piece of
justice. 

If they do, I shall begin to dread a Reconciliation; 
and must be forced to muse for a contrivance or two, to
prevent it; and to avoid mischief. For that (as I have
told honest Joseph Leman) is a great point with me. 
Thou wilt think me a sad fellow, I doubt. But
are not all Rakes sad fellows? —And art not thou, to
thy little power, as bad as any? If thou dost all that's
in thy head and in thy heart to do, thou art worse than
I; for I do not, I assure thee. 
I proposed, and she consented, that her cloaths, or
whatever else her relations should think fit to send her,
should be directed to thy Cousin Osgood's. Let a
special messenger, at my charge, bring me any Letter,
or portable parcel, that shall come. If not portable,
give me notice of it. But thou'lt have no trouble of
this sort from her relations, I dare be sworn. And,
in this assurance, I will leave them, I think, to act
upon their own heads. A man would have no more
to answer for than needs must. 
But one thing, while I think of it; which is of
great importance to be attended to—You must hereafter
write to me in character, as I shall do to you. It
would be a confounded thing to be blown up by a train
of my own laying. &dotup;And who knows what opportunities
a man in love may give against himself? In
changing a coat or waistcoat, something might be
forgotten. I once suffered that way. Then for the
Sex's curiosity, it is but remembring, in order to
guard against it, that the name of their common
Mother was Eve.&dotup; 
Another thing remember; I have changed my
name: Changed it without an act of Parliament. 
‘Robert Huntingford’ it is now. Continue Esquire. 
It is a respectable addition, altho' every sorry fellow
assumes it, almost to the banishment of the usual travelling
one of Captain. ‘To be left, till called for,
at the posthouse at Hertford.’ 
Upon naming thee, she asked thy character. I gave 

thee a better than thou deservest, in order to do credit
to Myself. Yet I told her, that thou wert an aukward
fellow; and this to do credit to Thee, that she may
not, if ever she be to see thee, expect a cleverer man
than she'll find. Yet thy apparent aukwardness befriends
thee not a little: For wert thou a sightly mortal,
people would discover nothing extraordinary in thee,
when they conversed with thee: Whereas seeing a
Bear, they are surprised to find in thee any-thing that
is like a Man. Felicitate thyself then upon thy defects; 
which are evidently thy principal perfections; and
which occasion thee a distinction which otherwise thou
wouldst never have. 
The lodgings we are in at present are not convenient. 
I was so delicate as to find fault with them, as
communicating with each other, because I knew she
would; and told her, That were I sure she was safe
from pursuit, I would leave her in them (since such
was her earnest desire and expectation) and go to
London. 
She must be an Infidel against all reason and appearances,
if I do not banish even the shadow of mistrust
from her heart. 
Here are two young likely Girls, Daughters of the
Widow Sorlings; that's the name of our landlady. 
I have only, at present, admired them in their dairy-works. 
How greedily do the Sex swallow praise! — 
&dotup;Did I not once, in the streets of London, see a well-dressed
handsome girl, laugh, bridle, and visibly enjoy
the praises of a sooty dog, a chimney-sweeper; who,
with his empty sack cross his shoulder, after giving
her the way, stopt, and held up his brush and shovel
in admiration of her? —Egad, girl, thought I, I despise
thee as Lovelace: But were I the chimney-sweeper,
and could only contrive to get into thy presence,
my life to thy virtue, I would have thee.&dotup; 
So pleased was I with the younger Sorlings, for the
elegance of her works, that I kissed her, and she made 

me a courtesy for my condescension; and blushed, and
seemed sensible all over: Encouragingly, yet innocently,
she adjusted her handkerchief, and looked towards the
door, as much as to say, She would not tell, were I
to kiss her again. 
Her elder Sister popt upon her. The conscious girl
blushed again, and looked so confounded, that I made
an excuse for her, which gratified both. Mrs. Betty,
said I, I have been so much pleased with the neatness
of your dairy-works, that I could not help saluting
your Sister: You have your share of merit in them, I
am sure—Give me leave— 
Good souls! —I like them both—She courtesied too! 
—How I love a grateful temper! O that my Clarissa
were but half so acknowledging! 
I think I must get one of them to attend my Charmer
when she removes. —The Mother seems to be a notable
woman. She had not best, however, be too notable: 
Since, were she by suspicion to give a face of difficulty
to the matter, it would prepare me for a trial with one
or both the Daughters. 
Allow me a little rhodomontade, Jack—But really
and truly my heart is fixed. I can think of no creature
breathing of the Sex, but my Gloriana. 