



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, May 30. 
I have a letter from Lord M. Such a one as I
would wish for, if I intended matrimony. But
as matters are circumstanced, I cannot think of shewing
it to my Beloved. 
My Lord regrets, ‘that he is not to be the Lady's
nuptial father. He seems apprehensive that I have 

still, specious as my reasons are, some mischief in
my head.’ 
He graciously consents, ‘that I may marry when I
please; and offers one or both of my cousins to
assist my bride, and to support her spirits on the occasion; 
since, as he understands, she is so much afraid
to venture with me. 
‘Pritchard, he tells me, has his final orders to draw
up deeds, to assign over to me in perpetuity 1000l.
per annum; which he will execute the same hour
that the Lady in person owns her marriage.’ 
He consents, ‘that the jointure be made from my
own estate.’ 
He wishes, ‘that the Lady would have accepted of
his draught; and commends me for tendering it to
her. But reproaches me for pride in not keeping it
myself. What the right-side gives up, the left, he
says, may be the better for.’ 
The girls, he means. 
With all my heart. If I can have Miss Clarissa
Harlowe, the devil take every thing else. 
A good deal of other stuff writes this stupid Peer; 
scribbling in several places half a dozen lines, apparently
for no other reason, but to bring in as many
musty words in an old saw. 
If thou askest, How I can manage, since my Beloved
will wonder, that I have not an answer from
my Lord to such a letter as I wrote to him; and if I
own I have one, will expect that I should shew it to
her, as I did my letter? —This I answer—That I
can be informed by Pritchard, that my Lord has the
gout in his right-hand; and has ordered him to attend
me in form, for my particular orders about the transfer: 
And I can see Pritchard, thou knowest, at the
King's Arms, or where I please in town; and he, by
word of mouth, can acquaint me with every thing
in my Lord's letter that is necessary for her to know. 
Whenever it suits me, I can restore the old Peer to 

his right hand, and then can make him write a much
more sensible letter than this he has now sent me. 
Thou knowest, that an adroitness in the art of manual
imitation, was one of my earliest attainments. 
It has been said, on this occasion, that had I been a
bad man in meum and tuum matters, I should not have
been fit to live. As to the girls, we hold it no sin to
cheat them. And are we not told, that in being well
deceived consists the whole of human happiness? 
Wednesday, May 31. 
All still happier and happier. A very high honour
done me: A chariot, instead of a coach, permitted,
purposely to indulge me in the subject of subjects. 
Our discourse in this sweet airing turned upon our
future manner of life. The day is bashfully promised
me. Soon, was the answer to my repeated urgency. 
Our equipage, our servants, our liveries, were parts of
the delightful subject. A desire that the wretch who
had given me intelligence out of the family [honest
Joseph Leman] might not be one of our menials; 
and her resolution to have her faithful Hannah, whether
recovered or not; were signified; and both as
readily assented to. 
The reconciliation prospect was enlarged upon. If
her uncle Harlowe will but pave the way to it, and if
it can be brought about, she shall be happy. —Happy,
with a sigh, as it is Now possible she can be! —She
won't forbear, Jack! 
I told her, that I had heard from Pritchard, just before
we set out, and expected him in town to-morrow
from Lord M. to take my directions. I spoke with
gratitude of my Lord's kindness to me; and with
pleasure of my aunt's and cousin's veneration for her: 
As also of his Lordship's concern that his gout, hinder'd
him from writing a reply with his own hand to
my last. 
She pitied my Lord. She pitied poor Mrs. Fretchville 

too; for she had the goodness to inquire after her. 
The dear creature pitied every-body that seemed to
want pity. Happy in her own prospects, she has leisure
to look abroad, and wishes every-body equally
happy. 
It is likely to go very hard with Mrs. Fretchville. 
Her face, which she had valued herself upon, will
be utterly ruin'd. This good, however, she may
reap from so great an evil: —As the greater malady
generally swallows up the less, she may have a grief
on this occasion, that may diminish the other grief,
and make it tolerable. 
I had a gentle reprimand for this light turn on so
heavy an evil. —For what was the loss of beauty to
the loss of a good husband? —Excellent creature! 
Her hopes, and her pleasure upon those hopes, that
Miss Howe's mother would be reconciled to her, were
also mentioned. Good Mrs. Howe was her word, for
a woman so covetous, and so remorseless in her covetousness,
that no one else would call her good. But
this dear creature has such an extension in her love, as
to be capable of valuing the most insignificant animal
related to those whom she respects. Love me, and
love my dog, I have heard Lord M. say. —Who knows,
but that I may in time, in compliment to myself, bring
her to think well of thee, Jack? 
But what am I about? —Am I not all this time
arraigning my own heart? —I know I am, by the remorse
I feel in it, while my pen bears testimony to
her excellence. But yet I must add (for no selfish
consideration shall hinder me from doing justice to this
admirable creature), that in this conversation she demonstrated
so much prudent knowlege in every thing
that relates to that part of the domestic management,
which falls under the care of a mistress of a family, that
I believe she has no equal of her years in the world. 
I break off, to re-peruse some of Miss Howe's virulence. 

* *
Cursed letters, these of Miss Howe, Jack! —Do
thou turn back to those of mine, where I take notice of
them. —I proceed— 
Upon the whole, my charmer was all gentleness,
all ease, all serenity, throughout this sweet excursion. 
Nor had she reason to be otherwise: For it being the
first time that I had the honour of her company sola,
I was resolved to encourage her, by my respectfulness,
to repeat the favour. 
On our return, I found the counsellor's clerk
waiting for me, with a draught of the marriage-settlements. 
They are drawn, with only the necessary variations,
from those made for my mother. The original of
which (now returned by the counsellor), as well as the
new draughts, I have put into my Beloved's hands. 
This made the lawyer's work easy; nor can she
have a better precedent; the great Lord S. having
settled them, at the request of my mother's relations,
all the difference, my charmer's are 100l. per annum
more than my mother's. 
I offer'd to read to her the old deed, while she looked
over the draught; for she had refused her presence at
the examination with the clerk: But this she also declined. 
I suppose she did not care to hear of so many children,
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and
seventh sons, and as many daughters, to be begotten
upon the body of the said Clarissa Harlowe. 
Charming matrimonial recitativoes!—tho' it is always
said lawfully begotten too—As if a man could
beget children unlawfully upon the body of his own
wife. —But thinkest thou not that these arch rogues
the lawyers hereby intimate, that a man may have
children by his wife before marriage? —This must be
what they mean. Why will these sly fellows put an
honest man in mind of such rogueries? —But hence, 

as in numberless other instances, we see, that Law and
Gospel are two very different things. 
—Dorcas, in our absence, tried to get at the wainscot
box in the dark closet. But it cannot be done
without violence. And to run a risque of consequence
now, for mere curiosity sake, would be inexcusable. 
Mrs. Sinclair and the nymphs are all of opinion, that
I am now so much of a favourite, and have such a
visible share in her confidence, and even in her affections,
that I may do what I will, and plead violence
of passion; which, they will have it, makes violence
of action pardonable with their sex; as well as an allowed
extenuation with the unconcerned of both
sexes; and they all offer their helping hands. Why
not? they say: Has she not passed for my wife before
them all? —And is she not in a fine way of being reconciled
to her friends; which was the pretence for
postponing consummation? 
They again urge me, since it is so difficult to make
night my friend, to an attempt in the day. They remind
me, that the situation of their house is such, that
no noises can be heard out of it; and ridicule me for
making it necessary for a lady to be undressed. It was
not always so with me, poor old man! Sally told me; 
saucily flinging her handkerchief in my face. 