


Lett.
I.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Humorous description of Mr. Hickman.
Imagines, from what Lovelace, Hickman, and Solmes,
are now, what figures they made when boys at school.
II.From the same. Useful observations in general life. Severe censures
of the Harlowe family, for their pride, formality, and other bad
qualities.
III.From the same. Mr. Hickman's conversation with two of Lovelace's
libertine companions.
IV.From the same. An unexpected visit from Mr. Lovelace. What passes
in it. Repeats her advice to her to resume her Estate.
V. VI. VII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Further particulars of the persecutions
she receives from her violent Brother.
VIII.From the same. Impertinence of Betty Barnes. Overhears her
Brother and Sister encourage Solmes to persevere in his address. She
writes warmly to her Brother upon it.
IX.From the same. Receives a provoking Letter from her Sister. Writes
to her Mother. Her Mother's severe Reply. Is impatient. Desires
Miss Howe's advice what course to pursue. Tries to compose her angry
passions at her harpsichord. An Ode to Wisdom, by a Lady.
X.From the same. Chides her for misrepresenting Mr. Hickman. Fully
answers her arguments about resuming her Estate. Her impartiality
with regard to what Miss Howe says of Lovelace, Solmes, and her
Brother. Reflections on Revenge and Duelling.
XI.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Sir Harry Downeton's account of what
passed between himself and Solmes. She wishes her to avoid both men.
Admires her for her manifold excellencies.
XII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Why she cannot overcome her aversion
to Solmes. Sharp Letter to Lovelace. On what occasion. All his
difficulties, she tells him, owing to his faulty morals; which level all
distinction. Insists upon his laying aside all thoughts of her. Her
impartial and dutiful reasonings on her difficult situation.
XIII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. A notable debate between her and her
Mother on her case. Those who marry for Love seldom so happy
as those who marry for Convenience. Picture of a modern Marriage.
A Lesson both to Parents and Children in Love-cases. Handsome
men seldom make good Husbands. Miss Howe reflects on the Harlowe
family, as not famous for strictness in Religion or Piety. Her
Mother's partiality for Hickman.
XIV.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Her increased apprehensions. Warmly
defends her own Mother. Extenuates her Father's failings; and expostulates

with her on her undeserved treatment of Mr. Hickman. A
Letter to her from Solmes. Her spirited Answer. All in an uproar
upon it. Her Aunt Hervey's angry Letter to her. She writes to her
Mother. Her Letter returned unopened. To her Father. He tears
her Letter in pieces, and sends it back to her. She then writes a
pathetic Letter to her Uncle Harlowe.
XV.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Receives a gentler Answer than she expected
from her Uncle Harlowe. Makes a new proposal in a Letter
to him, which she thinks must be accepted. Her Relations assembled
upon it. Her opinion of the sacrifice which a Child ought to make
to her Parents.
XVI.From the same. She tells her, that the proposal she had made to
her Relations, on which she had built so much, is rejected. Betty's
saucy report upon it. Her Brother's provoking Letter to her. Her
Letter to her Uncle Harlowe on the occasion. Substance of a Letter
excusatory from Mr. Lovelace. He presses for an Interview with her
in the garden.
XVII.From the same. Her Uncle's angry Answer. Substance of an
humble Letter from Mr. Lovelace. He has got a violent cold and
hoarseness, by his fruitless attendance all night in the coppice. She
is sorry he is not well. Makes a conditional appointment with him
for the next night, in the garden. Hates tyranny in all shapes.
XVIII.From the same. A characteristic dialogue with the pert Betty
Barnes. Women have great advantage over men in all the powers
that relate to the imagination. Makes a request to her Uncle Harlowe,
which is granted, on condition that she will admit of a visit
from Solmes. She complies; and appoints that day sevennight.
Then writes to Lovelace to suspend the intended Interview. Desires
Miss Howe to enquire into Lovelace's behaviour at the little Inn he
puts up at in his way to Harlowe-Place.
XIX.From the same. Receives a Letter from Lovelace, written in
very high terms, on her suspending the Interview. Her angry Answer.
Resolves against any further correspondence with him.
XX.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Humorous account of her Mother and
Mr. Hickman in their little journey to visit her dying Cousin.
Raillies her on her present displeasure with Lovelace.
XXI.Mr. Hickman, To Mrs. Howe. Resenting Miss Howe's treatment
of him.
XXII.Mrs. Howe. In Answer.
XXIII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Observes upon the contents of her seven
last Letters. Advises her to send to her all the Letters and Papers she
would not have her Relations see; also a parcel of cloaths, linen,
&c. Is in hopes of procuring an asylum for her with her Mother, if
things come to extremity.
XXIV.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Requisites of true satire. Rejoices in
the hopes she gives her of her Mother's protection. Deposits a parcel
of linen, and all Lovelace's Letters. Useful observations relating to
family-management, and to neatness of person and dress. Her contrivances
to amuse Betty Barnes.

XXV.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Result of her enquiry after Lovelace's
behaviour at the Inn. Doubts not but he has ruined the
Innkeeper's Daughter. Passionately inveighs against him.
XXVI.Clarissa. In Answer. Is extremely alarmed at Lovelace's supposed
baseness. Declares her abhorrence of him.
XXVII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Lovelace, on enquiry, comes out to
be not only innocent with regard to his Rosebud, but generous. Miss
Howe raillies her on the effects this intelligence must have upon her
generosity.
XXVIII.Clarissæ. In Reply. Acknowleges her generosity engaged in his
favour. Frankly expresses tenderness and regard for him; and owns,
that the intelligence of his supposed baseness had affected her more than
she thinks it ought. Contents of a Letter she has received from him.
Pities him. Writes to him, that her rejection of Solmes is not in
favour to himself; for that she is determined to hold herself free to
obey her Parents (as she had offered to them) if they insisted on her
renouncing him, as a condition of their giving up Solmes. Reproaches
him for his libertine declarations in all companies against Matrimony.
Her notions of filial duty, notwithstanding the persecutions
she meets with.
XXIX.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Her treatment of Mr. Hickman on
his intrusion into her company. Applauds Clarissa for the generosity
of her spirit, and the greatness of her mind.
XXX.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Dr. Lewen makes her a formal
visit. Affected civility of her Brother and Sister to her. Is visited
by her Uncle Harlowe: And by her Sister. She penetrates the low
art designed in this change of their outward behaviour. Substance of
Lovelace's reply to her last. He acknowleges his folly for having
ever spoken lightly of Matrimony.
XXXI.From the same. Another Letter from Mr. Lovelace; in
which he expresses himself extremely apprehensive of the issue of her
Interview with Solmes. Presses her to escape; proposes means for
effecting it; and threatens to rescue her by violence, if they attempt
to carry her to her Uncle Antony's against her will. Her terror
on this occasion. She insists, in her answer, on his forbearing to
take any rash step; and expresses herself highly dissatisfied, that he
should presume upon such an interest in her esteem, as to think himself
entitled to dispute her Father's authority in removing her to her Uncle's.
She relies on Mrs. Howe's protection till her Cousin Morden arrives.
XXXII.From the same. A visit from her Aunt Hervey, preparative to
the approaching Interview with Solmes. Her Aunt tells her what
is expected on her having consented to that Interview.
XXXIII. XXXIV.From the same. A particular account of what passed
in the Interview with Solmes; and of the parts occasionally taken in
it by her boistrous Uncle, by her brutal Brother, by her implacable
Sister, and by her qualifying Aunt. Her perseverance and distress.
Her Cousin Dolly's tenderness for her. Her closet searched for papers.
—All the pens and ink they find taken from her.
XXXV.From the same. Substance of a Letter from Lovelace.

His proposals, promises, and declarations. All her present wish is,
to be able to escape Solmes, on one hand, and to avoid incurring the
disgrace of refuging with the family of a man at enmity with her own,
on the other. Her emotions behind the yew-hedge on seeing her Father
going into the garden. Grieved at what she hears him say. Dutiful
message to her Mother. Harshly answered. She censures Mr.
Lovelace for his rash threatenings to rescue her. Justifies her friends
for resenting them; and condemns herself for corresponding with him
at first.
XXXVI.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Is vexed at the heart to be obliged
to tell her, that her Mother refuses to receive and protect her. Offers
to go away privately with her.
XXXVII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Her disinterested arguments in Mrs.
Howe's favour, on her refusal to receive her. All her consolation,
that her unhappy situation is not owing to her own inadvertence or folly.
Is afraid she is singled out either for her own faults, or for those of her
family, or perhaps for the faults of both, to be a very unhappy creature.
Justifies the ways of Providence, let what will befall her; 
and argues with exemplary greatness of mind on this subject.
Warmly discourages Miss Howe's motion to accompany her in her
flight.
XXXVIII.From the same. Further instances of her impartiality in condemning
Lovelace, and reasoning for her Parents. Overhears her
Brother and Sister exulting in the success of their schemes; and undertaking,
the one to keep his Father up to his resentment on occasion of
Lovelace's menaces, the other her Mother. Exasperated at this, and
at what her Aunt Hervey tells her, she writes to Lovelace, that
she will meet him the following Monday, and throw herself into the
protection of the Ladies of his family.
XXXIX.From the same. Her frightful dream. Now, that Lovelace
has got her Letter, she repents her appointment.
XL.From the same. Receives a Letter from Mr. Lovelace, full of
transport, vows, and promises. He presumes upon her being his on her
getting away, tho' she has not given him room for such hopes. In
her Answer she tells him, ‘That she looks not upon herself as absolutely
bound by her appointment: That there are many points to be
adjusted between them (were she to leave her Father's house) before
she can give him particular encouragement: That he must expect
she will do her utmost to procure a Reconciliation with her Father,
and his approbation of her future steps.’ All her friends are to be
assembled on the following Wednesday: She is to be brought before
them. How to be proceeded with. Lovelace, in his Reply asks
pardon for writing to her with so much assurance; and declares his
entire acquiescence with her will and pleasure.
XLI.From the same. Confirms her appointment; but tells him
what he is and he is not to expect. Promises, that if she should
change her mind as to withdrawing, she will take the first opportunity
to see him, and acquaint him with her reasons. Reflections on what
she has done. Her deep regrets to be thus driven.
XLII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Reasons why she ought to allow her to

accompany her in her flight. Punctilio at an end, the moment
she is out of her Father's house. Requisites of friendship. Questions,
Whether she will not rather chuse to go off with one of her own Sex,
than with Lovelace? And if not, Whether she should not marry
him as soon as possible?
XLIII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe (Miss Howe's last not received). Lovelace
promises compliance in every article with her pleasure. Her heart
misgives her notwithstanding. She knows not but she may yet recede.
XLIV.From the same. In Answer to Letter xlii. Reflections worthy of
herself on some of the passages in Miss Howe's last Letter. Gives
her home-put questions a full consideration; and determines NOT to
withdraw with Lovelace.
XLV. XLVI.From the same. Substance of her Letter to Lovelace,
revoking her appointment. Thinks herself obliged (her Letters being
not taken away) as well by promise as in order to prevent mischief, to
meet him, and to give him her reasons for revoking.—The hour
of meeting now at hand, she is apprehensive of the contest she shall
have with him, on her refusing to go off with him, as he will come
with a different expectation.
XLVII.From the same. Dated from St. Albans. Writes in the
utmost anguish of mind for the little parcel of linen she had sent to
her with far better hopes. Condemns her own rashness in meeting
Lovelace. Begs her pity, and her prayers.
XLVIII.Miss Howe. In Answer. Is astonished, confounded, aghast,
Repeats her advice to marry Lovelace.
XLIX.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Gives a particular account of her
meeting Lovelace; of her vehement contention with him; and, at
last, of her being terrified out of her pre-determined resolution, and
tricked away. Her grief, and compunction of heart, upon it. Lays
all to the fault of corresponding with him at first against paternal
prohibition. Is incensed against him for his artful dealings with her,
and for his selfish Love.
L.Mr. Lovelace, To Joseph Leman. A Letter which lays open the
whole of his contrivance to get off Clarissa.
LI.Joseph Leman. In Answer.