



My dear good Lady,
You have done me great Honour in the Letter
your Ladyship has been pleased to send
me; and it is an high Pleasure to me, now all
is so happily over, that my poor Papers were
in the least diverting to you, and to such
honourable and worthy Persons as your Ladyship
is pleased to mention. I could wish, my
dear Lady, I might be favour'd with such Remarks 

on my Conduct, (so nakedly set forth,
without any Imagination that they would ever
appear in such an Assembly) as may be of Use
to me in my future Life; and make me, by
that means, more worthy than it is otherwise
possible I can be, of the Honour to which I
am raised. Do, dearest Lady, favour me so far:
I am prepared to receive Blame, and to benefit
by it, and cannot expect Praise so much from
my Actions as from my Intentions; for, indeed,
these were always just and honourable:
But why, even for these, do I talk of Praise?
since, being prompted by Impulses I could not
resist, it can be no Merit in me, to have been
govern'd by them. 
As to the Papers following those in your
Ladyship's Hands, when I say, that they must
needs appear impertinent to such Judges, after
what you know, I dare say, your Ladyship will
not insist upon them; yet I will not scruple
briefly to mention what they contain. 
All my Dangers and Trials were happily at
an End: So that they only contain “The Conversations
that pass'd between your Ladyship's
generous Brother and me; his kind Assureances
of honourable Love to me; my Acknowlegements
of Unworthiness to him; 
Mrs. Jewkes's respectful Change of Behaviour
towards me; Mr. B.'s Reconciliation to Mr.
Williams; his introducing me to the good
Families in the Neighbourhood, and avowing
before them his honourable Intentions. A
Visit from my honest Father, who (not knowing 

what to conclude from the Letter I wrote
to him before I return'd to your honoured
Brother, desiring my Papers from him) came
in great Anxiety of Heart to know the worst,
doubting I had at last been caught by a Stratagem
that had ended in my Ruin. His
joyful Surprize to find how happy I was likely
to be. All the Hopes given me, answer'd,
by the private Celebration of our Nuptials. 
—An Honour so much above all that my
utmost Ambition could make me aspire to,
and which I never can deserve! —Your
Ladyship's Arrival, and Anger, not knowing I
was actually marry'd, but supposing me a vile
wicked Creature; in which Case I should
have deserved the worst of Usage. Mr. B.'s
angry Lessons to me, for daring to interfere,
tho' I thought in the tenderest and most dutiful
Manner, between your Ladyship and
himself. The most acceptable Goodness and
Favour of your Ladyship afterwards to me,
of which, as becomes me, I shall ever retain
the most grateful Sense. My Return to this
sweet Mansion in a manner so different from
my quitting it, where I had been so happy
for Four Years, in paying my Duty to the
best of Mistresses, your Ladyship's excellent
Mother, to whose Goodness, in taking me
from my poor honest Parents, and giving
me what Education I have, I owe, under
God, my Happiness. The Joy of good Mrs.
Jervis, Mr. Longman, and all the Servants,
on this Occasion. Mr. B.'s acquainting me 

with Miss Godfrey's Affair, and presenting to
me the pretty Miss Goodwin, at the Dairyhouse. 
Our Appearance at Church; the
Favour of the Gentry in the Neighbourhood,
who, knowing your Ladyship had not disdain'd
to look upon me, and to be favourable to me,
came the more readily into a neighbourly Intimacy
with me, and still so much the more
readily, as the continued Kindness of my dear
Benefactor, and his condescending Deportment
to me before them, (as if I had been
worthy of the Honour done me) did Credit
to his own generous Act.” 
These, my Lady, down to my good Parents
setting out to this Place, in order to be
settled, by my honoured Benefactor's Bounty,
in the Kentish Farm, are the most material
Contents of my remaining Papers: And tho'
they might be the most agreeable to those for
whom only they were written, yet, as they
were principally Matters of course, after what
your Ladyship has with you; as the Joy of my
fond Heart can be better judg'd of by your Ladyship,
than describ'd by me; and as your Ladyship
is acquainted with all the Particulars that
can be worthy of any other Person's Notice
but my dear Parents; I am sure your Ladyship
will dispense with your Commands: And I
make it my humble Request, that you will. 
For, Madam, you must needs think, that
when my Doubts were dispell'd; when I was
confident all my Trials were over; when I had
a Prospect before me of being so abundantly 

rewarded for what I had suffer'd; when every
Hour rose upon me with new Delight, and
fraught with fresh Instances of generous Kindness
from such a dear Gentleman, my Master,
my Benefactor, the Son of my honoured Lady; 
your Ladyship must needs think, I say, that I
must be too much affected, my Heart must be
too much open'd; and especially as it then
(reliev'd from its past Anxieties and Fears, which
had kept down and damp'd the latent Flame)
first discover'd to me Impressions of which
before I hardly thought it susceptible. —So
that it is scarce possible, that my Joy and my
Prudence, if I were to be try'd by such Judges
of Delicacy and Decorum, as Lord and Lady
Davers, the honoured Countess, and Lady
Betty, could be so intimately, so laudably
coupled, as were to be wish'd: Altho' indeed
the continued Sense of my Unworthiness, and
the Disgrace the dear Gentleman would bring
upon himself, by his generous Goodness to me,
always went hand-in-hand with that my Joy
and my Prudence; and what these Considerations
took from the former, being added to
the latter, kept me steadier and more equal to
myself, than otherwise it was possible such a
young Creature as I could have been. 
Wherefore, my dear good Lady, I hope
I stand excus'd, and shall not bring upon myself
the Censure of being disobedient to your Commands. 
Besides, Madam, since you inform me, that
my good Lord Davers will attend your Ladyship 

hither, I should never dare to look his
Lordship in the Face, if all the Emotions of
my Heart, on such affecting Occasions, stood
confess'd to his Lordship; and, indeed, if I am
ashamed they should to your Ladyship, and to
the Countess, and Lady Betty, whose Goodness
might induce you all Three to think favourably,
in such Circumstances, of one who is of
your own Sex, how would it concern me, that
the same should appear before such Gentlemen
as my Lord and his Nephew? —Indeed I
could not look up to either of them, in the
Sense of this. —And give me Leave to hope,
that some of the Scenes, in the Letters your
Ladyship had, were not read to Gentlemen:
Your Ladyship must needs know which I mean,
and will think of my Two grand Trials of all. 
For tho' I was the innocent Subject of wicked
Attempts, and so cannot, I hope, suffer in any
one's Opinion, for what I could not help; yet,
for your dear Brother's sake, as well as for the
Decency of the Matter, one would not, when
one shall have the Honour to appear before my
Lord and his Nephew, be look'd upon, methinks,
with that Levity of Eye and Thought,
which perhaps hard-hearted Gentlemen may
pass upon one, by reason of those very Scenes,
which would move Pity and Concern, in a
good Lady's Breast, for a poor Creature so attempted. 
So, my dear Lady, be pleased to let me
know, if the Gentlemen have heard all. —I
hope they have not. —And be pleased also to 

point out to me such Parts of my Conduct as
deserve Blame: Indeed, I will try to make a
good Use of your Censure, and am sure I shall
be thankful for it;—for it will make me hope
to be more and more worthy of the Honour I
have, of being exalted into such a distinguish'd
Family, and the right the best of Gentlemen has
given me to style myself 
Your Ladyship's most humble
and most obliged Servant,
P. B. 

