



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Thursday morning, Eight o'clock. 
Her chamber-door has not yet been opened. I
must not expect she will breakfast with me: 
Nor dine with me, I doubt. A little silly soul, what
troubles does she make to herself by her over-niceness! 
—All I have done to her, would have been looked
upon as a frolick only, a romping-bout, and laughed 

off by nine parts in ten of the sex accordingly. The
more she makes of it, the more painful to herself, as
well as to me. 
Why now, Jack, were it not better, upon her own
notions, that she seemed not so sensible, as she will
make herself to be, if she is very angry? 
But perhaps I am more afraid than I need. I believe
I am. From her over-niceness arises my fear, more
than from any extraordinary reason for resentment. 
Next time, she may count herself very happy, if she
come off no worse. 
The dear creature was so frighten'd, and so fatigued
last night, no wonder she lies it out this morning. 
I hope she has had more rest than I have had: Soft
and balmy, I hope, have been her slumbers, that she
may meet me in tolerable temper. All sweetly blushing
and confounded—I know how she will look! —But
why should she, the sufferer, be ashamed, when I, the
trespasser, am not? 
But custom is a prodigious thing. The ladies are
told how much their blushes heighten their graces: 
They practise for them therefore: Blushes come as
readily when they call them, as their tears: Ay, that's
it! While we men, taking blushes for a sign of guilt
or sheepishness, are equally studious to suppress them. 
* *
By my troth, Jack, I am half as much ashamed to
see the women below, as my fair one can be to see me. 
I have not yet open'd my door, that I may not be
obtruded upon by them. 
After all, what devils may one make of the Sex! 
To what a height of—What shall I call it?—must those
of it be arrived, who once loved a man with so much
distinction, as both Polly and Sally loved me, and yet
can have got so much above the pangs of jealousy, so
much above the mortifying reflections that arise from
dividing and sharing with new objects, the affections 

of him they prefer to all others, as to wish for, and
promote a competitorship in his love, and make their
supreme delight consist in reducing others to their
level! —For thou canst not imagine, how even Sally
Martin rejoiced last night in the thought that the lady's
hour was approaching. 
Past Ten o'clock. 
I never long'd in my life for any thing with so
much impatience, as to see my charmer. She has been
stirring, it seems, these two hours. 
Dorcas just now tapp'd at her door, to take her
morning commands. 
She had none for her, was the answer. 
She desired to know, If she would not breakfast? 
A sullen and low-voiced negative she received. 
I will go myself. 
* *
Three different times tapp'd I at the door, but
had no answer. 
Permit me, dearest creature, to inquire after your
health. As you have not been seen to-day, I am impatient
to know how you do. 
Not a word of answer; but a deep sigh, even to
sobbing. 
Let me beg of you, Madam, to accompany me up
another pair of stairs—You'll rejoice to see what a
happy escape we have all had. 
A happy escape indeed, Jack! —For the fire had
scorched the window-board, sindged the hangings,
and burnt through the slit-deal lining of the window-jambs. 
No answer, Madam! —Am I not worthy of one
word? —Is it thus you keep your promise with me? — 
Shall I not have the favour of your company for two
minutes, only for two minutes, in the dining-room? 
Hem! —And a deep sigh!—was all the answer. 

Answer me, but how you do! Answer me but that
you are well! —Is this the forgiveness that was the
condition of my obedience? 
Then, in a faintish but angry voice, Begone from
my door! —Wretch, inhuman, barbarous, and all
that's base and treacherous! —Begone from my door! 
Nor teaze thus a poor creature, intitled to protection,
not outrage. 
Well, Madam, I see how you keep your word
with me! —If a sudden impulse, the effects of an
unthought-of accident, cannot be forgiven— 
O the dreadful weight of a father's curse, thus in
the letter of it, so likely to be fulfilled! 
And then her voice dying away into inarticulate
murmurs, I looked through the key-hole, and saw
her on her knees, her face, tho' not towards me, lifted
up, as well as hands, and these folded, deprecating, I
suppose, that gloomy tyrant's curse. 
I could not help being moved. 
My dearest life! admit me to your presence, but
for two minutes, and confirm your promised pardon; 
and may lightning blast me on the spot, if I offer any
thing but my penitence, at a shrine so sacred! —I
will afterwards leave you for the whole day; and till
to-morrow morning; then to attend, with writings,
all ready to sign, a licence obtained, or, if it cannot,
a minister without one. This once believe me. When
you see the reality of the danger, that gave occasion
for this your unhappy resentment, you will think less
hardly of me. And let me beseech you to perform a
promise, on which I made a reliance not altogether
ungenerous. 
I cannot see you! Would to heaven I never had! 
If I write, that's all I can do. 
Let your writing then, my dearest life, confirm
your promise. And I will withdraw in expectation
of it. 

Past Eleven o'clock. 
Just now she rung her bell for Dorcas; and, with
her door in her hand, only half-open'd, gave her a
billet for me. 
How did the dear creature look, Dorcas? 
She was dressed. Turned her face quite from me. 
Sigh'd, as if her heart would break. 
Sweet creature! —I kissed the wet wafer, and drew
it from the paper with my breath. 
These are the contents. —No inscriptive Sir! No
Mr. Lovelace! 

I cannot see you: Nor will I, if I can help it. 
Words cannot express the anguish of my soul
on your baseness and ingratitude. 
If the circumstances of things are such, that I can
have no way for reconciliation with those who would
have been my natural protectors from such outrages,
but through you (the only inducement I can have to
stay a moment longer in your knowledge), pen and
ink must be, at present, the only means of communication
between us. 
Vilest of men! and most detestable of plotters!
how have I deserved from you the shocking indignities
—But no more—Only for your own sake,
wish not, at least for a week to come, to see 
The undeservedly injured and insulted,
Clarissa Harlowe. 
So thou seest, nothing could have stood me in stead,
but this plot of Tomlinson and her Uncle: To what a
pretty pass, nevertheless, have I brought myself! — 
Had Cæsar been such a fool, he had never passed the
Rubicon. But, after he had passed it, had he retreated,
re infectâ, intimidated by a senatorial edict, what a
pretty figure would he have made in history! —I
might have known, that to attempt a robbery, and
put a person in bodily fear, is as punishable as if the
robbery had been actually committed. 

But not to see her for a week! —Dear pretty soul!
how she anticipates me in every thing! The counsellor
will have finished the writings, ready to sign, today,
or to-morrow, at furthest: The licence with
the parson, or the parson without the licence, must
be also procured within the next four-and-twenty
hours: Pritchard is as good as ready with his indentures
tripartite: Tomlinson is at hand, with a favourable
answer from her Uncle—Yet not to see her for a
week! —Dear sweet soul! —Her good angel is gone
a journey: Is truanting at least. But nevertheless, in
thy week's time, and much less, my charmer, I doubt
not to have completed my triumph! 
But what vexes me of all things, is, that such an
excellent creature should break her word. —Fie, fie,
upon her! —But nobody is absolutely perfect! 'Tis
human to err, but not to persevere—I hope my charmer
cannot be inhuman! 