


Lady G. To Lady L. 


Selby-house, Tuesday, Nov. 14.
Well, my Sister, my Friend, my dear Lady L.
how do you? As well as can be expected, I hope:
The answer of a thousand years old, to every enquirer,
careful or ceremonious. And how does my
dear little boy? As well as can be expected, too—I am
glad of it. 
Here we are! —Every body well, and happy. 
I was afraid my brother would have looked more
polite upon us than familiar, as he invited us not:
But, no! —He was all himself, as Harriet says. He 

met us at our coach-door. He handed out his ward. 
She could not speak. Tears were in her eyes. I could
have beat her with my fan. He kissed her cheek. My
dear child, I thank you most sincerely for your goodness
to your mother. 
I was afraid that her joy would then have been too
much for her. She expanded, she collected, her
plumes. Her spread arms (soon, however, closed)
shewed me, that she with difficulty restrained herself
from falling at his feet. He turned from her to me. 
My best Charlotte, how do you? The journey, I
hope, has not incommoded you. He led me out,
and, taking each of the honest men by the hand, My
dear Lords, you do me honour. He then congratulated
Lord L. on the present you had made him, and
the family, he said. 
At the inner-gate met us our sweet Harriet, with
joy upon one brow, half the cares of this mortal life
on the other—She led us into the Cedar-parlour, my
brother returning to welcome in the two honest men,
and threw her arms about my neck—My dearest Lady
G. how much does your presence rejoice me! —I hope
(and looked at me) your journey—Be quiet, Harriet! 
—You must not think so much of these matters, my
Love. She was a little abashed—Don't be afraid of
me; I will be very good, said I. Then will I be very
thankful, replied she. 
My lovely Emily! turning to her: How does my
sweet friend? Welcome, once more, to Selby-house. 
The girl's heart was full—She, thanking her only
by a deep courtesy, abruptly withdrew to the window; 
and, trying for a third hem, in hopes to stifle her emotion,
it broke into a half-sob, and tears followed. 
Harriet and I looked; she compassionately, I vexedly,
I believe; and both shook our heads at each
other. 
Take no notice, said I, seeing Harriet move towards
the window to her—It will go off of itself
Her joy to see her Harriet, that's all. 

But I must take notice (for she found that Emily
heard her) My dear Emily, my lovely young friend—why,
why— 
I will tell you, madam, interrupted she, and threw
her arms about Harriet's neck, as Harriet (sitting in
the window) clasped hers about her waist; and I will
tell you truth, and nothing but the truth—You wrote
so cool to me, about my coming—And yet I to come! 
But I could not help it—And I thought you now
looked a little severely upon me—But Love, and, I
will say, Duty to you, my dearest Miss Byron, and
nothing else, made me so earnest to come. Say
you forgive me. 
Forgive you, my dearest Emily! —I had only your
sake, my dear, in view. If I wrote with less warmth
than you expected, forgive me. Consider my situation,
my Love. You are, and ever will be, welcome
to me. Your griefs, your joys, are mine—Give me
which you please. 
The girl burst into fresh tears—I, I, I am now as
unable, sobbed she, to bear your goodness, as before I
was your displeasure—But hide, hide me! Here comes
my Guardian! —What now, when he sees me thus,
will become of me? 
She heard his voice at the door, leading in the two
Lords; and they followed by Mr. Selby, Mrs. Selby,
Lucy, Nancy. 
Sir Charles went to the two young Ladies. Harriet
kept her seat, her arms folded about Emily; 
Emily's glowing face in her bosom. 
Sweet emotion! said he, my Emily in tears of joy! 
—What a charming picture! —O my Miss Byron,
how does your tenderness to this amiable child oblige
me! I sever you not; clasping his generous arms
about them both. 
I have afflicted my dear Emily, Sir, without intending
it. I wrote coldly, my precious young friend
thinks; and her Love for me makes her sweetly-sensible 

of my supposed ingratitude. But believe me, my
dear, I love you with a true sisterly tenderness. 
I took the dear girl aside, and gently expostulated
with her, upon the childishness of her behaviour, and
the uneasiness she would give to Miss Byron, as well
as to herself, by repetitions of the like weakness of
mind. 
She promised fair; but, Lady L. I wish there were
more of the child, and less of the woman, in this
affair. Poor thing! she was very thankful for my
advice; and expressed how wrong she was, because it
might discourage her Guardian and Miss Byron, that
now was, from letting her live with them: But for
my life, said she, whatever was the matter with me,
I could not help my foolishness. 
Miss Nancy Selby took Emily up with her; and
uncle Selby and I had a little lively hit at each other,
in the old stile. We drew my brother in. I had not
tried his strength a good while: But, as Harriet said
in one of the sauciest Letters she ever wrote, I soon
found he was the wrong person to meddle with. Yet
he is such a charming raillier, that I wonder he can
resist his talent. No wonder, Harriet would say; because
he has talents so superior to that which, she
says, runs away with his poor sister. 
Emily came down to us very composed, and behaved
prettily enough: But had my brother as much
mannish vanity as some of the sorry fellows have, who
have no pretence for it, he would discern the poor
Emily's foible to have some little susceptibility in it. I
am glad he does not; for it would grieve him. I have
already told him of the sufferings of poor Lady Anne
S. on her hearing he is near marriage; and he expressed
great concern upon it for that really-worthy woman. 
Mr. Reeves, his wife, and Mr. Deane, were abroad
when we arrived. They came in to tea. Our mutual
congratulations on the expected happy event
cheared our own hearts, and would have delighted 

yours. Charming, charming, is the behaviour of my
brother to his Bride-elect. You can have no notion
of it; because at Colnebrook we always saw him
acting under a restraint; owing, as since we have
found, to Honour, Conscience, and a prior Love. 
He diverts and turns the course of subjects that he
thinks would be affecting to her; yet in such a manner,
as it is hardly perceivable to be his intention to
do so: For he makes something of the begun ones
contribute to the new ones, so that, before uncle
Selby is aware of it, he finds himself in one that he
had not in his head when he sat out. —And then he
comes with his ‘What a pize was I going to say? 
But this is not what I had in my head.’ And then,
as my brother knows he misses his scent, only because
it has not afforded the merry mortal something to
laugh at; he furnishes him with some lively and innocent
occasion which produces that effect, and then
Mr. Selby is satisfied. Mrs. Selby and Lucy see how
my brother manages him; yet find it so delicately
done, that something arises from it that keeps the honest
man in credit with himself and every-body else,
for facetiousness, good-humour, good heart, and those
qualities which really are his due, and make him in his
worst subjects tolerable, and in his best valuable. 
Venerable Mrs. Shirley is to be here all to-morrow
and next day. Mr. Deane has chosen Shirley-manor
for his abode, for the time he stays; so has James
Selby, in order to make more room at Selby-house
for us women. There too Mr. and Mrs. Reeves take
up, of choice, their lodgings, tho' here all day. 
Poor Harriet! She told me once, that fear makes
cowards loving. She is so fond of me and Lucy, and
her aunt, at times, it would be a sin not to pity her. 
Yet Lucy once tossed up her head, upon my saying
so—Pity her! why, yes, I think I do, now you have
put me in the head of it: But I don't know whether
she is not more to be envied. Lucy is a polite girl. 

She loves her Harriet. But she knew I should be
pleased with the compliment to my brother. 
Harriet has just now looked in upon me—Writing,
Lady G. And of me? —To Lady L. I suppose? 
She clasped her arms about me: Ah, madam! 
Thursday! Thursday! 
What of Thursday? 
Is the day after to-morrow! 
Every child can tell that, Harriet. 
Ah but I, with such happiness before me, am sillier
than a child! 
Well, but I can tell you something, Harriet. 
What is that? 
That the next day to Thursday, is Friday—The
next to that is Saturday—The next— 
Pish! I'll stay no longer with you, giving me a
gentle tap—I would not have answered you so. 
Away she tript, desiring her affectionate compliments
to dear Lady L. 
Let me see! Have I any more to write? I think
not. But a call for supper makes me leave my paper
unsubscribed. 
* *
Emily behaved very prettily at supper; but it
would have been as well, if she had not thought so
herself: For she boasted of her behaviour afterwards
to me. That made it look like an extraordinary in
her own account. 
Mr. Selby sung us a song, with a good Fox-hunter
air. There is something very agreeable in his facetiousness:
But it would become nobody else. I
think you and I agreed at Dunstable, that he is a fine,
jolly, hearty, handsome ish man—He looks shrewd,
arch, open, a true country gentleman aspect; what
he says is so-so—What he means is better. —He is very
fond of your Lord—But I think rather fonder of mine
—A criterion, Lady L! 
As for Lord G. he is in the situation of Harriet's 

Singleton—He is prepared to laugh the moment Mr.
Selby opens his mouth; especially when he twists his
neck about, turns a glass upside-down, and looks
under his bent brows, at the company round, yet the
table always in his eye: For then we know, that
something is collected, and ready to burst forth. 
Well, good night! good night! good night! — 
Has my Godson-elect done crying yet? What a duce
has he to cry at? Unswaddled, unpinioned, unswathed,
legs and arms at full liberty: But they say crying does
good to the brats—opens their pipes—and so-forth— 
But tell him, that if he does not learn to laugh, as
well as cry, he shall not be related to 
Charlotte G. 

