


Lady G. To Miss Selby. 


Monday, Nov. 27. 
Come, come, Lucy, you do pretty well. Don't
be disheartened, child. Yet you are not quite
the clever girl I once thought you. You, that held 

such a part in the correspondence of our Harriet. —But
you say, you can't help it. Poor girl! I am sorry
for it. Your talents lie in speech, not in writing. — 
Your account of the interview between Orme and
my brother, shews you can't write at all. No, not
you—Poor Lucy! But write one Letter more before
you come to town. Do! my dear! You have
charming subjects before you, yet. 
I, you see, have a talent to make subjects out of
nothing: You, poor soul! can't follow them when
made to your hand. I'll tell you a story of my good
man and his good woman. A short one. The poor
man is very sensible of slight ailments. Happy, as he
is, in a wife, no wonder he is afraid of dying. He
was complaining to me just now [To whom but to
a pitying wife should a man complain when he ails
any-thing?] that he had a troublesome disorder in the
inside of his mouth. I looked very grave; shook my
careful head. I am afraid, my Lord, something is
breeding there, that should not. He started, and
looked concerned. The man will never know me. 
God forbid! said he—afraid of nothing less than a
cancer. Have I not told you a thousand times, my
Lord, of your gaping? As sure as you are alive, your
mouth is fly-blown. 
Expecting compassion, he found a jest, and never
was man so angry. I was forced to take his hand,
and stroke his cheeks with mine, to be friends. 
But, Lucy, let not any of these flippances meet
my brother's eye, or invade his ear; I shall be undone
if they do. 
Caroline is pure well. Her Lord is never out either
of her chamber, or the nursery. 
Aunt Nell makes an admirable nurse. Her parrot
and her squirrel are now neglected for a little marmouset. 
Every-body but the real nurse likes aunt
Nell. The good creature is so understanding, so 

directing! I protest, these old maids think they know
every-thing. The nurse, I see, can't endure her. 
I intersere not. The boy is robust, and they leave
him the free exercise of his limbs, and he has a fine
pipe, and makes the nursery ring whenever he pleases; 
so will do well enough. 
But high-ho, Lucy! all these nursery memento's
how do they sadden and mortify me! The word
mother, what a solemn sound has it to me now; Caroline's
situation before me! —But, come, the evil day
is at distance: Who's afraid? 
Beauchamp sighs for Emily: Emily for somebody
else. Sir Hargrave is still miserable. Poor Sir Harry! 
He still lives! But can life be life, when there is
no hope? 
Write me one more Letter before you come up:
If it be ever so short a one. Don't be proud and saucy:
You imagine, I suppose, that you can't write
as well as Harriet and I. Granted. Attempt it not
therefore. But write as well as you can; and that,
till Harriet can find herself at leisure to resume her
pen, shall content 
Your true friend, and humble servant,
Ch. G. 
No end of your compliments to us in town, you
say. —No end of ours to you in the country,
were I to begin them: Therefore will not say a
word about them. You know my meaning by
my gaping. 

