


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Wednesday Night. 
Sir Hargrave came before six o'clock. He was
richly dressed. He asked for Mr. Reeves. I
was in my closet, writing. He was not likely to be
the better received for the character Sir John Allestree
gave of him. 
He excused himself for coming so early, on the
score of his impatience, and that he might have a little
discourse with them, if I should be engaged before
tea-time. 
Was I within? —I was. —Thank heaven! —I was
very good. 
So he seemed to imagine that I was at home, in
compliment to him. 
Shall I give you, from my cousins, an account of
the conversation before I went down? You know Mrs.
Reeves is a nice observer. 
He had had, he told my cousins, a most uneasy
time of it, ever since he saw me. The devil fetch
him, if he had had one hour's rest. He never saw
a woman before whom he could love as he loved me. 
By his soul, he had no view, but what was strictly
honourable. 
He sometimes sat down, sometimes walk'd about
the room, strutting, and now-and-then adjusting something
in his dress that nobody else saw wanted it. 
He gloried in the happy prospects before him: Not
but he knew I had a little army of admirers: But as
none of them had met with encouragement from me,
he hoped there was room for him to flatter himself that
he might be the happy man. 
I told you, Mr. Reeves, said he, that I will give
you carte blanche as to settlements. What I do for 

so prudent a woman, will be doing for myself. I am
not used, Mr. Reeves, to boast of my fortune [Then,
it seems, he went up to the glass, as if his person
could not fail of being an additional recommendation]
but I will lay before you, or before any of Miss
Byron's friends (Mr. Deane, if she pleases—) my
rent-rolls. There never was a better-conditioned estate. 
She shall live in town, or in the country, as she thinks
fit; and in the latter, at which of my seats she pleases. 
I know I shall have no will but hers. I doubt not
your friendship, Mr. Reeves. I hope for yours,
madam. I shall have great pleasure in the alliance
I have in view, with every individual of your family
—As if he would satisfy them of his friendship, in the
near relation, as the only matter that could bear a
doubt. 
Then he ran on upon the part I bore in the conversation
at Lady Betty Williams's—By his soul, only
the wisest, the wittiest, the most gracefully modest of
women—that was all—Then Ha, ha, ha, hah, poor
Walden! What a silly fellow! He had caught a Tartar! 
—Ha, ha, ha, hah—Shaking his head and his
gay sides: Devil take him if he ever saw a Prig so
fairly taken in! —But I was a sly little rogue! —He
saw that! —By all that's good, I must myself sing small
in her company! —I will never meet at hard-edge with
her—If I did—(and yet I have been thought to carry
a good one) I should be confoundedly gapped, I can
see that [alluding to two knives, I suppose, gapping
each other; and winking with one eye; and, as Mrs.
Reeves described him, looking as wise as if he would
make a compliment to his penetration, at the expence
of his understanding]: But, continued he, as a woman
is more a husband's than a man is a wife's [Have all
the men this prerogative-notion, Lucy? You know it
is a better man's] I shall have a pride worth boasting
of, if I can call such a jewel mine. Poor Walden! — 
Rot the fellow! —I warrant he would not have so 

knowing a wife for the world. —Ha, ha, ha, hah! He
is right: It is certainly right for such narrow pedants
to be afraid of learned women! —Methinks, I see the
fellow, conjurer-like, circumscribed in a narrow circle,
putting into Greek what was better expressed in
English; and forbidding every one's approach within
the distance of his wand! —Hah, hah, hah! —Let
me die, if I ever saw a tragi-comical fellow better
handled! —Then the faces he made—Saw you ever,
Mr. Reeves, saw you ever in your life, such a parcel
of disastrous faces made by one man? 
Thus did Sir Hargrave, laughingly, run on: Nor
left he hardly any-thing for my cousins to say, or to
do, but to laugh with him, and to smile at him. 
On a message that tea was near ready, I went down. 
On my entering the room, he addressed me with an
air of kindness and freedom: Charming Miss Byron!
said he, I hope you are all benignity and compassion. 
You know not what I have suffered since I had the
honour to see you last; bowing very low; then rearing
himself up, holding back his head; and seemed
the taller for having bowed. 
Handsome fop! thought I to myself. I took my
seat; and endeavoured to look easy and free, as usual; 
finding something to say to my cousins, and to him. 
He begged that tea might be postponed for half an
hour; and that, before the servants were admitted, I
would hear him relate the substance of the conversation
that had passed between him and Mr. and Mrs.
Reeves. 
Had not Sir Hargrave intended me an honour, and
had he not a very high opinion of the efficacy of eight
thousand pounds a year in an address of this kind,
I dare say, he would have supposed a little more prefacing
necessary: But, after he had told me, in few
words, how much he was attracted by my character
before he saw me, he thought fit directly to refer himself
to the declaration he had made at Lady Betty Williams's, 

both to Mr. Reeves and myself; and then
talked of large settlements; boasted of his violent
passion; and besought my favour with the utmost earnestness. 
I would have played a little female trifling upon
him, and affected to take his professions only for polite
raillery, which men call making love to young women,
who perhaps are frequently but too willing to take in
earnest what the wretches mean but in jest; but the
fervour with which he renewed (as he called it) his
declaration, admitted not of fooling; and yet his volubility
might have made questionable the sincerity of
his declarations. As therefore I could not think of
encouraging his addresses, I thought it best to answer
him with openness and unreserve. 
To seem to question the sincerity of such professions
as you make, Sir Hargrave, might appear to you as if
I wanted to be assured. But be pleased to know that
you are directing your discourse to one of the plainesthearted
women in England; and you may therefore
expect from me nothing but the simplest truth. I
thank you, Sir, for your good opinion of me; but
I cannot encourage your addresses. 
You cannot, madam, encourage my addresses! And
express yourself so seriously! Good heaven! [He stood
silent a minute or two, looking upon me, and upon
himself; as if he had said, foolish girl! knows she
whom she refuses?] I have been assured, madam, recovering
a little from his surprize, that your affections
are not engaged. But surely it must be a mistake:
Some happy man— 
Is it, interrupted I, a necessary consequence, that
the woman who cannot receive the addresses of Sir
Hargrave Pollexfen, must be engaged? 
Why, madam—As to that—I know not what to
say—But a man of my fortune, and I hope, not absolutely
disagreeable either in person or temper; of
some rank in life—He paused; then resuming—What, 

madam, if you are as much in earnest as you seem,
can be your objection? Be so good as to name
it, that I may know, whether I cannot be so happy as
to get over it? 
We do not, we cannot, all like the same person. 
Women, I have heard say, are very capricious. Perhaps
I am so. But there is a something (we cannot
always say what) that attracts or disgusts us. 
Disgusts! madam—Disgusts! Miss Byron. 
I spoke in general, Sir; I dare say, nineteen women
out of twenty would think themselves favoured in the
addresses of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. 
But you, madam, are the twentieth that I must love:
And be so good as to let me know— 
Pray, Sir, ask me not a reason for a peculiarity. 
Do you not yourself shew a peculiarity in making me
the twentieth? 
Your merit, madam— 
It would be vanity in me, Sir, interrupted I, to allow
a force to that plea. You, Sir, may have more merit,
than perhaps the man I may happen to approve of
better; but—shall I say? (Pardon me, Sir) You do
not—You do not, hesitated I—hit my fancy—Pardon
me, Sir. 
If pardon depends upon my breath, let me die if I
do! Not hit your fancy, madam! [And then he
look'd upon himself all round] Not hit your fancy,
madam! 
I told you, Sir, that you must not expect any-thing
from me but the simplest truth. You do me an honour
in your good opinion; and if my own heart were not,
in this case, a very determined one, I would answer
you with more politeness. But, Sir, on such an occasion
as this, I think it would not be honourable, it
would not be just, to keep a man in an hour's suspense,
when I am in none myself. 
And are you then (angrily) so determined, Miss
Byron? 

I am, Sir. 
Confound me! —And yet I am enough confounded! 
—But I will not take an answer so contrary to my
hopes. Tell me, madam, by the sincerity which you
boast; Are you not engaged in your affections? Is
there not some one happy man, whom you prefer to
all men? 
I am a free person, Sir Hargrave. It is no impeachment
of sincerity, if a free person answers not every
question that may be put to her, by those to whom
she is not accountable. 
Very true, madam. But as it is no impeachment of
your freedom to answer this question either negatively
or affirmatively, and as you glory in your frankness,
let me be beseech you to answer it; Are you, madam,
or are you not, disengaged in your affections? 
Excuse me, Sir Hargrave; I don't think you are
intitled to an answer to this question. Nor, perhaps,
would you be determined by the answer I should make
to it, whether negative or affirmative. 
Give me leave to say, madam, that I have some
little knowlege of Mr. Fenwick and Mr. Greville,
and of their addresses. They have both owned, that
no hopes have you given them; yet declare that they
will hope. Have you, madam, been as explicit to
them, as you are to me? 
I have, Sir. 
Then they are not the men I have to fear—Mr.
Orme, madam— 
Is a good man, Sir. 
Ah! madam! —But why then will you not say
that you are engaged? 
If I own I am; perhaps it will not avail me:
It will still much less, if I say I am not. 
Avail you! dear Miss Byron! I have pride, madam. 
—If I had not, I should not aspire to your favour:
But give me leave to say [and he reddened with anger]
that my fortune, my descent, and my ardent affection 

for you, considered, it may not dis-avail you. Your
relations will at least think so, if I may have the honour
of your consent for applying to them. 
May your fortune, Sir Hargrave, be a blessing to
you. It will, as you do good with it. But were
it twice as much, that alone would have no charms
for me. My duties would be increased with my
power. My fortune is an humble one; but were
it less, it would satisfy my ambition while I am single; 
and if I marry, I shall not desire to live beyond the
estate of the man I choose. 
Upon my soul, madam, you must be mine. Every
word you speak, adds a rivet to my chains. 
Then, Sir, let us say no more upon this subject. 
He then laid a title to my gratitude from the passion
he avowed for me. 
That is a very poor plea, Sir, said I, as you yourself
would think, I believe, were one of our sex, whom
you could not like, to claim a return of love from you
upon it. 
You are too refined, surely, madam. 
Refined! what meant the man by the word in this
place? 
I believe, Sir, we differ very widely in many of our
sentiments. 
We will not differ in one, madam, when I know
yours; such is the opinion I have of your prudence,
that I will adopt them, and make them my own. 
This may be said, Sir; but there is hardly a man
in the world that, saying it, would keep his word:
Nor a woman, who ought to expect he should. 
But you will allow of my visits to your cousins,
madam? 
Not on my account, Sir. 
You will not withdraw if I come? You will not
refuse seeing me? 
As you will be no visitor of mine, I must be allowed
to act accordingly. Had I the least thought of encouraging 

your addresses, I would deal with you as openly
as is consistent with my notions of modesty and decorum. 
Perhaps, madam, from my gay behaviour at Lady
Betty Williams's, you think me too airy a man. You
have doubts of my sincerity: You question my honour. 
That, Sir, would be to injure myself. 
Your objections, then, dear madam? Give me, I
beseech you, some one material objection. 
Why, Sir, should you urge me thus? —When I
have no doubt, it is unnecessary to look into my own
mind for the particular reasons that move me to disapprove
of the addresses of a gentleman whose professions
of regard for me, notwithstanding, intitle him
to civility and acknowlegement. 
By my soul, madam, this is very comical: 

I do not like thee Dr. Fell;
The reason why, I cannot tell—
But I don't like thce, Dr. Fell.

Such, madam, seem to me to be your reasons. 
You are very pleasant, Sir. But let me say, that
if you are in earnest in your professions, you could
not have quoted any-thing more against you than these
humorous lines; since a dislike of such a nature as
is implied by them, must be a dislike arising from
something like a natural aversion; whether just or
not, is little to the purpose. 
I was not aware of that, replied he: But I hope
yours to me is not such a one. 
Excuse me, cousin, said I, turning to Mrs. Reeves:
But I believe I have talked away the tea-time. 
I think not of tea, said she. 
Hang tea, said Mr. Reeves. 
The devil fly away with the tea-kettle, said Sir
Hargrave; let it not have entrance here, till I have
said what I have further to say. And let me tell you, 

Miss Byron, that tho' you may not have a dying lover,
you shall have a resolute one: For I will not cease
pursuing you till you are mine, or till you are the
wife of some other man. 
He spoke this fiercely, and even rudely. I was disgusted
as much at his manner, as with his words. 
I cannot, replied I, but congratulate myself on one
felicity, since I have been in your company, Sir; and
that is, That in this whole conversation, (and I think
it much too long) I have not one thing to reproach
myself with, or be sorry for. 
Your servant, madam, bowing:—But I am of the
contrary opinion. By heaven, madam [with anger,
and an air of insolence] I think you have pride,
madam. —Pride, Sir! 
Cruelty. —Cruelty, Sir!— 
Ingratitude, madam. 
I thought it was staying to be insulted. All that Sir
John Allestree had said of him came into my head. 
Hold, Sir, (for he seemed to be going on) Pride,
Cruelty, Ingratitude, are crimes black enough. If
you think I am guilty of them, excuse me that I retire
for the benefit of recollection. —And making a low
courtesy, I withdrew in haste. He besought me to
return; and followed me to the stairs foot. 
He shewed his pride, and his ill-nature too, before
my cousins, when I was gone. He bit his lip: He
walked about the room; then sitting down, he lamented,
defended, accused, and re-defended himself; 
and yet besought their interest with me. 
He was greatly disturbed, he owned, that with such
honourable intentions, with so much power to make
me happy, and such a will to do so, he should be refused; 
and this without my assigning one reason for it. 
And my cousins (to whom he again referred on that
head) answering him, that they believed me disengaged
in my affections—D—him, he said, if he could account
then for my behaviour to him. 

He, however, threatened Mr. Orme: Who (if any)
he said, was the man I liked. I had acknowleged,
that neither Greville nor Fenwick were. My proud
repulse had stung him, he owned. He begged, that
they would send for me down in their names. 
They liked not the humour he seemed to be in well
enough to comply with his request; and he sent up in
his own name. 
But I returned my compliments: I was busy in
writing [And so I was—To you, my Lucy]; I hoped
Sir Hargrave, and my cousins, would excuse me. I
put them in, to soften my refusal. 
This still more displeased him. He besought their
pardon; but he would haunt me like a ghost. In spite
of man and devil I should be his, he had the presumption
to repeat: And went away with a flaming face. 
Don't you think, my dear, that my cousin Reeves
was a little too mild in his own house; as I am under
his guardianship? But perhaps he was the more patient
for that very reason; and he is one of the bestnatured
men in England. And then 8000l. a year! — 
Yet why should a man of my cousin's independent
fortune—But grandeur will have its charms! 
Thus did Sir Hargrave confirm all that Sir John
Allestree had said of his bad qualities: And I think I
am more afraid of him than ever I was of any man
before. I remember, that mischievous is one of the
bad qualities Sir John attributed to him: And revengeful
another. Should I ever see him again, on the same
errand, I will be more explicite, as to my being absolutely
disengaged in my affections, if I can be so
without giving him hope, lest he should do private
mischief to some one on my account. Upon my word,
I would not, of all the men I have ever seen, be the
wife of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. 
And so much for this first visit of his. I wish his
pride may be enough piqued to make it the last. 
But could you have thought he would have shewn 

himself so soon? —Yet he had paraded so much, before
I went down, to my cousins, and so little expected
a direct and determined repulse, that a man of his
self-consequence might, perhaps, be allowed to be
the more easily piqued by it. 
Lady Betty has sent us notice, that on Thursday
next, there will be a ball at the Opera-house in the
Hay-market. My cousins are to choose what they
will be; but she insists, that my dress shall be left to
her. I am not to know what it is to be, till the day
before, or the very day. If I like it not, she will
not put me to any expence about it. 
You will easily imagine, upon such an alternative,
I shall approve of it, be it what it will. I have only
requested, that I may not be so remarkably dressed, as
to attract the eyes of the company: If I am, I shall
not behave with any tolerable presence of mind. 

