



My dearest Lady,
What a Task have you imposed upon me! 
And, according to the Terms you annex to it,
how shall I acquit myself of it, without incurring
the Censure of Affectation, if I freely accuse myself
as I may deserve, or of Vanity, if I do not? Indeed,
Madam, I have a great many Failings; and you 

don't know the Pain it costs me to keep them under; 
not so much for fear the World should see them,
for, I bless God, I can hope they are not capital,
as for fear they should become capital, if I were to
let them grow upon me. 
And this, surely, Ineed not have told your Ladyship,
and my Lady Countess, who have read my
Papers, and seen my Behaviour in the kind Visit you
made to your dear Brother, and had from both but
too much Reason to censure me, did not your generous
and partial Favour make you overlook my greater
Eailings, and pass under a kinder Name many of my
lesser: For, surely, my good Ladies, you must both
of you have observed, in what you have read and
seen, that I am naturally of a spiteful, saucy Tempet; 
and, with all my appearing Meekness and Humility,
can resent, and sting too, when I think myself provok'd. 
I have also discover'd in myself, on many Occasions,
(of some of which I will by-and-by remind
your Ladyship) a Malignancy of Heart, that, it is
true, lasts but a little while—nor had it need— 
but for which I have often called myself to Account
—to very little Purpose hitherto. 
And, indeed, Madam, (now for a little Extenuation,
as you expect from me) I have some Difficulty,
whether I ought to take much Pains to subdue myself
in some Instances, in the Station to which I
am raised, that otherwise it would have become me
to attempt to do: For it is no easy Task, for a Person
in my Circumstances, to distinguish between the
ought and the ought not; to be humble without
Meanness, and decent without Arrogance. And let
me add, That if all Persons thought as justly as I 

flatter myself I do, of the Inconveniencies, as well
as Conveniencies, which attend their being rais'd to
a Condition above them, they would not imagine
all the World was their own, when they came to be
distinguish'd as I have been: For, what with the
Contempts of superior Relations on one side, (which
all such must undergo at first) the Envy of the
World, and low Reflections arising from that Envy,
on the other, from which no one must hope to be
totally exempted, and the Aukwardness, besides, with
which they support their elevated Condition, if they
have Sense to judge of their own Imperfections; 
and if the Gentleman be not such an one as mine
—(and where will such another be sound?)— 
On all these Accounts, I say, they will be made
sensible, That, whatever they might once think,
Happiness and a high Estate are Two very different
Things. 
But I shall be too grave, when your Ladyship,
and all my kind and noble Friends, expect, perhaps,
I should give the uncommon Subject a pleasanter
Air: Yet what must that Mind be, that is not
serious, when it is obliged to recollect, and give
Account of its Defects? 
But I must not only accuse myself, it seems: I
must give Proofs, such as your Ladyship can subscribe
to, of my Imperfections. There is so much
real Kindness in this seeming Hardship, that I will
obey you, Madam, and produce Proofs in a Moment,
which cannot be controverted. 
Let me then, in the first Place, as to the Self-accusation
of Spitefulness, refer your Ladyship,
and those of my noble Friends who have read my
Papers, to the Character I gave in them of poor 

Mrs. Jewkes* ; also to honest Mr. Colbrand's Character,
as I gave it, when I suspected he was to be
imploy'd for the worst Purposes† ; both of which,
tho' not untrue in the main, are so drawn, as to
shew a very spiteful Nature in the Characterizer. 
And as to my Sauciness, those Papers will give
an hundred Instances against me—as well to your
dear Brother, as to others—Indeed, to extenuate,
as you command me, as I go along, these were
mostly when I was apprehensive for my Honour,
that they were. 
And then, my dear Lady, I have a little Tincture
of Jealousy, which sometimes has made me
more uneasy than I ought to be, as the Papers you
have not seen, would have demonstrated, particularly
in Miss Godfrey's Case§ , and in my Conversation
with your Ladyships, in which I have frequently
betray'd my Apprehensions of what might
happen when we came to London: Yet, to extenuate
again, I have examined myself very strictly
on this Head; and I really think, that I can ascribe
a great Part of this Jealousy to laudable Motives; 
no less than to the Concern I have for your dear
Brother's future Happiness, in the Hope, that I may
be an humble Means in the Hands of Providence,
to induce him to abhor those Crimes, of which
young Gentlemen too often are guilty, and to bring
him over to the Practice of those Virtues, in which
he will for ever have Cause to rejoice. —Yet, my
Lady, some other Parts of the Charge must stand
against me; for, as, to be sure, I love his Person,
as well as his Mind, I have Pride in my Jealousy, 

that would not permit me, I verily think, to support
myself as I ought, under the Trial of a Competition,
in this tender, very tender Point. 
And this obliges me to own, that I have a little
Spark—not a little one, perhaps—of secret
Pride and Vanity, that will arise, now-and then,
on the Honours done me; but which I keep under
as much as I can: And to this Pride, let me tell
your Ladyship, I know no one contributes, or can
contribute, more largely than yourself. 
So you see, my dear Lady, what a naughty
Heart I have, and how far I am from being a faultless
Creature—I hope I shall be better and better,
however, as I live longer, and have more Grace,
and more Wit: For here, to recapitulate my Faults,
is, in the first Place, Vindictiveness; I will not
call it downright Revenge, that I will not—For,
as the Poet says, 

Revenge is but a Frailty, incident
To craz'd and sickly Minds; the poor Content
Of little Souls, unable to surmount
An Injury, too weak to bear Affront.

And I would not be thought to have a little Mind,
because I know I would not do a little Thing. Vindictiveness,
then, let it stand, tho' that's a harsh
Word to accuse one's self of—Spitefulness— 
Jealousy—Secret Pride—Vanity—which I
cannot, for my Life, keep totally under—O dear
Madam, are not here Faults enow, without naming
any more? —And how much Room do all these
leave for Amendment, and greater Perfection? 
Had your Ladyship, and my Lady Countess,
favour'd us longer, in your late kind Visit, it had 

been impossible but I must have so improv'd, by
your charming Conversations, and by that natural
Ease and Dignity which accompany every thing
your Ladyships do and say, as to have got over such
of these Foibles as are not rooted in Nature: Till
in time I had been able to do more than emulate
those Perfections, which, at present, I can only at
an awful Distance revere; as becomes, 
My dear Ladies,
Your most humble Admirer, and obliged Servant,
P. B. 

