



Mrs. Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Wedn. Night, July 12. 
I write, my dearest creature, I cannot but write,
to express my concern on your dejection. Let me
beseech you, my charming excellence, let me beseech
you, not to give way to it. 
Comfort yourself, on the contrary, in the triumphs
of a virtue unsullied; a will wholly faultless. Who
could have withstood the trials that you have surmounted? 
—Your Cousin Morden will soon come. 
He will see justice done you, I make no doubt, as
well with regard to what concerns your person as your
estate. And many happy days may you yet see; and
much good may you still do, if you will not heighten
unavoidable accidents into guilty despondency. 
But why, my dear, this pining solicitude continued
after a Reconciliation with relations as unworthy as
implacable; whose wills are governed by an all-grasping
Brother, who finds his account in keeping the
breach open? On this over-solicitude, it is now plain
to me, that the vilest of men built all his schemes. 
He saw that you thirsted after it, beyond all reason
for hope. The view, the hope, I own, extremely
desirable, had your family been Christians; or even
had they been Pagans who had bowels. 
I shall send this short Letter [I am obliged to make
it a short one] by young Rogers, as we call him; the
fellow I sent to you to Hamstead; an innocent, tho'
pragmatical Rustic. Admit him, I pray you, into
your presence, that he may report to me how you look,
and how you are. 
Mr. Hickman should attend you; but I apprehend, 

that all his motions, and mine own too, are watched
by the execrable wretch: As indeed his are by an
agent of mine; for I own, that I am so apprehensive of
his Plots and Revenge, now I know that he has intercepted
my vehement Letters against him, that he
is the subject of my dreams, as well as of my waking
fears. 
* *
My Mother, at my earnest importunity, has just
given me leave to write, and to receive your Letters — 
But fastened this condition upon the concession, that
yours must be under cover to Mr. Hickman [This
with a view, I suppose, to give him consideration with
me]; and upon this further condition, that she is to
see all we write. ‘—When girls are set upon a point,’ 
she told one, who told me again, ‘it is better for a
Mother, if possible, to make herself of their party,
than to oppose them; since there will be then hopes
that she will still hold the reins in her own hands.’ 
Pray let me know what the people are with whom
you lodge? —Shall I send Mrs. Townsend to direct
you to lodgings either more safe or more convenient
for you? 
Be pleased to write to me by Rogers; who will
wait on you for your Answer, at your own time. 
Adieu, my dearest creature. Comfort yourself, as
you would in the like unhappy circumstances comfort 
Your own
Anna Howe. 