



Why don't I subscribe Sister? asks my dearest
Lady Davers? –––I have not had the Courage
to do it of late. For my Title to that Honour,
arises from the dear, thrice dear Mr. B. And how
long I may be permitted to call him mine, I cannot
say. But since you command it, I will call your 

Ladyship by that beloved Name, let the rest happen
as God shall see fit. 
Mr. B. cannot be unpolite; but he is cold, and
a little cross, and short in his Speeches to me. I
try to hide my Grief from every body, and from
him most; for, my dear Lady, neither my Father,
Mother, nor Miss Darnford, know any thing from
me. Mrs. Jervis, from whom I seldom hide any
thing, as she is on the Spot with me, hears not my
Complainings, nor my Uneasiness; for I would not
lessen the dear Gentleman. He may yet see the
Error of the Way he is in. God grant it, for his
own sake, as well as mine! –––I am even sorry
your Ladyship is afflicted with the Knowlege of the
Matter. 
The poor unhappy Lady, God forgive her! is to
be pity'd: She loves him, and having strong Passions,
and being unus'd to be controul'd, is lost to a Sense of
Honour and Justice; poor, poor Lady! –––O these
wicked Masquerades! From them springs all my
Unhappiness! My Spaniard was too amiable, and
met with a Lady who was no Nun, but in Habit. 
Every one was taken with him in that Habit, so
suited to the natural Dignity of his Person! –––O
these wicked, wicked Masquerades! 
I am all Patience in Appearance, all Uneasiness
in Reality. I did not think I could, especially in
this Point, this most affecting Point, be such an
Hypocrite. It has cost me–––Your Ladyship knows
not what it has cost me! to be able to assume that
Character! Yet my Eyes are swell'd with crying, and
look red, altho' I am always breatheing on my Hand,
and patting them with that, and my warm Breath,
to hide the Distress that will, from my over-charged
Heart, appear in them. 
Then he says, What's the matter with the little
Fool! You're always in this Way. What ails you,
Pamela? 

Only a little vapourish, Sir! –––Nasty Vapours! 
Don't be angry at me! –––Then Billy, I thought, was
not very well! 
This Boy will spoil your Temper: At this Rate,
what should be your Joy, will become your Misfortune. 
Don't receive me in this Manner, I charge
you. 
In what Manner, Sir? I always receive you with
a grateful Heart! If any thing troubles me, it is in
your Absence: But see, Sir, (then I try to smile and
seem pleas'd) I am all Sunshine now you are come! 
–––Don't you see I am? 
Yes, your Sunshine of late is all thro' a Cloud! 
–––I know not what's the matter with you. Your
Temper will alter, and then –––– 
It shan't alter, Sir–––It shan't–––if I can help it. 
–––And then I kiss'd his Hand; that dear Hand, that,
perhaps, was last about his more beloved Countess's
Neck–––Distracting Reflection! 
But come, may-be I think the worst! –––To be
sure I do! –––For my Apprehensions were ever aforehand
with Events; and bad must be the Case, if it
is worse than I think it. But it will ripen of itself; it
is a corroding Evil: It will increase to its Crisis, and
then it may dissipate happily, or end in Death! 
All that grieves me, (for I have had the Happiness
of a whole Life crouded thick upon me into a
few past Months, and so ought to be grateful for the
Good I have reaped) is for his own dear sake, for
his Soul's sake. –––But, come, he is a young Gentleman,
and may see his Error:–––This may be a
Trial to him, as well as to me. And if he should
conquer it, what a charming, charming Thing
would that be! 
You command me to let you know what I have
heard, and how I came to hear it. I told your 

Ladyship, in one of my former*  , that two Gentlemen,
brought up to the Law, but above the Practice
of it, tho', I doubt, not above Practices less honourable,
had visited us, on coming to Town. 
They have been often here since, Mr. Turner
particularly; and sometimes by himself, when Mr.
B. has happen'd to be out; and he it was, as I
guess'd, that gave me, at the wicked Masquerade,
the Caution of looking after my Musidorus †  . 
I did not like their Visits, and his much less: For
he seem'd to me a Man of an intriguing Spirit. But
about Three Weeks ago, Mr. B. setting out upon
a Party of Pleasure to Oxford, he came, and pretending
great Business with me, and I happening to
be at Breakfast in the Parlour, only Polly attending
me, admitted him to drink a Dish of Chocolate
with me. And when Polly had stept down, he told
me, after many Apologies, that he had discover'd
who the Nun was at the Masquerade, that had
ingag'd Mr. B. 
I said, It was very indifferent to me, who the
Lady was. 
He reply'd, (making still more Apologies, and
pretending great Reluctance to speak out) That it
was no less a Lady than the young Countess Dowager
of &wblank;, a Lady noted for her Wit and
her Beauty; but of a gay Character, tho' he believ'd
not yet culpable. 
I was alarm'd; but would not let him see it; and
he run into the Topick of the Injustice of marry'd
Gentlemen, who had virtuous Wives, and gave
themselves up to Intrigues of this kind. 
I remember'd some of Mr. B's Lessons formerly,
of which I once gave your Ladyship a Transcript §  , particularly, that of drawing a kind Veil over his 

Faults, and extenuating those I could not hide; and
still more particularly that Caution, that if ever
Rakes attempted a marry'd Lady, their Incouragement
proceeded from the Slights and Contempts
with which they endeavour'd to inspire her against
her Husband; and I told Mr. Turner, That I was
so well satisfy'd in Mr. B.'s Affection for me, and
his well-known Honour, that I could not think myself
obliged to any Gentleman, who should endeavour
to give me a less Opinion of either, than I
ought to have. 
He then bluntly told me, that the very Party
Mr. B. was upon, was with the Countess for one,
and the Lord &wblank;, who had marry'd her Sister. 
I said, I was glad he was in such good Company,
and wished him all manner of Pleasure in it. 
He hoped, he said, he might trust to my Discretion,
that I would not let Mr. B. know from whom
I had the Information: That, indeed, his Motive
was Self-interest in mentioning it to me; for that he
had presum'd to make some Overtures of an honourable
Nature to the Countess, in his own Behalf; 
which had been rejected since that Masquerade
Night: And that he hoped the prudent Use I would
make of the Intimation, might, some-how, be a
Means to break off that Correspondence, before it
was attended with bad Consequences. 
I told him, coldly, tho' it stung me to the Heart,
That I should not interfere in the Matter at all: 
That I was fully assur'd of Mr. B.'s Honour; and
was sorry, he, Mr. Turner, had so bad an Opinion
of a Lady, for whom he professed so high a Consideration. 
And rising up, Will you excuse me, Sir,
that I cannot attend at all to such a Subject as this; 
and think I ought not; and so must withdraw? 
Only, Madam, one Word. He offer'd to take my
Hand, but I would not permit it—And then he 

swore a great Oath, that he had told me his true
and his only Motive: And that Letters had passed
between the Countess and Mr. B.; adding, That one
Day I would blame myself for not endeavouring to
stifle a Flame, that might now perhaps be kept
under; but which, if it got Head, would be of
more fatal Consequence to my Repose than I at
present imagin'd. —But, said he, I beg you'll keep
it in your own Breast; else it may, from two such
hasty Spirits, as his and mine, possibly be attended
with still worse Consequences. 
I will never, Sir, enter into a Subject, that is not
proper to be communicated, every Tittle of it, to
Mr. B.; and this must be my Excuse for withdrawing. 
And away I went from him. 
Your Ladyship will judge with how uneasy an
Heart; which became more so, when I sat down
to reflect upon what he had told me. But I was
resolved to give it as little Credit as I could, or that
any thing would come of it, till Mr. B.'s own
Behaviour should convince me, to my Affliction,
that I had some Reason to be alarm'd: So I open'd
not my Lips about it to Mrs. Jervis, or any body. 
At Mr. B.'s Return, I receiv'd him in my usual
affectionate and unreserved Manner; and he behav'd
himself with as great Goodness and Kindness to me
as usual; or, at least, with so little Difference, that
had not the Gentleman's Officiousness made me more
watchful, I should not have perceived it. 
But, next Day, a Letter was brought by a Footman
for Mr. B. He was out: So John gave it to
me. The Superscription was a Lady's Writing: 
The Seal, the Dowager Lady's, with a Coronet. 
This gave me great Uneasiness: And when Mr. B.
came in, I said, Here is a Letter for you, Sir; and
from a Lady too! 
What then?—said he with Quickness. 

I was balked, and withdrew. For I saw him turn
the Seal about and about, as if he would see if I
had endeavour'd to look into it. 
He needed not to have been so afraid; for I
would not have done such a Thing, had I known
my Life was to depend upon it. 
I went up, and could not help weeping at his
quick Answer; yet I did my Endeavour to hide it,
when he came up. 
Was not my Girl a little inquisitive upon me,
just now? 
I spoke pleasantly, Sir! —But you were very quick
upon your Girl. 
'Tis my Temper, my Dear—You know I mean
nothing. You should not mind it. 
I should not, Sir, if I had been used to it. 
He look'd at me with Sternness. —Do you doubt
my Honour, Madam? 
Madam! did you say, Sir! —I won't take that
Word! —Dear Sir, call it back—I won't be call'd
Madam! —Call me your Girl, your Rustick, your
Pamela—Call me any thing but Madam! 
My Charmer, then, my Life, my Soul; will any
of those do? and saluted me: But whatever you
do, let me not see, that you have any Doubts of my
Honour to you. 
The very Mention of the Word, dear Sir, is a
Security to me; I want no other; I cannot doubt: 
But if you speak short to me, how shall I bear that! 
He withdrew, speaking nothing of the Contents of
his Letter; as I dare say he would, had the Subject
been such as he chose to mention to me. 
We being alone, after Supper, I took the Liberty
to ask him, Who was of his Party to Oxford? 
He nam'd the Viscountess &wblank; and her Lord,
Mr. Howard and his Daughter, Mr. Herbert and
his Lady: And I had a Partner too, my Dear, to
represent you. 

I am much obliged to the Lady, Sir, be she who
she would. 
Why, my Dear, you are so ingag'd in your Nursery! 
Then this was a sudden Thing; as, you know,
I told you. 
Nay, Sir, as long as it was agreeable to you, I
had nothing to do, but to be pleas'd with it. 
He watched my Eyes, and the Turn of my
Countenance—You look, Pamela, as if you'd be
glad to return the Lady Thanks in Person. Shall I
ingage her to visit you? She longs to see you. 
Sir,—Sir,—hesitated I—as you please—I can't
be—I can't be—displeased. 
Displeased!—interrupted he; why that Word? 
And why that Hesitation in your Answer? You
speak very volubly, my Dear, when you're not
moved. 
Dear Sir, said I, almost as quick as himself, Why
should I be moved? What Occasion is there for it? 
I hope you have a better Opinion of me than— 
Than what? —Pamela—What would you say? I
know you're a little jealous Slut. I know you are. 
But, dear Sir, why should you think of imputing
Jealousy to me on this Score? —What a Creature
must I be, if you could not be abroad with a Lady,
but I must be jealous of you? —No, Sir, I have
Reason to rely upon your Honour; and I do rely
upon it; and— 
And what? Why, my Dear, you are giving me
Assurances, as if you thought the Case requit'd it! 
Ah! thought I, so it does, I see too plainly, or
apprehend I do; but I durst not say so; nor give
him any Hint about my Informant; tho' now I was
enough confirmed of the Truth of what Mr. Turner
had told me. 
Yet, I resolved, if possible, not to alter my
Conduct. But my frequent Weepings, when by 

myself, could not be hid as I wished; my Eyes not
keeping my Heart's Counsel. 
And this gives Occasion to some of the stern
Words which I have mention'd above. 
All that he further said, at this Time, was, with
a negligent, yet a determin'd Air—Well, Pamela,
don't be doubtful of my Honour. You know how
much I love you. But, one Day or other, I shall
gratify this Lady's Curiosity, and will bring her to pay
you a Visit, and you shall see you need not be asham'd
of her Acquaintance! —Whenever you please, Sir,
––– was all I car'd to say farther; for I saw he was
upon the Catch, and look'd stedfastly upon me
whenever I mov'd my Lips; and I am not a finish'd
Hypocrite; and he can read the Lines of one's
Face, and the Motions of one's Heart, I think. 
I am sure mine is a very uneasy one. But 'till I
reflected and weigh'd well the Matter, it was worse,
and my natural Imperfection of this sort made me
see a Necessity to be the more watchful over myself,
and to doubt my own Prudence. And thus I
reason'd when he withdrew: 
Here, thought I, I have had a greater Proportion
of Happiness, without Alloy, fallen to my Share,
than any of my Sex; and I ought to be prepar'd for
some Trials. 
'Tis true, this is of the sorest Kind; 'tis worse than
Death itself to me, who had an Opinion of the
dear Gentleman's Reformation, and prided myself
not a little on that Account. So that the Blow is
full upon my sore Place. 'Tis on the Side I could
be the most easily penetrated. But Achilles could
be touched only in his Heel; and if he was to die
by an Enemy's Hand, must not the Arrow find out
that only vulnerable Place? –––My Jealousy is that
Place with me, as your Ladyship observes *  , but is 

seated deeper than the Heel: It is in my Heart, and
the barbed Dart has found it out, and there it sticks
up to the very Feathers. 
Yet, thought I, I will take care, that I do not
exasperate him by Upbraidings, when I should try
to move him by Patience and Forbearance. For
the Breach of his Duty cannot warrant the Neglect
of mine. My Business is to reclaim, and not to provoke. 
And when, if it please God, this Storm
shall be over-blown, let me not, by my present Behaviour,
leave any Room for Heart-burnings; but, like
a skilful Surgeon, so heal the Wound to the Bottom,
tho' the Operation be painful, that it may not fester,
and break out again with fresh Violence, on future
Misunderstandings, if any shall happen. 
He is a young Gentleman, has been used to have
his own Will, thought I. This may be a permitted
Stumbling-block in his Way, to make him stand the
firmer, when recover'd. The Lady may be unhappy
that she cannot conquer her faulty Love. They
may both see their Error, and stop short of Crime. 
If not, he is a Gentleman of fine Sense; he may
run an undue Length, but may reclaim; and then
I shall be his Superior, by my preserved Virtue and
Duty, and have it in my Power to forgive the dear
Gentleman, and so repay him some of those Obligations
which I shall never otherwise have it in my
Power to repay; –––nor indeed wish to have it, in
this way, if it please God to prevent it. 
Then, thought I, how much better is it to be
the suffering than the offending Person! –––But yet,
Madam, to have so fine a Gentleman, who had
advanced so far up the Hill of Virtue, to slide back
all at once; and (between your Ladyship and me)
to have him sink down to the Character he had
despised; and, at last, if his dear Life should be
spared, (as is my hourly Prayer) to have him carry 

his Vices into advanced Years, and become such a
poor Gentleman, as we see Sir Simon Darnford,
retaining a Love of his juvenile Follies, even after
the Practice has left him; how my Heart shudders
at such a Thought for my Mr. B.! 
Well, but, thought I, let the worst come to the
worst, he may perhaps be so good as to permit me
to pass the Remainder of my Days, with my dear
Billy, in Kent, with my Father and Mother; and
so, when I cannot rejoice in Possession of a virtuous
Husband, I shall be imploy'd in praying for him,
and injoy a two sold Happiness, that of doing my
own Duty to my dear Baby, ––– and a pleasing Entertainment
that will be! ––– and that of comforting my
worthy Parents, and being comforted by them; ––– 
and no small Consolation this! –––And who knows,
but I may be permitted to steal a Visit now-and-then
to dear Lady Davers, and be called Sister, and be
deem'd a faultless Sister too! ––– and that will be a
fine Thing! But, remember, my dear Lady, that if
ever it come to this, I will not bear, that for my
sake, you shall, with too much Asperity, blame your
dear Brother; for I will be ingenious to find Excuses
or Extenuations for him; and I will now-and-then,
in some disguised Habit, steal the Pleasure of seeing
him, and his happier Countess; and give him, with
a silent Tear, my Blessing for the Good I and
mine have reaped at his dear Hands. 
But, oh! if he takes from me my dear Billy, who
must, after all, be his Heir, and gives him to the
cruel Countess, he will at once burst asunder the
Strings of my Heart! For, Oh my happy Rivaless!
if you tear from me my Husband, he is in his own
Disposal, and I cannot help it: –––Nor can I indeed,
if he will give you my Billy. But this I am sure
of, that my Child and my Life must go together! 

Your Ladyship will think I rave. Indeed I am
almost crazed at times. For the dear Gentleman
is so negligent, so cold, so haughty! that I cannot
bear it. He says, just now, You are quite alter'd,
Pamela. I believe I am, Madam. But what can I do! 
He knows not, that I know so much. I dare not tell
him. For he will have me then reveal my Intelligencer: 
And what may be the Case between them? 
I weep in the Night, when he is asleep; and in
the Day, when he is absent: And I am happy when
I can, unobserv'd, steal this poor Relief. I believe
already I have shed as many Tears as would drown
my poor Baby. How many more I may have to
shed, God only knows! –––For oh! Madam, after
all my Fortitude, and my Recollection, to fall from
so much Happiness, and so soon, is a trying Thing! 
But I will hope still the best, and resign to God's
Will, and his, and see how far the dear Gentleman
will be permitted to exercise me. So don't, my
good Lady, be over-much concern'd for me––– For
you know I am apt to be too apprehensive! And
should this Matter blow over, I shall be asham'd of
my Weakness, and the Trouble I must give to your
generous Heart, for one so undeservedly favour'd by
you, as is 
Your obliged Sister, and most humble Servant,
P. B. 
Dear my Lady, let no Soul see any Part of this our
present Correspondence, for your dear Brother's
sake, and your sake, and my sake. 

