


Lady G. In Continuation. 


PRepare, Harriet, to hear strange and wonderful
things. 
My Lord sent up his compliments, and desired to
know, if he might attend me. I was in my dressing-room. 
He was not always so polite. I wish, thought
I, since displeasure produces respect, that familiarity
does not spoil this man. But I'll try him. 
I shall be glad to see my Lord, was the answer I
returned. 
Up he came, one leg dragg'd after the other. Not
alert, as he used to be on admission to his Charlotte. 
The last eight stairs his steps sounded, I, go, up, with,
an, hea-vy, heart. He entered; bowed: Were the
words yours, You should be glad to see me, madam? 
They were, my Lord. 
Would to God you said truth! 
I did. I am glad to see you. I wanted to talk with
you—About this Northamptonshire visit? 
Are you in earnest, madam, to make that visit? 
I am. Miss Byron is not well. Emily pines to see
her as much as I. You have no objection? 
He was silent. 
Do you set out, to-morrow, Sir, for Windsor and
Oxford? 
He sighed. I think so, madam. 

Shall you visit Lord W.? 
I shall. 
And complain to him of me, my Lord? —He shook
his grave head, as if there were wisdom in it—Be quiet,
Harriet—Not good all at once—That would not be
to hold it. 
No, madam, I have done complaining to any-body. 
You will one day see you have not acted generously
by the man who loves you as his own soul. 
This, and his eyes glistening, moved me—Have we
not been both wrong, my Lord? 
Perhaps we have, madam: But here is the difference
—I have been wrong, with a right intention: You
have been wrong, and studied to be so. 
Prettily said—Repeat it, my Lord—How was it? 
And I took his hand, and looked very graciously. 
I cannot bear these airs of contempt. 
If you call them so, you are wrong, my Lord, tho',
perhaps, intending to be right. 
He did not see how good I was disposed to be. As
I said, a change all at once would have been unnatural. 
Very well, madam! and turned from me with an
air half-grieved, half-angry. 
Only answer me, my Lord; Are you willing I
should go to Northamptonshire? 
If you choose to go, I have no objection. Miss
Byron is an angel. 
Now, don't be perverse, Lord G. Don't praise
Miss Byron at the expence of somebody else. 
Would to heaven, madam— 
I wish so too—And I put my hand before his mouth
—So kindly! 
He held it there with both his, and kissed it. I
was not offended. But do you actually set out for
Windsor and Oxford to-morrow, my Lord? 
Not, madam, if you have any commands for me. 
Why, now, that's well said. Has your Lordship
any-thing to propose to me? 

I could not be so welcome as your escorte, as I am
sure I should be to Miss Byron and her friends, as her
guest. 
You could not! How can you say so, my Lord? 
You would do me both honour and pleasure. 
What would I give, that you mean what you say! 
I do mean it, my Lord—My hand upon it—I held
out my hand for his. He snatched it; and I thought
would have devoured it. 
We will take the coach, my Lord, that I may have
your company all the way. 
You equally astonish and delight me, madam! Is
it possible that you are— 
Yes, yes, don't, in policy, make it such a wonder,
that I am disposed to be what I ought to be. 
I shall be too, too, too happy! sobbed the man. 
No, no! I'll take care of that. Married folks,
brought up differently, of different humours, inclinations,
and so-forth, never can be too happy. Now
I intend to put up all our little quarrels in my workbag
[You know I am a worker: Not quite so bad,
at worst, as some modern wives]: There they shall
lie, till we get to Miss Byron's—I revere the character
of Mrs. Shirley, my Harriet's grandmother: Mrs.
Selby you have seen: Harriet, and you, and I, and
the two sages I have named, will get together in some
happy hour. Then I will open my work-bag, and
take out our quarrels one by one, and lay them on the
table before us; and we will be determined by their
judgments. 
My dear Lady G. if you think there is any-thing
amiss in your behaviour to me, or in mine to you,
let us spread the faults on your toilette now; and we
shall go down to Northamptonshire all love and harmony,
and delight those excellent— 
Always prescribing, my Lord! —O these men! — 
Why will you not let me have my own way? —Have
not all these good folks heard of our folly? And shall 

they not be witnesses of our wisdom? If they are not
at the agreement, they will wonder how it came about. 
—I tell you, Sir, that they shall have an opportunity
to laugh at us both; at me, for my flippancy; at you,
for your petulance. I will be sorry, you shall be
ashamed, that quarrels so easily made up, and where
the heart of either is not bad, should subsist a quarter
of an hour, and be perpetually renewing. I will have
my own way, I tell you. 
Don't make me look like a fool, madam, before
such Ladies as those, if we do visit them. 
I must have my jest, my Lord. You know (for
have you not try'd it?) that I can have patience—Let
me see—Is that the hat that you pulled off with an
air so lately? —Pish! How your countenance falls! 
I am not angry with you. But don't do so again, if
you can help it—I must have my jest, I say: But
assure yourself of the first place in my heart—What
more would the man have? 
O madam! nothing, nothing more! And he kissed
my hand on one knee, with a rapture, that he never
could have known, had we always been quiet, easy,
and drowsy, like some married folks, whom the world
calls happy. 
But then the man came out with his gew-gaw japan-china
taste. Why, why is it the privilege of people
of quality now, to be educated in such a way, that
their time can hardly ever be worthily filled up; and
as if it were a disgrace to be either manly or useful? 
He began to talk of equipage, and such nonsense; but
I cut him short, by telling him, that I must have my
whole way on this occasion—Our visit is to be a private
one, said I. We will have only the coach. 
Jenny shall attend on Emily and me. No other female
servant. Two men: We will have no more. 
I will not have so much as your French-horn. We
go to the land of harmony. Kings sometimes travel
incog. We will ape kings, when they put off royalty. 

Will not this thought gratify your pride? —You, my
Lord, have some foibles to be cured of, as well as I. 
—We shall be wonderfully amended, both of us, by
this excursion. 
Poor man! His heart was as light as a feather. 
Upon my word, my dear, I begin to think, that if my
Lord and Master had been a wise man, I should not
have known what to do with him. Yet I will not
forgive any one but myself, who finds him out to be
other—wise. 
He told me, in raptures of joy, that I should direct
every-thing as I pleased. God grant that I might not
change my mind, as to the visit! He hoped I was in
earnest; and looked now-and-then at me, as if he
questioned it. 
But what do you think the man did? He retired; 
came back presently; called me his dearest life; and
said, That it was possible I might want to have an
opportunity given me to make some presents, or to
furnish myself with trinkets of one nature or other,
against I set out; and he should be very sorry, if, by
his inattention, I were obliged to ask him for the
means to shew the natural liberality of my spirit in the
way I thought best to exert it; and then he begged
me to accept of that note, putting into my hand a
bank note of 500l. 
I stept to my closet, and as instantly returned. This,
my Lord, said I, is a most cruel reflexion upon me. 
It looks as if I were to be bribed to do my duty— 
There, my Lord! Take back your present. I will endeavour
to be good without it—And as a proof that
I will, you must not only receive back your favour
(tho' I look upon it as such, and from my heart thank
you for it) but take, as your right, this note which
Lord W. presented to me on the day you received
me as yours. 
He held back both hands, gratefully reluctant. 
You must, you shall, take both notes, my Lord. I 

only wanted a fit opportunity to put Lord W's note
into your hands before. It was owing to my flippant
folly, and not to your want of affection, that I had not
that opportunity sooner. Bear with me now-and-then,
if I should be silly again. Complain of me only
to myself. My heart, I re-assure you, is yours, and
yours only. I was not willing that you should owe to
any other person's interposition, my declarations of
affection and regard to you, not even to Miss Byron
(tho' I talked of my work-bag) whom I love as my
own sister. 
The worthy man was in ecstacies. He could not
express in words the joy of his heart. He kneeled,
and wrapt his arms about my waist; and sobbed his
request to me to forgive his petulance, and the offences
he had ever given me, by any acts of passion, or words
of anger. 
You have not offended me, my Lord. Forgive
my past follies, and my future failures. When you
were most angry, I wondered at your patience. Had
I been you, I should not have borne what you bore
with me. 
For God's sake, madam, take back both notes. 
We can have but one interest. You will make me
easier, when I know that you have power in your
hands to gratify every wish of your heart. 
You must, you shall, my Lord, take these notes. 
I will apply to you whenever I have occasion, and receive
your favours, as such. I wish not to be independent
of you. I have a handsome sum by me, the
moiety of the money that was my mother's, which my
brother divided between my sister and me, when he
first came over. Is not the settlement made upon me
more than my brother asked, or thought I should expect? 
Did he not oppose so large an annuity for pin-money,
as your father, Lady Gertrude, and you,
would have me accept of, because he thought that
such a large allowance might make a wife independent
of her husband, and put it out of his power, with discretion, 

to oblige her? My brother, in an instance
glorious to him, said, That he would not be a richer
man than he ought to be. In such instances I will be
his sister. 
Aunt Nell joined us. My Lord, in transports,
told her what had passed. The good old soul took
the merit of the reformation to herself. She wept
over us. She rejoiced to hear of our intended journey
to Northamptonshire. My Lord proposed to have the
house he had taken fitted up to my liking, while we
were away. At his desire, I promised to see it in his
company, and give my opinion of his designed alterations. 
But as I know he has judgment in nick-knackatories,
and even as much as I wish him in what is
called taste, I intend to compliment him with leaving
all to him; and resolve to be satisfied with whatever
he does. 
And now is the good man so busy, so pleased, so important! 
Bless me, my dear! Who would rob the honest
man of any part of his merit; or even divide it with him? 
And what, Harriet, do you say to me now? —In
a week's time I shall be with you. Be sure be chearful,
and well; or I shall be ready to question my
welcome. 
This moment, having let Dr. Bartlett into our intended
visit, he has offered to accompany us. Now
shall we, I know, be doubly welcome. The Doctor,
Emily, my Lord G. and your Charlotte, will be happy
in one coach. The Doctor is prodigiously pleased
with me. What is the text? More joy in heaven over
one sinner that repenteth, than over ninety-and-nine just
persons, who need it not. 
I long to see you, and every one of the family, so
deservedly dear to you! God give you health; and us
no worse news from Italy than we have yet had; and
how happy shall we be! —Lord and Lady L. wish
they could be of the party. They are in love with
me now. Emily says, she dotes upon me. I begin 

to think that there is almost as much pleasure in being
good, as in teazing. Yet a little roguery rises now-and-then
in the heart of 
Your Charlotte G. June 8. 
The Doctor has been so good (I believe because I
am good) as to allow me to take a copy of a Letter
of my brother's to that wretch Everard; but for your
perusal only. I inclose it, therefore, under that restriction. 
Let it speak its own praises. 
We are actually preparing to be your guests. You
will only have time to forbid us, if we shall not be
welcome. 
Merciful! what a pacquet! 

