


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Florence, Thursday, July 6–17.
Three weeks have now past since the date of
my last Letter to my paternal friend. Nor has
it, in the main, been a disagreeable space of time; 
since within it I have had the pleasure of hearing from
you and other of my friends in England; from those 

at Paris; and good news from Bologna, where-ever
I moved, as well from the Bishop and Father Marescotti
as from Mr. Lowther. 
The Bishop particularly tells me, that they ascribe
to the amendment of the brother, the hopes they now
have of the sister's recovery. 
I passed near a fortnight of this time at Naples and
Portici. The General, and his Lady, who is one of
the best of women, made it equally their study to oblige
and amuse me. 
The General, on my first arrival at Naples, entered
into talk with me, on my expectations with regard to
his sister. I answered him, as I had done his mother; 
and he was satisfied with what I said. 
When we parted, he embraced me as his brother
and friend; and apologized for the animosity he once
had to me. If it pleased God to restore his sister, no
more from him, he said, should her mind be endangered:
But her choice should determine him. His
Lady declared her esteem for me, without reserve; 
and said, That, next to the recovery of Clementina
and Jeronymo, her wish was, to be intitled to call me
Brother. 
What, my dear Dr. Bartlett, is, at last, to be my
destiny! The greatest opposer of the alliance once
in view, is overcome: But the Bishop, you will observe,
by what I have told you, ascribes to another
cause the merit which the General gives me; with a
view, possibly, to abate my expectation. Be the event
as it may, I will go on in the course I am in, and leave
to Providence the issue. 
Mrs. Beaumont returned from Bologna but yesterday. 
She confirms the favourable account I had before
received of the great alteration for the better that there
is in the health both of brother and sister; and, because
of that, in the whole family. Mr. Lowther, she
says, is as highly, as deservedly, caressed by every 

one. Jeronymo is able to sit up two hours in a day. 
He has tried his pen, and finds it will be again in his
power to give his friends pleasure with it. 
Mrs. Beaumont tells me, that Clementina generally
twice a day visits her beloved Jeronymo. She
has taken once more to her needleworks, and often
sits and works in her brother's room. This amuses
her, and delights him. 
She converses generally without much rambling; 
and seems to be very soon sensible of her misfortune,
when she begins to talk incoherently: For at such
times she immediately stops; not seldom sheds a tear; 
and either withdraws to her own closet, or is silent. 
She several times directed her discourse to Mr. Lowther,
when she met him in her brother's chamber. 
She observed great delicacy when she spoke of me to
him; and dwelt not on the subject: But was very
inquisitive about England, and the customs and manners
of the people; particularly of the women. 
Every-body has made it a rule (Jeronymo among
the rest, and to which also Camilla strictly conforms)
never to lead her to talk of me. She, however, asks
often after me; and numbers the days of my absence. 
At one time, seeking Mrs. Beaumont in her dressing-room,
she thus accosted her: I come, madam, to
ask you, Why every-body forbears to mention the
Chevalier Grandison; and when I do, talks of somebody
or something else? Camilla is as perverse in this
way as any body: Nay, Jeronymo (I have tried him
several times) does the very same. Can Jeronymo
be ungrateful? Can Jeronymo be indifferent to his
friend, who has done so much for him? I hope I am
not looked upon as a silly, or as a forward creature,
that am not to be trusted with hearing the name of
the man mentioned, for whom I profess an high esteem
and gratitude. Tell me, madam, have I, at any time,
in my unhappy hours, behaved or spoken aught unworthy
of my character, of my family, of the modesty 

of woman? —If I have, my heart renounces the guilt; 
I must, indeed, have been unhappy; I could not be
Clementina della Porretta. 
Mrs. Beaumont set her heart at ease on this subject. 
Well, said she, it shall be seen, I hope so, that
true modesty, and high gratitude, may properly have
a place together in this heart, putting her hand to her
bosom. Let me but own, that I esteem him; for I
really do; and I hope my sincerity shall never mislead
or betray me into indecorum: And now, madam, let
us talk of him for one quarter of an hour, and no
more. Here is my watch; it is an English watch; 
nobody knows that I bought it for that very reason. 
Don't you tell. She then, suspecting her head, dropt
a tear; and withdrew in silence. 
Mrs. Beaumont, my dear friend, knows the true
state of my heart; and she pities me. She wishes that
the Lady's reason may be established; she is afraid it
should be risqued by opposition: But there is a man
whom she wishes to be Clementina's. There is a
woman—But—do thou, Providence, direct us both! 
All that thou orderest must be best. 
Mrs. Beaumont thinks Lady Clementina is at times
too solemn: And is the more apprehensive when she
is so, as there is a greatness in her solemnity, which
she is afraid will be too much for her. She has often
her silent fits, in which she is regardless of what anybody
but her mother says to her. 
As she grows better, the fervor of her devotion,
which in her highest delirium never went quite off,
increases. Nor do they discourage, but indulge her
in it, because in her, it seems, by the chearfulness
with which her ardent zeal is attended, to be owing
to true piety, which they justly observe never makes a
good mind sour, morose, or melancholy. 
Mrs. Beaumont says, That for two days before she
came away, she had shewn, on several occasions, that
she began to expect my return—She broke silence in 

one of her dumb fits—“Twenty days, did he say
Camilla?” and was silent again. 
The day before Mrs. Beaumont set out, as she, the
young Lady, and Marchioness, were sitting at work together,
Camilla entered with unusual precipitation,
with a message from the Bishop, desiring leave to attend
them—And the Marchioness saying, By all means,
pray let him come in, the young Lady, on hearing
him approach, laid down her work, changed colour,
and stood up with an air of dignity. But on the Bishop's
entrance, sat down with a look of dissatisfaction, as if
disappointed. 
Adieu, my dear friend! I shall reach Bologna, I
hope, to-morrow night. You will soon have another
Letter from 
Your truly-affectionate
Grandison. 

