



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday morning, 7, May 21. 
I was at the play last night with Mr. Lovelace
and Miss Horton. It is, you know, a deep and
most affecting tragedy in the reading. You have my
remarks upon it, in the little book you made me write
upon the principal acting plays. You will not wonder,
that Miss Horton, as well as I, was greatly moved
at the representation, when I tell you, and have some
pleasure in telling you, that Mr. Lovelace himself was
very sensibly touched with some of the most affecting
scenes. I mention this in praise of the author's performance; 
for I take Mr. Lovelace to be one of the
most hard-hearted men in the world. Upon my
word, my dear, I do. 
His behaviour, however, on this occasion, and on
our return, was unexceptionable, only that he would
oblige me to stay to supper with the women below
when we came back, and to sit up with him
and them till near one o'clock this morning. I was
resolved to be even with him; and indeed I am not 

very sorry to have the pretence; for I love to pass the
Sundays by myself. 
To have the better excuse to avoid his teazing, I
am ready dressed to go to church this morning. I
will go only to St. James's church, and in a chair; 
that I may be sure I can go out and come in when I
please, without being obtruded upon by him, as I
was twice before. 
Near nine o'clock. 
I have your kind letter of yesterday. He knows
I have. And I shall expect, that he will be inquisitive
next time I see him after your opinion of his proposals. 
I doubted not your approbation of them, and
had written an answer on that presumption; which
is ready for him. He must study for occasions of procrastination,
and to disoblige me, if now any thing
happens to set us at variance again. 
He is very importunate to see me; he has desired
to attend me to church. He is angry, that I have declined
to breakfast with him. I was sure that I should
not be at my own liberty, if I had. —I bid Dorcas tell
him, that I desired to have this day to myself; I
would see him in the morning, as early as he pleased. 
She says, she knows not what ails him, but that he
is out of humour with every-body. 
He has sent again, in a peremptory manner. He
warns me of Singleton. But surely, I sent him word
if he was not afraid of Singleton at the play-house
last night, I need not at church to day: So many
churches to one play-house. —I have accepted of his
servant's proposed attendance. —But he is quite displeased,
it seems. I don't care. I will not be perpetually
at his insolent beck. —Adieu, my dear, till
I return. The chair waits. He won't stop me, sure
as I go down to it. 
* *
I did not see him as I went down. He is, it
seems, excessively out of humour. Dorcas says, Not 

with me neither, she believes: But something has
vex'd him. This is put on, perhaps, to make me
dine with him. But I won't, if I can help it. I
shan't get rid of him for the rest of the day, if I do. 
* *
He was very earnest to dine with me. But I was
resolved to carry this one small point; and so denied
to dine myself. And indeed I was endeavouring to
write to my cousin Morden; and had begun three
different letters, without being able to please myself; 
so uncertain and so unpleasing is my situation. 
He was very busy in writing, Dorcas says, and pursued
it without dining, because I denied him my company. 
He afterwards demanded, as I may say, to be admitted
to afternoon tea with me: And appealed by
Dorcas to his behaviour to me last night; as if, as I
sent him word by her, he thought he had a merit in
being unexceptionable. However, I repeated my
promise to meet him as early as he pleased in the
morning, or to breakfast with him. 
Dorcas says, he raved. I heard him loud, and I
heard his servant fly from him, as I thought. You,
my dearest friend, say, in one of yours (a) , that you
must have somebody to be angry at, when your mother
sets you up. —I should be very loth to draw comparisons. 
—But the workings of passion, when indulg'd,
are but too much alike, whether in man or woman. 
* *
He has just sent me word, that he insists upon supping
with me. As we had been in a good train for several
days past, I thought it not prudent to break
with him, for little matters. Yet, to be, in a manner,
threaten'd into his will, I know not how to bear that. 
* *
While I was considering, he came up, and, tapping
at my door, told me, in a very angry tone, he must see 

me this night. He could not rest, till he had been told
what he had done to deserve this treatment. 
I must go to him. Yet perhaps he has nothing
new to say to me. —I shall be very angry with him. 
As the Lady could not know what Mr. Lovelace's designs
were, nor the cause of his ill humour, it will
not be improper to pursue the subject from his letter. 
Having described his angry manner of demanding,
in person, her company at supper; he proceeds as follows. 
'Tis hard, answered the fair Perverse, that I am to
be so little my own mistress. I will meet you in the
dining-room half an hour hence. 
I went down to wait that half-hour. All the women
set me hard to give her cause for this tyranny. 
They demonstrated, as well from the nature of the
sex, as of the case, that I had nothing to hope for
from my tameness, and could meet with no worse treatment,
were I to be guilty of the last offence. They
urged me vehemently to try at least what effect some
greater familiarities, than I had ever used with her,
would have: And their arguments being strengthened
by my just resentments on the discoveries I had made,
I was resolved to take some liberties, and, as they
were received, to take still greater, and lay all the
fault upon her tyranny. In this humour I went up,
and never had paralytic so little command of his
joints, as I had, as I walked about the dining-room,
attending her motions. 
With an erect mien she enter'd, her face averted,
her lovely bosom swelling, and the more charmingly
protuberant for the erectness of her mien. O Jack!
that sullenness and reserve should give this haughty maid
new charms! But in every attitude, in every humour,
in every gesture, is beauty beautiful. —By her averted
face, and indignant aspect, I saw the dear insolent was 

disposed to be angry—But by the fierceness of mine,
as my trembling hands seized hers, I soon made fear
her predominant passion. And yet the moment I
beheld her, my heart was dastardiz'd, damp'd, and
reverenced-over. Surely this is an angel, Jack! — 
And yet, had she not been known to be a female,
they would not from babyhood have dressed her as
such, nor would she, but upon that conviction, have
continued the dress. 
Let me ask you, Madam, I beseech you tell me,
what I have done to deserve this distant treatment? 
And let me ask you, Mr. Lovelace, why are my
retirements to be thus invaded? —What can you have
to say to me since last night, that I went with you so
much against my will to the play? And after sitting
up with you, equally against my will, till a very late
hour?— 
This I have to say, Madam, that I cannot bear to
be kept at this distance from you under the same roof. 
I have a thousand things to say, to talk of, relating
to our present and future prospects; but when I want
to open my whole soul to you, you are always contriving
to keep me at a distance; you make me inconsistent
with myself; your heart is set upon delays; 
you must have views that you will not own. Tell
me; Madam, I conjure you to tell me, this moment,
without subterfuge or reserve, in what light am I to
appear to you in future? I cannot bear this distance; 
the suspense you hold me in I cannot bear. 
In what light, Mr. Lovelace? In no bad light, I
hope. —Pray, Mr. Lovelace, do not grasp my hands
so hard [endeavouring to withdraw her hands]. Pray
let me go— 
You hate me, Madam— 
I hate nobody, Sir— 
You hate me, Madam, repeated I. 
Instigated and resolved, as I came up, I wanted
some new provocation. The devil indeed, as soon as 

my angel made her appearance, crept out of my
heart; but he had left the door open, and was no
farther off than my elbow. 
You come up in no good temper, I see, Mr.
Lovelace—But pray be not violent—I have done you
no hurt—Pray be not violent— 
Sweet creature! And I clasped one arm about her,
holding one hand in my other—You have done me no
hurt! —You have done me the greatest hurt! —In
what have I deserved the distance you keep me at? — 
I knew not what to say. 
She struggled to disengage herself—Pray, Mr.
Lovelace, let me withdraw. I know not why this
is—I know not what I have done to offend you. I
see you are come with a design to quarrel with me. 
If you would not terrify me by the ill humour you
are in, permit me to withdraw. I will hear all you
have to say another time—To-morrow morning, as
I sent you word; but indeed you frighten me. —I beseech
you, if you have any value for me, permit me
to withdraw. 
Night, mid-night, is necessary, Belford. Surprize,
terror, must be necessary to the ultimate trial of this
charming creature, say the women below what they
will—I could not hold my purposes—This was not
the first time that I had intended to try if she could
forgive. 
I kissed her hand with a fervor, as if I would have
left my lips upon it—Withdraw then, dearest and
ever dear creature—Indeed I enter'd in a very ill
humour: I cannot bear the distance you so causlessly
keep me at—Withdraw, however, Madam, since it
is your will to withdraw; and judge me generously
judge me but as I deserve to be judged; and let me
hope to meet you to-morrow morning early, in such
a temper as becomes our present situation, and my
future hopes. And so saying, I conducted her to the
door, and left her there. But instead of going down 

to the women, went into my own chamber, and
locked myself in; ashamed of being awed by her majestic
loveliness and apprehensive virtue, into so great
a change of purpose, notwithstanding I had such just
provocations from the letters of her saucy friend,
founded on her own representations of facts and situations
between herself and me. 
The Lady thus describes her terrors, and Mr. Lovelace's
behaviour, on this occasion. 
On my entering the dining-room, he took my
hands in his, in such a humour, as I saw plainly he
was resolved to quarrel with me. —And for what? — 
I never in my life beheld in any-body such a wild,
such an angry, such an impatient spirit. I was terrified; 
and instead of being as angry as I intended to
be, I was forced to be all mildness. I can hardly remember
what were his first words, I was so frighted. 
But, You hate me, Madam! You hate me, Madam!
were some of them—with such a fierceness—I wish'd
myself a thousand miles distant from him. I hate nobody,
said I; I thank God I hate no-body—You terrify
me, Mr. Lovelace—Let me leave you. —The
man, my dear, looked quite ugly—I never saw a man
look so ugly, as passion made him look. —And for
what? —And he so grasped my hands—fierce
creature! He so grasped my hands! In short, he
seemed by his looks, and by his words (once putting
his arms about me), to wish me to provoke him. — 
So that I had nothing to do, but to beg of him, which
I did repeatedly, to permit me to withdraw; and to
promise to meet him at his own time in the morning. 
It was with a very ill grace, that he complied, on
that condition; and at parting he kissed my hand with
such a savageness, that a redness remains upon it
still. 
Perfect for me, my dearest Miss Howe, perfect for
me, I beseech you, your kind scheme with Mrs. 

Townsend. —And I will then leave this man. See
you not how from step to step, he grows upon me? — 
I tremble to look back upon his incroachments. And
now to give me cause to apprehend more evil from
him, than indignation will permit me to express! — 
O my dear, perfect your scheme, and let me fly from
so strange a wretch! He must certainly have views in
quarrelling with me thus, which he dare not own! 
Yet what can they be? 
* *
I was so disgusted with him, as well as frighted by
him, that, on my return to my chamber, in a fit of
passionate despair, I tore almost in two, the answer I
had written to his proposals. 
I will see him in the morning, because I promised
I would. But I will go out, and that without him,
or any attendant. If he account not tolerably for
his sudden change of behaviour, and a proper opportunity
offer of a private lodging in some creditable
house, I will not any more return to this: —At present
I think so. —And there will I either attend the
perfecting of your scheme; or, by your epistolary
mediation, make my own terms with the wretch; 
since it is your opinion, that I must be his, and cannot
help myself. Or, perhaps take a resolution to
throw myself at once into Lady Betty's protection; 
and this will hinder him from making his insolently-threatned
visit to Harlowe-Place. 
The Lady writes again on Monday evening; and
gives her friend an account of all that has passed between
herself and Mr. Lovelace that day; and of her
being terrified out of her purpose of going abroad: 
But Mr. Lovelace's next letters giving a more
ample account of all, hers are omitted. 
It is proper, however, to mention, that she reurges
Miss Howe (from the dissatisfaction she has
reason for from what passed between Mr. Lovelace 

and herself) to perfect her scheme in relation to
Mrs. Townsend. 
She concludes this letter in these words: 
‘I should say something of your last favour (but a
few hours ago received), and of your dialogue with
your mother. —Are you not very whimsical, my
dear? —I have but two things to wish for on this
occasion. The one, that your charming pleasantry
had a better subject, than that you find for it in
this dialogue. The other, that my situation were
not such, as must too often damp that pleasantry,
and will not permit me to enjoy it, as I used to do. 
Be, however, happy in yourself, tho' you cannot
in 
‘Your Clarissa Harlowe.’ 