



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Wednesday Night, April 12. 
I Have your narrative, my dear. You are the same
noble creature you ever were. Above disguise,
above art, above extenuating a failing. 
The only family in the world, yours, surely, that
could have driven such a daughter into such extremities. 
But you must not be so very much too good for
them, and for the case. 
You lay the blame so properly and so unsparingly
upon your meeting him, that nothing can be added to
that subject by your worst enemies, were they to see
what you have written. 
I am not surprised, now I have read your narrative,
that so bold, and so contriving a man—I am forced
to break off— 
* *
You stood it out much better and longer—Here
again comes my bustling, jealous mother! 
* *
Don't be so angry at yourself. Did you not do for
the best at the time? As to your first fault, the answering
his letters; it was almost incumbent upon
you to assume the guardianship of such a family, when
the bravo of it had run riot, as he did, and brought
himself into danger. 
Except your mamma, who is kept down, have
any of them common sense?— 
Forgive me, my dear—Here is that stupid uncle
Antony of yours. A pragmatical, conceited, positive
—He came yesterday, in a fearful pucker, and
puffed, and blowed, and stumped about our hall and
parlour, while his message was carried up. 

My mamma was dressing herself. These widows
are as starched as the batchelors. She would not see
him in a dishabille, for the world—What can she
mean by it? 
His errand was to set her against you, and to shew
their determined rage on your going away. The
issue proved it to be so too evidently. 
The odd creature desired to speak with her alone. 
I am not used to such exceptions, whenever any visits
are made to my mamma. 
When my mamma was primm'd out, down she
came to him—The door was locked upon themselves; 
the two positive heads were put together—close together,
I suppose—for I hearken'd, but could hear
nothing distinctly, tho' they both seem'd full of their
subject. 
I had a good mind, once or twice, to have made
them open the door—Could I have been sure of
keeping but tolerably my temper, I would have demanded
admittance—But I was afraid, if I had obtained
it, that I should have forgot it was my mamma's
house, and been for turning him out of it. —To
come to rave against and abuse my dearest, dearest,
faultless friend! and the ravings to be listen'd to— 
And this in order to justify themselves; the one for
contributing to drive her out of her father's house; 
the other for refusing her a temporary asylum, till the
reconciliation could have been effected, which her dutiful
heart was set upon! —And which it would have
become the love my mamma had ever pretended for
you, to have mediated for—Could I have had patience! 
The issue, as I said, shew'd what the errand was— 
Its first appearance, after the old fusty fellow was
marched off [You must excuse me, my dear], was in
a kind of gloomy, Harlowe-like reservedness in my
mamma; which, upon a few resenting flirts of mine,
was followed by a rigorous prohibition of correspondence. 

This put us, you may suppose, upon terms not the
most agreeable. I desired to know, If I were prohibited
dreaming of you? —For, my dear, you have
all my sleeping, as well as waking hours. 
I can easily allow for your correspondence with
your wretch, at first [and yet your motives were excellent],
by the effect this prohibition has upon me; 
since, if possible, it has made me love you better than
before; and I am more desirous than ever of corresponding
with you. 
But I have still a more laudable motive—I should
think myself the unworthiest of creatures, could I be
brought to slight a dear friend, and such a meritorious
one, in her distress. —I would die first—And so I
told my mamma. And I have desired her not to
watch me in my retired hours, nor to insist upon my
lying with her constantly, which she now does more
earnestly than ever. —'Twere better, I told her,
that the Harlowe-Betty were borrowed to be set over
me. 
Mr. Hickman, who greatly honours you, has, unknown
to me, interposed so warmly in your favour
with my mamma, that it makes for him no small merit
with me. 
I cannot, at present, write to every particular, unless
I would be in set defiance. —Teaze, teaze, teaze,
for ever! The same thing, tho' answered fifty times
over, is every hour to be repeated—Lord bless me!
what a life must my poor papa—But I must remember
to whom I am writing. 
If this ever-active, ever-mischievous monkey of a
man—This Lovelace—contrived as you suspect— 
But here comes my mamma again—Ay, stay a little
longer, my mamma, if you please—I can but be
suspected! I can but be chidden for making you wait; 
and chidden I am sure to be, whether I do or not,
in the way you are Antony'd into. 

Bless me! —how impatient! —I must break off— 
* *
A charming dialogue—But I am sent for down in
a very peremptory manner, I assure you. —What an
incoherent letter will you have, when I can get it to
you! But now I know where to send it, Mr. Hickman
shall find me a messenger. Yet, if he be detected,
poor soul, he will be Harlowed-off, as well
as his meek mistress!— 
Thursday, April 13. 
I have this moment your continuation-letter, and
a little absence of my Argus-eyed mamma.— 
Dear creature! —I can account for all your difficulties. 
A person of your delicacy! —And with
such a man! —I must be brief— 
The man's a fool, my dear, with all his pride, and
with all his complaisance, and affected regards to your
injunctions. Yet his ready inventions— 
Sometimes I think you should go to Lady Betty's. 
—I know not what to advise you to. —I could, if
you were not so intent upon reconciling yourself to
your relations. But they are implacable, you can
have no hopes from them—Your uncle's errand to
my mamma may convince you of that; and if you
have an answer to your letter to your sister, that will
confirm you, I dare say. 
You need not to have been afraid of asking me,
Whether I thought upon reading your narrative, any
extenuation could lie for what you have done. I have
told you above my mind as to that—And I repeat, that
I think, your provocations and inducements considered,
you are free from blame: At least, the freest, that
ever young creature was who took such a step. 
But you took it not—You were driven on one
side, and, possibly, trick'd on the other. —If any
young person on earth shall be circumstanced as you
were, and shall hold out so long as you did, against 

her persecutors on one hand, and her seducer on the
other, I will forgive her for all the rest. 
All your acquaintance, you may suppose, talk of nobody
but you. Some, indeed, bring your admirable
character against you: But nobody does, or can, acquit
your father and uncles. 
Every-body seems apprized of your brother's and
sister's motives. It is, no doubt, the very thing
they aimed to drive you to, by the various attacks
they made upon you; unhoping (as they might do
all the time) the success. They knew, that if once
you were restored to favour, Love suspended would be
Love augmented, and that you must defeat and expose
them, and triumph, by your amiable qualities, and
great talents, over all their arts. —And now, I hear,
they enjoy their successful malice. 
Your father is all rage and violence. He ought,
I am sure, to turn his rage inward. All your family
accuse you of acting with deep art; and are put upon
supposing, that you are actually every hour exulting
over them, with your man, in the success of it. 
They all pretend now, that your trial of Wednesday
was to be the last. 
Advantage would indeed, my mamma owns, have
been taken of your yielding, if you had yielded. But
had you not been to be prevailed upon, they would
have given up their scheme, and taken your promise
for renouncing Lovelace—Believe them who will! 
They own, however, that a minister was to be present. 
Mr. Solmes was to be at hand. And your
father was previously to try his authority over you,
in order to make you sign the settlements. —All
of it a romantic contrivance of your wild-headed
foolish brother, I make no doubt. —Is it likely, that
he and Bell would have given way to your restoration
to favour, on any other terms than those their
hearts had been so long set upon? 

How they took your flight, when they found it
out, may be better supposed than described. 
Your aunt Hervey, it seems, was the first that went
down to the Ivy summer-house, in order to acquaint
you, that their search was over. Betty followed her; 
and they not finding you there, went on toward the
cascade, according to a hint of yours. 
Returning by the garden-door, they met a servant
[They don't say, it was that Joseph Leman; but it
is very likely, that it was he] running, as he said,
from pursuing Mr. Lovelace (a great hedge-stake in
his hand, and out of breath), to alarm the family. 
If it were this fellow, and if he were employed in
the double agency of cheating them, and cheating
you, what shall we think of the wretch you are with? 
—Run away from him, my dear, if so—No matter
to whom—or marry him, if you cannot. 
Your aunt and all your family were accordingly
alarmed by this fellow [evidently when too late for
pursuit]. They got together, and, when a posse, ran
to the place of interview; and some of them as far
as to the tracks of the chariot-wheels, without stopping. 
And having heard the man's tale, upon the
spot, a general lamentation, a mutual upbraiding and
rage, and grief, were echoed from the different persons,
according to their different tempers and conceptions. 
And they returned like fools as they
went. 
Your brother, at first, ordered horses and armed
men, to be got ready for a pursuit. Solmes and your
uncle Tony were to be of the party. But your
mamma and your aunt Hervey dissuaded them from
it, for fear of adding evil to evil; not doubting but
Lovelace had taken measures to support himself in
what he had done; and especially when the servant
declared, that he saw you run with him, as fast as
you could set foot to ground; and that there were 

several armed men on horseback at a small distance
off. 
* *
My mamma's absence was owing to her suspicion,
that the Knollys's were to assist in our correspondence. 
She made them a visit upon it. She does every
thing at once. And they have promised, that no
more letters shall be left there, without her knowlege. 
But Mr. Hickman has engaged one Filmer, a husbandman,
in the lane we call Finch-lane, near us
to receive them. Thither you will be pleased to direct
yours, under cover, to Mr. John Soberton; and
Mr. Hickman himself will call for them there; and
there shall leave mine. It goes against me too, to
make him so useful to me. —He looks already so
proud upon it! —I shall have him (who knows?) give
himself airs. —He had best consider, that the favour
he has been long aiming at, may put him into a very
dangerous, a very ticklish situation. He that can
oblige, may disoblige—Happy for some people not to
have it in their power to offend! 
I will have patience, if I can, for a while, to see
if these bustlings in my mamma will subside—But
upon my word, I will not long bear this usage. 
Sometimes I am ready to think, that my mamma
carries it thus on purpose to tire me out, and to make
me the sooner marry. If I find it to be so, and that
Hickman, in order to make a merit with me, is in
the low plot, I will never bear him in my sight. 
Plotting wretch, as I doubt your man is, I wish to
heaven, that you were married, that you might brave
them all; and not be forced to hide yourself, and be
hurried from one inconvenient place to another. I
charge you, omit not to lay hold on any handsome
opportunity that may offer for that purpose. 

Here again comes my mamma. 
* *
We look mighty glum upon each other, I can tell
you. She had not best Harlowe me at this rate!— 
won't bear it!— 
I have a vast deal to write. I know not what to
write first. Yet my mind is full, and seems to run over. 
I am got into a private corner of the garden, to
be out of her way. —Lord help these mothers! — 
Do they think they can prevent a daughter's writing,
or doing any thing she has a mind to do, by suspicion,
watchfulness, and scolding? —They had better place
a confidence in one by half—A generous mind scorns
to abuse a generous confidence. 
You have a nice, a very nice part to act with
this wretch—Who yet has, I think, but one plain
path before him. I pity you! —But you must make
the best of the lot you have been forced to draw. Yet
I see your difficulties. —But if he do not offer to abuse
your confidence, I would have you seem, at least, to
place some in him. 
If you think not of marrying soon, I approve of
your resolution to fix somewhere out of his reach: 
And if he know not where to find you, so much the
better. Yet I verily believe, they would force you
back, could they but come at you, if they were not
afraid of him. 
I think, by all means, you should demand of both
your trustees to be put in possession of your own
estate. Mean time I have sixty guineas at your service. 
I beg you will command them. Before they
are gone, I'll take care you shall be further supplied. 
I don't think you'll have a shilling, or a shilling's
worth, of your own, from your relations, unless
you extort it from them. 
As they believe you went off by your own consent,
they are surpriz'd, it seems, and glad, that you have 

left your jewels and money behind you, and have
contrived for cloaths so ill. Very little likelihood
this shews, of their answering your requests. 
Indeed every-body, not knowing what I now know
must be at a loss to account for your flight, as they
will call it. And how, my dear, can one report
with any tolerable advantage to you? —To say, you
did not intend it, when you met him, who will believe
it? —To say, that a person of your known steadiness
and punctilio was over-persuaded, when you
gave him the meeting, how will that sound? —To
say you were trick'd out of yourself, and people were
to give credit to it, how disreputable? —And when
unmarried, and yet with him, he a man of such
character, what would it not lead a censuring woman
to think? 
I want to see how you put it in your letter for your
cloaths. 
You may depend, I repeat, upon all the little spiteful
and disgraceful things they can offer, instead of
what you write for. So pray accept the sum I tender. 
What will seven guineas do? —And I will find
a way to send you also any of my cloaths, and linen
for present supply. I beg, my dearest Miss Harlowe,
that you will not put your Anna Howe upon a foot
with Lovelace, in refusing to accept of my offer. If
you do not oblige me, I shall be apt to think, that you
rather incline to be obliged to him, than to favour me. 
And if I find this, I shall not know how to reconcile
it with your delicacy in other respects. 
Pray inform me of every thing that passes between
you and him. My cares for you (however needless
from your own prudence) make me wish you to
continue to be very minute. If any thing occur, that
you would tell me of, if present, fail not to put
down in writing, altho', from your natural diffidence
it should not appear to you altogether so worthy of
your pen, or of my knowing. A stander-by may see 

more of the game than one that plays. Great consequences,
like great folks, are generally attended, and
seen made great, by small causes, and little incidents. 
Upon the whole, I do not now think it is in your
power to dismiss him when you please. I apprized
you beforehand that it would not. I repeat, therefore,
that were I you, I would at least seem to place
some confidence in him: So long as he is decent,
you may. Very visibly observable, to such delicacy
as yours, must be that behaviour in him, which will
make him unworthy of some confidence. 
Your relations, according to old Antony to my
mother, and she to me (by way of threatening, that
you will not gain your supposed ends upon them by
your flight), seem to expect, that you will throw
yourself into Lady Betty's protection; and that she
will offer to mediate for you: And they vow, that
they will never hearken to any accommodation, or
terms, that shall come from that quarter. They
might speak out, and say, from any quarter; for I
dare aver, that your brother and sister will not let
them cool—At least, till their uncles have made such
dispositions, and your father too, perhaps, as they
would have them make. 
As this letter will apprize you of an alteration in
the place to which you must direct your next, I send
by a friend of Mr. Hickman's, who may be depended
upon. He has business in the neighbourhood of Mrs.
Earlings, whom he knows; and will return to Mr.
Hickman this night; and bring back any letter you
shall have ready to send, or can get ready. It is
moon-light. He won't mind waiting for you. I choose
not to send by any of Mr. Hickman's servants;—at
present, however. Every hour is now, or may be,
important; and may make an alteration in your resolutions
and situation necessary. 
I hear, from where I sit, my mamma calling about
her, and putting every-body into motion. She will 

soon, I suppose, make me, and my employment, the
subject of her inquiry. 
Adieu, my dear. May heaven preserve you, and
restore you with honour as unsullied as your mind, to 
Your ever-affectionate
Anna Howe. 