


Sir Cha. Grandison, To Arch. Reeves, Esq; 


Canterbury, Feb. 22. 
Dear Sir,
The inclosed long letter is just now brought to me. 
I pretend not to judge of the writer's penitence. 
Yet his confession seem ingenuous; and he was not
under any obligation to put them on paper. 
As I presume that you will not think it adviseable
to make the ineffectual attempt upon Miss Byron public
by a prosecution, perhaps your condescending to let
the man's sister know, that her brother, if in earnest,
may securely pursue the honest purposes he mentions,
may save the poor wretch from taking such courses
as might be fatal, not only to himself, but to innocent
persons, who otherwise may suffer by his being made
desperate. 
The man, as you will see by his letter, if you had
not a still stronger proof, has abilities to do mischief. 
He has been in bad hands, as he tells us, from his
youth upwards, or he might have been an useful member
of society. He is a young man; and if yet he
could be made so, his reformation will take from the 

number of the profligate, and add to that of the hopeful; 
and who knows how wide the circle of his acquaintance
is, and how many of them may be influenced
by his example either way? If he marry the
not-dishonest young woman, to whom he seems to be
contracted, may not your lenity be a means of securing
a whole future family on the side of moral honesty? 
His crime, as the attempt was frustrated, is not
capital: And, not to mention the service of such an
evidence as this, should Sir Hargrave seek for a legal
redress, as he sometimes weakly threatens, my hope
makes me see a further good that may be brought
about by this man's reformation: Wicked masters
cannot execute their base views upon the persons of the
innocent, without the assistance of wicked servants. 
What a nest of vipers may be crush'd at once, or at
least, render'd unhurtful, by depriving the three monsters
he names of the aid of such an agent? Men who
want to save appearances, and have estates to forfeit,
will sometimes be honest of necessity, rather than put
themselves into the power of untried villains. 
You will be so good as to make my compliments
to your lady, and to our lovely ward. You see, Sir,
that I join myself with you in the honour of that
agreeable relation. 
I hope the dear lady has perfectly recovered her
health and spirits. I am, dear Mr. Reeves, 
Your most faithful and obedient Servant,
Charles Grandison. 

