



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday, July 7. 
I have three of thy Letters at once before me to
answer; in each of which thou complainest of my
silence; and in one of them tellest me, that thou canst
not live without I scribble to thee every day, or every
other day at least. 
Why, then, die, Jack, if thou wilt. What heart,
thinkest thou, can I have to write, when I have lost
the only subject worth writing upon? 
Help me again to my Angel, to my Clarissa; 
and thou shalt have a Letter from me, or writing at
least, part of a Letter, every hour. All that the
Charmer of my heart shall say, that will I put down: 
Every motion, every air of her beloved person, every
look, will I try to describe; and when she is silent, I
will endeavour to tell thee her thoughts, either what
they are, or what I would have them to be—So that,
having her, I shall never want a subject. Having lost
her, my whole Soul is a blank: The whole Creation
round me, the Elements above, beneath, and everything
I behold (for nothing can I enjoy) are a blank
without her! 
O Return, Return, thou only Charmer of my
Soul! Return to thy adoring Lovelace! What is the
Light, what the Air, what the Town, what the
Country, what's Any-thing, without thee? Light,
Air, Joy, Harmony, in my notion, are but parts of
thee; and could they be all expressed in one word,
that word would be Clarissa. 
O my beloved Clarissa, Return thou then; 

once more Return to bless thy Lovelace, who now,
by the loss of thee, knows the value of the jewel he
has slighted; and rises every morning but to curse the
Sun, that shines upon every-body but him! 
* *
Well but, Jack, 'tis a surprising thing to me,
that the dear Fugitive cannot be met with; cannot be
heard of. She is so poor a plotter (for plotting is not
her talent) that I am confident, had I been at liberty,
I should have found her out before now; altho' the
different emissaries I have employed about town,
round the adjacent villages, and in Miss Howe's vicinage,
have hitherto failed of success. But my Lord
continues so weak and low-spirited, that there is no
getting from him. I would not disoblige a man whom
I think in danger still: For would his Gout, now it
has got him down, but give him, like a fair boxer,
the rising-blow, all would be over with him. And
here [Pox of his fondness for me! it happens at a very
bad time] he makes me sit hours together entertaining
him with my rogueries (a pretty amusement for a sick
man!): And yet, whenever he has the Gout, he
prays night and morning with his Chaplain. But
what must his notions of Religion be, who, after he
has nosed and mumbled over his Responses, can give
a sigh or groan of satisfaction, as if he thought he had
made up with Heaven; and return with a new appetite
to my Stories? —Encouraging them, by shaking
his sides with laughing at them, and calling me a sad
fellow in such an accent, as shews he takes no small
delight in his Kinsman. 
The old Peer has been a sinner in his day, and suffers
for it now: A sneaking sinner, sliding, rather than
rushing, into vices, for fear of his reputation: Or,
rather, for fear of detection, and positive proof; for
these sort of fellows, Jack, have no real regard for reputation. 
—Paying for what he never had, and never
daring to rise to the joy of an enterprize at first hand, 

which could bring him within view of a tilting, or of
the honour of being considered as the principal man in
a Court of Justice. 
To see such an old Trojan as this, just dropping
into the grave, which I hoped ere this would have
been dug, and filled up with him; crying out with
pain, and grunting with weakness; yet in the same
moment crack his leathern face into an horrible laugh,
and call a young sinner charming varlet, encoring
him, as formerly he used to do the Italian Eunuchs; 
what a preposterous, what an unnatural adherence to
old habits! 
My two Cousins are generally present when I entertain,
as the old Peer calls it. Those Stories must
drag horribly, that have not more hearers and applauders,
than relaters. 
Applauders! 
Ay, Belford, Applauders, repeat I; for altho' these
girls pretend to blame me sometimes for the facts,
they praise my manner, my invention, my intrepidity. 
—Besides, what other people call blame, that
call I praise: I ever did; and so I very early discharged
shame, that cold-water damper to an enterprising
spirit. 
These are smart girls; they have life and wit; and
yesterday, upon Charlotte's raving against me upon a
related enterprize, I told her, that I had had it in debate
several times, whether she were or were not too
near of kin to me: And that it was once a moot point
with me, whether I could not love her dearly for a
month or so: And perhaps it was well for her, that
another pretty little puss started up, and diverted me,
just as I was entering upon the course. 
They all three held up their hands and eyes at once. 
But I observed, that tho' the girls exclaimed against
me, they were not so angry at this plain speaking, as I
have found my Beloved upon hints so dark, that I have
wondered at her quick apprehension. 

I told Charlotte, That, grave as she pretended to
be in her smiling resentments on this declaration, I
was sure I should not have been put to the expence
of above two or three stratagems (for nobody
admired a good invention more than she) could I but
have disentangled her conscience from the embarrasses
of consanguinity. 
She pretended to be highly displeased: So did her
Sister for her. I told her, that she seemed as much
in earnest, as if she had thought me so; and dared
the trial. Plain words, I said, in these cases, were
more shocking to their Sex than gradatim actions. 
And I bid Patty not be displeased at my distinguishing
her Sister; since I had a great respect for her likewise. 
An Italian Air, in my usual careless way, a half-struggled-for
kiss from me, and a shrug of the shoulder
by way of admiration, from each pretty Cousin,
and Sad, sad fellow, from the old Peer, attended with
a side-shaking laugh, made us all friends. 
There, Jack! —Wilt thou, or wilt thou not, take
this for a Letter? There's Quantity, I am sure. — 
How have I filled a sheet (not a short-hand one indeed)
without a subject! My fellow shall take this; 
for he is going to town. And if thou canst think
tolerably of such execrable stuff, I will soon send thee
another. 