


Miss Lucy Selby, To Lady L. 


Sunday, Nov. 19.
My dear Lady G. insists upon my writing to your
Ladyship an account of the appearance which
the loveliest Couple in England made this day at
Church. 
We all thought nothing could have added to the
charms of our Harriet's person; but yet her dress and
jewels did. I sighed, from pride for the honour of
Female Beauty, to think they did. Can my dear Harriet,
thought I, exquisitely lovely as she is in any
dress, be ornamented by richer silks than common,
by costly laces, by jewels? Can dress add grace to that
admirable proportion, and those fine features, to
which no painter yet has ever done justice, tho' every
family related to her has a picture of her, drawn by a
different hand of eminence? 
We admired the Bridegroom as much as we did
her, when (before we could have thought he had been
half ready) he joined Mrs. Shirley, my Aunt Selby,
and me, in the great Parlour, completely dressed. 
But what we most admired in him was, that native
dignity and ease, and that inattentiveness to his own
figure and appearance, which demonstrate the trulyfine
gentleman, accustomed, as he is, to be always elegant. 
When his Lady presented herself to him, and to us, 

in all her glory, how did the dear creature dazle us! 
We involuntarily arose, as if to pay our homage to
her. Sir Charles approached her with rather an air of
greater freedom than usual, as if he considered not the
dress, as having added to the value he has for her:
Yet, Loveliest of women, he called her; and, taking
her hand, presented her to her grandmamma: Receive,
and again bless, my Angel, said he, best of
Parents! —How lovely! But what is even all this
amazing loveliness to the graces of her mind? They
rise upon me every hour. She hardly opens her lips,
but I find reason to bless God, and bless you both,
my dear Ladies: For God and you have given her
goodness. —My dearest Life, allow me to say, that
this sweet person, which will be your first perfection
in every stranger's eye, is but a second in mine. 
Instruct me, Sir, said she, bashfully, bowing her
face upon his hand, as he held hers, to deserve your
Love, by improving the mind you have the goodness
to prefer; and no creature was ever on earth so happy
as I shall be. 
My dear Daughter, said her delighted grandmother,
you see, can hardly bear your goodness, Sir. You
must blame her for something, to keep down her
pride. 
My Harriet, replied he, cannot be proud of what
the silkworm can do for her, or of the jeweller's polish:
But now you call upon me, madam, I will tax
her with a real fault. I open all my heart to her, as
subjects occasionally offer: I want her to have a will,
and to let me know it. The frankest of all Female
hearts will not treat me with that sweet familiarity
which banishes distance. You see, my dearest Love,
that I chide you before your parental friends, and your
Lucy. 
It is your own fault, Sir: Indeed it is. You prevent
me in all my wishes. Awe will mingle with the
Love of persons who are under perpetual obligation. 

My dear two mamma's, you must not blame me;
you must blame Sir Charles: He takes away, by his
goodness, even the power of making suitable acknowlegements,
and then complains I do not speak. 
My uncle Selby came in. He stood looking upon
my cousin, for a few moments, in silence; then broke
out, Sir Charles Grandison, you may indeed boast,
that you have for a Wife the Flower of the British
world, as you once called her: And, let me tell you,
Niece, you have for a Husband the noblest and gallantest
of men. Happy, happy Pair! say I. My
dear Mr. Deane, said he, who just then entered, if
you will keep me in countenance, I will venture to
salute that charming creature. 
Sir Charles presented his Bride to them both. With
a bent knee she received their salutes. At that moment
came in the three Lords, who followed the example. 
Lord W. called her Angel—Sir Charles
looked delighted with the praises of his Bride. 
The rest of the company being come, we proceeded
to Church. 
We were early; but the Church was crouded. 
How were the charming Couple admired on their
alighting, and as they walked to their pew! —Never
did my Cousin herself look so lovely! How charmingly
looked the Bridegroom! But he forgot not that
humble deportment, full of reverence for the place,
and the Divine Offices, which seemed to make him
absent for the time to that splendor and beauty which
took every eye out of our own pew. His example
was enough to give a proper behaviour, had it been
needful, to every one in it. 
I should have told your Ladyship, that Mr. Greville
had sent, over night, a sullenly-complaisant request
to my aunt, in writing, importing, that as he
heard the Bride would make her appearance on the
morrow, the Bride-men and maids, if it broke not
into our Ceremonial, would accept of his pew, which 

is over-against ours, for the look of the thing, he said; 
tho' he could not promise but he should all the day
curse the occasion. By this we found, he was not
gone to Lady Frampton's, as he had designed. His
offer was thankfully accepted. 
There was a great concourse of the genteelest people
there. Every-body, men and women, looked
delighted on the occasion. The humility of the
Bride was tried, by the respects paid her between the
offices, by all who had ever been in her company. 
They should have reined in their own pride; for it
was to that, as much as to respect to her, I doubt not,
that their notice was owing. She looked conscious,
bashful; sly, I told her afterwards. She hates the
word: But, as I said, she should not have given the
idea, that made no other word so proper to express it,
and which must be more observable in her generally
open free countenance, than in that of any other. She
more than once saw devoirs paid her by a leer, when her
sweet face was so disposed that, had she not returned
the compliment, it might have passed that she had not
seen them. But what an Insensible must have been
my cousin, had she not been proud of being Lady
Grandison! She is not quite an Angel, yet: She has
a few Femalities, as my uncle whimsically calls our
little foibles. So, perhaps, she should. But nobody
saw the least defect in your brother. His dress most
charmingly became him; and when he looked upon
his Bride, his eyes were fixed on her eyes, with such a
sweet benignity and complaisance, as if he saw her
mind through them, and could not spare a glance to
her ornaments: Yet by his own dress he shewed,
that he was no Stoical non-conformist to the fashion
of the world. But the politeness and respect with
which he treated her, did them both credit, and credit
(as Lady G. observed) to the whole Sex. Such
unaffected tenderness in his respect; and known to be
so brave, so good a man! —O my dear Lady L. what 

an admirable man is your brother! What a happy
creature is my Harriet! 
When Divine Service was over, I was afraid our
Procession, as I may call it, would have been interrupted
by the compliments of some of the gentry of
our acquaintance, whose opened pew-doors shewed
their readiness to address them: But all passed in silent
respects from Gentlemen and Ladies. My cousin,
when she came home, rejoiced that one of her parading
times was over: But when, my dearest Love,
said Sir Charles, will the time be past, that all who see
you will admire you? 
The Church in the afternoon was still more crouded
than before. How were Sir Charles and my uncle
blessed by the poor, and people of low degree, for their
well-dispensed bounty to them! 
My cousin has delighted Mrs. Shirley, by telling
her, that Sir Charles had said there would be a Rite
wanting, till he and she had communicated, according
to the order of the Church, at the Altar, on this
particular occasion. 
Just now is every-thing settled that Sir Charles
wished to be settled. Lady G. will acquaint you with
particulars, I doubt not. 
Permit me to commend myself to your Ladyship's
favour, as one of the 
Humblest and sincerest of your Servants,
Lucy Selby. 
P.S. Lady G. has half broke my heart. 
On perusal of what I have written, she says, I
have not done my best: I have not given half
particulars enough. —In short, she finds a multitude
of faults with me—Even calls me names,
Sorry girl, lazy, and I can't tell what. 
But do you, madam, acquit me, and I shall be
easy. 

I told her, that I thought I had been very minute. 
What! to a lying-in woman, she says, who has
no variety before her! All one dull chamberscene,
hourly acted over again—The subject
so rich! 
I answered, It should then have had the richest
pen! —Why did she not write herself? If it
was not for laziness-sake, it was for self-sake,
that she did not. As I knew Lady L. would
have been a gainer by the change of pen, I
had much rather have been in the company
for which she quitted the task, than grubbing
pens in my closet; and all to get nothing but
discommendation. 
I have shewn her this my Postscript. She raves:
But I am hardened. She will soon have an opportunity
to supply all my defects, in person. 

