



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday Morn. 10 o'clock (Mar. 23.) 
I will postpone, or perhaps pass by, several observations
which I had to make on other parts of your
Letters; to acquaint you, that Mr. Hickman, when
in London, found an opportunity to enquire after
Mr. Lovelace's town-life and conversation. 
At the Cocoa-tree in Pall-mall he fell in with two
of his intimates, the one named Belton, the other
Mowbray; both very free of speech, and probably
as free in their lives: But the waiters paid them great
respect, and on Mr. Hickman's enquiry after their
characters, called them men of fortune and honour. 
They began to talk of Mr. Lovelace of their own
accord; and upon some gentlemen in the room asking,
When they expected him in town, answered,
That very day. Mr. Hickman (as they both went
on praising Lovelace) said, He had indeed heard, that
Mr. Lovelace was a very fine Gentleman—and was
proceeding, when one of them, interrupting him,
said,—Only, Sir, the finest gentleman in the world; 
that's all. 
And so he led them on to expatiate more particularly
on his qualities; which they were very fond of
doing: But said not one single word in behalf of his
Morals—Mind that also, in your Uncle's style. 
Mr. Hickman said, That Mr. Lovelace was very
happy, as he understood, in the esteem of the Ladies; 
and, smiling, to make them believe he did not think
amiss of it, that he pushed his good fortune as far as
it would go. 
Well put, Mr. Hickman! thought I; equally
grave and sage—Thou seemest not to be a stranger to
their dialect, as I suppose this is. But I said nothing; 
for I have often tried to find out this mighty sober 

man of my Mother's: But hitherto have only to say,
that he is either very moral, or very cunning. 
No doubt of it, replied one of them; and out
came an oath, with a Who would not? —That he
did as every young fellow would do. 
Very true! said my Mother's Puritan—But I hear
he is in treaty with a fine Lady— 
So he was, Mr. Belton said—The devil fetch her! 
[Vile Brute!] for she engrossed all his time—But that
the Lady's family ought to be—something—[Mr.
Hickman desired to be excused repeating what—tho'
he had repeated what was worse] and might dearly
repent their usage of a man of his family and merit. 
Perhaps they may think him too wild, cried Hickman: 
And theirs is, I hear, a very sober family— 
Sober! said one of them: A good honest word,
Dick! —Where the devil has it lain all this time? — 
D&wblank;me if I have heard of it in this sense, ever since
I was at college! And then, said he, we bandied it
about among twenty of us, as an obsolete. 
These, my dear, are Mr. Lovelace's companions: 
You'll be pleased to take notice of that! 
Mr. Hickman said, This put him out of countenance. 
I stared at him, and with such a meaning in my
eyes, as he knew how to take; and so was out of
countenance again. 
Don't you remember, my dear, who it was that
told a young gentleman designed for the gown, who
owned that he was apt to be too easily put out of
countenance when he came into free company; 
‘That it was a bad sign; that it looked as if his
morals were not proof; but that his good disposition
seemed rather the effect of accident and education,
than of such a choice as was founded upon principle?’ 
And don't you know the lesson the very
same young Lady gave him, ‘To endeavour to stem
and discountenance vice, and to glory in being an 

advocate in all companies for virtue;’ particularly
observing, ‘That it was natural for a man to shun
or to give up what he was ashamed of?’ Which she
should be sorry to think his case on this occasion: 
Adding, ‘That vice was a coward, and would hide
its head, when opposed by such a virtue as had
presence of mind, and a full persuasion of its own
rectitude, to support it.’ The Lady, you may remember,
modestly put her doctrine into the mouth
of a worthy preacher, Dr. Lewen, as she uses to do,
when she has a mind not to be thought to be what she
is at so early an age; and that it may give more
weight to any-thing she hit upon, that might appear
tolerable, was her modest manner of speech. 
Mr. Hickman, upon the whole, professed to me,
upon his second recovery, that he had no reason to
think well of Mr. Lovelace's morals, from what he
heard of him in town: Yet his two intimates talked
of his being more regular than he used to be: That he
had made a very good resolution, That of old Tom
Wharton, was the expression, That he would never
give a challenge, nor refuse one; which they praised
in him highly: That, in short, he was a very brave
fellow, and the most agreeable companion in the
world: And would one day make a great figure in his
country; since there was nothing he was not capable
of— 
I am afraid that this last assertion is too true. And
this, my dear, is all that Mr. Hickman could pick up
about him: And is it not enough to determine such a
mind as yours, if not already determined? 
Yet it must be said too, that if there be a woman
in the world that can reclaim him, it is you. And,
by your account of his behaviour in the interview
between you, I own I have some hope of him. At
least, This I will say, That all the Arguments he then
used with you, seem to be just and right: And if you
are to be his—But no more of That: He cannot,
after all, deserve you. 