



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, April 20. 
I should think myself utterly unworthy of your
friendship, did my own concerns, heavy as they
are, so ingross me, that I could not find leisure for a
few lines, to declare to my beloved friend my sincere
disapprobation of her conduct, in an instance where
she is so generously faulty, that the consciousness of
that very generosity may hide from her the fault,
which I, more than any other, have reason to deplore,
as being the unhappy occasion of it. 
You know, you say, that your account of the contentions
between your mamma and you will trouble
me; and so you bid me spare myself the labour to tell
you that they do. 
You did not use, my dear, to forbid me thus beforehand. 
You was wont to say, you loved me the better
for my expostulations with you on that acknowleged
warmth and quickness of your temper, which
your own good sense taught you to be apprehensive of. 
What tho' I have so miserably fallen, and am unhappy; 
if ever I had any judgment worth regarding,
it is now as much worth as ever, because I can
give it as freely against myself, as against any-body
else. And shall I not, when there seems to be an infection
in my fault, and that it leads you likewise to
resolve to carry on a correspondence against prohibition,
expostulate with you upon it; when whatever
consequences flow from your disobedience, but widen
my error, which is as the evil root, from which such
bad branches spring? 

The mind that can glory in being capable of so
noble, so firm, so unshaken a friendship, as that of
my dear Miss Howe; a friendship which no casualty
or distress can lessen, but which increases with the
misfortunes of its friend—Such a mind must be above
taking amiss the well-meant admonitions of that distinguish'd
friend. I will not therefore apologize for
my freedom on this subject: And the less need I,
when that freedom is the result of an affection, in the
very instance, so absolutely disinterested, that it tends
to deprive myself of the only comfort left me. 
Your acknowleged sullens; your tearing from your
mamma's hands the letter she thought she had a right
to see; and burning it, as you own, before her face; 
your refusal to see the man, who is so willing to obey
you for the sake of your unhappy friend; and this
purely to vex your mamma; can you think, my
dear, upon this brief recapitulation of hardly one half
of the faulty particulars you give, that these faults are
excusable in one, who so well knows her duty? 
Your mamma had a good opinion of me once: Is
not that a reason why she should be more regarded
now, when I have, as she believes, so deservedly forfeited
it? A prejudice in favour is as hard to be totally
overcome, as a prejudice in disfavour. In what a
strong light, then, must that error appear to her, that
should so totally turn her heart against me, herself
not a principal in the case? 
There are other duties, you say, besides that of a
child to a parent: But That must be a prior duty to
all other duties; a duty anterior, as I may say, to
your very birth: And what duty ought not to give
way to That, when they come in competition? 
You are persuaded, that both duties may be performed
without derogating from either. She thinks
otherwise. What is the conclusion to be drawn from
these premises? 
When your mamma sees, how much I suffer in 

my reputation from the step I have taken, from whom
she and all the world expected better things, how
much reason has she to be watchful over you! One
evil draws another after it; and how knows she, or
any body, where it may stop? 
Does not the person who will vindicate, or seek to
extenuate, a faulty step in another [In this light must
your mamma look upon the matter in question between
you], give an indication either of a culpable
will, or a weak judgment? —And may not she apprehend,
that the censorious will think, that such a
one might probably have equally failed, under the same
inducements and provocations, to use your own words
in a former letter, apply'd to me? 
Can there be a stronger instance in human life than
mine has so early furnished within a few months past
(not to mention the uncommon provocations to it,
which I have met with), of the necessity of the continuance
of a watchful parent's care over a daughter; 
let that daughter have obtained ever so great a reputation
for her prudence? 
Is not the space from sixteen to twenty-one, that
which requires this care, more, than any time of a
young woman's life? For in that period, do we not
generally attract the eyes of the other sex, and become
the subject of their addresses, and not seldom of
their attempts? And is not That the period in which
our conduct or misconduct gives us a reputation or
disreputation, that almost inseparably accompanies us
throughout our whole future lives? 
Are we not then most in danger from ourselves,
because of the distinction with which we are apt to
behold particulars of that sex? 
And when our dangers multiply, both from within
and without, do not our parents know, that their vigilance
ought to be doubled? —And shall that necessary
increase of care sit uneasy upon us, because we
are grown up to stature and womanhood? 

Will you tell me, if so, what is the precise stature
and age, at which a good child shall conclude herself
absolv'd from the duty she owes to a parent? —And
at which a parent, after the example of the dams of
the brute creation, is to lay aside all care and tenderness
for her offspring? 
Is it so hard for you, my dear, to be treated like a
child? And can you not think it as hard, for a good
parent to imagine herself under the unhappy necessity
of so treating her woman-grown daughter? 
Do you think, if your mamma had been you, and
you your mamma, and your daughter had struggled with
you, as you did with her, that you would not have
been as apt, as your mamma was, to have slapt your
daughter's hands, to have made her quit her hold to
you, and give up the prohibited paper? 
It is great truth, that your mamma told you, that
you provoked her to this harshness; and a great condescension
in her (and not taken notice of by you, as
it deserv'd) to say, that she was sorry for it. 
At every age on this side matrimony (for then we
come under another sort of protection, tho' that is far
from abrogating the filial duty), it will be found, that
the wings of our parents are our most necessary and
most effectual safeguard, to preserve us from the vulturs,
the hawks, the kites, and the other villainous
birds of prey, that hover over us, with a view to
seize and destroy us, the first time we are caught wandering
out of the eye or care of our watchful and natural
guardians and protectors. 
Hard as you may suppose it to be deny'd the continuance
of a correspondence once so much approved,
even by the reverend denier;—Yet, if your mamma
think, that my fault is of such a nature, as that a correspondence
with me will cast a shade upon your
reputation; all my own friends having given me up; 
—that hardship is to be submitted to. And must it
not make her the more strenuous to support her own 

opinion, when she sees the first fruits of this tenaciousness
of your side, is to be gloriously in the sullens,
as you call it; and in a disobedient opposition? 
I know, my dear, you mean an humorousness in
that expression, which, in most cases, gives a delightful
poignancy, both to your conversation and correspondence—But
indeed, my dear, this case will not
bear it. 
Will you give me leave to add to this tedious expostulation,
that I by no means approve of some of the
things you write, in relation to the manner in which
your father and mother lived?—at times—Only
at times, I dare say; tho' perhaps, too often.— 
Your mamma is answerable to any-body, rather
than to her child, for whatever was wrong in her conduct,
if any thing was wrong, towards Mr. Howe; a
gentleman, of whose memory I will only say, that it
ought to be revered by you—But yet, should you not
examine yourself, whether your displeasure at your
mamma had no part in your revived reverence for
your papa, at the time you wrote? 
No one is perfect: And altho' your mamma may
not be so right to remember disagreeablenesses against
the departed, yet should you not want to be reminded,
on whose account, and on what occasion, she remembered
them. —You cannot judge, nor ought you
to attempt to judge, of what might have passed between
both, to keep awake, and imbitter disagreeable
remembrances in the survivor. 