


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Thursday, May 17. 
Lady Clementina is thoughtful, solemn, and
shuns company. Not one word will anybody
say to her of the Count of Belvedere: But as
he is expected here every-day to take his leave, Sir
Charles thinks she ought not to be surprized by his
coming at unawares. She neither dined nor supped
in company yesterday; nor breakfasted with us this
morning. She loves, as you have heard, to walk in
the garden. She diverts herself often with feeding
the deer, which gather about her, as soon as she enters 

the park. Sir Charles just now passed her in the
garden. He asked after her health. –––My mind is
not well, Chevalier! –––God Almighty heal it! said
he, taking her hand, and bowing upon it. –––Thank
you, Sir! Continue your prayers for me. That last
conversation, Chevalier–––But, adieu. 
She took a path that led to the park. He looked
after her. She turned once to see if he did. He
bowed, and motioned with his hand as for leave to
follow her. She understood his motion, and by hers
forbid him. –––Poor Lady! 
Thursday Evening, Six o'clock. 
Mr. Lowther returned from London about an
hour ago. He has always been of opinion with the
physicians of Italy, that a disorder of mind not hereditary,
but circumstanced as Lady Clementina's was,
will be in no danger of returning, or of becoming hereditary,
unless on some new distress like the former. 
He expressed his wonder more than once, at her relations
acquiescence with her plea, as she made that the
principal against marriage; tho' he allowed it to be
a noble and generous one in her. And now, in order
to justify his opinion, he has taken, of his
own accord, the opinions of the most noted London
physicians: who entirely agree with him. 
Saturday, May 19. 
Lady Clementina has been generously lamenting
to me the unhappiness of the cruel Laurana. What
I hinted to Sir Charles, said she, of her Love for the
Count of Belvedere, is but too true. I have been
urged to have compassion, as it is called, on him. He
should have shewed some for her. She was proposed
to him. He rejected the proposal with haughtiness:
But, I believe, knew not how much she loved him. 
I have faint remembrances of her ravings, as I may
call them, for him, to her mother and woman:
Sometimes vowing revenge for slighted Love. –––Poor
Laurana was another Olivia in the violence of her passion. 

In the few lucid intervals I had when I was
under her management, I always expected that these
ravings would end in harder usage of me. Yet even
then, when I had calmness enough to pity myself, I
pitied her. O that the Count would make her happy,
and could think himself happy in her!––– 
She asked me if Sir Charles were not indeed inclined
to favour the Count? 
He wishes you, madam, to marry, answered I, because
he thinks (and physicians of Italy and England,
and Mr. Lowther, concur with your parents wishes)
if there were a man in the world whom you could
consent to make happy, the consequence would not
only make your whole family so, but yourself. But
the choice of the man, he thinks, should be entirely
left to you: He thinks that the count, so often refused,
ought not to be insisted on; and that time
should be given you. 
Let me ask you, Lady Grandison, as one sister to
another, Could you, in my situation, have resolved to
give your hand–––She stopt, blushed, looked down. 
I snatched her hand, and lifted it to my lips–––Speak
your whole heart, my Clementina, to your Harriet. ––– 
But yet I will spare you, when I understand your
meaning. Noblest of women, I am not Clementina. 
I could not, situated as you once were, all my friends
consenting, and the man–––such as you knew him to be,
have refused him my hand as well as heart. But what
may not be expected from a Lady, who, from a regard
to her superior duties could make the most laudable
passion of inferior force? –––You have already
overcome the greatest difficulty; and when you can
persuade yourself that it is your duty to enter into new
measures, I am sure, whatever they may be––– 
Dear Lady Grandison, say no more–––My duty––– 
How delicate are your intimations! –––What a subject
have we slid into! –––Believe me, I am incapable— 

Of any thought, of any imagination, interrupted I,
that an angel might not own. It would be an injury
to your Harriet's emulative Love of you, were you
but to suppose any assurances of your greatness of
mind necessary. 
But I am at times pained, generous Lady Grandison,
for what your friends may think, may wish––– 
O that I were in my own country again! 
They wish for nothing but your happiness. Lay
down your own plan, dear Lady: Chalk out your
future steps. Look about you one, two, three years,
in the single life: Assure your indulgent parents––– 
Hush, hush, hush, hush, my dear Lady Grandison,
gently putting her hand on my mouth: I will, I must,
leave you! –––O my fluctuating heart! –––But whatever
I shall be enabled to do; whose-soever displeasure
I may incurr, do you continue to love me; still
call me Sister; and, through you, let me call Sir
Charles Grandison my Brother; and then shall I
have a felicity that will counterbalance many infelicities. 
She hurried from me, not staying to hear the affectionate
assurances of my admiring Love, that were
bursting my lips from a heart fervently desiring to
comply with every wish of hers. 
Sunday, May 20. 
The Marquis is slightly indisposed. The Marchioness
is not well. Lady Clementina applying to
Mrs. Beaumont for consolation on the occasion,
owned, that were their indispositions to gather
strength, she should be too ready for her peace of
mind, to charge them to her own account. Mrs.
Beaumont generously consoled her, without urging one
syllable in favour of the man, who has so large an interest
in the hearts of all her family, her own excepted. 
She herself mentioned with approbation to
Mrs. Beaumont, some particulars of the Count's munificence,
and greatness of mind, that had come to 

her knowlege: But wished he could think of her cousin
Laurana. Her Camilla came in. She asked with
anxious duty, after her mother's health; and withdrew
in tears, to attend her. 
Monday, May 21. 
Well, but now, I Charlotte G. who have taken
up Harriet's pen, say, these tears will soon be dried
up. The Marquis and his Lady are both better. 
The Count is arrived; Signors Juliano and Sebastiano
with him. Did you not see the Count when he
was in town, Lucy? A pretty man, upon my life,
were he not quite so solemn: But that very solemnity
will make for him with the fair romancer: Is he not
come, as Lee says, in his Theodosius, 

–––“To take eternal leave?
“Not to vouchsafe to see him, would be scorn,
“Which the fair soul of gentle Clementina
“Could never harbour.”

Accordingly, on his arrival, not unsent to, but almost
unexpected, down she came to tea; and with
such a grace! –––Indeed, my dear and venerable Mrs.
Shirley, she will be a good girl. All will come right. 
She was a little solemn indeed in her serenity: But
she plainly put herself forward to speak. She seemed
to pity the Count's confusion (who, poor soul! knew
not how to speak to her) and relieved it by enquiring
after his health, as he had not been well. She addressed
herself to him once or twice on indifferent subjects; 
and pleased every-body by her behaviour to
him. Nay, they talked together a good while at the
window, he, and she, and Mrs. Beaumont, very freely
about England and Italy, comparing in a few instances,
these gardens with those of the Marquis at
Bologna. No very interesting conversation indeed; 
but the good Count thought himself in paradise. Yet
he fears he shall to-morrow be allowed to take a long,
long leave of her. He goes to France and Italy; not 

to Spain. I like him for that, it would only be distressing
himself, further, he says, were he to amuse
a worthy family who have invited him thither with a
view that can never be answered, while Clementina
remains unmarried. 
My brother continues to insist upon it, that not
one word shall be said in the Count's favour. Searoom,
and Land-room, Mrs. Shirley, as I said once
before–––Where did he learn so throughly to understand
the perverseness of a female heart? 
* *
By Lady Grandison.] You see, my grandmamma,
what Lady G. has written. Her sweetly playful pen
may divert you. Her heart feels not, as mine does,
the perplexities of the dear Clementina: But I yield
with grateful pleasure, to a pen so much more lively,
than that of 
Your Harriet Grandison. 

