



Miss Montague, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Tuesday, Aug. 1. 
Dearest Madam,
All our family is deeply sensible of the injuries
you have received at the hands of one of it,
whom You only can render in any manner worthy
of the relation he stands in to us all: And if, as an
act of mercy and charity, the greatest your pious
heart can shew, you will be pleased to look over his
past wickedness and ingratitude, and suffer yourself
to be our Kinswoman, you will make us the happiest
family in the world: And I can engage, that Lord
M. and Lady Sarah Sadleir, and Lady Betty Lawrance,
and my Sister, who are all admirers of your
virtues, and of your nobleness of mind, will for ever
love and reverence you, and do every-thing in all
their powers to make you amends for what you have
suffered from Mr. Lovelace. This, Madam, we
should not, however, dare to petition for, were we
not assured, that Mr. Lovelace is most sincerely sorry
for his past vileness to you; and that he will, on his
knees, beg your pardon, and vow eternal Love and
Honour to you. 
Wherefore, my dearest Cousin [How you will
charm us all, if this agreeable style may be permitted!]
for all our sakes, for his Soul's sake [You must, I
am sure, be so good a Lady, as to wish to save a
Soul!] and allow me to say, for your own fame's sake,
condescend to our joint request: And if, by way of
encouragement, you will but say, you will be glad
to see, and to be as much known personally, as you
are by fame, to Charlotte Montague, I will, in two
days time from the receipt of your permission, wait
upon you, with or without my Sister, and receive
your further commands. 
Let me, our dearest Cousin [We cannot deny ourselves 

the pleasure of calling you so; let me] entreat
you to give me your permission for my journey to
London; and put it in the power of Lord M. and of
the Ladies of the family, to make you what reparation
they can make you, for the injuries which a person
of the greatest merit in the world has received
from one of the most audacious men in it; and you
will infinitely oblige us all; and particularly her, who
repeatedly presumes to style herself, 
Your affectionate Cousin, and obliged Servant,
Charlotte Montague. 