



Mr. Lovelace; In Continuation. 

Well say'st thou, that mine is the most plotting
heart in the world. Thou dost me honour; 
and I thank thee heartily. Thou art no bad judge. 
How like Boileau's parson, I strut behind my double
chin! Am I not obliged to deserve thy compliment? 
—And wouldst thou have me repent of a murder before
I have committed it? 
The Virtues and Graces are this Lady's handmaids. 
‘She was certainly born to adorn the age she was
given to.’ —Well said, Jack—‘And would be an
ornament to the first dignity.’ —But what praise is
that, unless the first dignity were adorned with the
first merit? —Dignity! gewgaw! —First dignity! 
Thou idiot! —Art thou, who knowest me, so taken
with ermine and tinsel? —I, who have won the gold,
am only fit to wear it. For the future therefore correct
thy stile, and proclaim her the ornament of the
happiest man, and (respecting herself and Sex) the
greatest conqueror in the world. 
Then, that she loves me, as thou imaginest, by
no means appears clear to me. —Her conditional offers 

to renounce me; the little confidence she places
in me; intitle me to ask, What merit can she have
with a man, who won her in spight of herself; and
who fairly, in set and obstinate battle, took her prisoner? 
As to what thou inferrest from her eye when with
us, thou knowest nothing of her heart from that, if
thou imaginest, there was one glance of love shot
from it. Well did I note her eye, and plainly did I
see, that it was all but just civil disgust to me and to
the company I had brought her into. Her early retiring
that night against all intreaty, might have convinced
thee, that there was very little of the gentle in
her heart for me. And her eye never knew what it
was to contradict her heart. 
She is thou sayest, All mind. So say I. But why
shouldst thou imagine, that such a mind as hers,
meeting with such a one as mine; and, to dwell
upon the word, meeting with an inclination in hers
to meet, should not propagate minds like her own? 
No doubt of it, as thou sayest, The devils would
rejoice in the fall of such a lady. But this is my confidence,
that I shall have it in my power to marry
when I will. And if do her this justice, shall I not
have a claim to her gratitude? And will she not
think herself the Obliged, rather than the Obliger? 
Then, let me tell thee, Belford, it is impossible so
far to hurt the morals of this lady, as thou and thy
brother-varlets have hurt others of the Sex, who now
are casting about the town firebrands and double
death. —Take ye that thistle to mumble upon. 
You will, perhaps, tell me, that among all the
objects of your respective attempts, there was not one
of the rank and merit of my charming Miss Harlowe. 
But let me ask, Has it not been a constant maxim
with us, that the greater the merit on the woman's
side, the nobler the victory on the man's? —And as
to rank, sense of honour, sense of shame, pride of family, 

may make rifled rank get up, and shake itself to
rights: And if any thing come of it, such a one may
suffer only in her pride, by being obliged to take up
with a second-rate match instead of a first; and,
as it may fall out, be the happier, as well as the more
useful, for the misadventure; since (taken off of her
public gaddings, and domesticated by her disgrace) she
will have reason to think herself obliged to the man
who has saved her from further reproach; while her
fortune and alliance will lay an obligation upon him; 
and her past fall, if she have prudence and consciousness,
will be his present and future security. 
But a poor girl; such a one as my Rosebud for instance; 
having no recalls from education—Being
driven out of every family that pretends to reputation; 
persecuted most perhaps by such as have only kept
their secret better; and having no refuge to fly to— 
The common, the stews, the street, is the fate of such
a poor wretch; penury, want, and disease, her sure
attendants; and an untimely end perhaps closes the
miserable scene. 
And will ye not now all join to say, that it is
more manly to attack a lion than a sheep? —Thou
knowest, that I always illustrated my eagleship, by
aiming at the noblest quarries; and by disdaining to
make a stoup at wrens, phil-tits, and wagtails. 
The worst, respecting myself, in the case before
me, is, that my triumph, when completed, will be so
glorious a one, that I shall never be able to keep up
to it. All my future attempts must be poor to this. 
I shall be as unhappy after a while, from my reflections
upon this conquest, as Don John of Austria
was, in his, on the renowned victory of Lepanto,
when he found, that none of his future atchievements
could keep pace with his early glory. 
I am sensible, that my pleas and my reasonings may
be easily answer'd, and perhaps justly censured; but
by whom censured? Not by any of the Confraternity, 

whose constant course of life, even long before I became
your general, to this hour, has justified what
ye now, in a fit of squeamishness, and thro' envy,
condemn. Having therefore vindicated myself and
my intentions to You, that is all I am at present concerned
for. 
Be convinced then, that I (according to our principles)
am right, thou wrong; or, at least, be silent. 
But I command thee to be convinced. And in thy
next, be sure to tell me that thou art. 