



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Harlowe. 

Saturday, July 29. 
I repine not, my dear Sister, at the Severity you
have been pleased to express in the Letter you favoured
me with; because that Severity was accompanied
with the grace I had petitioned for; and because
the reproaches of mine own heart are stronger
than any other person's reproaches can be: And yet
I am not half so culpable as I am imagined to be: 
As would be allowed, if all the circumstances of my
unhappy Story were known; and which I shall be
ready to communicate to Mrs. Norton, if she be
commissioned to enquire into them; or to you, my
Sister, if you can have patience to hear them. 
I remembred with a bleeding heart what day the
24th of July was. I began with the eve of it; and
I passed the day itself—as it was fit I should pass it. 
Nor have I any comfort to give to my dear and ever-honoured
Father and Mother, and to you, my Bella,
but This—That, as it was the first unhappy Anniversary
of my Birth, in all probability, it will be the
last. 
Believe me, my dear Sister, I say not this, merely
to move compassion; but from the best grounds. 
And as, on that account, I think it of the highest
importance to my peace of mind to obtain one further
favour, I would chuse to owe to your intercession,
as my Sister, the leave I beg, to address half a
dozen lines (with the hope of having them answered
as I wish) to either or to both my honoured Parents,
to beg their Last Blessing. 
This Blessing is all the favour I have now to ask: 
It is all I dare to ask: Yet am I afraid to rush at
once, tho' by Letter, into the presence of either. 
And if I did not ask it, it might seem to be owing 

to stubbornness and want of duty, when my heart is
all humility and penitence. Only, be so good as
to embolden me to attempt this task—Write but this
one line, “Clary Harlowe, you are at liberty to
write as you desire.” This will be enough—And
shall, to my last hour be acknowleged as the greatest
favour, by 
Your truly penitent Sister,
Clarissa Harlowe. 