


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Thursday Morning, Oct. 26.
I  Will hurry off a few lines. I am always ready
before these fiddling girls: Lucy and Nancy, I
mean. Never tedious, but in dressing! They will
over-do the morning appearance. I could beat them. 
So well acquainted with propriety as they are; and
knowing the beauty of elegant negligence. Were I
not afraid of Lucy's repartee; and that she would say
I was laying out for a compliment; I would tell them,
they had a mind to try to eclipse Miss Clarkson, and
the Yorkshire Ladies. Your brother supped, as well
as dined, at that Greville's. Fie upon him! I did not
think he had so little command of himself! —Vain Harriet! 
Perhaps he chose to be rather there than here, for
novelty-sake. I shall be saucy, by-and-by. He is below,
strongly engaged in talk with my aunt—About
me, I suppose: Ay, to be sure! methinks your Ladyship
says. He can talk of nobody else! —Well, and
what if one would wish he could not? [What are these
girls about?] No less than one-and-twenty gentlemen
at Greville's, besides the Prince of them all. They
all were ready to worship him. Fenwick looked in
just now, and tells us so. He says, that your brother
was the liveliest man in the company. He led the
mirth, he says, and visibly exerted himself the more,
finding the turn of the conversation likely to be what
might be expected from such a company of all men. 
Wretches! Can twenty of them, when met, be tolerable
creatures, not a woman among them, to soften
their manners, and give politeness to their conversation? 
—Fenwick says, they engaged him at one time
into talk of different regions, customs, usages. He
was master of every subject. Half a score mouths 

were open at once whenever he spoke, as if distended
with gags, was his word; and every one's eyes broader
than ever they were observed to be before. Fenwick
has humour; a little: Not much; only by accident. 
So unlike himself at times, that he may pass for a different
man. His aping Greville, helps his oddness. — 
How I ramble! You'll think I am aping my dear
Lady G. Mocking's catching! —[O these girls!] —I
think time lost when I am not writing to you. You
cannot imagine what a thief I am to my company. I
steal away myself, and get down, before I am missed,
half a score times in a couple of hours. Sir Charles
sung to the wretches: They all sung. They encored
him without mercy. —He talks of setting out for town
on Saturday, early. Lord bless me! what shall I do
when he is gone? —Do you think I say this? If I do,
I am kept in countenance: Every-body says so, as
well as I—But ah, Lady G.! —He has invited all the
gentlemen, the whole Twenty-one, and my cousin
James, and my uncle, to dine with him at his inn, to-morrow! 
—Inn! nasty inn! Why did we let him go
thither? —I am afraid he is a reveller. Can he be so
very good a man? O yes, yes, yes! wicked Harriet! 
What is in thy heart, to doubt it? A fine reflexion
upon the age; as if there could not be one good man
in it! and as if a good man could not be a man of
vivacity and spirit! From whom can spirits, can chearfulness,
can debonnairness, be expected, if not from a
good man? —I will shew these girls, by the quantity I
have written, how they have made me wait. Prating,
I suppose, to my Sally, about Sir Charles: They can
talk of nobody else. —Ready! Yes, you dear creatures! 
So you ought to have been a leaf and half of
my writing ago! —Adieu, Lady G. till our return
from Miss Orme's. 
Thursday Noon.
Just come back from Miss Orme's. Sir Charles
and my grandmamma are now got together, in serious 

talk. I know I was the subject, by the dear parent's
looking often smiling upon me, as I sat at distance, and
by his eye (taking the reference, as I may call it, of
hers) turned as often towards me; so I stole up to my
pen. 
We were very politely treated by Miss Orme. Miss
Clarkson is a charming young Lady: The three Yorkshire
sisters are lovely women. Sir Charles has told
us, that mere Beauty attracts only his eye, as fine
flowers do in a gay parterre. I don't know that, my
dear: That's the philosophical description of himself. 
The same men and women are not always the same
persons. The Ladies, one and all, when his back
was turned, declared, that he was the gallantest man
they ever were in company with. He said the easiest,
politest things, they ever heard spoken. —They never
were in his company before: They might else have
heard as fine. Such dignity they observed (so does
every-body), yet so much ease, in all he said, as well
as in his whole behaviour—Born to be a public man,
would his pride permit him to aim at being so! — 
Not a syllable, however, but what might be said to
each with the strictest truth. Sir Charles Grandison
[It is Lucy's observation, as well as mine] addresses
himself to women, as women, not as goddesses; yet
does honour to the persons, and to the sex. Other
men, not knowing what better to say, make Angels of
them, all at once. The highest things are ever said
by men of the lowest understandings; and, their bolts
once shot, the poor souls can go no further. So silly! 
—Has not your Ladyship some of these in your eye,
who make out the rest, by grinning in our faces, in
order to convince us of their sincerity? Complimental
men don't consider, that if the women they
egregiously flatter were what they would have them believe
they think them, they would not be seen in such
company. 
But what do you think the elder sister of the three 

said of your brother? —She was sure, those eyes, and
that vivacity and politeness, were not given him for
nothing. Given him for nothing! What a phrase is
that! In short, she said, that practice had improved
his natural advantages. This I have a good mind to
say of her—Either she has not charity, or her heart
has paid for enabling its mistress to make such an observation. 
Practice! What meant she by the word? 
—Indeed your brother was not quite so abstractedly inattentive,
I thought, to the Beauty of Miss Clarkson,
but he might give some little shadow of ground for observation
to a censorious person. 
I sometimes think, that, free and open as his eyes
are, his character might suffer, if one were to judge
of his heart by them. Lord L. I remember, once
said, that Ladies abroad used to look upon him as
their own man, the moment they beheld him. —Innocently
so, no doubt, and in their conversation-assemblies. 
Poor Lady Olivia, I suppose, was so
caught! at an unhappy moment, perhaps, when her
caution was half-asleep, and she was loth to have it
too rudely awakened. But ought I, your Harriet, to
talk of this? —Where was my caution, when I suffered
myself to be surprised? —O but my gratitude was
my excuse. Who knows what Olivia might have to
plead? —We have not her whole story, you know. 
Poor Lady! I pity her! To cross the seas, as she
did! —Ineffectually! 
But can you bear this pen-prattling; the effects of
a mind more at ease than it ever expected to be? 
I will go down. Can I be so long spared? I am
just thinking, that were I one of the creatures called
Coquettes, the best way to attract attention, when it
grew languid, is, to do as I do from zeal in writing
to you—Be always going out and returning, and not
staying long enough in a place to tire one's company,
or suffer them to turn their eyes upon any-body else. 
Did you ever try such an experiment, Charlotte? But 

you never could tire your company. Yet I think you
have a spice of that character in yours. Don't you
think so, yourself? —But don't own it, if you do— 
Hey-day! What's the matter with me! I believe by
my flippancy I am growing quite well, and as saucy
as I used to be—Poor Lady Clementina! I wish she
were happy! Then should I be so. 
* *
My dear Lady G. we had a charming conversation
this day: My grandmamma and your brother bore
the principal parts in it. It began with dress, and
fashion, and such-like trifling subjects; but ended in
the noblest. You know my grandmamma's chearful
piety. Sir Charles seemed at first only designing to
attend to her wisdom; but she drew him in. O my
dear! he seems to be, yet not to know it, as good
a man, as she is a woman! Yet years so different! — 
But austerity, uncharitableness, on one hand; ostentation,
affectation, on the other; these are qualities
which can have no place in his heart. Such a glorious
benevolence! Such enlarged sentiments! —What
a happy, thrice happy woman, thought I, several
times, must she be, who shall be considered as a partaker
of his goodness! Who shall be blest not only
in him, but for him; and be his, and he hers, to all
eternity! 
My aunt once, in the conclusion of this conversation,
said, How happy would it be, if he could reform
certain gentlemen of this neighbourhood! And as
they were so fond of his company, she hoped he
would attempt it. 
Example, he answered, and a silent one, would do
more with such men than precept. They have Moses,
and the prophets. They know when they do wrong,
and what is right. They would be afraid of, and
affronted at, a man pretending to instruct them. Decency,
from such men, is as much as can be expected. 
We live in such an age, added he, that I believe more 

good may be done by seeming to relax a little, than
by strictness of behaviour. Yet I admire those, who,
from a full persuasion of their duty, do not relax; 
and the more, if they have got above moroseness, austerity,
and uncharitableness. 
After dinner, Mr. Milbourne, a very good man,
minister of a Dissenting congregation in our neighbourhood,
accompanied by Dr. Curtis, called in upon
us. They are good friends; made so by the mediation
of my grandmamma, some years ago, when they
did not so well understand each other. Dr. Curtis had
been with us more than once, since Sir Charles was
our visiter. He greatly admires him, you need not
doubt. It was beautiful, after compliments had passed
between Sir Charles and the gentlemen, to see the
modest man shine out in your brother's behaviour. Indeed
he was free and easy, but attentive, as expecting
entertainment and instruction from them; and leading
each of them to give it in his own way. 
They staid but a little while; and when they
were gone, Sir Charles said, He wanted no other proof
of their being good men, than they gave by their charity,
and friendship to each other. My uncle, who,
you know, is a zealous man for the Church, speaking
a little severely of persons whom he called Schismatics;
O Mr. Selby! said Sir Charles, let us be afraid of
prescribing to tender consciences. You and I, who
have been abroad, in countries where they account us
worse than Schismatics, would have been loth to have
been prescribed to, or compelled, in articles for which
we ourselves are only answerable to the common Father
of us all! 
I believe in my conscience, Sir Charles, replied my
uncle, if the truth were known, you are of the mind
of that King of Egypt, who said, He looked upon the
diversity of religions in his kingdom with as much
pleasure as he did on the diversity of flowers in his
garden. 

I remember not the name of that King of Egypt,
Mr. Selby; but I am not of his mind. I should not,
if I were a King, take pleasure in such a diversity:
But as the examples of Kings are of great force, I
would, by making my own as faultless as I could, let
my people see the excellence of my persuasion, and
my uniform practical adherence to it; instead of discouraging
erroneous ones by unjustifiable severity. 
Religious zeal is generally a fiery thing: I would as
soon quarrel with a man for his Face, as for his Religion. 
A good man, if not over-heated by zeal, will
be a good man, whatever be his faith; and should always
be intitled to our esteem, as he is to our good
offices as a fellow-creature. 
The Methodists, Sir Charles; What think you of
the Methodists! Say you love 'em; and, and, and,
adds-dines, you shall not be my nephew. 
You now, my dear Mr. Selby, make me afraid of
you. You throw out a menace, the only one you could
perhaps think of, that would make me temporize. 
You need not, you need not, be afraid, Sir Charles,
said my uncle, laughing! What say you, Harriet? 
Need he? Hay? looking in my downcast face. Why
speak you not, lovely Love? Need Sir Charles, if he
had disobliged me, to have been afraid? —Hay? 
Dear Sir! you have not of a long time been so— 
So, what, Harriet? So, what, dearest? looking me
quite down. 
Fie, Mr. Selby! said my grandmamma. Sir Charles,
stepping to me, very gallantly took my hand—O Mr.
Selby, you are not kind, said he: But allow me to
make my advantage of your unkindness. My dear
Miss Byron, let you and me withdraw; in compassion
to Mr. Selby, let us withdraw: We will not
hear him chidden, as I see the Ladies think he ought
to be. 
And he hurried me off. The surprize made me
appear more reluctant than I was in my heart. 

Every one was pleased with his air and manner; 
and by this means he relieved himself from subjects
with which he seemed not delighted, and obtained an
opportunity to get me to himself. 
Here had he stopt, he would have been welcome:
But hurrying me into the Cedar-parlour; I am jealous,
my Love, said he; putting his arm round me:
You seemed loth to retire with me. Forgive me:
But thus I punish you, whenever you give me cause:
And, dear Lady G. he downright kissed me—My
lip; and not my cheek—and in so fervent a way—I
tell you every-thing, my Charlotte—I could have been
angry—had I known how, from surprize. Before I
could recollect myself, he withdrew his arm; and, resuming
his usual respectful air, it would have made me
look affected, had I then taken notice of it. But I
don't remember any instance of the like freedom used
to Lady Clementina. 
My lovely Love, said he, to express myself in your
uncle's stile, which is that of my heart, tell me, Can
you have pity for a poor man, when he is miserable,
who, on a certain occasion, shewed you none? See
what a Letter Sir Hargrave Pollexfen has written to
Dr. Bartlett; who asks my advice about attending
him. 
I obtained leave to communicate it to you, my dear
Ladies. Be pleased to return it to me. I presume,
you will read it here. 

Dear Dr. Bartlett,
Can your company be dispensed with by the best
of men, for one, two, three days? —I have not
had a happy hour since I saw you and Sir Charles Grandison
at my house on the Forest. All is gloom and
horror in my mind: My despondency is, must be, of
the blackest kind. It is blacker than remorse: It is
all repining; but no repentance: I cannot, cannot,
repent. Lord God of Heaven and Earth, what a 

wretch am I! with such a fortune; such estates! I
am rich as Crœsus, yet more miserable than the wretch
that begs his bread from door to door; and who
oftener meets repulses, than relief. What a glorious
choice has your patron made! Youth unbroken; conscience
his friend; he cannot know an enemy. O
that I had lived the life of your patron! I cannot see
a creature who does not extol him. My wine-merchant's
name is Danby—Good God! What stories
does he tell of him! Lord Jesus! What a heart must
he have, that would permit him to do such things as
Danby reports of him, of his own knowlege! While I— 
As young a man as himself, for what I know—With
powers to do good, as great, perhaps greater than his
own. —Lord! Lord! Lord! what a hand have I
made of it, for the last three or four years of my life!
who might have reached Threescore-and-ten with
comfort! whereas now, at Twenty-eight, I am on
the very brink of the grave. It appears to me as
ready dug: It yawns for me: I am neither fit to die,
nor to live. My days are dreadful: My nights are
worse: My bed is a bed of nettles, and not of down. 
Not one comfortable thought, not one good action,
to revolve, in which I had not some vile gratification
to promote! Wretched man! It is come home to me,
with a vengeance. 
You prayed by me: You prayed for me. I have
not been so happy since—Come, and make me easy— 
happy I can never be, in this world—For pity, for
charity sake, come and teach me how to bear life, or
how to prepare for its cessation. And if Sir Charles
Grandison would make me one more visit, would personally
join in prayer with you and me, a glimpse of
comfort would once more dart in upon my mind. 
Try your interest with him, my dear Sir, in my
behalf; and come together. Where is he? —The
great God of Heaven and Earth prosper to him all his
wishes, be he where he will, and be they what they 

will. Every-body will find their account in his prosperity. 
But I! what use have I made of the prosperity
given me? —Merceda gone to his account: Bagenhall
undone: Jordan shunning me! Narrow-soul'd
Jordan! He is reformed; but, not able to divide the
man from the crime, he thinks he cannot be in earnest,
but by hating both. God help me! I cannot, now,
if I would, give him a bad example! He need not be
afraid of my staggering him in his good purposes. 
One favour, for God's sake, procure for me—It
is, that the man whose life once I sought, and thought
myself justified by the provocation; who afterwards
saved mine, for a time saved it, reserved as I was for
pains, for sufferings, in mind and body, worse than
death—That this man will be the Executor of my last
Will. I have not a friend lest. My relations are
hungering and watching for my death, as birds of prey
over a field of battle. My next heirs are my worst
enemies, and most hated by me. Dear Sir Charles
Grandison, my deliverer, my preserver, from those
bloody Frenchmen, if you are the good man I think
you, complete your kindness to him whom you have preserved; 
and say, you will be his Executor. I will
(because I must) do justice to the pretensions of those
who will rejoice over my remains; and I will leave
you a discretionary power, in articles wherein you
may think I have shewn hatred. For justice-sake,
then, be my Executor. And do you, good Bartlett,
put me in the way of repentance; and I shall then be
happy. Draw me up, dear Sir, a Prayer, that shall
include Confession. You cannot suppose me too bad
a man, in a Christian sense. Thank God, I am a
Christian in belief, tho' I have been a Devil in practice. 
You are a heavenly-minded man; give me
words which may go to my heart; and tell me what
I shall say to my God. 
Tell Sir Charles Grandison, that he owes to me the
service I request of him. For if he had not interposed 

so hellishly as he did, on Hounslow-heath, I
had been the husband of Miss Byron in two hours; 
and she would have thought it her duty to reform me:
And, by the great God of Heaven, I swear, it was
my intention to be reformed, and to make her, if I
could have had but her Civility, tho' not her Love,
the best of husbands. Lord God of Heaven and
Earth! what a happy man had I then been! —Then
had I never undertaken that damned expedition to
France, which I have rued ever since. Let your pation
know how much I owe to him my unhappiness,
and he will not, in justice, deny any reasonable, any
honest request, that I shall make him. 
Lord help me! What a long Letter is here! My
Soul complains on paper: I do nothing but complain. 
It will be a relief, if your patron and you will visit,
will pray for, will pity, 
The most miserable of men,
Hargrave Pollexfen. 

Your brother's eye followed mine, as I read. I frequently
wept. In a soothing, tender, and respectful
manner, he put his arm round me, and, taking my
own handkerchief, unresisted, wiped away the tears as
they fell on my cheek. These were his soothing words
as my bosom heaved at the dreadful description of the
poor man's misery and despair: Sweet humanity! — 
Charming sensibility! —Check not the kindly gush! — 
Dew-drops of Heaven! wiping away my tears, and
kissing the handkerchief—Dew-drops of Heaven,
from a mind, like that Heaven, mild and gracious! — 
Poor Sir Hargrave! —I will attend him. 
You will, Sir! That is very good of you! —Poor
man! What a hand, as he says, has he made of it! 
A hand, indeed! repeated Sir Charles, his own
benign eyes glistening. 
And will you be his Executor, Sir? —You will, I
hope? 

I will do any-thing that my dear Miss Byron wishes
me to do; any-thing that may comfort the poor man,
if indeed he has not a person in whom he ought to
confide, whether he is willing to do so, or not. My
endeavour shall be, to reconcile him to his relations:
Perhaps he hates them because they are likely to be his
heirs: I have known men capable of such narrowness. 
When we came to the place where the unhappy
man mentions my having been likely to be his in two
hours time, a chilness came over my heart; I shud-dered. 
Ah, Sir! said I, how grateful ought I to be to
my deliverer! 
Ever-amiable goodness! resumed he, How have I
been, how am I, how shall I be, rewarded? —With
tender awe he kissed my cheek—Forgive me, Angel
of a woman! A man can shew his Love but as a
man. Your heart is the heart I wish it to be! Love,
Humanity, Graciousness, Benevolence, Forgivingness,
all the amiable qualities which can adorn the Female
mind, are, in perfection, yours! Be your Sister-excellence
happy! God grant it! and I shall be the happiest
man in the world. You, madam, who can pity
your oppressor when in misery, can allow of my grateful
remembrance of that admirable woman. 
Your tender remembrance of Lady Clementina,
Sir, will ever be grateful to me. —God Almighty
make her happy!—for your sake! for the sake of your
dear Jeronymo; and for mine! 
There spoke Miss Byron, and Clementina, both in
one! Surely you two are informed by one mind! 
What is distance of countries! What obstacles can
there be, to dissever Souls so paired! 
But, Sir! —Must Clementina be compelled to marry? 
Must the woman who has loved Sir Charles Grandison; 
who still avows her Love, and only prefers her
God to him; be obliged to give her hand to another
man? 

Would to Heaven that her friends, tender, indulgent,
as they have always been to her, would not
drive too fast! But how can I, of all men, remonstrate
to them in this case, when they think nothing is
wanting to obtain her compliance, but the knowlege
that she never can be mine? 
O Sir! you shall still call her yours, if the dear
Lady changes her resolution, and wishes to be so— 
Ought you not? 
And could Miss Byron— 
She could, she would, interrupted I—Yet dear, very
dear, I am not ashamed to own it, would now the resignation
cost me! 
Exalted loveliness! 
I never, but by such a trial, can be as great as
Clementina! —Then could I, as she does, take comfort
in the brevity of human life. Never, never, would
I be the wife of any other man. And shall the nobler
Clementina be compelled? 
Good God! lifting up his hands and eyes, With
what noble minds hast thou distinguished these two
women! —Is it for this, madam, that you wish to
wait for the next Letters from Italy? I have owned
before, that I presumed not to declare myself to you
till I was sure of Clementina's adherence to a resolution
so nobly taken. We will, however, expect
the next Letters. My situation has not been happy. 
Nothing but the consciousness of my own integrity
(excuse, madam, the seeming boast) and a firm trust in
Providence, could, at certain times, have supported me. 
My mind, my Charlotte, seemed too high wrought. 
Seeing me much disturbed, he resumed the subject of
Sir Hargrave's Letter, as a somewhat less-affecting
one. You see, my dearest Miss Byron, said he, a
kind of necessity for my hastening up. Another melancholy
occasion offers: Poor Sir Harry Beauchamp
desires to see me, before he dies. —What a chequered
life is this! —I received Sir Hargrave's Letter to Dr. 

Bartlett, and this intimation from my Beauchamp, by
a particular dispatch, just before I came hither. I
grudge the time I must lose to-morrow: But we must
make some sacrifices to good neighbourhood and civility. 
Poor Greville had a view, by inviting all his
neighbours and me, to let himself down with a grace,
in a certain case. He made a merit of his resignation
to me, before all the company; every one of which admired
my dear Miss Byron. Well received as I was, by
every gentleman then present, I could not avoid inviting
them, in my turn; but I will endeavour to recover
the time. Have I your approbation, madam,
for setting out on Saturday morning, early? —I am
afraid I must borrow of the Sunday some hours, on my
journey. But visiting the sick is an act of mercy. 
You will be so engaged to-morrow, Sir, said I,
with your numerous guests (and my uncle and cousin
James will add to the number) that I suppose we shall
hardly see you before you set out (early, as you say
that will be) on Saturday morning. 
He said, He had given orders already (and, for fear
of mistakes, should inforce them to-night) for the entertainment
of his guests; and he would do himself
the pleasure of breakfasting with us in the morning. — 
Dear Lady Clementina, forgive me! —I shall not, I
am afraid, know how to part with him, tho' but for
a sew weeks. —How could you let him depart from
you; you knew not but it would be for ever? —But
you are a wonder of a woman! —I am, at least at this
present writing, a poor creature, compared to you! 
I asked his leave to shew my grandmamma and aunt,
and my Lucy, as well as his two sisters, Sir Hargrave's
Letter. He wished that they only should see it. 
The perusal cost the three dear friends just named
some tears. My grandmamma, Lucy tells me (for I
was writing to you when they read it) made some fine
observations upon the different situations in which the
two gentlemen find themselves at this time. I myself 

could not but recollect the gay, fluttering figure
that the poor Sir Hargrave made at Lady Betty Williams's,
perpetually laughing; and compare it with the
dark scene he draws in the Letter before me; all
brought about in so short a space! 
There are, I am told, worse men than this: Were
those who are but as bad, to be apprized of the circumstances
of Sir Hargrave's story, as fully as we know
them, would they not reflect and tremble at his fate,
even tho' that of Meiceda (whose exit, I am told,
was all horror and despair) and of the unhappy Bagenhall,
were not taken into the shocking account? 
This last wretch, it seems, his spirits and constitution
both broken, is gone, nobody knows whither,
having narrowly escaped in person, from an execution
that was out against him, body and goods; the latter
all seized upon; his wife, and an unhealthy child, and
she big with another, turned out of doors; a mortgagee
in possession of his estate: The poor woman
wishing but for means to transport herself and child to
her mean friends at Abbeville; a collection set on foot
in her neighbourhood, for that purpose, failing; for the
poor man was neither beloved, nor pitied. 
These particulars your brother's trusty Richard
Saunders told my Sally; and in confidence, that your
brother, a little before he came down, being acquainted
with her destitute condition, sent her, by
him, twenty guineas. He never saw a deeper scene
of distress, he said. 
The poor woman, on her knees, received the
bounty; blessed the donor; owned herself reduced
to the last shilling; and that she thought of applying
to the parish for assistance to carry her over. 
Sir Charles staid not to supper. My grandmamma,
being desirous to take leave of her favourite
in the morning, has been prevailed upon to repose
here to-night. 
I must tell you, my Charlotte, all my fears, my 

feelings, my follies: You are now, you know, my
Lucy. Something arises in my heart, that makes me
uneasy: I cannot account to myself for this great and
sudden change of behaviour in Greville. His extraordinary
civilities, even to fondness, to your brother! 
Are they consistent with his blustering character, and
constant threatnings of any man who was likely to
succeed with me? A turn of behaviour so sudden! 
Sir Charles and he in a manner strangers, but by character
—And did he not so far prosecute his menaces,
as to try, wicked wretch! what bluster and a drawn
sword would do, and smart for it? Must not that
disgrace incense him? —My uncle says, he cannot be
a true spirit; witness his compromise with Fenwick,
after a rencounter, which, being reported to be on
my account, had like to have killed me at the time. 
And if not a true spirit, may he not be treacherous? 
God preserve your Brother from all secret as well as
open attacks! And do you, my dear Ladies, forgive
the tender folly of 
Your Harriet Byron. 

