


From the Countess Dowager of D. To Mrs. Selby. 


Feb. 23. 
I Should sooner have answer'd yours, had I not
waited for the return of my son, who had taken a
little journey into Wales, to look into the condition
of a small estate he has there; which he finds capable
of great improvements; and about which he has given
proper orders. 
I took the first opportunity to question him in relation
to his inclinations to marriage, and whether he
had a regard to any particular woman: And having
receiv'd an answer to my wishes, I mention'd Miss
Byron to him, as a young lady that I should think,
from the general good character she bore, would make
him an excellent wife. 
He said, he had heard her much talk'd of, and always
to her advantage. I then shew'd him, as in
confidence, my letter, and your answer. There can
be, said I (on purpose to try him) but one objection
on your part; and that is fortune: 15000l. to a nobleman,
who is possess'd of 12000l. a year, and has
been offered four times the portion, may be thought
very inadequate. The less to be stood upon, replied
he, where the fortune on my side is so considerable. 
The very answer, my dear Mrs. Selby, that I wish'd
him to make. 
I ask'd him, if I should begin a formal treaty with
you, upon what he said. He answer'd, that he had
heard from every mouth, so much said in praise of
Miss Byron's mind, as well as person, that he desir'd
I would; and that I would directly endeavour to obtain
leave for him to visit the young lady. 
I propose it accordingly. I understand, that she is
at present in London. I leave it to your choice, madam, 

and Mrs. Shirley's, and Mr. Selby's, to whom
now, as also to Miss Byron, you will be so good as to
communicate the affair, whether you will send for her
down to receive my Lord's visit and mine; or whether
we shall wait on her in town. 
I propose very high satisfaction to myself, if the
young people approve of each other, in an alliance so
much to my wishes in every respect. I shall love the
Countess of D. as well as any of you can do Miss
Byron. And as she has not at present a mother, I
shall with pleasure supply that tender relation to her,
for the sake of so many engaging qualities, as common
same, as well as good Mrs. Selby, says she is
mistress of. 
You will dispatch an answer as to the interview. I
am impatient for it. I depend much upon the frankness
of the young lady, which you make a part of her
agreeable character. And am, madam, 
Your affectionate and faithful humble Servant,
M. D. 

