


Signor Jeronymo della Porretta, To Sir
Charles Grandison. 


Bologna, Sunday, Sept. 24. Oct. 5.
We have at last, my Grandison, some hopes given
us, that our dear Clementina will yield to our
wishes. 

The General, with his Lady, made us a visit from
Naples, on purpose to make a decisive effort, as he
called it; and vowed that he would not return till he
left her in a disposition to oblige us. The Bishop at
one time brought the Patriarch to reason with her; 
who told her, that she ought not to think of the veil,
unless her father and mother consented to her assuming
it. 
Mrs. Beaumont was prevailed upon to favour us
with her company. She declared for us: And on
Thursday last Clementina was still harder set. Her
Father, Mother, the General and his Lady, the Bishop,
all came into my chamber, and sent for her. 
She came. Then did we all supplicate her to oblige
us. The General was at first tenderly urgent: The
Bishop besought her: The young Marchioness pressed
her: Her Mother took her hand between both hers,
and in silent tears could only sigh over it: And, lastly,
my Father dropt down on one knee to her—My
daughter, my child, said he, oblige me. Your Jeronymo
could not refrain from tears. 
She fell on her knees—O my Father, said she, rise,
or I shall die at your feet! Rise, my Father! 
Not, my dear, till you consent to oblige me. 
Grant me but a little time, my Father! my dear,
my indulgent Father! 
The General thought he saw a flexibility which we
had never before seen in her on this subject, and called
upon her for her instant determination. Shall a Father
kneel in vain? said he. Shall a Mother in weeping
silence in vain entreat? —Now, my Sister, comply
—or—He sternly stopt. 
Have patience with me, said she, but till the Chevalier's
next Letters come: You expect them soon. 
Let me receive his next Letter. And putting her hand
to her forehead—Rise, my Father, or I die at your
feet! 
I thought the General pushed too hard. I begged
that the next Letters might be waited for. 

Be it so, said my father, rising, and raising her:
But whatever be the contents, remember, my dearest
child, that I am your Father, your indulgent Father; 
and oblige me. 
My dear Clementina, said the General, will not
this paternal goodness prevail upon you? Your Father,
Mother, Brothers, are all ready to kneel to you; 
Yet are we all to be slighted? And is a foreigner, an
Englishman, a Heretic (great and noble as is the man; 
a man, too, whom you have so gloriously refused) to
be preferred to us all? Who can bear the thoughts of
such a preference! 
And remember, my Sister, said the Bishop, that
you already know his opinion. You have already had
his advice, in the Letters he wrote to you in the
month's correspondence which passed between you,
before he left Italy. Think you, that the Chevalier
Grandison can recede from an opinion solemnly given,
the circumstances not having varied? 
I have not been well. It is wicked to oppose my
Father, my Mother: I cannot argue with my Brothers. 
I have not been well. Spare me, spare me, my Lords,
to the General and the Bishop. My Father gives me
time: Don't you deny it me. 
My mother, afraid of renewing her disorder, said; 
Withdraw, my dear, if you choose to do so, and
compose yourself: The intention is not to compel,
but to persuade you. 
O madam! said she, persuasion so strongly urged
by my parents, is more than compulsion. —I take the
liberty you give me. 
She hurried to Mrs. Beaumont, and, throwing her
arms about her, O madam, I have been oppressed! 
Oppressed by persuasion! By a kneeling Father! By a
weeping Mother! By entreating Brothers! —And this
is but persuasion! —Cruel persuasion! 
Mrs. Beaumont then entered into argument with
her. She represented to her the General's inflexibility: 

Her Father's and Mother's indulgence: The wishes of
her two other Brothers: She pleaded your opinion
given as an impartial man, not merely as a Protestant:
She told her of an admirable young Lady of your own
country, who was qualified to make you happy; of
whom she had heard several of your countrymen speak
with great distinction. This last plea, as the intimate
friendship between you and Mrs. Beaumont is so well
known, took her attention. She would not for the
world stand in the way of the Chevalier Grandison. 
She wished you to be happy, she said, whatever became
of her. Father Marescotti strongly enforced
this point; and advised her to come to some resolution,
before your next Letters arrived, as it was not to
be doubted, but the contents of them would support
your former opinion. The Patriarch's arguments
were re-urged with additional force. A day was
named when she was again to be brought before her
assembled friends. Mrs. Beaumont applauded her for
the magnanimity she had already shewn, in the discharge
of her first duty; and called upon her to distinguish
herself equally in the filial. 
Clementina took time to consider of these and other
arguments; and after three hours passed in her closet,
she gave the following written paper to Mrs. Beaumont; 
which, she said, she hoped, when read in full
assembly, would excuse her from attending her friends
in the proposed congress. 

‘I Am tired out, my dear Mrs. Beaumont, with
your kindly-meant importunities: 
‘With the importunities, prayers, and entreaties,
of my brothers. 
‘my mamma, how well do you deserve even implicit
obedience, from a daughter who has over-clouded
your happy days! You never knew discomfort
till your hapless Clementina gave it you! 
The sacrifice of my life would be a poor atonement
for what I have made you suffer. 

‘But who can withstand a kneeling Father? Indeed
my papa, ever good, ever indulgent, I dread to see
you! Let me not again behold you as on Thursday
last. 
‘I have denied to myself, and such the motive, that
I must not, I do not repent it, the man I esteemed. I
never can be his. 
‘Father Marescotti, tho' he now loves the man,
suggests, that my late disorder might be a judgment
upon me for suffering my heart to be engaged by the
Heretic. 
‘I am absolutely forbidden to think of atoning for
my fault by the only measure that, in my opinion,
could have done it. 
‘You tell me, Mrs. Beaumont, and all my friends,
join with you, that honour, generosity, and the
esteem which I avow for the Chevalier Grandison,
as my friend, as my fourth brother, all join to oblige
me to promote the happiness of a man I myself have
disappointed. And you are of opinion, that there is
one particular woman of his own country, who is
capable of making him happy—But do you say, that
I ought to give the example? —Impossible. Honour,
and the punctilio of woman, will not permit me to
do that!— 
‘But thus pressed; thus dreading again to see a
kneeling Father; a weeping Mother; and having
reason to think I may not live long; that a relapse
into my former malady, with the apprehensions of
which Father Marescotti terrifies me, may be the
punishment of my disobedience [Cruel Father Marescotti,
to terrify me with an affliction I so much
dread!]; and that it will be a consolation to me, in
my departing hour, to reflect that I have obeyed my
parents, in an article on which their hearts are immoveably
fixed; and still further being assured, that
they will look upon my resignation as a compensation
for all the troubles I have given them, for many, 

many months passed—God enable me, I pray, to
resign to their will. But if I cannot, shall I be still
entreated, still persuaded? —I hope not. —I will do
my endeavour to prevail on myself to obey—But
whatever be the event of my Self-contendings,
Grandison must give the example.’ 

How did we congratulate ourselves, when we read
this paper, faint as are the hopes it gives us! 
Our whole endeavour is now, to treat her with
tender observance, that she may not think of receding. 
Nor will we ask her to see the person she knows we
favour, till we can assure her, that you will set her the
example. And if there be a Lady with whom you
think you could be happy, may not this, my dear
Grandison, pleaded by you, be a motive with her? 
The Count of Belvedere has made overtures to us,
which are too great for our acceptance, were this alliance
to take place. We have been told, but not by
himself, the danger to which his despair had subjected
him, in more than one visit to you at Bologna, had
you not borne with his rashness. You know him to
be a man of probity, of piety. He is a zealous Catholic; 
and you must allow, that a religious zeal is a
strengthener, a confirmer, of all the social sanctions. 
He is learned; and, being a domestic man, he, contrary
to the Italian custom, admires in a wife those intellectual
improvements which make a woman a fit
companion for her husband. You know how much
the Marchioness excels almost all the women of quality
in Italy, in a taste for polite literature: You know
she has encouraged the same taste in her daughter; 
and the Count considers her as the only woman in
Italy with whom he can be happy. 
As you, my Grandison, cannot now be my brother
by marriage, the Count of Belvedere is the only
man in the world I can wish to be so. He is of Italy. 
My sister, always so dear to us, and he, will be ever 

with us, or we with them. He knows the unhappy
way she has been in; and was so far from making
that an objection, that when her malady was at the
height (being encouraged by physicians to hope that
her recovery would be the probable consequence) he
would have thought himself the happiest of men,
could he have been honoured with her hand. He
knows her Love of you. He adores her for her motive
of refusing you. He loves you; and is confident
of the inviolable honour of both: Whose alliance, on
all these considerations, can be so desirable to us as that
with the Count of Belvedere? 
Surely, my dear friend, it must be in your power
to set the example: In yours, who could subdue a
whole family of zealous Catholics, and keep your own
religion; and who could engage the virgin heart of
one of the most delicate women in the world. What
woman, who has a heart to bestow; what family,
that has a daughter or sister to give, can withstand
you? Religion and Country of both the same? 
Give us hope, therefore, my dear Grandison, that
you will make the effort. Assure us, that you will
not scruple, if you can succeed, to set the example; 
and on this assurance we will claim from Clementina
the effects of the hope she has given us: And if we
can prevail, will in England return you thanks for the
numberless favours you have conferred upon us. 
Thus earnestly, as well from inclination, as in
compliance with the pressing entreaties of every one
of a family which I hope are still, and ever will be,
dear to you, do I, your Jeronymo, your Brother,
your Friend, solicit you. Mrs. Beaumont joins with
us. She scruples not, she bids me tell you, to pronounce,
that you and Clementina will both be more
happy; she, with the Count of Belvedere (your respective
Countries so distant, your Religion so different); 
you, with an Englishwoman; than you could
have been with each other. Mrs. Beaumont has 

owned to me in private, that you often in conversation
with her, even while you had hope of calling
Clementina yours, lamented, for her sake, as well as
your own, the unhappy situation, with respect to Religion,
you were both in; and that you had declared
more than once to her, as indeed you did once to us,
that in a beginning address you would not have compromised
thus with a Princess. May we not expect
every-thing, my Grandison, from your magnanimity? 
We hope it is in your power, and we doubt not your
will, to contribute to our happiness. But whatever
be the event, I beseech you, my dear friend, continue
to love 
Your Jeronymo. 

