



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday Night. 
The alarming hurry I mentioned under my date
of last night, and Betty's saucy dark hints, come
out to be owing to what I guessed they were; that is
to say, to the private intimation Mr. Lovelace contrived
our family should have of his insolent resolution 

[insolent I must call it] to prevent my being carried
to my Uncle's. 
I saw at the time that it was as wrong with respect
to answering his own view, as it was insolent: For
could he think, as Betty (I suppose from her betters)
justly observed, That Parents would be insulted out of
their right to the disposal of their own child, by a violent
man, whom they hate; and who could have no
pretension to dispute that right with them, unless what
he had from her who had none over herself? And how
must this insolence of his, aggravated as my Brother
is able to aggravate it, exasperate them against me? 
The rash man has indeed so far gained his point, as
to intimidate them from attempting to carry me away: 
But he has put them upon a surer and a more desperate
measure: And this has driven me also into one
as desperate; the consequence of which, altho' he
could not foresee it (a) , may perhaps too well answer
his great end, little as he deserves to have it
answered. 
In short, I have done, as far as I know, the most
rash thing that ever I did in my life. 
But let me give you the motive, and then the action
will follow of course. 
About Six o'clock this evening, my Aunt (who
stays here all night; on my account, no doubt) came
up, and tapped at my door; for I was writing; and
had locked myself in. I opened it; and she entering,
thus delivered herself: 
I come once more to visit you, my dear; but sorely
against my will; because it is to impart to you matters
of the utmost concern to you, and to the whole
family. 
What, Madam, is now to be done with me? said
I, wholly attentive. 

You will not be hurried away to your Uncle's,
child; let that comfort you. —They see your aversion
to go. —You will not be obliged to go to your Uncle
Antony's. 
How you revive me, Madam! This is a cordial to
my heart! 
I little thought, my dear, what was to follow this
supposed condescension. 
And then I ran over with blessings for this good
news (and she permitted me so to do, by her silence); 
congratulating myself, that I thought my Father could
not resolve to carry things to the last extremity.— 
Hold, Niece, said she, at last—You must not give
yourself too much joy upon the occasion neither. — 
Don't be surprised, my dear. —Why look you upon
me, child, with so affecting an earnestness? —But
you must be Mrs. Solmes, for all that. 
I was dumb. 
She then told me, that they had had undoubted information,
that a certain desperate ruffian (I must excuse
her that word, she said) had prepared armed men
to way-lay my Brother and Uncles, and seize me,
and carry me off. —Surely, she said, I was not consenting
to a violence that might be followed by murder
on one side or the other; perhaps on both. 
I was still silent. 
That therefore my Father (still more exasperated
than before) had changed his resolution as to my
going to my Uncle's; and was determined next Tuesday
to set out thither himself with my Mother; and
that (for it was to no purpose to conceal a resolution
so soon to be put in execution)—I must not dispute it
any longer—on Wednesday I must give my hand— 
as they would have me. 
She proceeded, That orders were already given for
a Licence: That the ceremony was to be performed
in my own Chamber, in presence of all my friends,
except of my Father and Mother; who would not 

return, nor see me, till all was over, and till they had
a good account of my behaviour. 
The very intelligence, my dear!—the very intelligence
This, which Lovelace gave me! 
I was still dumb—Only sighing, as if my heart
would break. 
She went on, comforting me, as she thought. ‘She
laid before me the merit of obedience; and told me,
that if it were my desire that my Norton should be
present at the Ceremony, it would be complied
with: That the pleasure I should receive from reconciling
all my friends to me, and in their congratulations
upon it, must needs overbalance, with
such a one as me, the difference of persons, however
preferable I might think the one man to the
other: That Love was a fleeting thing, little better
than a name, where Morality and Virtue did not
distinguish the object of it: That a choice made by
its dictates was seldom happy; at least not durably
so: Nor was it to be wondered at, when it naturally
exalted the Object above its merits, and made
the Lover blind to faults, that were visible to
every-body else: So that when a nearer intimacy
stript it of its imaginary perfections, it left frequently
both parties surprised, that they could be so grosly
cheated; and that then the Indifference became
stronger than the Love ever was. That a woman
gave a man great advantages, and inspired him with
great vanity, when she avowed her Love for him,
and preference of him; and was generally requited
with insolence and contempt: Whereas the confessedly-obliged
man, it was probable, would be all
reverence and gratitude’—and I cannot tell what. 
‘You, my dear, said she, believe you shall be unhappy,
if you have Mr. Solmes: Your Parents
think the contrary; and that you will be undoubtedly
so, were you to have Mr. Lovelace, whose
morals are unquestionably bad: Suppose it were 

your sad lot to be unhappy with either, let me beseech
you to consider, what great consolation you
will have on one hand, if you pursue your Parents
advice, that you did so; what mortification on the
other, that, by following your own, you have nobody
to blame but yourself.’ 
This, you remember, my dear, was an argument
enforced upon me by Mrs. Norton. 
These and other observations which she made,
were worthy of my Aunt Hervey's good sense and experience,
and, applied to almost any young creature
who stood in opposition to her Parents will, but one
who had offered to make the sacrifices I have offered
to make, ought to have had their due weight. But
altho' it was easy to answer some of them in my own
particular case; yet, having over and over, to my
Mother, before my confinement, and to my Brother
and Sister, and even to my Aunt Hervey, since, said
what I must now have repeated, I was so much mortified
and afflicted at the cruel tidings she brought me,
that, however attentive I was to what she said, I had
neither power nor will to answer one word; and, had
she not stopped of herself, she might have gone on an
hour longer, without interruption from me. 
Observing this, and that I only sat weeping, my
handkerchief covering my face, and my bosom heaving
ready to burst; What! no answer, my dear? —Why
so much silent grief? You know I always loved you. 
You know, that I have no interest in the affair. You
would not permit Mr. Solmes to acquaint you with
some things which would have set your heart against
Mr. Lovelace. Shall I tell you some of the matters
charged against him? —Shall I, my dear? 
Still I answered only by my tears and sighs. 
Well, child, you shall be told these things afterwards,
when you will be in a better state of mind to
hear them; and then you will rejoice in the escape
you will have had. It will be some excuse, then, for 

you to plead for your behaviour to Mr. Solmes, that
you could not have believed Mr. Lovelace had been
so very vile a man. 
My heart fluttered with impatience and anger at being
so plainly talked to as the Wife of this man; but
yet I then chose to be silent. If I had spoken, it
would have been with vehemence. 
Strange, my dear, such silence! —Your concern is
infinitely more on this side the day, than it will be on
the other. —But let me ask you, and do not be displeased,
Will you chuse to see what generous stipulations
for you there are in the Settlements? —You
have kowlege beyond your years—Give the writings
a perusal: Do, my dear: They are engrossed, and
ready for signing, and have been for some time. — 
Excuse me, my love—I mean not to disorder you: — 
Your Father would oblige me to bring them up, and
to leave them with you. He commands you to read
them. —But to read them, Niece—since they are ingrossed,
and were before you made them absolutely
hopeless. 
And then, to my great terror, out she drew some
parchments from her handkerchief, which she had
kept (unobserved by me) under her apron; and,
rising, put them in the opposite window. Had she
produced a serpent, I could not have been more
frighted. 
Oh! my dearest Aunt, turning away my face,
and holding out my hands: Hide from my eyes those
horrid parchments! —Let me conjure you to tell me
—By all the tenderness of near relationship, and upon
your Honour, and by your Love for me, say, Are
they absolutely resolved, that, come what will, I must
be That man's? 
My dear, you must have Mr. Solmes: Indeed you
must. 
Indeed I never will! This, as I have said over and
over, is not originally my Father's will. —Indeed I
never will—And that is All I will say! 

It is your Father's will now, replied my Aunt: 
And, considering how all the family is threatened by
Mr. Lovelace, and the resolution he has certainly
taken to force you out of their hands, I cannot but
say they are in the right, not to be bullied out of their
child. 
Well, Madam, then nothing remains for me to
say. I am made desperate. I care not what becomes
of me. 
Your piety, and your prudence, my dear, and
Mr. Lovelace's immoral character, together with his
daring insults, and threatenings, which ought to incense
you, as much as any-body, are every one's dependence. 
We are sure the time will come, when
you'll think very differently of the steps your friends
take to disappoint a man who has made himself so
justly obnoxious to them all. 
She withdrew; leaving me full of grief and indignation: 
—And as much out of humour with Mr.
Lovelace as with any-body; who, by his conceited
contrivances, has made things worse for me than before; 
depriving me of the hopes I had of gaining time
to receive your advice, and private assistance to get
to town; and leaving me no other choice, in all appearance,
than either to throw myself upon his family,
or to be made miserable for ever with Mr. Solmes. 
But I was still resolved to avoid both these evils, if
possible. 
I sounded Betty in the first place (whom my Aunt
sent up, not thinking it proper, as Betty told me,
that I should be left by myself, and who, I found,
knew their designs) whether it were not probable that
they would forbear, at my earnest entreaty, to push
matters to the threatened extremity. 
But she confirmed all my Aunt said; rejoicing (as
she said they All did) that Mr. Lovelace had given
them so good a pretence to save me from him now,
and for ever. 

She ran on about equipages bespoken; talked of my
Brother's and Sister's exultations that now the whole
family would soon be reconciled to each other: Of
the servants joy upon it: Of the expected Licence: 
Of a visit to be paid me by Dr. Lewen, or another
Clergyman, whom they named not to her; which
was to crown the work: And of other preparations,
so particular, as made me dread that they designed to
surprise me into a still nearer day than next Wednesday. 
These things made me excessively uneasy. I knew
not what to resolve upon. 
At one time, What have I to do, thought I, but
to throw myself at once into the protection of Lady
Betty Lawrance? —But then, in resentment of his
fine contrivances, which had so abominably disconcerted
me, I soon resolved to the contrary: And at
last concluded to ask the favour of another half-hour's
conversation with my Aunt. 
I sent Betty to her with my request. 
She came. 
I put it to her, in the most earnest manner, to tell
me, whether I might not obtain the favour of a fortnight's
respite? 
She assured me, it would not be granted. 
Would a week? Surely a week would? 
She believed a week might, if I would promise two
things: The first, upon my honour, not to write a
line out of the house, in that week: For it was still
suspected, she said, that I found means to write to
somebody. And, secondly, to marry Mr. Solmes, at
the expiration of it. 
Impossible! Impossible! I said with passion. — 
What! might I not be obliged with one week, without
such a horrid condition as the last? 
She would go down, she said, that she might not
seem of her own head to put upon me what I thought
a hardship so great. 

She went down: And came up again. 
Did I want, was the answer, to give the vilest of
men an opportunity to put his murderous schemes into
execution? —It was time for them to put an end to my
obstinacy (they were tired out with me) and to his
hopes at once. And an end should be put on Tuesday
or Wednesday next, at farthest; unless I would give
my honour to comply with the condition upon which
my Aunt had been so good as to allow me a longer
time. 
I even stamped with impatience! —I called upon
her to witness, that I was guiltless of the consequence
of this compulsion; This barbarous compulsion, I
called it; let that consequence be what it would. 
My Aunt chid me in a higher strain than ever she
did before. 
While I, in a half-phrensy, insisted upon seeing my
Father: Such usage, I said, set me above fear. I
would rejoice to owe my death to him, as I did my
life. 
I did go down half-way of the stairs, resolved to
throw myself at his feet where-ever he was. —My Aunt
was frighted. She owned, that she feared for my head. 
—Indeed I was in a perfect phrensy for a few minutes
—But hearing my Brother's voice, as talking to somebody
in my Sister's apartment just by, I stopt; and
heard the barbarous designer say, speaking to my
Sister, This works charmingly, my dear Arabella! 
It does! It does! said she, in an exulting accent. 
Let us keep it up, said my Brother. —The villain is
caught in his own trap! —Now must she be what we
would have her be. 
Do you keep my Father to it; I'll take care of my
Mother, said Bella. 
Never fear, said he! —And a laugh of congratulation
to each other, and derision of me (as I made it
out) quite turned my frantic humour into a vindictive
one. 

My Aunt then just coming down to me, and taking
my hand, led me up; and tried to sooth me. 
My raving was turned into sullenness. 
She preached patience and obedience to me. 
I was silent. 
At last she desired me to assure her, that I would
offer no violence to myself. 
God, I said, had given me more grace, I hoped,
than to permit me to be guilty of so horrid a rashness. 
I was his creature, and not my own. 
She then took leave of me; and I insisted upon her
taking down with her the odious parchments. 
Seeing me in so ill an humour, and very earnest
that she should take them with her, she took them; 
but said, That my Father should not know that she
did: And hoped I would better consider of the matter,
and be calmer next time they were offered to my perusal. 
I revolved after she was gone all that my Brother
and Sister had said. I dwelt upon their triumphings
over me; and found rise in my mind a rancour that
was new to me; and which I could not withstand. — 
And putting every-thing together, dreading the near
day, what could I do? —Am I in any manner excuseable
for what I did do? —If I shall be condemned by
the world, who know not my provocations, may I
be acquitted by you? —If not, I am unhappy indeed! 
—For This I did. 
Having shaken off the impertinent Betty, I wrote
to Mr. Lovelace, to let him know, ‘That all that
was threatened at my Uncle Antony's, was intended
to be executed here. That I had come to a resolution
to throw myself upon the protection of either of
his two Aunts, who would afford it me—In short,
that by endeavouring to obtain leave on Monday to
dine in the Ivy Summer-house, I would, if possible,
meet him without the garden-door, at two, three,
four, or five o'clock on Monday afternoon, as I 

should be able. That in the mean time he should
acquaint me, whether I might hope for either of those
Ladies protection: And if I might, I absolutely insisted
that he should leave me with either, and go to
London himself, or remain at Lord M's; nor offer
to visit me, till I were satisfied that nothing could be
done with my friends in an amicable way; and that
I could not obtain possession of my own estate, and leave
to live upon it: And particularly, that he should not
hint marriage to me, till I consented to hear him upon
that subject. —I added, that if he could prevail upon
one of the Misses Montague to favour me with her
company on the road, it would make me abundantly
more easy in the thoughts of carrying into effect a
resolution which I had not come to, altho' so driven,
but with the utmost reluctance and concern; and
which would throw such a slur upon my reputation
in the eye of the world, as perhaps I should never be
able to wipe off.’ 
This was the purport of what I wrote; and down
into the garden I slid with it in the dark, which at another
time I should not have had the courage to do; 
and deposited it, and came up again unknown to anybody. 
My mind so dreadfully misgave me when I returned,
that to divert in some measure my encreasing uneasiness,
I had recourse to my private pen; and in a very short
time ran this length. 
And now, that I am come to this part, my uneasy
reflections begin again to pour in upon me. Yet
what can I do? —I believe I shall take it back again
the first thing I do in the morning—Yet what can I
do? 
And who knows, but they may have a still earlier
day in their intention, than that which will too soon
come? 
I hope to deposit this early in the morning for you,
as I shall return from resuming my Letter, if I do resume
it as my inwardest mind bids me. 

Altho' it is now near two o'clock, I have a good
mind to slide down once more, in order to take back
my Letter. Our doors are always locked and barred
up at eleven; but the seats of the lesser hall windows
being almost even with the ground without, and the
shutters not difficult to open, I could easily get out. 
Yet why should I be thus uneasy, since, should the
Letter go, I can but hear what Mr. Lovelace says to
it? His Aunts live at too great a distance for him to
have an immediate Answer from them; so I can scruple
going to them till I have invitation. I can insist upon
one of his Cousins meeting me, as I have hinted, and
accompanying me in the chariot; and he may not be
able to obtain that favour from either of them. Twenty
things may happen to afford me a suspension at least: 
Why should I be so very uneasy? —When likewise I
can take back my Letter early, before it is probable he
will have the thought of finding it there. Yet he
owns he spends three parts of his days, and has done
for this fortnight past, in loitering about sometimes in
one disguise, sometimes in another, besides the attendance
given by his trusty servant when he himself is not
in waiting, as he calls it. 
But these strange forebodings! —Yet I can, if you
advise, cause the chariot he shall bring with him to
carry me directly for town, whither in my London
scheme, if you were to approve it, I had proposed to
go: And This will save you the trouble of procuring
for me a vehicle; as well as prevent any suspicion
from your Mother of your contributing to my escape. 
But, solicitous for your advice, and approbation
too, if I can have it, I will put an end to this Letter. 
Adieu, my dearest friend, adieu! 