


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Thursday, May 24. 
I begin this Letter, as I ended my last to Lucy––– 
May this day be a happy one to her, and then it
will be so to us all–––My dear aunt Selby will be so
good as to favour me with a line to acquaint me with
the actual celebration; that I may ground upon it my
earliest felicitations. 
I will proceed with an account of what so much
engages the attention of every one here. 
I told you in one of my former, that Lady G. had
shewn to Mrs. Beaumont Lucy's account of the conversation
held at Shirley-manor, on the subject of a
first Love, with Lady G's sprightly decision upon it,
and upon the appeal made to me. –––I must now tell
you, that Mrs. Beaumont prevailed upon Lady Clementina
to desire me to read it to her. She made
her request; and I obeyed. Mrs. Beaumont was
present. Not a word by way of application did either
she or I suggest, when I had done reading. Lady
Clementina's complexion often changed as I read. 
She was not at all diverted with those lively parts of
Lady G's decision, that I ventured to read; tho'
she is an admirer of her sprightly vein. She looked
down most of the time in solemn silence. And at last,
when I had ended, she, sighing, started, as if from a
resverie, arose, courtesied, and withdrew; not having
once opened her lips on the subject. 
* *

The Bishop, Signor Jeronymo, and the two young
Lords, justnow joined to request Sir Charles to become
avowedly an advocate for the Count to Lady Clementina. 
They urged, that she was balancing in his favour; 
and that Sir Charles's weight would turn the
scale: But Sir Charles not only desired to be excused,
but begged that she might not be solicited by any-body
on that subject–––May she not, asked he, be reasoning
with herself, and considering what she can do, with
justice to the Count and herself? Her future peace
of mind is concerned that her determination now,
shall be all her own. Leave her no room for after-regret,
for having been persuaded against her mind. 
If persuasion only is wanting, will she not wrap herself
up in reserve, to keep herself in countenance for
not having been persuaded before? 
Pursuant to this advice, the Marchioness in a conversation
with her beloved daughter, that might have
led to the subject on which their hearts are fixed, declined
it; saying, Whatever my child shall determine
upon, with regard to any plan for her future life, let
her whole heart be in it: Her choice shall be ours. 
Thursday Afternoon. 
Lady Clementina excused herself from breakfasting
with us; but obliged us with her company at
dinner. At, and after dinner, Sir Charles directed
himself to all the company, in turn, in his usual
agreeable manner. How does his benign countenance
always shine, when he finds himself surrounded
at table by his friends! The larger the circle, the
more diffused is his chearfulness. With what delight
does his Jeronymo meditate his every graceful motion! 
He dwells upon what he says, and by his eyes
cast with less complacency on an interrupter, seems
to wish every one silent, when Sir Charles's lips begin
to open. 

After he had gone round his ample table, saying
something obliging to all (in a manner calling forth
every one, to say something in his or her own way) he
addressed himself more particularly to the Count, and
led him into subjects both learned and familiar, in
which he knew he could shine; and in which he did. 
It was doubly kind in Sir Charles to do so; for the
poor man's reverence for the mistress of his fate, had
taken all courage from his love, and he wanted to be
drawn out. Never can bashful merit appear to so
much advantage, as in Sir Charles's address to it. 
How much soul did Lady Clementina shew in her
eyes! She was very attentive to every one that spoke. 
She asked the Count questions more than once on
some of the subjects he was led to talk of. My eyes,
as I could feel, glistened when she did, to see how
those of her father and mother rejoiced, as I may
say, on the notice she took of him. Lady Clementina
could not but observe how delightfully her complaisance
to the Count was received by all her family
—Is it possible, thought I, more than once,
were I in the situation of this admirable Lady, to
avoid obliging such indulgent parents with the grant
of all their wishes, that depended on myself; having
given up voluntarily the man I preferred to all
others? 
Signor Sebastiano dropt a hint once, of his own,
and the Count's, and Signor Juliano's intention of
setting out; mentioning a care for their baggage,
which by this time, he supposed, had reached Dover:
But Clementina turning an attentive ear to what he
said, Sir Charles was afraid she would take this hint
as a design to hasten her resolution; and said, We
will not sadden our hearts with the thoughts of parting
with any of our friends. 
Thursday Evening, Eight o'Clock. 
A Letter is this moment brought from town by
an especial messenger, to Signor Jeronymo. The 

whole family, Lady Clementina excepted, are got
together upon the contents. 
Ten o'Clock. 
The Marchioness, just now, taking my hand, tears
starting in her eyes, Ah, madam, said she, the poor
wretch Laurana–––Just then the Bishop and Father
Marescotti entering, she put the Letter into my hand. 
I shall inclose a translation of it. 


To Signor Jeronymo della Porretta.
May 6. N. S. 
The dear perverse Clementina may be now indulged,
if she has not from principles of gratitude
already yielded to give her hand to our Belvedere. 
I hope she has. One of our motives for urging
her, is at an end. Laurana is no more. Her
mother kept from her as long as she could, the news
of the Count's accompanying you all to England:
But when she was told that he was actually in that
kingdom; and that my sister was heard of; she doubted
not but the consequence would be the defeating of
all her hopes with regard to him. A deep melancholy
first seized her; that was succeeded by raving
fits; and it is suspected that the poor creature, eluding
the care of her attendants, came to a miserable
end. Lady Sforza is inconsolable. A malignant
fever is given out–––so let it pass–––She, whom the
wretched creature most cruelly used, will shed a tear
for the companion of her childhood: But who else,
besides her own mother, will? –––Yet, if the manner
of her quitting life were as shocking as it is whispered
to me it was–––But I will not enquire further
about it, for fear I should be induced to shew compassion
for a wretch who had not any to shew to a
near relation, entrusted to her care, and who had a
right to her kindest treatment. 
What a glorious creature, as you paint him, as
Fame, as father Marescotti, and you all report him, is 

your Grandison! Your Sister-in-law must, I believe,
be complied with. Ever since you all lest Italy, she
has been earnest to attend you in England. She even
threatens to steal from her husband, if he consent
not, and now Clementina has shewn her the way,
procure a passage thither, to try my Love in following
her, as that naughty girl has all yours, in a season
–––But what is the inclemency of season, what are
winds, mountains, seas, to a woman who has set
her heart on an adventure? This I must allow in her
favour, if she should fly from me, it will be to the
father, mother, brothers, from whom her Sister fled
–––Naughty, naughty Clementina! Can I forgive
her? Yet if her parents do, what have I to say? 
I do assure you, Jeronymo, that I unfeignedly join
with you in your joy, that so deserving a man is not
a loser by a disappointment, that we all know sat
heavily upon him, at the time. I even long to see
upon one spot, two women, who are capable of shewing,
as they have shewn, a magnanimity so very rare
in the Sex: One of whom, let me glory, is my Sister. 
But Clementina ever was one of the most generous,
however, in some points, unpersuadable, of human
creatures. 
Let Belvedere know how much I love him. Whatever
be his fate with one of the perversest, yet noblest
-minded of women, I will ever look upon him
as my brother. 
Reverence, duty, love, and the sincerest compliments,
distribute, as due, my dear Jeronymo, from 
Your
Giacomo. 

