



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Tuesday Evening; and continued thro' the night. 
Well, my dear, I am alive, and here! But
how long I shall be either here, or alive, I cannot say! 
—I have a vast deal to write; and perhaps shall
have little time for it. Nevertheless, I must tell you
how the saucy Betty again fluttered me, when she
came up with this Solmes's message; altho', as you
will remember from my last, I was in a way before,
that wanted no additional surprizes. 
Miss! Miss! Miss! cry'd she, as fast as she could
speak, with her arms spread abroad, and all her fingers
distended, and held up, will you be pleased to walk
down into your own parlour? —There is every-body,
I'll assure you, in full congregation! —And there is
Mr. Solmes, as fine as a Lord, with a charming white
peruke, fine laced shirt and ruffles, coat trimmed
with silver, and a waistcoat standing an end with
lace! —Quite handsome, believe me! —You never
saw such an alteration! —Ah! Miss, shaking her
head, 'tis pity you have said so much against him! — 
But you know how to come off, for all that! —I hope
it will not be too late!— 
Impertinence! said I,—Wert thou bid to come up
in this fluttering way? —And I took up my fan, and
fann'd myself. 
Bless me! said she, how soon these fine young
Ladies will be put into flusterations! —I meant not
either to offend or frighten you, I am sure.— 

Every-body there, do you say? —Who do you call
every-body?— 
Why, Miss, holding out her left palm opened,
and with a flourish, and a saucy leer, patting it with
the fore-finger of the other at every mentioned person,
There is your papa! —There is your mamma! — 
There is your uncle Harlowe! —There is your uncle
Antony! —Your aunt Hervey! —My young Lady! — 
And my young master! —And Mr. Solmes, with the
air of a great courtier, standing up, because he named
you: —Mrs. Betty, said he, [Then the ape of a
wench bowed, and scraped, as awkwardly as I suppose
the person she endeavoured to imitate] Pray give
my humble service to Miss, and tell her, I wait her
commands. 
Was not this a wicked wench? —I trembled so, I
could hardly stand. I was spiteful enough to say,
that her young mistress, I supposed, bid her put on
these airs, to frighten me out of a capacity of behaving
so calmly, as should procure me my uncle's compassion. 
What a way do you put yourself in, Miss, said
the insolent! —Come, dear Madam, taking up my
fan, which I had laid down, and approaching me with
it, fanning, shall I— 
None of thy impertinence! —But say you, all my
friends are below with him? And am I to appear before
them all? 
I can't tell if they'll stay when you come. I think
they seemed to be moving when Mr. Solmes gave me
his orders. —But what answer shall I carry to the
'Squire? 
Say, I can't go! —But yet, when 'tis over, 'tis over! 
Say, I'll wait upon—I'll attend—I'll come presently— 
Say any thing; I care not what—But give me my
fan, and fetch me a glass of water. 
She went, and I fanned myself all the time; for I
was in a flame; and hemm'd, and struggled with myself, 

all I could; and, when she returned, drank
my water; and finding no hope presently of a quieter
heart, I sent her down, and followed her with precipitation; 
trembling so, that, had I not hurried, I
question if I could have gone down at all. O, my
dear, what a poor, passive machine is the body, when
the mind is disorder'd! 
There are two doors to my parlour, as I used to
call it. As I entered at one, my friends hurried out
at the other. I saw just the gown of my sister, the
last who slid away. My uncle Antony went out
with them; but he staid not long, as you shall hear: 
And they all remained in the next parlour, a wainscot-partition
only parting the two. I remember
them both in one: But they were separated in favour
of us girls, for each to receive her visitors in, at her
pleasure. 
Mr. Solmes approached me as soon as I entered,
cringing to the ground; a visible confusion in every
feature of his face. After half a dozen choak'd-up Madams,
—He was very sorry—he was very much concerned
—It was his misfortune—And there he stopp'd,
being unable presently to complete a sentence. 
This gave me a little more presence of mind. Cowardice
in a foe begets courage in one's-self: —I see that
plainly now;—Yet perhaps, at bottom, the new-made 
bravo is a greater coward than the other. 
I turned from him, and seated myself in one of the
fire-side chairs, fanning myself. I have since recollected,
that I must have looked very saucily. Could
I have had any thoughts of the man, I should have
despised myself for it. But what can be said in the
case of an aversion so perfectly sincere? 
He hemmed five or six times, as I had done above; 
and these produced a sentence—That I could not but
see his confusion. This sentence produced two or
three more. I believe my aunt was his tutoress: For
it was his awe, his reverence for so superlative a 

Lady—[I assure you]—And he hoped—he hoped— 
Three times he hoped, before he told me what— 
that I was too generous [Generosity, he said, was
my character], to despise him for such—for such— 
true tokens of his love.— 
I do indeed see you under some confusion, Sir; and
this gives me hope, that altho' I have been compelled,
as I may call it, to this interview, it may be attended
with happier effects than I had apprehended from it. 
He had hemmed himself into more courage. 
You could not, Madam, imagine any creature so
blind to your merits, and so little attracted by them,
as easily to forego the interest and approbation he was
honoured with by your worthy family, while he had
any hope given him, that one day he might, by his
perseverance and zeal, expect your favour. 
I am but too much aware, Sir, that it is upon the
interest and approbation you mention, that you build
such hope. It is impossible, otherwise, that a man,
who has any regard for his own happiness, would
persevere against such declarations as I have made,
and think myself obliged to make, in justice to you,
as well as to myself. 
He had seen many instances, he told me, and had
heard of more, where Ladies had seemed as averse,
and yet had been induced, some by motives of compassion; 
others by persuasion of friends, to change
their minds; and had been very happy afterwards: 
And he hoped this might be the case here. 
I have no notion, Sir, of compliment, in an article
of such importance as this: Yet am I sorry to be
obliged to speak my mind so plainly, as I am going
to do. —Know then, that I have invincible objections,
Sir, to your address. I have declared them with an
earnestness that I believe is without example: And
why? —Because I believe it is without example, that
any young creature, circumstanced as I am, was ever
treated as I have been treated on your account. 

It is hoped, Madam, that your consent may, in
time, be obtained: That is the hope; and I shall be
a miserable man if it cannot. 
Better, Sir, give me leave to say, you were miserable
by yourself, than that you should make two so. 
You may have heard, Madam, things to my disadvantage. 
—No man is without enemies. —Be pleased
to let me know what you have heard, and I will either
own my faults, and amend; or I will convince you,
that I am basely bespattered: And once I understand
you overheard something that I should say, that gave
you offence: —Unguardedly, perhaps; but nothing
but what shewed my value, and that I would persist
so long as I could have hope. 
I have indeed heard many things to your disadvantage: 
—And I was far from being pleased with
what I overheard fall from your lips: But as you were
not any thing to me, and never could be, it was not
for me to be concerned about the one or the other. 
I am sorry, Madam, to hear this: I am sure you
should not tell me of any fault, that I would be unwilling
to correct in myself. 
Then, Sir, correct this fault: —Do not wish to
have a poor young creature compelled in the most
material article of her life, for the sake of motives she
despises; and in behalf of a person she cannot value: 
One that has, in her own right, sufficient to set her
above all offers, and a spirit that craves no more than
what it has, to make itself easy and happy. 
I don't see, Madam, how you would be happy, if
I were to discontinue my address: For— 
That is nothing to you, Sir, interrupted I: Do
you but withdraw your pretensions: And if it be
thought fit to start up another man for my punishment,
the blame will not lie at your door. You will
be intitled to my thanks; and most heartily will I
thank you. 
He paused, and seemed a little at a loss: And I 

was going to give him still stronger and more personal
instances of my plain-dealing; when in came my uncle
Antony! 
So, niece, so!—sitting in state like a Queen, giving
audience!—haughty audience!—Mr. Solmes, why
stand you thus humbly? —Why this distance, man? 
I hope to see you upon a more intimate footing before
we part. 
I arose, as soon as he entered—and approached
him with a bent knee: Let me, Sir, reverence my
uncle, whom I have not for so long a time seen! —Let
me, Sir, bespeak your favour and compassion! 
You'll have the favour of every-body, niece, when
you know how to deserve it. 
If ever I deserved it, I deserve it now. —I have
been hardly used—I have made proposals that ought
to have been accepted; and such as would not have
been asked of me. What have I done, that I must
be banished and confined thus disgracefully? That I
must be allowed to have no free-will, in an article
that concerns my present and future happiness?— 
Miss Clary, replied my uncle, you have had your
will in every-thing till now; and this makes your
parents will sit so heavy upon you. 
My will, Sir! Be pleased to allow me to ask, What
was my will till now, but my father's will, and yours,
and my uncle Harlowe's will? —Has it not been my
pride to obey and oblige? —I never asked a favour,
that I did not first sit down and consider, if it were fit
to be granted. And now, to shew my obedience,
have I not offered to live single? Have I not offered
to divest myself of my grandfather's bounty, and to
cast myself upon my papa's; to be withdrawn, whenever
I disoblige him? Why, dear good Sir, am I to
be made unhappy in a point so concerning to my
happiness? 
Your grandfather's estate is not wished from you. 
You are not desired to live a single life. You know 

our motives, and we guess at yours. And let me tell
you, well as we love you, we would much sooner choose
to follow you to the grave, than that yours should
take place. 
I will engage never to marry any man, without
my father's consent, and your's, Sir, and everybody's. 
Did I ever give you cause to doubt my
word? —And here I will take the solemnest oath that
can be offered me— 
That is the matrimonial one, interrupted he, with
a big voice—and to this gentleman. —It shall, it shall,
cousin Clary! —And the more you oppose it, the
worse it shall be for you. 
This, and before the man, who seem'd to assume
courage upon it, highly provoked me. 
Then, Sir, you shall sooner follow me to the grave
indeed. —I will undergo the cruelest death: I will
even consent to enter into the awful vault of my ancestors,
and to have that bricked up upon me, than
consent to be miserable for life. —And, Mr. Solmes,
(turning to him) take notice of what I say; This, or
any death, I will sooner undergo (That will soon be
over), than be yours, and for ever unhappy! 
My uncle was in a terrible rage upon this: He
took Mr. Solmes by the hand, shocked as the man
seemed to be, and drew him to the window—Don't
be surprised, Mr. Solmes, don't be concerned at this. 
We know, and rapp'd out a sad oath, what women
will say: The wind is not more boistrous, nor more
changeable: And again he swore to That! If you
think it worth your while to wait for such an ungrateful
girl as This, I'll engage she'll veer about; I'll engage
she shall: And a third time violently swore
to it. 
Then coming up to me (who had thrown myself,
very much disordered by my vehemence, into the
contrary window), as if he would have beat me; his
face violently working, his hands clenched, and his 

teeth set—Yes, yes, yes, hissed the poor gentleman,
you shall, you shall, you shall, cousin Clary, be Mr.
Solmes's; we will see that you shall; and this in one
week at farthest. —And then a fourth time he confirmed
it. Poor gentleman, how he swore! —Strange!
that people who have suffered in their time so much
by storms, should be so stormy!— 
I am sorry, Sir, said I, to see you in such a passion. 
All This, I am but too sensible, is owing to
my brother's instigation; who would not himself give
the instance of duty that is exacted from me. It is
best for me to withdraw. I shall but provoke you
farther, I fear: For though I would gladly obey you,
if I could, yet This is a point determined with me; 
and I cannot so much as wish to get it over. 
How could one help these strong declarations, the
man in presence? 
I was going out at the door I came in at; the gentlemen
looking upon one another, as if referring to each
other what to do, or whether to engage my stay, or
suffer me to go: And who should I meet at the door
but my brother, who had heard all that had passed. 
Judge my surprize, when he bolted upon me so
unexpectedly, and taking my hand, which he grasped
with violence, Return, pretty Miss, said he; return,
if you please! —You shall not yet be bricked up! 
—Your instigating brother shall save you from That! 
—O thou fallen angel, said he, peering up to my downcast
face,—such a sweetness here!—and such an obstinacy
there, tapping my neck! —O thou true woman!
—tho' so young—But you shall not have your
Rake: Remember that; in a loud whisper, as if he
would be decently indecent before the man! —You
shall be redeemed, and this worthy gentleman, raising
his voice, will be so good as to redeem you from
ruin—and hereafter you will bless him, or have reason
to bless him, for his condescension; that was the
brutal brother's word! 

He had led me up to meet Mr. Solmes, whose hand
he took, as he himself held mine. Here, Sir, said he,
take the rebel daughter's hand; I give it you now; She
shall confirm the gift in a week's time; or will have
neither father, mother, nor uncles, to boast of. 
I snatched my hand away. 
How now, Miss!— 
And how now, Sir—What right have You to
dispose of my hand? —If you govern every-body else,
you shall not govern me; especially in a point so immediately
relative to myself, and in which you neither
have, nor ever shall have, any thing to do. 
I would have broke from him, but he held my
hand too fast. 
Let me go, Sir! —Why am I thus treated? —You
design, I doubt not, with your unmanly gripings, to
hurt me, as you do: But again I say, Wherefore is
it that I am to be thus treated by You? 
He tossed my hand from him with a whirl, that
pained my very shoulder. I wept, and held my other
hand to the part. 
Mr. Solmes blamed him; so did my uncle. 
He had no patience, he said, with such a perverseness; 
and to think of my reflections upon himself,
before he entered. He had only given me back the
hand, I had not deserved he should touch. It was
one of my arts, to pretend to be pained. 
Mr. Solmes said, He would sooner give up all his
hopes of me, than that I should be used unkindly: 
And he offered to plead in my behalf to them both; 
and applied himself with a bow, as if for my approbation
of his interposition. 
But, I said, I am obliged to your intention, Mr.
Solmes, to interpose to save me from my brother's
violence: But I cannot wish to owe so poor an obligation
to a man whose ungenerous perseverance is
the occasion, or at least the pretence, of that violence,
and of all my disgraceful sufferings. 

How generous in you, Mr. Solmes, said my brother
to him, to interpose in behalf of such an immoveable
spirit! But I beg of you to persist! —For
all our family's sake, and for her sake too, if you
love her, persist! —Let us save her, if possible, from
ruining herself. Look at her person! Think of her
fine qualities! —All the world confesses them, and we
all gloried in her till now: She is worth saving! — 
And, after two or three more struggles, she will be
yours, and, take my word for it, will reward your
patience! —Talk not, therefore, of giving up your
hopes, for a little whining folly. She has entered upon
a parade, which she knows not how to quit with a
female grace. You have only her pride and her obstinacy
to encounter: And, depend upon it, you will
be as happy a man in a fortnight, as a marry'd man
can be. 
You have heard me say, my dear, that my brother
has always taken a liberty to reflect upon our Sex, and
upon Matrimony! —He would not, if he did not
think it wit! —Just as poor Mr. Wyerley, and others,
we both know, prophane and ridicule Scripture; and
all to evidence their pretensions to the same pernicious
talent, and to have it thought, that they are too wise
to be good. 
Mr. Solmes, with a self-satisfied air, presumptuously
said, He would suffer every thing, to oblige my
family, and to save me. And doubted not to be
amply rewarded, could he be so happy as to succeed
at last. 
Mr. Solmes, said I, if you have any regard for
your own happiness [Mine is out of the question: 
You have not generosity enough to make That any
part of your scheme] prosecute no further your address. 
It is but just to tell you, that I could not bring
my heart to think of you, without the utmost disapprobation,
before I was used as I have been: —And
can you think I am such a slave, such a poor slave, 

as to be brought to change my mind by the violent
usage I have met with? 
And you, Sir, turning to my brother, if you think
that meekness always indicates tameness; and that there
is no magnanimity without bluster, own yourself mistaken
for once: For you shall have reason to judge
from henceforth, that a generous mind is not to be
forced; and that— 
He lifted up his hands and eyes: No more, said the
imperious wretch, I charge you! —Then turning to
my uncle, Do you hear, Sir? This is your once faultless
niece! This is your favourite! 
Mr. Solmes looked as if he knew not what to
think of the matter; and had I been left alone with
him, I saw plainly, I could have got rid of him easily
enough. 
My uncle came up to me, looking up to my face,
and down to my feet: And is it possible This can
be you? All this violence from you, Miss Clary? 
Yes, it is possible, Sir—And, I will presume to
say, this vehemence on my side, is but the natural
consequence of the usage I have met with, and the
rudeness I am treated with, even in your presence,
by a brother, who has no more right to controul me,
than I have to controul him. 
This usage, cousin Clary, was not till all other
means were try'd with you. 
Try'd! to what end, Sir—Do I contend for any
thing more than a mere negative? You may, Sir (turning
to Mr. Solmes) possibly you may, be induced the
rather to persevere, thus ungenerously, as the usage,
I have met with, for your sake, and what you have
now seen offered to me by my brother, will shew you
what I can bear, were my evil destiny ever to make
me yours! 
Lord, Madam, cried Solmes, all this time distorted
into twenty different attitudes, as my brother and my
uncle were blessing themselves, and speaking only to 

each other by their eyes, and by their working features; 
Lord, Madam, what a construction is This! 
A fair construction, Sir, interrupted I: For he
that can see a person he pretends to value, thus treated,
and approve of it, must be capable of treating her
thus himself. And that you do approve of it, is evident
by your declared perseverance, when you know
I am confined, banished, and insulted in order to
make me consent to be what I never can be—And
this, let me tell you, as I have often told others, not
from motives of obstinacy, but aversion. 
Excuse me, Sir, turning to my uncle! —To you,
as to my papa's brother, I owe duty. I beg your pardon,
that I cannot obey you: But as for my brother; 
he is but my brother; he shall not constrain me. And,
turning to my brother, Knit your brows, Sir, and
frown as you will, I will ask you, Would you, in
my case, make the sacrifices I am willing to make, to
obtain every one's favour? If not, what right have
you to treat me thus? and to procure me to be treated
as I have been, for so long past? 
I had put myself by this time into great disorder. 
They were silent, and seemed to want to talk to one
another by their looks, walking about in violent disorders
too, between whiles. —I sat down fanning myself
(as it happened, against the glass) and I could perceive
my colour go and come; and being sick to the
very heart, and apprehensive of fainting, I rung. 
Betty came in. I called for a glass of water, and
drank it: —But no-hody minded me—I heard my
brother pronounce the words, Art! d&wblank;d Art! to
Solmes; which, I suppose, kept him back, together
with the apprehension, that he would not be welcome. 
—Else I could see the man was more affected than
my brother. And I, still fearing I should faint, rising,
took hold of Betty's arm, staggering with extreme
disorder, yet courtesying to my uncle, Let me hold by
you, Betty, said I; Let me withdraw. 

Whither go you, niece, said my uncle? We have
not done with you yet. I charge you depart not. 
Mr. Solmes has something to open to you, that will
astonish you: —And you shall hear it. 
Only, Sir, by your leave, for a few minutes into
the air—I will return, if you command it—I will
hear all that I am to hear; that it may be over Now,
and for-Ever. —You will go with me, Betty? 
And so, without any farther prohibition, I retired
into the garden; and there, casting myself upon the
first seat, and throwing Betty's apron over my face,
leaning against her side, my hands between her's, I
gave way to a violent burst of grief, or passion, or
both; which, as it seemed, saved my heart from breaking,
for I was sensible of an immediate relief. 
I have already given you specimens of Mrs. Betty's
impertinence. I shall not, therefore, trouble you with
more: For the wench, notwithstanding this my distress,
took great liberties with me, after she saw me
a little recovered, and as I walked further into the
garden; insomuch, that I was obliged to silence her
by an absolute prohibition of saying another word to
me; and then she dropped behind me quite sullen and
gloomy. 
It was near an hour before I was sent for in again. 
The messenger was my cousin Dolly Hervey, who,
with an eye of compassion and respect [for Miss Hervey
always loved me, and calls herself my scholar, as
you know] told me, my company was desired. 
Betty left us. 
Who commands my attendance, Miss, said I? — 
Have you not been in tears, my dear? 
Who can forbear tears, said she? 
Why, what's the matter, cousin Dolly? —Sure, nobody
is intitled to weep in this family, but I! 
Yes, I am, Madam, said she, because I love you. 
I kissed her; And is it for me, my sweet cousin,
that you shed tears? —There never was love lost between 

us: But tell me, what is designed to be done
with me, that I have this kind instance of your compassion
for me? 
You must take no notice of what I tell you: But
my mamma has been weeping for you, too, with me; 
but durst not let any-body see it: O my Dolly, said
my mamma, there never was so set a malice in man,
as in your cousin James Harlowe. They will ruin
the flower and ornament of their family. 
As how, Miss Dolly? —Did she not explain herself? 
—As how, my dear? 
Yes, she said, Mr. Solmes would have given up his
claim to you; for he said, you hated him, and there
were no hopes; and your mamma was willing he
should; and to have you taken at your word, to renounce
Mr. Lovelace, and to live single: My mamma
was for it too; for they heard all that passed between
you and my uncle Antony, and my cousin
James; saying, it was impossible to think of prevailing
upon you to have Mr. Solmes. My uncle Harlowe
seemed in the same way of thinking; at least, my
mamma says, he did not say any thing to the contrary. 
But your papa was immoveable, and was
angry at your mamma and mine upon it: And hereupon
your brother, your sister, and my uncle Antony,
joined in, and changed the scene intirely. In short,
she says, that Mr. Solmes had great matters ingaged
to him. He owned, that you were the finest young
Lady in England, and he would be content to be but
little beloved, if he could not, after marriage, engage
your heart, for the sake of having the honour to call
you his but for one twelvemonth—I suppose he would
break your heart in the next—For he is a cruel-hearted
man, I am sure. 
My friends may break my heart, cousin Dolly; but
Mr. Solmes will never have it in his power. 
I don't know That, Miss: You'll have good luck
to avoid having him, by what I can find; for my 

mamma says, they are all now of one mind, herself
excepted; and she is forced to be silent, your papa
and brother are both so outragious. 
I am got above minding my brother, cousin Dolly: 
He is but my brother: —But to my papa I owe duty
and obedience, if I could comply. 
We are apt to be fond of any-body, who will side
with us, when oppressed, or provoked: I always loved
my cousin Dolly; but now she endeared herself to me
ten times more, by her soothing concern for me. I
asked what she would do, were she in my case? 
Without hesitation she replied, Have Mr. Lovelace
out-of-hand, and take up her own estate, if she were
me; and there would be an end of it—And Mr.
Lovelace, she said, was a fine gentleman;—Mr.
Solmes was not worthy to buckle his shoes. 
Miss Hervey told me further, that her mamma was
desired to come to me, to fetch me in; but she excused
herself. I should have all my friends, she said,
she believed, sit in judgment upon me. 
I wish it had been so. But, as I have been told
since, neither my papa, nor my mamma, would trust
themselves with me: The one for passion-sake, it
seems; my mamma, for tenderer considerations. 
By this time we entered the house. Miss accompanied
me into the parlour, and left me, as a person
devoted, I just then thought. 
No-body was there. I sat down, and had leisure
to weep; reflecting, with a sad heart, upon what my
cousin Dolly had told me. 
They were all in my sister's parlour adjoining: For
I heard a confused mixture of voices, some louder
than others, drowning, as it seemed, the more compassionating
accents. 
Female accents I could distinguish the drowned ones
to be. O my dear! What a hard-hearted Sex is the
other! Children of the same parents, how came they
by their cruelty? —Do they get it by travel? Do 

they get it by conversation with one another? —Or
how do they get it? —Yet my sister too, is as hard-hearted
as any of them. But this may be no exception
neither: For she has been thought to be masculine in
her air, and in her spirit. She has then, perhaps, a
soul of the other Sex in a body of ours. —And so,
for the honour of our own, will I judge of every woman
for the future, who, imitating the rougher manners
of men, acts unbeseeming the gentleness of her
own sex. 
Forgive me, my dear friend, breaking into my
story by these reflections. Were I rapidly to pursue
my narration, without thinking, without reflecting,
I believe I should hardly be able to keep in my right
mind: Since vehemence and passion would then be always
uppermost; but while I think as I write, I cool,
and my hurry of spirits is allayed. 
I believe I was above a quarter of an hour enjoying
my own comfortless contemplations, before anybody
came in to me; for they seemed in full debate. 
My aunt looked in first; O my dear, said she,
are you there? and withdrew hastily to apprise them
of it. 
And then (as agreed upon, I suppose) in came my
uncle Antony, crediting Mr. Solmes with the words,
Let me lead you in, my dear friend; having hold of
his hand; while the new-made Beau aukwardly followed,
but more edgingly, as I may say, setting his
feet mincingly, to avoid treading upon his leader's
heels. Excuse me, my dear, this seeming levity; 
but those we do not love, in every thing are ungraceful
with us. 
I stood up. My uncle looked very surly. —Sit
down!—sit down, girl! —And drawing a chair near
me, he placed his dear friend in it, whether he would
or not, I having taken my seat. And my uncle sat
on the other side of me. 

Well, niece, taking my hand, we shall have very
little more to say to you than we have already said,
as to the subject that is so distasteful to you—Unless,
indeed, you have better considered of the matter— 
And first, let me know if you have? 
The matter wants no consideration, Sir. 
Very well, very well, Madam! said my uncle,
withdrawing his hands from mine: Could I ever have
thought of this from you? 
For God's sake, dearest Madam, said Mr. Solmes,
folding his hands—And there he stopped. 
For God's sake, what, Sir? —How came God's
sake, and your sake, I pray you, to be the same? 
This silenc'd him. My uncle could only be angry; 
and that he was before. 
Well, well, well, Mr. Solmes, said my uncle, no
more of supplication. You have not confidence
enough to expect a woman's favour. 
He then was pleased to hint what great things he
had designed to do for me; and that it was more for
my sake, after he returned from the Indies, than for the
sake of any other of the family, that he had resolved
to live a single life. —But now, concluded he, that
the perverse girl despises all the great things it was once
as much in my will, as in my power, to do for her,
I will change my measures. 
I told him, that I most sincerely thanked him for
all his kind intentions to me: But that I was willing
to resign all claim to any other of his favours than
kind looks, and words. 
He looked about him this way and that. 
Mr. Solmes looked pitifully down. 
But both being silent, I was sorry, I added, that I
had too much reason to say a very harsh thing, as it
might be thought; which was, That if he would but
be pleased to convince my brother and sister, that he
was absolutely determined to alter his generous purposes
towards me, it might possibly procure me 

better quarter from both, than I was otherwise likely
to have. 
My uncle was very much displeased. But he had
not the opportunity to express his displeasure, as he
seemed prepared to do; for in came my brother in
exceeding great wrath; and called me several vile
names. His success hitherto, had set him above keeping
even decent measures. 
Was This my spiteful construction, he asked? — 
Was This the interpretation I put upon his brotherly
care of me, and concern for me, in order to prevent
my ruining myself? 
It is, indeed it is, said I: I know no other way
to account for your late behaviour to me: And before
your face, I repeat my request to my uncle, and I
will make it to my other uncle, whenever I am permitted
to see him, that they will confer all their favours
upon you, and my sister; and only make me
happy [It is all I wish for!] in their kind looks, and
kind words— 
How they all gazed upon one another! —But
could I be less peremptory before the man? 
And, as to your care and concern for me, Sir, turning
to my brother; once more, I desire it not. You
are but my brother. My papa and mamma, I bless
God, are both living; and, were they not, you have
given me abundant reason to say that you are the very
last person I would wish to have any concern for me. 
How, Niece? And is a Brother, an only Brother,
of so little consideration with you, as this comes to? 
And ought he to have no concern for his sister's honour,
and the family's honour? 
My honour, Sir! —I desire none of his concern for
That! It never was endanger'd till it had his undesired
concerns! —Forgive me, Sir—But when my brother
knows how to act like a brother, or behave like a gentleman,
he may deserve more consideration from me,
than it is possible for me to think he now does. 

I thought my brother would have beat me upon
this—But my uncle stood between us. 
Violent girl, however, he called me! —Who, said
he, would have thought it of her? 
Then was Mr. Solmes told, that I was unworthy
of his pursuit. 
But Mr. Solmes warmly took my part: He could
not bear, he said, that I should be treated so roughly. 
And so very much did he exert himself on this occasion,
and so patiently was his warmth received by
my brother, that I began to suspect, that it was a contrivance
to make me think myself obliged to him; 
and that it might, perhaps, be one end of the pressed—
for interview. 
The very suspicion of this low artifice, violent as
I was thought to be before, put me still more out
of patience; and my uncle and my brother again
praising his wonderful generosity, and his noble return
of good for evil, You are a happy man, Mr.
Solmes, said I, that you can so easily confer obligations
upon a whole family, except one ingrateful person
of it, whom you seem to intend most to oblige; 
but who, being made unhappy by your favour, deserves
not to owe to you any protection from the violence
of a brother. 
Then was I a rude, an ingrateful, an unworthy
creature. 
I own it all! —All, all you can call me, or think
me, brother, do I own. I own my own unworthiness
with regard to This gentleman: I take your word
for his abundant merit, which I have neither leisure
nor inclination to examine into—It may, perhaps,
be as great as your own—But yet I cannot thank him
for his mediation: For who sees not, looking at my
uncle, that this is giving himself a merit with everybody
at my expence? 
Then turning to my brother, who seemed surprised
into silence by my warmth, I must also acknowlege, 

Sir, the favour of your superabundant care for me. 
But I discharge you of it; at least, while I have the
happiness of nearer and dearer relations. You have
given me no reason to think better of your prudence,
than of my own. I am independent of You, Sir; 
tho' I never desire to be so of my Father: And altho'
I wish for the good opinion of my Uncles, it is All I
wish for from Them: And This, Sir, I repeat, to
make you and my sister easy. 
Instantly almost came in Betty, in a great hurry,
looking at me as spitefully as if she were my sister: 
Sir, said she to my brother, my master desires to speak
to you this moment at the door. 
He went to that which led into my sister's parlour; 
and this sentence I heard thundered from the mouth
of one who had a right to all my reverence: Son
James, let the rebel be this moment carried away to
my brother's—This very moment—She shall not stay
one hour more under my roof! 
I trembled; I was ready to sink. Yet, not knowing
what I did, or said, I flew to the door, and would
have opened it—But my brother pulled it to, and
held it close by the key—O my papa!—my dear papa,
said I, falling upon my knees, at the door—admit
your child to your presence! —Let me but plead my
cause at your feet! —O reprobate not thus your
distressed daughter! 
My uncle put his handkerchief to his eyes: Mr.
Solmes made a still more grievous face than he had before. 
But my brother's marble heart was untouched. 
I will not stir from my knees, continued I,
without admission. —At this door I beg it! —O let
it be the door of mercy! And open it to me, honoured
Sir, I beseech you! —But this once, this once!
altho' you were afterwards to shut it against me for
ever! 
The door was endeavoured to be opened on the
inside, which made my brother let go the key on a 

sudden, and I pressing against it (all the time remaining
on my knees) fell flat on my face into the other
parlour; however, without hurting myself. But everybody
was gone, except Betty, who helped to raise me
up; and I looked round that apartment, and seeing nobody
there, re-entered the other, leaning upon Betty; 
and then threw myself into the chair which I had sat
in before; and my eyes overflowed, to my great relief: 
While my uncle Antony, my brother, and Mr.
Solmes, left me, and went to my other relations. 
What passed among them, I know not: But my
brother came in by the time I had tolerably recovered
myself, with a settled and haughty gloom upon his
brow—Your father and mother command you instantly
to prepare for your uncle Antony's. You need
not be solicitous about what you shall take with you. 
You may give Betty your keys: Take them, Betty,
if the perverse-one has them about her, and carry them
to her mother. She will take care to send every thing
after you that you shall want. But another night you
will not be permitted to stay in this house. 
I don't choose to give my keys to any-body, except
to my mamma, and into her own hands. You see
how much I am disordered. It may cost me my life,
to be hurried away so suddenly. I beg to be indulged,
till next Monday at least. 
That will not be granted you. So prepare for this
very night. And give up your keys. Give them to
me, Miss. I'll carry them to your mamma. 
Excuse me, brother. Indeed, I won't. 
Indeed you must. In no one instance comply,
Madam Clary? 
Not in this, Sir. 
Have you any thing you are afraid should be seen
by your mamma? 
Not, if I be permitted to attend my mamma. 
I'll make a report accordingly. 
He went out. 

In came Miss Dolly Hervey: I am sorry, Madam,
to be the messenger! —But your mamma insists upon
your sending up all the keys of your cabinet, library,
and drawers. 
Tell my mamma, that I yield them up to her commands; 
Tell her, I make no conditions with my
mamma: But if she finds nothing she disapproves of,
I beg that she will permit me to tarry here a few days
longer. —Try, my Dolly [the dear girl sobbing with
grief]; Try, if your gentleness cannot prevail for me. 
She wept still more, and said, It is sad, very sad,
to see matters thus carried! 
She took the keys, and wrapped her arms about me; 
and begged me to excuse her. —And would have said
more; but Betty's presence awed her, as I saw. 
Don't pity me, my dear, said I. It will be imputed
to you as a fault. You see who is by. 
The insolent wench scornfully smiled: One young
Lady pitying another in things of this nature, looks
promising in the youngest, I must needs say. 
I bid her, for a saucy creature, begone from my
presence. 
She would most gladly, she said, were she not to
stay about me by my mamma's order. 
It soon appeared for what she staid; for I offering
to go up stairs to my apartment when my cousin
went from me with the keys, she told me she was
commanded, (to her very great regret, she must own)
to desire me not to go up at present. 
Such a bold-face, as she, I told her, should not
hinder me. 
She instantly rang the bell, and in came my brother,
meeting me at the door. 
Return, return, Miss—No going up yet. 
I went in again, and throwing myself upon the
window-seat, wept bitterly. 
Shall I give you the particulars of a ridiculously
spiteful conversation that passed between my brother 

and me, while he, with Betty, was in office to keep
me in play, and my closet was searching? —But I
think I will not. It can answer no good end. 
I desired several times, while he stay'd, to have
leave to retire to my apartment; but it was not permitted
me. The search, I suppose, was not over. 
Bella was one of those employ'd in it. They could
not have a more diligent searcher. How happy it was
they were disappointed! 
But when my sister could not find the cunning creature's
papers; I was to stand another visit from Mr.
Solmes—preceded now by my aunt Hervey, sorely
against her will, I could see that; accompany'd by
my uncle Antony, in order to keep her steady, I
suppose. 
But being a little heavy (for it is now past Two in
the morning), I will lie down in my cloaths, to indulge
the kind summons, if it will be indulged. 
Three o'Clock, Wednesday Morning. 
I could not sleep—Only dozed away one half-hour. 
My aunt Hervey accosted me thus—O my dear
child, what troubles do you give to your parents, and
to every-body! —I wonder at you! 
I am sorry for it, Madam. 
Sorry for it, child! —Why then so very obstinate? 
—Come, sit down, my dear. I will sit next you,
taking my hand. 
My uncle placed Mr. Solmes on the other side of
me: Himself over-against me, almost close to me. 
Finely beset now, my dear! Was I not? 
Your brother, child, said my aunt, is too passionate
—His zeal for your welfare pushes him on a little
too vehemently. 
Very true, said my uncle: But no more of This. 
We would now be glad to see if milder means will
do with you—Tho', indeed, they were tried before. 

I asked my aunt, If it were necessary, that That
gentleman should be present? 
There is a reason, that he should, said my aunt,
as you will hear by-and-by. But I must tell you,
first, that, thinking you was a little too angrily treated
by your brother, your mamma desired me to try
what gentler means would do upon a spirit so generous
as we used to think yours. 
Nothing can be done, Madam, I must presume to
say, if This gentleman's address be the end. 
She looked upon my uncle, who bit his lip, and
looked upon Mr. Solmes, who rubbed his cheek; and
shaking her head, Good, dear creature, said she, be
calm: —Let me ask you, If something would have
been done, had you been gentler used, than you seem
to think you have been? 
No, Madam, I cannot say it would, in this gentleman's
favour. You know, Madam, you know, Sir,
to my uncle, I ever valued myself upon my sincerity: 
And once, indeed, had the happiness to be valued for it. 
My uncle took Mr. Solmes aside. I heard him say,
whisperingly, She must, she shall, be still yours! — 
We'll see, who'll conquer, parents, or child, uncles,
or niece! —I doubt not to be witness to all this
being got over, and many a good-humour'd jest made
of this high phrensy! 
I was heartily vexed. 
Tho' we cannot find out, continued he, yet we
guess, who puts her upon this obstinate behaviour. It
is not natural to her, man. Nor would I concern
myself so much about her, but that I know what I
say to be true, and intend to do great things for her. 
I will hourly pray for that happy time, whisper'd, as
audibly, Mr. Solmes. I never will revive the remembrance
of what is now so painful to me. 
Well, but, niece, I am to tell you, said my aunt,
that the sending up your keys, without making any
conditions, has wrought for you what nothing else 

could have done. —That, and the not finding anything
that could give them umbrage, together with
Mr. Solmes's interposition— 
O, Madam, let me not owe an obligation to Mr.
Solmes. —I cannot repay it, except by my thanks; 
and those only on condition that he will decline his
suit. To my thanks, Sir, (turning to him) if you have
a heart capable of humanity, if you have any esteem
for me, for my own sake, I beseech you to intitle
yourself! —I beseech you, do!— 
O Madam, cry'd he, believe, believe, believe me,
it is impossible! —While you are single, I will hope. 
While that hope is encouraged by so many worthy
friends, I must persevere! —I must not slight them,
Madam, because you slight me. 
I answered him with a look of high disdain; and,
turning from him—But what favour, dear Madam,
(to my aunt) has the instance of duty you mention
procur'd me? 
Your mamma and Mr. Solmes, replied my aunt,
have prevailed, that your request, to stay here till
Monday next, shall be granted, if you will promise
to go chearfully then. 
Let me but choose my own visitors, and I will go
to my uncle's house with pleasure. 
Well, niece, said my aunt, we must wave this
subject, I find. We will now proceed to another,
which will require your utmost attention. It will give
you the reason why Mr. Solmes's presence is requisite.— 
Ay, said my uncle, and shew you what sort of a
man Somebody is. Mr. Solmes, pray favour us, in
the first place, with the letter you received from your
anonymous friend. 
I will, Sir. And out he pulled a letter-case, and,
taking out a letter, It is written in answer to one
sent to the person. It is superscribed, To Roger Solmes,
Esq;. It begins thus: Honoured Sir— 

I beg your pardon, Sir, said I: But what, pray,
is the intent of reading this letter to me? 
To let you know, what a vile man you are thought
to have set your heart upon, said my uncle, in an
audible whisper. 
If, Sir, it be suspected, that I have set my heart
upon any other, why is Mr. Solmes to give himself
any farther trouble about me? 
Only hear, niece, said my aunt: Only hear what
Mr. Solmes has to read, and to say to you, on this
head. 
If, Madam, Mr. Solmes will be pleased to declare,
that he has no view to serve, no end to promote, for
himself, I will hear any thing he shall read. But if
the contrary, you must allow me to say, That it will
abate with me a great deal of the weight of whatever
he shall produce. 
Hear it but read, niece, said my aunt.— 
Hear it read, said my uncle. —You are so ready to
take part with— 
With any-body, Sir, that is accused anonymously; 
and from interested motives. 
He began to read; and there seemed to be a heavy
load of charges in this letter, against the poor criminal: 
But I stopped the reading of it, and said, It
will not be my fault, if this vilified man be not as
indifferent to me, as one whom I never saw. If he
be otherwise at present, which I neither own, nor
deny, it proceeds from the strange methods taken to
prevent it. Do not let one cause unite him and me,
and we shall not be united. If my offer to live single
be accepted, he shall be no more to me than this gentleman. 
Still—Proceed, Mr. Solmes—Hear it out, niece,
was my uncle's cry. 
But, to what purpose, Sir? said I—Has not Mr.
Solmes a view in this? And, besides, can any-thing 

worse be said of Mr. Lovelace, than I have heard
said for several months past? 
But this, said my uncle, and what Mr. Solmes can
tell you besides, amounts to the fullest proof— 
Was the unhappy man, then, so freely treated in
his character before, without full proof? I beseech
you, Sir, give me not too good an opinion of Mr.
Lovelace; as I may have, if such pains be taken to
make him guilty, by one who means not his reformation
by it; nor to do good, if I may presume to say
so in this case, to any-body but himself. 
I see very plainly, said my uncle, your prepossession,
your fond prepossession, for the person of a man
without morals. 
Indeed, my dear, said my aunt, you too much
justify all our apprehensions. Surprising! that a young
creature of virtue and honour should thus esteem a
man of a quite opposite character! 
Dear Madam, do not conclude against me too
hastily. I believe Mr. Lovelace is far from being
so good as he ought to be: But if every man's
private life were searched into by prejudiced people,
set on for that purpose, I know not whose reputation
would be safe. I love a virtuous character, as much
in man, as in woman. I think it as requisite, and
as meritorious, in the one as in the other. And, if
left to myself, I would prefer a person of such a character
to Royalty, without it. 
Why then, said my uncle— 
Give me leave, Sir—But I may venture to say,
that many of those who have escaped censure, have
not merited applause. 
Permit me to observe further, That Mr. Solmes
himself may not be absolutely faultless. I never heard
of his virtues. Some vices I have heard of—Excuse
me, Mr. Solmes, I speak to your face—The text
about casting the first stone affords an excellent lesson. 

He looked down; but was silent. 
Mr. Lovelace may have vices you have not. You
may have others, which he has not. —I speak not this
to defend him, or to accuse you. No man is bad,
no one is good, in every-thing. Mr. Lovelace, for
example, is said to be implacable, and to hate my
friends; that does not make me value him the more. 
But give me leave to say, That they hate him as bad. 
Mr. Solmes has his antipathies, likewise, very strong
ones! and those to his own relations! which I don't
find to be the other's fault; for he lives well with his. 
—Yet he may have as bad: —Worse, pardon me, he
cannot have, in my poor opinion: For what must be
the man, who hates his own flesh? 

You know not, Madam;
You know not, Niece;All in one breath.
You know not, Clary;

I may not, nor do I desire to know his reasons: It
concerns me not to know them: But the world, even
the impartial part of it, accuses him. If the world is
unjust, or rash, in one man's case, why may it not be so
in another's? That's all I mean by it. Nor can there
be a greater sign of want of merit, than where a man
seeks to pull down another's character, in order to
build up his own. 
The poor man's face was all this time overspread
with confusion; it appearing as if he were ready to
cry; twisted, as it were, and all awry, neither mouth
nor nose standing in the middle of it. And had he
been capable of pitying me, I had certainly tried to
pity him. 
They all three gazed upon one another in silence. My
aunt, I saw (at least I thought so), looked as if she would
have been glad she might have appeared to approve of
what I said. She but feebly blamed me, when she
spoke, for not hearing what Mr. Solmes had to say. He
himself seemed not now very earnest to be heard. My
uncle said, There was no talking to me. And I should 

have absolutely silenced both gentlemen, had not my
brother come in again to their assistance. 
This was the strange speech he made at his entrance,
his eyes flaming with anger; This prating girl has
struck you all dumb, I perceive. Persevere however,
Mr. Solmes. I have heard every word she has
said: And I know no other method of being even
with her, than, after she is yours, to make her as
sensible of your power, as she now makes you of her
insolence. 
Fie, cousin Harlowe! said my aunt—Could I have
thought a brother would have said this to a gentleman,
of a sister? 
I must tell you, Madam, said he, that you give
the rebel courage. You yourself seem to favour too
much the arrogance of her sex in her; otherwise she
durst not have thus stopp'd her uncle's mouth by reflections
upon him; as well as denied to hear a gentleman
tell her the danger she is in from a libertine,
whose protection, as she has plainly hinted, she intends
to claim against her family. 
Stopp'd my uncle's mouth, by reflections upon him, Sir!
said I, How can that be! How dare you to make such
an application as This! 
My aunt wept at his reflection upon her. —Cousin,
said she to him, If This be the thanks I have for my
trouble, I have done: Your father would not treat
me thus: —And I will say, that the hint you gave
was an unbrotherly one. 
Not more unbrotherly than all the rest of his conduct
to me, of late, Madam, said I. I see, by this
specimen of his violence, how every-body has been
brought into his measures. Had I any the least apprehension
of ever being in Mr. Solmes's power, this
might have affected me. But you see, Sir, to Mr.
Solmes, what a conduct is thought necessary to enable
you to arrive at your ungenerous end. You see
how my brother courts for you! 

I disclaim Mr. Harlowe's violence, Madam, with
all my soul. I will never remind you— 
Silence, worthy Sir! said I; I will take care you
never shall have the opportunity. 
Less violence, Clary, said my uncle. Cousin
James, you are as much to blame as your sister. 
In then came my sister. Brother, said she, you
kept not your promise. You are thought to be to
blame within, as well as here. Were not Mr. Solmes's
generosity and affection to the girl well known, what
you have said would be inexcusable. My papa desires
to speak with you; and with you, aunt; and with
you, uncle; and with you, Mr. Solmes, if you please. 
They all four withdrew into the next apartment. 
I stood silent, as not knowing, till she spoke, how to
take this intervention of my sister's. —O thou perverse
thing, said she, (poking out her angry face at me,
when they were all gone, but speaking spitefully
low)—What troubles do you give to us all! 
You and my brother, Bella, said I, give trouble
to yourselves; for neither you nor he have any business
to concern yourselves about me. 
She threw out some spiteful expressions, still in a
low voice, as if she chose not to be heard without; and
I thought it best to oblige her to raise her tone a little,
if I could. If I could, did I say? It is easy to make
a passionate spirit answer all our views upon it. 
She accordingly flamed out in a raised tone: And
this brought my cousin Dolly in to us. Miss Harlowe,
your company is desired. 
I will come presently, cousin Dolly. 
But again provoking a severity from me which
she could not bear, and calling me names; in once
more came Dolly, with another message, that her
company was desired. 
Not mine, I doubt, Miss Dolly, said I. 
The sweet-temper'd girl burst out into tears, and
shook her head. 

Go in before me, child, said Bella (vexed to see
her concern for me), with thy sharp face like a new
moon: What dost thou cry for? Is it to make thy
keen face look still keener? 
I believe Bella was blamed, too, when she went in; 
for I heard her say, The creature was so provoking,
there was no keeping a resolution. 
Mr. Solmes, after a little while, came in again by
himself, to take leave of me: Full of scrapes and
compliments; but too well tutored and encouraged,
to give me hope of his declining. He begged me not
to impute to him any of the severe things to which
he had been a sorrowful witness. He besought my
compassion, as he called it. 
He said, the result was, That he had still hopes
given him; and, altho' discouraged by me, he was resolved
to persevere, while I remained single: —And
such long and such painful services he talk'd of, as
never were heard of. 
I told him, in the strongest manner, what he had
to trust to. 
Yet still he determined to persist. —While I was
no man's else, he must hope. 
What! said I, will you still persist, when I declare,
as I now do, that my affections are engaged? — 
And let my brother make the most of it.— 
He knew my principles, and adored me for them. 
He doubted not, that it was in his power to make
me happy: And he was sure I would not want the
will to be so. 
I assured him, that, were I to be carried to my
uncle's, it should answer no end; for I would never
see him; nor receive a line from him; nor hear a
word in his favour, whoever were the person who
should mention him to me. 
He was sorry for it. He must be miserable, were I
to hold in that mind. But he doubted not, that I might
be induced by my father and uncles to change it.— 

Never, never, he might depend upon it. 
It was richly worth his patience, and the trial. 
At my expence? —At the price of all my happiness, Sir? 
He hoped I should be induced to think otherwise. 
And then would he have run into his fortune, his
settlements, his affection—Vowing, that never man
loved a woman with so sincere a passion, as he loved
me. 
I stopp'd him, as to the first part of his speech: 
And to the second, of the sincerity of his passion;— 
What then, Sir, said I, is your love to one, who must
assure you, that never young creature looked upon
man with a sincerer disapprobation, than I look upon
you: And tell me, What argument can you urge,
that this true declaration answers not beforehand? 
Dearest Madam, what can I say? —On my knees
I beg— 
And down the ungraceful wretch dropp'd on his
knees. 
Let me not kneel in vain, Madam: Let me not
be thus despised. —And he looked most odiously sorrowful. 
I have kneeled too, Mr. Solmes: Often have I kneeled: 
And I will kneel again—Even to you, Sir, will I kneel,
if there be so much merit in kneeling; provided you
will not be the implement of my cruel brother's undeserved
persecution.— 
If all the services, even to worship you during my
whole life—You, Madam, invoke and expect mercy,
yet shew none— 
Am I to be cruel to myself, to shew mercy to you? 
—Take my estate, Sir, with all my heart, since you
are such a favourite in This house! —Only leave me
myself—The mercy you ask for, do you shew to others. 
If you mean to my relations, Madam—unworthy
as they are, all shall be done that you shall prescribe. 
Who, I, Sir, to find you bowels you naturally have
not? I to purchase their happiness, by the forfeiture 

of my own? What I ask you for, is mercy to myself: 
That, since you seem to have some power over my
relations, you will use it in my behalf. Tell them,
that you see I cannot conquer my aversion to you: 
Tell them, if you are a wise man, that you value too
much your own happiness, to risque it against such a
determin'd antipathy: Tell them, that I am unworthy
of your offers: And that, in mercy to yourself, as
well as to me, you will not prosecute a suit so impossible
to be granted. 
I will risque all consequences, said the fell wretch,
rising, with a countenance whiten'd over, as if with
malice, his hollow eyes flashing fire, and biting his
under-lip, to shew he could be manly. Your hatred,
Madam, shall be no objection with me: And I
doubt not in a few days to have it in my power to
shew you— 
You have it in your power, Sir— 
He came well off—To shew you more generosity,
than, noble as you are said to be to others, you shew
to me. 
The man's face became his anger: It seems form'd
to express the passion. 
At that instant, again came in my brother—Sister,
sister, sister, said he, with his teeth set, act on the
termagant part you have so newly assumed—Most
wonderfully well does it become you. It is but a short
one, however. Tyranness in your turn! accuse
others of your own guilt! —But leave her, leave her,
Mr. Solmes; her time is short. You'll find her humble
and mortify'd enough very quickly! —Then, how
like a little tame fool will she look, with her conscience
upbraiding her, and begging of you [with a whining
voice, the barbarous brother spoke] to forgive and
forget!— 
More he said, as he flew out, with a face as red as
scarlet, upon Shorey's coming in to recal him, on his
violence. 

I removed from chair to chair, excessively frighted
and disturbed, at this brutal treatment. 
The man attempted to excuse himself, as being
sorry for my brother's passion. 
Leave me, leave me, Sir, fanning—or I shall faint. 
And indeed I thought I should. 
He recommended himself to my favour with an
air of assurance; augmented, as I thought, by a distress
so visible in me; for he even snatched my
trembling, my struggling hand; and ravish'd it to
his odious mouth. 
I flung from him with high disdain: And he withdrew,
bowing and cringing; self-gratify'd, and enjoying,
as I thought, the confusion he saw me in. 
The creature is now, methinks, before me; and
now I see him aukwardly striding backward, as he
retired, till the edge of the open'd door, which he
run against, remember'd him to turn his welcome
back upon me. 
Upon his withdrawing, Betty brought me word,
that I was permitted to go up to my own chamber: 
And was bid to consider of every-thing: For my time
was short. Nevertheless, she believed I might be permitted
to stay till Saturday. 
She tells me, That altho' my brother and sister
were blam'd for being so hasty with me, yet when
they made their report, and my uncle Antony his,
of my provocations, they were all more determin'd
than ever in Mr. Solmes's favour. 
The wretch himself, she tells me, pretends to be
more in love with me than before; and to be rather
delighted, than discouraged, with the conversation that
passed between us. He run on, she says, in raptures,
about the grace wherewith I should dignify his board; 
and the like sort of stuff, either of his saying, or her
making. 
She closed all with a Now is my time to submit
with a grace, and to make my own terms with him: — 

Else, she can tell me, were she Mr. Solmes, it should
be worse for me: And who, Miss, of our sex, proceeded
the saucy creature, would admire a rakish gentleman,
when she might be admired by a sober one to
the end of the chapter? 
The creature tells me, I have had amazing good
luck, to keep my writings concealed so cunningly: 
I must needs think, that she knows I am always at
my pen: And as I endeavour to hide that knowlege
from her, she is not obliged to keep my secret. But
that she loves not to aggravate. She had rather reconcile
by much. Peace-making is her talent, and ever
was. And had she been as much my foe, as I imagined,
I had not perhaps been here now. —But this,
however, she said not to make a merit with me: For,
truly, it would be better for me the sooner everything
was over with me. And better for her, and
every-one else; that was certain. —Yet one hint she
must conclude with; that my pen and ink, she would
assure me (soon as I was to go away), would not be
long in my power. And then, having lost that amusement,
it would be seen, how a mind so active as
mine, would be able to employ itself. 
This hint has such an effect upon me, that I shall
instantly begin to conceal, in different places, pens,
ink, and paper; and to deposite some in the ivy-summer-house,
if I can find a safe place; and, at the
worst, I have got a pencil of black, and another of
red, lead, which I use in my drawings; and my patterns
shall serve for paper, if I have no other. 
How lucky it was, that I had got away my papers! 
They made a strict search for them; That I can see,
by the disorderly manner they have left all things in: 
For you know that I am such an observer of method,
that I can go to a bit of ribband, or lace, or edging,
blindfold: The same in my books; which they have
strangely disordered and mismatched, to look behind
them, and in some of them, I suppose. My cloaths, 

too, are rumpled not a little. No place has escaped
them. To your hint, I thank you, are they indebted
for their disappointment. 
The pen, thro' heaviness and fatigue, dropp'd out
of my fingers, at the word indebted. I resume it, to
finish the sentence; and to tell you, that I am, 
Your for-ever obliged and affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 
