



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Eight o'clock, Sat. Morn. June 10. 
I am come back from Mrs. Moore's, whither I
went in order to attend my charmer's commands. 
But no admittance. A very bad night. 
Doubtless she must be as much concern'd, that
she has carried her resentments so very far, as I have
reason to be, that I made such a poor use of the opportunity
I had on Wednesday night. 
But now, Jack, for a brief review of my present
situation; and a slight hint or two of my precautions. 
I have seen the women this morning, and find
them half-right, half-doubting. 

Miss Rawlins's brother tells her, that she lives at
Mrs. Moore's. 
Mrs. Moore can do nothing without Miss Rawlins. 
People who keep lodgings at public places expect
to get by every one who comes into their purlieus. 
Tho' not permitted to lodge there myself, I have
engag'd all the rooms she has to spare, to the very garrets; 
and that, as I have told thee before, for a month
certain, and at her own price, board included; my
spouse's and all: But she must not, at present, know
it. So I hope I have Mrs. Moore fast by the interest. 
This; devil-like, is suiting temptations to inclinations. 
I have always observed, and, I believe, I have
hinted as much formerly (a) , that all dealers, tho'
but for pins, may be taken in by customers for pins,
sooner than by a direct bribe of ten times the value; 
especially if pretenders to conscience: For the offer
of a bribe, would not only give room for suspicion; 
but would startle and alarm their scrupulousness; 
while a high price paid for what you buy, is but submitting
to be cheated in the method the person makes
a profession to get by. Have I not said, that human
nature is a rogue (b) ? —And do not I know it? 
To give a higher instance, How many proud senators,
in the year 1720, were induced, by presents
or subscriptions of South Sea stock, to contribute to
a scheme big with national ruin; who yet would
have spurn'd the man who should have presumed to
offer them even twice the sum certain, that they had
a chance to gain by the stock? —But to return to my
review, and my precautions. 
Miss Rawlins fluctuates as she hears the lady's
story, or as she hears mine. Somewhat of an infidel,
I doubt, is this Miss Rawlins. I have not yet 

consider'd her foible. The next time I see her, I will
take particular notice of all the moles and freckles in
her mind; and then infer and apply. 
The Widow Bevis, as I have told thee, is all my
own. 
My man Will. lies in the house. My other new
fellow attends upon me; and cannot therefore be
quite stupid. 
Already is Will. over head and ears in love with
one of Mrs. Moore's maids. He was struck with
her the moment he set his eyes upon her. A raw
country wench too. But all women, from the
countess to the cookmaid, are put into high good
humour with themselves, when a man is taken with
them at first sight. Be they ever so plain [No woman
can be ugly, Jack!], they'll find twenty good reasons,
besides the great one, for Sake's sake, by the help of
the glass without (and perhaps in spite of it), and
conceit within, to justify the honest fellow's caption. 
“The rogue has saved 150 l. in my service”— 
More by 50 than I bid him save. No doubt he
thinks he might have done so; tho', I believe, not
worth a groat. “The best of masters I—Passionate,
indeed: But soon appeased.” 
The wench is extremely kind to him already. The
other maid is also very civil to him. He has a husband
for her in his eye. She cannot but say, that
Mr. Andrew, my other servant [The girl is for fixing
the person] is a very well-spoken civil young man. 
“We common folks have our joys, and please
your Honour, says honest Joseph Leman, like as
our betters have (a) .” And true says honest Joseph
—Did I prefer ease to difficulty, I should envy
these low-degree sinners some of their joys. 
But if Will. had not made amorous pretensions to
the wenches, we all know, that servants, united in 

one common compare-note cause, are intimate the
moment they see one another—Great genealogists
too; they know immediately the whole kin and kin's
kin of each other, tho' dispersed over the three kingdoms,
as well as the genealogies and kin's kin of
those they serve. 
But my precautions end not here. 
O Jack, with such an invention, what occasion
had I to carry my Beloved to Mrs. Sinclair's? 
My spouse may have further occasion for the messengers
whom she dispatch'd, one to Miss Howe, the
other to Wilson's. With one of these Will. is already
well-acquainted, as thou hast heard—To mingle
liquor is to mingle souls with these fellows: With
the other he will soon be acquainted, if he be not already. 
The Captain's servant has his uses and instructions
assign'd him. I have hinted at some of them already
(a) . He also serves a most humane and considerate
master. I love to make every-body respected
to my power. 
The post, general and peny, will be strictly watch'd
likewise. 
Miss Howe's Collins is remember'd to be described. 
Miss Howe's and Hickman's liveries also. 
James Harlowe and Singleton are warned against. 
I am to be acquainted with any inquiry that shall
happen to be made after my spouse, whether by her
married or maiden name, before she shall be told of
it—And this that I may have it in my power to
prevent mischief. 
I have order'd Mowbray and Tourville (and Belton,
if his health permit) to take their quarters at Hamstead
for a week, with their fellows to attend them. 
I spare thee for the present, because of thy private 

concerns. But hold thyself in chearful readiness
however, as a mark of thy allegiance. 
As to my spouse herself, has she not reason to be
pleased with me, for having permitted her to receive
Miss Howe's letter from Wilson's? A plain case,
either that I am no deep plotter, or that I have no
further views but to make my peace with her, for an
offence so slight, and so accidental. 
Miss Howe says, tho' prefaced with an alas! that
her charming friend loves me: She must therefore yearn
after this reconciliation—Prospects so fair—If she
used me with less rigor, and more politeness; if she
shewed me any compassion; seemed inclinable to spare
me, and to make the most favourable constructions; 
I cannot but say, that it would be impossible not to
shew her some. But to be insulted and defied by a
rebel in one's power, what prince can bear that? 
But I return to the scene of action. I must keep
the women steady. I had no opportunity to talk to
my worthy Mrs. Bevis in private. 
Tomlinson, a dog, not come yet! 