



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday Morning, past Two o' Clock. 
Io Triumphe! Io Clarissa, sing! —Once more, what
a happy man thy friend! —A silly dear novice, to
be heard to tell the coachman whither to carry her! — 
And to go to Hamstead, of all the villages about London! 
—The place where we had been together more
than once! 
Methinks I am sorry she managed no better! —I
shall find the recovery of her too easy a task, I fear! 
Had she but known how much difficulty enhances the
value of any-thing with me, and had she had the least
notion of obliging me by it, she would never have stopt
short at Hamstead, surely. 
Well, but after all this exultation, thou wilt ask,
‘If I have already got back my Charmer?’ —I have
not: But knowing where she is, is almost the same
thing as having her in my power. And it delights me
to think how she will start and tremble when I first 

pop upon her! How she will look with conscious guilt,
that will more than wipe off my guilt of Wednesday
night, when she sees her injured Lover, and acknowleged
Husband, from whom, the greatest of felonies,
she would have stolen herself. 
But thou wilt be impatient to know how I came by
my lights. Read the inclosed here, and remember the
instructions which from time to time, as I have told
thee, I have given my fellow, in apprehension of such
an elopement; and that will tell thee all, and what I
may reasonably expect from the rascal's diligence and
management, if he wishes ever to see my face again. 
I received it about half an hour ago, just as I was
going to lie down in my cloaths: And it has made me
so much alive, that, midnight as it is, I have sent for
a Blunt's chariot, to attend me here by day-peep, with
my usual coachman, if possible; and knowing not else
what to do with myself, I sat down, and, in the joy of
my heart, have not only written thus far, but have concluded
upon the measures I shall take when admitted
to her presence: For well am I aware of the difficulties
I shall have to contend with from her perverseness. 

Honnored Sur,
This is to sertifie your Honner, as how I am heer
at Hamestet, wher I have found out my Lady to
be in logins at one Mrs. Moore's, near upon Hamestet-Hethe. 
And I have so ordered matters, that her Ladiship
cannot stur but I must have notice of her goins and
comins. As I knowed I dursted not look into your
Honner's fase, if I had not found out my Lady, thoff
she was gone off the prems's in a quarter of an hour, as
a man may say; so I knowed you would be glad at
heart to know I had found her out: And so I send
thiss Petur Partrick, who is to have 5 shillins, it being
now near 12 of the clock at nite; for he would not
stur without a hearty drinck too-besides: And I was 

willing all shulde be snug likeways at the logins before
I sent. 
I have munny of youre Honner's; but I thought as
how if the man was payed by me beforend, he mought
play trix; so left that to your Honner. 
My Lady knows nothing of my being hereaway,
But I thoute it best not to leve the plase, because she
has tacken the logins but for a fue nites. 
If your Honner come to the Upper Flax, I will be
in site all the day about the Tapp-house or the Hethe. 
I have borroued another cote, instead of your Honner's
liferie, and a blacke wigg; so cannot be knoen by my
Lady, iff as howe she shuld see me: And have made
as if I had the toothe-ake; so with my hancriffe at
my mothe, the teth which your Honner was pleased to
bett out with your Honner's fyste, and my dam'd wide
mothe, as your Honner notifys it to be, cannot be
knoen to be mine. 
The tow inner Letters I had from my Lady, before
she went off the prems's. One was to be left at Mr.
Wilson's for Miss Howe. The next was to be for your
Honner. But I knowed you was not at the plase directed; 
and being afear'd of what fell out, so I kept
them for your Honner, and so could not give um to
you, until I seed you. Miss How's I only made belief
to her Ladiship as I carred it, and sed as how there
was nothing left for hur, as shee wished to knoe: So
here they be bothe. 
I am, may it plese your Honner, 
Your Honner's most dutiful,
and, wonce more, happy Sarvant,
Wm. Summers. 
The two inner Letters, as Will. calls them, 'tis
plain, were written for no other purpose, but to send
him out of the way with them, and one of them to
amuse me. That directed to Miss Howe is only this: 


Thursday, June 8. 
I write this, my dear Miss Howe, only for a feint,
and to see if it will go current. I shall write at
large very soon, if not miserably prevented!!! 
Cl. H. 
Now, Jack, will not her feints justify mine? Does
she not invade my province, thinkest thou? And is it
not now fairly come to Who shall most deceive and cheat
the other? So, I thank my Stars, we are upon a par,
at last, as to this point—Which is a great ease to my
Conscience, thou must believe. And if what Hudibras
tells us is true, the dear Fugitive has also abundance
of pleasure to come. 

Doubtless the pleasure is as great
In being cheated, as to cheat.
As lookers-on find most delight,
Who least perceive the juggler's sleight;
And still the less they understand,
The more admire the sleight of hand.
This is my dear juggler's Letter to me; the other
inner Letter sent by Will. 

Thursday, June 8. 
Mr. Lovelace,
Do not give me cause to dread your return. If
you would not that I should hate you for ever,
send me half a line by the bearer, to assure me that
you will not attempt to see me for a week to come. 
I cannot look you in the face without equal confusion
and indignation. The obliging me in This is but a
poor atonement for your last night's vile behaviour. 
You may pass this time in a journey to Lord M's; 
and I cannot doubt, if the Ladies of your family are
as favourable to me, as you have assured me they are,
but that you will have interest enough to prevail with
one of them to oblige me with her company. After 

your baseness of last night, you will not wonder, that
I insist upon this proof of your future honour. 
If Captain Tomlinson comes mean time, I can hear
what he has to say, and send you an account of it. 
But in less than a Week if you see me, it must be
owing to a fresh act of violence, of which you know
not the consequence. 
Send me the requested line, if ever you expect to
have the forgiveness confirmed, the promise of which
you extorted from 
The unhappy
Cl. H. 
Now, Belford, what canst thou say in behalf of this
sweet rogue of a Lady? What canst thou say for her? 
'Tis apparent, that she was fully determined upon an
Elopement, when she wrote it: And thus would she
make me of party against myself, by drawing me in to
give her a week's time to complete it: And, more
wicked still, send me upon a fool's errand to bring
up one of my cousins: —When we came, to have the
satisfaction of finding her gone off, and me exposed for
ever! —What punishment can be bad enough for such
a little villain of a Lady! 
But mind, moreover, how plausibly she accounts
by this billet (supposing she should not find an opportunity
of eloping before I returned) for the resolution
of not seeing me for a week; and for the bread and
butter expedient! —So childish, as we thought it! 
The chariot is not come; and if it were, it is yet
too soon for every-thing but my impatience. And as
I have already taken all my measures, and can think of
nothing but my triumph, I will resume her violent
Letter, in order to strengthen my resolutions against
her. I was before in too gloomy a way to proceed with
it: But now the subject is all alive to me, and my gayer
fancy, like the Sun-beams, will irradiate it, and turn
the solemn deep green into a brighter verdure. 

When I have called upon my Charmer to explain
some parts of her Letter, and to atone for others, I
will send it, or a copy of it, to thee. 
Suffice it at present to tell thee, in the first place,
that she is determined never to be my wife—To be sure,
there ought to be no compulsion in so material a case. 
Compulsion was her parents fault, which I have censured
so severely, that I shall hardly be guilty of the
same. I am therefore glad I know her mind as to this
essential point. 
I have ruined her, she says! —Now that's a fib,
take it in her own way—If I had, she would not perhaps
have run away from me. 
She is thrown upon the wide World: Now I own,
that Hamstead-Heath affords very pretty, and very
extensive prospects; but 'tis not the wide world neither: 
And suppose that to be her grievance, I hope
soon to restore her to a narrower. 
I am the enemy of her soul, as well as of her honour! 
—Confoundedly severe! Nevertheless, another
fib! —For I love her soul very well; but think no
more of it in this case than of my own. 
She is to be thrown upon strangers! —And is not
that her own fault? —Much against my will, I am
sure! 
She is cast from a State of Independency into one of
Obligation. She never was in a State of Independency; 
nor is it fit a woman should, of any Age, or in any
State of Life. And as to the State of Obligation, there
is no such thing as living without being beholden to
some-body. Mutual obligation is the very essence and
soul of the social and commercial life: —Why should
she be exempt from it? —I am sure the person she
raves at, desires not such an exemption;—has been
long dependent upon her; and would rejoice to owe
further obligations to her than he can boast of hitherto. 
She talks of her Father's curse—But have I not repaid
him for it an hundred-fold in the same coin? But 

why must the faults of other people be laid at my
door? Have I not enow of my own? 
But the grey-eyed dawn begins to peep—Let me
sum up all. 
In short, then, the dear creature's Letter is a collection
of invectives not very new to me; though the
occasion for them, no doubt, is new to her. A little
sprinkling of the romantic and contradictory runs thro'
it. She loves, and she hates: She encourages me to
pursue her, by telling me I safely may; and yet she begs
I will not: She apprehends poverty and want, yet resolves
to give away her Estate: To gratify whom? — 
Why, in short, those who have been the cause of her
misfortunes. And finally, tho' she resolves never to be
mine, yet she has some regrets at leaving me, because
of the opening prospects of a Reconciliation with her
friends. 
But never did morning dawn so tardily as this! — 
Neither is the chariot yet come. 
* *
A Gentleman to speak with me, Dorcas? — 
Who can want me thus early? 
Captain Tomlinson, sayst thou! Surely he must
have travelled all night! —Early riser as I am, how
could he think to find me up thus early? 
Let but the chariot come, and he shall accompany
me in it to the bottom of the hill (tho' he return to
town on foot; for the Captain is all obliging goodness)
that I may hear all he has to say, and tell him all my
mind, and lose no time. 
Well, now am I satisfied that this rebellious flight
will turn to my advantage, as all crushed Rebellions
do to the advantage of a Sovereign in possession. 
* *
Dear Captain, I rejoice to see you—Just in the
nick of time—See! See! 


The rosy-finger'd morn appears,
And from her mantle shakes her tears:
The Sun arising, mortals chears;
And drives the rising mists away,
In promise of a glorious day.
Excuse me, Sir, that I salute you from my favourite
Bard. He that rises with the Lark, will sing with the
Lark. Strange news since I saw you, Captain! —Poor
mistaken Lady! —But you have too much goodness, I
know, to reveal to her Uncle Harlowe the errors of
this capricious Beauty. It will all turn out for the best. 
You must accompany me part of the way. I know
the delight you take in composing differences. But
'tis the task of the Prudent to heal the breaches made
by the rashness and folly of the Imprudent. 
* *
And now (all around me so still, and so silent) the
rattling of the chariot-wheels at a Street's distance do I
hear! —And to this angel of a woman I fly! 
Reward, O God of Love [The cause is thy own]; 
reward thou, as it deserves, my suffering perseverance! 
—Succeed my endeavours to bring back to thy obedience,
this charming fugitive! —Make her acknowlege
her rashness; repent her insults; implore my fogiveness; 
beg to be reinstated in my favour, and that
I will bury in oblivion the remembrance of her heinous
offence against thee, and against me, thy faithful
votary. 
* *
The chariot at the door! —I come! I come— 
I attend you, good Captain— 
Indeed, Sir— 
Pray, Sir—Civility is not Ceremony. 
And now, dressed like a Bridegroom, my heart
elated beyond that of the most desiring one (attended
by a footman whom my Beloved never saw) I am already
at Hamstead! 