


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


In the doctor's next Letter, inclosed, you will
find mention made of Sir Charles's Literary Journal:
I fansy, my dear, it must be a charming thing. 
I wish we could have before us every line he wrote
while he was in Italy. Once the presumptuous
Harriet had hopes, that she might have been intitled— 
But no more of these hopes—It can't be helped,
Lucy. 


Dr. Bartlett's twelfth Letter.
Mr. Grandison proceeds thus:
The next morning I employed myself in visiting
and taking leave of several worthy members of
the University, with whom I had passed many very
agreeable and improving hours, during my residence
in this noble city. In my Literary Journal you have
an account of those worthy persons, and of some of
our conversations. I paid my duty to the Cardinal
Legate, and the Gonsaloniere, and to three of his
counsellors, by whom, you know, I had been likewise
greatly honoured. My mind was not free enough
to enjoy their conversation: Such a weight upon my
heart, how could it? But the debt of gratitude and
civility was not to be left unpaid. 

On my return to my lodgings, which was not till
the evening, I found, the General had been there to
enquire after me. 
I sent one of my servants to the palace of Porretta,
with my compliments to the General, to the Bishop,
and Jeronymo; and with particular enquiries after
the health of the Ladies, and the Marquis; but had
only a general answer, That they were much as I
left them. 
The two young Lords, Sebastiano and Juliano,
made me a visit of ceremony. They talked of visiting
England in a year or two. I assured them of my
best services, and urged them to go thither. I asked
them after the healths of the Marquis, the Marchioness,
and their beloved cousin Clementina. Signor
Sebastiano shook his head: Very, very indifferent,
were his words. We parted with great civilities. 
I will now turn my thoughts to Florence, and to
the affairs there that have lain upon me, from the
death of my good friend Mr. Jervois, and from my
wardship. I told you in their course, the steps I took
in those affairs; and how happy I had been in some
parts of management. There I hope soon to see
you, my dear Dr. Bartlett, from the Levant, to
whose care I can so safely consign my precious trust,
while I go to Paris, and attend the wished-for call of
my father to my native country, from which I have
been for so many years an exile. 
There also I hope to have some opportunities of
conversing with my good Mrs. Beaumont; resolving
to make another effort to get so valuable a person to
restore herself to her beloved England. 
Thus, my dear Dr. Bartlett, do I endeavour to
console myself, in order to lighten that load of grief
which I labour under on the distresses of the dear
Clementina. If I can leave her happy, I shall be
sooner so, than I could have been in the same circumstances,
had I, from the first of my acquaintance with 

the family (to the breach of all the laws of hospitality)
indulged a passion for her. 
Yet is the unhappy Olivia a damp upon my endeavours
after consolation. When she made her unseasonable
visit to me at Bologna, she refused to return
to Florence without me, till I assured her, that
as my affairs would soon call me thither, I would visit
her at her own palace, as often as those affairs would
permit. Her pretence for coming to Bologna was,
to induce me to place Emily with her, till I had settled
every-thing for my carrying the child to England; 
but I was obliged to be peremptory in my denial, tho'
she had wrought so with Emily, as to induce her to
be an earnest petitioner to me, to permit her to live
with Lady Olivia, whose equipages, and the glare in
which she lives, had dazled the eyes of the young
Lady. 
* *
I Was impatient to hear again from Jeronymo; 
and just as I was setting out for Florence, in despair
of that favour, it being the second day after my farewel
visit, I had the following Letter from him: 

I Have not been well, my dear Grandison. I am
afraid the wound in my shoulder must be laid open
again. God give me patience! But my life is a burden
to me. 
We are driving here at a strange rate. They promised
to keep measures with the dear creature; but
she has heard that you are leaving Bologna, and raves
to see you. 
Poor soul! She endeavoured to prevail upon her
father, mother, aunt, to permit her to see you, but
for five minutes: That was the petition which was
denied her, as I mentioned in my last. 
Camilla was afraid that she would go into a gloomy
fit upon it, as I told you—She did; but it lasted not
long: For she made an effort, soon after, to go out of 

the house by way of the garden. The gardener refused
his key, and brought Camilla to her, whom she
had, by an innocent piece of art, but just before, sent
to bring her something from her toilette. 
The General went with Camilla to her. They
found her just setting a ladder against the wall. She
heard them, and screamed, and, leaving the ladder,
ran, to avoid them, till she came in sight of the great
cascade; into which, had she not by a cross alley been
intercepted by the General, it is feared she would
have thrown herself. 
This has terrified us all: She begs but for one interview; 
one parting interview; and she promises to
make herself easy: But it is not thought adviseable. 
Yet Father Marescotti himself thought it best to indulge
her. Had my mother been earnest, I believe
it had been granted: But she is so much concerned
at the blame she met with on permitting the last interview,
that she will not contend, tho' she has let
them know, that she did not oppose the request. 
The unhappy girl ran into my chamber this morning
—Jeronymo! He will be gone, said she; I know
he will. All I want is, but to see him! To wish him
happy! And to know, If he will remember me when
he is gone, as I shall him! —Have you no interest,
Jeronymo? Cannot I once see him? Not once? 
The Bishop, before I could answer, came in quest
of her, followed by Laurana, from whom she had
forcibly disengaged herself, to come to me. 
Let me have but one parting interview, my Lord,
said she, looking to him, and clinging about my
neck. He will be gone: Gone for ever. Is there
so much in being allowed to say, Farewel, and be
happy, Grandison! and excuse all the trouble I have
given you? —What has my brother's preserver done,
what have I done, that I must not see him, nor he
me, for one quarter of an hour only? 
Indeed, my Lord, said I, she should be complied
with. Indeed she should. 

My Father thinks otherwise, said the Bishop: The
Count thinks otherwise: I think otherwise. Were
the Chevalier a common man, she might. But she
dwells upon what passed in the last interview, and his
behaviour to her. That, it is plain, did her harm. 
The next may drive the thoughts of that out of
her head, returned I. 
Dear Jeronymo, replied he, a little peevishly, you
will always think differently from every-body else! 
Mrs. Beaumont comes to morrow. 
What do I care for Mrs. Beaumont? said she. —I
don't love her: She tells every-thing I say. 
Come, my dear love, said Laurana, you afflict
your brother Jeronymo. Let us go up to your own
chamber. 
I afflict every-body, and every-body afflicts me; 
and you are all cruel. Why, he will be gone, I tell
you! That makes me so impatient: And I have
something to say to him. My father won't see me:
My mother renounces me. I have been looking for
her, and she hides herself from me! —And I am a
prisoner, and watched, and used ill! 
Here comes my mother! said Laurana. You now
must go up to your chamber, cousin Clementina. 
So she does, said she: Now I must go, indeed! — 
Ah, Jeronymo! Now there is no saying nay! —But
it is hard! Very hard! —And she burst into tears. I
won't speak tho', said she, to my aunt. Remember,
I will be silent, madam! —Then whispering me, My
aunt, brother, is not the aunt she used to be to me! — 
But hush, I don't complain, you know! 
By this I saw that Lady Sforza was severe with her. 
She addressed herself to her aunt: You are not my
mamma, are you, madam? 
No, child. 
No, child, indeed! I know that too well. But my
brother Giacomo is as cruel to me as any-body. But
hush, Jeronymo! —Don't you betray me! —Now my 

aunt is come, I must go! —I wish I could run away
from you all! 
She was yesterday detected writing a Letter to you. 
My mother was shewn what she had written, and
wept over it. My aunt took it out of my sister's
bosom, where she had thrust it, on her coming in. 
This she resented highly. 
When she was led into her own chamber, she refused
to speak; but in great hurry went to her closet,
and, taking down her bible, turned over one leaf and
another very quick. Lady Sforza had a book in her
hand, and sat over-against the closet-door to observe
her motions. She came to a place—Pretty! said
she. 
The Bishop had formerly given her a smattering of
Latin—She took pen and ink, and wrote. You'll
see, Chevalier, the very great purity of her thoughts,
by what she omitted, and what she chose, from the
Canticles. Velut unguentum diffunditur nomen tuum,
&c. 
[In the English translation, thus: Thy name is as
ointment poured forth; therefore do the virgins love
thee. Draw me; we will run after thee: The upright
love thee. 
Look not upon me because I am black, because the sun
hath looked upon me. My mother's children were angry
with me: They made me the keeper of the vineyards,
but mine own vineyard have I not kept. 
Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth! where thou
feedest, where thou makest thy flock to rest at noon:
For why should I be as one that turneth aside by the
flocks of thy companions?] 
She laid down her pen, and was thoughtful; her
elbow resting on the escritoire she wrote upon, her
hand supporting her head. 
May I look over you, my dear? said her aunt,
stepping to her; and, taking up the paper, read it,
and took it out of the closet with her, unopposed; 
her gentle bosom only heaving with sighs. 

I will write no more, so minutely, on this affecting
subject, my Grandison. 
They are all of opinion that she will be easy,
when she knows that you have actually left Bologna; 
and they strengthen their opinion by these words of
hers, above-recited: ‘Why he will be gone, I tell
you; and this makes me so impatient.’ —At least,
they are resolved to try the experiment. And so, my
dear Grandison, you must be permitted to leave us! 
God be your director and comforter, as well as ours!
prays 
Your ever affectionate
Jeronymo. 

Mr. Grandison, having no hopes of being allowed
to see the unhappy Lady, set out with a heavy heart
for Florence. He gave orders there, and at Leghorn,
that the clerks and agents of his late friend Mr. Jervois
should prepare every thing for his inspection
against his return from Naples; and then he set out for
that city, to attend the General. 
He had other friends to whom he had endeared
himself at Sienna, Ancona, and particularly at Rome,
as he had also some at Naples; of whom he intended
to take leave, before he set out for Paris: And therefore
went to attend the General with the greater
pleasure. 
Within the appointed time he arrived at Naples. 
The General received me, says Mr. Grandison,
with greater tokens of politeness than affection. You
are the happiest man in the world, Chevalier, said
he, after the first compliments, in escaping dangers
by braving them. I do assure you, that I had great
difficulties to deny myself the favour of paying you a
visit in my own way at Bologna. I had indeed resolved
to do it, till you proposed this visit to me here. 
I should have been very sorry, replied I, to have
seen a brother of Lady Clementina in any way that 

should not have made me consider him as her brother. 
But, before I say another word, let me ask after her
health. How does the most excellent of women? 
You have not heard, then? 
I have not, my Lord: But it is not for want of solicitude. 
I have sent three several messengers, but
can hear nothing to my satisfaction. 
Nor can you hear any thing from me that will give
you any. 
I am grieved at my soul, that I cannot. How, my
Lord, do the Marquis and Marchioness? 
Don't ask. They are extremely unhappy. 
I hear that my dear friend, Signor Jeronymo, has
undergone— 
A dreadful operation, interrupted the General. — 
He has. Poor Jeronymo! He could not write to you. 
God preserve my brother! But, Chevalier, you did
not save half a life, tho' we thank you for that, when
you restored him to our arms. 
I had no reason to boast, my Lord, of the accident. 
I never made a merit of it. It was a mere
accident, and cost me nothing. The service was
greatly over-rated. 
Would to God, Chevalier, it had been rendered by
any other man in the world! 
As it has proved, I am sure, my Lord, I have reason
to join in the wish. 
He shewed me his pictures, statues, and cabinet
of curiosities, while dinner was preparing; but rather
for the ostentation of his magnificence and taste,
than to do me pleasure. I even observed an increasing
coldness in his behaviour; and his eye was too often
cast upon me with a fierceness that shewed resentment; 
and not with the hospitable frankness that became
him to a visiter and guest who had undertaken
a journey of above two hundred miles, principally to
attend him, and to shew him the confidence he had in
his honour. This, as it was more to his dishonour 

than mine, I pitied him for. But what most of all
disturbed me, was, that I could not obtain from him
any particular intelligence relating to the health of one
person, whose distresses lay heavy upon my heart. 
There were several persons of distinction at dinner; 
the discourse could therefore be only general. He
paid me great respect at his table, but it was a solemn
one. I was the more uneasy at it, as I apprehended,
that the situation of the Bologna family was more unhappy
than when I left that city. 
He retired with me into his garden. You stay with
me at least the week out, Chevalier? 
No, my Lord: I have affairs of a deceased friend
at Florence and at Leghorn to settle. To-morrow,
as early as I can, I shall set out for Rome, in my way
to Tuscany. 
I am surprised, Chevalier. You take something
amiss in my behaviour. 
I cannot say that your Lordship's countenance (I
am a very free speaker) has that benignity in it, that
complacency, which I have had the pleasure to see
in it. 
By G. Chevalier, I could have loved you better
than any man in the world, next to the men of my
own family; but I own I see you not here with so
much love as admiration. 
The word admiration, my Lord, may require explanation. 
You may admire at my confidence: But
I thank you for the manly freedom of your acknowlegement
in general. 
By admiration I mean, all that may do you honour. 
Your bravery in coming hither, particularly; and
your greatness of mind on your taking leave of us
all. But did you not then mean to insult me? 
I meant to observe to you then, as I now do in
your own palace, that you had not treated me as my
heart told me I deserved to be treated: But when I
thought your warmth was rising to the uneasiness of 

your assembled friends, instead of answering your question
about my stay at Bologna, as you seemed to
mean it, I invited myself to an attendance upon you
here, at Naples, in such a manner as surely could not
be construed an insult. 
I own, Grandison, you disconcerted me. I had
intended to save you that journey. 
Was that your Lordship's meaning, when, in my
absence, you called at my lodgings, the day after the
farewel-visit? 
Not absolutely: I was uneasy with myself. I intended
to talk to you. What that talk might have
produced, I know not: But had I invited you out, if
I had found you at home, would you have answered
my demands? 
According as you had put them. 
Will you answer them now, if I attend you as far
as Rome, on your return to Florence? 
If they are demands fit to be answered. 
Do you expect I will make any that are not fit to be
answered? 
My Lord, I will explain myself. You had conceived
causeless prejudices against me: You seemed
inclined to impute to me a misfortune that was not,
could not be, greater to you than it was to me. I
knew my own innocence: I knew that I was rather
an injured man, in having hopes given me, in which
I was disappointed, not by my own fault: Whom
shall an innocent and an injured man fear? —Had I
feared, my fear might have been my destruction. 
For was I not in the midst of your friends? A foreigner? 
If I would have avoided you, could I, had
you been determined to seek me? —I would choose to
meet even an enemy as a man of honour, rather than
to avoid him as a malefactor. In my country, the
law supposes flight a confession of guilt: Had you
made demands upon me that I had not chosen to answer,
I would have expostulated with you. I could 

perhaps have done so as calmly as I now speak. If
you would not have been expostulated with, I would
have stood upon my defence: But for the world I
would not have hurt a brother of Clementina and Jeronymo,
a son of the Marquis and Marchioness of
Porretta, could I have avoided it. Had your passion
given me any advantage over you, and I had obtained
your sword (a pistol, had the choice been left to me,
I had refused for both our sakes), I would have presented
both swords to you, and bared my breast: It
was before penetrated by the distresses of the dear
Clementina, and of all your family—Perhaps I should
only have said, ‘If your Lordship thinks I have injured
you, take your revenge.’ 
And now, that I am at Naples, let me say, that
if you are determined, contrary to all my hopes, to
accompany me to Rome, or elsewhere, on my return,
with an unfriendly purpose; such, and no
other, shall be my behaviour to you, if the power
be given me to shew it. I will rely on my own
innocence, and hope by generosity to overcome
a generous man. Let the guilty secure themselves by
violence and murder. 
Superlative pride! angrily said he, and stood still,
measuring me with his eye: And could you hope
for such an advantage? 
While I, my Lord, was calm, and determined
only upon self-defence; while you were passionate,
and perhaps rash, as aggressors generally are; I did
not doubt it: But could I have avoided drawing, and
preserved your good opinion, I would not have
drawn. Your Lordship cannot but know my principles. 
Grandison, I do know them; and also the general
report in your favour for skill and courage. Do you
think I would have heard with patience of the once
proposed alliance, had not your character—And then
he was pleased to say many things in my favour, 

from the report of persons who had weight with him; 
some of whom he named. 
But still, Grandison, said he, this poor girl! —She
could not have been so deeply affected, had not some
Lover-like arts— 
Let me, my Lord, interrupt you—I cannot bear
an imputation of this kind. Had such arts been used,
the Lady could not have been so much affected. Cannot
you think of your noble sister, as a daughter of
the two houses from which you sprang? Cannot you
see her, as by Mrs. Beaumont's means we now so
lately have been able to see her, struggling nobly
with her own heart [Why am I put upon this tender
subject?] because of her duty and her religion; and resolved
to die rather than encourage a wish that was
not warranted by both? —I cannot, my Lord, urge
this subject: But there never was a passion so nobly
contended with. There never was a man more disinterested,
and so circumstanced. Remember only,
my voluntary departure from Bologna, against persuasion; 
and the great behaviour of your sister on that
occasion, great, as it came out to be, when Mrs.
Beaumont brought her to acknowlege what would
have been my glory to have known, could it have
been encouraged; but is now made my heaviest concern. 
Indeed, Grandison, she ever was a noble girl! We
are too apt perhaps to govern ourselves by events,
without looking into causes: But the access you had
to her; such a man! and who became known to us
from circumstances so much in his favour, both as a
man of principle and bravery— 
This, my Lord, interrupted I, is still judging from
events. You have seen Mrs. Beaumont's Letter. 
Surely you cannot have a nobler monument of magnanimity
in woman! And to that I refer, for a proof
of my own integrity. 
I have that Letter: Jeronymo gave it me, at my 

taking leave of him; and with these words: ‘Grandison
will certainly visit you at Naples. I am afraid
of your warmth. His spirit is well known. All
my dependance is upon his principles. He will not
draw but in his own defence. Cherish the noble
visiter. Surely, brother, I may depend upon your
hospitable temper. Read over again this Letter,
before you see him.’ —I have not yet read it, proceeded
the General; but I will, and that, if you will
allow me, now. 
He took it out of his pocket, walked from me,
and read it; and then came to me, and took my
hand—I am half ashamed of myself, my dear Grandison:
I own I wanted magnanimity. All the distresses
of our family, on this unhappy girl's account,
were before my eyes, and I received you, I behaved
to you, as the author of them. I was contriving to
be dissatisfied with you: Forgive me, and command
my best services. I will let our Jeronymo know how
greatly you subdued me before I had recourse to the
Letter; but that I have since read that part of it
which accounts for my sister's passion, and wish I had
read it with equal attention before. I acquit you: I
am proud of my sister. Yet I observe from this very
Letter, that Jeronymo's gratitude has contributed to
the evil we deplore. But—Let us not say one word
more of the unhappy girl: It is painful to me to talk
of her. 
Not ask a question, my Lord?— 
Don't, Grandison, don't! —Jeronymo and Clementina
are my soul's woe—But they are not worse
than might be apprehended. You go to court with
me to-morrow: I will present you to the king. 
I have had that honour formerly. I must depart
to-morrow morning early. I have already taken
leave of several of my friends here: I have some to
make my compliments to at Rome, which I reserved
for my return. 

You stay with me to-night? 
I intend it, my Lord. 
Well, we will return to company. I must make
my excuses to my friends. Your departure to-morrow
must be one. They all admire you. They are acquainted
with your character. They will join with
me to engage you, if possible, to stay longer. 
We returned to the company. 

