


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Lucy Selby. 


Thursday Night, Mar. 2. 
And what do you think was the reason of Mr.
Reeves's reserves? A most alarming one. I am
obliged to him, that he kept it from me, tho' the uncertainty
did not a little affect me. Take the account
of it, as it comes out. 
I told you in my former, that the person to whom
Sir Charles was sent for out, was Mr. Bagenhall; and
that Sir Charles had sent in for Mr. Reeves, who returned
to the company with a countenance that I did
not like so well as I did Sir Charles's. I now proceed to
give you, from Minutes of Mr. Reeves, what passed
on the occasion. 
Sir Charles took Mr. Reeves aside—This unhappy
man (Sir Hargrave, I mean, said he) seems to me to
want an excuse to himself, for putting up with a treatment
which he thinks disgraceful. When we have
to deal with children, humours must be a little allowed
for. But you'll hear what the proposal is now. 
Let not the Ladies, however, nor the Gentlemen,
within, know any thing of the matter till all is over. 
This is a day devoted to pleasure. But you, Mr.
Reeves, know something of the matter; and can answer
for your fair Cousin. 
He then led Mr. Reeves in to Mr. Bagenhall. 
This, Sir, is Mr. Reeves. —Sir Hargrave, in short,
Mr. Reeves, among other demands that I cannot comply
with (but which relate only to myself, and therefore
need not be mentioned) insists upon an introduction
to Miss Byron. He says, she is absolutely disengaged
—Is she, Sir? 
I dare say she is, answered my Cousin. 

This gentleman has been naming to me Mr. Greville,
Mr. Orme, and others. 
No one of them has ever met with the shadow of
encouragement from my Cousin. She is above keeping
any man in suspense, when she is not in any herself. 
Nothing has given her more uneasiness than the number
of her Admirers. 
Miss Byron, said Sir Charles, must be admired by
every one that beholds her; but still more by those
who are admitted to the honour of conversing with
her. But Sir Hargrave is willing to build upon her
disengagement something in his own favour. Is there
any room for Sir Hargrave, who pleads his sufferings
for her; who vows his honourable intentions even at
the time that he was hoping to gain her by so unmanly
a violence; and appeals to her for the purity, as he
calls it, of his behaviour to her, all the time she
was in his hands—who makes very large offers of
settlements—Is there any room to hope, that Miss
Byron— 
No, none at all, Sir Charles— 
What! not to save a life, Mr. Reeves?—said Mr.
Bagenhall. 
If you mean mine, Mr. Bagenhall, replied Sir
Charles, I beg that that may not be considered. If
Sir Hargrave means his own, I will pronounce that
safe from any premeditated resentment of mine. Do
you think Miss Byron will bear to see Sir Hargrave,
Mr. Reeves? I presume he intends to beg pardon of
her. Will she consent to receive a visit from him? — 
But is not this wretched trifling, Mr. Bagenhall? 
You will remember, Sir Charles, this is a proposal
of mine: What I hoped might be agreed to by Sir Hargrave; 
but that I was willing to consult you before I
mentioned it to him. 
I beg your pardon, Mr. Bagenhall: I now remember
it. 
If ever man doted upon a woman, said Mr. Bagenhall, 

it is Sir Hargrave on Miss Byron. The very
methods he took to obtain her for a wife, shew that
most convincingly. —You will promise not to stand in
his way, Sir. 
I repeat, Mr. Bagenhall, what I have heretofore
told you; That Miss Byron (You'll excuse me, Mr.
Reeves) is still under my protection. If Sir Hargrave,
as he ought, is inclined to ask her pardon; and if he
can obtain it, and even upon his own terms; I shall
think Miss Byron and he may be happier together
than at present I can imagine it possible. I am not
desirous to be any-way considered, but as her protector
from violence and insult; and that I will be, if she
claim it, in defiance of an hundred such men as Sir
Hargrave. But then, Sir, the occasion must be sudden. 
No legal relief must be at hand. I will not; 
either for an adversary's sake, or my own, be defied
into a cool and premeditated vengeance. 
But, Sir Charles, Sir Hargrave has some hardships
in this case. You will not give him the satisfaction of
a Gentleman: And, according to the Laws of Honour,
a man is not intitled to be treated as a Gentleman,
who denies to one— 
Of whose making, Mr. Bagenhall, are the Laws
of Honour you mention? I own no Laws, but the
Laws of God and my Country. But, to cut this
matter short, tell Sir Hargrave, that, little as is the
dependence a Man of Honour can have upon that
of a man, who has acted by an helpless woman, as he
has acted by Miss Byron, I will breakfast with him in
his own house to-morrow morning, if he contradicts
it not. I will attribute to the violence of his passion
for the lady, the unmanly outrage he was guilty of. 
I will suppose him mistaken enough to imagine, that
he should make her amends by marriage, if he could
compel her hand; and will trust my person to his honour,
one servant only to walk before his door, not
to enter the house, to attend my commands, after our 

conversation is over. My sword, and my sword only,
shall be my companion: But this rather, that I
would not be thought to owe my safety to the want of
it, than in expectation, after such confidence placed in
him, to have occasion to draw it in my own defence. 
And pray, Mr. Bagenhall, do you, his friend, be present; 
and any other friends, and to what number, he
pleases. 
When I came to this place in my Cousin's Minutes,
I was astonished; I was out of breath upon it. 
Mr. Bagenhall was surprised; and asked Sir Charles,
If he were in earnest? 
I would not be thought a rash man, Mr. Bagenhall. 
Sir Hargrave threatens me: I never avoid a
threatener. You seem to hint, Sir, that I am not intitled
to fair play, if I consent not to meet him with a
murderous intention. With such an intention I never
will meet any man; though I have as much reason to
rely on the skill of my arm, as on the justice of my
cause. If foul play is hinted at, I am no more safe
from an assassin in my bedchamber, than in Sir Hargrave's
house. Something must be done by a man
who refuses a challenge, to let a challenger see (such
is the world, such is the custom) that he has better
motives than fear, for his refusal. I will put Sir Hargrave's
Honour to the fullest test: Tell him, Sir, that
I will bear a great deal; but that I will not be insulted,
were he a Prince. 
And you really would have me— 
I would, Mr. Bagenhall. Sir Hargrave, I see, will
not be satisfied, unless something extraordinary be
done: And if I hear not from you, or from him, I
will attend him by ten to-morrow morning, in an
amicable manner, to breakfast at his own house in
Cavendish Square. 
I am in terror, Lucy, even in transcribing only. 
Mr. Reeves, said Sir Charles, you undo me, if one
word of this matter escape you, even to your Wife. 

Mr. Reeves begged, that he might attend him to
Sir Hargrave's. 
By no means, Mr. Reeves. 
Then, Sir Charles, you apprehend danger. 
I do not. Something, as I said, must be done. 
This is the shortest and best method to make all parties
easy. Sir Hargrave thinks himself slighted. He
may infer, if he pleases, in his own favour, that I do
not despise a man, in whom I can place such a confidence. 
Do you, Mr. Reeves, return to company; 
and let no one know the occasion of your absence,
or of mine, from it. 
I have told you, my dear, what a difference there
was in the countenances of both, when each separately
entered the dining-room. And could this great man
(surely I may call him great) could he, in such circumstances,
on his return, give joy, pleasure, entertainment,
to all the company, without the least cause
of suspicion of what had passed? 
Mr. Reeves, as I told you, singled out Sir Charles
in the evening to know what had passed after he left
him and Mr. Bagenhall. Sir Charles acquainted him,
that Mr. Bagenhall had proposed to let him know that
night, or in the morning, how Sir Hargrave approved
of his intended visit. He has, accordingly, signified
to me already, said Sir Charles, that Sir Hargrave expects
me. 
And will you go, Sir? 
Don't give yourself concern about the matter, Mr.
Reeves. All must end well. My intention is, not to
run into mischief, but to prevent it. My principles
are better known abroad, than they are in England. 
I have been challenged more than once by men, who
knew them, and thought to find their safety from
them. I have been obliged to take some extraordinary
steps to save myself from insult; and those steps
have answered my end, in more licentious countries 

than this. I hope this step will preserve me from calls
of this nature in my own country. 
For God's sake, Sir Charles— 
Be not uneasy on my account, Mr. Reeves. Does
not Sir Hargrave value himself upon his fortune? He
would be loth to forfeit it. His fortune is my security. 
And am I not a man of some consequence myself? Is
not the affair between us known? Will not therefore
the cause justify me, and condemn him? The man is
turbulent; he is uneasy with himself; he knows himself
to be in the wrong. And shall a man, who resolves
to pay a sacred regard to laws divine and
human, fear this Goth? 'Tis time enough to fear,
when I can be unjust. If you value my friendship, as
I do yours, my good Mr. Reeves, proceeded he, I
shall be sure of your absolute silence. I will attend Sir
Hargrave by ten to-morrow morning. You will hear
from me, or see me at your own house, by twelve. 
And then it was, as Mr. Reeves tells me, that Sir
Charles turned from him, to encourage me to give
the company a lesson from Dryden's Alexander's
Feast, as set by Handel; which I chose to be in the
lines, Softly sweet, c. 
Mr. Reeves went out in the morning. My Cousin
says, he had been excessively uneasy all night. He
now owns, he called at St. James's Square, and there
breakfasted with Lord and Lady L. Miss Grandison,
Miss Emily, and Dr. Bartlett. Sir Charles went out
at nine, in a chair, one servant only attending him:
The family knew not whither. And his two Sisters
were fomenting a rebellion against him, as they humourously
called it, for his keeping from them (who
kept nothing from him) his motions, when they and
my Lord were together, and at his house: But my
Lord and Miss Emily pleasantly refused to join in it. 
Mr. Reeves told us, on his return, that his heart was
so sunk, that they took great notice of his dejection. 
About three o' clock, just as Mr. Reeves was determined 

to go to St. James's Square again, and, if
Sir Charles had not been heard of, to Cavendish-Square
(tho' irresolute what to do when there) the
following billet was brought him from Sir Charles. 
After what I have written, does not your heart leap
for joy, my Lucy? 

Half an hour after two. 
Dear Sir,
I Will do myself the honour of visiting Mrs. Reeves,
Miss Byron, and you, at your usual tea-time, if
you are not engaged. I tell the Ladies here, that
those who have least to do, are generally the most busy
people in the world. I can therefore be only answerable,
on this visit, for, Sir, 
Your most humble Servant,
Charles Grandison. 

Then it was, that, vehemently urged both by my
Cousin and me, Mr. Reeves gave us briefly the cause
of his uneasiness. 
About six o' clock, Sir Charles came in a chair. 
He was charmingly dressed. I thought him, the moment
he enter'd, the handsomest man I ever saw in
my life. What a transporting thing must it be, my
Lucy, to an affectionate wife, without restraint, without
check, and performing nothing but her duty, to
run with open arms to receive a worthy husband, returning
to her after a long absence, or from an escaped
danger! How cold, how joyless! —But no! I was
neither cold, nor joyless; for my face, as I felt it,
was in a glow; and my heart was ready to burst with
congratulatory meaning, at the visible safety, and unhurt
person, of the man who had laid me before under
such obligations to him, as were too much for my
gratitude. O do not, do not tell me, my dear friends,
that you love him, that you wish me to be his. I shall
be ready, if you do, to wish—I don't know what I
would say: But your wishes were always the leaders of
mine. 

Mrs. Reeves, having the same cause for apprehension,
could hardly restrain herself when he entered the
room. She met him at the door, her hand held out,
and with so much emotion, that Sir Charles said, How
well, Mr. Reeves, you have kept my secret! —Mr.
Reeves told him, what an uneasiness he had laboured
under from the preceding evening; and how silent he
had been, till his welcome billet came. 
Then it was that both my Cousins, with equal freedom,
congratulated him. 
And I'll tell you how the Fool, the maiden Fool,
looked, and acted. Her feet insensibly moved to meet
him, while he was receiving the freer compliments of
my Cousins. I courtesied bashfully; it was hardly
noticeable; and, because unnoticed, I paid my compliments
in a deeper courtesy. And then, finding my
hand in his, when I knew not whether I had an hand
or not—I am grieved, Sir, said I, to be the occasion,
to be the cause—And I sighed for one reason (perhaps
you can guess what that was) and blushed for two; 
because I knew not what to say, nor how to look; 
and because I was under obligations which I could not
return. 
He kindly saved my further confusion, by making
light of what had passed: And, leading me to a seat,
took his place by me. 
May I ask, Sir Charles?—said my Cousin Reeves,
and stopt. 
The conversation was too tedious, and too various,
to be minutely related, Mr. Reeves. But Sir Hargrave
had, by Mr. Bagenhall's desire, got his short-hand
writer in a closet; and that unknown to me, till
all was over. I am to have a copy of what passed. 
You shall see it, if you please, when it is sent me. 
Mean time, what think you of a compromise at your
expence, Miss Byron? 
I dare abide by every-thing that Sir Charles Grandison
has stipulated for me. 

It would be cruelty to keep a Lady in suspense,
where doubt will give her pain, and cannot end in
pleasure. Sir Hargrave is resolved to wait upon you:
Are you willing to see him? 
If, Sir, you would advise me to see him. 
I advise nothing, Madam. Pursue your inclinations. 
Mr. Reeves is at liberty to admit whom he
pleases into his house: Miss Byron to see in it, or
wheresoever she is, whom she pleases. I told him my
mind very freely. But I left him determined to wait
on you. I have reason to believe he will behave very
well. I should be surprised, if he does not in the
humblest manner ask your pardon; and yours, Mr.
Reeves, and your Lady's. But if you have any apprehensions,
Madam (to me) I will be ready to attend
you at five minutes notice, before he shall be admitted
to your presence. 
It is very good, Sir, said Mr. Reeves, to be ready
to favour Miss Byron with your countenance, on such
an occasion. But I hope we need not give you that
trouble in this house. 
Sir Charles went away soon after; and Mr. Reeves
has been accusing himself ever since, with answering
him too abruptly, tho' he meant nothing but the truest
respect. And yet as I have written it, on re-perusal, I
don't above half like Mr. Reeves's answer. But where
high respect is entertained, grateful hearts will always,
I believe, be accusing themselves of imperfections,
which none other see, or can charge them with. 
As Sir Charles is safe, and I have now nothing to
apprehend but Sir Hargrave's visit, I will dispatch this
Letter, with assurances that I am, my dear Lucy, 
Your ever-affectionate
Harriet Byron. 

