


Lady G. In Continuation. 


Wedn. Nov. 15.
Wednesday is come, and, as Harriet says, to-morrow
is Thursday. Ah, Harriet! rich as content!
poor as patience! 
I have been talking to her: Half-comforting her,
half-laughing at her. She says, I am but half-good. — 
All the world is come. —Lord W. and his ever-agreeable
Lady. Beauchamp, as I am alive, with them! 
I wish I could see this rogue Emily in love with him. 
He is certainly in love with her. 
‘I know it—I know it! —Do you go down, about
your business’ 
Only Lord G. come to tell me what I knew before. 
Harriet's gone down to be complimented. She has
hardly spirits to compliment. 
‘Well, well, I'll only tell Lady L. who is come. 
Does not the poor soul keep her bed? And are we
not to be as complaisant to our ill friends, as our
well? —I am coming, child.’ 

Emily, with her pretty impertinence. Neither
Lord G. nor Emily, can be any-thing, when strangers
come, and I stand not by them to shew their
signification. 
Duce! a third messenger—O! Mrs. Selby herself. 
I'll tell you more by-and-by, Lady L. ‘Your servant,
Mrs. Selby. I attend you.’ 
* *
The two Miss Nedhams, Miss Watson, Miss
Barclay, the two Miss Holles's, Mr. Deane—‘So,
so, so, Harriet, said I, what is the meaning of
this?’ —My uncle's doings! I have no spirits. Sir
Charles should not have been so passive: He, and
no-body else, could have prevailed upon my uncle. 
My aunt has held him in, till her arms aked. O the
dear restiff man! She has now let go; and you see
how he prances over the whole meadow, the reins
upon his neck. 
Dear girl! said I, I am glad you are so fanciful. 
I would fain be lively, if I could, said she. Never
any creature had more reason, Lady G.—My heart is
all Gratitude, and, I will say, Love. 
Good girl! hold up your head, my dear, and all
will be as it should be. 
Sir Charles staid to attend hither the most venerable
of women. Mr. and Mrs. Reeves are to come
with them. You must, as you expect me to be minute,
be content with bits and scraps, written by
snatches of time. I pity you for your still-life, my
dear Lady L. and think your request, that I will so
write, as to make you suppose yourself on the spot, a
reasonable one. 
Here is come the man of men! 
* *
With what respect (all his Respect has Love in
it) did he attend Mrs. Shirley to her seat! And then
hastening to Lord and Lady W. he saluted them both,
and acknowleged the honour done him by their presence; 

an honour, he said, that he could not have
expected, nor therefore had the thought, the distance
so great, of asking for it. 
He then paid his compliments, in the most affectionate
manner, to his amiable friend Beauchamp; 
who, on his thanking him for his uninvited presence,
said, He could not deny himself being present at a solemnity
that was to complete the happiness of the best
of men, and best of friends. 
Sir Charles addressed himself to the young Ladies
who were most strangers to him; apologizing to them,
as they were engaged with Mr. Selby, Mr. Deane,
and Lord G. that he did not at first. He sat a few
minutes with them: What he said, I heard not; but
they smiled, blushed, and looked delighted upon each
other. Every-body followed him in his motions, with
their eye. So much presence of mind, never met
with so much modesty of behaviour, and so charming
a vivacity. 
The young Ladies came only intendedly to breakfast; 
and that at Mr. Selby's odd invitation. They
had the good sense to apologize for their coming this
day, as they were to make part of the cavalcade, as
I may call it, to-morrow. But the odd soul had met
the four at a neighbouring Lady's, where he made a
gossiping visit, and would make them come with
him. 
I observed, that nobody cared to find fault with him; 
so I began to rate him; and a very whimsical dialogue
passed between us at one end of the room, while Sir
Charles, Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby, Lady W. and
Harriet, were in close talk at the other. 
I made the honest man ashamed of himself; and
every-body in our circle was pleased with us. This
misled me to go on; and so, by attending to his nonsense,
and pursuing my own, I lost the opportunity of
hearing a conversation, which, I dare say, would have
been worth repeating to you by pen and ink. Harriet
shall write, and give it you. 

Mr. Orme and his Sister, we are told, set out yesterday
for London. Mrs. Selby and Harriet are yet afraid
of Greville. 
The gentlemen and some of the Ladies, myself
(but not Harriet) among them, have been to look at
the preparations made in the lesser Park, for the reception
of the tenants. Mr. Selby prided himself not a
little on his contrivances there. When we returned,
we found Harriet at one end of the great parlour,
sitting with Emily; her grandmother, Mr. Selby,
Lucy, in conversation at the other; the good girl's
hand in hers, Emily blushing, looking down, but delighted,
as it seemed; Harriet, with sweetness, love,
and compassion, intermingled in her aspect, talking to
her, and bending over her, her fine neck. I thought
I never saw her look so lovely. Elder sister like, and
younger, one instructing in love, the other listening
with pleasure. They (unobserved by themselves) took
every-body's attention, as the room filled with the
company, who all crouded about Mrs. Shirley, affecting
not to heed the two friends. What would I give,
said Lady W. to Sir Charles and her Lord, for a
picture of those two young Ladies (Emily just then
kissed the hand of her lovely friend with emotion, and
Harriet lifted up Emily's to her lips) if Love, Dignity,
and such Expression, could be drawn in the face of one
Lady; and that Reverence, Gratitude, and modest Attention,
in the other? I congratulate you, Sir Charles,
with all my heart. I have observed with rapture,
from every look, every word, and from the whole
behaviour of Miss Byron, that your goodness to hundreds
will be greatly recompensed. O my good Lord
W. turning to him, Miss Byron will pay all our
debts. 
Every attitude, every look, of Miss Byron's, said
my Lord, would furnish out a fine picture. I cannot
keep my eye from her, where-ever she is. 
My brother bowed, delighted. 

How pleased was Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby—Everybody! 
But what a different man is Lord W. to what
he once was! lifted up from low keeping, to a wife,
who, by her behaviour, good sense, politeness, gives
him consequence. Once I thought him one of the
lowest of men. I denied him, in my heart, a relation
to my mother, and thought him a savage. 
The two young Ladies, finding themselves observed,
stood up, in a parting posture; but Emily
seeming eager to detain her dear friend's attention,
Harriet took a hand of Emily's in each of hers. 
I had sidled that way—Yes, my dear, said the
lovely Harriet, a friendship unalterable by time or
fate, as you say. Dearest Emily, command me
ever. 
Emily looked about her—O madam, I want to
kneel to you. I will ever, ever—My good Lady G.
said Harriet, approaching me, one of Emily's hands
in hers, we have promised a friendship that is to continue
to the end of our lives. We are to tell each
the other all her faults. How causelesly has my Emily
been accusing herself! —The most ingenuous of human
hearts is hers. 
She left Emily's hand in mine, and bent towards
Mrs. Shirley, and the whole circle of friends surrounding
her chair. 
O my dear Lady G! said Emily, whisperingly, as
we followed the meek eyed Goddess of Wisdom [Such
her air, her manner, her amiableness, seemed in my
thought, at that time, to make her], never, never,
was such graciousness! I cannot bear her goodness. 
What a happy creature shall I be, if I follow her example,
and observe her precepts! —You cannot, my
dear, said I, have a better guide: But, Love, you
must not be capricious, as you were at first coming. 
She professed she would not. I have been excusing
myself to her, madam, said the dear girl, and am
forgiven. 

My brother met the lovely creature. He took her
hand, and, leading her towards her grandmother,
We have been attentive, my dearest life, to you and
Emily. You love her: She adores you. My Beauchamp,
you know not the hundredth part of the excellencies
of this admirable woman. 
You were born for each other. God preserve you
both, for an example to a world that wants it. 
Harriet courtesied to Beauchamp. Her face was
overspread with a fine crimson; but she attempted not
to speak. She squeezed herself, as it were, between
the chairs of her grandmamma and aunt; then turned
about, and looked so charmingly! Miss Jervois, Sir,
said she, to my brother, has the best of hearts. She
deserves your kind care. How happy is she, in such
protection! 
And how much happier will she be in yours, madam!
replied he. Of what a care, my Emily, turning
to her, has this admirable Lady already relieved
my heart! the care the greater, as you deserve it all. 
In every-thing take her direction: It will be the direction
of love and prudence. What an amiable
companion will you make her! and how happy will
your love of each other make me! 
Emily got behind me, as it were. Speak for me to
my guardian, promise for me, madam—You never,
never, shall break your word through my fault. 
Beauchamp was affected. Graciousness, said he,
looking at Harriet, and Goodness, looking at Emily,
how are they here united! What a happy man will
he be, who can intitle himself to a Lady formed upon
such an example! 
A sun beam from my brother's eye seemed to play
upon his face, and dazle his eyes. The fine youth
withdrew behind Lady W's chair. Mr. Selby, who
had been so good as to give us his silent attention,
then spoke with a twang through his nose. Adad,
adad, said he, I don't know what to make of myself— 
But go on; I love to hear you. 

Your good Lord, my dear, enjoyed the pleasure we
all had: Mine tossed up his head, and seemed to snust
the wind: And yet, my dear Lady L. there was nothing
so very extraordinary said; but the manner was
the thing, which shewed a meaning, that left language
behind it. 
My brother is absolutely passive as to the oeconomy
of the approaching solemnity. Mrs. Shirley, Mrs.
Selby, Lady W. your Charlotte, and Lucy, are the
council appointed; but uncle Selby will put in, to
marshal this happy proceeding. What a pize, he
says, is not Harriet his daughter? Will it not be his
Day? 
Mrs. Selby tries to smile off his oddity; but now-and-then
we see her good-naturedly redden at it, as if
for his sake. Lucy looks at her uncle as if she could
hardly away with his particularities; but Mrs. Shirley
has always something to say for him. She enters into
his character: She knows the honesty, as well as generosity,
of his heart: That it all proceeds from joy
and love; and always allows for him—as I would
have my friends allow for me: And, to say truth, I,
for my own part, like him the better for wanting allowances; 
because his case, in that respect, is mine. 
Ah, my dear! it is the thoughtful, half-asleep, half-awake,
blinking cat, that catches the mouse. Such
as your Charlotte, with their kittenish tricks, do but
fright away the prey; and, if they could catch it, had
rather play with it, than kill it. 
Harriet is with her virgins: Her dress is left to her
own choice. I slept in just now—She met me at her
dressing-room door, and looked so lovely! so silly!
and so full of unmeaning meaningness [Do you understand
me, Lady L?] She sighed—What would my
Harriet say to me? said I, taking her hand. —I don't
know; again sighed—But love me, Lady G.—Can I
help it? said I; and, putting my arms about her, kissed
her cheek. 

Uncle Selby has provided seven gentlemen of the
neighbourhood, to match the number of the Ladies; 
for there will be sixteen of us: Mr. Godfrey, Mr.
Steele, Mr. Falconbridge, three agreeable young men,
sons of gentlemen in the neighbourhood, Mr. Selby's
chosen friends and companions in his field-sports; his
cousin Holles, brother to the Miss Holles's, an admirer
of Miss Nedham; young Mr. Roberts, an admirer of
Miss Barclay; Mr. Allestree, a nephew of Sir John,
a young man of fine qualities, engaged to Miss Dolly
Nedham; and Lord Reresby of Ireland (related to
Mr. Selby's favourite Sir Thomas Falconbridge), a
young nobleman of shining parts, great modesty,
good-nature, and, what is worth them all, Mrs.
Shirley says, a man of virtue. 
Lord W. was very desirous of giving so rich a
jewel as Harriet to his nephew, in return, as he said,
for as rich a jewel which he had presented to him; 
but Mr. Selby would not admit of that. I told him,
on his appeal to me, that he was right, once in his
life. 
Mr. Selby talks much of the music he has provided
for to-morrow. He speaks of it as a band, I assure
you. 
* *
We have had a most agreeable evening. My brother
was the Soul of the company. His address to his
Harriet was respectfully-affectionate, yet, for her sake,
not very peculiar. Every-body, in turn, had his kindest
notice, and were happy in it. The next day's
solemnity was often hinted at by Mr. Selby, and even
by my flippant Lord—But Sir Charles always insensibly
led to more general subjects; and this supported
the spirits of the too-thoughtful Harriet, and she behaved,
on the whole, very prettily. His joy visibly
was joy; but it seemed to be joy of so familiar and
easy a nature, as if it would last. 
He once occasionally told the happy commencement 

of his acquaintance with Miss Byron; on purpose, I
saw, to remind her, that he ought not to be thought
of as a stranger to her, and to engage her in an easy
familiarity. But there was a delicacy observed by him
in the remembered commencement. He put it not
from the time that he rescued her from Sir Hargrave; 
but from the first visit she made me in St. James's
Square; tho' she, with great gratitude, carried it back
to its real commencement. 
Mrs. Shirley retired soon, as is her custom, her
Harriet attending her. The old Lady is lame, and
infirm; but, as she sits, is a very fine woman; and
every-body sees that she was once a beauty. I thought
I never saw beauty in full bloom so beautiful as when
it supported beauty in ruins, on the old Lady's retiring,
with a face so happy, leaning one arm on her lovely
grandchild, a neat crutch-stick in the other, lightening
her weight to the delicately-formed supporter of her
old age. It was so striking a picture, that every soul,
all standing up, from reverence, on her retreating, observed
it; and no one knew which observed it first,
when the door shut out the graceful figures. 
The old Lady's lameness is owing, it seems, to a
strained sinew, got in leading up a dance, not many
years ago, proposed by herself, in order to crown the
reconciliation which she had brought about, between
a couple that had, till then, been unhappy; and which
her good-nature and joy made her not sensible of till
she sat down. Pity, pity, that any-thing should have
hurt so benign, so chearful, so benevolent, a woman! 
Why did not Harriet tell us this circumstance? It
would have heightened our value for her: And the
more, if she had told us, as is the truth, that she
never considers it as a hurt (so honourably come by)
but when she thinks she is troublesome to those about
her. 
Harriet returned to company more chearful than
when she left it, enriched with her grandmother's 

blessings, and prayers for her and my brother (as she
whispered me) and in having been allowed to support
the tottering parent. 
Harriet, said I, aloud, you were a very naughty
girl to accuse me, as once you did, of reflecting upon
age. You never, in my eyes, looked more lovely
than you did half an hour ago, supporting the best of
old Ladies. 
We are all of your Ladyship's mind, said Lady W.
A new grace, believe me, my dear, shone out in every
graceful feature. 
Your kind notice, Ladies, bowing to me and Lady
W. does me honour; but more to your own hearts. 
Most gracefully does the dear girl receive and return
a compliment; but this, Lady L. I need not now say
to you: We have both admired her on these occasions. 
How happy will she make a man, who can be so sensible
of his happiness! And how happy will he make
her! He, who has the most grateful and enlarged of
human hearts! 
Mr. Deane, Sir Charles, Lord and Lady W. Mrs.
Shirley, Mr. and Mrs. Selby, Lucy, Lord L. and I,
withdrew, to read, and see signed, the Marriage-articles,
soon after tea (I tell you things out of course,
Lady L. as they come into my head): When they
were ready to sign, the dear Harriet was sent for in. 
She would not come before. She begged, she prayed,
she might not. The first line of each clause, and the
last, for form sake, were run over, by Mr. Deane, as
fast as he could read. How the dear creature trembled
when she came in, and all the time of the shortened
reading! But when the pen was given her, to
write her name, she dropt it twice, on the parchment. 
Sir Charles saw her emotion with great concern; and
held her up, as she stood. My dearest life, said he,
take time, take time—Do not hurry; putting the pen
each time, with reverence, in her fingers. She tried
to write, but twice her pen would not touch the 

parchment, so as to mark it. She sat down. Take
time, take time, my Love, repeated he. She soon
made another effort, his arm round her waist—She
then signed them; but Sir Charles held her hand, and
the parchments in them, when she delivered them. — 
‘As your act and deed, my dearest Love?’ said Sir
Charles. —‘Yes, indeed,’ said the dear creature, and
made him a courtesy; hardly knowing what she did. 
She must hear of this, when she can bear it. You
charged me to be very minute on the behaviour of our
Harriet: You was sure it would be a pattern. But,
no! you see she is too timid. 
She accompanied me to my chamber when we retired
for the night. She sighed. I took notice of it. 
—O my Charlotte! said she, To-morrow! Tomorrow!— 
Will be the beginning of your happiness, my Harriet! 
—What virgin heart, said I, but must have had
joy, on her contemplating the man of sense and politeness,
had his behaviour of this night only been the test
of her judgment of him? 
True! And I have joy: But the circumstance before
me is a solemn one: And does not the obligation
lie all on his side? 
Does he behave to you, my Love, as if he thought
any of it did? 
O no, no! But the fact is otherwise; and as I know
it, the obligation is heightened by his polite goodness
to me. 
Dearly does he love his Harriet (To-morrow will
you be his Harriet for life). Are you not convinced
that he loves you? 
I am, I am! But— 
But what, my dear? 
I never can deserve him. Hapless, hapless Clementina!
she only could! Let a fortnight after to-morrow
be over, and she be not un-happy, and what a thrice
happy creature shall I be! 

I kissed her glowing cheek. —Support yourself like a
heroine to-morrow, my dear. You will have a task,
because of the crouds which will attend you; but it is
the tax you pay for being so excellent, and so much
beloved. 
Is it not strange, Lady G. that my grandmamma
should join to support my uncle in his vehemence for
a public day? Had it been only his command, I would
have rebelled! 
The pride they take in the alliance with my brother,
not for his situation in life, but for his transcendent
merit, is their motive; your grandmother's particularly. 
She considers the day as one of the happiest
of her life: She has begged of me to support you in
undergoing it. She says, If there should be a thousand
spectators, she knows it will give pleasure to as
many hearts; and to hers the more, for that reason. 
And you will be, continued I, so lovely a Pair, when
joined, that every beholder, man and woman, will give
him to you; you to him. 
You are very good, my dear Lady G. to encourage
me thus: But I told my grandmother, this night, that
she knew not the hardship she had imposed on me, by
insisting on a public day; but I would not begin so
great a change, whatever it cost me, by an act of opposition
or disobedience to the will of so dear a parent. 
But your brother, my dear Lady G. continued she,
who would have thought he would have given into it? 
As your friends mean a compliment to my brother,
replied I; so he, by his acquiescence, means one to
you, and to them. He is not a confident man: He
looks upon Marriage in as awful a light as you do; 
but he is not shy of making a public declaration of his
Love to the woman he has chosen. He has told me,
talking of this very subject, that a public ceremony is
not what, for your delicacy-sake, he would have proposed:
But being proposed, he would not, by any
means, decline it. He had no concern but for you; 

and he took your acquiescence as a noble instance of
your duty and obligingness to one of the most affectionate
and worthy of parents. 
O my dear Lady G. how good was you to come
down! Support me in the arduous task of To-morrow! 
—You will not want my support, my love; 
you will have Sir Charles Grandison, bound, both by
Duty and Love, to support you. 
She threw her arms about me: I will endeavour to
behave as I ought, in a circumstance that shall intitle
me to such protection, and to such a Sister. 
My fidgetting Lord thrust in (unsent for) his sharp
face; and I chiding him for his intrusion, she slipt
away, or I had designed to attend her to her chamber; 
and there, perhaps, should we have staid together most
part of the night. If I had, I don't suppose that I
should have deprived her of any rest. What makes
my foolish heart throb for her? so happy as she is likely
to be! —But sincerely do I love her. 
I should have told you, that Emily behaved very
prettily. Mr. Beauchamp had a rich opportunity to
engage her, while the settlements were executing. 
On our return to them, the poor girl was wiping
her eyes. How now, Emily? said I, softly. O madam,
Mr. Beauchamp has been telling me how ill
Sir Harry is! His own eyes set mine the example. 
How I pity him! And how good he is! —No wonder
my Guardian loves him. 
Beauchamp may possibly catch her in a weeping fit. 
The heart, softened by grief, will turn to a comforter. 
Our own grief produces Pity for another: Pity, Love. 
They are next neighbours, and will call in to ask
kindly how a sufferer does: And what a heart must
that be, that will not administer comfort when it
makes its neighbourly call, if comfort be in its power? 
‘Lord G. you are very impertinent.’ I am in the
scribbling vein, my Caroline. And here this man— 
‘Say another word, Lord G. and I'll sit up all night— 

Well, well, now you return not sauciness for threatening,
I will have done.’ 
Good night—Good morrow, rather, Lady L.—O
Lady L! Good morrow may it be! 
Ch. G. 

