


My Master return'd home to Dinner, in
Compliment to me, tho' much press'd to
dine with Lady Jones, as he was also by Sir
Simon, to dine with him. But Mr. Peters
could not conveniently provide a Preacher for
his own Church To-morrow Morning, at so
short a Notice; Mr. Williams being gone, as I
said, to his new Living; but believ'd he could
for the Afternoon; and so he promised to give 

us his Company to Dinner, and to read Afternoon
Service; and this made my Master invite
all the rest, as well as him, to Dinner, and not
to Church, and made them promise to come; 
and told Mr. Peters, he would send his Coach
for him and his Family. 
Miss Darnford told him, pleasantly, she
would not come, unless he would promise to
let her be at his Wedding; by which, I find,
Mr. Peters has kept the Secret, as my Master
desired. 
He was pleased to give me an Airing after
Dinner in the Chariot, and renew'd his kind
Assurances to me, and, if possible, is kinder
than ever. This is sweetly comfortable to me; 
because it shews me he does not repent of his
Condescensions to me; and it incourages me
to look up to him with more Satisfaction of
Mind, and less Doubtfulness. 
I begged leave to send a Guinea to a poor
Body in the Town, that I heard, by Mrs.
Jewkes, lay very ill, and was very destitute. 
He said, Send Two, my Dear, if you please. 
Said I, Sir, I will never do any thing of this
kind without letting you know what I do. 
He most generously answer'd, I shall then,
perhaps, have you do less Good than you would
other wise do, from a Doubt of me; tho' I
hope, your Discretion, and my own Temper,
which is not avaricious, will make such Doubt
causless. 
Now, my Dear, continued he, I'll tell you
how we will order this Point, to avoid even the 

Shadow of Uneasiness on one Side, or Doubt
on the other. 
As to your Father and Mother, in the first
place, they shall be quite out of the Question; 
for I have already determin'd in my Mind about
them; and it is thus: They shall go down, if
they and you think well of it, to my little
Kentish Estate; which I once mention'd to you
in such a manner, as made you reject it with
a Nobleness of Mind, that gave me Pain then,
but Pleasure since. There is a pretty little
Farm and House, untenanted, upon that Estate,
and tolerably stock'd, and I will further stock
it for them; for such industrious Folks won't
know how to live without some Imployment:
and it shall be theirs for both their Lives,
without paying any Rent; and I will allow
them 50l. per Annum besides, that they may
keep up the Stock, and be kind to any other
of your Relations, without being beholden to
you or me, for small Matters; and for greater,
where needful, you shall always have it in your
Power to accommodate them; for I shall never
question your Prudence. And we will, so long
as God spares our Lives, go down once a Year
to see them, and they shall come up as often
as they please, it cannot be too often, to see
us; for I mean not this, my Dear, to send
them from us—Before I proceed, Does my
Pamela like this? 
O Sir, said I, the English Tongue affords
not Words, or at least I have them not, to
express sufficiently my Gratitude. Teach me, 

dear Sir, continued I, and press'd his dear
Hand to my Lips, teach me some other Language,
if there be any, that abounds with more
grateful Terms, that I may not thus be choak'd
with Meanings, for which I can find no Utterance. 
My Charmer! says he, your Language is all
wonderful, as your Sentiments; and you most
abound, when you seem most to want—All
that I wish, is to find my Proposals agreeable
to you; and if my first are not, my second
shall be, if I can but know what you wish. 
Did I say too much, my dearest Parents, when
I said, he was, if possible, kinder and kinder? 
—O the blessed Man! How my Heart is overwhelm'd
with his Goodness! 
Well, said he, my Dearest, let me desire
you to mention this to them, to see if they
approve it. But if it be your Choice, and
theirs, to have them nearer to you, or even
under the same Roof with you, I will freely
consent to it. 
O no, Sir, said I, (and I fear almost sinn'd
in my grateful Flight) I am sure they would not
chuse that; they could not, perhaps, serve God
so well, if they were to live with you: for so
constantly seeing the Hand that blesses them,
they would, it may be, as must be my Care to
avoid, be tempted to look no further in their
Gratitude, than to the dear Dispenser of such
innumerable Benefits! 
Excellent Creature! said he; my Beloved
wants no Language, nor Sentiment neither! 

and her charming Thoughts, so sweetly express'd,
would grace any Language; and this is a Blessing
almost peculiar to my Fairest. —Your so
kind Acceptance, my Pamela, added he, repays
the Benefit, with Interest, and leaves me
under Obligation to your Goodness. 
But now, my Dearest, I will tell you what
we will do, with regard to Points of your own
private Charity; for, far be it from me, to put
under that Name the Subject we have been
mentioning: Because that, and more than that,
is Duty, to Persons so worthy, and so nearly
related to my Pamela, and, as such, to myself. 
—O how the sweet Man out-does me in
Thoughts, Words, Power, and every thing! 
And this, said he, lies in very small Compass; 
for I will allow you Two hundred Pounds
a Year, which Longman shall constantly pay
you, at Fifty Pounds a Quarter, for your own
Use, and of which I expect no Account; to
commence from the Day you enter into my
other House: I mean, said he, that the first
Fifty Pounds shall then be due; because you
shall have something to begin with. And, added
the dear, generous Man, if this be pleasing to
you, let it, since you say you want Words, be
signify'd by such a sweet Kiss as you gave me
Yesterday. I hesitated not a Moment to comply
with these obliging Terms, and threw my
Arms about his dear Neck, tho' in the Chariot,
and bless'd his Goodness to me. But indeed,
Sir, said I, I cannot bear this generous Treatment! 
He was pleased to say, Don't be uneasy, 

my Dear, about these Trifles: God has bless'd
me with a very good Estate, and all of it in a
prosperous Condition, and generally well tenanted. 
I lay up Money every Year, and have,
besides, large Sums in Government, and other
Securities; so that you will find, what I have
hitherto promised, is very short of that Proportion
of my Substance, which, as my dearest
Wife, you have a Right to. 
In this sweet manner did we pass our Time
till Evening, when the Chariot brought us home; 
and then our Supper succeeded in the same agreeable
manner. And thus, in a rapturous Circle,
the Time moves on; every Hour bringing with
it something more delightful than the past! — 
Sure nobody was ever so bless'd as I! 
