



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Tuesday, March 7. 
By my last deposit, you will see how I am driven,
and what a poor prisoner I am. —No regard had
to my reputation. The whole matter is now before
you. Can such measures be supposed to soften? — 
But surely they can only mean to try to frighten me
into my Brother's views! —All my hope is, to be
able to weather this point till my Cousin Morden
comes from Florence; and he is soon expected: Yet,
if they are determined upon a short day, I doubt he
will not be here time enough to save me. 
It is plain by my Brother's Letter, that my Mother
has not spared me, in the report she was pleased to
make of the conference between herself and me: Yet
she was pleased to hint to me, that my Brother had
views which she would have had me try to disappoint. 
But indeed she had engaged to give a faithful
account of what was to pass between herself and me: 
And it was, doubtless, much more eligible to give up
a Daughter, than to disoblige a Husband, and every
other person of the family. 
They think they have done every-thing by turning
away my poor Hannah: But as long as the liberty of
the garden, and my poultry visits, are allowed me,
they will be mistaken. 
I asked Mrs. Betty, if she had any orders to watch
or attend me; or whether I was to ask her leave whenever
I should be disposed to walk in the garden, or
to go to feed my Bantams? —Lord bless her! what
could I mean by such a question! Yet she owned,
that she had heard, that I was not to go into the garden,
when my Father, Mother, or Uncles were
there. 
However, as it behoved me to be assured on this 

head, I went down directly, and staid an hour, without
question or impediment; and yet a good part of
the time, I walked under and in sight, as I may say,
of my Brother's study-window, where both he and
my Sister happened to be. And I am sure they saw
me, by the loud mirth they affected, by way of insult,
as I suppose. 
So this part of my restraint was doubtless a stretch
of the authority given him. The enforcing of that,
may perhaps, come next. But I hope not. 
Tuesday Night. 
Since I wrote the above, I ventured to send a
Letter by Shorey to my Mother. I desired her to
give it into her own hand, when no-body was by. 
I shall enclose the copy of it. You will see that I
would have it thought, that now Hannah is gone, I
have no way to correspond out of the house. I am
far from thinking all I do, right. I am afraid, this
is a little piece of art, that is not so. But this is an
after-thought—The Letter went first. 

Honoured Madam,
Having acknowleged to you, that I had received
Letters from Mr. Lovelace full of resentment,
and that I answered them purely to prevent
further mischief; and having shewn you copies of my
Answers, which you did not disapprove of, altho' you
thought fit, after you had read them, to forbid me
any further correspondence with him; I think it my
duty to acquaint you, that another Letter from him
has since come to my hand, in which he is very earnest
with me to permit him to wait on my Papa,
or you, or my two Uncles, in a pacific way,
accompanied by Lord M.: On which I beg your commands. 
I own to you, Madam, that had not the prohibition
been renewed, and had not Hannah been so suddenly 

dismissed my service, I should have made the
less scruple to have written an answer, and to have
commanded her to convey it to him, with all speed,
in order to dissuade him from these visits, lest anything
should happen on the occasion that my heart
akes but to think of. 
And here I cannot but express my grief, that I
should have all the punishment, and all the blame,
who, as I have reason to think, have prevented great
mischief, and have not been the occasion of any. 
For, Madam, could I be supposed to govern the passions
of either of the gentlemen? —Over the one indeed
I have had some little influence, without giving
him hitherto any reason to think he has fastened an
obligation upon me for it—Over the other, Who,
Madam, has any? —I am grieved at heart, to be
obliged to lay so great blame at my Brother's door,
altho' my reputation and my liberty are both to be
sacrificed to his resentment and ambition. May not,
however, so deep a sufferer be permitted to speak out? 
This communication being as voluntarily made, as
dutifully intended; I humbly presume to hope, that I
shall not be required to produce the Letter itself. I
cannot either in honour or prudence do that, because
of the vehemence of his style; for having heard [not,
I assure you, by my means, or thro' Hannah's] of
some part of the harsh treatment I have met with; 
he thinks himself intitled to place it to his own account,
by reason of speeches thrown out by some of
my relations, equally vehement. 
If I do not answer him, he will be made desperate,
and think himself justified (tho' I shall not think him
so) in resenting the treatment he complains of: If I do,
and if, in compliment to me, he forbears to resent
what he thinks himself intitled to resent; be pleased,
Madam, to consider the obligation he will suppose he
lays me under. 
If I were as strongly prepossessed in his favour as is 

supposed, I should not have wished this to be considered
by you. And permit me, as a still further
proof that I am not prepossessed, to beg of you to consider,
Whether, upon the whole, the proposal I made,
of declaring for the Single Life (which I will religiously
adhere to) is not the best way to get rid of his
pretensions with honour. To renounce him, and not
be allowed to aver, that I will never be the other
man's, will make him conclude (driven as I am driven)
that I am determined in that other man's favour. 
If this has not its due weight, my Brother's strange
schemes must be tried, and I will resign myself to my
destiny with all the acquiescence that shall be granted
to my prayers. And so leaving the whole to your
own wisdom, and whether you chuse to consult my
Papa and Uncles upon this humble application, or
not; or whether I shall be allowed to write an answer
to Mr. Lovelace, or not [And if allowed so to do, I
beg your direction, by whom to send it]; I remain, 
Honoured Madam,
Your unhappy, but ever-dutiful Daughter,
Cl. Harlowe. 
Wednesday Morning. 
I have just received an Answer to the inclosed Letter. 
My Mother, you will observe, has ordered me to
burn it: But, as you will have it in your safe keeping,
and nobody else will see it, her end will be equally
answered, as if it were burnt. It has neither date nor
superscription. 

Clarissa,
Say not all the blame and all the punishment is
yours. I am as much blamed, and as much punished,
as you are; yet am more innocent. When
your obstinacy is equal to any other person's passion,
blame not your Brother. We judged right, that Hannah
carried on your correspondencies. Now she is 

gone, and you cannot write [We think you cannot]
to Miss Howe, nor she to you, without our knowlege,
one cause of uneasiness and jealousy is over. 
I had no dislike to Hannah. I did not tell her so; 
because Somebody was within hearing when she desired
to pay her duty to me at going. I gave her a
caution, in a raised voice, To take care, where-ever
she went to live next, if there were any young Ladies,
how she made parties, and assisted in clandestine correspondencies: 
—But I slid two guineas into her hand. 
Nor was I angry to hear that you were still more
bountiful to her—So much for Hannah. 
I don't know what to write, about your answering
that man of violence. What can you think of it,
that such a family as ours, should have such a rod
held over it? —For my part, I have not owned that I
know you have corresponded: By your last boldness
to me [An astonishing one it was, to pursue before
Mr. Solmes the subject that I was forced to break
from above-stairs!] you may, as far as I know, plead,
that you had my countenance for your correspondence
with him; and so add to the uneasiness between your
Father and me. You was once all my comfort, Clarissa: 
You made all my hardships tolerable: —But
now! —However, nothing, it is plain, can move you; 
and I will say no more on that head: For you are
under your Father's discipline now; and he will neither
be prescribed to, nor entreated. 
I should have been glad to see the Letter you tell
me of, as I saw the rest: —You say, both honour
and prudence forbid you to shew it to me. —O Clarissa!
what think you of receiving Letters that honour
and prudence forbid you to shew to a Mother! — 
But it is not for me to see it, if you would chuse
to shew it me. I will not be in your secret. I will
not know that you did correspond. And, as to an Answer,
take your own methods. But let him know it
will be the last you will write. And, if you do write, 

I won't see it: So seal it up (if you do) and give it to
Shorey; and she—Yet do not think I give you licence
to write. 
We will be upon no conditions with him, nor will
you be allowed to be upon any. Your Father and
Uncles would have no patience were he to come. 
What have you to do to oblige him with your refusal
of Mr. Solmes? —Will not That refusal be to give him
hope? —And while he has any, can we be easy or free
from his insults? Were even your Brother in fault, as
that fault cannot be conquered, is a Sister to carry on
a correspondence that shall endanger her Brother? But
your Father has given his sanction to your Brother's
dislikes, and they are now your Father's dislikes, and
my dislikes, your Uncles and every-body's! —No
matter to whom owing. 
As to the rest, you have by your obstinacy put it
out of my power to do any-thing for you. Your
Father takes upon himself to be answerable for all
consequences. You must not therefore apply to me
for favour. I shall endeavour to be only an observer; 
Happy, if I could be an unconcerned one! —While I
had power, you would not let me use it as I would
have used it. Your Aunt has been forced to engage
not to interfere but by your Father's direction. You'll
have severe trials. If you have any favour to hope for,
it must be from the mediation of your Uncles. And
yet I believe, they are equally determined: For they
make it a principle [Alas! they never had children!]
that that Child, who in Marriage is not governed by
her Parents, is to be given up as a lost creature. 
I charge you, let not this Letter be found. Burn
it. There is too much of the Mother in it, to a
Daughter so unaccountably obstinate. 
Write not another Letter to me. I can do nothing
for you. But you can do every-thing for yourself. 
Now, my dear, to proceed with my melancholy
narrative. 

After this Letter, you will believe, that I could have
very little hopes, that an application directly to my
Father would stand me in any stead: But I thought
it became me to write, were it but to acquit myself
to myself, that I have left nothing unattempted that
has the least likelihood to restore me to his favour. 
Accordingly I wrote to the following effect: 
‘I presume not, I say, to argue with my Papa; I
only beg his mercy and indulgence in this one point,
on which depends my present and perhaps my future
happiness; and beseech him not to reprobate
his child for an aversion which it is not in her power
to conquer. I beg, that I may not be sacrificed to
projects, and remote contingencies. I complain of
the disgraces I suffer in this banishment from his
presence, and in being confined to my chamber. In
every-thing but this one point, I promise implicit
duty and resignation to his will. I repeat my offers
of a Single Life; and appeal to him, whether I have
ever given him cause to doubt my word. I beg to
be admitted to His, and to my Mamma's presence,
and that my conduct may be under their own eye: 
And this with the more earnestness, as I have too
much reason to believe, that snares are laid for me; 
and tauntings and revilings used on purpose to make
a handle of my words against me, when I am not
permitted to speak in my own defence. I conclude
with hoping, that my Brother's instigations may not
rob an unhappy child of her Father.’ 
This is the Answer, sent without superscription, and
unsealed, altho' by Betty Barnes, who delivered it with
an air, as if she knew the contents. 

Wednesday. 
I write, perverse girl; but with all the indignation
that your disobedience deserves. To desire to be
forgiven a fault you own, and yet resolve to persevere 

in, is a boldness, no more to be equalled, than passed
over. It is my authority you defy. Your reflections
upon a Brother, that is an honour to us all, deserve
my utmost resentment. I see how light all Relationship
sits upon you. The cause I guess at, too. I cannot
bear the reflections that naturally arise from this
consideration. Your behaviour to your too indulgent,
and too fond Mother—But, I have no patience— 
Continue banished from my presence, undutiful as
you are, till you know how to conform to my will. 
Ingrateful creature! Your Letter but upbraids me for
my past indulgence. Write no more to me, till you
can distinguish better; and till you are convinced of
your duty to 
A Justly incensed Father. 
This angry Letter was accompanied with one from
my Mother, unsealed, and unsuperscribed also. Those
who take so much pains to confederate every one
against me, I make no doubt, obliged her to bear her
testimony against the poor girl. 
My Mother's Letter being a repetition of some of
the severe things that passed between herself and me,
of which I have already informed you, I shall not need
to give you the contents—Only thus far, that she also
praises my Brother, and blames me for my freedoms
with him. 