



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;. 

There is certainly a good deal in the observation,
That it costs a man ten times more pains
to be wicked, than it would cost him to be good. What
a confounded number of contrivances have I had
recourse to, in order to carry my point with this
charming creature; and, after all, how have I puzzled
myself by it; and yet am near tumbling into the
pit, which it was the end of all my plots to shun! 
What a happy man had I been, with such an excellence,
could I have brought my mind to marry
when I first prevailed upon her to quit her father's
house! But then, as I have often reflected, how had
I known, that a but blossoming beauty, who could
carry on a private correspondence, and run such
risques with a notorious wild fellow, was not prompted
by inclination, which one day might give such a free
liver as myself, as much pain to reflect upon, as, at
the time, it gave me pleasure? Thou remembrest
the Host's tale in Ariosto. And thy experience, as
well as mine, can furnish out twenty Fiametta's in
proof of the imbecility of the sex. 
But to proceed with my narrative. 
The dear creature resumed the topic her heart
was so firmly fixed upon; and insisted upon quitting
the odious house, and that in very high terms. 
I urged her to meet me the next day at the altar,
in either of the two churches mentioned in the Licence. 

And I besought her, whatever were her resolution,
to let me debate this matter calmly with her. 
If, she said, I would have her give what I desired,
the least moment's consideration, I must not hinder
her from being her own mistress. To what purpose
did I ask her consent, if she had not a power over
either her own person or actions? 
Will you give me your honour, Madam, if I
consent to your quitting a house so disagreeable to
you?— 
My honour, Sir! said the dear creature—Alas! — 
And turned weeping from me with inimitable grace— 
As if she had said—Alas! —You have robb'd me of
my honour! 
I hoped then, that her angry passions were subsiding! 
—But I was mistaken! —For, urging her
warmly for the day; and that for the sake of our
mutual honour, and the honour of both our families,
in this high-flown, and high-soul'd strain, she
answer'd me: 
And canst thou, Lovelace, be so mean—as to wish
to make a wife of the creature thou hast insulted,
dishonoured, and abused, as thou hast me? Was
it necessary to humble Clarissa Harlowe down to
the low level of thy baseness, before she could be
a wife meet for thee? Thou hadst a father, who
was a man of honour: A mother, who deserved
a better son—Thou hast an uncle, who is no dishonour
to the peerage of a kingdom, whose peers are
more respectable than the nobility of any other
country. Thou hast other relations also, who may
be thy boast, tho' thou canst not be theirs. And
canst thou not imagine, that thou hearest them calling
upon thee; the dead from their monuments; 
the living from their laudable pride; not to dishonour
thy antient and splendid house, by entering into
wedlock, with a creature whom thou hast levelled
with the dirt of the street, and classed with the vilest
of her sex? 

I extoll'd her greatness of soul, and her virtue. 
I execrated myself for my guilt: And told her, how
grateful to the manes of my ancestors, as well as to
the wishes of the living, the honour I supplicated for,
would be. 
But still she insisted upon being a free agent; of
seeing herself in other lodgings before she would give
what I urged the least consideration. Nor would
she promise me favour even then, or to permit my
visits. How then, as I asked her, could I comply,
without resolving to lose her for ever? 
She put her hand to her forehead often as she
talked; and at last, pleading disorder in her head,
retired; neither of us satisfied with the other. But
she ten times more dissatisfied with me, than I with
her. 
Dorcas seems to be coming into favour with her— 
What now! —What now!— 
Monday Night. 
How determin'd is this lady! —Again had she like
to have escaped us! —What a fixed resentment! — 
She only, I find, assumed a little calm, in order to
quiet suspicion. She was got down, and actually had
unbolted the street-door, before I could get to her; 
alarmed as I was by Mrs. Sinclair's cookmaid, who
was the only one that saw her fly thro' the passage: 
Yet lightning was not quicker than I. 
Again I brought her back to the dining-room,
with infinite reluctance on her part. And before her
face, ordered a servant to be placed constantly at the
bottom of the stairs for the future. 
She seem'd even choak'd with grief and disappointment. 
Dorcas was exceedingly assiduous about her; and
confidently gave it as her own opinion, that her
dear lady should be permitted to go to another lodging,
since this was so disagreeable to her: Were she 

to be killed for saying so, she would say it. And
was good Dorcas for this afterwards. 
But for some time the dear creature was all passion
and violence— 
I see, I see, said she, when I had brought her
up, what I am to expect from your new professions,
O vilest of men!— 
Have I offered to you, my beloved creature, any
thing that can justify this impatience, after a more
hopeful calm? 
She wrung her hands. She disorder'd her head-dress. 
She tore her ruffles. She was in a perfect
phrensy. 
I dreaded her returning malady: But intreaty
rather exasperating, I affected an angry air—I bid
her expect the worst she had to fear—And was menacing
on, in hopes to intimidate her, when, dropping
down at my feet, 
'Twill be a mercy, said she, the highest act of
mercy you can do, to kill me outright upon this
spot—This happy spot, as I will, in my last moments,
call it! —Then, baring, with a still more
frantic violence, part of her inchanting neck—Here,
here, said the soul-harrowing beauty, let thy pointed
mercy enter! And I will thank thee, and forgive
thee for all the dreadful past! —With my latest gasp
will I forgive and thank thee! —Or help me to the
means, and I will myself put out of thy way so
miserable a wretch! And bless thee for those means! 
Why all this extravagant passion, why all these
exclamations? Have I offered any new injury to you,
my dearest life! What a phrensy is this! Am I not
ready to make you all the reparation that I can make
you? Had I not reason to hope— 
No, no, no, no—half a dozen times, as fast as
she could speak. 
Had I not reason to hope, that you were meditating
upon the means of making me happy, and 

yourself not miserable, rather than upon a flight so
causeless and so precipitate?— 
No, no, no, no, as before, shaking her head with
wild impatience, as resolved not to attend to what
I said. 
My resolutions are so honourable, if you will
permit them to take effect, that I need not be solicitous
whither you go, if you will but permit my
visits, and receive my vows. And, God is my
witness, that I bring you not back from the door
with any view to your dishonour, but the contrary: 
And this moment I will send for a minister to put an
end to all your doubts and fears. 
Say this, and say a thousand times more, and bind
every word with a solemn appeal to that God, whom
thou art accustomed to invoke to the truth of the
vilest falshoods, and all will still be short of what
thou hast vowed and promised to me. And, were
not my heart to abhor thee, and to rise against thee,
for thy perjuries, as it does, I would not, I tell thee
once more, I would not, bind my soul in covenant
with such a man, for a thousand worlds! 
Compose yourself, however, Madam; for your
own sake, compose yourself. Permit me to raise
you up; abhorred as I am of your soul!— 
Nay, if I must not touch you; for she wildly
flaps my hands; but with such a sweet passionate
air, her bosom heaving and throbbing as she looked
up to me, that altho' I was most sincerely enraged,
I could with transport have press'd her to mine— 
If I must not touch you, I will not. —But depend
upon it (and I assumed the sternest air I could assume,
to try what that would do), depend upon it, Madam,
that this is not the way to avoid the evils you
dread. Let me do what I will, I cannot be used
worse! —Dorcas, be gone! 
She arose, Dorcas being about to withdraw, and
wildly caught hold of her arm: O Dorcas! If thou 

art of mine own sex, leave me not, I charge thee! — 
Then quitting Dorcas, down she threw herself upon
her knees, in the furthermost corner of the room,
clasping a chair with her face laid upon the bottom
of it! —O where can I be safe? —Where, where
can I be safe, from this man of violence?— 
This gave Dorcas an opportunity to confirm herself
in her lady's confidence: The wench threw
herself at my feet, while I seemed in violent wrath; 
and, embracing my knees, Kill me, Sir, kill me, Sir,
if you please! —I must throw myself in your way,
to save my lady. I beg your pardon, Sir—But you
must be set on! —God forgive the mischief-makers! 
—But your own heart, if left to itself, would not
permit these things! —Spare, however, Sir! spare
my lady, I beseech you! bustling on her knees about
me, as if I were intending to approach her lady,
had I not been restrained by her. 
This, humour'd by me, Begone, devil! —Officious
devil, begone!—startled the dear creature; 
who, snatching up hastily her head from the chair,
and as hastily popping it down again in terror, hit
her nose, I suppose, against the edge of the chair; 
and it gush'd out with blood, running in a stream
down her bosom; she herself too much affrighted to
heed it!— 
Never was mortal man in such terror and agitation
as I; for I instantly concluded, that she had stabb'd
herself with some concealed instrument. 
I ran to her in a wild agony—For Dorcas was
frighted out of all her mock interposition— 
What have you done! —O what have you done! 
—Look up to me, my dearest life! —Sweet injur'd
innocence, look up to me! What have you done! 
—Long will I not survive you! —And I was upon
the point of drawing my sword to dispatch myself,
when I discover'd—[What an unmanly blockhead
does this charming creature make me at her pleasure!] 

that all I apprehended was but a bloody nose, which,
as far as I know (for it could not be stopp'd in a
quarter of an hour), may have saved her head, and
her intellects. 
But I see by this scene, that the sweet creature is
but a pretty coward at bottom; and that I can terrify
her out of her virulence against me, whenever
I put on sternness and anger: But then, as a qualifier
to the advantage this gives me over her, I find myself
to be a coward too, which I had not before suspected,
since I was capable of being so easily terrified
by the apprehensions of her offering violence to
herself. 