



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday Morning, May 23. 
The dear creature desires to be excused seeing
me till evening. She is not very well, as Dorcas
tells me. 
Read here, if thou wilt, the paper transcribed by
Dorcas. It is impossible that I should proceed with
my projects against this admirable woman, were it
not that I am resolved, after a few trials more, if as
nobly sustained as those she has already passed through,
to make her (if she really hate me not) legally
mine. 

To Mr. Lovelace.
‘When a woman is married, that supreme
earthly obligation requires that in all instances
where her husband's real honour is concerned, she
should yield her own will to his. But, beforehand, 

I could be glad, conformably to what I have always
signified, to have the most explicit assurances,
that every possible way should be tried to avoid litigation
with my Father. Time and patience will
subdue all things. My prospects of happiness are
extremely contracted. A Husband's right will be
always the same. In my life-time I could wish nothing
to be done of this sort. Your circumstances,
Sir, will not oblige you to extort violently from
him what is in his hands. All that depends upon
me, either with regard to my Person, to my Diversions,
or to the Oeconomy that no married
woman, of whatever Rank or Quality, should be
above inspecting, shall be done, to prevent a necessity
for such measures being taken. And if
there will be no necessity for them, it is to be
hoped that motives less excuseable will not have
force—Motives which must be founded in a Littleness
of Mind, which a woman, who has not that
Littleness of Mind, will be under such temptations
as her duty will hardly be able at all times to
check, to despise her Husband for having; especially
in cases where her own family, so much a
part of herself, and which will have obligations upon
her (tho' then but secondary ones) from which
she can never be freed, is intimately concerned. 
‘This article, then, I urge to your most serious
consideration, as what lies next my heart. I enter
not here minutely into the fatal misunderstanding
between them and you: The fault may be in both. 
But, Sir, yours was the foundation-fault: At least,
you gave a too plausible pretence for my Brother's
antipathy to work upon. Condescension was no
part of your study. You chose to bear the imputations
laid to your charge, rather than to make it
your endeavour to obviate them. 
‘But this may lead into hateful recrimination— 
Let it be remembred, I will only say, in this 

place, that, in their eye, you have robbed them
of a daughter they doted upon; and that their resentments
on this occasion rise but in proportion to
their love, and their disappointment. If they were
faulty in some of the measures they took, while
they themselves did not think so, who shall judge
for them? You, Sir, who will judge every-body
as you please, and will let no-body judge you,
in your own particular, must not be their judge. — 
It may therefore be expected, that they will stand
out. 
‘As for myself, Sir, I must leave it [So seems it
to be destined] to your justice, to treat me as you
shall think I deserve: But if your future behaviour
to them is not governed by that harsh-sounding
implacableness, which you charge upon some of
their tempers, the splendor of your family, and
the excellent character of some of them (of all indeed,
unless your own conscience furnishes you
with one only exception) will, on better consideration,
do every-thing with them: For they may
be overcome; perhaps, however, with the more
difficulty, as the greatly prosperous less bear controul
and disappointment than others: For I will
own to you, that I have often in secret lamented,
that their great acquirements have been a snare to
them; perhaps as great a snare, as some other accidentals
have been to you; which being less immediately
your own gifts, you have still less reason
than they to value yourself upon them. 
‘Let me only, on this subject, further observe,
that Condescension is not Meanness. There is a
glory in yielding, that hardly any violent spirit can
judge of. My Brother perhaps is no more sensible
of this than you. But as you have talents which
he has not (who, however, has, as I hope, that
regard for morals, the want of which makes one
of his objections to you) I could wish it may not 

be owing to you, that your mutual dislikes to each
other do not subside; for it is my earnest hope,
that in time you may see each other, without exciting
the fears of a Wife and a Sister for the
consequence. Not that I should wish you to yield
in points that truly concerned your honour: No,
Sir; I would be as delicate in such, as you yourself: 
More delicate, I will venture to say, because
more uniformly so. How vain, how contemptible,
is that pride, which shews itself in standing upon
diminutive observances; and gives up, and makes
a jest of, the most important Duties! 
‘This article being considered as I wish, all the
rest will be easy. Were I to accept of the handsome
separate provision you seem to intend me; 
added to the considerable sums arisen from my
Grandfather's Estate since his death (more considerable,
than perhaps you may suppose from your
offer); I should think it my duty to lay up for the
family good, and for unforeseen events, out of it: 
For, as to my donations, I would generally confine
myself in them to the tenth of my income,
be it what it would. I aim at no glare in what I
do of that sort. All I wish for, is the power of
relieving the Lame, the Blind, the Sick, and the
industrious Poor, and those whom accident has
made so, or sudden distress reduced. The common
or bred beggars I leave to others, and to the
public provision. They cannot be lower: Perhaps
they wish not to be higher: And, not able to do
for every one, I aim not at works of supererogation. 
Two hundred pounds a year would do all
I wish to do of the separate sort: For all above,
I would content myself to ask you; except, mistrusting
your own œconomy, you would give up
to my management and keeping, in order to provide
for future contingencies, a larger portion; 

for which, as your steward, I would regularly
account. 
‘As to cloaths, I have particularly two suits,
which, having been only in a manner tried on,
would answer for any present occasion. Jewels I
have of my Grandmother's, which want only new-setting: 
Another Set I have, which on particular
Days I used to wear. Altho' these are not sent
me, I have no doubt, being merely personals, but
they will, when I send for them in another name: 
Till when I should not chuse to wear any. 
‘As to your complaints of my diffidences, and
the like, I appeal to your own heart, if it be possible
for you to make my case your own for one
moment, and to retrospect some parts of your behaviour,
words, and actions, whether I am not
rather to be justified than censured: And whether,
of all men in the world, avowing what you avow,
you ought not to think so. If you do not, let
me admonish you, Sir, from the very great mismatch,
that then must appear to be in our minds,
never to seek, nor so much as wish, to bring
about the most intimate union of interests between
Yourself and 
‘Clarissa Harlowe. 
‘May 20.’ 
The original of this charming paper, as Dorcas
tells me, was torn almost in two. In one of her
pets, I suppose! What business have the Sex, whose
principal glory is meekness, and patience, and resignation,
to be in a passion, I trow? —Will not she,
who allows herself such liberties as a Maiden, take
greater when married? 
And a wife to be in a passion! —Let me tell the
Ladies, it is an impudent thing, begging their pardon,
and as imprudent as impudent, for a wife to be
in a passion, if she mean not eternal separation, or
wicked defiance, by it: For is it not rejecting at 

once all that expostulatory meekness, and gentle reasoning,
mingled with sighs as gentle, and graced with
bent knees, supplicating hands, and eyes lifted up to
your imperial countenance, just running over, that
should make a reconciliation speedy, and as lasting
as speedy? Even suppose the husband is in the wrong,
will not his being so, give the greater force to her
expostulation? 
Now I think of it, a man should be in the wrong
now-and-then, to make his wife shine. Miss Howe
tells my Charmer, that Adversity is her shining-time. 
'Tis a generous thing in a man, to make his
wife shine at his own expence: To give her leave
to triumph over him by patient reasoning: For were
he to be too imperial to acknowlege his fault on the
spot, she will find the benefit of her duty and submission
in future, and in the high opinion he will
conceive of her prudence and obligingness—And
so, by degrees, she will become her master's
master. 
But for a wife to come up with a kemboed arm,
the other hand thrown out, perhaps with a pointing
finger—Look ye here, Sir! —Take notice! —If you
are wrong, I'll be wrong! —If you are in a passion,
I'll be in a passion! —Rebuff, for rebuff, Sir! —If
you fly, I'll tear! —If you swear, I'll curse! —And
the same room, and the same bed, shall not hold
us, Sir! —For, remember, I am married, Sir! — 
I am a wife, Sir! —You can't help yourself, Sir! 
—Your honour, as well as your peace, is in my
keeping! —And, if you like not this treatment, you
may have worse, Sir! 
Ah! Jack! Jack! What man, who has observed
these things, either implied, or expressed, in other families,
would wish to be an husband! 
Dorcas found this paper in one of the drawers of
her Lady's dressing-table. She was reperusing it, as
she supposes, when the honest wench carried my 

message to desire her to favour me at the tea-table; 
for she saw her pop a paper into the drawer as she
came in; and there, on her mistress's going to meet
me in the Dining room, she found it; and to be
This. 
But I had better not to have had a copy of it, as
far as I know: For, determined as I was before upon
my operations, it instantly turned all my resolutions
in her favour. Yet I would give something
to be convinced, that she did not pop it into her
drawer before the wench, in order for me to see
it; and perhaps (if I were to take notice of it) to discover
whether Dorcas, according to Miss Howe's
advice, were most my friend, or hers. 
The very suspicion of this will do her no good: 
For I cannot bear to be artfully dealt with. People
love to enjoy their own peculiar talents in monopoly,
as I may say. I am aware, that it will strengthen
thy arguments against me in her behalf. But I
know every tittle thou canst say upon it. Spare
therefore thy wambling nonsense, I desire thee; and
leave this sweet excellence and me to our fate: 
That will determine for us, as it shall please itself: 
For, as Cowley says, 

 An unseen hand makes all our moves:
 And some are great, and some are small;
Some climb to good, some from good fortune fall:
 Some wise men, and some fools we call:
Figures, alas! of speech!—For destiny plays us all.
But, after all, I am sorry, almost sorry (for how
shall I do to be quite sorry, when it is not given to
me to be so?) that I cannot, until I have made further
trials, resolve upon wedlock. 
I have just read over again this intended answer to
my proposals: And how I adore her for it! 
But yet; another Yet! —She has not given it or 

sent it to me. —It is not therefore her answer. It is
not written for me, tho' to me. 
Nay, she has not intended to send it to me: She
has even torn it, perhaps with indignation, as thinking
it too good for me. By this action she absolutely
retracts it. Why then does my foolish fondness seek
to establish for her the same merit in my heart, as if
she avowed it? Pr'ythee, dear Belford, once more,
leave us to our fate; and do not thou interpose with
thy nonsense, to weaken a spirit already too squeamish,
and strengthen a conscience that has declared itself of
her party. 
Then again, remember thy recent discoveries,
Lovelace! Remember her indifference, attended
with all the appearance of contempt and hatred. 
View her, even now, wrapt up in reserve and mystery; 
meditating plots, as far as thou knowest,
against the Sovereignty thou hast, by right of conquest,
obtained over her. Remember, in short, all
thou hast threatened to remember against this insolent
Beauty, who is a Rebel to the power she has
listed under. 
But yet, how dost thou propose to subdue thy
sweet enemy? —Abhorred be force, be the necessity of
force, if that can be avoided! There is no triumph
in force—No conquest over the will—No prevailing,
by gentle degrees, over the gentle passions! —Force is
the devil! 
My cursed character, as I have often said, was
against me at setting-out—Yet is she not a woman? 
Cannot I find one yielding or but half-yielding moment,
if she do not absolutely hate me? 
But with what can I tempt her? —Riches she
was born to, and despises, knowing what they are. 
Jewels and Ornaments, to a mind so much a jewel,
and so richly set, her worthy consciousness will not
let her value. Love—If she be susceptible of Love,
it seems to be so much under the direction of Prudence, 

that one unguarded moment, I fear, cannot
be reasonably hoped for: And so much Vigilance,
so much Apprehensiveness, that her fears are ever
aforehand with her dangers. Then her Love of
Virtue seems to be Principle, native Principle, or,
if not native, so deeply rooted, that its fibres have
struck into her heart, and, as she grew up, so
blended and twisted themselves with the strings of
life, that I doubt there is no separating of the one
without cutting the others asunder. 
What then can be done to make such a matchless
creature get over the first tests, in order to put her
to the grand proof, whether once overcome, she will not
be always over come? 
&dotup;Our Mother and her nymphs say, I am a perfect
Craven, and no Lovelace: And so I think. 
But this is no simpering, smiling charmer, as I
have found others to be, when I have touched upon
affecting subjects at a distance; as once or twice
I have tried to her, the Mother introducing them
(to make Sex palliate the freedom to Sex) when
only we three together. She is above the affectation
of not seeming to understand you. She
shews by her displeasure, and a fierceness not natural
to her eye, that she judges of an impure
heart by an impure mouth, and darts dead at once
even the embryo hopes of an encroaching Lover,
however distantly insinuated, before the meaning
hint can dawn into double entendre.&dotup; 
By my faith, Jack, as I sit gazing upon her, my
whole soul in my eyes, contemplating her perfections,
and thinking, when I have seen her easy and serene,
what would be her thoughts, did she know my heart
as well as I know it; when I behold her disturbed
and jealous, and think of the justness of her apprehensions,
and that she cannot fear so much, as
there is room for her to fear; my heart often misgives
me. 

And must, think I, O creature so divinely excellent,
and so beloved of my soul, those arms, those
incircling arms, that would make a monarch happy,
be used to repel brutal force; all their strength, unavailingly
perhaps, exerted to repel it, and to defend
a person so delicately framed? Can violence enter into
the heart of a wretch, who might entitle himself
to all her willing, yet virtuous Love, and make the
blessings he aspireth after, her duty to confer? —Begone,
villain-purposes! Sink ye all to the hell that could
only inspire ye! And I am then ready to throw myself
at her feet, to confess my villainous designs, to
avow my repentance, and to put it out of my power
to act unworthily by such an excellence. 
How then comes it, that all these compassionate,
and, as some would call them, honest Sensibilities go
off? —Why, Miss Howe will tell thee: She says, I
am the devil. —By my conscience, I think he has at
present a great share in me. 
There's ingenuousness! —How I lay myself open
to thee! —But seest thou not, that the more I say
against myself, the less room there is for thee to take
me to task? —O Belford, Belford! I cannot, cannot
(at least at present I cannot) marry. 
Then her family, my bitter enemies—To supple
to them, or, if I do not, to make her as unhappy as
she can be from my attempts— 
Then does she not love Them too much, Me too
little? 
She now seems to despise me: Miss Howe declares,
that she really does despise me. To be despised
by a Wife! —What a thought is that! —To
be excelled by a Wife too, in every part of praiseworthy
knowlege! —To take lessons, to take instructions,
from a Wife! —More than despise me,
she herself has taken time to consider whether she
does not hate me: —I hate you, Lovelace, with my
whole heart, said she to me but yesterday! My soul 

is above thee, man! —Urge me not to tell thee, how
sincerely I think my soul above thee! —How poor indeed
was I then, even in my own heart! —So visible a superiority,
to so proud a spirit as mine! —And here
from Below, from Below indeed! from these women! 
I am so goaded on— 
Yet 'tis poor too, to think myself a machine in the
hands of such wretches. —I am no machine. —Lovelace,
thou art base to thyself, but to suppose thyself a
machine. 
But having gone thus far, I should be unhappy, if,
after marriage, in the petulance of ill humour, I had
it to reproach myself, that I did not try her to the
utmost. And yet I don't know how it is, but this
Lady, the moment I come into her presence, half-assimilates
me to her own virtue. —Once or twice (to
say nothing of her triumph over me on Sunday night)
I was prevailed upon to fluster myself, with an intention
to make some advances, which, if obliged to
recede, I might lay upon raised spirits: But the instant
I beheld her, I was soberized into awe and reverence: 
And the majesty of her even visible purity
first damped, and then extinguished, my double
flame. 
What a surprisingly powerful effect, so much and
so long in my power, she! so instigated by some of
her own Sex, and so stimulated by Passion, I! —How
can this be accounted for, in a Lovelace! 
But, what a heap of stuff have I written! —How
have I been run away with! —By what? —Canst
thou say, by what? —O thou lurking varletess Conscience! 
—Is it Thou, that hast thus made me of
party against myself? —How camest thou in? —In
what disguise, thou egregious haunter of my more
agreeable hours? —Stand thou, with fate, but neuter
in this controversy; and, if I cannot do credit to
human nature, and to the female Sex, by bringing
down such an angel as this to class with and adorn 

it (for adorn it she does in her very foibles) then I am
all yours, and never will resist you more. 
Here I arose. I shook myself. The window was
open. Away the troublesome bosom-visitor, the intruder,
is flown. —I see it yet! —I see it yet! —And
now it lessens to my aching eye! —And now the cleft
Air is closed after it, and it is out of sight! —And
once more I am 
Robert Lovelace. 