


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


It was convenient to me, Lucy, to break off just
were I did in my last; else I should not have been
so very self-denying as to suppose you had no curiosity
to hear, what undoubtedly I wanted to tell. Two
girls talking over a new set of company, would my
Uncle Selby say, are not apt to break off very abruptly; 
not she especially of the two, who has found out
a fair excuse to repeat every compliment made to herself; 
and when perhaps there may be a new admirer
in the case. 

May there so, my Uncle? And which of the gentlemen
do you think the man? The Baronet, I warrant,
you guess. —And so he is. 
Well then, let me give you, Lucy, a sketch of
him. But consider; I form my accounts from what
I have since been told, as well as from what I observed
at the time. 
Sir Hargrave Pollexfen is handsome and genteel; 
pretty tall; about twenty-eight or thirty. His complexion
is a little of the fairest for a man, and a little
of the palest. He has remarkably bold eyes; rather
approaching to what we would call goggling; and he
gives himself airs with them as if he wish'd to have
them thought rakish: Perhaps as a recommendation,
in his opinion, to the ladies. Miss Cantillon, on his
back being turned, Lady Betty praising his person,
said, Sir Hargrave had the finest eyes she ever saw in
a man. They were manly, meaning ones. 
He is very voluble in speech; but seems to owe his
volubility more to his want of doubt, than to the extraordinary
merit of what he says. Yet he is thought
to have sense; and if he could prevail upon himself to
hear more, and speak less, he would better deserve
the good opinion he thinks himself sure of. But as
he can say any-thing without hesitation, and excites a
laugh by laughing himself at all he is going to say,
as well as at what he has just said, he is thought infinitely
agreeable by the gay, and by those who wish
to drown thought in merriment. 
Sir Hargrave, it seems, has travelled: But he must
have carried abroad with him a great number of follies,
and a great deal of affectation, if he has left any
of them behind him. 
But with all his foibles, he is said to be a man of
enterprize and courage; and young ladies, it seems,
must take care how they laugh with him: For he
makes ungenerous constructions to the disadvantage
of a woman whom he can bring to seem pleas'd with 

his jests. I will tell you hereafter, how I came to
know this, and even worse, of him. 
The taste, of the present age seems to be dress: No
wonder, therefore, that such a man as Sir Hargrave
aims to excel in it. What can be misbestowed by a
man on his person, who values it more than his mind? 
But he would, in my opinion, better become his dress,
if the pains he undoubtedly takes before he ventures
to come into public, were less apparent: This I judge
from his solicitude to preserve all in exact order, when
in company; for he forgets not to pay his respects to
himself at every glass; yet does it with a seeming
consciousness, as if he would hide a vanity too apparent
to be concealed; breaking from it, if he finds
himself observed, with an half-careless, yet seemingly
dissatisfied air, pretending to have discover'd something
amiss in himself. This seldom fails to bring him a
compliment: Of which he shews himself very sensible,
by affectedly disclaiming the merit of it; perhaps
with this speech, bowing, with his spread hand on his
breast, waving his head to and fro—By my Soul,
Madam (or Sir) you do me too much honour. 
Such a man is Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. He placed
himself next to the country girl; and laid himself out
in fine speeches to her, running on in such a manner,
that I had not for some time an opportunity to convince
him that I had been in company of gay people
before. He would have it that I was a perfect beauty,
and he supposed me very young—Very silly of course:
And gave himself such airs, as if he were sure of my
admiration. 
I viewed him steadily several times; and my eye
once falling under his, as I was looking at him, I dare
say, he at that moment pity'd the poor fond heart,
which he supposed was in tumults about him; when,
at the very time I was considering, whether, if I were
obliged to have the one or the other, as a punishment
for some great fault I had committed, my choice would 

fall on Mr. Singleton, or on him. I mean, supposing
the former were not a remarkably obstinate man; 
since obstinacy in a weak man, I think, must be worse
than tyranny in a man of sense—If indeed a man of
sense can be a tyrant. 
A summons to dinner relieved me from his more particular
addresses, and placed him at distance from
me. 
Sir Hargrave, the whole time of dinner, received
advantage from the supercilious looks and behaviour
of Mr. Walden; who seemed, on every-thing the
Baronet said, (and he was seldom silent) half to despise
him; for he made at times so many different
mouths of contempt, that I thought it was impossible
for the same features to express them. I have been
making mouths in the glass for several minutes, to try
to recover some of Mr. Walden's, in order to describe
them to you, Lucy; but I cannot for my life so distort
my face as to enable me to give you a notion of one
of them. 
He might perhaps have been better justified in some
of his contempts, had it not been visible, that the
consequence which he took from the Baronet, he gave
to himself; and yet was as censurable one way, as
Sir Hargrave was the other. 
Mirth, however insipid, will occasion smiles; tho'
sometimes to the disadvantage of the mirthful. But
gloom, severity, moroseness, will always disgust, tho'
in a Solomon. Mr. Walden had not been taught
that: And indeed it might seem a little ungrateful
[Don't you think so, Lucy?] if women fail'd to reward
a man with their smiles, who scrupled not to
make himself a—monkey (shall I say?) to please
them. 
Never before did I see the difference between the
man of the town, and the man of the college, displayed
in a light so striking as between these two gentlemen
in the conversation after dinner. The one 

seemed resolved not to be pleased; while the other
laid himself out to please every-body; and that in a
manner so much at his own expence, as frequently to
bring into question his understanding. By a second
silly thing he banish'd the remembrance of a first; by
a third the second; and so on: And by continually
laughing at his own absurdities, left us at liberty to
suppose that his folly was his choice; and that, had
it not been to divert the company, he could have
made a better figure. 
Mr. Walden, as was evident by his scornful brow,
by the contemptuous motions of his lip, and by his
whole face affectedly turn'd from the Baronet, grudged
him the smile that sat upon every one's countenance; 
and for which, without distinguishing whether it was
a smile of approbation or not, he look'd as if he pity'd
us all, and as if he thought himself cast into unequal
company. Nay, twice or thrice he addressed himself,
in preference to every one else, to honest simpering
Mr. Singleton: Who for his part, as was evident,
much better relished the Baronet's flippances, than the
dry significance of the student. For, whenever Sir
Hargrave spoke, Mr. Singleton's mouth was open:
But it was quite otherwise with him, when Mr. Walden
spoke, even at the time that he paid him the distinction
of addressing himself to him, as if he were
the principal person in the company. 
But one word, by the bye, Lucy—Don't you think
it is very happy for us foolish women, that the generality
of the lords of the creation are not much wiser
than ourselves? Or, to express myself in other words,
That over-wisdom is as foolish a thing to the full, as
moderate folly! —But, hush! I have done! —I know
that at this place my Uncle will be ready to rise
against me. 
After dinner, Mr. Walden, not chusing to be any
longer so egregiously eclipsed by the man of the town,
put forth the scholar. 

By the way, let me ask my Uncle, if the word
scholar means not the learner, rather than the learned? 
If it originally means no more, I would suppose that
formerly the most learned men were the most modest,
contenting themselves with being thought but learners;
a modesty well becoming a learned man; since, vast
is the field of science, as my revered first instructor
used to say, and the more a man knows, the more he
will find he has to know. 
Pray, Sir Hargrave, question'd Mr. Walden, may
I ask you—You had a thought just now, speaking of
love and beauty, which I know you must have from
Tibullus [And then he repeated the line in an heroic
accent; and, pausing, look'd round upon us women]
Which University had the honour of finishing your
studies, Sir Hargrave? I presume you were brought
up at one of them. 
Not I, said the Baronet: A man, surely, may read
Tibullus, and Virgil too, without being indebted to
either University for his learning. 
No man, Sir Hargrave, in my humble opinion
[With a decisive air he spoke the word humble] can
be well-grounded in any branch of learning, who has
not been at one of our famous Universities. 
I never yet proposed, Mr. Walden, to qualify myself
for a degree. My Chaplain is a very pretty fellow. 
He understands Tibullus, I believe [Immoderately
laughing, and by his eyes cast in turn upon each person
at table, bespeaking a general smile]—And of
Oxford, as you are. And again he laughed: But
his laugh was then such a one, as rather shewed
ridicule than mirth. A provoking laugh, such a one
as Mr. Greville often affects when he is in a disputatious
humour, in order to dash an opponent out of
countenance, by getting the laugh, instead of the argument,
on his side. 
My Uncle, you know, will have it sometimes, that
his girl has a satirical vein. I am afraid she has— 

A bold hussy! —But this I will say, I mean no ill-nature:
I love every-body; but not their faults; as my
Uncle in his letter tells me: And wish not to be spared
for my own. Nor, very probably, am I, if those
who see me, write of me to their chosen friends as I
do to mine, of them. Shall I tell you what I imagine
each person of the company I am writing about (writing
in character) would say of me to their correspondents? 
—It would be digressing too much, or I would. 
Mr. Walden in his heart, I dare say, was revenged
on the Baronet. He gave him such a look, as would
have grieved me the whole day, had it been given me
by one whom I valued. 
Sir Hargrave had too much business for his eyes
with the ladies, in order to obtain their countenance,
to trouble himself about the looks of the men. And
indeed he seemed to have as great a contempt for Mr.
Walden, as Mr. Walden had for him. 
But here I shall be too late for the post. Will this
stuff go down with you at Selby-house, in want of
better subjects? 
Every thing from you, my Harriet— 
Thank you! Thank you, all, my indulgent friends! 
So it ever was. Trifles from those we love, are acceptable. 
May I deserve your love! 
Adieu, my Lucy! —But tell my Nancy, that she
has delighted me by her letter. 
H. B. 

