


Mrs. Selby, To Miss Harriet Byron. 


Selby-house, Feb. 25. 
My dearest Harriet,
Altho' we have long ago taken a resolution, never
to dictate to your choice; yet we could not
excuse ourselves, if we did not acquaint you with any
proposal that is made to us, on your account, that you
might encourage it, or otherwise, as you thought fit. 
The dowager Lady D. wrote me a letter some time
ago (as you will see by the date): But insisted, that I 

should keep the contents a secret in my own bosom, till
she gave me leave to reveal it. She has now given
me that leave, and requested that I will propose the
matter to you. I have since shewn what has passed
between her Ladyship and me, to your grandmamma,
Mr. Selby, and Lucy. They are all silent upon it; 
for the same reasons, that I give you not my opinion; 
that is to say, till you ask it. 
But do we not see, my dearest child, that something
has happened, within a very few days past, that must
distance the hope of every one of your admirers, as
they come to be acquainted with the circumstances
and situation you are now in? My dear love, you will
never be able to resist the impulses of that gratitude
which always opened and expanded your worthy heart. 
Your uncle's tenderness for you, on such a prospect,
has made him suppress his inclination to railly you. 
He professes to pity you, my dear. While, says he,
the sweet girl was vaunting herself, and refusing this
man, and dismissing that; and imagining herself out
of the reach of the deity, to which, sooner or later,
all women bow, I spared her not: But now, that I
see she is likely to be over head and ears in the passion,
and has so much to be said for her excuse if she is
caught; and as our side must perhaps be the hoping
side, the gentleman's the triumphant; I pity her too
much for what may be the case, to teaze her with
my animadversions; especially after what she has suffered
from the vile Sir Hargrave. 
By several hints in your letters, it is impossible, my
dear, that we can be aforehand with your inclinations. 
Young women in a beginning love are always willing
to conceal themselves from themselves; they are desirous
to smother the fire, before they will call out for
help, till it blazes, and frequently becomes too powerful
to be extinguished by any help. They will call the
passion by another name; as gratitude suppose: But,
my Harriet, gratitude so properly sounded as yours 

is, can be but another name for love. The object so
worthy, your own heart so worthy, consent of minds
must bring it to love on one side; perhaps on both,
if the half-score of ladies you have heard of, are all
of them but mere moderns. But that, my dear, is not
to be supposed; since worthy hearts find out, and
assimilate with, each other. Indeed, those ladies may
be such as are captivated with outward figure. An
handsome man need not to have the great qualities of
a Sir Charles Grandison, to engage the hearts of the
generality of our sex. But a good man, and an handsome
man, if he has the vivacity that distinguishes Sir
Charles, may marry whom he pleases. If we women
love an handsome man, for the sake of our eye, we
must be poor creatures indeed, if we love not good
men, for the sake of our hearts. 
What makes us apprehensive for you, my Harriet,
is this: That we every one of us are in love ourselves
with this fine young gentleman. Your uncle has
fallen in with Mr. Dawson, an attorney of Nottingham,
who acts for Sir Charles in some of his affairs; 
and gives him such a character, respecting his goodness
to his tenants and dependents only, as will render credible
all that even the fondest love, and warmest gratitude,
can say in his praise. 
We can hardly sometimes tell how to regret (tho'
your accounts of your sufferings and danger cut us to
the heart as we read them) the base attempt of Sir Hargrave:
Were all to end as we wish, we should not
regret them: But that, my Harriet, is our fear. What
will become of me, said your grandmamma, if, at
last, the darling of my heart should be entangled in
an hopeless passion? 
If this is likely to be the case, while the fire I spoke
of is but smothering, and while but here and there a
spark escapes your struggling efforts to keep it down,
resolve, my dear, to throw cold water on it, and
quench it quite. And how is this to be done, but 

by changing your personal friendship with the amiable
family, into a correspondence by pen and ink, and
returning to our longing arms, before the flame gets
a head? 
When you are with us, you may either give hope
to the worthy Orme, or encourage the proposal I
inclose, as you please. 
As you are not capable of the mean pride of seeing
a number of men in your train, and have always been
uneasy at the perseverance of Mr. Fenwick and Mr.
Greville—As you have suffered so much from the
natural goodness of your heart, on the urgency of that
honest man Sir Rowland Meredith, in his nephew's
favour; and still more from the baseness of that wicked
Sir Hargrave—As your good character, and lovely
person, engage you more and more admirers—And,
lastly, As it would be the highest comfort that your
grandmamma and your uncle, and I, and all your
friends and well-wishers, could know, to see you happily
married—We cannot but wish for this pleasure and
satisfaction: The sooner you give it to us, the better. 
But could there be any hope—You know what I
mean—A royal diadem, my dear, would be a despicable
thing in the comparison. 
Adieu, my best love. You are called upon, in my
opinion, to a greater trial than ever yet you knew,
of that prudence for which you have hitherto been so
much applauded by every one, and particularly by 
Your truly maternal
Marianna Selby. 

