



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday Morning (April 9.). 
Nobody it seems will go to church this day. No
blessing to be expected perhaps upon views so
worldly, and in some so cruel. 
They have a mistrust that I have some device in
my head. Betty has been looking among my cloaths. 
I found her, on coming up from depositing my Letter
to Lovelace (for I have written!) peering among
them; for I had left the key in the lock. She coloured,
and was confounded to be caught. But I
only said, I should be accustomed to any sort of treatment
in time. If she had her orders—those were
enough for her. 
She owned, in her confusion, that a motion had
been made to abridge me of my Airings; and the report
she should make, would be of no disadvantage to
me. One of my friends, she told me, urged in my
behalf, That there was no need of laying me under
greater restraint, since Mr. Lovelace's threatening to
rescue me by violence, were I to have been carried to
my Uncle's, was a conviction that I had no design to
go to him voluntarily; and that if I had, I should
have made preparations of that kind before now; and,
most probably, been detected in them. —Hence, it
was also inferred, that there was no room to doubt,
but I would at last comply. And, added the bold
creature, if you don't intend to do so, your conduct,
Miss, seems strange to me. —Only thus she reconciled
it; 
That I had gone so far, I knew not how to
come off genteelly: And she fansied I should, in full 

congregation, on Wednesday, give Mr. Solmes my
hand. And then said the confident wench, as the
learned Dr. Brand took his text last Sunday, There
will be joy in heaven— 
This is the substance of my Letter to Mr. Lovelace: 
‘That I have reasons of the greatest consequence
to myself (and which, when known, must satisfy
him) to suspend, for the present, my intention of
leaving my Father's house: That I have hopes that
matters may be brought to an happy conclusion,
without taking a step, which nothing but the last
necessity could justify: And that he may depend
upon my promise, that I will die, rather than consent
to marry Mr. Solmes.’ 
And so, I am preparing myself to stand the shock
of his exclamatory reply. But be that what it will,
it cannot affect me so much, as the apprehensions of
what may happen to me next Tuesday or Wednesday; 
for now those apprehensions engage my whole attention,
and make me sick at the very heart. 
Sunday, Four in the Afternoon. 
My Letter is not yet taken away—If he should
not send for it, or take it, and come hither on my
not meeting him to-morrow, in doubt of what may
have befallen me, what shall I do! Why had I any
concerns with this Sex! —I, that was so happy till I
knew This man! 
I dined in the Ivy Summer-house. My request to
do so, was complied with at the first word. To shew
I meant nothing, I went again into the house with
Betty, as soon as I had dined. I thought it was not
amiss to ask this liberty; the weather seeming to be set
in fine. Who knows what Tuesday or Wednesday
may produce? 
Sunday Evening, Seven o' Clock. 
There remains my Letter still! —He is busied, I 

suppose, in his preparations for to-morrow. But then
he has servants. Does the man think he is so secure
of me, that having appointed, he need not give himself
any further concern about me, till the very moment? 
He knows how I am beset. He knows not
what may happen. I might be ill, or still more closely
watched or confined than before. The correspondence
might be discovered. It might be necessary to vary
the scheme. I might be forced into measures, which
might entirely frustrate my purpose. I might have
new doubts. I might suggest something more convenient,
for any-thing he knew. What can the man
mean, I wonder! —Yet it shall lie; for if he has it
any time before the appointed hour, it will save me
declaring to him personally my changed purpose, and
the trouble of contending with him on that score. 
If he send for it at all, he will see by the date, that
he might have had it in time; and if he be put to
any inconvenience from shortness of notice, let him
take it for his pains. 
Sunday Night, Nine o' Clock. 
It is determined, it seems, to send to Mrs. Norton
to be here on Tuesday to dinner; and she is to stay
with me for a whole week. 
So she is first to endeavour to persuade me to comply; 
and, when the violence is done, she is to comfort
me, and try to reconcile me to my fate. They
expect fits and fetches, Betty insolently tells me, and
expostulations, and exclamations, without number: 
But every-body will be prepared for them: And when
it's over, it's over; and I shall be easy and pacified
when I find I can't help it. 
Monday Morn. April 10. Seven o' Clock. 
O my dear! There yet lies the Letter, just as I
left it! 
Does he think he is so sure of me? —Perhaps he
imagines that I dare not alter my purpose. I wish I 

had never known him! I begin now to see this rashness
in the light every one else would have seen it in,
had I been guilty of it. But what can I do, if he
come to-day at the appointed time! If he receive not
the Letter, I must see him, or he will think something
has befallen me; and certainly will come to the
house. As certainly he will be insulted. And what,
in that case, may be the consequence! Then I as
good as promised that I would take the first opportunity
to see him, if I changed my mind, and to give
him my reasons for it. I have no doubt but he will
be out of humour upon it: But better, if we meet,
that he go away dissatisfied with me, than that I should
go away dissatisfied with myself. 
Yet, short as the time is, he may still perhaps
send, and get the Letter. Something may have happened
to prevent him, which when known will excuse
him. 
After I have disappointed him more than once before,
on a requested interview only, it is impossible
he should not have curiosity at least, to know if something
has not happened; and whether my mind hold
or not in this more important case. And yet, as I
rashly confirmed my resolution by a second Letter, I
begin now to doubt it. 
Nine o' Clock. 
My Cousin Dolly Hervey slid the inclosed Letter
into my hand, as I passed by her, coming out of the
garden. 

Dearest Madam,
I have got intelligence from one who pretends to
know every-thing, that you must be married on
Wednesday morning to Mr. Solmes. Perhaps however,
she says this only to vex me; for it is that saucy
creature Betty Barnes. A Licence is got, as she says: 
And so far she went as to tell me (bidding me say 

nothing; but she knew I would) that Mr. Brand is
to marry you. For Dr. Lewen, I hear, refuses, unless
your consent can be obtained; and they have
heard that he does not approve of their proceedings
against you. Mr. Brand, I am told, is to have his
fortune made by Uncle Harlowe and among them. 
You will know better than I what to make of all
these matters; for sometimes I think Betty tells me
things as if I should not tell you, and yet expects that
I will (a) . For there is great whispering between Miss
Harlowe and her; and I have observed that when
their whispering is over, Betty comes and tells me
something by way of secret. She and all the world
know how much I love you: And so I would have
them. It is an honour to me to love a young Lady
who is and ever was an honour to all her family, let
them say what they will. 
But from a more certain authority than Betty's I
can assure you (but I must beg of you to burn this
Letter) that you are to be searched once more for
Letters, and for Pen and Ink; for they know you
write. Something they pretend to have come at from
one of Mr. Lovelace's servants, which they hope to
make something of. I know not for certain what it
is. He must be a very vile and wicked man, who
would boast of a Lady's favour to him, and reveal
Secrets. But Mr. Lovelace, I dare say, is too much
of a gentleman to be guilty of such ingratitude. 
Then they have a notion, from that false Betty I
believe, that you intend to take something to make
yourself sick; and so they will search for phials and
powders, and such-like. 
If nothing shall be found that will encrease their 

suspicions, you are to be used more kindly by your
Papa when you appear before them all, that he of late
has used you. 
Yet, sick or well, alas! my dear Cousin! you must
be married. But your Husband is to go home every
night without you, till you are reconciled to him. 
And so illness can be no pretence to save you. 
They are sure you will make a good Wife. So
would not I, unless I liked my Husband. And Mr.
Solmes is always telling them how he will purchase
your Love by rich presents. —A sycophant man! —I
wish he and Betty Barnes were to come together; 
and he would beat her every day. 
After what I have told you, I need not advise you
to secure every-thing you would not have seen. 
Once more let me beg that you will burn this Letter: 
And, pray, dearest Madam, do not take anything
that may prejudice your health: For that will
not do. I am 
Your truly loving Cousin,
D. H. 
When I first read my Cousin's Letter, I was half
inclined to resume my former intention; especially as
my countermanding Letter was not taken away; and
as my heart aked at the thoughts of the conflict I
must expect to have with him on my refusal. For, see
him for a few moments I doubt I must, lest he should
take some rash resolutions; especially, as he has reason
to expect I will see him. But here your words,
That all punctilio is at an end, the moment I am out of
my Father's house, added to the still more cogent considerations
of Duty and Reputation, determined me
once more against taking the rash step. And it will
be very hard (altho' no seasonable fainting, or wished-for
fit, should stand my friend) if I cannot gain one
month, or fortnight, or week. And I have still more
hopes that I shall prevail for some delay, from my 

Cousin's intimation that the good Dr. Lewen refuses
to give his assistance to their projects, if they have not
my consent, and thinks me cruelly used: Since, without
taking notice that I am apprised of this, I can
plead a Scruple of Conscience, and insist upon having
that worthy Divine's opinion upon it: In which, enforced
as I shall enforce it, my Mother will surely
second me: My Aunt Hervey, and my Mrs. Norton,
will support her: The suspension must follow: And
I can but get away afterwards. 
But, if they will compel me: If they will give me
no time: If nobody will be moved: If it be resolved
that the Ceremony shall be read over my constrained
hand—Why then—Alas! What then! —I can but— 
But what? O my dear! This Solmes shall never
have my vows I am resolved! And I will say nothing
but No, as long as I shall be able to speak. And who
will presume to look upon such an act of violence as
a Marriage? —It is impossible, surely, that a Father
and Mother can see such a dreadful compulsion offered
to their child—But if mine should withdraw, and
leave the task to my Brother and Sister, they will
have no mercy. 
I am grieved to be driven to have recourse to the
following artifices. 
I have given them a clue, by the Feather of a Pen
sticking out, where they will find such of my hidden
Stores, as I intend they shall find. 
Two or three little essays I have left easy to be
seen, of my own writing. 
About a dozen lines also of a Letter begun to you,
in which I express my hopes (altho' I say, that appearances
are against me) that my friends will relent. 
They know from your Mother, by my Uncle Antony,
that, some how or other, I now-and-then get a Letter
to you. In this piece of a Letter, I declare renewedly
my firm resolution to give up the man so obnoxious
to my family, on their releasing me from the
address of the other. 

Near the essays, I have left a Copy of my Letter
to Lady Drayton (a) ; which affording arguments
suitable to my case, may chance (thus accidentally
to be fallen upon) to incline them to favour me. 
I have reserves of pens and ink, you may believe; 
and one or two in the Ivy Summer-house; with which
I shall amuse myself, in order to lighten, if possible,
those apprehensions which more and more affect me
as Wednesday, the day of trial, approaches. 