



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Wednesday, July 19. 
This morning I took chair to Smith's; and,
being told, that the Lady had a very bad night,
but was up, I sent for her worthy Apothecary; who,
on his coming to me, approving of my proposal of
calling in Dr. H.; I bid the women acquaint her with
the designed visit. 
It seems, she was at first displeased; yet withdrew
her objection: But, after a pause, asked them, What 

she should do? She had effects of value, some of
which she intended, as soon as she could, to turn into
money; but, till then, had not a single guinea to give
the Doctor for his fee. 
Mrs. Lovick said, She had five guineas by her: 
They were at her service. 
She would accept of three, she said, if she would
take that (pulling a diamond ring from her finger)
till she repaid her; but on no other terms. 
Having been told, I was below with Mr. Goddard,
she desired to speak one word with me, before she saw
the Doctor. 
She was sitting in an elbow-chair, leaning her head
on a pillow, Mrs. Smith and the Widow on each side
her chair; her Nurse, with a phial of harts-horn, behind
her; in her own hand, her Salts. 
Raising her head at my entrance, she enquired, If
the Doctor knew Mr. Lovelace? 
I told her, No; and that I believed you never saw
him in your life. 
Was the Doctor my friend? 
He was; and a very worthy and skilful man. I
named him for his eminence in his profession: And
Mr. Goddard said, he knew not a better physician. 
I have but one condition to make before I see the
gentleman; that he refuse not his fees from me. If
I am poor, Sir, I am proud. I will not be under obligation. 
You may believe, Sir, I will not. I suffer
this visit, because I would not appear ungrateful to the
few friends I have left, nor obstinate to such of my
relations, as may some time hence, for their private
satisfaction, enquire after my behaviour in my sick
hours. So, Sir, you know the condition. And don't
let me be vexed: I am very ill; and cannot debate
the matter. 
Seeing her so determined, I told her, If it must be
so, it should. 
Then, Sir, the gentleman may come. But I shall 

not be able to answer many questions. Nurse, you
can tell him, at the window there, what a night I
have had, and how I have been for two days past. 
And Mr. Goddard, if he be here, can let him know
what I have taken. Pray let me be as little questioned,
as possible. 
The Doctor paid his respects to her, with the gentlemanly
address for which he is noted: And she cast
up her sweet eyes to him, with that benignity which
accompanies her every graceful look. 
I would have retired; but she forbid it. 
He took her hand, the Lily not of so beautiful a
white: Indeed, Madam, you are very low, said he: 
But, give me leave to say, That you can do more for
yourself, than all the faculty can do for you. 
He then withdrew to the window. And, after a
short conference with the women, he turned to me,
and to Mr. Goddard, at the other window: We
can do nothing here, speaking low, but by cordials
and nourishment. What friends has the Lady? 
She seems to be a person of condition; and, ill
as she is, a very fine woman. —A Single Lady, I
presume? 
I whisperingly told him she was. That there were
extraordinary circumstances in her case; as I would
have apprised him, had I met with him yesterday: 
That her friends were very cruel to her; but that she
could not hear them named without reproaching herself; 
tho' they were much more to blame than she. 
I knew I was right, said the Doctor. A Love-case,
Mr. Goddard! A Love-case, Mr. Belford! There is
one person in the world, who can do her more service,
than all the faculty. 
Mr. Goddard said, He had apprehended her disorder
was in her mind; and had treated her accordingly: 
And then told the Doctor what he had done: 
Which he approving of, again taking her charming
hand, said, My good young Lady, you will require 

very little of our assistance. You must, in a great
measure, be your own doctress. Come, dear Madam
[Forgive me the familiar tenderness; your aspect commands
Love, as well as Reverence; and a Father of
Children, some of them older than yourself, may be
excused for his familiar address] chear up your spirits. 
Resolve to do all in your power to be well; and you'll
soon grow better. 
You are very kind, Sir, said she. I will take
whatever you direct. My spirits have been hurried. 
I shall be better, I believe, before I am worse. The
care of my good friends here, looking at the women,
shall not meet with an ungrateful return. 
The Doctor wrote. He would fain have declined
his fee. As her malady, he said, was rather to be
relieved by the soothings of a friend, than by the prescriptions
of a physician, he should think himself greatly
honoured to be admitted rather to advise her in the
one character, than to prescribe to her in the other. 
She answered, That she should be always glad to
see so humane a man: That his visits would keep her
in charity with his Sex: But that, were she to forget
that he was her physician, she might be apt to abate
of the confidence in his skill, which might be necessary
to effect the amendment that was the end of
his visits. 
And when he urged her still further, which he did
in a very polite manner, and as passing by the door
two or three times a day, she said, She should always
have pleasure in considering him in the kind light he
offered himself to her: That that might be very generous
in one person to offer, which would be as
ungenerous in another to accept: That indeed she
was not at present high in circumstance; and he
saw by the tender (which he must accept of) that
she had greater respect to her own convenience, than
to his merit, or than to the pleasure she should take in
his visits. 

We all withdrew together; and the Doctor and
Mr. Goddard having a great curiosity to know something
more of her Story, at the motion of the latter
we went into a neighbouring Coffee-house, and I gave
them, in confidence, a brief relation of it; making all
as light for you as I cou'd; and yet you'll suppose,
that, in order to do but common justice to the Lady's
character, heavy must be that light. 
Three o'clock, Afternoon. 
I just now called again at Smith's; and am told
she is somewhat better; which she attributed to the
soothings of her Doctor. She expressed herself highly
pleased with both gentlemen; and said, that their behaviour
to her was perfectly paternal.— 
Paternal, poor Lady! —Never having been, till
very lately, from under her parents wings, and now
abandoned by all her friends, she is for finding out
something paternal and maternal in every one (the
latter qualities in Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith) to supply
to herself the Father and Mother her dutiful heart
pants after. 
Mrs. Smith told me, that, after we were gone, she
gave the keys of her trunks and drawers to her and
the widow Lovick, and desired them to take an inventory
of them; which they did, in her presence. 
They also informed me, That she had requested
them to find her a purchaser for two rich dressed
Suits; one never worn, the other not above once or
twice. 
This shocked me exceedingly—Perhaps it may thee
a little!!! —Her reason for so doing, she told them,
was, That she should never live to wear them: That
her Sister, and other relations, were above wearing
them: That her Mother would not endure in her
sight any-thing that was hers: That she wanted the
money: That she would not be obliged to any-body,
when she had effects by her for which she had no occasion: 

And yet, said she, I expect not that they will
fetch a price answerable to their value. 
They were both very much concerned, as they
owned; and asked my advice upon it: And the richness
of her apparel having given them a still higher
notion of her rank than they had before, they supposed
she must be of quality; and again wanted to
know her Story. 
I told them, That she was indeed a woman of
family and fortune: I still gave them room to suppose
her married: But left it to her to tell them all in her
own time and manner: All I would say, was, That
she had been very vilely treated; deserved it not; and
was all innocence and purity. 
You may suppose, that they both expressed their
astonishment, that there could be a man in the world,
who could ill treat so fine a creature. 
As to disposing of the two suits of apparel, I told
Mrs. Smith, That she should pretend, that, upon
enquiry, she had found a friend who would purchase
the richest of them; but (that she might not mistrust)
would stand upon a good bargain. And having
twenty guineas about me, I left them with her, in
part of payment; and bid her pretend to get her to
part with it for as little more as she could induce her
to take. 
I am setting out for Edgware with poor Belton— 
More of whom in my next. I shall return to-morrow; 
and leave This in readiness for your messenger,
if he call in my absence. 
Adieu. 