



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Wednesday, Three o'clock. 
I will proceed where I left off in my last. 
As soon as I had seen Mowbray mounted, I
went to attend upon poor Belton; whom I found in
dreadful agonies, in which he awoke, as he generally
does. 
The doctor came in presently after; and I was concerned
at the scene that passed between them. 
It opened with the dying man's asking him, with
melancholy earnestness, If nothing, if nothing at all,
could be done for him? 
The doctor shook his head, and told him, he
doubted, not. 
I cannot die, said the poor man; I cannot think of
dying. I am very desirous of living a little longer,
if I could but be free from these horrible pains in my
stomach and head. Can you give me nothing to make
me pass one week, but one week, in tolerable ease,
that I may die like a man? —If I must die! 
But, doctor, I am yet a young man; in the prime
of my years—Youth is a good subject for a physician
to work upon: Can you do nothing, nothing at all
for me, doctor? 
Alas! Sir, replied his physician, you have been long
in a bad way. I fear, I fear, nothing in physic can
help you. 
He was then out of all patience: What, then, is
your Art, Sir? —I have been a passive machine for a
whole twelvemonth, to be wrought upon at the pleasure
of you people of the faculty. I verily believe, had
I not taken such doses of nasty stuff, I had been now
a well man—But who the plague would regard Physicians,
whose Art is to cheat us with hopes while they 

help to destroy us? And who, not one of you, know
any-thing but by guess? 
Sir, continued he fiercely (and with more strength
of voice, and coherence, than he had shewn for several
hours before) if you give me over, I give you over. 
—The only honest and certain part of the art of Healing
is Surgery. A good Surgeon is worth a thousand
of you. I have been in Surgeons hands often, and
have always found reason to depend upon their skill: 
But your Art, Sir, what is it?—but to dawb, dawb,
dawb; load, load, load; plaister, plaister, plaister; 
till ye utterly destroy the appetite first, and the constitution
afterwards, which you are called in to help. I
had a companion once—My dear Belford, thou knewest
honest Blomer—as pretty a physician he would have
made, as any in England, had he kept himself from
excess in wine and women; and he always used to say,
there was nothing at all but pick-pocket parade in the
Physicians Art; and that the best guesser was the best
physician. And I used to believe him too: And yet,
fond of life, and fearful of death, what do we do, when
we are taken ill, but call ye in? And what do ye do,
when called in, but nurse our distempers, till from
pygmies you make giants of them? —And then ye
come creeping with solemn faces, when ye are ashamed
to prescribe, or when the stomach won't bear
its natural food, by reason of your poisonous potions,
Alas! I am afraid physic can do no more for him! — 
Nor need it, when it has brought to the brink of the
grave, the poor wretch who placed all his reliance in
your cursed slops, and the flattering hopes you gave
him. 
The doctor was out of countenance; but said, If
we could make mortal men immortal, and would not,
all this might be just. 
I blamed the poor man; yet excused him to the physician. 
To die, dear doctor, when, like my poor
friend, we are so desirous of life, is a melancholy thing. 

We are apt to hope too much, not considering that
the Seeds of Death are sown in us when we begin to
live, and grow up, till, like rampant Weeds, they
choak the tender flower of life; which declines in us,
as those Weeds flourish. We ought therefore to begin
early to study what our constitutions will bear, in
order to root out, by Temperance, the Weeds which
the soil is most apt to produce; or, at least, to keep
them down as they rise; and not, when the flower or
plant is withered at the root, and the weed in its full
vigour, expect, that the medical art will restore the
one, or destroy the other; when that other, as I
hinted, has been rooting itself in the habit from the
time of our birth. 
This speech, Bob, thou wilt call a Prettiness; but
the Allegory is just; and thou hast not quite cured
me of the Metaphorical. 
Very true, said the doctor; you have brought a good
metaphor to illustrate the thing. I am sorry I can do
nothing for the gentleman; and can only recommend
patience, and a better frame of mind. 
Well, Sir, said the poor angry man, vexed at the
doctor, but more at death; you will perhaps recommend
the next in succession to the physician, when he
can do no more; and, I suppose, will send your
Brother to pray by me for those virtues which you
wish me. 
It seems the physician's Brother is a Clergyman in
the neighbourhood. 
I was greatly concerned to see the gentleman thus
treated; and so I told poor Belton when he was gone: 
But he continued impatient, and would not be denied,
he said, the liberty of talking to a man, who had taken
so many guineas of him for doing nothing, or worse
than nothing, and never declined one, though he
knew all the time he could do him no good. 
It seems, the gentleman, though rich, is noted for
being greedy after Fees; and poor Belton went on, 

raving at the extravagant Fees of English Physicians,
compared with those of the most eminent foreign
ones. But, poor man! he, like the Turks, who
judge of a General by his success (out of patience to
think he must die) would have worshiped the doctor,
and not grudged three times the sum, could he have
given him hopes of recovery. 
But nevertheless, I must needs say, that gentlemen
of the faculty should be more moderate in their Fees,
or take more pains to deserve them; for, generally,
they only come into a room, feel the sick man's pulse,
ask the nurse a few questions, inspect the patient's
tongue, and perhaps his water; then sit down, look
plaguy wise; and write. The golden fee finds the
ready hand, and they hurry away, as if the sick man's
room were infectious. So to the next they troll, and
to the next, if men of great practice; valuing themselves
upon the number of visits they make in a morning,
and the little time they make them in. They go
to dinner, and unload their pockets; and sally out
again to refill them. And thus, in a little time, they
raise vast estates; for, as Ratcliffe said, when first
told of a great loss which befel him, It was only going
up and down a hundred pair of stairs to fetch it up. 
Mrs. Sambre (Belton's Sister) had several times proposed
to him a Minister to pray by him; but the poor
man could not, he said, bear the thoughts of one; 
for that he should certainly die in an hour or two after: 
And he was willing to hope still, against all probability,
that he might recover; and was often asking
his Sister, if she had not seen people as bad as he
was, who, almost to a miracle, when every-body
gave them over, had got up again? 
She, shaking her head, told him, she had: But,
once saying, that their disorders were of an acute
kind, and such as had a Crisis in them, he called her
Small-hopes, and Job's Comforter; and bid her say
nothing, if she could not say more to the purpose, 

and what was fitter for a sick man to hear. And yet,
poor fellow! he has no hopes himself, as is plain by
his desponding terrors; one of which he fell into,
and a very dreadful one, soon after the doctor went. 
Wednesday, 9 o'clock at Night. 
The poor man has been in convulsions, terrible
convulsions! for an hour past. O Lord! Lovelace,
death is a shocking thing! By my faith it is! —I wish
thou wert present on this occasion. It is not merely
the concern a man has for his friend; but, as death
is the common lot, we see, in his agonies, how it
will be one day with ourselves. I am all over as if
cold water were poured down my back, or as if I had
a strong ague-fit upon me. I was obliged to come
away. And I write, hardly knowing what. —I wish
thou wert here. 
* *
Though I left him, because I could stay no
longer, I can't be easy by myself, but must go to
him again. 
Eleven o'clock. 
Poor Belton! —Drawing on apace! Yet was he
sensible when I went in—Too sensible, poor man! 
He has something upon his mind to reveal, he tells
me, that is the worst action of his life; worse than
ever you or I knew of him, he says. It must be then
very bad! 
He ordered every-body out; but was seized with
another convulsion-fit, before he could reveal it:
And in it he lies struggling between life and death. 
But I'll go in again. 
One o'clock in the Morning. 
All now must soon be over with him: Poor!
poor fellow! He has given me some hints of what he
wanted to say; but all incoherent, interrupted by
dying hiccoughs and convulsions. 

Bad enough it must be, heaven knows, by what
I can gather! —Alas! Lovelace, I fear, I fear, he
came too soon into his Uncle's Estate. 
If a man were to live always; he might have some
temptation to do base things, in order to procure to
himself, as it would then be, everlasting ease, plenty,
or affluence: But, for the sake of ten, twenty,
thirty years of poor life, to be a villain—Can that
be worth while? with a conscience stinging him all
the time too! And when he comes to wind up all,
such agonizing reflections upon his past guilt! All
then appearing as nothing! What he most valued,
most disgustful! and not one thing to think of, as
the poor fellow says twenty and twenty times over,
but what is attended with anguish and reproach!— 
To hear the poor man wish he had never been
born! To hear him pray to be nothing after death! 
Good God! how shocking! 
By his incoherent hints, I am afraid 'tis very bad
with him. No pardon, no mercy, he repeats, can
lie for him! 
I hope I shall make a proper use of this lesson,
Laugh at me if thou wilt; but never, never more,
will I take the liberties I have taken; but whenever
I am tempted, will think of Belton's dying agonies,
and what my own may be. 
Thursday, three in the morning. 
He is now at the last gasp—Rattles in the throat— 
Has a new convulsion every minute almost! What
horror is he in! His eyes look like breath-stained
glass! They roll ghastly no more; are quite set: 
His face distorted, and drawn out, by his sinking
jaws, and erected staring eyebrows, with his lengthened
furrowed forehead, to double its usual length,
as it seems. It is not, it cannot be, the face of
Belton, thy Belton, and my Belton, whom we have
beheld with so much delight over the social bottle, 

comparing notes, that one day may be brought against
us, and make us groan, as they very lately did him— 
that is to say, while he had strength to groan; for
now his voice is not to be heard; all inward, lost; 
not so much as speaking by his eyes: Yet, strange!
how can it be? the bed rocking under him like a
cradle. 
Four o'clock. 

Alas! he's gone! That groan, that dreadful groan,
Was the last farewel of the parting mind!
The struggling soul has bid a long adieu
To its late mansion—Fled!—Ah! whither fled?
Now is all indeed over! —Poor, poor Belton! By
this time thou knowest if thy crimes were above the
size of God's mercies! Now are every one's cares
and attendance at an end! Now do we, thy friends,
—Poor Belton!—know the worst of thee, as to this
life! Thou art released from insufferable tortures both
of body and mind! May those tortures, and thy repentance,
expiate for thy offences, and mayst thou
be happy to all eternity! 
We are told, that God desires not the death, the
spiritual death, of a sinner: And 'tis certain, that
thou didst deeply repent! I hope therefore, as thou
wert not cut off in the midst of thy sins by the sword
of injured friendship, which more than once thou
hadst braved [the dreadfullest of all deaths, next to
Suicide, because it gives no opportunity for repentance]
that this is a merciful earnest that thy penitence
is accepted; and that thy long illness, and dreadful
agonies in the last stages of it, were thy only punishment. 
I wish indeed, I heartily wish, we could have seen
one ray of comfort darting in upon his benighted
mind, before he departed. But all, alas! to the very
last gasp, was horror and confusion. And my only
fear arises from this, That, till within the four last 

days of his life, he could not be brought to think he
should die, though in a visible decline for months; 
and, in that presumption, was too little inclined to
set about a serious preparation for a journey, which
he hoped he should not be obliged to take; and when
he began to apprehend that he could not put it off,
his impatience, and terror, and apprehension, shewed
too little of that reliance and resignation, which afford
the most comfortable reflections to the friends of
the dying, as well as to the dying themselves. 
But we must leave poor Belton to that Mercy, of
which we have all so much need; and, for my own
part (do you, Lovelace, and the rest of the fraternity,
as ye will) I am resolved, I will endeavour to
begin to repent of my follies while my health is sound,
my intellects untouched, and while it is in my power
to make some atonement, as near to restitution or
reparation, as is possible, to those I have wronged or
misled. And do ye outwardly, and from a point of
false bravery, make as light as ye will of my resolution,
as ye are none of ye of the class of abandoned
and stupid sots who endeavour to disbelieve the future
existence of which ye are afraid, I am sure you will
justify me in your hearts, if not by your practices; 
and one day you will wish you had joined with me in
the same resolution, and will confess there is more
good sense in it, than now perhaps you will own. 
Seven o'clock, Thursday morning. 
You are very earnest, by your last Letter (just
given me) to hear again from me, before you set out
for Berks. I will therefore close with a few words
upon the only subject in your Letter, which I can at
present touch upon: And this is the Letter of which
you give me a copy from the Lady. 
Want of rest, and the sad scene I have before my
eyes, have rendered me altogether incapable of accounting
for the contents of it in any shape. You 

are in ecstasies upon it. You have reason to be so,
if it be as you think. Nor would I rob you of your
joy: But I must say, that I am amazed at it. 
Surely, Lovelace, this surprising Letter cannot be
a forgery of thy own, in order to carry on some
view, and to impose upon me. Yet by the style of
it, it cannot; tho' thou art a perfect Proteus too. 
I will not, however, add another word, after I
have desired the return of this, and have told you,
that I am 
Your true Friend, and Well-wisher
J. Belford. 