


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


What is your opinion, my charming Miss Byron?
said the Baronet: May not a man of fortune,
who has not receiv'd his education and polish
[He pronounced the word polish with emphasis, and
with another laugh] at an University, make as good
a figure in social life, and as ardent a lover as if he
had? 

I would have been silent: But, staring in my face,
he repeated, What say you to this, Miss Byron? 
The world, Sir Hargrave, I have heard called an
University: But, in my humble opinion, neither a
learned, nor what is called a fine education, has any
other value than as each tends to improve the morals
of men, and to make them wise and good. 
The world an Uni-versity! repeated Mr. Walden. 
Why, truly, looking up to Sir Hargrave's face, and
then down to his feet disdainfully, as if he would
measure him with his eye, I cannot but say, twisting
his head on one side, and with a drolling accent, that
the world produces very pretty scholars—for the ladies— 
The Baronet took fire at being so contemptuously
measured by the eye of the scholar; and I thought it
was not amiss, for fear of high words between them,
to put-myself forward. 
And are not women, Mr. Walden, resumed I, one
half in number, tho' not perhaps in value, of the
human species? —Would it not be pity, Sir, if the
knowlege that is to be obtained in the lesser University
should make a man despise what is to be acquired
in the greater, in which that knowlege was principally
intended to make him useful? 
This diverted the Baronet's anger: Well, Mr.
Walden, said he, exultingly rubbing his hands, what
say you to the young lady's observation? By my Soul
it is worth your notice. You may carry it down with
you to your University; and the best scholars there
will not be the worse for attending to it. 
Mr. Walden seemed to collect himself, as if he were
inclined to consider me with more attention than he
had given me before; and waving his hand, as if he
would put by the Baronet as an adversary he had done
with, I am to thank you, Madam, said he, it seems,
for your observation. And so the lesser University— 

I have great veneration, Mr. Walden, interrupted
I, for learning, and great honour for learned men— 
But this is a subject— 
That you must not get off from, young Lady. 
I am sorry to hear you say so, Sir—But indeed I
must. 
The company seemed pleased to see me so likely to
be drawn in; and this encouraged Mr. Walden to
push his weak adversary. 
Know you, Madam, said he, any-thing of the
learned languages? 
No, indeed, Sir—Nor do I know which, particularly,
you call so. 
The Greek, the Latin, Madam. 
Who, I, a woman, know any thing of Latin and
Greek! I know but one Lady who is mistress of
both; and she finds herself so much an owl among
the birds, that she wants of all things to be thought
to have unlearned them. 
Why, Ladies, I cannot but say, that I should rather
choose to marry a woman whom I could teach
something, than one who would think herself qualified
to teach me. 
Is it a necessary consequence, Sir, said Miss Clements,
that knowlege, which makes a man shine,
should make a woman vain and pragmatical? May
not two persons, having the same taste, improve each
other? Was not this the case of Monsieur and Madame
Dacier, think you? 
Flint and steel to each other, added Lady Betty. 
Turkish policy, I doubt, in you men, proceeded
Miss Clements—No second brother near the throne. 
That empire some think the safest which is founded
in ignorance. 
We know, Miss Clements, replied Mr. Walde,
that you are a well-read Lady. But I have nothing to
say to observations that are in every-body's mouth— 
Pardon me, Madam. 

Indeed, Sir, said Mr. Reeves, I think Miss Clements
should not pardon you. There is, in my opinion,
great force in what she hinted. 
But I have a mind to talk with this fair lady, your
cousin, Mr. Reeves. She is the very lady that I wish
to hold an argument with, on the hints she threw
out. 
Pardon me, Sir. But I cannot return the compliment. 
I cannot argue. 
And yet, Madam, I will not let you go off so
easily. You seem to be very happy in your elocution,
and to have some pretty notions, for so young a lady. 
I cannot argue, Sir— 
Dear Miss Byron, said the Baronet, hear what Mr.
Walden has to say to you. 
Every one made the same request. I was silent,
look'd down, and play'd with my fan. 
When Mr. Walden had liberty to say what he
pleased, he seemed at a loss himself, for words. 
At last, I asked you, Madam, I asked you (hesitatingly
began he) whether you knew any thing of
the learned languages? It has been whispered to me,
that you have had great advantages from a Grandfather,
of whose learning and politeness we have heard
much. He was a scholar. He was of Christ's, in our
University, if I am not mistaken—To my question
you answered, That you knew not particularly which
were the languages that I called the learned ones:
and you have been pleased to throw out hints in relation
to the lesser, and to the greater University; by
all which you certainly mean something— 
Pray, Mr. Walden, said I— 
And pray, Miss Byron—I am afraid of all smatterers
in learning. Those who know a little—and ladies
cannot know to the bottom—They have not the happiness
of an University education— 
Nor is every man at the University, I presume, Sir,
a Mr. Walden. 

He took it for a compliment—Why, as to that,
Madam—bowing—But this is a misfortune to ladies,
not a fault in them—But as I was going to say, Those
who know little are very seldom sound, are very seldom
orthodox, as we call it, whether respecting religion
or learning: And as it seems you lost your Grandfather
too early to be well-grounded in the latter (in the former
Lady Betty, who is my informant, says, you are
a very good young lady) I should be glad to put you
right if you happen to be a little out of the way. 
I thank you, Sir, bowing, and (simpleton!) still
playing with my fan. But, tho' Mr. Reeves said nothing,
he did not think me very politely treated. Yet
he wanted, he told me afterwards, to have me drawn out. 
He should not have served me so, I told him; especially
among strangers, and men. 
Now, Madam, will you be pleased to inform me,
said Mr. Walden, Whether you had any particular
meaning, when you answered, that you knew not
which I called the learned languages? You must know,
that the Latin and Greek are of those so called! 
I beg, Mr. Walden, that I may not be thus singled
out—Mr. Reeves—Sir—you have had University-education. 
Pray relieve your cousin. 
Mr. Reeves smiled, bowed his head, but said nothing. 
You were pleased, Madam, proceeded Mr. Walden,
to mention one learned lady; and said that she
looked upon herself as an owl among the birds— 
And you, Sir, said, that you had rather (and I
believe most men are of your mind) have a woman
you could teach— 
Than one who would suppose she could teach me
—I did so. 
Well, Sir, and would you have me be guilty of an
ostentation that would bring me no credit, if I had
had some pains taken with me in my education? But
indeed, Sir, I know not any-thing of those you call 

the learned languages. Nor do I take all learning to
consist in the knowlege of languages. 
All learning! —Nor I, Madam—But if you place
not learning in language, be so good as to tell us what
you do place it in? 
He nodded his head with an air, as if he had said,
This pretty Miss is got out of her depth. I believe
I shall have her now. 
I would rather, Sir, said I, be an hearer than a
speaker; and the one would better become me than
the other. I answered Sir Hargrave, because he
thought proper to apply to me. 
And I, Madam, apply to you likewise. 
Then, Sir, I have been taught to think, that a
learned man and a linguist may very well be two persons:
In other words, That science, or knowlege, and
not language merely, is learning. 
Very well. Be pleased to proceed, Madam. 
Languages, I own, Sir, are of use, to let us into
the knowlege for which so many of the antients were
famous—But— 
Here I stopt. Every one's eyes were upon me. 
I was a little out of countenance. 
In what a situation, Lucy, are we women in? If we
have some little genius, and have taken pains to cultivate
it, we must be thought guilty of affectation,
whether we appear desirous to conceal it, or submit
to have it call'd forth. 
But, what, Madam? Pray proceed, eagerly said
Mr. Walden—But, what, Madam? 
But have not the moderns, Sir, if I must speak,
if they have equal genius's, the same heavens, the
same earth, the same works of God, or of nature, as
it is called, to contemplate upon, and improve by? 
The first great genius's of all had not human example,
had not human precepts— 
Nor were the first genius's of all (with an emphasis,
replied Mr. Walden) so perfect, as the observations 

of the genius's of after-times, which were built upon
their foundations, made them; and they others. Learning,
or knowlege, as you choose to call it, was a progressive
thing: And it became necessary to understand
the different languages in which the sages of antiquity
wrote, in order to avail ourselves of their learning. 
Very right, Sir, I believe. You consider skill in
languages then as a vehicle to knowlege—Not, I presume,
as science itself. 
I was sorry the Baronet laughed; because his laughing
made it more difficult for me to get off, as I
wanted to do. 
Pray, Sir Hargrave, said Mr. Walden, let not every
thing that is said be laughed at. I am fond of talking
to this young lady: And a conversation upon this topic
may tend as much to edification, perhaps, as most of
the subjects with which we have been hitherto entertained. 
Sir Hargrave took an empty glass, and with it humourously
rapped his own knuckles, bowed, smiled,
and was silent; by that act of yielding, which had
gracefulness in it, gaining more honour to himself,
than Mr. Walden obtained by his rebuke of him,
however just. 
But this humourous acknowlegement hinder'd not
Mr. Walden from shewing, by a nod, given with an
assuming air, that he thought he had obtained a victory
over the Baronet: And then he again applied himself
to me. 
Now, Madam, if you please [and he put himself
into a disputing attitude] a word or two with you,
on your vehicle, and-so-forth. 
Pray spare me, Sir: I am willing to sit down quietly. 
I am unequal to this subject. I have done. 
But, said the Baronet, you must not sit down quietly,
Madam: Mr. Walden has promised us edification; and
we all attend the effect of his promise. 

No, no, Madam, said Mr. Walden, you must not
come off so easily. You have thrown out some extraordinary
things for a lady, and especially for so young a
lady. From you we expect the opinions of your worthy
Grandfather, as well as your own notions. He no
doubt told you, or you have read, that the competition
set on foot between the learning of the antients
and moderns, has been the subject of much debate
among the learned in the latter end of the last century. 
Indeed, Sir, I know nothing of the matter. I am
not learned. My Grandfather was chiefly intent to
make me an English, and, I may say, a Bible scholar,
I was very young when I had the misfortune to lose
him. My whole endeavour has been since, that the
pains he took with me, should not be cast away. 
I have discovered you, Madam, to be a Parthian
lady. You can fight flying, I see. You must not,
I tell you, come off so easily, for what you have
thrown out. Let me ask you, Did you ever read The
Tale of a Tub? 
The Baronet laughed-out, tho' evidently in the
wrong place. 
How apt are laughing spirits, said Mr. Walden,
looking solemnly, to laugh, when perhaps they ought
—There he stopt—[to be laugh'd at, I suppose he had
in his head]. But I will not, however, be laugh'd
out of my question—Have you, Madam, read Swift's
Tale of a Tub? —There is such a book, Sir Hargrave; 
looking with a leer of contempt at the Baronet. 
I know there is, Mr. Walden, replied the Baronet,
and again laughed—Have you, Madam, to me? Pray
let us know, what Mr. Walden drives at. 
I have, Sir. 
Why then, Madam, resumed Mr. Walden, you
no doubt read, bound up with it, The Battle of the
Books; a very fine piece, written in favour of the antients,
and against the moderns; and thence must be 

acquainted with the famous dispute I mentioned. And
this will shew you, that the moderns are but pygmies
in science compared to the antients. And, pray, shall
not the knowlege which enables us to understand and
to digest the wisdom of these immortal antients be accounted
learning? —Pray, Madam, nodding his head,
answer me that. 
O how these pedants, whispered Sir Hargrave to
Mr. Reeves, strut in the livery and brass buttons of
the antients, and call their servility learning! 
You are going beyond my learning, or capacity,
Sir. I must agree, that the knowlege which enables
us to comprehend the wisdom of the antients, and to
be improved by it, deserves to be call'd learning. Yet
the antients may be read, I suppose, and not understood? 
—But pray, Sir, let the Parthian fly the field. I
promise you that she will not return to the charge. 
Escape, not victory, is all she contends for. 
All in good time, Madam—But who, pray, learns
the language but with a view to understand the author? 
No-body, I believe, Sir. But yet some who read
the antients, may fail of understanding them, or at
least, of improving by them; for every scholar, I presume,
is not, necessarily, a man of sense. 
The Baronet was wicked here, in pointing by a
laugh, as particular satire, what I meant but as general
observation. 
But supposing the knowlege of these antients, continued
I, as great as you please, is it not to be lamented,
is it not, indeed, strange, that none of the modern
learned, notwithstanding the advantage of their works
(most of which they have taught to speak our language); 
notwithstanding the later important discoveries
in many branches of science; notwithstanding a Revelation
from Heaven, to which the religion of the Pagans
was foolishness (and on which foolishness, however, I am
told, most of the works of antiquity are founded); 

should have deserved a higher consideration in the comparison,
than as pygmies to giants? 
I was going to say something farther; but the Baronet,
by his loud applauses, disconcerted me; and I
was silent. 
Proceed, Madam. —No triumph, no cause of triumph,
here, Sir Hargrave! —Pray, Madam, proceed
—You have not done, I perceive. 
I should be very glad, Sir, to have done. Pray
change either the subject, or choose another disputant. 
Every one called upon me to proceed; and Mr.
Walden urged me to say what I was going to say. 
But will you not, my Lucy, be glad of a little relief
from this argument. —Yes, say. 
Here then I conclude this letter, to begin another. 
But it must be after I return from the play this night,
or early in the morning before I go to church. 

