


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Sunday noon. 
What a crouded church-yard and church had I
to pass thro' to the handsome seat, which belongs
to the excellent patron of it! —How much exalted
was I to hear his whispered praises! How did
my Northamptonshire friends rejoice in the respectful
approbation paid to the happy creature, to whom they
are more immediately related! I am always a little
mortified by praises of my figure. What a transitory
thing is outward form! —May I make to myself a
more solid and permanent foundation for that respect,
which is generally more pleasing to a female heart
that it ought to be! 
Sir Charles was not unhappy in his invitation for
next Tuesday. It took off, I imagine, some particular
addresses to him. Yet several gentlemen at his
coach-side acknowleged the favour done them in it. 
My uncle, who, you know, madam, loves everything
that promotes good neighbourhood, is greatly
delighted with the thoughts of the day. How proud
is he of his Harriet! How much more proud of his
relation to the best of men! 
I have looked upon what Lucy has written. I see
there will be but little room for me to say any-thing. 
She is delighted with her task. It employs all her faculties; 
displays her fine taste in architecture, paintings,
needle-works, shell-works. She will give you
a description of several charming performances in the
two latter arts, of the late Lady Grandison! —How
does the character of that admirable Lady rise upon
us! With what emulation does it fire me! On
twenty accounts, it was a very bold thing, my grandmamma,
for your Harriet to aspire to be Lady Grandison! 
—Yet how does Sir Charles's goodness, his 

kind acceptance of all my humble endeavours, encourage
me! —O madam! he said truth, when in courtship
he told me, that I parted with power to have it
returned me with augmentation. I don't know how
it is, but his freedom of behaviour to me is increased; 
yet his respectfulness is not diminished. —And, tender
as he was before to me, his tenderness is still greater
than it was: Yet so much unaffected dignity in it,
that my reverence for him is augmented, but without
any abatement of my Love. Then his chearfulness,
his more than chearfulness, his vivacity, shews,
that he is at heart pleased with his Harriet. Happy
Harriet! —Yet I cannot forbear now-and-then, when
my joy and my gratitude are at the highest, a sigh
to the merits of Lady Clementina! —What I am
now, should she have been, think I often! —The general
admiration paid me as the wise of Sir Charles
Grandison, should have been paid to her! —Lady L.
Lady G. should have been her sisters! —She should
have been the mistress of this house, the co-guardian
of Emily, the successor of the late excellent Lady
Grandison! —Hapless Clementina! —What a strange
thing, that a love of religion in two persons so pious,
so good, each in their way, should sunder, for ever
sunder, persons whose minds were so closely united! 
Sir Charles, by Lucy, invites me, till dinner is
ready, to walk with them, at her request, in the gallery. 
Lucy wants, in describing that gallery, to give
you, my dearest grandmamma (in whom every other
of my friends is included) a brief history of the ancestors
of Sir Charles, whose pictures adorn it. I
come! Lord of my heart! I attend you!— 
* *
How, madam, would you have been delighted,
could you have sat in this truly noble gallery, and
seen the dear man, one arm round my waist, holding
my opposite hand in the hand of the same surrounding
arm, pointing sometimes with the other, sometimes 

putting that other arm round my Lucy's, and giving
short histories of the persons whose pictures we saw! 
Some of the pictures are really fine. One of Sir
Charles's, which is drawn when he was about sixteen,
is on horseback. The horse a managed, curvetting,
proud beast. —His seat, spirit, courage, admirably
expressed: He must have been, as his sisters
say he was, the loveliest, and the most undaunted,
yet most modest-looking, of youths. He passed his
own picture so slightly, that I had not time to take
in half the beauties of it. You will not doubt, madam,
but I shall be often in this gallery, were only
this one picture there. 
What pleasure had I in hearing the history of this
antient family, from this unbroken series of the pictures
of it, for so many generations past! And will mine,
one day, thought I, be allowed a place among them,
near to that of the most amiable of them all, both
as to mind and figure? How my heart exulted! 
What were my meditations as I traced the imagined
footsteps of dear Lady Grandison, her picture and
Sir Thomas's in my eye! as finely executed, as those
in the best bedchamber. May I, thought I, with
a happier lot, be but half as deserving! But, madam,
did not Lady Grandison shine the more for the hardships
she passed through? —And is it necessary for
virtue to be called forth by trials, in order to be justified
by its fortitude under them? What trials can I
be called to with Sir Charles Grandison? But may I
not take my place on the footstep of her throne, yet
make no contemptible figure in the family of her beloved
son? I will humbly endeavour to deserve my
good fortune, and leave the rest to Providence. 
There are in different apartments of this seat,
besides two in the house in town, no less than six
pictures of Sir Thomas: But then two of them were
brought from his seat in Essex. Sir Thomas was fond
of his person: They are drawn in different attitudes. 

He appears to be, as I have always heard he was, a
fine figure of a man. But neither Lucy nor I, tho'
we made not the compliment to Sir Charles, you
may suppose (who always speaks with reverence and
unaffected Love of his father) thought him comparable
in figure, dignity, intelligence, to his son. 
We were called to dinner, before we had gone
half-way thro' the gallery. 
We had a crouded church again in the asternoon. 
Sunday night.] This excellent Dr. Bartlett! And,
this excellent Sir Charles Grandison! I may say. — 
Sir Charles having enquired of the Doctor, when
alone with him, after the rules observed by him before
we came down, the Doctor told him, that he
had every morning and night the few servants attending
him in his antechamber to prayers, which he
had selected out of the Church Service. Sir Charles
desired him by all means to continue so laudable a
custom; for he was sure master and servants would
both find their account in it. 
Sir Charles sent for Richard Saunders and Mrs.
Curzon. He applauded to them the Doctor's goodness,
and desired they would signify, the one to the
men-servants, the other to the women, that he
should take it well of them, if they chearfully attended
the Doctor; promising to give them opportunity,
as often as was possible. Half an hour after
ten, Doctor, I believe is a good time in the evening? 
That, Sir, is about my time, and eight in the
morning, as an hour the least likely to interfere with
their business. Whenever it does, they are in their
duty, and I do not then expect them. 
About a quarter after ten, the Doctor slipt away. 
Soon after Sir Charles withdrew, unperceived by any
of us. The Doctor and his little church were assembled. 
Sir Charles joined them, and afterwards returned
to company, with that chearfulness that always 

beams in his aspect. The Doctor followed him, with
a countenance as serene. I took the Doctor aside,
tho' in the same apartment, supoosing the matter. 
Sir Charles joining us—O Sir, said I, why was I not
whispered to withdraw with you? Think you, that
your Harriet— 
The company, my dearest Love, interrupted he,
was not now to be broken up. When we are settled,
we can make a custom for ourselves, that will be
allowed for by every-body, when it is seen we persevere,
and are in every other respect, unisorm:
Joshua's resolution, Doctor, was an excellent one (a) . 
The chapel, now our congregation is large, will be
the properest place; and there, perhaps, the friends we
may happen to have with us, will sometimes join us. 
Monday morning.] Sir Charles has just now presented
to me, in Doctor Bartlett's presence, Mr. Daniel
Bartlett, the Doctor's nephew, and his only care
in this world; a young gentleman of about eighteen,
well educated, and a fine accomptant, a master of his
pen and particularly of the art of short hand writing. 
The Doctor insisted on the specification of a salary,
which he named himself to be 40l. a year, and to
be within the house, that he might always be at hand. 
He could not trust, he said, to his patron's assurances,
that his bountiful spirit would allow him to have a regard,
in the reward, only to the merit of the service. 
Monday noon.] Lady Mansfield, Miss Mansfield,
and the three Brothers, are arrived. What excellent
women, what agreeable young gentlemen, what
grateful hearts, what joy to Lady W. on their arrival,
what pleasure to Lord W. who, on every occasion,
shews his delight in his nephew! —All these things,
with their compliments to your happy Harriet, let
Lucy tell. I have not time. 

* *
What, my dear grandmamma, shall we do with
Lord and Lady W.? —Such a rich service of gilt plate! 
Just arrived! A present to me! —It is a noble present! 
—And so gracefully presented! And I so gracesully
permitted to accept of it, by my best, my tenderest
friend! —Let Lucy describe this too. 
Tuesday morning.] A vast company we shall have. 
Gentlemen and their Ladies are invited: Your Harriet
is to be dressed: She is already dressed. How
kindly am I complimented, by every one of my
friends! —Let Lucy, let my aunt (she promises to
assist Lucy) relate all that shall pass, describe the persons,
and give the characters of our visiters; our
managements, our entertainments, the Ball, that is
to conclude the day and night. I shall not be able,
I suppose, to write a line. 
Wednesday noon.] Our company left us not till six
this morning. My uncle was transported with the
day; with the night. 
I will only say, that all was happy; and decency,
good order, myrth, and jollity, went thro' the whole
space. Sir Charles was every-where, and with everybody. 
He was almost as much every Lady's as mine. 
O how be charmed them all! Sir William Turner
said once, behind his back, Of what transports did
my late friend Sir Thomas, who doted upon his son,
deprive himself, by keeping him so long abroad! 
I could not but think of what my dear Lady G. once
wrote, that women are not so soon tired as men, with
these diversions, with dancing particularly. By three,
all but Sir Charles and my uncle seemed quite fatigued:
But recovered themselves. My Emily delighted
every-body. She was the whole night what I
wished her to be—Dear madam, be not uneasy. We
shall be very happy in each other. 

O that you were with us, my dearest grandmamma! 
But you, from your chearful piety, and joyful
expectation of happiness supreme, are already, tho'
on earth, in heaven! —Yet it is my wish, my aunt's,
my uncle's, Lucy's, twenty times a day, that you
were present, and saw him, The Domestic man, The
chearful Friend, The kind Master, The enlivening
Companion, The polite Neighbour, The tender
Husband! Let nobody who sees Sir Charles Grandison
at home, say, that the private station is not that
of true happiness. 
How charmingly respectful is he to my uncle, aunt,
and good Mr. Deane! To Lucy, he is an affectionate
brother. Emily, dear girl, how she enjoys his tenderness
to her! 
My uncle is writing to you, madam, a Letter. He
says, it will be as long as his arm. My aunt will dispatch
this day a very long one. Theirs will supply
my defects. Lucy is not quite ready with her first
Letter. If there were not so much of your Harriet
in it, I would highly praise what she has hitherto
written. 
Thursday morning.] I leave to my uncle the account
of the gentlemens diversions in the gardens and
fields. They are all extremly happy. But Lord G.
already pines after his Charlotte. He will not be prevailed
on to stay out his week, I doubt; sweet-temper'd
man! as I see him in a thousand little amiable instances. 
If Lady G. did not love him, I would not
love her. Lord W. is afraid of a gouty attack. He
is never quite free. He and his admirable Lady will
leave us to-morrow. 
I think, my dear Lady G. with you, that discretion
and gratitude are the corner-stones of the matrimonial
fabric. Lady W. had no prepossessions in
any other man's favour. My Lord loves her. What
must be that woman's heart, that Gratitude and Love 

cannot engage? But she loves my Lord. Surely she
does. Is not real and unaffected tenderness for the
infirmities of another, the very essence of Love? What
is wanting where there is that? My Sir Charles is delighted
with Lady W's goodness to his uncle. He
tells her often, how much he reveres her for it. 
In our retired hours, we have sometimes the excellent
Lady abroad for our subject. I always begin
it. He never declines it. He speaks of her with
such manly tenderness! He thanks me, at such times,
for allowing him, as he calls it, to love her. He regrets
very much the precipitating of her: Yet pities
her parents and brothers. How warmly does he speak
of his Jeronymo! He has a sigh for Olivia. But of
whom, except Lady Sforza and her Laurana, does
he not speak kindly? —And them he pities. Never,
never, was there a more expanded heart! 
* *
Ah, madam, a cloud has just brushed by us! Its
skirts have affected us with sadness, and carried us
from our sunshine prospects home; that is to say, to
thoughts of the general destiny! —Poor Sir Harry Beauchamp
is no more! A Letter from his Beauchamp! 
Sir Charles shewed it to me, for the honour of the
writer, now Sir Edward. We admired this excellent
young man together, over his Letter. What fine
things did Sir Charles say on this occasion, both by
way of self-consolation, and on the inevitable destiny! 
But he dwelt not on the subject. He has written
to Lady Beauchamp, and to the young Baronet. How
charmingly consolatory! —What admirable—But Sir
Charles, madam, is a Christian! 
* *
This event has not at all influenced his temper. 
He is the same chearful man to his guests; to his
Harriet: to every-body. I am afraid it will be the
cause of his first absence from me: How shall I part
with him, tho' it were but for two days? 

Friday noon.] What a vacancy! Lady Mansfield,
and her sons, Lord G. and Lord and Lady W. have
left us. Miss Mansfield is allowed to stay with me
some time longer. Emily is very fond of her. No
wonder: She is a good young woman. 
We are busied in returning the visits of our neighbours,
which Sir Charles promised to do, as if they
were individually made to us. We have a very agreeable
neighbourhood. But I want these visitings to be
over. Sir Charles and his relations and mine, are
the world to me. These obligations of ceremony,
tho' unavoidable, are drawbacks upon the true domestic
felicity. One happiness, however, results
from the hurry and bustle they put us in: Emily's
mind (tho' she not always accompanies us) seems to
be engaged: When we are not quite happy in our
own thoughts, it is a relief to carry them out of ourselves. 
* *
Sir Charles and I have just now had a short conversation
about this dear girl. We both joined in
praising her; and then I said, I thought, that some
time hence Mr. Beauchamp and she would make a
very happy pair. 
I have, said he, a Love for both. But as the one
is my own very particular friend, and as the other is
my ward, I would rather he found for himself, and
she for herself, another Lover, and that for obvious
reasons. 
But, suppose, Sir, they should like each the other? 
So as they made it not a compliment to me, but
gave me reason to believe, that they would have preferred
each the other to every one else, were they
strangers to me, I would not stand in their way. But
the man, who hopes for my consent for Emily, must
give me reason to think, that he would have preferred
her to any other woman, tho' she had a much
less fortune than she is mistress of. 

I am much mistaken, Sir, if that may not be the
case of your friend. 
Tell me, my nobly frank, and ever-amiable Harriet,
what you know of this subject. Has Beauchamp
any thoughts of Emily?— 
Ah, Sir, thought I, I dare not tell you all my
thoughts; but what I do tell you, shall be truth. 
I really, Sir, don't imagine Emily has a thought of
your Beauchamp— 
Nor of any other person? Has she?— 
Lady G. Lady L. and myself, are of opinion, that
Beauchamp loves Emily. 
I am glad, my dear, if any-thing were to come of
it, that the man loved first. 
I was conscious. A tear unawares dropt from my
eye—He saw it. He folded his arm about me, and
kissed it from my cheek. Why, my Love! my
dearest Love! why this? and seemed surprised. 
I must tell you, Sir, that you may not be surprised. 
I fear, I fear— 
What fears my Love? 
That the happiest of all women cannot say, that
her dear man loved her first!— 
He folded me in his kind arms. How sweetly engaging!
said he: I will presume to hope, that my
Harriet, by the happiest of all women, means herself— 
You say not no! I will not insult your goodness
so much, as to ask you to say yes. But, this I say,
that the happiest of all men loved his Harriet, before
she could love him; and, but for the honour he owed
to another admirable woman, tho' then he had no
hopes of ever calling her his, would have convinced
her of it, by a very early declaration. Let me add,
that the moment I saw you first (distressed and terrified
as you were, too much to think of favour to any
man) I loved you: And you know not the struggle it
cost me (my destiny with our dear Clementina so uncertain)
to conceal my Love—Cost me, who ever 

was punctiliously studious to avoid engaging a young
Lady's affections, lest I should not be able to be just
to her; and always thought what is called Platonic
Love an insidious pretension. 
O Sir! And I flung my fond arms about his neck,
and, hiding my glowing face in his bosom, called him,
murmuringly, the most just, the most generous, of men. 
He pressed me still to his heart; and when I raised
my conscious face, tho' my eye could not bear his,
Now, Sir, said I, after this kind, this encouraging
acknowlegement, I can consent, I think I can, that
the Lord of my heart shall see, as he has more than
once wished to see, long before he declared himself,
all that was in that forward, that aspiring heart.— 
Lucy had furnished me with the opportunity before. 
I instantly arose, and took out of a drawer a
parcel of my Letters, which I had sorted ready, on
occasion, to oblige him, which, from what he had seen
before, down to the dreadful masquerade affair, carried
me to my setting out with his sisters to Colnebrook. 
I think not to shew him farther, by my own consent,
because of the recapitulation of his family story,
which immediately follows; particularly including
the affecting accounts of his mother's death; his
father's unkindness to the two young Ladies; Mrs.
Oldham's story; the sisters conduct to her; which
might have revived disagreeable subjects. 
Be pleased, Sir, said I, putting them into his hands,
to judge me favourably. In these papers is my heart
laid open. 
Precious trust! said he, and put the papers to his
lips: You will not find your generous confidence
misplaced. 
An opportunity offering to send away what I have
written, here, my dearest grandmamma, concludes 
Your ever-dutiful
Harriet Grandison. 

