



My dear good Lady,
What kind, what generous things, are
you pleased to say of your happy Correspondent! 
And what Reason have I to value
myself on such an Advantage as is now before
me, if I am capable of improving it as I ought,
from a Correspondence with so noble and so
admired a Lady! I wish I be not now proud
indeed! —To be praised by such a Genius,
and my honoured Benefactor's worthy Sister,
whose Favour, next to his, it was always my
chief Ambition to obtain, is what would be
enough to fill with Vanity a steadier and a more
equal Mind than mine. 
I have heard from my late honoured Lady,
what a fine Pen her beloved Daughter was Mistress
of, when she pleased to take it up: But I
never could have had the Presumption, but
from your Ladyship's own Motion, to hope to
be, in any manner, the Subject of it, much less
to be called your Correspondent. 
Indeed, Madam, I am proud, very proud
of this Honour, and consider it as such a Heightening
to my Pleasures, as only that could give; 
and I will set about obeying your Lady without
Reserve. 
But permit me, in the first Place, to disclaim
any Merit, from my own poor Writings,
to that Improvement which your Goodness imputes
to me. What I have to boast of that sort, 

is owing principally, if it deserves Commendation,
to my late excellent Lady. It is hardly to
be imagined what Pains her Ladyship took with
her poor Servant. Besides making me keep a
Book of her Charities dispensed by my Hands,
she caused me always to set down, in my Way,
the Cases of the Distressed, their Griefs from
their Misfortunes, and their Joys in her bountiful
Relief; and so I was enter'd early into the various
Turns, that affected worthy Hearts, and
was taught the better to regulate my own,
especially by the Help of the fine Observations
which my good Lady used to make to me,
when I read to her what I wrote. For many a
time has her worthy Heart run over with Pleasure
at my Remarks, and with Praises; and I
was her good Girl, her dear Pamela, her hopeful
Maiden; and she would sometimes snatch
my Hand with Transport, and draw me to her,
and vouchsafe to kiss me; and always was saying,
what she would do for me, if God spared
her, and I continued to be deserving. 
O my dear Lady! you cannot think what an
Encouragement this condescending Behaviour
and Goodness was to me! Indeed, Madam,
you cannot think it. 
I used to throw myself at her Feet, and
embrace her Knees; and, my Eyes streaming
with Tears of Joy, would often cry, O continue
to me, my dearest Lady, the Blessing of
your Favour and kind Instructions, and it is all
your happy, happy Pamela can wish for! 

But I will proceed to obey your Ladyship,
and write with as much Freedom as I possibly
can: For you must not expect, that I can intirely
divest myself of that Awe, which will necessarily
lay me under a greater Restraint, than if I was
writing to my Father and Mother, whose Partiality
for their Daughter, made me, in a manner,
secure of their good Opinions. 
And now, that I may shorten the Work before
me, in the Account I am to give of the
sweet Fortnight that we passed in Kent, I inclose
not only the Copy of the Letter your Ladyship
desired me to send you, but my Father's Answer
to it, which, with those you have already,
will set before your Ladyship all you want to
see, in relation to the Desire some of my Kindred
had to live with my Father, and my own Advice
on the Occasion. And I am humbly confident
you will join in Sentiment with me: For Persons
are less doubtful of Approbation, when their
Minds are incapable of dark Reserves, or such
Views as they would be afraid should be detected
by any watchful Observer of their Conduct:
And your Ladyship gives me double Pleasure,
that you are pleased to have an Eye upon mine; 
first, Because I hope it will be such as will generally
bear the strictest Scrutiny; and, next, Because,
when my Actions fall short of my Intentions,
I presume to hope your Ladyship will be
as kind a Monitor to me, as you are a Correspondent; 
and then I shall have an Opportunity
to correct myself, and be, as near as my 

slender Talents will permit, what your Ladyship
would have me to be. 
As the Letters I sent before, and those I
now send, will let your Ladyship into several
Particulars, such as a brief Description of the
House and Farm, and your honoured Brother's
Intentions of retiring thither now-and-then; of
the Happiness and Gratitude of my dear Parents,
and their Wishes to be able to deserve the Comforts
his Goodness has heaped upon them; and
that in stronger Lights than I am able to set
them; I will only, in a summary manner, mention
the rest: And, particularly, 
That the Behaviour of my dear Benefactor
to me, to my Parents, to Mr. Longman, and
to the Tenants, was one continued Series of
Benignity and Condescension. He endeavour'd,
in every kind and generous way, to encourage
the good Couple to be free and chearful with
him; and, seeing them unable to get over that
Awe and Respect which they owe him above
all Mankind, and which they sought to pay him
on all Occasions, he would take their Hands,
and more than once called them by the nearest
and dearest Names of Relationship, as if they
were his own Parents; and I believe would
have distinguished them oftener in this manner,
but that he saw them too much affected with
his Goodness to bear the Honour (as my dear
Father says, in his first Letter) with Equalness
of Temper; and he seemed always to delight in
being particularly kind to them before Strangers,
and before the Tenants, and before Mr. Sorby, 

and Mr. Bennet, and Mr. Shepherd, Three of
the principal Gentlemen in the Neighbourhood,
who, with their Ladies, came to visit us; and
whose Visits we all returned; for your dear
Brother would not permit my Father and Mother
to decline the Invitation of those worthy
Families. 
Judge you, my dear Lady, with what a
Joy these kind Distinctions, and this sweet Behaviour,
must fill their honest Hearts: Judge of
my grateful Sentiments and Acknowlegements,
of these hourly Instances of his Goodness; and
judge of the Respect with which this must
inspire every one for the good Couple. And
when once Mrs. Bennet had like to have said
something of their former Condition, which
she would have recalled in some Confusion; 
and when she could not, apologized for it; the
dear Gentleman said,—All is well, Mrs. Bennet. 
No Apologies are necessary; and to shew
you they are not, I'll tell you myself what you
cannot have heard so particularly from others,
and which, were I to endeavour to conceal,
would be a Piece of Pride, as stupid as despicable:
So, in a concise manner, he gave them an
Account of my Story, so much to my Advantage,
and so little to his own, in the ingenuous
Relation of his Attempts upon me, that you
can't imagine, Madam, how much the Gentry
were affected by it; and how much, in particular,
they applauded him for the Generosity of
his Actions to me, and to my dear Parents:
And your Ladyship will permit me to observe, 

that since the Matter is circumstanced as it is,
Policy, as well as Nobleness of Mind, obliged
the dear Gentleman to this Frankness and Acknowlegement; 
for, having said worse of himself,
and as mean of my Parents Fortunes, as
any one could think, what remained for the
Hearers but to applaud, when he had left them
no room to reproach, not so much as in
Thought? 
Every Day we rode out, or walked a little
about the Grounds; and while we were there,
he imploy'd Hands to cut a Vista thro' a Coppice,
as they call it, or rather a little Wood, to a
rising Ground, which fronting an old-fashioned
Balcony, in the Middle of the House, he order'd
it to be planted like a Grove, and a pretty Alcove
to be erected on its Summit, of which he
has sent them a Draught, drawn by his own
Hand; and this, and a few other Alterations
mentioned in my Letter to my Father, are
to be finish'd against we go down next. 
The dear Gentleman was every Hour pressing
me, while there, to take one Diversion or other; 
frequently upbraiding me, that I seemed not to
chuse any thing; urging me to propose sometimes
what I could wish he should oblige me in,
and not always to leave it to him to chuse for
me; saying he was half afraid, that my constant
Compliance with every thing he proposed, laid
me sometimes under a Restraint; and he would
have me have a Will of my own, since it was
impossible, that it could be such, as he should
not take a Delight in conforming to it. 

But, when (as I told him) his Goodness for
me, made him rather study what would oblige
me, than himself, even to the Prevention of all
my Wishes, how was it possible for me not to
receive with Pleasure and Gratitude every Intimation
from him, in such a manner, as that tho’ 
it might seem to be the Effect of an implicit
Obedience to his Will, yet was it (nor could it
be otherwise) intirely agreeable to my own? 
I will not trouble your Ladyship with any
further Particulars relating to this happy Fortnight,
which was made up all of white and unclouded
Days, to the very last; and your Ladyship
will judge, better than I can describe, what
a Parting there was between my dear Parents,
and their honoured Benefactor, and me. 
We set out, attended with the good Wishes
of Crouds of Persons of all Degrees; for your
dear Brother left behind him noble Instances of
his Bounty; it being the first Time, as he bid
Mr. Longman say, that he had been down
among them since that Estate had been in his
Hands. 
But permit me, Madam, to observe, that I
could not forbear, often, very often, in this
happy Period, to thank God in private, for the
blessed Terms upon which I was there, to what
I should have been, had I gracelesly accepted of
those which were tender'd to me; for your Ladyship
will remember, that the Kentish Estate was
to be Part of the Purchace of my Infamy*  . 

We return'd thro' London again, by the like
easy Journeys, but tarry'd not to see any thing
of that vast Metropolis, any more than we did
in going thro' it before; your beloved Brother
only stopping at his Banker's, and desiring him
to look out for a handsome House, which he
purposes to take for his Winter Residence: He
chuses it to be about Soho-Square, or the new
Buildings call'd Hanover-Square; and he left
Mr. Longman there, to see one, which his
Banker believed would be fit for him. 
And thus, my dear good Lady, I have answer'd
your First Commands, by the Help of
the Letters which passed between my dear Parents
and me; and conclude this, with the
Assurance, that I am, with high Respect, 
Your Ladyship's most obliged
and faithful Servant,
P. B. 

