



From Sir Darnford Mr. B. 


Sir,
Little did I think I should ever have Occasion
to make a formal Complaint against a Person
very dear to you, and who I believe deserves to be so; 
but don't let them be so proud and so vain of obliging
and pleasing you, as to make them not care how
they affront every body else. 
The Person is no other than the Wife of your
Bosom, who has taken such Liberties with me as
ought not to be taken, and sought to turn my own
Child against me, and make a dutiful Girl a Rebel. 
If People will set up for Virtue, and all that, let
'em be uniformly virtuous, or I would not give a
Farthing for their Pretences to it. 
Here I have been plagued with Gouts, Rheumatisms,
and nameless Disorders, ever since you left us,
which have made me call for a little more Attendance
than ordinary; and I had Reason to think myself
slighted, where an indulgent Father can least bear to
be slighted, that is, where he most loves; and that
by young Upstarts, who are growing up to the Injoyment
of those Pleasures which have run away
from me, fleeting Rascals as they are! before I was
willing to part with them. And I rung and rung, and, 

Where's Polly? (for I honour the Slut with too much
of my Notice) Where's Polly? was all my Cry,
to every one who came up to ask what I rung for. 
And at last in burst the pert Slut, with an Air of Assurance,
as if she thought all must be well the Moment
she appeared, with, Do you want me, Papa? 
Do I want you, Confidence! Yes, I do. Where
have you been these two Hours, and never came
near me, when you knew 'twas my Time to have
my Foot rubbed, which gives me mortal Pain? For
you must understand, Mr. B. that nobody's Hand's
so soft as Polly's. 
She gave me a saucy Answer, as I was disposed to
think it, because I had just then a Twinge, that I could
scarce bear; for Pain is a plaguy thing to a Man of
my lively Spirits. Why, with a P&sblank;&sblank;x to it, cannot it
go and rouse up some stupid lethargic Rascal, whose
Blood is ready to stagnate? There it might do some
Good; and not make an honest Man miserable, as it
does me, who want none of its pungent Helps to
Feeling. 
She gave me, I say, a pert Answer, and turn'd
upon her Heel; and not coming near me at my first
Word, I flung a Book I had in my Hand at her
Head. 
This the saucy Slut (Girls now-a-days make nothing
of exposing their indulgent Parents) has mentioned
in a Letter to your Lady; and she has abused
me upon it in such a Manner ––– Well, if you don't
take some Course with her, I must with you, that's
positive; and young as you are, and a Cripple as I
am, I'll stump to an appointed Place, to procure to
myself the Satisfaction of a Man of Honour. 
Your Lady has written to Polly what she would
have said to me on this Occasion. She has reflected
upon me for not reading a Book of Mortification,
when I was labouring under so great a Sense of it, 

and confin'd to my Elbow-Chair in one Room, whom
lately half a Dozen Counties could hardly contain; 
She has put it into Polly's Head to fling this very
Book at her Sister's Head, in Imitation of my Example,
and hopes Nancy will fling it at somebody's
else, till it goes all round the House: She reproaches
me for making no better Use of a good Book, as she
calls Rabelais's Pantagruel, which I innocently was
reading to make me the more chearfully bear my
Misfortune; and runs on a Pack of Stuff about my
Polly's Eyes, and Skin, and I don't know what, on
Purpose to fill the Girl with Notions that don't belong
to her, in order to make her proud and saucy; 
and then to inspire her with Insolence to me, runs on
with Suppositions of what Harm I might have done
her, had the Book bruised her Face, or Eyes, and
so forth: As if our Daughters Eyes were not our
own Eyes, their brazen Faces our brazen Faces; at
least till we can find somebody to take them, and all
the rest of their Trumpery, off of our Hands.––– 
Saucy Baggages! who have neither Souls nor Senses,
but what they have borrowed from us; and whose
very Bones, and the Skin that covers them, so much
their Pride and their Ornament, are so many Parts of
our own undervalued Skin and Bones; and ours only
are more wrinkled, by taking Pains to make theirs
smooth. 
Nay, this fine Lady of yours, this Paragon of
Meekness and Humility, in so many Words, bids me,
or tells my own Daughter to bid me, which is worse,
never to take a Book in my Hands again, if I won't
make a better Use of it:–––And yet, what better Use
can an offended Father make of the best Books,
than to correct a rebellious Child with them, and
oblige a saucy Daughter to jump into her Duty all at
once? 

Then, pray, Sir, do you allow your Lady to beg
Presents from Gentlemen? –––This is a tender Point
to touch upon: But you shall know all, I am resolv'd. 
–––For here she sends to desire me to make her
a Present of this very Book, and promises to send me
another as good. 
Come, come, Sir, these are no jesting Matters; 
for, is it not a sad thing to think, that Ladies, let
them be young or old, well-marry'd or ill-marry'd,
cannot live without Intrigue? And here, if I were not
a very honest Man, and your Friend, and resolv'd to
be a virtuous Man too, in spite of Temptation, one
does not know what might be the Consequence of
such a Correspondence as is here begun, or rather
desired to be begun; for I have too much Honour to
give into it, for your sake, and I hope you'll think
yourself much oblig'd to me. ––––I know the Time
that I have improv'd a more mysterious Hint than this,
into all that I had a Mind to make of it. And it may
be very happy for you, Neighbour, that I must and
will be virtuous, let the Temptation be from whom
it will: For the finest Lady in the World is nothing
to me now ––– in this my Reformed State. 
But this is not all: Mrs. B. goes on to reflect upon
me for making her blush formerly, and saying Things
before my Daughters, that, truly, I ought to be
ashamed to say; and then avows Malice and Revenge,
and all that. Why, Sir, why, Neighbour,
are these Things to be borne? —Do you allow your
Lady to set up for a general Corrector of every body's
Morals but your own? Do you allow her to condemn
the only Instances of Wit that remain to this
Generation, that dear polite Double Entendre; which
keeps alive the Attention, and quickens the Apprehension
of the best Companies in the World, and is
the Salt, the Sauce, which gives a Poignancy to all
our genteeler Entertainments? 

Very fine, truly! that more than half the World
shall be shut out of Society, shall be precluded their
Share of Conversation among the Gay and Polite of
both Sexes, were your Lady to have her Will! Let
her first find People that can support a Conversation
with Wit and good Sense like her own, and then
something might be said: But, till then, I positively
say, and will swear upon Occasion, that Double Entendre
shall not be banished from our Tables; and
where this won't raise a Blush, or create a Laugh,
we will be at Liberty, if we please, for all Mrs. B.
and her new-fangled Notions, to force the one and
the other by still plainer Hints, and let her help herself
how she can. 
Thus, Sir, you find my Complaints are of a high
Nature, regarding the Quiet of a Family, the Duty
of a Child to a Parent, the Advances of a married
Lady to a Gentleman who is resolv'd to be virtuous,
and the Freedom of Conversation; in all which
Points your Lady has greatly offended; and I insist
upon Satisfaction from you, or such a Correction of
the fair Transgressor, as is in your Power to inflict,
and which may prevent worse Consequences, from 
Your offended Friend and Servant,
Simon Darnford. 

