


Honoured Father and Mother,
I will now proceed with my Journal. 
On Tuesday Morning, my dear Sir rode
out, attended by Abraham; and he brought
with him, to Dinner, Mr. Martin of the Grove,
and Mr. Arthur, and Mr. Brooks, and one Mr.
Chambers; and he stepp'd up to me, and said, He
had rid out too far to return to Breakfast; but
had brought with him some of his old Acquaintance,
to dine with me: Are you sorry for it,
Pamela? said he. I remember'd his Lessons,
and said, No, sure, Sir; I can't be angry at any
thing you are pleased to do. Said he, you know
Mr. Martin's Character; and have severely censur'd
him, in one of your Letters, as one of my
Brother Rakes, and for his Three Lyings-in. 
He then gave me the following Account, how
he came to bring them. Said he, “I met them
all at Mr. Arthur's, and his Lady ask'd me. If
I was really marry'd? I said, Yes, really. And
to whom? said Mr. Martin. Why, reply'd
I, bluntly, to my Mother's Waitingmaid. 
They could not tell what to say to
me hereupon, and look'd one upon another. 
And I saw I had spoil'd a Jest, from each. 
Mrs. Arthur said, You have, indeed, Sir, a
charming Creature as ever I saw; and she has
mighty good Luck. Ay, return'd I, and so
have I. But I shall say the less, because a Man 

never did any thing of this Nature, that he
did not think he ought, if it were but in
Policy, to make the best of. Nay, said
Mr. Arthur, if you have sinn'd, it is with
your Eyes open! For you know the World
as well as any Gentleman of your Years in
it. 
“Why, really, Gentlemen, said I, I should
be glad to please all my Friends; but I can't
expect, till they know my Motives and Inducements,
that it will be so immediately. But
I do assure you, I am exceedingly pleased myself;
and that, you know, is most to the
Purpose. 
“Said Mr. Brooks, I have heard my Wife
praise your Spouse that is, so much for Person
and Beauty, that I wanted to see her of all
Things. Why, reply'd I, if you will all go
and take a Dinner with me, you shall see
her with all my Heart. And, Mrs. Arthur,
will you bear us Company? No, indeed, Sir,
said she. What, I'll warrant, my Wife will
not be able to reconcile you to my Mother's
Waiting-maid; is not that it? Tell Truth,
Mrs. Arthur. Nay, said she, I shan't be backward
to pay your Spouse a Visit, in Company
of the neighbouring Ladies; but for one single
Woman to go, on such a sudden Motion
too, with so many Gentlemen, is not right. 
But that need not hinder you, Gentlemen. 
So, said he, the rest sent, that they should
not dine at home; and they, and Mr. Chambers,
a Gentleman lately settled in these Parts, 

one and all, came with me: And so, my Dear,
concluded he, when you make your Appearance,
next Sunday, you are sure of a Party in
your Favour; for all that see you must esteem
you.” 
He went to them; and when I came down
to Dinner, he was pleased to take me by the
Hand, at my Entrance into the Parlour, and
said, My dear Love, I have brought some of
my good Neighbours to take a Dinner with you. 
I said, You are very good, Sir. —My Dear,
this Gentleman is Mr. Chambers. And so he presented
every one to me; and they saluted me,
and wish'd us both Joy. 
I, for my part, said Mr. Brooks, wish you
Joy most heartily. My Wife told me a good
deal of the Beauties of your Person; but I did
not think we had such a Flower in our County. 
Sir, said I, your Lady is very partial to me; and
you are so polite a Gentleman, that you will not
contradict your good Lady. 
I'll assure you, Madam, return'd he, you
have not hit the Matter at all; for we contradict
one another twice or thrice a Day. But the
Devil's in it, if we are not agreed in so clear a
Case. 
Said Mr. Martin, Mr. Brooks says very true,
Madam, in both respects (meaning his Wife's
and his own Contradiction to one another, as
well as in my Favour); for, added he, they have
been married some Years. 
As I had not the best Opinion of this Gentleman,
nor his Jest, I said, I am almost sorry, 

Sir, for the Gentleman's Jest upon himself and
his Lady; but I think it should have reliev'd
him from a greater Jest, your pleasant Confirmation
of it. —But still, the Reason you
give that it may be so, I hope, is the Reason
that may be given that it is not so,—to wit,
That they have been married some Years. 
Said Mr. Arthur, Mr. Martin, I think the
Lady has very handsomely reprov'd you. I think
so too, added Mr. Chambers; and it was but a
very indifferent Compliment to a Bride. Said
Mr. Martin, Compliment or not, Gentlemen, I
have never seen a Matrimony of any time standing,
that it was not so, little or much. But I
dare say, it will never be so here. 
To be sure, Sir, said I, if it was, I must be
the ungratefullest Person in the World, because
I am the most obliged Person in it. That Notion,
said Mr. Arthur, is so excellent, that it gives a
moral Certainty, it never can. 
Sir, said Mr. Brooks, to my dear Master,
softly. You have a most accomplish'd Lady, I do
assure you, as well in her Behaviour and Wit, as
in her Person, call her what you please. Why,
my dear Friend, said my Master, I must tell you,
as I have said before now, that her Person
made me her Lover, but her Mind made her my
Wife. 
The first Course coming in, my dear Sir led
me himself to my Place; and set Mr. Chambers,
as the greatest Stranger, at my Right-hand, and
Mr. Brooks at my Left; and Mr. Arthur was
pleased to observe, much to my Advantage, on 

the Ease and Freedom with which I behav'd myself,
and helped them; and said, He would bring
his Lady to be a Witness, and a Learner both,
of my Manner. I said, I should be proud of any
Honour Lady Arthur would vouchsafe to do me; 
and if once I could promise myself the Opportunity
of his good Lady's Example, and those of
the other Gentlemen present, I should have the
greater Opinion of my Worthiness to sit in the
Place I fill'd, at present, with much Insufficiency. 
Mr. Arthur drank to my Health and Happiness; 
and said, My Wife told your Spouse, Madam,
You had very good Luck in such a Husband; 
but I now see who has the best of it. Said
Mr. Brooks, Come, come, let's make no Compliments; 
for the plain Truth of the Matter is,
our good Neighbour's Generosity and Judgment
have met with so equal a Match, in his Lady's
Beauty and Merit, that I know not which has
the best Luck. But may you be both long happy
together, say I! And so he drank a Glass of
Wine. 
My best Friend, who always takes Delight to
have me praised, seemed much pleased with our
Conversation; and he said the kindest, tenderest,
and most respectful things in the World to
me: Insomuch that the rough Mr. Martin said,
Did you ever think our good Friend here, who
used to ridicule Matrimony so much, would have
made so complaisant a Husband? How long do
you intend, Sir, that this shall hold? As long as
my good Girl deserves it, said he, and that I hope 

will be for ever. But, continued the kind Gentleman,
you need not wonder I have changed
my Mind as to Wedlock; for I never expected
to meet with one whose Behaviour, and Sweetness
of Temper, were so well adapted to make
me happy. 
After Dinner, and having drank good
Healths to each of their Ladies, I withdrew; and
they sat and drank Two Bottles of Claret apiece,
and were very merry; and went away full of
my Praises, and vowing to bring their Ladies
to see me. 
John having brought me your kind Letter,
my dear Father, I told my good Master, after his
Friends were gone, how gratefully you receiv'd
his generous Intentions as to the Kentish Farm,
and promised your best Endeavours to serve him
in that Estate; and that you hoped your Industry
and Care would be so well imploy'd in it, that
you should be very little troublesome to him as
to the liberal Manner in which he had intended
to add to a Provision, that of itself exceeded all
you wished. He was very well pleased with your
chearful Acceptance of it. 
I am glad your Ingagements in the World lie
in so small a Compass: As soon as you have gotten
an Account of them exactly, you will be
pleased to send it me, with the List of the poor
Folks you are so kind to promise to procure
me. 
I think, as my dear Master is so generous, you
should account nothing, that is plain, too good. 

Pray, don't be afraid of laying out upon yourselves. 
My dear Sir intends, that you shall not,
when you come to us, return to your old Abode,
but stay with us, till you set our for Kent; and
so you must dispose of yourselves accordingly. 
And I hope, my dear Father, you have quite left
off all slavish Business. As Farmer Jones has
been kind to you, as I have heard you say, pray,
when you take Leave of them, present them
with Three Guineas worth of good Books: Such
as a Family Bible, a Common Prayer, a Whole
Duty of Man, or any other you think will be
acceptable; for they live a great way from
Church; and in Winter the Ways from their
Farm thither are unpassable. 
He has brought me my Papers safe: And I
will send them to Lady Davers, the first Opportunity,
down to the Place I mention'd in my last. 
My dear Mr. B. just now tells me, that he
will carry me in the Morning a little Airing,
about Ten Miles off, in his Chariot and Four,
to breakfast at a Farm-house, noted for a fine
Dairy, and whither, now-and-then, the neighbouring
Gentry of both Sexes resort for that
Purpose. And he will send Abraham on Horseback,
before us, to let the good Folks know it. 
