



Dearest Sir,
I now resume my Subject. I had gone thro' the
Article of the Tutor, as well as I could; and
now let me trouble you with a few Lines upon what
Mr. Locke says, That Children are wholly, if possible,
to be kept from the Conversation of the
meaner Servants; whom he supposes to be, as too
frequently they are, unbred and debauch'd, to use
his own Words. 
Now, Sir, let me observe, on this Head, that I
think it is very difficult to keep Children from
the Conversation of Servants at all times. The
Care of personal Attendance, especially in the Child's
early Age, must fall upon Servants of one Denomination
or other, who, little or much, must be conversant
with the inferior Servants, and so be liable 

to be tainted by their Conversation; and it will be
difficult in this Case to prevent the Taint being communicated
to the Child. Wherefore it will be a
surer, as well as a more laudable Method, to insist
upon the regular Behaviour of the whole Family,
than to expect the Child, and its immediate Attendant
or Tutor, should be the only good ones in it. 
Nor is this so difficult a thing to bring about, as
may be imagin'd. Your Family, dear Sir, affords
an eminent Instance of it: The Good have been confirm'd,
the Remiss have been reform'd, the Passionate
have been tam'd; and there is not a Family in
the Kingdom, I will venture to say, to the Honour
of every Individual of it, more uniform, more regular,
and freer from Evil, and more regardful of
what they say and do, than yours. And, I believe,
Sir, you will allow, that tho' they were always honest,
yet they were not always so laudably, so exemplarily
virtuous, as of late: Which I mention
only to shew the Practicableness of a Reformation,
even where bad Habits have taken place–––For your
Pamela, Sir, arrogates not to herself the Honour
of this Change: 'Tis owing to the Divine Grace
shining upon Hearts naturally good; for else an Example
so easy, so plain, so simple, from so young a
Mistress, who, moreover, had been exalted from
their own Station, could not have been attended
with such happy Effects. 
You see, dear Sir, what a Master and Mistress's
Example could do, with a poor Soul so far gone as
Mrs. Jewkes. And I dare be confident, that if,
on the Hiring of a new Servant, Sobriety of Manners,
and a virtuous Conversation, were insisted upon; 
and they were told, that a general Inoffensiveness
in Words, as well as Actions, was expected
from them, as indispensable Conditions of their Service; 

and that a Breach of that kind would be no
more pass'd over, than a wilful Fraud, or Act of
Dishonesty; and if, added to these Requisites, their
Principals take care to support these Injunctions by
their own Example; I say, in this Case, I dare be
confident, that if such a Service did not find them
good, it would make them so. 
And why, indeed, should we not think this a very
practicable Scheme, when it is consider'd, that the
Servants we take, are at Years of Discretion, and
have the strong Tie of Interest superadded to the
Obligations we require of them; and which, they
must needs know (let 'em have what bad Habits they
will) are right for themselves to discharge, as well as
for us to exact? 
We all know of how much Force the Example
of Superiors is to Inferiors. It is generally and too
justly said, That the Courts of Princes abound with
the most profligate of Men, insomuch that you cannot
well give a Man a more significantly bad Title,
than by calling him a Courtier: Yet even
among these, one shall see the Force of Example,
as I have heard you, Sir, frequently observe: For
let but the Land be blest with a pious and religious
Prince, who makes it a Rule with him to countenance
and promote none but Men of Virtue and
Probity; and, to put the Case still stronger, let
such an one even succeed to the most libertine Reign,
wherein the Manners of the People have seem'd to
be wholly deprav'd; yet a wonderful Change will
be immediately effected. The flagitious Livers will
be chas'd away, or reform'd; or at least will think
it their Duty, or their Interest, which is a stronger
Tie with such, to appear reform'd; and not a Man
will seek for the Favour or Countenance of his Prince,
but by laudable Pretences, or by worthy Actions. 

There was a Time, the Reign of King Richard III.
when, as I have read, Deformity of Body was the
Fashion, and the Nobility and Gentry of the Court
thought it an indispensable Requisite of a graceful
Form to pad for themselves a round Shoulder, because
the King was crooked. And can we think
human Nature so absurdly wicked, that it would
not much rather have try'd to imitate a personal
Perfection, than a Deformity so shocking in its Appearance,
in People who were naturally strait? 
'Tis a melancholy thing to reflect, that of all Professions
of Men, the Mariners, who most behold
the Wonders of Almighty Power display'd in the
great Deep, (a Sight that has struck me with Awe
and Reverence only from a Coast Prospect) and who
every Moment of their Lives, while at Sea, have
but one frail Plank betwixt themselves and inevitable
Destruction; are yet, generally speaking, as I have
often heard it observ'd, the most abandon'd Invokers
and Blasphemers of the Name of that God,
whose Mercies they every Moment unthankfully,
altho' so visibly, experience. Yet, as I heard it once
remark'd at your Table, Sir, on a particular Occasion,
we have now living one Commander in the British
Navy, who, to his Honour, has shewn the Force of
an excellent Example supporting the best Precepts:
For on board of his Ship not an Oath or Curse was
to be heard; while Volleys of both (issued from impious
Mouths in the same Squadron out of his
Knowlege) seem'd to fill the Sails of other Ships
with guilty Breath, calling aloud for that Perdition
to overtake them, which perhaps his worthy Injunctions
might be of Weight to suspend. 
If such then, dear Sir, be the Force of a good
Example, what have Parents to do, who are dispos'd
to bring up a Child at home under their own 

Eye, according to Mr. Locke's Advice, but, first,
to have a strict Regard to their own Conduct? 
This will not want its due Influence on the Servants; 
especially if a proper Care and Scrutiny be
made into their Characters, before they are entertain'd,
and a watchful Eye be had over them, to
keep them up to those Characters afterwards. And
when they know they must forfeit the Favour of a
worthy Master, and their Places too, (which may
be thought to be the best of Places, because an uniform
Character must make all around it easy and
happy) they will readily observe such Rules and Directions
as shall be prescrib'd to them–––Rules and
Directions, which their own Consciences will tell
them are right to be prescrib'd; and even right for
them to follow, were they not insisted upon by their
Superiors: And this Conviction must go a great way
towards their thorough Reformation: For a Person
wholly convinc'd, is half reform'd. And thus the
Hazard a Child will run of being corrupted by conversing
with the Servants, will be remov'd, and all
Mr. Locke's other Rules be better inforc'd. 
I have the Boldness, Sir, to make another Objection; 
and that is, to the Distance which Mr. Locke
prescribes to be kept between Children and Servants: 
For may not this be a Means to fill the Minds of the
former with a Contempt of those below them, and
an Arrogance that is not warranted by any Rank or
Condition, to their Inferiors of the same Species? 
I have transcrib'd, Sir*  , what Mr. Locke has
injoin'd in relation to this Distance, where he says,
That the Children are by all means to be kept
wholly from the Conversation of the meaner Servants. 
–––But how much better Advice does the same 

Author give for the Behaviour of Children to Servants
in the following Words? Which, I humbly
presume to think, are not so intirely consistent with
the former, as might be expected from so admirable
an Author. 
“Another way,” says he, (§ III.) “to instil
Sentiments of Humanity, and to keep them lively
in young Folks, will be, to accustom them to
Civility in their Language and Deportment towards
their Inferiors, and the meaner sort of
People, particularly Servants. It is not unusual
to observe the Children in Gentlemens Families
treat the Servants of the House with domineering
Words, Names of Contempt, and an imperious
Carriage, as if they were of another Race and
Species beneath them. Whether ill Example,
the Advantage of Fortune, or their natural Vanity,
inspire this Haughtiness, it should be prevented
or weeded out; and a gentle, courteous,
affable Carriage towards the lower Ranks of
Men, plac'd in the Room of it. No Part of
their Superiority,” continues this excellent Author,
“will be hereby lost, but the Distinction increas'd,
and their Authority strengthen'd, when
Love in Inferiors is join'd to outward Respect,
and an Esteem of the Person has a Share in their
Submission: And Domesticks will pay a more
ready and chearful Service, when they find themselves
not spurn'd, because Fortune has laid them
below the Level of others at their Master's
Feet.” 
These, dear Sir, are certainly the Sentiments of
a generous and inlarg'd Spirit: But I hope I shall
be forgiven, if I observe, that the great Distance
Mr. Locke before injoins to be kept between Children
and Servants, is not very consistent with the 

above-cited: For if we would prevent this undue
Contempt of Inferiors in the Temper of Children,
the best way, as I humbly presume to think, is not
to make it so unpardonable a Fault for them, especially
in their early Years, to be in their Company. 
For can one make the Children shun the Servants,
without rendering them odious or contemptible to
them, and representing them to the Child in such
disadvantageous Lights, as must needs make the
Servants vile in their Eyes, and themselves lofty and
exalted in their own? and thereby cause them to treat
them with “domineering Words, and an imperious
Carriage, as if they were of another Race
or Species beneath them; and so,” as Mr. Locke
says, “nurse up their natural Pride into an habitual
Contempt of those beneath them: And
then,” as he adds, “where will that probably
end, but in Oppression and Cruelty?” –––But
this Matter, dear Sir, as I presume to think, will
all be happily accommodated and reconcil'd, when
the Servants good Behaviour is secur'd by the Example
and Injunctions of the Principals. 
Upon the Whole, then, of what Mr. Locke has
injoin'd, and what I have taken the Liberty to suggest
on this Head, it shall be my Endeavour, in
that early Part of your dear Billy's Education,
which your Goodness will intrust to me, to inculcate
betimes in his Mind the Principles of universal
Benevolence and Kindness to others, especially to
Inferiors. 
Nor, dear Sir, shall I fear, that the little Dear
will be wanting to himself in assuming, as he grows
up, an Air of Superiority and Distance of Behaviour
equal to his Condition, or that he will descend too
low for his Station. For, Sir, there is a Pride and
Self-love natural to human Minds, that will seldom 

be kept so low, as to make them humbler than they
ought to be. 
I have observ'd, before now, Instances of this,
in some of the Families we visit, between the young
Masters or Misses, and those Children of lower Degree,
who have been brought to play with them,
or divert them. On the Masters and Misses Side,
I have always seen, they lead the Play, and prescribe
the Laws of it, be the Diversion what it will; 
while, on the other hand, their lower-rank Play-fellows
have generally given into their little Humours,
tho' ever so contrary to their own; and the Difference
of Dress and Appearance, and the Notion
they have of the more eminent Condition of their
Play-fellows Parents, have begot in them a kind of
Awe and Respect, that perhaps more than sufficiently
secures the Superiority of the one, and the
Subordination of the other. 
The Advantage of this universal Benevolence to
a young Gentleman, as he grows up, will be, as I
humbly conceive, that it will so diffuse itself over
his Mind, as to influence all his Actions, and give
a Grace to every thing he does or says, and make
him admir'd and respected from the best and most
durable Motives; and will be of greater Advantage
to him for his attaining an handsome Address and Behaviour,
(for it will make him conscious, that he
merits the Distinction he will meet with, and encourage
him still more to merit it) than the best
Rules that can be given him for that Purpose. 
I will therefore teach the little Dear Courteousness
and Affability, from the properest Motives I
am able to think of; and will instruct him in only
one Piece of Pride, That of being above doing a
mean or low Action. I will caution him not to
behave in a lordly or insolent manner, even to the 

lowest Servants. I will tell him, as I do my dear
Miss Goodwin, That that Superiority is the most
commendable, and will be best maintain'd, that is
owing to Humanity and Kindness, and which is
grounded on the Perfections of the Mind, rather
than on the accidental Advantages of Fortune and
Condition: That if his Conduct be such as it ought
to be, there will be no Occasion to tell a Servant,
that he will be observ'd and respected: That Humility,
as I once told my Miss Goodwin*  , is a
charming Grace, and most conspicuously charming
in Persons of Distinction; for that the Poor, who
are humbled by their Condition, cannot glory in it,
as the Rich may; and that it makes the lower Ranks
of People love and admire the High-born, who can
so condescend: Whereas Pride, in such, is Meanness
and Insult, as it owes its Boast and its Being to
accidental Advantages; which, at the same time,
are seldom of his procuring, who can be so mean as
to be proud: That even I would sooner forgive Pride
in a low Degree, than in an high; for it may be a
Security in the first, against doing a base thing: But
in the Rich, it is a base thing itself, and an impolitick
one too; for the more Distinction a proud Mind
grasps at, the less it will have; and every poor despis'd
Person can whisper such an one in the Ear,
when surrounded with, and adorn'd by, all his
glittering Splendors, that he was born, and must
die, in the same manner with those whom he
despises. 
Thus will the Doctrine of Benevolence and Affability,
inculcated early in the Mind of Youth, and
duly cultivated, as he grows up, inspire the young
Gentleman with the requisite Conduct to command 

Respect from proper Motives; and at the same
time that it will make the Servants observe a Decorum
towards him, it will oblige them to have a
Guard upon their Words and Actions in the Presence
of one, whose Manner of Education and
Training-up would be so great a Reproach to them,
if they were grosly faulty: So that hereby, as I conceive,
a mutual Benefit would flow to the Manners
of each, and his good Behaviour would render him,
in some measure, an instructive Monitor to the
whole Family. 
But permit me, Sir, to inlarge on the Hint I
have already given, in relation to the Example of
the Parents, in case a Preference be given to the
Home Education. For if this Point cannot be secur'd,
I should always imagine it were best to put
the Child to such a School, as I have taken the Liberty
to mention*  . But yet the Subject, Sir,
might be spar'd by me in the present Case, as I
write with a View only to your Family; tho' you
will remember, that while I follow Mr. Locke,
whose Work is publick, I must be consider'd as if I
was directing myself to the Generality of the
World: For, Sir, I have the Pleasure to say,
That your Conduct in your Family is unexceptionable; 
and the Pride to think, that mine is no Disgrace
to it. No one hears a Word from your
Mouth unbecoming the Character of a polite Gentleman; 
and I shall always endeavour to be very
regardful of what falls from mine. Your Temper,
Sir, is equal and kind to all your Servants, and they
love you, as well as awefully respect you: And well
does your Generosity, and bountiful and considerate
Mind, deserve it of them all: And they, seeing I am 

watchful over my own Conduct, so as not to behave
unworthy of your kind Example, regard me
as much as I could wish they should; for well do
they know, that their beloved Master will have it
so, and greatly honours and esteems me himself. ––– 
Your Table-talk is such as Persons of the strictest
Principles may hear, and join in: Your Guests,
and your Friends, are, generally speaking, Persons
of the genteelest Life, and of the best Manners:––– 
So that Mr. Locke would have advis'd you, of all
Gentlemen, had he been living, and known you,
to give your Children an Home Education, and
assign'd these, and still stronger Reasons for it. 
But, dear Sir, were we to speak to the Generality,
it is to be fear'd, this would be an almost insuperable
Objection to it. For (I am sorry to say
it, but) when one turns one's Eyes to the bad Precedents
given by the Heads of some Families, it is
hardly to be wonder'd at, that there is so little Virtue
and Religion among Men. For can those Parents
be surpris'd at the Ungraciousness of their
Children, who hardly ever shew them, that their
own Actions are govern'd by reasonable or moral
Motives? Can the gluttonous Father expect a self-denying
Son? With how ill a Grace must a Man
who will often be disguis'd in Liquor, preach Sobriety? 
A passionate Man, Patience? An irreligious
Man, Piety? How will a Parent, whose Hands
are seldom without Cards or Dice, be observ'd in
Lessons against the pernicious Vice of Gaming? 
Can the profuse Father, who is squandering away
the Fortunes of his Children, expect to be regarded
in a Lesson of Frugality? 'Tis impossible he should,
except it were, that the Youth, seeing how pernicious
his Father's Example is, should have the Grace
to make a proper Use of it, and look upon it as a 

Sea-mark, as it were, to enable him to shun the dangerous
Rocks, on which he sees his Father splitting. 
And even in this best Case, let it be consider'd, how
much Shame and Disgrace this thoughtless Parent
ought to take to himself, who can admonish his
Child by nothing but the Odiousness of his own
Vice; and how little it is owing to him, that his
Guilt is not doubled, by his Son's treading in his
Steps! Let such an unhappy Parent duly weigh this,
and think how likely he may be, by his bad Example,
to be the Cause of his Child's Perdition, as
well as his own, and stand unshock'd and unamended,
if he can! 
Give me Leave to add, That it is then of no
Avail to wish for discreet Servants, if the Conduct
of the Parents is faulty. If the Fountain-head be
polluted, how shall the Under-currents run clear? 
That Master or Mistress, who would exact from
their Servants a Behaviour which they themselves
don't practise, will be but ill observ'd. And that
Child, who discovers great Excesses and Errors in
his Parents, will be found to be less profited by their
good Precepts, than prejudic'd by their bad Examples. 
Excessive Fondness this Hour, violent Passions,
and perhaps Execrations, the next; unguarded
Jests, an Admiration for fashionable Vanities, rash
Censures, are perhaps the best, that the Child sees
in, or hears from, those who are most concern'd to
inculcate good Precepts into his Mind. And where
it is so, an Home Education is not by any means,
surely, to be chosen. 
Having, Sir, as well as my slender Abilities will
permit, presum'd to deliver my Opinion upon Three
great Points, viz. The Qualifications of a Tutor; 
The Necessity of having an Eye to the Morals of
Servants; and, The Example of Parents (all which, 

being taken care of, gives a Preference, as I imagine,
to an Home Education); permit me, dear Sir,
to offer one more Point, on this Subject, to your
Consideration, altho' I just touch'd upon it before. 
It is that of Emulation; which I humbly conceive
to be of great Efficacy to lead Children on
in their Duties and Studies. And how, dear Sir,
shall this Advantage be procur'd for a young Master,
who has no Schoolfellows, and who has no Example
to follow, but that of his Tutor, whom he cannot,
from the Disparity of Years, and other Circumstances,
without Pain, (because of this Disparity)
think of emulating? And this, I conceive, is a very
great Advantage to such a School Education, as I
mentioned in my former Letter*  , where there are
no more Scholars, than the Master can with Ease
and Pleasure instruct. 
But one way, in my humble Opinion, is lest
to answer this Objection, and still preserve the Reason
for the Preference which Mr. Locke gives to
an Home Education; and that is, what I formerly
hinted to you, dear Sir†  , to take into your Family the Child of some honest Neighbour of but middling
Circumstances, and like Age with your own, but
who should give apparent Indications of his natural
Promptitude, ingenuous Temper, obliging Behaviour,
and good Manners; and to let him go hand-in-hand
with yours in his several Studies and Lessons
under the same Tutor. 
This Child would be sensible of the Benefit, as
well as the Distinction he receiv'd, and consequently
of what was expected from him, and would double
his Diligence, and exert all his good Qualities,
which would inspire the young Gentleman with the 

wish'd-for Emulation, and, as I imagine, would be
so promotive of his Learning, that it would even
greatly compensate the Tutor's Pains with the additional
Scholar; for the young Gentleman would be
asham'd to be out-done by one of like Years and
Stature with himself. And little Rewards might
be propos'd to the greatest Proficient, in order to
heighten the Emulation. 
Then, Sir, permit me to add, That the Generosity
of such a Method, to a Gentleman of your
Fortune, and beneficent Mind, would be its own
Reward, were there no other Benefit to be receiv'd
by it. 
Moreover, such an ingenious Youth might, by
his good Morals and Industry, hereafter, be of Service
in some Place of Trust in the Family; and it
would be easy for a Gentleman of your Interest in
the World, if such a thing offer'd not, to provide
for the Youth in the Navy, in some of the publick
Offices, or among your private Friends–––If he
prov'd faulty in his Morals, his Dismission would be
in your own Power, and would be Punishment
enough. 
But if, on the other hand, he prov'd a sober and
hopeful Youth, such an one would make an excellent
Companion for your Billy in riper Years; as he
would be, in a manner, a Corroborator of his Morals; 
for, as his Circumstances would not support him in
any Extravagance, so those Circumstances would be
a Check upon his Inclinations; and this being
seconded by the Hopes of future Preferment from
your Favour and Interest, which he could not expect
but upon the Terms of his Perseverance in Virtue, he
would find himself under a Necessity of setting such
an Example, as might be of great Benefit to his
Companion: Who should be watch'd as he grew up, 

that he did not (if his ample Fortune became dangerous
to his Virtue) contribute of his Affluence to
draw the other after him into Extravagance. And
to this End, as I humbly conceive, the noble Doctrine
of Independence should be early instill'd into
both their Minds, and, upon all Occasions, inculcated
and inforc'd; which would be an Inducement for
the one to endeavour to improve his Fortune by his
honest Industry, lest he should never be inabled to
rise out of a State of Dependence; and to the other,
to keep, if not improve, his own, lest he should
ever fall into such a servile State, and thereby lose
the glorious Power of conferring Obligations on the
Deserving; which surely is one of the highest Pleasures
that a generous Mind can know. 
A Pleasure, Sir, which you have oftener experienc'd
than Thousands of Gentlemen: And which
may you still continue to experience for a long,
long, and happy Succession of Years to come, is
the Prayer of one, the most oblig'd of all others in
her own Person, as well as in the Persons of her
dearest Relations; and who owes to this glorious
Beneficence the Honour she boasts, of being 
Your ever dutiful and grateful
P. B. 

