


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


Thursday, Feb. 22. 
We are as happy here, as we can expect to be; 
Lady Clementina in her state of suspense and
apprehension; I without my Harriet. 
You hinted to me once, my Love, something of
our Beauchamp's regard for Emily. He just now,
after more hesitations than I expected from my friend,
opened his heart to me, and asked me to countenance
his addresses to her. I chid him for his hesitation— 
and then said, Is my Beauchamp in this proposition
so right as he generally is? —Emily, tho' tall and
womanly, is very young. I am not a friend to very
early marriages. You know as well as any man, my
dear friend, the reasons that may be urged against such. 
Methinks I would give Emily an opportunity, as well
for her husband's sake, whoever shall be the man,
as for her own, to look round her, and make her
own choice. The merit of Sir Edward Beauchamp,
his personal accomplishments, and character, to say
nothing of his now ample fortune, must make his
addresses to any woman acceptable. You would not,
I presume, think of marrying her, if you might, till
she is eighteen or twenty: And would my Beauchamp
fetter himself, by engagements to a girl; and leave
her who at present can hardly give him the preference
he deserves, no chance of choosing for herself, when
at woman's estate? 
He waved the discourse; and lest me without resuming
it. I am grieved, on recollection; for I am
afraid he is not satisfied with me, for what I said. 
My dearest Life, you must advise me. I will not
take any important step, whether relative to myself or
friends, but by your advice, and, if you please, Dr.
Bartlett's. Whenever heretofore I have had time to 

take that good man's, I have been sure of the ground
I stood upon. His has been of infinite service to me,
as you have heard me often acknowlege. Yours and
his, will establish my judgment in every case: But in
this of Emily's, yours, my dear, for obvious reasons,
I must prefer even to his. In the mean time I will
seek Beauchamp. He shall not be angry with his
Grandison! —But, good young man! Can it be,
that he is really in love with such a girl as to years? 
This I dare say; Beauchamp's principal regard cannot
be to her fortune: His estate is unincumbred. I
should think myself, as well as Emily, happy, and
that I had performed all my duty by her, were I to
marry her to such a man. But, methinks I want
him to be sooner married, than I should wish my
Emily to be a wife. I think you told me, that Emily
at present has no thoughts of him—But you, my
dear, must advise me. 
Thursday afternoon. 
Sir Edward has just left me. He asked my excuse
for having mentioned the above subject to me. 
It is at present in your power, Sir Charles, said he,
to silence me upon it for ever. It might not have
been so some time hence. I thought, therefore, on
examining the state of my heart, it was but honourable
to open it to you. Forbid me this moment to
think of her, and I will endeavour to obey her
guardian. 
My dear friend! You know Emily's age—Would
you willingly—I stopt that he might speak. 
Stay for her? I would, Sir Charles, till you and
she—He paused—Then resuming: My Love for her
is not an interested Love. I would, if I might have
your permission to make my addresses to her (and
that should be by honest assiduities, before declaration)
be wholly determined by your advice for the
good of both. I would make your conduct to Lady 

Clementina, when you last went over, my pattern. 
I would be bound, she should be free. I never would
be so mean as to endeavour to engage her by promises
to me. My pride will set her free, whenever I perceive
she balances in favour of another man. 
But what, my excellent friend, shall we do? Can
you condescend to court two women, Emily so young,
for her distant consent? 
What means Sir Charles Grandison? 
I will read to you without reserve, what I had just
written to my Harriet, on this topic; reciting to her,
what passed in the conversation between you and me,
a little while ago. 
I read to him accordingly, what I wrote to you,
my dearest Love. He heard me with great attention,
not interrupting me once (nor did I interrupt myself); 
no not by apologies for the freedom of my thoughts,
on the subject. And when I had done, he wrung
my hand, and thanked me for my unreservedness, in
terms worthy of our mutual friendship. 
You see, my dear Sir Edward, said I, how I am
circumstanced: What I have promised to my wife, is
a Law to me, prudence and after-events not controuling. 
She loves Emily: She has a high regard for you. 
Women know women. Go hand in hand with her. 
I will save you the trouble of referring to me, in the
progress of your application to my wife and Emily. 
My Harriet will acquaint me with what is necessary
for me, as Emily's guardian, to know. I build on
your hint of assiduities, in preference to an early declaration. 
You, my Beauchamp, need not be afraid of
giving time to a young creature to look round her. 
Let me add, that Emily shall give signs of preferring
you to all men, as I expect from you demonstrations
of your preferring her to all women; or I shall make
a difficulty, for both your sakes, of giving a guardian's
consent: And remember also, that Emily has a mother; 
who, tho' she has not greatly merited consideration, 

is her mother. We must do our duty,
you know, my Beauchamp, in the common relations
of life, whether others do theirs or not. But the address
of a man of your credit and consequence cannot
give you any difficulty there, when that of Miss
Jervois's tender years is got over. 
He was pleased with what I said. I asked him, If
he approved of her motion to go down with Mrs. Selby
and Lucy? Highly, he said; and as it came from
herself, he thought it an instance of prudence in her,
that few young creatures would have been able to shew. 
Instance of prudence! my Love! How so! When,
wise as our Northamptonshire relations are, Emily
would have wanted no benefit that her choice can
give her, were she to remain with us, in the instructions
and example of my Harriet. —But, my dear Life,
does Emily hold her mind to attend Mrs. Selby and
Lucy into Northamptonshire? Let it be with her
whole heart. 
My cousin Grandison believes himself to be very
happy. His wife, he says, thinks herself the happiest
of women. I am glad of it. She has a greater opinion
of his understanding, than she has of her own:
This seems to be necessary to the happiness of common
minds in wedlock. He is gay, fluttering, debonnaire; 
and she thinks those qualities appendages of family. 
He has presented her with a genealogical table
of his ancestors, drawn up and blazoned by heraldry
art. It is framed, glazed, and hung up in her drawingroom. 
She shews it to every one. Perhaps she thinks
it necessary to apologize, by that means, to all her
visiters, for bestowing her person and fortune on a
ruined man. But what, in a nation, the glory and
strength of which are trade and commerce, is gentility! 
What even nobility, where descendants depart
from the virtue of the first enobling ancestor! 
Lord and Lady G. have invited Lady Clementina
to dinner to-morrow. She has had the goodness to 

accept of the invitation. Lord and Lady L. and my
aunt Grandison, will attend her. 
What, my dear, makes Charlotte so impatient
(so petulant I had almost said) under a circumstance,
which, if attended with a happy issue, will lay all us,
her friends, under obligation to her? I asked once
my Harriet, If Lord G. were as happy in a wife, as
Charlotte is in a husband? You returned me not a
direct answer. I was afraid of repeating my question,
because I knew you would have chearfully answered
it, could you have done it to my wishes. I see in
my Lord's behaviour to her, respect and affection even
to fondness; but not the polite familiarity that becomes
a wedded Love. Let her present circumstance
be happily over, and she will find her brother's eye a
more observant one, than hitherto she has found it. 
But be not, my dear, over-solicitous for the friend
you so greatly value: True brotherly Love shall ever
hold the principal seat in my heart, when I sit in
judgment upon a Sister's conduct. 
My fond heart throbs in expectation of soon presenting
a Sister to each of the two noblest women on
earth. Allow for the perplexity of Clementina's
mind; and for the impolitic urgency of her friends; 
and you will not, when you see her, scruple to hold
out to a Sister-excellence, not happily situated, the
hand that blessed 
Your ever-faithful,
Ch. Grandison. 

