


Mr. Reeves, To George Selby, Esq;
In Continuation of Letter XXIII. 


Lady Betty's chairmen have found out the first
chairmen. 
The fellows were made almost dead drunk. They
are sure something was put into their liquor. They
have been hunting after the footmen, who enticed
them, and drank them down. They describe their
livery to be brown, trimmed and turned up with
yellow; and are in the service of a merchant's relict,
who lives either in Mark-lane, or Mincing-lane; they
forgot which; but have not yet been able to find them
out. Their lady, they said, was at the Masquerade. 
They were very officious to scrape acquaintance with
them. We know not any-body who gives this livery:
So no lights can be obtained by this part of the information. 
A cursed deep-laid villainy! —The fellows
are resolved, they say, to find out these footmen, if
above-ground; and the chairmen who were hired on
their failure. 
Every hour we have one messenger or other returning
with something to say; but hitherto with nothing
to the purpose. This has kept me within. O Mr.
Selby, I know not what to direct! I know not what
to do! I send them out again as fast as they return:
Yet rather shew my despair, than my hope. 
Surely this villainy must be Mr. Greville's. Tho'
I have but just dispatched away my servant to you, I
am impatient for his return. 
I will write every hour, as any-thing offers, that
I may have a letter ready to send you by another man,
the moment we hear any-thing. And yet I expect
not to hear any thing material, but from you. 

We begin to suspect the servant (that Wilson) whom
my cousin but so lately hired. Were he clear of the
matter, either he or the chairmen he hired, must have
been heard of. He would have returned. They
could not all three be either murdered or secreted. 
These cursed Masquerades! —Never will I— 
* *
O Mr. Selby! Her servant is, must be a villain! — 
Sarah, my dear cousin's servant (My poor wife can
think of nothing. She is extremely ill) Sarah took
it into her head to have the specious rascal's trunk broke
open. It felt light, and he had talk'd, but the night
before, of his stock of cloaths and linen, to the other
servants. There was nothing of value found in it; 
not of six-pence value. The most specious villain,
if a villain. Every-body liked him. The dear creature
herself was pleased with him. He knew everything
and every-body. Cursed be he for his adroitness
and knowlege! We had made too many enquiries
after a servant for her. 
Eleven o'Clock. 
I Am just returned from Smithfield. From the villain's
sister. He comes out to be a villain—This
Wilson I mean—A practised villain! 
The woman shook her head at the enquiry which
I made, half out of breath, after what was become
of him. She was afraid, she said, that all was not
right: But was sure her brother had not robbed. 
He had been guilty, I said, of a villainy, that was
a thousand times worse than robbery. 
She was inquisitive about it; and I hinted to her
what it was. 
Her brother, she said, was a young man of parts
and understanding, and would be glad, she was sure,
of getting a livelihood by honest services. It was a
sad thing that there should be such masters in the world,
as would put servants upon bad practices. 
I ask'd after the character of that Bagenhall, whose 

service her brother last lived in? and imprudently I
threatened her brother. 
Ah, Sir! was all the answer she made, shaking her
head. 
I repeated my question, Who was that Bagenhall?— 
Excuse me, Sir, said she. I will give no other
answer, till I hear whether my brother's life may be
in danger or not. She abhorred, she said, all base
practices as much as any-body could do; and she was
sorry for the lady, and for me. 
I then offer'd to be the making of her brother, were
it possible to engage him before any violence was done
to the lady. I ask'd, If she knew where to send to him? 
Indeed she did not. She dared to say, she should
not hear of him for one while. Whenever he had
been drawn in to assist in any out-of-the-way pranks
[See, Mr. Selby, a practised villain!] he kept away
from her till all was blown over. Those who would
take such steps, she feared, would by this time have
done the mischief. 
How I raved! 
I offered her money, a handsome sum, if she would
tell me what she knew of that Bagenhall, or of any
of her brother's employers: But she refused to say one
word more, till she knew whether her brother's life
were likely to be affected or not. 
I left her, and hastened home, to enquire after
what might have happened in my absence. But will
soon see her again, in hopes she may be wrought upon
to drop some hints, by which something may
be discover'd—But all this time, What may be the
fate of this dear sufferer! —I cannot bear my own
thoughts! 
Lady Betty is inexpressibly grieved— 
I have dispatched a man and horse (God knows to
what purpose) to a friend I have at Reading, to get
him to enquire after the character of this Bagenhall. 

There is such a man, and he is a man of pleasure, as
Sir John Allestree informs me—Accursed villain, this
Wilson! He could not bear with his master's constant
bad hours, and profligate course of life, as he told
our servants, and Mrs. Sarah! —Specious impostor! 
One o'Clock. 
Lady Betty's chairmen have found out, and they
brought with them, one of the fellows whom that
vile Wilson hired. The other was afraid to come. I
have secured this fellow: Yet he seems to be ingenuous; 
and I have promised, that if he prove innocent, he
shall be rewarded instead of punish'd; and the two
chairmen, on this promise, are gone to try to prevail
upon his partner to come, were it but to release the
other, as both insisted upon their innocence. 
And now will you be impatient to know what account
this fellow gives. 
O Mr. Selby! The dear, dear creature—But before
I can proceed, I must recover my eyes. 
Two o'Clock. 
This fellow's name is Macpherson. His partner's
Mc Dermot. This is Macpherson's account of the
matter. 
Wilson hired them to carry his young lady to Paddington
—To Paddington! A vile dog!— 
They objected distance and dauger, the latter, as
Macpherson owns, to highten the value of the service. 
As to the danger, Wilson told him, they would be
met by three others of his fellow-servants, armed,
at the first fields: And as to the distance, they would
be richly rewarded; and he gave them a crown a
piece earnest, and treated them besides with brandy. 
To prevent their curiosity, and entirely to remove
their difficulties, the villain told them, that his young
lady was an heiress, and had agreed to go off from
the Masquerade with her lover: But that the gentleman 

would not appear to them till she came to the
very house, to which she was to be conveyed. 
She thinks, said the hellish villain, that she is to be
carried to May-Fair Chapel, and to be married directly; 
and that the minister (unseasonable as the hour
is) will be there in readiness. But the gentleman, who
is a man of the utmost honour, intends first to try
whether he cannot obtain her friend's consent. So
when she finds her way lengthened, proceeded the vile
wretch, she will perhaps be frightned, and will ask me
questions. I would not for the world disoblige her; 
but here she must be cheated for her own sake; and
when all is over, will value me the more for the innocent
imposture. But whatever orders she may give
you, observe none but mine, and follow me. You
shall be richly rewarded, repeated the miscreant. 
Should she even cry out, mind it not: She is full of
fears, and hardly holds in one mind for an hour together. 
He farther cautioned them not to answer any questions
which might possibly be ask'd of them, by the
person who should conduct his young lady to her chair; 
but refer to himself: And in case any other chairs
were to go in company with hers, he bid them fall behind,
and follow his flambeaux. 
Macpherson says, that she drew the curtains close
(because of her dress, no doubt) the moment I had
left her, after seeing her in the chair. 
The fellows thus prepossessed and instructed, speeded
away, without stopping for our chairs. Yet the
dear creature must have heard me give that direction. 
They had carried her a great way before she called
out: And then she called three times before they would
hear her: At the third time they stopt, and her servant
asked her commands. Where am I, William,
said she? Just at home, madam, answered he. Surely
you have taken a strange round-about way. We are 

come about, said the rascal, on purpose to avoid the
croud of chairs and coaches. 
They proceeded onwards, and were joined by three
men, as Wilson had told them they would; but they
fansied one of them to be a gentleman; for he was
muffled up in a cloak, and had a silver-hilted sword in
his hand: But he spake not. He gave no directions:
And all three kept aloof, that they might not be seen
by her. 
At Maribone, she again called out; William, William,
said she, with vehemence: The Lord have
mercy upon me! Where are you going to carry me? 
Chairmen, stop! Stop, chairmen! Set me down! — 
William! —Call my servant, chairmen!— 
Dear soul! Her servant! Her devil! 
The chairmen called him. They lifted up the head. 
The side-curtains were still undrawn, and Mc Dermot
stood so close, that she could not see far before her. 
Did you not tell me, said the villain to them, that it
was not far about? —See how you have frighted my
lady! —Madam, we are now almost at home. 
They proceeded with her, saying, they had indeed
mistaken their way; but they were just there; and
hurried on. 
She then undrew the side-curtains—Good God of
heaven protect me! they heard her say—I am in the
midst of fields—They were then at Lissom-Green. 
They heard her pray; and Macpherson said, He began
then to conclude, that the lady was too much
frighten'd, and too pious, to be in a love-plot. 
But, nevertheless, beckoned by their villainous
guide, they hurried on: And then she screamed out,
and happening to see one of the three men, she begg'd
his help for God's sake. 
The fellow blustered at the chairmen, and bid them
stop. She asked for Grosvenor-street. She was to be
carried, she said, to Grosvenor-street. 
She was just there, that fellow said—It can't be, 

Sir! It can't be! —Don't I see fields all about me? —I
am in the midst of fields, Sir. 
Grosvenor-Square, madam, reply'd that villain; 
the trees and garden of Grosvenor-Square. 
What a strange way have you come about, cry'd
her miscreant! And then trod out his flambeaux; while
another fellow took the chairmens lantern from them; 
and they had only a little glimmering star-light to
guide them. 
She then, poor dear soul! screamed so dismally,
that Macpherson said, it went to his heart to hear her. 
But they following Wilson, who told them they were
just landed, that was his word, he led them up a long
garden-walk, by a back-way. One of the three men
having got before, opened the garden-door, and held it
in his hand; and by the time they got to the house
to which the garden seemed to belong, the dear creature
ceased screaming. 
They too well saw the cause, when they stopt with
her. She was in a fit. 
Two women, by the assistance of the person in the
cloak, helped her out, with great seeming tenderness. 
They said something in praise of her beauty, and expressed
themselves concerned for her, as if they were
afraid she was past recovery: Which apparently startled
the man in the cloak. 
Wilson entered the house with those who carried in
the dear creature; but soon came out to the chairmen. 
They saw the man in the cloak (who hung about the
villain, and hugg'd him, as in joy) give the rascal
money; who then put a guinea into each of their
hands; and conveyed them thro' the garden again, to
the door at which they entered; but refused them light
even so much as that of their own candle and lantern. 
However he sent another man with them, who led
them over rough and dirty by-ways into a path that
pointed London-ward; but plainly so much about with 

design to make it difficult for them to find out the place
again. 
* *
The other fellow is brought hither: He tells exactly
the same story. 
I ask'd of both, what sort of man he in the cloak
was: But he so carefully muffled himself up, and so
little appeared to them, either walking after them, or
at the house, that I could gain no light from their description. 
On their promise to be forth-coming, I have suffered
them to go with Lady Betty's chairmen to try if
they can trace out their own footsteps, and find the
place. 
How many hopeless things must a man do, in an
exigence, who knows not what is right to be done! 
* *
I Have enquired of Lady Betty, Who it was that
told her, Mr. Greville was not gone out of town; 
but intended to lie perdue; and she named her informant. 
I ask'd how the discourse came in? She
own'd, a little aukwardly. I ask'd whether that lady
knew Mr. Greville? She could not say whether she
did, or not. 
I went to that lady: Mrs. Preston, in New Bondstreet. 
She had her intelligence, she told me from
Sir Hargrave Pollexfen; who had hinted to her, that
he should take such notice of Mr. Greville, as might
be attended with consequences; and she was the
readier to intimate this to Lady Betty, in order to prevent
mischief. 
Now, Mr. Selby, as the intimation that the darklantern
figure at the Masquerade was Mr. Greville,
came from Sir Hargrave, and nobody else; and we
saw nothing of him ourselves; how do we know— 
And yet Mr. Greville intended that we should believe
him to be out of town—Yet even that intimation
came from Sir Hargrave—And furthermore, was it 

not likely that he would take as much care to conceal
himself from Sir Hargrave, as from us? But I will go
instantly to Sir Hargrave's house. He was to dine at
home, and with company. If I cannot see him; If
he should be absent—But no more till I return. 
* *
O Mr. Selby! I believe I have wrong'd Mr. Greville. 
The dear soul, I am afraid, is fallen into even
worse hands than his. 
I went to Sir Hargrave's house. He was not at
home. He was at home. He had company with
him. He was not to be spoken with. These were the
different answers given me by his porter, with as
much confusion, as I ask'd with impatience; and yet
it was evident to me, that he had his lesson given him. 
In short, I have reason to think, that Sir Hargrave
came not home all night. The man in the cloak, I
doubt, was he. Now does all that Sir John Allestree
said of the malicious wickedness of this devilish
man, and his arrogant behaviour to our dear
Miss Byron, on her rejecting him, come fresh into
my memory. And is she, can she be, fallen into the
power of such a man? —Rather, much rather, may
my first surmises prove true. Greville is surely (exceptionable
as he is) a better man, at least, a betternatured
man, than this; and he can have no thoughts
less honourable than marriage: But this villain, if he
be the villain—I cannot, I dare not, pursue the thought. 
* *
The four chairmen are just returned. They think
they have found the place; but having gained some
intelligence (intelligence which distracts me!) they
hurried back for directions. 
They had asked a neighbouring alehouse-keeper, if
there were not a long garden (belonging to the house
they suspected) and a back-door out of it to a dirty
lane and fields. He answered in the affirmative. The
front of this house faces the road. 

They called for some hot liquors; and asked the
landlord after the owners. He knew nothing of harm
of them, he said. They had lived there near a twelvemonth
in reputation. The family consisted of a widow,
whose name is Awberry, her son and two daughters. 
The son (a man of about thirty years of age)
has a place in the Custom-house, and only came down
on a Saturday, and went up on Monday. But an odd
circumstance, he said, had alarmed him that very
morning. 
He was at first a little shy of telling what it was. 
He loved, he said, to mind his own business: What
other people did was nothing to him: But, at last,
he told them, that about six o'clock in the morning
he was waked by the trampling of horses; and looking
out of his window, saw a chariot-and-six, and
three or four men on horseback at the widow Awberry's
door. He got up. The footmen and coachmen
were very hush, not calling for a drop of liquor, tho'
his doors were open: A rare instance, he said, where
there were so many men-servants together, and a
coachman one of them. This, he said, could not
but give a greater edge to his curiosity. 
About seven o'clock, one of the widow's daughters
came to the door, with a lighted candle in her hand,
and directed the chariot to drive up close to the house. 
The alehouse-keeper then slipt into an arbour-like
porch, next door to the widow's; where he had not
been three minutes before he saw two persons come to
the door; the one a tall gentleman in laced cloaths,
who had his arms about the other, a person of middling
stature, wrapt up in a scarlet cloak; and resisting,
as one in great distress, the other's violence, and
begging not to be put into the chariot, in a voice
and accent, that evidently shewed it was a woman. 
The gentleman made vehement protestations of
honour; but lifted the lady into the chariot. She
struggled, and seemed to be in agonies of grief; and 

on being lifted in, and the gentleman going in after
her, she scream'd out for help; and he observed in the
struggling, that she had on, under her cloak, a silverlaced
habit [The Masquerade habit, no doubt!] Her
screaming grew fainter and fainter, and her voice
sounded to him, as if her mouth were stopped. And
the gentleman seemed to speak high, as if he threatened
her. 
Away drove the chariot. The servants rode after it. 
In about half an hour, a coach and four came to
the widow's door; the widow and her two daughters
went into it, and it took the same road. 
The alehouse-keeper had afterwards the curiosity to
ask the maid-servant, an ignorant country wench,
whither her mistresses went so early in the morning? 
She answered they were gone to Windsor, or that
way, and would not return, she believed, in a week. 
O this damn'd Sir Hargrave! He has a house upon
the forest. I have no doubt but he is the villain. Who
knows what injuries the dear creature might have
sustained before she was forced into the chariot? — 
God give me patience! Dear soul! Her prayers! Her
struggling! Her crying out for help! Her mouth
stopt! O the villain! 
I have ordered as many men and horses as two of
my friends can furnish me with, to be added to two
of my own (we shall be nine in all) to get ready with
all speed. I will pursue the villain to the world's end,
but I will find him. 
Our first course shall be to his house at Windfor. 
If we find him not there, we will proceed to that Bagenhall's,
near Reading. 
It would be but losing time, were I to go now to
Paddington. And when the vile widow and her
daughters are gone from home, and only an ignorant
wench left, what can we learn of her more than is
already told to us? 
I have, however, accepted Lady Betty's offer of her 

steward's going with the two chairmen, to get what
farther intelligence he can from Paddington, against
my return. 
I shall take what I have written with me, to form
from it a letter less hurrying, less alarming, for your
perusal, than this that I have written at such snatches
of time, and under such dreadful uncertainties, would
be to you, were I to send it; that is to say, if I have
time, and if I am able to write with any certainty— 
O that dreaded certainty! 
At four in the morning the six men I borrow, and
myself, and two of my servants, well armed, are to
rendezvous at Hyde-Park Corner. It is grievous that
another night must pass. But so many people cannot
be got together as two or three might. 
My poor wife has made me promise to take the
assistance of peace officers, where-ever I find either the
villain, or the suffering angel. 
Where the road parts, we shall divide, and enquire
at every turnpike; and shall agree upon our places of
meeting. 
I am harass'd to death: But my mind is the greatest
sufferer. 
* *
O My dear Mr. Selby! We have tidings—God be
praised, we have tidings—Not so happy indeed as
were to be wish'd: Yet the dear creature is living,
and in honourable hands—God be praised! 
Read the inclosed letter directed to me. 

SIR,
Miss Byron is in safe and honourable hands. 
The first moment she could give any account
of herself, she besought me to quiet your heart, and
your lady's, with this information. 
She has been cruelly created. 
Particulars, at present, she cannot give. 
She was many hours speechless. 

But don't fright yourselves: Her fits, tho' not less
frequent, are weaker and weaker. 
The bearer will acquaint you who my Brother is; 
to whom you owe the preservation and safety of the
loveliest woman in England; and he will direct you
to an house where you will be welcome with your
lady (for Miss Byron cannot be removed) to convince
yourselves that all possible care is taken of her, by, Sir, 
Your humble Servant,
Charlotte Grandison.
Friday, Feb. 17. 

In fits! —Has been cruelly treated! —Many hours speechless! 
—Cannot be removed! —Her solicitude, tho' hardly
herself, for our ease! —Dearest, dear creature! —But
you will rejoice with me, my cousins, that she is in
such honourable hands. 
What I have written must now go. I have no
time to transcribe. 
I have sent to my two friends to let them know,
that I shall not have occasion for their peoples assistance. 
She is at a nobleman's house, the earl of L. near
Colnebrooke. 
My wife, harassed and fatigued in mind as she
has been on this occasion, and poorly in health, wanted
to go with me: But it is best first for me to see
how the cear creature is. 
I shall set out before day, on horseback. My servant
shall carry with him a portmanteau of things,
ordered by my wife. My cousin must have made a
strange appearance in her Masquerade dress, to her
deliverer. 
The honest man who brought the letter [He looks
remarkably so; but had he a less agreeable countenance,
he would have been received by us as an angel,
for his happy tidings] was but just returned from
Windsor, whither he had been sent early in the morning,
to transact some business, when he was dispatch'd 

away to us with the welcome letter. He could not
therefore be so particular as we wish'd him. What
he gathered was from the housekeeper; the men-servants,
who were in the fray [A fray there was!] being
gone to town with their master. But what we
learnt from him, is briefly, as follows: 
His master is Sir Charles Grandison; a gentleman
who has not been long in England. I have often
heard mention of his father, Sir Thomas, who died
not long ago. This honest man knew not when to
stop in his master's praise. He gives his young lady
also an excellent character. 
Sir Charles was going to tow nin his chariot and six
when he met (most happily met!) our distressed cousin. 
Sir Hargrave is the villain. 
I am heartily sorry for suspecting Mr. Greville. 
Sir Charles had earnest business in town; and he
proceeded thither, after he had rescued the dear creature,
and committed her to the care of his sister. — 
God for ever bless him! 
The vile Sir Hargrave, as the servant understood,
was wounded. Sir Charles it seems was also hurt. 
Thank God it was so slightly, as not to hinder him
from pursuing his journey to town after the glorious
act. 
I would have given the honest man a handsome
gratuity: But he so earnestly besought me to excuse
him, declaring that he was under an obligation to the
most generous of masters to decline all gifts, that I
was obliged to withdraw my hand. 
I will speed this away by Richard Fennell. I will
soon send you farther particulars by the post: Not unhappy
ones, I hope. 
Excuse, mean time, all that is amiss in a letter the
greatest part of which was written in such dreadful
uncertainty, and believe, that I will be 
Ever Yours,
Archibald Reeves. 

