


I must still write on, till I come to be
settled in the Duty of the Station to which I
am so generously exalted, and to let you participate
with me the transporting Pleasures that
arise from my new Condition, and the Favours
that are hourly heap'd upon me by the best of
Husbands. When I had got my Pacquet for
you finish'd, I then set about writing, as he
had kindly directed me, to Mrs. Jervis; and
had no Difficulty, till I came to sign my
Name; and so I brought it down with me,
when I was call'd to Supper, unsigned. 
My good Master (for I delight, and always
shall, to call him by that Name) had been
writing to Mr. Longman; and he said, pleasantly,
See here, my Dearest, what I have
written to your Somebody. I read as follows: 

“Mr. Longman,
I have the Pleasure to acquaint you, that
last Thursday I was marry'd to my beloved
Pamela. I have had Reason to be disoblig'd
with you, and Mrs. Jervis, and Jonathan,
not for your Kindness to, and Regard for,
my dear Spouse, that now is, but for the 

Manner in which you appeal'd to my Sister
Davers; which has made a very wide Breach
between her and me. But as it was one of
her first Requests, that I would overlook
what had pass'd, and reinstate you all in
your former Charges, I think myself obliged,
without the least Hesitation, to comply with
it. So, if you please, you may enter again
upon an Office which you have always executed
with unquestionable Integrity, and to
the Satisfaction of 
“Yours, &c. 
Friday Afternoon. 
“I shall set out next Tuesday or Wednesday
for Bedfordshire; and desire to find
Jonathan, as well as you, in your former
Offices; in which, I dare say,
you'll have the more Pleasure, as you
have such an early Instance of the Sentiments
of my dear Wife, from whose
Goodness you may expect every agreeable
thing. She writes herself to Mrs.
Jervis.” 

I thanked him most gratefully for his
Goodness, and afterwards took the above Copy
of it. And shew'd him my Letter to Mrs.
Jervis, as follows: 

“My dear Mrs. Jervis,
I have joyful Tidings to communicate
to you. For Yesterday I was happily marry'd
to the best of Gentlemen, yours and my 

beloved Master. I have only now to tell
you, that I am inexpressibly happy: That
my generous Benefactor denies me nothing,
and even anticipates my Wishes. You may
be sure I could not forget my dear Mrs.
Jervis; and I made it my Request, and had
it granted, as soon as ask'd, that you might return
to the kind Charge, which you executed
with so much Advantage to our Master's Interest,
and so much Pleasure to all under
your Direction. All the Power that is put
into my Hands, by the most generous of
Gentlemen, shall be exetted to make every
thing easy and agreeable to you; and as
I shall soon have the Honour of attending
my beloved Spouse to Bedfordshire, it will
be a very considerable Addition to my Delight,
and to my unspeakable Obligations
to the best of Men, to see my dear Mrs.
Jervis, and to be receiv'd by her with that
Pleasure, which I promise myself from her
Affection, For I am, my dear good Friend,
and always will be, 
“Yours, very affectionately, and gratefully,
Pamela &wblank;.” 

He read this Letter, and said, Tis Yours,
my Dear, and must be good: But don't you put
your Name to it? Sir, said I, your Goodness
has given me a Right to a very honourable one:
But as this is the first Occasion of the kind, 

except that to my dear Father and Mother, I
think I ought to shew it you unsign'd, that I
may not seem over-forward to take Advantage
of the Honour you have done me. 
However sweetly humble and requisite,
said he, this may appear to my dear Pamela's
Niceness, it befits me to tell you, that I am
every Moment more and more pleased with
the Right you have to my Name: And, my
dear Life, added he, I have only to wish I may
be half as worthy as you are of the happy
Knot so lately knit. He then took a Pen himself,
and wrote, after Pamela, his most worthy
Surname; and I under wrote thus: “O rejoice
with me, my dear Mrs. Jervis, that I am
inabled, by God's Graciousness, and my dear
Master's Goodness, thus to write myself.” 
These Letters, and the Pacquet to you,
were sent away by Mr. Thomas early this
Morning. 
My dearest Master is just gone to take a Ride
out, and intends to call upon the Lady Jones,
Mr. Peters, and Sir Simon Darnford, to invite
them to Chapel and Dinner To-morrow; and
says, he chuses to do it himself, because the
Time is so short, they will, perhaps, deny a
Servant. 
I forgot to mention, that Mr. Williams
was here Yesterday, to ask Leave to go to see
his new Living, and to provide for taking Possession
of it; and seemed so pleased with my
Master's Kindness and Fondness for me, as well 

as his generous Deportment to himself, that he
lest us in such a Disposition, as shew'd he was
quite happy. I am very glad of it; for it
would rejoice me to be an humble Means of
making all Mankind so: And Oh! what Returns
ought I not to make to the Divine Goodness!
and how ought I to strive to diffuse the
Blessings I experience, to all in my Knowlege! 
—For else, what is it for such a Worm as I
to be exalted! What is my single Happiness, if
I suffer it, Niggard-like, to extend no further
than to myself? —But then, indeed, do God
Almighty's Creatures act worthy of the Bles
sings they receive, when they make, or endeavour
to make, the whole Creation, so far as is
in the Circle of their Power, happy! 
Great and good God! as thou hast inlarg'd
my Opportunities, inlarge also my Will, and
make me delight in dispensing to others, a Portion
of that Happiness which I have myself so
plentifully receiv'd at the Hands of thy gracious
Providence! Then shall I not be useless in my
Generation! —Then shall I not stand a single
Mark of thy Goodness to a poor worthless Creature,
that in herself is of so poor Account in
the Scale of Beings, a mere Cypher on the
wrong Side of a Figure; but shall be placed on
the right Side; and tho' nothing worth in myself,
shall give Signification by my Place, and
multiply the Blessings I owe to thy Goodness,
which has distinguish'd me by so fair a Lot! 
This, as I conceive, is the indispensable
Duty of a high Condition; and how great must 

be the Condemnation of poor Creatures, at
the great Day of Account, when they shall be
ask'd what Uses they have made of the Opportunities
put into their Hands! and are able only
to say, We have liv'd but to ourselves: We
have circumscribed all the Power thou hast
given us, into one narrow, selfish Compass: 
We have heap'd up Treasures for those who
came after us, tho' we knew not whether they
would not make a still worse Use of them than
we ourselves had done. And how can such poor
selfish Pleaders expect any other Sentence, than
the dreadful, Depart, ye Cursed! 
But sure, my dear Father and Mother, such
Persons can have no Notion of the exalted
Pleasures that flow from doing Good, were
there to be no After-account at all! 
There is something so satisfactory and
pleasing, to reflect on the being able to administer
Comfort and Relief to those who stand
in need of it, as infinitely, of itself, rewards
the beneficent Mind. And how often have I
experienced this in my good Lady's time; tho'
but the second-hand Dispenser of her Benefits
to the Poor and Sickly, when she made me
her Almoner! —How have I been affected
with the Blessings which the Miserable have
heap'd upon her for her Goodness, and upon
me for being but the humble Conveyer of her
Bounty to them! —And how delighted have
I been, when the moving Report I have made
of a particular Distress, has augmented my good
Lady's first Intentions in Relief of it! 

This I recal with Pleasure, because it is
now, by the Divine Goodness, become my
Part to do those good Things she was wont to
do: And Oh! let me watch myself, that my
prosperous State do not make me forget to
look up with due Thankfulness, to the Providence
which has intrusted me with the Power,
that so I may not incur a terrible Woe by the
Abuse or the Neglect of it! 
Forgive me these Reflections, my dear
Parents, and let me have your Prayers, that I
may not find my present Happiness a Snare to
me; but that I may consider, that more and
more will be expected from me, in proportion
to the Power given me; and that I may not so
unworthily act, as if I believed I ought to set
up my Rest in my mean Self, and think nothing
further to be done with the Opportunities
put into my Hand, by the Divine Favour, and
the best of Men! 
