



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

The Lady staid longer above than we wished; 
and I hoping that (Lady-like) she only waited
for an invitation to return to us, desired the Widow 

Bevis, in the Captain's name (who wanted to go to
town) to request the favour of her company. 
I cared not to send up either Miss Rawlins or Mrs.
Moore on the errand, lest my Beloved should be in a
communicative disposition; especially as she had hinted
at an appeal to Miss Rawlins; who, besides, has such
an unbounded curiosity. 
Mrs. Bevis presently returned with an answer (winking
and pinking at me) that the Lady would follow
her down. Miss Rawlins could not but offer to retire,
as the others did. Her eyes, however, intimated that
she had rather stay. But they not being answered as
she seemed to wish, she went with the rest, but with
slower feet; and had hardly left the parlour, when
the Lady entered it by the other door; a melancholy
dignity in her person and air. 
She sat down. Pray, Mr. Tomlinson, be seated. 
He took his chair over-against her. I stood behind
hers, that I might give him agreed-upon signals,
should there be occasion for them. 
As thus—A wink of the left-eye was to signify
Push that point, Captain. 
A wink of the right, and a nod, was to indicate
Approbation of what he had said. 
My fore-finger held up, and biting my lip, Get off
of that, as fast as possible. 
A right-forward nod, and a frown—Swear to it,
Captain. 
My whole spread hand, To take care not to say too
much on that particular subject. 
A scouling brow, and a positive nod, was to bid
him rise in his temper. 
And these motions I could make, even those with
my hand, without holding up my arm, or moving my
wrist, had the women been there; as, when the motions
were agreed upon, I knew not but they would. 
She hemmed—I was going to speak, to spare her
supposed confusion: But this Lady never wants presence 

of mind, when presence of mind is necessary either
to her honour, or to that conscious dignity which
distinguishes her from all the women I ever knew. 
I have been considering, said she, as well as I was
able, of every-thing that has passed; and of all that
has been said; and of my unhappy situation. I mean
no ill; I wish no ill, to any creature living, Mr. Tomlinson. 
I have always delighted to draw favourable
rather than unfavourable conclusions; sometimes, as
it has proved, for very bad hearts. Censoriousness,
whatever faults I have, is not naturally my fault. — 
But, circumstanced as I am; treated as I have been,
unworthily treated, by a man who is full of contriveances,
and glories in them— 
Lovel. My dearest Life! —But I will not interrupt
you. 
Cl. Thus treated, it becomes me to doubt—It concerns
my honour to doubt, to fear, to apprehend— 
Your intervention, Sir, is so seasonable, so kind, for
this man—My Uncle's Expedient, the first of the
kind he ever, I believe, thought of; a plain, honest,
good-minded man, as he is, not affecting such Expedients
—Your report in conformity to it—The consequences
of that report; The alarm taken by my Brother; 
His rash resolution upon it—The alarm taken
by Lady Betty, and the rest of Mr. Lovelace's relations
—The sudden Letters written to him upon it,
which, with yours, he shewed me—All ceremony,
among persons born observers of ceremony, and entitled
to value themselves upon their distinction, dispensed
with—All these things have happened so quick, and
some of them so seasonable— 
Lovel. Lady Betty, you see, Madam, in her Letter,
dispenses with punctilio, avowedly in compliment
to you. Charlotte, in hers, professes to do the same
for the same reason. Good Heaven! that the respect
intended you by my relations, who, in every other
case, are really punctilious, should be thus construed! 

They were glad, Madam, to have an opportunity
to compliment you at my expence. Every one of
my family takes delight in raillying me. But their
joy on the supposed occasion— 
Cl. Do I doubt, Sir, that you have not something
to say, for any-thing you think fit to do? I am speaking
to Captain Tomlinson, Sir. I will you would be
pleased to withdraw—At least to come from behind
my chair. 
And she looked at the Captain, observing, no doubt,
that his eyes seemed to take lessons from mine. 
A fair match, by Jupiter! 
The Captain was disconcerted. The dog had not
had such a blush upon his face for ten years before. I
bit my lip for vexation: Walked about the room; 
but nevertheless took my post again; and blinked
with my eyes to the Captain, as a caution for him to
take more care of his: And then scouling with my
brows, and giving the nod positive, I as good as said,
Resent that, Captain. 
Capt. I hope, Madam, you have no suspicion, that
I am capable— 
Cl. Be not displeased with me, Captain Tomlinson. 
I have told you, that I am not of a suspicious temper. 
Excuse me for the sake of my sincerity. There
is not, I will be bold to say, a sincerer heart in the
world, than hers before you. 
She took out her handkerchief, and put it to her eyes. 
I was going at the instant, after her example, to
vouch for the honesty of my heart; but my conscience
Mennell'd upon me; and would not suffer the meditated
vow to pass my lips. —A devilish thing, thought
I, for a man to be so little himself, when he has most
occasion for himself! 
The villain Tomlinson looked at me with a rueful
face, as if he begged leave to cry for company. It
might have been as well, if he had cried. A feeling
heart, or the tokens of it given by a sensible eye, 

are very reputable things, when kept in countenance
by the occasion. 
And here let me fairly own to thee, that twenty
times in this trying conversation I said to myself, that
could I have thought, that I should have had all this
trouble, and incurred all this guilt, I would have been
honest at first. But why, Jack, is this dear creature
so lovely; yet so invincible? —Ever heardst thou before,
that the sweets of May blossomed in December? 
Capt. Be pleased—be pleased, Madam—if you have
doubts of my honour— 
A whining varlet! He should have been quite angry
—For what gave I him the nod positive? He
should have stalked again to the window, as for his
Whip and Hat. 
Cl. I am only making such observations as my
youth, my inexperience, and my present unhappy
circumstances, suggest to me—A worthy heart (such,
I hope, is Captain Tomlinson's) need not fear an
examination—need not fear being looked into— 
Whatever doubts that man, who has been the Cause
of my Errors, and, as my severe Father imprecated,
the Punisher of the Errors he has caused, might have
had of me, or of my honour, I would have forgiven
him for them, if he had fairly proposed them to me: 
For some doubts perhaps such a man might have of the
future conduct of a creature whom he could induce
to correspond with him against parental prohibition,
and against the lights which her own judgment threw
in upon her: And if he had propounded them to me
like a man and a gentleman, I would have been glad
of the opportunity given me to clear my intentions,
and to have shewn myself entitled to his good opinion
—And I hope you, Sir— 
Capt. I am ready to hear all your doubts, Madam,
and to clear them up— 
Cl. I will only put it, Sir, to your Conscience and
honour— 

The dog sat uneasy: He shuffled with his feet: 
Her eye was upon him: He was therefore, after the
rebuff he had met with, afraid to look at me for my
motions; and now turned his eyes towards me, then
from me, as if he would unlook his own looks. 
Cl.—That all is true, that you have written, and
that you have told me. 
I gave him a right-forward nod, and a frown—as
much as to say, Swear to it, Captain. But the varlet
did not round it off as I would have had him. 
However, he averred that it was. 
He had hoped, he said, that the circumstances with
which his commission was attended, and what he had
communicated to her, which he could not know but
from his dear friend her Uncle, might have shielded
him even from the shadow of suspicion—But I am
contented, said he, stammering, to be thought—to
be thought—what—what you please to think me— 
till, till, you are satisfied— 
A Whore's-bird! 
Cl. The circumstances you refer to, I must own,
ought to shield you, Sir, from suspicion—But the man
before you is a man that would make an angel suspected,
should that angel plead for him. 
I came forward. Traversed the room—Was indeed
in a bloody passion—I have no patience, Madam! — 
And again I bit my unpersuasive lip— 
Cl. No man ought to be impatient at imputations
he is not ashamed to deserve. An innocent man will
not be outrageous upon such imputations. A guilty
man ought not. [Most excellently would this charming
creature cap sentences with Lord M.!] But I am
not now trying you, Sir, [to me] on the foot of
your merits. I am only sorry, that I am constrained
to put questions to this worthier gentleman [Worthier
gentleman, Jack!] which perhaps I ought not to
put, so far as they regard himself. —And I hope,
Captain Tomlinson, that you, who know not Mr. 

Lovelace so well, as, to my unhappiness, I do, and
who have Children of your own, will excuse a poor
young creature, who is deprived of all worthy protection,
and who has been insulted and endangered by
the most designing man in the world, and perhaps by a
confederacy of his creatures. 
There she stopt; and stood up, and looked at me; 
Fear, nevertheless, apparently mingled with her Anger. 
And so it ought. I was glad, however, of
this poor sign of Love—No one fears whom they
value not. 
Womens tongues were licensed, I was going to say— 
But my conscience would not let me call her a woman; 
nor use to her so vulgar a phrase. I could only rave
by my motions; lift up my eyes, spread my hands,
rub my face, pull my wig, and look like a fool. Indeed,
I had a great mind to run mad. Had I been
alone with her, I would; and she should have taken
consequences. 
The Captain interposed in my behalf; gently, however,
and as a man not quite sure that he was himself
acquitted. Some of the pleas we had both insisted
on, he again enforced—And, speaking low—Poor
gentleman! said he, who can but pity him! —Indeed,
Madam, it is easy to see, with all his failings, the
power you have over him! 
Cl. I have no pleasure, Sir, in distressing any one
—Not even him, who has so much distressed me. — 
But, Sir, when I THINK, and when I see him before
me, I cannot command my temper! —Indeed, indeed,
Captain Tomlinson, Mr. Lovelace has not acted
by me either as a grateful, or a generous man; nor
even as a prudent one! —He knows not, as I told him
yesterday, the value of the heart he has insulted! 
There the angel stopt; her handkerchief at her
eyes. 
O Belford, Belford! that she should so greatly excel,
as to make me, at times, appear as a villain in
my own eyes! 

I besought her pardon. I promised, that it should
be the study of my whole life to deserve it. My
faults, I said, whatever they had been, were rather
faults in her apprehension, than in fact. I besought
her to give way to the Expedient I had hit upon—I
repeated it. The Captain enforced it, for her Uncle's
sake. I once more, for the sake of the general Reconciliation; 
for the sake of all my family; for the
sake of preventing further mischief— 
She wept. She seemed staggered in her resolution
—She turned from me. I mentioned the Letter of
Lord M. I besought her to resign to Lady Betty's
mediation all our differences, if she would not forgive
me before she saw her. 
She turned towards me—She was going to speak; 
but her heart was full—And again she turned away
her face—Then, half-turning it to me, her handkerchief
at her eyes—And do you really and indeed expect
Lady Betty and Miss Montague? —And do you
—Again she stopt— 
I answered in a solemn manner. 
She turned from me her whole face, and paused,
and seemed to consider. But, in a passionate accent,
again turning towards me [O how difficult, Jack,
for a Harlowe spirit to forgive!] —Let her Ladyship
come, if she pleases, said she—I cannot, cannot wish
to see her—And if I did see her, and she were to plead
for you, I cannot wish to hear her! —The more I
think, the less can I forgive an attempt, that I am
convinced was intended to destroy me. [A plaguy
strong word for the occasion, supposing she was right!] 
What has my conduct been, that an insult of such a
nature should be offered to me, as it would be a weokness
in me to forgive? I am sunk in my own eyes! 
—And how can I receive a visit that must depress me
more? 
The Captain urged her in my favour with greater
earnestness than before. We both even clamoured as 

I may say, for mercy and forgiveness. [Didst thou
never hear the good folks talk of taking Heaven by
storm?] —Contrition repeatedly avowed—A total Reformation
promised—The happy Expedient again
urged— 
Cl. I have taken my measures. I have gone too
far to recede, or to wish to recede. My mind is prepared
for Adversity. That I have not deserved the
evils I have met with, is my consolation! —I have
written to Miss Howe what my intentions are. My
heart is not with you—It is against you, Mr. Lovelace. 
I had not written to you as I did in the Letter
I left behind me, had I not resolved, whatever became
of me, to renounce you for ever. 
I was full of hope now. Severe as her expressions
were, I saw she was afraid that I should think of what
she had written. And indeed, her Letter is violence
itself. Angry people, Jack, should never write while
their passion holds. 
Lovel. The severity you have shewn me, Madam,
whether by pen or by speech, shall never have place
in my remembrance, but for your honour. In the
light you have taken things, all is deserved, and but
the natural result of virtuous resentment; and I adore
you, even for the pangs you have given me. 
She was silent. She had employment enough with
her handkerchief at her eyes. 
Lovel. You lament sometimes, that you have no
friends of your own Sex to consult with. Miss Rawlins,
I must confess, is too inquisitive to be confided
in [I liked not, thou mayest think, her appeal to
Miss Rawlins]. She may mean well. But I never in
my life knew a person who was fond of prying into
the secrets of others, that was fit to be trusted. The
curiosity of such is governed by pride, which is not
gratified but by whispering about a secret till it becomes
public, in order to shew either their consequence,
or their sagacity. It is so in every case. What 

man or woman, who is covetous of power, or of wealth,
is covetous of either, for the sake of making a right
use of it? —But in the Ladies of my family you may
confide. It is their ambition to think of you, as one
of themselves. Renew but your consent to pass to the
world, for the sake of your Uncle's Expedient, and
for the prevention of mischief, as a Lady some time
married. Lady Betty may be acquainted with the
naked truth; and you may (as she hopes you will) accompany
her to her Seat; and, if it must be so, consider
me as in a State of Penitence or Probation, to
be accepted or rejected, as I may appear to deserve. 
The Captain again clapt his hand on his breast, and
declared upon his honour, that this was a proposal, that
were the case that of his own Daughter, and she were
not resolved upon immediate Marriage (which yet he
thought by far the more eligible choice) he should be
very much concerned, were she to refuse it. 
Cl. Were I with Mr. Lovelace's relations, and to
pass as his Wife to the world, I could not have any
choice. And how could he be then in a State of
Probation? —O Mr. Tomlinson, you are too much
his friend to see into his drift. 
Capt. His friend, Madam, as I said before, as I
am Yours and your Uncle's, for the sake of a general
Reconciliation, which must begin with a better understanding
between yourselves. 
Lovel. Only, my dearest Life, resolve to attend the
arrival and visit of Lady Betty: And permit her to
arbitrate between us. 
Capt. There can be no harm in that, Madam. 
You can suffer no inconvenience from that. If Mr.
Lovelace's offence be such, that a woman of Lady
Betty's character judges it to be unpardonable, why
then— 
Cl. [interrupting; and to me] If I am not invaded
by you, Sir—If I am (as I ought to be) my own mistress,
I think to stay here, in this honest house [And 

then had I an Eye-beam, as the Captain calls it, flashed
at me] till I receive a Letter from Miss Howe. That,
I hope, will be in a day or two. If in that time the
Ladies come whom you expect, and if they are desirous
to see the creature whom you have made unhappy,
I shall know whether I can or cannot receive
their visit. 
She turned short to the door, and retiring, went upstairs
to her chamber. 
O Sir, said the Captain, as soon as she was gone,
what an angel of a woman is this! I have been, and I
am, a very wicked man. But if any-thing should
happen amiss to this admirable Lady, thro' my means,
I shall have more cause for self-reproach, than for all
the bad actions of my life put together. 
And his eyes glistened. 
Nothing can happen amiss, thou sorrowful dog! — 
What can happen amiss? —Are we to form our opinion
of things by the romantic notions of a girl, who
supposes that to be the greatest which is the slightest
of evils? Have I not told thee our whole Story? Has
she not broken her promise? Did I not generously
spare her, when in my power? I was decent, tho' I
had her at such advantage. Greater liberties have I
taken with girls of character at a common Romping-bout,
and all has been laughed off, and Handkerchief
and Headcloaths adjusted, and Petticoats shaken to
rights, in my presence. Never man, in the like circumstances,
and resolved as I was resolved, goaded on
as I was goaded on, as well by her own Sex, as by
the impulses of a violent passion, was ever so decent. 
Yet what mercy does she shew me? 
Now, Jack, this pitiful dog was such another unfortunate
one as thyself—His arguments serving to
confirm me in the very purpose he brought them to
prevail upon me to give up. Had he left me to myself,
to the tenderness of my own nature, moved as I
was when the Lady withdrew; and had he sat down, 

and made odious faces, and said nothing; it is very
possible, that I should have taken the chair over-against
him which she had quitted; and have cried and blubbered
with him for half an hour together. But the
varlet to argue with me! —To pretend to convince a
man, who knows in his heart that he is doing a wrong
thing! —He must needs think, that this would put me
upon trying what I could say for myself; and when the
excited compunction can be carried from the heart to
the lips, it must evaporate in words. 
Thou perhaps, in this place, wouldst have urged
the same pleas that he urged. What I answered to
him therefore may do for thee, and spare thee the
trouble of writing, and me of reading, a good deal of
nonsense. 
Capt. You were pleased to tell me, Sir, that you
only proposed to try her virtue; and that you believed
you should actually marry her. 
Lovel. So I shall, and cannot help it. I have no
doubt but I shall. And as to trying her, is she not
now in the height of her trial? Have I not reason to
think that she is coming about? Is she not now yielding
up her resentment for an attempt which she thinks
she ought not to forgive? —And if she do, may she
not forgive the last attempt? —Can she, in a word,
resent that more than she does this? —Women often,
for their own sakes, will keep the last secret; but will
ostentatiously din the ears of gods and men with their
clamours upon a successless offer. It was my folly,
my weakness, that I gave her not more cause for
this her unsparing violence! 
Capt. O Sir, you never will be able to subdue this
Lady without Force. 
Lovel. Well, then, puppy, must I not endeavour
to find a proper time and place— 
Capt. Forgive me, Sir! But can you think of Force
to such a fine creature? 
Lovel. Force, indeed, I abhor the thought of; and 

for what, thinkest thou, have I taken all the pains I
have taken, and engaged so many persons in my cause,
but to avoid the necessity of violent compulsion? 
But yet, imaginest thou that I expect direct consent
from such a Lover of Forms as this Lady is known
to be? Let me tell thee, M`Donald, that thy master
Belford has urged on thy side of the question all that
thou canst urge. Must I have every sorry fellow's
conscience to pacify, as well as my own? —By my
Soul, Patrick, she has a friend here [clapping my
hand on my breast] that pleads for her with greater
and more irresistible eloquence, than all the men in
the world can plead for her. And had she not escaped
me? —And yet how have I answered my first design
of trying her (a) , and in her the Virtue of the most
virtuous of the Sex? —Perseverance, man! Perseverance
—What! wouldst thou have me decline a trial
that may make for the honour of a Sex we all so
dearly love? 
Then, Sir, you have no thoughts—no thoughts— 
[looking still more sorrowfully] of marrying this wonderful
Lady? 
Yes, yes, Patrick, but I have. But let me, first,
to gratify my pride, bring down hers. Let me see,
that she loves me well enough to forgive me for my
own sake. Has she not heretofore lamented, that she
staid not in her Father's house, tho' the consequence
must have been, if she had, that she would have been
the wife of the odious Solmes? If now she be brought
to consent to be mine, seest thou not, that the Reconciliation
with her detested relations is the inducement,
as it always was, and not Love of me? —Neither her
Virtue nor her Love can be established but upon full
trial; the last trial—But if her resistance and resentment
be such as hitherto I have reason to expect they
will be, and if I find in that resentment less of hatred
of Me, than of the Fact, then shall she be mine in 

her own way. Then, hateful as is the Life of Shackles
to me, will I marry her. 
Well, Sir, I can only say, that I am dough in your
hands, to be moulded into what shape you please. But
if, as I said before— 
None of thy Saids-before, Patrick. I remember
all thou saidst—And I know all thou canst further say
—Thou art only, Pontius Pilate like, washing thine
own hands (don't I know thee?) that thou mayst
have something to silence thy conscience with by
loading me. But we have gone too far to recede. 
Are not all our engines in readiness? —Dry up thy
sorrowful eyes. Let unconcern and heart's ease once
more take possession of thy solemn features. Thou
hast hitherto performed extremely well. Shame not
thy past by thy future behaviour; and a rich reward
awaits thee. If thou art dough, be dough; and I
slapt him on the shoulder—Resume but thy former
shape—And I'll be answerable for the event. 
He bowed assent and compliance: Went to the
glass; and began to untwist and unsadden his features: 
Pull'd his wig right, as if that, as well as his
head and heart, had been discomposed by his compunction; 
and once more became old Lucifer's and
mine. 
But didst thou think, Jack, that there was so much
—What-shall-I-call-it?—in this Tomlinson? Didst
thou imagine, that such a fellow as that, had bowels? 
That nature, so long dead and buried in him, as to
all humane effects, should thus revive and exert itself? 
—Yet why do I ask this question of thee, who, to
my equal surprize, hast shewn, on the same occasion,
the like compassionate sensibilities? 
As to Tomlinson, it looks as if Poverty had made
him the wicked fellow he is; as Plenty and Wantonness
have made us what we are. Necessity, after all,
is the Test of Principle. But what is there in this dull
word, or thing, called Honesty, that even I, who 

cannot in my present views be served by it, cannot
help thinking even the accidental Emanations of it
amiable in Tomlinson, tho' demonstrated in a Female
case; and judging better of him for being capable
of such? 