



My honoured and dear Parents,
I Hope you will excuse my long Silence, which has
been owing to several Causes, and having had
nothing new to entertain you with: And yet this last
is but a poor Excuse neither to you, who think every
trifling Subject agreeable from your Daughter. 
I daily expect here my Lord and Lady Davers. 
This gives me no small Pleasure, and yet it is mingled
with some Uneasiness at times, lest I should not,
when view'd so intimately near, behave myself answerably
to her Ladyship's Expectations. But this
I resolve upon, I will not endeavour to move out of
the Sphere of my own Capacity, in order to emulate
her Ladyship. She has, and must have, Advantages,
by Conversation, as well as Education, which
it would be Arrogance in me to assume, or to think
of imitating. 
All that I will attempt to do, therefore, shall be,
to shew such a respectful Obligingness to my Lady,
as shall be consistent with the Condition to which I
am raised; that so her Ladyship may not have Reason
to reproach me of Pride in my Exaltation, nor
her dear Brother to rebuke me for Meanness in condescending:
And, as to my Family Management, I
am the less afraid of Inspection, because by the
natural Byass of my own Mind, I bless God, I am
above dark Reserves, and have not one selsish or sordid
View, that should make me wish to avoid the
most scrutinizing Eye. 
I have begun a Correspondence with Miss Darnford,
a young Lady of uncommon Merit. But you
know her Character from my former Writings. She
is very solicitous to hear of every thing that concerns 

me, and particularly how Lady Davers and I agree
together. I loved her from the Moment I saw her
first; for she has the least Pride, and the most Benevolence
and solid Thought, I ever knew in a young
Lady, and knows not what it is to envy any one. 
I shall write to her often: And as I shall have so
many Avocations besides to fill up my Time, I know
you will excuse me, if I procure from Miss, as I hope
to do, the Return of my Letters to her, for your
Perusal, and the Entertainment of your Leisure
Hours. This will give you, from time to time, the
Accounts you desire of all that happens here. But
as to what relates to our own Particulars, I beg you
will never spare writing, as I shall not answering; 
for it is one of my greatest Delights, that I have such
dear, such worthy Parents, (as, I hope in God, I
long shall) to bless me, and to correspond with me. 
The Papers I send herewith will afford you some
Diversion; particularly, those relating to Sir Simon
Darnford; and I must desire, that when you have
perused them, (as well as what I shall send for the
future) you will return them to me. 
Mr. Longman gave me great Pleasure, on his last
Return from you, in his Account of your Health,
and the Satisfaction you take in your happy Lot; and
I must recite to you a brief Conversation, on this
Occasion, that, I dare say, will please you as much as
it did me. 
After he had been adjusting some Affairs with his
dear Principal, which took them up two Hours, my
best Beloved sent for me. —My Dear, said he, taking
my Hand, and seating me down by him, and
making the good old Gentleman sit down, (for he
will always rise at my Approach) Mr. Longman and
I have settled in two Hours some Accounts, which
would have taken up as many Months with some Persons. 
But never was an exacter or more methodical 

Accomptant than Mr. Longman: He gives me,
(greatly to my Satisfaction, because I know it will
delight you) an Account of the Kentish Concern,
and of the Pleasure your Father and Mother take in
it. —Now, my Charmer, said he, I see your sweet
Eyes begin to glisten:–––– O how this Subject raises
your whole Soul to the Windows of it!––– Never
was so dutiful a Daughter, Mr. Longman, and never
did Parents better deserve a Daughter's Duty! 
I endeavour'd before Mr. Longman to rein in a
Gratitude, that my throbbing Heart confessed thro'
my Handkerchief, as I could perceive: But the good
old Gentleman could not hinder his from shewing itself
at his worthy Eyes, to see how much I was favour'd
––––oppress'd, I should say, with the dearest
Gentleman's tender Goodness to me, and kind expressions. 
Excuse me, Sir, excuse me, Madam, said
he, wiping his Chceks: My Delight to see such Merit
so justly rewarded, will not be contained, I think.––– 
And so he got up, and walked to the Window. 
Well, good Mr. Longman, said I, as he returned
towards us, you give me the Pleasure to know, that
my Father and Mother are well; and happy then
they must be, in a Goodness and Bounty, that I, and
many more, rejoice in. 
Well and happy, Madam! –––Ay that they are indeed! 
And a worthier Couple never lived, I assure
you. Most nobly do they go on, in the Farm. 
Your Honour's one of the happiest Gentlemen in
the World. All the Good you do, returns upon
you in a Trice. It may well be said, You cast your
Bread upon the Waters; for it presently comes to
you again, richer and heavier than when you threw
it in. All the Kentish Tenants, Madam, are hugely
delighted with their good Steward: Every thing prospers
under his Management: The Gentry love both 

him and my Dame; and the poor People adore
them. Indeed they do a Pow'r of Good, in visiting
their poor Neighbours, and giving them Cordials,
and such-like; insomuch that Colicks, Agues, and
twenty Distempers, nipp'd in the Bud, fly before
them. So that I reckon the Doctors will soon be
the only Enemies they have in the World: For, in a
while, there will be no Occasion for one within ten
Miles of their Habitation. 
In this manner ran on Mr. Longman, to my inexpressible
Delight, you may believe; and when he
withdrew, 'Tis an honest Soul, said my dear Mr. B.
I love him for his respectful Love to my Angel, and
his Value for the worthy Pair. Very glad I am, that
every thing answers their Wishes. May they long
live, and be happy! 
The dear Gentleman makes me spring to his Arms,
whenever he touches this String: For he speaks always
thus generously and kindly of you; and is glad
to hear, he says, that you don't live only to yourselves:
And now-and-then adds, That your Prudence
and mine do more Credit to his Choice, than might
have been done him by an Alliance with the first
Quality: Since every Mouth, he is pleased to say,
is full of our Merits. How pleasing, how transporting
rather, my dear Parents, must this Goodness be
to your happy Daughter! And how could I forbear
repeating these kind Things to you, that you may see
how well every thing is taken that you do? 
When the expected Visit from Lord and Lady
Davers is over, the approaching Winter will carry
us to London; and as I shall then be nearer to you,
we may more frequently hear from one another,
which, to be sure, will be a great Heightening to my
Pleasures. 
But I have such an Account given me of the Immoralities
to which Persons are exposed there, along 

with the publick Diversions, that it takes off a little
from the Satisfaction I should otherwise have in the
Thought of going thither. For they say, Quarrels,
and Duels, and Gallantries, as they are called, so
often happen at London, that those Enormities are
heard of without the least Wonder or Surprize. 
This makes me very thoughtful at times. But God,
I hope, will preserve our dearest Benefactor, and
continue to me his Affection, and then I shall be
always happy; especially while your Healths and
Felicity confirm and crown the Delights of 
Your ever dutiful Daughter,
P. B. 

