



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sat. Morn, 8 o'Clock, April 8. 
Whether you will blame me, or not, I cannot tell,
But I have deposited a letter confirming my
former resolution to leave this house on Monday next,
within the hours, if possible, prefixed in my former. 
I have not kept a copy of it. But this is the substance: 

I tell him, ‘That I have no way to avoid the determin'd
resolution of my friends in behalf of Mr.
Solmes; but by abandoning this house by his assistance.’ 
I have not pretended to make a merit with him on
this score; for I plainly tell him, ‘That could I,
without an unpardonable sin, die when I would, I
would sooner make death my choice, than take a
step, which all the world, if not my own heart,
will condemn me for taking.’ 
I tell him, ‘That I shall not try to bring any
other cloaths with me, than those I shall have on; 
and those but my common wearing-apparel; lest I
should be suspected. That I must expect to be deny'd
the possession of my estate: But that I am determin'd
never to consent to a litigation with my father,
were I to be reduced to ever so low a state: 
So that the protection I am to be obliged for, to any
one, must be alone for the distress-sake: And yet,
that I have too much pride to think of marrying,
until I have a fortune that shall make me appear
upon a foot of equality with, and void of obligation
to, any-body: That, therefore, he will have nothing
to hope for from this step, that he had not before: 
And that, in every light, I reserve to myself to
accept or refuse his address, as his behaviour and circumspection
shall appear to me to deserve.’ 
I tell him, ‘That I think it best to go into a private
lodging, in the neighbourhood of his aunt Lawrance; 
and not to her house; that it may not appear
to the world, that I have refuged myself in his
family; and that a reconciliation with my friends,
may not, on that account, be made impracticable: 
That I will send for thither my faithful Hannah; 
and apprize only Miss Howe where I am: That he
shall instantly leave me, and go to London, or to
one of his uncle's seats; and (as he had promised) 

not come near me, but by my leave; contenting
himself with a correspondence by letter only. 
‘That if I find myself in danger of being discovered,
and carried back by violence, I will then
throw myself directly into the protection of either
of his aunts, who will receive me: But This only
in case of absolute necessity; for that it will be more
to my reputation, for me, by the best means I can,
(taking advantage of my privacy) to enter by a second
or third hand into a treaty of reconciliation
with my friends. 
‘That I must, however, plainly tell him, That
if, in this treaty, my friends insist upon my resolving
against marrying him, I will engage to comply
with them; provided they will allow me to promise
him, that I will never be any other man's, while
he remains single, or is living: That this is a compliment
I am willing to pay to him, in return for
the trouble and pains he has taken, and the usage
he has met with, on my account: Altho' I intimate,
that he may, in a great measure, thank himself, and
the little regard he has paid to his reputation, for the
slights he has met with.’ 
I tell him, ‘That I may, in this privacy, write to
my cousin Morden, and, if possible, interest him
in my cause. 
‘I take some brief notice of his alternatives.’ 
You must think my dear, that this unhappy force
upon me, and this projected flight, makes it necessary
for me to account to him much sooner than it
agrees with my stomach to do, for every part of my
conduct. 
‘It is not to be expected, I tell him, that your
mamma will embroil herself, or suffer you, or Mr.
Hickman to be embroiled, on my account: And as
to his proposal of my going to London, I am such
an absolute stranger to every-body there, and have 

such a bad opinion of the place, that I cannot by
any means think of going thither; except I should
be induced, some time hence, by the Ladies of his
family to attend them. 
‘As to the meeting he is desirous of, I think it by
no means proper; especially as it is so likely that I
may soon see him. But that if any thing occurs to
induce me to change my mind, as to withdrawing,
I may then, very probably, take the first opportunity
to see him, and give him my reasons for that
change.’ 
This, my dear, I the less scrupled to write, that
I might qualify him for such a disappointment, should
I give it; he having, besides, behaved so very unexceptionably,
when he surprized me some time ago in
the lonely woodhouse. 
Finally, ‘I commend myself, as a person in distress,
and merely as such, to his honour, and to
his aunt's protection. I repeat [most cordially, I am
sure!] my deep concern for being forced to take a
step so disagreeable, and so derogatory to my
honour. And having told him, that I will endeavour
to obtain leave to dine in the Ivy summer-house 
(a) , and to send Betty of some errand, when
there, I leave the rest to him; but imagine, that
about four o'clock will be a proper time for him to
contrive some signal to let me know he is at hand,
and for me to unbolt the garden-door.’ 
I added, by way of postscript, ‘That their suspicions 

seeming to increase, I advise him to contrive
to send or come to the usual place, as frequently
as possible, in the interval of time, till Monday morning
ten or eleven o' clock; as something may possibly
happen to make me alter my mind.’ 
O my dear Miss Howe!—what a sad, sad thing is
the necessity, forced upon me, for all this preparation
and contrivance! —But it is now too late! —But how! 
—Too late, did I say? —What a word is that!—what
a dreadful thing, were I to repent, to find it to be
too late, to remedy the apprehended evil! 
Saturday, Ten o' Clock. 
Mr. Solmes is here. He is to dine with his new
relations, as Betty tells me he already calls them. 
He would have thrown himself in my way, once
more: But I hurry'd up to my prison, in my return
from my garden-walk, to avoid him. 
I had, when in the garden, the curiosity to see, if
my letter were gone: I cannot say, with an intention
to take it back again, if it had not; because I see not
how I could do otherwise than I have done. Yet
what a caprice was this! —For when I found it gone,
I began (as yesterday-morning) to wish it had not: 
For no other reason, I believe, than because it was out
of my power. 
A strange diligence in this man! —He says, he almost
lives upon the place; and I think so too. 
He mentions, as you will see in his letter, four
several disguises, which he put on in one day. It is a
wonder, nevertheless, that he has not been seen by
some of our tenants: For it is impossible that any disguise
can hide the gracefulness of his figure. But this
is to be said, that the adjoining grounds being all in
our own hands, and no common foot-paths near that
part of the garden, and thro' the park and coppice,
nothing can be more bye and unfrequented. 
Then they are less watchful, I believe, over my 

garden-walks, and my poultry-visits, depending, as
my aunt hinted, upon the bad character they have
taken so much pains to fasten upon Mr. Lovelace. 
This, they think (and justly think), must fill me
with doubts. And then the regard I have hitherto
had for my reputation, is another of their securities. 
Were it not for these two, they would not surely
have used me as they have done; and at the same
time left me the opportunities, which I have several
times had, to get away, had I been disposed to do so 
(a) : And indeed, their dependencies on both these
motives would have been well founded, had they kept
but tolerable measures with me. 
Then, perhaps, they have no notion of the backdoor; 
as it is seldom open'd, and leads to a place so
pathless and lonesome (b) . If not, there can be no other
way to go off (if one would), without discovery, unless
by the plashy lane, so full of springs, by which your
servant reaches the solitary wood-house; to which
lane one must descend from a high bank, that bounds
the poultry-yard. For, as to the front-way, you
know, one must pass thro' the house to That, and in
sight of the parlours, and the servants hall; then have
the large open court-yard to go through, and,
by means of the iron-gate, be full in view, as one passes 

over the lawn, for a quarter of a mile together; 
the young plantations of elms and limes affording yet
but little shade or covert. 
The Ivy summer-house is the most convenient for
this affecting purpose of any spot in the garden, as it
is not far from the back-door, and yet in another
alley, as you may remember. Then it is seldom resorted
to by any-body else, except in the summer-months,
because it is cool. When they loved me,
they would often, for this reason, object to my long
continuance in it: —But now, it is no matter what
becomes of me. Besides, cold is a bracer, as my brother
said yesterday. 
Here I will desposite what I have written. Let me
have your prayers, my dear; and your approbation, or
your censure, of the steps I have taken: For yet it may
not be quite too late to revoke the appointment. I am 
Your most affectionate and faithful
Cl. Harlowe. 
Why will you send your servant empty-handed? 
