



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sat. Mar. 4. 
Would you not have thought that something
might have been obtained in my favour, from
an offer so reasonable, from an expedient so proper, as
I imagine, to put a tolerable end, as from myself, to a
correspondence I hardly know how otherwise, with
safety to some of my family, to get rid of? —But my
Brother's plan (which my Mother spoke of, and of
which I have in vain endeavoured to procure a copy,
with a design to take it to pieces, and expose it, as I
question not there is room to do) joined with my Father's
impatience of contradiction, are irresistible. 
I have not been in bed all night; nor am I in the
least drowsy. Expectation, and hope, and doubt (an
uneasy state!) kept me sufficiently wakeful. I stept
down at my usual time, that it might not be known
I had not been in bed; and gave directions in the family-way. 
About eight o'clock Shorey came to me from my
Mother with orders to attend her in her chamber. 
My Mother had been weeping, I saw by her eyes: 
But her aspect seemed to be less tender, and less affectionate,
than the day before; and this, as soon as I
entered into her presence, struck me with an awe,
which gave a great damp to my spirits. 
Sit down, Clary Harlowe; I shall talk to you by-and-by: 
And continued looking into a drawer among
Laces and Linen, in a way neither busy nor unbusy. 
I believe it was a quarter of an hour before she spoke 

to me (my heart throbbing with the suspense all the
time); and then she asked me coldly, What directions
I had given for the day? 
I shewed her the Bill of fare for this day, and tomorrow,
if, I said, it pleased her to approve of it. 
She made a small alteration in it; but with an air so
cold and so solemn, as added to my emotions. 
Mr. Harlowe talks of dining out to-day, I think, at
my Brother Antony's.— 
Mr. Harlowe!—Not my Father! —Have I not then
a Father!—thought I? 
Sit down when I bid you. 
I sat down. 
You look very sullen, Clary. 
I hope not, Madam. 
If children would always be children—parents— 
And there she stopt. 
She then went to her toilette, and looked in the glass,
and gave half a sigh—The other half, as if she would
not have sighed could she have helped it, she gently
hem'd away. 
I don't love to see the girl look so sullen. 
Indeed, Madam, I am not sullen. —And I arose,
and, turning from her, drew out my handkerchief; 
for the tears ran down my cheeks. 
I thought, by the glass before me, I saw the Mother
in her softened eye cast towards me: But her words
confirmed not the hoped-for tenderness. 
One of the most provoking things in the world is,
to have people cry for what they can help! 
I wish to heaven I could, Madam! —And I sobbed
again. 
Tears of penitence and sobs of perverseness are
mighty well suited! —You may go up to your chamber. 
I shall talk with you by-and-by. 
I courtesied with reverence. 
Mock me not with outward gestures of respect. 
The heart, Clary, is what I want. 

Indeed, Madam, you have it. It is not so much
mine as my Mamma's! 
Fine talking! —As somebody says, If words were
to pass for duty, Clarissa Harlowe would be the dutifullest
child breathing. 
God bless that somebody! —Be it whom it will, God
bless that somebody! —And I courtesied, and, pursuant
to her last command, was going. 
She seemed struck; but was to be angry with me. 
So turning from me, she spoke with quickness,
Whither now, Clary Harlowe? 
You commanded me, Madam, to go to my chamber. 
I see you are very ready to go out of my presence. — 
Is your compliance the effect of sullenness, or obedience? 
—You are very ready to leave me. 
I could hold no longer; but threw myself at her
feet: O my dearest Mamma! Let me know all I am
to suffer: Let me know what I am to be! —I will bear
it, if I can bear it: But your displeasure I cannot
bear! 
Leave me, leave me, Clary Harlowe! —No kneeling! 
—Limbs so supple; Will so stubborn! —Rise, I
tell you. 
I cannot rise! I will disobey my Mamma, when
she bids me leave her without being reconciled to me! 
No sullens, my Mamma: No perverseness: But, worse
than either: This is direct disobedience! —Yet tear
not yourself from me! [wrapping my arms about her
as I kneeled; she struggling to get from me; my face
lifted up to hers, with eyes running over, that spoke
not my heart if they were not all humility and reverence] 
You must not, must not, tear yourself from
me! [for still the dear Lady struggled, and looked this
way and that, in a sweet disorder, as if she knew not
what to do]. —I will neither rise, nor leave you, nor
let you go, till you say you are not angry with me. 
O thou ever-moving child of my heart! [folding 

her dear arms about my neck, as mine embraced her
knees] Why was this task—But leave me! —You
have discomposed me beyond expression! Leave me,
my dear! —I won't be angry with you—if I can
help it—if you'll be good. 
I arose trembling, and hardly knowing what I did,
or how I stood or walked, withdrew to my chamber. 
My Hannah followed me as soon as she heard me quit
my Mother's presence, and with salts and spring-water
just kept me from fainting; and that was as much as
she could do. It was near two hours before I could so
far recover myself as to take up my pen, to write to
you how unhappily my hopes have ended. 
My Mother went down to breakfast. I was not fit
to appear: But if I had been better, I suppose I should
not have been sent for; since the permission for my
attending her down, was given by my Father (when in
my chamber) only on condition that she found me
worthy of the name of Daughter. That, I doubt, I
never shall be in his opinion, if he be not brought to
change his mind as to this Mr. Solmes. 