



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday, April 21. 
As it was not probable, that the Lady could give so
particular an account of her own confusion, in the
affecting scene she mentions on Mr. Lovelace's offering
himself to her acceptance; the following extracts are made
from his Letter of the above date. 
And now, Belford, what wilt thou say, if like the
fly buzzing about the bright taper, I had like to have
sindged the silken wings of my liberty? Never was man
in greater danger of being caught in his own snares: 
All my views anticipated; all my schemes untried; the
admirable creature not brought to town; nor one effort
made to know if she be really Angel or Woman. 
I offered myself to her acceptance, with a suddenness,
'tis true, that gave her no time to wrap herself in
reserves; and in terms less tender than fervent, tending
to upbraid her for her past indifference, and to remind 

her of her Injunctions: For it was the fear of her Brother,
not her Love of me, that had inclined her to
dispense with those Injunctions. 
I never beheld so sweet a confusion. What a glory
to the pencil, could it do justice to it, and to the mingled
impatience which visibly informed every feature of the
most meaning and most beautiful face in the world! She
hemmed twice or thrice: Her look, now so charmingly
silly, then so sweetly significant; till at last the lovely
teazer, teazed by my hesitating expectation of her answer,
out of all power of articulate speech, burst into
tears, and was turning from me with precipitation,
when, presuming to fold her in my happy arms—O
think not, best beloved of my heart, said I, think not,
that this motion, which you may believe to be so contrary
to your former Injunctions, proceeds from a design
to avail myself of the cruelty of your relations: If I have
disobliged you by it (and you know with what respectful
tenderness I have presumed to hint it) it shall be my utmost
care for the future—There I stopt— 
Then she spoke; but with vexation—I am—I am— 
very unhappy—Tears trickling down her crimson
cheeks; and her sweet face, as my arms still encircled
the finest waist in the world, sinking upon my shoulder; 
the dear creature so absent that she knew not the
honour she permitted me. 
But why, but why unhappy, my dearest Life? said
I: —And the gratitude that ever overflowed the heart of
the most obliged of men— 
Justice to myself there stopt my mouth: For what
gratitude did I owe her for obligations so involuntary? 
Then recovering herself, and her usual reserves, and
struggling to free herself from my clasping arms, How
now, Sir! said she, with a cheek more indignantly
glowing, and eyes of a fiercer lustre. 
I gave way to her angry struggle; but, absolutely
overcome by so charming a display of innocent confusion,
I caught hold of her hand as she was flying from 

me; and, kneeling at her feet, O my angel, said I,
(quite destitute of reserve, and hardly knowing the tenor
of my own speech; and had a parson been there, I had
certainly been a gone man) receive the vows of your
faithful Lovelace. Make him yours, and only yours,
for ever. This will answer every end. Who will
dare to form plots and stratagems against my Wife? 
That you are not so, is the ground of all their foolish
attempts, and of their insolent hopes in Solmes's favour. 
—O be mine! —I beseech you (thus on my knee I beseech
you) to be mine. We shall then have all the
world with us. And every-body will applaud an event
that every-body expects. 
Was the devil in me! I no more intended all this
ecstatic nonsense, than I thought the same moment of
flying in the air! All power is with this charming
creature. It is I, not she, at this rate, that must fail
in the arduous trial. 
Didst thou ever before hear of a man uttering solemn
things by an involuntary impulse, in defiance of premeditation,
and of all his own proud schemes? But
this sweet creature is able to make a man forego every
purpose of his heart that is not favourable to her. And
I verily think I should be inclined to spare her all further
trial [And yet what trial has she had?] were it not
for the contention that her vigilance has set on foot,
which shall overcome the other. Thou knowest my
generosity to my uncontending Rosebud—And sometimes
do I qualify my ardent aspirations after even this
very fine creature, by this reflection: —That the most
charming woman on earth, were she an Empress, can
excel the meanest, in the customary visibles only— 
Such is the equality of the dispensation, to the Prince
and the Peasant, in this prime gift, Woman. 
Well, but what was the result of this involuntary
impulse on my part? —Wouldst thou not think, I was
taken at my offer? —An offer so solemnly made, and on
one knee too? 

No such thing! —The pretty trifler let me off as
easily as I could have wished. 
Her Brother's project; and to find, that there were
no hopes of a Reconciliation for her; and the apprehension
she had of the mischiefs that might ensue—These,
not my offer, nor love of me, were the causes to which
she ascribed all her sweet confusion—An Ascription that
is high treason against my sovereign pride—To make
marriage with me, but a second-place refuge; and as
good as to tell me, that her confusion was owing to
her concern that there were no hopes that my enemies
would accept of her intended offer to renounce a man
who had ventured his life for her, and was still ready
to run the same risk in her behalf! 
I re-urged her to make me happy—But I was to be
postponed to her Cousin Morden's arrival. On him
are now placed all her hopes. 
I raved; but to no purpose. 
Another Letter was to be sent, or had been sent, to
her Aunt Hervey; to which she hoped an Answer. 
Yet sometimes I think, that fainter and fainter would
have been her procrastinations, had I been a man of
courage. —But so fearful was I of offending! 
A confounded thing! The Man to be so bashful; 
the Woman to want so much courting! —How shall
two such come together; no kind mediatress in the way? 
But I must be contented. 'Tis seldom, however, that
a Love so ardent as mine meets with a Spirit so resigned
in the same person. But true Love, I am now convicted,
only wishes: Nor has it any active will but that
of the adored object. 
But, O the charming creature, again of herself to
mention London! Had Singleton's plot been of my own
contriving, a more happy expedient could not have been
thought of to induce her to resume her purpose of going
thither; nor can I divine what could be her reason for
postponing it. 
I inclose the Letter from Joseph Leman, which I 

mentioned to thee in mine of Monday last (a) , with my
Answer to it. I cannot resist the vanity that urges me
to the communication. Otherwise, it were better,
perhaps, that I suffer thee to imagine, that this Lady's
Stars fight against her, and dispense the opportunities in
my favour which are only the consequences of my own
superlative invention. 