



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

But what a pretty scheme of life hast thou drawn out
for thyself, and thy old widow! By my soul, Jack,
I am mightily taken with it. There is but one thing
wanting in it; and that will come of course: Only to be
in the commission, and one of the quorum. Thou art already
provided with a clerk, as good as thou'lt want; 
for thou understandest Law, and she Conscience: A
good Lord Chancellor between ye! —I should take prodigious
pleasure to hear thee decide in a bastard case, upon
thy new notions, and old remembrances. 
But raillery apart [All gloom at heart, by Jupiter! altho'
the pen and the countenance assume airs of levity!]: 

If, after all, thou canst so easily repent and reform, as
thou thinkest thou canst: If thou canst thus shake off thy
old sins, and thy old habits: And if thy old master will
so readily dismiss so tried and so faithful a servant, and
permit thee thus calmly to enjoy thy new system; no room
for scandal; all temptation ceasing: And if at last (thy
reformation warranted and approved by time) thou marriest,
and livest honest: —Why, Belford, I cannot but say,
that if all these IF's come to pass, thou standest a good
chance to be a happy man! 
All I think, as I told thee in my last, is, that the devil
knows his own interest too well, to let thee off so easily. 
Thou thyself tellest me, that we cannot repent when we
will. And indeed I found it so: For, in my lucid intervals,
I made good resolutions: But, as health turned its
blyth side to me, and opened my prospects of recovery,
all my old inclinations and appetites returned; and this
letter, perhaps, will be a thorough conviction to thee,
that I am as wild a fellow as ever, or in the way to be so. 
Thou askest me, very seriously, If, upon the faint sketch
thou hast drawn, thy new scheme be not infinitely preferable
to any of those which we have so long pursued? — 
Why, Jack—Let me reflect—Why, Belford—I can't say
but it is. It is really, as Biddy in the play says, a good
comfortable scheme. 
But when thou tellest me, That it was thy misfortune
to love me, because thy value for me made thee a wickeder
man than otherwise thou wouldst have been; I desire thee
to revolve this assertion: And I am persuaded, that thou
wilt not find thyself in so right a train as thou imaginest. 
No false colourings, no glosses, does a true penitent
aim at. Debasement, diffidence, mortification, contrition,
are all near of kin, Jack, and inseparable from a repentant
spirit. —If thou knowest not this, thou art not got three
steps (out of threescore) towards repentance and amendment. 
And let me remind thee, before the grand accuser
comes to do it, that thou wert ever above being a passive
follower in iniquity. Tho' thou hadst not so good an invention
as he to whom thou writest, thou hadst as active
an heart for mischief, as ever I met with in man. 
Then for improving an hint, thou wert always a true 

Englishman. I never started a roguery, that did not come
out of thy forge in a manner ready anvilled and hammered
for execution, when I have sometimes been at a loss
to make any-thing of it myself. 
What indeed made me appear to be more wicked than
thee, was, that I being a handsome fellow, and thou an
ugly one, when we had started a game, and hunted it
down, the poor frighted puss generally chose to throw
herself into my paws, rather than into thine: And then,
disappointed, hast thou wiped thy blubber-lips, and marched
off to start a new game, calling me a wicked fellow all
the while. 
In short, Belford, thou wert an excellent starter and
setter. The old women were not afraid for their daughters,
when they saw such a face as thine. But, when I
came, whip, was the key turned upon their girls. And
yet all signified nothing; for Love, upon occasion, will
draw an elephant thro' a key-hole. But for thy Heart,
Belford, who ever doubted that? 
Nor even in this affair, that sticks most upon me, and
which my conscience makes such a handle of against me,
art thou so innocent as thou fansiest thyself. Thou wilt
stare at this: But it is true; and I will convince thee of
it in an instant. 
Thou sayst, thou wouldst have saved the lady from the
ruin she met with. Thou art a pretty fellow for this: For
how wouldst thou have saved her? What methods didst
thou take to save her? 
Thou knewest my designs all along. Hadst thou a
mind to make thyself a good title to the merit to which
thou now pretendest to lay claim, thou shouldest, like a
true knight-errant, have sought to set the lady free from
her inchanted castle. Thou shouldst have apprised her of
her danger; have stolen in, when the giant was out of the
way; or, hadst thou the true spirit of chivalry upon thee,
and nothing else would have done, have killed the giant; 
and then something wouldst thou have had to brag of. 
‘O but the giant was my friend: He reposed a confidence
in me: And I should have betrayed my friend,
and his confidence!’ This thou wouldst have pleaded,
no doubt. But try this plea upon thy present principles, 

and thou wilt see what a caitiff thou wert to let it have
weight with thee, upon an occasion where a breach of confidence
is more excuseable than to keep the secret. 
Thou canst not pretend, and I know thou wilt not, that
thou wert afraid of thy life by taking such a measure: For
a braver fellow lives not, nor a more fearless, than Jack
Belford. I remember several instances, and thou canst
not forget them, where thou hast ventured thy bones, thy
neck, thy life, against numbers, in a cause of roguery; 
and hadst thou had a spark of that virtue, which now thou
art willing to flatter thyself thou hast, thou wouldst surely
have run a risk to save an innocence, and a virtue, that it
became every man to protect and espouse. This is the
truth of the case, greatly as it makes against myself. But
I hate an hypocrite from my soul. 
I believe I should have killed thee at the time, if I could,
hadst thou betrayed me thus. But I am sure now, that I
would have thanked thee for it, with all my heart; and
thought thee more a father, and a friend, than my real
father, and my best friend—And it was natural for thee to
think, with so exalted a merit as this lady had, that this
would have been the case, when consideration took place
of passion; or, rather, when that damn'd fondness for intrigue
ceased, which never was my pride so much, as it is
now, upon reflection, my curse. 
Set about defending thyself, and I will probe thee still
deeper, and convict thee still more effectually, that thou
hast more guilt than merit even in this affair. And as to
all the others, in which we have hunted in couples, thou
wert always the forwardest whelp, and more ready, by far,
to run away with me, than I with thee. Yet canst thou
now compose thy horse-muscles, and cry out, How much
more hast thou, Lovelace, to answer for, than I have! — 
Saying nothing, neither, when thou sayst this, were it true: 
— For thou wilt not be tried, when the time comes, by
comparison. 
In short, thou mayst, at this rate, so miserably deceive
thyself, that, notwithstanding all thy self-denial and mortification,
when thou closest thy eyes, thou mayst perhaps
open them in a place where thou thoughtest least to be. 
However, consult thy old woman on this subject. I 

shall be thought to be out of character, if I go on in this
strain. But really, as to a title to merit in this affair, I
do assure thee, Jack, that thou less deservest praise than
an horse-pond: And I wish I had the sousing of thee. 
* *
I am actually now employed in taking leave of my
friends in the country. I had once thoughts of taking
Tomlinson, as I called him, with me: But his destiny
has frustrated that intention. 
Next Monday I think to see you in town; and then
you, and I, and Mowbray, and Tourville, will laugh off
that evening together. They will both accompany me
(as I expect you will) to Dover, if not cross the water. I
must leave you and them good friends. They take extremely
amiss the treatment you have given them in your
last letters. They say, you strike at their understandings. 
I laugh at them; and tell them, that those people who
have least, are the most apt to be angry when it is called
in question. 
Make up all the papers and narratives you can spare
me against the time. The Will particularly I expect to
take with me. Who knows but that those things, which
will help to secure you in the way you are got into, may
convert me? 
Thou talkest of a wife, Jack: What thinkest thou of
our Charlotte? Her family and fortune, I doubt, according
to thy scheme, are a little too high. Will those be
an objection? Charlotte is a smart girl. For piety (thy
present turn) I cannot say much: Yet she is as serious as
most of her Sex, at her time of life—Would flaunt it a
little, I believe too, like the rest of them, were her reputation
under covert. 
But it won't do neither, now I think of it: —Thou art
so homely, and so aukward a creature! Hast such a boatswain
like air! —People would think she had picked thee
up in Wapping, or Rotherhith; or in going to see some
new ship launched, or to view the docks at Chatham, or
Portsmouth. So gaudy and so clumsy! Thy tawdriness
won't do with Charlotte! —So sit thee down contented,
Belford. 

Yet would I fain secure thy morals too, if matrimony
will do it. 
Let me see! —Now I have it. 
Has not the widow Lovick a daughter, or a niece? It is
not every girl of fortune and family that will go to prayers
with thee once or twice a day. But since thou art for taking
a wife to mortify with, what if thou marriest the widow
herself? —She will then have a double concern in thy
conversion. You and she may tête à tête pass many a
comfortable winter's evening together, comparing experiences,
as the good folks call them. 
I am serious, Jack. Faith I am. And I would have
thee take it into thy wise consideration. 