



Colonel Morden, To John Belford, Esq; 

Sat. Sept. 23. 
Dear Sir,
I am very sorry that any-thing you have heard I have
said should give you uneasiness. 
I am obliged to you for the Letters you have communicated
to me; and still further for your promise to favour
me with others occasionally. 
All that relates to my dear Cousin I shall be glad to
see, be it from whom it will. 
I leave to your own discretion, what may or may
not be proper for Miss Howe to see from a pen so free
as mine. 
I admire her spirit. Were she a man, do you think, 

Sir, she, at this time, would have your advice to take
upon such a subject as that upon which you write? 
Fear not, however, that your communications shall
put me upon any measures that otherwise I should not
have taken. The wickedness, Sir, is of such a nature,
as admits not of aggravation. 
Yet I do assure you, that I have not made any resolutions
that will be a tie upon me. 
I have indeed expressed myself with vehemence upon
the occasion. Who could forbear to do so? But it is
not my way to resolve in matters of moment, till opportunity
brings the execution of my purposes within
my reach. We shall see by what manner of spirit this
young man will be acted, on his recovery. If he continue
to brave and defy a family, which he has so irreparably
injured—If—But resolutions depending upon
future contingencies are best left to future determination,
as I just now hinted. 
Mean time, I will own, that I think my Cousin's
arguments unanswerable. No good man but must be
influenced by them. —But, alas! Sir, who is good? 
As to your arguments; I hope you will believe me,
when I assure you, as I now do, that your opinion,
and your reasonings, have, and will always have, great
and deserved weight with me: And that I respect you
still more than I did, if possible, for your expostulations
in support of my Cousin's pious injunctions to me. They
come from you, Sir, with the greatest propriety, as her
Executor and Representative; and likewise as you are a
man of humanity, and a well-wisher to both parties. 
I am not exempt from violent passions, Sir, any
more than your friend; but then I hope they are only
capable of being raised by other peoples insolence, and
not by my own arrogance. If ever I am stimulated by
my imperfections and my resentments to act against
my judgment, and my Cousin's injunctions; some such
reflections as these that follow, will run away with my
reason. Indeed they are always present with me. 

In the first place; My own disappointment: Who
came over with the hope of passing the remainder
of my days in the conversation of a kinswoman so
beloved; and to whom I had a double relation, as
her Cousin and Trustee. 
Then I reflect, too-too often perhaps for my engagements
to her in her last hours, that the dear creature
could only forgive for herself. She, no doubt,
is happy: But who shall forgive for a whole family,
in all its branches made miserable for their lives? 
That the more faulty her friends were as to her, the
more enormous his ingratitude, and the more inexcuseable
—What! Sir, was it not enough, that
she suffered what she did for him, but the barbarian
must make her suffer for her sufferings for his sake? 
—Passion makes me express this weakly: Passion
refuses the aid of expression sometimes, where the
propriety of a resentment prima facie declares expression
to be needless. I leave it to you, Sir, to
give this reflection its due force. 
That the author of this diffusive mischief perpetrated
it premeditatedly, wantonly, in the gaiety of his
heart. To try my Cousin, say you, Sir? To try
the virtue of a Clarissa, Sir! —Had she then given
him any cause to doubt her virtue? —It could not
be. —If he averrs that she did, I am indeed called
upon—But I will have patience. 
That he carried her, as now it appears, to a vile
Brothel, purposely to put her out of all human resource; 
Himself out of the reach of all humane
remorse: And that, finding her proof against all
the common arts of delusion, base and unmanly
arts were there used to effect his wicked purposes. 
Once dead, the injured Saint, in her Will, says,
he has seen her. 
That I could not know this, when I saw him at M.
Hall: That, the object of his attempts considered,
I could not suppose there was such a monster 

breathing as he: That it was natural for me to
impute her refusal of him rather to transitory resentment,
to consciousness of human frailty, and
mingled doubts of the sincerity of his offers, than
to villainies, which had given the irreversible blow,
and had at that instant brought her down to the
gates of death, which in a very few days inclosed
her. 
That he is a man of defiance: A man who thinks to
awe every one by his insolent darings, and by his
pretensions to superior courage and skill. 
That, disgrace as he is to his name, and to the character
of a gentleman, the man would not want
merit, who, in vindication of the dishonoured distinction,
should expunge and blot him out of the
worthy list. 
That the injured family has a Son, who, however
unworthy of such a Sister, is of a temper vehement,
unbridled, fierce; unequal therefore (as he has
once indeed been found) to a contention with this
man: The loss of which Son, by a violent death,
on such an occasion, and by an hand so justly hated,
would complete the misery of the whole family: 
And who, nevertheless, resolves to call him to
account, if I do not: His very misbehaviour perhaps
to such a Sister stimulating his perverse heart
to do her memory the more signal justice; tho'
the attempt might be fatal to himself. 
Then, Sir, to be a witness, as I am every hour, to
the calamity and distress of a family to which I am
related; every one of whom, however averse to
an alliance with him while it had not taken place,
would no doubt have been soon reconciled to the
admirable creature, had the man (to whom, for
his family and fortunes, it was not a disgrace to be
allied) done her but common justice! 
To see them hang their pensive heads; mope about,
shunning one another; tho' formerly never used to 

meet but to rejoice in each other; afflicting themselves
with reflections, that the last time they respectively
saw the dear creature, it was here, or
there, at such a place, in such an attitude; and
could they have thought that it would have been
the last? 
Every one of them reviving instances of her excellencies
that will for a long time make their very
blessings a curse to them! 
Her closet, her chamber, her cabinet, given up to
me to disfurnish, in order to answer (now too late
obliging!) the legacies bequeathed; unable themselves
to enter them; and even making use of less
convenient back-stairs, that they may avoid passing
by the doors of her apartment! 
Her parlour locked up; the walks, the retirements,
the summer-house in which she delighted, and in
which she used to pursue her charming works; 
that, in particular, from which she went to the
fatal interview; shunned, or hurried by, or over! 
Her perfections, nevertheless, called up to remembrance,
and enumerated: Incidents and graces,
unheeded before, or passed over in the groupe of
her numberless perfections, now brought into notice,
and dwelt upon! 
The very servants allowed to expatiate upon these
praiseful topics to their principals! Even eloquent
in their praises—The distressed principals listening
and weeping! Then to see them break in upon
the zealous applauders, by their impatience and
remorse, and throw abroad their helpless hands,
and exclaim; then again to see them listen to hear
more of her praises, and weep again—They even
encouraging the servants to repeat, how they used
to be stopt by strangers to ask after her, and by
those who knew her, to be told of some new instances
to her honour—How aggravating all this! 
In dreams they see her, and desire to see her: Always 

an angel, and accompanied by angels: Always
clad in robes of light: Always endeavouring
to comfort them, who declare, that they shall never
more know comfort! 
What an example she set! how she indited! How
she drew! How she wrought! How she talked! 
How she sung! How she played! Her voice,
music! Her accent, harmony! 
Her conversation how instructive! how sought after! 
The delight of persons of all ages, of both sexes,
of all ranks! Yet how humble, how condescending! 
Never were dignity and humility so illustriously
mingled! 
At other times, how generous, how noble, how charitable,
how judicious in her charities! In every
action laudable! In every attitude attractive! In
every appearance, whether full-dressed, or in the
housewife's more humble garb, equally elegant,
and equally lovely! Like or resembling Miss Clarissa
Harlowe, they now remember to be a praise
denoting the highest degree of excellence, with every
one, whatever person, action, or rank, spoken of. 
The desirable Daughter; the obliging Kinswoman; 
the affectionate Sister (All Envy now subsided!); 
the faithful, the warm friend; the affable, the
kind, the benevolent Mistress! —Not one fault
remembred! All their severities called cruelties: 
Mutually accusing each other; each him and herself; 
and all to raise her character, and torment
themselves. 
Such, Sir, was the angel, of whom the vilest of men
has deprived the world! You, Sir, who know more of
the barbarous machinations and practices of this strange
man, can help me to still more inflaming reasons, were
they needed, why a man not perfect may stand excused
to the generality of the world, if he should pursue his
vengeance; &dotup;and the rather, as thro' an absence of six 

years (high as just report, and the promises of her
early youth from childhood, had raised her in his
esteem) he could not till now know one half of her
excellencies—Till now! that we have lost, for ever
lost, the admirable creature!—&dotup; 
But I will force myself from the subject, after I have
repeated, that I have not yet made any resolutions that
can bind me. Whenever I do, I shall be glad they may
be such as may merit the honour of your approbation. 
I send you back the copies of the posthumous Letters. 
I see the humanity of your purpose, in the transmission
of them to me; and I thank you most heartily for it. I
presume, that it is owing to the same laudable consideration,
that you kept back the copy of that to the wicked
man himself. 
I intend to wait upon Miss Howe in person with the
diamond ring, and such other of the effects bequeathed
to her as are here. I am, Sir, 
Your most faithful and obliged Servant,
Wm. Morden. 
Mr. Belford, in his Answer to this Letter, farther
enforces the Lady's dying injunctions; and rejoices
that the Colonel has made no vindictive resolutions; 
and hopes every-thing from his prudence and consideration,
and from his promise given to the dying Lady. 
He refers to the seeing him in town on account of the
dreadful ends of two of the greatest criminals in his
Cousin's affair. ‘This, says he, together with
Mr. Lovelace's disorder of mind, looks as if Providence
had already taken the punishment of
these unhappy wretches into its own hands.’ 
He desires the Colonel will give him a day's notice of
his coming to town, lest otherwise he may be absent
at the time. 
This he does, tho' he tells him not the reason, with a
view to prevent a meeting between him and Mr.
Lovelace; who might be in town (as he apprehends)
about the same time, in his way to go abroad. 