



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

I thought it was now high time to turn my whole
mind to my Beloved; who had had full leisure to
weigh the contents of the Letters I had left with her. 
I therefore requested Mrs. Moore to step in, and
desire to know, whether she would be pleased to admit
me to attend her in her apartment, on occasion of
the Letters I had left with her; or whether she would
favour me with her company in the Dining-room? 
Mrs. Moore desired Miss Rawlins to accompany her
in to the Lady. They tapped at her door, and were
both admitted. 
I cannot but stop here for one minute, to remark,
tho' against myself, upon that Security which Innocence
gives, that nevertheless had better have in it a greater
mixture of the Serpent with the Dove. For here,
heedless of all I could say behind her back, because she
was satisfied with her own worthiness, she permitted
me to go on with my own Story, without interruption,
to persons as great strangers to her as to me; and who,
as strangers to both, might be supposed to lean to the
side most injured: And that, as I managed it, was to
mine. A deaf silly Soul, thought I, at the time, to
depend upon the goodness of her own heart, when the
heart cannot be seen into but by its actions; and she,
to appearance, a Runaway, an Eloper, from a tender, 

a most indulgent Husband! —To neglect to cultivate
the opinion of individuals, when the whole world is
governed by appearance! 
Yet, what can be expected of an angel under Twenty? 
—She has a world of knowlege; knowlege speculative,
as I may say; but no Experience! How should
she? —Knowlege by theory only is a vague uncertain
light: A Will o' the Wisp, which as often misleads
the doubting mind, as puts it right. 
There are many things in the world, could a moralizer
say, that would afford inexpressible pleasure to
a reflecting mind, were it not for the mixture they
come to us with. To be graver still; I have seen Parents
[Perhaps my own did so] who delighted in those
very qualities in their children, while young, the natural
consequences of which (too much indulged and
encouraged) made them, as they grew up, the plague
of their hearts—To bring this home to my present purpose,
I must tell thee, that I adore this charming creature
for her vigilant prudence; but yet I would not,
methinks, wish her, by virtue of that prudence, which
is, however, necessary to carry her above the devices
of all the rest of the world, to be too wise for mine. 
My Revenge, my sworn Revenge, is nevertheless
(adore her as I will) uppermost in my heart. —Miss
Howe says, that my Love is an Herodian Love (a) : 
By my Soul, that Girl's a Witch! —I am half-sorry to
say, that I find a pleasure in playing the Tyrant over
what I love. Call it an ungenerous pleasure, if thou
wilt: Softer hearts than mine know it. The women
to a woman know it, and shew it too, whenever they
are trusted with power. And why should it be thought
strange, that I, who love them so dearly, and study
them so much, should catch the infection of them? 