



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Saturday Evening. 
Mr. Lovelace has seen divers apartments at Windsor; 
but not one, he says, that he thought fit
for me, or in any manner answering my description. 
He had been very solicitous to keep to the letter of
my instructions: Which looks well: And the better
I liked him, as, altho' he proposed that town, he
came back, dissuading me from it: For he said, that,
in his journey from thence, he had thought Windsor,
altho' of his own proposal, a wrong choice; because
I coveted privacy, and that was a place generally visited
and admired. 
I told him, that if Mrs. Sorlings thought me not an
incumbrance, I would be willing to stay there a little
longer; provided he would leave me, and go to Lord
M.'s, or to London, which ever he thought best. 
He hop'd, he said, that he might suppose me absolutely
safe from the insults or attempts of my brother; 
and therefore, if it would make me easier, he would
obey, for a few days at least. 
He again proposed to send for Hannah—I told him
I design'd to do so, thro' you: And shall I beg of you,
my dear, to cause the honest creature to be sent to? 
Your faithful Robert, I think, knows where she is. 
Perhaps she will be permitted to quit her place directly,
by allowing a month's wages, which I will repay
her. 
He took notice of the serious humour he found me
in, and of the redness of my eyes: I had just been
answering your letter; and, had he not approach'd 

me, on his coming off his journey, in a very respectful
manner, had he not made an unexceptionable report of
his inquiries, and been so ready to go from me, at the
very first word; I was prepar'd (notwithstanding the
good terms we parted upon when he set out for
Windsor) to have given him a very unwelcome reception: 
For the contents of your last letter had so affected
me, that the moment I saw him, I beheld
with indignation the seducer, who had been the cause
of all the evils I suffer, and have suffered. 
He hinted to me, that he had received a letter from
Lady Betty, and another, as I understood him, from
one of the Miss Montagues. If they take notice of
me in them, I wonder that he did not acquaint me
with the contents. I am afraid, my dear, that his
relations are among those, who think I have taken a
rash and inexcusable step. It is not to my credit to
let even them know, how I have been frighted out of
myself: And who knows but they may hold me unworthy
of their alliance, if they may think my flight
a voluntary one? —O my dear, how uneasy to us are
our reflections upon every doubtful occurrence, when
we know we have been prevailed upon to do a wrong
thing! 
Sunday Morning. 
What an additional concern must I have in my
reflections upon Mr. Lovelace's hatred of all my relations? 
—He calls some of them implacable; but I
am afraid that he is as implacable himself; as the most
inveterate of them. 
I could not forbear, with great earnestness, to express
my wishes for a reconciliation with them; and,
in order to begin a treaty for that purpose, to re-urge
his departure from me: He gave himself high airs upon
the occasion, not doubting, he said, that he was
to be the preliminary sacrifice; and then he reflected
in a very free manner upon my brother; nor spared
my father himself. 

So little consideration for me, my dear! —Yet it
had always, as I told him, been his polite way, to
treat my family with contempt; wicked creature that
I was, to know it, and yet to hold correspondence
with him!— 
But let me tell you, Sir, said I, that whatever your
violent temper and contempt of me, may drive you to
say of my brother, I will not hear my father spoken
ill of. It is enough, surely, that I have tormented
his worthy heart by my disobedience; and that his
once beloved child has been spirited away from him. — 
To have his character reflected upon, by the man
who has been the cause of all, is what I will not
bear. 
He said many things in his own defence; but not
one, as I told him, that could justify a daughter to
hear, or a man to say, who pretended what he pretended
to that daughter. 
And then, seeing me very sincerely angry, he
begg'd my pardon, tho' not in a very humble manner. 
But, to change the subject, he took notice of
the two letters he had received, one from Lady Betty
Lawrance, the other from Miss Montague; and read
me passages out of both. 
Why did not the man shew them to me last night? 
Was he afraid of giving me too much pleasure? 
Lady Betty in hers, express herself in the most
obliging manner, in relation to me. ‘She wishes him
so to behave, as to encourage me to make him soon
happy. She desires her compliments to me; and expresses
her impatience to see, as her niece, so celebrated
a lady [Those are her high words]. She shall
take it for an honour, she says, to be put into a way
to oblige me. She hopes I will not too long delay
the ceremony; because that perform'd, will be to
her, and to Lord M. and Lady Sarah, a sure pledge
of her nephew's merits, and good behaviour.’ 

She says, ‘She was always sorry to hear of the
hardships I had met with on his account. That he
will be the most ingrateful of men, if he make not
all up to me: And that she thinks it incumbent
upon all their family to supply to me the lost favour
of my own: And, for her part, nothing of that
kind, she bids him assure me, shall be wanting.’ 
Her Ladyship observes, ‘That the treatment he
had received from my family, would have been
more unaccountable than it was, with such natural
and accidental advantages as he had, had it not been
owing to his own careless manners. But she hopes,
that he will convince the Harlowe-family, that they
had thought worse of him than he had deserved; 
since now it was in his power to establish his character
for ever: Which she prays God to enable
him to do, as well for his own honour, as for the
honour of their house’ [was the magnificent word]. 
She concludes, with ‘desiring to be informed of
our nuptials the moment they are celebrated, that
she may be with the earliest in felicitating me on the
happy occasion.’ 
But her Ladyship gives me no direct invitation to
attend her before marriage. Which I might have expected
from what he had told me. 
He then shew'd me part of Miss Montague's more
sprightly letter, ‘congratulating him upon the honour
he had obtain'd, of the confidence of so admirable
a Lady’ [Those are her words. Confidence, my
dear! Nobody, indeed, as you say, will believe otherwise,
were they to be told the truth: And you see,
that Miss Montague (and all his family, I suppose)
think the step I have taken, an extraordinary one]. 
‘She also wishes for his speedy nuptials; and to see
her new cousin at M. Hall: As do Lord M. she tells
him, and her sister; and in general all the well-wishers
of their family.’ 

‘Whenever his happy day shall be passed, she proposes,
she says, to attend me, and to make one in
my train to M. Hall, if his lordship shall continue
so ill of the gout, as at present. But that should he
get better, he will himself attend me, she is sure,
and conduct me thither: And afterwards quit either
of his three seats to us, till we shall be settled to our
mind.’ 
This young lady says nothing in excuse for not
meeting me on the road, or at St. Albans, as he had
made me expect she would: Yet mentions her having
been indisposed. He had also told me, that Lord M.
was ill of the gout; which Miss Montague's letter
confirms. 