


My Master had said to Mrs. Jewkes, That he
should not rise till Eight or Nine, as he had
lat up all the Night before; but it seems, my Lady,
knowing he usually rose about Six, got up soon after
that Hour, rais'd her Woman, and her Nephew; 
having a whimsical Scheme in her Head, to try to
find whether we were in Bed together: And at
about half an Hour after Six, she rapt at our Chamber-door. 
My Master was wak'd at the Noise, and asked
who was there? Open the Door, said she; open it
this Minute! I said, clinging about his Neck, Dear,
dear Sir, pray, pray don't! —O save me, save me! 
Don't fear, Pamela, said he. The Woman's mad,
I believe. 
But he call'd out, Who are you? What do you
want?––– You know my Voice well enough, said
she!––– I will come in! —Pray, Sir, said I, don't
let her Ladyship in. —Don't be frighted, my Dear,
said he; she thinks we are not marry'd, and are
afraid to be found a-bed together. I'll let her in; 
but she shan't come near my Dearest. 
So he slipt out of Bed, and putting on some of
his Cloaths, and Gown, and Slippers, he said, What
bold body dares disturb my Repose thus? and open'd
the Door. In rush'd she; I'll see your Wickedness,
said she, I will! In vain shall you think to hide it
from me! —What should I hide? said he. How
dare you set a Foot into my House after the Usage
I have receiv'd from you? —I had cover'd myself
over Head and Ears, and trembled every Joint. He
look'd and 'spy'd her Woman, and Kinsman, in the
Room, she crying out, Bear Witness, Jackey; bear
Witness, Beck; the Creature is now in his Bed. 
And not seeing the young Gentleman before, who
was at the Feet of the Bed, he said, How now, Sir? 
What's your Business in this Apartment! Begone
this Moment! —And he went away directly. 
Beck, said my Lady, you see the Creature is in his
Bed. I do, Madam, answer'd she. My Master came to
me, and said, Ay look, Beck, and bear Witness; here
is my Pamela! —My dear Angel, my lovely Creature,
don't be afraid; look up, and see how frantickly
this Woman of Quality behaves. 
At that I just peep'd, and saw my Lady, who
could not bear this, coming to me; and she said,
Wicked abandon'd Wretch, vile Brother, to brave
me thus! I'll tear the Creature out of Bed before
your Face, and expose you both as you deserve. 
At that he took her in his Arms, as if she had been
nothing, and carrying her out of the Room, she
cry'd out, Beck, Beck! help me, Beck; the Wretch is
going to fling me down Stairs. Her Woman ran to
him, and said, Good Sir, for God's sake, do no
Violence to my Lady: Her Ladyship has been ill all
Night. 
He sat her down in the Chamber she lay in, and
she could not speak for Passion. Take care of your
Lady, said he; and when she has render'd herself
more worthy of my Attention, I'll see her; till then,
at her Peril, and yours too, come not near my Apartment. 
And so he came to me, and with all the
sweet soothing Words in the world, pacify'd my
Fears, and gave me Leave to go to write in my
Closet, as soon as my Fright was over, and to stay
there till Things were more calm And so he
dress'd himself, and went out of the Chamber, permitting
me, at my Desire, to fasten the Door after
him. 
At Breakfast-time my Master tapp'd at the Door,
and I said, Who's there? I, my Dearest, said he. 
Oh! then, reply'd I, will I open it with Pleasure. 
I had wrote on a good deal; but I put it by when I
ran to the Door. I would have lock'd it again,
when he was in; but he said, Am not I here! Don't
be afraid. Said he, Will you come down to Breakfast,
my Love? O no, dear Sir, said I; be pleas'd to
excuse me. Said he, I cannot bear the Look of it,
that the Mistress of my House should breakfast in her
Closet, as if she durst not come down, and I in it!
 ––– O dearest Sir, reply'd I, pray pass that over for my
sake; and don't let my Presence aggravate your
Sister, for a kind Punctilio. Then, my Dear, said he,
I shall breakfast with you here. No, pray, dear Sir,
answer'd I, breakfast with your Sister, That, my Dear,
reply'd he, will too much gratify her Pride, and look 
like a Slight to you.––– Dear Sir, said I, your Goodness
is too great, for me to want punctilious Proofs
of it. Pray oblige her Ladyship. She is your
Guest; surely, Sir, you may be freest with your
dutiful Wife! 
She is a strange Woman, said he: How I pity
her!––– She has thrown herself into a violent Fit of
the Colick, thro' Passion! And is but now, her
Woman says, a little easier. I hope, Sir, said I, when
you carry'd her Ladyship out, you did not hurt her. 
No, reply'd he, I love her too well. I sat her down in
the Apartment she had chosen; and she but now
desires to see me, and that I will breakfast with her,
or refuses to touch any thing. But, if my Dearest
please, I will insist it shall be with you at the same
time. 
O no, no, dear Sir, said I, I should never forgive
myself, if I did. I would on my Knees beg
her Ladyship's Goodness to me, now I am in your
Presence, tho' I thought I ought to carry it a little
stiff when you was absent, for the sake of the Honour
you had done me. And, dear Sir, if my deepest
Humility will please, permit me to shew it. 
You shall do nothing, return'd he, unworthy of my
Wife, to please the proud Woman!––– But I will,
however, permit you to breakfast by yourself
this once, as I have not seen her since I have used
her in so barbarous a manner, as I understand she
exclaims I have; and as she will not eat any thing,
unless I give her my Company.––– So he saluted me,
and withdrew, and I lock'd the Door after him again
for Fear. 
Mrs. Jewkes, soon after, rapp'd at my Door. 
Who's there? said I. Only I, Madam. So I open'd
the Door. 'Tis a sad Thing, Madam, said she, you
should be so much afraid in your own House. She
brought me some Chocolate and Toast; and I ask'd 
her about my Lady's Behaviour. She said, She would
not suffer any body to attend but her Woman, because
she would not be heard what she had to say; 
but she beliey'd, she said, her Master was very angry
with the young Lord, as she call'd her Kinsman; for
as she pass'd by the Door, she heard him say, in a
high Tone, I hope, Sir, you did not forget what
belongs to the Character you affume: or to that
Effect.––– 
About one o'Clock, my Master came up again,
and he said, Will you come down to Dinner, Pamela,
when I send for you? Whatever you command,
Sir, I must do: But my Lady won't desire to
see me. No matter whether she will or no. But I
will not suffer that she shall prescribe her insolent Will
my Wife, and in your own House too.––– I will by
my Tenderness to you, mortify her Pride, and it
cannot be done so well as to her Face. 
Dearest Sir, said I, pray indulge me, and let me
dine here by myself. It will make my Lady but more
inveterate. ––– Said he, I have told her we are marry'd
She is out of all Patience about it, and yet pretends
not  to believe it. Upon that I tell her, Then she
shall have it her own way, and that I am not. 
And what has she to do with it either way? She
has scolded and begg'd, commanded and pray'd,
bless'd me, and curs'd me, by Turns, twenty times,
in these few Hours. And I have sometimes soothed
her, sometimes storm'd at her, sometimes argued,
sometimes raged; and at last I lest her, and took
a Turn in the Garden for an Hour to compose myself,
because you should not see how the foolish Woman
ruffled me; and just now, I came out, seeing her
coming in. 
Just as he had said so, I cry'd, Oh! my Lady, my
Lady! for I heard her Voice in the Chamber, saying,
Brother, Brother, one Word with you!––– 
Stopping in Sight of the Closet where I was. He
stept out, and she went up to the Window that
looks towards the Garden, and said, Mean Fool
that I am, to follow you up and down the House
in this manner, tho' I am shunn'd and avoided by
you! You a Brother!—you a Barbarian! —Is it
possible we could be born of one Mother? 
Why, said he, do you charge me with a Conduct
to you, that you bring upon yourself? —Is it not
surprizing, that you should take Liberties with me,
that the dear Mother you have nam'd, never gave
you an Example for to any of her Relations? ––– 
Was it not sufficient, that I was insolently taken to
Task by you in your Letters, but my Retiretments
must be invaded? My House insulted? And, if I
have one Person dearer to me than another, that
that Person must be singled out for an Object of
Violence? 
Ay, said she, that one Person is the Thing! —But
tho' I came up with a Resolution to be temperate,
and to expostulate with you on your avoiding me
so unkindly, yet cannot I have Patience to look
upon that Bed in which I was born, and to be
made the guilty Scene of your Wickedness with
such a— 
Hush! said he, I charge you, call not the dear Girl
by any Name unworthy of her. You know not,
as I told you, her Excellence; and I desire you'll not
repeat the Freedoms you have taken below. 
She stamp'd with her Foot, and said, God give
me Patience! So much Contempt to a Sister that
loves you so well; and so much Tenderness to a
vile––––– 
He put his Hand before her Mouth, Be silent,
said he, once more, I charge you. You know not
the Innocence you abuse so freely; I ought not,
neither will I bear it. 
She sat down, and fann'd herself, and burst into
Tears, and such Sobs of Grief, or rather Passion,
that griev'd me to hear; and I sat and trembled
sadly.––– 
He walk'd about the Room, in great Anger; 
and at last said, Let me ask you, Lady Davers,
why I am thus insolently to be called to Account
by you. Am I not independent? Am I not of
Age? Am I not at Liberty to please myself?––– 
Would to God, that instead of a Woman and my
Sister, any Man breathing had dar'd, whatever his
Relation under that of a Father, to give himself
half the Airs you have done! —Why did you not
send of this accursed Errand your Lord, who could
write me such a Letter as no Gentleman should
write, nor any Gentleman tamely receive? He should
have seen the Difference. 
We all know, said she, that since your Italian
Duel, you have commenc'd a Bravo; and all your
Airs breathe as strongly of the Manslayer as of the
Libertine. This, said he, I will bear; for I have no
Reason to be asham'd of that Duel, nor the Cause
of it; since it was to save a Friend; and because
'tis levell'd at myself only: But suffer not your
Tongue to take too great a Liberty with my Pamela. 
She interrupted him, in a violent Burst of Passion. 
If I bear this, said she, I can bear any thing! —O
the little Strumpet!––– He interrupted her then, and
said wrathfully, Begone, rageful Woman, begone
this Moment from my Presence! Leave my House
this Instant!––– I renounce you, and all Relation to
you; and never more let me see your Face, or call
me Brother. And took her by the Hand to lead her
out. She laid hold of the Curtains of the Window,
and said, I will not go! you shall not force me from
you thus ignominiously in the Wretch's Hearing, and 
suffer her to triumph over me in your barbarous
Treatment of me. 
Not considering anything, I run out of the Closet,
and threw myself at my dear Master's Feet, as
he held her Hand, in order to lead her out; and I
said, Dearest Sir, let me beg, that no Act of Unkindness,
for my sake, pass between so worthy and
so near Relations. Dear, dear Madam, said I, and
clasp'd her Knees, pardon and excuse the unhappy
Cause of all this Evil; on my Knees I beg your Ladyship
to receive me to your Grace and Favour, and
you shall find me incapable of any Triumph but in
your Ladyship's Goodness to me. 
Creature, said she, art thou to beg an Excuse for
me!––– Art thou to implore my Forgiveness! Is
it to thee I am to owe the Favour that I am not
cast headlong from my Brother's Presence! Begone
to thy Corner, Wench; begone, I say, lest
thy Paramour kill me for trampling thee under my
Foot. 
Rise, my dear Pamela, said my Master; rise,
dear Life of my Life, and expose not so much
Worthiness to the ingrateful Scorn of so violent a
Spirit. And so he led me to my Closet again, and
there I sat and wept. 
Her Woman came up, just as he had led me to
my Closet, and was returning to her Lady; and she
very humbly said, Excuse my Intrusion, good Sir! 
—I hope I may come to my Lady. Yes, Mrs.
Worden, said he, you may come in, and pray take
your Lady down Stairs with you, for fear I should
too much forget what belongs either to my Sister or
myself! 
I began to think (seeing her Ladyship so outrageous
with her Brother) what a happy Escape
I had had the Day before, tho' hardly enough us'd in
Conscience too, as I thought. 
Her Woman begg'd her Ladyship to walk down,
and she said, Beck, seest thou that Bed? That was the
Bed that I was born in; and yet that was the Bed,
thou sawest as well as I, the wicked Pamela in
this Morning, and this Brother of mine just risen
from her! 
True, said he; you both saw it, and 'tis my Pride
that you could see it. 'Tis my Bridal-bed, and 'tis
abominable that the Happiness I knew before
you came hither, should be so barbarously interrupted. 
Swear to me but, thou bold Wretch, said she; 
swear to me, that Pamela Andrews is really and
truly thy lawful Wife, without Sham, without Deceit,
without Double-meaning, and I know what I
have to say. 
I'll humour you for once, said he; and then swore
a solemn Oath, that I was. And, said he, did I not
tell you so at first? 
I cannot yet believe you, said she, because, in this
Particular, I had rather have called you Knave than
Fool.––– Provoke me not too much, said he; for if
I should as much forget myself as you have done,
you'd have no more of a Brother in me, than I have
a Sister in you! 
Who marry'd you? said she; tell me that: Was
it not a broken Attorney in a Parson's Habit? 
Tell me truly, in the Wench's Hearing. When
she's undeceived, she'll know how to behave herself
better! Thank God, thought I, it is not so. 
No, said he, and I'll tell you, that I bless God, I
abhorred that Project, before it was brought to
bear; and Mr. Williams marry'd us.––– Nay then,
said she ––– but answer me another Question or two,
I beseech you. Who gave her away? Parson
Peters, said he. Where was the Ceremony perform'd? 
In my own little Chapel, which you
may see, as it was put in Order on purpose. 
Now, said she, I begin to fear there is something
in it! But who was present? said she. Methinks,
reply'd he, I look like a fine Puppy, to suffer
myself to be thus interrogated by an insolent Sister. 
But, if you must know, Mrs. Jewkes was present. 
O the Procuress, said she! But nobody else? Yes,
said he, all my Heart and Soul! 
Wretch! said she! And what would thy Father
and Mother have said, had they lived to this Day? 
Their Consents, reply'd he, I should have thought it
my Duty to ask; but not yours, Madam. 
Suppose, said she, I had marry'd my Father's
Groom! what would you have said to that? — 
I could not have behav'd worse, reply'd he, than you
have done. And would you not have thought, said
she, I had deserv'd it? 
Said he, Does your Pride let you see no Difference
in the Case you put? None at all, said she. 
Where can the Difference be between a Beggar's
Son marry'd by a Lady; or a Beggar's Daughter
made a Gentleman's Wife? 
Then I'll tell you, reply'd he; The Difference is,
a Man ennobles the Woman he takes, be she who
she will; and adopts her into his own Rank, be it
what it will: But a Woman, tho' ever so nobly
born, debases herself by a mean Marriage, and descends
from her own Rank, to his she stoops to. 
When the noble Family of Stuart ally'd itself
into the low Family of Hyde, (comparatively low,
I mean) did any body scruple to call the Lady
Royal Highness, and Duchess of York? And did any
body think her Daughters, the late Queen Mary and
Queen Anne, less Royal for that? 
When the broken-fortun'd Peer goes into the City
to marry a rich Tradesman's Daughter, be he Duke 
or Earl, does not his Consort immediately become
ennobled by his Choice? and who scruples to call
her Lady Duchess, or Countess? 
But when a Duchess, or Countess Dowager, descends
to mingle with a Person of obscure Birth,
does she not then degrade herself? and is she not
effectually degraded? And will any Duchess or
Countess rank with her? 
Now, Lady Davers, do you not see a Difference
between my marrying my dear Mother's beloved
and deserving Waiting-maid, with a Million of
Excellencies about her, and such Graces of Mind
and Person, as would adorn any Distinction; and
your marrying a sordid Groom, whose constant
Train of Education, Conversation, and Opportunities,
could poffibly give him no other Merit, than that
which must proceed from the vilest lowest Taste, in
his sordid Dignifier? 
O the Wretch! said she, how he finds Excuses to
palliate his Meanness! 
Again, said he, let me observe to you, Lady Davers,
when a Duke marries a private Person, is he
not still her Head, by virtue of being her Husband? 
But, when a Lady descends to marry a Groom, is
not that Groom her Head, as her Husband? And
does not that Difference strike you? For what Lady
of Quality ought to respect another, who has made
so sordid a Choice, and set a Groom above her? 
For, would not that be to put that Groom upon
a Par with themselves? —Call this Palliation,
or what you will; but if you see not the Difference,
you are blind, and a very unfit Judge
for yourself, much more unfit to be a Censurer of
me. 
I'd have you, said she, publish your fine Reasons to
the World, and they will be sweet Encouragements
to all the young Gentlemen that read them, to cast 
themselves away on the Servant-wenches in their
Families. 
Not at all, Lady Davers, reply'd he: For, if any
young Gentleman stays till he finds such a Person as
my Pamela; so inrich'd with the Beauties of Person
and Mind, so well accomplish'd, and so fitted to
adorn the Degree she is raised to, he will stand
as easily acquitted, as I shall be to all the World
that sees her, except there be many more Lady
Davers's than I apprehend can possibly be met
with. 
And so, return'd she, you say, You are actually and
really marry'd, honestly, or rather foolishly, marry'd
to this Slut? 
I am indeed, said he, if you presume to call her
so! And why should I not, if I please? Who is
there ought to contradict me? Whom have I hurt by
it? —Have I not an Estate, free and independent? 
Am I likely to be beholden to you, or any of my
Relations? And why, when I have a Sufficiency in
my own single Hands, should I scruple to make a
Woman equally happy, who has all I want? For
Beauty, Virtue, Prudence, and Generosity too, I
will tell you, she has more than any Lady I ever saw. 
Yes, Lady Davers, she has all these naturally; they
are born with her; and a few Years Education, with
her Genius, has done more for her, than a whole
Life has done for others. 
No more, no more, I beseech you, said she; thou
surfeitest me, honest Man, with thy weak Folly. 
Thou art worse than an Idolater; thou hast made a
graven Image, and thou fallest down and worshippest
the Works of thine own Hands; and, Jerohoam
like, would have every body else bow down before
thy Calf! 
Well said, Lady Davers! Whenever your Passion
suffers you to descend to Witticism, 'tis almost over 
with you. But, let me tell you, tho' I worship myself
this sweet Creature that you call such Names,
I want nobody else to do it; and should be glad you
had not intruded upon me, to interrupt me in the
Course of our mutual Happiness. 
Well said, well said, my kind, my well-manner'd
Brother! said she. I shall, after this, very little interrupt
your mutual Happiness, I'll assure you. I
thought you a Gentleman once, and prided myself
in my Brother; but I'll say with the Burial Service,
Asbes to Asbes, and Dirt to Dirt! 
Ay, said he, Lady Davers, and there we must all
end at last; you with all your Pride, and I with my
plentiful Fortune, must come to it; and then where
will be your Distinction? Let me tell you, except
you and I both mend our Manners, tho' you
have been no Duellist, no Libertine, as you call me,
this amiable Girl, whom your Vanity and Folly so
much despises, will out-soar us both, infinitely outsoar
us; and He that judges best, will give the Preference
where due, without Regard to Birth or
Fortune. 
Egregious Preacher, said she! What, my Brother
already turn'd Puritan! —See what Marriage and
Repentance may bring a Man to! I heartily congratulate
this Change! —Well, said she, and came
towards me, and I trembled to see her coming; but
her Brother followed to observe her, and I stood
up at her Approach, and she said, Give me thy
Hand, Mrs. Pamela, Mrs. Andrews, Mrs. &wblank; what
shall I call thee! —Thou hast done Wonders in a
little time: Thou hast not only made a Rake a
Husband; but thou hast made a Rake a Preacher! 
But take care, added she, after all, in ironical Anger,
and tapp'd me on the Neck, take care that thy Vanity
begins not where his ends; and that thou callest
not thyself my Sister! 
She shall, I hope, Lady Davers, said he, when
she can make as great a Convert of you from Pride,
as she has of me from Libertinism. 
Mrs. Jewkes just then came up, and said, Dinner
was ready. Come, my Pamela, said my dear Master; 
you desired to be excus'd from breakfasting
with us; but I hope you'll give Lady Davers and
me your Company to Dinner. 
How dare you insult me thus? said my Lady. — 
How dare you, said he, insult me by your Conduct
in my own House, after I have told you I am marry'd? 
How dare you think of staying here one Moment,
and refuse my Wife the Honours that belong
to her, as such? 
Merciful God! said she, give me Patience! and
held her Hand to her Forehead. 
Pray, Sir, dear Sir, said I, excuse me; don't vex
my Lady. —Be silent, my dear Love, said he; you
see already what you have got by your sweet Condescension. 
You have thrown yourself at her Feet,
and, insolent as she is, she has threaten'd to trample
upon you. She'll ask you presently, if she is to owe
her Excuse to your Interposition; and yet nothing
else can make her forgiven. 
Poor Lady! she could not bear this, and, as if she
was discomposed, she ran to her poor grieved Woman,
and took hold of her Hand, and said, Lead me
down, lead me down, Beck! Let us instantly quit
this House, this cursed House, that once I took Pleasure
in; order the Fellows to get ready, and I will
never see it, nor its Owner, more. And away she
went down Stairs, in a great Hurry. And the
Servants were order'd to make ready for their Departure. 
I saw my Master was troubled, and I went to
him, and I said, Pray, dear Sir, follow my Lady
down, and picify her. 'Tis her Love to you. — 
Poor Woman! said he, I am concern'd for her! But
I insist upon your coming down, since Things are
gone so far. Her Pride will get new Strength else,
and we shall be all to begin again. 
Dearest, dear Sir, said I, excuse me going down
this once! In deed, my Dear, I won't, reply'd he. 
What! shall it be said, that my Sister shall scare
my Wife from my Table, and I present? —No, I
have borne too much already; and so have you. 
And I charge you come down, when I send for
you. 
He departed, saying these Words, and I durst not
dispute; for I saw, he was determin'd. And there
is as much Majesty as Goodness in him; as I have
often had Reason to observe, tho' never more, than
on the present Occasion with his Sister. Her Ladyship
instantly put on her Hood and Gloves, and her
Woman ty'd up a Handkerchief full of Things; 
for her principal Matters were not unpack'd, and
her Coachman got her Chariot ready, and her Footmen
their Horses, and she appear'd resolved to go. 
But her Kinsman and Mr. Colbrand had taken a
Turn together, some-where; and she would not come
in, but sat fretting on a Seat in the Fore-yard, with
her Woman by her; and at last said, to one of the
Footmen, Do you, James, stay, to attend my Nephew; 
and we'll take the Road we came. 
Mrs. Jewkes went to her Ladyship, and said,
Your Ladyship will be pleas'd to stay Dinner; 'tis
just coming upon Table. No, said she, I have
enough of this House! I have indeed But give
my Service to your Master, and I wish him happier
than he has made me. 
He had sent for me down, and I came, tho' unwillingly,
and the Cloth was laid in the Parlour I
had jump'd out of; and there was my Master walking
about it. Mrs. Jewkes came in, and asked, If 
he pleas'd to have Dinner brought in? for my Lady
would not come in, but desired her Service, and
wish'd him happier than he had made her. He
seeing at the Window, when he went to that Side
of the Room, all ready to go, stept out to her, and
said, Lady Davers, if I thought you would not be
harden'd rather than soften'd by my Civility, I would
ask you to walk in, and at least let your Kinsman
and Servants dine before they go. She wept, and
turn'd her Face from him to hide it; he look her
Hand, and said, Come, Sister, let me prevail upon
you: Walk in. No! said she, don't ask me. — 
I wish I could hate you, as much as you hate me! — 
You do, said he, and great deal more, I'll assure
you; or else you'd not vex me as you do. —Come,
pray, walk in. Don't ask me, said she. Her Kinsman
just then return'd: Why, Madam, said he,
your Ladyship won't go till you have din'd, I hope,
No, Jackey, said she, I can't stay; I'm an Intruder
here, it seems! —Think, said my Master, of the
Occasion you gave for that Word. Your violent
Passions are the only Intruders! Lay them aside,
and never Sister was dearer to a Brother. Don't
say such another Word, said she, I beseech you; for
I am too easy to forgive you any thing, for one
kind Word! —You shall have One hundred, said he,
nay, Ten thousand, if they will do, my dear Sister. 
And kissing her, he added, Pray give me your Hand. 
John, said he, put up the Horses; you are all as
welcome to me, for all your Lady's angry with me,
as at any Inn you can put up at. Come, Mr. H. said
he, lead your Aunt in; for she won't permit that
Honour to me. 
This quite overcame her; and she said, giving
her Brother her Hand, Yes, I will, and you shall
lead me any-whither!—and kiss'd him. But don't
think, said she, I can forgive you neither. And so 
he led her into the Parlour where I was. But, said
she, why do you lead me to this Wench? 'Tis my
Wife, my dear Sister; and if you will not love her,
yet don't forget common Civilities to her, for your
own sake. 
Pray, Madam, said her Kinsman, since your Brother
is pleas'd to own his Marriage, we must not
forget common Civilities, as the 'Squire says. And,
Sir, added he, permit me to wish you Joy. Thank
you, Sir said he. And may I, said he, looking at
me? Yes, Sir, reply'd my Master. So he saluted
me, very complaisantly, and said, I vow to Gad, Madam,
I did not know this Yesterday; and, if I was
guilty of a Fault, I beg your Pardon. 
My Lady said, Thou'rt a good-natur'd foolish Fellow; 
thou mightst have sav'd this nonsensical Parade,
till I had given thee Leave. Why, Aunt, said he, if
they're actually marry'd, there's no Help for't, and
we must not make Mischief between Man and
Wife. 
But, Brother, said she, do you think I'll sit at
Table with the Creature? No contemptuous Names
I beseech you, Lady Davers! I tell you she is really
my Wife; and I must be a Villain to suffer her to
be ill used. She has no Protector but me; and, if
you will permit her, she will always love and honour
you. —Indeed, indeed, I will, Madam, said I. 
I cannot, I wo'not sit down at Table with her,
said she: Pamela, I hope thou dost not think I
will? Indeed, Madam, said I, if your good Brother
will permit it, I will attend your Chair all the
time you dine, to shew my Veneration for your
Ladyship, as the Sister of my kind Protector. See,
said he, her Condition has not altered her; but I
cannot permit in her a Conduct unworthy of my
Wife, and I hope my Sister would not expect it
neither. 
Let her leave the Room, reply'd she, if I must stay. 
Indeed, you're out of the Way, Aunt, said her Kinsman; 
that is not right, as Things stand. Said my
Master, No, Madam, that must not be, but if it
must be so, we'll have two Tables; you and your
Nephew shall sit at one, and my Spouse and I at the
other: And then see what a Figure your unreasonable
Punctilio will make you cut. —She seem'd irresolute,
and he sat her down at the Table, the first
Course, which was Fish, being brought in. Where,
said she to me, wouldst thou presume to sit? 
Wouldst have me give Place to thee too, Wench? 
—Come, come, said my Master, I'll put that out
of Dispute: and so sat himself down by her Ladyship,
at the upper End of the Table, and plac'd me
on his Left-hand. Excuse me, my Dear, said he,
this once excuse me! —Oh! your cursed Complaisance,
said she, to such a——Hush, Sister! 
Hush, said he! I will not bear her to be spoken
slightingly of! 'Tis enough, that to oblige your
violent and indecent Caprice, you make me compromise
with you thus. 
Come, Sir, added he, pray take your Place next
your gentle Aunt! —Beck, said she, do you sit down
by Pamela there, since it must be so; we'll be hail
Fellow all! With all my Heart, reply'd my Master: 
I have so much Honour for all the Sex, that I would
not have the meanest Person of it stand, while
I sit, had I been to have made the Custom. Mrs.
Worden, pray sit down. Sir, said she, I hope I shall
know my Place better. 
My Lady sat considering, and then lifting up her
Hands, said, Lord! what will this World come to? 
—To nothing but what's very good, reply'd my Master,
if such Spirits as Lady Davers's do but take the
Rule of it. Shall I help you, Sister, to some of that
Carp? Help your Beloved, said she! That's kind, 
said he! —Now, that's my good Lady Davers. 
Here, my Love, let me help you, since my Sister
desires it! —Mighty well! return'd she, mighty
well! —But sat on one Side, turning from me, as
it were. 
Dear Aunt, said her Kinsman, let's see you buss
and be Friends; since 'tis so, what signifies it? Hold
thy Fool's Tongue, said she! Is thy Tone so soon
turn'd since Yesterday? Said my Master, I hope
nothing affronting was offer'd Yesterday to my Wife
in her own House. She hit him a good smart Slap
on the Shoulder; Take that, impudent Brother, said
she. I'll Wife you, and in her own House! She
seem'd half afraid; but he, in very good Humour,
kiss'd her, and said, I thank you, Sister, I thank you. 
But I have not had a Blow from you before of
fome Time! 
'Fore Gad, Sir, said her Kinsman, 'tis very kind
of you to take it so well. Her Ladyship is as good
a Woman as ever liv'd; but I have had many a Cuff
from her myself. 
I won't put it up neither, said my Master, except
you'll assure me, you have seen her serve her Lord
so. 
I press'd my Foot to his, and said, softly, Don't,
dear Sir! —What, said she, is the Creature begging
me off from Insult? If his Manners won't keep him
from outraging me, I wo'not owe his Forbearance
to thee, Wench. 
Said my Master, and put some Fish on my Lady's
Plate, Well, does Lady Davers use the Word Insult! 
—But, come, let me see you eat one Mouthful,
and I'll forgive you; and he put the Knife in
one of her Hands, and the Fork in the other. As I
hope to live, said he, I cannot bear this silly Childishness,
for nothing at all. I am quite asham'd of
it. 
She put a little Bit to her Mouth, but put it down
in her Plate again: I cannot eat, said she; I cannot
swallow, I'm sure. It will certainly choak me. He
had forbid his Men-servants to come in, that they
might not behold the Scene he expected; and rose
from Table himself, and fill'd a Glass of Wine, her
Woman offering, and her Kinsman rising to do it. 
Mean-time, his Seat between us being vacant, she
turn'd to me, How now, Confidence, said she, darest
thou sit next me? Why dost thou not rise, and
take the Glass from thy Property? 
Sit still, my Dear, said he, I'll help you both. But
I arose; for I was afraid of a good Cuff; and said,
Pray, Sir, let me help my Lady! So you shall,
reply'd he, when she's in a Humour to receive it as she
ought. Sister, said he, with a Glass in his Hand,
Pray drink; you'll perhaps eat a little Bit of something
then. Is this to insult me, said she? —No,
really, return'd he; but to incite you to eat; for
you'll be sick for want of it. 
She took the Glass, and said, God forgive you,
wicked Wretch, for your Usage of me this Day! — 
This is a little as it used to be! —I once had your
Love; —and now it is changed; and for who?
that vexes me! And wept so, she was forced to set
down the Glass. 
You don't do well, said he. You neither treat
me like your Brother, nor a Gentleman; and if you
would suffer me, I would love you as well as ever. 
–––But, for a Woman of Sense and Understanding,
and a fine-bred Woman, as I once thought my Sister,
you act quite a childish Part. Come, added he, and
held the Glass to her Lips, let your Brother, that
you once lov'd, prevail on you to drink this Glass of
Wine.––– She then drank it. He kiss'd her, and said,
Oh! how Passion deforms the noblest Minds! You
have lost a good deal of that Loveliness that used 
to adorn my Sister. And let me persuade you to
compose yourself, and be my Sister again! —For
Lady Davers is indeed a fine Woman, and has a
Presence as majestick for a Lady, as her dear Brother
has for a Gentleman. 
He then sat down between us again, and said,
when the second Course came in, Let Abraham
come in, and wait. I touch'd his Toe again; but
he minded it not; and I saw he was right; for her
Ladyship began to recollect herself, and did not behave
half so sorrowfully before the Servants, as she
had done; and help'd herself with some little Freedom; 
but she could not forbear a strong Sigh and
a Sob, now-and-then. She call'd for a Glass of the
same Wine she had drank before. Said he, shall I
help you again, Lady Davers?—and rose at the
same time, and went to the Side-board, and filled
her a Glass. Indeed, said she, I love to be sooth'd
by my Brother! —Your Health, Sir! 
Said my Master to me with great Sweetness, My
Dear, now I'm up, I'll fill for you! —I must serve
both Sisters alike! She look'd at the Servant, as if he
were a little Check upon her, and said to my Master,
How now, Sir! —Not that you know of. He
whisper'd her, Don't shew any Contempt before my
Servants to one I have so deservedly made their
Mistress. Consider 'tis done. —Ay, said she, that's
the Thing that kills me. 
He gave me a Glass; My good Lady's Health,
Sir, said I, and stood up. —That won't do, said she,
leaning towards me, softly; and was going to say,
Wench, or Creature, or some such Word. And my
Master, seeing Abraham look towards her, her Eyes
being red and swell'd, said, Indeed, Sister, I would
not vex myself about it, if I was you. About what,
said she? Why, reply'd he, about your Lord's not
coming down, as he had promised. He sat down, 
and she tapp'd him on the Shoulder: Ah! Wickedone,
said she, nor will that do neither! —Why, to
be sure, added he, it would vex a Lady of your Sense
and Merit, to be slighted, if it was so; but I am
sure my Lord loves you, as well as you love him; 
and you know not what may have happen'd. 
She shook her Head, and said, That's like your
Art! —This makes one amaz'd you should be so
caught! —Who, my Lord caught! said he; no, no!
he'll have more Wit than so! But I never heard
you was jealous before. Nor, said she, have you
any Reason to think so now! Honest Friend, you
need not wait, said she; my Woman will help us to
what we want. Yes, let him, reply'd he. Abraham,
fill me a Glass. Come, said my Master, Lord Davers
to you, Madam: I hope he'll take care he is
not found out! —You're very provoking, Brother,
said she. I wish you was as good as Lord Davers. 
—But don't carry your Jest too far. Well, said he,
'tis a tender Point, I own. I've done! 
By these kind Managements the Dinner passed over
better than I expected. And when the Servants were
withdrawn, my Master said, still keeping his Place
between us, I have a Question to ask you, Lady
Davers; and that is, If you'll bear me Company to Bedfordshire. 
I was intending to set out thither to-morrow. 
But I'll tarry your Pleasure, if you'll go with me. 
Is thy Wife, as thou callest her, to go along with
thee, Friend? said she. Yes, to be sure, answer'd he,
my dear Quaker Sister, and took her Hand, and
smil'd. And wouldst have me parade it with her on
the Road? —Hay! —And make one to grace her
Retinue? —Hay! —Tell me how thou'dst chalk it
out, if I would do as thou wouldst have me, honest
Friend! 
He clasped his Arms about her, and kissed her: 
You are a dear saucy Sister, said he; but I must 
love you! —Why, I'll tell you how I'd have it. Here
shall you, and my Pamela—Leave out my, I desire
you, if you'd have me sit patiently. No, said
he, I can't do that. Here shall you, and my Pamela,
go together in your Chariot, if you please; and she
will then appear as one of your Retinue; and your
Nephew and I will sometimes ride, and sometimes
go into my Chariot, to your Woman. 
Shouldst thou like this, Creature? said she to me.––– 
If your Ladyship think it not too great an Honour for
me, Madam, said I. Yes, reply'd she, but my Ladyship
does think it would be too great an Honour. 
Now I think of it, said he, this must not be, neither; 
for without you'd give her the Hand, in your
own Chariot, my Wife would be thought your
Woman, and that must not be. Why, that would,
may-be, said she, be the only Inducement for me to
bear her near me, in my Chariot. —But, how then? 
–––Why then, when we came home, we'd get Lord
Davers to come to us, and stay a Month or two. 
And what if he was to come? —Why I would
have you, as I know you have a good Fancy, give
Pamela your Judgment on some Patterns I expect
from London, for Cloaths. —Provoking Wretch! said
she; now I wish I may keep my Hands to myself. 
I don't say it to provoke you, said he, nor ought it
to do so. But when I tell you, I am marry'd, Is it
not a Consequence, that we must have new Cloaths? 
Hast thou any more of these obliging things to
say to me, Friend? said she. I will make you a Present,
return'd he, worth your Acceptance, if you
will grace us with your Company at Church, when
we make our Appearance! —Take that, said she, if
I die for't; Wretch that thou art! And was going
to hit him a great Slap, but he held her Hand. Her
Kinsman said, Dear Aunt, I wonder at you! why
all these are things of Course. 
I begg'd Leave to withdraw; and, as I went out,
my good Master said, There's a Person! There's a
Shape! There's a Sweetness! O Lady Davers! were
you a Man, you would doat on her, as I do. Yes,
said the naughty Lady, so I should, for my Harlot,
but not for a Wife. I turn'd, on this, and said, Indeed
your Ladyship is cruel; and well may Gentlemen
take Liberties, when Ladies of Honour say such
things! And I wept, and added, Your Ladyship's
Influence, if your good Brother were not the most
generous of Men, would make me very unhappy. 
No Fear, Wench; no Fear, said she: Thou'lt hold
him, as long as any body can, I see that! —Poor
Sally Godfrey never had half the Interest in him, I'll
assure you! 
Stay, my Pamela, said he, in a Passion; stay,
when I bid you. You have heard, this Day, two
vile Charges upon me! I love you with such a true
Affection, that I ought to say something before this
malicious Accuser, that you may not think your
consummate Virtue link'd to too black a Villain. 
Her Nephew seem'd uneasy, and blam'd her much; 
and I came back, but trembled as I stood; and he
sit me down, and said, taking my Hand, I have been
accused, my Dear, as a Dueller, and now as a Profligate,
in another Sense! and there was a Time, I
should not have received these Imputations with so
much Concern as I now do, when I would wish,
by degrees, by a Conformity of my Manners to
your Virtue, to shew every one the Force your
Example has upon me. But this briefly is the Case
of the first. 
I had a Friend, who had been basely attempted
to be assassinated by Bravoes, hir'd by a Man of
Title in Italy, who, like many other Persons of
Title, had no Honour; and at Padua, I had the
Fortune to disarm one of these Bravoes in my Friend's 
Defence, and made him confess his Employer; and
him, I own, I challeng'd. At Sienna we met, and
he dy'd in a Month after, of a Fever, but, I hope,
not occasion'd by the slight Wounds he had receiv'd
from me, tho' I was obliged to leave Italy upon it,
sooner than I intended, because of his numerous
Relations, who looked upon me as the Cause of his
Death. Tho' I pacify'd them by a Letter I wrote
them from Inspruck, acquainting them with the
Baseness of the Deceased; and they followed me
not to Munich, as they had intended. 
This is one of the good-natur'd Hints, that might
shock your Sweetness on reflecting that you are
yoked with a Murderer. The other—Nay, Brother,
said she, say no more. 'Tis your own Fault
if you go further. She shall know it all, said he; 
and I defy the utmost Stretch of your Malice. 
When I was at College, I was well received by
a Widow Lady, who had several Daughters, and but
small Fortunes to give them; and the old Lady set
one of them; a deserving good Girl she was; to
draw me in to a Marriage with her, for the sake of
the Fortune I was Heir to; and contriv'd many
Opportunities to bring us and leave us together. I
was not then of Age; and the young Lady, not half
so artful as her Mother, yielded to my Addresses,
before the Mother's Plot could be ripen'd, and so
utterly disappointed it. This, my Pamela, is the
Sally Godfrey this malicious Woman, with the worst
Intentions, has inform'd you of. And whatever
other Liberties I may have taken; for perhaps some
more I have, which, had she known, you had heard
of, as well as this; I desire Heaven will only forgive
me till I revive its Vengeance by the like Offences,
in Injury to my Pamela. 
And now, my Dear, you may withdraw; for this
worthy Sister of mine has said all the Bad she knows 
of me; and what, at a proper Opportunity, when
I could have convinced you, that they were not my
Boast, but my Concern, I should have acquainted you
with, myself; for I am not fond of being thought
better than I am: Tho', I hope, from the Hour I
devoted myself to so much Virtue, to that of my
Death, my Conduct shall be irreproachable. 
She was greatly mov'd at this, and the noble Manner
in which the dear Gentleman own'd and repented
of his Faults; and gushed out into Tears, and said,
No, don't yet go, Pamela, I beseech you. My
Passion has carry'd me too far a great deal; and
coming to me, she took my Hand, and said, You
must stay to hear me beg his Pardon, and so took
his Hand—But, to my Concern, (for I was grieved
for her Ladyship's Grief) he burst from her; and
went out of the Parlour into the Garden, in a violent
Rage, that made me tremble. Her Ladyship
sat down, and leaned her Head against my Bosom,
and made my Neck wet with her Tears, holding
me by my Hands; and I wept for Company. –––– 
Her Kinsman walked up and down the Parlour, in a
sad Fret; and going out afterwards, he came in, and
said, The 'Squire has order'd his Chariot to be got
ready, and won't be spoken to by any body. Where
is he? said she—Walking in the Garden till 'tis
ready, reply'd he. 
Well, said she, I have indeed gone too far. I was
bewitched! And now, said she, malicious as he calls
me, will he not forgive me for a Twelvemonth: 
For I tell you, Pamela, if ever you offend, he will
not easily forgive. I was all delighted, tho' sad, to
see her Ladyship so good to me. Will you venture,
said she, to accompany me to him! –––Dare you
follow a Lion in his Retreats? —I'll attend your
Ladyship, said I, where-ever you command. Well,
Wench, said she, Pamela, I mean, thou art very good 
in the main! —I should have lov'd thee as well as
my Mother did—if—but 'tis all over now! Indeed
you should not have marry'd my Brother! But
come, I must love him! Let's find him out. And
yet will he now use me worse than a Dog! —I should
not, added she, have so much exasperated him: For
whenever I have, I have always had the worst of it. 
He knows I love him! 
In this manner her Ladyship talk'd to me, learning
on my Arm, and walked into the Garden. I saw
he was still in a Tumult, as it were; and he took
another Walk to avoid us. —She call'd after him,
and said, Brother, Brother, Let me speak to you!––– 
One Word with you! And as we made haste towards
him, and came near to him; I desire, said he,
That you'll not oppress me more with your Follies
and your Violence. I have borne too much with
you. And I will vow for a Twelvemonth, from this
Day––– Hush, said she, don't vow, I beg you; for
too well will you keep it, I know by Experience, if
you do: You see, said she, I stoop to ask Pamela
to be my Advocate. Sure that will pacify you! 
Indeed, said he, I desire to see neither of you, on
such an Occasion; and let me only be left to myself; 
for I will not be intruded upon thus; and was
going away.––– But she said, One Word first, I desire
–––If you'll forgive me, I'll forgive you! ––– What,
said the dear Man, haughtily, will you forgive me! 
–––Why, said she, for she saw him too angry to
mention his Marriage, as a Subject that requir'd her
Pardon,––– I will forgive you all your bad Usage of
me this Day. 
I will be serious with you, Sister, said he: I wish
you most sincerely well; but let us, from this Time,
study so much one another's Quiet, as never to come
near one another more. —Never? said she. —And
can you desire this, barbarous Brother! can you? — 

I can, I do, said he; and I have nothing to do, but
hide from you, not a Brother, but a Murderer, and
a Profligate, unworthy of your Relation; and let
me be consign'd to Penitence for my past Evils: A
Penitence however, that shall not be broken in upon
by so violent an Accuser. 
Pamela, said he, and made me tremble, How dare
you approach me, without Leave, when you see me
thus disturb'd!––– Never, for the future, come near
me, while I am in these Tunults, unless I send for
you. 
Dear Sir! said I—Leave me, interrupted he. I
will set out for Bedfordshire this Moment: What! 
Sir, said I, without me?––– What have I done! You
have too meanly, said he, for my Wife, stooped to
this furious Sister of mine; and, till I can recollect,
I am not pleased with you: But Colbrand shall attend
you, and two other of my Servants; and Mrs. Jewkes
shall wait upon you part of the Way. And I hope,
you'll find me in a better Disposition to receive you
there, than I am at parting with you here. 
Had I not hoped, that this was partly put on to
intimidate my Lady, I believe I could not have
borne it: But it was grievous to me; for I saw he
was most sincerely in a Passion. 
I was afraid, said she, he would be angry at you,
as well as me; for well do I know his unreasonable
Violence, when he is moved. But one Word, Sir,
said she; Pardon Pamela, if you won't me; for she
has committed no Offence, but that of Good-nature
to me, and at my Request. I will begone myself,
directly, as I was about to do, had you not prevented
me. 
I prevented you, said he, thro' Love; but you
have stung me for it, thro' Hatred. But as for my
Pamela, I know, besides the present Moment, I
cannot be angry with her; and therefore I desire her 
never to see me on such Occasions, till I can see her
in the Temper I ought to be in when so much
Sweetness approaches me. 'Tis therefore, I say, my
Dearest, leave me now. 
But, Sir, said I, must I leave you, and let you go
to Bedford without me! O dear Sir, how can I? 
—Said my Lady, You may go to-morrow, both
of you, as you had design'd, and I will go away this
Afternoon; and since I cannot be forgiven, I will
try to forget I have a Brother. 
May I, Sir, said I, beg all your Anger on myself,
and to be reconciled to your good Sister? Presuming
Pamela! reply'd he, and made me start, art thou then
so hardy, so well able to sustain a Displeasure, which,
of all things, I expected, from thy Affection and
thy Tenderness, thou wouldst have wished to avoid?––– 
Now, said he, and took my Hand, and, as it
were, tost it from him, begone from my Presence,
and reflect upon what you have said to me! 
I was so frighted, for then I saw he took amiss
what I said, that I took hold of his Knees, as he
was turning from me, and I said, Forgive me, good
Sir; you see I am not so hardy! I cannot bear your
Displeasure! And was ready to sink. 
His Sister said, Only forgive Pamela; 'tis all I
ask! —You'll break her Spirit quite! —You'll
carry your Passion as much too far as I have done! 
—I need not say, said he, how well I love her:
but she must not intrude upon me at such times as
these! —I had intended, as soon as I could have
quell'd, by my Reason, the Tumults you had caused
by your Violence, to have come in, and taken such
a Leave of you both, as might become a Husband
and a Brother; but she has, unbidden, broken in
upon me, and must take the Consequence of a Passion,
which, when raised, is as uncontroulable as your
own. 
Said she, Did I not love you so well, as Sister
never loved a Brother, I should not have given you
all this Trouble. And did I not, said he, love you
better than you are resolv'd to deserve, I should
be indifferent to all you say. But this last Instance,
(after the Duelling-story, which you would not have
mention'd, had you not known it is always matter
of Concern for me to think upon) of poor Sally
Godfrey, is a Piece of Spite and Meanness, that I
can renounce you my Blood for. 
Well, said she, I am convinced it was wrong. I
am asham'd of it myself. 'Twas poor, 'twas mean,
'twas unworthy of your Sister: And 'tis for this Reason
I stoop to follow you, to beg your Pardon, and
even to procure for my Advocate one, that I thought
had some Interest in you, if I might have believed
your own Professions to her; which now I shall begin
to think made purposely to insult me. 
I care not what you think! —After the Meanness
you have been guilty of, I can only look upon
you with Pity. For, indeed, you have fallen very
low with me. 
'Tis plain I have, said she. But, I'll begone. ––– 
And so, Brother, let me call you so this once! God
bless you! And, Pamela, said her Ladyship, God
bless you! And kissed me, and wept. 
I durst say no more; and my Lady turning from
him, he said, Your Sex is the D&wblank;l; how strangely
can you discompose, calm, and turn, as you please,
us poor Weathercocks of Men! Your last kind Blessing
to my Pamela, I cannot stand! Kiss but each
other again. And he then took both our Hands, and
join'd them; and my Lady saluting me again, with
Tears on both sides, he put his kind Arms about
each of our Waists, and saluted us with great Affection,
saying, Now, God bless you both, the
two dearest Creatures I have in the World. 
Well, said she, you will quite forget my Fault
about Miss—He stopt her, before she could
speak the Name, and said, For ever forget it! —And,
Pamela, I'll forgive you too, if you don't again make
my Displeasure so light a thing to you, as you did
just now! 
Said my Lady, She did not make your Displeasure
a light thing to her; but the heavier it was, the
higher Compliment she made me, that she would
bear it all, rather than not see you and me reconciled. 
No matter for that, said he: It was either an Absence
of Thought, or a Slight, by Implication at
least, that my Niceness could not bear from her
Tenderness. For, looked it not presuming, that she
could stand my Displeasure, or was sure of making
her Terms when she pleas'd? Which, fond as I am
of her, I assure her, will not be always, in wilful
Faults, in her own Power. 
Nay, said my Lady, I can tell you, Pamela, you
have a Gentleman here in my Brother; and you
may expect such Treatment from him, as that Character,
and his known good Sense and Breeding, will
always oblige him to shew: But if you offend, the
Lord have Mercy upon you! —You see how it is
by poor me! —And yet, I never knew him forgive
so soon. 
I am sure, said I, I will take care as much as I
can! for I have been frighted out of my Wits, and
had offended before I knew where I was. 
So happily did this Storm blow over; and my
Lady was quite subdu'd and pacify'd. When we
came out of the Garden, his Chariot was ready; 
and he said, Well, Sister, I had most assuredly gone
away towards my other House, if things had not
taken this happy Turn; and if you please, instead
of it, you and I will take an Airing: And pray,
my Dear, said he to me, bid Mis. Jewkes order 
Supper by Eight o'Clock, and we shall then join
you. 
Sir, added he, to her Nephew, will you take your
Horse, and escorte us? I will, said he; and am glad,
at my Soul, to see you all so good Friends. —So my
dear lordly Master (O my dear Parents! he is very
dreadful when he pleases, I see! —But, I hope, I
shall never incur his Anger) handed my Lady into
his Chariot, and her Kinsman, and his Servant, rode
after them; and I went up to my Closet, to ruminate
on these things. And, foolish thing that I am,
this poor Miss Sally Godfrey runs in my Head!–––– 
How soon the Name and Quality of a Wife gives
one Privileges, in one's own Account! —Yet, methinks,
I want to know more about her; for, is it
not strange, that I, who lived Years in the Family,
should have heard nothing of this? But I was so
constantly with my Lady, that I might the less hear
of it; for she, I dare say, never knew it, or she
would have told me. 
But I dare not ask him about the poor Lady— 
Yet I wonder what became of her? Whether she
be living? And whether any thing came of it?–––– 
May-be I shall hear full soon enough: —But I hope
not to any bad Purpose. 
As to the other unhappy Case, I know it was
talk'd of, that in his Travels, before I was taken into
the Family long, he had one or two Broils; and,
from a Youth, he was always remarkable for Courage,
and is reckon'd a great Master of his Sword. 
God grant he may never be put to use it! And that
he may be always preserved in Honour and Safety! 
About Seven o'Clock, my Master sent word, that
he would have me not expect him to Supper. For
that he and my Lady his Sister, and Nephew, were
prevailed upon to stay with Lady Jones; and that 
Lady Darnford, and Mr. Peters's Family, had promised
to meet them there. I was glad that they
did not send for me; and the rather, as I hoped those
good Families, being my Friends, would confirm my
Lady a little in my Favour; and so I follow'd my
Writing closely. 
About Eleven o'Clock they return'd. I had but
just come down, having tir'd myself with my Pen,
and was sitting talking with Mrs. Jewkes and Mrs.
Worden, whom I would, tho' unwillingly on their
Sides, make sit down over-against me. Mrs. Worden
asked me Pardon, in a good deal of Confusion, for
the Part she had acted against me; saying, That
Things had been very differently represented to her; 
and that she little thought I had been marry'd, and
that she was behaving so rudely to the Lady of the
House. 
I said, I took nothing amiss, and very freely forgave
her; and hoped my new Condition would not
make me forget how to behave properly to every
one; but that I must endeavour to act not unworthy
of it, for the Honour of the Gentleman who
had so generously raised me to it. 
Mrs. Jewkes said, that my Situation gave me
great Opportunities of shewing the Excellency of
my Nature, that I could forgive Offences against
me so readily, as she for her own Part, must always,
she said, acknowledge, with Confusion of Face. 
People, said I, Mrs. Jewkes, don't know how
they shall act, when their Wills are in the Power of
their Superiors; and I always thought one should
distinguish between Acts of Malice, and of implicit
Obedience; tho', at the same time, a Person should
know how to judge between Lawful and Unlawful. 
And even the Great, continued I, tho' at present angry
they are not obey'd, will afterwards have no ill Opinion 
of a Person for withstanding them in their unlawful Commands. 
Mrs. Jewkes seem'd a little concern'd at this; and
I said, I spoke chiefly from my own Experience; for
that I might say, as they both knew my Story, that
I had not wanted both for Menaces and Temptations; 
and had I comply'd with the one, or been
intimidated by the other, I should not have been
what I was. 
Ah! Madam, said Mrs. Jewkes, I never knew
any body like you: And I think your Temper sweeter
since the happy Day, than before; and that, if possible,
you take less upon you than before. 
Why, a good Reason, said I, may be assigned for
that: I thought myself in Danger: I look'd upon
every one as my Enemy; and it was impossible
that I should not be fretful, uneasy, jealous. But
when my dearest Sir had taken from me the Ground
of my Uneasiness, and made me quite happy, I
should have been very blameable if I had not shewn
a satisfy'd and easy Mind, and a Temper that should
engage every one's Respect and Love at the same
time, if possible: And so much the more, as it was
but justifying, in some sort, the Honour I had
received; for the fewer Enemies I made myself,
the more I engaged every one to think, that my good
Benefactor had been less to blame in descending as
he has done. 
This way of talking pleas'd them both very much; 
and they made me many Compliments upon it, and
wished me to be always happy, as, they said, I so
well deserved. 
We were thus engaged, when my Master and his
Sister, and her Nephew, came in. And they made
me quite alive, in the happy Humour in which they
all return'd. The two Women would have withdrawn; 
but my Master said, Don't go, Mrs. Worden; 
Mrs. Jewkes, pray stay; I shall speak to you presently
So he came to me, and saluting me, said, Well, my
dear Love, I hope I have not trespass'd upon your
Patience, by an Absence longer than we design'd. 
But it has not been to your Disadvantage; for tho'
we had not your Company, we have talked of nobody
else but you. 
My Lady came up to me, and said, Ay, Child,
you have been all our Subject. I don't know how
it is; but you have made two or three whole Families,
in this Neighbourhood, as much your Admirers,
as your Friend here. 
My Sister, said he, has been hearing your Praises,
Pamela, from half a score Mouths, with more Pleasure
than her Heart will easily let her express. 
My good Lady Davers's Favour, said I, and the
Continuance of yours, Sir, would give me more
Pride than that of all the rest of the World put together. 
Well, Child, said she, proud Hearts don't come
down all at once; tho' my Brother here has, this
Day, set mine a good many Pegs lower than I
ever knew it: But I will say, I wish you Joy with
my Brother; and so kissed me. 
My dear Lady, said I, you for ever oblige me! 
–––I shall now believe myself quite happy. This
was all I wanted to make me so!––– And, I hope,
I shall always, thro' my Life, shew your Ladyship,
that I have the most grateful and respectful Sense of
your Goodness. 
But, Child, said she, I shall not give you my
Company when you make your Appearance. Let
your own Merit make all your Bedfordshire Neighbours
your Friends, as it has done here, by your
Lincolnshire ones; and you'll have no need of my
Countenance, nor any body's else. 
Now, said her Nephew, 'tis my Turn; I wish
you Joy with all my Soul, Madam; and, by what I
have seen, and by what I have heard, 'fore Gad,
I think you have met with no more than you deserve; 
and so all the Company says, where we have
been. And pray forgive all my Nonsense to you. 
Sir, said I, I shall always, I hope, respect as I
ought, so near a Relation of my good Lord and
Lady Davers; and I thank you for your kind Compliment. 
Gad, Beck, said he, I believe you've some Forgiveness
too to ask; for we were all to blame, to
make Madam, here, fly the Pit, as she did! Little
did we think we made her quit her own House. 
Thou always, said my Lady, say'st too much or
too little. 
Mrs. Worden said, I have been treated with so
much Goodness and Condescension, since you went,
that I have been beforehand, Sir, in asking Pardon
for myself. 
So my Lady sat down with me half an Hour, and
told me how her Brother had carry'd her a fine Airing,
and had quite charm'd her with his kind Treatment
of her; and had much confirm'd her in the
good Opinion she had begun to entertain of my discreet
and obliging Behaviour: But, continued she,
when he would make me visit, without intending to
stay, my old Neighbours, (for, said she, Lady Jones
being nearest, we visited her first; and she scrap'd all
the rest of the Company together) they were all
so full of your Praises, that I was quite borne down; 
and, truly, it was Saul among the Prophets! 
You may believe how much I was delighted with
this; and I spar'd not my due Acknowledgments. 
When her Ladyship took Leave, to go to-bed,
she said, Good-night to you, heartily, and to your
good Man. I kiss'd you when I came in, out of 
Form; but I now kiss you out of more than Form,
I'll assure you. 
Join with me, my dear Parents, in my Joy for this
happy Turn; the contrary of which, I so much
dreaded, and was the only Difficulty I had to labour
with! —This poor Miss Sally Godfrey, I wonder
what's become of her, poor Soul! —I wish he would,
of his own Head, mention her again. —Not that I
am very uneasy neither. —You'll say, I must be a
little saucy, if I was. 
My dear Master gave me an Account, when we
went up, of the Pains he had taken with his beloved
Sister, as he himself styled her; and of all the
kind Things the good Families had said in my Behalf; 
and that he observ'd she was not so much displeas'd
with hearing them, as she was at first; when
she would not permit any body to speak of me as
his Wife. And that my Health, as his Spouse, being
put; when it came to her, she drank it; but said,
Come, Brother, here's your Pamela to you. —But
I shall not know how to stand this Affair, when the
Countess –––––––– and the young Ladies come to
visit me. It was with one of those young Ladies,
that she was so fond of promoting a Match with
her Brother. —Lady Betty, I know, said she, will
rally me smartly upon it; and you know, Brother,
she wants neither Wit, nor Satire. He said, I hope,
Lady Betty, whenever she marries, will meet with
a better Husband than I should have made her; for,
on my Conscience, I think, I should hardly have
made a tolerable one to any but Pamela. 
He told me, That they rallied him on the Stateliness
of his Temper; and said, They saw he would
make an exceeding good Husband where he was; 
but it must be owing to my Meekness, more than
his Complaisance; for, said Miss Darnford, I could
see, well enough, when your Ladyship detained her, 
tho' he had but hinted his Desire of finding her at
our House, he was so out of Humour at her supposed
Non-complaisance, that mine and my Sister's Pity
for her was much more engag'd than our Envy. 
Ay, said my Lady, he is too lordly a Creature,
by much, and can't bear Disappointment, and never
could. 
Said he, Well, Lady Davers, you should not, of
all Persons, find Fault with me; for I bore a great
deal from you, before I was at all angry. 
Yes, reply'd she; but when I had gone a little too
far, as I own I did, you made me pay for it severely
enough! You know you did, Sauce-box. And the
poor thing too, added she, that I took with me for
my Advocate, so low had he brought me! he
treated in such a manner, as made my Heart ach for
her: But part was Art, I know, to make me think
the better of her. 
Indeed, Sister, said he, there was very little of
that; for, at that time, I cared not what you thought,
nor had Complaisance enough to have given a Shilling
for your good or bad Opinion of her or me. 
And, I own, I was displeased to be broken in
upon, after your Provocations, by either of you; 
and she must learn that Lesson, never to come near
me, when I am in those Humours; which shall be
as little as possible; for, after a-while, if let alone,
I always come to myself, and am sorry for the Violence
of a Temper so like my dear Sister's here: 
And, for this Reason, think it is no matter how few
Witnesses I have of its Intemperance, while it lasts; 
especially since every Witness, whether they merit it
or not, as you see in my Pamela's Case, must be
a Sufferer by it, if, unsent for, they come in my
Way. 
He repeated the same Lesson to me again, and
inforc'd it; and own'd, that he was angry with me 
in Earnest, just then; tho' more with himself, afterwards,
for being so: But when, Pamela, said he, you
wanted to transfer all my Displeasure upon yourself,
it was so much braying me with your Merit, as if
I must soon end my Anger, if placed there; or it
was making it so light to you, that I was truly displeased. 
For, continued he, I cannot bear that you
should wish, on any Occasion whatever, to have me
angry with you, or not to value my Displeasure, as
the heaviest Misfortune that could befal you. 
But, Sir, said I, you know, that what I did was to
try to reconcile my Lady, and as she herself observ'd,
it was paying her a high Regard. It was so, reply'd he; 
but never think of making a Compliment to her,
or any body living, at my Expence. Besides, she
had behav'd herself so intolerably, that I began to
think you had stooped too much, and more than I
ought to permit my Wife to do; and Acts of Meanness
are what I cant't endure in any body, but especially
where I love; and as she had been guilty of a
very signal one, I had much rather have renounced
her, at that time, than have been reconciled to
her. 
Sir, said I, I hope I shall always comport myself
so, as not wilfully to disoblige you for the future; 
and the rather do I hope this, as I am sure I shall
want only to know your Pleasure, to obey it. But
this Instance shews me, that I may much offend,
without designing it in the least. 
Now, Pamela, reply'd he, don't be too serious; I
hope I shan't be a very tyrannical Husband to you. 
Yet do I not pretend to be perfect, or to be always
govern'd by Reason in my first Transports; and I
expect, from your Affection, that you will bear
with me when you find me wrong. I have no ingrateful
Spirit, and can, when cool, enter as impartially
into myself, as most Men; and then I am always 
kind and acknowledging, in proportion as I
have been out of the Way. 
But, to convince you, my Dear, continued he, of
your Fault, (I mean, with regard to the Impetuosity
of my Temper; for there was no Fault in your Intention,
that I acknowledge) I'll observe only, that you
met, when you came to me, while I was so out of
Humour, a Reception you did not expect, and a
harsh Word or two, that you did not deserve. Now,
had you not broken in upon me, while my Anger
lasted, but stay'd till I had come to you, or sent to
desire your Company, you'd have seen none of this; 
but that affectionate Behaviour, that, I doubt not,
you'll always merit, and I shall always take Pleasure
in expressing; and in this Temper shall you always
find a proper Influence over me: But you must not
suppose, whenever I am out of Humour, that, in opposing
yourself to my Passion, you oppose a proper
Butt to it; but when you are so good, like the slender
Reed, to bend to the Hurricane, rather than,
like the sturdy Oak, to resist it, you will always stand
firm in my kind Opinion, while a contrary Conduct
would uproot you, with all your Excellencies, from
my Soul. 
Sir, said I, I will endeavour to conform myself,
in all things, to your Will. I make no Doubt,
but you will: And I'll endeavour to make my Will
as conformable to Reason as I can. And, let me
tell you, that this Belief of you, is one of the Inducements
I have had to marry at all. For nobody
was more averse to this State than myself; and now
we're upon this Subject, I'll tell you why I was so
averse. 
We People of Fortune, or such as are born to
large Expectations, of both Sexes, are generally educated
wrong. You have occasionally touch'd upon
this, Pamela, several times in your Journal, so justly, 
that I need say the less to you. We are usually so
headstrong, so violent in our Wills, that we very
little bear Controul. 
Humour'd by our Nurses, thro' the Faults of our
Parents, we practise first upon them; and shew the
Gratitude of our Dispositions, in an Insolence that
ought rather to be check'd and restrain'd, than encouraged. 
Next, we are to be indulged in every thing at
School; and our Masters and Mistresses are rewarded
with further grateful Instances of our boisterous Behaviour. 
But, in our wise Parents Eyes, all looks well, all
is forgiven and excus'd; and for no other Reason,
but because we are Theirs. 
Our next Progression is, we exercise our Spirits,
when brought home, to the Torment and Regret
of our Parents themselves, and torture their
Hearts by our undutiful and perverse Behaviour to
them; which, however ingrateful in us, is but the
natural Consequence of their culpable Indulgence
to us, from Infancy upwards. 
And then, next, after we have, perhaps, half broken
their Hearts, a Wife is look'd out for: Convenience,
or Birth and Fortune, are the first Motives,
Affection the last (if it is at all consulted): And two
People thus educated, thus trained up in a Course of
unnatural Ingratitude, and who have been headstrong
Torments to every one who has had a Share in their
Education, as well as to those to whom they owe
their Being, are brought together; and what can be
expected, but that they should pursue, and carry on,
the same comfortable Conduct, in Matrimony, and
join most heartily to plague one another? And, in
some measure, indeed, this is right, because hereby
they tevenge the Cause of all those who have been
aggrieved and insulted by them, upon one another. 
The Gentleman has never been controuled: The
Lady has never been contradicted. 
He cannot bear it from one whose new Relation,
he thinks, should oblige her to shew a quite contrary
Conduct. 
She thinks it very barbarous, now, for the first
time, to be opposed by a Man, from whom she expected
nothing but Tenderness. 
So great is the Difference, between what they
both expect from one another, and what they both
find in each other, that no wonder Misunderstandings
happen; that these ripen to Quarrels; that Acts
of Unkindness pass, which, even had the first Motive
to their Union been Affection, as usually it is
not, would have effaced all manner of tender Impressions
on both sides. 
Appeals to Parents or Guardians often ensue: If,
by Mediation of Friends, a Reconciliation takes
place, it hardly ever holds; for why? The Fault is
in the Minds of both, and neither of them will think
so; so that the Wound (not permitted to be
probed) is but skinn'd over, and rankles still at the
Bottom, and at last breaks out with more Pain and
Anguish than before. Separate Beds are often the
Consequence; perhaps Elopements; if not, an unconquerable
Indifference, possibly Aversion. And
whenever, for Appearance-sake, they are obliged to
be together, every one sees, that the yawning Husband,
and the vapourish Wife, are truly insupportable
to one another; but, separate, have freer Spirits,
and can be tolerable Company. 
Now, my Dear, I would have you think, and, I
hope, you will have no other Reason, that had I
marry'd the first Lady in the Land, I would not have
treated her better than I will my Pamela. For my
Wife is my Wife; and I was the longer in resolving 
on the State, because I knew its Requisites, and
doubted my Conduct in it. 
I believe I am more nice than many Gentlemen; 
but it is because I have been a close Observer of
the Behaviour of wedded Folks, and hardly have
ever seen it to be such as I could like in my own
Case. I shall, possibly, give you Instances, of a more
particular Nature, of this, as we are longer, and,
perhaps, I might say, better acquainted. 
Had I marry'd with the Views of most Gentlemen,
and with such as my good Sister (supplying
the Place of my Father and Mother) would have
recommended, I had wedded a fine Lady, brought up
pretty much in my own Manner, and used to have
her Will in every thing. 
Some Gentlemen can come into a Compromise; 
and, after a few Struggles, sit down tolerably contented. 
But, had I marry'd a Princess, I could not
have done so. I must have loved her exceedingly
well, before I had consented to knit the Knot
with her, and preferr'd her to all her Sex; for without
this, Pamela, Indifferences, if not Disgusts, will
arise in every wedded Life, that could not have made
me happy at home; and there are sewer Instances,
I believe, of Mens loving better after Matrimony,
than of Womens; the Reasons of which 'tis not
my present Purpose to account for. 
Then I must have been morally sure, that she
prefer'd me to all Men; and, to convince me of
this, she must have lessen'd, not aggravated, my Failings; 
she must have borne with my Imperfections; 
she must have watch'd and study'd my Temper; and
if ever she had any Points to carry, any Desire of
overcoming, it must have been by Sweetness and
Complaisance; and yet not such a slavish one, as
should make her Condescension seem to be rather 
the Effect of her Insensibility, than Judgment or Affection. 
She should not have given Cause for any Part of
my Conduct to her, to wear the least Aspect of
Compulsion or Force. The Word Command, on
my Side, or Obedience, on hers, I would have blotted
from my Vocabulary. For this Reason I should
have thought it my Duty to have desired nothing of
her, that was not significant, reasonable, or just; 
and that then she should, on hers, have shewn no
Reluctance, Uneasiness, or Doubt, to oblige me,
even at half a Word. 
I would not have excus'd her to let me twice injoin
the same thing, while I took such care to make
her Compliance with me reasonable, and such as
should not destroy her own free Agency, in Points
that ought to be allow'd her. And if I was not always
right, that yet she would bear with me, if she
saw me set upon it; and expostulate with me on the
right side of Compliance; for that would shew me,
(supposing Small Points in Dispute, from which the
greatest Quarrels, among Friends, generally arise)
that she differ'd from me, not for Contradiction-Sake,
but desir'd to convince me for my own; and that I
should, another time, take better Resolutions. 
This would be so obliging a Conduct, that I
should, in Justice, have doubled my Esteem for one,
who, to humour me, could give up her own Judgment; 
and I should see she could have no other
View in her Expostulations, after her Compliance
had passed, than to rectify my Notions for the future; 
and it would have been impossible then, but
I must have paid the greater Deference to her Opinion
and Advice in more momentous Matters. 
In all Companies she must have shewn, that she
had, whether I deserved it altogether, or not, a high
Regard and Opinion of me; and this the rather, as 
that such a Conduct in her, would be a Reputation
and Security to herself; for if ever we Rakes attempt
a marry'd Lady, our first Encouragement,
exclusive of our own Vanity, arises from the indifferent
Opinion, Slight, or Contempt she expresses
for her Husband. 
That therefore she would draw a kind Veil over
my Faults; that such as she could not hide, she would
extenuate: That she would place my better Actions
in an advantageous Light, and shew, that I had her
good Opinion, at least, whatever Liberties the World
took with my Character. 
She must have valued my Friends for my sake; 
been chearful and easy, whomever I had brought home
with me; and whatever Faults she had observed in
me, have never blamed me before Company; at
least, with such an Air of Superiority as should have
shewn she had a better Opinion of her own Judgment,
than mine. 
Now, my Pamela, this is but a faint Sketch of
the Conduct I must have expected from my Wife,
let her Quality have been what it would, or have
lived with her on bad Terms. Judge then, if, to me,
a Lady of the modish Taste could have been tolerable. 
The Perverseness and Contradiction I have too
often seen, in some of my Visits, even among People
of Sense, as well as Condition, had prejudiced me to
the marry'd State; and, as I knew I could not bear
it, surely I was in the right to decline it; and you
see, my Dear, that I have not gone among this
Class of People for a Wife; nor know I indeed,
where, in any Class, I could have sought one, or
had one, suitable to my Mind, if not you. For here
is my Misfortune; I could not have been contented
to have been but moderately happy in a Wife. 
Judge you, from all this, if I could very well bear,
that you should think yourself so well secur'd of my
Affection, that you could take the Faults of others
upon yourself; and, by a supposed supererogatory
Merit, think your Interposition sufficient to atone
for the Faults of others. 
Yet am I not perfect myself: No, I am greatly
imperfect. Yet will I not allow, that my Imperfections
shall excuse those of my Wife, or make her
think I ought to bear Faults in her, that she can
rectify, because she bears greater from me. 
Upon the Whole, I may expect, that you will
bear with me, and study my Temper, till, and only
till, you see I am capable of returning Insult for
Obligation; and till you think that I shall be of a
gentler Deportment, if I am roughly used, than
otherwise. One thing more I will add, That I should
scorn myself, if there was one Privilege of your
Sex, that a Princess might expect, as my Wise, to
be indulg'd in, that I would not allow to my Pamela. 
For you are the Wife of my Affections: I never
wish'd for one before you, nor ever do I hope to have
another! 
I hope, Sir, said I, my future Conduct––––– Pardon
me, said he, my Dear, for interrupting you; 
but it is to assure you, that I am so well convinc'd
of your affectionate Regards for me, that I know I
might have spared the greatest Part of what I have
said: And indeed, it must be very bad for both of
us, if I should have Reason to think it necessary to
say so much. But one thing has brought on another; 
and I have rather spoken what my Niceness
has made me observe in other Families, than what I
fear in my own. And therefore, let me assure you,
I am thoroughly satisfy'd with your Conduct hitherto. 
You shall have no Occasion to repent it. 
And you shall find, tho' greatly imperfect, and passionate, 

on particular Provocations, (which yet I will
try to overcome) that you have not a brutal or ungenerous
Husband, who is capable of offering Insult
for Condescension, or returning Evil for Good. 
I thank'd him for these kind Rules, and generous
Assurances; and assured him, that they had
made so much Impression on my Mind, that these,
and his most agreeable Injunctions before given me,
and such as he should hereafter be pleased to give
me, should be so many Rules for my future Conduct. 
And I am glad of the Method I have taken of
making a Journal of all that passes in these first
Stages of my Happiness, because it will sink the
Impression still deeper; and I shall have recourse to
them for my better Regulation, as often as I shall
mistrust my Memory. 
Let me see: What are the Rules I am to observe
from this awful Lecture? Why, these: 
1. That I must not, when he is in great Wrath with
any body, break in upon him, without his Leave. 
––––Well, I'll remember it, I warrant. But yet I
fansy this Rule is almost peculiar to himself. 
2. That I must think his Displeasure the heaviest
thing that can befal me. To be sure I shall. 
3. And so that I must not wish to incur it, to save
any body else. I'll be further if I do. 
4. That I must never make a Compliment to any
body at his Expence. 
5. That I must not be guilty of any Acts of wilful
Meanness! There is a great deal meant in this; 
and I'll endeavour to observe it all. To be sure,
the Occasion on which he mentions this, explains it; 
that I must say nothing, tho' in Anger, that is
spiteful or malicious; that is disrespectful or undutiful,
and such-like. 
6. That I must bear with him, even when I find
him in the wrong. This is a little hard, as the
Case may be! 
I wonder whether poor Miss Sally Godfrey be
living or dead! 
7. That I must be as flexible as the Reed in the
Fable, lest, by resisting the Tempest, like the
Oak, I be torn up by the Roots. Well! I'll do
the best I can! —There is no great Likelihood, I
hope, I should be too perverse; yet, sure, the
Tempest will not lay me quite level with the Ground
neither. 
8. That the Education of young People of Condition
is generally wrong. Memorandum, That if any
Part of Childrens Education fall to my Lot, I never
indulge or humour them in things that they
ought to be restrain'd in. 
9. That I accustom them to bear Disappointments
and Controul. 
10. That I suffer them not to be too much indulged
in their Infancy. 
11. Nor at School. 
12. Nor spoil them when they come home. 
13. For that Children generally extend their Perverseness
from the Nurse to the Schoolmaster; 
from the Schoolmaster to the Parents. 
14. And, in their next Step, as a proper Punishment
for all, make their own Selves unhappy. 
15. That undutiful and perverse Children make had
Husbands and Wives: And, collaterally, bad Masters
and Mistresses. 
16. That not being subject to be controuled early,
they cannot, when marry'd, bear one another. 
17. That the Fault lying deep, and in the Minds of
each, neither will mend it. 
18. Whence follow Misunderstandings, Quarrels,
Appeals, incffectual Reconciliations, Separations, 

Elopements—or, at best, Indifference; perhaps,
Aversion. —Memorandum, A good Image of unhappy
Wedlock, in the Words Yawning Husband
and Vapourish Wife, when together:––– 
But separate, both quite alive. 
19. Few marry'd Persons behave as he likes!––– Let
me ponder this with Awe and Improvement. 
20. Some Gentlemen can compromise with their
Wives for. Quietness-sake; but he can't.––– Indeed
I believe that's true! —I don't desire he should. 
21. That Love before Marriage is absolutely necessary. 
22. That there are fewer Instances of Mens than
Womens loving better after Marriage. —But why
so? I wish he had given his Reasons for this! I
fansy they would not have been to the Advantage
of his own Sex. 
23. That a Woman give her Husband Reason to
think she prefers him before all Men. Well, to
be sure this should be so. 
24. That if she would overcome, it must be by
Sweetness and Complaisance; that is, by yielding,
he means, no doubt. 
25. Yet not such a slavish one neither, as should
rather seem the Effect of her Insensibility, than
Judgment or Affection! 
26. That the Words Command and Obey shall be
blotted out of his Vocabulary. Very good! 
27. That a Man should desire nothing of his Wife
but what is significant, reasonable, just. To be
sure that is right. 
28. But then, that she must not shew Reluctance,
Uneasiness, or Doubt, to oblige him; and that
too at half a Word; and must not be bid twice
to do one thing. —But may not there be some
Occasions, where this may be a little dispens'd with? 
But he says afterwards, indeed, 

29. That this must be only while he took care to
make her Compliance reasonable, and consistent
with her free Agency, in Points that ought to be
allow'd her. —Come, this is pretty well, considering. 
30. That if the Husband be set upon a wrong Thing,
she must not dispute with him, but do it, and
expostulate afterwards. —Good-sirs! I don't know
what to say to this! —It looks a little hard, methinks! 
—This would bear a smart Debate, I
fansy, in a Parliament of Women. —But then he
says, 
31. Supposing they are only small Points that are in
Dispute. —Well, this mends it a little. For small
Points, I think, should not be stood upon. 
32. That the greatest Quarrels among Friends, and
Wives and Husbands are or should be Friends, arise
from small Matters. —I believe this is very true; 
for I had like to have had Anger here, when I
intended very well. 
33. That a Wife should not desire to convince her
Husband for Contradiction sake; but for his
own. As both will find their Account in this, if
one does; I believe 'tis very just. 
34. That in all Companies a Wife must shew Respect
and Love to her Husband. 
35. And this for the sake of her own Reputation and
Security; for, 
36. That Rakes cannot have a greater Encouragement
to attempt a marry'd Lady's Virtue, than
her slight Opinion of her Husband. To be sure,
this stands to Reason, and is a fine Lesson. 
37. That a Wife should therefore draw a kind Veil
over her Husband's Faults. 
38. That such as she could not conceal, she should
extenuate. 

39. That his Virtues she should place in an Advantageous
Light. 
40. And shew the World, that he had her good
Opinion at least. 
41. That she must value his Friends for his sake. 
42. That she must be chearful and easy in her Behaviour,
to whomsoever he brings home with him. 
43. That whatever Faults she sees in him, she never
blames him before Company. 
44. At least, with such an Air of Superiority, as
if she had a less Opinion of his Judgment than her
own. 
45. That a Man of nice Observation cannot be
contented to be only moderately happy in a Wife. 
46. That a Wife take care how she ascribe supererogatory
Merit to herself; so as to take the Faults
of others upon her. —Indeed, I think it is well if
we can bear our own! This is of the same Nature
with the Third. And touches upon me on the present
Occasion, for this wholsome Lecture. 
47. That his Imperfections must not be a Plea for
hers. To be sure, 'tis no matter how good the Women
are; but 'tis to he hoped, Men will allow a
little. But, indeed, he says, 
48. That a Husband who expects all this, is to be
incapable of returning Insult for Obligation, or
Evil for Good; and ought not to abridge her of
any Privilege of her Sex. 
Well, my dear Parents, I think this last Rule
crowns the rest, and makes them all very tolerable; 
and a generous Man, and a Man of Sense, cannot
be too much obliged. And, as I have this Happiness,
I shall be very unworthy, if I do not always
so think, and so act. 
Yet, after all, you'll see I have not the easiest
Task in the World. But I know my own Intentions, 

that I shall not wilfully err; and so fear the
less. 
Not one Hint did he give, that I durst lay hold
of, about poor Miss Sally Godfrey. I wish my Lady
had not spoken of it. For it has given me a Curiosity
that is not quite so pretty in me; especially so
early in my Nuptials, and in a Case so long ago
past. Yet he intimated too, to his Sister, that he
had had other Faults, (of this Sort, I suppose) that
had not come to her Knowledge!&blank;&blank;&blank; But I make no
Doubt, he has seen his Error, and will be very good
for the future. I wish it, and pray it may be so, for
his own dear sake! 