



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday Afternoon. 
A letter received from the worthy Captain Tomlinson,
has introduced me into the presence of
my Charmer sooner than perhaps I should otherwise
have been admitted. 

Sullen her brow, at her first entrance into the Dineing-room. 
But I took no notice of what had passed,
and her anger of itself subsided. 
‘The Captain, after letting me know, that he
chose not to write, till he had the promised draught
of the Settlements, acquaints me, that his friend
Mr. John Harlowe, in their first conference (which
was held as soon as he got down) was extremely
surprised, and even grieved (as he feared he would
be) to hear, that we were not married. The world,
he said, who knew my character, would be very
censorious, were it owned, that we had lived so
long together unmarried in the same lodgings; 
altho' our marriage were now to be ever so publicly
celebrated. 
‘His Nephew James, he was sure, would make
a great handle of it against any motion that might
be made towards a Reconciliation; and with the
greater success, as there was not a family in the
kingdom more jealous of their honour than theirs.’ 
This is true of the Harlowes, Jack: They have
been called The proud Harlowes: And I have ever
found, that all young Honour is supercilious and
touchy. 
But seest thou not how right I was in my endeavour
to persuade my Fair-one to allow her Uncle's
friend to think us married; especially as he came prepared
to believe it; and as her Uncle hoped it was
so? —But nothing on earth is so perverse, as a woman
when she is set upon carrying a point, and has
a meek man, or one who loves his peace, to deal
with. 
My Beloved was vexed. She pulled out her handkerchief: 
But was more inclined to blame me, than
herself. 
Had you kept your word, Mr. Lovelace, and left
me when we came to town—And there she stopt; 
for she knew, that it was her own fault that we were 

not married before we left the country; and how
could I leave her afterwards, while her Brother was
plotting to carry her off by violence? 
Nor has this Brother yet given over his machinations. 
For, as the Captain proceeds, ‘Mr. John Harlowe
owned to him (but in confidence) that his
Nephew is at this time busied in endeavouring to
find out where we are; being assured (as I am not
to be heard of at any of my relations, or at my
usual lodgings) that we are together. And that we
are not married, is plain, as he will have it, from
Mr. Hickman's application so lately made to her Uncle; 
and which was seconded by Mrs. Norton to her
Mother. And her Brother cannot bear, that I
should enjoy such a triumph unmolested.’ 
A profound sigh, and the handkerchief again lifted
to the eye. But did not the sweet soul deserve this
turn upon her, for feloniously resolving to rob me of
herself, had the application made by Hickman succeeded? 
I read on to the following effect: 
‘Why (asked Mr. Harlowe) was it said to his other
enquiring friend, that we were married; and that
by his Niece's woman, who ought to know? Who
could give convincing reasons, no doubt’— 
Here again she wept; took a turn cross the room; 
then returned—Read on, said she— 
Will you, my dearest life, read it yourself? 
I will take the Letter with me, by-and-by—I cannot
see to read it just now, wiping her eyes. —Read on— 
Let me hear it all—that I may know your sentiments
upon this Letter, as well as give my own. 
‘The Captain then told Uncle John, the reasons
that induced me to give out that we were married; 
and the conditions on which my Beloved was
brought to countenance it; which had kept us at
the most punctilious distance. 

‘But still Mr. Harlowe objected my character. 
And went away dissatisfied. And the Captain was
also so much concerned, that he cared not to write
what the result of his first conference was. 
‘But in the next, which was held on receipt of
the Draughts, at the Captain's house (as the former
was, for the greater secrecy) when the old
gentleman had read them, and had the Captain's
opinion, he was much better pleased. And yet he
declared, that it would not be easy to persuade any
other person of his family to believe so favourably
of the matter, as he was now willing to believe,
were they to know that we had lived so long together
unmarried. 
‘And then, the Captain says, his dear friend
made a proposal: —It was this—That we should
marry out of hand, but as privately as possible, as indeed
he found we intended (for he could have no objection
to the Draughts)—But yet, he expected to
have present one trusty friend of his own, for his better
satisfaction’— 
Here I stopt, with a design to be angry—But she
desiring me to read on, I obeyed. 
‘—But that it should pass to every one living, except
to that trusty person, to himself, and to the
Captain, that we were married from the time that
we had lived together in one house; and that this
time should be made to agree with that of Mr. Hickman's
application to him from Miss Howe.’ 
This, my dearest life, said I, is a very considerate
proposal. We have nothing to do, but to caution
the people below properly on this head. I did not
think your Uncle Harlowe capable of hitting upon
such a charming expedient as this. But you see how
much his heart is in the Reconciliation. 
This was the return I met with—You have always,
as a mark of your politeness, let me know, how meanly
you think of every one of my family. 

Yet, thou wilt think, Belford, that I could forgive
her for the reproach. 
‘The Captain does not know, he says, how this
proposal will be relished by us. But, for his part,
he thinks it an expedient that will obviate many
difficulties, and may possibly put an end to Mr.
James Harlowe's further designs: And on this account
he has, by the Uncle's advice, already declared
to two several persons, by whose means it
may come to that young gentleman's ears, that he
[Captain Tomlinson] has very great reason to believe,
that we were married soon after Mr. Hickman's
application was rejected. 
‘And this, Mr. Lovelace (says the Captain) will
enable you to pay a compliment to the family,
that will not be unsuitable to the generosity of some
of the declarations you were pleased to make to the
Lady before me (and which Mr. John Harlowe
may make some advantage of in favour of a Reconciliation); 
in that you have not demanded your
Lady's Estate so soon as you were entitled to make
the demand.’ An excellent contriver surely she
must think this worthy Mr. Tomlinson to be! 
But the Captain adds, ‘that if either the Lady or
I disapprove of his report of our Marriage, he will
retract it. Nevertheless he must tell me, that Mr.
John Harlowe is very much set upon this way of
proceeding; as the only one, in his opinion, capable
of being improved into a general Reconciliation. 
But if we do acquiesce in it, he beseeches
my Fair-one not to suspend my Day, that he may
be authorized in what he says, as to the truth of
the main fact [How conscientious this good man!]: 
Nor must it be expected, he says, that her Uncle
will take one step towards the wished-for Reconciliation,
till the Solemnity is actually over.’ 
He adds, ‘that he shall be very soon in town on
other affairs; and then proposes to attend us, and 

give us a more particular account of all that has
passed, or shall further pass, between Mr. Harlowe
and him.’ 
Well, my dearest life, what say you to your Uncle's
expedient? Shall I write to the Captain, and acquaint
him, that we have no objection to it? 
She was silent for a few minutes. At last, with a
sigh, See, Mr. Lovelace, said she, what you have
brought me to, by treading after you in such crooked
paths! —See what disgrace I have incurred! —Indeed
you have not acted like a wise man. 
My beloved creature, do you not remember, how
earnestly I besought the honour of your hand before
we came to town? —Had I been then favoured— 
Well, well, Sir—There has been much amiss
somewhere; that's all I will say at present. And
since what's past cannot be recalled, my Uncle must
be obeyed, I think. 
Charmingly dutiful! —I had nothing then to do,
that I might not be behind-hand with the worthy Captain
and her Uncle, but to press for the Day. This
I fervently did. But (as I might have expected) she
repeated her former answer; to wit, That when the
Settlements were completed; when the Licence was
actually obtained; it would be time enough to name
the Day: And, O Mr. Lovelace, said she, turning
from me with a grace inimitably tender, her handkerchief
at her eyes, what a happiness, if my dear
Uncle could be prevailed upon to be personally a
Father, on this occasion, to the poor fatherless
girl!— 
What's the matter with me! —Whence this dew-drop! 
—A tear! —As I hope to be saved, it is a tear,
Jack! —Very ready methinks! —Only on reciting! 
—But her lovely image was before me, in the very attitude
she spoke the words—And indeed at the time
she spoke them, these lines of Shakespeare came into
my head: 


Thy heart is big. Get thee apart, and weep!
Passion, I see, is catching:—For my eyes,
Seeing those Beads of Sorrow stand in thine,
Begin to water—
I withdrew, and wrote to the Captain to the following
effect—‘I desired, that he would be so good
as to acquaint his dear friend, that we entirely acquiesced
with what he had proposed; and had already
properly cautioned the gentlewomen of the
house, and their servants, as well as our own: 
And to tell him, That if he would in person give
me the blessing of his dear Niece's hand, it would
crown the wishes of both. In this case, I consented,
that his own Day, as I presumed it would be a short
one, should be ours: That by this means the secret
would be with fewer persons: That I myself, as
well as he, thought the Ceremony could not be too
privately performed; and this not only for the sake
of the wise end he had proposed to answer by it,
but because I would not have Lord M. think himself
slighted; since that nobleman, as I had told
him [the Captain] had once intended to be our
Nuptial-father; and actually made the offer; but
that we had declined to accept of it, and that for
no other reason than to avoid a public wedding; 
which his beloved Niece would not come into,
while she was in disgrace with her friends—But
that, if he chose not to do us this honour, I wished
that Captain Tomlinson might be the trusty person
whom he would have to be present on the happy
occasion.’ 
I shewed this Letter to my Fair-one. She was not
displeased with it. So, Jack, we cannot now move
too fast, as to Settlements and Licence: The Day is
her Uncle's Day, or Captain Tomlinson's perhaps, as
shall best suit the occasion. Miss Howe's Smuggling-Scheme
is now surely provided against in all events. 

But I will not by anticipation make thee a judge of
all the benefits that may flow from this my elaborate
contrivance. Why will these girls put me upon my
master-strokes? 
And now for a little Mine which I am getting ready
to spring. The first that I have sprung, and at the
rate I go on (now a resolution, and now a remorse)
perhaps the last that I shall attempt to spring. 
A little Mine, I call it. But it may be attended
with great effects. I shall not, however, absolutely
depend upon the success of it, having much more effectual
ones in reserve. And yet great engines are
often moved by small springs. A little spark falling
by accident into a powder-magazine, has done more
execution in a siege, than an hundred cannon. 
Come the worst, the hymeneal torch, and a white
sheet, must be my Amende Honorable, as the French
have it. 