



From Miss Darnford to Mrs. B. 


My dear Mrs. B.
Pray give my Service to your Mr. B. and
tell him, he is very unpolite in his Reflections
*  upon me, in relation to Mr. Murray,
when he supposes I regret the Loss of him. 
You are much more favourable, and just too, I
will say, to your Polly Darnford. These Gentlemen,
the very best of them, are such Indelicates! 
They think so highly of their saucy
Selves, and confident Sex, as if a Lady cannot
from her Heart despise them: But if she turns
them off, as they deserve, and happens to continue
her Dislike, what should be interpreted in
her Favour, as a just and regular Piece of Conduct,
is turn'd against her, and it must proceed
from Spite. 

Mr. B. may think he knows a good deal of
the Sex. But, perhaps, were I as malicious as he
is reflecting, (and yet, if I have any Malice, he
has raised it) I could say, That his Acquaintance
was not with the most unexceptionable, till he
had the Happiness to know you: And he has not
long enough been happy in You, I find, to do
Justice to those who are proud to emulate your
Virtues. 
But I can't bear, it seems, to see my Sister
address'd and complimented, and prefer'd by one
whom I had thought in my own Power! But he
may be mistaken: With all his Sagacity, he has
been often. Nor is it so mortifying a thing to me,
as he imagines, to sit and see Two such Anticks
playing their Pugs Tricks, as he calls them, with
one another. 
But you hardly ever saw such Pugs Tricks
play'd as they play, at so early a Time of Courtship. 
The Girl hangs upon his Arm, and receives
his empty Head on her Shoulder, already, with a
Freedom that would be censurable in a Bride,
before Folks. A stiff, sullen, proud, scornful
Girl, as she used to be, she now puts on Airs
that are not natural either to her Features or
her Character; and judge then how it must disgust
one; especially when one sees her Man so
proud and vain upon it, that, like a true Man, he
treats her with the less Ceremony for her Condescensions,
putting on Airs of Consequence, while
her Easiness of Behaviour makes him secure of
Acceptance, and a kind Rcception, let him be
as negligent or as forward as he pleases. 

I say, Mrs. B. there can be no living with
these Men upon such Beginnings—They ought
to know their Distance, or be taught it; and not
to think it in their Power to confer that as a Favour,
which they should esteem it an Honour to
receive. 
But neither can I bear, it seems, the Preparatives
to Matrimony, the fine Cloaths, the Compliments,
the busy Novelty, as he calls it, the
new Equipages, and so forth. That's his Mistake
again, tell him: For one, who can look forwarder
than the Nine Days of Wonder, can easily
despise so flashy and so transient a Glare. And
were I fond of Compliments, it would not perhaps
be the way to be pleased in that respect, if I
were to marry. 
Compliments, in the single State, are a
Lady's Due, whether courted or not; and she
receives them, or ought always to receive them,
as such: But in Courtship they are pour'd out upon
one, like a hasty Shower, that one knows
will soon be over! —A mighty comfortable Consideration
this, to a Lady who loves to be complimented! 
—Instead of the refreshing April-like
Showers, which beautify the Sunshine, she shall
stand a Deluge of Complaisance, be wet to the
Skin with it; and then—What then? —Why,
be in a Libyan Desart ever after;—experience a
constant parching Drought, and all her attributed
Excellencies will be swallow'd up in the Quicksands
of Matrimony. 
It may be otherwise with You; and it must
be otherwise; because there is such an infinite 

Variety in your Excellence. Every rising Sun
adorns you with some new Rays, and sets not,
without leaving you brighter than himself can
hold it. —But does Mr. B. think it must be so
in every Matrimony? 
'Tis true, he improves every Hour, as I see
in your kind Papers, in his fine Speeches to you:
But it could not be Mr. B. if he did not: Your
Merit extorts it from him: And what an ingrateful,
as well as absurd Churl, would He be, who
should seek to obscure a meridian Lustre, that
dazles the Eyes of every one else! 
But, let me observe, moreover, that you had
so few of these fine Speeches before-hand, that
you have all the Reason in the World to expect
them now: And this lessens his Merit a good
deal; as the most he can say, is but common Justice,
on full Proof; for, can the like Generosity
be attributed to him, as might to a Gentleman
who praises on Trust? 
You promise, if I will come to you, you will
join with me against Mr. B. on this Subject. 
'Tis very kindly offer'd; but when Mr. B. is in
the Question, I expect very little Assistance from
you, be the Argument what it will. 
But 'tis not my Fault I don't come. I am
quite tir'd with the perverse Folly of this Nancy
of ours. She every Day behaves more like a Fool
to Mr. Murray, and less like a Sister to me; and
takes Delight to teize and vex me, by all the little
ways in her Power. And then Surliness and
Ill-temper are so natural to her, that I, who can
but throw out a spiteful Word, by way of Flourish, 

as I may say, and 'tis over, and I am sorry
for it as soon as spoken, am no Match for her–––– 
For she perseveres so intolerably, and comes back
to the Attack, tho' never so often repuls'd, rising
like Antëus, with fresh Vigour for every Fall, or
like the Lernëan Hydra, which had a new Head
sprouting up, as fast as any One of the Seven was
lopp'd of, that there is no bearing her. Wedlock,
in fine, must be her Hercules, and will furnish
me, I doubt, with a Revenge I wish not for. 
But let me thank you for your delightful
Narratives, and beg you to continue them. I
told you how your Saturday's Conversation with
Lady Davers, and your Sunday Imployments,
charm us all: So regular, and so easy to be perform'd! 
––––That's the delightful thing. ––––What
every body may do! –––––And yet so beautiful, so
laudable, so uncommon in the Practice, especially
among People in genteel Life! 
Your Conversation and Decision in relation
to the Two Parsons (more than charm) transport
us. Mr. B. let me tell you, judges right, and
acts a charming Part, to throw such a fine Game
into your Hands. And so excellently do you
play it, that you do as much Credit to your Partner's
Judgment as to your own: Never, surely,
was so happy a Couple! 
He has a prodigious Merit with me, I can tell
him, tho' he thinks not so well of me as I would
have him. To see, to praise, and to reward a
Virtue, is next to having it one's self: And, in
time, he will make as good a Man (these fine
Appearances encourage one to hope so) as he is
a Husband. 

Your Notions of Dispensations, and double
Livings, are admirably just. Mr. Williams is
more my Favourite than ever! —And the amply-rewarded
Mr. Adams, how did that Scene
affect us! 
Again, and again, I say, (for what can I say
else, or more—since I can't find Words to
speak all I think?) you're a charming Lady! — 
Yet, methinks, poor Mr. H. makes but a sorry
Figure among you. 
We are delighted with Lady Davers; but
still more, if possible, with the Countess: She
is a fine Lady, as you have drawn her; but your
Characters, tho' Truth and Nature, are the most
shocking, or the most amiable, that ever I read. 
We are full of Impatience to hear of the Arrival
of Sir Jacob Swynford. We know his Character
pretty well; but when he has sat for it to your
Pencil, it must be an Original indeed. 
I will have another Trial with my Papa,
to move him to let me attend you. I am rallying
my Forces for that Purpose: I have got my
Mamma on my Side again; who is concern'd to
see her Girl vex'd and insulted by her younger
Sister; and who yet minds no more what she
says to her, than what I say; and Sir Simon loves
at his Heart to make Mischief between us, instead
of interposing to silence either: And truly, I am
afraid, the Delight of this kind, which he takes,
will make him deny his Polly what she so ardently
wishes for. 
I had a good Mind to be sick, to be with
you. I could fast Two or Three Days, to give it 

the better Appearance; but then my Mamma,
who loves not Deceit, would blame me, if she
knew my Stratagem; and be grieved, if she
thought I was really ill. —I know, Fasting,
when one has a Stomach to eat, gives one a very
gloomy and mortify'd Air. 
What would I not do, in short, to procure
to myself the inexpressible Pleasure that I should
have in your Company and Conversation? But
continue to write to me till then, however, and
that will be next Best. I am 
Your most obliged and obedient
Polly Darnford. 

