



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Sat. Sunday, May 20, 21. 
Now, my dear, for the promised subject. You
must not ask me, how I came by the originals
(such they really are) that I am going to present you
with: For my mamma would not read to me those 

parts of your uncle's letter, which bore hard upon
myself, and which leave him without any title to
mercy from me: Nor would she let me hear but
what she pleased of hers in answer; for she has condescended
to answer him; with a denial, however: — 
But such a denial, as no-one but an old batchelor
would take from a widow. 
Any-body, except myself, who could have been
acquainted with such a fal-lal courtship as this must
have been had it proceeded, would have been glad it
had gone on; and I dare say, but for the saucy
daughter, it had. My mamma, in that case, would
have been ten years the younger for it, perhaps: And
could I but have approved of it, I should have been
considered as if ten years older than I am: Since,
very likely, it would then have been: ‘We widows,
my dear, know not how to keep men at a distance
—So as to give them pain, in order to try
their love. —You must advise me, child: You must
teach me to be cruel—Yet not too cruel neither. — 
So as to make a man heartless, who has no tune,
God wot, to throw away.’ Then would my behaviour
to Mr. Hickman have been better liked; and
my mother would have bridled like her daughter! 
O my dear, how we might have been diverted, by
the practisings for recovery of the Long-forgottens!
could I have been sure that it would have been in my
power to have put them asunder, in the Irish stile,
before they had come together. But there's no trusting
to a widow whose goods and chattels are in her own
hands, addressed by an old batchelor, who has fine
things, and offers to leave her ten thousand pounds
better than he found her, and sole mistress besides, of
all her Notables! for these, as you'll see by-and-by,
are his proposals. 
The old Triton's address carries the writer's marks
upon the very superscription—To the equally amiable
and worthily admired [There's for you] Mrs. Annabella 

Howe, widow; the last word added, I suppose
as Esquire to a man; or for fear the bella to
Anna, should not enough distinguish the person meant
from the spinster [Vain hussey you'll call me, I
know]: And then follows: —These humbly present. — 
Put down as a memorandum, I presume, to make a
leg, and behave handsomely at presenting it; he intending
very probably to deliver it himself. 
And now stand by—To see 
Enter Old Neptune.
His head adorned with sea-weed, and a crown of
cockle-shells, as we see him decked out in Mrs.
Robinson's ridiculous grotto. 

Monday, May 15. 
Madam,
I did make a sort of resolution ten years ago, never
to marry. I saw in other families, where they lived
best, you'll be pleased to mark that, queernesses I
could not away with. Then, liked well enough to
live single for sake of my brother's family; and for one
child in it, more than the rest. But that girl has
turned us all off of the hinges: And why I should
deny myself any comforts for them as will not thank
me for so doing, I don't know. 
So much for my motives, as from self and family: 
But the dear Mrs. Howe makes me go further. 
I have a very great fortune, I bless God for it, all
of my own getting, or most of it; you'll be pleased
to mark that; for I was the younger brother of three. 
You have also, God be thanked, a great estate, which
you have improved by your own frugality and wise
management. Frugality, let me stop to say, is one
of the greatest virtues in this mortal life, because it
enables us to do justice to all, and puts it in our power
to benefit some by it, as we see they deserve. 
You have but one child; and I am a batchelor,
and have never a one. —All batchelors cannot say so: 
Wherefore your daughter may be the better for me, 

if she will keep with my humour; which was never
thought bad: Especially to my equals. Servants, indeed,
I don't matter being angry with, when I please: 
They are paid for bearing it, and too-too often deserve
it; as we have very frequently taken notice of to
one another. But this won't hurt neither you nor
Miss. 
I will make very advantageous settlements; such
as any common friend shall judge to be so. But must
have all in my own power, while I live: Because,
you know, Madam, it is as creditable to the wife,
as the husband, that it should be so. 
I aim not at fine words. We are not children; 
tho' it is hoped we may have some; for I am a very
healthy sound man, I bless God for it: And never
brought home from my voyages and travels, a worser
constitution than I took out with me. I was none of
those, I will assure you. But this I will undertake,
that if you are the survivress, you shall be at the least
ten thousand pounds the better for me: What, in the
contrary case, I shall be the better for you, I leave to
you, as you shall think my kindness to you shall deserve. 
But one thing, Madam, I should be glad of, that
Miss Howe might not live with us then (She need not
know I write thus)—But go home to Mr. Hickman,
as she is upon the point of marriage, I hear. And if
she behaves dutifully, as she should do, to us both,
she shall be the better; for so I said before. 
You shall manage all things, both mine and your
own; for I know little of land-matters. All my opposition
to you shall be out of love, when I think
you take too much upon you for your health. 
It will be very pretty for you, I should think, to
have a man of experience, in a long winter's evening,
to sit down and tell you stories of foreign parts, and
the customs of the nations he has consorted with. And
I have fine curiosities of the Indian growth, such as 

ladies love, and some that even my niece Clary, when
she was good, never saw. These, one by one, as you
are kind to me (which I make no question of, because
I shall be kind to you) shall all be yours. —Prettier entertainment
by much, than sitting with a too smartish
daughter, sometimes out of humour, and thwarting,
and vexing, as daughters will, when women-grown
especially (as I have heard you often observe); and
thinking their parents old, without paying them the
reverence due to years; when, as in your case, I
make no sort of doubt, they are young enough to
wipe their noses. You understand me, Madam. 
As for me myself, it will be very happy, and I am
delighted with the thinking of it, to have, after a
pleasant ride, or so, a lady of like experience with myself,
to come home to, and but one interest betwixt
us: To reckon up our comings-in together; and what
this day and this week has produced: —O how this
will increase love! —Most mightily will it increase
it! —And I believe I should never love you enough,
or be able to shew you all my love. 
I hope, Madam, there need not be such maiden
niceties and hangings-off, as I may call them, between
us, for hanging-off sake, as that you will deny me a
line or two to this proposal, written down, altho' you
would not answer me so readily when I spoke to you: 
Your daughter being, I suppose, hard by; for you
looked round you, as if not willing to be overheard: 
So I resolved to write: That my writing may stand,
as upon record, for my upright meaning; being none
of your Lovelaces; you'll mark that, Madam; but a
downright, true, honest, faithful Englishman. So hope
you will not disdain to write a line or two to this my
proposal: And I shall look upon it as a great honour. 
I will assure you, and be proud thereof. —What can I
say more? —For you are your own mistress, as I am
my own master: And you shall always be your own 

mistress: Be pleased to mark that; for so a lady of
your prudence and experience ought to be. 
This is a long letter. But the subject requires it; 
because I would not write twice where once would
do: So would explain my sense and meaning at one
time. 
I have had writing in my head, two whole months
very near; but hardly knew how, being unpractised
in these matters, to begin to write. And now, good
lady, be favourable to 
Your most humble Lover,
and obedient Servant,
Ant. Harlowe. 
Here's a letter of courtship, my dear! —And let me
subjoin to it, that if now, or hereafter, I should treat
this hideous lover, who is so free with me to my mother,
with asperity, and you should be disgusted at it; 
I shall think you don't give me that preference in your
love, which you have in mine. 
And now, which shall I first give you; the answer
of my mamma; or, the dialogue that passed between
the widow-mother and the pert daughter, upon her
letting the latter know that she had a letter? 
I think you shall have the dialogue. But let me
premise one thing; that if you think me too free, you
must not let it run in your head, that I am writing of
your uncle, or of my mother: But of a couple of old
lovers, no matter whom. Reverence is too apt to be
forgotten by second persons, where the Reverends forget
first. 
Well then, suppose my mamma, after twice coming
into my closet to me, and as often going out, with
very meaning features, and lips ready to burst open,
but still closed, as it were by compulsion, a speech
going off, in a slight cough, that never went near the
lungs; grown more resolute, the third time of entrance,
and sitting down by me, thus begin. 

Mother. I have a very serious matter to talk with
you upon, Nancy, when you are disposed to attend
to matters within ourselves, and not let matters without
ourselves, wholly engross you. 
A good selves-ish speech! —But I thought that
friendship, and gratitude, and humanity, were matters
that ought to be deemed of the most intimate
concern to us. But not to dwell upon her words: 
Daughter. I am now disposed to attend to every
thing my mamma is disposed to say to me. 
M. Why then, child. —Why then, my dear— 
[And the good lady's face looked so plump! so smooth!
and so shining!] —I see you are all attention, Nancy! — 
But don't be surprised! —Don't be uneasy! —But I
have—I have—Where is it? —[And yet it lay next
her heart, never another near it. —So no difficulty to
have found it.] —I have a letter, my dear! —[And out
from her bosom it came: But she still held it in her
hand.] —I have a letter, child. —It is—It is—It is
from—from a gentleman, I assure you!—lifting up
her head, and smiling. 
There is no delight to a daughter, thought I, in
such surprizes, as seem to be collecting: I will deprive
my mamma of the satisfaction of making a gradual
discovery. 
D. From Mr. Anthony Harlowe, I suppose, Madam? 
M. [Lips drawn closer: Eye raised] Why, my
dear! —But how, I wonder, could you think of Mr.
Antony Harlowe? 
D. How, Madam, could I think of any-body
else? 
M. How could you think of any-body else!—angrily,
and drawing back her face; but do you know
the subject, Nancy? 
D. You have told it, Madam, by your manner
of breaking it to me. But, indeed,I questioned not, 

that he had two motives in his visits here—Both equally
agreeable to me; for all that family love me dearly. 
M. No love lost, if so, between you and them. 
But this [Rising] is what I get—So like your papa! — 
I never could open my heart to him! 
D. Dear Madam, excuse me. Be so good as to
open your heart to me. —I don't love the Harlowes. 
But pray excuse me. 
M. You have put me quite out with your forward
temper! —[Angrily sitting down again]. 
D. I will be all patience and attention. May I be
allowed to read his letter? 
M. I wanted to advise with you upon it. —But you
are such a strange creature! —You are always for answering
one, before one speaks! 
D. You'll be so good as to forgive me, Madam. — 
But I thought every-body (he among the rest) knew,
that you had always declared against a second marriage. 
M. And so I have. But then it was in the mind I
was in. Things may offer— 
I stared. 
M. Nay, don't be surprised! —I don't intend—I
don't intend— 
D. Not, perhaps, in the mind you are in, Madam. 
M. Pert creature! —Rising again! —We shall
quarrel, I see! —There's no— 
D. Once more, dear Madam, I beg your excuse. 
I will attend in silence. —Pray, Madam, sit down
again. —Pray do. —[She sat down]—May I see the
letter? 
No; there are some things in it, you won't like. — 
Your temper is known, I find, to be unhappy. —But
nothing bad against you; intimations, on the contrary,
that you shall be the better for him, if you
oblige him. 
Not a living soul but the Harlowes, I said, thought
he ill-temper'd: And I was contented that they 

should, who could do as they had done by the most
universally acknowleged sweetness in the world. 
Here we broke out a little; but, at last, she read
me some of the passages in it. —But not the most
mightily ridiculous; yet I could hardly keep my countenance
neither. And when she had done;. 
M. Well now, Nancy, tell me what you think
of it? 
D. Nay, pray, Madam, tell me what you think
of it? 
M. I expect to be answered by an answer; not by
a question! —You don't use to be shy to speak your
mind. 
D. Not when my mamma commands me to do so. 
M. Then speak it now. 
D. Without hearing it all? 
M. Speak to what you have heard. 
D. Why then, Madam—You won't be my mamma
Howe, if you give way to it. 
M. I am surprised at your assurance, Nancy! 
D. I mean, Madam, you will then be my mamma
Harlowe. 
M. Oh dear heart! —But I am not a fool. 
And her colour went and came. 
D. Dear, Madam! —(But, indeed, I don't love
a Harlowe—that's what I meant). I am your child,
and must be your child, do what you will. 
M. A very pert one, I am sure, as ever mother
bore! And you must be my child, do what I will! — 
As much as to say, you would not, if you could help
it, if I— 
D. How could I have such a thought! —It would
be forward, indeed, if I had—when I don't know
what your mind is, as to the proposal: —When the
proposal is so very advantageous a one too. 
M. [looking a little less discomposed] Why, indeed,
ten thousand pounds— 

D. And to be sure of outliving him, Madam! 
This staggered her a little— 
M. Sure! Nobody can be sure! —But it is very
likely, that— 
D. Not at all, Madam; you was going to read
something (but stopt) about his constitution: His sobriety
is well known. —Why, Madam, these gentlemen
who have been at sea, and in different climates,
and come home to relax from cares in a temperate
one, and are sober—are the likeliest to live long of
any men in the world. —Don't you see, that his very
skin is a fortification of buff? 
M. Strange creature! 
D. God forbid, that any-body I love and honour,
should marry a man, in hopes to bury him. —But suppose,
Madam, at your time of life— 
M. My time of life! —Dear heart! —What is my
time of life, pray? 
M. Not old, Madam; and that may be your danger! 
As I hope to live (my dear) my mamma smiled, and
looked not displeased with me. 
M. Why, indeed, child—Why, indeed, I must
needs say—And then I should choose to do nothing
(froward as you are sometimes) to hurt you. 
D. Why, as to that, Madam—I can't expect you
should deprive yourself of any satisfaction— 
M. Satisfaction, my dear! —I don't say, it would
be a satisfaction. —But could I do any thing that would
benefit you, it would perhaps be an inducement to
hold one conference upon the subject. 
D. My fortune already will be more considerable
than my match, if I am to have Mr. Hickman. 
M. Why so? —Mr. Hickman's fortune is enough
to intitle him to yours. 
D. If you think so, that's enough. 
M. Not but I should think the worse of myself, if
I desired any body's death; but I think, as you say, 

Mr. Antony Harlowe is a healthy man, and bids fair
for a long life. 
Bless me, thought I, how shall I do to know whether
this be an objection or a recommendation! 
D. Will you forgive me, Madam? 
M. What would the girl say. —Looking as if she
was half afraid to hear what. 
D. Only, that if you marry a man of his time of
life, you stand two chances instead of one, to be a
nurse at your time of life. 
M. Saucebox! 
D. Dear Madam! —What I mean is only, that
these healthy old men sometimes fall into lingering disorders
all at once. And I humbly conceive, that the
infirmities of age are too uneasily borne with, where
the remembrance of the pleasanter season comes not in
to relieve the healthier of the two. 
M. A strange girl! —I always told you, that you
know either too much to be argued with, or too little
for me to have patience with you. 
D. I can't but say, I would be glad of your commands,
Madam, how to behave myself to Mr. Harlowe
next time he comes. 
M. How to behave yourself! —Why, if you retire
with contempt of him, when he next comes, it will
be but as you have been used to do of late. 
D. Then he is to come again, Madam? 
M. And suppose he be? 
D. I can't help it, if it be your pleasure, Madam. — 
He desires a line in answer to his fine letter. If he
comes, it will be in pursuance of that line, I presume? 
M. None of your arch and pert leers, girl! —You
know I won't bear them. I had a mind to hear what
you would say to this matter. I have not wrote; but I
shall presently. 
D. It is mighty good of you, Madam; I hope the
man will think so; to answer his first application by
letter. —Pity he should write twice, if once will do. 

M. That fetch won't let you into my intention, as
to what I shall write: It is too saucily put. 
D. Perhaps I can guess at your intention, Madam,
were it to become me so to do. 
M. Perhaps I would not make a Mr. Hickman of
any gentleman; using him the worse for respecting
me. 
D. Nor, perhaps, would I, Madam, if I liked his
respects. 
M. I understand you. But, perhaps, it is in your
power to make me hearken, or not, to Mr. Harlowe. 
D. Young gentlemen, who have probably a great
deal of time before them, need not be in haste for a
wife. Mr. Hickman, poor man! must stay his time,
or take his remedy. 
M. He bears more from you, than a man ought. 
D. Then, I doubt, he gives a reason for the treatment
he meets with. 
M. Provoking creature! 
D. I have but one request to make you, Madam. 
M. A dutiful one, I suppose. What is it, pray? 
D. That if you marry, I may be permitted to live
single. 
M. Perverse creature! —I am sure. 
D. How can I expect, Madam, that you should refuse
such terms? Ten thousand pounds! —At the least
ten thousand pounds! —A very handsome proposal! — 
So many fine things too, to give you one by one! 
Dearest Madam, forgive me! —I hope it is not yet so
far gone, that raillying this man will be thought want
of duty to you. 
M. Your raillying of him, and your reverence to
me, it is plain, have one source. 
D. I hope not, Madam. But ten thousand pounds— 
M. Is no unhandsome proposal. 
D. Indeed I think so. I hope, Madam, you will
not be behindhand with him in generosity. 

M. He won't be ten thousand pounds the better
for me, if he survive me. 
D. No, Madam, he can't expect that, as you have
a daughter, and as he is a batchelor, and has not a
child—poor old soul! 
M. Old soul, Nancy! —And thus to call him for
being a batchelor, and not having a child? —Does this
become you? 
D. Not old soul for that, Madam. —But half the
sum; five thousand pounds; you can't engage for less,
Madam. 
M. That sum has your approbation then? —Looking
as if she'd be even with me. 
D. As he leaves it to your generosity, Madam, and
as the reward of his kindness to you, it can't be less. — 
Do, dear Madam, permit me, without incurring your
displeasure, to call him poor old soul again. 
M. Never was such a whimsical creature! —Turning
away [for I believe, I looked very archly; at
least I intended to do so] to hide her involuntary
smiling. —I hate that wicked sly look. You give
yourself very free airs—Don't you? 
D. I snatched her hand, and kiss'd it—My dear
mamma, be not angry with your girl! —You have
told me, that you was very lively formerly. 
M. Formerly! Good lack! —But were I to encourage
his proposals, you may be sure, that for Mr.
Hickman's sake, as well as yours, I should make a
wise agreement. 
D. You have both lived to years of prudence,
Madam. 
M. Yes, I suppose I am an old soul too. 
D. He also is for making a wise agreement, or
hinting at one, at least. 
M. Well, the short and the long I suppose is this: 
I have not your consent to marry? 
D. Indeed, Madam, you have not my wishes to
marry. 

M. Let me tell you, that if prudence consists in
wishing well to one's self, I see not but the young
flirts are as prudent as the old souls. 
D. Dear Madam, Would you blame me, if to wish
you not to marry Mr. Antony Harlowe, is wishing
well to myself? 
M. You are mighty witty. I wish you were as
dutiful. 
D. I am more dutiful, I hope, than witty; or I
should be a fool, as well as a saucebox. 
M. Let me judge of both. —Parents are only to live
for their children, let them deserve it or not. That's
their dutiful notion! 
D. Heaven forbid that I should wish, if there be
Two interests between my mamma and me, that my
mamma postpone her own for mine! or give up any
thing that would add to the real comforts of her life,
to oblige me! —Tell me, my dear mamma, if you
think this proposal will? 
M. I say, That ten thousand pounds is such an acquisition
to one's family, that the offer of it deserves
a civil return. 
D. Not the offer, Madam: The chance only! — 
if you have a view to an increase of family, the money
may provide— 
M. You cannot keep within tolerable bounds! — 
That saucy fleer, I cannot away with— 
D. Dearest, dearest Madam, forgive me, but old
soul ran in my head again! —Nay, indeed and upon
my word, I won't be robbed of that charming smile; 
and again I kissed her hand. 
M. Away, bold creature! Nothing can be so provoking,
as to be made to smile, when one would
choose, and ought, to be angry. 
D. But, dear Madam, if it be to be, I presume
you won't think of it before next winter. 
M. What now would the pert one be at? 
D. Because he only proposes to entertain you with 

pretty stories of foreign nations in a winter's evening. 
Dearest, dearest Madam, let me have the reading of
his letter thro'. I will forgive him all he says about
me. 
M. It may be a very difficult thing perhaps, for a
man of the best sense to write a Love-letter, that may
not be cavilled at. 
D. That's because lovers, in their letters, hit not
the medium: —They either write too much nonsense,
or too little. But do you call this odd soul's letter (no
more will I call him old soul, if I can help it) a Love-letter? 
M. Well, well, I see you are averse to this matter. 
I am not to be your mamma; you will live single, if I
marry. I had a mind to see if generosity govern'd you
in your views. I shall pursue my own inclinations; 
and if they should happen to be suitable to yours, pray
let me for the future be better rewarded by you, than
hitherto I have been. 
And away she flung, without staying for a reply. — 
Vex'd, I dare say, that I did not better approve of
the proposal: —Were it only that the merit of denying
might have been all her own, and to lay the
stronger obligation upon her saucy daughter. 
She wrote such a widow-like refusal when she went
from me, as might not exclude hope in any other
wooer; whatever it may do in Mr. Tony Harlowe. 
It will be my part, to take care to beat her off of
the visit she half-promises to make him, upon condition
of withdrawing his suit, as you will observe in
hers: For who knows what effect the old batchelor's
exotics (Far-fetched and dear-bought, you know, is a
proverb) might otherwise have upon a woman's mind
wanting nothing but unnecessaries, gewgaw, and
fineries, and offered such as are not easily to be met
with, or purchased? 
Well, but now I give you leave to read here, in
this place, the copy of my mother's answer to your 

uncle's letter. Not one comment will I make upon
it. I know my duty better. And here therefore,
taking the liberty to hope, that I may, in your present
less disagreeable, if not wholly agreeable, situation,
provoke a smile from you, I conclude myself, 
Your ever-affectionate and faithful
Anna Howe. 

Mrs. Annabella Howe, To Antony
Harlowe, Esq;
Friday, May 19. 
Mr. Antony Harlowe,
SIR,
It is not usual, I believe, for our Sex to answer by
pen and ink, the first letter on these occasions. 
The first letter! —How odd is that! —As if I expected
another; which I do not. —But then, I think,
as I do not judge proper to encourage your proposal,
there is no reason why I should not answer in civility,
where so great a civility is intended. Indeed I was
always of opinion, that a person was intitled to That,
and not to ill-usage, because he had a respect for me. 
And so I have often and often told my daughter. 
A woman, I think, makes but a poor figure in a
man's eye afterwards, and does no reputation to her
Sex neither, when she behaves like a tyrant to him
beforehand. 
To be sure, Sir, if I were to change my condition,
I know not a gentleman whose proposal could be more
agreeable. Your nephew and nieces have enough
without you: My daughter is a fine fortune without
me, and I should take care to double it, living or dying,
were I to do such a thing: So nobody need to
be the worse for it. But Nancy would not think so. 
All the comfort I know of in children, is, that
when young they do with us what they will, and all
is pretty in them to their very faults; and when they
are grown up, they think their parents must live for 

them only; and deny themselves every thing for their
sakes. I know Nancy could not bear a father-in-law. 
She would fly at the very thought of my being
in earnest to give her one. Not that I stand in fear
of my daughter neither: It is not fit I should. But
she has her poor papa's spirit: A very violent one,
that was—And one would not choose, you know,
Sir, to enter into any affair, that, one knows, one
must renounce a daughter for, or she a mother. — 
Except indeed one's heart were much in it;—which,
I bless God, mine is not. 
I have now been a widow these ten years; nobody
to controul me: —And I am said not to bear controul: 
So, Sir, you and I are best as we are, I believe—nay,
I am sure of it—For we want not what either has;— 
having both more than we know what to do with. 
And I know I could not be in the least accountable
for any of my ways. 
My daughter indeed, tho' she is a fine girl, as girls
go [She has too much sense indeed for her sex; and
knows she has it], is more a check to me than one
would wish a daughter to be—For one would not be
always snapping at each other: But she will soon be
married; and then, not living together, we shall only
come together when we are pleased, and stay away
when we are not; and so, like other lovers, never see
any thing but the best sides of each other. 
I own, for all this, that I love her dearly; and she
me, I dare say. So would not wish to provoke her
to do otherwise. Besides, the girl is so much regarded
every-where, that having lived so much of my prime
a widow, I would not lay myself open to her censures,
or even to her indifference, you know. 
Your generous proposal requires all this explicitness. 
I thank you for your good opinion of me. 
When I know you acquiesce with This my civil refusal; 
and indeed, Sir, I am as much in earnest in it,
as if I had spoke broader; I don't know, but Nancy 

and I may, with your permission, come to see your
fine things; for I am a great admirer of rarities that
come from abroad. 
So, Sir, let us only converse occasionally as we
meet, as we used to do, without any other view to
each other, than good wishes: Which I hope may
not be lessen'd for this declining. And then I shall
always think myself 
Your obliged servant,
Annabella Howe. 
I sent word by Mrs. Lorimer, that I would write
an answer: But would take time for consideration. 
So hope, Sir, you won't think it a slight,
I did not write sooner. 