


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Who would have thought that a man of Sir Rowland's
time of life, and a woman so young as I,
could have so much discomposed each other? I obey'd
the summons to breakfast, and enter'd the room at
one door, as he came in at the other. In vain had I
made use of the short retirement to conceal my emotion
from my cousins. They also saw Sir Rowland's by
his eyes, and looked at him, at me, and at each other. 
Mercy! said Sir Rowland, in an accent that seem'd
between crying and laughing, You, you, you, madam,
are a surprising lady! I, I, I, never was so affected in
my life. And he drew the back of his hand cross first
one eye, then the other. 
O Sir Rowland, said I, you are a good man. How
affecting are the visible emotions of a manly heart! 
My cousins still looked as if surpris'd; but said nothing. 
O my cousins, said I, I have found a father in Sir
Rowland; and I acknowlege a brother in Mr. Fowler. 
Best of women! Most excellent of creatures! And
do you own me? He snatched my hand, and kiss'd it. 
What pride do you give me in this open acknowlegement! 
If it must not be niece; why then I will endeavour
to rejoice in my daughter, I think. But yet, 

my boy, my poor boy—But you are all goodness:
And with him I say, I must not teaze you. 
What you have been saying to each other alone,
said Mrs. Reeves, I cannot tell: But I long to know. 
Why, madam, I will tell you—if I know how— 
You must know, that I, that I, came as an ambassador-extraordinary
from my sorrowful boy: Yet not
desired; not sent; I came of my own accord, in
hopes of getting one word of comfort, and to bring
matters on, before I set out for Caermarthen. 
The servant coming in, and a loud rap, rap, rap,
on the footman's musical instrument, the knocker of
the door, put a stop to Sir Rowland's narrative. In
apprehension of company, I breathed on my hand,
and put it to either eye; and Sir Rowland hemmed
twice or thrice, and rubbed his, the better to conceal
their redness, tho' it made them redder than before. 
He got up, look'd at the glass: Would have sung. 
Toll, doll—Hem, said he, as if the muscles of his
face were in the power of his voice. Mercy! All the
infant still in my eye—Toll, doll—Hem! —I would
sing it away if I could. 
Sir Hargrave enter'd bowing, scraping to me, and
with an air not ungraceful. 
Servant, Sir, said the knight (to Sir Hargrave's silent
salute to him) bowing, and looking at the baronet's
genteel morning dress, and then at his own—Who
the duce is he! whispering to Mr. Reeves; Who then
presented each to the other by name. 
The baronet approached me; I have, madam, a
thousand pardons to ask— 
Not one, Sir. 
Indeed I have—And most heartily do I beg— 
You are forgiven, Sir— 
But I will not be so easily forgiven. 
Mercy! whispered the knight to Mr. Reeves, I
don't liken, Ah! my poor boy: No wonder at this
rate!— 

You have not much to fear, Sir Rowland (rewhisper'd
my cousin) on this gentleman's account. 
Thank you, thank you—And yet 'tis a fine figure
of a man! whisper'd again Sir Rowland: Nay, if she
can withstand him—But a word to the wise, Mr.
Reeves! —Hem! —I am a little easier than I was. 
He turned from my cousin with such an air, as if
from contrasted pleasure and pain, he would again
have sung Toll, doll. 
The servant came in with the breakfast: And we
had no sooner sat down, as before, than we were
alarmed by another modern rapping. Mr. Reeves was
called out, and return'd, introducing Mr. Greville. 
Who the duce is he? whisper'd to me Sir Rowland
(as he sat next me) before Mr. Reeves could name
him. 
Mr. Greville profoundly bowed to me. I asked
after the health of all our friends in Northamptonshire. 
Have you seen Fenwick, madam? —No, Sir. 
A dog! I thought he had played me a trick. I
missed him for three days—But (in a low voice) if
you have not seen him, I have stolen a march upon
him! —Well, I had rather ask his pardon than he
should ask mine. I rejoice to see you well, madam!
(raising his voice)—But what!—looking at my eyes. 
Colds are very rife in London, Sir— 
I am glad it is no worse; for your grandmamma,
and all friends in the country, are well. 
I have found a papa, Mr. Greville (referring to Sir
Rowland) since I came to town. This good gentleman
gives me leave to call him father. 
No son! —I hope, Sir Rowland, you have no son,
said Mr. Greville; The relation comes not about that
way, I hope. And laughed, as he used to do, at his
own smartness. 
The very question, I was going to put, by my soul,
said the baronet. 

No!—said the knight: But I have a nephew, gentlemen—A
very pretty young fellow! And I have this
to say before ye all (I am downright Dunstable) I had
much rather call this lady niece, than daughter. And
then the knight forced a laugh, and looked round upon
us all. 
O Sir Rowland, replied I, I have uncles, more than
one—I am a niece: But I have not had for many
years till now the happiness of a father. 
And do you own me, madam, before all this gay
company? —The first time I beheld you, I remember
I called you a perfect paragon. Why, madam, you
are the most excellent of women! 
We are so much convinced of this, Sir Rowland,
said the baronet, that I don't know, but Miss Byron's
choosing you for a father, instead of an uncle, may
have saved two or three throats. And then he laugh'd. 
His laugh was the more seasonable, as it soften'd the
shockingness of his expression. 
Mr. Greville and the baronet had been in company
twice before in Northamptonshire at the races: But
now-and-then look'd upon each other with envious
eyes; and once or twice were at cross-purposes: But
my particular notice of the knight made all pass
lightly over. 
Sir Rowland went first away. He claimed one word
with his daughter, in the character of a father. 
I withdrew with him to the farther end of the
room. 
Not one word of comfort? not one word, madam?
—to my boy? whisper'd he. 
My compliments (speaking low) to my brother, Sir. 
I wish him as well and as happy as I think he deserves
to be. 
Well but—Well but— 
Only remember, Sir Rowland, that you act in character. 
I followed you hither, on the strength of
your authority, as a father; I beg, Sir, that you will
preserve to me that character. 

Why God in heaven bless my daughter, if only
daughter you can be. Too well do I understand you! 
I will see how my poor nephew will take it. If it can
be no otherwise, I will prevail upon him, I think, to
go down with me to Caermarthen for a few months. — 
But as to those two fine gentlemen, madam—It would
grieve me ('tis a folly to deny it) to say I have seen
the man that is to supplant my nephew. 
I will act in character, Sir Rowland: As your
daughter, you have a right to know my sentiments on
this subject—You have not yet seen the man you seem
to be afraid of. 
You are all goodness, madam—my daughter—and
I cannot bear it! 
He spoke this loud enough to be heard; and Mr.
Greville and the baronet both, with some emotion,
rose, and turned about to us. 
Once more, Sir Rowland, said I, my compliments
to my brother—Adieu! 
God in heaven bless you, madam, that's all—Gentlemen,
your servant. Mrs. Reeves, your most obedient
humble servant. Madam, to me, you will allow
me, and my nephew too, one more visit, I hope,
before I set out for Caermarthen. 
I courtesied, and joined my cousins. Away went the
knight, brushing the ground with his hat, at his going
out. Mr. Reeves waited on him to the outward door. 
'Bye, 'bye, to you, Mr. Reeves—with some emotion
(as my cousin told me afterwards)—A wonderful
creature! By mercy, a wonderful creature! —I
go away with my heart full; yet am pleased; I know
not why neither, that's the jest of it—'Bye, Mrs.
Reeves, I can stay no longer. 
An odd mortal! said the man of the town—But he
seems to know on which side his bread is butter'd. 
A whimsical old fellow! said the man of the country. 
But I rejoice that he has not a son; that's all. 
A good many frothy things passed not worth relateing. 

I wanted them both to be gone. They seemed
each to think it time; but looked as if neither cared
to leave the other behind him. 
At last, Mr. Greville, who hinted to me, that he
knew I loved not too long an intrusion, bowed, and,
politely enough, took his leave. And then the baronet
began, with apologizing for his behaviour at taking
leave, on his last visit. 
Some gentlemen, I said, had one way, some another,
of expressing themselves on particular occasions:
He had thought fit to shew me what was his. 
He seemed a little disconcerted. But quickly recovering
himself, he could not indeed excuse himself, he said,
for having then called me cruel—Cruel, he hoped he
should not find me—Proud—I knew not what pride
was. Ungrateful—I could not be guilty of ingratitude. 
He begged me to forgive his peremptoriness—He had
hoped (as he had been assured, that my affections were
absolutely disengaged) that the proposals he had to
make, would have been acceptable; and so positive a
refusal, without any one reason assigned, and on his
first visit, had indeed hurt his pride (he owned, he
said, that he had some pride) and made him forget
that he was addressing himself to a woman who deserved
and met with the veneration of every one who
approached her. He next expressed himself with apprehensions
on Mr. Greville's arrival in town. He
spoke slightly of him. Mr. Greville, I doubt not, will
speak as slightly of Sir Hargrave. And if I believe
them both, I fansy I shall not injure either. 
Mr. Greville's arrival, I said, ought not to concern
me. He was to do as he thought fit. I was only desirous
to be allowed the same free agency that I was
ready to allow to others. 
That could not be, he said. Every man who saw
me must wish me to be his; and endeavour to obtain
his wishes. 
And then making vehement professions of love, he 

offered me large settlements; and to put it in my
power to do all the good that he knew it was in my
heart to do—And that I should prescribe to him in
every thing as to place of residence, excursions, even
to the going abroad to France, to Italy, and where-ever
I pleased. 
To all which I answer'd as before; and when he
insisted upon my reasons for refusing him, I frankly
told him, tho' I owned it was with some reluctance,
that I had not the opinion of his morals that I must
have of those of the man to whom I gave my hand
in marriage. 
Of my morals, madam! (starting; and his colour
went and came) My morals, madam! —I thought he
looked with malice. But I was not intimidated: And
yet my cousins looked at me with some little surprize
for my plain dealing, tho' not as blaming me. 
Be not displeased, Sir, with my freedom. You call
upon me to make objections. I mean not to upbraid
you; that is not my business; but thus called upon,
I must repeat—I stopt. 
Proceed, madam, angrily. 
Indeed, Sir Hargrave, you must pardon me on this
occasion, if I repeat that I have not that opinion of
your morals— 
Very well, madam— 
That I must have of those of the man on whose
worthiness I must build my hopes of present happiness,
and to whose guidance intrust my future. This, Sir,
is a very material consideration with me, tho' I am
not fond of talking upon it, except on proper occasions,
and to proper persons: But, Sir, let me add, that I
am determin'd to live longer single. I think it too
early to engage in a life of care: And if I do not
meet with a man to whom I can give my whole heart,
I never will marry at all. [O how maliciously looked
the man!] —You are angry, Sir Hargrave, added I; 
but you have no right to be so. You address me as 

one who is her own mistress. And tho' I would not
be thought rude, I value myself on my openness of
heart. 
He arose from his seat. He walked about the room
muttering, “You have no opinion of my morals”— 
By heaven, madam! —But I will bear it all—Yet,
“No opinion of my morals!” —I cannot bear that— 
He then clenched his fist, and held it up to his
head; and snatching up his hat, bowing to the ground
to us all, his face crimson'd over (as the time before)
he withdrew. 
Mr. Reeves attended him to the door—Not like my
morals, said he! —I have enemies, Mr. Reeves—“Not
like my morals!” —Miss Byron treats politely every
body but me, Sir. Her scorn may be repaid—Would
to God I could say with scorn, Mr. Reeves. —Adieu. 
Excuse my warmth. —Adieu. 
And into his chariot he stept, pulling up the glasses
with violence: And, as Mr. Reeves told us, rearing
up his head to the top of it, as he sat swelling. And
away it drove. 
His menacing airs, and abrupt departure, terrified
me. I did not recover myself in an hour. 
A fine husband for your Harriet would this half
madman make! —O Mr. Fowler, Sir Rowland, Mr.
Orme, what good men are you to Sir Hargrave! 
Should I have known half so much as I do of his ill
qualities, had I not refused him? Drawn in by his
professions of love, and by 8000l. a year, I might
have married him; and, when too late, found myself
miserable, yoked with a tyrant and madman, for the
remainder of a life begun with happy prospects, and
glorying in every one's love! 

