


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


But now what remains to be done for our sister?
ask'd Lady L. Charlotte looked round her, as
seconding the question. Every one referr'd to Sir
Charles. 
In the first place, let me assure you, my dear Charlotte,
resumed he, that if you have but the shadow of a 

preference for Captain Anderson; and if you believe,
from what has passed between you, and from the suspense
you have kept him in (which may have been an
hindrance to his fortune or preferment) that you ought
to be his, whether in justice, or by inclination; I will
amicably meet him, in order to make and to receive
proposals. If we do not find him grateful or generous,
we will make him so, by our example; and I
will begin to set it. 
Every one was affected: Dr. Bartlett as much as
any-body. Miss Grandison could hardly sit still. 
Her chair was uneasy to her. While her brother
looked like one who was too much accustomed to acts
of beneficence, to suppose he had said any-thing extraordinary. 
Miss Grandison, after some hesitation, replied, Indeed,
Sir, Captain Anderson is not worthy of being
called your brother. I will not enter into the particulars
of his unworthiness; because I am determined not to
have him. He knows I am: Nor does my promise
engage me to be his. Had he virtue, had he generosity
—But indeed he has not either, in the degree
that would make me respect him, as a woman should
respect her husband. 
Sir Ch. Well then, Charlotte, I would have you
excuse yourself, if you have given him hopes of meeting
him; let him know, that you have acquainted me
with all that has passed between you; and that you
refer yourself wholly to me; but with a resolution (if
such be your resolution) never to be his. 
Miss Gr. I shall dread his violent temper— 
Sir Ch. Dread nothing! Men who are violent to
a woman, when they have a point to carry by being
so, are not always violent to men. But I shall treat
him civilly. If the man ever hoped to call you his, he
will be unhappy enough in losing such a prize. You may
tell him, that I will give him a meeting where-ever he
pleases. Mean time, it may not be amiss, if you have 

no objection, to shew me some of the letters that have
passed between you; of those particularly, in which
you have declared your resolution not to be his; the
farther backward, the better, if from the date of such
you have always been of the same mind. 
Miss Gr. You shall see the copies of all my letters; 
and all his, if you please. And you will gather from
both, Sir, that it was owing to the unhappy situation I
thought myself in, from the unkind treatment my
sister met with, and to the being forbidden to expect a
fortune that would intitle me to look up to a man of
figure in the world, that I was ever approachable by
Captain Anderson. 
Sir Ch. Unhappy! But let us look forward. I will
meet Captain Anderson. If there are any letters, in
which he has treated my sister unhandsomely, you must
not let me see them. My motive for looking into any
of them, is service to you, Charlotte, and not curiosity. 
But let me, nevertheless, see all that is necessary
to the question, that I may not, when I meet him,
hear any-thing from him, that I have not heard from
you; and which may make for him, and against you. 
I do assure you, that I will allow in his favour, all that
shall appear favourable to him, tho' against my sister. 
I may meet him prejudiced, but not determined: And
I hope you see by my behaviour to you, Charlotte, that
were you and he to have been fond Lovers in your
letters, you need not be afraid of my eye. I never am
severe on Lovers foibles. Our passions may be made
subservient to excellent purposes. Don't think you
have a supercilious brother. A susceptibility of the
passion called Love, I condemn not as a fault; but the
contrary. Your brother, Ladies (looking upon all
three) is no Stoic. 
And have you been in love, Sir Charles Grandison?
thought I to myself. —Shall I, Lucy, be sorry, or shall
I be glad, if he has? —But after all, is it not strange,
that in all this time one knows so little of his history 

while he was abroad? —And yet, he said, That he
was not angry at his sister for questioning him on the
subject. Had I been his sister, questions of that sort
would not have been to be now asked. 
But here is a new task for her brother. I shall long
to know how this affair will end. 
The tryal of Miss Grandison, as she called it, being
thus happily over, and Miss Emily and Mr. Grandison
desired to walk in, Sir Charles took notice, with
some severity on our Sex, on the general liking, which
he said women have for military men. He did not
know, he said, whether the army were not beholden
to this approbation, and to the gay appearance officers
were expected to make, rather than to a true martial
spirit, for many a gallant man. 
What say you, Emily? said he: Do not a cockade,
and a scarlet coat, become a fine gentleman, and help
to make him so, in your eyes? 
Be pleased, Sir, to tell me how such an one should
look in my eyes, and I will endeavour to make them
conform to your lessons. 
He bowed to the happy girl: For my part, said he,
I cannot but say, that I dislike the life of a soldier in
general; whose trade is in blood; who must be as
much a slave to the will of his superiors in command,
as he is almost obliged to be a tyrant to those under
him. 
But as to the Sex, if it were not, that Ladies, where
Love and their own happiness interfere, are the most
incompetent judges of all others for themselves—Pardon
me— 
Your servant, Sir, said Lady L.—And we all bowed
to him. 
How can a woman, proceeded he, who really loves
her husband, subject herself of choice, to the necessary
absences, to the continual apprehensions, which she
must be under for his safety, when he is in the height
of what is emphatically called his Duty? He stopt. 

No answer being made, Perhaps, resumed he, it
may be thus accounted for: Women are the most delicate
part of the creation. Conscious of the weakness
of their Sex, and that they stand in need of protection
(for apprehensiveness, the child of prudence,
is as characteristic in them, as courage in a man) they
naturally love brave men—And are not all military
men supposed to be brave? 
But how are they mistaken in their main end, supposing
this to be it! 
I honour a good, a generous, a brave, an humane
soldier: But were such an one to be the bravest of
men, how can his wife expect constant protection from
the husband who is less his own, and consequently less
hers, than almost any other man can be (a sailor excepted); 
and who must therefore, oftener than any
other man, leave her exposed to those insults, from
which she seems to think he can best defend her? 
Lady L. (smiling) But may it not be said, Sir, that
those women who make soldiers their choice, deserve,
in some degree, a rank with heroes; when they can
part with their husbands for the sake of their country's
glory? 
Sir Ch. Change your word glory for safety, Lady L.
and your question will be strengthen'd. The word
and thing called Glory, what mischief has it not occasioned! 
—As to the question itself, were you serious,
let every one, I answer, who can plead the motive,
be intitled to the praise that is due to it. 
Miss Gr. There is so much weight in what my
brother has said, that I thank Heaven, I am not in
danger of being the wife of a soldier. 
We, who knew what she alluded to, smiled at it; 
and Mr. Grandison looked about him, as if he wanted
to find more in the words, than they could import to
him: And then was very earnest to know how his
cousin had come off. 

Sir Ch. Triumphantly, cousin. Charlotte's supposed
fault has brought to light additional excellencies. 
Mr. Gr. I am sorry for that with all my soul— 
There was no bearing her before—And now what
will become of me? 
Miss Gr. You have nothing new to fear, Mr.
Grandison, I assure you. I have been detected in real
faults. I have been generously treated; and repent
of my fault. Let me have an instance of like ingenuousness
in you; and I will say, there are hopes of us
both. 
Mr. Gr. Your servant, cousin. Either way I must
have it. But were you to follow the example by
which you own yourself amended, I might have the
better chance, perhaps, of coming up to you in ingenuousness. 
Lord L. Upon my word, sister Charlotte, Mr.
Grandison has said a good thing. 
Miss Gr. I think so too, my Lord. I will put it
down. And if you are wise, Sir (to him) ask me to
sew up your lips 'till to-morrow dinner-time. 
Mr. Grandison looked offended. 
Sir Ch. Fie, Charlotte! 
I am glad, thought I, my good Miss Grandison,
that you have not lost much spirit by your tryal! 
* *
Miss Grandison has shewed me some of the letters
that passed between Captain Anderson and her. How
must she have despised him, had she been drawn in to
give him her hand! And the more for the poor figure
he would have made as a brother to her brother! How
must she have blushed at every civility paid him in
such a family! Yet from some passages in his letters,
I dare say, he would have had the higher opinion of
himself; first for his success with her, and for every
civility paid him afterwards by her relations. 
And thus had Sir Thomas Grandison, with all his
pride, like to have thrown his daughter, a woman of 

high character, fine understanding, and an exalted
mind, into the arms of a man, who had neither fortune,
nor education, nor yet good sense, nor generosity
of heart, to countenance his pretensions to such a
Lady, or her for marrying beneath herself. 
This is a copy of what Miss Grandison has written
to send to Captain Anderson. 

Sir,
Had I had a generous man to deal with, I needed
not to have exposed myself to the apprehended
censures of a brother, whose virtues made a sister, less
perfect than himself, afraid that he would think her
unworthy of that tender relation to him, from the
occasion. But he is the noblest of brothers. He pities
me; and undertakes to talk with you, in the most
friendly manner, at your own appointment, upon a
subject that has long greatly distressed me, as well
you know. I will not recriminate, as I might: But
this assurance I must, for the hundredth time, repeat,
That I never can, never will be to you, any other than 
Charlotte Grandison. 

She is dissatisfied with what she has written: But I
tell her, I think it will do very well. 

