


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Lucy Selby. 


Saturday, March 18. 
Self, my dear Lucy, is a very wicked
thing; a sanctifier, if one would give way
to its partialities, of actions, which, in
others, we should have no doubt to condemn. 
Delicacy, too, is often a misleader; 
an idol, at whose shrine we sometimes offer
up our Sincerity; but, in that case, it should be called
Indelicacy. 
Nothing, surely, can be delicate, that is not true,
or that gives birth to equivocation: Yet how was I
pleased with Lord and Lady L. and Miss Grandison,
for endeavouring to pass me off to good Dr. Bartlett
in the light I had no title to appear in! —As if my
mind, in a certain point, remained to be known; 

and would so remain, till the gentleman had discovered
his. 
And are there some situations, in which a woman
must conceal her true sentiments? In which it would
be thought immodesty to speak out? —Why was I
born with an heart so open and sincere? But why,
indeed, as Sir Charles has said in his Letter relating to
the Danby's, should women be blamed, for owning
modestly a passion for a worthy and suitable object? 
Is it, that they will not speak out, lest, if their wishes
should not be crowned with success by one man, they
should deprive themselves of a chance to succeed with
another? Do they not propose to make the man they
love, happy? —And is it a crime to acknowlege, that
they are so well disposed to a worthy object? A worthy
object, I repeat; for that is what will warrant the
open heart. What a littleness is there in the custom
that compels us to be insincere? And suppose we do
not succeed with a first object, shall we cheat a future
Lover with the notion that he was the first? 
Hitherto I had acted with some self-approbation: I
told Mr. Greville, Mr. Fenwick, Mr. Orme, Mr.
Fowler, that I had not seen the man to whom I could
wish to give my hand at the altar: But when I found
my heart engaged, I was desirous Lady D. should
know that it was. But yet, misled by this same notion
of delicacy, I could think myself obliged to the
two sisters, and my Lord, that they endeavoured to
throw a blind over the eyes of good Dr. Bartlett:
When the right measure, I now think, would have
been, not to have endeavoured to obtain lights from
him, that we all thought he was not commissioned to
give; or, if we had, to have related to him the whole
truth, and not have put on disguises to him; but
to have left him wholly a judge of the fit, and the
unfit. 
And -this is Love, is it? that puts an honest girl
upon approving of such tricks? —Begone, Love! I 

banish thee if thou wouldst corrupt the simplicity of
that heart, which was taught to glory in truth. 
And yet, I had like to have been drawn into a
greater fault: For, What do you think? —Miss Grandison
had (by some means or other; she would not
tell me how) in Dr. Bartlett's absence on a visit to one
of the Canons of Windsor, got at a letter brought
early this morning from her brother to that good
man, and which he had left opened on his desk. 
Here, Harriet, said she, is the letter so lately
brought, not perhaps quite honestly come at, from
my brother to Dr. Bartlett (holding it out to me). 
You are warmly mentioned in it. Shall I put it where
I had it? Or will you so far partake of my fault as
to read it first? 
O Miss Grandison! said I: And am I warmly mentioned
in it? Pray oblige me with the perusal of it. 
And I held out my more than half guilty hand, and
took it: But (immediately recollecting myself) did
you not hint that you came at it by means not honest? 
—Take it again; I will not partake of your
fault. —But, cruel Charlotte! how could you tempt
me so? And I laid it on a chair. 
Read the first paragraph, Harriet. She took it up,
unfolded it, and pointed to the first paragraph. 
Tempter! said I, how can you wish me to imitate
our first pattern! And down I sat, and put both my
hands before my eyes. Take it away, take it away,
while yet I am innocent! —Dear Miss Grandison,
don't give me cause for self-reproach. I will not partake
of your acknowleged fault. 
She read a line or two; and then said, Shall I read
farther, Harriet? The very next word is your name. 
I will— 
No, no, no, said I, putting my fingers in my ears. 
—Yet, had you come honestly by it, I should have
longed to read it—By what means— 

Why, if people will leave their closet-doors open,
let them take the consequence. 
If people will do so—But was it so? —And yet, if
it was, would you be willing to have your letters looked
into? 
Well then, I will carry it back—Shall I? (holding
it out to me) Shall I, Harriet? —I will put it where
I had it—Shall I? And twice or thrice went from me,
and came back to me, with a provoking archness in
her looks. 
Only tell me, Miss Grandison, is there any-thing
in it that you think your brother would not have us
see? —But I am sure, there is, or the obliging Dr.
Bartlett, who has shewn us others, would have favoured
us with communicating the contents of this. 
I would not but have seen this letter for half I am
worth! O Harriet! there are such things in it—Bologna! 
Paris! Grandison-hall! 
Be gone, Siren: Letters are sacred things. Replace
it—Don't you own, that you came not honestly by
it? —And yet— 
Ah! Lucy, I was ready to yield to the curiosity
she had raised: But, recollecting myself, Be gone,
said I: Carry back the letter: I am afraid of myself. 
Why, Harriet, here is one passage, the contents
of which you must be acquainted with in a very little
while— 
I will not be tempted, Miss Grandison. I will stay
till it is communicated to me, be it what it will. 
But you may be surprised, Harriet, at the time, and
know not what answer to give to it. —You had as good
read it—Here, take it—Was there ever such a scrupulous
creature? —It is about you and Emily— 
About me and Emily! O Miss Grandison, What
can there be about me and Emily? 
And where's the difference, Harriet, between asking
me about the contents, and reading them? —But
I'll tell you— 

No, you shall not: I will not hear the contents. I
never will ask you. Can nobody act greatly but your
brother? Let you and me, Charlotte, be the better
for his example. You shall neither read them, nor
tell me of them. I would not be so used myself. 
Such praises did I never hear of woman! —Oh,
Harriet! —Such praises— 
Praises, Charlotte! —From your brother? —O this
curiosity! the first fault of our first parent! But I will
not be tempted. If you provoke me to ask questions,
laugh at me, and welcome: But I beseech you, answer
me not. Dear creature, if you love me, replace
the letter; and do not seek to make me mean in my
own eyes. 
How you reflect upon me, Harriet! —But let me
ask you, Are you willing, as a third sister, to take
Emily into your guardianship, and carry her down
with you into Northamptonshire? —Answer me that. 
Ah! Miss Grandison! And is there such a proposal
mentioned as that? —But answer me not, I beseech
you. Whatever proposal is intended to be made me,
let it be made: It will be too soon, whenever that is,
if it be a disagreeable one. 
But let me say, madam (and tears were in my eyes)
that I will not be treated with indignity by the best
man on earth. And while I can refuse to yield to a
thing that I think unworthy of myself (you are a
sister, madam, and have nothing either to hope or
fear) I have a title to act with spirit, when occasions
call for it. 
My dear, you are serious—Twice madam, in one
breath! I will not forgive you. You ought now to
hear that passage read, which relates to you and Emily,
if you will not read it yourself. 
And she was looking for it; I suppose, intending
to read it to me. 
No, Miss Grandison, said I, laying my spread hand
upon the letter; I will neither read it, nor hear it 

read. I begin to apprehend, that there will be occasion
for me to exert all my fortitude; and while it is
yet in my power to do a right or a wrong thing, I
will not deprive myself of the consciousness of having
merited well, whatever may be my lot—Excuse me,
madam. 
I went to the door, and was opening it—when she
ran to me—Dear creature! you are angry with me:
But how that pride becomes you! There is a dignity
in it that awes me. O Harriet! how infinitely does it
become the only woman in the world, that is worthy
of the best man in it! Only say, you are not angry
with me. Say that you can and do forgive me. 
Forgive you, my Charlotte! —I do. But can you
say, that you came not honestly by that letter, and
yet forgive yourself? But, my dear Miss Grandison,
instantly replace it; and do you watch over me, like
a true friend, if in a future hour of weakness you
should find me desirous to know any of the contents
of a paper so naughtily come at. I own that I had like
to have been overcome: And if I had, all the information
it would have given me, could never have recompensed
me for what I should have suffered in my own
opinion, when I reflected on the means by which I had
obtained it. 
Superior creature! how you shame me! I will replace
the letter. And I promise you, that if I cannot
forget the contents of it myself (and yet they are glorious
to my brother) I will never mention any of them
to you; unless the letter be fairly communicated to
you, and to us all. 
I threw my arms about her neck. She fervently
returned the sisterly embrace. We separated; she retiring
at one door, in order to go up to replace the
letter; I at the other, to re-consider all that had passed
on the occasion. And I hope I shall love her the better
for taking so kindly a behaviour so contrary to what
her own had been. 

Well, but, don't you congratulate me, my dear,
on my escape from my curiosity? I am sure my grandmamma,
and my aunt, will be pleased with their girl. 
Yet it was an hard struggle, I own; in the suspense
I am; in a very hard struggle. But tho' wishes will
play about my heart, that I knew such of the contents
as it might concern me to know; yet I am infinitely
better pleased that I yielded not to the temptation,
than I should have been, if I had. And then,
methinks, my pride is gratified in the superiority this
lady ascribes to me over herself, whom so lately I
thought greatly my superior. 
Yet what merit have I in this? Since if I had considered
only rules of policy, I should have been utterly
wrong, had I yielded to the temptation: For
what use could I have made of any knowlege I might
have obtained by this means? If any proposal is to be
made me, of what nature soever, it must, in that
case, have appeared to be quite new to me: And what
an affectation must that have occasioned, what dissimulation,
in your Harriet? —And how would a creature,
educated as I have been, have behaved under such
trials as might have arisen from a knowlege so faultily
obtained? 
And had I been discovered; had I given cause of
suspicion, either to Dr. Bartlett, or Sir Charles; I
should have appeared as the principal in the fact: It
would have been mean to accuse Miss Grandison, as
the tempter, in a temptation yielded to with my eyes
open. And should I not have cast a slur upon that
curiosity which Dr. Bartlett before had not refused to
gratify, as well as shut myself out from all future
communications and confidence? 
It is very possible, besides, that, unused as I have
been to artifice and disguise, I should have betrayed
myself; especially had I found any of the contents of
the letter very affecting. 
Thus you see, Lucy, that policy, as well as rectitude 

of manners, justify me: And in this particular I
am an happy girl. 
Miss Grandison has just now told her sister what
passed between us. Lady L. says, she would not have
been Miss Grandison, in taking the letter, by what
means soever come at; for how, said she, did I know
what secrets there might be in it, before I read it? 
But I think verily, when it had been got at, and offered
me, I could not have been Miss Byron. 
And she threw her arms about me, and hugged me
to her. Dear creature, said she, you must be Lady
Grandison—Must! said Miss Grandison: She shall. 
Who, Lucy, whether that may ever come to pass,
or not, would not, on reflexion (thus approved by
both sisters) rejoice that she conquered her curiosity,
and acted as I did? 
Miss Grandison talked to Lady L. of its being likely
that her brother would go to Bologna: Of a visit he
is soon to make to Grandison-hall; and she to go
with him: Of his going to Paris, in order to settle
some matters relating to the Will of his late friend
Mr. Danby— 
Well, Lucy, my time in town is hastening to its
period. Why am I not reminded, that my three allotted
months are near expired? Will you receive the
poor girl, who perhaps will not be able to carry down
with her the heart she brought up? And yet, to go
down to such dear friends without it, what an ungrateful
sound has that! 
Miss Grandison began to talk of other subjects relating
to her brother, and that greatly to his praise. I
could have heard all she had to say with infinite pleasure. 
I do love to hear him praised. But, as I doubted
not but these subjects arose from the letter so surreptitiously
obtained, I restrained myself, and withdrew. 
* *
Of what an happy temper is Miss Grandison! She
was much affected with the scene that passed between 

us, but all is over with her already. One lesson upon
her harpsichord sets every-thing right with her. She
has been raillying Lord L. with as much life and spirit,
as if she had done nothing to be vexed at. Had I
been induced by her to read the letter which she
got at dishonestly, as she owned, what a poor figure
should I have made in my own eyes, for a month to
come! 
But did she not as soon overcome the mortification
given her by her brother, on the detection of captain
Anderson's affair? How unmercifully did she railly
me, within a few hours after! —Yet, she has fine qualities. 
One cannot help loving her. I do love her. 
But is it not a weakness to look without abatement of
affection on those faults in one person, which we should
hold utterly inexcusable in another? In Miss Grandison's
case, however, don't say it is, Lucy. O what
a partiality! Yet she has within these few minutes
owned, that she thought the step she had taken a
faulty one, before she came to me with the letter; 
and hoped to induce me to countenance her in what
she had done. 
I called her a little Satan on this occasion. But, after
all, what if the dear Charlotte's curiosity was more
for my sake than her own? No motive of friendship,
you will say, can justify a wrong action—Why no,
Lucy; that is very true; but if you knew Miss Grandison,
you would love her dearly. 

