


Mrs. Selby, To the Countess Dowager of D. 


Jan. 27. 
Madam,
I Am greatly obliged to your Ladyship for your good
opinion of me, and for the honour you do me,
and all our family, in the proposed alliance. 
I will answer your Ladyship's question with the requisite
explicitness. 
Mr. Greville, Mr. Orme, and Mr. Fenwick, all
of this county, have respectively made application to
us for our interest, and to Miss Byron for her favour:
But hitherto without effect; tho' the terms each proposes
might intitle him to consideration. 
Miss Byron professes to honour the married state,
and one day proposes to make some man happy in it,
if it be not his own fault: But declares, that she has 

not yet seen the man to whom with her hand she can
give her heart. 
In truth, madam, we are all neutrals on this occasion. 
We have the highest opinion of her discretion. 
She has read, she has conversed; and yet there
is not in the county a better housewife, or one who
would make a more prudent manager in a family. 
We are all fond of her, even to doting. Were she
not our child, we should love her for her good qualities,
and sweetness of manners, and a frankness that
has few examples among young women. 
Permit me, madam, to add one thing; about
which Miss Byron, in her turn, will be very nice. 
Your Ladyship is pleased to say, that my Lord's affections
are disengaged. Were his Lordship a prince,
and hoped to succeed with her, they must not be so,
after he had seen and conversed with her. Yet the
future happiness, and not pride, would be the consideration
with her; for she has that diffidence in her
own merits, from which the worthy of both sexes
cannot be totally free. This diffidence would increase
too much for her happiness, were she to be thought
of with indifference by any man on earth, who hoped
to be more than indifferent to her. 
As to other questions, which, as this is answered,
your Ladyship thinks may come to be ask'd, I choose
un-ask'd (having no reserves) to acquaint your Ladyship
that Miss Byron has not, in her own power, quite
15,000l. She has, it is true, reversionary expectations. 
But we none of us wish that they should for many
years take place; since that must be by the death of
Mrs. Shirley, her grandmother, who is equally revered
and beloved by all that know her; and whose life is
bound up in the happiness of her grand-daughter. 
I will strictly obey your Ladyship in the secrecy enjoined; 
and am, madam, 
Your Ladyship's obliged and faithful humble Servant,
Marianna Selby. 

