


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Saturday morning, Feb. 3. 
Emily and I have had another conversation. 
She had been more grave and solemn than usual
from the time of the last, of which I gave you an account. 
Her Anne had taken notice to Sally of a change
in the temper of her young mistress. She knew not
how to please her, she said. From the best-natured
young Lady in the world, she was grown one of the
most peevish; and she had taken the Liberty to tell
her, that she must quit her service, if she found her
so hard to be pleased. 
Do then, was her answer; I won't be threatened
by you, Anne. You seem to have found out your 

consequence with me. Go, Anne, as soon as you will. 
I won't be threatened, Anne. I have enough to vex
me, without being disturbed by you. 
The honest maid, who dearly loves her, and has
been with her ever since she was seven years old, and
was much approved for her fidelity and good behaviour
by her father, burst out into tears, and would,
in a mild and humble manner, have expostulated
with her. Let me beseech you, madam, said she,
to permit me a word or two by way of dutiful expostulation. 
But she hurried from her—I won't hear
you, Anne. You have begun at the wrong end. 
You should have expostulated, and not threatened,
first. And then going up to her closet. She locked
herself in. 
I pitied the dear girl. Too well I thought I could
account for this change of temper in her: So exceeding
good her guardian to her, her gratitude augmented
her Love [Don't I know how that might easily
be?]: Yet, thought I, it would half break her heart,
if he were to assume reserve—I would not for her
sake have him imagine there was a necessity for a
change of his behaviour to her. And indeed if he
were to be more reserved, what would that do? So
good a man; so uniform his goodness; the poor
Emily must acquit him, and condemn herself; yet
have no cure for her malady. 
Sally offered Anne to acquaint me with what had
passed: But the good young woman begged she would
not. Her young Lady was so tenacious, she said
(young Lady like) of her authority, that she would
never forgive her if she were known to make an appeal
to me, or to my aunt. And to complain without
a probability of redress, the prudent creature observed,
except to her, as one Lady's woman to another,
would expose her beloved young mistress; 
when, perhaps, the present grievance might be cured
by time, assiduity, and patience. 

This was necessary to premise. 
Sir Charles, my Uncle, and Mr. Deane, having
rode out pretty early this morning to breakfast, at
Sir William Turner's; and my aunt and Lucy retiring
after breakfast to write; and I to my closet for
the same purpose; Emily came and tapped at my door. 
I instantly opened it. 
I intrude, madam. —No, my dear. 
I had observed at supper last night, and at breakfast
this morning, that she had been in tears; tho' nobody
else did; for the above hints, privately given me
by Sally, made me more observant of her motions. 
I took her hand, and would have placed her by
me—No, madam, said she, let me stand: I am not
worthy of sitting down in your presence. 
Her eyes were brimful of tears; but as she twinkled
in hopes to disperse them, I would not take such full
notice of them, as might make them run over, if they
could be dispersed: Yet mine, I believe glistened
sympathetically. 
In my presence, my Emily! my friend! Why,
why, this? 
I stood up. Your elder sister, my Love, fits not,
while her younger stands. 
She threw her arms about me, and her tears ran
over. This goodness, this goodness, kills me! — 
I am, I am, a most unhappy creature! —Unhappy
from the grant of my own wishes! —O that you
would treat me severely! I cannot, cannot support
myself, under the hourly instances which I receive of
your goodness! 
Whence, my dearest Emily, these acknowlegements? 
I do love my Emily: And should be either
ungrateful or insensible to the merits of my beloved
Sister, did I not do all in my power to make her happy. 
What can I do for her, that is not her due? 
She struggled herself out of my embracing arms,
withdrawing hers—Let me, let me go, madam!— 

She hurried into the adjoining apartment. I followed
her; and taking her hand, Leave me not, in this
perplexity, my Emily! I cannot, part with you: If
you love your Harriet, as she loves her Emily, you
will put me in the way of alleviating this anguish of
the most innocent, and most amiable of minds. Open
your heart to me, my dear. 
O Lady Grandison! the deserving wife of the best
of men, you ought to hate me! 
My dearest Emily! said I. 
Indeed you ought. 
Let us sit down on this Sofa, if you will not return
to my closet. 
I sat down. She sat by me, leaning her glowing
face on my shoulder. I put one arm round her neck; 
with the other hand, I grasped one of hers. Now,
my dear, I conjure you, by the friendship that is between
us, the more than sisterly friendship, open your
whole heart to me; and renounce me, if it be in my
power to heal the wounds of your mind, and I do
not pour into them the balm of friendly Love. 
What can I say? —Yesterday, my dearest Lady
Grandison, I received an answer to a case I put to
Dr. Bartlett, of a young creature, who—I can't tell
you— 
She wept; raised her head; dried her eyes; again
leaned her face on my shoulder; again I put my arm
round her neck—Your case, my Love? 
Ah, madam! My case—Did you say, My case? 
I asked, my dear, not as for your case, any other
than as for the case you put to the Doctor. 
He has not told you, madam? 
Indeed he has not said a word of your consulting
him. 
I had rather tell you myself. I am afraid he guesses
who the young woman is. O the poor cunning! —I
am a weak silly creature! —He certainly guesses— 
May I, my Love, see the case? —May I see the
answer to it? 

I have burnt them both! —In a sit of anger at myself,
that I should expose myself (for he certainly
guesses who the young woman is) I threw them in
the fire. 
But you can tell me the case. You can give me
the substance of the answer. 
How can I? You of all women! You, madam, whom
I best love of all women; but who ought to hate, to
despise me! 
Trust me, Love, with your secret. It shall never
without your Leave pass this faithful bosom, if it be
a secret that already I do not guess at. 
She started—Guess at, madam! 
Don't start at what I say, my Love. 
O you cannot, cannot guess at it. If you did— 
What if I did? 
Then would you banish from your presence for
ever the justly-hated Emily: Then would you make
my guardian renounce me! 
Shall I, my dear, tell you what I guess? 
Whisper me then, throwing about me the hand I
held not: But whisper me that I may not hear. 
You love your guardian, my Emily! —He loves
you! 
O madam! 
He will always love you; so will I. 
Banish the criminal from your presence for ever; 
rising; yet again laying her face on my shoulder— 
and clasping her arms about me, Hide me, hide me
from myself. 
No need, my dear. Every-body loves your
guardian. You cannot love him but with innocence. 
Your Love is founded in gratitude. So was mine. 
Don't I know how to allow for my Emily? 
You will banish fear from my heart, madam, by
this your goodness to me. I find I may own all my
weakness, my folly, to you; and the rather, as I shall
intitle myself by it to your advice. I wanted to do 

it; but was afraid you would hate me. In the same
circumstances I doubt I should not be so generous as
you are. O that I had not put my case to the
Doctor! 
The Doctor, my dear, is all goodness. He will
keep your secret— 
And not tell my guardian, madam, any thing
about it? It would be worse than death to me, if
my guardian should mistrust me. He would hate
the poor Emily, if you did not. 
He never shall know it, my dear. You have already
engaged the Doctor to secrecy, I doubt not. 
I have. 
He will inviolably keep your secret, no fear; especially
as your charming ingenuousness to me, will be
a means of putting you and me, my Love, on finding
expedients, that shall equally secure your honour,
and your guardian's regard for you. 
That, madam, is the very thing. 
Open then to me your innocent heart, my dear. 
Regard me, as your friend, your sister, and as if I
were not the happy wife of your beloved guardian— 
And so I will. —I did not, madam, mistrust myself
till the solemnity had passed, that made you and
my guardian one. Then I began to be uneasy with
myself; and the more, as I was for hiding myself
from myself, as I may say; for I was asraid of looking
into my heart: Why so? thought I. Am I not
an innocent girl? What do I wish for? What can I
hope for? Do I not love Lady Grandison? I do. 
Yet now-and-then—Don't hate me, madam! I will
reveal to you all my heart, and all my weakness. 
Proceed, my Emily. This is indeed a token of
your love, of your confidence in me. What a compliment
does my dearest younger sister make to her
elder? 
Yet now and then, something like Envy, I thought,
arose in my heart: And can your countenance forbear
to change, when I tell you of Envy? 

If it did, it would be from compassionate Love to
my Emily. You don't know, my dear, how my
heart dilates on this your most agreeable confidence
in me. 
God bless that dear heart! —There never was such
a heart as yours. Well, but I will go on if you
please. 
Do, my dear. 
Here, thought I, once (that I was resolved to call
myself to account) did I ask the favour of being allowed
to live with my guardian and his Lady, when they
were married: And what did I mean by it? Nothing
but innocence, believe me. Well, and my request
is granted! This was all that I thought was wanting
to make me happy: But, said I to myself, Am I happy? 
No. Do I love my guardian less? No. Do I
love Lady Grandison more for granting me this favour? 
I admire her more, I think; and I have a
grateful sense of her goodness to me: But, I don't
know how it is—I think, tho' I dearly love her, yet
I would be sometimes glad I did not, quite so well. 
Ungrateful Emily! And severely I took myself to task. 
Surely, pity, madam, is near akin to Love; for while
your suspenses lasted, I thought I loved you better
than I loved my own heart: But when you were happy,
and there was no room for pity, wicked wretch
that I was! I wanted, methought, sometimes to lower
you. —Don't you hate me now? 
No, no, my Emily; my Pity, as you say, increases
my Love of you. Proceed, child, your mind is the
unsullied book of nature: Turn to another Leaf. Depend
upon my kindest allowances. I knew, before
you knew it yourself, that you loved your guardian. 
Before I knew it myself! Why that might be. So
I went on reasoning with myself—“What, Emily,
canst thou love thy guardian more; and Lady
Grandison, with all her goodness to me, not
more—And canst thou mingle envy with admiration 

of her? —Ah, silly, and worse than silly, girl,
where may this end? —Lord bless me! If I suffer
myself to go on thus, shall I not be the most ungrateful
of creatures? Shall I not, instead of my
guardian's love, incur his hatred? Will not all the
world despise me? —And where may this stop?” — 
Yet I went on excusing myself; for I knew I had
no vile meaning: I knew I only wanted my guardian to
love me, and to be allowed to love him. But what!
thought I, at last, can I allow myself in loving a married
man, the husband of my friend? And sometimes I trembled
at the thought; for I looked back; and said to myself,
“Wouldst hou, Emily, a year ago, have allowed
in thyself but the same lengths that thou hast now
run?” —No; answered I my own question. “Is
not this a fair warning of what may be a year
hence?” —So I put a case, to Dr. Bartlett, as of
three persons of my Anne's acquaintance, two young
women, one young man, living in one house: The
young man contracted to one of the young women; 
the other knowing it; and tho' a person incapable of
a criminal thought, yet finding an increasing regard
for the young man, tho' she dearly loved her friend,
began to be afraid her heart was not quite as it should
be: What, I asked, as for my Anne's friend, would
he advise in the case? 
And what, my dear, was the Doctor's advice? 
I was a silly creature to put it to him. As I said,
he certainly must guess. If you, madam, could,
without such a case put, he certainly must. We
young girls think, if we put our hands before our
eyes, nobody can see us. In short, the Doctor pronounced
the increasing regard to be a beginning Love. 
The consequence would be, that the young woman
would in time endeavour to supplant her friend; 
tho' at present she might probably shudder at the
thought. He bid me tell Anne to warn her acquaintance
against the growing flame. He said, she 

might entangle her own heart, and, without gaining
her end, render unhappy a couple, who, according
to my representation from my Anne, deserved to be
happy: And he advised, by all means, that she
should leave the contracted couple to themselves, and
for her own honour's, her own heart's sake, remove
to as great distance from them as possible. 
Believe me, madam, I was shocked, I was frighted
at myself: I threw the papers in the fire; and have
been, ever since I read them, more unhappy than usual. 
My dear Lady Grandison, then thought I, I will, if
you give me encouragement, open my heart to you. 
You will hear of my folly, my weakness, one day or
other. —And now, dear good madam, forgive me:
Keep my secret; and advise me what to do. 
What, my dearest creature, can I advise you? I
love you. I ever will love you. I will be as careful
of your honour as of my own. I will endeavour to
cultivate your guardian's affection to you. 
He never, madam, I hope, guessed at the poor
Emily's folly. 
He never mentioned you to me, but with love and
tenderness. 
Thank God! —But say, advise me, madam; my
heart shall be in your hand; guide it, as you please. 
What, my dear, did you think of doing yourself? 
I must not think of living with you now, madam. 
Why not? You shall find me ever your true friend. 
But I am sure Dr. Bartlett's advice to Anne's acquaintance
is right. I tell you, madam, that I must
every day, and every hour of the day, that I see his
tender behaviour to you; that I behold him employ'd
in acts of beneficence; that I see every one adoring
him; admire him more. I see that I am less my own
mistress than I thought it was possible I could be:
And if such a girl as I, have so little command of
myself, and his merit every hour spreading itself out
before me with increasing lustre, my weak eyes will 

not be able to bear his glory—O madam, I ought to
fly; I am resolved, whatever it cost me, to fly. 
How I admired, how I pitied, how I loved, the dear
creature! I clasped both my arms about her, and
pressing her to my bosom—What can I say, my Emily? 
What can I say? Tell me, what would you wish
me to say? 
You are wise, madam: You have a tender and
generous heart: O that I were half as good! —Advise
me something—I see the folly of my wishing to live
with you and my guardian. 
And is it necessary, my dear, to a conquest of
yourself, that we should not live together? 
Absolutely so: I am convinced of it. 
Suppose, my dear, you go to the London house,
and put yourself under Mrs. Grandison's protection? 
What, madam, my guardian's house still? 
I hope a few weeks absence, by help of a discretion
of which you have, in the present conversation,
given shining proofs, will answer all we wish; since
you never, my dear, could have thought but of admiring,
and that at distance, the great qualities of
your guardian. 
I have, 'tis true, but just found myself out, I never
could have hope of being looked upon in any
other light, than as his daughter, and I hope, I have
made the discovery in time. But I must not be with
him in his own house. I must not be in the way of
his constant conversation. 
Admirable discretion! Amiable innocence! —Well
then suppose you request Lady L. Lady G&wblank; 
Ah, no, no! That would not do, neither. My
guardian would be the continual subject of our conversation; 
and often, very often, his brotherly goodness
would lead him to them; them to him. 
Charming fortitude! Heroic Emily! How I admire
you! I see you have thought attentively of this matter. 
What are your thoughts? 

Can't you guess? 
I know what I wish—But you must speak first. 
Don't you remember what the blessed Mrs. Shirley
(I must call her blessed!) said to me on your
wedding-day, in the vestry? 
I do, my dearest Emily! And are you inclined— 
Shall I be received, madam, as a second Harriet
in your family? It would be my ambition to tread in
your steps at Selby-house and Shirley-manor; to hear
from you; to write to you; to form myself by the
model, by which you were formed; to be called by
Mrs. Shirley, by Mrs. Selby, their Emily. 
How you would rejoice them all, my Emily! and,
if we must part, me, to have my Emily be to my
dearest friends what their Harriet so happily was! 
But, madam, will you undertake to procure my
guardian's consent? 
I will endeavour it. 
Endeavour it! Then it is done. He will deny you
nothing. Will good Mrs. Shirley consent? 
I have no doubt but she will, if your guardian do. 
Will Mrs. Selby, will Mr. Selby, be my uncle and
aunt? 
We will consult them: They are happily with us,
you know. 
But, madam, there is one objection; a very great
one. 
What is that, my Love? 
Your cousin James Selby! I should respect him,
as your cousin, and as the brother of the two Miss
Selby's: But that is all. 
I never, my dear, approved of any motion of that
kind. Not one of my friends think of it: They wish
it not. He has met with discouragement from every
one of my family, and his own: He submits to the
discouragement. 
Then, madam, if you please to break the matter
to Mr. and Mrs. Selby; and to Mrs. Shirley, without 

letting them know the poor girl flies to them as
for refuge against herself; and satisfy Lady L. Lady
G. and Mrs. Eleanor Grandison, that I mean nothing
of slight to them; then will I attend Mr. and Mrs.
Selby in their return home: And I shall be in a while
a very happy girl, I doubt not. But still remember,
madam, I must love my guardian: But it shall be
with a Love that shall not exclude Lady Grandison
from a large share of it; the largest, if I can. And
now, clasping her arms about my neck, let me beg
your pardon for all the strange things I have said. 
My heart will be the easier for having found a confident,
such a confident, however, as no girl ever
found before—But in this instance of goodness, you
more than equal Lady Clementina herself; and a thousand,
thousand thanks for your patience with me on
such a subject! —Yet say, say, my dear Lady Grandison,
you don't hate the poor girl, who has the vanity
to emulate you and Lady Clementina! 
I wept over her from joy, pity, tenderness. 
Will you not, my dear grandmamma, love my
Emily more than ever? Will you call her your Emily,
and think of her, as your Harriet? 
Lady L. Lady G. will you excuse the preference
she has given to quiet Northamptonshire, against noisy
London, and its gay scenes, at so young a time of
Life? —Excuse it! I am sure you will think that the
reason she has given for the preference, lifts her up
above woman. 
Monday, Feb. 5. 
I have already obtained my uncle's and aunt's,
and Lucy's, high approbation of Emily's proposal. 
They, at her request, asked Sir Charles's consent, as
a favour. He desired to see her upon it. She came
in, bashful, her steps unassured, looking down. He
took her hand: My good Emily, said he, I am told
that you have a desire to restore to Mrs. Shirley,
Mrs. Selby, and Mr. Selby, the grand-daughter and 

niece I have robbed them of. They rejoice in your
proposal. You will be exceedingly happy in their
protection. My Harriet will be loth to part with
you; but for their sakes, as well as yours, she will
chearfully acquiesce: And, though we wanted it not,
we shall have an additional pleasure in visiting Northamptonshire. 
—It is your deliberate choice, my dear? 
It is, Sir: And I hope I may be allowed to accompany
Mrs. Selby down. 
Settle the matter, Ladies, among yourselves. I
have but one thing to add on the subject. You have
a Mother, my dear. We must not absolutely resolve
till we have her consent. She is good now: You
must make a compliment to my sisters, and their
Lords also, and to my aunt Grandison: They love
my ward: And she must preserve every worthy person's
Love. 
The dear girl courtesied; wept—You are all—all
goodness, Sir. 
If your mind should change, my dear, don't be
afraid to signify the alteration. It will be the business
of us all to make each other happy. You will be
always dear to my Harriet. Recollect, mean time, if
there be any-thing further in my power to oblige you. 
O Sir! You must not (she ran to me, and in my
bosom, weeping, spoke out her sentence) be too good
to me! 
I kissed the dear girl's forehead—Heroic Emily!
whispered I, to confirm her in her heroism. 
And thus already, my dearest grandmamma, is
this material article settled. My aunt answers for
your approbation; and Lucy for the pleasure that this
acquisition, as I may call it, will give to Nancy, to
Miss Holles's, and all our other kindred and acquaintance. 
But how, when the time comes, shall I part
with her? 
What, I wonder, will Sir Edward Beauchamp say 

to this? —He must get his dear friend's leave to visit
with us Shirley-manor and Selby house, which I
hope we shall do twice a year at least. 
My Uncle and Aunt, Lucy, and Mr. Deane, are
exceedingly rejoiced on this occasion: How fond are
they of Emily! She of them! This gives them a relation
to each other, that I hope will produce a friendship
which will last for ever. 
My Aunt and Lucy have been asking my opinion,
whether Sir Charles did not discover something of the
good girl's growing affection for him; so undisguisedly
sincere as she always was, and for some time not
suspecting herself; he so penetrating a man? Of this,
said Lucy, I am sure, he would have seen it with
half an eye, had any other man been as much the
object of her regard. 
If any-thing would induce me, said I, to think he
did, it would be his ready acquiescence with her proposal,
and from his being so little inquisitive after
her motives for leaving us: The case, continued I,
is of so nice a nature, that he never will say, even
to me, what his thoughts are upon it, if such thoughts
he has. And as to myself, it would be dealing with
Emily less delicately than I was dealt with by the two
noble sisters, should I presume to sound him on so
nice a subject. 
And indeed there never could be a man in the world
that had a greater regard than he has to those real delicacies
of our Sex, which border not upon what is
called Prudery. 
Mr. Lowther is gone to London: He has given into
Sir Charles's wishes, to settle in this neighbourhood. 
He said, He liked the country: He had no particular
attachment to any place; and made a fine compliment
to Sir Charles on the occasion. I need not say,
it was a just one. 
My uncle, my aunt, write. Lucy has another
long Letter almost ready. I have only further to 

say therefore, at this time, that I am and ever will
be 
Your most dutiful,
Harriet Grandison. 
Sir Charles intends to write to you, madam, on
Emily's proposal —My uncle, and aunt begin to
be weary of us, as Sir Charles and I tell them:
But they call us both unreasonable. God give us
good news from Italy! 

