


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Sunday, May 7. 
I Believe I shall become as arrant a scribbler as
Somebody else. I begin to like writing. A great
compliment to you, I assure you. I see one may bring
one's mind to any-thing—I thought I must have 

had recourse, when you and my brother left us, and
when I was married, to the public amusements, to fill
up my leisure: And as I have seen every-thing worth
seeing of those, many times over (masquerades excepted,
and them I despise); time, you know, in
that case, would have passed a little heavily, after having
shewn myself, and, by seeing Who and Who were
together, laid in a little store of the right sort of conversation
for the tea-table. For you know, Harriet,
that among us modern fine people, the company, and
not the entertainment, is the principal part of the
Raree-show. Pretty enough! to make the entertainment,
and pay for it too, to the honest fellows, who
have nothing to do, but to project schemes to get us
together. 
I don't know what to do with this man. I little
thought that I was to be considered as such a Doll,
such a Toy, as he would make me. I want to drive
him out of the house without me, were it but to purvey
for me news and scandal. What are your fine
gentlemen fit for else? You know, that, with all my
faults, I have a domestic and managing turn. A man
should encourage that in a wife, and not be perpetually
teazing her for her company abroad, unless he did
it with a view to keep her at home. Our Sex don't
love to be prescribed to, even in the things from 
which they are not naturally averse: And for this
very reason, perhaps, because it becomes us to submit
to prescription. Human nature, Harriet, is a perverse
thing. I believe, if my good man wished me to stay
at home, I should torture my brain, as other good
wives do, for inventions to go abroad. 
It was but yesterday, that, in order to give him a
hint, I pinned my apron to his coat, without considering
who was likely to be a sufferer by it; and he,
getting up, in his usual nimble way, gave it a rent,
and then looked behind him with so much apprehension
—Hands folded, eyes goggling, bag in motion 

from shoulder to shoulder. I was vexed too much to
make the use of the trick which I had designed, and
huffed him. He made excuses, and looked pitifully; 
bringing in his Soul, to testify that he knew not how it
could be—How it could be! Wretch! When you are
always squatting upon one's cloaths, in defiance of
hoop, or distance. 
He went out directly, and brought me in two
aprons, either of which was worth twenty of that he
so carelesly rent. Who could be angry with him? — 
I was, indeed, thinking to chide him for this—As if I
were not to be trusted to buy my own cloaths: And it
was just at my tongue's end, to ask him, What the
milaner could think of a man buying linen for a woman; 
but he looked at me with so good-natured an
eye, that I relented, and accepted, with a bow of graciousness,
his present; only calling him an odd creature
—And that he is, you know, my dear. 
We live very whimsically, in the main: Not above
four quarrels, however, and as many more chidings,
in a day. What does the man stay at home for then
so much, when I am at home? —Married people, by
frequent absences, may have a chance for a little happiness. 
How many debatings, if not direct quarrels,
are saved by the good man's and his meek wife's seeing
each other but once or twice a week! In what
can men and women, who are much together, employ
themselves, but in proving and defending, quarrelling
and making-up? Especially if they both chance to
marry for Love (which, thank Heaven, is not altogether
my case); for then both honest souls, having
promised more happiness to each other than they can
possibly meet with, have nothing to do but reproach
each other, at least tacitly, for their disappointment. — 
A great deal of Free-masonry in Love, my dear, believe
me! The secret, like that, when found out, is
hardly worth the knowing. 
Well, but what silly rattle is this, Charlotte! 

methinks you say, and put on one of your wisest
looks. 
No matter, Harriet! There may be some wisdom
in much folly. Every one speaks not out so plainly
as I do. But when the novelty of an acquisition or
change of condition is over, be the change or the acquisition
what it will, the principal pleasure is over,
and other novelties are hunted after, to keep the pool
of life from stagnating. 
This is a serious truth, my dear, and I expect you
to praise me for it. You are very sparing of your
praise to poor me; and yet I had rather have your
good word, than any woman's in the world: Or
man's either, I was going to say; but I should then
have forgot my brother. As for Lord G. were I to
accustom him to obligingness, I should destroy my
own consequence: For then it would be no novelty; 
and he would be hunting after a new folly—Very
true, Harriet. 
Well, but we have had a good serious falling-out; 
and it still subsists. It began on Friday night; present
Lord and Lady L. and Emily. I was very angry
with him for bringing it on before them. The man
has no discretion, my dear; none at all. And what
about? Why, we have not made our appearance at
court, forsooth. 
A very confident thing, this same appearance, I
think! A compliment made to fine cloaths and jewels,
at the expence of modesty. Lord G. pleads decorum
—Decorum against modesty, my dear! —But
if by decorum is meant sashion, I have in a hundred
instances found decorum beat modesty out of the
house. And as my brother, who would have been
our principal honour on such an occasion, is gone
abroad; and as ours is an elderly novelty, as I may say; 
(our fineries were not ready, you know, before my
brother went) I was fervent against it. 
‘I was the only woman of condition, in England,
who would be against it.’ 

I told my Lord, that was a reflexion on my Sex:
But Lord and Lady L. who had been spoken to, I
believe, by Lady Gertrude, were both on his side [I
shall have this man utterly ruined for a husband
among you]—When there were three to one, it would
have looked cowardly to yield, you know. I was
brave. But it being proposed for Sunday, and that
being at a little distance, it was not doubted but I
would comply. So the night past off, with prayings,
hopings, and a little mutteration [Allow me that
word, or find me a better.] The entreaty was renewed
in the morning; but, no! —‘I was ashamed
of him,’ he said. I asked him, If he really thought
so? —‘He should think so, if I refused him.’ Heaven
forbid, my Lord, that I, who contend for the liberty
of acting, should hinder you from the liberty of
thinking! Only one piece of advice, honest friend,
said I: Don't imagine the worst against yourself: And
another, If you have a mind to carry a point with me,
don't bring on the cause before any-body else: For
that would be to doubt either my duty, or your own
reasonableness. 
As sure as you are alive, Harriet, the man made an
exception against being called honest friend; as if, as
I told him, either of the words were incompatible
with quality. So, once, he was as froppish as a child,
on my calling him the man; a higher distinction, I
think, than if I had called him a king, or a prince. 
THE Man! —Strange creature! To except to a
distinction that implies, that he is the Man of Men! — 
You see what a captious mortal I have been forced to
call My Lord. But Lord and Master do not always
go together; tho' they do too often, for the happiness
of many a meek soul of our Sex. 
Well, this debate seemed suspended, by my telling
him, that if I were presented at court, I would not
have either the Earl or Lady Gertrude go with us,
the very people who were most desirous to be there— 

But I might not think of that, at the time, you know. — 
I would not be thought very perverse; only a little
whimsical, or so. And I wanted not an excellent reason
for excluding them—‘Are their consents to our
past affair doubted, my Lord, said I, that you think
it necessary for them to appear to justify us?’ 
He could say nothing to this, you know. And I
should never forgive the husband, as I told him, on another
occasion, who would pretend to argue, when he
had nothing to say. 
Then (for the baby will be always craving something)
he wanted me to go abroad with him—I forget
whither—But to some place that he supposed
(poor man!) I should like to visit. I told him, I dared
to say, he wished to be thought a modern husband, and
a fashionable man; and he would get a bad name, if
he could never stir out without his wife. Neither
could he answer that, you know. 
Well, we went on, mutter, mutter, grumble,
grumble, the thunder rolling at a distance; a little
impatience now-and-then, however, portending, that
it would come nearer. But, as yet, it was only, Pray,
my dear, oblige me; and, Pray, my Lord, excuse me; 
till this morning, when he had the assurance to be
pretty peremptory; hinting, that the Lord in waiting
had been spoke to. A fine time of it would a wife
have, if she were not at liberty to dress herself as she
pleases. Were I to choose again, I do assure you, my
dear, it should not be a man, who by his taste for
Moths and Butterflies, Shells, China, and such-like trifles,
would give me warning, that he would presume to
dress his baby, and when he had done, would perhaps
admire his own fancy more than her person. I believe,
my Harriet, I shall make you afraid of Matrimony:
But I will pursue my subject, for all that.— 
When the Insolent saw that I did not dress, as he
would have had me; he drew out his face, glouting,
to half the length of my arm; but was silent. Soon 

after Lady L. sending to know whether her Lord and
she were to attend us to the Drawing-room, and I
returning for answer, that I should be glad of their
company at dinner; he was in violent wrath. True,
as you are alive! and dressing himself in a great hurry,
left the house, without saying, By your leave, With
your leave, or Whether he would return to dinner, or
not. Very pretty doings, Harriet! 
Lord and Lady L. came to dinner, however. I
thought they were very kind, and, till they opened
their lips, was going to thank them: For then, it was
all elder Sister, and insolent Brother-in-law, I do assure
you. Upon my word, Harriet, they took upon
them. 
Lady L. told me, I might be the happiest creature
in the world, if—and there was so good as to stop. 
One of the happiest only, Lady L.! Who can be
happier than you? 
But I, said she, should neither be so, nor deserve to
be so, if—Good of her again, to stop at if. 
We can't be all of one mind, replied I. I shall be
wiser, in time. 
Where was poor Lord G. gone? 
Poor Lord G. is gone to seek his fortune, I believe. 
What did I mean? 
I told them the airs he had given himself; and that
he was gone without leave, or notice of return. 
He had served me right, ab-solutely right, Lord L.
said. 
I believed so myself. Lord G. was a very good
sort of man, and ought not to bear with me so much
as he had done: But it would be kind in them, not to
tell him what I had owned. 
The Earl lifted up one hand; the Countess both. 
They had not come to dine with me, they said, after
the answer I had returned, but as they were afraid
something was wrong between us. 

Mediators are not to be of one side only, I said:
And as they had been so kindly free in blaming me, I
hoped they would be as free with him, when they saw
him. 
And then it was, For God's sake, Charlotte; and,
Let me entreat you, Lady G. And let me, too, beseech
you, madam, said Emily, with tears stealing down
her cheeks. 
You are both very good: You are a sweet girl,
Emily. I have a too-playful heart. It will give me
some pain, and some pleasure; but if I had not more
pleasure than pain from my play, I should not be so
silly. 
My Lord not coming in, and the dinner being
ready, I ordered it to be served. —Won't you wait a
little longer for Lord G.? —No. I hope he is safe,
and well. He is his own master, as well as mine (I
sighed, I believe!); and, no doubt, has a paramount
pleasure in pursuing his own choice. 
They raved. I begged that they would let us eat
our dinner with comfort. My Lord, I hoped, would
come in with a keen appetite, and Nelthorpe should
get a supper for him that he liked. 
When we had dined, and retired into the adjoining
drawing-room, I had another schooling-bout: Emily
was even saucy. But I took it all: Yet, in my heart,
was vexed at Lord G.'s perverseness. 
At last, in came the honest man. He does not read
this, and so cannot take exceptions, and I hope you
will not, at the word honest. 
So lordly! so stiff! so solemn! —Upon my word! — 
Had it not been Sunday, I would have gone to my
harpsichord directly. He bowed to Lord and Lady L.
and to Emily, very obligingly; to me he nodded. —I
nodded again; but, like a good-natured fool, smiled. 
He stalked to the chimney; turned his back towards
it, buttoned up his mouth, held up his glowing face,
as if he were disposed to crow; yet had not won the 

battle. —One hand in his bosom; the other under the
skirt of his waistcoat, and his posture firmer than his
mind. —Yet was my heart so devoid of malice, that
I thought his attitude very genteel; and, had we not
been man and wife, agreeable. 
We hoped to have found your Lordship at home,
said Lord L. or we should not have dined here. 
If Lord G. is as polite a husband as a man, said I,
he will not thank your Lordship for this compliment
to his wife. 
Lord G. swelled, and reared himself up. His complexion,
which was before in a glow, was heightened. 
Poor man! thought I. —But why should my tender
heart pity obstinate people? —Yet I could not
help being dutiful. —Have you dined, my Lord? said
I, with a sweet smile, and very courteous. 
He stalked to the window, and never a word answered
he. 
Pray, Lady L. be so good as to ask my Lord G. If
he has dined? Was not this very condescending, on
such a behaviour? 
Lady L. asked him, and as gently-voiced as if
she were asking the same question of her own Lord. 
Lady L. is a kind-hearted soul, Harriet: She is my
Sister. 
I have not, madam, to Lady L. turning rudely
from me, and, not very civilly, from her. Ah!
thought I, these men! The more they are courted! — 
Wretches! to find their consequence in a woman's
meekness. —Yet, I could not forbear shewing mine. — 
Nature, Harriet! Who can resist constitution? 
What stiff airs are these! approaching him. —I do
assure you, my Lord, I shall not take this behaviour
well; and put my hand on his arm. 
I was served right. Would you believe it? The
man shook off my condescending hand, by raising his
elbow scornfully. He really did! 
Nay, then! —I left him, and retired to my former 

seat. I was vexed that it was Sunday: I wanted a
little harmony. 
Lord and Lady L. both blamed me, by their looks; 
and my Lady took my hand, and was leading me towards
him. I shewed a little reluctance: And, would
you have thought it? out of the drawing-room whipt
my nimble Lord, as if on purpose to avoid being
moved by my concession. 
I took my place again. 
I beg of you, Charlotte, said Lady L. go to my
Lord. You have used him ill. 
When I think so, I will follow your advice, Lady
L. 
And don't you think so, Lady G.? said Lord L. 
What! for taking my own option how I would be
dressed to-day? —What! for deferring—That moment
in came my bluff Lord—Have I not, proceeded I,
been forced to dine without him to-day? Did he let
me know what account I could give of his absence? 
Or when he would return? —And see, now, how angry
he looks! 
He traversed the room—I went on—Did he not
shake off my hand, when I laid it, smiling, on his
arm? Would he answer me a question, which I kindly
put to him, fearing he had not dined, and might be
sick for want of eating? Was I not forced to apply
to Lady L. for an answer to my careful question, on
his scornfully turning from me in silence? —Might we
not, if he had not gone out so abruptly, nobody
knows where, have made the appearance his heart is
so set upon? —But now, indeed, it is too late. 
Oons, madam! said he, and he kemboed his arms,
and strutted up to me. Now for a cuff, thought I. 
I was half afraid of it: But out of the room again
capered he. 
Lord bless me, said I, What a passionate creature
is this! 
Lord and Lady L. both turned from me with indignation. 

But no wonder if one, that they both did. 
They are a silly pair; and I believe have agreed to
keep each other in countenance in all they do. 
But Emily affected me. She sat before in one
corner of the room, weeping; and just then ran to
me, and, wrapping her arms about me, Dear, dear
Lady G. said she, for Heaven's sake, think of what
our Miss Byron said; ‘Don't jest away your own
happiness.’ I don't say who is in fault: But, my
dear Lady, do you condescend. It looks pretty in a
woman to condescend. Forgive me; I will run to
my Lord, and I will beg of him— 
Away she ran, without waiting for an answer—and,
bringing in the passionate wretch, hanging on his
arm—You must not, my Lord, indeed you must not
be so passionate. Why, my Lord, you frighted me;
indeed you did. Such a word I never heard from your
Lordship's mouth— 
Ay, my Lord, said I, you give yourself pretty
airs! Don't you? and use pretty words; that a child
shall be terrified at them! But come, come, ask my
pardon, for leaving me to dine without you. 
Was not that tender? —Yet out went Lord and
Lady L. To be sure they did right, if they withdrew
in hopes these kind words would have been received
as reconciliatory ones; and not in displeasure
with me, as I am half-afraid they did: For their
good-nature, worthy souls! does sometimes lead them
into misapprehensions. I kindly laid my hand on
his arm again. —He was ungracious. —Nay, my Lord,
don't once more reject me with disdain—If you do— 
I then smiled most courteously. Carry not your absurdities,
my Lord, too far: And I took his hand
[There, Harriet, was condescension!]: I protest, Sir,
if you give yourself any more of these airs, you will
not find me so condescending. —Come, come, tell me
you are sorry, and I will forgive you. 
Sorry! madam; sorry! —I am indeed sorry, for
your provoking airs! 

Why that's not ill said—But kemboed arms, my
Lord! are you not sorry for such an air? And Oons! 
are you not sorry for such a word? and for such looks
too? and for quarreling with your dinner? —I protest,
my Lord, you make one of us look like a child
who flings away his bread and butter because it has
not glass windows upon it.— 
Not for one moment forbear, madam!— 
Pr'ythee, pr'ythee—[I profess I had like to have
said honest friend] No more of these airs; and, I tell
you, I will forgive you. 
But, madam, I cannot, I will not— 
Hush, hush; no more in that strain, and so loud,
as if we had lost each other in a wood! —If you will
let us be friends, say so—In an instant—If not, I am
gone—gone this moment—casting off from him, as I
may say, intending to mount up-stairs. 
Angel, or Demon, shall I call you? said he. —Yet
I receive your hand, as offered. But, for God's sake,
madam, let us be happy! And he kissed my hand,
but not so cordially as it became him to do; and in
came Lord and Lady L. with countenances a little
ungracious. 
I took my seat next my own man, with an air of
officiousness, hoping to oblige him by it; and he was
obliged: And another day, not yet quite agreed upon,
this parade is to be made. 
And thus began, proceeded, and ended, this
doughty quarrel. And who knows, but before the
day is absolutely resolved upon, we may have half a
score more? Four, five, six days, as it may happen,
is a great space of time for people to agree, who are
so much together; and one of whom is playful, and
the other will not be played with. But these kembo
and oons airs, Harriet, stick a little in my stomach; 
and the man seems not to be quite come to neither. 
He is sullen and gloomy, and don't prate away as he
used to do, when we have made up before. 

But I will sing him a song to-morrow: I will please
the honest man, if I can. But he really should not
have had for a wife a woman of so sweet a temper as 
Your Charlotte G. 

