


Lady G. To Miss Selby. 


Tuesday, May 22. 
And so, Lucy, your day is fixed. May next
Thursday be a happy one, and reward the heroic
girl who so nobly conquered a first Love, on
the discovered unworthiness of the man. And you
own that your heart is far from being indifferent to
Lord Reresby–––Good girl! –––Confirmation of all
my doctrines. We women prate and prate of what
we can, and what we can-not; what we ought, and
what we ought-not, to do: But none of us stay-till-we-are-asked
mortals know what we shall, or can,
do, till we are tried by the power of determining being
put into our hands. Was it possible for me to
have loved that sorry wretch Anderson, so well as I
really love my honest Lord G? It was not. But 

tho' I name that creature myself, never do you presume
to do it. I blush even to this hour at looking
back to certain giddinesses that debased my character
–––But let me quit a subject so disagreeable. 
Lady Clementina has had a bad night, it seems. ––– 
Came not down to breakfast. The poor Enamoretto
was in despair. I tried to hearten him up a
little: But my brother will not let any body flatter
him with a hope that too probably may end in disappointment. 
Yonder [I am writing at my window, you must
know] is the fair Inflexible musing in the garden. I
have a good mind to call to her; for I see by her
motions and downcast looks, that resverie is no favourable
sign for the Count–––No need of my calling
to her; my brother has this minute joined her. 
As soon as he came in sight, she went to him. ––– 
Now, dear brother, put in a word for the poor
man. 
Well, but Lucy, this Lord of yours must come
among us. He shall not carry you to Ireland this
year. Let all who would be good husbands and good
wives, come to Grandison-hall, and learn: And,
pray, let them come while I am here. Yet I have
something to say against our Harriet too. –––She is so
taken up with her heroic friendship, that Clementina
is now almost the only subject of her pen. What
godlike instances of my brother's goodness does she
leave untold, tho' she admires him for them, as much
as ever! Every rising, every setting sun, are witnesses
of his divine philanthropy. I suppose she looks upon
his praises now, to be her own. Well she may. 
Never were hearts so united, so formed, for one another. 
But Harriet used to praise herself formerly; 
Did she not, uncle Selby? 
Believe me, I will praise my honest man whenever
he gives me cause. For instance; Yesterday, I
was well enough pleased with what he said to my 

brother. –––You, Sir Charles, ought not to give yourself
up to a private life. Your country has a claim
upon such a character as yours. 
Without doubt, said I–––Shall we, my Lord, make
my brother an embassador, or a justice of peace? 
Lord G. rubbed his forehead; but seeing me smile,
his countenance brightened up. Don't you know,
Charlotte, said my brother, that nothing but the
engagements our noble guests have given me, would
have prevented me from acting in the useful character
you have last named? 
O that you had, brother! What admirable causes
would then have been brought before US, en dernier
ressort! How delightfully would your time have been
taken up with the appeals of scolding wives, forsaken
damsels, and witches presumptive! 
Lady G. must be herself, whatever be the subject,
replied Sir Charles. You and I love her, my Lord,
for her charming vivacity. But think you, my sister,
that a day spent in doing good, be the objects of it
ever so low, is not more pleasing to reflect upon, than
a day of the most elegant indulgence? Would persons
of sense and distinction (myself out of the question)
more frequently than they do, undertake the
task, it would be lighter to every one, and would
keep the great power vested in this class of magistrates,
and which is every year increasing, out of mean and
mercenary hands. And, surely, men of consideration
in the world owe it to their tenants and neighbours,
and to those of their fellow-creatures to whose
industry they are obliged for their affluence, to employ
in their service, those advantages of rank and
education, which make it perhaps easy for them to
clear up and adjust, in half an hour, matters that
would be of endless perplexity and entanglement to
the parties concerned. 
Mind this, uncle Selby; for I think you are too
fond of your own ways, and your own hours, to do
your duty as an active justice, tho' of the quorum. 

But I should have told you, Lucy, how this conversation
began. I got the occasion for it out of
Dr. Bartlett afterwards. You must know, that I
visit him now and then as Harriet used to do, to learn
some of my brother's good deeds, that otherwise
would not come to our knowlege; by which I understand
that notwithstanding he gives his guests so
much of his company, and appears so easy and free
among us, yet, that every beneficent scheme is going
on: Not one improvement stands still: He knows
not what it is to be one moment idle. 
Dr. Bartlett tells me, that some gentlemen of
prime consideration in the county, have been offering
my brother their interest against the next election. 
He modestly acknowleged the grateful sense he had
of the honour done him; but declined it for the present,
as having been too little a while returned into
his own country, after so long an absence, to be as
yet fit for a trust so important. We young men,
said he, are apt to be warm: When we have not
studied a point throughly, we act upon hasty conclusions,
and sometimes support, sometimes oppose,
on insufficient grounds. I would not be under
Engagements to any party: Neither can I think of
contributing to destroy the morals and health of all
the country people round me, to make myself what
is called an Interest. Forgive me, gentlemen: I mean
not to slight your favours: But on such an occasion,
I ought to be explicit. 
But, after the gentlemen were gone. There is a
county, Dr. Bartlett, said he, of which I should be
ambitious to be one of the representatives, had I a natural
interest in it; because of the reverence I bear
to the good man, to whom in that case I should have
the honour to call myself a collegue. When I can
think myself more worthy than at present I am, of
standing in such a civil relation to him, I shall consider
him, as another Gamaliel, at whose feet (so 

long absent as I have been from my native country)
I shall be proud to be initiated into the service of the
public. 
It is not difficult to guess, who my brother––– 
But my Marmouset is squalling for me; and I must
fly to silence it. 
* *
Now, Lucy, that I have pacified my Brat, do I
wish you with me at my window. My Brother and
his Harriet only, are at this instant walking almost
under it, engaged in earnest conversation: Seemingly,
how pleasing a one! admiration and tenderness
mingled in his looks: In her, while he speaks,
the most delighted attention: When she answers,
love, affiance, modest deference, benevolence, compassion; 
an expression that no pen can describe––– 
Knowing them both so well, and acquainted with
their usual behaviour to each other, I can make it
all out. She is pleading, I am sure, for Clementina. 
Charming pleader! –––Yet, my dear Mrs. Shirley, I
fear her reasonings are romantic ones. Our Harriet,
you know, was always a little tinctured with Heroism; 
and she goes back in her mind to the time that
she thought she could never be the wife of any other
man than my brother (tho' then hopeless that he
could be hers); and supposes Clementina in the same
situation. 
When I looked first, I dare say, he was giving her
an account of the conversation that passed an hour
ago, between him and Clementina. He had his arm
round her waist, sometimes pressing her to him as
they walked; sometimes standing still; and, on her
replies, raising her hand to his lips, with such tender
passion–––But here she comes. 
Harriet, if I am a witch, let Lucy know it. Here
–––read this last paragraph–––Have I guessed right at
your subject of discourse? –––You will tell me, you
say, in a Letter by itself–––Do so. 

