


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Selby-house, Wedn. Oct. 25.
Sir Charles came not this morning till we were
all assembled for breakfast. I had begun to think,
whether, if I had been Sir Charles, and he had been
Miss Byron, I would not have been here an hour before,
expecting the decision of the judges to whom a 

certain cause was referred. O my dear Lady G.!
how narrow minded I am, with all my quondam heroism! 
The knowlege of his past engagements with
the excellent Clementina, and of his earnest wishes
then to be hers, makes me, on every occasion that can
be tortured into an appearance of neglect or coldness,
so silly! —Indeed I am ashamed of myself. But all
my petulance was dispelled, the instant he shone upon
us. 
Well, my dear Ladies, said he, the moment he
took his place, whisperingly to my grandmamma (who
sat between my aunt and Lucy), Is sentence given? 
It is, Sir Charles—He took my hand, cross my
Nancy's lap, as she sat between him and me—I have
hopes, my dear Miss Byron [from the foolishness in
my looks, I suppose] that you are cast. 
Have patience, Sir, said I—It is well that the best
of us are not always to be our own carvers. 
He looked, Lucy said afterwards, with eyes of
love upon me, and of apprehension on his judges; 
and the discourse turned upon indifferent subjects. 
I retired as soon as breakfast was over; and he demanded
his sentence. 
My uncle was, as he called it, turned out of door
before my grandmamma gave your brother the paper. 
Sir Charles read it—You are not serious upon it,
Sir Charles, said my grandmamma. —I am infinitely
obliged to you, Ladies, replied he. I love to argue
with my dear Miss Byron: I must attend her, this
moment. 
He sent up Sally before him, and came up. I was
in my closet; and scrupled not to admit him. 
Henceforth, my dearest dear Miss Byron, said he,
the moment he approached me (as I stood up to receive
him) I salute you undoubtedly mine—And he
saluted me with ardor—I knew not which way to
look—So polite a Lover, as I thought him! —Yet
never man was so gracefully free! —It remains now, 

madam, proceeded he, still holding my hand, to put
to trial your goodness to me [You have done that already,
thought I!] in the great question, by which I
am to conduct myself for the next week, or ten days. 
Week or ten days, thought I! Surely, Sir, you are
an incroacher. 
You see, Sir, said I, when a little recovered, what
judges who, on such points as these, cannot err, have
determined. 
Yes, they can, interrupted he: As Ladies, they are
parties—But I submit. Their judgment must be a
law to me—I will go up to town, as they advise. I
cannot, however, be long absent from you. When I
return, I will not put up at a public place. Either
your uncle, or your grandmother, must allow me to be
their guest. This will oblige you, I hope, even for
dear punctilio sake, to honour me with your hand very
soon after my return. 
He paused: I was silent. His first address had put me
out. Remember, madam, I said, resumed he, that I
cannot be long absent: You are above being governed
by mere punctilio. Add to the obligations your generous
acceptance of me has laid me under—Why sighs
my Angel? [It was, my dear Lady G. an involuntary
sigh!] —For the world, I would not give you either
sensible or lasting pain. But if the same circumstances
would make your nomination of a day as painful to
you, some time hence, as now, then bless me with as
early a day as you can give me, to express myself in
the words of my judges. 
This, Sir, said I (but I hesitated, and looked down)
is one of the solemn points which precede one of the
most solemn circumstances of my life. You seem
more in earnest for an early day than I could have expected. 
When I have declared that affectation has no
part in the more distant compliance, I may be allowed,
by the nicest of my own Sex, to lay open to a man so
generous, tho' so precipitating, my whole heart. Indeed, 

Sir, it is wholly yours—I blushed, as I felt,
and turned away my face. It was a free declaration:
But I was resolved to banish affectation. He bowed
profoundly on my hand, and kissed it. Gratitude
looked out in his eyes, and appeared in his graceful
manner, tho' attentively silent. 
You was my deliverer, proceeded I. An esteem
founded on gratitude, the object so meritorious, ought
to set me above mere forms—Our judges say, that you
have the advantage in the argument. 
I will lay no stress, madam, on this part of their
judgment in my favour—To your goodness, and to
that so nobly-acknowleged esteem, I wholly refer myself. 
I myself think, proceeded I, that you have the advantage
in the argument—All that is in my power, I
would wish to do, to oblige you— 
Condescending goodness! —Again he bowed on my
hand. 
Do you think, Sir— 
Why hesitates my Love? 
Do you think, six weeks— 
Six ages, my dearest, dearest creature? —Six weeks! 
For Heaven's sake, madam—He looked, he spoke,
impatience. 
What can a woman, who has owned your title to
expect to be obliged, say? —Let me, at least, ask (and
I unaffectedly hesitated) a month, Sir—from this day— 
And that you will acknowlege yourself not perversely
or weakly treated. 
He dropt on one knee, and kissing my hand, once,
twice, thrice, with rapture, Within the month! then
I hope—I cannot live a month from you—Allow me
to return in the first fortnight of the month— 
O Sir! and take up your residence with us, on your
return? 
Undoubtedly, madam. —Consider, Sir—Do you
also, dearest madam, consider; and banish me not
from you for so very long a time. 

My heart wanted, I thought, to oblige him; but to
allow him to return sooner, as he was to take up his
abode with us, what was that, but, in effect, complying
with his first proposal? 
Permit me, Sir, to retire. Indeed you are too urgent. 
He asked my excuse; but declared, that he would
not give up his humble plea (humble he called it) unless
my grandmamma and aunt told him, that he
ought. 
On his leaving me to return to company below, he
presented me with four little boxes. Accept, my beloved
Miss Byron, said he, of these trifles. I received
them not till this morning. While I had the Day to
hope from you, my heart would not suffer me to offer
them, lest you should suspect me mean enough to
imagine an influence from them. I oblige myself by
the tender, and I comply with custom, which I am
fond of doing, whenever I can innocently do it. But
I know, that you, my dear Miss Byron, value the
heart more than a thousand times the value of these— 
Mine, madam, is yours, and will be yours to the end
of my life. 
What could I say? —My heart, on recollection, reproaches
me for my ungraceful acceptance. I courtesied. 
I was silly. Sir Charles Grandison only can
be present to every occasion. 
He looked as if my not refusing them was a favour
more than equivalent to the value of the presents. 
My dearest life! said he, on my putting them on my
toilette, how much you oblige me! —Shall I conduct
you to our friends below? Will you acquaint your
grandmamma and aunt with our debate, and my bold
expectation? 
I stood still. He took my hand, pressed it with his
lips, and, with a reverence more than usually profound,
as if he had received instead of conferred a favour,
withdrew. Never was a present so gracefully 

made! I cannot describe the grace with which he
made it. 
My uncle, it seems, as soon as he went down,
asked him, How we had settled the great affair? My
grandmamma and aunt in a breath, as he paid his
compliments to them, asked him, If their Harriet had
been good?—or, as good as he expected? 
Miss Byron, said he, has taken more time than I
could have wished she had. A month, she talks of. 
Has she complied so far? said my grandmamma. 
I am glad of it. I was afraid she would have insisted
upon more time—So was I, said my aunt. But who
can withstand Sir Charles Grandison? Has the dear
girl given you the very day, Sir? 
No, madam. If she had, I should have hoped it
would have been considerably within the month. As
yet, Ladies, I hope it will. 
Nay, Sir Charles, if you are not pleased with a
month, said my aunt—Hush, dear Ladies! —Here
comes the Angel. —Not a word, I beseech you, on
that side of the question—She will think, if you applaud
her, that she has consented to too short a term— 
You must not make her uneasy with herself. 
Does not this look as if he imagined there was
room for me to be so? —I almost wish—I don't know
what I wish; except I could think but half so well of
myself as I do of him: For then should I look forward
with less pain in my joy than now too often
mingles with it. 
Your brother excused himself from dining with us:
That Greville has engaged him. Why would he permit
himself to be engaged by him? Greville cannot
love him: He can only admire him, and that everybody
does, who has been but once in his company. 
Miss Orme, even Miss Orme, is in Love with him. 
I received a note from her while your brother was with
us. These are the contents: 


Dear Miss Byron,
I am in Love with your young Baronet. It is well
that your Beauty and your Merit secure you, and
make every other woman hopeless. To see and know
Miss Byron, is half the cure, unless a woman were
presumption itself. O my poor brother! —But will
you let me expect you, and as many of the dear family
as you can bring, at breakfast to-morrow morning? 
—Sir Charles Grandison, of course. Shew your
own obligingness to me, and your power over him, at
the same time. Your cousin Holles's will be with me,
and three sister-toasts of York; besides that Miss
Clarkson of whose Beauty and Agreeableness you have
heard me talk. They long to see you. You may
come. Poor things! how will they be mortified! If
any one of them can allow herself to be less lovely
than the others, she will be least affected by your superiority. 
But let me tell you, that Miss Clarkson,
had she the intelligence in her eyes that Somebody
else has, and the dignity with the ease, would be as
charming a young woman. But we are all prepared,
I to love, they to admire, your gentleman. Pray,
pray, my dear, bring him, or the disappointment will
kill 
Your Kitty Orme. 

Lucy, acquainting Sir Charles with the invitation,
asked him, If he would oblige Miss Orme. He was
at our command, he said—So we shall breakfast tomorrow
at The Park. 
But I am vexed at his dining from us to-day. So
little time to stay with us! I wish him to be complaisant
to Mr. Greville; but need he be so very obliging? 
There are plots laying for his company all over the
county. We are told, there is to be a numerous
assembly, all of gentlemen, at Mr. Greville's. Mr. 

Greville humorously declares, that he hates all women, for the sake of one. 
* *
We have just opened the boxes. O my dear Lady
G.! your brother is either very proud, or his fortune
is very high! Does he not say, that he always consults
fortune, as well as degree, in matters of outward
appearance? He has not, in these presents, I am sure,
consulted either the fortune or degree of your Harriet
—Of your happy Harriet, I had like to have written:
But the word happy, in this place, would have looked
as if I thought these jewels an addition to my happiness. 
How does his bounty insult me, on my narrow
fortune! —Narrow, unless he submit to accept of the
offered contributions of my dear friends—Contributions! 
—Proud Harriet! how art thou, even in thy
exaltation, humbled! —Trifies, he called them! The
very ornamenting one's self with such toys, may, in
his eye, be thought trifling, tho' he is not above complying
with the fashion, in things indifferent: But, the
cost and beauty of these jewels considered, they are
not trifles. The jewel of jewels, however, is his
heart! How would the noble Clementina—Hah, Pen! 
Heart, rather, Why, why, just now, this check of
Clemertina? —I know why—Not from want of admiration
of her; but when I am allowing my heart
to open, then does—Something here, in my inmost
bosom [Is it Conscience?] strike me, as if it said, Ah,
Harriet! —Triumph not; rejoice not! Check the
overflowings of thy grateful heart! —Art thou not an
invader of another's rights? 

