



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Saturday Evening. 
Mr. Lovelace has seen divers apartments at Windsor; 
but not one, he says, that he thought fit for
me, and which at the same time answered my description. 
He has been very solicitous to keep to the Letter of
my instructions: Which looks well: And the better
I liked him, as, altho' he proposed that town, he came
back, dissuading me from it: For he said, that, in his
journey from thence, he had thought Windsor, altho'
of his own proposal, a wrong choice; because I coveted
privacy, and that was a place generally visited and admired (a) . 
I told him, that if Mrs. Sorlings thought me not an
incumbrance, I would be willing to stay here a little
longer; provided he would leave me, and go to Lord
M's, or to London, which-ever he thought best. 
He hoped, he said, that he might suppose me absolutely
safe from the insults or attempts of my Brother; 
and therefore, if it should make me easier, he would
obey, for a few days at least. 
He again proposed to send for Hannah. I told him
I designed to do so, thro' you—And shall I beg of you,
my dear, to cause the honest creature to be sent to? 
Your faithful Robert, I think, knows where she is. 
Perhaps she will be permitted to quit her place directly,
by allowing a month's wages, which I will repay her. 

He took notice of the serious humour he found me
in, and of the redness of my eyes. I had just been
answering your Letter; and had he not approached
me, on his coming off his journey, in a very respectful
manner; had he not made an unexceptionable report
of his enquiries, and been so ready to go from
me, at the very first word; I was prepared (notwithstanding
the good terms we parted upon when he set
out for Windsor) to have given him a very unwelcome
reception: For the contents of your last Letter
had so affected me, that the moment I saw him, I beheld
with indignation the seducer, who had been the
cause of all the evils I suffer, and have suffered. 
He hinted to me, that he had received a Letter from
Lady Betty, and another (as I understood him) from
one of the Miss Montagues. If they take notice of me
in them, I wonder that he did not acquaint me with
the contents. I am afraid, my dear, that his relations
are among those, who think I have taken a rash and
inexcuseable step. It is not to my credit to let even
them know, how I have been frighted out of myself: 
And yet perhaps they would hold me unworthy of their
alliance, if they were to think my flight a voluntary
one. O my dear, how uneasy to us are our reflections
upon every doubtful occurrence, when we know
we have been prevailed upon to do a wrong thing! 
Sunday Morning. 
&dotup;Ah! this man, my dear! We have had warmer
dialogues than ever yet we have had. At fair argument,
I find I need not fear him (a) : But he is
such a wild, such an ungovernable creature [He reformed!]
that I am half-afraid of him. 
&dotup;He again, on my declaring myself uneasy at his
stay with me here, proposed that I would put myself
into Lady Betty's protection; assuring me that he
thought he could not leave me at Mrs. Sorling's, 

with safety to myself. And upon my declining to
do that, for the reasons I gave you in my last (a) ,
he urged me to make a demand of my Estate. 
&dotup;He knew it, I told him, to be my resolution not
to litigate with my Father. 
&dotup;Nor would he put me upon it, he replied, but
as the last thing. But if my spirit would not permit
me to be obliged, as I called it, to any-body; and
yet if my relations would refuse me my own; he
knew not how I could keep up that spirit, without
being put to inconveniences, which would give him
infinite concern—Unless—unless—unless, he said,
hesitating, as if afraid to speak out—Unless I would
take the only method I could take, to obtain the possession
of my own. 
&dotup;What is that, Sir? 
&dotup;Sure the man saw by my looks, when he came
with his creeping Unless's, that I guessed what he
meant. 
&dotup;Ah! Madam, can you be a loss to know what
that method is? —They will not dispute with a man
that right which they would contest with you. 
&dotup;Why said he, with a man, instead of with him? 
Yet he looked as if he wanted to be encouraged to
say more. 
&dotup;So, Sir, you would have me employ a Lawyer,
would you, notwithstanding what I have ever declared,
as to litigating with my Father? 
&dotup;No, I would not, my dearest Creature, snatching
my hand, and pressing it with his lips—except you
would make me the Lawyer. 
&dotup;Had he said me at first, I should have been above
the affectation of mentioning a Lawyer. 
&dotup;I blushed. The man pursued not the subject so
ardently, but that it was more easy as well as more
natural to avoid it, than to fall into it. 
&dotup;Would to Heaven he might, without offending! 

—But I so over-awed him? —[Over-awed him— 
Your (a)  notion, my dear!] And so the over-awed,
bashful man went off from the subject, repeating his
proposal, that I would demand my own Estate, or
impower some man of the Law to demand it, if I
would not [he put in] impower a happier man to
demand it. But it could not be amiss, he thought,
to acquaint my two Trustees, that I intended to assume
it. 
&dotup;I should know better what to do, I told him, when
he was at a distance from me, and known to be so. 
I suppose, Sir, that if my Father propose my return,
and engage never to mention Solmes to me, nor
any other man, but by my consent, and I agree upon
that condition to think no more of you, you will acquiesce. 
&dotup;I was willing to try whether he had the regard to
all my previous declarations, which he pretended to
have to some of them. 
&dotup;He was struck all of a heap. 
&dotup;What say you, Mr. Lovelace? You know, all
you mean is for my good. Surely I am my own
mistress: Surely I need not ask your leave to make
what terms I please for myself, so long as I break none
with you? 
&dotup;He hemm'd twice or thrice. —Why, Madam, Why,
Madam, I cannot say—Then pausing—and rising
from his seat, with petulance; I see plainly enough,
said he, the reason why none of my proposals can be
accepted: At last I am to be a sacrifice to your Reconciliation with your implacable family. 
&dotup;It has always been your respectful way, Mr. Lovelace,
to treat my family in this free manner. But
pray, Sir, when you call others implacable, see that
you deserve not the same censure yourself. 
&dotup;He must needs say, there was no love lost between
some of my family and him; but he had not deserved
of them what they had of him. 

&dotup;Yourself being judge, I suppose, Sir? 
&dotup;All the world, you yourself, Madam, being judge. 
&dotup;Then, Sir, let me tell you, had you been less upon
your defiances, they would not have been irritated so
much against you. But nobody ever heard, that
avowed despite to the Relations of a person was a
proper courtship either to that person, or to her
friends. 
&dotup;Well, Madam, all that I know, is, that their malice
against me is such, that, if you determine to sacrifice
me, you may be reconciled when you please. 
&dotup;And all that I know, Sir, is, that if I do give my
Father the power of a negative, and he will be contented
with that, it will be but my duty to give it
him; and if I preserve one to myself, I shall break
thro' no obligation to you. 
&dotup;Your duty to your capricious Brother, not to your
Father, you mean, Madam. 
&dotup;If the dispute lay between my Brother and me at
first, surely, Sir, a Father may chuse which party he
will take. 
&dotup;He may, Madam—But that exempts him not from
blame for all that, if he take the wrong— 
&dotup;Different people will judge differently, Mr. Lovelace,
of the right and the wrong. You judge as you
please. Shall not others as they please? And who
has a right to controul a Father's judgment in his
own family, and in relation to his own child? 
&dotup;I know, Madam, there is no arguing with you. 
But nevertheless I had hoped to have made myself
some little merit with you, so as that I might not
have been the preliminary sacrifice to a Reconciliation. 
&dotup;Your hopes, Sir, had been better grounded, if
you had had my consent to my abandoning of my
Father's house— 
&dotup;Always, Madam, and for ever, to be reminded of
the choice you would have made of that damn'd
Solmes—rather than— 

&dotup;Not so hasty! Not so rash, Mr. Lovelace! I am
convinced, that there was no intention to marry me
to that Solmes on Wednesday. 
&dotup;So I am told they now give out, in order to justify
themselves at your expence. Every-body living,
Madam, is obliged to you for your kind thoughts,
but I. 
&dotup;Excuse me, good Mr. Lovelace [waving my hand,
and bowing] that I am willing to think the best of
my Father. 
&dotup;Charming Creature! said he, with what a bewitching
air is that said! —And with a vehemence
in his manner, would have snatched my hand. But
I withdrew it, being much offended with him. 
&dotup;I think, Madam, my sufferings for your sake might
have entitled me to some favour. 
&dotup;My sufferings, Sir, for your impetuous temper, set
against your sufferings for my sake, I humbly conceive,
leave me very little your debtor. 
&dotup;Lord! Madam, [assuming a drolling air] What
have you suffered! —Nothing but what you can easily
forgive. You have been only made a prisoner in your
Father's house, by the way of doing credit to your
judgment! —You have only had an innocent and
faithful servant turned out of your service, because
you loved her—You have only had your Sister's confident
servant set over you, with leave to teaze and
affront you!— 
&dotup;Very well, Sir! 
&dotup;You have only had an insolent Brother take upon
him to treat you like a slave, and as insolent a Sister
to undermine you in every-body's favour, on pretence
to keep you out of hands, which, if as vile as they
vilely report, are not, however, half so vile and cruel
as their own! 
&dotup;Go on, Sir, if you please! 
&dotup;You have only been persecuted, in order to oblige
you to have a sordid fellow, whom you have professed 

to hate, and whom every-body despises! The
Licence has been only got! The Parson has only been
had in readiness! The day, a near, a very near day,
has been only fixed! And you were only to be searched
for your correspondencies, and still closer confined,
till the day came, in order to deprive you of all means
of escaping the snare laid for you! —But all This you
can forgive! You can wish you had stood all This; 
inevitable as the compulsion must have been! —And
the man who, at the hazard of his life, has delivered
you from all these mortifications, is the only person
you cannot forgive! 
&dotup;Can't you go on, Sir? You see I have patience
to hear you. Can't you go on, Sir? 
&dotup;I can, Madam, with my sufferings: Which I confess
ought not to be mentioned, were I at last to be
rewarded in the manner I hoped. 
&dotup;Your sufferings then, if you please, Sir? 
&dotup;—Affrontingly forbidden your Father's house,
after encouragement given, without any reasons they
knew not before, to justify the prohibition: Forced
upon a rencounter I wished to avoid, the first I ever,
so provoked, wished to avoid: And that, because the
wretch was your Brother! 
&dotup;Wretch, Sir! —And my Brother! —This could be
from no man breathing, but from him before me! 
&dotup;Pardon me, Madam! —But oh! how unworthy to
be your Brother! —The quarrel grafted upon an old
one, when at College; he universally known to be
the aggressor; and revived for views equally sordid,
and injurious both to yourself and me—Giving life to
him, who would have taken away mine! 
&dotup;Your generosity THIS, Sir; not your sufferings: 
A little more of your sufferings, if you please! —I
hope you do not repent, that you did not murder my
Brother! 
&dotup;My private life hunted into! My morals decried! 
Some of the accusers not unfaulty! 

&dotup;That's an aspersion, Sir! 
&dotup;Spies set upon my conduct! One hired to bribe
my own servant's fidelity; perhaps to have poisoned
me at last, if the honest fellow had not— 
&dotup;Facts, Mr. Lovelace! —Do you want facts in the
display of your sufferings? —None of your Perhaps's,
I beseech you! 
&dotup;Menaces every day, and defiances, put into every
one's mouth against me! Forced to creep about in
disguises—and to watch all hours— 
&dotup;And in all weathers, I suppose, Sir—That I remember
was once your grievance! —In all weathers,
Sir (a) ! And all these hardships arising from yourself,
not imposed by me. 
&dotup;—Like a thief, or an eves-dropper, proceeded he: 
And yet neither by birth nor alliances unworthy of
their relation, whatever I may be and am of their
admirable Daughter: Of whom they, every one of
them, are at least as unworthy! —These, Madam, I
call sufferings: Justly call so; if at last I am to be
sacrificed to an imperfect Reconciliation—Imperfect,
I say: For can you expect to live so much as tolerably,
under the same roof, after all that is passed,
with that Brother and Sister? 
&dotup;O Sir, Sir! What sufferings have yours been! 
And all for my sake, I warrant! —I can never reward
you for them! —Never think of me more, I beseech
you—How can you have patience with me? —Nothing
has been owing to your own behaviour, I presume: 
Nothing to your defiances for defiances: Nothing to
your resolution declared more than once, that you
would be related to a family, which, nevertheless,
you would not stoop to ask a Relation of: Nothing,
in short, to courses which every-body blamed you for,
you not thinking it worth your while to justify yourself. 
Had I not thought you used in an ungentlemanly
manner, as I have heretofore told you, you had not 

had my notice by pen and ink (a) . That notice gave
you a supposed security, and you generously defied my
friends the more for it: And this brought upon me
(perhaps not undeservedly) my Father's displeasure; 
without which my Brother's private pique, and selfish
views, would have wanted a foundation to build
upon: So that for all that followed of my treatment,
and your redundant Only's, I might thank you
principally, as you may yourself for all your sufferings,
your mighty sufferings! —And if, voluble Sir, you
have founded any merit upon them, be so good as to
revoke it: And look upon me, with my forfeited
reputation, as the only sufferer—For what—Pray
hear me out, Sir, [for he was going to speak] have
you suffered in, but your pride? Your reputation
could not suffer: That it was beneath you to be solicitous
about. And had you not been an unmanageable
man, I should not have been driven to the extremity
I now every hour, as the hour passes, deplore
—With this additional reflection upon myself,
that I ought not to have begun, or, having begun,
not continued a correspondence with one, who
thought it not worth his while to clear his own character
for my sake, or to submit to my Father for
his own, in a point wherein every Father ought to
have an option.— 
&dotup;Darkness, light; Light, darkness; by my Soul! 
—Just as you please to have it. O Charmer of my
heart! snatching my hand, and pressing it between
both his, to his lips, in a strange wild way, Take
me, take me to yourself: Mould me as you please: 
I am wax in your hands: Give me your own impression; 
and seal me for ever yours—We were
born for each other! —You to make me happy, and
save a soul—I am all error, all crime. I see what I
ought to have done. But do you think, Madam, I
can willingly consent to be sacrificed to a partial Reconciliation, 

in which I shall be so great, so irreparable
a sufferer! —Any-thing but that—Include me
in your terms: Prescribe to me: Promise for me as
you please—Put a halter about my neck, and lead
me by it, upon condition of forgiveness on that disgraceful
penance, and of a prostration as servile, to
your Father's presence (your Brother absent); and I
will beg his consent at his feet, and bear any-thing
but spurning from him, because he is your Father. 
But to give you up upon cold conditions, D&wblank;n
me [said the shocking wretch] if I either will, or
can! 
&dotup;These were his words, as near as I can remember
them; for his behaviour was so strangely wild and
fervent, that I was perfectly frighted. I thought he
would have devoured my hand. I wished myself a
thousand miles distant from him. 
&dotup;I told him, I by no means approved of his violent
temper: He was too boisterous a man for my liking. 
I saw now, by the conversation that had passed, what
was his boasted regard to my Injunctions; and should
take my measures accordingly, as he should soon find. 
And with a half-frighted earnestness I desired him to
withdraw, and leave me to myself. 
&dotup;He obeyed; and that with extreme complaisance
in his manner, but with his complexion greatly
heightened, and a countenance as greatly dissatisfied. 
&dotup;But, on recollecting all that passed, I plainly see,
that he means not, if he can help it, to leave me to
the liberty of refusing him; which I had nevertheless
preserved a right to do; but looks upon me as
his, by a strange sort of obligation, for having run
away with me against my will. 
&dotup;Yet you see he but touches upon the edges of
matrimony neither. And that at a time generally,
when he has either excited one's passions or apprehensions; 
so that one cannot at once descend. But 

surely this cannot be his design. —And yet such
seemed to be his behaviour to my Sister (a) , when he
provoked her to refuse him, and so tamely submitted,
as he did, to her refusal. —But he dare not—What
can one say of so various a man? —I am now again
out of conceit with him. I wish I were fairly out
of his power. 
&dotup;He has sent up three times to beg admittance; 
in the two last, with unusual earnestness. But I
have sent him word I will first finish what I am
about. 
&dotup;What to do about going from this place, I cannot
tell. I could stay here with all my heart, as I
have said to him: The Gentlewoman and her Daughters
are desirous that I will; altho' not very convenient
for them, I believe, neither: But I see he will
not leave me, while I do—So I must remove somewhere. 
&dotup;I have long been sick of myself: And now I am
more and more so. But let me not lose your good
opinion. If I do, that loss will complete the misfortunes
of 
&dotup;Your
&dotup;Cl. Harlowe.&dotup; 