


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Friday, March 24. 
The conference, the impatiently-expected conference,
my Lucy, is over: And what is the
result? —Take the account of it, as it was brought
on, proceeded with, and concluded. Miss Grandison
and her Lovers were not our only subjects. I
will soon be with you, my dear. —But I'll try to be
as minute as I used to be, notwithstanding. 
Notwithstanding what?— 
You shall hear, Lucy. 
Sir Charles gave us his company at breakfast. He
entered with a kind of benign solemnity in his countenance,
but the benignity increased, and the solemnity
went off, after a little while. 
My Lord said, he was very sorry that he had met
with any-thing to disturb him, in the Letters that were
brought him yesterday. Emily joined by her eyes,
tho' not in speech, her concern with his Lordship's:
Miss Grandison was sedately serious: Lady L. had
expectation in her fine face; and Dr. Bartlett sat like
a man that was determined to be silent. I had apprehension,
and hope, I suppose, struggling in mine, as I
knew not whether to wish for the expected conference,
or not; my cheeks, as I felt, in a glow. 

Let us think of nothing, my Lord, in this company,
said he, but what is agreeable. 
He enquired kindly of my health and last night's
rest; because of a slight cold that had affected my
voice: Of Emily, Why she was so sad? Of Lady L.
and my Lord, When they went to town? Of Miss
Grandison, Why she looked so meditatingly? that
was his word—Don't you see, Miss Byron, said he,
that Charlotte looks as if she had not quite settled the
humour she intends to be in for the next half-hour? 
Charlotte looks, I believe, Sir, replied she, as if she
were determined to take her humour for the next
half-hour from yours, whether grave, or airy. 
Then, returned he, I will not be grave, because I
will not have you so. —May I hope, madam, by-and-by,
addressing himself to me, for the honour of
your hand, to my Lord's library? 
Sir, I will—I will—attend you—hesitated the simpleton,
but she can't tell how she looked. 
Thus, Lucy, was the matter brought on: 
He conducted me to my Lord's library. —How did
I struggle with myself for presence of mind! What a
mixture was there of tenderness and respect, in his
countenance and air! 
He seated me; then took his place over-against me. 
I believe I looked down, and conscious, and silly; 
but there was such a respectful modesty in his looks,
that one could not be uneasy at being now-and-then,
with an air of languor, as I thought, contemplated by
him: Especially as, whenever I reared my eye-lids to
cast a momentary look at him as he spoke, I was always
sure to see his eye withdrawn: This gave more
freedom to mine, than it possibly otherwise could have
had. What a bold creature, Lucy, ought she to be,
who prefers a bold man! If she be not bold, how silly
must she look under his staring confident eye! How
must her want of courage add to his! and, of course,
to his self-consequence! 

Thus he began the subject we were to talk of. 
I will make no apology for requesting the favour
of this conference with one of the most frank and
open-hearted young Ladies in the world: I shall have
the honour, perhaps, of detaining your ear on more
than one subject [How my heart throbbed!] But that
which I shall begin with, relates to my Lord G. and
our sister Charlotte. I observe, from hints thrown out
by herself, as well as from what Lady L. said, that
she intends to encourage his addresses; but it is easy
to see, that she thinks but slightly of him. I am indeed
apprehensive, that she is rather induced to favour
my Lord, from an opinion that he has my interest and
good wishes, than from her own inclination. I have
told her, more than once, that hers are, and shall be,
mine: But such is her vivacity, that it is very difficult
for me to know her real mind. I take it for granted,
that she prefers my Lord to Sir Walter. 
I believe, Sir—But why should I say believe, when
Miss Grandison has commissioned me to own, that Lord
G. is a man whom she greatly prefers to Sir Walter
Watkyns. 
Does she, can she, do you think, madam, prefer
Lord G. not only to Sir Walter, but to all the men
whom she at present knows? In other words, Is there
any man that you think she would prefer to Lord G.? 
I am extremely sollicitous for my sister's happiness; 
and the more, because of her vivacity, which, I am
afraid, will be thought less to become the wife, than
the single woman. 
I dare say, Sir, that if Miss Grandison thought of
any other man in preference to Lord G. she would not
encourage his addresses, upon any account. 
I don't expect, madam, that a woman of Charlotte's
spirit and vivacity, who has been disappointed
by a failure of supposed merit in her first Love (if we
may so call it), should be deeply in love with a
man that has not very striking qualities. She can play 

with a flame now, and not burn her fingers. Lord G.
is a worthy, tho' not a very brilliant man. Ladies
have eyes; and the eye expects to be gratified. Hence
men of appearance succeed often, where men of intrinsic
merit fail. Were Charlotte to consult her happiness,
possibly she would have no objection to Lord
G. She cannot, in the same man, have every-thing. 
But if Lord G. consulted his, I don't know whether
he would wish for Charlotte. Excuse me, madam; 
you have heard, as well as she, my opinion of both
men. Sir Walter, you say, has no part in the question; 
Lord G. wants not understanding: He is a
man of probity; he is a virtuous man; a quality not
to be despised in a young nobleman: He is also a mild
man: He will bear a great deal. But contempt, or
such a behaviour as should look like contempt, in a
wife, what husband can bear? I should much more
dread, for her sake, the exasperated spirit of a meek
man; than the sudden gusts of anger of a passionate
one. 
Miss Grandison, Sir, has authorized me to say,
That if you approve of Lord G.'s addresses, and will
be so good as to take upon yourself the direction of
every-thing relating to settlements, she will be entirely
governed by you. Miss Grandison, Sir, has known
Lord G. some time: His good character is well
known: And I dare answer, that she will acquit herself
with honour and prudence, in every engagement,
but more especially in that which is the highest of all
worldly ones. 
Pray, madam, may I ask, If you know what she
could mean by the questions she put in relation to Mr.
Beauchamp? I think she has never seen him. Does
she suppose, from his character, that she could prefer
him to Lord G.? 
I believe, Sir, what she said in relation to that gentleman,
was purely the effect of her vivacity, and
which she never thought of before, and, probably, 

never will again. Had she meant any-thing by it, I
dare say, she would not have put the questions about
him in the manner she did. 
I believe so. I love my sister, and I love my friend. 
Mr. Beauchamp has delicacy. I could not bear, for
her sake, that, were she to behold him in the light
hinted at, he should imagine he had reason to think
slightly of my sister, for the correspondence she carried
on, in so private a manner, with a man absolutely
unworthy of her. But I hope she meant nothing, but
to give way to that vein of raillery, which, when
opened, she knows not always how to stop. 
My spirits were not high: I was forced to take out
my handkerchief—O my dear Miss Grandison! said I,
I was afraid she had forfeited, partly, at least, what
she holds most dear, the good opinion of her brother! 
Forgive me, madam; 'tis a generous pain that I
have made you suffer: I adore you for it. But I think
I can reveal all the secrets of my heart to you. Your
noble frankness calls for equal frankness: You would
inspire it, where it is not. My sister, as I told her
more than once in your hearing, has not lost any of
my love. I love her, with all her faults; but must
not be blind to them. Shall not praise and dispraise
be justly given? I have faults, great faults, myself:
What should I think of the man who called them
virtues? How dangerous would it be to me, in that
case, were my opinion of his judgment, joined to self-partiality,
to lead me to believe him, and acquit myself? 
This, Sir, is a manner of thinking worthy of Sir
Charles Grandison. 
It is worthy of every man, my good Miss Byron. 
But, Sir, it would be very hard, that an indiscretion
(I must own it to be such) should fasten reproach
upon a woman who recovered herself so soon, and
whose virtue was never sullied, or in danger. 
Indeed it would: And therefore it was in tenderness 

to her that I intimated, that I never could think
of promoting an alliance with a man of his nice notions,
were both to incline to it. 
I hope, Sir, that my dear Miss Grandison will run
no risque of being slighted, by any other man, from a
step which has cost her so dear in her peace of mind— 
I hesitated, and looked down. 
I know, madam, what you mean. Altho' I love
my friend Beauchamp above all men, yet would I do
Lord G. or any other man, as much justice, as I would
do him. I was so apprehensive of my sister's indifference
to Lord G. and of the difference in their tempers,
tho' both good, that I did my utmost to dissuade
him from thinking of her: And when I found that
his love was fixed beyond the power of dissuasion, I
told him of the affair between her and Captain Anderson; 
and how lately I had put an end to it. He
flattered himself, that the indifference, with which she
had hitherto received his addresses, was principally
owing to the difficulty of her situation; which being
now so happily removed, he had hopes of meeting
with encouragement; and doubted not, if he did, of
making a merit with her, by his affection and gratitude. 
And now, madam, give me your opinion— 
Do you think Charlotte can be won (I hope she can)
by indulgence, by Love? Let me caution her by you,
madam, that it is fit she should still more restrain herself,
if she marry a man to whom she thinks she has
superior talents, than she need to do if the difference
were in his favour. 
Permit me to add, That if she should shew herself
capable of returning slight for tenderness; of taking
such liberties with a man who loves her, after she had
given him her vows, as should depreciate him, and, of
consequence, herself, in the eye of the world; I should
be apt to forget that I had more than one sister: For,
in cases of right and wrong, we ought not to know
either relation or friend. 

Does not this man, Lucy, shew us, that goodness
and greatness are synonymous words? 
I think, Sir, replied I, that if Lord G. prove the
good-natured man he seems to be; if he dislike not
that brilliancy of temper in his Lady, which he seems
not to value himself upon, tho' he may have qualities,
at least, equally valuable; I have no doubt but Miss
Grandison will make him very happy: For has she
not great and good qualities? Is she not generous, and
perfectly good natured? You know, Sir, that she is. 
And can it be supposed, that her charming vivacity
will ever carry her so far beyond the bounds of prudence
and discretion, as to make her forget what the
nature of the obligation she will have entered into,
requires of her? 
Well, madam, then I may rejoice the heart of
Lord G. by telling him, that he is at liberty to visit
my sister, at her coming to town; or, if she come
not soon (for he will be impatient to wait on her) at
Colnebrooke? 
I dare say you may, Sir. 
As to articles and settlements, I will undertake for
all those things: But be pleased to tell her, that she
is absolutely at her own liberty, for me. If she shall
think, when she sees farther of Lord G.'s temper and
behaviour, that she cannot esteem him as a wife ought
to esteem her husband; I shall not be concerned, if
she dismiss him; provided that she keeps him not on
in suspense, after she knows her own mind; but behaves
to him according to the example set her by the
best of women. 
I could not but know to whom he designed this
compliment; and had like to have bowed, but was glad
I did not. 
Well, madam, and now I think this subject is concluded. 
I have already written a Letter to Sir Walter,
as at the request of my sister, to put an end, in the
civillest terms, to his hopes. My Lord G. will be 

impatient for my return to town. I shall go with the
more pleasure, because of the joy I shall be able to
give him. 
You must be very happy, Sir, since, besides the
pleasure you take in doing good for its own sake, you
are intitled to partake, in a very high manner, of the
pleasures of every-one you know. 
He was so nobly modest, Lucy, that I could talk
to him with more confidence than I believed, at my
entrance into my Lord's study, would fall to my share:
And I had, besides, been led into a presence of mind,
by being made a person of some consequence in the
Love-case of another: But I was soon to have my
whole attention engaged in a subject still nearer to my
heart; as you shall hear. 
Indeed, madam, said he, I am not very happy in
myself. Is it not right, then, to endeavour, by promoting
the happiness of others, to intitle myself to a
share of theirs? 
If you are not happy, Sir—and I stopt. I believe I
sighed; I looked down: I took out my handkerchief,
for fear I should want it. 
There seems, said he, to be a mixture of generous
concern, and kind curiosity, in one of the loveliest
and most intelligent faces in the world. My sisters
have, in your presence, expressed a great deal of the
latter. Had I not been myself in a manner uncertain,
as to the event that must, in some measure, govern
my future destiny, I would have gratified it; especially
as my Lord L. has, of late, joined in it. The
crisis, I told them, however, as perhaps you remember,
was at hand. 
I do remember you said so, Sir. And indeed,
Lucy, it was more than perhaps. I had not thought
of any words half so often, since he spoke them. 
The crisis, madam, is at hand: And I had not intended
to open my lips upon the subject till it was
over, except to Dr. Bartlett, who knows the whole 

affair, and indeed every affair of my life: But, as I
hinted before, my heart is opened by the frankness of
yours. If you will be so good as to indulge me, I
will briefly lay before you a few of the difficulties of
my situation; and leave it to you to communicate or
not, at your pleasure, what I shall relate to my two
sisters and Lord L. You four seem to be animated by
one soul. 
I am extremely concerned, Sir—I am very much
concerned—repeated the trembling simpleton [one
cheek feeling to myself very cold, the other glowingly
warm, by turns; and now pale, now crimson, perhaps 
to the eye] that any-thing should make you unhappy. 
But, Sir, I shall think myself favoured by your
confidence. 
I am interrupted in my recital of his affecting narration. 
Don't be impatient, Lucy: I almost wish I
had not myself heard it. 

