


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Urged thus by every one, What I had further
in my thoughts to say, resumed I, was from
what I read in my Bible. The first man seems to have
had an intuitive knowlege given him of almost all that
concerned him to know: And his early descendants,
while there was but one language, and long before the
Greek and Roman sages existed, understood Husbandry
and Musick, were Artificers in Brass and Iron, built
that surprising naval structure the Ark; attempted a
yet greater piece of architecture, the Tower of Babel; 
and therefore must have had skill in many other parts
of science which are not particularly mentioned. 
And so, Madam, you really seem to think, that the
knowlege we gather from the great antients is hardly
worth the pains we take in acquiring the languages in
which they wrote? 

Not so, Sir. I have great respect even for linguists:
Do we not owe to them the translation of the Sacred
Books? —But methinks I could wish that such a distinction
should be made between language and science, as
should convince me, that That confusion of tongues,
which was intended for a punishment of presumption
in the early ages of the world, should not be thought
to give us our greatest glory in these more enlightened
times. 
Well, Madam, ladies must be treated as ladies. 
But I shall have great pleasure, on my return to Oxford,
in being able to acquaint my learned friends, that
they must all turn fine gentlemen and laughers [Mr.
Reeves had smiled as well as the Baronet] and despise
the great antients as men of straw, or very shortly they
will stand no chance in the ladies favour. 
Good Mr. Walden! Good Mr. Walden! laughed
the Baronet, shaking his embroider'd sides, let me,
let me, beg your patience, while I tell you, that the
young gentlemen at both Universities are already in
more danger of becoming fine gentlemen than fine
scholars—And then again he laughed; and looking
round him, bespoke, in his usual way, a laugh from
the rest of the company. 
Mr. Reeves, a little touch'd at the scholar's reference
to him, in the word laughers, said, It were to be
wish'd, that in all nurseries of learning, the manners
of youth were proposed as the principal end. It is too
known a truth, said he, that the attention paid to languages
has too generally swallowed up all other and
more important considerations; insomuch that sound
morals and good breeding themselves are obliged to
give way to that which is of little moment, but as it
promotes and inculcates those. And learned men, I
am persuaded, if they dared to speak out, would not
lay so much stress upon languages as you seem to do,
Mr. Walden. 
Learning here, reply'd Mr. Walden, a little peevishly, 

has not a fair tribunal to be try'd at. As it is said
of the advantages of birth or degree, so it may be said
of learning, No one despises it that has pretensions
to it. But proceed, Miss Byron, if you please. 
Very true, I believe, Sir, said I: But, on the other
hand, may not those who have either, or both, value
themselves too much on that account? I knew once
an excellent scholar, who thought, that too great a portion
of life was bestowed in the learning of languages; 
and that the works of many of the antients were more
to be admired for the stamp which antiquity has fixed
upon them, and for the sake of their purity in languages
that cannot alter (and whose works are therefore
become the standard of those languages) than for
the lights obtained from them by men of genius, in
ages that we have reason to think more enlightened,
as well by new discoveries as by revelation. 
And then I was going to ask, Whether the reputation
of learning was not often acquir'd by skill in
those branches of science, which principally serve for
amusement to inquisitive and curious minds, than by
that in the more useful sort: But Mr. Walden broke
in upon me with an air that had severity in it. 
I could almost wish, said he (and but almost, as you
are a lady) that you knew the works of the great antients
in their original languages. 
Something, said Miss Clements, should be left for
men to excel in. I cannot but approve of Mr. Walden's
word almost. 
She then whisper'd me; Pray, Miss Byron, proceed
(for she saw me a little out of countenance at Mr.
Walden's severe air)—Strange, added she, still whispering,
that people who know least how to argue
should be most disputatious. Thank Heaven, all
scholars are not like this. 
A little encouraged, Pray, Sir, said I, let me ask
one question—Whether you do not think, that our
Milton, in his Paradise Lost, shews himself to be a 

very learned man? And yet that work is written
wholly in the language of his own country, as the
works of Homer and Virgil were in the language of
theirs:—And they, I presume, will be allowed to be
learned men. 
Milton, Madam, let me tell you, is infinitely obliged
to the great antients; and his very frequent allusions
to them, and his knowlege of their mythology,
shew that he is. 
His knowlege of their mythology, Sir! —His own
subject so greatly, so nobly, so divinely, above that
mythology! —I have been taught to think, by a very
learned man, that it was a condescension in Milton to
the taste of persons of more reading than genius in
the age in which he wrote, to introduce so often as he
does, his allusions to the pagan mythology: And that
he neither raised his sublime subject, nor did credit to
his vast genius, by it. 
Mr. Addison, said Mr. Walden, is a writer admired
by the ladies. Mr. Addison, Madam, as you will
find in your Spectators [Sneeringly he spoke this] gives
but the second place to Milton, on comparing some
passages of his with some of Homer. 
If Mr. Addison, Sir, has not the honour of being
admired by the gentlemen, as well as the ladies, I dare
say Mr. Walden will not allow, that his authority
should decide the point in question: And yet, as I
remember, he greatly extols Milton. —But I am going
out of my depth—Only permit me to say one thing
more—If Homer is to be preferred to Milton, he
must be the sublimest of writers; and Mr. Pope, admirable
as his translation of the Iliad is said to be,
cannot have done him justice. 
You seem, Madam, to be a very deep English
scholar. But say you this from your own observation,
or from that of any other? 
I readily own, that my lights are borrowed, reply'd
I, I owe the observation to my Godfather Mr. Deane. 

He is a scholar; but a greater admirer of Milton than
of any of the antients. A gentleman, his particular
friend, who was as great an admirer of Homer, undertook
from Mr. Pope's translation of the Iliad, to
produce passages that in sublimity exceeded any in the
Paradise Lost. The gentlemen met at Mr. Deane's
house, where I then was. They allowed me to be
present; and this was the issue: The gentleman went
away convinced, that the English poet as much excelled
the Grecian in the grandeur of his sentiments,
as his subject, founded on the Christian system, surpasses
the pagan. 
The debate, I have the vanity to think, said Mr.
Walden, had I been a party in it, would have taken
another turn. 
The Baronet expressed himself highly delighted with
me, and was running over with the praises he had
heard given me at last Northampton races; when I endeavoured
to stop him by saying, Surely, Sir, it must
be your too low opinion of the qualifications of our
sex, that can induce you to think such obvious remarks
as I have been drawn in to make, at all considerable. 
But this hindered not Sir Hargrave from being even
noisy in his applauses. He would have it, that I must
know a vast deal, because I happened to touch upon
some things that had not taken his attention. He
drowned the voice of Mr. Walden, who two or three
times was earnest to speak; but not finding himself
heard, drew up his mouth as if to a contemptuous
whistle, shrugg'd his shoulders, and sat collected in
his own conscious worthiness: His eyes, however,
were often cast upon the pictures that hung round the
room, as much better objects than the living ones before
him. 
But what extremely disconcerted me was a freedom
of Miss Barnevelt's; taken upon what I last said, and
upon Mr. Walden's hesitation, and Sir Hargrave's applauses:
She profess'd that I was able to bring her own 

sex into reputation with her. Wisdom, as I call it, said
she, notwithstanding what you have modestly alleged to
depreciate your own, proceeding thro' teeth of ivory,
and lips of coral, give a grace to every word. And
then clasping one of her mannish arms round me,
she kissed my cheek. 
I was surpris'd, and offended; and with the more
reason, as Sir Hargrave, rising from his seat, declared,
that since merit was to be approved in that manner,
he thought himself obliged to follow so good an
example. 
I stood up, and said, Surely, Sir, my compliance
with the request of the company, too much I fear at my
own expence, calls rather for civility than freedom,
from a gentleman. I beg, Sir Hargrave—There I
stopt; and I am sure look'd greatly in earnest. 
He stood suspended till I had done speaking; and
then, bowing, sat down again; but, as Mr. Reeves
told me afterwards, he whisper'd a great oath in his
ear, and declared, that he beheld with transport his
future wife; and cursed himself if he would ever
have another; vowing, in the same whisper, that
were a thousand men to stand in his way, he would
not scruple any means to remove them. 
Miss Barnevelt only laughed at the freedom she had
taken with me. She is a loud and fearless laugher. 
She hardly knows how to smile: For as soon as any
thing catches her fancy, her voice immediately bursts
her lips, and widens her mouth to its full extent. — 
Forgive me, Lucy. I believe I am spiteful. 
Lady Betty and Miss Clements, in low voices,
praised me for my presence of mind, as they called
it, in checking Sir Hargrave's forwardness. 
Just here, Lucy, I laid down my pen, and stept to
the glass, to see whether I could not please myself
with a wise frown or two; at least with a solemnity of
countenance, that, occasionally, I might dash with it
my childishness of look; which certainly encouraged 

this freedom of Miss Barnevelt. But I could not
please myself. My muscles have never been used to
any-thing but smiling: So favoured, so beloved, by
every one of my dear friends; an heart so grateful for
all their favours—How can I learn now to frown; or
even long to look grave? 
All this time the scholar sat uneasily-careless. Can
you connect together, my Lucy, two ideas so very
different as these two words joined will give you? 
In the mean time Mr. Reeves having sent for, from
his study, Bishop Burnet's History of his own Times,
said he would, by way of moderatorship in the present
debate, read them a passage, to which he believed
all parties would subscribe: And then read what
I will transcribe for you from the conclusion to that
performance: 
‘I have often thought it a great error to waste
young gentlemens years so long in learning Latin,
by so tedious a grammar. I know those who are
bred to the profession in literature, must have the
Latin correctly; and for that the rules of grammar
are necessary: But these rules are not at all requisite
to those, who need only so much Latin, as thoroughly
to understand and delight in the Roman authors
and poets. But suppose a youth had, either for want
of memory, or of application, an incurable aversion
to Latin, his education is not for that to be despaired
of: There is much noble knowlege to be had in
the English and French languages: Geography,
History, chiefly that of our own country, the knowlege
of Nature, and the more practical parts of the
Mathematics (if he has not a genius for the demonstrative)
may make a gentleman very knowing, tho'
he has not a word of Latin’ [And why, I would
fain know, said Mr. Reeves, not a gentlewoman?]. 
‘There is a fineness of thought, and a nobleness of
expression, indeed, in the Latin authors’ [This makes
for your argument, Mr. Walden] ‘that will make 

them the entertainment of a man's whole life, if he
once understands and reads them with delight’ [Very
well, said Mr. Walden!]: ‘But if this cannot be
attained to, I would not have it reckon'd that the
education of an ill Latin scholar is to be given
over.’ 
Thus far the Bishop. We all know, proceeded
Mr. Reeves, how well Mr. Locke has treated this
subject. And he is so far from discouraging the fair
sex from learning languages, that he gives us a method
in his Treatise of Education, by which a mother
may not only learn Latin herself, but be able to
teach it to her son. Be not therefore, ladies, ashamed
either of your talents or acquirements. Only take
care, you give not up any knowlege that is more
laudable in your sex, and more useful, for learning; 
and then I am sure, you will, you must, be the more
agreeable, the more suitable companions to men of
sense. Nor let any man have so narrow a mind as to
be apprehensive for his own prerogative, from a learned
woman. A woman who does not behave the better,
the more she knows, will make her husband uneasy,
and will think as well of herself, were she utterly illiterate; 
nor would any argument convince her of her
duty. Do not men marry with their eyes open? And
cannot they court whom they please? A conceited, a
vain mind in a woman cannot be hid. Upon the
whole, I think it may be fairly concluded, that the
more a woman knows, as well as a man, the wiser
she will generally be; and the more regard she will
have for a man of sense and learning. 
Here ended Mr. Reeves. Mr. Walden was silent; 
yet shrugg'd up his shoulders, and seemed unsatisfied. 
The conversation then took a more general turn, in
which every one bore part. Plays, Fashion, Dress,
and the Public Entertainments, were the subjects. 
Miss Cantillon, who had till now sat a little uneasy,
seemed resolved to make up for her silence: But did not 

shine at all where she thought herself most intitled to
make a figure. 
But Miss Clements really shone. Yet in the eye
of some people, what advantages has folly in a pretty
face, over even wisdom in a plain one? Sir Hargrave
was much more struck with the pert things, spoken
without fear or wit by Miss Cantillon, than with the
just observations that fell from the lips of Miss Clements. 
Mr. Walden made no great figure on these fashionable
subjects; no not on that of Plays: For he
would needs force into conversation, with a preference
to our Shakespeare, his Sophocles, his Euripides, his
Terence; of the merits of whose performances, except
by translations, no one present but Mr. Reeves
and himself could judge. 
Sir Hargrave spoke well on the subject of the reigning
fashions, and on modern dress, so much the foible
of the present age. 
Lady Betty and Mrs. Reeves spoke very properly of
the decency of dress, and propriety of fashions, as
well as of public entertainments. 
Miss Clements put in here also with advantage to
herself. 
Nor would Mr. Walden be excluded this topic. 
But, as the observations he made on it, went no deeper
than what it was presumed he might have had at second-hand,
he made a worse figure here, than he did
on his more favourite subject. He was, however,
heard, till he was for bringing in his Spartan jacket,
I forget what he called it, descending only to the knees
of the women, in place of hoops; and the Roman
toga for the men. 
My Uncle will be pleased to remember, that Mr.
Walden has given my letters the learned jaundice. 
Had not that gentleman been one of the company,
not a word of all this jargon would my Uncle have
had from his Harriet. And yet all I have said is but 

from common reading. And let me ask, why, because
we know but little, we are to be supposed to
know nothing? 
Miss Barnevelt broke in upon the scholar; but by
way of approbation of what he said; and went on
with subjects of heroism, without permitting him to
rally and proceed, as he seemed inclined to do. After
praising what he said of the Spartan and Roman
dresses, she fell to enumerating her heroes, both antient
and modern. Achilles, the savage Achilles,
charmed her. Hector was a good clever man, however. 
Yet she could not bear to think of his being
so mean as to beg for his life, tho' of her heroic
Achilles. He deserved for it, she said, to have his
corpse dragg'd round the Trojan walls at the wheels
of the victor's chariot. Alexander the Great was
her dear creature; and Julius Cæsar was a very pretty
fellow. These were Miss Barnevelt's antient heroes. 
Among the moderns, the great Scanderbeg, our Henry
V. Henry IV. of France, Charles XII. of Sweden,
and the great Czar Peter, who my Grandfather used
to say was worth them all, were her favourites. 
All this while honest Mr. Singleton had a smile at
the service of every speaker, and a loud laugh always
ready at the Baronet's service. 
Sir Hargrave seemed not a little pleased with the
honest man's complaisance; and always directed himself
to him, when he was disposed to be merry. 
Laughing, you know, my dear, is almost as catching
as gaping, be the subject ever so silly: And more
than once he shew'd by his eyes, that he could have
devoured Miss Cantillon for generally adding her affected
Te-he (twisting and bridling behind her fan) to
his louder Hah, hah, hah, hah. 
What a length have I run! How does this narrative
letter-writing, if one is to enter into minute and
characteristic descriptions and conversations, draw one
on! I will leave off for the present. Yet have not 

quite dismissed the company (tho' I have done with
the argument) that I thought to have parted with before
I concluded this letter. 
But I know I shall please my Uncle in the livelier
parts of it, by the handle they will give him against
me. My Grandmother and Aunt Selby will be pleased,
and so will you, my Lucy, with all I write, for the
writer's sake: Such is their and your partial love to 
Their ever-grateful
Harriet. 

