


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Saturday Night, Oct. 14.
Now, my dear Ladies L. and G. let me lay before
you, just as it happened, for your approbation,
or censure, all that has passed between the best
of men and your Harriet. Happy shall I be, if I can
be acquitted by his sisters. 
My grandmamma went home last night, but was
here before Sir Charles; yet he came a little after
Eleven. We were all in the great parlour when he
came. He addressed us severally with his usual politeness,
and my grandmother, particularly, with such an
air of reverence, as did himself credit, because of her
years and wisdom. 
We all congratulated him on what we had heard
from Mr. Fenwick. 
Mr. Greville and I, said he, are on very good
terms. When I have the presumption to think my self
a welcome guest, I am to introduce him as my
friend. Mr. Greville, tho' so long your neighbour,
modestly doubts his own welcome. 
Well he may, said my aunt Selby, after—No
afters, dear madam, if you mean any-thing that has
passed between him and me. 
He again addressed himself to me. I rejoice, Sir,
said I, that you have quieted so happily a spirit always
thought uncontroulable. 
You must tell me, madam, replied he, when I can
be allowed to introduce Mr. Greville to you? 

Shall I answer for my cousin, said Lucy? —I did
not, Sir Charles, think you such a designer. —You
were not, you know, to introduce Mr. Greville, till
you were assured of being yourself a very welcome
guest to my cousin. 
I own my plot, replied he: I had an intent to surprise
Miss Byron into an implied favour to myself. 
You need not, Sir Charles, thought I; take such a
method. 
On his taking very kind notice of my cousin James; 
Do you know, Sir Charles, said my uncle (whose joy,
when it overflows, seldom suffers the dear man to
consult seasonableness) that that boy is already in Love
with your Emily? —The youth blushed— 
I am obliged to every-body who loves my Emily. 
She is a favourite of Miss Byron—Must she not then
be a good girl? 
She is indeed a favourite, said I; and so great a
one, that I know not who can deserve her. 
I said this, lest Sir Charles should think (on a supposition
that my uncle meant something) that my
cousin had my countenance. 
Sir Charles then addressed himself to my grandmamma
and aunt, speaking low—I hope, Ladies, I
may be allowed in your presence to resume the conversation
of yesterday with Miss Byron? 
No, Sir Charles, answered my grandmamma, affecting
to look serious, that must not be. 
Must not be, madam! and he seemed surprised, and
affected too. My aunt was a little startled; but not
so much as she would have been, had she not known
the lively turns which that excellent parent sometimes
gives to subjects of conversation. 
Must not be, I repeat, Sir Charles: But I will not
suffer you to be long in suspense. We have always,
when proposals of this kind have been made, referred
ourselves to our Harriet. She has prudence: She has
gratitude. We will leave her and you together, when 

she is inclined to hear you on the interesting subject. 
I know I am right. Harriet is above disguises. She
will be obliged to speak for herself, when she has not
either her aunt or me to refer to. She and you are
not acquaintance of yesterday. You, Sir, I dare say,
will not be displeased with the opportunity— 
Neither Miss Byron nor I, madam, could wish for
the absence of two such parental relations. But this
reference I will presume to construe as a hopeful prognostic. 
May I now, through your mediation, madam
(to my aunt) hope for the opportunity of addressing
myself to Miss Byron? 
My aunt, taking me to the window, told me what
had passed. I was a little surprised at my grandmamma's
reference to myself only. I expostulated
with my aunt: It is plain, madam, that Sir Charles
expected not this compliment. 
Your grandmamma's motion surprised me a little,
my dear: It proceeded from the fulness of her joy:
She meant a compliment to you both: There is now
no receding. Let us withdraw together. 
What, madam, at his proposal? As if expecting to
be followed? —See how my uncle looks at me! 
Every one's eyes are upon me! —In the afternoon, if
it must be—as by accident. But I had rather you and
my grandmamma were to be present. I mean not to
be guilty of affectation to him: I know my own
heart, and will not disguise it. I shall want to refer
to you. I shall be silly: I dare not trust myself. 
I wish the compliment had not been made, replied
my aunt. But, my dear, come along with me. 
She went out. I followed her; a little reluctantly,
however; and Lucy tells me, that I looked so silly, as
was enough, of itself, to inform every-body of the intent
of my withdrawing, and that I expected Sir
Charles would follow me. 
She was very cruel, I told her; and in my case
would have looked as silly as I; while I should have
pitied her. 

I led to my closet. My aunt seating me there, was
going from me. Well, madam, and so I am to stay
here quietly, I suppose, till Sir Charles vouchsafes to
come? Would Clementina have done so? 
No hint to him of Clementina in this way, I
charge you: It would look ungrateful, and girlish. I
will introduce him to you— 
And stay with me, I hope, madam, when he is introduced. 
I tell you, Lady G. all my foibles. 
Away went my aunt; but soon returned, and with
her the man of men. 
She but turned herself round, and saw him take
my hand, which he did with a compliment that would
have made me proud at another time, and left us together. 
I was resolved then to assume all my courage, and,
if possible, to be present to myself. He was to himself; 
yet had a modesty and politeness in his manner,
which softened the dignity of his address. 
Some men, I fansy, would have begun with admiring,
or pretending to admire, the pieces of my own
workmanship, which you have seen hang there: But
not he. After another compliment made (as I presume,
to re-assure me) on my restored complexion
[I did indeed feel my face glow]; he spoke directly
to his subject. 
I need not, I am sure, said he, repeat to my dear
Miss Byron what I said yesterday, as to the delicacy
of my situation, with regard to what some would deem
a divided or double Love. I need not repeat to you
the very great regard I have, and ever shall have, for
the Lady abroad. Her merit, and your greatness of
mind, render any apology for so just a regard needless. 
But it may be necessary to say, what I can with truth
say, that I love not my own Soul better than I love
Miss Byron. You see, madam, I am wholly free,
with regard to that Lady—free by her own choice, by
her own will. —You see, that the whole family build 

a part of their happiness on the success of my address
to a Lady of my own country. Clementina's wish
always was, that I would marry; and only be careful,
that my choice should not disgrace the regard she
vouchsafed to own for me. Clementina, when she
has the pleasure of knowing the dear Lady before me,
if that may be, by the name of Grandison, will confess,
that my choice has done the highest credit to the
favour she honoured me with. 
And will you not, my dear Lady G. be ready to
ask, Could Sir Charles Grandison be really in earnest
in this humble court (as if he doubted her favour) to
a creature, every wish of whose heart was devoted to
him? Did he not rather for his own sake, in order to
give her the consequence which a wife of his ought to
have, resolve to dignify the poor girl, who had so long
been mortified by cruel suspense, and who had so often
despaired of ever being happy with the Lord of her
heart? O no, my dear, your brother looked the humble,
the modest Lover; yet the man of sense, of dignity,
in Love. I could not but be assured of his affection,
notwithstanding all that had passed. And
what had passed, that he could possibly have helped? 
—His pleas of the day before, the contents of Signor
Jeronymo's Letter, were all in my mind. 
He seemed to expect my answer. He only, whose
generously-doubting eye kept down mine, can tell how
I looked, how I behaved—But hesitatingly, tremblingly,
both voice, and knees, as I sat; thus brokenly,
as near as I remember, I answered, not withdrawing
my hand, tho', as I spoke, he more than once pressed
it with his lips:—The honour of Sir Charles Grandison
—Sir Charles Grandison's honour—no one ever
did, or ever can, doubt. —I must own—I must confess
—There I paused. 
What does my dear Miss Byron own? —What confess? 
—Assure yourself, madam, of my honour, of my
gratitude. —Should you have doubts, speak them. I 

desire your favour but as I clear up your doubts. I
would speak them for you—I have spoken them for
you. I own to you, madam, that there may be force
in your doubts, which nothing but your generosity,
and affiance in the honour of the man before you, can
induce you to get over. And thus far I will own
against myself, that were the Lady, in whose heart I
should hope an interest, to have been circumstanced
as I was, my own delicacy would have been hurt; 
owing, indeed, to the high notion I have of the true
Female delicacy. —Now say, now own, now confess,
my dear Miss Byron—what you were going to confess. 
This, Sir, is my confession—and it is the confession
of a heart which I hope is as sincere as your own— 
That I am dazled, confounded, shall I say? at the superior
merits of the Lady you so nobly, so like yourself,
glory still in esteeming as she well deserves to be
esteemed. 
Joy seemed to flash from his eyes—He bowed on my
hand, and pressed it with his lips; but was either
silent by choice, or could not speak. 
I proceeded, tho' with a hesitating voice, a glowing
cheek, and downcast eyes—I fear not, Sir, any more
than she did, your honour, your justice, no nor your
indulgent tenderness—Your character, your principles,
Sir, are full security to the woman who shall endeavour
to deserve from you that indulgence—But so
justly high do I think of Lady Clementina, and her
conduct, that I fear—ah, Sir, I fear—that it is impossible— 
I stopt—I am sure I was in earnest, and must look
to be so, or my countenance and my heart were not
allied. 
What impossible! —What fears my dear Miss Byron
is impossible? 
Why (thus kindly urged, and by a man of unquestionable
honour) shall I not speak all that is in my 

mind? The poor Harriet Byron fears, she justly fears,
when she contemplates the magnanimity of that exalted
Lady, that with all her care, with all her endeavours,
she never shall be able to make the figure
to Herself, which is necessary for her own tranquillity
(however you might generously endeavour to assure
her doubting mind). This, Sir, is my doubt— 
And—all my doubt. 
Generous, kind, noble Miss Byron! in a rapturous
accent—And is this all your doubt? Then must yet
the man before you be a happy man; for he questions
not, if life be lent him, to make you one of the happiest
of women. Clementina has acted gloriously in
preferring to all other considerations her Religion and
her Country: I can allow this in her favour, against
myself: And shall I not be doubly bound in gratitude
to her sister-excellence, who, having not those trials,
yet the most delicate of human minds, shews in my
favour a frankness of heart which sets her above little
forms and affectation, and at the same time a generosity
with regard to the merits of another Lady which
has few examples? 
He then on one knee, taking my passive hand between
both his, and kissing it, once, twice, thrice— 
Repeat, dear, and ever-dear, Miss Byron, that this is
all your doubt [I bowed assentingly: I could not
speak]—A happy, an easy task, is mine! Be assured,
dearest madam, that I will disavow every action of
my life, every thought of my heart, every word of
my mouth, which tends not to dissipate that doubt. 
I took out my handkerchief— 
My dear Miss Byron, proceeded he, with an ardour
that bespoke his heart, you are goodness itself. I approached
you with diffidence, with more than diffidence,
with apprehension, because of your known delicacy; 
which I was afraid, on this occasion, would
descend into punctiliousness. —May blessings attend my
future life, as my grateful heart shall acknowlege this
goodness!— 

Again he kissed my hand, rising with dignity. I
could have received his vows on my knees; but I was
motionless; yet I had joy to be enabled to give him
joy. —Joy to your brother! to Sir Charles Grandison! 
He saw me greatly affected, and indeed my emotion
increased on reflexion. He considerately said, I will
leave you, my dear Miss Byron, to intitle myself to
the congratulations of all our friends below. From
this moment, after a thousand suspenses and strange
events, which, unsought-for, have chequered my past
life, I date my happiness. 
He most respectfully left me. 
I was glad he did: Yet my eyes followed him. 
His very shadow was grateful to me, as he went downstairs. 
And there, it seems, he congratulated himself,
and called for the congratulations of every one present,
in so noble a manner, that every eye run over with
joy. 
Was I not right, said my grandmamma to my aunt
(You half-blamed me, my dear) in leaving Sir Charles
and my Harriet together? Harriet ever was above disguise. 
Sir Charles might have guessed at her heart; 
but he would not have known it from her own lips,
had she had you and me to refer to. 
Whatever you do, madam, answered my aunt, must
be right. 
My aunt came up to me. She found me in a very
thoughtful mood. I had sometimes been accusing
myself of forwardness, and at others was acquitting
myself, or endeavouring to do so—yet mingling, tho'
thus early, a hundred delightful circumstances with
my accusations and acquittals, which were likely to
bless my future lot. Such as, his relations and friends
being mine, mine his; and I run them over all by
name. But my Emily, my dear Emily! I considered
as my ward, as well as his. In this way my aunt
found me. She embraced me, applauded me, and 

cleared up all my self-doubtings, as to forwardness; 
and told me of their mutual congratulations below,
and how happy I had made them all. What self-confidence
did her approbation give me! —And as she
assured me, that my uncle would not railly, but extol
me, I went down, with spirits much higher than I
went up with. 
Sir Charles and my grandmamma were talking together,
sitting side by side, when I entered the room. 
All the company stood up at my entrance. —O my
dear! what a Princess in every one's eye will the declared
Love of such a man make me! How will all
the consequence I had before, among my partial friends
and favourers, be augmented! 
My uncle said, sideling by me (kindly intending not
to dash me) My sweet sparkler! [That was the name
he used to call me, before Sir Charles Grandison taught
me a lesson that made me thoughtful] You are now
again my delight, and my joy. I thank you for not
being—a fool—that's all. Egad, I was afraid of your
Femality, when you came face to face. 
Sir Charles came to me, and, with an air of the
most respectful love, taking my hand, led me to a seat
between himself and my grandmamma. 
My ever-dear Harriet, said she, and condescended
to lift my hand to her lips, I will not abash you; but
must just say, that you have acquitted yourself as I
wished you to do. I knew I could trust to a heart that
ever was above affectation or disguise. 
Sir Charles Grandison, madam, said I, has the
generosity to distinguish and encourage a doubting
mind. 
Infinitely obliging Miss Byron, replied he, pressing
one hand between both his, as my grandmamma held
the other, your condescension attracts both my Love
and Reverence. Permit me to say, That had not
Heaven given a Miss Byron for the object of my hope,
I had hardly, after what had befallen me abroad, ever
looked forward to a wedded Love. 

One favour I have to beg of you, Sir, resumed my
grandmamma: It is, that you will never use the word
abroad, or express persons by their countries; in fine,
that you will never speak with reserve, when the admirable
Clementina is in your thoughts. Mention her
name with freedom, my dear Sir, to my child, to me,
and to my daughter Selby—you may—We always
loved and reverenced her: Still we do so. She has
given an example to all her Sex, of a passion properly
subdued—Of temporal considerations yielding to
eternal! 
Sir, said I, bowing as I sat, I join in thisrequest. 
His eyes glistened with grateful joy. He bowed low
to each, but spoke not. 
My aunt came to us, and sat down by Sir Charles,
refusing his seat, because it was next me. Let me,
said she, enjoy your conversation: I have heard part
of your subject, and subscribe to it, with all my heart. 
Lady G. can testify for us all three, that we cannot be
so mean, as to intend you a compliment, Sir, by what
has been said. 
Nor can I, madam, as to imagine it. You exalt
yourselves even more than you do Clementina. I will
let my Jeronymo know some of the particulars which
have given joy to my heart. They will make him
happy; and the excellent Clementina (I will not forbear
her name) will rejoice in the happy prospects before
me. She wanted but to be assured that the friend
she so greatly honoured with her regard, was not
likely (either in the qualities of the Lady's mind, or in
her family-connexions) to be a sufferer by her declining
his address. 
May nothing now happen, my dear Lady G. to
overcloud—But I will not be apprehensive. I will
thankfully enjoy the present moment, and leave the
future to the All-wise Disposer of events. If Sir
Charles Grandison be mine, and reward by his kindness
my Love, what can befal me, that I ought not
to bear with resignation? 

But, my dear Ladies, let me here ask you a question,
or two. 
Tell me, Did I ever, as you remember, suffer by
suspenses, by any-thing? —Was there ever really such
a man as Sir Hargrave Pollexfen? —Did I not tell you
my dreams, when I told you of what I believed I had
undergone from his persecuting insults? It is well, for
the sake of preserving to me the grace of humility,
and for the sake of warning (for all my days preceding
that insult had been happy) that I wrote down at the
time an account of those sufferings, those suspenses, or
I should have been apt to forget now, that I ever was
unhappy. 
And, pray, let me ask, Ladies, Can you guess what
is become of my illness? I was very ill, you know,
when you, Lady G. did us the honour of a visit; so
ill, that I could not hide it from you, and my other
dear friends, as fain I would have done. I did not
think it was an illness of such a nature, as that its cure
depended on an easy heart. I was so much convinced
of the merits of Lady Clementina, and that no other
woman in the world ought to be Lady Grandison, that
I thought I had pretty tolerably quieted my heart in
that expectation. I hope I brag not too soon. But,
my dear, I now feel so easy, so light, so happy—that
I hardly know what's the matter with me—But I
hope nobody will find the malady I have lost. May
no disappointed heart be invaded by it! Let it not travel
to Italy! The dear Lady there has suffered enough
from a worse malady! Nor, if it stay in the island,
let it come near the sighing heart of my Emily! That
dear girl shall be happy, if it be in my power to make
her so. Pray, Ladies, tell her she shall. —No, but
don't: I will tell her so myself by the next post. Nor
let it, I pray God, attack Lady Anne S. or any of
the half-score Ladies, of whom once I was so unwilling
to hear. 

* *
Our discourse at table was on various subjects. 
My cousin James was again very inquisitive after the
principal courts, and places of note, in Italy. 
What pleasure do I hope one day to receive from
the perusal (if I shall be favoured with it) of Sir
Charles's Literary Journal, mentioned to Dr.
Bartlett, in some of his Letters from Italy: For it includes,
I presume, a description of palaces, cities,
cabinets of the curious, diversions, amusements, customs,
of different nations. How attentive were we
all, to the answers he made to my cousin James's questions! 
My memory serves but for a few generals; 
and those I will not trouble you with. Sir Charles
told my cousin, that if he were determined on an excursion
abroad, he would furnish him with recommendatory
Letters. 
Mr. Greville and his insult were one of our subjects
after dinner, when the servants were withdrawn. 
Lucy expressed her wonder, that he was so soon reconciled
to Sir Charles, after the menaces he had for
years past thrown out against any man who should be
likely to succeed with me. 
My uncle observed, that Mr. Greville had not for a
long time had any hopes; that he always was apprehensive,
that if Sir Charles Grandison were to make
his addresses, he would succeed: That it had been his
and Fenwick's custom, to endeavour to bluster away
their competitors(a) . He possibly, my uncle added,
might hope to intimidate Sir Charles; or at least,
knowing his principles, might suppose he ran no risque
in the attempt. 
Mr. Deane said, Mr. Greville had told him, that
the moment he knew Miss Byron had chosen her man,
he would give up his pretensions; but that, as long as
she remained single, he was determined to persecute
her, as he himself called it. Perseverance he had 

known do every-thing, after an admired woman had
run through her circle of humble servants, and perhaps
found herself disappointed in her own choice; 
and for his part, but with her, he had no fondness for
the married life; he cared not who knew it. 
Sir Charles spoke of Mr. Greville with candour. He
thought him a man of rough manners, but not illnatured. 
He affected to be a joker, and often therefore
might be taken for a worse man than he really
was. He believed him to be careless of his reputation,
and one who seemed to think there were wit and
bravery in advancing free and uncommon things; 
and gloried in bold surprizes. For my part, continued
he, I should hardly have consented to cultivate his acquaintance,
much less to dine with him to-morrow,
but as he insisted upon it, as a token of my forgiving
in him a behaviour that was really what a gentleman
should not have pardoned himself for. I considered
him, proceeded Sir Charles, as a neighbour to this
family, with whom you had lived, and perhaps chose
to live, upon good terms. Bad neighbours are nuisances,
especially if they are people of fortune: It is
in the power of such to be very troublesome in their
own persons; and they will often let loose their servants
to defy, provoke, insult, and do mischief to
those they love not. Mr. Greville I thought, added
he, deserved to be the more indulged, for the sake of
his Love to Miss Byron. He is a proud man, and
must be mortified enough in having it generally known
that she had constantly rejected his suit. 
Why that's true, said my uncle. Sir Charles, you
consider every-body. But I hope all's over between
you— 
I have no doubt but it is, Mr. Selby. Mr. Greville's
whole aim now, seems to be, to come off with
as little abatement of his pride, as possible. He thinks,
if he can pass to the world as one who having no hope
himself, is desirous to promote the cause of his friend, 

as he will acknowlege me to be, it will give him consequence
in the eye of the world, and be a gentle method
of letting his pride down easy. 
Very well, said my uncle; and a very good contrivance
for a proud man, I think. 
It is an expedient of his friend Fenwick, replied Sir
Charles; and Mr. Greville is not a little fond of it. 
And what, Ladies, and Gentlemen, will you say, if
you should see me come to church to-morrow with
him, sit with him in the same pew, and go with him
to dinner in his coach? It is his request that I will. 
He thinks this will put an end to the whispers which
have passed, in spite of all his precaution, of a rencounter
between him and me: For he has given out,
that he strained his wrist and arm by a fall from his
horse. Tell me, dear Ladies, shall I, or shall I not,
oblige him in this request? He is to be with me tonight,
for an answer. 
My grandmamma said, that Mr. Greville was always
a very odd, a very particular man. She thought
Sir Charles very kind to us in being so willing to conciliate
with him. My uncle declared, that he was
very desirous to live on good terms with all his neighbours,
particularly with Mr. Greville, a part of whose
estate being intermixed with his, it might be in his
power to be vexatious, at least to his tenants. Mr.
Deane thought the compromise was a happy one; 
and he supposed entirely agreeable to Sir Charles's generous
wishes to promote the good understanding of
neighbours; and to the compassion it was in his nature
to shew, to an unsuccessful rival. 
Sir Charles then turning to Lucy; May I, Miss
Selby, said he, do you think, without being too deep
a designer, ask leave of Miss Byron, on the presumption
of her goodness to me, to bring Mr. Greville to
drink tea with her to-morrow in the afternoon? 
Your servant, Sir Charles, answered Lucy, smiling. 
But what say you, cousin Byron, to this question? 

This house is not mine, replied I; but I dare say, I
may be allowed the liberty, in the names of my uncle
and aunt, to answer, that any person will be welcome
to Selby-house, whom Sir Charles Grandison shall
think proper to bring with him. 
Mr. Greville, said Sir Charles, professes himself
unable to see any of you (Miss Byron, in particular)
without an introductor. He makes a high compliment
to me, when he supposes me to be a proper one. 
If you give me leave, bowing to my uncle and aunt, I
will answer him to his wishes; and hope, when he
comes, every-thing will be passed by in silence that
has happened between him and me. 
Two or three lively things passed between Lucy and
Sir Charles, on his repetition of her word designer. 
She began with advantage, but did not hold it; yet
he gave her consequence in the little debate, at his
own expence. 
My grandmamma will go to her own church; but
will be here at dinner, and the rest of the day. I have
a thousand things more to say, all agreeable; but it
is now late, and a drowsy fit has come upon me. I
will welcome it. Adieu, adieu, my dear Ladies! 
Felicitate, I am sure you will, 
Your ever-obliged, ever-devoted,
Harriet Byron. 

