



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday, March 17. 
I receive, with great pleasure, the early and chearful
assurances of your Loyalty and Love. And let
our principal and most trusty friends named in my last
know that I do. 
I would have thee, Jack, come down, as soon as
thou canst. I believe I shall not want the others so
soon. Yet they may come down to Lord M's. I
will be there, if not to receive them, to satisfy my
Lord, that there is no new mischief in hand, which
will require his second intervention. 

For thyself, thou must be constantly with me: Not
for my Security: The family dare do nothing but
bully: They bark only at distance: But for my Entertainment: 
That thou mayst, from the Latin and the
English Classics, keep my love-sick Soul from drooping. 
Thou hadst best come to me here, in thy old corporal's
coat: Thy servant out of livery; and to be upon
a familiar foot with me, as a distant relation, to be
provided for by thy interest above—I mean not in
Heaven, thou mayst be sure. Thou wilt find me at a
little Alehouse; they call it an Inn: The White Hart; 
most terribly wounded (but by the weather only) the
Sign: —In a sorry village; within five miles from Harlowe-Place. Every-body knows Harlowe-Place; for,
like Versailles, it is sprung up from a dunghill, within
every elderly person's remembrance. Every poor body,
particularly, knows it: But that only for a few years
past, since a certain angel has appeared there among
the sons and daughters of men. 
The people here at the Hart are poor, but honest; 
and have gotten it into their heads, that I am a man
of quality in disguise; and there is no reining-in their
officious respect. Here is a pretty little smirking
Daughter; Seventeen six days ago. I call her my
Rose-bud. Her Grandmother (for there is no Mother)
a good neat old woman, as ever filled a wicker-chair
in a chimney-corner, has besought me to be merciful
to her. 
This is the right way with me. Many and many
a pretty rogue had I spared, whom I did not spare,
had my power been acknowleged, and my mercy in
time implored. But the Debellare superbos should be
my motto, were I to have a new one. 
This simple chit (for there is a simplicity in her
thou wilt be highly pleased with: All humble; all
officious; all innocent—I love her for her humility,
her officiousness, and even for her innocence) will be 

pretty amusement to thee; while I combat with the
weather, and dodge and creep about the walls and purlieus
of Harlowe-Place. Thou wilt see in her mind, all
that her superiors have been taught to conceal, in order
to render themselves less natural, and of consequence
less pleasing. 
But I charge thee, that thou do not (what I would
not permit myself to do for the world—I charge
thee, that thou do not) crop my Rose-bud. She is
the only flower of fragrance, that has blown in this vicinage
for ten years past; or will for ten years to
come: For I have looked backward to the have-been's,
and forward to the will-be's; having but too much
leisure upon my hands in my present waiting. 
I never was so honest for so long together since my
matriculation. It behoves me so to be—Some way or
other, my recess at this little Inn may be found out; 
and it will then be thought that my Rose-bud has attracted
me. A report in my favour, from simplicities
so amiable, may establish me; for the Grandmother's
relation to my Rose-bud may be sworn to: And the
Father is an honest poor man: Has no joy, but in his
Rose-but. —O Jack! spare thou therefore (for I shall
leave thee often alone with her, spare thou) my Rose-bud! 
—Let the rule I never departed from, but it cost
me a long regret, be observed to my Rose-bud! Never
to ruin a poor girl, whose simplicity and innocence
were all she had to trust to; and whose fortunes were
too low to save her from the rude contempts of worse
minds than her own, and from an indigence extreme: 
Such a one will only pine in secret; and at last, perhaps,
in order to refuge herself from slanderous tongues
and virulence, be induced to tempt some guilty stream,
or seek her end in the knee-incircling garter, that, peradventure,
was the first attempt of abandoned Love. — 
No defiances will my Rose-bud breathe; no self-dependent, thee-doubting watchfulness (indirectly challenging
thy inventive machinations to do their worst) 

will she assume. Unsuspicious of her danger, the
Lamb's throat will hardly shun thy knife! —O be not
thou the Butcher of my Lambkin! 
The less be thou so, for the reason I am going to
give thee—The gentle heart is touched by Love: 
Her soft bosom heaves with a passion she has not yet
found a name for. I once caught her eye following
a young carpenter, a widow neighbour's son, living
[to speak in her dialect] at the little white-house over
the way. A gentle youth he also seems to be, about
three years older than herself: Play-mates from infancy,
till his Eighteenth and her Fifteenth year
furnished a reason for a greater distance in shew, while
their hearts gave a better for their being nearer than
ever—For I soon perceived the Love reciprocal. A
scrape and a bow at first seeing his pretty mistress; 
turning often to salute her following eye; and, when
a winding lane was to deprive him of her sight, his
whole body turned round, his hat more reverently
d'offed, than before. This answered (for, unseen, I
was behind her) by a low courtesy, and a sigh, that
Johnny was too far off to hear! —Happy Whelp!
said I to myself! —I withdrew; and in tript my Rose-bud,
as if satisfied with the dumb shew, and wishing
nothing beyond it. 
I have examined the little heart. She has made me
her confident. She owns, she could love Johnny
Barton very well: And Johnny Barton has told her,
He could love her better than any maiden he ever
saw—But, alas! it must not be thought of. Why not
be thought of? —She don't know! —And then she
sighed: But Johnny has an Aunt, who will give him
an hundred pounds, when his time is out; and her
Father cannot give her but a few things, or so, to set
her out with: And tho' Johnny's Mother says, she
knows not where Johnny would have a prettier, or
notabler Wife, yet—And then she sighed again— 
What signifies talking? —I would not have Johnny 

be unhappy and poor for me! —For what good would
that do me, you know, Sir! 
What would I give [By my Soul, my angel will
indeed reform me, if her friends implacable folly ruin
us not both! —What would I give] to have so innocent
and so good a heart, as either my Rose-bud's, or
Johnny's! 
I have a confounded mischievous one—by nature
too, I think! —A good motion now-and-then rises
from it: But it dies away presently—A love of intrigue
—An invention for mischief—A triumph in subduing
—Fortune encouraging and supporting—And a
constitution—What signifies palliating? But I believe
I had been a rogue, had I been a plough-boy. 
But the devil's in this Sex! Eternal misguiders! 
Who, that has once trespassed with them, ever recovered
his virtue? And yet where there is not virtue,
which nevertheless we free-livers are continually plotting
to destroy, what is there even in the ultimate of
our wishes with them? —Preparation and Expectation
are in a manner every-thing: Reflection indeed may
be something, if the mind be hardened above feeling
the guilt of a past trespass: But the Fruition, what is
there in that? And yet That being the end, nature
will not be satisfied without it. 
See what grave reflections an innocent subject will
produce! It gives me some pleasure to think, that it
is not out of my power to reform: But then, Jack,
I am afraid I must keep better company than I do at
present—For we certainly harden one another. But
be not cast down, my boy; there will be time enough
to give the whole fraternity warning to chuse another
leader: And I fansy thou wilt be the man. 
Mean time, as I make it my rule, whenever I have
committed a very capital enormity, to do some good
by way of atonement; and as I believe I am a pretty
deal indebted on that score; I intend, before I leave
these parts (successfully shall I leave them I hope, or 

I shall be tempted to double the mischief by way of
revenge, tho' not to my Rose-bud any) to join an
hundred pounds to Johnny's Aunt's hundred pounds,
to make one innocent couple happy. I repeat therefore,
and for half-a-dozen more therefores, Spare thou
my Rose-bud. 
An interruption—Another Letter anon; and both
shall go together. 