



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

We had at dinner, besides Miss Rawlins, a young
Widow-niece of Mrs. Moore, who is come to
stay a month with her Aunt—Bevis her name; very
forward, very lively, and a great admirer of me, I
assure you;—hanging smirkingly upon all I said; and
prepared to approve of every word before I spoke: 
And who, by the time we had half-dined (by the
help of what she had collected before) was as much
acquainted with our Story, as either of the other two. 
As it behoved me to prepare them in my favour
against whatever might come from Miss Howe, I
improved upon the hint I had thrown out above-stairs
against that mischief-making Lady. I represented her
to be an arrogant creature, revengeful, artful, enterprizing,
and one who, had she been a Man, would
have sworn and cursed, and committed Rapes, and
played the devil, as far as I knew [I have no doubt of
it, Jack]: But who, nevertheless, by advantage of 

a Female Education, and Pride and Insolence, I believed
was personally virtuous. 
Mrs. Bevis allowed, that there was a vast deal in
Education—and in Pride too, she said. While Miss
Rawlins came with a prudish God forbid, that Virtue
should be owing to Education only! However, I
declared, that Miss Howe was a subtle contriver of
mischief; one who had always been my Enemy: Her
motives I knew not: But despising the man whom
her Mother was desirous she should have, one Hickman; 
altho' I did not directly aver, that she would
rather have had me; yet they all immediately imagined,
that that was the ground of her animosity to
me, and of her Envy to my Beloved: And it was
pity, they said, that so fine a young Lady did not
see thro' such a pretended friend. 
And yet nobody [added I] has more reason than
she to know by experience the force of a hatred founded
in Envy; as I hinted to you above, Mrs. Moore,
and to you, Miss Rawlins, in the case of her Sister
Arabella. 
I had compliments made to my person and talents
on this occasion; which gave me a singular opportunity
of displaying my modesty, by disclaiming the
merit of them, with a No, indeed! —I should be very
vain, Ladies, if I thought so. While thus abasing
myself, and exalting Miss Howe, I got their opinion
both for modesty and generosity; and had all the
graces which I disclaimed thrown in upon me besides. 
In short, they even oppressed that modesty, which
(to speak modestly of myself) their praises created, by
disbelieving all I said against myself. 
And, truly, I must needs say, they have almost persuaded
even me myself, that Miss Howe is actually
in love with me. I have often been willing to hope
this. And who knows but she may? The Captain
and I have agreed, that it shall be so insinuated occasionally
—And what's thy opinion, Jack? She certainly 

hates Hickman: And girls who are disengaged
seldom hate, tho' they may not love: And if she had
rather have another, why not that other ME? For am
I not a smart Fellow, and a Rake? And do not your
sprightly Ladies love your smart Fellows, and your
Rakes? And where is the wonder, that the man who
could engage the affections of Miss Harlowe, should
engage those of a Lady (with her (a)  Alas's) who
would be honoured in being deemed her Second? 
Nor accuse thou me of SINGULAR vanity in this
presumption, Belford. Wert thou to know the secret
vanity that lurks in the hearts of those who disguise
or cloak it best, thou wouldst find great reason to acquit,
at least, to allow for, me: Since it is generally
the conscious over-fulness of conceit, that makes the
hypocrite most upon his guard to conceal it. —Yet
with these fellows, proudly-humble as they are, it
will break out sometimes in spite of their cloaks, tho'
but in self-denying, compliment-begging Self-degradation. 
But now I have undervalued myself, in apologizing
to thee on this occasion, let me use another argument
in favour of my observation, that the Ladies generally
prefer a Rake to a Sober man; and of my presumption
upon it, that Miss Howe is in love with me: It is this: 
Common fame says, That Hickman is a very virtuous,
a very innocent fellow—a male-virgin, I warrant! — 
An odd dog I always thought him. —Now women, Jack,
like not Novices. &dotup;Two maidenheads meeting together in
Wedlock, the first child must be a Fool, is their common
aphorism.&dotup; They are pleased with a Love of the Sex that
is founded in the knowlege of it. Reason good; Novices
expect more than they can possibly find in the
commerce with them. The man who knows them,
yet has Ardors for them, to borrow a word from Miss
Howe (b) , tho' those Ardors are generally owing more 

to the devil within him, than to the witch without
him, is the man who makes them the highest and most
grateful compliment. He knows what to expect, and
with what to be satisfied. 
Then the merit of a woman, in some cases, must
be Ignorance, whether real or pretended. The Man,
in these cases, must be an Adept. Will it then be
wondered at, that a woman prefers a Libertine to a
Novice? —While she expects in the one the confidence
she wants, she considers the other and herself as
two parallel lines, which, tho' they run side by side,
can never meet. 
Yet in this the Sex is generally mistaken too; for
these sheepish fellows are sly. I myself was modest
once; and this, as I have elsewhere hinted to thee (a) ,
has better enabled me to judge of both Sexes. 
But to proceed with my narrative: 
Having thus prepared every one against any Letter
should come from Miss Howe, and against my Beloved's
messenger returns, I thought it proper to conclude
that subject with a hint, that my Spouse could
not bear to have any-thing said that reflected upon
Miss Howe; and, with a deep sigh, added, that I had
been made very unhappy more than once by the ill-will
of Ladies whom I had never offended. 
The widow Bevis believed, that might very easily
be. 
These hints within-doors, joined with others to
Will. both without and within [For I intend he shall
fall in love with widow Moore's maid, and have saved
one hundred pounds in my service, at least] will be
great helps, as things may happen. 