


Mr. Deane, To Sir Charles Grandison. 


Selby-house, Tuesday, Oct. 3.
An alliance more acceptable, were it with a prince,
could not be proposed, than that which Sir
Charles Grandison, in a manner so worthy of himself,
has proposed with a family who have thought
themselves under obligation to him, ever since he delivered
the darling of it from the lawless attempts of
a savage Libertine. I know to whom I write; and
will own, that it has been my wish, in a most particular
manner. 
As to the surviving part of the family, exclusive of
Miss Byron (for I will mention her parents by-and-by)
it is, in all its branches, worthy. Indeed, Sir,
your wish of a relation to them, is not a discredit to
your high character. As to the young Lady—I say
nothing of her—Yet how shall I forbear—O Sir, believe
me! she will dignify your choice. Her duty 

and her inclination through every relation of life, were
never divided. 
Excuse me, Sir—No parent was ever more fond of
his child than I have been, from her infancy, of this
my daughter by adoption. Hence, Sir, being consulted
on this occasion, as my affection I will say for
the whole family deserves, I take upon me to acquaint
you, before any further steps are taken, what our dear
child's fortune will be: For it has been always my
notion, that a young gentleman, in such a case,
should, the moment he offers himself, if his own proposals
are acceptable, be spared the indelicacy of asking
questions as to fortune. We know, Sir, yours is
great: But as your spirit is princely, you ought to
have something worthy of your own fortune with a
wife. But here, alas! we must fail, I doubt; at least,
in hand. 
Mr. Byron was one of the best of men; his Lady
a most excellent woman: There never was a happier
pair. Both had reason to boast of their ancestry. 
His estate was upwards of Four thousand pounds a
year; but it was entailed, and, in failure of male
heirs, was to descend to a second branch of the family
which had made itself the more unworthy of it, by
settling in a foreign country, renouncing, as I may
say, its own. Mr. Byron died a young man, and left
his Lady ensient; but grief for losing him, occasioned
first her miscarriage, and then her death; and the
estate followed the name. Hence, be pleased to know,
that Miss Byron's fortune, in her own right, is no
more than between Thirteen and Fourteen thousand
pounds. It is chiefly in the funds. It has been called
15,000l. but is not much more than thirteen. Her
grandmother's jointure is between 4 and 500l. a year. 
We none of us wish to see my god-daughter in possession
of it: She herself least of all. Mrs. Shirley
is called, by every one that knows her, or speaks of
her, The ornament of old age. Her husband, an 

excellent man, desired her to live always in the mansion-house,
and in the hospitable way he had ever
kept up, if what he left her would support her in it. 
She has been longer spared to the prayers of her
friends, and to those of the poor, than was apprehended; 
for she is but infirm in health. She therefore
can do but little towards the increase of her child's
fortune. But Shirley-manor is a fine old seat, Sir! — 
And there is timber upon the estate, which wants but
ten years growth, and will be felled to good account. 
Mr. Selby is well in the world. He proposes, as a
token of his love, to add 3000l. in hand to his niece's
fortune; and by his will, something very considerable,
farther expectant on his Lady's death; who being
Miss Byron's aunt, by the father's side, intends by her
will to do very handsomely for her. —By the way, my
dear Sir, be assured, that what I write is absolutely
unknown to Miss Byron. 
There is a man who loves her as he loves himself. 
This man has laid by a sum of money every year for
the advancing her in marriage, beginning with the
fifth year of her life, when it was seen what a hopeful
child she was: This has been put at accumulated interest; 
and it amounts, in sixteen years, or there-abouts,
to very near 8000l. This man, Sir, will
make up the Eight thousand Ten, to be paid on the
day of marriage: And I hope, without promising for
what this man will do further at his death, that you
will accept of this Five or Six-and-twenty thousand
Pounds, as the chearfullest given and best-bestowed
money that ever was laid out. 
Let not these particulars pain you, Sir: They should
not: The subject is a necessary one. You, who ought
to give way to the increase of that power which you
so nobly use, must not be pained at this mention, once
for all. Princes, Sir, are not above asking money of
their people as free-gifts, on the marriage of their
children. He that would be greater than a prince, 

may, before he is aware, be less than a gentleman. 
Of this Ten thousand pounds, Eight is Miss Byron's
due, as she is likely to be so happy with all our consents; 
else it would not: For that was the man's reserved
condition; and the sum, or the designation of
it, was till this day only known to himself. 
As to settlements in return, I would have acted the
lawyer, but the honest lawyer, with you, Sir, and
made demands of you; but Mr. and Mrs. Selby, and
Mrs. Shirley, unanimously declare, that you shall not
be prescribed to in this case. Were you not Sir
Charles Grandison? was the question. I was against
leaving it to you, for that very reason. It will be, said
I, to provoke such a man as Sir Charles to do too
much. Most other men ought to be spurred; but
this must be held in. But, however, I acquiesced; 
and the more easily, because I expect that the deeds
shall pass through my hands; and I will take care
that you shall not, in order to give a proof of Love
where it is not wanted, exert an inadequate generosity. 
These matters I thought it was absolutely necessary
to apprize you of: You will have the goodness to excuse
any imperfections in my manner of writing. 
There are none in my heart, when I assure you, that
no man breathing can more respect you, than, Sir, 
Your most faithful and
obedient humble Servant,
Thomas Deane. 

