



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Sat. morning, Sept. 2. 
I have some little pleasure given me by thine, just
now brought me. I see now, that thou hast a little
humanity left. Would to heaven, for the dear lady's sake,
as well as for thy own, that thou hadst romaged it up from
all the dark forgotten corners of thy soul a little sooner! 
The lady is alive, and serene, and calm, and has all her
noble intellects clear and strong: But Nineteen will not
however save her. She says, she will now content herself
with her closet-duties, and the visits of the parish-minister; 
and will not attempt to go out. Nor, indeed, will she, I
am afraid, ever walk up or down a pair of stairs again. 
I am sorry at my soul to have this to say: But it would
be a folly to flatter thee. 
As to thy seeing her, I believe the least hint of that sort,
now, would cut off some hours of her life. 
What has contributed to her serenity, it seems, is, That,
taking the alarm her fits gave her, she has intirely finished,
and signed and sealed, her last will: Which she had deferred
doing till this time, in hopes, as she said, of some
good news from Harlowe-Place; which would have occasioned
the alteration of some passages in it. 
Miss Howe's letter was not given her till four in the afternoon,
yesterday; at what time the messenger returned
for an answer. She admitted him to her presence in the
dining-room, ill as she then was; and would have written
a few lines, as desired by Miss Howe; but, not being able
to hold a pen, she bid the messenger tell her, that she hoped
to be well enough to write a long letter by the next day's
post; and would not now detain him. 

Saturday, six in the Afternoon. 
I called just now, and found the lady writing to Miss
Howe. She made me a melancholy compliment, that
she shewed me not Miss Howe's letter, because I should
soon have that and all her papers before me. But she told
me, that Miss Howe had very considerately obviated to
Colonel Morden several things which might have occasioned
misapprehensions between him and me; and had
likewise put a lighter construction, for the sake of peace,
on some of your actions, than they deserved. 
She added, That her cousin Morden was warmly engaged
in her favour with her friends: And one good piece
of news Miss Howe's letter contained; that her father
would give up some matters, which (appertaining to her
of right) would make my executorship the easier in some
particulars that had given her a little pain. 
She owned she had been obliged to leave off (in the letter
she was writing) thro' weakness. 
Will, says, he shall reach you to-night. I shall send in
the morning; and if I find her not worse, will ride to
Edgware, and return in the afternoon. 