


Mr. Greville, To Lady Frampton. 
Inclosed in the preceding. 


Northampton, January 6. 
Your Ladyship demands a description of the
Person of the celebrated Miss Byron in our neighbourhood; 
and to know, whether, as report tells you,
Love has listed me in the number of her particular
admirers? —Particular admirers you well distinguish; 
since every one who beholds her admires her. 
Your Ladyship confines your enquiries to her Person,
you tell me; and own, that women are much
more solicitous about the beauties of that, than of the
Mind. Perhaps it may be so; and that their envy 

is much sooner excited by the one than by the other. 
But who, Madam, can describe the person of Miss
Harriet Byron, and her person only; animated as
every feature is by a mind that bespeaks all human
excellence, and dignifies her in every Air, in every
Look, in every Motion? 
No man living has a greater passion for Beauty than
I have. Till I knew Miss Byron, I was one of those
who regarded nothing else in the Sex. Indeed, I considered
all intellectual attainments as either useless
or impertinent in women. Your Ladyship knows
what were my free notions on this head, and has
rebuked me for them. A wise, a learned lady, I
considered as a very unnatural character. I wanted
women to be all Love, and nothing else. A very
little Prudence allow'd I to enter into their composition; 
just enough to distinguish the Man of Sense
from the Fool; and that for my own sake. You
know I have vanity, Madam: But lovely as Miss Byron's
person is, I defy the greatest Sensualist on earth
not to admire her mind more than her person. What
a triumph would the devil have, as I have often
thought, when I have stood contemplating her perfections,
especially at church, were he able to raise
up a man that could lower this Angel into Woman? 
—Pardon me! —Your Ladyship knows my mad way
of saying every thing that rises to my thoughts. 
Sweetness of temper must make plain features glow:
What an effect must it then have upon fine ones? Never
was there a sweeter-temper'd woman. Indeed from
Sixteen to Twenty, all the Sex (kept in humour by
their hopes, and by their attractions) are said to be
good-temper'd; but she is remarkably so. She is just
turned of Twenty, but looks not more than Seventeen. 
Her beauty hardly yet in its full blow, it will
last longer, I imagine, than in an earlier blossom. Yet
the prudence visible in her whole aspect, gave her a 

distinction, even at Twelve, that promised what she
would be at a riper age. 
Yet with all this reigning good-nature visible in
her face and manner, there is such a native dignity in
all she says, in all she does (tho' mingled with a frankness
that shews her mind's superiority to the minds of
almost all other women) that it damps and suppresses,
in the most audacious, all imaginations of bold familiarity. 
But, by my soul, I know not how she does this
neither: But so it is. She jests; she raillies: But
I cannot railly her again. Love, it is said, dignifies
the adored object. Perhaps it is that which awes me. 
And now will your Ladyship doubt of an affirmative
answer to your second question, Whether Love
has listed me in the number of her particular admirers. 
He has: And the devil take me if I can help myself:
And yet I have no encouragement—Nor anybody
else; that's my consolation. Fenwick is deeper
in, if possible, than I. We had at our first acquaintance,
as you have heard, a Tilting-bout on the occasion:
But are sworn friends now; each having agreed
to try his fortune by patience and perseverance; and
being assured that the one has no more of her favour
to boast of, than the other(a) . “We have indeed
blustered away between us half a score more of
her admirers. Poor whining Orme, however, perseveres. 
But of him we make no account: He
has a watry head, and tho' he finds a way, by his
Sister, who visits at Mr. Selby's, and is much
esteemed there, to let Miss Byron know his passion
for her, notwithstanding the negative he has
received; yet doubt we not that she is safe from a 

flame that he will quench with his tears, before it
can rise to an head to disturb us. 
“You ladies love men should whine after you:
But never yet did I find, that where a blustering
fellow was a competitor, the lady married the
milksop.” 
But let me in this particular do Miss Byron justice:
How she manages it, I can't tell; but she is courteous
to all: nor could ever any man charge her
either with pride or cruelty. All I fear, is, that she
has such an equality in her temper, that she can hardly
find room in her heart for a particular Love: Nor
will, till she meets with one whose mind is near as
faultless as her own; and the general tenor of whose
life and actions call upon her discretion to give her
leave to love. “This apprehension I owe to a conversation
I had with her Grandmother Shirley; 
a lady that is an ornament to old age; and who
hinted to me, that her Grand-daughter had exceptions
both to Fenwick and me, on the score of a
few indulgences that perhaps have been too public; 
but which all men of fashion and spirit give themselves,
and all women, but this, allow of, or hate
not men the worse for. But then what is her objection
to Orme? He is a sober dog.” 
She was but eight years old when her Mother died. 
She also was an excellent woman. Her death was
brought on by grief for that of her husband; which
happened but six months before—A rare instance! 
The Grandmother and Aunt, to whom the Girl
is dutiful to a proverb, will not interfere with her
choice. If they are applied to for their interest, the
answer is constantly this: The approbation of their
Harriet must first be gained, and then their consent
is ready. 
There is a Mr. Deane, a Man of excellent character
for a Lawyer; but indeed he left off practice
on coming into possession of an handsome estate. He 

was the girl's godfather. He is allowed to have great
influence over them all. Harriet calls him Papa. To
him I have applied: But his answer is the very same:
His daughter Harriet must choose for herself: All
motions of this kind must come first from her. 
And ought I to despair of succeeding with the girl
herself? I, her Greville; not contemptible in person; 
an air—free and easy, at least; having a good estate
in possession; fine expectances besides; dressing well,
singing well, dancing well, and blest with a moderate
share of confidence; which makes other women think
me a clever fellow: She, a girl of twenty; her fortune
between ten and fifteen thousand pounds only; 
for her father's considerable estate, on his demise, for
want of male heirs, went with the name; her grandmother's
jointure not more than 500l. a year. —And
what though her uncle Selby has no children, and loves
her, yet has he nephews and nieces of his own, whom
he also loves; for this Harriet is his wife's niece. 
I will not despair. If resolution, if perseverance, will
do, and if she be a woman, she shall be mine—And
so I have told her aunt Selby, and her uncle too; 
and so I have told Miss Lucy Selby, her cousin, as she
calls her, who is highly and deservedly in her favour; 
and so indeed have I more than once told the girl
herself. 
But now to the description of her Person—Let me
die, if I know where to begin. She is all over loveliness. 
Does not every-body else who has seen her
tell you so? Her Stature; shall I begin with her stature? 
She cannot be said to be tall; but yet is something
above the middling. Her Shape—But what
care I for her shape? I, who hope to love her still
more, tho' possession may make me admire her less,
when she has not that to boast of? We young fellows
who have been abroad, are above regarding English
shapes, and prefer to them the French negligence. 
By the way, I think the foreign ladies in the right, 

that they aim not at what they cannot attain. Whether
we are so much in the right to come into their
taste, is another thing. But be this as it will, there
is so much ease and dignity in the person, in the dress,
and in every air and motion, of Miss Harriet Byron,
that fine shapes will ever be in fashion where she is,
be either native or foreigner the judge. 
Her Complexion is admirably fair and clear. I
have sat admiring her complexion, till I have imagined
I have seen the life-blood flowing with equal
course thro' her translucent veins. 
Her Forehead, so nobly free and open, shews dignity
and modesty, and strikes into one a kind of awe,
singly contemplated, that (from the delight which accompanies
the awe) I know not how to describe. 
Every single feature, in short, will bear the nicest
examination; and her whole Face, and her Neck, so
admirably set on her finely-proportioned Shoulders— 
let me perish, if, taking her all together, I do not
hold her to be the most unexceptionable Beauty I ever
beheld. But what still is her particular excellence,
and distinguishes her from all other English women
(for it must be acknowleged to be a characteristic of
the French women of quality), is, the grace which
that people call Physiognomy, and we may call Expression:
Had not her features and her complexion
been so fine as they are, that grace alone, that Soul
shining out in her lovely aspect, joined with the ease
and gracefulness of her Motion, would have made her
as many admirers as beholders. 
After this, shall I descend to a more particular description? 
—I will. 
Her Cheek—I never saw a cheek so beautifully
turned; illustrated as it is by a charming Carmine
flush, which denotes sound Health. A most bewitching
dimple takes place in each when she smiles; and
she has so much reason to be pleased with herself,
and with all about her (for she is the idol of her relations) 

that I believe from infancy she never frowned; 
nor can a frown, it is my opinion, sit upon her face
for a minute. Would to Heaven I were considerable
enough with her to prove the contrary! 
Her Mouth—There never was so lovely a mouth. 
But no wonder; since such rosy Lips, and such ivory
and even Teeth, must give beauty to a mouth less
charming than hers. 
Her Nose gives dignity to her other features. Her
Chin is sweetly turn'd, and almost imperceptibly
dimpled. 
Her Eyes! —Ay, Madam, her Eyes! —Good Heaven
what a lustre; yet not a fierce, but a mild lustre! 
How have I despised the romancing Poets for their
unnatural descriptions of the Eyes of their heroines! 
But I have thought those descriptions, tho' absurd
enough in conscience, less absurd (allowing something
for poetical licence) ever since I beheld those of
Miss Harriet Byron. 
Her Hair is a real and unlabour'd ornament to her. 
All natural its curls: Art has no share in the lustre it
gives to her other beauties. 
I mention'd her Neck—Here I dare not trust myself
—Inimitable creature! All-attracting loveliness! 
Her Arm—Your Ladyship knows my passion for a
delicate Arm—By my Soul, Madam, your own does
not exceed it. 
Her Hands are extremely fine. Such Fingers! 
And they accustomed to the Pen, to the Needle,
to the Harpsichord; excelling in all—O Madam!
women have Souls. I now am convinced they have. 
Given us for temporary purposes only, I dare own to
your Ladyship, that once I doubted it. —And have I
not seen her dance! Have I not heard her sing! — 
But indeed, mind and person, she is all harmony. 
Then for Reading, for acquired Knowlege, what
lady so young—But you know the character of her
Grandfather Shirley. He was a man of universal 

learning, and, from his public employments abroad,
as polite as learned. This Girl, from Seven years of
age, when he came to settle in England, to Fourteen,
when she lost him, was his delight; and her education
and instruction the amusement of his vacant
hours. This is the period, he used to say, in which
the foundations of all female goodness are to be laid,
since so soon after Fourteen they leap into women. 
The dead languages he aimed not to teach her; lest
he should overload her young mind: But in the
Italian and French he made her an adept. 
Nor were the advantages common ones which she
received from his Lady, her Grandmother, and from her
Aunt Selby, her Mother's Sister, a woman of equal
worthiness. Her Grandmother particularly is one of
the most pious, yet most chearful, of women. She
will not permit her Daughter Byron, she says, to live
with her, for both their sakes—For the Girl's sake, Because
there is a greater resort of company at Mr. Selby's,
than at Shirley-Manor; and she is afraid, as her Grandchild
has a serious turn, that her own contemplative
life may make her more grave than she wishes so
young a woman to be. Youth, she says, is the season
for chearfulness—For her own sake, Because she looks
upon her Harriet's company as a cordial too rich to
be always at hand; and when she has a mind to
regale, she will either send for her, fetch her, or visit
her at Mrs. Selby's. One of her letters to Mrs. Selby
I once saw. It ran thus—“You must spare me my
Harriet. I am in pain. My spirits are not high. 
I would not that the undecay'd mind should yield,
for want of using the means, to the decaying body. 
One happy day with our child, the true child of the
united minds of her late excellent parents, will, I
hope, effect the cure: If it do not, you must spare
her to me two.” 
Did I not tell you, Madam, that it was very difficult
to describe the Person only of this admirable young 

lady. —But I stop here. A cursed apprehension comes
cross me! —How do I know but I am praising another
man's future wife, and not my own? Here is a
Cousin of hers, a Mrs. Reeves, a fine Lady from
London, come down under the cursed influence of
my evil stars, to carry this Harriet away with her
into the gay world. Woman! Woman! —I beg
your Ladyship's pardon; but what Angel of Twenty
is proof against vanity? The first hour she appears,
she will be a Toast; Stars and Titles will croud about
her; and who knows how far a paltry coronet may
dazle her who deserves an imperial crown? But, woe
to the man, whoever he be, whose pretensions
dare to interfere (and have any assurance of success)
with those of 
Your Ladyship's
Most obedient and faithful Servant,
John Greville. 

