



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Harlowe-Place, Jan. 20. 
I will now resume my narrative of proceedings
here. —My Brother being in a good way, altho'
you may be sure that his resentments are rather heightened
than abated by the galling disgrace he has received,
my friends (my Father and Uncles, however,
if not my Brother and Sister) begin to think that I
have been treated unkindly. My Mother has been so
good as to tell me this since I sent away my last. 
Nevertheless I believe they all think that I receive
Letters from Mr. Lovelace. But Lord M. being inclined
rather to support than to blame his Nephew,
they seem to be so much afraid of Mr. Lovelace, that
they do not put it to me whether I do or not; conniving
on the contrary, as it should seem, at the only
method left to allay the vehemence of a spirit which
they have so much provoked: For he still insists upon
Satisfaction from my Uncles; and this possibly (for he
wants not Art) as the best way to be introduced again
with some advantage into our family. And indeed my
Aunt Hervey has put it to my Mother, whether it
were not best to prevail upon my Brother to take a
turn to his Yorkshire Estate (which he was intending
to do before) and to stay there till all is blown over. 
But this is very far from being his intention: For
he has already begun to hint again, that he shall never
be easy or satisfied till I am married; and, finding
neither Mr. Symmes nor Mr. Mullins will be accepted,
has proposed Mr. Wyerley once more, on the
score of his great passion for me. This I have again
rejected; and but yesterday he mentioned one who
has applied to him by Letter, making high offers. This
is Mr. Solmes; Rich Solmes you know they call him. 
But this application has not met with the attention of
one single soul. 

If none of his schemes of getting me married take
effect, he has thoughts, I am told, of proposing to me
to go to Scotland, that, as the compliment is, I may
put his house there in such order as our own is in. But
this my Mother intends to oppose for her own sake; 
because, having relieved her, as she is pleased to say,
of the houshold cares (for which my Sister, you know,
has no turn) they must again devolve upon her if I go. 
And if she did not oppose it, I should; for, believe
me, I have no mind to be his housekeeper; and I
am sure, were I to go with him, I should be treated
rather as a Servant than a Sister: —Perhaps, not the
better because I am his Sister. And if Mr. Lovelace
should follow me, things might be worse than they are
now. 
But I have besought my Mother, who is apprehensive
of Mr. Lovelace's visits, and for fear of whom my
Uncles never stir out without arms and armed servants
(my Brother also being near well enough to go abroad)
to procure me permission to be your guest for a fortnight,
or so. —Will your Mother, think you, my
dear, give me leave? 
I dare not ask to go to my dairy-house, as my good
Grandfather would call it: For I am now afraid of
being thought to have a wish to enjoy that independence
to which his Will has entitled me: And as
matters are situated, such a wish would be imputed to
my regard to the man to whom they have now so
great an antipathy. And indeed could I be as easy and
happy here as I used to be, I would defy that man
and all his Sex; and never repent that I have given the
power of my fortune into my Father's hands. 
* *
Just now, my Mother has rejoiced me with the
news that my requested permission is granted. Every
one thinks it best that I should go to you, except my
Brother. But he was told, that he must not expect
to rule in every-thing. I am to be sent for into the 

Great Parlour, where are my two Uncles and my
Aunt Hervey, and to be acquainted with this concession
in form. 
You know, my dear, that there is a good deal of
solemnity among us. But never was there a family
more united in its different branches than ours. Our
Uncles consider us as their own children, and declare,
that it is for our sakes they live single. So that they
are advised with upon every article relating to us, or
that may affect us. It is therefore the less wonder,
at a time when they understand that Mr. Lovelace
is determined to pay us an amicable visit, as he calls it
(but which I am sure cannot end amicably) that they
should both be consulted upon the permission I had
desired to attend you. 
* *
I will acquaint you with what passed at the general
leave given me to be your guest. And yet I
know that you will not love my Brother the better for
my communication. But I am angry with him myself,
and cannot help it. And besides, it is proper to
let you know the terms I go upon, and their motives
for permitting me to go. 
Clary, said my Mother, as soon as I entered the
Great Parlour, your request to go to Miss Howe's for
a few days has been taken into consideration, and
granted— 
Much against my liking, I assure you, said my
Brother, rudely interrupting her. 
Son James! said my Father, and knit his brows. 
He was not daunted. His arm is in a sling. He
often has the mean art to look upon that, when anything
is hinted that may be supposed to lead towards
the least favour to or reconciliation with Mr. Lovelace. 
—Let the girl then [I am often the girl with
him] be prohibited seeing that vile Libertine. 
Nobody spoke. 
Do you hear, Sister Clary? taking their silence for 

approbation of what he had dictated; you are not to
receive visits from Lord M's Nephew. 
Every one still remained silent. 
Do you so understand the licence you have, Miss?
interrogated he. 
I would be glad, Sir, said I, to understand that you
are my Brother;—and that you would understand that
you are only my Brother. 
O the fond, fond heart! with a sneer of insult,
lifting up his hands. 
Sir, said I to my Father, to your justice I appeal: 
If I have deserved reflection, let me not be spared. 
But if I am to be answerable for the rashness— 
No more! —No more of either side, said my Father. 
You are not to receive the visits of that Lovelace,
tho'. —Nor are you, Son James, to reflect upon
your Sister. She is a worthy child. 
Sir, I have done, replied he;—and yet I have her
honour at heart, as much as the honour of the rest of
the family. 
And hence, Sir, retorted I, your unbrotherly reflections
upon me! 
Well but you observe, Miss, said he, that it is
not I, but your Father, that tells you, that you are
not to receive the visits of that Lovelace. 
Cousin Harlowe, said my Aunt Hervey, allow me
to say, That my Cousin Clary's prudence may be
confided in. 
I am convinced it may, joined my Mother. 
But, Aunt, but, Madam (put in my Sister) there
is no hurt, I presume, in letting my Sister know the
condition she goes to Miss Howe upon; since, if he
gets a knack of visiting her there— 
You may be sure, interrupted my Uncle Harlowe,
he will endeavour to see her there. 
So would such an impudent man here, said my
Uncle Antony: And 'tis better there than here. 
Better no-where, said my Father. —I command you 

(turning to me) on pain of my displeasure, that you
see him not at all. 
I will not, Sir, in any way of encouragement, I
do assure you: Nor at all, if I can properly avoid it. 
You know with what indifference, said my Mother,
she has hitherto seen him. —Her prudence may be
trusted to, as my Sister Hervey says. 
With what appa—rent indifference, drolled my
Brother. 
Son James! said my Father, sternly! 
I have done, Sir, said he. But again, in a provoking
manner, he reminded me of the prohibition. 
Thus ended this conference. 
Will you engage, my dear, that the hated man
shall not come near your house? —But what an inconsistence
is this, when they consent to my going,
thinking his visits here no otherwise to be avoided! — 
But if he does come, I charge you never leave us
alone together. 
As I have no reason to doubt a welcome from your
good Mother, I will put every-thing in order here,
and be with you in two or three days. 
Mean time, I am 
Your most affectionate and obliged
Clarissa Harlowe. 