


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Tuesday Night. 
I am just returned from St. James's Square. 
But, first, I should tell you, that I had a visit
from Lady Olivia and Lady Maffei. Our conversation
was in Italian and French. Lady Olivia and I had a
quarter of an hour's discourse in private: You may 

guess at our subject. She is not without that tenderness
of heart which is the indispensable characteristic
of a woman. She lamented the violence of her
temper, in a manner so affecting, that I cannot help
pitying her, tho' at the instant I had in my head a
certain attempt that makes me shudder whenever I
think of it. She regrets my going to Northamptonshire
so soon. I have promised to return her visit tomorrow
in the afternoon. 
She sets out on Friday next for Oxford. She wished
I could accompany her. She resolves to see all that is
worth seeing in the western circuit, as I may call it. 
She observes, she says, that Sir Charles Grandison's
sisters, and their Lords, are very particularly engaged
at present; and are in expectation of a call to Windsor,
to attend Lord W's nuptials: She will therefore,
having attendants enough, and two men of consideration
in her train, one of whom is not unacquainted
with England, take cursory tours over the kingdom; 
having a taste for travelling, and finding it a great relief
to her spirits: And when Lady L. and Lady G.
are more disengaged, will review the seats and places
which she shall think worthy of a second visit, in their
company. 
She professed to like the people here, and the face
of the country; and talked favourably of the religion
of it: But, poor woman! she likes all those the better,
I doubt not, for the sake of one Englishman. Love,
Lucy, gilds every object which bears a relation to the
person beloved. 
Lady Maffei was very free in blaming her niece for
this excursion. She took her chiding patiently; but
yet, like a person that thought it too much in her
power to gratify the person blaming her, to pay much
regard to what she said. 
I took a chair to Lady G's. Emily ran to meet
me in the hall. She threw her arms about me: I rejoice
you are come, said she. Did you not meet 

the house in the square? —What means my Emily? — 
Why, it has been flung out of the windows, as the
saying is. Ah madam! we are all to pieces. One
so careless, the other so passionate! —But, hush! Here
comes Lady G.— 
Take, Lucy, in the dialogue-way, particulars. 
Lady G. Then you are come, at last, Harriet. 
You wrote, that you would not come near me. 
Harriet. I did; but I could not stay away. Ah,
Lady G. you will destroy your own happiness! 
Lady G. So you wrote. Not one word, on the
subject you hint at, that you have ever said or written
before. I hate repetitions, child. 
Harriet. Then I must be silent upon it. 
Lady G. Not of necessity. You can say new things
upon old subjects. —But hush! Here comes the man. — 
She ran to her harpsichord—Is this it, Harriet? and
touched the keys—repeating 

Softly sweet, in Lydian measures,
Soon she sooth'd—
Enter Lord G.
Lord G. Miss Byron, I am your most obedient
servant. The sight of you rejoices my soul. —Madam
(to his Lady) you have not been long enough together
to begin a tune. I know what this is for— 
Lady G. Harmony! harmony! is a charming
thing! But I, poor I! know not any but what this
simple instrument affords me. 
Lord G. lifting up his hands. Harmony, madam! 
God is my witness—But I will lay every-thing before
Miss Byron. 
Lady G. You need not, my Lord: She knows as
much as she can know, already; except the fine colourings
be added to the woeful tale, that your unbridled
spirit can give it. —Have you my long Letter
about you, Harriet? 
Lord G. And could you, madam, have the heart
to write— 

Lady G. Why, my Lord, do you mince the matter? 
For Heart, read Courage. You may speak as
plain in Miss Byron's presence, as you did before she
came: I know what you mean. 
Lord G. Let it be Courage, then. 
Harriet. Fie, fie, Lord G. Fie, fie, Lady G.
What lengths do you run! If I understand the matter
right, you have both, like children, been at play, till
you have fallen out. 
Lord G. If, Miss Byron, you know the truth, and
can blame me— 
Harriet. I blame you only, my Lord, for being in
a passion. You see, my Lady is serene: She keeps
her temper: She looks as if she wanted to be friends
with you. 
Lord G. O that cursed serenity! —When my soul
is torn by a whirlwind— 
Lady G. A good tragedy rant! —But, Harriet,
you are mistaken: My Lord G. is a very passionate
man. So humble, so—what shall I call it? before
marriage—Did not the man see what a creature I
was? —To bear with me, when he had no obligation
to me; and not now, when he has the highest—A
miserable sinking! —O Harriet! Harriet! Never, never
marry! 
Harriet. Dear Lady G. you know in your own
heart you are wrong—Indeed you are wrong— 
Lord G. God for ever reward you, madam! —I
will tell you how it began— 
Lady G. ‘Began!’ She knows that already, I tell
you, my Lord. But what has passed within these
four hours, she knows not: You may entertain her
with that, if you please. —It was just about the time
this day is a week, that we were all together, mighty
comfortably, at St. George's, Hanover-Square— 
Lord G. Every tittle of what you promised there,
madam— 
Lady G. And I, my Lord, could be your echo in 

this, were I not resolved to keep my temper, as you
cannot but say I have done, all along. 
Lord G. You could not, madam, if you did not
despise me. 
Lady G. You are wrong, my Lord, to think so:
But you don't believe yourself: If you did, the pride
of your heart ought not to permit you to own it. 
Lord G. Miss Byron, give me leave— 
Lady G. Lord bless me! that people are so fond
of exposing themselves! Had you taken my advice,
when you pursued me out of my dressing-room into
company—My Lord, said I, as mildly as I now speak,
Don't expose yourself. But he was not at all the wiser
for my advice. 
Lord G. Miss Byron, you see—But I had not come
down but to make my compliments to you. He bowed,
and was about to withdraw. 
I took him by the sleeve—My Lord, you must not
go. Lady G. if your own heart justifies you for your
part in this misunderstanding, say so; I challenge you
to say so. —She was silent. 
Harriet. If otherwise, own your fault, promise
amendment—Ask excuse. 
Lady G. Hey-day! 
Harriet. And my Lord will ask yours, for mistaking
you. —For being too easily provoked— 
Lord G. Too easily, madam— 
Harriet. What generous man would not smile at
the foibles of a woman whose heart is only gay with
prosperity and lively youth; but has not the least malice
in it? Has not she made choice of your Lordship
in preference of any other man? She raillies every
one; she can't help it: She is to blame. —Indeed,
Lady G. you are. Your brother felt your edge; he
once smarted by it, and was angry with you. —But
afterwards, observing that it was her way, my Lord; 
that it was a kind of constitutional gaiety of heart,
and exercised on those she loved best; he forgave, 

raillied her again, and turned her own weapons upon
her; and every one in company was delighted with
the spirit of both. —You love her, my Lord.— 
Lord G. Never man more loved a woman. I am
not an ill-natured man— 
Lady G. But a captious, a passionate one, Lord
G. —Who'd have thought it? 
Lord G. Never was there, my dear Miss Byron,
such a strangely-aggravating creature! She could not
be so, if she did not despise me. 
Lady G. Fiddle-faddle, silly man! And so you said
before. If you thought so, you take the way (don't
you?) to mend the matter, by dancing and capering
about, and putting yourself into all manner of disagreeable
attitudes; and even sometimes being ready
to foam at the mouth? —I told him, Miss Byron,
There he stands, let him deny it, if he can; that I
married a man with another face. Would not any
other man have taken this for a compliment to his natural
undistorted face, and instantly have pulled off the
ugly mask of passion, and shewn his own?— 
Lord G. You see, you see, the air, Miss Byron! — 
How ludicrously does she now, even now— 
Lady G. See, Miss Byron! —How captious! — 
Lord G. ought to have a termagant wife: One who
could return rage for rage. Meekness is my crime. — 
I cannot be put out of temper. —Meekness was never
before attributed to woman as a fault. 
Lord G. Good God! —Meekness! —Good God! 
Lady G. But, Harriet, do you judge on which side
the grievance lies. —Lord G. presents me with a face
for his, that I never saw him wear before marriage:
He has cheated me, therefore. I shew him the same
face that I ever wore, and treat him pretty much in
the same manner (or I am mistaken) that I ever did:
And what reason can he give, that will not demonstrate
him to be the most ungrateful of men, for the
airs he gives himself? Airs that he would not have 

presumed to put on eight days ago. Who then, Harriet,
has reason to complain of grievance; my Lord,
or I? 
Lord G. You see, Miss Byron—Can there be
any arguing with a woman who knows herself to be
in just, in all she says? 
Harriet. Why then, my Lord, make a jest of it. 
What will not bear an argument, will not be worth
one's anger. 
Lord G. I leave it to Miss Byron, Lady G. to decide
between us, as she pleases. 
Lady G. You'd better leave it to me, Sir. 
Harriet. Do, my Lord. 
Lord G. Well, madam! —And what is your decree? 
Lady G. You, Miss Byron, had best be Lady
Chancellor, after all. I should not bear to have my
decree disputed, after it is pronounced. 
Harriet. If I must, my decree is this:—You,
Lady G. shall own yourself in fault; and promise
amendment. My Lord shall forgive you; and promise
that he will, for the future, endeavour to distinguish
between your good and your ill-nature:
That he will sit down to jest with your jest, and never
be disturbed at what you say, when he sees it accompanied
with that archness of eye and lip which you
put on to your brother, and to every one whom you
best love, when you are disposed to be teazingly facetious. 
Lady G. Why, Harriet, you have given Lord G.
a clue to find me out, and spoil all my sport. 
Harriet. What say you, my Lord? 
Lord G. Will Lady G. own herself in fault, as you
propose? 
Lady G. Odious recrimination! —I leave you together. 
I never was in fault in my life. Am I not a
woman? If my Lord will ask pardon for his froppishness,
as we say of children— 

She stopt, and pretended to be going— 
Harriet. That my Lord shall not do, Charlotte. 
You have carried the jest too far already. My Lord
shall preserve his dignity for his wife's sake. My Lord,
you will not permit Lady G. to leave us, however? 
He took her hand, and pressed it with his lips: For
God's sake, madam, let us be happy: It is in your
power to make us both so: It ever shall be in your
power. If I have been in fault, impute it to my Love. 
I cannot bear your contempt; and I never will deserve
it. 
Lady G. Why could not this have been said some
hours ago? —Why, slighting my early caution, would
you expose yourself? 
I took her aside. Be generous, Lady G. Let not
your husband be the only person to whom you are not
so. 
Lady G. (whispering) Our quarrel has not run
half its length. If we make up here, we shall make
up clumsily. One of the silliest things in the world
is, a quarrel that ends not, as a coachman after a journey
comes in, with a spirit. We shall certainly renew
it. 
Harriet. Take the caution you gave to my Lord:
Don't expose yourself. And another; That you cannot
more effectually do so, than by exposing your
husband. I am more than half-ashamed of you. You
are not the Charlotte I once thought you were. Let
me see, if you have any regard to my good opinion of
you, that you can own an error with some grace. 
Lady G. I am a meek, humble, docible creature. 
She turned to me, and made me a rustic courtesy, her
hands before her: I'll try for it; tell me, if I am
right. Then stepping towards my Lord, who was
with his back to us looking out at the window—and
he turning about to her bowing—My Lord, said she,
Miss Byron has been telling me more than I knew before
of my duty. She proposes herself one day to 

make a won-der-ful obedient wife. It would have
been well for you, perhaps, had I had her example to
walk by. She seems to say, that, now I am married,
I must be grave, sage, and passive: That smiles will
hardly become me: That I must be prim and formal,
and reverence my husband. —If you think this behaviour
will become a married woman, and expect it
from me, pray, my Lord, put me right by your
frowns, whenever I shall be wrong. For the future,
if I ever find myself disposed to be very light-hearted,
I will ask your leave before I give way to it. And
now, what is next to be done? humorously courtesying,
her hands before her. 
He clasped her in his arms: Dear provoking creature! 
This, this is next to be done—I ask you but to
love me half as much as I love you, and I shall be the
happiest man on earth. 
My Lord, said I, you ruin all by this condescension
on a speech and air so ungracious. If this is all
you get by it, never, never, my Lord, fall out again. 
O Charlotte! If you are not generous, you come off
much, much too easily. 
Well now, my Lord, said she, holding out her
hand, as if threatening me, let you and me, man and
wife like, join against the interposer in our quarrels. — 
Harriet, I will not forgive you, for this last part of
your lecture. 
And thus was this idle quarrel made up. All that
vexes me on the occasion is, that it was not made up
with dignity on my Lord's part. His honest heart so
overflowed with joy at his lips, that the naughty creature,
by her arch leers, every now-and-then, shewed,
that she was sensible of her consequence to his happiness. 
But, Lucy, don't let her sink too low in your
esteem: She has many fine qualities. 
They prevailed on me to stay supper. Emily rejoiced
in the reconciliation: Her heart was, as I may
say, visible in her joy. Can I love her better than I 

do? If I could, she would, every time I see her, give
me reason for it. 

