



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday Midnight. 
I have now a calmer moment. Envy, Ambition,
high and selfish Resentment, and all the violent
Passions, are now, most probably, asleep all around
me; and shall not my own angry ones give way to
the silent hour, and subside likewise? —They have
given way to it; and I have made use of the gentler
space to re-peruse your last Letters. I will touch
upon some passages in them. And that I may the
less endanger the but just-recovered calm, I will begin
with what you write about Mr. Hickman. 
Give me leave to say, That I am sorry you cannot
yet persuade yourself to think better, that is to
say, more justly, of that gentleman, than your whimsical
picture of him shews you do; or, at least, than
the humourousness of your natural vein would make
one think you do. 
I do not imagine, that you yourself will say, he sat
for the picture you have drawn. And yet, upon the
whole, it is not greatly to his disadvantage. Were I
at ease in my mind, I would venture to draw a much
more amiable and just likeness. 
If Mr. Hickman has not that assurance which some
men have, he has that humanity and gentleness
which many want: And which, with the infinite
value he has for you, will make him one of the
fittest Husbands in the world for a person of your
vivacity and spirit. 
Altho' you say I would not like him myself, I do
assure you, if Mr. Solmes were such a man as Mr.
Hickman, in person, mind, and behaviour, my friends
and I had never disagreed about him, if they would
not have permitted me to live single; Mr. Lovelace 

(having such a character as he has) would have stood
no chance with me. This I can the more boldly
aver, because I plainly perceive, that of the two passions,
Love and Fear, This man will be able to inspire
one with a much greater proportion of the latter,
than I imagine is compatible with the former, to
make a happy Marriage. 
I am glad you own, that you like no one better
than Mr. Hickman. In a little while, I make no
doubt, you will be able, if you challenge your heart
upon it, to acknowlege, that you like not any man
so well: Especially, when you come to consider,
that the very faults you find in Mr. Hickman, admirably
fit him to make you happy: That is to say, If
it be necessary to your happiness, that you should
have your own will in every-thing. 
But let me add one thing: And that is this: —You
have such a sprightly turn, that, with your admirable
talents, you would make any man in the world, who
loved you, look like a fool, except he were such a
one as Lovelace. 
Forgive me, my dear, for my frankness: And forgive
me also, for so soon returning to subjects so immediately
relative to myself, as those I now must
touch upon. 
You again insist (strengthened by Mr. Lovelace's
opinion) upon my assuming my own Estate [I cannot
call it resuming, having never been in possession of
it]: And I have given you room to expect, that I
will consider this subject more closely than I have
done before. —I must however own, that the reasons
which I had to offer against taking your advice, were
so obvious, that I thought you would have seen them
yourself, and been determined by them, against your
own hastier counsel. —But since this has not been so,
and that both you and Mr. Lovelace call upon me to
assume my own Estate, I will enter briefly into the
subject. 

In the first place, let me ask you, my dear, supposing
I were inclined to follow your advice, Whom
have I to support me in my demand? My Uncle
Harlowe is one of my Trustees—He is against me. 
My Cousin Morden is the other—He is in Italy, and
very probably may be set against me too. My Brother
has declared, that they are resolved to carry their
point before he arrives: So that, as they drive on,
all will probably be decided before I can have an
Answer from him, were I to write: And, confined
as I am, were the Answer to come in time, and they
did not like it, they would keep it from me. 
In the next place, Parents have great advantages
in every eye over the child, if she dispute their pleasure
in the disposing of her: And so they ought; 
since out of twenty instances, perhaps two could not
be produced, when they were not in the right, the
child in the wrong. 
You would not, I am sure, have me accept of
Mr. Lovelace's offered assistance in such a claim. If
I would embrace any other person's, who else would
care to appear for a child against parents, ever, till of
late, so affectionate? —But were such a protector to
be found, what a length of time would it take up in
a course of litigation? The Will and the Deeds have
flaws in them, they say. My Brother sometimes
talks of going to reside at The Grove: I suppose, with
a design to make Ejectments necessary, were I to offer
at assuming; or, were I to marry Mr. Lovelace, in
order to give him all the opposition and difficulty the
Law would help him to give. 
These cases I have put to myself, for argument-sake: 
But they are all out of the question, altho' anybody
were to be found who would espouse my cause: 
For I do assure you, I would sooner beg my bread,
than litigate for my right with my Father: Since I
am convinced, that whether the Parent do his duty
by the Child or not, the Child cannot be excused 

from doing hers to him. And to go to Law with my
Father, what a sound has That? You will see, that
I have mentioned my wish (as an alternative, and as
a favour) to be permitted, if I must be put out of his
house, to go thither: But not one step further can I
go. And you see how This is resented. 
Upon the whole, then, what have I to hope for,
but a change in my Father's resolution? —And is
there any probability of that; such an ascendency as
my Brother and Sister have obtained over every-body; 
and such an interest to pursue the enmity they have
now openly avowed against me? 
As to Mr. Lovelace's approbation of your assumption-scheme,
I wonder not at it. He very probably
penetrates the difficulties I should have to bring it to
effect, without his assistance. Were I to find myself
as free as I would wish myself to be, perhaps Mr.
Lovelace would stand a worse chance with me than
his vanity may permit him to imagine; notwithstanding
the pleasure you take in raillying me on his account. 
How know you, but all that appears to be
specious and reasonable in his offers; such as, standing
his chance for my favour, after I became independent,
as I may call it [by which I mean no more,
than to have the liberty of refusing for my Husband
a man whom it hurts me but to think of in that
light]; and such as his not visiting me but by my
leave; and till Mr. Morden come; and till I am
satisfied of his Reformation;—How know you, I say,
that he gives not himself these airs purely to stand
better in your graces as well as mine, by offering of
his own accord conditions which he must needs think
would be insisted on, were the case to happen? 
Then am I utterly displeased with him. To
threaten as he threatens; yet to pretend, that it is
not to intimidate me; and to beg of you not to tell
me, when he must know you would, and no doubt
intended that you should, is so meanly artful! —The 

man must think he has a frighted fool to deal with. — 
I, to join hands with such a man of violence! my
own Brother the man whom he threatens! —And
what has Mr. Solmes done to him? —Is he to be
blamed, if he thinks a person would make a Wife
worth having, to endeavour to obtain her? —O that
my friends would but leave me to my own way in
this one point! For have I given the man encouragement
sufficient to ground these threats upon? Were
Mr. Solmes a man to whom I could be but indifferent,
it might be found, that to have the merit of a sufferer
given him from such a flaming spirit, would very little
answer the views of that spirit. It is my fortune to
be treated as a fool by my Brother: But Mr. Lovelace
shall find—Yet I will let him know my mind; 
and then it will come with a better grace to your
knowlege. 
Mean time, give me leave to tell you, that it goes
against me, in my cooler moments, unnatural as my
Brother is to me, to have you, my dear, who are my
other Self, write such very severe reflections upon
him, in relation to the advantage Lovelace had over
him. He is not indeed your Brother: But remember,
that you write to his Sister. —Upon my word, my
dear Miss Howe, you dip your pen in gall whenever
you are offended: And I am almost ready to question,
when I read some of your expressions against others
of my Relations as well as him (altho' in my favour)
whether you are so thoroughly warranted by your own
patience, as you think yourself, to call other people
to account for their warmth. Should we not be particularly
careful to keep clear of the faults we censure? 
—And yet I am so angry both at my Brother and
Sister, that I should not have taken this liberty with
my dear friend, notwithstanding I know you never
lov'd them, had you not made so light of so shocking
a transaction, where a Brother's life was at stake: 
When his credit in the eye of the mischievous Sex 

has received a still deeper wound than he personally
sustained; and when a revival of the same wicked resentments
(which may end more fatally) is threatened. 
His credit, I say, in the eye of the mischievous Sex: 
Who is not warranted to call it so; when it is reckoned
among the men such an extraordinary piece of self-conquest
(as the two Libertines his companions gloried)
to resolve never to give a challenge; and among
whom Duelling is so fashionable a part of brutal bravery,
that the man of temper, who is, mostly, I believe,
the truly brave man, is often at a loss so to
behave as to avoid incurring either a mortal guilt, or
a general contempt? 
To enlarge a little upon this subject, May we not
infer, That those who would be guilty of throwing
these contempts upon a man of temper, who would
rather pass by a verbal injury, than to imbrue his hands
in blood, know not the measure of true magnanimity?
nor how much nobler it is to forgive, and even how
much more manly to despise, than to resent, an injury? 
Were I a man, methinks, I should have too much
scorn for a person, who could wilfully do me a mean
wrong, to put a value upon his life, equal to what I
put upon my own. What an absurdity, Because a
man had done me a small injury, that I should put it
in his power (at least, to an equal risque) to do me,
and those who love me, an irreparable one? —Were
it not a wilful injury, nor avowed to be so, there
could not be room for resentment. 
How willingly would I run away from myself, and
what most concerns myself, if I could! This digression
brings me back again to the occasion of it—And
That to the impatience I was in, when I ended my
last Letter; for my situation is not altered. I renew
therefore my former earnestness, as the new day approaches,
and will bring with it perhaps new trials,
that you will (as undivestedly as possible of favour or
resentment) tell me what you would have me do: — 

For, if I am obliged to go to my Uncle Antony's,
All, I doubt, will be over with me. Yet how to
avoid it—That's the difficulty! 
I shall deposit this the first thing. When you have
it, lose no time, I pray you, to advise (lest it be too
late) 
Your ever obliged
Cl. Harlowe. 