


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


As the chariot drove by houses, I cry'd out for help
once or twice, at setting out. But under pretence
of preventing my taking cold, he tied an handkerchief
over my face, head, and mouth, having first muffled
me up in the cloak; pressing against my arm with his
whole weight, so that I had not my hands at liberty. 
And when he had done, he seized them, and held them
both in his left-hand, while his right-arm thrown
round me, kept me fast on the seat. And except that
now-and-then my struggling head gave me a little
opening, I was blinded. 
But at one place on the road, just after I had screamed,
and made another effort to get my hands free, I
heard voices; and immediately the chariot stopt. Then 

how my heart was filled with hope! But, alas! it was
but momentary. I heard one of his men say (that
Wilson I believe) The best of husbands, I assure you,
Sir; and she is the worst of wives. 
I screamed again. Ay, scream and be d&wblank;n'd, I
heard said in a stranger's voice, if that be the case. 
Poor gentleman! I pity him with all my heart. And
immediately the coachman drove on again. 
The vile wretch laugh'd; That's you, my dear, and
hugg'd me round. You are the d&wblank;n'd wife. And again
he laugh'd: By my soul, I am a charming contriver! 
Greville, Fenwick, Orme, where are you now? —By
my soul, this will be a pretty story to tell when all
your fears are over, my Byron! 
I was ready to faint several times. I begg'd for
air: And when we were in an open road, and I suppose
there was nobody in sight, he vouchsafed to pull
down the blinding handkerchief, but kept it over my
mouth; so that except now-and-then, that I struggled
it aside with my head (and my neck is still, my dear,
very stiff with my efforts to free my face) I could only
make a murmuring kind of noise. 
The curtain of the fore-glass was pull'd down, and
generally the canvas on both sides drawn up. But I was
sure to be made acquainted when we came near houses,
by his care again to blind and stifle me up. 
A little before we were met by my deliverer, I had,
by getting one hand free, unmuffled myself so far as
to see (as I had guessed once or twice before by the
stone pavements) that we were going thro' a town; 
and then I again vehemently screamed. But he had
the cruelty to thrust an handkerchief into my mouth,
so that I was almost strangled; and my mouth was
hurt, and is still sore, with that and his former violence
of the like nature. 
Indeed, he now-and-then made apologies for the
cruelty, to which, he said, he was compelled, by my
invincible obstinacy, to have recourse. I was sorely 

hurt, he said, to be the wife of a man of his consideration! 
But I should be that, or worse. He was in
for it, he said more than once, and must proceed. I
might see that all my resistance was in vain. He had me
in his net: And, d&wblank;n him, if he were not revenged
for all the trouble I had given him. You keep no
terms with me, my Byron, said he, once; and d&wblank;n
me, if I keep any with you! 
I doubted not his malice: His love had no tenderness
in it: But how could I think of being consenting,
as I may say, to such barbarous usage, and by a man
so truly odious to me? What a slave had I been in
spirit, could I have qualified on such villainous treatment
as I had met with! or had I been able to desert
myself! 
At one place the chariot drove out of the road, over
rough ways, and little hillocks, as I thought by its
rocking; and then, it stopping, he let go my hands,
and endeavoured to sooth me. He begged I would
be pacified, and offered, if I would forbear crying out
for help, to leave my eyes unmuffled all the rest of
the way. But I would not, I told him, give such a
sanction to his barbarous violence. 
On the chariot's stopping, one of his men came up,
and put an handkerchief into his master's hands, in
which were some cakes and sweet-meats; and gave him
also a bottle of sack, with a glass. Sir Hargrave was
very urgent with me to take some of the sweet-meats,
and to drink a glass of the wine: But I had neither
stomach nor will to touch either. 
He eat himself very cordially. God forgive me, I
wish'd in my heart, there were pins and needles in
every bit he put into his mouth. 
He drank two glasses of the wine. Again he urged
me. I said, I hoped I had eat and drank my last. 
You have no dependence upon my honour, madam,
said the villain; so cannot be disappointed much, do
what I will. Ungrateful, proud, vain, obstinate, he
called me. 

What signifies, said he, shewing politeness to a
woman who has shewn none to me, tho' she was civil
to every other man? Ha, ha, ha, hah! What, my sweet
Byron, I don't hit your fancy! You don't like my morals! 
Laughing again. My lovely fly, said the insulting
wretch, hugging me round in the cloak, how
prettily have I wrapt you about in my web!— 
Such a provoking, low wretch! —I struggled to free
myself; and unhook'd the curtain of the fore-glass:
But he wrapt me about the closer, and said he would
give me his garter for my girdle, if I would not sit still,
and be orderly. Ah, my charming Byron, said he,
your opportunity is over—All your struggles will
not avail you—Will not avail you. That's a word
of your own, you know. I will, however, forgive
you, if you promise to love me now. But if you stay
till I get you to the allotted place; then, madam, take
what follows. 
I saw that I was upon a large, wild, heath-like place,
between two roads, as it seemed. I asked nothing
about my journey's end. All I had to hope for as to
an escape (tho' then I began to despair of it) was upon
the road, or in some town. My journey's end, I
knew, must be the beginning of new trials; for I was
resolved to suffer death rather than to marry him. 
What I now was most apprehensive about, was, of falling
into fits; and I answered to his barbarous insults,
as little as possible, that I might not be provoked beyond
the little strength I had left me. 
Three or four times he offered to kiss me; and
cursed my pride for resisting him; making him clasp
a cloud, was his speech (aiming at wit) instead of his
Juno; calling the cloak a cloud. 
And now, my dear Byron, said he, if you will
not come to a compromise with me, I must dress you
again for the journey. We will stop at a town a little
further (beckoning to one of his men, and on his approaching,
whispering to him, his whole body out of 

the chariot) and there you shall alight; and a very
worthy woman, to whom I shall introduce you, will
persuade you, perhaps, to take refreshment, tho' I
cannot. 
You are a very barbarous man, Sir Hargrave. I
have the misfortune to be in your power. You may
dearly repent the usage I have already received from
you. You have made my life of no estimation with
me. I will not contend. 
And tears run down my cheeks. Indeed, I thought
my heart was broke. 
He wrapt me up close, and tied the handkerchief
about my mouth and head. I was quite passive. 
The chariot had not many minutes got into the
great road again, over the like rough and sometimes
plashy ground, when it stopt on a dispute between the
coachman, and the coachman of another chariot-and-six,
as it proved. 
Sir Hargrave had but just drawn my handkerchief
closer to my eyes, when this happened. Hinder not
my tears from flowing, said I; struggling to keep my
eyes free, the cloak enough muffling me, and the hand-kerchief
being over my mouth; so that my voice
could be but just heard by him, as I imagine. 
He looked out of his chariot, to see the occasion of
this stop; and then I found means to disengage one
hand. 
I heard a gentleman's voice directing his own coachman
to give way. 
I then push'd up the handkerchief with my disengaged
hand, from my mouth, and pulled it down from
over my eyes, and cried out for help: Help, for God's
sake. 
A man's voice (it was my deliverer's, as it happily
proved) bid Sir Hargrave's coachman proceed at his
peril. 
Sir Hargrave, with terrible oaths and curses, order'd
him to proceed, and to drive thro' all opposition. 

The gentleman call'd Sir Hargrave by his name; 
and charg'd him with being upon a bad design. 
The vile wretch said, he had only secured a runaway
wise, eloped to, and intending to elope from, a masquerade,
to her adulterer [Horrid!]: He put aside the
cloak, and appealed to my dress. 
I cried out, No, no, no, five or six times repeated; 
but could say no more at that instant, holding up then
both my disengaged hands for protection. 
The wicked man endeavoured to muffle me up
again, and to force the handkerchief, which I had then
got under my chin, over my mouth; and brutally
cursed me. 
The gentleman would not be satisfied with Sir Hargrave's
story. He would speak to me. Sir Hargrave
called him impertinent, and other names; and ask'd,
Who the devil he was? with rage and contempt. — 
The gentleman, however, asked me, and with an
air that promised deliverance, if I were Sir Hargrave's
wise. 
No, no, no, no—I could only say. 
For my own part, I could have no scruple, distress'd
as I was, and made desperate, to throw myself into
the protection, and even into the arms, of my deliverer; 
tho' a very fine young gentleman. It would
have been very hard, had I fallen from bad to bad; 
had the sacred name of protector been abused by another
Sir Hargrave, who, vile as the first was, had not
the crime of betraying a confidence to answer for. 
But, however this had prov'd, an escape from the present
evil was all I had in my head at the time. 
But you may better conceive, than I can express,
the terror I was in, when Sir Hargrave drew his sword,
and push'd at the gentleman with such words as denoted
(for I could not look that way) he had done him
mischief. But when I found my oppressor, my lowmeaning,
and soon after low-laid oppressor, pulled out
of the chariot, by the brave, the gallant man (which 

was done with such force, as made the chariot rock)
and my protector safe; I was as near fainting with
joy, as before I had been with terror. I had shaken
off the cloak, and untied the handkerchief. 
He carried me in his arms (I could not walk) to
his own chariot. 
I heard Sir Hargrave curse, swear, and threaten. 
I was glad, however, he was not dead. 
Mind him not, madam, fear him not, said Sir Charles
Grandison [You know his noble name, my Lucy!] 
Coachman, drive not over your master. Take care
of your master; or some such words he said, as he
lifted me into his own chariot. He came not in, but
shut the chariot-door, as soon as he had seated me. 
He just surveyed, as it were, the spot, and bid a
servant let Sir Hargrave know who he was; and then
came back to me. 
Partly thro' terror, partly thro' weakness, I had sunk
to the bottom of the chariot. He opened the door,
entered, and, with all the tenderness of a brother,
soothed me, and listed me on the seat once more. He
ordered his coachman to drive back to Colnebrooke. 
In accents of kindness, he told me, that he had there
at present the most virtuous and prudent of sisters,
to whose care he would commit me, and then proceed
on his journey to town. 
How irresistably welcome to me was his supporting
arm, thrown round me, as we flew back, to what
the vile Sir Hargrave's were! 
Mr. Reeves has given you an account from the
angelic sister—O my Lucy, they are a pair of
angels! 
I have written a long, long letter, or rather five
letters in one, of my distresses, of my deliverance:
And, when my heart is stronger, I will say more of
the persons, as well as minds, of this excellent brother
and his sister. 
But what shall I do with my gratitude? O my dear, 

I am overwhelmed with my gratitude: I can only express
it in silence before them. Every look, if it be
honest to my heart, however, tells it: Reverence
mingles with my gratitude—Yet there is so much
ease, so much sweetness, in the behaviour of both— 
O my Lucy! Did I not find that my veneration of
both is equal; did I not, on examination, find, that
the amiable sister is as dear to me, from her experienced
tenderness, as her brother from his remembred
bravery (which must needs mingle awe with my
esteem); in short, that I love the sister, and revere the
brother; I should be afraid of my gratitude. 
I have over-written myself. I am tired. O my
grandmamma, you have never yet, while I have
been in London, sent me your ever-valued blessing
under your own hand: Yet, I am sure I had it; and
your blessings, my dear uncle and aunt Selby; and
your prayers, my Lucy, my Nancy, and all my
loves; else my deliverance had not perhaps followed
my presumptuous folly, in going dress'd out, like the
fantastic wretch I appeared to be, at a vile, a foolish
masquerade. —How often, throughout the several stages
of my distress, and even in my deliverance, did I
turn my eye to myself, and from myself, with the disgust
that made a part, and that not a light one, of
my punishment! 
And so much, my Lucy, for masquerades, and
masquerade-dresses, for ever! 
Pray let not any-body unnecessarily be acquainted
with this shocking affair. Particularly neither Mr. Greville
nor Mr. Fenwick. It is very probable, that they
(especially Mr. Greville) would be for challenging Sir
Hargrave, were it only on a supposition that it would
give him an interest in me in the eye of the world. You
know that Mr. Greville watches for all opportunities
to give himself consequence with me. 
Were any farther mischief to happen to any-body,
I should be grieved beyond measure. Hitherto I have 

reason to think, that a transaction so shocking is not
very unhappily concluded. May the vile man sit
himself down satisfied, and I shall be willing to do
so too; provided I never more behold his face. 
* *
Mr. Reeves will send you with the above packet,
a letter from Sir Charles Grandison, inclosing one from
that vile Wilson. I can write no more just now, and
they will sufficiently explain themselves. 
Adieu, my dearest Lucy. I need not say how
much I am, and will ever be, 
Your faithful and affectionate
Harriet Byron. 

