



Miss Howe, To Mrs. Judith Norton. 

Thursday, May 11. 
Good Mrs Norton,
Cannot you, without naming me as an adviser,
who am hated by the family, contrive a
way to let Mrs. Harlowe know, that in an accidental
conversation with me, you had been assured, that my
beloved friend pines after a Reconciliation with her
relations? That she has hitherto, in hopes of it, refused
to enter into any obligation that shall be in the
least an hindrance to it: That she would fain avoid
giving Mr. Lovelace a right to make her family uneasy
in relation to her Grandfather's Estate: That all
she wishes for still, is to be indulged in her choice of
a Single Life, and, on that condition, would make
her Father's pleasure hers with regard to that Estate: 
That Mr. Lovelace is continually pressing her to marry
him; and all his friends likewise: But that I am
sure, she has so little liking to the man, because of
his faulty morals, and of the antipathy of her relations
to him, that if she had any hope given her of a Reconciliation,
she would forego all thoughts of him,
and put herself into her Father's protection. But that
their resolution must be speedy; for otherwise she
would find herself obliged to give way to his pressing
entreaties; and it might then be out of her power to
prevent disagreeable litigations. 
I do assure you, Mrs. Norton, upon my honour,
that our dearest friend knows nothing of this procedure
of mine: And therefore it is proper to acquaint
you, in confidence, with my grounds for it. —These
are they: 
She had desired me to let Mr. Hickman drop hints
to the above effect to her Uncle Harlowe; but indirectly
as from himself, lest, if the application should
not be attended with success, and Mr. Lovelace (who 

already takes it ill, that he has so little of her favour)
come to know it, she may be deprived of every protection,
and be perhaps subjected to great inconveniences
from so haughty a spirit. 
Having this authority from her, and being very
solicitous about the success of the application, I
thought, that if the weight of so good a Wife, Mother,
and Sister, as Mrs. Harlowe is known to be,
were thrown into the same scale with that of Mr.
John Harlowe (supposing he could be engaged) it
could hardly fail of making a due impression. 
Mr. Hickman will see Mr. John Harlowe to-morrow: 
By that time you may see Mrs. Harlowe. If
Mr. Hickman finds the old gentleman favourable, he
will tell him, that you will have seen Mrs. Harlowe
upon the same account; and will advise him to join
in consultation with her how best to proceed to melt
the most obdurate hearts in the world. 
This is the fair state of the matter, and my true
motive for writing to you. I leave all therefore to
your discretion; and most heartily wish success to it; 
being of opinion that Mr. Lovelace cannot possibly
deserve our admirable friend: Nor indeed know I the
man who does. 
Pray acquaint me by a line of the result of your interposition. 
If it prove not such as may be reasonably
hoped for, our dear friend shall know nothing of this
step from me; and pray let her not from you. For,
in that case, it would only give deeper grief to a heart
already too much afflicted. I am, dear and worthy
Mrs. Norton, 
Your true friend,
Anna Howe. 