


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley 


Grandison-hall, Saturday, April 28 
My dearest grandmamma will not complain that
my three last Letters (a)  were not filled with particulars
of our engagements and conversations here. 
What a scene of happiness! What have I to pray for
but the continuance of it? Except that the admirable
Lady Clementina were somehow settled to her own
liking, and that her indulgent relations could be satisfied
with it? Something seems to be wanting for
her, and therefore for them. Yet can a lover of her,
of her same, of her family, say, what that something
should be? I, for my part, ought to be the last who
should decide for her; I, who never, I think (say
Lady G. what she pleases of my romancings) could
have been happy with any man in the world, but Sir
Charles Grandison, after I had known him, and once
was led to hope for so great a blessing; and who have
not that notion that she has, or seems to have, of the
dreariness, and disadvantages of a single state; on the
contrary, who think the married life attended with so
many cares and troubles, that it is rather (as it is a
duty to enter into it, when it can be done with prudence)
a kind of faulty indulgence and selfishness, in order
to avoid these cares and troubles, to live single. 
But to leave this subject to the decision of Lady G.
and Lady Gertrude, the latter of whom has given
some unanswerable hints on her side of the question,
I will proceed with my narrative. 
And here let me observe, that had not Lady Clementina
made her rejection of the best of men her
sole and deliberate act, it is my humble opinion that
her loss of him would have been insupportable to her. 
That consideration, and her noble motive for it, enable 

her to behave gloriously under the self-deprivation,
as I may call it. Yet, I can see, at times, by her
studiously avoiding his company, and frequently excusing
herself from making one in little parties of Sir
Charles's proposing; and by her chusing, at all times,
my company, that the noble Lady thinks self-denial
necessary to her peace. 
She was once for putting Jeronymo on proposing
to leave England sooner than they had intended; and
take my promise to follow them. I was present. She
had tears in her eyes when she proposed it. We had
been talking of Sir Charles in raptures, on some of
his noble charities which had but lately come to our
knowlege, and it was pretty evident to me, that she,
at the time, was of opinion, that distance from him
would be a means to quiet her heart. –––The dear
Emily finds it so, thank God! 
Lady Clementina has been, however, tolerably
chearful since, amusing herself with drawing up plans
for her future life. Very pretty ones, some of them:
But a little too ideal, if I may so express myself; and
she changes them too often to shew that steadiness,
which I want to see in her mind. Poor Lady! How
I pity her as I contemplate her, in her contrivances
and proposals! I am often forced to turn away my face,
that she may not see the starting tear. 
Tuesday, May 1. 
The Count of Belvedere being returned to London
from a country excursion, and not very well, the
Marquis was desirous of making a visit to him, and
at the same time to pass a few days in London to see
the curiosities of the place, and to be present at some
of the public entertainments. The gentlemen at
the first motion made a party to attend him, and Sir
Charles, you may suppose, would not, in complaisance,
be excused. Dr. Bartlett and Father Marescotti, who
are inseparable, had formed a scheme of their own; 
and the Ladies declared, that not one of them would
leave me. 

The gentlemen accordingly set out yesterday morning. 
In the afternoon arrived here, one of the most
obliging of wives, tenderest of mothers, and amiable
of nurses—Who do you think, madam? —No other
than Lady G. and her Lord. Ungovernable Charlotte! 
Her month but just up! We have all blamed her. 
We blamed her Lord too for suffering her to come. ––– 
But what could I do, said he, innocently—But they
are both so much improved as husband and wife! ––– 
Upon my word, I am charmed with her in every one
of the above characters. My Lord appears, even in
her company, now that his wife has given him his due
consequence, a manly, sensible man: If he ever had
any levities of behaviour they are all vanished and
gone. She is all vivacity, as heretofore; but no flippancy. 
Her liveliness, in the main, is that of a sensible,
not a very saucy wife, entirely satisfied with herself,
her situation and prospects. Upon my word, I
am brought over to her opinion, that if the second
man be worthy, a woman may be happy, who has
not been indulged in her first fancy: And I am the
rather induced to hope so for my Emily's sake. 
Tuesday Evening. 
Mrs. Beaumont has received a Letter from the Ladies
her friends at Florence, expressing their fear that
the love of her country now she is in it, has taken
place in her heart, and weakened her affection for
them. They beg of her to convince them of the contrary
by hastening to them. 
This Letter, it seems, mentions some severe reflexions
cast upon Lady Clementina by the unhappy
Olivia. Camilla, who is very fond of me, has hinted
this to me, and at the same time acquainted me with
her young Lady's earnestness to see it; Mrs. Beaumont
having expressed to her her indignation against
Olivia on the occasion. Unworthy Olivia! What
reflexions can you cast on the admirable Clementina! 

–––Yet I wish Mrs. Beaumont would let me see them. 
–––But dear Mrs. Beaumont, impart not to Clementina
any thing that may affect her delicate and too
scrupulous mind! 
This over-lively Lady G. has been acquainting
Lady Clementina with Emily's story, yet intending
to set forth nothing by it, she says, but the fortitude
of so young a creature. 
She owns, that Lady Clementina often reddened as
she proceeded in it; yet that she went on–––How
could she? –––I chid her for poor Emily's sake, for her
own sake, for Lady Clementina's, for Sir Edward
Beauchamp's sake–––How could she be so indelicate? 
Is there a necessity, dear Lady G. (thought I, as she
repeated what passed on the occasion) now you are so
right in the great articles of your duty, that you must
be wrong in something? 
Lady Clementina highly applauded Emily, however. 
A charming young creature she called her. 
Absence, added she, is certainly a right measure. 
Were the man a common man, it would not signify:
Presence, in that case, might help her, as he probably
would every day expose his faults to her observation. 
But absence from such a man as Sir Charles Grandison,
is certainly right. Lady G. says, it was easy to
see, that Lady Clementina made some self-applications
upon it. 
Wednesday Morning, May 2. 
Lady G. has been communicating to me a conference
which, she says, she could not but overhear,
between Lady Clementina and Mrs. Beaumont, held
in the closet of the latter, which joins to a closet in
Lady G's dressing-room, separated only by a thin partition. 
The rooms were once one–––A little of your
usual curiosity, I doubt, my dear Lady G. thought I. 
You were not confined to that closet. You might have
retired when their conversation began. But, no; Curiosity
is a nail, that will fasten to the ground, the 

foot of an inquisitive person, however painful, what
she hears may sometimes make her situation. 
Mrs. Beaumont had acquainted Lady Clementina
with the contents of the Letter she had received from
her friends at Florence. The poor Lady was in tears
upon it. She called Olivia cruel, unjust, wicked. 
The very surmize, said she, is of such a nature, that
I cannot bear to look either Lady Grandison, or any
of her friends in the face: For Heaven's sake, let it
not be hinted to any one in the family, nor even to
my own relations, that Olivia herself could be capable
of making such a reflexion upon me. 
My dearest Lady Clementina, said Mrs. Beaumont,
I wish––– 
What wisheth, my dear Mrs. Beaumont––– 
That you would change your system. 
Articles, Mrs. Beaumont! Articles! –––If
they are broken with me, I resume my solicitude to
be allowed to take the veil. That allowance, and
that only, can set all right. My heart is distressed by
what you have let me see Olivia has dared to throw
out against me. 
Allow me one observation only, my dear Clementina. 
What Olivia has hinted, the world will hint. 
It behoves you to consider, that the husband of Lady
Grandison ought not to be so much the object of any
woman's attention, as to be an obstacle to the address
of another man really worthy. 
Cruel, cruel Olivia! There is no bearing the
thought of her vile suggestion. None but Olivia— 
Say not the world. Olivia only, Mrs. Beaumont, was
capable of such a suggestion— 
For my own part, interrupted Mrs. Beaumont, I
am confident that it is a base suggestion; and that if
Sir Charles Grandison had not been married, you never
would have been his. You could not have receded
from your former objections. You see what a determined
Protestant he is; a Protestant upon principle. 

You are equally steady in your Faith: Yet, as matters
stand; so amiable as he is; and the more his private
life and manners are seen, the more to be admired; 
must not your best friends lay it at the door of
a first Love, that you cannot give way to the address
of a man, against whom no one other objection
can lie? 
Articles, Mrs. Beaumont! Articles!––– 
One word more only, my dear Lady Clementina,
as the subject was begun by yourself–––May it not be
expected, now that no opposition is given you, you
will begin to feel, that your happiness, and peace, and
strength of mind will flow from turning your thoughts
on principles of Duty (so the world will call them) to
other objects; and that the dwelling on those it will
suppose you to dwell upon, till your situation is visibly
altered, will serve only to disturb your mind, and fill
your friends, on every instance that may affect it, with
apprehensions for you? 
You have said a great deal, Mrs. Beaumont. But
is not the veil the only possible expedient to make us
a., easy? 
Articles, Articles! my dear Clementina. I
have been drawn in by yourself insensibly to speak
my mind on this subject. But I have no view, no
design. Your parents, your brothers, you see, inviolably
adhere to the Articles. But, consider, my
dear, were you even allowed to assume the veil, that
all such recollections of your former inclination as
would be faulty in a married state, would have been
equally contrary to your religious vows. Would
then the assuming of the veil make you happy? 
Don't you hint, Olivia-like, Mrs. Beaumont, at
culpable inclinations? Do you impute to me culpable
inclinations? 
I do not, neither do I think you are absolutely as
yet an Angel. Would you, my dear, refuse your
vows to the Count of Belvedere, or any other man, 

for a certain reason, yet think yourself free enough to
give them to your God? 
Will this argument hold, Mrs. Beaumont, in the
present case? 
You will call upon Articles, my dear, if I proceed. 
Your silence, however, is encouraging. What
were just now your observations upon the story of
Miss Emily Jervois? Is there not a resemblance between
her case and yours? 
Surely, madam, I am not such a girl! –––O Mrs.
Beaumont, how am I sunk in your opinion! 
You are not, my dear Clementina, you cannot in
any-body's. Miss Jervois is under obligations to her
guardian, that you are not. 
Is that, Mrs. Beaumont, all the difference? ––– 
That makes none. I am under greater. What are
pecuniary obligations to the preservation of a brother's
life? To a hundred other instances of goodness
—That girl my pattern! Poor, poor Clementina! 
How art thou fallen! Let me fly this country. 
–––Now I see in the strongest light, what a rashness
I was guilty of, when I fled to it. How must
the Chevalier Grandison himself despise me! –––But
I tell you, Mrs. Beaumont, that I am incapable of a
wish, of a thought, contrary to those that determined
me when I declined the hand of the best of men. O
that I were in my own Italy! –––What must young
creatures suffer from the love of an improper object, in
the opinion of their friends, if, after the sacrifices I
have made, I must lie under disgraceful imputations
from my gratitude and esteem for the most worthy of
human minds? –––O how I disdain myself! 
It is a generous disdain, my dear lady Clementina. 
I end as I began–––I wish you would think of changing
your system. But I leave the whole upon your
own consideration. Your parents are passive. God
direct you. I wish you happy. At present you will
not yourself say you are so. Yet nobody controuls 

you, nor wishes to controul you. Every-body loves
you. Your happiness is the subject of all our prayers. 
Lady G. believes the conversation ended here. 
* *
Lady L. in Mrs. Beaumont's presence, has been
just making me a compliment on my generous Love, as
she calls it, of Lady Clementina, and my security in
Sir Charles's affection. Dear madam, said I, where
is the merit? A man of such established principles,
and a woman of such delicate honour! They both
of them move my pity, and engage my love. With
regard to Lady Clementina, this is my consolation,
that I stood not in her way: That your Brother never
made his addresses to me, till she, on the noblest motives,
left him free to chuse the next eligible, as I have
reason to think he allowed me to be. And let me
tell you, my dear Mrs. Beaumont, that in his address
to me, he did her justice; and dealt so nobly with me,
that had I not before preferred him to all other men,
I should have done it then. 
Thursday, May 3. 
I Have received a Letter from Sir Charles. Lady
Clementina and I were together when it was brought. 
She seeing whom it came from, and that I meditated
the seal with impatience, begged me to read it then,
or she would withdraw. I opened it. There were
in it, I told her, the politest remembrances of her,
and the other ladies; and read what he wrote of that
nature. She looked with so desiring an eye at it,
that I said, Were you to read it, madam, you would
find him the kindest of men. Sir Charles and I
have not a secret between us. But there are in it a
passage or two, relating to a certain gentleman, that,
were you to read it, might affect you. [By the way
she reads English extremely well.] And is that, Lady
Grandison, your only objection? I should be glad to 

see, were it not improper, how the politest of men
writes to the best of wives. 
I gave her the Letter. 
She had greatness of mind to be delighted with his
affectionate stile–––Tender delicacy! said she, as she
read:–––Happy, happy Lady Grandison! Tears in
her eyes, and clasping her arms about me, let me
thus congratulate you. I acted right in declining his
address. I must have thought well of the religion of
the man, who could speak, who could write, who
could act, who could live, as he does. 
I bowed my face on her shoulder. To have expressed
but half the admiration I had in my heart of
her nobleness of mind, would have been to hint to
her the delicate situation she had been in, and to
wonder how she could overcome herself. 
What follows, said she, sitting down, I presume I
may read: For my eye has caught the name of a man
my heart can pity. 
She read to herself the passage, which is to the following
effect: “The person of the poor Count of
Belvedere” (Sir Charles writes, in the Count's
words) “is loitering in town, endeavouring to divert
itself there; while his soul is at Grandison-hall. 
He cannot think of quitting England, till he has
taken leave of Lady Clementina; yet, dreading
the pangs he shall feel on that occasion, he cannot
bring himself to undergo them.” 
The Marquis, the Bishop, Signor Jeronymo, all
joined, Sir Charles writes, to console him; yet wished
him to pursue his better fortune at Madrid; and the
Count thinks of prevailing on himself to accompany
them down, in order to take this dreaded Farewel. 
Sir Charles expresses his pity for him; but applauds
the whole family for their inviolable adherence to
their agreement. 
When she read to that place, tears stole down her
cheeks–––Agreement, said she,–––Ah, Lady Grandison! 

It is true, they speak not: But I can read their
wishes in their eyes. 
She read on Sir Charles's praises of the Count for
his beneficent spirit. The Count, said she, is certainly
a good man–––But is not his, a strange perseverance? 
Then, giving me the Letter, How few of
us know, said she, what is best for ourselves! There
is a Lady in Spain of great honour and merit, who
would make him a much happier man, than she can
do, on whom he has cast a partial eye. And besides
there is the poor Laurana— 
She stopt. I suffered the subject to end there. 
Sir Charles supposes it will be the latter end of
next week before they return, if the Marquis holds
his purpose of being present at a Ball to which he is
invited by the Venetian ambassador—Near a fortnight's
absence on the whole! –––O dear! O dear! 
* *
The following by Lady G. 
And O dear! O dear! say I! This is Saturday,
and not a word more written. So taken up with her
walks and walking-mate! –––Selfish creatures both. 
It was with difficulty I procured a sight of this Letter. 
No wonder. You see how freely she has treated me
in it. I told her, it never would be finished, if I did
not finish it for her. Her excuse is, Sir Charles's
absence, and that you, madam, charged her not to
write by every post, lest an accidental omission should
make you uneasy. –––Ungrateful for indulgence given! 
She must therefore let several posts pass–––But get
thee gone, Paper, now. And carry with thee all
manner of compliments from Charlotte G. as well as
from [Here sign it, my sweet Sister] 
Harriet Grandison. 

