



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

This, my dear, was the situation Mr. Lovelace
and I were in, when my brother arrived from
Scotland. 
The moment Mr. Lovelace's visits were mentioned
to him, he, without either hesitation or apology, expressed
his disapprobation of them. He found great
flaws in his character; and took the liberty to say, in
so many words, That he wondered, how it came into
the hearts of his uncles to encourage such a man for
either of his sisters: At the same time returning his
thanks to my father for declining his consent till he
arrived, in such a manner, I thought, as a superior
would do, when he commended an inferior, for having
well performed his duty in his absence. 
He justified his avowed inveteracy, by common
fame, and by what he had known of him at college; 
declaring, That he had ever hated him; ever should
hate him; and would never own him for a brother,
nor me for a sister; if I married him. 
That college-begun antipathy I have heard accounted
for in this manner: 

Mr. Lovelace was always noted for his vivacity and
courage; and no less, it seems, for the swift and surprising
progress he made in all parts of literature: 
For diligence in his studies, in the hours of study, he
had hardly his equal. This, it seems, was his general
character at the university; and it gained him many
friends among the more learned youth; while those
who did not love him, feared him, by reason of the
offence his vivacity made him too ready to give, and
of the courage he shewed in supporting the offence
when given; which procured him as many followers
as he pleased among the mischievous sort. —No very
amiable character, you'll say, upon the whole. 
But my brother's temper was not happier. His
native haughtiness could not bear a superiority so visible; 
and whom we fear more than love, we are
not far from hating: And, having less command of his
passions, than the other, was evermore the subject of
his, perhaps indecent, ridicule: So that they never met
without quarreling: And every-body, either from love
or fear, siding with his antagonist, he had a most uneasy
time of it, while both continued in the same college. — 
It was the less wonder, therefore, that a young man,
who is not noted for the gentleness of his temper,
should resume an antipathy early begun, and so deeply-rooted. 
He found my sister, who waited but for the occasion,
ready to join him in his resentments against the man
he hated. She utterly disclaimed all manner of regard
for him: ‘Never liked him at all: —His estate was
certainly much incumber'd: It was impossible it
should be otherwise; so intirely devoted as he was to
his pleasures. He kept no house; had no equipage: 
Nobody pretended that he wanted pride: The reason
therefore was easy to be guessed at.’ And then did
she boast of, and my brother praise her for, refusing
him: And both joined on all occasions to depreciate
him, and not seldom made the occasions; their displeasure 

against him causing every subject to run into
this, if it began not with it. 
I was not solicitous to vindicate him, when I was
not joined in their reflections. I told them, I did not
value him enough to make a difference in the family
on his account: And as he was supposed to have
given too much cause for their ill opinion of him, I
thought he ought to take the consequence of his own
faults. 
Now-and-then, indeed, when I observed, that their
vehemence carried them beyond all bounds of probability,
I thought it but justice to put in a word for
him. But this only subjected me to reproach, as having
a prepossession in his favour that I would not own. 
—So that when I could not change the subject, I used
to retire either to my music, or to my closet. 
Their behaviour to him, when they could not help
seeing him, was very cold and disobliging; but, as
yet, not directly affrontive: For they were in hopes
of prevailing upon my papa to forbid his visits. But,
as there was nothing in his behaviour, that might warrant
such a treatment of a man of his birth and fortune,
they succeeded not: And then they were very earnest
with me to forbid them. I ask'd, What authority I
had to take such a step in my father's house; and when
my behaviour to him was so distant, that he seemed
to be as much the guest of any other person of the
family, themselves excepted, as mine? —In revenge,
they told me, That it was cunning management between
us; and that we both understood one another
better than we pretended to do. And at last, they
gave such a loose to their passions, all of a sudden (a) ,
as I may say, that instead of withdrawing, as they
used to do when he came, they threw themselves in
his way, purposely to affront him. 
Mr. Lovelace, you may believe, very ill brooked 

this: But, nevertheless, contented himself to complain
of it to me: In high terms, however; telling me, that,
but for my sake, my brother's treatment of him was
not to be borne. 
I was sorry for the merit this gave him, in his own
opinion, with me: And the more as some of the affronts
he received, were too flagrant to be excused: 
But I told him, That I was determin'd not to fall
out with my brother, if I could help it, whatever
were his faults: And, since they could not see one
another with temper, should be glad, that he would
not throw himself in my brother's way; and I was
sure my brother would not seek him. 
He was very much nettled at this answer: But said,
He must bear his affronts, if I would have it so. He
had been accused himself of violence in his temper: 
But he hoped to shew on this occasion, that he had a
command of his passions, which few young men, so
provoked, would be able to shew; and doubted not,
but it would be attributed to a proper motive by a person
of my generosity and penetration. 
My brother had just before, with the approbation
of my uncles, employ'd a person related to a discharged
bailiff or steward of Lord M. who had had the management
of some part of Mr. Lovelace's affairs (from which
he was also dismissed by him), to inquire into his debts; 
after his companions; into his amours; and the like. 
My aunt Hervey, in confidence, gave me the following
particulars of what the man said of him. 
‘That he was a generous landlord: That he spared
nothing for solid and lasting improvements upon his
estate: And that he looked into his own affairs,
and understood them: That he had, when abroad,
been very expensive; and contracted a large debt
(for he made no secret of his affairs); yet chose to
limit himself to an annual sum, and to decline equipage,
in order to avoid being obliged to his uncle
and aunts; from whom he might have what money 

he pleased; but that he was very jealous of their
controul; had often quarrels with them, and treated
them so freely, that they were all afraid of him. 
However, that his estate was never mortgaged, as
my brother had heard it was; his credit was always
high; and, he believed, he was by this time, near
upon, if not quite, clear of the world. 
‘He was a sad gentleman, he said, as to women: — 
If his tenants had pretty daughters, they chose to
keep them out of his sight. He believed, he kept
no particular mistress; for he had heard newelty, that
was the man's word, was every-thing with him. 
But for his uncle's and aunts teazings, fansy'd he
would not think of marriage: Was never known to
be disguised with liquor: But was a great plotter,
and a great writer: That he lived a wild life in
town, by what he had heard: Had six or seven companions
as bad as himself; whom now-and-then he
brought down with him; and the country was always
glad when they went up again. He would have
it, that, altho' passionate, he was good-humour'd; 
loved as well to take a jest, as to give one, and would
railly himself, upon occasion, the freest of any man
he ever knew.’ 
This was his character from an enemy; for, as my
aunt observed, every thing the man said commendably
of him, came grudgingly, with a Must needs say—To
do him justice, &c. while the contrary was delivered
with a free good-will. And this character, as a worse
was expected, tho' This was bad enough, not answering
the end of inquiring after it, my brother and sister
were more apprehensive than before, that his address
would be encouraged: since the worst part of it was
known, or supposed, when he was first introduced to
my sister. 
But, with regard to myself, I must observe in his
disfavour, that, notwithstanding the merit he wanted
to make with me, for his patience upon my brother's 

ill-treatment of him, I owed him no compliments for
trying to conciliate with him. Not that I believe it
would have signified any thing, if he had made ever
such court, either to him, or to my sister: Yet one
might have expected, from a man of his politeness,
and from his pretensions, you know, that he would
have been willing to try. Instead of which, such a
hearty contempt he shew'd of them both, of my brother
especially, that I ever heard of it with aggravations. 
And for me to have hinted at an alteration in
his behaviour to my brother, was an advantage I knew
he would have been proud of; and which therefore I
had no mind to give him. —But I doubted not, that
having so very little encouragement from any-body,
his pride would soon take fire, and he would of himself
discontinue his visits, or go to town; where, till
he came acquainted with our family, he used chiefly
to reside: And in this latter case he had no reason to
expect, that I would receive, much less answer, his
letters; the occasion, which had led me to receive any
of his, being by this time over. 
But my brother's antipathy would not permit him
to wait for such an event; and after several excesses,
which Mr. Lovelace still return'd with contempt, and
a haughtiness too much like that of the aggressor, my
brother took upon himself to fill up the door-way,
once, when he came, as if to oppose his entrance:
and, upon his asking for me, demanded, What his
business were with his sister? 
The other, with a challenging air, as my brother
says, told him, He would answer a gentleman any
question: But he wished, that Mr. James Harlowe, who
had of late given himself high airs, would remember,
that he was not now at college. 
Just then the good Dr. Lewin, who frequently honours
me with a visit of conversation, as he is pleased
to call it, and had parted with me in my own parlour,
came to the door; and, hearing the words, interposed; 

both having their hands upon their swords: 
And telling Mr. Lovelace where I was, he burst by
my brother, to come to me; leaving him chasing,
he said, like a hunted boar at bay. 
This alarm'd us all. My father was pleased to hint
to Mr. Lovelace; and I, by his command, spoke a
great deal plainer; that he wish'd he would discontinue
his visits, for the peace-sake of the family. 
But Mr. Lovelace is not a man to be easily brought
to give up his purpose, in a point, especially, wherein
he pretends his heart is so much engag'd: And an
absolute prohibition not having been given, things
went on for a little while as before: For I saw plainly,
that to have deny'd myself to his visits (which, however,
I declin'd receiving, as often as I could) was to
bring forward some desperate issue between the two; 
since the offence so readily given on one side, was
only brooked by the other, out of consideration to
me. And thus did my brother's rashness lay me under
an obligation where I would least have ow'd it. 
The intermediate proposals of Mr. Symmes and Mr.
Mullins, both (in turn) encouraged by my brother,
were inducements for him to be more patient for a
while; he being in hopes, as no-body thought me
over-forward in Mr. Lovelace's favour, that he should
engage my father and uncles to espouse the one or the
other in opposition to him. But when he found, that
I had interest enough to disengage myself from their
addresses, as I had (before he went to Scotland, and,
before Mr. Lovelace visited here) of Mr. Wyerley's,
he then kept no measures: And first set himself to
upbraid me for a supposed prepossession; which he
treated, as if it were criminal: And then to insult Mr.
Lovelace in person. And it being at Mr. Edward
Symmes's, the brother of the other Symmes, two
miles off, and no good Dr. Lewin again to interpose,
the unhappy rencounter follow'd. My brother was
disarm'd in it, as you have heard; and on being 

brought home, and giving us ground to suppose he
was much worse hurt than he really was, and a fever
ensuing, every-one flam'd out; and all was laid at my
door. 
Mr. Lovelace, for three days together, sent twice each
day to inquire after my brother's health; and, altho'
he received rude, and even shocking returns, he thought
fit, on the fourth day, to make in person the fame
inquiries; and received still greater incivilities from
my two uncles, who happen'd to be both there. My
papa also was held by force from going to him with
his sword in his hand, altho' he had the gout upon
him. 
I fainted away with terror, seeing every-one so
violent; and hearing his voice, swearing he would not
depart without seeing me, or making my uncles ask
his pardon for the indignities he had received at their
hands: A door being also held fast lock'd between
them; my mamma struggling with my papa; and my
sister, after treating him with virulence, insulting me,
as fast as I recover'd. But, when he was told how ill
I was, he departed, vowing revenge. 
He was ever a favourite with our domestics. His
bounty to them, and having always something facetious
to say to each, had made them all of his party: And
on this occasion they privately blamed every-body else,
and reported his patience and gentlemanly behaviour
(till the provocations given him ran very high) in such
favourable terms, that those reports, and my apprehensions
of the consequence of this treatment, induced me
to read a letter he sent me that night; and, it being
written in the most respectful terms, offering to submit
the whole to my decision, and to govern himself intirely
by my will, to answer it some days after. 
To this unhappy necessity was owing our renewed
correspondence, as I may call it: Yet I did not write,
till I had inform'd myself from Mr. Symmes's brother,
that he was really insulted into the act of drawing his 

sword, by my brother's repeatedly threatening, upon
his excusing himself out of regard to me, to brand him
if he did not; and, by all the inquiry I could make,
that he was again the sufferer from my uncles, in a
more violent manner than I have related. 
The same circumstances were related to my papa,
and other friends, by Mr. Symmes; but they had gone
too far, in making themselves parties to the quarrel,
either to retract or forgive; and I was forbid corresponding
with him, or to be seen a moment in his
company. 
But one thing I can say, but that in confidence,
because my mamma commanded me not to mention
it: —That, expressing her apprehension of the consequences
of the indignities offered to Mr. Lovelace, she
told me, She would leave it to my prudence, to prevent,
all I could, the impending mischief on one side. 
I am obliged to break off. But, I believe, I have
written enough to answer very fully all that you have
commanded from me. It is not for a child to seek to
clear her own character, or to justify her actions, at
the expence of the most revered ones: Yet, as I
know, that the account of all those further proceedings,
by which I may be affected, will be interesting
to so dear a friend (who will communicate to others
no more than what is fitting), I will continue to write
as I have opportunity, as minutely as we are used to
write to each other. Indeed I have no delight, as I have
often told you, equal to that which I take in conversing
with you: —By letter, when I cannot in person. 
Mean time, I can't help saying, that I am exceedingly
concerned to find, that I am become so
much the public talk, as you tell me, and as every-body
tells me, I am. Your kind, your precautionary regard
for my fame, and the opportunity you have given me
to tell my own story, previous to any new accident,
which heaven avert! is so like the warm friend I have 

ever found my dear Miss Howe, that, with redoubled
obligation, you bind me to be 
Your ever-grateful and affectionate
Clarissa Harlowe. 
Copy of the requested Preamble to the clauses in her
grandfather's will, in her favour, inclosed in the
preceding letter. 
As the particular estate I have mentioned and described
above is principally of my own raising. 
As my three sons have been uncommonly prosperous; 
and are very rich: The eldest by means of the unexpected
benefits he reaps from his new-found mines: 
The second, by what has, as unexpectedly, fallen in
to him, on the deaths of several relations of his present
wife, the worthy daughter by both sides of very honourable
families; over and above the very large portion
which he received with her in marriage: My son Antony,
by his East-India traffick, and successful voyages: 
As furthermore my grandson James will be
sufficiently provided for by his godmother Lovell's
kindness to him; who, having no near relations, assures
me, that she has, as well by deed of gift, as by will,
left him both her Scotish and English estates: For
never (blessed be God therefore!) was there a family
more prosperous in all its branches: And as my second
son James will very probably make it up to my grandson,
and also to my grand-daughter Arabella; to
whom I intend no disrespect; nor have reason; for
she is a very hopeful and dutiful child: And as my
sons John and Antony seem not inclined to a marry'd
life; so that my son James is the only one who has
children, or is likely to have any: —For all these
reasons; and because my dearest and beloved grand-daughter
Clarissa Harlowe has been from infancy a
matchless young creature in her duty to me, and admired 

by all who knew her, as a very extraordinary
child; I must therefore take the pleasure of considering
her, as my own peculiar child; and this, without
intending offence; and I hope it will not be taken as
any, since my son James can bestow his favours accordingly,
and in greater proportion, upon Miss Arabella,
and Master James: —These, I say, are the reasons
which move me to dispose of the above-described
estate in the precious child's favour; who is the delight
of my old age; and, I verily think, has contributed,
by her amiable duty, and kind and tender regards, to
prolong my life. 
Wherefore it is my express will and commandment,
and I injoin my three sons John, James, and
Antony, and my grandson James, and my grand-daughter
Arabella, as they value my blessing, and my
memory, and would wish their own last wills and desires
to be fulfilled by their survivors, that they will
not impugn or contest the following bequests and dispositions
in favour of my said grand-daughter Clarissa,
altho' they should not be strictly conformable to law,
or the forms thereof; nor suffer them to be controverted
or disputed on any pretence whatsoever. 
And in this confidence, &c. &c. &c. 