



From Mrs. B. to Mr. B. 


My ever dear, and ever honoured Mr. B. 
As I know not how it may please God Almighty
to deal with me on the approaching Occasion,
I should think myself inexcusable, if I could not 

find one or two select Hours to dedicate to you,
out of the very many, in the writing Way, in which
your Goodness has indulged me, because you saw I
took Delight in it. 
But yet think not, O best Beloved of my Heart!
that I have any Boon to beg, any Favour to ask,
either for myself, or for my Friends, or so much as
the Continuance of your Favour to the one or the
other. As to them, you have prevented and exceeded
all my Wishes: As to myself, if it please God to
spare me, I know I shall always be rewarded beyond
my Desert, let my Deservings be what they will. 
I have only therefore to acknowlege, with the deepest
Sense of your Goodness to me, and with the most
Heart-affecting Gratitude, that from the happy,
the thrice happy Hour, that you so generously made
me yours, till this Moment, you have not left me
one Thing, on my own Part, to wish for, but the
Continuance and Increase of your Felicity, and that
I might be worthier and worthier of the unexampled
Goodness, Tenderness, and Condescension, where-with
you have always treated me. 
No, my dearest, my best beloved Master, Friend,
Husband, my first, my last, and only Love! believe
me, I have nothing to wish for but your Honour
and Felicity, temporary and eternal; and I make no
doubt, that God, in his infinite Goodness and Mercy,
will perfect his own good Work, begun in your
dear Heart; and whatever may now happen, give
us a happy Meeting never more to part from one
another. For, altho', as you were pleased to question
t'other Day, when you were resolving some of my
Doubts–––(and, Oh! what a sweet Expositor have
you been to me upon all those Occasions, on which
my diffident Mind led me to you for Information and
Direction!) whether the Happiness of the Blessed
was not too exalted an Happiness to be subjected to 

the poor Ties of Relationship and Sense, which now
delight, and attach so much to them, our narrow
Minds and Conceptions; yet cannot I willingly give
up the pleasing, the charming Hope, that I shall one
Day rejoice, distinguishingly rejoice, in the Society
of my best beloved Husband and Friend, and in
that of my dear Parents; and I will keep and incourage
this dear Hope, so consolatory to us in the
Separation, which dearest Friends must experience, so
long as it can stand me in any stead; and till I shall
be all Intellect, and above the soothing Impressions
which are now so agreeable to Sense, and to
conjugal and filial Piety. 
Let me then beg of you, my dearest Protector,
and best Friend, to pardon all my Imperfections
and Defects; and if, ever since I have had the
Honour to be yours, I have in Looks, or in Word,
or in Deed, given you Cause to wish me other than
I was, that you will kindly put it to the Score of
natural Infirmity (for in Thought or Intention, I
can truly boast, I never wilfully err'd). Your Tenderness
for me, and your generous Politeness to me,
always gave me Apprehension, that I was not what
you wish'd me to be, because you would not find
Fault with me, so often as I fear I deserved: And
this makes me beg of you to do, as I hope God
Almighty will, pardon all my involuntary Errors
and Omissions. 
You have inabled me, Sir, to do all the Good
to my poor Neighbours, and to distressed Objects,
that was in my own Heart to do; and I hope I have
dispensed the Power you have so generously intrusted
to my Disposal, without Extravagance or Dishonour,
with regard to you, and with Comfort and Suitableness
to the particular Cases recommended to me:
But yet, as it is necessary I should render some Account
of my Stewardship, in relation to the large Sums you 

have put into my Hands for charitable Uses, you will
find, my beloved Master, and best Friend, your poor
Steward's Accounts of every thing, in the Cabinet
that was my honoured Lady's, till your Goodness made
it mine, in a†  Vellom Book, which is written on the
first Leaf, Title-page wise, Humble Returns for
Divine Mercies; and you will see a Balance struck,
down to this very Day, and the little Surplus in the
green Purse upon the Book. And if you will be
pleased, Sir, to perfect, by your Generosity, the Happiness
of the Cases I have marked with a Star, [thus,
*] which are such as are not fully recover'd, and will
be pleased to keep up my little School, I dare ask
no more; for, my dearest Mr. B. if I should be
called from your Service to my new Place, your next
Steward (and long, I hope, for your honourable Family's
sake, you will not be without one) may find
out another and better Method for your Honour
and her own, to dispense your Bounty, than that I
have taken. 
The rich Jewels and Equipage, with which your
generous Goodness adorned my Unworthiness, will
be found in the same Cabinet, in the private Drawer:
And if I may be pardon'd for one extravagant Wish,
(your Circumstances, dear Sir, are very great! and
your future Lady will not wear any thing that was
mine) it is, that my dear Miss Darnford may be desir'd,
as the Effect of your own Goodness, and generous
Consideration for my Memory, to wear the Diamond
Necklace, which, I know, she admires; but is far from
wishing for it, or expecting it, altho' the Neck that
it was given to adorn, and to make more worthy
of you, should be laid low by the irresistible Leveller. 
In the bottom Drawer, on the Left-hand of the
Cabinet, you will find, Sir, all my unfinish'd Scribble, 

and among the rest, a little Parcel, indorsed, Mr. H.
and P. Barlow. The Title will surprise you; but
as I know not what may happen to make Doubts
and Puzzles in the Affair mentioned in those Papers,
when I cannot obviate them, I thought it was best
to give a brief History of it in Writing, with his
Letter to me on the Occasion; and I humbly beg,
the Whole may be kept within your own Breast,
unless that vile Affair, which has much disturb'd me,
should be reviv'd: Altho' I have no Reason to apprehend
it will, because the poor Girl, I hope, is
sincerely penitent, and Mr. H. himself seems in another
way of thinking as to her. 
Will you be pleased, Sir, to bestow on my dearest
Miss Goodwin, as a Remembrance of her Aunt's
true Love, the Diamond Solitaire, and the second
Pair of Ear-rings? Perhaps, my dearest Lady Davers
would not disdain to wear, as a Present from her
beloved Brother, my best Diamond Ring. And if
my most beloved and most valued Ring of all, the
dear first Pledge of my Happiness, were, for the first
time since I was honoured with it, by your own
putting it on, taken from my Finger and inamell'd,
it would be a mournful, yet a pleasing Token for
my poor Mother, and a sweet Memento of your
Bounty to them, and of your inexpressible Goodness
and Favour to her poor Daughter! –––––––But
how I presume! And yet just now said, I had nothing
to ask! 
Now I am, unawares to myself, upon the Subject
of petitioning, how it would please me, could I know
it, if the dear Child I have just named, were given
to the Care and Example of my excellent Miss
Darnford, if she would be pleased to accept of the
Trust; and if Lady Davers has no Objection, and
would not chuse to take the pretty Soul under her
own Wing! 

I had once great Pleasure in the Hope of having
this dear Miss committed to my Care—But what
Pleasures, what Happiness, have I not had crouded
into this last, and this first happy, thrice happy
Year—even more than most of my Sex have had
to boast of, and those not unhappy neither, in a
long, long Life! Every Day has brought with it some
new Felicity, some new Happiness, as unlook'd for,
as undeserv'd; for, Oh! best Beloved of my Heart,
how have you always met me in your Comings-in,
left me at your Goings-out, with Smiles and
Complacency, the latter only distinguish'd from the
former, by a kind Regret, as the other was from
that, by a Joy, next to Transport, when all your
dear generous Heart appeared in your noble Countenance,
and set my faithful one into responsive
Flutters, to meet and receive it with all the grateful
Emotions that the chastest conjugal Flame could
inspire!— 
But I must not dwell upon these charming, charming
Reflections! —My present Doubts will not permit
me to indulge them! For, if I were &wblank; how
would my Desires be rivetted to this Earth! —With
what Regret should I transfer my Thoughts to a
still more important and more necessary Subject! 
and with what Ingratitude look up to a diviner, and
still more noble Master, who ought to be the Ultimate
of all our Wishes and Desires! And who has
given me You, my dearest Mr. B. and with You, all
that this World can make desirable! —And has therefore
a Right to take away, what he has given! —And
if I now die, what a Glory will it be to me, to be
permitted to discharge Part of my Obligations to
the worthiest of Gentlemen, by laying down my
Life in the Service of his honourable Family! 
But let me say one Word for my dear worthy
Mrs. Jervis. Her Care and Fidelity will be very 

necessary for your Affairs, dear Sir, while you remain
single, which I hope will not be long. But whenever,
Sir, you make a second Choice, be pleased to
allow her such an Annuity as may make her independent,
and pass away the Remainder of her Life
with Comfort and Ease. And this the rather I presume
to request, as my late honoured Lady*  once
intimated the same thing to your Generosity. If I were
to name what that may be, it would not be with the
Thought of heightening, But of limiting rather, the
natural Bounty of your Heart; and Fifty Pounds
a Year would be a rich Provision in her Opinion,
and will intail upon you, dear Sir, the Blessings of
one of the faithfullest and worthiest Hearts in the
Kingdom. 
Nor will Christian Charity permit me to forget
the once wicked, but now penitent Jewkes. I understand
by Miss Darnford, that she begs for nothing
but to have the Pleasure of dying in your Service,
and of having, by that means, an Opportunity given
her of atoning for some small Slips and Mistakes in
her Accounts, which she had made formerly, as she
accuses herself; for she will have it, that Mr. Longman
has been better to her than she deserv'd in passing
one†  Account particularly, to which he had; 
with too much Reason, objected. Do, dear Sir, if
your future happy Lady has no great Dislike to the
poor Woman, be pleased to grant her Request, except
her own Mind should alter, and she desire her
Dismission: And be pleased to present her with my
little Book of select Devotions, with my Notes in
the Inter-leaves: It is in the bottom Drawer of the
Right-hand, among my devotional Miscellanies: Or
rather, much rather, be pleased to order a Copy of 

it to be made out for her, and to give the Original,
being mostly my own Hand-writing, to my dear
Father. This is a better Thought by much; for
the dear good Man will esteem it the more for
that. I wonder I did not think of this before.— 
To the other Servants, I have only to leave my
Thanks, and best Wishes, for their respectful Love
and dutiful Behaviour to one, who from being once
hardly the Equal to some of them, has been exalted
to the honourable Station of their Mistress, by your
superlative Goodness and Favour. No Servants, my
dear Mr. B. ever deserved a Mistress's Thanks, if
they do not; for they, every one of them, most
chearfully came into all my little Schemes and Regulations,
and they have incouraged me, by their ready
Obedience, and their respectful Loves, to pursue to
them the natural Dictates of my own Heart, and
have made all Assumings and Pride as unnecessary,
as they would have been grievous to me, and censurable
by every one else: For was it not my high
Concern so to behave myself to all, Low as well as
High, that my best beloved Benefactor should not,
by my Arrogance or Inattention, have Censurers of
him, added to Enviers of me, for the Step he had
taken, so derogatory to his own Honour, and to that
of his antient and splendid Family? 
To the Favour of the best of Masters I therefore
leave them, with this Testimony of their Merits, and
my kind Regard to them, which makes me venture
to call them, without one Exception, from my
Silver-hair'd Jonathan, to the lowest Menial, The
best Set of Servants that Gentleman ever had: Nor,
by Miss Darnford's Account of the Behaviour of
those at the Hall, do I find them at all unworthy of
being class'd with these here, in the happy Character. 
And let me say, my dearest Mr. B. that I have been
not a little attentive to their respective Behaviours, 

as well from my own, as (more particularly) from
Mrs. Jervis's Observations; because I thought it my
Duty, as well in Justice to your dear Self, as to
them. 
As to Polly Barlow, to whom I was willing to
behave with an Eye to my dear good Lady's Kindness
to myself, I have nothing to say, by way of
Distinction from the rest; having hinted to Mrs. Jervis
to give her her Advice, from time to time, and
that if a good honest Husband should offer, she should
advise the poor Girl not to decline it. 
Forgive me, dearest Sir, for thus mentioning to
you, in this solemn Letter, so particularly, your Servants. 
But the Pleasure which their Regularity and
Worthiness have given me, together with the Knowlege
I have of their Fidelity and affectionate Duty
to You, methinks call for this Testimony of my Satisfaction
in them, and Recommendation of them to
your Favour. 
And now, what have I farther to say, but to beg
of God to shower down his most precious Blessings
upon you, my dearest, my first, my last, and my
only Love! and to return to You an hundred-fold,
the Benefits, which you have conferr'd upon Me and
Mine, and upon so many poor Souls, as you have
bless'd thro' my Hands! And that you may in your
next Choice be happy with a Lady, who may have
every thing I want; and who may love and honour
you, with the same affectionate Duty, which has
been my Delight, and my Glory to pay you: For
in this, I am sure, no one can exceed me! ––––And
after having given you long Life, Prosperity, and
Increase of Honour, translate you into a blessed
Eternity, where, through the Merits of our common
Redeemer, I hope I shall be allowed a Place, and be
permitted (O let me indulge that pleasing, that consolatory
Thought!) to receive and rejoice in my restored 

Spouse, and principal earthly Good, for ever
and ever; are the Prayers, the last Prayers, if it so
please God! of, my dearest dear Mr. B. 
Your dutiful and affectionate Wife,
and faithful Servant,
P. B. 

