



Well, now, my dear Lady, I will give you my
poor Opinion of a Masquerade, to which Mr. B.
persuaded me to accompany Miss Darnford; for, 

as I hinted in my former, I had a great Indifference,
or rather Dislike, to go, and Miss therefore wanted
so powerful a Second, to get me with her; because
I was afraid the Freedoms which I had heard were
used there, would not be very agreeable to my
apprehensive Temper, at this Time especially. 
But finding Mr. B. chose to have me go, if, as he
was pleased to say, I had no Objection; I said, I will
have none, Sir, I can have none, when you tell me
it is your Choice; and so send for the Habits you
like, and that you would have me appear in, and I
will chearfully attend you. 
The Habit Mr. B. pitch'd upon, was that of a
Spanish Don, and it well befitted the Majesty of his
Person and Air, and Miss chose that of a young Widow; 
and Mr. B. recommended that of a Quaker
for me. We all admir'd one another in our Dresses; 
and Mr. B. promising to have me always in his Eye,
we took Coach, and went thither. 
But I never desire to be present at another. Mr. B.
was singled out by a bold Nun, who talk'd Italian to
him with such free Airs, that I did not much like
it, tho' I know not what she said; for I thought the
dear Gentleman no more kept to his Spanish Gravity,
than she to the Requisites of the Habit she wore:
When I had imagin'd, that all that was tolerable in a
Masquerade, was the acting up to the Characters each
Person assum'd: And this gave me no Objection to
the Quaker's Dress; for I thought I was prim enough
for that naturally. 
I said softly, Dear Miss, (for Mr. B. and the Nun
were out of Sight in a Moment) What is become
of that Nun? —Rather, whisper'd she, What is
become of the Spaniard? 
A Cardinal attack'd me instantly in French: But
I answer'd in English, not knowing what he said,
Quakers are not fit Company for Red-hats. 

They are, said he, in the same Language; for a
Quaker and a Jesuit is the same Thing. 
Miss was address'd by the Name of the sprightly
Widow: Another ask'd, How long she intended to
wear those Weeds? And a Footman, in a rich Livery,
answer'd for her Eyes, thro' her Mask, that it would
not be a Month. 
But I was startled, when a Presbyterian Parson
came up to me, and bid me look after my Musidorus
—So that I doubted not by this, it must be somebody
who knew my Name to be Pamela; and I
presently thought of one of my Lawyers, whose
Characters I gave in a former Letter. 
Indeed, he needed not to bid me; for I was
sorry, on more Accounts than that of my Timorousness,
to have lost Sight of him. Out upon these
nasty Masquerades! thought I; I can't abide them
already! 
An egregious beauish Appearance came up to
Miss, and said, You hang out a very pretty Sign,
Widow.— 
Not, reply'd Miss, to invite such Fops as you to
my Shop. 
Any Customer would be welcome, return'd he,
in my Opinion. —I whisper this as a Secret. 
And I whisper another, said Miss, That no Place
warrants ill Manners. 
Are you angry, Widow? 
She affected Laugh: No, indeed; it i'n't worth
while. 
He turn'd to me—and I was afraid of some such
Hit as he gave me–––I hope, Friend, thou art prepar'd
with a Father for the Light within thee? — 
That was his free Word. 
Is this Wit? said I, turning to Miss: I have enough
of this Diversion, where nothing but coarse Jests
appear barefac'd. 

At last Mr. B. accosted us, as if he had not known
us: So lovely a Widow, and so sweet a Friend! no
wonder you do not separate: For I see not in this
various Assemblee a third Person of your Sex fit to
join with you. 
Not one, Sir! —said I—Will not a penitent
Nun make a good Third with a mournful Widow,
and a prim Quaker? 
Not for more than Ten Minutes, at most. 
Instantly the Nun, a fine Person of a Lady, with
a noble Air, tho' I did not like her, join'd-us, and
spoke in Italian something very free, as it seem'd by
her Manner, and Mr. B.'s smiling Answer; but
neither Miss nor I understood that Language, and
Mr. B. would not explain it to us. 
But she gave him a Signal to follow her, seeming
to be much taken with his Person and Air; for
tho' there were three other Spanish Habits there, he
was call'd The stately Spaniard by one, and The
handsome Spaniard by another, in our Hearing,
as he pass'd with us to the Dessert, where we drank
each of us a Glass of Champaign, and eat a few
Sweet-meats, with a Croud about us; but we appear'd
not to know one another: While several odd Appearances,
as One Indian Prince, One Chinese Mandarin,
several Domine's, of both Sexes, a Dutch Skipper,
a Jewish Rabbi, a Greek Monk, an Harlequin,
a Turkish Bashaw, and a Capuchin Frier, glided by
us, as we return'd into Company, signifying, that
we were Strangers to them, by squeaking out, I know
you! —Which is half the Wit of the Place. 
Mr. B. had more Attacks made upon him by
Ladies, than we had by Gentlemen; and his fine
Person, noble Air, and a Deportment so suited to
his Habit, (only in the Encounter of the Nun, when
he had more of the French Freedom, as I thought,
than the Spanish Gravity) made him many Admirers; 

and more, when the Spanish Minister, who was there
in a French Dress, spoke to him in Spanish, and
receiv'd a polite Answer from him in the same; while
there were several who personated Foreign Characters,
and knew nothing of the Language of the Country,
whose Habits they assumed. 
There were divers Antick Figures, some with Caps
and Bells, one dress'd like a Punch; several Harlequins,
and other ludicrous Forms, that jump'd and
ran about like mad; and seem'd as if they would
have it thought, that all their Wit lay in their Heels. 
Two Ladies, one in a very fantastick party-colour'd
Habit, with a Plume of Feathers, the other in a
rustick one, with a Garland of Flowers round her
Head, were much taken notice of for their Freedom,
and having something to say to every body. They
were as seldom separated as Miss and I, and were
follow'd by a Croud, where-ever they went. 
The party-colour'd one came up to me: Friend,
said she, there is something in thy Person, that attracts
every one's Notice: But if a Sack had not been a
profane Thing, it would have become thee almost
as well. 
I thank thee, Friend, said I, for thy Counsel; but if
thou hadst been pleas'd to look at home, thou wouldst
not have taken so much Pains to join such Advice,
and such an Appearance, together, as thou makest! 
This made every one that heard it, laugh—One
said, The Butterfly had met with her Match. 
She return'd, with an affected Laugh–––Smartly
said! —But art thou come hither, Friend, to make
thy Light shine before Men or Women? 
Verily, Friend, neither, reply'd I; but out of
mere Curiosity to look into the Minds of both Sexes; 
which I read in their Dresses. 
A general Satire on the Assemblee, by the Mass!
said a fat Monk. 

The Nun whisk'd to us: We're all concern'd in
my Friend's Remark.–––– 
And no Disgrace to a fair Nun, return'd I, if
her Behaviour answer her Dress–––Nor to a Reverend
Frier, turning to the Monk, if his Mind be
not a Discredit to his Appearance––––Nor yet to a
Country Girl, turning to the party-colour'd Lady's
Companion, if she has not Weeds in her Heart to
disgrace the Flowers on her Head. 
An odd Figure, representing a Merry Andrew,
took my Hand, and said, I had the most piquant
Wit he had met with that Night: And, Friend,
said he, let us be better acquainted! 
Forbear, said I, withdrawing my Hand, not a
Companion for a Jack-pudden neither! 
A Roman Senator just then accosted Miss; and
Mr. B. seeing me so much ingag'd, 'Twere hard,
said he, if our Nation, in Spite of Cervantes, produc'd
not one Cavalier to protect a fair Lady thus
surrounded. 
Tho' surrounded, not distress'd, my good Knight-Errant,
said the Nun: The fair Quaker will be too
hard for half a dozen Antagonists, and wants not
your Protection:–––But your poor Nun bespeaks it,
whisper'd she, who has not a Word to say for herself. 
Mr. B. answer'd her in Italian, (I wish I understood
Italian!)—and she had recourse to her Beads. 
You can't imagine, Madam, how this Nun haunted
the dear Gentleman! —Indeed, my Lady, you can't
imagine it! 
I must needs say, I don't like these Masquerades
at all. Many Ladies, on these Occasions, are so
very free, that the Censorious will be apt to blame
the whole Sex for their Conduct, and to say, their
Hearts are as faulty as those of the most culpable
Men, since they scruple not to shew as much, when 

they think they cannot be known by their Faces. 
But it is my humble Opinion, that could there be a
Standard fix'd, by which one could determine readily
what is, and what is not Wit, Decency would not
be so often wounded, by Attempts to be witty, as
it is. For here every one, that can give himself the
Liberty to say Things that shock a modester Person,
not meeting with due Rebuke, but perhaps a Smile,
(without considering whether it be of Contempt or
Approbation) mistakes Courage for Wit; and every
thing sacred or civil becomes the Subject of his
frothy Jest. 
How else can one account for the Liberties of
Expression and Behaviour taken by some of those
who personated Bishops, Cardinals, Priests, Nuns,
&c.? –––For the freest Things I heard said, were from
Persons in those Habits; who behav'd with so much
Levity and Indecorum, as if they were resolved,
as much as in them lay, to throw those venerable
Characters into Ridicule, for no other Reason, than
because they are by the Generality of the World
deem'd venerable: But if it was once determin'd,
that nothing should be call'd true Wit, as nothing
certainly ought, but what will stand the Test of
Examination, but what is consistent with Decency
and good Manners, and what will make an innocent
Heart brilliant and chearful, and give its Sanction to
the happy Expression, by trying to keep up and
return the Ball in like virtuous and lively Raillery; 
then we should have our publick Entertainments
such as the most Scrupulous might join to countenance
and applaud. 
But what a Moralizer am I! will your Ladyship
say: Indeed I can't help it:—And especially on such
a Subject as a Masquerade, which I dislike more than
any thing I ever saw. I could say a great deal more
on this Occasion; but, upon my Word, I am quite out 

of Humour with it; for I liked my English Mr. B.
better than my Spaniard; and the Nun I approved
not by any means; tho' there were some who
observed, that she was one of the gracefullest Figures
in the Place. And indeed, in spite of my own
Heart, I could not help thinking so too. 
Your Ladyship knows so well what Masquerades
are, that I may well be excus'd saying any thing
further on a Subject I am so little pleased with: For
you only desire my Notions of those Diversions,
because I am a Novice to them; and this, I doubt
not, will doubly serve to answer that Purpose. 
I shall only therefore add, That after an hundred
other Impertinencies spoken to Miss and me, and
retorted with Spirit by Miss, and as well as I could
by myself, quite sick of the Place, I feign'd to be more
indisposed than I was, and so got my beloved Spaniard
to go off with us, and reached Home by Three
in the Morning. And so much for Masquerades. 
I hope I shall never have Occasion to mention them
again to your Ladyship. I am, my dearest Lady, 
Your ever-obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

