



From Mr. Lovelace; In Continuation. 

But is it not the divine Clarissa [Harlowe let me
not say; my soul spurns them all but her] whom
I am thus by implication threatening? —If virtue be
the true nobility, how is she ennobled, and how would
an alliance with her ennoble, were there no drawbacks
from the family she is sprung from, and prefers
to me? 
But again, let me stop. —Is there not something
wrong; has there not been something wrong in this
divine creature? —And will not the reflections upon
that wrong [what tho' it may be construed in my favour?]
make me unhappy, when novelty has lost its
charms, and she is mind and person all my own? — 
Libertines are nicer, if at all nice, than other men. 
They seldom meet with the stand of virtue in the
women whom they attempt. And by those they have
met with, they judge of all the rest. Importunity
and Opportunity no woman is proof against, especially
from a persevering lover, who knows how to suit
temptations to inclinations. This, thou knowest, is
a prime article of the rake's creed. 
And what! (methinks thou askest with surprize)
Dost thou question this most admirable of women? — 
The virtue of a Clarissa dost thou question? 
I do not, I dare not question it. My reverence
for her will not let me, directly, question it. But let
me, in my turn, ask thee—Is not, may not her
virtue be founded rather in pride than principle? — 
Whose daughter is she? —And is she not a daughter? 
If impeccable, how came she by her impeccability? 
—The pride of setting an example to her sex has run
away with her hitherto, and may have made her
till now invincible—But is not that pride abated? — 

What may not both men and women be brought to
do, in a mortify'd state? What mind is superior to
calamity? —Pride is perhaps the principal bulwark of
female virtue. Humble a woman, and may she not
be effectually humbled? 
Then who says, Miss Clarissa Harlowe is the paragon
of virtue? Is virtue itself? 
All who know her, and have heard of her, it will
be answer'd. 
Common bruit! —Is virtue to be established by
common bruit only? —Has her virtue ever been
proved? —Who has dared to try her virtue? 
I told thee, I would sit down to argue with myself; 
and I have drawn myself into the argumentation before
I was aware. 
Let me enter into a strict discussion of this subject. 
I know how ungenerous an appearance what I have
said, and what I have farther to say, on this topic,
will have from me: But am I not bringing virtue to
the touchstone, with a view to exalt it, if it come
out to be virtue? —Avaunt then, for one moment,
all consideration that may arise from a weakness,
which some would miscall gratitude; and is oftentimes
the corrupter of a heart not ignoble! 
To the test then. And I will bring this charming
creature to the strictest test, that all the sex, who may
be shewn any passages in my letters [And I know
thou chearest the hearts of all thy acquaintance with
such detached parts of mine, as tend not to dishonour
characters, or reveal names. And this gives me an
appetite to oblige thee by interlardment] that all the sex,
I say, may see what they ought to be; what is expected
from them; and if they have to deal with a person of
reflection and punctilio [pride, if thou wilt], how
careful they ought to be, by a regular and uniform
conduct, not to give him cause to think lightly of them,
by favours granted, which may be interpreted into natural
weakness. For is not a wife the keeper of a man's 

honour? And do not her faults bring more disgrace
upon a husband, than even upon herself? 
It is not for nothing, Jack, that I have disliked the
life of shackles!— 
To the test, then, as I said, since now I have the
question brought home to me, Whether I am to have
a wife? And whether she be to be a wife at the first,
or at the second hand? 
I will proceed fairly; I will do the dear creature
not only strict, but generous justice; for I will try
her by her own judgment, as well as by our principles. 
She blames herself for having corresponded with
me, a man of free character; and one indeed whose
first view it was, to draw her into this correspondence; 
and who succeeded in it, by means unknown
to herself. 
Now, what were her inducements to this correspondence? 
—If not what her niceness makes her
think blame-worthy, why does she blame herself? 
Has she been capable of error? —Of persisting in
that error? 
Whoever was the tempter, that is not the thing; 
nor what the temptation. The fact, the error, is now
before us. 
Did she persist in it against parental prohibition? 
She owns she did. 
Was there ever known to be a daughter who had
higher notions of the filial duty, of the parental authority? 
Never. 
What must be those inducements, how strong,
that were too strong for duty, in a daughter so dutiful? 
—What must my thought have been of them,
what my hopes built upon them, at the time, taken
in this light? 
Well, but it will be said, That her principal view
was, to prevent mischief between her brother and her 

other friends, and the man vilely insulted by them
all. 
But why should she be more concerned for the safety
of others, than they were for their own? —And had
not the rencounter then happen'd? —Was a person of
virtue to be prevailed upon to break through her apparent,
her acknowledged duty, upon any consideration? 
—Much less was she to be so prevailed upon
to prevent an apprehended evil only? 
Thou, Lovelace, the tempter (thou'lt again break
out and say), to be the accuser! 
But I am not the accuser. I am an arguer only,
and, in my heart, all the time acquit and worship the
divine creature. But let me, nevertheless, examine,
whether the acquittal be owing to her merit, or to my
weakness, the true name for love. 
But shall we suppose another motive? —And that
is Love; a motive which all the world will excuse
her for. —But let me tell all the world that do, not because
they ought, but because all the world is apt to
be misled by it. 
Let Love then be the motive: —Love of whom? 
A Lovelace is the answer. 
Is there but one Lovelace in the world? —May
not more Lovelaces be attracted by so fine a figure? 
By such exalted qualities? —It was her character that
drew me to her: And it was her beauty and good
sense, that rivetted my chains; and now, all together
make me think her a subject worthy of my attempts; 
worthy of my ambition. 
But has she had the candor, the openness, to acknowlege
that love? 
She has not. 
Well then, if love it be at bottom, is there not
another vice lurking beneath the shadow of that
love? —Has she not affectation? —Or is it pride of
heart? 
And what results? —Is then the divine Clarissa 

Harlowe capable of loving a man whom she ought not
to love? —And is she capable of affectation? And
is her virtue founded in pride? —And, if this answer
be affirmative, must she not then be a woman? 
And can she keep this lover at bay? —Can she make
him, who has been accustomed to triumph over other
women, tremble? —Can she so conduct herself, as
to make him, at times, question whether she loves
him or any man; yet not have the requisite command
over the passion itself in steps of the highest consequence
to her honour, as she thinks [I am trying her,
Jack, by her own thoughts]—but suffer herself to
be provoked to promise to abandon her father's house,
and go off with him, knowing his character; and even
conditioning not to marry till improbable and remote
contingencies were to come to pass? —What tho' the
provocations were such as would justify any other
woman; yet was a Clarissa to be susceptible to provocations,
which she thinks herself highly censurable
for being so much moved by? 
But let us see the dear creature resolving to revoke
her promise; yet meeting her lover; a bold and intrepid
man, who was more than once before disappointed
by her; and who comes, as she must think,
prepared to expect the fruits of her appointment, and
resolved to carry her off. —And let us see him actually
carrying her off; and having her at his mercy—May
there not be, I repeat, other Lovelaces; other like
intrepid persevering enterprizers; altho' they may not
go to work in the same way? 
And has then a Clarissa [herself her judge]
failed? —In such great points failed? —And may
she not further fail? —Fail in the greatest point, to
which all the other points in which she has failed,
have but a natural tendency? 
Nor say thou, that virtue, in the eye of heaven,
is as much a manly as a womanly grace [By virtue in
this place I mean chastity, and to be superior to temptation; 

my Clarissa out of the question]. Nor ask
thou, Shall the man be guilty, yet expect the woman
to be guiltless, and even unsuspectable? —Urge thou
not these arguments, I say, since the wife, by a
failure, may do much more injury to the husband,
than the husband can do to the wife, and not only
to her husband, but to all his family, by obtruding
another man's children into his possessions, perhaps to
the exclusion of (at least to a participation with) his
own; he believing them all the time to be his. In the
eye of heaven, therefore, the sin cannot be equal. 
Besides, I have read in some place, that the woman
was made for the man, not the man for the woman. 
Virtue then is less to be dispensed with in the woman
than in the man. 
Thou, Lovelace (methinks some better man than
thyself will say), to expect such perfection in a woman!— 
Yes, I, may I answer. Was not the great Cæsar a
great Rake as to women? —Was he not called, by
his very soldiers, on one of his triumphant entries into
Rome, The bald-pated lecher?—and warning given
of him to the wives, as well as to the daughters, of
his fellow-citizens? —Yet did not Cæsar repudiate
his wife for being only in company with Clodius, or
rather because Clodius, tho' by surprize upon her, was
found in hers? And what was the reason he gave for
it? —It was this (tho' a rake himself, as I have said),
and only this—The wife of Cæsar must not be suspected!— 
Cæsar was not a prouder man than Lovelace.— 
Go to then, Jack; nor say, nor let any-body
say, in thy hearing, that Lovelace, a man valuing
himself upon his ancestry, is singular in his expectations
of a wife's purity, tho' not pure himself. 
As to my Clarissa, I own, that I hardly think,
there ever was such an angel of a woman. But has
she not, as above, already taken steps, which she herself
condemns? Steps, which the world, and her own 

family, did not think her capable of taking? —And
for which her own family will not forgive her? 
Nor think it strange, that I refuse to hear any thing
pleaded in behalf of a standard virtue, from high provocations. 
—Are not provocations and temptations
the tests of virtue? —A standard virtue must not be
allowed to be provoked to destroy or annihilate itself. 
May not then the success of him, who could carry
her thus far, be allowed to be an encouragement for
him to try to carry her farther? —'Tis but to try,
Jack—Who will be afraid of a trial for this divine
lady? —Thou knowest, that I have more than once,
twice or thrice, been tempted to make this trial upon
young ladies of name and character: But never yet
found one of them to hold me out for a month; nor
so long as could puzzle my invention. I have concluded
against the whole sex upon it. And now, if I
have not found a virtue that cannot be corrupted, I
will swear that there is not one such in the whole sex. 
Is not then the whole sex concerned that this trial
should be made? —And who is it that knows her,
that would not stake upon her head the honour of the
whole? —Let her who would refuse it, come forth,
and desire to stand in her place. 
I must assure thee, that I have a prodigious high
opinion of virtue; as I have of all those graces and
excellencies, which I have not been able to attain
myself. —Every free liver would not say this, nor
think thus—Every argument he uses, condemnatory
of his own actions, as some would think—But ingenuity
was ever a signal part of my character. 
Satan, whom thou mayest, if thou wilt, in this
case, call my instigator, put the good man of old upon
the severest trials. —To his behaviour under these
trials, that good man owed his honour and his future
rewards. An innocent person, if doubted, must wish
to be brought to a fair and candid trial. 

Rinaldo, indeed, in Ariosto, put the Mantuan
knight's cup of trial from him, which was to be the
proof of his wife's chastity (a) —This was his argument
for forbearing the experiment: ‘Why should I
seek a thing I should be loth to find? My wife is a
woman: The sex is frail. I cannot believe better of
her than I do. It will be to my own loss, if I find
reason to think worse.” But Rinaldo would not
have refused the trial of the lady, before she became
his wife, and when he might have availed himself by
detecting her. 
For my part, I would not have put the cup from
me, tho' married, had it been but in hope of finding
reason to confirm my good opinion of my wife's honour; 
and that I might know whether I had a snake
or a dove in my bosom. 
To my point—What must that virtue be, which
will not stand a trial? —What that woman, who
would wish to shun it? 
Well then, a trial seems necessary for the further
establishment of the honour of so excellent a creature. 
And who shall put her to this trial? —Who, but
the man, who has, as she thinks, already induced her,
in lesser points, to swerve? —And this for her own
sake, in a double sense—Not only, as he has been
able to make some impression, but as she regrets the
impression made; and so may be presumed to be
guarded against his further attempts. 
The situation she is at present in, it must be confessed,
is a disadvantageous one to her: But if she
overcome, that will redound to her honour. 

Shun not, therefore, my dear soul, further trials,
nor hate me for making them. —For what woman
can be said to be virtuous till she has been tried? 
Nor is one effort, one trial, to be sufficient. Why? 
Because a woman's heart may be at one time adamant,
at another wax. —As I have often experienced. 
And so, no doubt, hast thou. 
A fine time on't, methinks, thou sayest, would the
women have, if they were all to be tried! 
But, Jack, I am not, for that, neither. Tho' I
am a rake, I am not a rake's friend; except thine
and company's. 
And be this one of the morals of my tedious
discussion—‘Let the little rogues who would not
be put to the question, as I may call it, choose
accordingly—Let them prefer to their favour, good
honest sober fellows, who have not been used to
play dogs tricks: Who will be willing to take them
as they offer; and who, being tolerable themselves,
are not suspicious of others.’ 
But what, methinks thou askest, is to become of
the lady, if she fail? 
What? —Why will she not, if once subdued, be
always subdued? Another of our libertine maxims— 
And what an immense pleasure to a marriage-hater,
what rapture to thought, to be able to prevail upon
such a lady as Miss Clarissa Harlowe to live with him,
without real change of name! 
But if she resist—If nobly she stand her trial— 
Why then I will marry her, to be sure; and bless
my stars for such an angel of a wife. 
But will she not hate thee? —Will she not refuse— 
No, no, Jack! —Circumstanced and situated as
we are, I am not afraid of that. —And hate me! 
—Why should she hate the man who loves her upon
proof?— 

And then for a little hint at reprizal—Am I not
justify'd in my resolutions of trying her virtue; who
is resolved, as I may say, to try mine? —Who has
declared, that she will not marry me, till she has
hopes of my reformation? 
And now, to put an end to this sober argumentation,
wilt thou not thyself [whom I have supposed an
advocate for the lady, because I know that Lord M.
has put thee upon using the interest he thinks thou
hast in me, to persuade me to enter the pale; wilt
thou not thyself] allow me to try, if I cannot awaken
the woman in her? —To try, if she, with all that
glowing symmetry of parts, and that full bloom of
vernal graces, by which she attracts every eye, be
really inflexible, as to the grand article? 
Let me begin then, as opportunity presents. I
will—And watch her every step to find one sliding
one; her every moment, to find the moment critical. 
And the rather, as she spares not me, but takes
every advantage that offers, to puzzle and plague me; 
nor expects, nor thinks me to be a good man. If she
be a woman, and love me, I shall surely catch her
once tripping: For Love was ever a traitor to its harbourer: 
And Love within, and I without, she'll be
more than woman, as the poet says, or I less than
man, if I succeed not. 
Now, Belford, all is out. The lady is mine; shall
be more mine. —Marriage, I see, is in my power,
now she is so [Else perhaps it had not]. If I can
have her without, who can blame me for trying? If
not, great will be her glory, and my future confidence. 
—And well will she merit the sacrifice I shall
make her of my liberty; and from all her sex honours
next to divine, for giving a proof that there was once
a woman whose virtue no trials, no stratagems, no
temptations, even from the man she hated not, could
overpower. 

Now wilt thou see all my circulation: As in a glass
wilt thou see it. —Cabala, however, is the word
(a) ; nor let the secret escape thee even in thy
dreams. 
Nobody doubts, that she is to be my wife. Let
her pass for such, when I give the word. Meantime
Reformation shall be my stalking-horse; some
one of the women in London, if I can get her thither,
my bird. —And so much for this time. 