



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe. 

Tuesday, May 16. 
I think once more, we seem to be in a kind of
train; but through a storm. I will give you the
particulars. 
I heard him in the Dining-room at Five in the 

morning. I had rested very ill, and was up too. But
opened not my door till Six: When Dorcas brought
me his request for my company. 
He approached me, and taking my hand, as I entered
the Dining-room, I went not to bed, Madam,
till two, said he; yet slept not a wink. For God's
sake, torment me not, as you have done for a week
past. 
He paused. I was silent. 
At first, proceeded he, I thought your resentment
of a curiosity, in which I had been disappointed, could
not be deep; and that it would go off of itself: But
when I found, it was to be kept up till you knew the
success of some new overtures which you had made,
and which, complied with, might have deprived me
of you for ever; how, Madam, could I support
myself under the thoughts of having, with such an
union of interests, made so little impression upon your
mind in my favour? 
He paused again. I was still silent. He went on. 
I acknowledge that I have a proud heart, Madam. 
I cannot but hope for some instances of previous and
preferable favour from the Lady I am ambitious to
call mine; and that her choice of me should not appear,
not flagrantly appear, directed by the perverseness
of her selfish persecutors, who are my irreconcileable
enemies. 
More to the same purpose he said. You know,
my dear, the room he had given me to recriminate
upon him in twenty instances. I did not spare him. 
Every one of these instances, said I (after I had
enumerated them) convinces me of your pride indeed,
Sir, but not of your merit. I confess, that I
have as much pride as you can have, altho' I hope
it is of another kind than that you so readily avow. 
But if, Sir, you have the least mixture in yours,
of that pride which may be expected, and thought
laudable, in a man of your birth, alliances, and fortune, 

you should rather wish, I will presume to say,
to promote what you call my pride, than either to
suppress it, or to regret that I have it. It is this my
acknowleged pride, proceeded I, that induces me to
tell you, Sir, that I think it beneath me to disown
what have been my motives for declining, for some
days past, any conversation with you, or visit from
Mr. Mennell, that might lead to points out of my
power to determine upon, until I heard from my
Uncle Harlowe; whom, I confess, I have caused to
be sounded, whether I might be favoured with his
interest, to obtain for me a Reconciliation with my
friends, upon terms which I had caused to be proposed. 
I know not, said he, and suppose must not presume
to ask, what these terms were. But I can but
too well guess at them; and that I was to have been
the preliminary Sacrifice. But you must allow me,
Madam, to say, That as much as I admire the nobleness
of your sentiments in general, and in particular that
laudable pride which you have spoken of; I wish that
I could compliment you with such an uniformity in it,
as had set you as much above all submission to minds
implacable and unreasonable (I hope I may, without
offence, say, that your Brother's and Sister's are such)
as it has above all favour and condescension to me. 
Ducy and Nature, Sir, call upon me to make the
Submissions you speak of: There is a Father, there
is a Mother, there are Uncles in the one case, to justify
and demand those Submissions—What, pray,
Sir, can be pleaded for the Condescension, as you call
it? —Will you say, your Merits, either with regard
to them, or to myself, may? 
This, Madam, to be said, after the persecutions of
those relations! After what you have suffered! After
what you have made me hope! Let me, my dearest
creature, ask you (we have been talking of pride)
What sort of pride must his be, which can dispense 

with inclination and preference in the Lady whom he
adores? —What must be that Love— 
Love, Sir! who talks of Love? —Was not Merit
the thing we were talking of? —Have I ever professed,
have I ever required of you professions of a
passion of that nature! —But there is no end of these
debatings; each so faultless, each so full of self— 
I do not think myself faultless, Madam: —But— 
But what, Sir!—Would you evermore argue with
me, as if you were a child? —Seeking palliations, and
making promises? —Promises of what, Sir? Of being
in future the man it is a shame a gentleman is
not? —Of being the man— 
Good God! interrupted he, with eyes lifted up,
if thou wert to be thus severe— 
Well, well, Sir, [impatiently] I need only to observe,
that all this vast difference in sentiments shews
how unpaired our minds are—So let us— 
Let us what, Madam! —My Soul is rising into
tumults! And he looked so wildly, that I was a good
deal terrified—Let us what, Madam!— 
I was, however, resolved not to desert myself— 
Why, Sir, let us resolve to quit every regard for
each other—Nay, flame not out—I am a poor weak-minded
creature in some things: But where what I
should be, or not deserve to live, if I am not, is in
the question, I have a great and invincible spirit, or
my own conceit betrays me—Let us resolve to quit
every regard for each other that is more than civil. 
This you may depend upon; I will never marry any
other man. I have seen enough of your Sex; at
least of You. —A Single Life shall ever be my choice: 
While I will leave you at liberty to pursue your
own. 
Indifference, worse than indifference! said he, in
a passion— 
Interrupting him—Indifference let it be—You
have not (in my opinion at least) deserved that it 

should be other: If you have in your own, you have
cause (at least your pride has) to hate me for misjudging
you. 
Dearest, dearest creature! snatching my hand with
fierceness, let me beseech you to be uniformly noble! 
Civil regards, Madam! —Civil regards! —Can you
so expect to narrow and confine such a passion as mine! 
Such a passion as yours, Mr. Lovelace, deserves
to be narrowed and confined. It is either the passion
you do not think it, or I do not. I question
whether your mind is capable of being so narrowed
and so widened, as is necessary to make it be what I
wish it to be. Lift up your hands and your eyes,
Sir, in silent wonder, if you please: But what does
that wonder express, what does it convince me of,
but that we are not born for one another? 
By my Soul, said he, and grasped my hand with
an eagerness that hurt it, we were born for one another: 
You must be mine—You shall be mine [and
put his other arm round me] altho' my damnation
were to be the purchase! 
I was still more terrified—Let me leave you, Mr.
Lovelace, said I; or do you be gone from me. Is
the passion you boast of, to be thus shockingly demonstrated? 
You must not go, Madam! —You must not leave
me in anger— 
I will return—I will return—When you can be less
violent—less shocking. 
And he let me go. 
The man quite frighted me; insomuch that when
I got into my chamber, I found a sudden flow of tears
a great relief to me. 
In half an hour, he sent a little billet, expressing
his concern for the vehemence of his behaviour, and
praying to see me. 
I went. Because I could not help myself, I
went. 

He was full of his excuses. —O my dear, what
would you, even you, do with such a man as this; 
and in my situation? 
It was very possible for him now, he said, to account
for the workings of a beginning phrensy. For
his part, he was near distraction. All last week to
suffer as he had suffered; and now to talk of Civil
Regards only, when he had hoped from the nobleness
of my mind— 
Hope what you will, interrupted I; I must insist
upon it, that our minds are by no means suited to
each other. You have brought me into difficulties. 
I am deserted by every friend but Miss Howe. My
true sentiments I will not conceal—It is against my
will, that I must submit to owe protection from a
Brother's projects, which Miss Howe thinks are not
given over, to You, who have brought me into these
streights: Not with own concurrence brought me
into them; remember that— 
I do remember that, Madam! —So often reminded,
how can I forget it?— 
Yet I will owe to you this protection, if it be necessary,
in the earnest hope, that you will shun rather
than seek mischief, if any further enquiry after
me be made. But what hinders you from leaving
me? —Cannot I send to you? The Widow Fretchville,
it is plain, knows not her own mind: The
people here indeed are more civil to me every day
than other: But I had rather have lodgings more
agreeable to my circumstances. I best know what
will suit them; and am resolved not to be obliged to
any-body. If you leave me, I will privately retire to
some one of the neighbouring villages, and there wait
my Cousin Morden's arrival with patience. 
I presume, Madam, replied he, from what you
have said, that your application to Harlowe-Place
has proved unsuccessful: I therefore hope, that you
will now give me leave to mention the terms in the 

nature of Settlements, which I have long intended
to propose to you; and which having till now delayed
to do, thro' accidents not proceeding from
myself, I had thoughts of urging to you the moment
you entered upon your new house; and upon your finding
yourself as independent in appearance as you are
in fact. Permit me, Madam, to propose these matters
to you—Not with an expectation of your immediate
answer; but for your consideration. 
Were not hesitation, a self-felt glow, a downcast
eye, encouragement more than enough? &dotup;And yet
you will observe (as I now do on recollection) that
he was in no great hurry to solicit for a Day; since
he had no thoughts of proposing Settlements, till
I had got into my new house; and now, in his
great complaisance to me, he desired leave to propose
his Terms, not with an expectation of my immediate
answer; but for my consideration only—&dotup; 
Yet, my dear, your advice was too much in my
head at this time. I hesitated. 
He urged on upon my silence: He would call
God to witness to the justice, nay to the generosity of
his intentions to me, if I would be so good as to
hear what he had to propose to me, as to Settlements. 
Could not the man have fallen into the subject
without this parade? Many a point, you know, is
refused, and ought to be refused, if leave be asked to
introduce it; and when once refused, the refusal must
in honour be adhered to—Whereas, had it been slid
in upon one, as I may say, it might have merited
further consideration. If such a man as Mr. Lovelace
knows not this, who should? 
But he seemed to think it enough that he had asked
my leave to propose his Settlements. He took no advantage
of my silence, as I presume men as modest
as Mr. Lovelace would have done, in a like case: 
Yet, gazing in my face very confidently, and seeming
to expect my answer, I thought myself obliged 

to give the subject a more diffuse turn, in order to
save myself the mortification of appearing too ready
in my compliance, after such a distance as had been
between us; and yet (in pursuance of your advice)
I was willing to avoid the necessity of giving him
such a repulse, as might again throw us out of the
course. —A cruel alternative to be reduced to! 
You talk of Generosity, Mr. Lovelace, said I; and
you talk of Justice; perhaps without having considered
the force of the words, in the sense you use
them on this occasion. —Let me tell you what Generosity
is, in my sense of the word—True Generosity
is not confined to pecuniary instances: It
is more than politeness: It is more than good faith: 
It is more than honour: It is more than justice: Since
all these are but duties, and what a worthy mind
cannot dispense with. But True Generosity
is Greatness of Soul. It incites us to do more by a
fellow-creature, than can be strictly required of us. It
obliges us to hasten to the relief of an object that
wants relief; anticipating even such a one's hope or
expectation. Generosity, Sir, will not surely permit
a worthy mind to doubt of its honourable and
beneficent intentions: Much less will it allow itself
to shock, to offend any one; and, least of all, a person
thrown by adversity, mishap, or accident, into its
protection. 
What an opportunity had he to clear his intentions,
had he been so disposed, from the latter part of this
home observation! —But he ran away with the first,
and kept to that. 
Admirably defined! he said. —But who at this
rate, Madam, can be said to be generous to you? — 
Your Generosity I implore; while Justice, as it must
be my sole merit, shall be my aim. Never was
there a woman of such nice and delicate sentiments! 
It is a reflection upon yourself, Sir, and upon the 

company you have kept, if you think these notions
either nice or delicate. Thousands of my Sex are
more nice than I; for they would have avoided the
devious path I have been surprised into: The consequences
of which surprize have laid me under the
sad necessity of telling a man, who has not delicacy
enough to enter into those parts of the female character
which are its glory and distinction, what True
Generosity is. 
His divine monitress, he called me. He would
endeavour to form his manners (as he had often promised)
by my example. But he hoped I would now
permit him to mention briefly the Justice he proposed
to do me, in the terms of the Settlements; a subject
so proper, before now, to have been entered upon; 
and which would have been entered upon long ago,
had not my frequent displeasure [I am ever in fault,
my dear!] taken from him the opportunity he had
often wished for: But now having ventured to lay
hold of this, nothing should divert him from improving
it. 
I have no spirits, just now, Sir, to attend to such
weighty points. What you have a mind to propose,
write to me: And I shall know what answer to return. 
Only one thing let me remind you of, that
if you touch upon any subject, in which my Father
has a concern, I shall judge by your treatment of the
Father, what value you have for the Daughter. 
He looked as if he would chuse rather to speak than
write: But had he said so, I had a severe return to
have made upon him; as possibly he might see by
my looks. 
* *
In this way are we now: A sort of Calm, as I
said, succeeding a Storm. What may happen next,
whether a Storm or a Calm, with such a spirit as I
have to deal with, who can tell? 
But be that as it will, I think, my dear, I am not 

meanly off: And that is a great point with me; and
which I know you will be glad to hear: If it were
only, that I can see this man without losing any of
that dignity [What other word can I use, speaking of
myself, that betokens decency, and not arrogance?]
which is so necessary to enable me to look up, or rather
with the mind's eye, I may say, to look down
upon a man of this man's cast. 
Altho' circumstances have so offered, that I could
not take your advice as to the manner of dealing
with him; yet you gave me so much courage
by it, as has enabled me to conduct things to this
issue; as well as determined me against leaving
him: Which before, I was thinking to do, at all adventures. 
Whether, when it came to the point, I
should have done so, or not, I cannot say, because
it would have depended upon his behaviour at the
time. 
But let his behaviour be what it will, I am afraid,
(with you) that, should any-thing offer at last to
oblige me to leave him, I shall not mend my situation
in the world's eye; but the contrary. And yet I
will not be treated by him with indignity while I have
any power to help myself. 
You, my dear, have accused me of having modesty'd
away, as you phrase it, several opportunities of being
—Being what, my dear? —Why, the wife of a Libertine: 
And what a Libertine and his Wife are,
my Cousin Morden's Letter tells us. —Let me here,
once for all, endeavour to account for the motives
of my behaviour to this man, and for the principles
I have proceeded upon, as they appear to me upon a
close self-examination. 
Be pleased then to allow me to think, that my
motives on this occasion, arise not altogether from
maidenly niceness; nor yet from the apprehension
of what my present tormentor, and future husband,
may think of a precipitate compliance, on such a 

disagreeable behaviour as his: But they arise principally
from what offers to my own heart; respecting,
as I may say, its own rectitude, its own judgment
of the Fit and the Unfit; as I would, without
study, answer for myself to myself, in the first place; 
to him, and to the world, in the second only. Principles
that are in my mind; that I found there; implanted,
no doubt, by the first gracious Planter: 
Which therefore impel me, as I may say, to act up
to them, that thereby I may, to the best of my judgment,
be enabled to comport myself worthily in both
States (the Single and the Married) let others act as
they will by me. 
I hope, my dear, I do not deceive myself, and,
instead of setting about rectifying what is amiss in
my heart, endeavour to find excuses for habits and
peculiarities, which I am unwilling to cast off or overcome. 
The heart is very deceitful: Do you, my
dear friend, lay mine open [But surely it is always open
before you!] and spare me not, if you think it culpable. 
This observation, once for all, as I said, I thought
proper to make, to convince you, that, to the best of
my judgment, my errors, in matters as well of lesser
moment, as of greater, shall rather be the fault
of my Judgment, than of my Will. 
I am, my dearest friend, 
Your ever-obliged
Clarissa Harlowe. 