






My dearest Miss Darnford,
I am retired from a very busy Day, having
had no less than Fourteen of our Neighbours,
Gentlemen and Ladies, to Dinner with us: The
Occasion, principally, to welcome our noble
Guests into these Parts; Mr. B. having, as I 

mentioned in a former, turn'd the intended Visit
into an Entertainment, after his usual generous
Manner. 
Mr. B. and Lord Davers are gone Part
of the Way with them home; and Mr. H. or
Lord Jackey, (as we call the Gentleman, who
will always be young) mounted, with his Favourite
Colbrand, as an Escorte to the Countess
and Lady Davers, who are gone to take an Airing
in the Chariot. They offer'd to take the
Coach, if I would have gone; but being fatigu'd,
I desir'd to be excus'd. So I retir'd to my Closet,
and Miss Darnford, who is seldom out of my
Thoughts, coming into my Mind, I had a new
Recruit of Spirits, which enabled me to resume
my Pen, and thus I proceed with my Journal: 
Our Company was,*  the Earl and Countess
of D. who are so fashionable a marry'd Couple,
that the Earl made it his Boast, and his Countess
bore it like one accustomed to such Treatment,
that he had not been in his Lady's Company an
Hour abroad before for Seven Years. You know
his Lordship's Character: Every body does; and
there is not a worse, as Report says, in the Peerage. 
Sir Thomas Atkyns, a single Gentleman, not
a little finical and ceremonious, and a mighty
Beau, tho' of the tawdry Sort, and affecting
foreign Airs, as if he was afraid it would not be
judg'd by any other Mark, that he had travell'd. 

Mr. Arthur, and his Lady, a moderately
happy Couple, who seem always, when together,
to behave as if they were upon a Compromise; 
that is, that each would take it in Turn to say
free Things of the other—tho' some of their
Freedoms are of so cutting a Nature, that it
looks as if they intended to divert the Company
at their own Expence. The Lady, being of a
noble Family, takes great Pains to let every one
know, that she values herself not a little upon
that Advantage: But otherwise has many good
Qualities. 
Mr. Brooks, and his Lady. The Gentleman
is a free Joker on serious Subjects, but a goodnatur'd
Man, and says sprightly Things with no
ill Grace. The Lady is a little reserved, and of
a haughty Turn, tho' To-day she happened to
be freer than usual; as was observed at Table
by 
Lady Towers, who is a Maiden Lady of Family,
noted for her Wit and Repartee, and who
says many good Things, with so little Doubt,
and really so good a Grace, that one cannot help
being pleas'd with her. This Lady is generally
gallanted by 
Mr. Martin of the Grove, as he is called,
to distinguish him from a rich Citizen of that
Name, who is settled in these Parts; but being
covetous and proud, is seldom admitted among
the Gentry in their Visits or Parties of Pleasure. 
Mr. Martin is a shrewd Gentleman, but has
been a little too much of the Libertine Cast, and
has lived freely as to Women; and for that Reason 

has not been receiv'd by Mrs. Towers, who
hates free Actions, tho' she'll use free Words,
modestly free, as she calls them; that is to say,
the Double Entendre, in which Sir Simon Darnford,
a Gentleman you are not unacquainted
with, takes great Delight; tho', by the way,
what that worthy Gentleman calls innocent,
Lady Towers would blush at. 
Mr. Dormer, a Gentleman of a very courteous
Demeanour, a Widower, was another, who
always speaks well of his deceased Lady, and of
all the Sex for her sake. 
Mr. Chapman, and his Lady, a well-behav'd
Couple, who are not ashamed to be very tender
and observing to one another, but without that
censurable Fondness which sits so ill upon some
married Folks in Company. 
Then there was the Dean, our good Minister,
whom I name last, because I would close
with one of the worthiest; and his Daughter,
who came to supply her Mamma's Place, who
was indispos'd; a well-behav'd prudent young
Lady. And here were our Fourteen Guests. 
The Countess of C. Lady Davers, Lord
Davers, Mr. H. my dear Mr. B. and your
humble Servant, made up the rest of the Company. 
So we had a capacious and brilliant Circle,
you may imagine; and all the Avenues to
the House were crouded with their Equipages. 
The Subjects of Discourse at Dinner were
various, as you may well suppose, and the Circle
was too large to fall upon any regular or very
remarkable Topicks. A good deal of sprightly 

Wit, however, flew about, between the Earl
of D. Mrs. Towers and Mr. Martin, in which
that Lord suffered as he deserved; for he was by
no means a Match for the Lady, especially as the
Presence of the Dean was a very visible Restraint
upon him, and upon Mr. Brooks too: So much
Awe will the Character of a good Clergyman
always have upon even forward Spirits, where
he is known to have had an inviolable Regard
to it himself. 
Besides, the good Gentleman has naturally
a genteel and inoffensive Vein of Raillery, and
so was too hard for them at their own Weapons. 
But after Dinner was over, and the Servants
were withdrawn, Mr. Martin singled me out,
as he loves to do, for a Subject of Encomium,
and made some high Compliments to my dear
Mr. B. upon his Choice; and wished (as he
often does) he could find just such another Person
for himself. 
Lady Towers told him, That it was a Thing
as unaccountable, as it was unreasonable, that
every Rake, who loved to destroy Virtue, should
expect to be rewarded with it: And if his Brother B.
had come off so well, she thought no
one else ought to expect it. 
Lady Davers said, It was a very just Observation; 
and she thought 'twas pity there was not
a Law, that every Man who made a Harlot of
an honest Woman, should be obliged to marry
one of another's making. 
That would be too severe, Mr. B. said; it
would be Punishment enough, if he was to 

marry his own; and especially if he had not
seduced her under Promise of Marriage. 
Then you'd have a Man be obliged to stand
to his Promise, I suppose, Mr. B. reply'd Lady
Davers? 
Yes, Madam. 
But, said she, the Proof would be difficult
perhaps; and the most unguilty Heart of our
Sex, might be least able to make it out. But
what say you, my Lord D. continued her Ladyship,
will you, and my Lord Davers, join to
bring a Bill into the House of Peers, for the Purposes
I mentioned? I fansy my Brother would
give it all the Assistance he could in the Lower
House. 
Your Ladyship, said Mr. Martin, is highly
unreasonable, I think, to propose that: It would
be enough, surely, that a Man should be obliged,
as Mr. B. says, to marry the Woman he himself
seduced. 
The Earl said, That he thought neither the
one nor the other should be imposed upon
any Man; for that when Womens Virtue was
their Glory, and they were brought up with
that Notion, and to avoid the Snares of Men,
he thought, if they yielded, they ought to pay
the Forfeit, and take the Disgrace of it to themselves. 
May I ask your Lordship, said I, How it comes
to pass, that a Woman's Virtue is her Glory, and
that a Man's shall not be his? —Or, in other
Words, Why you think Virtue in a Man is not
as requisite as in a Woman? 

Custom, Madam, reply'd the Earl, has
made it very different; and those Things which
are scandalous in a Lady, are not so in a Gentleman. 
Will your Lordship argue, that it should be
so, because it is so? Does not the Gentleman
call himself the Head of his Family? Is it not
incumbent upon him, then, to set a good Example? 
And will he plead it as a Fashion, that he
may do by the dearest Relatives of another Man's
Family, what, if any one should attempt to do
by his, he would mortally resent? 
Very well observed, Madam, said the Dean:
There is not a Free-liver in the World, I believe,
who can answer that Argument. 
Mr. B. said the Earl, pray speak to your Lady:
She is too close upon us. And where Sentiments
have been so well supported by a Conduct
so uniform and exemplary, I chuse not to enter
the Lists with such an Antagonist. 
Well, well, said Mr. B. since your Lordship
will speak in the Plural Number US, let
me say, We must not pretend to hold an Argument
on this Subject. —But, however, I think,
my Lord, you should not call upon a Man to
defend it, who, bad as he has been, never committed
a Fault of this Nature, that he was not
sorry for, tho' the Sorrow generally lasted too
little a while. 
Mr. B. (said Lady Towers) has some Merit
with me for that Answer: And he has still a
greater on another Account; and that is, that 

he has seen his Error so early, and has left his
Vices before they have left him. 
She looked, as every one did, on the Earl,
who appeared a little disconcerted, as one conscious,
that he deserved the Reflection. And
the Dean said, Lady Towers observes very well:
For, altho' I presume not to make personal Applications,
yet I must say, That the Gentleman who
sees his Error in the Prime of Life, before he is
overtaken by some awakening Misfortune, may
be called one of the happiest of those who have
erred. 
Ay, Mr. Dean, said Lady Towers, I can tell
you one thing, that such another Buttress, as
you know who, taken away from Libertinism,
and such another Example as a certain Lady every
Day gives, would go near in a few Years to ruin
the Devil's Kingdom in Bedfordshire. 
The Gentlemen looked round upon one another
upon this home Push: And the Lady would
not let them recover it. See, said she, how the
Gentlemen look upon one another, as who
should say, each to his Companion, I'm not so
bad as you! 
Ay, said Lady Davers, I see, my Lord Davers,
and the Earl of D. and Mr. Martin, look
most concerned. 
Faith, Ladies, said Mr. Martin, this is too
severely personal: A Man who contends with a
Lady, has a fine Time of it; for we are under
Restraint, while you say any thing you please. 
But let me tell you, there's not a Man of us all,
'tis my Opinion, that could have attempted 

what a certain Renegado has attempted, tho' he
is so readily acquitted. 
Not so hasty, my good Friend, said Mr. B.
You don't consider well what you say, nor of
whom: For did I take upon myself to censure
you? But tho' I may challenge you to say the
worst you can, because I always dealt upon my
own Stock, while other People I could name
enter'd into a Society and clubb'd for Mischief; 
yet I see you deal with a Brother Rake, when
he reforms, as Highwaymen with one of their
Gang, who would fain withdraw and be honest,
but is kept among them by Fear of an Impeachment. 
But is not this, Ladies, said Mrs. Arthur, a
sad thing, that so many fine Gentlemen as think
themselves concern'd in this Charge, should have
no way to clear themselves but by Recrimination? 
Egad, Gentlemen, said Sir Thomas Atkyns,
I know not what you're about! You make but
sorry Figures, by my Faith! —I have heard
of many queer Pranks among my Bedfordshire
Neighbours; but I bless my Stars, I was in
France and Italy all the Time. 
Said Mr. Martin, Mrs. Arthur spoke the
Words fine Gentlemen, and Sir Thomas thought
himself obliged to enter upon his own Defence. 
Ay, said the Earl, and the best of it is, Sir
Thomas pleads not his Virtue neither, that he
did not join in these queer Pranks with his Bedfordshire
Neighbours, but his Absence. 

Gad take me, return'd he, taking a Pinch of
Snuff with an Air, you're plaguy sharp, Gentlemen:
I believe in my Conscience, you're in a
Confederacy, as Mr. B. says, and would swear
an honest Man into the Plot, that would not
care for such Company. What say you, Mr. H.? 
Which Side are you of? 
Every Gentleman, reply'd he, who is not
of the Lady's Side, is deem'd a Criminal; and
I was always of the Side that had the Power of
the Gallows. 
That shews, return'd Lady Towers, that
Mr. H. is more afraid of the Punishment, than
of deserving it. 
'Tis well, said Mr. B. that any Consideration
deters a Gentleman at Mr. H.'s Time of Life. 
What may be Fear now, may improve to Virtue
in Time. 
Ay, said Lady Davers, Jackey is one of his
Uncle's Foxes: He'd be glad to snap up a straggling
Pullet, if he was not well look'd after,
perhaps. 
Pray, my Dear, said Lord Davers, forbear:
You ought not to introduce Two different Conversations
into different Companies. 
I think, truly, said Mr. B. you should take
the Dean's Hint, my good Friends; else you'll
be less polite than personal. 
Well, but Gentlemen, said Lady Arthur,
since you seem to have been so hard put to it,
as single Gentlemen, What's to be done with the
marry'd Man, who ruins an innocent Body? 
What Punishment, Mrs. Towers, shall we find 

out for such an one? And what Reparation to
the Injured? This, it seems, was said with a
particular View to the Earl, on a late scandalous
Occasion: But I knew it not till afterwards. 
As to the Punishment of the Gentleman, reply'd
Mrs. Towers, where the Law has not provided
for it, it must be left, I believe, to his
Conscience. It will then one Day be heavy
enough. But as to the Reparation to the Woman,
so far as it can be made, it will be determinable
as the unhappy Person may or may not
know, that her Seducer is a marry'd Man: If
she knows he is, I think she neither deserves
Redress not Pity, tho' it alleviates not his Guilt. 
But if the Case be otherwise, and she had no
Means of informing herself that he was marry'd,
and he promised to make her his Wife, to be
sure, tho' she cannot be acquitted, he deserves
the severest Punishment that can be inflicted. 
What say you, Mrs. B.? 
If I must speak my Mind, reply'd I, I think,
that since Custom, as the Earl said just now,
exacts so little Regard to Virtue from Men,
and so much from Women, and since the
Designs of the former upon the latter are so
flagrantly avow'd and known, the poor Creature,
who suffers herself to be seduced, either
by a single or marry'd Man, with Promises, or
without, has nothing to do, but to sequester
herself from the World, and devote the Remainder
of her Days to Penitence and Obscurity. As
to the Gentleman, added I, he must, I doubt, be
left to his Conscience, as you say, Mrs. Towers, 

which he will one Day have enough to do to
pacify. 
Every young Lady has not your angelick
Perfection, Madam, said Mr. Dormer. And
there are Cases, in which the Fair Sex deserve
Compassion, ours Execration. Love may insensibly
steal upon a soft Heart: When once
admitted, the Oaths, Vows, and Protestations
of the favour'd Object, who perhaps, on all
Occasions, declaims against the Deceivers of his
Sex, confirm her good Opinion of him; till,
having lull'd asleep her Vigilance, in an unguarded
Hour he takes Advantage of her unsuspecting
Innocence. Is not such a poor Creature
to be pity'd? And what Punishment does not
such a Seducer deserve? 
You have put, Sir, said I, a moving Case, and
in a generous manner. What, indeed, does not
such a Deceiver deserve? 
And the more, said Mrs. Chapman, as the
most innocent Heart is generally the most credulous. 
Very true, said my Countess; for such a
one as would do no Harm to others, seldom
suspects any from others: And her Lot is very
unequally cast; admir'd for that very Innocence,
which tempts some brutal Ravager to ruin it. 
Yet, What is that Virtue, said the Dean,
which cannot sland the Test? 
But, said Mrs. Towers, very satirically, Whither,
Ladies, are we got? We are upon the Subject
of Virtue and Honour. Let us talk of something,
in which the Gentlemen can join with us. 

This is such a one, you see, that none but the
Dean and Mr. Dormer can disourse upon. 
Let us then, retorted Mr. Martin, to be even
with one Lady at least, find a Subject that will
be new to her. And that is Charity. 
Does what I said concern Mr. Martin more
than any other Gentleman, returned Mrs. Towers,
that he is disposed to take Offence at it? 
You must pardon me, Mrs. Towers, said
Mr. B. but I think a Lady should never make a
Motion to wave such Subjects as those of Virtue
and Honour; and less still, in Company, where
there is so much Occasion, as she seems to think,
for inforcing them. 
I desire not to wave the Subject, I'll assure
you, reply'd she. And if, Sir, you think it may
do good, we will continue it, for the sakes of
all you, Gentlemen, (looking round her archly)
who are of Opinion, you may be benefited by it. 
We are going into Personals again, Gentlemen
and Ladies, said the Earl. 
And that won't bear, my Lord, you seem to
think, retorted Lady Davers. 
A Health to the King and Royal Family
brought on Publick Affairs, and Politicks; and
the Ladies withdrawing to Coffee and Tea, I
have no more to say as to this Conversation,
having repeated all that I remember was said to
any Purpose; for such large Companies, you
know, Miss, don't always produce the most
agreeable and edifying Talk. But this I was the
more willing to recite, because I thought the
Characters of some of our Neighbours would 

be thereby made more familiar to you, if ever
I should have the Happiness to see you in these
Parts. 
I will only add, that Miss L. the Dean's
Daughter, is a very modest and agreeable young
Lady, and a perfect Mistress of Musick; in
which the Dean takes great Delight also, and is a
fine Judge of it. The Gentlemen coming in, to
partake of our Coffee and Conversation, as they
said, obtain'd of Miss to play several Tunes on
the Harpsichord; and would have me play too. 
But really, Miss L. so very much surpass'd me,
that had I regarded my Reputation for playing
above the Desire I had (as I said, and truly said)
to satisfy the good Company, I ought not to
have pretended to touch a Key after such a
Mistress of it. Miss has no Voice, which is great
Pity; and, at the Request of every one, I sung to
her Accompanyment, twice or thrice; as did
Mrs. Towers, whose Voice exceeds her Taste. 
But here, Miss, will I end my Fourth Conversation-Piece. 





The Countess being a little indispos'd, Lady
Davers and I took an Airing this Morning
in the Chariot, and had a great deal of Discourse
together. Her Ladyship was pleased to express
great Favour and Tenderness towards me; gave
me a great deal of good Advice, as to the Care
she would have me take of myself; and told me, 

That her Hopes, as well as her Brother's, all centred
in my Welfare; and that the Way I was in,
made her love me better and better. 
She was pleased to tell me, how much she
approv'd of the domestick Management; and to
say, That she never saw such Regularity and Method
in any Family in her Life, where was the
like Number of Servants: Every one, she said,
knew their Duty, and did it without speaking
to, in such Silence, and with so much apparent
Chearfulness and Delight, without the least
Hurry or Confusion, that it was her Surprize and
Admiration. But kindly would have it, that I
took too much Care upon me: Yet, said she,
I don't see, but you are always fresh and lively,
and never seem tir'd or fatigu'd; and are always
dress'd and easy, so that no Company find you
unprepar'd, or unfit to receive them, come when
they will, whether it be to Breakfast or Dinner. 
I told her Ladyship, I owed all this, and
most of the Conduct for which she was pleased
to praise me, to her dear Brother, who, at the
Beginning of my Happiness, gave me several
Cautions*  and Instructions for my Behaviour; 
which had always been the Rule of my Conduct
ever since, and I hoped ever would be: To say
nothing, added I, which yet would be very
unjust, of the Assistance I receive, from worthy
Mrs. Jervis, who is an excellent Manager. 
Good Creature, sweet Pamela, and charming
Girl, were her common Words, and she 

was pleased to attribute to me a graceful and
unaffected Ease, and would have it, that I have a
natural Dignity in my Person and Behaviour,
which command Love and Reverence at the same
time: So that, my dear Miss, I am in Danger
of being as proud as any thing. For you must
believe, that her Ladyship's Approbation gives
me great Pleasure; and the more, as I was afraid,
before she came, I should not have come off near
so well in her Opinion. 
As the Chariot passed along, she took great
Notice of the Respects paid me by People of
different Ranks, and of the Blessings bestow'd
upon me, by several, as we proceeded; and said,
She should fare well, and be rich in good Wishes,
for being in my Company. 
The good People, who know us, will do
so, Madam, said I; but I had rather have their
silent Prayers, than their audible ones; and I
have caused some of them to be told so. But
they say, They cannot help it: And one honest
Man said, That every body's Hearts sprang to
their Lips as soon as I appeared, and they could
not keep their Words in. 
What I apprehend, Madam continued I, is
that you will be more uneasy To-morrow, when
at Church you'll see a good many People in the
same way. Indeed, added I, my Story, and
your dear Brother's Tenderness to me, are so
much talked of, that many Strangers are brought
thither to see us. 'Tis the only thing, continued
I, (and so it is, Miss) that makes me desirous to 

go to London; for, by the Time we return,
the Novelty, I hope; will cease. 
Then I mention'd some Verses of Mr. Cowley,
which had been laid under my Cushion in
our Seat at Church, Two Sundays ago, by some
unknown Hand; and how uneasy they have
made me. I will transcribe them, Miss, and
give you the Particulars of our Conversation on
that Occasion. The Verses are these: 


Thou robb'st my Days of Bus'ness and Delights,
 Of Sleep thou robb'st my Nights.
Ah! lovely Thief! what wilt thou do?
 What! rob me of Heav'n too!
Thou ev'n my Pray'rs dost steal from me,
 And I with wild Idolatry,
Begin to God, and end them all to thee.


No, to what Purpose should I speak?
No, wretched Heart, swell till you break:
 She cannot love me, if she would;
And, to say Truth, 'twere pity that she should.
 No, to the Grave thy Sorrows bear,
 As silent as they will be there:
Since that lov'd Hand this mortal Wound does give,
 So handsomely the Thing contrive,
 That she may guiltless of it live:
 So perish, that her killing thee
May a Chance-medley, and no Murder be!


I had them in my Pocket, and read them to
my Lady; who ask'd me, If her Brother had 

seen them? I told her, It was he that found them
under the Cushion I used to sit upon; but did
not shew them to me, till I came home; and
that I was so vexed at them, that I could not go
to Church in the Afternoon. 
What should you be vex'd at, my Dear?
said she: How could you help it? —My Brother
was not disturb'd at them, was he? 
No, indeed, reply'd I: He chid me for being
so; and was pleased to make me a fine Compliment
upon it; that he did not wonder, that
every body who saw me, lov'd me. —But I
said, This was all that wicked Wit was good for,
to inspire such Boldness in bad Hearts, which
might other wise not dare to set Pen to Paper to
affront any one. 
But pray, Madam, added I, don't own I
have told you of them, lest the least Shadow of
a Thought should arise, that I was prompted by
some vile, secret Vanity, to tell your Ladyship
of them: When, I am sure, they have vex'd me
more than enough. For is it not a sad thing,
that the Church should be profan'd by such
Actions, and such Thoughts, as ought not to be
brought into it? 
Then, Madam, to have any wicked Man
dare to think of one with impure Notions, it
gives me the less Opinion of myself, that I should
be so much as thought of as the Object of any
wicked Body's Wishes. I have called myself to
Account upon it, Whether any Levity in my
Looks, my Dress, my Appearance, could embolden
such an affrontive Insolence. And I have 

thought upon this Occasion better of Julius
Cæsar's Delicacy, than I did when I read of it; 
who, upon an Attempt made on his Wife, to
which, however, it does not appear she gave the
least Encouragement, said, to those who pleaded
forher against the Divorce he was resolved upon,
That the Wife of Cæsar ought not to be suspected. 
Indeed, Madam, continued I, it would extremely
shock me, but to know, that any wicked
Heart had conceived a Design upon me; Upon
me, give me Leave to repeat, whose only Glory
and Merit is, that I have had the Grace to withstand
the greatest of Trials and Temptations,
from a Gentleman more worthy to be beloved
both for Person and Mind, than any Man in
England. 
Your Observation, my Dear, is truly delicate,
and such as becomes your Mind and Character. 
And I really think, if any Lady in the
World is secure from vile Attempts, it must be
you; not only from your Story, so well known,
and the Love you bear to your Man, and his
Merit to you, but from the Prudence, and natural
Dignity, I will say, of your Behaviour; 
which, tho' easy and chearful, is what would
strike dead the Hope of any presumptuous Libertine,
the Moment he sees you. 
How can I enough, return'd I, and kissed
her Hand, acknowlege your Ladyship's polite
Goodness in this Compliment! But, my Lady,
you see, by the very Instance I have mention'd,
that a Liberty is taken, which I cannot think of
without Pain. 

Tis such a Liberty, reply'd my Lady, as
shews more Despair than Hope, and is a Confirmation
of my Sentiments on the Prudence
and Dignity which not only I, but every body
attributes to you. 
Kind, kind Lady Davers! said I, again
pressing her Hand with my Lips. But I think I
will turn my Quarrel, since I know not, and
hope I never shall, the vile Transcriber, upon the
Author of the Verses; for had they not been
written, I should not have been thus insulted,
perhaps. 
Cowley, reply'd my Lady, is my favourite
Poet: He has a beautiful Imagination, a vast
deal of brilliant Wit, and a Chastity too in most
of his Pieces, that hardly any of the Tribe can
boast. 
I once liked him better too, said I, than I
have done since this; for he was one of the
Poets that my Lady would permit me to read
sometimes; and his Pieces in Praise of the Country
Life, and those charming Lines against Ambition,
used to delight me much: 

If e'er Ambition should my Fancy cheat
With any Wish so mean as to be great,
Continue, Heav'n, still from me to remove
The humble Blessings of the Life I love.

I have taken Notice of these Lines often,
said my Lady, and been pleased with them. But
I think you have no Reason to be out of Conceit
with Cowley, for the ill Use made of his 

Verses. He but too naturally describes the Influence
of Love, which frequently interferes with
our best Duties. And there is something very
natural, and easy, and witty, in the first Lines:
And shews that the Poet laments the too engaging
Impressions which Love made upon his Mind,
even on the most solemn Occasions—What!
rob me of Heav'n too! —A bad Heart, Pamela,
could not have so lamented, or so written. 
Ah! but, Madam, return'd I, I have seen,
in your dear Brother's Collection of Manuscripts,
a Poem in which this very Point, nice as it is,
is touch'd with much greater Propriety. 
Can you repeat it, my Dear? 
The Lines I mean, I can. Your Ladyship
must know, It was upon a Quarrel between a
beloved Couple, where the Gentleman had been
wild, and the Lady's ill-natur'd Uncle, who
wanted to break the Match, (altho' it was design'd
by her deceased Parents) had fomented it,
so that she would not look upon her Lover, nor
see him, nor receive a Letter of Excuse from
him, tho' they were betrothed, and she lov'd
him dearly. This oblig'd him to throw himself
in her Way at Church, and thus he writes: 

But, O! forgive me, Heav'n, if oft my Fair
Robs thee of my Devoir, disturbs my Pray'r,
Confounds my best Resolves, and makes me prove,
That she's too much a Rival in thy Love!

These now, Madam, continued I, are the
Lines I admire: 


But better Thoughts my happier Hopes suggest,
When once this stormy Doubt's expell'd my Breast;
When once this agitated Flame shall turn
To steadier Heat, and more intensely burn,
My dear Maria then, thought I, will join,
And we, one heart, one Soul, shall all be thine!

Ay, Pamela, these are very pretty Lines. 
But you must not think ill of my Favourite
Cowley, however; for I say, with a Gentleman,
whose Judgment, and good Heart, have hardly
any Equal, That tho' Cowley was going out of
Fashion with some, yet he should always suspect
the Head or the Heart of him or her, who could
not taste, and delight in, his Beauties. The
Words, 

She cannot love me, if she would,
And, to say Truth, 'twere pity that she should;

Shew the Goodness of the Poet's Heart; and
even, that the Transcriber himself, be he
who he will, had not the worst, that he could
single out these; when, if he would be shining
with borrow'd Rays, he might have chosen a
much worse Poet to follow. 
Oh! Madam, reply'd I, say not one Word in
behalf of the wicked Transcriber. For a Wretch
to entertain the Shadow of a Wish for a marry'd
Person, is a Degree of Impurity that ought not
to be excus'd: But to commit such Thoughts to
Writing, to put that Writing under the Seat of
the marry'd Person at Church, where her Heart 

should be engag'd wholly in her first Duties; 
where, too, it might be more likely to be seen by
the Pew-keepers than her, and so be spread over
the whole Parish, to the Propagation of bad
Ideas, whenever I appeared; and, moreover,
might come to the Hands of one's Husband,
who, from his own free Life formerly, and
high Passions, as far as the Transcriber knew,
might be uneasy at, and angry with, the innocent
Occasion of the Insult—Besides the Apprehension
it must give one, that the Man who
could take this vile Step, might proceed to greater
Lengths, which my busy Fears could improve to
Duelling and Murder—Then the Concern it
must fill me with, to the diverting of my Mind
from my first Regards, when any one looked at
me wistfully, that he might be the Transcriber,
which must always give me Confusion of
Thought—Dearest Madam, can one forbear
being vex'd, when all these Imaginations dart in
upon a Mind apprehensive as mine? —Indeed
this Action has given me great Uneasiness at
times ever since, and I cannot help it. 
I am pleas'd with your Delicacy, my Dear,
as I said before. —You can never err, while
thus watchful over your Conduct;—and I
own you have the more Reason for it, as you
have marry'd a mere Julius Cæsar, an open-ey'd
Rake, that was her Word, who would on the
least Surmises, tho' ever so causeless on your
Part, have all his Passions up in Arms, in Apprehension
of Liberties that might be offer'd like
those he has not scrupled to take. 

O but, Madam, said I, your dear Brother
has given me great Satisfaction in one Point; for
you must think, I should not love him as I ought,
if I had not a Concern for his future Happiness,
as well as for his present; and that is, he has
assured me, that in all the Liberties he has
taken, he never attempted a marry'd Lady,
but always abhorred the Thought of so great an
Evil. 
'Tis pity, said her Ladyship, that a Man who
could conquer his Passions so far, could not subdue
them intirely. This shews it was in his own
Power to do so; and increases his Crime: And
what a Wretch is he, who scrupling, under Pretence
of Conscience or Honour, to attempt
Ladies within the Pale, boggles not to ruin a
poor Creature without; altho' he knows, he
thereby, most probably, for ever, deprives her
of that Protection, by preventing her Marriage,
which, even among such Rakes as himself, is
deemed, he owns, inviolable, and so casts the
poor Creature headlong into the Jaws of Perdition? 
Ah, Madam, reply'd I, this was the very
Inference I made upon the Occasion. 
And what could he say? 
He said, My Inference was just; but call'd
me pretty Preacher;—and once having caution'd
me*  not to be over serious with him, so
as to east a Gloom over our innocent Enjoyments,
I never dare to urge Matters further, when he
calls me by that Name. 

Well, said my Lady, thou'rt an admirable
Girl! God's Goodness was great to our Family,
when it gave thee to it. 
No Wonder, continu'd her Ladyship, as my
Brother says, every body that sees you, and has
heard your Character, loves you: And this is
some Excuse for the inconsiderate Folly even of
this unknown Transcriber. 
Ah! Madam, reply'd I; but is it not a sad
thing, that People, if they must take upon them
to like one's Behaviour in general, should have
the worst instead of the best Thoughts upon it? 
If I were as good as I ought to be, and as some
think me, must they wish to make me bad for
that Reason? and so to destroy the Cause of that
Pleasure, which they pretend to take in seeing a
body set a good Example? For what, my dear
Lady, could a Wretch mean, even by the Words
your Ladyship thinks most innocent, 

She cannot love me, if she would;
And, to say Truth,

—(as if this Truth were
extorted rather by his Fears than his Wishes) 

 —'twere pity that she should.

But why then, if this be the Case, and that
he would bear his Sorrows, as the Poet calls
them, to the Grave, should he not keep them
to himself? make that very Mind their Grave,
which gave them their Birth? If the bold Creature,
whoever he be, had not thought this might
be a Hint that might some-how be improved, and
a vile Foundation for some viler Superstructure, 

would he have transcribed them, and caused
them to be placed where they were found? — 
Then, in my humble Opinion, the Thought
that is contained in these Lines, 

Since that lov'd Hand this mortal Wound does give,
 So handsomely the Thing contrive,
 That she may guiltless of it live:
 So perish, that her killing thee
May a Chance-medley, and no Murder be;

Is rather a Conceit, or Prettiness, that won't
bear Examination, than that true Wit in which
this fine Poet excels:—For, if she cannot love
him if she would, and if it were pity, that she
should love him; this implies she was a Lady
under previous Obligation, whether Marriage or
Betrothment, is the same thing to him: Then,
need the Thing to be so handsomely contrived,
need any Pains be taken (if her Repulse had
killed, as Poetical Licence makes him say, this
Invader of another's Right) to bring it in Chance-medley;
—since no Jury could have brought it
in Murder, except that Sort of Murder which is
called Felo de se (you know, my Lady, what a
Scholar your Brother has made me)? So that
I presume to think, the Poet himself is not so
blameless in this, as he has taken care to be in
most of his Pieces. And permit me to make one
Observation, my good Lady, that if the chastest
Writers (supposing Cowley meant ever so well)
may have their Works and their Thoughts turn'd
to be Panders and Promoters of the Wickedness 

of coarse Minds, whose grosser Ideas could not
be cloathed in a Dress fit to appear in decent
Company, without their Assistance, how careful
ought a good Author to be, whose Works
are likely to live to the End of Time, how he
propagates the worst of Mischiefs, to such a
Duration, when he himself is dead and gone,
and incapable of antidoting the Poison he has
spread? 
Her Ladyship was pleased to kiss me, as we
sat. My charming Pamela, my more than
Sister,—(Did she say?—Yes, she did say so!
and made my Eyes overflow with Joy to hear
the sweet Epithet!—) How your Conversation
charms me! —I charge you, when you get to
Town, let me have your Remarks on the Diversions
you will be carried to by my Brother. 
Now I know what to expect from you, and you
know how acceptable every thing will be to me
that comes from you, I promise great Pleasure as
well to myself as to my worthy Friends, particularly
to Lady Betty, in your unrestrained free
Correspondence. 
Indeed, Pamela, I must bring you acquainted
with Lady Betty: She is one of the Worthies of
our Sex, and has a fine Understanding. —I'm
sure you'll like her. —But (for the World say
it not to my Brother, nor let Lady Betty know
I tell you so, if ever you should be acquainted––––)
I had carry'd the Matter so far by my officious
Zeal to have my Brother marry'd to so fine a
Lady, not doubting his joyful Approbation, that
it was no small Disappointment to her, I can tell 

you, when he marry'd you: And this is the best
Excuse I can make for my furious Behaviour to
you at the Hall. For tho' I am naturally very
hasty and passionate, yet then I was almost mad. 
Indeed my Disappointment had given me so much
Indignation both against you and him, that it
is well I did not do some violent thing by you.* 
 I believe you did feel the Weight of my
Hand:—But what was that! —'Twas well I
did not kill you dead—these were her Ladyship's
Words—For how could I think the wild
Libertine capable of being engag'd by such noble
Motives, or Thee what thou art? —So this
will account to thee a little for my Violence
then. 
Your Ladyship, said I, all these Things consider'd,
had but too much Reason to be angry at
your dear Brother's Proceedings, so well as you
always lov'd him, so high a Concern as you always
had to promote his Honour and Interest, and so
far as you had gone with Lady Betty. 
I tell thee, Pamela, said she, that the old
Story of Eleanor and Rosamond run in my Head
all the Way of my Journey, and I almost wished
for a Potion to force down thy Throat: And
when I came, and found thy lewd Paramour absent,
(for little did I think thou wast marry'd to
him, tho' I expected thou wouldst endeavour to
persuade me to believe it) apprehending that his
Intrigue with thee would effectually frustrate my 

Hopes as to Lady Betty and him; Now, thought I,
all happens as I wish! —Now will I confront this
brazen Girl! —Now will I try her Innocence
as I please, by offering to take her with me out
of his Hands; if she refuses, take that Refusal
for a Demonstration of her Guilt; and then,
thought I, I will make the Creature provoke
me, in the Presence of my Nephew and my
Woman (and I hoped to have got that Woman
Jewkes to testify for me too); and I cannot tell
what I might have done, if thou hadst not got
out of the Window as thou didst, especially after
thou hadst told me, Thou wast as much marry'd
as I was, and hadst shewn me his tender Letter
to thee, which had a quite different Effect upon
me than thou hadst hoped for. But if I had
committed any Act of Violence, what Remorse
should I have had, when I came to reflect, and
had known what an Excellence I had injured! 
Thank God, thou didst escape me! thank God,
thou didst! And then her Ladyship folded her
Arms about me, and kissed me. 
This was a sad Story, you'll say, my dear
Miss: And I wonder what her Ladyship's Passion
would have made her do! Surely she would not
have killed me dead indeed! Surely she would
not! —Let it not, however,' Miss, nor you,
my dear Father and Mother,—when you see
it,—go out of your own Hands, nor be read,
for my Lady's sake, to any body else—No,
Miss, not to your own dear Mamma. —It
made me tremble a little, even at this Distance,
to think what a sad thing Passion is, when Way 

is given to its ungovernable Tumults, and how
it deforms and debases the noblest Minds! 
We returned from this agreeable Airing but
just Time enough to dress before Dinner; and
then I attended my Lady, and we went together
into the Countess's Apartment, where I received
abundance of Compliments from both. As this
brief Conversation will give you some Notion of
that Management and Oeconomy for which
they heaped upon me their kind Praises, I will
recite to you what passed in it, and hope you
will not think me too vain; and the less, because
what I underwent formerly from my Lady's Indignation,
half intitles me to be proud of her
present Kindness and Favour. 
Lady Davers said, Your Ladyship must excuse
us, that we have lost so much of your Company; 
but here, this sweet Girl has entertained
me in such a manner, that I could have staid out
with her all Day; and several times did I bid the
Coachman prolong his Circuit. 
My good Lady Davers, Madam, said I, has
given me inexpressible Pleasure, and has been
all Condescension and Favour, and made me as
proud as proud can be. 
You, my dear Mrs. B. said she, may have
given great Pleasure to Lady Davers; for it cannot
be otherwise. —But I have no great Notion
of her Ladyship's Condescension, as you call it,
(pardon me, Madam, said she to her, smiling)
when she cannot raise her Style above the Word
Girl, coming off from a Tour you have made
so delightful to her. 

I protest to you, my Lady C. reply'd her
Ladyship, with great Goodness, that that
Word which once indeed I used thro' Pride, as
you'll call it, I now use for a very different
Reason. I begin to doubt, whether to call her
Sister is not more Honour to myself than to her; 
and to this Hour am not quite convinc'd. When
I am, I will call her so with Pleasure. 
I was quite overcome with this fine Compliment,
but could not answer a Word: And the
Countess said, I could have spared you longer,
had not the Time of Day compell'd your Return. 
For I have been very agreeably entertained, as
well as you, altho' but with the Talk of your
Woman and mine: For here they have been
giving me such an Account of Mrs. B.'s Oeconomy,
and Family Management, as has highly
delighted me. I never knew the like; and in
so young a Lady too. We shall have strange
Reformations to make in our Families, Lady
Davers, when we go home, were we to follow
so good an Example. 
Why, my dear Mrs. B. continued her Ladyship,
you out-do all your Neighbours. And
indeed I am glad I live so far from you:—For
were I to try to imitate you, it would still be
but Imitation, and you'd have the Honour of it. 
Yet you hear, and you see by Yesterday's
Conversation, said Lady Davers, how much
her best Neighbours of both Sexes admire her:
They all yield to her the Palm, unenvying. 
Then, my good Ladies, said I, it is a Sign
I have most excellent Neighbours, full of Generosity, 

and willing to encourage a young Person
in doing right things: So it makes, considering
what I was, more for their Honour than my
own. For what Censures should not such a one
as I deserve, who have not been educated to fill
up my Time like Ladies of Condition, were I
not to employ myself as I do? I, who have so
little other Merit, and who brought no Fortune
at all? 
Come, come, Pamela, none of your self-denying
Ordinances—that was Lady Davers's
Word––––You must know something of your own
Excellence:—If you do not, I'll tell it you, because
there is no Fear you will be proud or vain
upon it. I don't see then, that there is the Lady
in your Neighbourhood, or any Neighbourhood,
that behaves with more Decorum, or better keeps
up the Port of a Lady, than you do. How you
manage it, I can't tell; but you do as much by a
Look, and a pleasant one too, that's the Rarity!
as I do by high Words, and passionate Exclamations. 
I have often nothing but Blunder upon
Blunder, as if the Wretches were in a Confederacy
to try my Patience. 
Perhaps, Madam, said I, the Awe they
have of your Ladyship, because of your high
Qualities, makes them commit Blunders; for I
myself have always been more afraid of appearing
before your Ladyship, when you have visited
your honoured Mother, than of any body else,
and have been the more sensibly aukward thro
that very aweful Respect. 

Psha, psha! Pamela, that is not it: 'Tis all
in yourself. I us'd to think my Mamma, and
my Brother too, had as aukward Servants as I
ever saw any-where—except Mrs. Jervis. — 
Well enough for a Batchelor, indeed! —But,
here!—thou hast not parted with one Servant— 
Hast thou? 
No, my Lady. 
How! said the Countess; what Excellence is
here! All of them, pardon me, Mrs. B. your
Fellow-servants, as one may say, and all of them
so respectful, so watchful of your Eye; and you,
at the same time, so gentle to them, so easy, so
chearful! 
Don't you think me, Miss, insufferably vain? 
But 'tis what they were pleased to say. 'Twas
their Goodness to me, and shew'd how much
they can excel in generous Politeness. So I will
proceed: 
Why this, continued the Countess, must be
born Dignity,—born Discretion. —Education
cannot give it:—If it could, why should not
we have it? 
The Ladies said many more kind things of
me then; and after Dinner they mentioned all
over again, with Additions, before my best
Friend, who was kindly delighted with the Encomiums
given me by Two Ladies of such distinguishing
Judgment in all other Cases. They
told him, How much they admired my Family
Management: Then would have it, that my
Genius was universal, for the Employments and
Accomplishments of my Sex, whether they consider'd 

it, they were pleased to say, as employ'd
in Penmanship, in Needle-work, in paying or receiving
Visits, in Musick, and I can't tell how
many other Qualifications, which their Goodness
made them attribute to me, over and above
the Family Management; saying, that I had an
Understanding which comprehended every
thing, and an Eye that penetrated into the very
Bottom of Matters in a Moment, and was never
at a Loss for the Should be, the Why or
Wherefore, and the How; these were their comprehensive
Words—That I did every thing
with Celerity, clearing all as I went, and left nothing,
that was their Observation, to recur or
come over again, that could be dispatched at
once: By which means, they said, every Hand
was clear to undertake a new Work, as well as
my own Head to direct it; and there was no
Hurry nor Confusion; but every coming Hour
was fresh and ready, and unincumber'd, (so they
said) for its new Employment; and to this they
attributed that Ease and Pleasure with which
every thing was performed, and that I could do,
and cause to be done, so much Business without
Hurry either to myself or Servants. 
These things, they would have it, they observed
in part themselves, and in part were beholden
for to the Observations of their Women, who
looked, they said, so narrowly into every Part
of the Management, as if they were Spies upon
it; but were such faithful ones, that it was like
a good Cause brought to a strict Scrutiny, the
brighter and fairer for it. 

Thus, my dear Miss, did their Ladyships
praise me for what I ought to be; and I will
endeavour to improve more and more by their
kind Admonitions, which come cloathed in the
agreeable and flattering Shape of Praise; the
noblest Incitement to the doing of one's Duty. 
Judge you how pleasing this was to my best
Beloved, who found, in their kind Approbation,
such a Justification of his own Conduct, as could
not fail of being pleasing to him, especially as
Lady Davers was one of the kind Praisers. 
Lord Davers was so highly delighted, that
he rose once, begging his Brother's Excuse, to
salute me; and remained standing over my Chair,
with a Pleasure in his Looks that cannot be expressed,
now-and-then lifting up his Hands, and
his good-natur'd Eye glistening with Joy, which
a Pier-glass gave me the Opportunity of seeing,
as sometimes I stole a bashful Glance towards it,
not knowing how or which way to look. Even
Mr. H. seem'd to be touch'd very sensibly; and
recollecting his Behaviour to me at the Hall, he
once cry'd out, What a sad Whelp was I, to be-have
as I formerly did, to so much Excellence! ––– 
Not, Mr. B. that I was any thing uncivil, neither; 
—but in unworthy Sneers and Nonsense. 
—You know me well enough. —P&wblank;x
on me for a Jackanapes! —You call'd me*  Tinsel'd Toy, tho', Madam; don't you remember
that? and said, Twenty or Thirty Years hence,
when I was at Age, you'd give me an Answer. –––– 

Egad! I shall never forget your Looks, nor your
Words neither! —They were d&wblank;n'd severe
Speeches, were they not, Sir? 
O you see, Mr. H. reply'd my dear Gentleman,
Pamela is not quite perfect. —We must
not provoke her; for she'll call us both so, perhaps; 
for I wear a lac'd Coat, sometimes, as
well as you. 
Nay, Faith, I can't be angry, said he. I
deserv'd it richly, that I did, had it been worse. 
Thy silly Tongue, said my Lady, runs on
without Fear or Wit. What's past is past. 
Why, i'faith, Madam, I was plaguily wrong; 
and I said nothing of any body but myself:— 
And have been ready to hang myself since, as
often as I have thought of my Nonsense. 
My Nephew, said my Lord, must bring in
Hanging, or the Gallows, in every Speech he
makes, or it will not be he. 
Mr. B. smiling, said, with Severity enough
in his Meaning, as I could see by the Turn of his
Countenance,—Mr. H. knows, that his Birth
and Family intitle him more to the Block, than
the Rope, or he would not make so free with
the latter. 
Good! very good, by Jupiter! said Mr. H.
laughing. The Countess smil'd. Lady Davers
shook her Head at her Brother, and said to her
Nephew, Thou'rt a good-natur'd foolish Fellow,
that thou art. 
For what, Madam? Why the Word, foolish,
Aunt? What have I said now? 

Nothing to any Purpose, indeed! said she; 
when thou dost, I'll write it down. 
Then, Madam, said he, have your Pen and
Ink always about you, when I'm present. — 
The Devil's in't, if you won't put that down, to
begin with! 
This made every one laugh. What a happy
thing is it, thought I, that Good-nature generally
accompanies this Character; else, my dear
Miss, how would some People be supportable? 
But here I'll break off. 'Tis Time, you'll say. –– 
But you know to whom I write, as well as to
yourself, and they'll be pleas'd with all my silly
Scribble. —So excuse one Part for that, and
another for Friendship's sake, and then I shall be
wholly excusable to you. 
Now the Trifler again resumes her Pen. I
am in some Pain, Miss, for To-morrow, because
of the Rules we observe of late in our Family
on Sundays, and of going through a Croud
to Church; which will afford new Scenes to
our noble Visitors, either for Censure or otherwise:
But I will sooner be censured for doing
what I think my Duty, than for the Want of it; 
and so will omit nothing of that we have been
accustom'd to do. 
I hope I shall not be thought ridiculous, or
as one who aims at Works of Supererogation,
for what I think is very short of my Duty. — 
Some Order, surely, becomes the Heads of 

Families; and besides, it would be discrediting
one's own Practice, if one did not appear at one
Time what one does at another. For that which
is a Reason for discontinuing a Practice, for some
Company, would seem to be a Reason for laying
it aside for ever, especially in a Family visiting
and visited as ours. 
And I remember well a Hint given me by
my dearest Friend once on another Subject*  That it is in every one's Power to prescribe Rules
to himself, after a while; and Persons see what
is one's Way, and that one is not to be put out
of it. 
But my only Doubt is, that to Ladies, who
have not been accustomed perhaps to the necessary Strictness, I should make myself censurable,
as if I aimed at too much Perfection: For, however
one's Duty is one's Duty, and ought not to
be dispensed with; yet when a Person who uses
to be remiss, sees so hard a Task before them,
and so many great Points to get over, all to be
no more than tolerably regular, it is rather apt to
frighten and discourage, than to allure; and one
must proceed, as I have read Soldiers do in a
difficult Siege, Inch by Inch, and be more studious
to intrench and fortify themselves as they
go on gaining upon the Enemy, than by rushing
all at once upon an Attack of the Place, be
repulsed, and perhaps obliged with great Loss to
abandon an hopeful Enterprize. 

And permit me to add, that, young as I am,
I have often observed, that over-great Strictnesses
all at once injoin'd, and insisted upon, are not
fit for a beginning Reformation, but for stronger
Christians only; and therefore generally do more
Harm than Good, in such a Circumstance. 
What a miserable Creature am I, said a
neighbouring Widow Gentlewoman, (whom I
visited in her Illness, at her own Desire, tho' a
Stranger to me but by Name) if all the Good
you do, and the strict Life you live, is no more
than absolutely necessary to Salvation! 
I saw the poor Gentlewoman, thro' Illness
and low Spirits, was ready to despond; and, to
comfort her, I said, Dear Madam, don't be cast
down: God Almighty gives us all a Light to
walk by in these our dark Paths; and 'tis my
humble Opinion, He will judge us according
to the unforced and unbyassed Use we make of
that Light. I think it my Duty to do several
Things, which, perhaps, the Circumstances of
others will not permit them to do, or which
they, on serious and disinterested Reflection,
may not think absolutely necessary to be done:
In each Case our Judgments are a Law to each; 
and I ought no more to excuse myself from doing
such Parts as I think my Duty, than you to condemn
yourself for not doing what does not appear
to you so strictly necessary: And besides,
Madam, you may do as much Good one way, as
I another, and so both may be equally useful in
the general System of Providence. 

But shall I not be too grave, my dear Miss? ––– 
Excuse me; for this is Saturday Night; and as
it was a very good Method which the ingenious
Authors of the Spectators took, generally to
treat their more serious Subjects on this Day; so
I think one should, when one can, consider it as
the preparative Eve to a still better. 




Now, my dear Miss, by what I have already
written, it is become in a manner necessary
to acquaint you briefly with the Method my dear
Mr. B. not only permits, but encourages me to
take, in the Family he leaves to my Care, as to
the Sunday Duty. 
The worthy Dean, at my Request, and by
my Beloved's Permission, recommended to me,
as a sort of Family Chaplain, for Sundays, a
young Gentleman of great Sobriety, and Piety,
and sound Principles, who having but lately
taken Orders, has no other Provision. And this
Gentleman comes, and reads Prayers to us about
Seven in the Morning, in the lesser Hall, as we
call it, a retired Apartment, next the little Garden; 
for we have no little Chapel with us here,
as in your Neighbourhood: And this generally,
with some suitable Exhortation, or Meditation
out of some good Book, which the young Gentleman
is so kind as to let me chuse now-and-then,
when I please, takes up little more than
half an Hour. 

We have a great Number of Servants of both
Sexes; and myself, my good Mrs. Jervis, and
my Polly Barlow, are generally in a little Closet,
which, when we open the Door, is but just
a Separation, and that's all, from the Hall. 
Mr. Adams (for that is our young Clergyman's
Name) has a Desk, at which sometimes
Mr. Jonathan makes up his running Accounts
to Mr. Longman; who is very scrupulous of
admitting any body to the Use of his Office,
because of the Writings in his Custody, and the
Order he values himself upon having every thing
in. 
About Seven in the Evening the young
Gentleman comes again, and I generally, let me
have what Company I will, find Time to retire
for about another Half-hour, and my dear Mr. B.
connives at, and excuses my Absence, if inquir'd
after; tho', for so short a time, I am seldom
miss'd. 
To the young Gentleman I shall present, every
Quarter, Five Guineas; and Mr. B. presses him
to accept of a Place at his Table, at his Pleasure:
But as we have generally a good deal of
Company, his Modesty makes him decline it,
especially at those times. 
Mr. Longman is so kind as to join with us
very often in our Sunday Office, and Mr. Colbrand
seldom misses; and they tell Mrs. Jervis,
That they cannot express the Pleasure they have to
meet me there; and the Edification they receive,
as they are so kind to say, from my Example, and
from the chearful Temper I am always in, which 

does 'em good to look upon me: And they will
have it, that I do Credit to Religion. But if they
do but think so, it must have been of Service to
me, in the Order I have now established, as I
hope; and that thro' less Difficulties than I expected
to meet with, especially from the*  Cookmaid; 
but she says, She comes with double Delight
to have the Opportunity to see her blessed
Lady, as it seems she calls me at every Word. 
My best Beloved dispenses, as much as he can,
with the Servants, for the Evening Part, if he
has Company, or will be attended only by John
or Abraham, perhaps, by turns; and sometimes
looks upon his Watch, and says, 'Tis near Seven. 
And if he says so, they take it for a Hint they
may be dispensed with for half an Hour; and
this Countenance which the dear Gentleman
gives me, has not contributed a little to make
the Matter easy and delightful to me, and to
every one. 
I am sure, my dear Miss, were only Policy to
be considered, this Method must be laudable; 
for since I have begun it, there is not a more
diligent, a more sober, not more courteous Set
of Servants in any Family in a great Way: We
have no Broils, no hard Words, no Revilings,
no Commandings, nor Complainings; and
Mrs. Jervis's Government is made so easy, as
she says, that she need not speak twice; and all
the Language of the Servants is, Pray, John, or
Pray, Jane, do so or so; and they say, Their
dear Master's Service is a Heaven upon Earth. 

When I part from them, on the breaking
up of our Assembly, they generally make a little
Row on each Side to the Hall-door, and when
I have made my Compliments, and paid my
Thanks to Mr. Adams, one whispers, as I go
out, God bless you, Madam! And so says another,
and another, and indeed every one; and
bow and court'sy with such Pleasure in their
honest Countenances, as greatly delights me:
And I say, (if it so happens) So, my good
Friends! —I am glad to see you—Not one
absent!—or but one—(as it falls out)— 
This is very obliging, I cry: And thus I shew
them, that I take Notice, if any body be not
there. And back again I go to pay my Duty to
my Earthly Benefactor; and he is pleased to say
sometimes, that I come to him with such a
Radiance in my Countenance, as gives him double
Pleasure to behold me; and often he tells
me afterwards, that, but for appearing too fond
before Company, he could meet me, as I enter,
with Embraces as pure as my own Heart. 
I hope, in time, I shall prevail upon the dear
Gentleman to give me his Company. —But,
thank God, I am enabled to go thus far already! 
I will leave the rest to his Providence. For I
have a Point very delicate to touch upon in this
Particular; and I must take care, not to lose the
Ground I have gained, by too precipitately pushing
at too much at once. This is my Comfort,
that next to being uniform himself, is that Permission
and Encouragement he gives me to be
so, and the Pleasure he takes in seeing me so 

delighted. —And besides the dear Gentleman
always gives me his Company to Church. O
how happy should I think myself, if he would
be pleased to accompany me to the Divine Office,
which yet he has not done, tho' I have urg'd him
as much as I durst! One thing after another, he
says: We shall be better and better, I hope: But
nobody is good all at once. But, my dear Miss,
as I consider this as the Seal of all the rest, and
he himself has an awful Notion of it, I shall
hardly think my dear Mr. B.'s Morals fully secur'd
till then. 
Mrs. Jervis ask'd me, on Saturday Evening,
If I would be concerned to see a larger Congregation
in the lesser Hall next Morning, than
usual? I answer'd, No, by no means. She said,
Mrs. Worden, and Mrs. Lesley, (the Two Ladies
Women) and Mr. Sidney, my Lord Davers's
Gentleman, and Mr. H.'s Servant, and the
Coachmen and Footmen, belonging to our
noble Visitors, who are, she says, all great Admirers
of our Family Management, and good
Order, having been told our Method, begg'd to
join in it. I knew I should be a little dash'd at
so large a Company; but the Men being pretty
orderly, for Lords Servants, and Mrs. Jervis
assuring me, that they were very earnest in their
Request, I consented to it. 
When, at the usual Time, (attended by my
Polly I went down, I found Mr. Adams there,
(to whom I made my first Compliments) and
every one of our own People, waiting for me,
Mr. Colbrand excepted, (whom Mr. H. had kept 

up late the Night before) together with Mrs. Worden,
and Mrs. Lesley, and Mr. Sidney, with the
Servants of our Guests, who, as also worthy
Mr. Longman, and Mrs. Jervis, and Mr. Jonathan,
paid me their Respects; and I said, This
is early rising, Mrs. Lesley, and Mrs. Worden;
you are very kind to countenance us with your
Companies in this our Family Order. — 
Mr. Sidney, I am glad to see you. How do you,
Mr. Longman? And looked round with Complacency
on the Servants of our noble Visitors. 
And then I led Mrs. Worden and Mrs. Lesley to
my little Retiring-place, and Mrs. Jervis and
my Polly followed, and throwing the Door
open, Mr. Adams began some select Prayers; 
and as the young Gentleman reads with great
Emphasis and Propriety, and as if his Heart was
in what he read, all the good Folks were exceedingly attentive. 
After Prayers, Mr. Adams read a Meditation,
from a Collection made for private Use,
which I shall more particularly mention by-and-by; 
and ending with the usual Benediction, I
thank'd the worthy Gentleman, and gently chid
him, in Mr. B.'s Name, for his Modesty, in
declining our Table; and, thanking Mr. Longman,
and Mrs. Worden, and Mrs. Lesley, receiv'd
their kind Wishes, and hasten'd, blushing, thro'
their Praises, to my Chamber; where, being
alone, I pursued the Subject for an Hour, till
Breakfast was ready, when I attended the Ladies,
and my best Beloved, who had told them of the
Verses plac'd under my Cushion at Church. 

We set out, my Lord and Lady Davers, and
myself, and Mr. H. in our Coach; and Mr. B.
and the Countess, in the Chariot, both Ladies,
and the Gentlemen, splendidly dress'd; but I
avoided a Glitter as much as I could, that I might
not seem to vie with the Two Peeresses. — 
Mr. B. said, Why are you not full-dress'd, my
Dear? —I said, I hop'd he would not be displeas'd: 
If he was, I would do as he commanded. 
He kindly answer'd, As you like best, my Love. 
You are charming in every Dress. 
The Chariot first drawing up to the Church-Door, 
Mr. B. led the Countess into the Church. 
My Lord Davers did me that Honour; and
Mr. H. handed his Aunt, thro' a Croud of
Gazers, many of whom, as usual, were Strangers. 
The neighbouring Gentlemen and their Ladies
paid us their silent Respects: But the Thoughts
of the wicked Verses, or rather, as Lady Davers
will have me say, wicked Action of the Transcriber
of them, made me keep behind in the
Pew: But, my Lady, with great Goodness, sat
down by me, and whisperingly talked a good
deal, between whiles, to me, with great Tenderness
and Freedom in her Aspect; which I could
not but take kindly, because I know she intended
by it, to shew every one she was pleas'd with me. 
Among other things, she said softly, Who
would wish to be a King or Queen, Pamela, if
it is so easy for Virtue and Beauty (so she was
pleas'd to say) to attract so many sincere Admirers,
without any of their Grandeur? —Look round,
my dear Girl, and see what a solemn Respect, 

and mingled Delight, appears in every Countenance: 
And, pressing my Hand, Thou art a
charming Creature! such a natural Modesty, and
such a becoming Dignity in thy whole Appearance
—no wonder that every one's Eyes are
upon thee, and that thou bringest to Church so
many booted Gentlemen, as well as Neighbours,
to behold thee! 
Afterwards she was pleased to add, taking
my Hand, (and my dear Gentleman and the
Countess heard her; for she raised her Voice to
a more audible Whisper) I am proud to be in
thy Company; and in this solemn Place, I take
thy Hand, and acknowlege, with Pride, my
Sister. I looked down; and indeed here at
Church, I can hardly at any time look up; for
who can bear to be gaz'd at so? —And softly
said, O, my good Lady! how much you honour
me, the Place, and these surrounding Eyes, can
only hinder me from acknowleging as I ought. 
My best Friend, with Pleasure in his Eyes,
said, pressing his Hand upon both ours, as my
Lady had mine in hers, you are Two beloved
Creatures: Both excellent in your way. God
bless you both! And you, too, my dear Brother!
said my Lady. 
The Countess whisper'd, You should spare
a body a little! You give one, Ladies, and Mr. B.
too much Pleasure all at once. Such Company,
and such Behaviour, adds still more Charms to
Devotion; and were I to be here a Twelvemonth,
I would never miss once accompanying
You to this good Place. 

Mr. H. thought he must say something, and
addressing himself to his noble Uncle, who
could not keep his good-natur'd Eye off me, I'll
be hang'd, my Lord, if I know how to behave
myself! —Why this out-does the Chapel! — 
I'm glad I put on my new Suit! And then he
look'd upon himself, as if he would support, as
well as he could, his Part of the general Admiration. 
But think you not, my dear Miss, and my
dearest Father and Mother, that I am now at the
Height of my Happiness in this Life, thus favour'd
by Lady Davers? 
The Dean preached an excellent Sermon; 
but I need not to have said that: Only to have
mention'd, that he preached, was saying enough. 
My Lord led me out, when Divine Service
was over (and being a little tender in his Feet,
from a Gouty Notice, walked very slowly). 
Mr. B. led the Countess, and Mr. H. his Aunt. 
Lady Towers and Mrs. Brooks joined us in the
Porch, and made us their Compliments; as did
Mr. Martin. Will you favour us with your
Company home, my old Acquaintance? said
Mr. B. to that Gentleman. I can't, having a
Gentleman my Relation to dine with me; but
if it will be agreeable in the Evening, I will
bring him with me to taste of your Burgundy;
for we have not any such in the County. I
shall be glad to see you, or any Friend of yours,
reply'd Mr. B. 
Mr. Martin whisper'd, It is more, however,
to admire your Lady, I can tell you that, than 

your Wine. —Get into your Coaches, Ladies,
said he, with his usual Freedom; our Maiden
and Widow Ladies have a fine Time of it, where-ever
you come: By my Faith, they must every
one of them quit this Neighbourhood, if you
were to stay in it: But all the Hopes they have,
are, that while you're in London, they'll have
the Game in their own Hands. 
Sister, said Lady Davers, most kindly to
me, in Presence of many, who (in a respectful
manner) gather'd near us, Mr. Martin is the
same Gentleman he us'd to be, I see. 
Mr. Martin, Madam, said I, smiling, has
but one Fault: He is too apt to praise whom he
favours, at the Expence of his absent Friends! 
I am always proud of your Reproofs, Mrs. B.
reply'd he. 
Ay, said Lady Towers, that I believe: And
therefore I wish, for all our sakes, you'd take
him oftener to Task, Mrs. B. 
Lady Towers, Lady Arthur, Mrs. Brooks,
and Mr. Martin, all claim'd Visits from us; and
Mr. B. making Excuses, that he must husband
his Time, because of being oblig'd to go to Town
soon, proposed to breakfast with Lady Towers
the next Morning, dine with Mrs. Arthur, and
sup with Mrs. Brooks; and as there cannot be a
more social and agreeable Neighbourhood anywhere,
his Proposal, after some Difficulty, was
accepted; and our usual visiting Neighbours
were all to have Notice accordingly, at each of
the Places. 

I saw Sir Thomas Atkyns coming towards us,
and fearing to be stifled with Compliments, I
said, Your Servant, Ladies and Gentlemen; 
and, giving my Hand to Lord Davers, stept
into the Chariot, instead of the Coach; for People
that would avoid Bustle, sometimes make it. 
Finding my Mistake, I would have come out; 
but my Lord said, Indeed you shan't: And I'll
step in, because I'll have you all to myself. 
Lady Davers smil'd: Now, said she, (while
the Coach drew up) is my Lord Davers pleas'd; 
but I see, Sister, you were tir'd with Part of your
Company in the Coach. 
'Tis well contriv'd, my Dear, said Mr. B. as
long as you have not depriv'd me of this Honour; 
taking the Countess's Hand, and leading her into
the Coach. 
Will you excuse all this Impertinence, my
dear Miss? —I know my dear Father and Mother
will be pleas'd with it; and you will have
the Goodness to bear with me on that Account; 
for their kind Hearts will be delighted to hear
every minute thing in relation to Lady Davers
and myself. 
When Mr. Martin came in the Evening,
with his Friend, (who is Sir William G. a polite
young Gentleman of Lincolnshire) he told us a
deal of the Praises lavish'd away upon me by several
genteel Strangers; one saying to his Friend,
He had travell'd Twenty Miles to see me. 
My Lady Davers was praised too for her
Goodness to me, and the Gracefulness of her
Person; the Countess for the noble Serenity of 

her Aspect, and that charming Ease and Freedom
which distinguish her Birth and Quality: My dear
Mr. B. he said, was greatly admired too; but
he would not make him proud; for he had Superiorities
enough already, that was his Word,
over his Gentlemen Neighbours: But I can tell
you, said he, that for most of your Praises you are
obliged to your Lady, and for having rewarded
her Excellence as you have done: For one Gentleman,
added he, said, He knew no one but
you could deserve her; and he believed you did,
from that Tenderness in your Behaviour to her,
and from that Grandeur of Air, and Majesty of
Person, that seem'd to shew you formed for her
Protector as well as Rewarder. —Get you gone
to London, both of you, said he. I did not intend
to tell you, Mr. B. what was said of you. –––– 
And indeed I see no such extraordinary Excellence,
do you, Sir, to his Friend, in that Gentleman? 
Sir William said, Mr. B. was all that was
polite and noble, and it was no Wonder, that
every body pronounced us both the charmingest
Couple they had ever seen. 
The Women of the Two Ladies had acquainted
their Ladyships with the Order I observed
for the Day, and the devout Behaviour of
the Servants, &c. And about Seven I withdrawing
as silently and as unobserved as I could, was
surprised, as I was going thro the great Hall, to
be joined by both. 
I shall come at all your Secrets, Pamela,
said my Lady, and be able, in time, to cut you 

out in your own way. I know whither you are
going. 
My good Ladies, said I, pardon me for leaving
you. I will attend you in half an Hour. 
No, my Dear, said Lady Davers, the Countess
and I have resolved to attend you for that Half-hour,
and we will return to Company together. 
Is it not descending too much, my Ladies, as
to the Company? 
If it is for us, it is for you, said the Countess; 
so we will either act up to you, or make you
come down to us; and we will judge of all your
Proceedings. 
Nay, my dear Ladies! said I; and sat down
on the first Chair. 
Nay, my dear Pamela! returned my Lady,
shew us the Way. 
If I must, I must—But I was much abashed. 
Every one, but Abraham, who attended
the Gentlemen, and all their Ladyships Servants,
and their Two Women, and Mr. Longman and
Mrs. Jervis, were there; which pleas'd me,
however; because it shew'd me, that even the
Strangers, by this their second voluntary Attendance,
had no ill Opinion of the Service. But
they were all startled, ours and theirs, to see my
Ladies accompanying me. 
I stept up to Mr. Adams.—I was in hopes,
Sir, said I, we should have been favour'd with
your Company at our Table. 
Your Ladyship, said he, will excuse me: I
did not think myself Company for such noble
Guests as were there. 

A Gentleman and a Scholar is Company,
said the Countess, for the first Quality. 
Well, Sir, said I, you see the Nobleness
of these Ladies. They come now to be obliged
to you, for your good Offices; and you'll have
no better way of letting them return their Obligation,
than to sup, tho' you would not dine,
with them. 
My Lady tapp'd me on the Neck—Genteelly
said! This was like my Sister, her own
Self. Mr. Longman, said she, how do you? — 
We are come to be Witnesses of my Sister's
Goodness, and the Family Decorum. 
We have a blessed Lady, Madam, said he:
And your Ladyships Presence augments our
Joys. 
Let us follow you, Pamela, said she: We
must learn of you what we are to do. 
I led to the little Closet, with as much Presence
of Mind as I could, and my Two Ladies
followed me; and Mrs. Jervis, and Mrs. Worden,
and Mrs. Lesley, stood just without, the
Door being half shut, for their Ladies sakes. 
I should have said, we were not at Church
in the Afternoon. —And when I do not go,
we have the Evening Service read to us, as it is
at Church; which Mr. Adams performed now
with his usual Distinctness and Fervour; and the
Ladies seem'd not at all uneasy, altho' we had
a Meditation besides. 
When all was concluded, I said, Now, my
dearest Ladies, excuse me for the sake of the
Delight I take in seeing all my good Folks about 

me in this decent and obliging manner. —Indeed
I have no Ostentation in it, if I know my
own Heart—Indeed I have not! 
The Countess and Lady Davers, delighted
to see such good Behaviour in every one, sat a
Moment or two looking upon one another in
Silence; and then my Lady Davers caught me
in her Arms: Beloved, deservedly beloved of
the kindest of Husbands, what a Blessing art
thou to this Family! 
And to every Family, said the Countess, who
have the Happiness to know, and the Grace to
follow, her Example; and saluted me too. But
where, said my Lady, collectedst thou all this
good Sense, and fine Spirit, in thy Devotions? 
The Bible, my dear Ladies, said I, is the
Foundation of all: But this, and the Common-Prayer
Book, and the Duty of Man, our worthy
Folks have every one of them, and are so good
as to imploy themselves in them at all Leisure
Opportunities on other Days. For which Reason,
that I may diversify their Devotions, I have,
with the Assistance of Mr. Adams, and by Advice
of the Dean, made Extracts from several good
Pieces, which we read on these Days. Mr. Adams,
said my Lady Davers, will you oblige me with
a Copy of my Sister's Book, at your Leisure? He
readily engag'd to do this; and the Countess
desir'd another Copy, which he also promised. 
Lady Davers then turning herself to Mrs.
Jervis, How do you, good Woman? said she. 
Why you are now made ample Amends for the
Love you bore to this dear Creature formerly! 

You have an Angel, and not a Woman, for
your Lady, my good Mrs. Jervis, said the
Countess. 
Mrs. Jervis, folding her uplifted Hands together,
O my Lady! you know not our Happiness; 
no, not one Half of it. We were before
bless'd with Plenty, and a bountiful Indulgence,
by our good Master; but our Plenty brought
on Wantonness and Pride: But now, we have
Peace as well as Plenty; and Peace of Mind, my
dear Lady, in doing all in our respective Powers,
to shew ourselves thankful Creatures to God, and
to the best of Masters and Mistresses. 
Good Soul! said I, and was forc'd to put my
Handkerchief to my Eye: Your Heart is always
overflowing thus with Gratitude and Praises, for
what you so well merit from us. 
Mr. Longman, said my Lady, assuming a
sprightly Air, altho' her Eye twinkled, to keep
within its Lids the precious Water, that sprang
from a noble and well-affected Heart, I am glad
to see you here attending your pious young
Lady. —Well might you love her, honest Man!
well might you! —I did not know there was
so excellent a Creature in any Rank. 
Madam, said the other worthy Heart, unable
to speak but in broken Sentences,—You don't
know—indeed you don't what a—what
a—hap—happy—Family we are! — 
Truly, we are like unto Alexander's Soldiers,
every one fit to be a General; so well do we all
know our Duties, and practise them too, let me
say. —Nay, and please your Ladyship, we all 

of us long, till Morning comes, thus to attend
my Lady; and after that is past, we long for
Evening, for the same Purpose: For she is so
good to us—You cannot think how good she
is! But permit your honoured Father's old Servant
to say one Word more, That tho' we are
always pleased and joyful on these Occasions; 
yet we are in Transports to see our Master's noble
Sister thus favouring us, with your Ladyship too,
(to the Countess) and approving our young Lady's
Conduct and Piety. 
Blessing on you all! said my Lady. — 
Let us go, my Lady;—Let us go, Sister;— 
for I can stay no longer! 
As I slid by, following their Ladyships, How
do you, Mr. Colbrand? said I, softly:—I
fear'd you were not well in the Morning. — 
He bow'd, Par-don me, Ma-dame—I vas leetell
indispose, dat ish true! 
Now, my dear Miss, will you forgive me all
this Self-praise, as it may seem. —Yet when
you know I give it you, and my dear Parents,
as so many Instances of my Lady Davers's Reconciliation
and Goodness to me, and as it will
shew what a noble Heart that good Lady has at
Bottom, when her Pride of Quality and her Passion
have subsided, and her native good Sense
and Excellence taken place, I flatter myself, I
may be the rather excused; and especially as I
hope to have my dear Miss Darnford's Company
and Countenance one Day, in this my delightful
Sunday Imployment. 

I should have added, (for I think a good
Clergyman cannot be too much respected) that
I repeated my Request to Mr. Adams, to oblige
us with his Company at Supper; but he so very
earnestly begg'd to be excused, and with so much
Concern of Countenance, that I thought it
would be wrong to insist upon it; tho' I was
sorry for it, because I am sure, as of any thing,
that Modesty is always a Sign of Merit. 
We return'd to the Gentlemen as soon as Supper
was ready, and as chearful and easy, as Lady
Davers observ'd, as if we had not been present
at so solemn a Service: And this, said she, after
the Gentlemen were gone, makes Religion so
pleasant and delightful a thing, that I profess I
shall have a much higher Opinion of those who
make it a regular and constant Part of their
Imployment, than ever I had. But I have seen,
added her Ladyship, very humourously, such wry
Faces, and such gloomy Countenances, among
some of your pious Folks, in and after a solemn
Office, as quite dishearten'd me; for I thought,
after such an Exercise, that it would be a Sin to
go to Bed with a Smile upon one's Face, or without
sighing and groaning at such a Rate, as must
rob one of all the Comforts of Life. 
Then, said she, I was once, I remember,
when a Girl, at the House of a very devout Man,
for a Week, with his Grand daughter, my School-fellow; 
and there were such Preachments against
Vanities, and for Self-denials, that were we to
have followed the good Man's Precepts, (tho'
indeed not his Practice, for well did he love his 

Belly) half God Almighty's Creatures and Works
would have been useless, and Industry would
have been banished the Earth. 
Then, added her Ladyship, (for she was in a
pleasant Vein) have I heard the good Man confess
himself guilty of such Sins, as, if true, (and
by his hiding his Face with his broad-brim'd Hat,
it look'd a little bad against him) he ought to
have been hang'd on a Gallows Fifty Feet high. 
I said, that this Over-gloominess was not
Religion, I was persuaded; but either Constitution
or Mistake; and I was sorry always when
I met with it; for tho' it might betoken a pious
Mind, it certainly shew'd a narrow one, and I
fear'd did more Harm than Good. 
These Reflections, as I said, fell from my
Lady, after the Gentlemen were gone, when
she recounted to her dear Brother, the Entertainment,
as she was pleased to call it, I had given
her: On which she made high Encomiums, as
did the Countess; and they praised also the natural
Dignity which they imputed to me, saying,
I had taught them a Way they never could have
found out, to descend to the Company of Servants,
and yet to secure, and even augment, the
Respect and Veneration of those Inferiors at the
same time. And, Pamela, said my Lady, you
are certainly very right, to pay so much Regard
to the young Clergyman; for that makes all he
reads, and all he says, of greater Efficacy with
the Auditors, facilitates the Work you have in
View to bring about, and in your own Absence
(for your Monarch may not always dispense with 

you, perhaps) strengthens his Influences, and
encourages the young Gentleman besides. 




I am to thank you, my dear Miss, for your
kind Letter, approving of my Scribble*  . 
When you come to my Saturday's and Sunday's
Accounts, I shall try your Patience. But no
more of that; for as you can read them, or let
them alone, I am the less concern'd, especially
as they will be more indulgently receiv'd somewhere
else, than they may merit; so that my
Labour will not be wholly lost. 
I congratulate you with all my Heart,
on your dismissing Mr. Murray; for, besides
that some of his Qualities are not to be approv'd
by a Lady of your Taste and Judgment, I will
never give my Consent, that any Gentleman
shall have the Honour of calling my Miss Darnford
his, who can so easily resign his Pretensions
to her and address her Sister. 
You are extremely diverting, my dear Miss
with your Greater and Lesser Bear Stars, and I
could not help shewing it to Mr. B. And what.
do you think the free Gentlemen said upon it? 
I am half-afraid to tell you: But do, now you
are so happily disengaged, get Leave to come,
and let us Two contrive to be even with him for
it. You are the only Lady in the World, that I
would join with aginst him. 

He said, That your Characters of Mr. Murray
and Miss Nanny, which he called severe,
(but I won't call them so, without your Leave)
look'd a little like pretty Spite, and as if you
were sorry the Gentleman took you at your Word. —That was what he said—Pray let
us punish him for it. Yet, he called you charming
Lady, and said a great deal in your Praise,
and join'd with me, that Mr. Murray could not
possibly deserve you, who was so easy to part
with you. 
But, Pamela, said he, I know the Sex well
enough. Miss Polly may not love Mr. Murray;
yet to see her Sister address'd and complimented,
and prefer'd to herself, by one whom she so
lately thought it was in her own Power to chuse
or to refuse, is a mortifying Thing. And young
Ladies cannot bear to fit by neglected, while
Two Lovers are playing Pugs Tricks with one
another. 
Then, said he, all the Preparations to Matrimony,
the Cloaths to be bought, the Visits to be
paid and received, the Compliments of Friends,
the busy Novelty of the Thing, the Day to be
fixed, and all the little foolish Humours and Nonsense
attending a concluded Courtship, when
one Sister is to engross all the Attention and
Regard; the new Equipages, and so forth; these
are all Subjects of Mortification to the other,
tho' she had no great Value for the Man perhaps. 
Well, but, Sir, said I, a Lady of Miss Darnford's
good Sense and good Taste, is not to be 

affected by these Parades, and has well consider'd
the Matter, no doubt; and I dare say, rejoices,
rather than repines, at missing the Gentleman. 
Thus, my dear Miss, had we a Dispute about
you. But I hope you will leave the happy Pair
(for they are so, if they think themselves so)
together, and Sir Simon to rejoice in his accomplish'd
Son-in-Law elect, and give us your Company
to London. For who would stay to be
vex'd by that ill-natur'd Miss Nanny, as you own
you were, at your last writing? 
But I will proceed with my Journal, and the
rather, as I have something to tell you of a Conversation,
the Result of which has done me great
Honour, and given me inexpressible Delight:
Of which in its Place. 
We pursued Mr. B.'s Proposal, returning several
Visits in one Day; for we have so polite and
agreeable a Neighbourhood, that all seem to concur
in a Desire to make every thing easy to one
another: And, as I mentioned before, hearing
Mr. B.'s Intention to set out for London, as soon
as our noble Guests should leave us, they dispensed
with Formalities, being none of them studious to
take things amiss, and having a general good Opinion
of one another's Intentions not to disoblige. 
We came not home till Ten in the Evening,
and then found a Letter from Sir Jacob Swynford,
Uncle by the Half-Blood to Mr. B. acquainting
him, That hearing his Niece Lady
Davers was with him, he would be here in a Day
or Two, being then upon his Journey, to pay a
Visit to his Nephew and Niece at the same time. 

This Gentleman is very particularly odd and
humoursome; and, his eldest Son being next
Heir to the maternal Estate, if Mr. B. should
have no Children, has been exceedingly dissatisfied
with his debasing himself in marrying me; 
and would have been better pleased, had he not
married at all, perhaps. 
There never was any cordial Love between
Mr. B.'s Father and him, nor between the Uncle,
and Nephew and Niece; for his Positiveness,
Roughness, and Self-interestedness too, has
made him, tho' very rich, but little agreeable to
the generous Tempers of his Nephew and Niece; 
yet, when they meet, which is not above once
in Four or Five Years, they are always very civil
and obliging to him. 
Lady Davers wonder'd what could bring
him hither now; for he lives in Herefordshire,
and seldom stirs Ten Miles from home. Mr. B.
said, he was sure it was not to compliment him
and me on our Nuptials. No, rather, said my
Lady, to satisfy himself, if you are in a way to
cut out his own Cubs. Thank God, we are, said
my dearest Friend: Whenever I was strongest
set against Matrimony, the only Reason I had to
weigh against my Dislike to it, was, that I was
unwilling to leave so large a Part of my Estate*  to that Family. 
My Dear, said he to me, don't be uneasy; 
but you'll see a Relation of mine much more
disagreeable than you can imagine: But no doubt
you have heard his Character. 

Ah, Pamela, said Lady Davers, we are a
Family that value ourselves upon our Ancestry; 
but, upon my Word, Sir Jacob and all his Line
have nothing else to boast of. And I have been
often ashamed of my Relation to them. 
No Family, I believe, my Lady, has every
Body excellent in it, reply'd I: But I doubt I
shall stand but poorly with Sir Jacob. 
He won't dare to affront you, my Dear, said
Mr. B. altho' he'll say to you, and to me, and
to my Sister too, blunt and rough things. But
he'll not stay above a Day or Two, and we shall
not see him again for some Years to come; so
we'll bear with him. 
Iam now, Miss, coming to the Conversation
I hinted at. 
TUESDAY.
On Tuesday, Mr. Williams came to pay his
Respects to his kind Patron. I had been to
visit the Widow Gentlewoman I mentioned before,
and on my Return, went directly to my
Closet; so knew not of his being there till I
came to Dinner; for Mr. B. and he, were near
two Hours together in Discourse in the Library. 
When I came down, Mr. B. presented him
to me. My Friend Mr. Williams, my Dear,
said he. 
Mr. Williams, how do you do? said I: I am
glad to see you. 
He rejoiced, he said, to see me look so well; 
and had long'd for an Opportunity to pay his 

Respects to his worthy Patron and me before
But had been prevented twice, when he was upon
the Point of setting out. 
Mr. B. said, I have prevail'd upon my old
Acquaintance to take up his Residence with us,
while he stays in these Parts. Do you, my Dear,
see that every thing is made agreeable to him. 
To be sure, Sir, I will. 
Mr. Adams being in the House, Mr. B. sent
to desire he would dine with us; if it were but
in respect to a Gentleman of the same Cloth,
who gave us his Company. And with great
Modesty he came. But neither of the Gentlemen
knew how to speak, at first, before Lady
Davers, who is so majestick a Lady, and has so
majestick a Character too, that every one has an
Awe upon him in her Presence. 
Mr. B. when Dinner was over, and the Servants
were withdrawn, said, My Dear, Mr. Williams's
Business, in Part, was to ask my Advice
as to a Living that is offer'd him by the Earl
of—who is greatly taken with his Preaching
and Conversation. 
And to quit yours, I presume, Sir? said Lord
Davers. 
No, the Earl's is not quite so good as mine,
and his Lordship would procure him a Dispensation
to hold both. What would you advise,
my Dear? 
It becomes not me, Sir, to meddle with
such Matters as these. 
Yes, my Dear, it does, when I ask your Opinion. 

I beg Pardon, Sir. —My Opinion then is,
That Mr. Williams will not care to do any thing
that requires a Dispensation, and which would
be unlawful without it. 
Your Ladyship, said Mr. Williams, speaks
exceedingly well. 
I am glad, Mr. Williams, that you approve
of my Sentiments. You see they were required
of me by one who has a Right to command me
in every thing; otherwise this Matter is above
my Sphere; and I have so much Good will to
Mr. Williams, that I wish him every thing that
will contribute to make him happy. 
Well, my Dear, said Mr. B. but what
would you advise in this Case? The Earl proposes,
that Mr. Williams's present Living be
supply'd by a Curate; to whom, no doubt,
Mr. Williams will be very genteel; and, as we
are seldom or never there, his Lordship thinks
we shall not be displeas'd with it, and insists upon
it, that he will propose it to me; as he has done. 
Lord Davers said, I think this may do very
well, Brother. But, what, pray, Mr. Williams,
do you propose to allow to your Curate? Excuse
me, Sir; but I think the Clergy do so hardly
by one another generally, that they are not to
be surpris'd, that some of the Laity treat them as
they do. 
Indeed, said Mr. H. that's well observed; 
for I have heard it said Twenty and Twenty
times, If you would know how to value a Clergyman,
and what he deserves for spending his
whole Life in the Duties of his Function, you 

need but form your Opinion upon the Treatment
they give to one another; and 40 or 50l. a Year,
would be thought too much, even for him who
does all the Labour. 
Who says my Nephew speaks not well? said
my Lord. 
O, said my Lady, No Wonder! This is
Jackey's Peculiar. He has always something to
say against the Clergy. For he never lov'd them,
because his Tutors were Clergymen; and since,
said her Ladyship, (very severely) he never got
any Good from them, why should they expect
any from him? 
Always hard upon my poor Nephew! said
Lord Davers. 
Thank you, Aunt, said Mr. H. 
Mr. Williams said, Mr. H.'s Observation was
but too true; that nothing gave greater Cause of
Scandal, than the Usage some even of the dignified
Clergy gave their Brethren: That he had
always lamented it, as one of the greatest Causes
of the Contempt with which the Clergy are too
generally treated. 
He was proceeding; but Lady Davers said,
I am not at all surpris'd at their Treatment of
one another; for if a Gentleman of Education
and Learning can so far forget what belongs to
his Function, as to accept of Two Livings, when
One would afford him a handsome Maintenance,
it is no Wonder that such a one would make the
most of it; for does he not as good as declare,
that he takes it for that very Purpose? 

I must not let this Argument proceed, said
Mr. B. without clearing my worthy Friend. 
He is under no Difficulty about holding the Two. 
He proposes not to do it; and, like a good Man,
as I always thought him to be, is of Opinion,
he ought not to do it. But here is his Difficulty,
and all his Difficulty: He is desirous to oblige
his good Friend the Earl, who is very pressing
to have him near him; but, apprehending that I
may take it amiss, if he relinquishes my Living,
he came to ask my Advice; and after we had
talked a good deal of the Matter, I told him we
would refer it to Pamela, who was a kind of
Casuist in such Matters of Equity and good
Order as fell within the Compass of her Observation
and Capacity: And so, my Dear, give
us your free Opinion; for this is a Subject you
have spoken your Mind to me upon once before. 
I am very glad, Sir, replied I, that Mr. Williams's
own Resolution was so conformable to
what I wish'd it to be, and indeed expected from
his Character; and I can therefore more freely
speak my Mind upon the Occasion, tho' I am
but a poor Casuist neither. 
You remember, my Dear, said Mr. B. what
you observed to me in favour of the Clergy and
their Maintenance, when we fell occasionally
opon that Subject a while ago. I found you had
consider'd the Point, and thought you spoke
well upon the Occasion. Let us hear your Opinion
now upon it. 
Indeed, reply'd I, I say now, as I then took
the Liberty to say, that I have so general a Good-will 

to the Order, that if my Wishes could have
Effect, there is not one of it, but should have a
hand some Competency; at least such a one as to
set him above Contempt. And this, I am persuaded,
would be a great Furtherance to the
Good we expect from them, in teaching the
lower Rank of People (as well as the higher) their
Duties, and making them good Servants, and
useful Members of the Common wealth. 
But, my Dear, you took Notice of some
things, that would, if you can recollect them,
be very a propos to the Subject we are now
upon. 
I remember, Sir, we were talking of Impropriations. 
I took the Liberty to express myself
a little earnestly against Impropriations; and
I remember you stopped my Mouth at once upon
that Head. 
As how, Sister? said Lady Davers. 
Ay, as how, Mrs. B.? said the Countess. 
Why, Madam, Mr. B. was pleased to say,
That when the Clergy would come into a Regulation
for the more equal and useful Disposition
of the Revenues which at present were in the
Church, he would be the first who would bring
in a Bill for restoring to it all that it had lost by
Impropriations, and other Secularizations; and
leave it upon the Publick to make Satisfaction
to such of the Laity as would be Sufferers by the
Restoration. 
That was not, my Dear, what I meant returned
Mr. B. You were particularly against Dispensations; 
which is the Point before us now. 

I remember, Sir, I did say, That as there
are so many Gentlemen of the Function, who
have no Provision at all, I could not wish any
one of it should hold Two Livings; especially,
if they cannot perform the Duties of both, and
where One would afford a tolerable Competence:
Much less (I remember I took the Liberty
to add) could I think it excusable, that a Gentleman
should rate the Labours of his Brother, who
does every thing, so low, as is too frequently
the Case, and pay himself so well, for doing
nothing at all. 
This is what I mean, returned Mr. B. and I
thought you observed very well upon it, my
Dear. For my own Part, I have always been of
Opinion, that the Clergy who do thus, make
the best Excuse that can be made, for Impropriators
and Lay-Patrons. For here is a Gentleman
the Son of a Layman (I speak to general Cases)
is sent to the University, and takes Orders. He
has Interest perhaps to get Two or more Livings,
and hires a Person, who is as deserving as himself,
but destitute of Friends, at a low Rate, to
do the Duties of one of them. We will suppose
in his Favour, that he has several Children
to provide for out of these, and makes that his
Pretence for oppressing the Person he imploys to
do his own Duty. Some of these Children are
Males, some Females; and not One in Five of
the former is brought up to the Church; and all
that he saves for them, and gives them, out of
what he squeezes from his unhappy Brother, is
it not secularizing, as it were, at least as far as 

he can do it, the Revenues appropriated to the
Church? And can he, whatever others may,
blame an Impropriator for applying that Portion
of the produce of Church-Lands to his Lay-Family,
which the other intends for the Lay-Family
he is endeavouring to build up? Some one or
Two of which Impropriator's Sons may possibly
too, in order to possess the Living in their Father's
Gift, be brought up to the Church: What
is the Difference, I would fain know? 
If the Clergy were always to have done thus. 
continued Mr. B. should we not have wanted
many Endowments, and charitable Foundations,
which we now have? And I am very sorry to have
Reason to say, that we owe such sort of Works
more to the Piety of the Clergy of past Times,
than to the present; for now, let us cast our Eye
upon the Practices of some of our Prelates, (for
who is it that looks not up first for Examples to
that venerable Order?) and we shall find, that too
many among them, seem more intent on making
a Family, as it is call'd, and thereby secularizing,
as I observed, as much as they can, the Revenues
of the Church, than to live up either to the antient
Hospitality, or with a View to those Acts
of Munificence, which were the Reason for endowing
the Church with such ample Revenues,
as it once had, and still has, were it not so unequally
distributed, and in so few Hands. 
But, dear Sir, said I, what a sad Hardship
do the inferior Clergy labour under all this
Time? —To be oppressed and kept down by
their Brethren, and by the Laity too! This is 

hard indeed—'Tis pity, methinks, this, at least,
could not be remedied. 
It will hardly ever be done, my Dear. The
Evil lies deep; 'tis in human Nature; and when
that can be mended, it will be better: but I see
not how it can be expected, while those who
have most Influence to procure the Redress, are
most interested to prevent it: And the Views of
others, aspiring to the same Power and Interest,
make too many wish to have things left as they
are, altho' they have no present Benefit by it. 
And those would join in a Cry of the Church's
Danger, were the Legislature to offer at a Redress. 
'Tis pity, Sir, said I, the Convocation are
not permitted to sit. They would, perhaps, undertake
this Province, and several others for the
Benefit of the whole Body of the Clergy; and I
should think such Regulations would come best
from them. 
So it is, my Dear, would they imploy themselves,
and their Deliberations, in such good
Works. But 'tis a sad Thing to consider, that
there is little Good to be expected from Bodies
of Men in general; for altho' an Individual cares
not to pull down upon himself the Odium of a
bad or unpopular Action, yet when there are
many to share it among them, I see not that they
scruple doing things which very little become
them to do. But, far be it from me to say this
with a View to Convocations as Convocations. 
I speak what is but too generally the Case in all
Bodies of Men whatever, whether Clergy or 

Laity. And let us look into the greater or lesser
Corporations and Societies throughout the Kingdom,
and we shall find, if a poor Witticism may
be excused, that Bodies are really Bodies, and
act too often as if they had no Souls among them. 
I hope, Sir, said the Countess, when you
judge thus hardly of Bodies, you include the
Two supreme Bodies. 
Thou shalt not, said Mr. B.—I know these
Reverend Gentlemen (looking at Mr. Williams
and Mr. Adams) will tell me, speak Evil of the
Rulers of thy People. —But I wish I could
always defend, what I am loth at any time to
censure. But were you to read, or attend to the
Debates in both Houses, which sometimes happen
in Cases almost self-evident, you would find it
impossible not to regret, that you are now-and-then
under a Necessity to join with the Minority,
as well in your House, Lord Davers, as
in ours. 
I wish, Brother, reply'd his Lordship, I could
differ from you with Reason: But this always
was, and, I fear, always will be so, more or
less in every Session. 
But, to return to our first Subject, said Mr. B.
You know, my Dear, how much Pleasure I take
to hear your Opinion in Cases of natural Equity:
And you must tell us freely, what you would
advise your Friend Mr. Williams to do. 
And must I, Sir, speak my Mind on such a
Point, before so many better Judges? 
Yes, Sister, said her Ladyship, (a Name she
is now pleased to give me freely before Strangers 

after her dear Brother's Example, who is kindest,
tho' always kind, at such Times) you must; if I
may be allow'd to say must. 
Why then, proceeded I, I beg leave to ask
Mr. Williams one Question; that is, Whether
his present Parishioners do not respect and esteem
him, in that particular Manner, which I think
every body must, who knows his Worth? 
I am very happy, Madam, in the Good-will
of all my Parishioners, and have great Acknow-legements
to make for their Civilities to me. 
I don't doubt, said I, but it will be the same
where-ever you go; for, bad as the World is, a
prudent and good Clergyman will never fail of
Respect. But, Sir, if you think your Ministry
among them is attended with good Effects; if
they esteem your Person with a Preference, and
listen to your Doctrines with Attention; me-thinks,
for their sakes, 'tis pity to leave them,
were the Living of less Value, as it is of more,
than the other. For how many People are there
who can benefit by one Gentleman's Preaching,
rather than by another's; altho' possibly, the
one's Abilities may be no way inferior to the
other's? There is a great deal in a Delivery, as
it is called, in a Way, a Manner, a Deportment,
to engage People's Attention and Liking; and
as you are already in Possession of their Esteem,
you are sure to do much of the Good you aim
and wish to do. For where the Flock loves the
Shepherd, all his Work is easy, and more than
half done; and without that, let him have the
Tongue of an Angel, and let him live the Life of 

a Saint, he will be heard with Indifference, and'
oftentimes, as his Subject may be, with Disgust. 
I paused here; but every one being silent,
As to the Earl's Friendship, Sir, continued I, you
can best judge what Force that ought to have upon
you; and what I have mention'd would be the
only Difficulty with me, were I in Mr. Williams's
Case. To be sure it will be a high Compliment
to his Lordship, and so he ought to think it,
that you quit a better Living to oblige him. 
And he will be bound in Honour to make it up
to you. For I am far from thinking, that a
prudent Regard to worldly Interest misbecomes
the Character of a good Clergyman; and I wish
all such were set above the World, for their own
sakes, as well as for the sakes of their Hearers,
since Independency gives a Man Respect, besides
the Power of doing Good, which will inhance
that Respect, and, of consequence, give greater
Efficacy to his Doctrines. 
The Countess mentioned hereupon, the Saying
of Dr. Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, who was
beheaded in the Reign of Henry VIII. because
he would not own the King's Supremacy: This
Prelate, being offer'd a richer Bishoprick, would
not accept of it, saying, “He looked upon his
Bishoprick as his Wife; and he should not
think it excusable to part with his Wife because
she was poor.” This brought so many
Reflections upon frequent Translations, and the
Earnestness with which richer Bishopricks were
sought after, that I was very sorry to hear, or to
think there was Occasion for them. And I did 

take the Liberty to say, That, as Mr. B. had observ'd,
the Fault was in human Nature; and tho
it was an inexcusable one, perhaps we that censur'd
them, might find it hard, in their Circumstances,
to resist the Temptation. 
Mr. B. said, He wish'd, for the sake of the
Clergy in general, that there was a Law against
Translations; and that the Bishopricks in England
were made equal in Revenue: For, do
we not see, said he, that the Prelates, almost
to a Man, vote on the Side of Power? And,
by this means, contribute not a little to make
themselves, and the whole Body of the Clergy,
(so numerous, and so deserving too, as those of
the Church of England are) a By-word to Freethinkers
of all Denominations, who are ever
ready to take Occasion to malign them and their
venerable Order. 
Would you not, asked Lord Davers,
have the Two Primacies distinguish'd in Revenue? 
No, said Mr. B. the Distinction of Dignity
and Precedence would be enough, if not too
much; for where there is but One Pope, the
whole College of Cardinals, Seventy in Number,
are always looking up to, and gaping after
the Chair: And I would have no Temptations
laid in the Way of good Men to forfeit their
Characters, and weaken their Influences, which
are of so much Consequence, for Example-sake,
to the Publick Weal. 
I think, said Lord Davers, there was
some Reason for the Celibacy of the Clergy in 

the Roman Church at first; altho' the Inconveniencies
arising from it, are too many, and too
obvious, to wish the Restraint so general. For
the Provision for Families and Children furnishes
so natural and so laudable a Pretence to
Clergymen to lay up all they can for them, that
their Characters suffer not a little on that Account. 
If we look round us, said Mr. B. and see
how many good and worthy Families are sprung
from the Clergy; and look abroad, and see
what are too often the Effects of Celibacy in
the Roman Church; and the Scandal, worse
than what we complain of, thrown upon them,
even by Bigots of their own Communion, we
shall have sufficient Reason to condemn the
Celibacy which that Church injoins. Besides, a
bad Mind, and oppressive or covetous Nature,
will be the same, whether marry'd or single:
For have we not seen to what a scandalous
Height Nepotism has been carried in that Church? 
And has not a Pope of a private and narrow
Spirit, done as much for his Nephews and
Nieces, (and perhaps nearer Relations under
those Names) as he could have done for his Sons
and Daughters? So still here too, we must resolve
all into that Common Sewer of Iniquity,
Human Nature; and conclude, That a truly
good Man will not do a bad Thing upon any
the nearest and most affecting Considerations; 
and that a bad Man will never want a Pretence
to display his evil Qualities, not Flatterers neither 

(if he has Power) to defend him, in the
worst he can do. 
I well remember the Argument, when I
was at Rome, used to the Pope, on such an
Occasion. His Holiness declar'd against Nepotism,
saying, That he would never look upon the
Revenues of the Church, as the Patrimony of
his private Family; and forbad his numerous
Relations, who, on his Promotion, swarmed
about him, with Looks as hungry, as if they
were so many North-Britons, travelling South-ward
for Preferment—(that was Mr. B.'s
Word, spoken pleasantly) to think of him in
any other Light, than that of the common Father
of all his People; and as having no other
Relation but Merit. 
This was setting out well, you'll say: But
what was the Event? —Why, Two-thirds of
his Relations rushed into Orders directly; and it
was not long, before Parasites were found, to
represent to the Holy Father, that it was a Sin,
to deprive the Church of so many excellent
Props and Buttresses; and that for the Good of
the Publick, he ought to prefer them to the
first Dignities; so that the good Man, overcome
with their Reasons, and loth to continue in so
great a Sin, graced the Cardinalate with one,
the Episcopate with half a Dozen, and the
richest Abbacies with a Score or Two; and the
Emperor, having occasion to make Interest with
his Holiness, found Merit enough in some of
the Lay-Relations, to create them Princes and
Counts of the Holy Roman Empire. 

But, Sir, said I, (for I am always sorry to
hear things said to the Discredit of the Clergy,
because I think it is of publick Concern, that
we reverence the Function, notwithstanding the
Failings of Particulars) have I not been a silent
Witness, that you have made the same Observations
on a Minister of State, who, tho' he shall
be perhaps the first to blame this Disposition in
a Clergyman, will be equally ready to practise
it himself, to Relations and Children, full as
worthless, to the Exclusion of the Worthy? — 
So that, Sir, this is all human Nature still; and
should we not be tender in our Censures of the
one, when we are so ready to acquit the other? 
There's this Difference, Mrs. B. said the
Countess: From the one we expect a better Example; 
from the other, no Example fit to be
followed. And this is one Reason that makes a
First Minister generally so hated a Thing in all
Nations, because he usually resolves all Considerations
into Self, and is beloved by nobody,
but those, to whom he gives the Overflowings
of such Benefits as he has not Relations enough
to heap them upon. 
Well, Mr. Adams, said I, if I may be allow'd
to be so serious, does not this shew the
Excellency of the Prayer we are taught by the
supreme Teacher, and that Part of it, Lead us
not into Temptation? —For it seems too natural
a Consequence, that no sooner are we tempted,
but we deliver ourselves up to Evil. —Right,
Sister, said Lord Davers; and this ends in
Mr. B.'s human Nature again. 

What remains then, observed Lady Davers,
but that we take the World as we find it? Give
Praise to the Good, Dispraise to the Bad; and
every one try to mend one? 
Yet I wish, said Mr. B. so over-tender are
many good Clergymen of the Failings in their
Brethren, which they would not be guilty of
themselves, that we might avoid displeasing
them, if they were to know the Freedom of this
Conversation, when we are so well disposed to
reverence their Function. 
I hope otherwise, return'd Mr. Williams;
for it is but giving due Praise and Dispraise, as
my Lady says; and were evil Actions to go uncensur'd,
good ones would lose their Reward; 
and Vice, by being put upon a Foot with Virtue
in this Life, would meet with too much Countenance. 
But give me leave, resum'd Lady Davers, to
interpose a little in the Matter we have departed
from, that of the Curate, and Dispensation; and
when I have deliver'd my Sentiments, I insist
upon it, that Mrs. B. will as freely give us hers,
as if I had been silent. 
Dispensations are usual Things. Mr. Williams
may pay a young Gentleman handsomely;
and the Censure we have pass'd, is only upon
such as do not. To a young Man, at first setting
out, a good Curacy will be very acceptable. If
he has Merit, it will put him in a Way of
shewing it, and he may raise himself by it. If
he has not, he will not deserve more. And
Mr. Williams may marry, perhaps, and have a 

Family to provide for. His Opportunities may
not always be the same: The Earl may die; and
he should be excused, if he make the best Use
of his Interest and Favour, for the very Reason
Mrs. B. gave, that, as he is a good Man, it will
strengthen his Influences: And, come, Brother,
you know I am always for prescribing!
here is a worthy young Gentleman in my Eye,
who won't take it amiss to begin with a Curacy:
And you shall give your Dispensation, previous
to the legal one, on Condition, that Mr. Williams
will permit you to present his Curate:
And thus all will be solv'd. 
Both the Gentlemen bow'd—and Mr. Williams
was going to speak; but Mr. B. said, Take
my Sister at her Word, Pamela; and if you
have any thing to say to this Scheme, speak it
freely, as if her Ladyship had been silent; for, I
perceive, by your downcast Eye, and Silence,
you could say something, if you would. 
Ay, pray do, said my Lady. I love to hear
you speak. You always make me think of something
I had not consider'd before. 
I am very loth to say any thing on so nice a
Subject. Indeed it would not become me. 
There is so much Generosity and Benevolence in
my good Lady's Scheme, that I ought not. 
Ought not! repeated my dearest Friend, interrupting
me; none of your Ought nots: I
know you are always forming in your Mind
Notions of Right and Wrong, in the common
Cases of Life: Let us therefore have your Opinion
in this Matter more fully than you have 

hitherto given it; and deliver it too without
Hesitation, and with that Ease and Freedom,
which are born with you: for, I can tell you,
that were we, thro' the Corruptions of human
Nature, to lose the Distinctions of Right and
Wrong, I know not where we could apply ourselves,
but to such as you, to recover them. 
I bow'd, and said, If you will have it so,
Sir, it must be so; and I will then bespeak all
your kind Allowances, casting my Eye around me
to each Person, and tell you all I think upon
this Matter; and when I have done, submit my
poor Sentiments, as becomes me, to your superior
Judgments. 
Thus then I would say–––Pardon me, Madam,
for taking your Ladyship's Words for my Theme,
as I remember them; and hardly any thing
falls from your Ladyship that I do not remember
––––That Dispensations are usual Things.–––– 
I am sure, I am going to display my Ignorance; 
because, knowing nothing of their Original or
Design, I must presume them to be very antient
in this Kingdom, and introduced only when
there were fewer Clergymen than Benefices. 
Was there ever such a Time? 
They smil'd—Nay, now, you would command
me, Sir, to speak, when I needed to do
nothing else, to expose myself. There was a
Time, as I have read, that there were so few
Scholars, that the Benefit of Clergy was allow'd
to some sort of Criminals who could do no
more than read, because the Commonwealth
could ill spare learned Men, and thought it right 

to encourage the Love of Letters. —And
might not there be a Time then, when Dispensations
were allowed to worthy Men, because it
was difficult to find enow of such as deserv'd that
Character, to fill the Church Preferments? 
Tell us, Pamela, said Mr. B. whether you
do not intend this as a Satire upon the Practice,
or is it really your pretty Ignorance, that has
made you pronounce one of the severest Censures
upon it, that could be thought of? 
I smiled; and said, Indeed, Sir, I think
only some such Reason, or a worse, must be the
Original of Dispensations: For is it right, that
One Gentleman shall have Two or Three Liveings,
the Duties of no more than One of which
he can personally attend, while so many are
destitute of Bread, almost, and exposed to Contempt,
the too frequent Companions of Poverty? 
And what tho' Custom may have sanctified it, to
be sure, that is all that can; and a good Man
will not do all he may do, without incurring a
Penalty, because there is in every thing a Right
and a Wrong; and because, be the Custom what
it will, a Man should regulate his Actions by his
Conscience, and the Golden Rule. 
My good Lady says, Mr. Williams may pay
a Gentleman handsomely: I don't doubt but
Mr. Williams would do so; and this, I am sorry
to say it, would be doing what is not so often
done as one would wish. But may I be permited
to ask, For what would he pay the Gentleman
handsomely? —Why, for doing that
Duty for him, which, in Conscience and Honour, 

he ought to do himself, and which, when
he takes Institution and Induction, he engages
solemnly to do! And pray, excuse me, my Dear
Every-body—that was my foolish Word, which
made them smile—To what End is all this? — 
Only, that the Gentleman who does all the
Labour in the Vineyard, shall live upon 30, 40,
or 50l. per Annum, more or less, while the
Gentleman who has best nothing but best Interest,
(another of my foolish Phrases) shall receive
twice, and perhaps three times the Sum for doing
nothing at all. Can any Dispensation, my dear
Friends, make this a just or equitable thing? 
Indeed if the Living be so poor, as too many of
them are, that a Man cannot comfortably and
creditably subsist without putting Two poor ones
together to make One tolerable one, that is another
Thing. But pray now, my good Mr. Williams,
excuse me, if Mr. Adams can live upon a
Curacy of 40 or 50l. a Year, cannot another
Gentleman live, unless his Rectory or Vicarage
bring him 2 or 300? Mr. Adams may marry as
well as Mr. Williams; and both, I believe, will
find God's Providence a better Reliance, than
the richest Benefice in England. 
A good Curacy, no doubt, continued I, may
be a comfortable thing at setting out, to a young
Gentleman: But if here be a Rectory or Vicarage,
of 200l. a Year for Example, (for, if it be
of no more Value than a good Curacy, he must
be content) is not that 200l. a Year the Reward
for doing such and such Labour? And if this be
the stated Hire for this Labour, to speak in the 

Scripture Phrase, is not the Labourer worthy of
his Hire? Or is he that does not labour, to go
away with the greatest Part of it? 
If the Gentleman, my Lady is pleased to say,
has Merit, this Curacy may put him in a way
of shewing it: But does the Manifestation of
Merit, and the Reward of it, always go together? 
My Lady is so good as to observe—But
may I, Madam, be excused? 
Proceed, proceed, Child! —I shall only
have a Care of what I say before you for the
future, that's all. 
And I too, said Mr. H.—which made them
smile. 
Nay, now, my Lady— 
Proceed, I tell you—I only wonder, as
my Brother has said, on another Occasion, where
thou gottest all these equitable Notions. 
My Lady is so good as to observe, proceeded
I, (for they were pleased to be attentive) that
Mr. Williams should make use of his Opportunities. 
I know her Ladyship speaks this rather
in generous Indulgence to the usual Practice,
than what always ought to be the chief Consideration; 
for if the Earl should die, may not
some other Friend arise to a Gentleman of
Mr. Williams's Merit? 
As to strengthening of a good Man's Influence,
which is a Point always to be wish'd, I would
not say so much as I have done, if I had not
heard Mr. Longman say, and I am sure I heard it
with great Pleasure, that the Benefice Mr. Williams 

so worthily enjoys, is a clear 250l. a
Year. 
But after all, does Happiness to a Gentleman,
a Scholar, a Philosopher, rest in a greater or
letter Income? —On the contrary, Is it not
oftener to be found in a happy Competency, or
Mediocrity? Suppose my dear Mr. B. had 5000l.
a Year added to his present large Income, would
that increase his Happiness? That it would add
to his Cares, is no Question; but could that
Addition give him one single Comfort which he
has not already? And if the dear Gentleman had
2 or 3000 less, might he be less happy on that
Account? No, surely; for it would render a
greater Prudence on my humble Part necessary,
and a nearer Inspection, and greater Frugality, on
his own; and he must be contented (if he did
not, as now, perhaps, lay up every Year) so long
as he lived within his Income. —And who will
say, that the Obligation to greater Prudence
and Oeconomy is a Misfortune? 
The Competency, therefore, the Golden
Mean, is the Thing; and I have often consider'd
the Matter, and endeavoured to square my
Actions by the Result of that Consideration. 
For a Person, who being not born to an Estate,
is not satisfied with a Competency, will, probably,
not know any Limits to his Desires. One
whom an Acquisition of 100 or 200l. a Year
will not satisfy, will hardly sit down contented
with any Sum. For altho' he may propose to
himself at a Distance, that such and such an
Acquisition will be the Height of his Ambition, 

yet he will, as he approaches to that, advance
upon himself farther and farther; and know no
Bound, till the natural one is forced upon him,
and his Life and his Views end together. 
Now let me humbly beg Pardon of you all,
Ladies and Gentlemen, turning my Eye to each; 
but most of You, my good Lady, whose Observations
I have made so free with. If you can forgive
me, it will be an Instance of your Goodness,
that I may wish for, but hardly can promise to
myself. Will you, my dear Lady? said I, and
laid my Hand upon her Ladyship's, in a supplicatory
Manner; for she sat next me. 
I think not, said her Ladyship. I think I
ought not. —Should I, Brother? Can I, my
Lord? —Ought I, my Lady Countess? — 
Brother, Brother, if you have been in any degree
contributing to the Excellency of this— 
what shall I call her? how cunningly do you
act, to make her imbibe your Notions, and then
utter them with such Advantage, that you have
the secret Pride to find your own Sentiments
praised from her Mouth! But I will forgive
you both, be it as it will; for I am sure, outdone
as I am, in Thought, Word, and Deed,
and by so young a Gypsey—that was her Word,
it is by one that would out-do every body else,
as well as me; only I would except your Ladyship. 
None of your Exceptions, Lady Davers,
reply'd the Countess—I know not, in so young
a Lady, whether I should most envy or admire
her Excellence. 

Well, but since I have the Pleasure, resum'd
I, to find myself forgiven, may I be indulged a
few Moments Prattle more? Only just to observe,
that the State of the Case I have given,
is but one Side of the Question; that which a
good Clergyman, in my humble Opinion, would
chuse to act. But when we come to the other
Side, what it would be kind we of the Laity
should think and act by them, that is another
thing. For, when we think of the Hardships the
Clergy lie under, more than almost any other
Body of Men, we shall see they are intitled to
better Usage than they often meet with. 
Here, in the first Place, a Youth is sent to
the University, after a painful Course to qualify
him for it. He endangers his Health, and impairs
his Constitution, by hard Study, and a sedentary
Life; and after he has passed such a Number of
Years, he is admitted into Orders, perhaps gets
a small Fellowship, turns Tutor, a painful
Imployment; and his Education having been
designed for all his Portion, and that expended
in it, he at last, by Interest or Favour, gets a
Curacy, or little Living, of 40, 50, or 60l. a
Year; if less, so much the worse; and is obliged
to maintain himself in a genteel Appearance out
of that, and be subject not seldom to the Jests
of Buffoons and Rakes at a great Man's Table,
where the Parson is too often the Butt to receive
the supposed witty Shafts of such as can allow
themselves to say any thing. If he marries,
which possibly too he is kept from, contrary to
his Wishes, of all Men he is the least to follow 

his own Liking; since Prudence too often obliges
him to take the Person his Inclination would not. 
If Children follow, what melancholy Views
has he of providing for them, did not his strong
Reliance on Providence exercise his Faith against
worldly Appearance? 
Then has he too often to contend for his
Dues, the Produce of his poor Income, with
churlish and ignorant Spirits, whom his Function
would make him wish to smooth and instruct; 
who, tho’ they farm and pay to the Landlord for
no more than Nine Tenths of the Lands they
occupy, hardly think it a Sin to cheat the Parson
of his Tythe; who, however, has the same Right
to it, by the Laws of the Land, as the Gentleman
has to the Estate, or the Tenant to the Produce
of his Farm. 
This obliges the poor Gentleman to live in
a State of War, among a People with whom
both his Duty and Inclination would make him
desirous to cultivate a good Understanding. And
what Benefits can result from his Ministry in such
a Situation; when the People to be instructed
look upon him as an Invader of their Substance,
at the very Time that they are robbing him of
what is legally his? 
In the next Place, I presume to think, that
the Clergy are too much looked upon by some as
a detached Body, as I may say, from the rest of
the People, and as Persons acting upon a separate
Interest, quite opposite to that of the Laity:
When, possibly, that very Churl, who refuses
them their Right, or would cheat them of it, 

has a View to bring up one of his Family to the
Church, and hopes to get him provided for out
of its Revenues. And are not the Clergy, moreover,
the Fathers, the Sons, the Uncles, the
Brothers of the Laity, who shall set themselves
against their Maintenance? And must their Education
debar them of those Comforts, which it
better qualifies them to enjoy, and which it incapacitates
them any other way to procure? 
What Opportunity have not the Laity in
general, of all Degrees and Ranks, to make their
Lives easy and happy, to what the Clergy have? 
Here is a middling Family, with Three or Four
Sons: Suppose the Father's Circumstances will
allow him to bring up one to the Law: What
Opportunities has he, unenvied, to make a Fortune? 
Another is brought up to Trade: If he
has but tolerable Success in the World, in what
Ease and Affluence does he support himself, and
provide for his Family? And as to the Physick
Line, what Fortunes are raised in that? And
nobody envies any of these. But the Son, whose
Inclination shall lead him perhaps best to deserve,
and most to require, an easy and comfortable
Subsistence, and who ought wholly to devote
himself to the Duties of his Function, is grudged
every thing, and is treated as if he were not a
Son of the same Family, and had not a natural
Right and Stake in the same Commonwealth. 
There are, 'tis true, Preferments, and some
great ones, and Honours too, in the Church; 
but how few, compared to the Numbers of the
Clergy, or to those Livings which are so poor 

as can hardly set a Man above Penury and Contempt? 
—And how are those few ingross'd by
the Descendants or Dependants of the Rich and
Powerful! And, what by Commendams, Dispensations,
and such-like Contrivances, how
does one Man of Interest and Address swallow
up the Provision which was designed for several,
as deserving, perhaps, at least, as himself? — 
For, my good Lady, (you have forgiven me,
and must not be displeased) a Gentleman's
Friends may die off, and he must, you know,
make the best Use of his Opportunities. 
O you dear Sauce-box, as my Brother calls
you! —How dare you, by that arch pretty
Look, triumph over me thus? —Let me, Brother,
give her a Slap for this! —I'm sure she
deserves it. 
I think she is a little insolent, indeed, Lady
Davers. —But to the Case in hand. There
is so much Truth in what Pamela says, of the
Hardships to which the Clergy, the inferior
Clergy particularly, are subjected, that I wonder
any Gentleman who can chuse for himself, and
has no probable Prospects, should enter into
Orders, under such Discouragements. 
I humbly conceive, Sir, said I, that there
can be but one good Inducement, and that is
what the Apostle hints at, in these Words— 
If in this Life only we have Hope, we are of all
Men most miserable. 
Well, said Mr. B. by how much this is
their Motive, by so much are they intitled to
that better Hope; and may it never deceive them! 

But I have the Pleasure to acquaint this
Company, that I had a Mind only to hear what
Pamela, who, as I hinted, talked to me learnedly
on this very Subject a few Days ago, would
say, when she came Face to Face, to her Two
worthy Friends, Mr. Williams, and Mr. Adams,
(and so I desired Mr. Williams would let her run
on, if I could set her into the Subject)—else my
old Acquaintance was resolved not to hold both
Livings, since either, he was so good as to say,
would afford him as handsome a Provision as
he wished for; his only Difficulty being about
obliging the Earl, or whether he should not disoblige
me, if he complied with that Nobleman's
Request. 
Indeed, Madam, said Mr. Williams, this is
the very Case: And after what I have heard from
your Ladyship, (so he call'd me) I would not, for
the World, have been of another Mind, nor
have put it upon any other Foot than I did. 
You are a good Gentleman, said I; and I
have such an Opinion of your Worthiness, and
the Credit you do your Function, that I can
never suspect either your Judgment or your Conduct. 
But pray, Sir, may I ask, What have
you determined to do? 
Why, Madam, reply'd he, I am stagger'd in
that too, by the Observation your Ladyship made,
that where a Man has the Love of his Parishioners,
he ought not to think of leaving them. 
Else, Sir, I find, you were rather inclined
to oblige the Earl, though the Living be of less
Value! This is very noble, Sir; it is more than
generous. 

My Dear, said Mr. B. I'll tell you (for
Mr. Williams's Modesty will not let him speak
it before all the Company) what is his Motive,
and a worthy one you'll say it is. Excuse me,
Mr. Williams—for the Reverend Gentleman
blush'd. 
The Earl has of late Years—we all know
his Character—given himself up to Carousiug,
and he will suffer no Man to go from his Table
sober. Mr. Williams has taken the Liberty to
expostulate, as became his Function, with his
Lordship on this Subject, and upon some other
Irregularities, in so agreeable a manner, that
the Earl has taken a great Liking to him; and
promises, that he will suffer his Reasonings to
have an Effect upon him, and that he shall reform
his whole Houshold, if he will come and live
near him, and regulate his Table by his own
Example. 
The Countess is a very good Lady, and privately
presses Mr. Williams to oblige the Earl:
And this is our worthy Friend's main Inducement; 
with the Hope, which I should not forget
to mention, that he has, of preserving untainted
the Morals of the Two young Gentlemen, the
Earl's Sons, who, he fears, will be carried away
by the Force of such an Example: And he thinks,
as the Earl's Living has fallen, mine, probably,
will be better supplied than the Earl's, if he, as
he kindly offers, gives it me back again; otherwise
the Earl, as he apprehends, will find outfor
his, some Gentleman, if such a one can be found,
as will rather further, than obstruct, his own Irregularities; 

as was the unhappy Case of the last
Incumbent. 
Well, said Lady Davers, (and so said the
Countess) I shall always have the highest Respect
for Mr. Williams, for a Conduct so genteel and
so prudent. But, Brother, will you, and will
you, Mr. Willams, put this whole Affair, in all
its Parts, into Mrs. B.'s Hands, since you have
such Testimonies, both of you, of the Rectitude
of her Thinking and Acting? 
With all my Heart, Madam, replied Mr. Williams;
and I shall be proud of such a Direction. 
What say you, Brother? You are to suppose
the Living in your own Hands again; will you
leave the whole Matter to my Sister here? 
Come, my Dear, said Mr. B. let us hear
how you'd wish it to be order'd. I know you
have not need of one Moment's Consideration,
when once you are Mistress of a Point. 
Nay, said Lady Davers, that is not the
Thing. I repeat my Demand: Shall it be as
Mrs. B. lays it out, or not? 
This is a weighty Matter, my good Sister; 
and, bad as I have been, I think Patrons are accountable,
in a great measure, for the Characters
of the Persons they present; and I do assure you,
that had I Twenty Livings in my Gift, I should
think I ought not to prefer my Brother to any
one of them, if his Morals and Character were
not likely to do Honour to the Church, as well
as to my Presentation. And I expected to hear
from Pamela, when she was enumerating the
Hardships of the Clergy, of that scandalous Practice 

of some Patrons, who rob the regularly-bred
Clergymen, by pushing into Orders, some Kinsman
or Friend, or Friend's Kinsman or Friend,
when a Living falls in, let his Character or Qualifications
be ever so faulty and defective. I could
name several such Instances, that ought to make
the Ordainers, as well as the Ordained, blush, as
(were I to borrow one of Pamela's serious Inferences,
I would say) it will one Day make them
both tremble, when they come to give an Account
of the Trusts commited to them. 
Well, said my Lady, I have a noble Brother,
that's true. What Pity you ever were wicked at
all! But, come, and laid her Hand upon mine,
this same good Girl will be a Blessing to you:
Nay, why say I, will be? she is; and the greatest
that Man can receive. —But still I must have
you put this Matter into Mrs. B.'s Hands. 
Conditionally I will—Provided I cannot
give satisfactory Reasons, why I ought not to
conform to her Opinion; for this, as I said, is a
Point of Conscience with me; and I made it so,
when I presented Mr. Williams to the Living,
and have not been deceived in that Presentation. 
To be sure, said I, that is very reasonable, Sir; 
and on that Condition, I shall the less hesitate to
speak my Mind, because I shall be in no Danger
to commit an irreparable Error. 
I know well, Lady Davers, added Mr. B.
the Power your Sex have over ours, and their
subtle Tricks; and so will never, in my weakest
Moments, be drawn in to make a blindfold Promise. 
There have been several Instances, both 

in sacred and profane Story, of Mischiefs done
by such Surprizes: So you must allow me to
suspect myself, when I know the dear Slut's
Power over me, and have been taught, by the
inviolable Regard she pays to her own Word,
to value mine. —And now, Pamela, speak all
that's in your Heart to say. 
With your requisite Condition in my Eye,
I will, Sir. But let me see, that I state the Matter
right. And preparative to it, pray, Mr. Williams,
tho’ you have not been long in Possession
of this Living, yet may-be you can compute what
it is likely, by what you know of it, to bring in,
clear? 
Madam, said he, by the best Calculation I
can make, (I thank you for it, good Sir) it may,
one Year with another, be reckoned at 300l.
per Annum: It is the best Living within Twenty
Miles of it, having been improved within these
Two last Years. 
If it was 500l. and would make you happier,
—(for that, Sir, is the thing) I should
wish it you, said I, and think it short of your
Merits. But pray, Sir, what is the Earl's Living
valued at? 
At about 220l. Madam. 
Well then, reply'd I, very pertly, I believe
now I have it. 
Mr. Williams, for Motives most excellently
worthy of his Function, inclines to surrender up
to Mr. B. his Living of 300l. per Annum, and
to accept of the Earl's Living of 220l. per Annum. 
Dear Sir, I am going to be very bold; but under 

your Condition nevertheless:—Let the Gentleman
to whom you shall present the Living of F.
allow 80l. per Annum out of it to Mr. Williams,
till the Earl's Favour shall make up the Difference
to him, and no longer. —And—but I dare
not name the Gentleman:—For how, dear Sir,
were I to be so bold, shall I part with my Chaplain? 
Admirable! most admirable! said Lord
and Lady Davers, in the same Words. The
Countess praised the Decision too; and Mr. H.
with his Let me be hang'd, and his 'Fore Gads,–––– 
and such Exclamations natural to him, made his
Plaudits. 
Mr. Williams said, He could wish with all
his Heart it might be so; and Mr. Adams was so
abash'd and surpris'd, that he could not hold up
his Head—but Joy danced in his silent Countenance
for all that. 
Mr. B. having hesitated a few Minutes, Lady
Davers called out for his Objection or Consent,
according to Condition; and he said, I cannot
so soon determine as that prompt Slut did. I'll
withdraw one Minute. 
He did so, as I found afterwards, to advise, like
the considerate and genteel Spirit he possesses,
with Mr. Williams, whom he beckon'd out, and
to examine whether he was in Earnest willing
to give it up, or had any body he was very desirous
should succeed him; telling him, That,
if he had, he thought himself obliged, in Return
for his worthy Behaviour to him, to pay a particular
Regard to his Recommendation. And so, 

being answer'd as he desired, in they came together
again. 
But I should say, that his withdrawing with
a very serious Aspect, made me afraid I had
gone too far: And I said, before they came in,
What shall I do, if I have incurred Mr. B.'s
Anger by my Over-forwardness! —Did he not
look displeas'd? Dear my Ladies, if he be so,
plead for me, and I will withdraw, when he
comes in; for I cannot stand his Anger: I have
not been used to it. 
Never fear, you charming Pamela, said my
Lady; he can't be angry at any thing you say or
do. But I wish, for the sake of what I have been
Witness to, of Mr. Adams's Behaviour and Modesty,
that such a thing could be done for him. 
Mr. Adams bow'd, and said, O my good
Ladies! 'tis too, too considerable a thing:—I
cannot expect it—I do not—It would be
Presumption, if I did. 
Just then re-enter'd Mr. B. and Mr. Williams,
the first with a stately Air, the other with a more
Peace-portending Smile on his Countenance. 
But Mr. B. sitting down, Well, Pamela, said
he, very gravely, I see, that Power is a dangerous
thing in any Hand. —Sir, Sir! said I. —My dear
Lady, (whispering to Lady Davers) I will withdraw,
as I said I would! —And I was getting
away as fast as I could: But he arose, and coming
up to me, took my Hand, Why is my Charmer
so soon frighten'd? said he, most kindly; and
still more kindly, with a noble Air, pressed it to
his Lips. —I must not carry my Jest too far upon 



a Mind so apprehensive, as I otherwise might be
inclined to do. And leading me to Mr. Adams
and Mr. Williams, he said, taking Mr. Williams's
Hand with his Left, as he held mine
in his Right, Your worthy Brother Clergyman,
Mr. Adams, gives me Leave to confirm the Decision
of my dear Spouse, and you are to thank
her for the Living of F. upon the*  Condition
she proposed; and may you give but as much
Satisfaction there, as you have done in this Family,
and as Mr. Williams has given to his Flock; 
and they will then, after a while, be pleas'd as
much with your Ministry, as they have hitherto
been with his. 
Mr. Adams trembled with Joy, and said, He
could not tell how to bear this Excess of Goodness
in us both: And his Countenance and his
Eyes gave Testimony of a Gratitude that was too
high for further Expression. 
As for myself, You, my honoured and dear
Friends, who know how much I am always
raised (even out of myself, as I may say) when I
am made the Dispenser of Acts of Bounty and
Generosity to the Deserving; and who now,
instead of incurring Blame, as I had apprehended,
found myself applauded by every one, and most
by the Gentleman whose Approbation I chiefly
coveted to have: You, I say, will judge how
greatly I must be delighted. 
But I was still more affected, when Mr. B.
directing himself to me, and to Mr. Williams, at
the same time, was pleased to say, Here, my 

Dear, you must thank this good Gentleman for
enabling you to give such a shining Proof of your
Excellence: And whenever I put Power into
your Hands for the future, act but as you have
now done, and it will be impossible, that I
should have any Choice or Will but Yours. 
O Sir, said I, pressing his Hand with my
Lips, forgetting how many Witnesses I had of
my grateful Fondness, How shall I, oppressed
with your Goodness, in such a signal Instance as
this, find Words equal to the Gratitude of my
Heart! —But here, patting my Bosom, just
here they stick; and I cannot— 
And indeed I could say no more: And Mr. B.
in the Delicacy of his Apprehensiveness for me,
led me into the next Parlour, and placing himself
by me on the Settee, said, Take care, my
best Beloved, that the Joy which overflows your
dear Heart, for having done a beneficent Action
to a deserving Gentleman, does not affect you
too much. 
My Lady Davers followed us: Where is my
Angelick Sister? said she. I have a Share in her
next to yourself, my noble Brother: And clasping
me to her generous Bosom, she ran over with
Expressions of Favour to me, in a Style and
Words, which would suffer, were I to endeavour
to repeat them. 
Coffee being ready, we all Three returned
to the Company. My Lord Davers was pleased
to make me a great many fine Compliments,
and so did Mr. H. after his Manner. But the
Countess exceeded herself in Goodness. 

Mr. Williams seemed so pleased, or, rather,
so elated with the deserved Acceptation his worthy
Conduct had met with, that it shew'd he was
far from repenting at the generous Turn the Matter
had taken, in favour of Mr. Adams: On the
contrary, he congratulated him upon it, telling
him, He would introduce him, when his generous
Patron thought proper, to his new Parishioners,
and would read Prayers for him at his
first Preaching. And I think, Mr. Adams, said
he, since this happy Affair has been brought
about from the Conversation upon Dispensations,
you and I, both by our Examples and our
Arguments, must, on all Occasions, discredit
that Practice; since, as my Lady has observed,
God's Providence is a better Reliance than the
richest Benefice in England; and since, as her
Ladyship has also observed, we ought not to look
beyond a happy Competency, as if in this Life
only we had Hope. 
My Lady, said Mr. Adams, has given me
many Lessons, relating to different Parts of my
Duty, both as a Christian and a Clergyman, that
will not only furnish me with Rules for my
future Conduct, but with Subjects for the best
Sermons I shall ever be able to compose. 
Mr. B. was pleased to say, It is a Rule with
me, not to leave till To morrow what can be
done To-day: And when, my Dear, do you propose
to dispense with Mr. Adams's good Offices
in your Family? Or did you intend to induce
him to go to Town with us? 

I had not proposed any thing, Sir, as to that; 
for I had not asked your kind Direction: But
the good Dean will supply us, I doubt not; and
when we set out for London, Mr. Adams will
be at full Liberty, with his worthy Friend
Mr. Williams, to pursue the happy Scheme,
which your Goodness has permitted to take
Effect. 
Mr. Adams, my Dear, who came so lately
from the University, can, perhaps, recommend
such another young Gentleman as himself, to
perform the Functions he used to perform in
your Family. 
I looked, it seems, a little grave, and Mr. B.
said, What have you to offer, Pamela? What
have I said amiss? 
A miss! dear Sir!— 
Ay, and dear Madam, too! I see by your
bashful Seriousness, in place of that smiling
Approbation which you always shew, when I
utter any thing you intirely approve, that I have
said something which would rather meet with
your Acquiescence, than Choice. So, as I have
often told you, none of your Reserves! And
never hesitate to me your Consent in any thing,
while you are sure, I will conform to your
Wishes, or pursue my own Liking, as either
shall appear reasonable to me, when I have heard
your Reasons. 
Why then, dear Sir, what I had presumed
to think, but I submit it to your better Judgment,
was, Whether, since the Gentleman who
is so kind as to assist us in our Family Devotions, 

in some measure acts in the Province of the
worthy Dean, it were not right, that our own
Parish Minister, whether here or in London,
should name, or at least approve our naming, the
Gentleman? 
Why could not I have thought of that, as
well as you, Sauce-box? Lady Davers, I'm intirely
on your Side: I think she deserves a Slap
now from us both. 
I'll forgive her, said my Lady, since I find
her Sentiments and Actions as much a Reproof
to others as to me. 
Mr. Williams, did you ever think, said Mr. B.
it would have come to this? Did you ever know
such a saucy Girl in your Life? —Already to
give herself these reproaching Airs? 
No, never, if your Honour is pleased to call
the most excellent Lady in the World by such a
Name, nor any body else! 
Pamela, I charge you, said the dear Gentleman,
if you study for it, be sometimes in the
Wrong, that one may not always be taking Lessons
from such an Assurance; but, in our Turns,
have something to teach you. 
Then, dear Sir, said I, must I not be a strange
Creature? For how, when you, and my good
Ladies, are continually giving me such charming
Examples, can I do a wrong thing? 
Mr. H. said; Let him be hang'd, if he would
not marry, as soon as ever he could get any body
to have him. 
Foolish Fellow! said Lady Davers, dost
think that thou'lt meet with such a Wife as that,
when thou marriest? 

Why not, Madam? —For if I am not so
good as Mr. B. now is, I have not been so bad
neither as he was formerly; —Excuse me,
Sir:—And so I may stand a Chance. 
A Chance! said my Lady—that's like
thee. —Didst ever hear of such a one as she? 
I never, said he, and fell a laughing, saw
such a one, I own. And take that, my good
Lady, for calling me foolish Fellow. 
There's not the Reproach in thy Answer
that thou intendest, except to thy own grinning
Insolence, said her Ladyship, (severe enough,
but smiling) that makes thee think that a Reflection,
which is none in this Case. 
Egad, Madam, you're always hard upon me! 
I can say nothing to please you. While every
body else gives and receives Compliments, I can
come in for nothing but foolish Fellow with your
Ladyship. 
Nephew, said my Lord, laughing, I think
you come in for a large Part, and a facetious one
too: For when you're present, and Conversation
takes a serious Turn, you make an excellent Character
to set us all a laughing. 
He got up, and bow'd very low: I thank
your Lordship. —You might as well have called
me a Jack pudden in plain Words;—but then
I would have looked upon you all as so many
Mountebanks! —There I have you! said he,
and fell a laughing. 
The Countess, shuddering, said, Dear, dear
Mr. H. be silent, I beseech you, whenever we 

are serious: For you tear one from the Feast of
Souls to the Froth of Bodies. 

I hope, Miss, you will forgive me for being
so tedious on the aforegoing Subject, and its
most agreeable Conclusion. It is an important
one, because several Persons, as Conferrers or
Receivers, have found their Pleasure and Account
in it; and it would be well, if Conversation
were often attended with like happy Consequences. 
I have one Merit to plead in behalf
even of my Prolixity; That in reciting the
delightful Conferences I have the Pleasure of
holding with our noble Guests, and Mr. B.
I am careful not to write twice upon one Topick; 
altho' several which I omit, may be more worthy
of your Notice, than those I give; so that you
have as much Variety from me, as the Nature of
the Facts and Cases will admit of. 
But here I will conclude, having a very different
Subject, as a Proof of what I have advanc'd,
to touch in my next. Till when, I am 
Your most affectionate and faithful
P. B. 
