



&dotup;Mr. Brand, To John Harlowe, Esq; 

Sat. Night, Sept. 2. 
&dotup;Worthy Sir,
&dotup;I am under no small concern, that I should (unhappily)
be the occasion (I am sure I intended nothing
like it) of widening differences by light misreport,
when it is the duty of one of my function (and no less
consisting with my inclination) to heal and reconcile. 
&dotup;I have received two Letters to set me right: One
from a particular acquaintance (whom I set to enquire
of Mr. Belford's character); and that came
on Tuesday last, informing me, that your unhappy
Niece was greatly injured in the account I had had
of her (for I had told him of it, and that with very
great concern, I am sure, apprehending it to be
true). So I then set about writing to you, to acknowlege
the error: And had gone a good way in it; 
when the second Letter came (a very handsome one
it is, both in style and penmanship) from my friend
Mr. Walton (tho' I am sure it cannot be his inditing)
expressing his sorrow, and his Wife's, and
his Sister-in-law's likewise, for having been the
cause of misleading me, in the account I gave of the
said young Lady; whom they now say (upon further
enquiry) they find to be the most unblameable, and
most prudent, and (it seems) the most pious young
Lady, that ever (once) committed a great error; 
as (to be sure) hers was, in leaving such worthy Parents 

and Relations for so vile a man as Mr. Lovelace: 
But what shall we say? —Why, the divine
Virgil tells us, 

&dotup;Improbe Amor, quid non mortalia pectora cogis?
&dotup;For my part, I was but too much afraid (for we
have great opportunities, you are sensible, Sir, at
the University, of knowing human nature from
books, the calm result of the wise mens wisdom, as I
may say, 

&dotup;(Haurit aquam cribro, qui discere vult sine libro)
uninterrupted by the noise and vanities, that will
mingle with personal conversation, which (in the
turbulent world) is not to be enjoyed but over a
bottle, where you have an hundred foolish things pass
to one that deserveth to be remembered; I was but too
much afraid, I say) that so great a slip might be attended
with still greater and worse: For your Horace,
and my Horace, the most charming writer
that ever lived among the Pagans (for the lyric kind
of poetry, I mean; for, to be sure, Homer and
Virgil would otherwise be first named in their way)
well observeth (and who understood human nature
better than he?) 

&dotup;Nec vera virtus, cum semel excidit,
&dotup;Curat reponi deterioribus.
&dotup;And Ovid no less wisely observeth: 

&dotup;Et mala sunt vicina bonis. Errore sub illo
 &dotup;Pro vitio virtus crimina sæpe tulit.
&dotup;Who, that can draw knowlege from its fountain-head,
the works of the sages of antiquity (improved
by the comments of the moderns) but would prefer to
all others the silent quiet life, which contemplative
men lead in the seats of learning, were they not
called out (according to their dedication) to the service
and instruction of the world? 

&dotup;Now, Sir, another favourite poet of mine (and
not the less a favourite for being a Christian) telleth
us, that it is the custom of some, when in a fault,
to throw the blame upon the backs of others, 

&dotup;—Hominum quoque mos est,
&dotup;Quæ nos cunque premunt, alieno imponere tergo.
&dotup;Mant.
But I, tho' (in this case) misled (well-intendedly,
nevertheless, both in the misleaders and misled, and
therefore entitled to lay hold of that plea, if anybody
is so entitled) will not, however, be classed
among such extenuators; but (contrarily) will always
keep in mind that verse, which comforteth in
mistake, as well as instructeth; and which I quoted
in my last Letter; 

&dotup;Errare est hominis, sed non persistere—
And will own, that I was very rash to take up
with conjectures and consequences drawn from probabilities,
where (especially) the character of so fine a
Lady was concerned. 

&dotup;Credere fallaci gravis est dementia famæ
Mant.
&dotup;Notwithstanding, Miss Clarissa Harlowe (I must
be bold to say) is the only young Lady, that ever I
heard of (or indeed read of) that, having made such
a false step, so soon (of her own accord, as I may
say) recovered herself, and conquered her Love of
the deceiver (A great conquest indeed!); and who
flieth him, and resolveth to die, rather than to be
his; which now to her never-dying honour (I am
well assured) is the case—And, in justice to her, I
am now ready to take to myself (with no small vexation)
that of Ovid, 

&dotup;Heu! patior telis vulnera facta meis.
&dotup;But yet I do insist upon it, that all that part of
my information, which I took upon mine own personal 

enquiry, which is what relates to Mr. Belford,
and his character, is literally true; for there is not
any-where to be met with a man of a more libertine
character as to women, Mr. Lovelace excepted, than
he beareth. 
&dotup;And so, Sir, I must desire of you, that you will
not let any blame lie upon my intention; since you
see how ready I am to accuse myself of too lightly
giving ear to a rash information (not knowing it so to
be, however): For I depended the more upon it,
as the people I had it from are very sober, and live
in the fear of God: And indeed when I wait upon
you, you will see by their Letter, that they must
be conscientious good people: Wherefore, Sir, let
me be entitled, from all your good family, to that of
my last-named poet, 

&dotup;Aspera confesso verba remitte reo.
&dotup;And now, Sir (what is much more becoming of
my function) let me, instead of appearing with the
face of an accuser, and a rash censurer (which in my
heart I have not deserved to be thought), assume the
character of a reconciler; and propose (by way of
penance to myself for my fault) to be sent up as a
messenger of peace to the pious young Lady; for they
write me word absolutely (and, I believe in my heart,
truly that the Doctors have given her over, and that
she cannot live. Alas! alas! what a sad thing would
that be, if the poor bough, that was only designed
(as I very well know, and am fully assured) to be bent,
should be broken! 
&dotup;Let it not, dear Sir, seem to the world, that there
was any-thing in your resentments (which, while
meant for reclaiming, were just and fit) that hath the
appearance of violence, and fierce wrath, and inexorability
(as it would look to some, if carried to extremity,
after repentance, and contrition, and humiliation,
on the fair offender's side): For all this while
(it seemeth) she hath been a second Magdalen in her penitence, 

and yet not so bad as a Magdalen in her faults
(faulty, nevertheless, as she hath been once, the Lord
knoweth!) 

&dotup;Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur: optimus ille est,
&dotup;Qui minimis urgetur—saith Horace).
&dotup;Now, Sir, if I may be named for this blessed employment
(For, Blessed is the peacemaker!) I will
hasten to London; and (as I know Miss had always
a great regard to the function I have the honour to
be of) I have no doubt of making myself acceptable
to her, and to bring her, by sound arguments, and
good advice, into a liking of life, which must be the
first step to her recovery: For, when the mind is
made easy, the body will not long suffer; and the love
of life is a natural passion, that is soon revived, when
fortune turneth about, and smileth: 

&dotup;Vivere quisque diu, quamvis & egenus & æger,
&dotup;Optat—,
Ovid.
&dotup;And the sweet Lucan truly observeth, 

&dotup;—Fatis debentibus annos
&dotup;Mors invita subit—
&dotup;And now, Sir, let me tell you what shall be the
tenor of my pleadings with her, and comfortings of
her, as she is, as I may say, a learned Lady; and
as I can explain to her those sentences, which she cannot
so readily construe herself: And this in order to
convince you (did you not already know my qualifications)
how well qualified I am for the Christian
Office to which I commend myself. 
&dotup;I will, IN THE FIRST PLACE, put her in mind
of the common course of things in this sublunary world,
in which joy and sorrow, sorrow and joy, succeed
one another by turns; in order to convince her,
that her griefs have been but according to that common
course of things: 

&dotup;Gaudia post luctus veniunt, post gaudia luctus.

&dotup;Secondly, I will remind her of her own notable
description of Sorrow, when she was once called
upon to distinguish wherein Sorrow, Grief, and
Melancholy, differed from each other; which she
did impromptu, by their effects, in a truly admirable
manner, to the high satisfaction of every one: I
myself could not, by study, have distinguished better,
nor more concisely—Sorrow, said she, wears; 
Grief tears; but Melancholy sooths. 
&dotup;My inference to her shall be, that since a happy
Reconciliation will take place, Grief will be banished; 
Sorrow dismissed; and only sweet Melancholy remain
to sooth and indulge her contrite heart, and shew to
all the world the penitent sense she hath of her great
error. 
&dotup;Thirdly, That her Joys (a) , when restored
to health and favour, will be the greater, the deeper
her griefs were. 

&dotup;Gaudia, qua multo parta labore, placent.
&dotup;Fourthly, That having really been guilty of a
great error, she should not take impatiently the correction
and anger with which she hath been treated. 

&dotup;Leniter, ex merito quicquid patiare, ferundum est.
&dotup;Fifthly, That Virtue must be established by
Patience; as faith Prudentius: 

&dotup;Hæc virtus vidua est, quam non patientia firmat.
&dotup;Sixthly, That, in the words of Horace, she
may expect better times, than (of late) she had reason
to look for: 

&dotup;Grata superveniet, quæ non sperabitur, hora.

&dotup;Seventhly, That she is really now in a way
to be happy, since, according to Ovid, she can count
up all her woe: 

&dotup;Felix, qui patitur quæ numerare potest.
&dotup;And those comforting lines, 

&dotup;Estque serena dies post longos gratior imbres,
 &dotup;Et post triste malum gratior ipsa salus.
&dotup;Eighthly, That, in the words of Mantuan,
her Parents and Uncles could not help loving her all
the time they were angry at her: 

&dotup;Æqua tamen semper mens est, & amica voluntas,
&dotup;Sit licet in natos facies austera parentum.
&dotup;Ninthly, That the ills she hath met with may
be turned (by the good use to be made of them) to
her everlasting benefit; for that, 

&dotup;Cum furit atque ferit, Deus olim parcere quærit.
&dotup;Tenthly, That she will be able to give a fine
lesson (a very fine lesson) to all the young Ladies of
her acquaintance, of the vanity of being lifted up in
prosperity, and the weakness of being cast down in
adversity; since no one is so high, as to be above
being humbled; so low, as to need to despair: For
which purpose the advice of Ausonius, 

&dotup;Dum Fortuna juvat, caveto tolli:
&dotup;Dum fortuna tonat, caveto mergi.
&dotup;I shall tell her, that Lucan saith well, when he
calleth adversity the element of patience: 

&dotup;—Gaudet patientia duris.
&dotup;That 

&dotup;Fortunam superat virtus, prudentia famam.
&dotup;That while weak souls are crushed by fortune, the
brave mind maketh the fickle deity afraid of it: 

&dotup;Fortuna fortes metuit, ignavos premit.

&dotup;Eleventhly, That if she take the advice of
Horace, 

&dotup;Fortiaque adversis opponite pectora rebus,
&dotup;it will delight her hereafter (as Virgil saith) to revolve
her past troubles: 

&dotup;—Forsan & hæc olim meminisse juvabit.
&dotup;And, to the same purpose, Juvenal speaking of
the prating joy of mariners, after all their dangers
are over: 

&dotup;Gaudent securi narrare pericula nautæ.
&dotup;Which suiting the case so well, you'll forgive me,
Sir, for popping down in English metre, as the translative
impulse (pardon a new word, and yet we
scholars are not fond of authenticating new words)
came upon me uncalled for: 

&dotup;The Seaman, safe on shore, with joy doth tell
&dotup;What cruel dangers him at sea befell.
&dotup;With these, Sir, and an hundred more, wise adages,
which I have always at my fingers end, will I (when
reduced to form and method) entertain Miss; and as
she is a well-read, and (I might say, but for this one
great error) a wise young Lady, I make no doubt
but I shall prevail upon her, if not by mine own arguments,
by those of wits and capacities that have a
congeniality (as I may say) to her own, to take heart, 

 &dotup;—Nor of the laws of fate complain,
&dotup;Since, tho' it has been cloudy, now 't clears up again.—
&dotup;Oh! what wisdom is there in these noble classical
authors! A wise man will (upon searching into them)
always find that they speak his sense of men and
things. Hence it is, that they so readily occur to my
memory on every occasion—Tho' this may look like
vanity it is too true to be omitted: And I see not
why a man may not know those things of himself, 

which every-body seeth and saith of him; who, nevertheless,
perhaps know not half so much as he, in
other matters. 
&dotup;I know but of one objection, Sir, that can lie against
my going; and that will arise from your kind care
and concern for the safety of my person, in case that
fierce and terrible man, the wicked Mr. Lovelace (of
whom every one standeth in fear) should come cross
me, as he may be resolved to try once more to gain
a footing in Miss's affections: But I will trust in
providence for my safety, while I shall be engaged in
a cause so worthy of my function; and the more trust
in it, as he is a learned man, as I am told. 
&dotup;Strange too, that so vile a Rake (I hope he will
never see this!) should be a learned man; that is to
say, that a learned man should find leisure to be a
Rake. Altho', possibly, a learned man may be
sly sinner, and take opportunities, as they come in his
way—Which, however, I do assure you, I never did. 
&dotup;I repeat, That as he is a learned man, I shall vest
myself, as I may say, in classical armour; beginning
meekly with him (for, Sir, bravery and meekness are
qualities very consistent with each other, and in no persons
so shiningly exert themselves, as in the Christian
priesthood; beginning meekly with him, I say) from
Ovid, 

&dotup;Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrâsse leoni:
&dotup;So that, if I should not be safe behind the shield
of mine own prudence, I certainly should behind the
shields of the ever-admirable classics: Of Horace particularly; 
who, being a Rake (and a jovial Rake
too) himself, must have great weight with all learned
Rakes. 
&dotup;And who knoweth but I may be able to bring
even this Goliath in wickedness, altho' in person but
a little David myself (armed with the slings and stones
of the antient sages), to a due sense of his errors? 
And what a victory would that be! 

&dotup;I could here, Sir, pursuing the allegory of David
and Goliath, give you some of the stones (Hard arguments
may be called stones, since they knock down
a pertinacious opponent) which I could pelt him with,
were he to be wroth with me; and this in order
to take from you, Sir, all apprehensions for my life,
or my bones; but I forbear them till you demand
them of me, when I have the honour to attend you
in person. 
&dotup;And now (my dear Sir) what remaineth, but that,
having shewn you (what yet, I believe, you did not
doubt) how well qualified I am to attend the Lady
with the olive branch, I beg of you to dispatch me
with it out of hand? For if she be so very ill, and
if she should not live to receive the grace, which
(to my knowlege) all the worthy family design her,
how much will that grieve you all! And then, Sir,
of what avail will be the eulogies you shall all, peradventure,
join to give to her memory? For, as
Martial wisely observeth, 

&dotup;—Post cineres gloria sera venit.
&dotup;Then, as Ausonius layeth it down with equal propriety,
that those favours, which are speedily conferred,
are the most graceful and obliging— 
&dotup;And to the same purpose Ovid: 

&dotup;Gratia ab officio, quod mora tardat, abest.
&dotup;And, Sir, whatever you do, let the Lady's pardon
be as ample, and as chearfully given, as she can
wish for it; that I may be able to tell her, that it
hath your hands, your countenances, and your whole
hearts, with it—For, as the Latin verse hath it (and
I presume to think I have not weakened its sense by
my humble advice) 

&dotup;Dat bene, dat multum, qui dat cum munere vultum.

&dotup;And now, Sir, when I survey this long Letter (a) ,
(albeit I see it enamelled, as a beautiful meadow is
enamelled by the spring or summer flowers, very glorious
to behold!) I begin to be afraid, that I may
have tired you; and the more likely, as I have
written without that method or order, which I think
constituteth the beauty of good writing: Which method
or order, nevertheless, may be the better excused
in a familiar epistle (as this may be called), you
pardoning, Sir, the familiarity of the word: But yet
not altogether here, I must needs own; because this
is a Letter, and not a Letter, as I may say; but a
kind of short and pithy Discourse, touching upon
various and sundry topics, every one of which might
be a fit theme to enlarge upon, even to volumes: If
this Epistolary Discourse (then let me call it) should
be pleasing to you (as I am inclined to think it will,
because of the sentiments and aphorisms of the wisest
of the antients, which glitter thro' it like so many
dazling sun-beams), I will (at my leisure) work it up
into a methodical Discourse; and perhaps may one
day print it, with a dedication to my honoured patron
(if, Sir, I have your leave) singly at first (but not till
I have thrown out anonymously two or three smaller
things, by the success of which I shall have made
myself of some account in the Commonwealth of Letters),
and afterwards in my Works—Not for the
vanity of the thing (however) I will say, but for the
use it may be of to the public; for (as one well observeth)
Tho' glory always followeth virtue, yet it
should be considered only as its shadow. 


&dotup;Contemnit laudem virtus, licet usque sequatur
 &dotup;Gloria virtutem, corpus ut umbra suum.
&dotup;A very pretty saying, and worthy of all mens admiration! 
&dotup;And now (most worthy Sir, my very good friend
and patron) referring the whole to yours, and to
your two Brothers, and to young Mr. Harlowe's consideration,
and to the wise consideration of good
Madam Harlowe, and her excellent Daughter Miss
Arabella Harlowe; I take the liberty to subscribe
myself, what I truly am, and ever shall delight to be,
in all cases, and at all times, 
&dotup;Your and their most ready and obedient
&dotup;as well as faithful Servant,
&dotup;Elias Brand.&dotup; 