


I have been hinder'd, by this wicked Woman's
watching me too close, from writing
on Tuesday; and so I will put both these
Days together. She took me with her a little
Turn for an Airing, in the Chariot, and I have
walked several times in the Garden; but have
always her at my Heels. 
Mr. Williams came to see us, and took a
Walk with us once; and while her Back was
just turn'd, (encourag'd by the Hint he had before
given me) I said, Sir, I see Two Tiles
upon that Parsly-bed: Might not one cover
them with Mould, with a Note between them,
on Occasion? —A good Hint! said he: Let
that Sun-flower by the Back-door of the Garden
be the Place; I have a Key to that Door; 
for it is my nearest Way to the Town. 
So I was forced to begin. O what Inventions
will Necessity push one upon! I hugg'd myself
at the Thought; and she coming to us, he said,
as if he was continuing a Discourse we were in,
No, not extraordinary pleasant. What's that?
what's that? said Mrs. Jewkes. —Only, said
he, the Town, I'm saying, is not very pleasant. 
No, indeed, said she, 'tis not; 'tis a poor
Town, to my thinking. Are there any Gentry
in it? said I. And so we chatted on about the
Town, to deceive her. But my Deceit intended
no Hurt to any body. 

We then talked of the Garden, how large
and pleasant, and the like; and sat down on
the turfted Slope of the fine Fish-pond, to see
the Fishes play upon the Surface of the Water; 
and she said, I should angle, if I would. 
I wish, said I, you'd be so kind to fetch
me a Rod and Baits. Pretty Mistress! said she. 
I know better than that, I'll assure you, at
this time. —I mean no Harm, said I, indeed. 
Let me tell you, said she, I know none, who
have their Thoughts more about them than you. 
A body ought to look to it, where you are. But
we'll angle a little To-morrow. Mr. Williams,
who is much afraid of her, turn'd the Discourse
to a general Subject. I saunter'd in, and left
them to talk by themselves; but he went away
to Town, and she was soon after me. 
I had got to my Pen and Ink; and I said,
I want some Paper, Mrs. Jewkes (putting what
I was about in my Bosom). You know I have
written Two Letters, and sent them by John
(O how his Name, poor guilty Fellow, grieves
me!) Well, said she, you have some left: One
Sheet did for those Two Letters. Yes, said I; 
but I used half another for a Cover, you know; 
and see how I have scribbled the other Half; 
and so I shewed her a Parcel of broken Scraps of
Verses, which I had try'd to recollect, and had
written purposely that she might see, and think
me usually employ'd to such idle Purposes. Ay,
said she, so you have; well, I'll give you Two
Sheets more; but let me see how you dispose
of them, either written or blank. Well, thought 

I, I hope still, Argus, to be too hard for thee. 
Now Argus, the Poets say, had an hundred
Eyes, and was set to watch with them all, as
she does. 
She brought me the Paper, and said, Now,
Madam, let me see you write something. I
will, said I; and took the Pen, and wrote,
“I wish Mrs. Jewkes would be so good to me,
as I would be to her, if I had it in my Power.” 
—That's pretty, now, said she; well, I hope
I am; but what then? “Why then (wrote I)
she would do me the Favour to let me know,
what I have done to be made her Prisoner; 
and what she thinks is to become of me.” 
Well, and what then? said she. “Why then,
of Consequence, (scribbled I) she would let
me see her Instructions, that I may know
how far to blame or acquit her.” 
Thus I fool'd on, to shew her my Fondness
for Scribbling; for I had no Expectation of any
Good from her; that so she might suppose I
employ'd myself, as I said, to no better Purpose
at other Times: For she will have it, that I am
upon some Plot, I am so silent, and love so
much to be by myself. —She would have had
me write on a little further. No, said I; you
have not answered me. Why, said she, what
can you doubt, when my Master himself assures
you of his Honour? Ay, said I; but lay your
Hand to your Heart, Mrs. Jewkes, and tell
me, if you yourself believe him. Yes, said she,
to be sure I do. But, said I, what do you call
Honour? —Why, said she, what does he call 

Honour, think you? —Ruin! Shame! Disgrace!
said I, I fear. —Pho, pho! said she; if
you have any Doubt about it, he can best explain
his own Meaning:—I'll send him Word
to come and satisfy you, if you will. —Horrid
Creature! said I, all in a Fright. —Can'st
thou not stab me to the Heart! I'd rather thou
wouldst, than say such another Word! —But
I hope there is no Thought of his coming. 
She had the Wickedness to say, No, no; 
he don't intend to come, as I know of:— 
But if I was he, I would not be long away. 
What means the Woman? said I. —Mean!
said she (turning it off); why I mean, I would
come, if I was he, and put an End to all your
Fears–––––by making you as happy as you wish. 
'Tis out of his Power, said I, to make me happy,
great and rich as he is! but by leaving me innocent,
and giving me Liberty to go to my dear
Father and Mother. 
She went away soon after, and I ended my
Letter, in hopes to have an Opportunity to lay
it in the appointed Place. So I went to her,
and said, I suppose, as it is not dark, I may
take another Turn in the Garden. 'Tis too late,
said she; but if you will go, don't stay; and,
Nan, see, and attend Madam, as she called
me. 
So I went towards the Pond, the Maid following
me, and dropp'd purposely my Hussey:
And when I came near the Tiles, I said, Mrs.
Ann, I have dropp'd my Hussey; be so kind to
look for it: I had it by the Pond-side. She 

went back to look, and I slipp'd the Note between
the Tiles, and cover'd them as quick as
I could with the light Mould, quite unperceived; 
and the Maid finding the Hussey, I took
it, and saunter'd in again, and met Mrs. Jewkes
coming to seek after me. What I wrote was
this: 

‘Reverend Sir,
The want of Opportunity to speak my
Mind to you, I am sure will excuse this
Boldness in a poor Creature that is betray'd
hither, I have Reason to think, for the worst
Purposes. You know something, to be sure,
of my Story, my native Poverty, which I am
not ashamed of, my late Lady's Goodness,
and my Master's Designs upon me. 'Tis true,
he promises Honour, and all that; but the
Honour of the Wicked is Disgrace and Shame
to the Virtuous. And he may think he keeps
his Promises, according to the Notions he may
allow himself to hold; and yet, according to
mine, and every good Body's, basely ruin me. 
‘I am so wretched, and ill-treated by this
Mrs. Jewkes, and she is so ill-principled a
Woman, that as I may soon want the Opportunity
which the happy Hint of this Day
affords to my Hopes, I throw myself at once
upon your Goodness without the least Reserve; 
for I cannot be worse than I am, should that
fail me; which, I dare say, to your Power,
it will not: For I see it, Sir, in your Looks,
I hope it from your Cloth, and I doubt it not 

from your Inclination, in a Case circumstanced
as my unhappy one is. For, Sir, in
helping me out of my present Distress, you
perform all the Acts of Religion in one; and
the highest Mercy and Charity, both to Body
and Soul of a poor Wretch, that, believe me,
Sir, has at present not so much as in Thought,
swerv'd from her Innocence. 
‘Is there not some way to be found out
for my Escape, without Danger to yourself? 
Is there no Gentleman or Lady of Virtue in
this Neighbourhood, to whom I may fly,
only till I can find a way to get to my poor
Father and Mother? Cannot Lady Davers be
made acquainted with my sad Story, by your
conveying a Letter to her? My poor Parents
are so low in the World, they can do nothing
but break their Hearts for me; and that, I
fear, will be the End of it. 
‘My Master promises, if I will be easy, as he
calls it, in my present Lot, he will not come
down without my Consent. Alas! Sir, this
is nothing: For what's the Promise of a Person,
who thinks himself at Liberty to act as
he has done by me? If he comes, it must be
to ruin me; and come, to be sure, he will,
when he thinks he has silenced the Clamours
of my Friends, and lulled me, as no doubt
he hopes, into a fatal Security. 
‘Now, therefore, Sir, is all the Time I have
to work and struggle for the Preservation of
my Honesty. If I stay till he comes, I am
undone. You have a Key to the back Garden-door; 

I have great Hopes from that. 
Study, good Sir, and contrive for me. I will
faithfully keep your Secret. —Yet I should
be loth to have you suffer for me! 
‘I say no more, but commit this to the happy
Tiles, in the Bosom of that Earth, where I
hope my Deliverance will take Root, and
bring forth such Fruit, as may turn to my
inexpressible Joy, and your eternal Reward,
both here and hereafter: As shall ever pray 
‘Your oppressed humble Servant.’ 

