



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, April 20. 
Mr. Lovelace's servant is already return'd with an
answer from his friend Mr. Doleman, who has
taken pains in his inquiries, and is very particular. 
Mr. Lovelace brought me the letter as soon as he had
read it; and as he now knows, that I acquaint you
with every thing that offers, I desired him to let me
send it to you for your perusal. Be pleased to return
it by the first opportunity. You will see by it, that
his friends in town have a notion, that we are actually
married. 

To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
Tuesday Night, April 18. 
Dear Sir,
I am extremely rejoiced to hear, that we shall so
soon have you in town, after so long an absence. 
You will be the more welcome still, if what report
says, be true; which is, that you are actually marry'd
to the fair Lady upon whom we have heard you make
such encomiums. Mrs. Doleman, and my sister,
both wish you joy, if you are, and joy upon your
near prospect, if you are not. I have been in town
for this week past, to get help, if I could, from my
paralytic complaints, and am in a course for them. — 
Which, nevertheless, did not prevent me from making
the desired inquiries. This is the result. 
You may have a first floor, well-furnished, at a
mercer's in Bedford-street, Covent-garden, with
what conveniencies you please for servants: And
these either by the quarter or month. The terms according
to the conveniencies required. 
Mrs. Doleman has seen lodgings in Norfolk-street, 

and others in Cecil-street; but tho' the prospects to the
Thames, and Surry-hills, look inviting from both
these streets, yet I suppose they are too near the
city. 
The owner of those in Norfolk-street would have
half the house go together. It would be too much
for your description therefore: And I suppose, that
you will hardly, when you think fit to declare your
marriage, be in lodgings. 
Those in Cecil-street are neat and convenient. The
owner is a widow of good character; but she insists,
that you take them for a twelvemonth certain. 
You may have good accommodations in Dover-street,
at a widow's, the relict of an officer in the
guards, who dying soon after he had purchased his
commission (to which he had a good title by service,
and which cost him most part of what he had), she
was obliged to let lodgings. 
This may possibly be an objection. But she is very
careful, she says, that she takes no lodgers, but of
figure and reputation. She rents two good houses,
distant from each other, only join'd by a large handsome
passage. The inner-house is the genteelest, and
is very elegantly furnished; but you may have the use
of a very handsome parlour in the outer-house, if you
choose to look into the street. 
A little garden belongs to the inner-house, in which
the old gentlewoman has display'd a true female fancy,
and cramm'd it with vases, flower-plots, and figures,
without number. 
As these lodgings seem'd to me the most likely to
please you, I was more particular in my inquiries about
them. The apartments she has to let are in the inner-house: 
They are a dining-room, two neat parlours,
a withdrawing-room, two or three handsome bed-chambers
(one with a pretty light closet in it, which
looks into the little garden); all furnish'd in taste. 
A dignify'd clergyman, his wife, and maiden-daughter, 

were the last who lived in them. They
have but lately quitted them, on his being presented
to a considerable church-preferment in Ireland. The
gentlewoman says, that he took the lodgings but for
three months certain; but liked them and her usage
so well, that he continued in them two years; and
left them with regret, tho' on so good an account. 
She bragg'd, that this was the way of all the lodgers
she ever had, who staid with her four times as long
as they at first intended. 
I had some knowlege of the colonel, who was always
looked upon as a man of honour. His relict I
never saw before. I think she has a masculine air,
and is a little forbidding at first: But when I saw her
behaviour to two agreeable maiden gentlewomen, her
husband's nieces, whom, for that reason, she calls
doubly hers, and heard their praises of her, I could
impute her very bulk to good humour; since we seldom
see your four peevish people plump. She lives
very reputably, and is, as I find, aforehand in the
world. 
If these, or any other of the lodgings I have mentioned,
be not altogether to your Lady's mind, she
may continue in them the less while, and choose
others for herself. 
The widow consents, that you should take them
for a month only, and what of them you please: The
terms, she says, she will not fall out upon, when she
knows what your Lady expects, and what her servants
are to do, or yours will undertake; for she observed,
that servants are generally worse to deal with, than
their masters or mistresses. 
The Lady may board or not, as she pleases. 
As we suppose you marry'd, but that you have
reason, from family-differences, to keep it private for
the present, I thought it not amiss to hint as much to
the widow (but as uncertainty, however), and asked
her, if she could, in that case, accommodate you and 

your servants, as well as the lady and hers? She said,
she could; and wish'd; by all means, it were to be
so; since the circumstance of a person's being single,
if not as well recommended as this lady, was one of
her usual exceptions. 
If none of these lodgings please, you need not doubt
very handsome ones in or near Hanover-Square, Soho-Square,
Golden-Square, or in some of the new streets
about Grosvenor-Square. And Mrs. Doleman, her
sister, and myself, most cordially join to offer to your
good lady the best accommodations we can make for
her at Uxbridge (and also for you, if you are the happy
man we wish you to be), till she fits herself more
to her mind. 
Let me add, that the lodgings at the Mercer's,
those in Cecil-street, those at the widow's in Dover-street,
any of them, may be enter'd upon at a day's
warning. 
I am, my dear Sir,
Your sincere and affectionate friend and servant,
Tho. Doleman. 
You will easily guess, my dear, when you have
read the letter, which lodgings I made choice of. But
first, to try him, as in so material a point I thought I
could not be too circumspect, I seemed to prefer those
in Norfolk-street, for the very reason the writer gives
why he thought I would not; that is to say, for its
neighbourhood to a city so well-govern'd as London
is said to be. Nor should I have disliked a lodging in
the heart of it, having heard but indifferent accounts
of the liberties sometimes taken at the other end of
the town. —Then seeming to incline to the lodgings
in Cecil-street—Then to the Mercer's. But he made
no visible preference: And when I asked his opinion
of the widow-gentlewoman's, he said, He thought
these the most to my taste and convenience: But as he
hoped, that I would think lodgings necessary but for a 

very little while, he knew not which to give his vote
for. 
I then fixed upon the widow's; and he has written
accordingly to Mr. Doleman, making my compliments
to his lady and sister, for their kind offer. 
I am to have the dining-room, the bedchamber,
with the light closet (of which, if I stay any time at
the widow's, I shall make great use), and a servant's
room; and we propose to set out on Saturday morning. 
As for a maid-servant, poor Hannah's illness is
a great disappointment to me: But, as he says, I can
make the widow satisfaction for one of hers, till I can
get one to my mind. And you know, I want not
much attendance. 
* *
Mr. Lovelace has just now, of his own accord,
given me five guineas for poor Hannah. I send them
inclosed. Be so good as to cause them to be convey'd
to her; and to let her know from whom they came. 
He has obliged me much by this little mark of his
considerateness. Indeed I have the better opinion of
him ever since he proposed her return to me. 
* *
I have just now another instance of his considerateness. 
He came to me, and said, that, on second
thoughts, he could not bear, that I should go up to
town without some attendant, were it but for the
look of the thing to the widow and her nieces, who
according to his friend's account, lived so genteelly; 
and especially as I required him to leave me
soon after I arrived there; and so would be left alone
among strangers. He therefore thought, that I might
engage Mrs. Sorlings to lend me one of her two
maids, or to let one of her daughters go up with me
and stay till I were provided. And if the latter, the
young gentlewoman, no doubt, would be glad of so
good an opportunity to see a little of the curiosities of 

the town, and would be a proper attendant to me on
the same occasions. 
I told him, as I had done before, that the servants,
and the two young gentlewomen, were so equally
useful in their way (and servants in a busy farm were so
little to be spared), that I should be loth to take them
off of their laudable employments. Nor should I
think much of diversions for one while; and so the
less want an attendant out of doors. 
And now, my dear, lest any thing should happen,
in so variable a situation as mine, to overcloud my
prospects (which at present are more promising than
ever yet they have been since I quitted Harlowe-Place),
I will snatch the opportunity to subscribe
myself 
Your not unhopeing,
and ever-obliged friend and servant,
Cl. Harlowe. 