

SIR,
I return the Manuscript of Pamela by
the Bearer, which I have read with a great deal
of Pleasure. It is written with that Spirit of
Truth and agreeable Simplicity, which, tho' much
wanted, is seldom found in those Pieces which
are calculated for the Entertainment and Instruction
of the Publick. It carries Conviction in
every Part of it; and the Incidents are so natural
and interesting, that I have gone hand-in-hand, and
sympathiz'd with the pretty Heroine in all her
Sufferings, and been extremely anxious for her
Safety, under the Apprehensions of the bad Consequences
which I expected, every Page, would
ensue from the laudable Resistance she made. I
have interested myself in all her Schemes of Escape; 
been alternately pleas'd and angry with her in her
Restraint; pleas'd with the little Machinations and
Contrivances she set on foot for her Release, and
angry for suffering her Fears to defeat them; always
lamenting, with a most sensible Concern, the Mifcarriages
of her Hopes and Projects. In short, the
whole is so affecting, that there is no reading it
without uncommon Concern and Emotion. Thus
far only as to the Entertainment it gives. 
As to Instruction and Morality, the Piece is full
of both. It shews Virtue in the strongest Light,
and renders the Practice of it amiable and lovely. 

The beautiful Sufferer keeps it ever in her View,
without the least Ostentation, or Pride; she has it
so strongly implanted in her, that thro' the whole
Course of her Sufferings, she does not so much as
hesitate once, whether she shall sacrifice it to Liberty
and Ambition, or not; but, as if there were
no other way to free and save herself, carries on a
determin'd Purpose to persevere in her Innocence,
and wade with it throughout all Difficulties and
Temptations, or perish under them. It is an astonishing
Matter, and well worth our most serious Consideration,
that a young beautiful Girl, in the low
Scene of Life and Circumstance in which Fortune
placed her, without the Advantage of a Friend capable
to relieve and protect her, or any other Education
than what occurr'd to her from her own
Observation and little Reading, in the Course of her
Attendance on her excellent Mistress and Benefactress,
could, after having a Taste of Ease and Plenty in a
higher Sphere of Life than what she was born and
first brought up in, resolve to return to her primitive
Poverty, rather than give up her Innocence. I
say, it is surprizing, that a young Person, so circumstanced,
could, in Contempt of proffer'd Grandeur
on the one side, and in Defiance of Penury on the
other, so happily and prudently conduct herself thro'
such a Series of Perplexities and Troubles, and withstand
the alluring Baits, and almost irresistible Offers
of a fine Gentleman, so universally admired and
esteemed, for the Agreeableness of his Person and
good Qualities, among all his Acquaintance; defeat
all his Measures with so much Address, and oblige
him, at last, to give over his vain Pursuit, and sacrifice
his Pride and Ambition to Virtue, and become
the Protector of that Innocence which he so long
and so indefatigably labour'd to supplant: And all
this without ever having entertain'd the least previous 

Design or Thought for that Purpose: No Art
used to inflame him, no Coquetry practised to tempt
or mtice him, and no Prudery or Affectation to
tamper with his Passions; but, on the contrary, artless
and unpractised in the Wiles of the World, all
her Endeavours, and even all her Wishes, tended
only to render herself as un-amiable as she could in
his Eyes: Tho' at the same time she is so far from
having any Aversion to his Person, that she seems
rather prepossess'd in his Favour, and admires his
Excellencies, whilst she condemns his Passion for
her. A glorious Instance of Self-denial! Thus her
very Repulses became Attractions: The more she
resisted, the more she charm'd; and the very Means
she used to guard her Virtue, the more indanger'd it,
by inflaming his Passions: Till, at last, by Perseverance,
and a brave and resolute Defence, the Besieged
not only obtain'd a glorious Victory over the
Besieger, but took him Prisoner too. 
I am charmed with the beautiful Reflections she
makes in the Course of her Distresses; her Soliloquies
and little Reasonings with herself, are exceeding
pretty and entertaining: She pours out all her Soul
in them before her Parents without Disguise; so that
one may judge of, nay, almost see, the inmost Recesses
of her Mind. A pure clear Fountain of
Truth and Innocence, a Magazine of Virtue and
unblemish'd Thoughts! 
I can't conceive why you should hesitate a Moment
as to the Publication of this very natural and
uncommon Piece. I could wish to see it out in
its own native Simplicity, which will affect and
please the Reader beyond all the Strokes of Oratory
in the World; for those will but spoil it: and,
should you permit such a murdering Hand to be
laid upon it, to gloss and tinge it over with superfluous
and needless Decorations, which, like too 

much Drapery in Sculpture and Statuary, will but
incumber it; it may disguise the Facts, marr the Reflections,
and unnaturalize the Incidents, so as to
be lost in a Multiplicity of fine idle Words and
Phrases, and reduce our Sterling Substance into an
empty Shadow, or rather frenchify our English Solidity
into Froth and Whip-syllabub. No; let us
have Pamela as Pamela wrote it; in her own Words,
without Amputation, or Addition. Produce her to
us in her neat Country Apparel, such as she appear'd
in, on her intended Departure to her Parents; for
such best becomes her Innocence and beautiful
Simplicity. Such a Dress will best edify and entertain. 
The flowing Robes of Oratory may indeed
amuse and amaze, but will never strike the Mind
with solid Attention. 
In short, Sir, a Piece of this Kind is much wanted
in the World, which is but too much, as well
as too early debauched by pernicious Novels. I
know nothing Entertaining of that Kind that one
might venture to recommend to the Perusal (much
less the Imitation) of the Youth of either Sex: All
that I have hitherto read, tends only to corrupt their
Principles, mislead their Judgments, and initiate them
into Gallantry and loose Pleasures. 
Publish then, this good, this edifying and instructive
little Piece for their Sakes. The Honour of
Pamela's Sex demands Pamela at your Hands, to
shew the World an Heroine, almost beyond Example,
in an unusual Scene of Life, whom no Temptations,
or Sufferings, could subdue. It is a fine, and
glorious Original, for the Fair to copy out and imitate. 
Our own Sex, too, require it of you, to free
us, in some measure, from the Imputation of being
incapable of the Impressions of Virtue and Honour; 
and to shew the Ladies, that we are not inflexible
while they are so. 

In short, the Cause of Virtue, calls for the Publication
of such a Piece as this. Oblige then, Sir,
the concurrent Voices of both Sexes, and give us
Pamela for the Benefit of Mankind: And as I believe
its Excellencies cannot be long unknown to
the World, and that there will not be a Family without
it; so I make no Doubt but every Family that
has it, will be much improv'd and better'd by it. 
T will form the tender Minds of Youth for the
Reception and Practice of Virtue and Honour; confirm
and establish those of maturer Years on good and
steady Principles; reclaim the Vicious, and mend
the Age in general; insomuch that as I doubt not
Pamela will become the bright Example and Imitation
of all the fashionable young Ladies of Great
Britain; so the truly generous Benefactor and Rewarder
of her exemplary Virtue, will be no less admired
and imitated among the Eeau Monde of out
own Sex. I am, 
Your affectionate Friend, &c. 
