


Lady G. To Lady Grandison. 


Thursday, April 12. 
I am very well—What's the matter with the women! 
—I will write! —Fifteen days controul and
caudle—Why surely!— 
They are impertinent, my dear; and would take
my pen and ink from me!— 
You do well, Harriet, to throw upon me your self-condemning
task. 
How conscious you are, when you tell me, before
you know my opinion of the contents of Lucy's Letter,
that you will not subscribe implicitly to my determination! 
—But I will not spare you. In my condemnation
of them, read your own. I have written
my answer, and shall inclose it; and no more at present
trouble myself about them. 
But here, I, Charlotte G. who married with indifference 

the poor Lord G.; who made the honest
man, whenever I pleased, foam, fume, fret, and execrate
the hour that he first beheld my face, now
stand forth, an example of true conjugal felicity, and
an encouragement for girls who venture into the married
state, without that prodigious quantity of violent
passion, which some hare-brained creatures think an
essential of Love. 
You, my dear, lest us tolerably happy. But now
we are almost in-tolerably so. I had begun to recover
my spirits, depressed, as they had been, for near a
month before, on finding myself, like any common
woman, confined to my chamber, while every other
mouth sang O be joyful; and one was preparing,
another had set out, and half a score more were actually
got to dear Grandison-hall. I bit my lip, and
raved at the wretch to whom I attributed my durance:
When, yesterday (after a series indeed of the most
bliging and most grateful behaviour, that a man ever
expressed for a Present made him, which he holds invaluable)
he entered my chamber; and surprised me,
as I did him (for I intended that he should know
nothing of the matter, nor that I would ever be so
condescending); surprised me, as how? Ah, Harriet! 
In an act that confessed the mother, the whole mother! 
—Little Harriet at my breast; or, at my neck, I
believe I should say—should I not? 
The nurse, the nursery-maids, knowing that I
would not for the world have been so caught by my
nimble Lord (for he is in twenty places in a minute)
were more affrighted than Diana's nymphs, when the
goddess was surprised by Acteon; and each, instead
of surrounding me in order to hide my blushes, was
for running a different way; not so much as attempting
to relieve me from the Brat. 
I was ready to let the little Leech drop from my
arms—O wretch! screamed I—Begone!—begone! 
Whence the boldness of this intrusion? 

Never was man in a greater rapture. For Lady
Gertrude had taught him to wish that a mother would
be a mother: He threw himself at my feet, clasping
me and the little varlet together in his arms. Brute!
said I, will you smother my Harriet—I was halfashamed
of my tenderness—Dear-est, dear-est, dear-est
Lady G. —Shaking his head, between every dear and
est, every muscle of his face working; how you transport
me! —Never, never, never, saw I so delightful
a sight! Let me, let me, let me (every emphatic
word repeated three times at least) behold again the
dear sight. Let me see you clasp the precious gift,
our Harriet's Harriet too, to that lovely bosom—The
wretch (trembling however) pulled aside my handkerchief. 
I try'd to scold; but was forced to press the
little thing to me, to supply the place of the hand-kerchief— 
Do you think, I could not have killed
him? —To be sure, I was not half angry enough. 
I knew not what I did, you may well think—for I
bowed my face on the smiling infant, who crowed to
the pressure of my lip. 
Begone, Lord G. said I—See! see! how shall I
hold the little Marmouset, if you devour first one of
my hands, then the other? 
He arose, took the little thing from me, kissed its
forehead, its cheeks, its lips, its little pudsey hands,
first one, then the other; gave it again to my arms; 
took it again; and again resigned it to me. 
Take away the pug, said I, to the attendants— 
Take it away, while any of it is left—They rescued
the still smiling babe, and run away with it. 
My Lord then again threw himself at my feet— 
Pardon, pardon me, dearest creature, said he, that I
took amiss any thing you ever said or did—You that
could make me such rich amends—O let not those
charming, charming spirits ever subside, which for
a fortnight together, till yesterday, I missed. I loved
you too well, proceeded he, to take any usage that was 

not quite what I wished it, lightly. But for some
time past I have seen that it was all owing to a vivacity,
that now, in every instance of it, delights my
soul. You never, never, had malice or ill-hature in
what I called your petulance. You bore with mine. 
You smiled at me: Henceforth, every thing you say,
every thing you do, will I take for a favour. O my
Charlotte! Never, never more shall it be in your
power to make me so far forget myself, as to be angry! 
My dear Lord G.! —I had like to have said—I
believe I did say—Then will you ruin, absolutely
ruin, me! —What shall I do—for my Roguery?— 
Never, never part with what you call so!— 
Impossible, my Lord, to retain it, if it lose its
wonted power over you. I shall have a new lesson to
learn. O my Lord! why began you not this course
before Harriet and Caroline set out for Grandisonhall? 
I might by a closer observation of their behaviour,
have made myself mistress of lessons that would
have far more delightfully supplied the old ones, than
can be done without their examples. But, my Lord,
the time will soon come, when we shall be allowed to
fly to that benefit at Grandison-hall. Our little Harriet
shall go with us: The infant is the cement between
us; and we will for the future be every day
more worthy of that, and of each other. 
My Lord hurried from me in speechless rapture; 
His handkerchief at his eyes—Nurse, said I, bring
me again our precious charge. I will be all the mother. 
I clasped it to my bosom. What shall I do, my
little Harriet! Thy father, sweet one! has run away
with my Roguery— 
What a scene is here! —I will not read it over. If
it requires a blush, do you, my dear, blush for me:
I am hardened—And shall not perhaps, were I to reperuse
it, my maternity so kindly acknowleged, so
generously accepted, by my Lord G. be able to blush
for myself. 

But, that I may seem only to have changed the object,
not wholly to have parted with my levity, read
the inclosed here, in answer to the appeal of the young
people; directed thus: 


Lady G. To Miss Lucy Selby And the rest of the Girls at Selby-house,
Greeting. 
You appeal to Harriet, and revoke your appeal:
You appeal to me, and withdraw it in the same
Letter—A parcel of chits! You know not what you
would have; what you would be; and hardly what
you are: You can have the sauciness in more places
than one, to reflect upon me your judge. But are
you not convinced by the solid arguments of Mrs. Shirley?
and her Mrs. Eggleton? If you are not, what
strange creatures are girls from sixteen to twenty-two! 
Don't boys read romances as well as girls? Yet, in
these latter days, do the glaring absurdities influence
them so much in Love matters, or last so long? 
Foolish things! would you give a preference against
yourselves to the other Sex? 
Harriet, I think, was a romantic girl, when she
made her declarations of one man only, or no one,
for a husband. I did let her know my mind at the
time by hints: But had my brother actually married
Clementina; not only I, but her grandmother Shirley,
and aunt Selby, and uncle too (odd soul as he is in
some things) would have spoken out, in favour of the
young Earl of D. And had it not been with success,
after a proper time had passed, I, for my part, would
have set her down as a very silly girl; inferior, in this
respect, to you, Lucy, and to twenty more I could
name: For how few of us are there, who have their
first Loves? And indeed how few first Loves are fit
to be encouraged? You know my thoughts, Lucy, 

of a beginning Love, in a young bosom (a) —A very,
very silly and childish affair, believe me. 
Let me enumerate a few chances that may render
a first Love impracticable. 
A young woman may fix her affections on a man,
who may prove perfidious—On a man, who may be
engaged to another woman; as had like to have been
my brother's case—On a man who may be superior
to her in degree or fortune; or who may be greatly
inferior to her in both. —If Love be not a voluntary
passion, why not upon a hostler, a groom, a coachman,
a footman—A grenadier, a trooper, a footsoldier? 
—She may be in Mrs. Eggleton's case: Her
Lover may be taken from her by death. In either,
or any, of these cases, what is to be done? Must a
woman sit down, cry herself blind, and become useless
to the principal end of her being, as to this life,
and to all family connexions, when, probably, she has
not lived one third of her time? —Silly creatures!—to
maintain these nonsenses at their own expence, in favour
of a passion that is generally confined to the
days of girlhood; and which they themselves would
laugh at in a woman after she was arrived at honest
thirty, or at years of discretion—Thus narrowing
their own use and consequence. —I, for my part, am,
and ever will be, a friend of my Sex. 
But, hark ye, girls—Let me ask you—Do you find
many of these constant nymphs, when they have had
their foolish way given them, and they have buried
the honest man of whom they were once so dotingly
fond, refuse to marry again? —Do they wish, like
the wives of some Pagan wretches, to be thrown into
the funeral pile, with the dead bodies of their Lords? 
—No! They have had their whimsey out. Their
Fit of constancy is over; and, quiet good souls as
they are by that time become, they go on without
Rantipoling, in the ordinary course of reasonable
creatures. 

Not but Harriet was in earnest: I am sure she
was. She believed, she certainly believed, Herself. 
And were it given to us women always to be in one
mind, she would have made all her friends, the good
Mrs. Shirley at the head of us, despair of succeeding
with her in our endeavours to induce her to change
it. But Harriet, with all her wisdom, could not
know what Time would have done for her. Time is
the pacifier of every woe, the qualifier of every disappointment
—Pity for the man [the Earl of D. suppose
—He would have thought it worth his while to
feign dying for her]; the Entreaty of her friends:— 
You see what arguments her excellent grandmamma
could have produced—Pho, pho, never fear but Harriet
would have married before my Brother and Clementina
had seen the face of their second boy—No girls
shall he have, for fear they should be Romancers. 
And, do you think, that Clementina and the Count
of Belvedere, a year or two hence—I have no fear of
the matter; if they do not teaze, torment, oppose
her. If they do—Why then, I will not be answerable
for their success. For, with excellences that
none but she and Harriet among women ever boasted,
there is a glorious perverseness, which they miscall
constancy and perseverance, in the mind of that noble
Lady (and indeed in the minds of most of us) that
will probably, as it has already done, carry her thro'
all opposition—In short, no more teazing, tormenting
from Friends, no more heroics from Girl—Is not
opposition, is not resistance, the very soul and essence
of all sorts of heroism? —My life therefore for Clementina's,
admirable creature as she undoubtedly is— 
Leave her sea-room, leave her land-room, and let her
have time to consider; and she will be a Bride. 
Did I ever mention to you a trick that an honest
guardian put upon his ward? Many a one have you
heard of from dishonest ones. This briefly was it. 
The girl was of the heroic stamp; as good a girl 

as an heroic girl could well be. A match was proposed
for her, much more considerable than she could have
expected, as to fortune; and as to the man's person
and qualities of mind, absolutely unexceptionable— 
Young, handsome, gallant, and most ardently in
Love with her: But, impolitic! he had let her know
as much, before he had made himself sure of the shadow
of a return, or acceptance. Her guardian, from
pure Love of his ward, and a sense of the advantageousness
of the offer, heartily espoused the interests of
the young gentleman. This was another unhappiness
to him. She gave him an absolute denial: Nor
vouchsafed she to assign a reason for it; having, indeed,
no other man either in her head or heart. 
Her guardian was a man who knew the world,
and a little of the Sex: He saw that Miss was in the
very meridian of her heroics; and that the grievance
most probably was, that there was no likelihood of
difficulty or opposition. He took another course. He
acquainted the young Lady, that he had altered his
mind: That he had objections to the address of Sir
Arthur Poinings (the young gentleman's name) and
declared, that he never would give his consent. He
desired that she would by no means see him, or receive
Letters from him; and he talked of carrying
her down to his country-seat in a full town-season; 
[The girl had a taste for pleasure—What girl has
not?] not doubting, he said, that the young Baronet
would persecute her with his addresses while she remained
in London. He then actually forbid Sir Arthur
his house; and, more than once, read Miss a Lecture
on the Authority of a guardian, and the Duty of
a ward. Words that naturally incite young girls to
rebellion. 
Sir Arthur found means to write to the minx,
as if unknown to her guardian. Darts, flames, and
distresses, were suggested in his Letter. The girl began
to relent; the guardian to suspect: He renewed 

his prohibition; cunning creature! The affair now
wore a face of difficulty. She answered the young
gentleman's Letters. It became a regular Loveaffair
of the heroic kind. And, at last—What at
last! —Why, the young Lady, attended only by her
faithful Delia, who had been assistant to the Lovers
in their correspondence, ran away from an inexorable
guardian, to Sir Arthur; married him; and, in a few
days, writing an humble Letter for her cloaths, acknowledged
rashness, which she laid at the door of
Love, and so-forth. The guardian desired a meeting
with the Love-yers; now no more Love-yers, but
man and wife. They met, with trembling on her side,
with pretended apprehension on Sir Arthur's, for having
disobliged so good a guardian. The guardian was
in high good-humour. He forgave them both, at the
first word, and surrendered up his trust with pleasure. 
The girl was surprized at his unexpected goodness; 
and had she not been actually nailed down by the Solemnity,
would very probably have again resumed her
heroics. 
Well, but I am charmed with Mrs. Shirley's
Eggleton, as well as with her account of herself in her
heroic days. Little did I think that she ever was
girl enough to be infected: But, as she says, romances
were the fashionable reading of her youthful
years. 
Tell aunt Selby that I am not an enemy to old
maids; but only to those ill qualities which I should
equally dislike in old or in young Any-bodies. I love
Lady Gertrude, and even aunt Eleanor, for those qualities
that are love-able in them. But you see that your
Nancy, the mild, good-natured Nancy, could not forbear
laughing at the idea of the young-old Penelope
Arby: Yet knows she not; says the malicious Lucy,
what may be her own case. But I have appealed for
you; and to whom? To Lady Gertrude. I was
writing to her on a particular occasion, when your 

pacquet was brought me; and, in order to enliven my
subject, transcribed three lines of Lucy's query upon
defending the single state. She was but at Ensield,
and returned me the following by the same messenger; 
the other part of my Letter requiring an immediate
answer. 


“Your question, my dearest niece, is whimsically
asked: You tell me that a whole room-full of
young country ladies wait only the success of an
appeal you have referred to me, to know whether
they shall out of hand dispose of themselves to recruiting
officers, mountebanks, and fox-hunters; 
or venture to live on with the melancholy title of
old maids, in an unsupported, undefended state. 
“One or two queries to be put, proceeds the Sage,
are, Whether the worthy matches you have mentioned,
or any unsuitable matches whatsoever,
would be a support and defence? Whether the woman
who makes a rash and improper choice, does
not throw herself out of that protection and defence
which every-one may depend upon in the state of
life marked out to them by Providence? And whether
the single state is not thus marked out to the
woman who never has it fitly in her choice to
change it? 
“I, my dear, who am an old maid, must not write
partially on that side of the question. In general,
I will fairly own, that I think a woman is most
likely to find her proper happiness in the married
state. May you, my dear niece, experience it every
day more and more! –––But there are surely many
exceptions: Women of large and independent
fortunes, who have the hearts and understanding
to use them as they ought, are often more beneficial
to the world, than they would have been had
they bestowed them on such men as look for fortune
only. Women who have by their numerous
relations many connexions in the world, need not 

seek out of their own alliances for protection and
defence. Ill health, peculiarity of temper or sentiments,
unhappiness of situation, of person, afford
often such reasons, as make it a virtue to refuse
what it would otherwise be right to accept. 
“But why do I write seriously to such a lively
creature? Only, my dear”— 

But, girls, I will give you no more of Lady Gertrude. 
I have not done with you myself yet. 
Much to the same purpose, I remember, as Mrs.
Shirley's, were the expostulations of Lady D. in one
of her Letters to Harriet; who only answered her, (I
also remember) like a girl. What could she say? 

“You, my Harriet,” (wrote that Lady,) “are
pious, dutiful, benevolent—Cannot you, if you
are unable to entertain, for the man who now with
so much ardour addresses you, were you married to
him, the passion called Love, regard him as Gratitude
would oblige you to prefer any other man who
is assiduous to do you service or pleasure? Cannot
you shew him as much good-will, as you could
any other man, whom it was in your power to make
happy? Would you esteem him less than a person
absolutely a stranger to you? The exertion of your
native benevolence, of your natural obligingness,
of your common gratitude, of your pity, is all that
is asked of you. You have no expectation of the
only man, who is dearer to you than he. This exertion
will make my Lord happy; and if you retain
that delight, which you have hitherto taken, in
promoting the happiness of others who are not undeserving,
yourself not unhappy.” 

You have now before you, girls, the opinion of
Mrs. Shirley, and the Countess of D. on the case you
put. They both sit enthroned on the serene hill of
wisdom, which hardly one in fifty of their Sex attains. 
From thence they look down with pity, and with
beckoning finger, to the crowds below them, who 

with aching eyes, and despairing hearts, emulate
their starry heights; but in too faintly attempting to
gain the ascent, tumble down, some (shameful!) headover-heels,
immersed in the miry puddles of sense; 
and others taking a supposed more easy, tho' visibly
round-about way, are misled by mazy paths into
dreary desarts, till they lose even the distant sight of
the sacred hill. 
There, chits, I end romantically, figuratively at
least, in compliment to your fanciful tastes. And
thus much as to you, girls, young Lady-expectants,
whimsicals, and so forth, from 
Your Charlotte G.
Friday, Saturday, April 13, 14. 
My women are so impertinent, and
my Marmouset is so voracious,
that I have been forced to take
two days for what once I could
have performed in little more
than two hours. 
