


Lady G. To Miss Selby. 


Wednesday, May 9. 
I am afraid your brother James will terrify you all. 
Surprising;–––I am very angry with him; for, however
slight he might make of what I have to tell you, I
know, that none of you besides will. I therefore
dispatch this by a man and horse, on purpose to set
your hearts at ease. –––The wretch left her in a fainting
fit. Had the dear creature ever any of these fits
before? But why do I ask? This is easily accounted
for: She was over-fatigued with a walk. Against
warning, against threatenings, she and Lady Clementina
had taken a longer walk than ever they did 

before, quite to the end of the park, to view some alterations
which Sir Charles was making there. They
had forgotten that they had the same length to walk
back again. Half-way on their return, tired, and
each accusing herself, and apologizing to the other,
they were surprised by a sudden shower of rain; a violent
one; a thunder-shower: No shelter: They
were forced to run for it towards a distant tree; 
which, when they approached, they found wet thro'; 
as they both were. So they made the best of their
way to the house; were seen at a little distance, making
the appearance of frighted hares. The servants
ran to them with clokes, which, thrown over their
wet cloaths, helped to load them. As Harriet entered
the hall-door, which leads into the garden, she
was surprised with the sight of Sir Charles, entering
at the other. She expected him not till Friday or
Saturday. Her complexion changed: She sighed; 
sobbed: Her cheeks, her lips turned pale: Down she
was sinking. My Brother was terrified; but he
caught her in his arms, and saved her fall. 
Lady L. and I were together, indulging ourselves
with our little nurseries, who were crowing at each
other; I singing to both [By the way they are surprising
infants] when word was brought, that my
Brother was come, and Lady Grandison was dying. 
How were we both terrified! We, in our fright,
each popt her pug into the arms of the other, by way
of ridding our hands of our own; and the women
being not at hand, threw the smiling brats into one
cradle; and down hurried we to our Harriet. 
In the midst of all this bustle, this wise Brother of
yours, Lucy, slipt away without taking leave of us. 
What tho' his hour was fixed, and his post-chaise
waiting, could he not have staid one half hour? O
these inconsiderate, hare-brained–––Don't be angry,
Lucy, he has vexed us for you. I should otherwise
have left to herself the account of her indisposition 

and recovery. She has got cold: So has her Sister-excellence,
as my Brother justly calls her. Is it to
be wondered at? –––She was feverish all day yesterday; 
but made slight of it; and would have come down
to dinner; but we would not permit her to leave her
chamber. 
How was Lady Clementina affected! She laid all
at her own door: And last night, Harriet being still
more feverish, we all talked ourselves into a thousand
panics. Lady Clementina was not to be pacified. 
To-day, she is, in a manner, quite well; and we
are all joy upon it. But she shall never again do the
honours of the Park to Lady Clementina. Trust me
for that, grandmamma Shirley; and expect a Letter
from the dear creature herself by the post. Adieu,
adieu, Lucy, every body, in a violent hurry subscribes 
Your
Charlotte G. 
P. S. My hurry is owing only to the demands of
my Marmouset upon me. To nothing else,
upon my honour! For we are all safe, serene,
and so-forth. 

