



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sat. Afternoon. 
The expected conference is over: But my difficulties
are encreased. This, as my Mother was
pleased to tell me, being the last persuasory effort that
is to be attempted, I will be as particular in the account
of it as my head and my heart will allow me
to be. 
I have made, said she, as she entered my room, a
short as well as early dinner, on purpose to confer
with you: And I do assure you, that it will be the
last conference I shall either be permitted or inclined
to hold with you on the subject, if you should prove
as refractory as it is imagined you will prove by some,
who are of opinion, that I have not the weight with
you which my indulgence deserves. But I hope you
will convince as well them as me of the contrary. 
Your Father both dines and sups at your Uncle's,
on purpose to give us this opportunity; and according
to the report I shall make on his return (which I have
promised shall be a very faithful one) he will take his
measures with you. 
I was offering to speak—Hear, Clarissa, what I 

have to tell you, said she, before you speak, unless
what you have to say will signify to me your compliance
—Say—Will it? —If it will, you may speak. 
I was silent. 
She looked with concern and anger upon me—No
compliance, I find! —Such a dutiful young creature
hitherto! —Will you not, can you not, speak as I
would have you speak? —Then [rejecting me as it
were with her hand] continue silent. —I, no more
than your Father, will bear your avowed contradiction. 
She paused, with a look of expectation, as if she
waited for my consenting answer. 
I was still silent; looking down; the tears in my
eyes. 
O thou determined girl! —But say—Speak out— 
Are you resolved to stand in opposition to us all, in a
point our hearts are set upon? 
May I, Madam, be permitted to expostulate?— 
To what purpose expostulate with me, Clarissa? 
Your Father is determined. Have I not told you
there is no receding; that the honour as well as the
interest of the family is concerned? Be ingenuous: 
You used to be so, even occasionally against yourself: 
—Who at the long-run must submit—all of us to
you; or you to all of us? —If you intend to yield at
last if you find you cannot conquer, yield now, and
with a grace—for yield you must, or be none of our
child. 
I wept. I knew not what to say; or rather how
to express what I had to say. 
Take notice, that there are flaws in your Grandfather's
Will: Not a shilling of that Estate will be
yours, if you do not yield. Your Grandfather left it
to you, as a reward of your duty to him and to us— 
You will justly forfeit it, if— 
Permit me, good Madam, to say, that, if it were
unjustly bequeathed me, I ought not to wish to have 

it. But I hope Mr. Solmes will be apprised of these
flaws. 
This is very pertly said, Clarissa: But reflect, that
the forfeiture of that Estate thro' your opposition will
be attended with the total loss of your Father's favour: 
And then how destitute must you be; how
unable to support yourself; and how many benevolent
designs and good actions must you give up! 
I must accommodate myself, Madam, in the latter
case, to my circumstances: Much only is required
where much is given. It becomes me to be thankful
for what I have had. I have reason to bless You,
Madam, and my good Mrs. Norton, for bringing
me up to be satisfied with little; with much less,
I will venture to say, than my Father's indulgence
annually confers upon me. —And then I thought of
the old Roman and his Lentils. 
What perverseness! said my Mother. —But if you
depend upon the favour of either or both your Uncles,
vain will be that dependence: They will give you
up, I do assure you, if your Father does, and absolutely
renounce you. 
I am sorry, Madam, that I have had so little merit
as to have made no deeper impressions of favour for
me in their hearts: But I will love and honour them
as long as I live. 
All this, Clarissa, makes your prepossession in a
certain man's favour the more evident. Indeed your
Brother and Sister cannot go any-whither, but they
hear of these prepossessions. 
It is a great grief to me, Madam, to be made the
subject of the public talk: But I hope you will have
the goodness to excuse me for observing, that the authors
of my disgrace within-doors, the talkers of my
prepossession without, and the reporters of it from
abroad, and originally the same persons. 
She severely chid me for this. 
I received her rebukes in silence. 

You are sullen, Clarissa: I see you are sullen. — 
And she walked about the room in anger. Then
turning to me—You can bear the imputation of sullenness
I see! —You have no concern to clear yourself
of it. I was afraid of telling you all I was enjoined
to tell you, in case you were to be unpersuadeable: 
But I find that I had a greater opinion of your
delicacy, of your gentleness, than I needed to have— 
It cannot discompose so steady, so inflexible a young
creature, to be told, as I now tell you, that the Settlements
are actually drawn; and that you will be
called down in a very few days to hear them read,
and to sign them: For it is impossible, if your heart
be free, that you can make the least objection to
them; except it will be an objection with you, that
they are so much in your favour, and in the favour
of all our family. 
I was speechless, absolutely speechless. Altho' my
heart was ready to burst, yet could I neither weep nor
speak. 
I am sorry, said she, for your averseness to this
match [Match she was pleased to call it!]: But
there is no help. The honour and interest of the
family, as your Aunt has told you, and as I have
told you, are concerned; and you must comply. 
I was still speechless. 
She folded the warm Statue, as she was pleased to
call me, in her arms; and entreated me, for Heaven's
sake, and for her sake, to comply. 
Speech and Tears were lent me at the same time. — 
You have given me Life, Madam, said I, clasping
my uplifted hands together, and falling on one knee; 
a happy one, till now, has your goodness, and my
Papa's, made it! O do not, do not, make all the
remainder of it miserable! 
Your Father, replied she, is resolved not to see
you, till he sees you as obedient a child as you used
to be. You have never been put to a test till now, 

that deserved to be called a test. This is, This must
be, my last effort with you. Give me hope, my dear
child: My peace is concerned: I will compound with
you but for hope: And yet your Father will not be
satisfied without an implicit, and even a chearful obedience
—Give me but hope, my child! 
To give you hope, my dearest, my most indulgent
Mamma, is to give you every-thing. Can I be honest,
if I give a hope that I cannot confirm? 
She was very angry. She again called me perverse: 
She upbraided me with regarding only my own prepossessions,
and respecting not either her peace of
mind, or my own duty: —‘It is a grating thing, said
she, for the parents of a child, who delighted in her
in all the time of her helpless infancy, and throughout
every stage of her childhood, and in every part
of her education to womanhood, because of the promises
she gave of proving the most grateful and
dutiful of children; to find, just when the time
arrived which should crown their wishes, that child
stand in the way of her own happiness, and her
parents comfort, and, refusing an excellent offer,
and noble settlements, give suspicions to her anxious
friends, that she would become the property of a
vile Rake and Libertine, who (be the occasion what
it will) defies her family, and has actually embrued
his hands in her Brother's blood. 
‘I have had a very hard time of it, said she, between
your Father and you; for, seeing your dislike,
I have more than once pleaded for you: But
all to no purpose. I am only treated as a too fond
Mother, who, from motives of a blameable indulgence,
encourage a child to stand in opposition
to a Father's will. I am charged with dividing
the family into two parts; I and my youngest
Daughter standing against my Husband, his two
Brothers, my Son, my eldest Daughter, and my
Sister Hervey. I have been told, that I must be 

convinced of the fitness as well as advantage to the
whole (your Brother and Mr. Lovelace out of the
question) of carrying the contract with Mr. Solmes,
on which so many contracts depend, into execution. 
‘Your Father's heart, I tell you once more, is
in it: He has declared, that he had rather have no
Daughter in you, than one he cannot dispose of for
your own good: Especially as you have owned,
that your heart is free; and as the general good of
his whole family is to be promoted by your obedience. 
He has pleaded, poor man! that his frequent
gouty paroxysms (every Fit more threatening
than the former) give him no extraordinary prospects,
either of worldly happiness, or of long
days: And he hopes, that you, who have been
supposed to have contributed to the lengthening of
your Grandfather's life, will not, by your disobedience,
shorten your Father's.’ 
This was a most affecting plea, my dear. I wept
in silence upon it. I could not speak to it. And my
Mother proceeded: ‘What therefore can be his motives,
Clary Harlowe, in the earnest desire he has
to see this treaty perfected, but the welfare and aggrandizement
of his family; which already having
fortunes to become the highest condition, cannot
but aspire to greater distinctions? However slight
such views as these may appear to you, Clary, you
know, that they are not slight ones to any other of
the family: And your Father will be his own judge
of what is and what is not likely to promote the
good of his children. Your abstractedness, child,
(Affectation of abstractedness some call it) favours,
let me tell you, of greater particularity, than what
we aim to carry. Modesty and Humility therefore
will oblige you rather to mistrust yourself of peculiarity,
than censure views which all the world pursues,
as opportunity offers.’ 

I was still silent; and she proceeded—‘It is owing
to the good opinion, Clary, which your Father has
of you, and of your prudence, duty, and gratitude,
that he engaged for your compliance, in your
absence (before you returned from Miss Howe); 
and that he built and finished contracts upon it,
which cannot be made void, or cancelled.’ 
But why then, thought I, did they receive me, on
my return from Miss Howe, with so much intimidating
solemnity? —To be sure, my dear, this argument,
as well as the rest, was obtruded upon my
Mother. 
She went on, ‘Your Father has declared, that
your unexpected opposition [Unexpected she was
pleased to call it] and Mr. Lovelace's continued
menaces and insults, more and more convince him,
that a short day is necessary in order to put an end
to all that man's hopes, and to his own apprehensions
resulting from the disobedience of a child so
favoured. He has therefore actually ordered Patterns
of the richest Silks to be sent for from London—’ 
I started—I was out of breath—I gasped, at this
frightful precipitance—I was going to open with
warmth against it. I knew whose the happy expedient
must be: Female minds, I once heard my Brother
say, that could but be brought to balance on the change
of their State, might easily be determined by the glare
and splendor of the Nuptial Preparations, and the
pride of becoming the mistress of a family. —But she
was pleased to hurry on, that I might not have time
to express my disgusts at such a communication—to
this effect: 
‘Your Father therefore, my Clary, cannot, either
for your sake, or his own, labour under a suspense
so affecting to his repose. He has even thought fit
to acquaint me, on my pleading for you, that it
becomes me, as I value my own peace [How harsh 

to such a Wife!] and as I wish, that he do not
suspect that I secretly favour the address of a vile
Rake (a character which all the Sex, he is pleased to
say, virtuous and vicious, are but too fond of!)
to exert my authority over you: And that This I
may the less scrupulously do, as you have owned
[The old string!] that your heart is free.’ 
Unworthy reflection in my Mother's case, surely,
This of our Sex's valuing a Libertine; since she made
choice of my Father in preference to several suitors of
equal fortune, because they were of inferior reputation
for morals! 
‘Your Father, added she, at his going out, told
me what he expected from me, in case I found that
I had not the requisite influence upon you—It was
this—That I should directly separate myself from
you, and leave you singly to take the consequence
of your double disobedience—I therefore entreat you,
my dear Clarissa, concluded she, and that in the
most earnest and condescending manner, to signify
to your Father, on his return, your ready obedience; 
and this as well for my sake as for your
own.’ 
Affected by my Mother's goodness to me, and by
that part of her argument which related to her own
peace, and to the suspicions they had of her secretly
inclining to prefer the man so hated by them, to the
man so much my aversion, I could not but wish it
were possible for me to obey. I therefore paused,
hesitated, considered, and was silent for some time. I
could see, that my Mother hoped that the result of
this hesitation would be favourable to her arguments. 
But then, recollecting, that all was owing to the instigations
of a Brother and Sister, wholly actuated by
selfish and envious views; That I had not deserved
the treatment I had of late met with; That my disgrace
was already become the public talk; That the
man was Mr. Solmes; and that my aversion to him 

was too generally known, to make my compliance
either creditable to myself or to them: That it would
give my Brother and Sister a triumph over me, and
over Mr. Lovelace, which they would not fail to
glory in; and which, altho' it concerned me but
little to regard on his account, yet might be attended
with fatal mischiefs—And then Mr. Solmes's disagreeable
person; his still more disagreeable manners; his
low understanding—Understanding! the glory of a
man, so little to be dispensed with in the head and
director of a family, in order to preserve to him that
respect which a good Wife (and that for the justification
of her own choice) should pay him herself, and
wish every-body to pay him—And as Mr. Solmes's
inferiority in this respectable faculty of the human
mind [I must be allowed to say this to you, and no
great self-assumption neither] would proclaim to all
future, as well as to all present observers, what must
have been my mean inducement—All these reflections
crouding upon my remembrance; I would, Madam,
said I, folding my hands, with an earnestness in which
my whole heart was engaged, bear the cruellest tortures,
bear loss of limb, and even of life, to give you
peace. But this man, every moment I would, at
your command, think of him with favour, is the
more my aversion. You cannot, indeed you cannot,
think, how my whole Soul resists him! —And to
talk of Contracts concluded upon; of Patterns; of
a Short Day! —Save me, save me, O my dearest
Mamma, save your child, from this heavy, from this
insupportable evil!— 
Never was there a countenance that expressed so
significantly, as my Mother's did, an anguish, which
she struggled to hide, under an anger she was compelled
to assume—Till the latter overcoming the former,
she turned from me with an uplifted eye; and
stamping—Strange perverseness! were the only words
I heard of a sentence that she angrily pronounced; 

and was going. I then, half-franticly I believe, laid
hold of her gown—Have patience with me, dearest
Madam! said I—Do not you renounce me totally! — 
If you must separate yourself from your child, let it
not be with absolute reprobation on your own part! — 
My Uncles may be hard-hearted—My Father may be
immoveable—I may suffer from my Brother's Ambition,
and from my Sister's Envy! —But let me not
lose my Mamma's Love; at least, her Pity. 
She turned to me with benigner rays—You have
my Love! You have my Pity! But, O my dearest
girl—I have not yours. 
Indeed, indeed, Madam, you have: And all my
Reverence, all my Gratitude, you have! —But in
this one point—Cannot I be this once obliged? —Will
no expedient be accepted? Have I not made a very
fair proposal as to Mr. Lovelace? 
I wish, for both our sakes, my dear unpersuadeable
girl, that the decision of this point lay with me. 
But why, when you know it does not, why should
you thus perplex and urge me? —To renounce Mr.
Lovelace is now but half what is aimed at. Nor
will any-body else believe you in earnest in the offer,
if I would. While you remain single, Mr. Lovelace
will have hopes—and you, in the opinion of
others, inclinations. 
Permit me, dearest Madam, to say, That your
goodness to me, your patience, your peace, weigh
more with me, than all the rest put together: For
altho' I am to be treated by my Brother, and, thro'
his instigations, by my Father, as a Slave in this point,
and not as a Daughter, yet my mind is not that of a
Slave. You have not brought me up to be mean. 
So, Clary! you are already at defiance with your
Father! I have had too much cause before to apprehend
as much—What will this come to? —I, and
then my dear Mamma sighed—I, am forced to put
up with many humours— 

That you are, my ever-honoured Mamma, is my
grief. And can it be thought, that this very consideration,
and the apprehension of what may result
from a much worse-tempered man (a man, who has
not half the sense of my Father) has not made an impression
upon me, to the disadvantage of the married
life? Yet 'tis something of an alleviation, if one must
bear undue controul, to bear it from a man of sense. 
My Father I have heard you say, Madam, was for
years a very good-humoured gentleman—Unobjectible
in person and manners. —But the man proposed
to me— 
Forbear reflecting upon your Father [Did I, my
dear, in what I have repeated, and I think they are
the very words, reflect upon my Father?]: It is not
possible, I must say again, and again, were all men
equally indifferent to you, that you should be thus
sturdy in your will. I am tired out with your obstinacy
—The most unpersuadeable girl—You forget,
that I must separate myself from you, if you will
not comply. You do not remember that your Father
will take you up, where I leave you. Once more,
however, I will put it to you,—Are you determined
to brave your Father's displeasure? —Are you determined
to defy your Uncles? —Do you chuse to break
with us all, rather than encourage Mr. Solmes? — 
Rather than give me hope? 
Dreadful alternative—But is not my sincerity, is
not the integrity of my heart, concerned in my answer? 
May not my everlasting happiness be the sacrifice? 
Will not the least shadow of the hope you just
now demanded from me, be driven into absolute and
sudden certainty? Is it not sought to ensnare, to entangle
me in my own desire of obeying, if I could
give answers that might be construed into hope? —Forgive
me, Madam: Bear with your child's boldness in
such a cause as This! —Settlements drawn! —Patterns
sent for! —An Early Day! —Dear, dear Madam, how
can I give hope, and not intend to be this man's? 

Ah, girl, never say your heart is free! You deceive
yourself if you think it is. 
Thus to be driven [and I wrung my hands thro'
impatience] by the instigations of a designing, an ambitious
Brother, and by a Sister, that— 
How often, Clary, must I forbid your unsisterly
reflections? —Does not your Father, do not your
Uncles, does not every-body, patronize Mr. Solmes? — 
And let me tell you, ungrateful girl, and unmoveable
as ungrateful, let me repeatedly tell you, that it
is evident to me, that nothing but a Love unworthy
of your prudence can make a creature late so dutiful,
now so sturdy. You may guess what your Father's
first question on his return will be. He must know,
that I can do nothing with you. I have done my
part. Seek me, if your mind change before he comes
back: You have yet a little more time, as he stays
supper. I will no more seek you, nor to you. —And
away she flung. 
What could I do but weep? 
I am extremely affected on my Mother's account— 
more, I must needs say, than on my own. And indeed,
all things considered; and especially, that the
measure she is engaged in, is (as I dare say it is)
against her own judgment; she deserves more compassion
than myself. —Excellent woman! What pity,
that meekness and condescension should not be attended
with the due rewards of those charming
graces! —Yet had she not let violent spirits (as I
have elsewhere observed with no small regret) find
their power over hers, it could not have been thus. 
But here, run away with by my pen, I suffer my
Mother to be angry with me on her own account. 
She hinted to me, indeed, that I must seek her, if
my mind changed; which is a condition that amounts
to a prohibition of attending her: But, as she left
me in displeasure, will it not have a very obstinate
appearance, and look like a kind of renunciation of 

her mediation in my favour, if I go not down before
my Father returns, to supplicate her pity, and her
kind report to him? 
I will attend her. I had rather all the world should
be angry with me than my Mamma! 
Mean time, to clear my hands from papers of such
a nature, Hannah shall deposit this. If two or three
Letters reach you together, they will but express, from
one period to another, the anxieties and difficulties
which the mind of your unhappy but ever affectionate
friend labours under. 
Cl. H. 