



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

An angry dialogue, a scolding-bout rather, has
passed between my sister and me. Did you think
I could scold, my dear? 
She was sent up to me, upon my refusal to see Mr.
Solmes—Let loose upon me, I think! —No intention,
on their parts, to conciliate! I am to be given up
to my brother and her I suppose, by general consent. 
Every thing she said against me, which carried
force with it, I will do justice to. As I ask for your
approbation or disapprobation of my conduct, upon
the facts I lay before you, I should think it the sign
of a very bad cause, if I endeavoured to mislead my
judge. 
She began with representing to me the danger I
had been in, had my father come up, as he would
have done, had he not been hindered, by Mr. Solmes,
among the rest. She reflected upon my good Mrs.
Norton, as if she encouraged me in my perverseness. 
She ridiculed me for my supposed esteem for Lovelace. 
Was surprised that the witty, the prudent, nay,
the dutiful and pi-ous (so she sneeringly pronounced
the word) Clarissa Harlowe, should be so strangely
fond of a profligate man, that her parents were forced
to lock her up, to keep her from running into his
arms. Let me ask you, my dear, said she, how you
now keep your account of the disposition of your
time? How many hours in the twenty-four do you
devote to your Needle? How many to your Prayers? 
How many to Letter-writing? And how many to
Love? —I doubt, I doubt, my little dear, was her
arch expression, The latter article is like Aaron's rod,
and swallows up all the rest! —Tell me; is it not so? 
To these I answered, That it was a double mortification
to me to owe my safety from my papa's indignation 

to a man I could never thank for any thing. — 
I vindicated the good Mrs. Norton with a warmth
that her merit required from me. —With equal
warmth I resented her unsisterly reflections upon me
on Mr. Lovelace's account. As to the disposition of
my time, in the twenty-four hours, I told her it
would better have become her to pity a sister in distress,
than to exult over her—Especially, when I
could too justly attribute to the disposition of some of
her wakeful hours no small part of that distress. 
She raved extremely at this last hint: But reminded
me of the gentle treatment of all my friends, my
mamma's particularly, before it came to This: She
said, that I had discovered a spirit they never had expected: 
That, if they had thought me such a championess,
they would hardly have ventured to engage
with me: But that now, the short and the long was,
that the matter had gone too far to be given up: 
That now it was a contention between duty and wilfulness; 
Whether a parent's authority was to yield to
a daughter's obstinacy, or the contrary: That I must
therefore bend or break, that was all, child. 
I told her, that I wished the subject were of such a
nature, that I could return her pleasantry with equal
lightness of heart: But that, if Mr. Solmes had such
merit in every-body's eye, in hers particularly, why
might he not be a brother to me, rather than a husband? 
O child, she thought I was as pleasant to the full
as she was: She began to have some hopes of me now. 
But did I think she would rob her sister of her humble
servant? Had he first addressed himself to me, said
she, something might have been said: But to take
my younger sister's refusal! No, no, child; it is not
come to that neither! Besides, That would be to
leave the door open in your heart for you know who,
child; and we would fain bar him out, if possible. In
short (and then she changed both her tone, and her looks),
had I been as forward as somebody, to throw myself 

into the arms of one of the greatest profligates in England,
who had endeavoured to support his claim to
me thro' the blood of my brother, then might all
my family join together to save me from such a wretch,
and to marry me as fast as they could, to some worthy
gentleman, who might oppor-tune-ly offer himself. And now, Clary, all's out, and make the most
of it. 
Did not this deserve a severe return? Do, say it
did, to justify my reply. —Alas! for my poor sister!
said I. —The man was not always so great profligate. 
How true is the observation, That unrequited love
turns to deepest hate! 
I thought she would have beat me. —But I proceeded
—I have heard often of my brother's danger,
and my brother's murderer. When so little ceremony
is made with me, why should I not speak out? —Did
he not seek to kill the other, if he could have done
it? Would he have given him his life, had it been in
his power? —The aggressor should not complain. — 
And, as to oppor-tune offers, would to heaven some
one had offer'd oppor-tune-ly to somebody. It is not
my fault, Bella, the oppor-tune gentleman don't
come! 
Could you, my dear, have shewn more spirit? I
expected to feel the weight of her hand. She did
come up to me, with it held up: Then, speechless
with passion, ran down half way of the stairs, and
then up again. 
When she could speak—God give her patience
with me! 
Amen, said I: But you see, Bella, how ill you
bear the retort you provoke. Will you forgive me; 
and let me find a sister in you, as I am sorry, if you
have reason to think me unsisterly in what I have
said? 
Then did she pour upon me, with greater violence; 
considering my gentleness as a triumph of temper over 

her. She was resolved, she said, to let every-body
know how I took the wicked Lovelace's part against
my brother. 
I wish'd, I told her, I could make the plea for my-self,
which she might for her-self: That my anger
was more inexcusable than my judgment. But I presumed
she had some other view in coming to me, than
she had hitherto acquainted me with. Let me, said I,
but know (after all that has passed) if you have anything
to propose that I can comply with; any thing that can
make my only sister once more my friend? 
I had before, upon her ridiculing me on my supposed
character of meekness, said, that, altho' I wished
to be thought meek, I would not be abject; altho'
humble, not mean: And here, in a sneering way, she
cautioned me on that head. 
I replied, that her pleasantry was much more agreeable
than her anger: But I wished she would let me
know the end of a visit that had hitherto (between us)
been so unsisterly? 
She desired to be informed, in the name of everybody,
was her word, what I was determined upon: 
And whether to comply or not? —One word for all: 
My friends were not to have patience with so perverse
a creature, for ever. 
This then I told her I would do: Absolutely break
with the man they were all so determined against: 
Upon condition, however, that neither Mr. Solmes,
nor any other, were urged to me with the force of a
command. 
And what was this, more than I had offered before? 
What, but ringing my changes upon the same
bells, and neither receding nor advancing one tittle? 
If I knew what other proposals I could make, that
would be acceptable to them all, and free me from the
address of a man so disagreeable to me, I would make
them. I had indeed before offered, never to marry
without my father's consent— 

She interrupted me, That was because I depended
upon my whining tricks to bring my father and mother
to what I pleased. 
A poor dependence! I said: —She knew those who
would make that dependence vain— 
And I should have brought them to my own beck,
very probably, and my uncle Harlowe too, as also
my aunt Hervey, had I not been forbidden their sight,
and thereby hindered from playing my pug's tricks
before them. 
At least, Bella, said I, you have hinted to me to
whom I am obliged, that my father and mother, and
every-body else, treat me thus harshly. But surely you
make them all very weak. Indifferent persons, judging
of us two, from what you say, would either think me
a very artful creature, or you a very spiteful one. 
You are indeed a very artful one, for that matter,
interrupted she in a passion: One of the artfullest I
every knew! And then followed an accusation so low!
so unsisterly! —That I next-to-bewitch'd people, by
my insinuating address: That no-body could be valued
or respected, but must stand like cyphers wherever
I came. How often, said she, have I and my
brother been talking upon a subject, and had everybody's
attention, till you came in, with your bewitching
meek pride, and humble significance; and then have
we either been stopped by references to Miss Clarissa's
opinion, forsooth; or been forced to stop ourselves,
or must have talked on unattended to by every-body. 
She paused. Dear Bella, proceed! —She indeed
seemed only gathering breath. 
And so I will, said she. Did you not bewitch my
grandfather? Could any thing be pleasing to him,
that you did not say or do? How did he use to hang,
till he slabber'd again, poor doting old man! on your
silver tongue! Yet what did you say, that we could
not have said? What did you do, that we did not
endeavour to do? —And what was all this for? His 

Last Will shewed what effect your smooth obligingness
had upon him! —To leave the acquired part of his
estate from the next heirs, his own sons, to a grandchild; 
to his youngest grandchild! a daughter too! — 
To leave the family-pictures from his sons to you,
because you could tiddle about them, and, tho' you
now neglect their examples, could wipe and clean
them with your dainty hands! The family-plate too,
in such quantities, of two or three generations standing,
must not be changed, because his precious child
(a) , humouring his old fal-lal taste, admired it, to
make it all her own. 
This was too low to move me: O my poor sister!
said I: Not to be able, or at least willing, to distinguish
between art and nature! If I did oblige, I was
happy in it: I looked for no further reward: My
mind is above art, from the dirty motives you mention. 
I wish with all my heart my grandfather had
not thus distinguished me: He saw my brother likely
to be amply provided for out of the family, as well as
in it: He desired that you might have the greater share
of my papa's favour for it; and no doubt but you both
will. You know, Bella, that the estate my grandfather
bequeathed me was not half the real estate he left. 
What's all that to an estate in possession, and left
you with such distinctions, as gave you a reputation
of greater value than the estate itself? 
Hence my misfortune, Bella, in your Envy, I
doubt! But have I not given up that possession in the
best manner I could— 
Yes, interrupting me, she hated me for that best
manner. Specious little witch! she called me: Your
best manner, so full of art and design, had never been
seen thro', if you, with your blandishing ways, had not
been put out of sight, and reduced to positive declarations! 
—Hindered from playing your little, whining 

tricks; curling, like a serpent, about your mamma; 
and making her cry to deny you any thing your little
obstinate heart was set upon! 
Obstinate heart, Bella! 
Yes, obstinate heart! For did you ever give up any
thing? Had you not the art to make them think all
was right you asked, tho' my brother and I were frequently
refused favours of no greater import? 
I knew not, Bella, that I ever asked any thing unfit
to be granted. I seldom asked favours for myself,
but for others. 
I was a reflecting creature for this! 
All you speak of, Bella, was a long time ago. I
cannot go so far back into our childish follies. Little
did I think of how long standing this your late-shewn
antipathy is. 
I was a reflecter again! Such a saucy meekness; 
such a best manner; and such venom in words! —O
Clary! Clary! Thou wert always a two faced girl! 
No-body thought I had two faces, when I gave up
All into my papa's management; taking from his
bounty, as before, all my little pocket-money, without
a shilling addition to my stipend, or desiring it— 
Yes, cunning creature! —And that was another of
your fetches! —For did it not engage my fond papa
(as no doubt you thought it would) to tell you, that,
since you had done so grateful and dutiful a thing, he
would keep intire, for your use, all the produce of
the estate left you, and be but your steward in it; and
that you should be intitled to the same allowances as
before: Another of your hook-in's, Clary! —So that
all your extravagancies have been supported gratis. 
My extravagancies, Bella! —But did my papa ever
give me any-thing he did not give you? 
Yes, indeed; I got more by that means, than I
should have had the conscience to ask. But I have still
the greater part to shew! But you! What have you to
shew? —I dare to say, not fifty pieces in the world! 

Indeed I have not! 
I believe you! —Your mamma Norton, I suppose— 
But mum for that! 
Unworthy Bella! —The good woman, altho' low in
circumstance, is great in mind! Much greater than those
who would impute meanness to a soul incapable of it. 
What then have you done with the sums given you
from infancy to squander? —Let me ask you (affecting
archness), Has, has, has, Lovelace, has your Rake,
put it out at interest for you? 
O that my sister would not make me blush for her! 
It is, however, out at interest! —And I hope it will
bring me interest upon interest! —Better than to lie
rusting in my cabinet, as yours does. 
She understood me, she said. Were I a man, she
should suppose I was aiming to carry the County. 
Popularity! A croud to follow me with their blessings,
when I went to and from church, and no-body else
to be regarded, were agreeable things! House-top
proclamations! I hid not my light under a bushel, she
would say that for me. But was it not a little hard
upon me, to be kept from blazing on a Sunday? — 
And to be hindered from my charitable ostentations? 
This, indeed, Bella, is cruel in you, who have so
largely contributed to my confinement. —But go on. 
You'll be out of breath by-and-by. I cannot wish
to be able to return this usage. —Poor Bella! And I
believe I smiled a little too contemptuously for a sister. 
None of my saucy contempts (rising in her voice): 
None of my poor Bella's, with that air of superiority
in a younger sister! 
Well then, rich Bella! courtesying—that will please
you better—And it is due likewise to the hoards you
boast of. 
Look-ye, Clary, holding up her hand, if you are
not a little more abject in your meekness, a little more
mean in your humility, and treat me with the respect
due to an elder sister—you shall find— 

Not that you will treat me worse than you have
done, Bella! —That cannot be; unless you were to
let fall your uplifted hand upon me—And that would
less become you to do, than me to bear. 
Good, meek creature! —But you were upon your
overtures just now! —I shall surprize every-body by
carrying so long. They will think some good may
be done with you—And supper will be ready. 
A tear would stray down my cheek—How happy
have I been, said I, sighing, in the supper-time conversations,
with all my dear friends in my eye, round the
hospitable board! 
I met only with insult for this—Bella has not a
feeling heart: The highest joy in this life she is not
capable of: But then she saves herself many griefs, by
her impenetrableness. —Yet, for ten times the pain
that such a sensibility is attended with, would I not
part with the pleasure it brings with it. 
She asked me, upon my turning from her, If she
should say any thing below of my compliances? 
You may say, That I will do every-thing they
would have me do, if they will free me from Mr.
Solmes's address. 
This is all you desire at present, creeper-on! (What
words she has!) But will not t'other man flame out,
and roar most horribly, upon a prey's being snatch'd
from his paws, that he thought himself sure of? 
I must let you talk in your own way, or we shall
never come to a point. I shall not matter his roaring,
as you call it: I will promise him, that, if I ever
marry any other man, it shall not be till he is married. 
And if he be not satisfied with such a condescension
as this, I shall think he ought: And I will
give any assurances, that I will neither correspond
with him, nor see him. Surely this will do. 
But I suppose then you will have no objection to
see and converse, on a civil foot, with Mr. Solmes— 
as your papa's friend, or so? 

No! I must be permitted to retire to my apartment
whenever he comes: I would no more converse with
the one, than correspond with the other: That would
be to make Mr. Lovelace guilty of some rashness, on
a belief, that I broke with him, to have Mr. Solmes. 
And so, that wicked wretch is to be allowed such a
controul over you, that you are not to be civil to
your papa's friends, at his own house, for fear of incensing
him! —When this comes to be represented, be
so good as to tell me, what it is you expect from it? 
Every-thing, I said, or nothing, as she was pleased
to represent it. —Be so good as to give it your interest,
Bella: And say farther, That I will by any means I
can, in the Law, or otherwise, make over to my papa,
to my uncles, or even to my brother, all I am intitled
to by my grandfather's will, as a security for
the performance of my promises. And as I shall have
no reason to expect any favour from my papa, if I
break them, I shall not be worth any-body's having. 
And further still, unkindly as my brother has used
me, I will go down to Scotland privately, as his housekeeper
(I now see I may be spared here), if he will
promise to treat me no worse than he would do an
hired one. —Or I will go to Florence, to my cousin
Morden, if his stay in Italy will admit of it: And, in
either case, it may be given out, that I am gone to
the other; or to the world's end: I care not whither
it is said I am gone, or do go. 
Let me ask you, child, if you will give your pretty
proposal in writing? 
Yes, with all my heart. And I stept to my closet,
and wrote to the purpose I have mentioned; and,
moreover, a few lines to my brother with it; expressing
‘my concern for having offended him; beseeching
him to support with his interest the accompanying
proposal; disdaining subterfuge and art; referring
to him to draw up a writing to bind me to
the observance of my promises; declaring, that what 

the law would not establish, my resolution should. — 
I told him, That he could do more than any-body
to reconcile my father and mother to me: And I
should be infinitely obliged to him, if he would let
me owe this favour to his brotherly mediation.’ 
And how do you think Bella employed herself
while I was writing? —Why, playing gently upon my
harpsichord: And hamming to it, to shew her unconcernedness. 
When I approached her with what I had written,
the cruel creature arose with an air of levity—Why,
love, you have not written already! —You have, I
protest! —O what a ready penwoman! —And may I
read it? 
If you please, Bella. 
She read it; and burst into an affected laugh: How
wise-ones may be taken in! —Then you did not know,
that I was jesting with you all this time! —And so you
would have me carry down this pretty piece of nonsense? 
Don't let me be surprized at your seeming unsisterliness,
Bella. I hope it is but seeming. There can be
no wit in such jesting as this. 
The folly of the creature! How natural it is for
people, when they set their hearts upon any-thing,
to think every-body must see with their eyes! —Pray,
dear child, what becomes of your papa's authority
here? —Who stoops here, the parent, or the child? — 
How does this square with the engagements actually
agreed upon between your Papa and Mr. Solmes? 
What security, that your Rake will not follow you to
the world's-end? —Pr'ythee, pr'ythee, take it back; 
and put it to thy love-sick heart, and never think I
will be laughed at for being taken-in by thy whining
nonsense. I know thee better, my dear. —And, with
another spiteful laugh, she flung it on my toilette; 
and away she went. —Contempts for contempts, as she
passed! —That's for your poor Bella's! 

Nevertheless, I inclosed what I had written, in a
few lines directed to my brother: As modestly as I
could, accounting, from my sister's behaviour, for
sending it down to him; lest she, having, in her passion,
mistaken me, as I said, should set what I had
written in a worse light than, as I apprehended, it
deserved to appear in. The following is the answer I
received to it, delivered to me just as I was going to
bed. His passion would not let him stay till morning. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
I wonder that you have the courage to write to me,
upon whom you are so continually emptying your
whole female quiver. I have no patience with you, for
reflecting upon me as the aggressor in a quarrel which
owed its beginning to my consideration for you. 
You have made such confessions in a villain's favour,
as ought to cause all your relations to renounce
you for ever. For my part, I will not believe any
woman in the world, who promises against her avowed
inclination. To put it out of your power to ruin
yourself, is the only way left to prevent your ruin. I
did not intend to write; but your too-kind sister has
prevailed upon me. As to your going into Scotland,
that day of grace is over! —Nor would I advise, that
you should go to grandfather-up your cousin Morden. 
Besides, that worthy gentleman might be involved in
some fatal dispute, upon your account; and then be
called the aggressor. 
A fine situation you have brought yourself to, to
propose to hide yourself from your Rake, and to have
falshoods told, to conceal you! —Your confinement,
at this rate, is the happiest thing that could befal you. 
Your Bravo's behaviour at church, looking out for
you, is a sufficient indication of his power over you,
had you not so shamelesly acknowleged it. 
One word for all—If, for the honour of the family, 

I cannot carry this point, I will retire to Scotland, and
never see the face of any one of it more. 
Ja. Harlowe. 
There's a brother! —There's flaming duty to a father,
and mother, and uncles! —But he sees himself
valued, and made of consequence; and he gives himself
airs accordingly!— 