



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Edgware, Tuesday Night, May 2. 
Without staying for the promised Letter from you
to inform us what the Lady says of us, I write
to tell you, That we are all of one opinion with regard
to her; which is, that there is not of her age
a finer woman in the world, as to her Understanding. 
As for her Person, she is at the age of bloom,
and an admirable creature; a perfect Beauty: But
this poorer praise, a man, who has been honoured
with her conversation, can hardly descend to give; 
and yet she was brought amongst us contrary to her
will. 
Permit me, dear Lovelace, to be a means of saving
this excellent creature from the dangers she hourly
runs from the most plotting heart in the world. In a
former, I pleaded your own family, Lord M's wishes
particularly; and then I had not seen her: But, now,
I join her sake, honour's sake, motives of justice, generosity,
gratitude, and humanity, which are all concerned
in the preservation of so fine a woman. Thou
knowest not the anguish I should have had (whence
arising, I cannot devise) had I not known before I set
out this morning, that the incomparable creature had
disappointed thee in thy cursed view of getting her to
admit the specious Partington for a bedfellow. 
I have done nothing but talk of this Lady ever since 

I saw her. There is something so awful, and yet so
sweet, in her aspect, that were I to have the Virtues
and the Graces all drawn in one piece, they should
be taken, every one of them, from different airs and
attitudes in her. She was born to adorn the age she
was given to, and would be an ornament to the first
dignity. What a piercing, yet gentle eye; every
glance, I thought, mingled with Love and Fear of
you! What a sweet smile darting through the cloud
that overspread her fair face, demonstrating, that she
had more apprehensions and grief at her heart, than
she cared to express! 
You may think what I am going to write too
slighty; but, by my faith, I have conceived such a
profound reverence for her sense and judgment, that,
far from thinking the man excuseable who should treat
her basely, I am ready to regret that such an angel of
a woman should even marry. She is in my eye all
mind: And were she to meet with a man all mind
likewise, why should the charming qualities she is
mistress of, be endangered? Why should such an angel
be plunged so low as into the vulgar offices of
domestic life? Were she mine, I should hardly wish
to see her a Mother, unless there were a kind of moral
certainty, that Minds like hers could be propagated. 
For why, in short, should not the work of Bodies be
left to mere Bodies? I know, that you yourself have
an opinion of her little less exalted. Belton, Mowbray,
Tourville, are all of my mind; are full of her
praises; and swear, it would be a million of pities
to ruin a woman in whose fall none but devils can
rejoice. 
What must that merit and excellence be which can
extort this from us, free livers, like yourself, and all
of us your partial friends, who have joined with you in
your just resentments against the rest of her family,
and offered our assistance to execute your vengeance
on them? But we cannot think it reasonable, that you 

should punish an innocent creature, who loves you so
well, and who is in your protection, and has suffered
so much for you, for the faults of her relations. 
And here, let me put a serious question or two. 
Thinkest thou, truly admirable as this Lady is, that
the end thou proposest to thyself, if obtained, is answerable
to the means, to the trouble thou givest thyself,
and to the perfidies, tricks, stratagems, and contrivances
thou hast already been guilty of, and still
meditatest? In every real excellence she surpasses all
her Sex. But in the article thou seekest to subdue
her for, a mere Sensualist, a Partington, a Horton,
a Martin, would make a Sensualist a thousand times
happier than she either will or can. 

Sweet are the joys that come with willingness.
And wouldst thou make her unhappy for her whole
life, and thyself not happy for a single moment? 
Hitherto, it is not too late; and that perhaps is as
much as can be said, if thou meanest to preserve her
esteem and good opinion, as well as person; for I
think it is impossible she can get out of thy hands
now she is in this cursed house. O that damn'd hypocritical
Sinclair, as thou callest her! How was it
possible she should behave so speciously as she did all
the time the Lady staid with us! —Be honest, and
marry; and be thankful, that she will condescend to
have thee. If thou dost not, thou wilt be the worst
of men; and wilt be condemned in this world and
the next: As I am sure thou oughtest, and shouldest
too, wert thou to be judged by one, who never before
was so much touched in a woman's favour: And
whom thou knowest to be 
Thy partial Friend,
J. Belford. 
Our companions consented, that I should withdraw
to write to the above effect. They can make 

nothing of the characters we write in; so I read
this to them. They approve of it; and of their
own motion each man would set his name to it. 
I would not delay sending it, for fear of some
detestable scheme taking place. 
Thomas Belton. 
Richard Mowbray. 
James Tourville. 
Just now are brought me both yours. I vary not
my opinion, nor forbear my earnest prayers to
you in her behalf, notwithstanding her dislike
of me. 