



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Monday Afternoon, May 15. 
Now indeed it is evident, my best, my only
friend, that I have but one choice to make. 

And now do I find, that I have carried my resentment
against this man too far; since now I am
to appear as if under an obligation to his patience
with me for a conduct, which perhaps he will think
(if not humoursome and childish) plainly demonstrative
of my little esteem of him; of but a secondary
esteem at least, where before, his pride rather than
his merit, had made him expect a first. O my
dear! to be cast upon a man, that is not a generous
man; that is indeed a cruel man! A man that is capable
of creating a distress to a young creature, who
by her evil destiny is thrown into his power; and
then of enjoying it, as I may say! [I verily think I
may say so, of this savage!] —What a fate is mine! 
You give me, my dear, good advice, as to the peremptory
manner in which I ought to treat him: 
But do you consider to whom it is that you give it?  — 
&dotup;And then should I take it, and should he be capable
of delay, I unprotected, desolate, nobody to
fly to, in what a wretched light must I stand in his
eyes; and, what is still as bad, in my own!&dotup; O
my dear, see you not, as I do, that the occasion for
this my indelicate, my shocking situation, should never
have been given by me, of all creatures; since
I am unequal, utterly unequal, to the circumstances
to which my inconsideration has reduced me! What,
I, to challenge a man for a husband! —I, to exert
myself to quicken the delayer in his resolutions! 
And, having as you think, lost an opportunity, to
begin to try to recal it, as from myself, and for myself! 
To threaten him, as I may say, into the Marriage
State! —O my dear! if this be right to be done, how
difficult is it, where Modesty and Self (or where Pride
if you please) is concerned, to do that right? Or, to
express myself in your words, to be Father, Mother,
Uncle, to myself! —Especially where one thinks a
triumph over one is intended. 
You say, you have tried Mrs. Norton's weight 

with my Mother. —Bad as the returns are which my
application by Mr. Hickman has met with, you tell
me, ‘that you have not acquainted me with all the
bad; nor now, perhaps, ever will.’ But why so,
my dear? What is the bad, what can be the bad,
which now you will never tell me of? —What worse,
than renounce me! and for ever! ‘My Uncle, you
say, believes me ruined: He declares, that he can
believe every-thing bad of a creature who could
run away with a man: And they have all made a
resolution, not to stir an inch in my favour; no,
not to save my life.’ —Have you worse than this,
my dear, behind? —Surely my Father has not renewed
his dreadful malediction! —Surely, if so, my
Mother has not joined in it! Have my Uncles given
it their sanction, and made it a family act? And
themselves thereby more really faulty, than even They
suppose me to be, tho' I the cause of that greater fault in
them? —What, my dear, is the worst, that you will
leave for ever unrevealed? 
O Lovelace! why comest thou not just now, while
these black prospects are before me? For now, couldst
thou look into my heart, wouldst thou see a distress
worthy of thy barbarous triumph! 
* *
I was forced to quit my pen. And you say you
have tried Mrs. Norton's weight with my Mother? 
What is done cannot be remedied: But I wish
you had not taken a step of this importance to me
without first consulting me. Forgive me, my dear,
but I must tell you that that high-soul'd and noble
friendship, which you have ever avowed with so
obliging and so uncommon a warmth, altho' it has
been always the subject of my grateful admiration,
has been often the ground of my apprehension, because
of its unbridled fervor. 
Well, but now to look forward, you are of opinion
that I must be his: And that I cannot leave him with 

reputation to myself, whether with or without his
consent. I must, if so, make the best of the bad
matter. 
He went out in the morning; intending not to
return to dinner, unless (as he sent me word) I would
admit him to dine with me. 
I excused myself. The man, whose anger is now
to be of such high importance to me, was, it seems,
displeased. 
As he (as well as I) expected, that I should receive
a Letter from you this day by Collins, I suppose he
will not be long before he returns; and then, possibly,
he is to be mighty stately, mighty mannish,
mighty coy, if you please! And then must I be very
humble, very submissive, and try to insinuate myself
into his good graces: With downcast eye, if not
by speech, beg his forgiveness for the distance I have
so perversely kept him at! —Yes, I warrant! —But I
shall see how this behaviour will sit upon me! —You
have always rallied me upon my meekness, I think: 
Well then, I will try, if I can be still meeker, shall
I! —O my dear!— 
But let me sit with my hands before me, all patience,
all resignation; for I think I hear him coming
up. Or shall I roundly accost him, in the words, in
the form, which you, my dear, have prescribed? 
He is come in. He has sent to me, all impatience,
as Dorcas says, by his aspect. —But I cannot,
cannot see him! 
Monday Night. 
The contents of your Letter, and my own heavy
reflections, rendered me incapable of seeing this expecting
man. The first word he asked Dorcas, was,
If I had received a Letter since he had been out? She
told me this; and her answer, that I had; and was
fasting, and had been in tears ever since. 
He sent to desire an interview with me. 
I answered by her, That I was not very well. In 

the morning, if better, I would see him as soon as he
pleased. 
Very humble! was it not, my dear? Yet he was
too royal to take it for humility; for Dorcas told me,
he rubbed one side of his face impatiently; and said
a rash word, and was out of humour; stalking about
the room. 
Half an hour after, he sent again; desiring very
earnestly, that I would admit him to supper with me. 
He would enter upon no subjects of conversation, but
what I should lead to. 
So I should have been at liberty, you see, to court
him! 
I again desired to be excused. 
Indeed, my dear, my eyes were swelled: I was
very low-spirited; and could not think of entering
all at once, after the distance I had kept him at for
several days, into the freedom of conversation which
the utter rejection I have met with from my relations,
as well as your advice, has made necessary. 
He sent up to tell me, that as he heard I was fasting,
if I would promise to eat some chicken which
Mrs. Sinclair had ordered for supper, he would acquiesce. 
—Very kind in his anger! —Is he not? 
I promised that I would. Can I be more preparatively
condescending? —How happy, I'll warrant,
if I may meet him in a kind and forgiving humour! 
I hate myself! —But I won't be insulted—Indeed
I won't, for all this. 