


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Thursday, Mar. 16. 
Sir Charles has already left us. He went to town
this morning on the affairs of his executorship. 
He breakfasted with us first. 
Dr. Bartlett, with whom already I have made myself
very intimate, and who, I find, knows his whole heart,
tells me he is always fully employed. That we knew
before—No wonder then, that he is not in love. He 

has not had leisure, I suppose, to attend to the calls of
such an idle passion. 
You will do me the justice to own, that in the
round of employments I was engaged in at Selby-house,
I never knew any-thing of the matter: But
indeed there was no Sir Charles Grandison; first to
engage my gratitude; and then, my heart. So it is; 
I must not, it seems, deny it. If I did, “a child in
Love-matters would detect me.” 
* *
O My Lucy! I have been hard set by these
sisters. They have found me out; or rather, let me
know, that they long ago found me out. I will tell
you all as it passed. 
I had been so busy with my pen, that, tho' accustomed
to be first dressed, where-ever I was, I was
now the last. They entered my dressing-room arm
in arm; and I have since recollected, that they looked
as if they had mischief in their hearts; Miss Grandison
especially. She had said, She would play me a
trick. 
I was in some little hurry, to be so much behind-hand,
when I saw them dressed. 
Miss Grandison would do me the honour of assisting
me, and dismissed Jenny, who had but just come
in to offer her service. 
She called me charming creature twice, as she was
obligingly busy about me; and the second time said,
Well may my brother, Lady L. say what he did of
this girl! 
With too great eagerness, What, what, said I— 
I was going to add—did he say? —But, catching myself
up, in a tone of less surprize—designing to turn
it off—What honour you do me, madam, in this your
kind assistance! 
Miss Grandison leered archly at me; then turning
to Lady L. This Harriet of ours, said she, is more
than half a rogue. 

Punish her then, Charlotte, said Lady L. You have,
tho' with much ado, been brought to speak out yourself; 
and so have acquired a kind of right to punish
those who affect disguises to their best friends. 
Lord bless me, Ladies! And down I sat—What,
what—I was going to say, do you mean? But stopt,
and I felt my face glow. 
What, what! repeated Miss Grandison—My
sweet girl can say nothing but What, what! —One
of my fellows, Sir Walter Watkyns, is in her head,
I suppose—Did you ever see Wat—Watkyns,
Harriet? 
My handkerchief was in my hand, as I was going
to put it on. I was unable to throw it round my
neck. O how the fool throbbed, and trembled! 
Miss Gr. Confirmation, Lady L.! Confirmation! 
Lady. L. I think so, truly—But it wanted none
to me. 
Har. I am surprised! Pray, Ladies, what can
you mean by this sudden attack? 
Miss Gr. And what, Harriet, can you mean by
these What, what's, and this sudden emotion? —Give
me your handkerchief! —What doings are here! 
She snatch'd it out of my trembling hand, and put
it round my neck—Why this suddcn palpitation? — 
Ah! Harriet! Why won't you make confidents of
your two sisters? Do you think we have not found
you out before this? 
Har. Found me out! How found me out! —Dear
Miss Grandison, you are the most alarming Lady that
ever lived!— 
I stood up, trembling. 
Miss Gr. Am I so? But, to cut the matter short— 
[Sit down, Harriet. You can hardly stand.] Is it such
a disgraceful thing for a fine girl to be in Love? 
Har. Who I, I, in Love? 
Miss Gr. (laughing) So, Lady L. you see that
Harriet has found herself out to be a fine girl!— 

Disqualify now; can't you, my dear? Tell fibs. 
Be affected. Say you are not a fine girl, and-so-forth. 
Har. Dear Miss Grandison—It was your turn the
day before yesterday. How can you forget— 
Miss Gr. Spiteful too! My life to a farthing, you
pay for this, Harriet! —But, child, I was not in
Love—Ah! Harriet! That gentleman in Northhamptonshire
—Did you think we should not find you
out? 
This hearten'd me a little. 
Har. O Madam, do you think to come at anything
by such methods as this? I ought to have been
aware of Miss Grandison's alarming ways. 
Miss Gr. You pay for this, also, Harriet. Did
you not say, that I should take the reins, Lady L.? 
I will have no mercy on our younger sister for this
abominable affectation and reserve. 
Harr. And so, Ladies, you think, I warrant, that
Mr. Orme— 
Lady L. Take the reins, Charlotte; making a
motion, with a sweet pretty air, with her handkerchief,
as if she tossed her something—I myself, Harriet,
am against you now. I wanted a trial of that
frankness of heart, for which I have heard you so
much commended: And, surely, you might have
shewed it, if to any persons living, to your two
sisters. 
Miss Gr. No more, no more, Lady L. Have you
not left her to me? I will punish her. You will have
too much lenity. —And now tell me, Harriet— 
Don't you love Mr. Orme better than any man you
ever yet saw? 
Har. Indeed I do not. 
Miss Gr. Whom do you love better, Harriet? 
Har. Pray, Miss Grandison! 
Miss Gr. And pray, Miss Byron! 
Har. Resume the reins, Lady L.—Pray do!— 

Miss Grandison has no mercy! Yet met with a great
deal the day before yester— 
Miss Gr. The day before yesterday? —Very well! 
—But then I was ingenuous— 
Har. And am not I? —Pray, Lady L. 
Lady L. I think, not— 
And she seemed a little too cruelly to enjoy the flutter
I was in. 
Miss Gr. And you say, that there is no one gentleman
in Northamptonshire— 
Har. What is the meaning of this, Ladies? But
I do assure you, there is not— 
Miss Gr. See, Lady L. there are some questions
that the girl can answer readily enough. 
I believe I looked serious. I was silent. Indeed
my very soul was vexed. 
Miss Gr. Ay, Harriet, be sullen: Don't answer
any questions at all. That's your only way, now— 
And then we go no further, you know. But tell me
—Don't you repent, that you have given a denial to
Lady D.? 
Har. I won't be sullen, Ladies. Yet I am not
pleased to be thus— 
Miss Gr. Then own yourself a woman, Harriet; 
and that, in some certain instances, you have both affectation,
and reserve. There are some cases, my
dear, in which it is impossible but a woman must be
guilty of affectation. 
Har. Well then, suppose I am. I never pretended
to be clear of the foibles which you impute to the Sex. 
I am a weak, a very weak creature: You see I am— 
And I put my hand in my pocket for my handkerchief. 
Miss Gr. Ay, weep, love. My sister has heard me say,
that I never in my life saw a girl so lovely in tears. 
Har. What have I done to deserve— 
Miss Gr. Such a compliment! —Hay? —But you
sha'n't weep neither. —Why, why, is this subject so
affecting, Harriet? 

Har. You surprise me! —Parted with you but an
hour or two ago—And nothing of these reproaches,
And now, all at once, both Ladies— 
Miss Gr. Reproaches, Harriet!— 
Har. I believe so. I don't know what else to call
them. 
Miss Gr. What! Is it a reproach to be taxed with
Love— 
Har. But the manner, madam— 
Miss Gr. The manner you are taxed with it, is
the thing then—Well, putting on a grave look, and
assuming a softer accent—You are in Love, however:
But with whom? is the question—Are we, your
sisters, intitled to know with whom? 
Surely, Ladies, thought I, you have something to
say, that will make me amends for all this intolerable
teazing: And yet my proud heart, whatever it were
to be, swelled a little, that they should think that would
be such high amends, which, however, I by myself,
communing only with my own heart, would have
thought so. 
Lady L. (coming to me, and taking my hand) Let
me tell you, our dearest Harriet, that you are the most
insensible girl in the world, if you are not in Love— 
And now what say you? 
Har. Perhaps I do know, Ladies, enough of the
Passion, to wish to be less alarmingly treated. 
They then sitting down, one on either side of me; 
each took a hand of the trembling fool. 
I think I will resume the reins, Charlotte, said the
Countess. We are both cruel. But tell us, my lovely
sister, in one word tell your Caroline, tell your Charlotte,
if you have any confidence in our love (and indeed
we love you, or we would not have teazed you
as we have done) if there be not one man in the
world, whom you love above all men in it? 
I was silent. I looked down. I had, in the same
moment, an ague, in its cold, and in its hot fit. They 

vouchsafed, each, to press with her lips the passive
hand each held. 
Be not afraid to speak out, my dear, said Miss
Grandison. Assure yourself of my love; my true
sisterly love. I once intended to lead the way to the
opening of your heart by the discovery of my own,
before my brother, as I hoped, could have found me
out—But nothing can be hid— 
Madam! Ladies! said I, and stood up in an hurry,
and, in as great a discomposure, sat down again— 
Your brother has not, could not—I would die before— 
Miss Gr. Amiable delicacy! —He has not—But
say you, Harriet, he could not? —If you would not be
teazed, don't aim at reserves—But think you, that
we could not see, on an hundred occasions, your heart
at your eyes? —That we could not affix a proper
meaning to those sudden throbs just here, patting my
neck; those half-suppressed, but always involuntary
sighs—[I sighed]—Ay, just such as that—[I was confounded]
—But, to be serious, we do assure you, Harriet,
that had we not thought ourselves under some
little obligation to Lady Anne S. we should have
talked to you before on this subject. The friends of
that Lady have been very solicitous with us—And
Lady Anne is not averse— 
Har. Dear Ladies! withdrawing the hand that
Miss Grandison held, and taking out my handkerchief; 
you say, you love me! —Won't you despise
whom you love? —I do own— 
There I stopt; and dried my eyes. 
Lady L. What does my Harriet own?— 
Har. O madam, had I a greater opinion of my
own merit, than I have reason to have (and I never
had so little an one, as since I have known you two)
I could open to you, without reserve, my whole
heart—But one request I have to make you—You
must grant it. 

They both in a breath asked what that was. 
Har. It is, That you will permit your chariot to
carry me to town this very afternoon—And long shall
not that town hold your Harriet—Indeed, indeed, Ladies,
I cannot now ever look your brother in the face
—And you will also both despise me! I know you
will! 
Sweet, and as seasonable as sweet (for I was very
much affected) were the assurances they gave me of
their continued love. 
Miss Gr. We have talked with our brother this
morning— 
Har. About me! I hope he has not a notion, that
—There I stopt. 
Lady L. You were mentioned: But we intend not
to alarm you farther. We will tell you what passed. 
Lady Anne was our subject. 
I was all attention. 
Miss Gr. We asked him if he had any thoughts of
marriage? The question came in properly enough,
from the subject that preceded it. He was silent:
But sighed, and looked grave [Why did Sir Charles
Grandison sigh, Lucy?] We repeated the question. 
You told us, brother, said I, that you do not intend
to resume the treaty begun by my father for Lady
Frances N. What think you of Lady Anne S.? 
We need not mention to you how considerable her
fortune is; what an enlargement it would give to
your power of doing good; nor what her disposition
and qualities are: Her person is far from being disagreeable:
And she has a great esteem for you. 
I think Lady Anne a very agreeable woman, replied
he: But if she honours me with a preferable esteem,
she gives me regret: because it is not in my power to
return it. 
Not in your power, brother? 
It is not in my power to return it. 
O Lucy! how my heart flutter'd! The ague-fit 

came on again; and I was hot and cold, as before,
almost in the same moment. 
They told me, they would not teaze me further. 
But there are subjects, that cannot be touch'd upon
without raising emotion in the bosom of a person who
hopes, and is uncertain. O the cruelty of suspense! 
How every new instance of it tears in pieces my before
almost bursting heart! 
Miss Gr. My brother went on—You have often
hinted to me at distance this subject. I will not, as
I might, answer your question, now so directly put,
by saying, that it is my wish to see you, Charlotte,
happily married, before I engage myself. But, perhaps,
I shall be better enabled some time hence, than
I am at present, to return such an answer as you may
expect from a brother. 
Now, my Harriet, we are afraid, by the words, Not
in his power; and by the hint, that he cannot at present
answer our question as he may be enabled to do
some time hence; we are afraid, that some foreign
Lady— 
They had raised my hopes; and now, exciting my
fears by so well-grounded an apprehension, they were
obliged for their pains to hold Lady L.'s salts to my
nose. I could not help exposing myself, my heart
having been weaken'd too by their teazings before. 
My head dropt on the shoulder of Miss Grandison. 
Tears relieved me. 
I desired their pity. They assured me of their
love; and called upon me, as I valued their friendship,
to open my whole heart to them. 
I paused. I hesitated. For words did not immediately
offer themselves. But at last, I said, Could I
have thought myself intitled to your excuse, Ladies,
your Harriet, honoured, as she was, from the first,
with the appellation of sister, would have had no reserve
to her sisters: But a just consciousness of my
own unworthiness, overcame a temper that I will 

say, is naturally frank and unreserved. Now, however— 
There I stopt, and held down my head. 
Lady L. Speak out, my dear—What Now— 
Miss Gr. What Now, however— 
Harriet. Thus called upon; thus encouraged— 
And I lifted up my head as boldly as I could (but it
was not, I believe, very boldly) I will own, that the
man, who by so signal an instance of his bravery and
goodness engaged my gratitude, has possession of my
whole heart. 
And then, almost unknowing what I did, I threw
one of my arms, as I sat between them, round Lady
L.'s neck, the other round Miss Grandison's; my
glowing face seeking to hide itself in Lady L.'s bosom. 
They both embraced me, and assured me of their
united interest. They said, They knew I had also
Dr. Bartlett's high regard: But that they had in vain
sought to procure new lights from him; he constantly,
in every-thing that related to their brother, referring
himself to him: And they assured me, that I had
likewise the best wishes and interest of Lord L. to the
fullest extent. 
This, Lucy, is some—consolation—must I say?
—some ease to my pride, as to what the family think
of me: But yet, how is that pride mortified, to be
thus obliged to rejoice at this strengthening of hope
to obtain an interest in the heart of a man, of whose
engagements none of us know any-thing! But if, at
last, it shall prove, that that worthiest of hearts is
disengaged; and if I can obtain an interest in it, be
pride out of the question! The man, as my aunt
wrote, is Sir Charles Grandison. 
I was very earnest to know, since my eyes had been
such tell-tales, if their brother had any suspicion of my
regard for him. 
They could not, they said, either from his words
or behaviour, gather that he had. He had not been 

so much with me, as they had been. Nor would they
wish that he should suspect me. The best of men,
they said, loved to have difficulties to conquer. 
Their brother, generous as he was, was a man. 
Yet, Lucy, I thought at the time of what he said
at Sir Hargrave Pollexfen's, as recited by the shorthand
writer—That he would not marry the greatest
princess on earth, if he were not assured, that she loved
him above all the men in it. 
I fancy, my dear, that we women, when we love,
and are doubtful, suffer a great deal in the apprehension,
at one time, of disgusting the object of our passion,
by too forward a Love; and, at another, of disobliging
him by too great a reserve. Don't you
think so? 
The Ladies said, They were extremely solicitous to
see their brother married. They wished it were to
me, rather than to any other woman; and kindly
added, That I had their hearts, even at the time when
Lady Anne, by a kind of previous engagement, had
their voices. 
And then they told me what their brother said of
me, with the hint of which they began this alarming
conversation. 
When my brother had let us know, said Miss
Grandison, that it was not in his power to return a
preferable esteem for a like esteem, if Lady Anne
honoured him with it; I said—Had Lady Anne as
many advantages to boast of, as Miss Byron has,
could you then, brother, like Lady Anne? 
Miss Byron, replied he, is a charming woman. 
Lady L. (slily enough, continued Miss Grandison)
said, Miss Byron is one of the prettiest women I ever
beheld. I never faw in any face, youth, and dignity,
and sweetness of aspect, so happily blended. 
On this occasion, Lucy, my vanity may, I hope,
revive, so long as I repeat only, and repeat justly. 
“Forgive me, Lady L. replied my brother—But 

as Alexander would be drawn only by Apelles; so
would I say to all those who leave mind out of the
description of Miss Byron, That they are not to
describe her. This young Lady” [You may look
proud, Harriet!] “has united in her face, feature,
complexion, grace, and expression, which very few
women, even of those who are most celebrated for
beauty, have singly in equal degree: But, what is
infinitely more valuable, she has an heart that is
equally pure and open—She has a fine mind: And
it is legible in her face. Have you not observed,
Charlotte, added he, what intelligence her very
silence promises? And yet, when she speaks, she
never disappoints the most raised expectation.” 
I was speechless, Lucy. 
Well, brother, continued Miss Grandison—If there
is not every-thing you say in Miss Byron's face and
mind, there seems to me little less than the warmth of
Love in the description—You are another Apelles,
Sir, if his colours were the most glowing of those of
all painters. 
My eyes had the assurance to ask Miss Grandison,
What answer he returned to this? She saw they had. 
Ah! Harriet! smiling—That's a meaning look,
with all its bashfulness. This was my brother's answer
—“Every-body must love Miss Byron—You
know, Charlotte, that I presented her to you, and
you to her, as a third sister: And what man better
loves his sisters, than your brother?” 
We both looked down, Harriet; but not quite so
silly, and so disappointed, as you now look— 
Dear Miss Grandison!— 
Well, then another time don't let your eyes ask
questions, instead of your lips. 
Third sister! my Lucy! Indeed I believe I looked
silly enough. To say the truth, I was disappointed. 
Har. And this was all that passed? You hear by
my question, Ladies, that my lips will keep my eyes
in countenance. 

Miss Gr. It was; for he retired as soon as he had
said this. 
Har. How retired, madam? —Any discompo—You
laugh at my folly; at my presumption perhaps—. 
They both smiled. No, I can't say that there
seemed to be either in his words or manner, any
distinguishing emotion; any great discompo—He was
about to retire before. 
Well, Ladies, I will only say, That the best thing
I can do, is, to borrow a chariot-and-fix, and drive
away to Northamptonshire. 
But why so, Harriet? 
Because it is impossible but I must suffer in your
brother's opinion, every time he sees me, and that
whether I am silent or speaking. 
They made me fine compliments: But they would
indeed have been fine ones, could they have made
them from their brother. 
Well, but, Lucy, don't you think, that had Sir
Charles Grandison meant any-thing, he would have
expressed himself to his sisters in such high terms, before
he had said one very distinguishing thing to me? 
Let me judge by myself—Men and women, I believe,
are so much alike, that, put custom, tyrant-custom,
out of the question, the meaning of the one may be
generally guessed at by that of the other, in cases
where the heart is concern'd. What civil, what polite
things, could I allow myself to say to and of Mr.
Orme, and Mr. Fowler! How could I praise the honesty
and goodness of their hearts, and declare my
pity for them! And why? Because I meant nothing
more by it all, than a warmer kind of civility; that I
was not afraid to let go, as their merits pulled. —And
now, methinks, I can better guess, than I could till
now, at what Mr. Greville meant, when he wished
me to declare, that I hated him—Sly wretch!—since
the woman who uses a man insolently in courtship,
certainly makes that man of more importance to her,
than she would wish him to think himself.— 

But why am I studious to torment myself? What
will be, must. “Who knows what Providence has
designed for Sir Charles Grandison?” —May he be
happy! But indeed, my Lucy, your Harriet is much
otherwise, at this time. 

