


Mr. Hickman, To Mrs. Howe. 

Wednesday, March 29. 
&dotup;Madam,
&dotup;It is with infinite regret that I think myself obliged,
by pen and ink, to repeat my apprehensions,
that it is impossible for me ever to obtain a
share in the affections of your beloved Daughter. 
O that it were not too evident to every one, as well
as to myself, even to our very servants, that my
Love for her, and my Assiduities, expose me rather
to her Scorn [Forgive me, Madam, the hard word!]
than to the treatment due to a man whose proposals
have met with your approbation, and who loves
her above all the women in the world! 
&dotup;Well might the merit of my passion be doubted,
if, like Mr. Solmes to the truly admirable Miss
Clarissa Harlowe, I could continue my addresses to
Miss Howe's distaste. Yet what will not the discontinuance
cost me! 
&dotup;Give me leave, nevertheless, dearest, worthiest
Lady, to repeat, what I told you, on Monday night,
at Mrs. Larkin's, with a heart even bursting with
grief, That I wanted not the treatment of that day
to convince me, that I am not, nor ever can be,
the object of Miss Howe's voluntary favour. What
hopes can there be, that a Lady will ever esteem,
as a Husband, the man, whom, as a Lover, she
despises? Will not every act of obligingness from
such a one, be construed an unmanly tameness of
spirit, and entitle him the more to her disdain? — 
My heart is full: Forgive me if I say, that Miss
Howe's treatment of me does no credit either to her
education, or fine sense. 

&dotup;Since then it is too evident, that she cannot esteem
me; and since, as I have heard it justly observed by
the excellent Miss Clarissa Harlowe, that Love is
not a voluntary passion; would it not be ungenerous
to subject the dear Daughter to the displeasure of a
Mother so justly fond of her; and you, Madam,
while you are so good as to interest yourself in my
favour, to uneasiness? And why, were I to be even
sure, at last, of succeeding by means of your kind
partiality to me, should I wish to make the Best-beloved
of my soul unhappy; since mutual must be
our happiness, or misery for life the consequence to
both? 
&dotup;My best wishes will for ever attend the dear, the
ever-dear Lady! May her Nuptials be happy! They
must be so, if she marry the man she can honour
with her Love. Yet I will say, that whoever be the
happy, the thrice happy man, he never can love her
with a passion more ardent and more sincere than
mine. 
&dotup;Accept, dear Madam, of my most grateful thanks
for a distinction that has been the only support of my
presumption in the address I am obliged, as utterly
hopeless, to discontinue. A distinction, on which
(and not on my own merits) I had entirely relied; 
but which, I find, can avail me nothing. To the
last hour of my life, it will give me pleasure to think,
that had your favour, your recommendation, been
of sufficient weight to conquer what seems to be an
invincible Aversion, I had been the happiest of men. 
&dotup;I am, dear Madam, with inviolable respect, 
&dotup;Your ever-obliged and faithful
&dotup;humble Servant,
&dotup;Charles Hickman.&dotup; 