



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, July 6. 
Few young persons have been able to give more
convincing proofs than myself, how little true
happiness lies in the enjoyment of our own wishes. 
To produce one instance only of the truth of this
observation; What would I have given for weeks past,
for the favour of a Letter from my dear Miss Howe,
in whose friendship I placed all my remaining comfort? 
Little did I think, that the next Letter she would
honour me with, should be in such a style, as should
make me look more than once at the Subscription,
that I might be sure (the name not being written at
length) that it was not signed by another A. H. For
surely, thought I, this is my Sister Arabella's style: 
Surely Miss Howe (blame me as she pleases in other
points) could never repeat so sharply upon her friend,
words written in the bitterness of spirit, and in the disorder
of head; nor remind her, with asperity, and
with mingled strokes of wit, of an argument held in
the gaiety of an heart elated with prosperous fortunes
(as mine then was) and very little apprehensive of the
severe turn that argument would one day take against
herself. 

But what have I, sunk in my fortunes; my character
forfeited; my honour lost [While I know it,
I care not who knows it]; destitute of friends, and
even of hope; What have I to do to shew a spirit of
repining and expostulation to a dear friend, because
she is not more kind than a Sister?— 
* *
You have till now, my dear, treated me with great
indulgence. If it was with greater than I had deserved,
I may be to blame to have built upon it, on the consciousness
that I deserve it now as much as ever. But I
find, by the rising bitterness which will mingle with
the gall in my ink, that I am not yet subdued enough
to my condition. —I lay down my pen for one moment. 
* *
Pardon me, my Miss Howe. I have recollected
myself: And will endeavour to give a particular Answer
to your Letter; altho' it will take me up too
much time to think of sending it by your messenger
to-morrow: He can put off his journey, he says, till
Saturday. I will endeavour to have the whole Narrative
ready for you by Saturday. 
But how to defend myself in every-thing that has
happened, I cannot tell: Since in some part of the
time, in which my conduct appears to have been censurable,
I was not myself; and to this hour know not
all the methods taken to deceive and ruin me. 
You tell me, that in your first Letter you gave me
such an account of the vile house I was in, and such
cautions about that Tomlinson, as make you wonder
how I could think of going back. 
Alas, my dear! I was tricked, most vilely tricked
back, as you shall hear in its place. 
Without knowing the house was so very vile a house
from your intended information, I disliked the people
too much, ever voluntarily to have returned to it. 
But had you really written such cautions about Tomlinson,
and the house, as you seem to have purposed 

to do, they must, had they come in time, have been
of infinite service to me. But not one word of either,
whatever was your intention, did you mention to me,
in that first of the three Letters you so warmly TELL
ME you did send me. I will inclose it to convince you (a) . 
But your account of your messenger's delivering to
me your second Letter, and the description he gives of
me, as lying upon a Couch, in a strange way, bloated,
and flush-coloured, you don't know how, absolutely
puzzles and confounds me. 
Lord have mercy upon the poor Clarissa Harlowe! 
What can this mean! —Who was the messenger you
sent? Was he one of Lovelace's creatures too! —Could
nobody come near me but that man's confederates,
either setting out so, or made so? I know not what to
make of any one syllable of this! Indeed I don't. 
Let me see. You say, this was before I went from
Hamstead! My intellects had not then been touched! 
—Nor had I ever been surprised by wine [Strange if
I had!]: How then could I be found in such a strange
way, bloated, and flush-coloured; you don't know how! 
—Yet what a vile, what a hateful figure has your
messenger represented me to have made! 
But indeed I know nothing of ANY messenger from
you. 
Believing myself secure at Hamstead, I staid longer
there than I would have done, in hopes of the Letter
promised me in your short one of the 9th, brought me
by my own messenger, in which you undertake to send
for and engage Mrs. Townsend in my favour (b) . 
I wondered I heard not from you: And was told
you were sick; and, at another time, that your Mother
and you had had words on my account, and that
you had refused to admit Mr. Hickman's visits upon
it: So that I supposed at one time, that you were not 

able to write; at another, that your Mother's prohibition
had its due force with you. But now I have
no doubt, that the wicked man must have intercepted
your Letter; and I wish he found not means to corrupt
your messenger to tell you so strange a Story. 
It was on Sunday June 11. you say, that the man
gave it me. I was at Church twice that day with Mrs.
Moore. Mr. Lovelace was at her house the while,
where he boarded, and wanted to have lodged; but
I would not permit that, tho' I could not help the
other. In one of these spaces it must be that he had
time to work upon the man. You'll easily, my dear,
find that out, by enquiring the time of his arrival at
Mrs. Moore's, and other circumstances of the strange
way he pretended to see me in, on a Couch, and the
rest. 
Had any-body seen me afterwards, when I was betrayed
back to the vile house, struggling under the
operation of wicked potions, and robbed indeed of my
intellects (for this, as you shall hear, was my dreadful
case) I might then, perhaps, have appeared bloated,
and flush-coloured, and I know not how myself. But
were you to see your poor Clarissa now (or even to
have seen her at Hamstead before she suffered the vilest
of all outrages) you would not think her bloated, or
flush-coloured: Indeed you would not. 
In a word, it could not be me your messenger saw; 
nor (if any-body) who it was can I divine. 
I will now, as briefly as the subject will permit,
enter into the darker part of my sad Story: And yet
I must be somewhat circumstantial, that you may not
think me capable of reserve or palliation. The latter
I am not conscious that I need. I should be utterly
inexcuseable, were I guilty of the former to you. 
And yet, if you knew how my heart sinks under the
thoughts of a recollection so painful, you would pity
me. 
As I shall not be able, perhaps, to conclude what 

I have to write in even two or three Letters, I will
begin a new one with my Story; and send the whole
of it together, altho' written at different periods, as I
am able. 
Allow me a little pause, my dear, at this place; 
and to subscribe myself 
Your ever-affectionate and obliged
Clarissa Harlowe. 