



My dear Father and Mother,
We had a great many neighbouring Gentlemen,
and their Ladies, this Day at Dinner; 
and my Master made a fine Entertainment for
them. And Isaac, and Mr. Jonathan, and
Benjamin, waited at Table. And Isaac tells
Mrs. Jervis, that the Ladies will by-and-by
come to see the House, and have the Curiosity
to see me; for, it seems, they said to my Master,
when the Jokes flew about, Well, Mr. B&wblank;,
we understand, you have a Servant-maid, who
is the greatest Beauty in the County; and we
promise ourselves to see her before we go. 
The Wench is well enough, said he; but
no such Beauty as you talk of, I'll assure ye. She
was my Mother's Waiting-maid, who, on her
Death-bed, engag'd me to be kind to her. She
is young, and every thing is pretty that is young. 
Ay, ay, said one of the Ladies, that's true; 
but if your Mother had not recommended her 

so strongly, there is so much Merit in Beauty,
that I make no Doubt, so fine a Gentleman
would have wanted no such strong Inducement
to be kind to it. 
They all laugh'd at my Master: And he, it
seems, laugh'd for Company; but said, I don't
know how it is, but I see with different Eyes
from other People; for I have heard much more
Talk of her Prettiness, than I think it deserves:
She is well enough, as I said; but her greatest
Excellence is, that she is humble, and courteous,
and faithful, and makes all her Fellow-servants
love her: My House-keeper, in particular, doats
upon her; and you know, Ladies, she is a
Woman of Discernment: And, as for Mr.
Longman, and Jonathan, here, if they thought
themselves young enough, I am told, they
would fight for her. Is it not true, Jonathan? 
Troth, Sir, said he, an't please your Honour,
I never knew her Peer; and all your Honour's
Family are of the same Mind. Do you hear
now? said my Master—Well, said the Ladies,
we will make a Visit to Mrs. Jervis by-and-by,
and hope to see this Paragon. 
I believe they are coming; and will tell
you the rest by-and-by. I wish they had come,
and were gone. Why can't they make their
Game without me? 
Well, these fine Ladies have been here,
and are gone back again. I would have been
absent, if I could; and did step into the Closet; 
so they saw me not when they came in. 

There were Four of them, Lady Arthur at
the great white House on the Hill, Lady
Brooks, Lady Towers, and the other, it seems,
a Countess, of some hard Name, I forget
what. 
Now, if I shall not tire you, I will give
you some little Account of the Characters and
Persons of these Four Ladies; for when I was
hardly Twelve Years old, you us'd not to dislike
my Descriptions. 
You must know, then, That Lady Arthur
(for she is of a Quality-Family, tho' married only
to a 'Squire) is a comely Person, inclinable to
be fat; but very easy with it, and has pretty
good Features, tho' a little too masculine, in
my Opinion. She has the Air of a Person of
Birth, and seems by it to shew, that she expects
to be treated as such; and has a Freedom and
Presence of Mind in all she says or does, that
sets her above being in the least conscious of
Imperfection in either. It is said, she is pretty
passionate in her Family on small Occasions,
and reminds her Husband, now-and-then, that
he is not of Birth equal to her own; tho' he is
of a good Gentleman's Family too: And yet
her Ancestor was ennobled, it seems, but two
Reigns ago. On the Whole, however, she
bears no bad Character, when her Passion is
over; and will be sometimes very familiar with
her Inferiors: Yet, Mrs. Jervis says, Lady
Davers is more passionate a great deal; but
has better Qualities, and is more bountiful. 
Mr. Arthur has the Character of a worthy 

Gentleman, as Gentlemen go; for he drinks
hard, it seems; so indeed all the Gentlemen
around us do, except my Master, who has
not that Vice to answer for: I am sure, I have
a double Reason, to wish,—for his sake, as
well as my own—he had no worse! But let
that pass, at present. 
Mrs. Brooks is well descended, tho' not of
Quality. And has as much Pride as if she was,
if I can guess by her scornful Looks: For
being a tall, thin Lady, and of a forbidding
kind of Aspect, she looks down upon one, as
it were, with so much Disdain! —Yet she
has no bad Character in her Family; is of few
Words, but affects to be thought a Lady of
great Discernment. Her Spouse bears a pretty
good Character; but he gives himself great Airs
of Jesting and Rallying upon serious Things; 
and particularly on Matrimony, which is his
standing Jest, whenever his Lady is not by. 
And some People impute this to him as Wit:
But I remember a Saying of my good Lady's,
That any-body might have a Character for Wit,
who could give themselves the Liberty to say
what would shock others to think. 
The Countess is not only Noble by Marriage,
but by Birth:—But don't you wonder
to find me scribble so much about Family and
Birth? –––When, had I Reason to boast of it, I
should, if I know my own Mind, very little
value myself upon it; but, contrarily, think
with the Poet I have heard quoted, That
Virtue is the only Nobility. –––But, indeed, 

even we Inferiors, when we get into genteel
Families, are infected with this Vanity; 
and tho' we cannot brag of our own, we will
sometimes pride ourselves in that of our Principals. 
But, for my part, I cannot forbear
smiling at the Absurdity of Persons even of the
first Quality, who value themselves upon their
Ancestors Merits, rather than their own? For
is it not as much as to say, they are conscious
they have no other? —But how strangely I
run on! –––Let me proceed with the Countess's
Character, and don't think me too bold, to
take these Freedoms with my Betters. Her
Ladyship is not handsome, yet has such an affable
Look, that one cannot chuse but respect
her. I have thought, that she looks as if
she was secure of every one's Regard, being
really a Countess; while Lady Arthur gives
herself Airs, as if she would exact Respect, for
fear (being only a 'Squire's Lady) her Birth
should be forgotten. But then, my Lady
Countess has, with this affable Aspect, an Air
quite—intrepid—Methinks, I want a Word
–––that shews, as if she could not easily be
daunted. And I don't know how it is, but
one of the chief Beauties of the Sex seems
banish'd from the Faces of Ladies, now-a-days:
For they not only don't know how to blush
themselves, but they laugh at any innocent
young Body that does, as rustick and half-bred; 
and (as I have more than once heard them)
toss their Jests about, and their Double-meanings,
as they own them, as freely as the Gentlemen. 

But whatever Reputation these Freedoms
may give to their Wit, I think they do but little
Credit to their Hearts –––– For does not the Observation
hold severely against such, That out
of the Abundance of the Heart the Mouth
speaketh? The Countess's Lord, it seems, is a
bad Man, and a bad Husband, and her Ladyship
lives very unhappily with him; and this all the
World knows; for he is a Lord, and above
the World's Opinion. And indeed I never
heard of any Couple so happy as you, my dear
Parents, tho' you labour so hard for a poor
Livelihood. But Providence gives one thing
to one, and another to another. No one has
every thing. But to you, my dear Father and
Mother, is given Content; and that is better
than all the Riches in the World, without it. 
But Lady Towers out-does all the Ladies
in the Neighbourhood for Wit and Repartee; 
and her Conversation is mightily coveted by
every body, Gentlemen as well as Ladies: For
no one, they say, can be sad in her Company. 
She has something smart and humourous to say
to every body, and on every Occasion: So that,
tho' she were to speak a silly thing, (and that I
have the Boldness to think she has many an one,
on Visits to my Lady) yet every body has such
an Opinion of her, that they are prepared to
laugh and applaud, before she opens her Lips. 
Then she, too, is of Family, and so is call'd
Lady; tho', you know, we simple Bodies are
us'd to give that Title to all fine Folks, who live
upon their Means. Lady Towers is well-shap'd, 

is of an easy Deportment, and has no one ill
Feature, taken separately: Yet I know not how
it is; but they seem as if they were not well
put together, if I may so say. And this makes
me think of what I have read of a great Painter,
in former Times, Apelles by Name, who being
to draw a Picture of Venus, the Goddess of
Beauty, took a Mouth from one Lady, a Nose
from another, Eyes from a Third, Brows and
Forehead from a Fourth; but when they were
all put together, they made but a poor Piece; 
tho' separately they were Beauties on their own
proper Faces. It was talk'd, that the rakish
'Squire Martin of the Grove, and this Lady,
were to make a Match; but she refus'd him,
because of his free Life: For tho' she takes great
Liberties of Speech, and can't help it, being a
Wit, as they call it, yet she is a Lady of Virtue,
and Morals, at least. —But what a Length
have I run! It is time to return to their Visit to
Mrs. Jervis. 
They enter'd the Room with great Flutter,
laughing heartily at something Lady Towers had
said, coming up-stairs. Mrs. Jervis stood up at
their Appearance: So, Mrs. Jervis, says one of the
Ladies, how do you do? We are all come to inquire
after your Health. I am much oblig'd to your
Ladyships, said Mrs. Jervis: Will your Ladyships
please to sit down? But, said the Countess,
we are not only come to ask after Mrs. Jervis's
Health neither: We are come to see a Rarity
besides. Ay, says Lady Arthur, I have
not seen your Pamela these two Years, and 

they tell me she is grown wond'rous pretty in
that Time. 
Then I wish'd I had not been in the Closet; 
for when I came out, they must needs know I
heard them: But I have often found, that
bashful Bodies owe themselves a Spite, and frequently
confound themselves more, by endeavouring
to avoid Confusion. 
Why, yes, says Mrs. Jervis, Pamela is
very pretty indeed; she's but in the Closet
there:–––Pamela, pray step hither. I came
out, all cover'd with Blushes; and they smil'd
at one another. 
The Countess took me by the Hand: Why,
indeed, she was pleased to say, Report has not
been too lavish, I'll assure you. Don't be
asham'd, Child (and star'd full in my Face); 
I wish I had just such a Face to be asham'd of. 
O how like a Fool I look'd! 
Lady Arthur said, Ay, my good Pamela,
I say as her Ladyship says: Don't be so confus'd; 
tho' indeed it becomes you too. I think
your good Lady departed made a sweet Choice
of such a pretty Attendant. She would have
been mighty proud of you, as she always was
praising you, had she liv'd till now. This was
a high Compliment from Lady Arthur, you
must think. 
Ah! Madam, said Mrs. Brooks, do you
believe, that so dutiful a Son as our Neighbour,
who always admir'd what his Mother lov'd,
does not pride himself, for all what he said at
Table, in such a pretty Maiden? 

She look'd with such a malicious sneering
Countenance, I cannot abide her. 
Lady Towers said, with her usual free Air,
Well, Mrs. Pamela, I can't say I like you so
well as these Ladies do; for I should never care,
if I had a Husband, and you were my Servant,
to have you and your Master in the same House
together. Then they all set up a great Laugh. 
I know what I could have said, if I durst. But
they are Ladies—and Ladies may say any thing. 
Says Lady Towers, Can the pretty Image
speak, Mrs. Jervis? I vow she has speaking
Eyes! O you little Rogue, said she, and tapp'd
me on the Cheek, you seem born to undo, or
to be undone! 
God forbid, and please your Ladyship, said
I, it should be either! —I beg, said I, to withdraw; 
for the Sense I have of my Unworthiness,
renders me unfit for such a Presence. 
I then went away, with one of my best
Court'sies; and Lady Towers said, as I went
out, Prettily said, I vow! —And Lady Brooks
said, See that Shape! I never saw such a Face
and Shape in my Life; why she must be better
descended than you have told me! 
And so, belike, their Tongues ran for half
an Hour in my Praises; and glad was I, when I
got out of the Hearing of them. 
But, it seems, they went down with such
a Story to my Master, and so full of me, that
he had much ado to stand it; but as it was
very little to my Reputation, I am sure I could
take no Pride in it; and I fear'd it would make 

no better for me. This gives me another
Cause for wishing myself out of this House. 
This is Thursday Morning, and next
Thursday I hope to set out; for I have finish'd
my Task, and my Master is horrid cross! And
I am vex'd his Crossness affects me so. If ever
he had any Kindness towards me, I believe he
now hates me heartily. 
Is it not strange, that Love borders so much
upon Hate? But this wicked Love is not like
the true virtuous Love, to be sure: That and
Hatred must be as far off, as Light and Darkness. 
And how must this Hate have been increas'd,
if he had met with a base Compliance,
after his wicked Will had been gratify'd? 
Well, one may see by a little, what a
great deal means: For if Innocence cannot
attract common Civility, what must Guilt expect,
when Novelty had ceas'd to have its
Charms, and Changeableness had taken place
of it? Thus we read in Holy Writ, that wicked
Amnon, when he had ruin'd poor Tamar,
hated her more than ever he lov'd her, and
would have her turn'd out of Door! 
How happy am I, to be turn'd out of Door,
with that sweet Companion my Innocence! — 
O may that be always my Companion! And
while I presume not upon my own Strength,
and am willing to avoid the Tempter, I hope
the Divine Grace will assist me. 
Forgive me, that I repeat in my Letter
Part of my hourly Prayer. I owe every thing,
next to God's Goodness, to your Piety and 

good Examples, my dear Parents; my dear
poor Parents! I say that Word with Pleasure; 
for your Poverty is my Pride, as your Integrity
shall be my Imitation. 
As soon as I have din'd, I will put on my
new Cloaths. I long to have them on. I
know I shall surprise Mrs. Jervis with them; 
for she shan't see me till I am full-dress'd. — 
John is come back, and I'll soon send you
some of what I have written. —I find he is
going early in the Morning; and so I'll close
here, that I am 
Your most dutiful Daughter. 
Don't lose your Time in meeting me; because
I am so uncertain. It is hard, if
some-how or other, I can't get a Passage
to you. But may-be my Master won't refuse
to let John bring me. I can ride behind
him, I believe, well enough; for he
is very careful, and very honest; and you
know John as well as I; for he loves you
both. Besides, may-be, Mrs. Jervis can
put me in some way. 

