


Lady Grandison, To Ladies L. and G. 


Wedn. Febr. 14. 
Let me now give you the promised particulars. 
As we, and our beloved guests, were at dinner
on Monday, all harmony, all love; the dear Emily
laying out the happy days she hoped to see in Northhamptonshire; 
Sir Charles using generous arguments
to prevail on my uncle and aunt to stay a little longer
with him; the Letter, the affecting Letter, was
given into Sir Charles's hands: “From my Jeronymo!” 
said he, looking at the superscription. Asking
excuse, he broke it open, and, casting his eye upon
the first lines, he started; and bowing to his guests,
and to me, he arose from table, and withdrew to his
Study. 
We had not half dined. I urged our friends, but
could not set them the example; and we arose by
consent, and went into the adjoining drawing room. 
Sir Charles soon joined us there: His face was in a
glow: He seemed to have struggled for a composure,
for our sakes, which, however, he had not obtained. 
I looked upon him with eyes, I suppose, that had
speech in them, by his taking my hand, and saying,
Be not surprised, my Love: You will soon have
guests. 
From Italy! From Italy, Sir? —“Yes, my life”— 
Who? Who, Sir? 
Dr. Bartlett was with us. He besought him to 

give a translation of that Letter. The Doctor retired
to do it: And Sir Charles said, It is not impossible
but Clementina may be soon in England: Perhaps before
the rest of her family. Be not surprised (for we
all looked upon one another): Dr. Bartlett will give
you the contents of the Letter. Oblige me, my
dearest Love, with your hand. 
He led me into his Study; and there, in the most
tender and affectionate manner, acquainted me with
the contents of the Letter. 
My dearest Harriet, said he, his arms encircling my
waist, will not, cannot doubt the continuance of my
tenderest Love. I am equally surprised and disturbed
at the step taken. God preserve the dear Clementina! 
Join your prayers with mine for her safety. You
can pity the unhappy Lady: She is, I am asraid, desolate
and unprotected: You can pity her equally unhappy
friends. They are following her: They are all
good: They mean well. Yet over-persuasion, as you
lately observed, in such a case as hers, is a degree of
persecution. In the unhappy circumstances she had
been in, she should have had time given her. Time
subdues all things. 
Let me beseech you, Sir, said I, to give the unhappy
Lady your instant protection. Consider me as
a strengthener, not a weakener, of your hands, in her
service. I have no concern but for her safety and
honour, and for your concern on the affecting occasion. 
Dear Sir, let me by participation lessen it. 
Soul of my Soul, said he, clasping me more ardently
to his bosom, I had no doubt of your generous
goodness. It would be doing injustice to the unhappy
absent, and to the knowlege I have of my own
heart, as well as to you, the absolute mistress of it,
did I think it necessary to make professions of my
unalterable, my inviolable Love to you. I will acquaint
you with every step I take in this arduous affair. 
You must advise me as I go along. Minds so 

delicate as yours and Clementina's, must be allied. I
shall be sure of my measures when I have the approbation
of my Harriet. All our friends (They have
discretion) shall be made acquainted with my proceedings. 
I will not leave a doubt upon the mind of any
one of them, that my Harriet is not, as far as it is
in my power to make her, the happiest of women. 
What, Sir, is the date of the Letter? —He looked; 
It has no date, my dear. Jeronymo's grief—The Lady,
Sir, said I, may be arrived. Leave me here at Grandison-hall,
with my friends: I will endeavour to engage
their stay a little longer than they had designed; and do
you hasten up to town: If you can do service to the
unhappy Lady, destitute as you apprehend she is at
present of protection, and exposed to difficulties and
dangers, your Letters shall be, if possible, more acceptable
to me, than even the presence of the man
who is as dear to me as my own soul. 
I was raised. It was making me great, my dear
Ladies, to have it in my power, as I may say, to convince
Sir Charles Grandison, that my compassion, my
love, my admiration of the noblest of women, was
a sincere admiration and love. 
How happy a man am I! said he. You have anticipated
me by your goodness. I will hasten up to
town. You will engage your friends. The man
whose Love is fixed on the mind, all loveliness as is
the admirable person that thus I again press to my
fond bosom, must be as happy as a mortal man can
be! 
He led me back to the expecting company: Who
all stood up, as by an involuntary motion, at our
entrance; each person looking eager to know our
sentiments. The Doctor had not finished the translation:
But Sir Charles sent up for the Letter; and
begged of the Doctor, who brought it down himself,
to read it in English to us all. He did so. 
What, my dear Ladies, was there of Peculiarity in 

my generosity, as your brother was pleased to call
it? —My uncle, my aunt, my Lucy, Mr. Deane, all,
before Sir Charles could well speak, besought him not
to suffer their being here to be one moment's hindrance
to his setting out for London. 
He generously applauded me to them for what had
passed between us in his Study, and told them, he would
set out early in the morning, if they would promise to
keep me company here. 
They said, they would stay as long as their convenience
would permit; and the longer, that he might
be the easier on such a generous call to town. 
One thing, dear Sir, said I, let me beg; Let not
the sweet fugitive be compelled, if you can help it, to
marry. Let not advantage be taken, as they seem, by
a hint in this Letter, inclined to take it, of this seeming
rash step, to make her compliance the condition of
their forgiveness and reconciliation. 
He called me his generous, his noble Harriet; repeated,
that he would be governed by my advice, and
that then he should be sure of his footing. 
Your brother set out early this morning for London:
Join your prayers, my dear Ladies, with his and
mine, and with those of all our friends here, for a
happy issue to the present afflictions of the dear Clementina. 
How I long, yet half-fear, to see her! Shall
I, do you think, be able to see her, without being apprehensive,
that she will look upon me as the invader
of her right? She was undoubtedly his first Love. 
Your brother communicated to me his intention of
completing the furnishing of the new-taken house in
Grosvenor-square, which was before in great forwardness,
and to have it well aired for the reception of his
noble friends. He will acquaint his sisters with his
farther intentions, as occasions arise. God succeed to
him his own wishes! —He may be trusted with them. 
A dieu, my dearest Sisters! How proud am I, that I
can indeed call you so, by the name of 
Harriet Grandison! 

