



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday, April 28. 
Mr. Lovelace is returned already. My Brother's
projects were his pretence. I could not but look
upon this short absence as an evasion of his promise; 
especially as he had taken such precautions with the
people below; and as he knew that I proposed to keep
close within-doors. I cannot bear to be dealt meanly
with; and angrily insisted, that he should directly set
out for Berkshire, in order to engage his Cousin, as he
had promised. 
O my dearest Life, said he, why will you banish
me from your presence? I cannot leave you for so long
a time, as you seem to expect I should. I have been
hovering about town ever since I left you. Edgware
was the farthest place I went to; and there I was not
able to stay two hours, for fear, at this crisis, any-thing
should happen. Who can account for the workings of
an apprehensive mind, when all that is dear and valuable
to it is at stake? You may spare yourself the trouble
of writing to any of your friends, till the solemnity
has passed that shall entitle me to give weight to your
application. When they know we are married, your
Brother's plots will be at an end; and your Father, and
Mother, and Uncles, must be reconciled to you. Why
then should you hesitate a moment to confirm my happiness? 
Why, once more, would you banish me from
you? Why will you not give the man, who has brought
you into difficulties, and who so honourably wishes to
extricate you from them, the happiness of doing so? 

He was silent. My voice failed to second the inclination
I had to say something not wholly discouraging
to a point so warmly pressed. 
I'll tell you, my angel, resumed he, what I propose
to do, if you approve of it. I will instantly go out to
view some of the handsome new Squares, or fine Streets
round them, and make a report to you of any suitable
house I find to be lett. I will take such a one as you
shall chuse, and set up an equipage befitting our condition. 
You shall direct the whole. And on some early
day, either before or after we fix [It must be at your own
choice] be pleased to make me the happiest of men. And
then will every-thing be in a desirable train. You shall
receive in your own house (if it can be so soon furnished
as I wish) the compliments of all my relations. Charlotte
shall visit you in the interim: And if it take up
time, you shall chuse whom you will honour with your
company, first, second, or third, in the summer-months; 
and on your return you shall find all that was wanting
in your new habitation supplied; and pleasures in a
constant round shall attend us. O my angel, take me
to you, instead of banishing me from you, and make
me yours for ever. 
You see, my dear, that here was no Day pressed for. 
I was not uneasy about that; and the sooner recovered
myself, as there was not. But, however, I gave him
no reason to upbraid me for refusing his offer of going
in search of a house. 
He is accordingly gone out for this purpose. But I
find, that he intends to take up his lodging here tonight; 
and if to-night, no doubt on other nights, while
he is in town. As the doors and windows of my apartment
have good fastenings; As he has not, in all this
time, given me cause for apprehension; As he has the
pretence of my Brother's schemes to plead; As the people
below are very courteous and obliging; Miss Horton
especially, who seems to have taken a great liking
to me, and to be of a gentler temper and manners, 

than Miss Martin; and, As we are now in a tolerable
way—I imagine, it would look particular to them all,
and bring me into a debate with a man, who (let him
be set upon what he will) has always a great deal to say
for himself, if I were to insist upon his promise: On
all these accounts, I think, I will take no notice of his
lodging here, if he don't. 
Let me know, my dear, your thoughts of everything. 
You may believe I gave him back his Bank Note the
moment I saw him. 
Friday Evening. 
Mr. Lovelace has seen two or three houses; but
none to his mind. But he has heard of one which looks
promising, he says, and which he is to enquire about in
the morning. 
Saturday Morning. 
He has made his enquiries, and actually seen the
house he was told of last night. The owner of it is a
young widow Lady, who is inconsolable for the death of
her husband; Fretchville her name. It is furnished
quite in taste, every-thing being new within these six
months. He believes, if I like not the furniture, the
use of it may be agreed for, with the house, for a time
certain: But if I like it, he will endeavour to take the
one, and purchase the other, directly. 
The Lady sees nobody; nor are the best apartments
above-stairs to be viewed till she is either absent, or
gone into the country; which she talks of doing in a
fortnight, or three weeks, at farthest; and to live there
retired. 
What Mr. Lovelace saw of the house (which were
the Salon and two Parlours) was perfectly elegant; and
he was assured, all is of a piece. The Offices are also
very convenient; Coach-house and Stables at hand. 
He shall be very impatient, he says, till I see the
whole; nor will he, if he finds he can have it, look 

farther till I have seen it, except any-thing else offer to
my liking. The price he values not. 
&dotup;He now does nothing but talk of the Ceremony; 
but not indeed of the Day. I don't want him to
urge that—But I wonder he does not.&dotup; 
He has just now received a Letter from Lady Betty
Lawrance, by a particular hand; the contents principally
relating to an affair she has in Chancery. But in
the postscript she is pleased to say very respectful things
of me. 
They are all impatient, she says, for the Happy Day
being over; which, they flatter themselves, will ensure
his Reformation. 
He hoped, he told me, that I would soon enable
him to answer their wishes, and his own. 
But, my dear, altho' the opportunity was so inviting,
he urged not for the Day. Which is the more extraordinary,
as he was so pressing for pressing for marriage before we
came to town. 
He was very earnest with me to give him, and four
of his friends, my company on Monday evening, at a
little collation. Miss Martin and Miss Horton cannot,
he says, be there, being engaged in a party of their own,
with two daughters of Colonel Solcombe, and two
nieces of Sir Antony Holmes, upon an annual occasion. 
But Mrs. Sinclair will be present, and she gave him
hope of the company of a young Lady of very great
fortune and merit (Miss Partington) an Heiress, to
whom Colonel Sinclair it seems in his life-time was
guardian, and who therefore calls Mrs. Sinclair Mamma. 
I desired to be excused. He had laid me, I said,
under a most disagreeable necessity of appearing as a
married person; and I would see as few people as possible
who were to think me so. 
He would not urge it, he said, if I were much averse: 
But they were his select friends; men of birth and fortune; 
who longed to see me. It was true, he added,
that they, as well as his friend Doleman, believed we 

were married: But they thought him under the restrictions
that he had mentioned to the people below. I
might be assured, he told me, that his politeness before
them should be carried into the highest degree of reverence. 
When he is set upon any-thing, there is no knowing,
as I have said heretofore, what one can do (a) . 
But I will not, if I can help it, be made a shew of; 
especially to men of whose characters and principles I
have no good opinion. I am, my dearest friend, 
Your ever-affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 
&dotup;Mr. Lovelace in his next Letter gives an account of his
quick return: Of his reasons to the Lady for it: Of
her displeasure upon it: And of her urging his absence
from the safety she was in from the situation of
the house, except she were to be traced out by his visits. 
&dotup;I was confoundedly puzzled, says he, on this occasion,
and on her insisting upon the execution of a
too-ready offer which I made her to go down to Berks,
to bring up my Cousin Charlotte to visit and attend
her. I made miserable excuses; and, fearing that
they would be mortally resented, as her passion
began to rise upon my saying Charlotte was delicate,
which she took strangely wrong, I was obliged to
screen myself behind the most solemn and explicit declarations. 
&dotup;He then repeats those declarations, to the same effect
with the account she gives of them. 
&dotup;I began, says he, with an intention to keep my
Life of Honour in view, in the declarations I made
her; but, as it has been said of a certain orator in
the House of Commons, who more than once, in a
long speech, convinced himself as he went along, and
concluded against the side he set out intending to favour, 

so I in earnest pressed without reserve for Matrimony
in the progress of my harangue, which state
I little thought of urging upon her with so much
strength and explicitness. 
&dotup;He then values himself upon the delay that his proposal
of taking and furnishing a house must occasion. 
&dotup;He wavers in his resolutions whether to act honourably
or not, by a merit so exalted. 
&dotup;He values himself upon his own delicacy, in expressing
his indignation against her friends, for supposing
what he pretends his heart rises against them for presuming
to suppose. 
&dotup;But have I not reason, says he, to be angry with
her, for not praising me for this my delicacy, when
she is so ready to call me to account for the least
failure in punctilio? —However, I believe I can excuse
her too, upon this generous consideration [For
generous I am sure it is, because it is against myself]; 
That her mind being the essence of delicacy, the least
want of it shocks her; while the meeting with what
is so very extraordinary to me, is too familiar to her
to obtain her notice, as an extraordinary. 
&dotup;He glories in the story of the house, and of the young
Widow possessor of it, Mrs. Fretchville he calls her; 
and leaves it doubtful to Mr. Belford, whether it be
a real or fictitious story. 
&dotup;He mentions his different proposals in relation to the
Ceremony, which he so earnestly pressed for; and
owns his artful intention in avoiding to name the Day. 
&dotup;And now, says he, I hope soon to have an opportuity
to begin my operations; since all is Halcyon and
Security. 
&dotup;It is impossible to describe the dear Creature's sweet
and silent confusion, when I touched upon the matrimonial
topics. 

&dotup;She may doubt. She may fear. The wise in all
important cases will doubt, and will fear, till they
are sure. But her apparent willingness to think well
of a spirit so inventive, and so machinating, is a
happy prognostic for me. O these reasoning Ladies! 
—How I love these reasoning Ladies! —'Tis all over
with them, when once Love has crept into their
hearts: For then will they employ all their reasoning
Powers to excuse rather than to blame the conduct of
the doubted Lover, let appearances against him be
ever so strong.&dotup; 
Mowbray, Belton, and Tourville, long to see my
angel, and will be there. She has refused me; but must
be present notwithstanding. &dotup;So generous a spirit as
mine is, cannot enjoy its happiness without communication. 
If I raise not your envy and admiration
both at once, but half-joy will be the joy of having
such a charming Fly entangled in my web. She therefore
must comply. And thou must come.&dotup; And then
will I shew thee the pride and glory of the Harlowe family,
my implacable enemies; and thou shalt join with
me in my triumph over them all. 
&dotup;I know not what may still be the perverse Beauty's
fate: I want thee therefore to see and admire her,
while she is serene, and full of hope: Before her apprehensions
are realized, if realized they are to be; 
and if evil apprehensions of me she really has: Before
her beamy eyes have lost their lustre: While yet her
charming face is surrounded with all its virgin glories; 
and before the plough of disappointment has thrown
up furrows of distress upon every lovely feature.&dotup; 
If I can procure you this honour, you will be ready
to laugh out, as I have often much ado to forbear, at
the puritanical behaviour of the Mother before this Lady. 
Not an oath, not a curse, nor the least free word,
escapes her lips. She minces in her gaite. She prims
up her horse-mouth. Her voice, which when she pleases,
is the voice of thunder, is sunk into an humble whine. 

Her stiff hams, that have not been bent to a civility for
ten years past, are now limbered into courtesies three-deep
at every word. Her fat arms are crossed before
her; and she can hardly be prevailed upon to sit in the
presence of my goddess. 
I am drawing up instructions for ye all to observe on
Monday night. 
Saturday night. 
Most confoundedly alarmed! —Lord, Sir, what
do you think? cried Dorcas —My Lady is resolved to
go to Church to-morrow! I was at Quadrille with the
women below—To Church! said I; and down I laid
my cards. To Church! repeated they, each looking
upon the other. We had done playing for that night. 
Who could have dreamt of such a whim as this? — 
Without notice, without questions! Her cloaths not
come! No leave asked! —Impossible she should think
of being my wife! —Besides, she don't consider, if she
go to Church, I must go too! —Yet not to ask for my
company! —Her Brother and Singleton ready to snap
her up, as far as she knows! —Known by her cloaths! 
—Her person, her features, so distinguished! —Not
such another woman in England! To Church of all
places! —Is the devil in the girl? said I, as soon as I
could speak. 
Well, but to leave this subject till to-morrow morning,
I will now give you the Instructions I have drawn
up for yours and your companions behaviour on Monday
night. 
Instructions to be observed by John Belford, Richard
Mowbray, Thomas Belton, and James Tourville,
Esquires of the Body to General Robert Lovelace, on
their admission to the presence of his Goddess. 
&dotup;Ye must be sure to let it sink deep into your heavy
heads, that there is no such Lady in the world,
as Miss Clarissa Harlowe; and that she is neither 

more nor less than Mrs. Lovelace, though at present,
to my shame be it spoken, a Virgin. 
&dotup;Be mindful also, that your old Mother's name,
after that of her Mother when a Maid, is Sinclair: 
That her Husband was a Lieutenant-colonel, and all
that you, Belford, know from honest Doleman's Letter
of her (a) , that let your brethren know. 
&dotup;Mowbray and Tourville, the two greatest blunderers
of the four, I allow to be acquainted with the
Widow and Nieces, from the knowledge they had of
the Colonel. They will not forbear familiarities of
speech to the Mother, as of longer acquaintance than
a day. So I have suited their parts to their capacities. 
&dotup;They may praise the Widow and the Colonel for
people of great honour—But not too grosly; nor to
labour the point so as to render themselves suspected. 
&dotup;The Mother will lead ye into her own and the
Colonel's praises; and Tourville and Mowbray may
be both her vouchers—I, and you, and Belton, must
be only hearsay confirmers. 
&dotup;As poverty is generally suspectible, the Widow
must be got handsomely aforehand; and no doubt but
she is. The elegance of her house and furniture, and
her readiness to discharge all demands upon her, which
she does with ostentation enough, and which makes
her neighbours, I suppose, like her the better, demonstrate
this. She will propose to do handsome things
by her two Nieces. Sally is near Marriage—with an
eminent Woolen-draper in the Strand, if ye have a
mind to it; for there are five or six of them there. 
&dotup;The Nieces may be enquired after, since they will
be absent, as persons respected by Mowbray and Tourville,
for their late worthy Uncle's sake. 
&dotup;Watch ye diligently every turn of my countenance; 
every motion of my eye; for in my eye, and in my
countenance, will ye find a sovereign regulator.&dotup; I
need not bid you respect me mightily: Your allegiance 

obliges ye to that: And who that sees me, respects me
not? 
&dotup;Priscilla Partington (for her looks so innocent, and
discretion so deep, yet seeming so softly) may be greatly
relied upon. She will accompany the Mother, gorgeously
dressed, with all her Jew's extravagance
flaming out upon her; and first induce, then countenance,
the Lady. She has her cue, and I hope will
make her acquaintance coveted by my Charmer. 
&dotup;Miss Partington's history is this: The Daughter of
Col. Sinclair's Brother-in-law: That Brother-in-law
may have been a Turky merchant, or any merchant,
who died confoundedly rich: The Colonel one of her
guardians [Collateral credit in that to the Old one]: 
Whence she always calls Mrs. Sinclair Mamma; tho'
not succeeding to the trust. 
&dotup;She is just come to pass a day or two, and then to
return to her surviving guardian's at Barnet. 
&dotup;Miss Partington has suitors a little hundred (her
Grandmother, an Alderman's Dowager, having left
her a great additional fortune); and is not trusted out
of her guardian's house, without an old gouvernante
noted for discretion, except to her Mamma Sinclair; 
with whom now-and-then she is permitted to be for a
week together. 
&dotup;Prisc. will Mamma-up Mrs. Sinclair, and will undertake
to court her guardian to let her pass a delightful
week with her—Sir Edward Holden, he may as
well be, if your shallow pates will not be clogged
with too many circumstantials. Lady Holden perhaps
will come with her; for she always delighted in her
Mamma Sinclair's company; and talks of her, and
her good management, twenty times a day. 
&dotup;Be it principally thy part, Jack, who art a parading
fellow, and aimest at wisdom, to keep thy
brother-varlets from blundering; for, as thou must
have observed from what I have written, we have
the most watchful and most penetrating Lady in the 

world to deal with: A Lady worth deceiving! But
whose eyes will pierce to the bottom of your shallow
souls the moment she hears you open. Do thou therefore
place thyself between Mowbray and Tourville: 
Their toes to be played upon and commanded by thine,
if they go wrong: Thy elbows to be the ministers of
approbation. 
&dotup;As to your general behaviour; No hypocrisy! —I
hate it: So does my Charmer. If I had studied for it,
I believe I could have been an hypocrite: But my general
character is so well known, that I should have
been suspected at once, had I aimed at making myself
too white. But what necessity can there be for hypocrisy,
unless the generality of the Sex were to refuse
us for our immortalities? The best of them love to
have the credit of reforming us. Let the sweet souls
try for it: If they fail, their intent was good. That
will be a consolation to them. And as to us, our
work will be the easier; our sins the fewer: Since
they will draw themselves in with a very little of our
help; and we shall save a parcel of cursed Falshoods,
and appear to be what we are both to Angels and
Men—Mean time their very Grandmothers will acquit
us, and reproach them with their Self-do, Self-have; 
and as having erred against knowlege, and ventured
against manifest appearances. What folly therefore
for men of our character to be hypocrites! 
&dotup;Be sure to instruct the rest, and do thou thyself remember,
not to talk obscenely.&dotup; You know I never
permitted any of you to talk obscenely. Time enough
for that, when ye grow old, and can only talk. &dotup;Besides,
ye must consider Prisc's affected character, my
Goddess's real one. Far from obscenity therefore, do
not so much as touch upon the double Entendre.&dotup; 
What! as I have often said, cannot you touch a Lady's
heart, without wounding her ear? 
&dotup;It is necessary, that ye should appear worse men
than myself. You cannot help appearing so, you'll 

say. Well then, there will be the less restraint upon
you—The less restraint, the less affectation. —And if
Belton begins his favourite subject in behalf of Keeping,
it may make me take upon myself to oppose him: 
But fear not; I shall not give the argument all my
force. 
&dotup;She must have some curiosity, I think, to see what
sort of men my companions are: She will not expect
any of you to be saints. Are ye not men born to
considerable fortunes, altho' ye are not all of ye men
of parts? Who is it in this mortal life, that wealth
does not mislead? And as it gives people the power of
being mischievous, does it not require great virtue to
forbear the use of that power? Is not the devil said to
be the god of this world? Are we not children of this
world? Well then! Let me tell thee my opinion— 
It is this, That were it not for the Poor and the
Middling, the world would probably, long ago, have
been destroyed by Fire from Heaven. Ingrateful
wretches the rest, thou wilt be apt to say, to make
such sorry returns, as they generally do make, to the
poor and the middling!&dotup; 
This dear Lady is prodigiously learned in Theories. 
But as to Practics, as to Experimentals, must be, as
you know from her tender years, a mere novice. Till
she knew me, I dare say, she did not believe, whatever
she had read, that there were such fellows in the
world, as she will see in you four. I shall have much
pleasure in observing how she'll stare at her company,
when she finds me the politest man of the five. 
&dotup;And so much for Instructions general and particular
for your behaviour on Monday night. 
&dotup;And let me add, that you must attend to every
minute circumstance, whether you think there be
reason in it, or not. Deep, like golden ore, frequently
lies my meaning, and richly worth digging
for. The hint of least moment, as you may imagine
it, is often pregnant with events of the greatest. Be 

implicit. Am not I your General? Did I ever lead
you on, that I brought ye not off with safety and
success, sometimes to your own stupid astonishment?&dotup; 
And now, methinks, thou art curious to know,
what can be my view in risquing the displeasure of my
Fair-one, and alarming her fears, after four or five
halcyon days have gone over our heads? —I'll satisfy
thee. 
The visitors of the two Nieces will croud the house. 
Beds will be scarce. Miss Partington, a sweet modest
genteel girl, will be prodigiously taken with my
Charmer; will want to begin a friendship with her. 
A share in her bed for one night only, will be requested. 
Who knows, but on that very Monday night I may
be so unhappy, as to give mortal offence to my Beloved? 
The shiest birds may be caught napping. Should she attempt
to fly me upon it, cannot I detain her? Should she
actually fly, cannot I bring her back by authority civil
or uncivil, if I have evidence upon evidence that she
acknowleged, though but tacitly, her Marriage? —And
should I, or should I not succeed, and she forgive me, or
if she but descend to expostulate, or if she bear me in her
sight; then will she be all my own. All delicacy is my
Charmer. I long to see how such a delicacy, on any of
these occasions, will behave. And in my situation it
behoves me to provide against every accident. 
I must take care, knowing what an Eel I have to do
with, that the little wriggling rogue does not slip thro'
my fingers. How silly should I look, staring after her,
when she had shot from me into the muddy river, her
family, from which with so much difficulty I have
taken her! 
Well then; here are—Let me see—How many persons
are there who, after Monday night, will be able
to swear, that she has gone by my name, answered to
my name, had no other view in leaving her friends,
but to go by my name? Her own relations neither able
nor willing to deny it. —First, here are my Servants; 

her Servant Dorcas; Mrs. Sinclair; Mrs. Sinclair's
two Nieces; and Miss Partington. 
But for fear these evidences should be suspected, here
comes the jet of the business—‘No less than four worthy
gentlemen, of fortune and family, who were all
in company such a night particularly, at a collation
to which they were invited by Robert Lovelace, of
Sandoun-hall in the county of Lancaster, Esquire, in
company with Magdalen Sinclair widow, and Priscilla
Partington spinster, and the Lady complainant; 
when the said Robert Lovelace addressed himself to
the said Lady, on a multitude of occasions, as his
wife; as they and others did, as Mrs. Lovelace; 
every one complimenting and congratulating her upon
her nuptials; and that she received such their compliments
and congratulations with no other visible
displeasure or repugnance, than such as a young
Bride, full of blushes and pretty confusion, might be
supposed to express upon such contemplative revolvings
as those compliments would naturally inspire.’ 
Nor do thou rave at me, Jack, nor rebel. —Dost think
I brought the dear creature hither for nothing? 
And here's a faint sketch of my plot. —Stand by,
varlets—Tanta-ra-ra-ra! —Veil your bonnets, and
confess your master! 