



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Tuesday, March 21. 
How willingly would my dear Mother shew kindness
to me, were she permitted! None of this
persecution should I labour under, I am sure, if that
regard were paid to her prudence and fine understanding,
which they so well deserve. Whether owing to
her, or to my Aunt, or to both, that a new trial was
to be made upon me, I cannot tell; but this morning
her Shorey delivered into my hand the following condescending
Letter. 

For so I must still call you; since dear you may
be to me, in every sense of the word—We have
taken into particular consideration, some hints that fell
yesterday from your good Norton, as if we had not,
at Mr. Solmes's first application, treated you with
that condescension, wherewith we have in all other
instances treated you. If it even had been so, my dear,
you were not excusable to be wanting in your part,
and to set yourself to oppose your Father's will in a
point into which he had entered too far, to recede 

with honour. But all yet may be well. On your
single will, my child, depends all our happiness. 
Your Father permits me to tell you, that if you
now at last comply with his expectations, all past disobligations
shall be buried in oblivion, as if they had
never been: But withal, that this is the last time that
that grace will be offered you. 
I hinted to you, you must remember (a) , that patterns
of the richest silks were sent for. They are come. 
And as they are come, your Father, to shew how
much he is determined, will have me send them up to
you. I could have wished they might not have accompanied
this Letter—But there is no great matter
in that. I must tell you, that your delicacy is not to
be quite so much regarded, as I had once thought it
deserved to be. 
These are the newest, as well as richest, that we
could procure; answerable to our station in the world; 
answerable to the fortune, additional to your Grandfather's
Estate, designed you; and to the noble Settlements
agreed upon. 
Your Father intends you six Suits (three of them
dressed Suits) at his own expence. You have an entire
new Suit; and one besides, which I think you
never wore but twice. As the new Suit is rich, if you
chuse to make That one of the six, your Father will
present you with an hundred guineas in lieu. 
Mr. Solmes intends to present you with a set of
jewels. As you have your Grandmother's and your
own, if you chuse to have the former new-set, and
to make them serve, his present will be made in
money; a very round sum—which will be given in
full property to yourself; besides a fine annual allowance
for pin-money, as it is called. So that your objection
against the spirit of a man you think worse of
than it deserves, will have no weight; but you will
be more independent than a Wife of less discretion 

than we attribute to you, perhaps ought to be. You
know full well, that I, who first and last brought a
still larger fortune into the family than you will carry
to Mr. Solmes, had not a provision made me of near
This that we have made for you. —Where people
marry to their liking, terms are the least things stood
upon. —Yet should I be sorry if you cannot (to oblige
us all) overcome a dislike. 
Wonder not, Clary, that I write to you thus plainly
and freely upon this subject. Your behaviour hitherto
has been such, that we have had no opportunity of
entering minutely into the subject with you. Yet,
after all that has passed between you and me in conversation,
and between you and your Uncles by Letter,
you have no room to doubt what is to be the consequence. 
—Either, child, we must give up our authority,
or you your humour. You cannot expect the
one. We have all the reason in the world to expect
the other. You know I have told you more than
once, that you must resolve to have Mr. Solmes, or
never to be looked upon as our child. 
The draught of the Settlements you may see whenever
you will. We think there can be no room for
objection to any of the articles. There is still more
in them in our family's favour, than was stipulated at
first, when your Aunt talked of them to you. More
so, indeed, than we could have asked. If, upon perusal
of them, you think any alteration necessary, it shall be
made. —Do, my dear girl, send to me within this day
or two, or rather ask me, for the perusal of them. 
As a certain person's appearance at church so lately,
and what he gives out every-where, make us extremely
uneasy, and as that uneasiness will continue
while you are single, you must not wonder that a
short day is intended. This-day-fortnight we design
it to be, if you have no objection to make that I shall
approve of. But if you determine as we would have
you, and signify it to us, we shall not stand with you
for a week or so. 

Your sightliness of person may perhaps make some
think this alliance disparaging. But I hope you will
not put such a personal value upon yourself: If you
do, it will indeed be the less wonder that person should
weigh with you (however weak the consideration!) in
another man. 
Thus we Parents, in justice, ought to judge: That
our two Daughters are equally dear and valuable to us: 
If so, why should Clarissa think that a disparagement,
which Arabella would not (nor we for her) have
thought any, had the address been made to her? — 
You will know what I mean by this, without my explaining
myself further. 
Signify to us, now, therefore, your compliance with
our wishes. And then there is an end of your confinement. 
An act of oblivion, as I may call it, shall
pass upon all your former refractoriness: And you
will once more make us happy in you, and in one
another. You may, in this case, directly come down
to your Father and me, in his Study; where we will
give you our opinions of the patterns, with our hearty
forgiveness and blessings. 
Come, be a good child, as you used to be, my
Clarissa. I have (notwithstanding your past behaviour,
and the hopelesness which some have expressed of your
compliance) undertaken this one time more for you. 
Discredit not my hopes, my dear girl. I have promised
never more to interfere between your Father
and you, if this my most earnest application succeed
not. I expect you down, Love. Your Father expects
you down. But be sure don't let him see any-thing
unchearful in your compliance. If you come,
I will clasp you to my fond heart, with as much pleasure
as ever I pressed you to it in my whole life. You
don't know what I have suffered within these few
weeks past; nor ever will be able to guess, till you
come to be in my situation; which is that of a fond
and indulgent Mother, praying night and day, and 

struggling to preserve, against the attempts of more
ungovernable spirits, the peace and union of her family. 
But you know the terms. Come not near us, if
you resolve to be undutiful: But this, after what I
have written, I hope you cannot be. 
If you come directly, and, as I said, chearfully, as
if your heart were in your duty (and you told me it
was free, you know) I shall then, as I said, give you
the most tender proofs, how much I am 
Your truly affectionate Mother. 
Think for me, my dearest friend, how I must be
affected by this Letter; the contents of it so surprisingly
terrifying, yet so sweetly urged! —O why, cried
I to myself, am I obliged to undergo this severe conflict
between a command that I cannot obey, and language
so condescendingly moving! —Could I have
been sure of being struck dead at the altar before the
ceremony had given the man I hate a title to my
vows, I think I could have submitted to have been led
to it. But to think of living with and living for a
man one abhors, what a sad thing is that! 
And then, how could the glare of habit and ornament
be supposed any inducement to one, who has
always held, that the principal view of a good Wife
in the adorning of her person, ought to be, to preserve
the affection of her Husband, and to do credit to his
choice; and that she should be even fearful of attracting
the eyes of others? —In this view, must not the
very richness of the patterns add to my disgusts? — 
Great encouragement indeed, to think of adorning
one's self to be the Wife of Mr. Solmes!— 
Upon the whole, it was not possible for me to go
down upon the prescribed condition. Do you think
it was? —And to write, if my Letter would have been
read, what could I write that would be admitted, and
after what I had written and said to so little effect? 

I walked backward and forward. I threw down
with disdain the patterns. Now to my closet retired
I; then quitting it, threw myself upon the Settee; 
then upon this chair; then upon that; then into one
window, then into another—I knew not what to do! 
—And while I was in this suspense, having again taken
up the Letter to re-peruse it, Betty came in, reminding
me, by order, That my Papa and Mamma waited
for me in my Father's study. 
Tell my Mamma, said I, that I beg the favour of
seeing her here for one moment; or to permit me to
attend her any-where by herself. 
I listened at the stairs-head—You see, my dear,
how it is, cried my Father, very angrily: All your
condescension (as your indulgence heretofore) is
thrown away. You blame your Son's violence, as you
call it [I had some pleasure in hearing this]; but nothing
else will do with her. You shall not see her
alone. Is my presence an exception to the bold creature? 
Tell her, said my Mother to Betty, she knows
upon what terms she may come down to us. Nor
will I see her upon any other. 
The maid brought me this Answer. I had recourse
to my pen and ink; but I trembled so, that I
could not write, nor knew I what to say, had I had
steadier fingers. At last Betty brought me these lines
from my Father. 

Undutiful and perverse Clarissa,
No condescension, I see, will move you. Your
Mother shall not see you; nor will I. Prepare
however to obey. You know our pleasure. Your
Uncle Antony, your Brother, and your Sister, and
your favourite Mrs. Norton, shall see the ceremony
performed privately at your Uncle's chapel. And
when Mr. Solmes can introduce you to us, in the
temper we wish to behold you in, we may perhaps 

forgive his Wife, altho' we never can, in any other
character, our perverse Daughter. As it will be so
privately performed, cloaths and equipage may be provided
afterwards. So prepare to go to your Uncle's
for an early day in next week. We will not see you
till all is over: And we will have it over the sooner,
in order to shorten the time of your deserved confinement,
and our own trouble in contending with such a
rebel, as you have been of late. I will hear no pleas. 
I will receive no Letter, nor Expostulation. Nor shall
you hear from me any more till you have changed
your name to my liking. This from 
Your incensed Father. 
If this resolution be adhered to, then will my Father
never see me more! —For I will never be the
Wife of that Solmes—I will die first!— 
Tuesday Evening. 
HE, this Solmes, came hither soon after I had received
my Father's Letter. He sent up to beg leave
to wait upon me—I wonder at his assurance!— 
I said to Betty, who brought me his message, Let
him restore an unhappy creature to her Father and
Mother, and then I may hear what he has to say. But,
if my friends will not see me on his account, I will
not see him upon his own. 
I hope, Miss, said Betty, you will not send me
down with this Answer. He is with your Papa and
Mamma. 
I am driven to despair, said I. I cannot be used
worse. I will not see him. 
Down she went with my Answer. She pretended,
it seems, to be loth to repeat it: So was commanded out
of her affected reserves, and gave it in its full force. 
O how I heard my Father storm! 
They were all together, it seems, in his Study. 
My Brother was for having me turned out of the house 

that moment, to Lovelace, and my evil destiny. My
Mother was pleased to put in a gentle word for me: 
I know not what it was: But thus she was answered— 
My dear, this is the most provoking thing in the world
in a woman of your good sense! —To love a rebel,
as well as if she were dutiful. What encouragement
for duty is this? —Have I not loved her as well as ever
you did? And why am I changed? Would to the
Lord, your Sex knew how to distinguish! It is plain,
that she relies upon her power over you. The fond
Mother ever made a hardened child! 
She was pleased, however, to blame Betty, as the
wench owned, for giving my Answer its full force. 
But my Father praised her for it. 
The wench says, That he would have come up in
his wrath, at my refusing to see Mr. Solmes, had not
my Brother and Sister prevailed upon him to the contrary. 
I wish he had! —And, were it not for his own sake,
that he had killed me! 
Mr. Solmes condescended [I am mightily obliged
to him, truly!] to plead for me. 
They are all in tumults! How it will end, I know
not—I am quite weary of my life—So happy, till
within these few weeks! —So miserable now! 
Well, indeed, might my Mother say, That I should
have severe trials (a) . 
P. S. The Idiot [such a one am I treated like!] is
begged, as I may say, by my Brother and Sister. 
They have desired, that I may be consigned over
entirely to their management. If it be granted [It
is granted, on my Father's part, I understand, but
not yet on my Mother's] what cruelty may I not
expect from their envy, jealousy, and ill-will! —I
shall soon see, by its effects, if I am to be so consigned— 
This is a written intimation privately 

dropt in my Woodhouse-walk, by my Cousin Dolly
Hervey. The dear girl longs to see me, she tells
me: But is forbidden till she see me as Mrs. Solmes,
or as consenting to be his. I will take example by
their perseverance! —Indeed I will!— 