



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

Well sayest thou, that mine is the most plotting
heart in the world. Thou dost me honour; 
and I thank thee heartily. Thou art no bad
judge. How like Boileau's parson, I strut behind
my double chin! Am I not obliged to deserve thy
compliment? And wouldst thou have me repent of a
murder before I have committed it? 
‘The Virtues and Graces are this Lady's handmaids. 
She was certainly born to adorn the age
she was given to.’ —Well said, Jack—‘And would
be an ornament to the first dignity.’ But what
praise is that, unless the first dignity were adorned
with the first merit? —Dignity! gewgaw! —First
dignity! thou idiot! —Art thou, who knowest me,
so taken with Ermine and Tinsel? —I, who have won
the gold, am only fit to wear it. For the future therefore
correct thy style, and proclaim her the ornament
of the happiest man, and (respecting herself and Sex)
the greatest conqueror in the world. 
Then, that she loves me, as thou imaginest, by no
means appears clear to me. Her conditional offers 

to renounce me; the little confidence she places in
me; entitle me to ask, What merit can she have
with a man, who won her in spite of herself; and
who fairly, in set and obstinate battle, took her prisoner? 
As to what thou inferrest from her Eye when with
us, thou knowest nothing of her Heart from that, if
thou imaginest there was one glance of Love shot
from it. Well did I note her Eye, and plainly did I
see, that it was all but just civil disgust to me and to
the company I had brought her into. Her early retiring
that night, against all entreaty, might have convinced
thee, that there was very little of the gentle in
her heart for me. And her Eye never knew what it
was to contradict her Heart. 
She is, thou sayest, All mind. So say I. But why
shouldst thou imagine, that such a mind as hers,
meeting with such a one as mine; and, to dwell
upon the word, meeting with an inclination in hers; 
should not propagate minds like her own? 
&dotup;Were I to take thy stupid advice, and marry; 
what a figure should I make in Rakish annals! 
The Lady in my power: Yet not having intended
to put herself in my power: Declaring against
Love, and a Rebel to it: So much open-eyed caution: 
No confidence in my honour: Her family
expecting the worst hath passed; herself seeming to
expect, that the worst will be attempted: [Priscilla
Partington for that!] What! wouldst thou
not have me act in character? 
&dotup;But why callest thou the Lady innocent? And
why sayst thou she loves me? 
&dotup;By innocent, with regard to me, and not taken
as a general character, I must insist upon it, she is
not innocent. Can she be innocent, who, by wishing
to shackle me in the prime and glory of my
youth, with such a capacity as I have for noble
mischief (a) , would make my perdition more certain, 

were I to break, as I doubt I should, the
most solemn vow I could make? I say, no man
ought to take even a common oath, who thinks
he cannot keep it. This is conscience! This is
honour! —And when I think I can keep the Marriage-vow,
then will it be time to marry.&dotup; 
No doubt of it, as thou sayest, the devils would
rejoice in the fall of such a woman. But this is my
confidence, that I shall have it in my power to marry
when I will. And if I do her this justice, shall I not
have a claim to her gratitude? And will she not think
herself the Obliged, rather than the Obliger? Then,
let me tell thee, Belford, it is impossible so far to hurt
the morals of this Lady, as thou and thy brother-varlets
have hurt others of the Sex, who now are casting
about the town firebrands and double death. Take
ye that thistle to mumble upon. 
* *
&dotup;A short interruption. I now resume. 
&dotup;That the morals of this Lady cannot fail, is a consideration
that will lessen the guilt on both sides. 
And if, when subdued, she knows but how to middle
the matter between Virtue and Love, then will
she be a Wife for me: For already I am convinced,
that there is not a woman in the world that
is Love-proof and Plot-proof, if she be not the
person. 
&dotup;And now imagine (the Charmer overcome) thou
seest me sitting supinely cross-kneed, reclining on
my soffa, the god of Love dancing in my eyes, and
rejoicing in every mantling feature; the sweet
rogue, late such a proud rogue, wholly in my power,
moving up slowly to me, at my beck, with heaving
sighs, half-pronounced upbraidings from murmuring
lips, her finger in her eye, and quickening
her pace at my Come hither, Dearest? 
&dotup;One hand stuck in my side, the other extended
to encourage her bashful approach—Kiss me, Love! 

—Sweet, as Jack Belford says, are the joys that
come with willingness. 
&dotup;She tenders her purple mouth [Her coral lips
will be purple then, Jack!]: Sigh not so deeply,
my Beloved! —Happier hours await thy humble
love, than did thy proud resistance. 
&dotup;Once more bend to my ardent lips the swanny
glossiness of a neck late to stately.— 
&dotup;There's my precious!— 
&dotup;Again!— 
&dotup;Obliging Loveliness!— 
&dotup;O my ever-blooming Glory! —I have try'd thee
enough. —To-morrow's Sun— 
&dotup;Then I rise, and fold to my almost-talking heart
the throbbing-bosom'd Charmer. 
&dotup;And now shall thy humbled pride confess its
obligation to me!— 
&dotup;To-morrow's Sun—And then I disengage myself
from the bashful Passive, and stalk about the
room—To-morrow's Sun shall gild the Altar at
which my vows shall be paid thee! 
&dotup;Then, Jack, the rapture! then the darted sunbeams
from her gladdened eye, drinking up at one
sip, the precious distillation from the pearl-dropt
cheek! Then hands ardently folded, eyes seeming
to pronounce, God bless my Lovelace! to supply
the joy-locked tongue: Her transports too strong,
and expression too weak, to give utterance to her
grateful meanings! —All—All the studies—All
the studies of her future life vowed and devoted
(when she can speak) to acknowlege and return
the perpetuated obligation! 
&dotup;If I could bring my Charmer to this, would it
not be the Eligible of Eligibles? —Is it not worth
trying for? —As I said, I can marry her when I will. 
She can be nobody's but mine, neither for shame,
nor by choice, nor yet by address: For who, that
knows my character, believes that the worst she
dreads, is now to be dreaded? 

&dotup;I have the highest opinion that man can have
(thou knowest I have) of the merit and perfections
of this admirable woman; of her virtue and honour
too; altho' thou, in a former, art of opinion, that
she may be overcome (a) . Am I not therefore obliged
to go further, in order to contradict thee, and,
as I have often urged, to be sure, that she is what
I really think her to be, and, if I am ever to marry
her, hope to find her? 
&dotup;Then this Lady is a mistress of our passions: No
one ever had to so much perfection the Art of moveing. 
This all her family know, and have equally
feared and revered her for it. This I know too; 
and doubt not more and more to experience. How
charmingly must this divine creature warble forth
(if a proper occasion be given) her melodious Elegiacs! 
—Infinite beauties are there in a weeping eye. 
I first taught the two nymphs below to distinguish
the several accents of the Lamentable in a new subject,
and how admirably some, more than others,
become their distresses.&dotup; 
But to return to thy objections—Thou wilt perhaps
tell me, in the names of thy Brethren, as well as
in thy own name, That among all the objects of your
respective attempts, there was not one of the rank and
merit of my charming Miss Harlowe. 
But let me ask, Has it not been a constant maxim
with us, that the greater the merit on the woman's
side, the nobler the victory on the man's? And as to
rank, sense of honour, sense of shame, pride of family,
may make rifled rank get up, and shake itself
to rights: And if any thing come of it, such a one
may suffer only in her pride, by being obliged to
take up with a second-rate match instead of a first; 
and, as it may fall out, be the happier, as well as the
more useful, for the misadventure; since (taken off
of her public gaddings, and domesticated by her disgrace) 

she will have reason to think herself obliged
to the man who has saved her from further reproach; 
while her fortune and alliance will lay an obligation upon
him; and her past fall, if she have prudence and
consciousness, will be his present and future security. 
But a poor girl [Such a one as my Rosebud for instance]
having no recalls from education; being
driven out of every family that pretends to reputation; 
persecuted most perhaps by such as have only
kept their secret better; and having no refuge to fly
to—The Common, the Stews, the Street, is the fate
of such a poor wretch; Penury, Want, and Disease,
her sure attendants; and an untimely End perhaps
closes the miserable scene. 
And will ye not now all join to say, that it is
more manly to attack a Lion than a Sheep? —Thou
knowest, that I always illustrated my Eagleship, by
aiming at the noblest quarries; and by disdaining to
make a stoup of wrens, phyl-tits (a) , and wag-tails. 
The worst respecting myself, in the case before
me, is, that my triumph, when completed, will be so
glorious a one, that I shall never be able to keep up
to it. All my future attempts must be poor to this. 
I shall be as unhappy, after a while, from my reflections
upon this conquest, as Don John of Austria
was, in his, on the renowned victory of Lepanto,
when he found that none of his future atchievements
could keep pace with his early glory. 
I am sensible, that my pleas and my reasonings may
be easily answered, and perhaps justly censured; but
by whom censured? Not by any of the Confraternity,
whose constant course of life, even long before I
became your General, to this hour, has justified what
ye now, in a fit of squeamishness, and thro' envy, 

condemn. Having therefore vindicated myself and
my intentions to You, that is all I am at present
concerned for. 
Be convinced then, that I (according to our principles)
am right, thou wrong; or, at least, be silent. 
But I command thee to be convinced. And in thy next,
be sure to tell me that thou art. 