



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Sat. Morning, Sept. 2. 
I have some little pleasure given me by thine,
just now brought me. I see now that thou hast
a little humanity left. Would to heaven, for the
dear Lady's sake, as well as for thy own, that thou
hadst romaged it up from all the dark forgotten corners
of thy soul a little sooner! 
The Lady is alive, and serene, and calm, and has
all her noble intellects clear and strong: But Nineteen
will not however save her. She says, she will now
content herself with her Closet-duties, and the visits
of the Parish-minister; and will not attempt to go
out. Nor, indeed, will she, I am afraid, ever walk
up or down a pair of stairs again. 
I am sorry at my soul to have this to say: But it
would be a folly to flatter thee. 
As to thy seeing her, I believe the least hint of
that sort, now, would cut off some hours of her life. 
What has contributed to her serenity, it seems, is,
That, taking the alarm her fits gave her, she has entirely 

finished, and signed and sealed, her Last Will: 
Which she had deferred doing till this time, in hopes,
as she said, of some good news from Harlowe-Place; 
which would have induced her to alter some
passages in it. 
Miss Howe's Letter was not given her till Four in
the afternoon, yesterday; at what time the messenger
returned for an Answer. She admitted him into
her presence in the Dining-room, ill as she then was; 
and she would have written a few lines, as desired by
Miss Howe; but, not being able to hold a pen, she
bid the messenger tell her, that she hoped to be well
enough to write a long Letter by the next day's post; 
and would not now detain him. 
Saturday, Six in the Afternoon. 
I called just now, and found the Lady writing
to Miss Howe. She made me a melancholy compliment,
that she shewed me not Miss Howe's Letter,
because I should soon have that and all her papers before
me. But she told me, that Miss Howe had very
considerately obviated to Colonel Morden several
things which might have occasioned misapprehensions
between him and me; and had likewise put a lighter
construction, for the sake of peace, on some of your
actions, than they deserved. 
She added, That her Cousin Morden was warmly
engaged in her favour with her friends: And one
good piece of news Miss Howe's Letter contained; 
that her Father would give up some matters, which
(appertaining to her of right) would make my Executorship
the easier in some particulars that had given
her a little pain. 
She owned she had been obliged to leave off (in the
Letter she was writing) thro' weakness. 
Will. says, he shall reach you to-night. I shall
send in the morning; and if I find her not worse,
will ride to Edgware, and return in the afternoon. 