


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Friday, Feb. 10. 
One of Mr. Greville's servants has just been
here, with his master's compliments. So the
wretch is come to town. I believe I shall soon be able
to oblige him: He wishes, you know, to provoke
me to say I hate him. 
Surely I draw inconveniencies upon myself by being
so willing to pay civility for esteem. Yet it is in my
nature to do so, and I can't help it without committing
a kind of violence on my temper. There is no
merit, therefore, in my behaviour, on such occasions. 
Very pretty self-deception! —I study my own ease, and
(before I consider) am ready to call myself patient, and
good-humoured, and civil, and to attribute to myself
I know not how many kind and complaisant things,
when I ought, in modesty, to distinguish between the
virtue and the necessity. 

I never was uncivil, as I call it, but to one young
gentleman; a man of quality (you know who I mean); 
and that was, because he wanted me to keep secret his
addresses to me, for family considerations. The young
woman who engages to keep her lover's secrets in this
particular, is often brought into a plot against herself,
and oftener still against those to whom she owes unreserved
honour and duty: And is not such a conduct
also an indirect confession, that you know you are engaging
in something wrong and unworthy? 
Mr. Greville's arrival vexes me. I suppose it will
not be long before Mr. Fenwick comes too. I have a
good mind to try to like the modest Mr. Orme the
better, in spite. 
Sat. Morn. Feb. 11. 
I Shall have nothing to trouble you with, I think,
but scenes of courtship. Sir Rowland, Sir Hargrave,
and Mr. Greville, all met just now at our breakfast-time. 
Sir Rowland came first; a little before breakfast was
ready. After enquiries of Mr. Reeves whether I held
in the same mind, or not; he desired to have the favour
of one quarter of an hour's conversation with me
alone. 
Methinks I have a value for this honest knight. 
Honesty, my Lucy, is good sense, politeness, amiableness,
all in one. An honest man must appear in every
light with such advantages, as will make even singularity
agreeable. I went down directly. 
He met me; and taking my not-withdrawn hand,
and peering in my face, Mercy, said he; the same
kind aspect! The same sweet and obliging countenance! 
How can this be? But you must be gracious! You
will. Say you will. 
You must not urge me, Sir Rowland. You will
give me pain if you lay me under a necessity to repeat— 
Repeat what? Don't say a refusal. Dear madam, 

don't say a refusal! Will you not save a life? Why,
madam, my poor boy is absolutely and bona fide
broken-hearted. I would have had him come with
me: But, no, he could not bear to teaze the beloved
of his soul! Why there's an instance of love now! 
Not for all his hopes, not for his life's sake, could he
bear to teaze you! None of your fluttering Jack-a
dandy's, now, would have said this! And let not
such succeed, where modest merit fails! —Mercy! You
are struck with my plea! Don't, don't, God bless
you now, don't harden your heart on my observation. 
I was resolved to set out in a day or two: But I will
stay in town, were it a month, to see my boy made
happy. And let me tell you, I would not wish him
to be happy unless he could make you so. —Come,
come— 
I was a little affected. I was silent. 
Come, come, be gracious; be merciful. Dear
lady, be as good as you look to be. One word of
comfort for my poor boy. I could kneel to you for one
word of comfort—Nay, I will kneel, taking hold of
my other hand, as he still held one; and down on his
knees dropt the honest knight. 
I was surprised. I knew not what to say, what to
do. I had not the courage to attempt to lift him up. 
Yet to see a man of his years, and who had given
himself a claim to my esteem, kneel; and, with glistening
eyes, looking up to me for mercy, as he called it,
on his boy; how was I affected! —But, at last, Rise,
dear Sir Rowland, rise, said I: You call out for
mercy to me; yet have none upon me. O how you
distress me! 
I would have withdrawn my hands; but he held
them fast. I stamped in tender passion (I am sure
it was in tender passion) now with one foot, now
with the other; Dear Sir Rowland, rise! I cannot bear
this. I beseech you rise [And down I dropt involuntarily
on one knee]. What can I say? Rise, dear Sir, 

on my knee I beg of you kneel not to me? Indeed,
Sir, you greatly distress me! Pray let go my hands. 
Tears ran down his cheeks—And do I distress you,
madam! And do you vouchsafe to kneel to me? —I
will not distress you: For the world I will not distress
you. 
He arose, and let go my hands. I arose too, abashed. 
He pulled out his handkerchief, and hastening from
me to the window, wiped his eyes. Then turning to
me, What a fool I am! What a mere child I make
of myself! How can I blame my boy? O madam!
have you not one word of comfort to send by me to
my boy? Say, but, you will see him. Give him
leave to wait on you: Yet, poor soul! [wiping his
eyes again] he would not be able to say a word in his
own behalf. —Bid me bring him to you: Bid us come
together. 
And so I could, and so I would, Sir Rowland, if
no other expectations were to be formed than those
of civility. But I will go farther to shew my regard
for you, Sir: Let me be happy in your friendship,
and good opinion: Let me look upon you as my father:
Let me look upon Mr. Fowler as my brother:
I am not so happy, as to have either father or brother. 
And let Mr. Fowler own me as his sister; and every
visit you make me, you will both, in these characters,
be dearer to me than before. —But, O my father!
(already will I call you father!) Urge not your daughter
to an impossibility! 
Mercy! Mercy! What will become of me! What
will become of my boy, rather! 
He turned from me, with his handkerchief at his
eyes again, and even sobbed: Where are all my purposes! 
Irresistible lady! —But must I give up my hopes? 
Must my boy be told—And yet, do you call me father;
and do you plead for my indulgence as if you
were my daughter? 
Indeed I do; indeed I must. I have told Mr. Fowler, 

with so much regard for him, as an honest, as a
worthy man— 
Why that's the weapon that wounds him, that cuts
him to the heart! Your gentleness, your openness— 
And are you determined? Can there be no hope? 
Mr. Fowler is my brother, Sir; and you are my father. 
Accept me in those characters. 
Accept you! Mercy! Accept you? —Forgive me,
madam [catching my hand, and pressing it with his
lips] you do me honour in the appellation: But if
your mind should change on consideration, and from
motives of pity— 
Indeed, indeed, Sir Rowland, it cannot change. 
Why then, I, as well as my nephew, must acquiesce
with your pleasure. But, madam, you don't know
what a worthy creature he is. I will not, however,
teaze you? —But how, but how, shall I see Mr. Reeves? 
I am ashamed to see him with this baby in my face. 
And I, Sir Rowland, must retire before I can appear. 
Excuse me, Sir (withdrawing); but I hope you
will breakfast with us. 
I will drink tea with you, madam, if I can make
myself fit to be seen, were it but to claim you for my
daughter: But yet had much rather you would be a
farther remove in relation: Would to God you would
let it be but niece!— 
I courtesied, as a daughter might do, parting with
her real father; and withdrew. 
And now, my Lucy, will you not be convinced
that one of the greatest pains (the loss of dear friends
excepted) that a grateful mind can know, is to be too
much beloved by a worthy heart, and not to be able
to return his love? 
My sheet is ended. With a new one I will begin
another letter. —Yet a few words in the margin—I
tell you not, my dear, of the public entertainments
to which lady Betty is continually contriving to draw
me out. She intends by it to be very obliging, and is 

so. But my present reluctance to go so very often,
must not be overcome, as it possibly would be too
easily done, were I to give way to the temptation. 
If it be, your Harriet may turn gadfly, and never be
easy but when she is forming parties, or giving way
to them, that may make the home, that hitherto has
been the chief scene of her pleasures, undelightful to
her. Bad habits are sooner acquired than shaken off,
as my grandmamma has often told us. 

