



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Monday Morning, March 27. 
This morning early my Uncle Harlowe came
hither. He sent up the inclosed very tender
Letter. It has made me wish I could oblige him. 
You will see how Mr. Solmes's ill qualities are glossed
over in it. What blemishes does affection hide! — 
But perhaps they may say to me, What faults does
antipathy bring to light! 
Be pleased to send me back this Letter of my Uncle
by the first return. 

Sunday Night, or rather Monday Morning. 
I must answer you, tho' against my own resolution. 
Every-body loves you; and you know they do. 
The very ground you walk upon is dear to most of
us. But how can we resolve to see you? There is
no standing against your looks and language. It is
our Love makes us decline to see you. How can
we, when you are resolved not to do what we are
resolved you shall do? I never, for my part, loved
any creature, as I loved you from your infancy till
now. And indeed, as I have often said, Never was
there a young creature so deserving of our Love. 
But what is come to you now! Alas! alas! my dear
Kinswoman, how you fail in the trial! 

I have read the Letters you inclosed. At a proper
time, I may shew them to my Brother and Sister. 
But they will receive nothing from you at present. 
For my part, I could not read your Letter to me,
without being unmanned. How can you be so unmoved
yourself, yet be so able to move every-body
else? How could you send such a Letter to Mr.
Solmes? Fie upon you! How strangely are you
altered! 
Then to treat your Brother and Sister as you did,
that they don't care to write to you, or to see you! 
Don't you know where it is written, That soft answers
turn away wrath? But if you will trust to
your sharp-pointed wit, you may wound: Yet a club
will beat down a sword: And how can you expect,
that they who are hurt by you will not hurt you
again? Was this the way you used to take to make
us all adore you, as we did? —No, it was your gentleness
of heart and manners, that made every-body,
even strangers, at first sight, treat you as a Lady, and
call you a Lady, tho' not born one, while your elder
Sister had no such distinctions paid her. If you were
envied, why should you sharpen envy, and file up its
teeth to an edge? —You see I write like an impartial
man, and as one that loves you still. 
But since you have displayed your talents, and
spared no-body, and moved every-body, without being
moved, you have but made us stand the closer and
firmer together. This is what I likened to an embattled
Phalanx, once before. Your Aunt Hervey
forbids your writing, for the same reason that I must
not countenance it. We are all afraid to see you,
because we know we shall be made as so many fools. 
Nay, your Mother is so afraid of you, that once or
twice, when she thought you was coming to force
yourself into her presence, she shut the door, and
locked herself in, because she knew she must not see
you upon your terms, and you are resolved you will
not see her upon hers. 

Resolve but to oblige us all, my dearest Miss Clary,
and you shall see how we will clasp you every one by
turns to our rejoicing hearts. If the one man has
not the wit, and the parts, and the person, of the
other, no one breathing has a worse heart than that
other: And is not the Love of all your friends, and
a sober man (if he be not so polished) to be preferred
to a debauchee, tho' ever so fine a man to look at? 
You have such talents, that you will be adored by
the one: But the other has as much advantage in
those respects, as you have yourself, and will not set
by them one straw: For Husbands are sometimes jealous
of their authority, with witty Wives. You will
have in one, a man of virtue. Had you not been so
rudely affronting to him, he would have made your
ears tingle with what he could have told you of the
other. 
Come, my dear Niece, let me have the honour of
doing with you what no-body else yet has been able
to do. Your Father, Mother, and I, will divide the
pleasure, and the honour, I will again call it, between
us; and all past offences shall be forgiven; and Mr.
Solmes, we will engage, shall take nothing amiss
hereafter, of what has passed. 
He knows, he says, what a jewel that man will
have, who can obtain your favour; and he will think
light of all he has suffered, or shall suffer, in obtaining
you. 
Dear, sweet creature, oblige us: And oblige us
with a grace. It must be done, whether with a grace
or not. I do assure you it must. You must not conquer
Father, Mother, Uncles, every-body: Depend
upon That. 
I have sat up half the night to write This. You
do not know how I am touched at reading yours, and
writing this. Yet will I be at Harlowe-Place early
in the morning. So, upon reading this, if you will
oblige us all, send me word to come up to your 

apartment: And I will lead you down, and present
you to the embraces of every one: And you will then
see, you have more of a Brother and Sister in them
both, than of late your prejudices will let you think
you have. This from one who used to love to stile
himself, 
Your paternal Uncle,
John Harlowe. 
In about an hour after this kind Letter was given
me, my Uncle sent up to know, If he should be a
welcome visitor, upon the terms mentioned in his
Letter? He bid Betty bring him down a verbal Answer: 
A written one, he said, would be a bad sign:
and he bid her therefore not bring a Letter. But I
had just finished the inclosed transcription of one I had
been writing. She made a difficulty to carry it; but
was prevailed upon to oblige me by a token which
these Mrs. Betty's cannot withstand. 

Dear and honoured Sir,
How you rejoice me by your condescending
goodness! —So kind, so paternal a Letter!—so
soothing to a wounded heart; and of late what I
have been so little used to! —How am I affected
with it! Tell me not, dear Sir, of my way of writeing: 
Your Letter has more moved me, than I have
been able to move any-body! —It has made me wish
with all my heart, that I could intitle myself to be
visited upon your own terms; and to be led down
to my Father and Mother by so good and so kind
an Uncle. 
I will tell you, dearest Sir, what I will do to make
my peace. I have no doubt that Mr. Solmes, upon
consideration, would greatly prefer my Sister to such
a strange averse creature as me. His chief, or one
of his chief motives in his address to me, is, as I have
reason to believe, the contiguity of my Grandfather's 

Estate to his own. I will resign it; for ever I will
resign it: And the resignation must be good, because
I will never marry at all. I will make it over to my
Sister, and her heirs for ever. I shall have no heirs,
but my Brother and her; and I will receive, as of
my Father's bounty, such an Annuity (not in lieu of
the Estate, but as of his bounty) as he shall be pleased
to grant me, if it be ever so small: And whenever I
disoblige him, he to withdraw it, at his pleasure. 
Will not This be accepted? —Surely it must— 
Surely it will! —I beg of you, dearest Sir, to propose
it; and second it with your interest. This will answer
every end. My Sister has a high opinion of Mr.
Solmes. I never can have any in the light he is proposed
to me. But as my Sister's Husband, he will
be always intitled to my respect; and shall have it. 
If this be accepted, grant me, Sir, the honour of
a visit; and do me then the inexpressible pleasure of
leading me down to the feet of my honoured Parents,
and they shall find me the most dutiful of children; 
and to the arms of my Brother and Sister, and they
shall find me the most obliging and most affectionate
of Sisters. 
I wait, Sir, for your answer to this proposal, made
with the whole heart of 
Your dutiful and most obliged Niece,
Cl. Harlowe. 
Monday Noon. 
I hope this will be accepted: For Betty tells me,
that my Uncle Antony and my Aunt Hervey are sent
for; and not Mr. Solmes; which I look upon as a
favourable circumstance. With what chearfulness
will I assign over this envied Estate! —What a much
more valuable consideration shall I part with it for! 
—The Love and Favour of all my relations! That
Love and Favour, which I used for Eighteen years
together to rejoice in, and be distinguished by! — 

And what a charming pretence will this afford me of
breaking with Mr. Lovelace! And how easy will it
possibly make him to part with me! 
I found this morning in the usual place, a Letter
from him, in answer, I suppose, to mine of Friday,
which I deposited not till Saturday. But I have not
opened it; nor will I, till I see what effect this new
offer will have. 
Let me but be permitted to avoid the man I hate; 
and I will give up with chearfulness, the man I could
prefer. To renounce the one, were I really to value
him as much as you seem to imagine, can give but a
temporary concern, which time and discretion will
alleviate. This is a sacrifice which a child owes to
parents and friends, if they insist upon its being made. 
But the other, to marry a man one cannot endure, is
not only a dishonest thing, as to the man; but it is
enough to make a creature who wishes to be a good
Wife, a bad or indifferent one, as I once wrote to
the man himself: And then she can hardly be either
a good Mistress, or a good Friend; or any-thing but
a discredit to her family, and a bad example to all
around her. 
Methinks I am loth, in the suspense I am in at present,
to deposit this, because it will be leaving you
in one as great: But having been prevented by Betty's
officiousness twice, I will now go down to my little
poultry; and if I have an opportunity, will leave it
in the usual place, where I hope to find something
from you. 