



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sat. Night, March 18. 
I have been frighted out of my wits—Still am in a
manner out of breath—Thus occasioned—I went
down, under the usual pretence, in hopes to find something
from you. Concerned at my disappointment,
I was returning from the Woodhouse, when I heard
a rustling as of somebody behind a stack of wood. I
was extremely surprised: But still more, to behold a
man coming from behind the furthermost stack. O,
thought I, at that moment, the sin of a prohibited
correspondence! 
In the same point of time that I saw him, he besought
me not to be frighted: And, still nearer approaching
me, threw open a horseman's coat: And
who should it be but Mr. Lovelace! —I could not
scream out (yet attempted to scream, the moment I
saw a man; and again, when I saw who it was); for
I had no voice: And had I not caught hold of a
prop which supported the old roof, I should have
sunk. 

I had hitherto, as you know, kept him at a distance; 
And now, as I recovered myself, judge of my first
emotions, when I recollected his character from every
mouth of my family; his enterprising temper; and
found myself alone with him, in a place so near a
bye-lane, and so remote from the house. 
But his respectful behaviour soon dissipated these
fears, and gave me others; lest we should be seen together,
and information of it given to my Brother: 
The consequences of which, I could readily think,
would be, if not further mischief, an imputed assignation,
a stricter confinement, a forfeited correspondence
with you, my beloved friend, and a pretence for the
most violent compulsion: And neither the one set of
reflections, nor the other, acquitted him to me for
his bold intrusion. 
As soon therefore as I could speak, I expressed with
the greatest warmth my displeasure; and told him,
that he cared not how much he exposed me to the
resentment of all my friends, provided he could gratify
his own impetuous humour. I then commanded
him to leave the place that moment; and was hurrying
from him, when he threw himself in the way at
my feet, beseeching my stay for one moment; declaring,
that he suffered himself to be guilty of this
rashness, as I thought it, to avoid one much greater: — 
For, in short, he could not bear the hourly insults he
received from my family, with the thoughts of having
so little interest in my favour, that he could not promise
himself that his patience and forbearance would
be attended with any other issue than to lose me for
ever, and be triumphed over and insulted upon it. 
This man, you know, has very ready knees. You
have said, that he ought in small points, frequently
to offend, on purpose to shew what an address he is
master of. 
He ran on, expressing his apprehensions that a temper
so gentle and obliging, as he said mine was, to 

every-body but him (and a dutifulness so exemplary
inclining me to do my part to others, whether they
did theirs or not by me) would be wrought upon in
favour of a man set up in part to be revenged upon
myself, for my Grandfather's envied distinction of
me; and in part to be revenged upon him, for having
given life to one, who would have taken his; and
now sought to deprive him of hopes dearer to him
than life. 
I told him, he might be assured, that the severity
and ill-usage I met with would be far from effecting
the proposed end: That altho' I could, with great sincerity,
declare for a Single Life (which had always
been my choice); and particularly, that if ever I
married, if they would not insist upon the man I had
an aversion to, it should not be with the man they
disliked— 
He interrupted me here: He hoped I would forgive
him for it; but he could not help expressing his
great concern, that, after so many instances of his
passionate and obsequious devotion— 
And pray, Sir, said I, let me interrupt you in my
turn;—Why don't you assert, in still plainer words,
the obligation you have laid me under by this your
boasted devotion? Why don't you let me know, in
terms as high as your implication, that a perseverance
I have not wished for, which has set all my relations
at variance with me, is a merit that throws upon me
the guilt of ingratitude for not answering it as you
seem to expect? 
I must forgive him, he said, if he, who pretended
only to a comparative merit (and otherwise thought
no man living could deserve me) had presumed to
hope for a greater share in my favour, than he had
hitherto met with, when such men as Mr. Symmes,
Mr. Wyerley, and now, lastly, so vile a reptile as
this Solmes, however discouraged by myself, were
made his competitors. As to the perseverance I mentioned, 

it was impossible for him not to persevere: 
But I must needs know, that were he not in being,
the terms Solmes had proposed were such, as would
have involved me in the same difficulties with my
relations that I now laboured under. He therefore
took the liberty to say, that my favour to him, far
from encreasing those difficulties, would be the readiest
way to extricate me from them. They had
made it impossible [he told me, with too much truth]
to oblige them any way, but by sacrificing myself to
Solmes. They were well apprised besides of the difference
between the two; one, whom they hoped to
manage as they pleased; the other, who could and
would protect me from every insult; and who had
natural prospects much superior to my Brother's
foolish views of a Title. 
How comes this man to know so well all our foibles? 
But I more wonder, how he came to have a
notion of meeting me in this place? 
I was very uneasy to be gone; and the more as
the night came on apace. But there was no getting
from him, till I had heard a great deal more of what
he had to say. 
As he hoped, that I would one day make him the
happiest man in the world, he assured me, that he
had so much regard for my fame, that he would be
as far from advising any step that was likely to cast a
shade upon my reputation (altho' that step was to be
ever so much in his own favour) as I would be to
follow such advice. But since I was not to be permitted
to live single, he would submit it to my consideration,
whether I had any way but one to avoid the
intended violence to my inclinations—My Father so
jealous of his Authority: Both my Uncles in my
Father's way of thinking: My Cousin Morden at a
distance: My Uncle and Aunt Hervey awed into
insignificance, was his word: My Brother and Sister
inflaming every one: Solmes's offers captivating: 

Miss Howe's Mother rather of party with them, for
motives respecting example to her own Daughter. 
And then he asked me, if I would receive a Letter
from Lady Betty Lawrance, on this occasion: For
Lady Sarah Sadleir, he said, having lately lost her
only child, hardly looked into the world, or thought
of it farther than to wish him married, and preferably
to all the women in the world, with me. 
To be sure, my dear, there is a great deal in what
the man said—I may be allowed to say This, without
an imputed glow or throb. —But I told him nevertheless,
that altho' I had great honour for the Ladies
he was related to, yet I should not chuse to receive a
Letter on a subject that had a tendency to promote an
end I was far from intending to promote: That it
became me, ill as I was treated at present, to hope
every-thing, to bear every-thing, and to try every-thing: 
When my Father saw my stedfastness, and
that I would die rather than have Mr. Solmes, he
would perhaps recede— 
Interrupting me, he represented the unlikelihood
there was of that, from the courses they had entered
upon; which he thus enumerated: —Their engaging
Mrs. Howe against me, in the first place, as a person
I might have thought to fly to, if pushed to desperation:  —My brother continually buzzing in my Father's
ears, that my Cousin Morden would soon arrive,
and then would insist upon giving me possession of my
Grandfather's Estate, in pursuance of the Will; which
would render me independent of my Father: —Their
disgraceful confinement of me: —Their dismissing so
suddenly my servant, and setting my Sister's over me: 
—Their engaging my Mother, contrary to her own
judgment, against me: These, he said, were all so
many flagrant proofs that they would stick at nothing
to carry their point; and were what made him inexpressibly
uneasy. 
He appealed to me, whether ever I knew my Father 

recede from any resolution he had once fixed; 
especially, if he thought either his Prerogative, or his
Authority, concerned in the question. His acquaintance
with our family, he said, enabled him to give
several instances (but they would be too grating to
me) of an arbitrariness that had few examples even
in the Families of Princes: An arbitrariness, which
the most excellent of women, my Mother, too severely
experienced. 
He was proceeding, as I thought, with reflections
of this sort; and I angrily told him, I would not
permit my Father to be reflected upon; adding, That
his severity to me, however unmerited, was not a
warrant for me to dispense with my duty to him. 
He had no pleasure, he said, in urging any-thing
that could be so construed; for, however well warranted
he was to make such reflections from the provocations
they were continually giving him, he knew
how offensive to me any liberties of this sort would
be. —And yet he must own, that it was painful to
him, who had youth and passions to be allowed for,
as well as others; and who had always valued himself
upon speaking his mind; to curb himself, under
such treatment. Nevertheless, his consideration for me
would make him confine himself, in his observations,
to facts that were too flagrant, and too openly avowed,
to be disputed. It could not therefore justly displease,
he would venture to say, if he made this natural inference
from the premises, That if such were my Father's
behaviour to a Wife who disputed not the imaginary
Prerogative he was so unprecedentedly fond of
asserting, what room had a Daughter to hope, that
he would depart from an Authority he was so earnest,
and so much more concerned, to maintain? —Family-interests
at the same time engaging; an aversion, however
causlesly conceived, stimulating; my Brother's
and Sister's resentments and selfish views co-operateing; 
and my banishment from their presence depriveing 

me of all personal plea or entreaty in my own favour. 
How unhappy, my dear, that there is but too
much reason for these observations, and for this inference; 
made, likewise, with more coolness and respect
to my family than one would have apprehended from
a man so much provoked, and of passions so high,
and generally thought uncontroulable! 
Will you not question me about throbs and glows,
if, from such instances of a command over his fiery
temper, for my sake, I am ready to infer, that were
my friends capable of a Reconciliation with him, he
might be affected by arguments apparently calculated
or his present and future good? Nor is it a very bad
findication, that he has such moderate notions of that
very high Prerogative in Husbands, of which we in
our family have been accustomed to hear so much. 
He represented to me, that my present disgraceful
confinement was known to all the world: That neither
my Sister nor Brother scrupled to represent me as
an obliged and favoured child in a state of actual rebellion: —That, nevertheless, every-body who knew
me was ready to justify me for an aversion to a man
whom every-body thought utterly unworthy of me,
and more fit for my Sister: That unhappy as he was,
in not having been able to make any greater impression
upon me in his favour, all the world gave me to
him: —Nor was there but one objection made to
him, by his very enemies (his birth, his fortunes, his
prospects all unexceptionable, and the latter splendid); 
and that objection, he thanked God, and my example,
was in a fair way of being removed for ever: 
Since he had seen his error, and was heartily sick of
the courses he had followed; which, however, were
far less enormous than malice and envy had represented
them to be. But of This he should say the
less, as it were much better to justify himself by his
actions, than by the most solemn asseverations and 

promises. And then complimenting my person, he
assured me (for that he always loved virtue, altho' he
had not followed its rules as he ought) that he was
still more captivated with the graces of my mind: 
And would frankly own, that till he had the honour
to know me, he had never met with an inducement
sufficient to enable him to overcome an unhappy kind
of prejudice to Matrimony; which had made him
before impenetrable to the wishes and recommendations
of all his relations. 
You see, my dear, he scruples not to speak of himself,
as his enemies speak of him. I can't say, but his
openness in these particulars gives a credit to his other
professions. I should easily, I think, detect an hypocrite: 
And this man particularly, who is said to have
allowed himself in great liberties, were he to pretend
to instantaneous lights and convictions—at his time of
life too—Habits, I am sensible, are not so easily
changed. You have always joined with me in remarking,
that he will speak his mind with freedom,
even to a degree of unpoliteness sometimes; and that
his very treatment of my family is a proof that he
cannot make a mean court to any-body for interest-sake
—What pity, where there are such laudable traces,
that they should have been so mired, and choaked up,
as I may say! —We have heard, that the man's head
is better than his heart: But do you really think
Mr. Lovelace can have a very bad heart? Why should
not there be something in Blood in the human creature,
as well as in the ignobler animals? None of
his family are exceptionable—but himself, indeed. 
The characters of the Ladies are admirable—But I
shall incur the imputation I wish to avoid. Yet what
a look of censoriousness does it carry in an unsparing
friend, to take one to task for doing that justice, and
making those charitable inferences in favour of a particular
person, which one ought without scruple to
do, and to make, in the behalf of any other man
living? 

He then again pressed me to receive a Letter of
offered protection from Lady Betty. He said, that
people of birth stood a little too much upon punctilio; 
as people of virtue also did (But indeed Birth, worthily
lived up to, was Virtue: Virtue, Birth; the
inducements to a decent punctilio the same; the origin
of both, one) [How came this notion from him!]—: 
Else, Lady Betty would write to me: But she would
be willing to be first apprised, that her offer would be
well received—as it would have the appearance of
being made against the liking of one part of my family; 
and which nothing would induce her to make,
but the degree of unworthy persecution which I actually
laboured under, and had reason further to apprehend. 
I told him, that, however greatly I thought myself
obliged to Lady Betty Lawrance, if this offer came
from herself; yet it was easy to see to what it led. It
might look like vanity in me perhaps to say, That
this urgency in him, on this occasion, wore the face
of art, in order to engage me into measures from
which I might not easily extricate myself. I said, that
I should not be affected by the splendor of even a
Royal Title. Goodness, I thought, was Greatness: 
That the excellent characters of the Ladies of his
family weighed more with me, than the consideration
that they were Half-sisters to Lord M. and Daughters
of an Earl: That he would not have found encouragement
from me, had my friends been consenting to
his address, if he had only a mere relative merit to
those Ladies: Since, in that case, the very reasons that
made me admire them, would have been so many objections
to their kinsman. 
I then assured him, that it was with infinite concern,
that I had found myself drawn into an epistolary
correspondence with him; especially since that
correspondence had been prohibited: —And the only
agreeable use I could think of making of this unexpected 

and undesired Interview, was, to let him know,
that I should from henceforth think myself obliged to
discontinue it. And I hoped, that he would not have
the thought of engaging me to carry it on by menacing
my relations. 
There was light enough to distinguish, that he
looked very grave upon this. He so much valued
my free choice, he said, and my unbiassed favour
(scorning to set himself upon a foot with Solmes in the
compulsory methods used in that man's behalf) that
he should hate himself, were he capable of a view of
intimidating me by so very poor a method. But, nevertheless,
there were two things to be considered: 
First, That the continual outrages he was treated
with; the spies set over him, one of which he had
detected; the indignities all his family were likewise
treated with; as also, myself; avowedly in malice to
him, or he should not presume to take upon himself
to resent for me, without my leave [The artful wretch
saw he would have lain open here, had he not thus
guarded]—All these considerations called upon him to
shew a proper resentment: And he would leave it to
me to judge, whether it would be reasonable for him,
as a man of spirit, to bear such insults, if it were not
for my sake. I would be pleased to consider, in the
next place, whether the situation I was in (a prisoner
in my Father's house, and my whole family determined
to compel me to marry a man unworthy of
me; and that speedily, and whether I consented or
not) admitted of delay in the preventive measures he
was desirous to put me upon, in the last resort only. 
Nor was there a necessity, he said, if I were actually
in Lady Betty's protection, that I should be his, if,
afterwards, I should see any-thing objectible in his
conduct. 
But what would the world conclude would be the
end, I demanded, were I, in the last resort, as he 

proposed, to throw myself into the protection of his
friends, but that it was with such a view? 
And what less did the world think now, he asked,
than that I was confined that I might not? You are to
consider, Madam, you have not now an option; and
to whom it is owing that you have not; and that you
are in the power of those (Parents why should I call
them?) who are determined, that you shall not have
an option. All I propose is, that you will embrace
such a protection;—but not till you have tried every
way, to avoid the necessity for it. 
And give me leave to say, proceeded he, that if a
correspondence on which I have founded all my hopes,
is, at this critical conjuncture, to be broken off; and
if you are resolved not to be provided against the worst; 
it must be plain to me, that you will at last yield to
That worst—Worst to me only—It cannot be to you— 
And then! [and he put his hand clenched to his forehead]
how shall I bear the supposition? —Then will
you be That Solmes's! —But, by all that's Sacred, neither
He, nor your Brother, nor your Uncles, shall enjoy
their triumph-Perdition seize my Soul, if they shall! 
The man's vehemence frightened me: Yet, in resentment,
I would have left him; but, throwing himself
at my feet again, Leave me not thus—I beseech
you, dearest Madam, leave me not thus, in despair. 
I kneel not, repenting of what I have vowed in such
a case as That I have supposed. I re-vow it, at your
feet! —And so he did. But think not it is by way
of menace, or to intimidate you to favour me. If your
heart inclines you [and then he arose] to obey your
Father (your Brother, rather) and to have Solmes; 
altho' I shall avenge myself on those who have insulted
me, for their insults to myself and family; yet will I
tear out my heart from This bosom (if possible with
my own hands) were it to scruple to give up its ardors
to a woman capable of such a preference. 
I told him, that he talked to me in very high language; 

but he might assure himself, that I never would
have Mr. Solmes (Yet that this I said not in favour to
him) and I had declared as much to my relations,
were there not such a man as himself in the world. 
Would I declare, that I would still honour him with
my correspondence? —He could not bear, that, hoping
to obtain greater instances of my favour, he should
forfeit the only one he had to boast of. 
I bid him forbear rashness or resentment to any of
my family, and I would, for some time at least, till
I saw what issue my present trials were likely to have,
proceed with a correspondence, which, nevertheless,
my heart condemned— 
And his spirit him, the impatient creature said, interrupting
me, for bearing what he did; when he considered,
that the necessity of it was imposed upon him,
not by my will (for then he would bear it chearfully,
and a thousand times more) but by creatures—And
there he stopt. 
I told him plainly, that he might thank himself
(whose indifferent character, as to morals, had given
such a handle against him) for all. It was but just,
that a man should be spoken evil of, who set no value
upon his own reputation. 
He offered to vindicate himself: But I told him, I
would judge him by his own rule—by his actions, not
by his professions. 
Were not his enemies, he said, so powerful, and
so determined; and had they not already shewn their
intentions in such high acts of even cruel compulsion; 
but would leave me to my choice, or to my
desire of living single; he would have been content
to undergo a twelvemonth's probation, or more: But
he was confident, that one month would either complete
all their purposes, or render them abortive: And
I best knew what hopes I had of my Father's receding
—He did not know him, if I had any. 
I said, I would try every method, that either my 

duty or my influence upon any of them should suggest,
before I would put myself into any other protection: 
And, if nothing else would do, would resign
the envied Estate; and that I dared to say would. 
He was contented, he said, to abide that issue. He
should be far from wishing me to embrace any other
protection, but, as he had frequently said, in the last
necessity. But, dearest creature, said he, catching my
hand with ardor, and pressing it to his lips, if the
yielding up that Estate will do—Resign it;—and be
mine—And I will corroborate, with all my soul, your
resignation! 
This was not ungenerously said: But what will not
these men say to obtain belief, and a power over one? 
I made many efforts to go; and now it was so
dark, that I began to have great apprehensions. I
cannot say from his behaviour: Indeed, he has a good
deal raised himself in my opinion by the personal
respect, even to reverence, which he paid me during
the whole conference: For altho' he flamed out once,
upon a supposition that Solmes might succeed, it was
upon a supposition that would excuse passion, if any-thing
could, you know, in a man pretending to love
with fervor; altho' it was so levelled, that I could not
avoid resenting it. 
He recommended himself to my favour at parting,
with great earnestness, yet with as great submission; 
not offering to condition any-thing with me; altho'
he hinted his wishes for another meeting: Which I
forbad him ever attempting again in the same place. — 
And I will own to you, from whom I should be really
blameable to conceal any-thing, that his arguments
(drawn from the disgraceful treatment I meet with)
of what I am to expect, make me begin to apprehend,
that I shall be under an obligation to be either the one
man's or the other's—And if so, I fansy I shall not
incur your blame, were I to say, which of the two it
must be. You have said, which it must not be. But, 

O my dear, the Single Life is by far the most eligible
to me: Indeed it is. And I hope yet to be permitted
to make that option. 
I got back without observation: But the apprehension
that I should not, gave me great uneasiness; and
made me begin my Letter in a greater flutter than he
gave me cause to be in, except at the first seeing him; 
for then indeed my spirits failed me; and it was a
particular felicity, that, in such a place, in such a
fright, and alone with him, I fainted not away. 
I should add, That having reproached him with
his behaviour the last Sunday at church, he solemnly
assured me, That it was not what had been represented
to me: That he did not expect to see me there: 
But hoped to have an opportunity to address himself
to my Father, and to be permitted to attend him
home. But that the good Dr. Lewen had persuaded
him not to attempt speaking to any of the family, at
that time; observing to him the emotions into which
his presence had put every-body. He intended no
pride, or haughtiness of behaviour, he assured me; 
and that the attributing such to him was the effect of
that ill-will which he had the mortification to find insuperable: 
Adding, That when he bowed to my
Mother, it was a compliment he intended generally
to every one in the pew, as well as to her, whom he
sincerely venerated. 
If he may be believed (and I should think he would
not have come purposely to defy my family, yet expect
favour from me) one may see, my dear, the force of
hatred, which misrepresents all things: —Yet why
should Shorey (except officiously to please her principals)
make a report in his disfavour? He told me,
That he would appeal to Dr. Lewen for his justification
on this head; adding, That the whole conversation
between the Doctor and him turned upon his
desire to attempt to reconcile himself to us all, in the
face of the church; and upon the Doctor's endeavouring 

to dissuade him from making such a public overture,
till he knew how it would be accepted. But to
what purpose his appeal, when I am debarred from
seeing that good man, or any one who would advise
me what to do in my present difficult situation! 
In fansy, my dear, however, that there would hardly
be a guilty person in the world, were each suspected or
accused person to tell his or her own Story, and be
allowed any degree of credit. 
I have written a very long Letter. 
To be so particular as you require in subjects of conversation,
it is impossible to be short. 
I will add to it only the assurance, That I am, and
ever will be, 
Your affectionate and faithful
Friend and Servant,
Cl. Harlowe. 
You'll be so good, my dear, as to remember, that
the date of your last Letter to me, was the 9th. 