



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Monday, P. M. May 15. 
Now indeed, is it evident, my best, my only
friend, that I have but one choice to make. 
And now do I find, that I have carried my resentment
against this man too far; since now I am to appear
as if under an obligation to his patience with
me for a conduct, that, perhaps, he will think, if
not humoursome and childish, plainly demonstrative
of my little esteem of him; of but a secondary
esteem at least, where before, his pride, rather than 

his merit, had made him expect a first. O my dear!
—to be under obligation to, and to be cast upon a
man, that is not a generous man! —That is, indeed,
a cruel man! —That is capable of creating a distress
to a young creature, who by her evil destiny, is
thrown into his power; and then of enjoying it, as I
may say! [I verily think I may say so, of this savage!] 
—What a fate is mine! 
You give me, my dear, good advice, as to the peremptory
manner in which I ought to treat him: But
do you consider to whom it is that you give that
advice? 
The occasion for it should never have been given
by me, of all creatures; for I am unequal, utterly
unequal to it! —What, I, to challenge a man for a
husband! —I, to exert myself to quicken the delayer
in his resolutions! And, having lost an opportunity,
to begin to try to recal it, as from myself, and for
myself! —To threaten him, as I may say, into the
marriage-state! —O my dear! if this be right to be
done, how difficult is it, where Modesty and Self (or
where Pride, if you please) is concerned to do that
right? Or, to express myself in your words, to be
father, mother, uncle, to myself! —Especially where
one thinks a triumph over one is intended. —Do,
my dear, advise me, persuade me, to renounce the
man for ever: And then I will for ever renounce
him! 
You say, you have tried Mrs. Norton's weight with
my mamma. —Bad as the returns are which my application
by Mr. Hickman has met with, you tell me,
you have not acquainted me with all the bad; nor
now, perhaps, ever will. But why so, my dear? What
is the bad, what can be the bad, which now you will
never tell me of? —What worse, than renounce me!
and for ever! ‘My uncle, you say, believes me ruin'd: 
He declares, that he can believe every thing
bad of a creature, who could run away with a man: 

And they have all made a resolution, not to stir an
inch in my favour; no, not to save my life.’ 
Have you worse than this, my dear, behind? — 
Surely my father has not renewed his dreadful malediction! 
—Surely, if so, my mamma has not joined
in it! Have my uncles given it their sanction, and
made it a family act! What, my dear, is the worst,
that you will leave for ever unrevealed? 
O Lovelace! why comest thou not just now; 
while these black prospects are before me? For now,
couldst thou look into my heart, wouldst thou see a
distress worthy of thy barbarous triumph! 
* *
I was forced to quit my pen. 
And you say you have try'd Mrs. Norton's weight
with my mamma? 
What is done, cannot be help'd: But I wish you
had not taken any step, in a matter so very concerning
to me, without first consulting me. —Forgive me,
my dear;—but that high-soul'd and noble friendship,
which you avow with so obliging, and so uncommon
a warmth, at the same time, that it is the subject of
my grateful admiration, is no less, because of its fervor,
the ground of my apprehension! 
Well, but now, to look forward, you are of opinion,
that I must be his: And that I cannot leave him
with reputation to myself, whether with or without
his consent. I must, if so, make the best of the bad
matter. 
He went out in the morning; intending not to return
to dinner, unless (as he sent me word) I would
admit him to dine with me. 
I excused myself. The man, whose anger is now to
be of such high importance to me, was, it seems,
displeased. 
As he, as well as I, expected, that I should receive
a letter from you this day, by Collins, I suppose he
will not be long before he returns; and then, possibly, 

he is to be mighty stately, mighty mannish,
mighty coy, if you please! And then must I be very
humble, very submissive, and try to whine myself into
his good graces: With downcast eye, if not by
speech, beg his forgivenness for the distance I have so
perversely kept him at! —Yes, I warrant you! —But
I'll see how this behaviour will sit upon me! —You
have always railly'd me upon my meekness, I think! 
Well then, I'll try, if I can be still meeker, shall I! — 
O my dear!— 
But let me sit with my hands before me, all patience,
all resignation; for I think I hear him coming
up. —Or shall I roundly accost him, in the words, in
the form, you, my dear, have prescrib'd? 
He is come in. —He has sent to me, all impatience
in his aspect, Dorcas says. —But I cannot, cannot
see him! 
Monday Night. 
The contents of your letter, and my own heavy
reflections, render'd me incapable of seeing this expecting
man! —The first word he asked Dorcas, was,
If I had received a letter since he had been out? —She
told me this; and her answer, That I had; and was
fasting, and had been in tears ever since. 
He sent to desire an interview with me. 
I answer'd by her, That I was not very well. In
the morning, if better, I would see him as soon as he
pleased. 
Very humble! was it not, my dear? —Yet he was
too royal to take it for humility; for Dorcas told me,
he rubb'd one side of his face impatiently; and said a
rash word, and was out of humour; stalking about
the room. 
Half an hour after, he sent again; desiring very
earnestly, that I would admit him to supper with
me. He would enter upon no subjects of conversation,
but what I should lead to. 

So I should have been at liberty, you see, to court
him! 
I again desired to be excused. 
Indeed, my dear, my eyes were swelled: I was
very low-spirited; and could not think of entering
all at once, after several days distance, into the freedom
of conversation, which my friends utter rejection
of me, as well as your opinion, have made necessary. 
He sent up to tell me, that as he heard I was fasting,
if I would promise to eat some chicken which
Mrs. Sinclair had order'd for supper, he would acquiesce. 
—Very kind in his anger! —Is he not? 
I promised him. Can I be more preparatively condescending? 
—How happy, I'll warrant you, if I may
meet him in a kind and forgiving humour! 
I hate myself! —But I won't be insulted. Indeed
I won't! for all this. 