



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, Aug. 22. 
I must write on, to divert myself: For I can get no rest; 
no refreshing rest. I awaked just now in a cursed
fright. How a man may be affected by dreams! 
‘Methought I had an interview with my beloved. I
found her all goodness, condescension, and forgiveness. 
She suffer'd herself to be overcome in my favour by the
joint intercessions of Lord M, Lady Sarah, Lady Betty,
and my two cousins Montague, who waited upon her in
deep mourning; the ladies in long trains sweeping after
them; Lord M. in a long black mantle trailing after
him. They told her, they came in these robes to express
their sorrow for my sins against her, and to implore
her to forgive me. 
‘I myself, I thought, was upon my knees, with a
sword in my hand, offering either to put it up in the
scabbard, or to thrust it into my heart, as she should command
the one or the other. 
‘At that moment her cousin Morden, I thought, all of
a sudden, flash'd in thro' a window, with his drawn
sword—Die, Lovelace, said he! this instant die, and be
damned, if in earnest thou repairest not by marriage my
cousin's wrongs! 
‘I was rising to resent this insult, I thought, when
Lord M. run between us with his great black mantle,
and threw it over my face: And instantly, my charmer,
with that sweet voice which has so often played upon
my ravished ears, wrapped her arms round me, muffled
as I was in my Lord M's mantle, O spare, spare my
Lovelace! And spare, O Lovelace, my beloved cousin
Morden! Let me not have my distresses augmented by
the fall of either or both of those who are so dear to me. 
‘At this, charmed with her sweet mediation, I thought
I would have clasped her in my arms: When immediately
the most angelic form I had ever beheld, vested
all in transparent white, descended from a ceiling,
which, opening, discovered a ceiling above that, stuck 

round with golden cherubs and glittering seraphs, all
exulting, Welcome, welcome, welcome! and, encircling
my charmer, ascended with her to the region of seraphims; 
and instantly, the opening ceiling closing, I lost
sight of her, and of the bright form together, and found
wrapt in my arms her azure robe (all stuck thick with
stars of embossed silver), which I had caught hold of in
hopes of detaining her; but was all that was left me of
my beloved Miss Harlowe. And then (horrid to relate!)
the floor sinking under me, as the ceiling had opened for
her, I dropt into a hole more frightful than that of Elden; 
and, tumbling over and over down it, without view
of a bottom, I awaked in a panic; and was as effectually
disordered for half an hour, as if my dream had
been a reality.’ 
Wilt thou forgive me troubling thee with such visionary
stuff? Thou wilt see by it, only, that, sleeping or waking,
my Clarissa is always present with me. 
But here this moment is Will. come running hither to
tell me, that his lady actually returned to her lodgings last
night between eleven and twelve, and is now there, tho'
very ill. 
I hasten to her. But, that I may not add to her indisposition,
by any rough or boisterous behaviour, I will be
as soft and gentle as the dove herself in my addresses to
her. 

That I do love her, O all ye host of heaven,
Be witness!—That she is dear to me!
Dearer than day to one whom sight must leave;
Dearer than life, to one who fears to die;
The chair is come. I fly to my beloved. 