



Dear Father and Mother,
John says you wept when you read my
last Letters, that he carry'd. I am sorry you
let him see that; for they all mistrust already how
Matters are; and as it is no Credit, that I have been
attempted; tho' it is that I have resisted; yet I am
sorry they have Cause to think so evil of my Master
from any of us. 
Mrs. Jervis, has made up her Accounts with Mr.
Longman; and I believe will stay again. I am glad
of it, for her own sake, and for my Master's; for
she has a good Master of him; so indeed all have, but
poor me! —and he has a good Housekeeper in
her. 
Mr. Longman, it seems, took upon him to talk to
my Master, how faithful and careful of his Interests
she was, and how exact in her Accounts; and he
told him, there was no Comparison between her Accounts
and Mrs. Jewkes's, at the Lincolnshire Estate. 

He said so many fine Things, it seems, of Mrs. Jervis,
that my Master sent for her in Mr. Longman's Presence,
and said, I might come along with her: I
suppose to mortify me, that I must go while she was
to stay: But as, when I go away, I am not to go
with her, nor she with me; so I did not matter it
much; only it would have been creditable to such
a poor Girl, that the House-keeper would bear me
Company, if I went. 
Said he, to her, Well Mrs. Jervis, Mr. Longman
says you have made up your Accounts with him,
with your usual Fidelity and Exactness. I had a good
mind to make you an Offer of continuing with me,
if you can be a little sorry for your hasty Words,
which indeed were not so respectful as I have deserv'd
at your Hands. She seem'd at a sad Loss
what to say, because Mr. Longman was there, and
she could not speak of the Occasion of those Words,
which was me. 
Indeed, said Mr. Longman, I must needs say before
your Face, that since I have known my Master's
Family, I have never found such good Management,
and so much Love and Harmony too. I wish the
Lincolnshire Estate was as well serv'd! —No more
of that, said my Master; but Mrs. Jervis may stay,
if she will; and here, Mrs. Jervis, pray accept of
this, which at the Close of every Year's Accounts I
will present you with, besides your Salary, as long
as I find your Care so useful and agreeable. And
he gave her five Guineas! —She made him a low
Curchee, and pray'd God to bless him; and look'd
to me, as if she would have spoken of me. 
He took her Meaning, I believe; for he said,— 
Indeed I love to encourage Merit and Obligingness,
Mr. Longman; but I can never be equally kind to
those who don't deserve it at my Hands; and then 

he look'd full at me; Mr. Longman, continued
he, I said that Girl might come in with Mrs. Jervis;
because they love to be always together. For Mrs.
Jervis is very good to her, as if she was her Daughter. 
But else—Mr. Longman, interrupting him, said,
Good to Mrs. Pamela! Aye, Sir, and so she is, to be
sure! But every body must be good to her,— 
He was going on. But my Master said, No more,
no more, Mr. Longman. I see old Men are taken with
pretty young Girls, as well as other Folks; and fair
Looks hide many a Fault, where a Person has the Art to
behave obligingly. Why, and please your Honour,
said Mr. Longman, every body—and was going on,
I believe to say something more in my Praise; but
he interrupted him, and said, Not a Word more of
this Pamela. I can't let her stay, I'll assure you; not
only for her own Freedom of Speech; but her
Letter-writing of all the Secrets of my Family. Aye,
said the good old Man! I'm sorry for that too! But
Sir,—No more, I say, said my Master; for my Reputation's
so well known (mighty fine, thought I!)
that I care not what any body writes or says of me:
But to tell you the Truth, not that it need go further,
I think of changing my Condition soon; and,
you know, young Ladies of Birth and Fortune will
chuse their own Servants, and that's my chief Reason
why Pamela can't stay. As for the rest, said he, the
Girl is a good sort of Body, take her all together; 
tho' I must needs say, a little pert, since my Mother's
Death, in her Answers, and gives me two Words for
one; which I can't bear; nor is there Reason I
should, says he, you know, Mr. Longman. No, to
be sure, Sir, said he; but 'tis strange methinks, she
should be so mild and meek to every one of us
in the House, and forget herself so where she should
shew most Respect! Very true, Mr. Longman, said
he, I'll assure you; and in was from her Pertness 

that Mrs. Jervis and I had the Words: And I should
mind it the less; but that the Girl (there she stands,
I say it to her Face)! has Wit and Sense above her
Years, and knows better. 
I was in great Pain to say something; but yet I
knew not what, before Mr. Longman; and Mrs.
Jervis, look'd at me, and walk'd to the Window to
hide her Concern for me. At last, I said, It is for
You, Sir, to say what you please; and for me
only to say, God bless your Honour! 
Poor Mr. Longman falter'd in his Speech, and was
ready to cry. Said my insulting Master to me; why
pr'ythee, Pamela, now, shew thy self as thou art, before
Mr. Longman. Canst not give him a Specimen
of that Pertness which thou hast exercis'd upon me
sometimes? Did not he, my dear Father and Mother,
deserve all the Truth to be told; yet I overcame myself,
so far, as to say, Well, your Honour may play
upon a poor Girl, that you know can answer you, but
dare not. Why pr'ythee now, Insinuator, said he,
say the worst you can before Mr. Longman and Mrs.
Jervis! —I challenge the utmost of thy Impertinence; 
and as you are going away, and have the
Love of every body, I would be a little justify'd to
my Family, that you have no Reason to complain of
Hardships from me, as I have of pert saucy Answers
from you, besides exposing me by your Letters. 
Well, Sir, said I, I am of no Consequence equal
to this, sure, in your Honour's Family, that such a
great Gentleman as you, my Master, should need
to justify yourself about me. I am glad Mrs. Jervis
stays with your Honour; and I know I have not deserv'd
to stay; and more than that, I don't desire to
stay. 
Ads-bobbers! said Mr. Longman, and ran to me; 
don't say so, don't say so, dear Mrs. Pamela! We all
love you dearly; and pray down of your Knees, and 

ask his Honour Pardon, and we will all become Pleaders
in a Body, and I, and Mrs. Jervis too, at the Head
of it, to beg his Honour's Pardon, and to continue
you, at least till his Honour marries. —No, Mr.
Longman, said I, I cannot ask; nor will I stay, if I
might. All I desire is to return to my poor Father
and Mother, and tho' I love you all, I won't stay;— 
O well-a-day, well-a-day! said the good old Man, I
did not expect this! —When I had got Matters thus
far, and had made all up for Mrs. Jervis, I was in
Hopes to have got a double Holiday of Joy for all
the Family, in your Pardon too. Well, said my Master,
this is a little Specimen of what I told you, Mr.
Longman. You see there's a Spirit you did not expect. 
Mrs. Jervis told me after, that she could stay
no longer to hear me so hardly used, and must
have spoke, had she stay'd, what would never have
been for given her; so she went out. I look'd after
her to go too; but my Master said, Come, Pamela,
give another Specimen, I desire you, to Mr. Longman:
I am sure you must, if you will but speak. 
Well, Sir, said I, since it seems your Greatness wants
to be justified by my Lowness, and I have no Desire
you should suffer in the Sight of your Family, I
will say, on my bended Knees (and so I kneeled
down) that I have been a very faulty, and a very
ingrateful Creature to the best of Masters! I have
been very perverse, and sawcy; and have deserv'd
nothing at your Hands, but to be turn'd out of
your Family with Shame and Disgrace. I, therefore,
have nothing to say for myself, but that I am not
worthy to stay, and so cannot wish to stay, and will
not stay: And so God Almighty bless you, Sir,
and you, Mr. Longman, and good Mrs. Jervis, and
every living Soul of the Family! and I will pray for
you all as long as I live. —And so I rose up, and was 

forc'd to lean upon my Master's Elbow Chair, or
I should have sunk down. 
The poor old Man wept more than I, and said,
Ads-bobbers! was ever the like heard! 'Tis too much,
too much; I can't bear it. As I hope to live, I am quite
melted. Dear Sir, forgive her: The poor Thing
prays for you; she prays for us all! She owns her
Fault; yet won't be forgiven! I profess I know not
what to make of it. 
My Master himself, harden'd Wretch as he was,
seem'd a little mov'd, and took his Handkerchief out
of his Pocket, and walk'd to the Window: What
Sort of a Day is it, said he? —And then getting a
little more Hard-heartedness, he said, Well, you
may be gone from my Presence, thou strange Medley
of Inconsistence! but you shan't stay after your
Time in the House. 
Nay, pray Sir, pray Sir, said the good old Man,
relent a little! Ads-heartlikins, you young Gentlemen
are made of Iron and Steel, I think: I'm sure,
said he, my Heart's turn'd into Butter, and is running
away at my Eyes. I never felt the like before. — 
Said my Master, with an imperious Tone, Get out
of my Presence, Hussy, I can't bear you in my
Sight. Sir, said I, I'm going as fast as I can. 
But indeed, my dear Father and Mother, my Head
was so giddy, and my Limbs trembled so, that I was
forc'd to go holding by the Wainscot all the way,
with both my Hands, and thought I should not have
got to the Door: But when I did, as I hop'd this
would be my last Interview with this terrible hardhearted
Master; I turn'd about, and made a low
Curchee, and said, God bless you, Sir! God bless
you, Mr. Longman! And I went into the Lobby
leading to the great Hall, and dropt into the first
Chair; for I could get no further a good while. 

I leave all these Things to your Reflection, my
dear Parents; but I can write no more. My poor
Heart's almost broke! Indeed it is. —O when shall I
get away! —Send me, good God, in Safety, once to
my poor Father's peaceful Cot! —and there the
worst that can happen will be Joy in Perfection to
what I now bear! —O pity 
Your distressed Daughter. 

