



My dear Miss,
I Now proceed with my Journal, which I brought
down to Tuesday Evening; and of course I begin
with 




Towards the Evening came Sir. Jacob Swynford,
on Horseback, attended by two Servants in Liveries. 
I was abroad; for I had got Leave for a whole Afternoon,
attended by my Polly, which Time I passed
in visiting no less than four several poor sick Families,
whose Hearts I made glad. But I should be
too tedious, were I to give you the Particulars; and
besides, I have a brief List of Cases, which, when 

you'll favour me with your Company, I may shew
you; for I have obliged myself*  ,tho' not desired, to
keep an Account of what I do with no less than
200l. a Year, that my dear Mr. B. allows me to expend
in Acts of Charity and Benevolence. 
Lady Davers told me afterwards, that Sir Jacob
carried it mighty stiff and formal, when he alighted. 
He strutted about the Court-yard in his Boots, with
his Whip in his Hand; and tho' her Ladyship went
to the great Door, in order to welcome him, he
turn'd short, and, whistling, followed the Groom
into the Stable, as if he had been at an Inn, only,
instead of taking off his Hat, pulling its broad Brim
over his Eyes, for a Compliment. In she went in a
Pet, as she says, saying to the Countess, A surly Brute
he always was! My Uncle! He's more of an Hostler
than a Gentleman: I'm resolv'd I'll not stir to meet
him again. And yet the Wretch loves Respect from
others, tho' he never practises common Civility himself. 
The Countess said, She was glad he was come; 
for she lov'd to divert herself with such odd Characters
now-and-then. 
And now let me give you a short Description of
him as I found him, when I came in, that you may
the better conceive what sort of a Gentleman he is. 
He is about Sixty-five Years of Age, a coarse,
strong, big-bon'd Gentleman, with large irregular
Features; he has a haughty supercilious Look, a
swaggering Gait, and a Person not at all bespeaking
one's Favour in behalf of his Mind; and his Mind,
as you shall hear by-and-by, not clearing up those
Prepossessions in his Disfavour, with which his Person
and Features at first impress one. His Voice is big
and surly; his Eyes little and fiery; his Mouth large, 

with what Teeth he has left, ground down, as it
seem'd, even with his many-colour'd Gums, as if by
constant Use. But with all these Imperfections, he
has an Air that sets him somewhat above the mere
Vulgar, and such as makes one think, that half his
Disadvantages are rather owing to his own haughty
Humour, than to Nature: For he seems to be a
perfect Tyrant at first Sight, a Man used to prescribe,
and not to be prescribed to; and has the Advantage
of a shrewd penetrating Look, which yet, methinks,
seems rather acquired than natural. 
After he had seen his Horses well serv'd, and put
on an old-fashion'd Gold-button'd Coat, which by
its Freshness shew'd he had been very chary of it, a
better Wig, but in stiff Buckle, and a long Sword,
stuck stiffly, as if thro' his Coat Lappets; in he came,
and with an imperious Air entering the Parlour,
What, nobody come to meet me! said he; and saluting
her Ladyship, How do you do, Niece? and
look'd about haughtily, she says, as if he expected to
see me. 
My Lady, presenting the Countess, said, The
Countess of C. Sir Jacob! —O, cry Mercy! said he
—Your most obedient humble Servant, Madam; I
hope his Lordship is well. 
At your Service, Sir Jacob. 
I wish he was, said he, bluntly; he should not
have voted as he did last Sessions, I can tell you
that. 
Why, Sir Jacob, said she, Servants don't always,
in this free Kingdom, do as their Masters would
have'em. 
Mine do, I can tell you that, Madam. 
Right or Wrong, Sir Jacob? 
It can't be wrong, if I command them. 
Why, truly, Sir Jacob, there's many a private
Gentleman carries it higher to a Servant, than he 

cares his Prince should to him: But I thought, till
now, 'twas the King only could do no wrong. 
But, Madam, I always take care to be right. 
A good Reason—because, I dare say, you never
think you can be in the wrong. 
Your Ladyship should spare me: I'm but just
come off a Journey. Let me turn myself about,
and I'll be up with you, never fear, Madam. But
where's my Nephew, Lady Davers? And where's
your Lord? I was told you were all here, and young
H. too, upon a very extraordinary Occasion; so I
was willing to see how Causes went among you,
and what you were about. It will be long enough
before you come to see me. 
My Brother, and Lord Davers, and Mr. H. are
all rid out together. 
Well, Niece, strutting, with his Hands behind
him, and his Head held up—Ha! –––He has made
a fine Kettlé on't,—han't he! —'Sblood, (that was
his profligate Word) that ever such a Rake should
be so caught! —They tell me, she's plaguy cunning,
and quite smart and handsome. —But I wish his Father
were but living. —Yet what could he have done? 
He was always unmanageable: But I wish he'd been
my Son;—by my Faith I do! —What! I hope,
Niece, he locks up his Baby, while you're here! 
You don't keep her Company, do you? 
Yes, Sir Jacob, reply'd my Lady, I do; and you'll
not scruple to do so too, when you see her. 
Why, thou countenancest him in his Folly, Child; 
I'd a better Opinion of thy Spirit! Thou married to
a Lord, and thy Brother to a—Canst tell me what,
Barbara? If thou canst, pr'ythee do. 
To an Angel; and so you'll say, when you see her. 
What, dost think I shall look thro' his foolish
Eyes? —What a Disgrace to a Family ancienter
than the Conquest! —O Tempora! O Mores! What
will this World come to! 

The Countess was diverted with this odd Gentleman,
but run on in my Praise, for fear he should
say some rude things to me when I came in, and Lady
Davers seconded her. But all, it seems, sighify'd
nothing. He would tell us both his Mind, let the
young Whelp, that was his Word, take it as he
would. And pray, said he, can't I see this fine
Body before he comes in? Let me but turn her
round two or three times, and ask her a Question
or two; and by her Answers I shall know what to
think of her in a Twinkling. 
She is gone to take a little Airing, Sir Jacob, and
won't be back till Supper-time. 
Supper-time! Why, she is not to sit down at
Table, is she? If she does, I won't; that's positive. 
–––But now you talk of Supper, what have you? — 
I must have a boil'd Chicken, and shall eat it all myself. 
—Who's House-keeper now? I suppose all's
turn'd upside down. 
No, there is not one new Servant, except a Girl
that waits upon her own Person: All the old Servants
are continued. 
That's much! these Creatures generally take as great
State upon 'em as a born Lady: And they're in the
right. If they can make the Man stoop to the great
Point, they'll hold his Nose to the Grindstone, never
fear; and all the little ones come about in course. 
Well, Sir Jacob, when you see her, you'll alter
your Mind. 
Never, never; that's positive. 
Ay, Sir Jacob, I was as positive as you once; 
but I love her now as well as if she was my own
Sister. 
O hideous, hideous! ––Tell it not in Gath; for thou'lt
make the Daughters of Philistia triumph! All the
Fools that he has made where-ever he has travelled,
will clap their Hands at him, and at you too, if you 

talk at this Rate. —But let me speak to Mrs. Jervis,
if she be here: I'll order my own Supper. 
So he went out, saying, He knew the House, tho'
in a better Mistress's Days. 
The Countess said, If Mr. B. kept his Temper,
as she hoped he would, there would be good Diversion
with the old Gentleman. 
O yes, said my Lady, my Brother will, I dare say. 
He despises this surly Brute too much to be angry at
him, let him say what he will. 
He went, and talked a great deal against me, to
Mrs. Jervis. You may guess, Miss, that she launched
out in my Praises; and he was offended at her, and
said, Woman! Woman! forbear these ill-tim'd
Praises: Her Birth's a Disgrace to our Family. 
What! my Sister's Waiting-maid, taken upon Charity! 
I cannot bear it. 
I mention all these things, as the Ladies afterwards
told them to me, because it shall prepare you to
judge what a fine Time I was likely to have of it. 
When Mr. B. and my Lord Davers, and Mr. H.
came home, which they did about half an Hour after
Six, they were told who was there, just as they entered
the Parlour; and Mr. B. smiled at Lord Davers, and
entering,–––Sir Jacob, said he, Welcome to Bedfordshire! 
And thrice Welcome to this House! I rejoice
to see you. 
My Lady says, Never was so odd a Figure, as the
old Baronet made, when thus accosted. He stood
up indeed; but as Mr. B. offer'd to take his Hand,
he put 'em both behind him––––Not that you know
of, Sir! –––And then looking up at his Face, and down
at his Feet, three or four times successively––––Are
you my Brother's Son? That very individual Son,
that your good Father used to boast of, and say, that
for handsome Person, true Courage, noble Mind, 

was not to be matched in any three Counties in
England? 
The very same, dear Sir, that my honoured
Father's Partiality used to think he never praised
enough. 
And what is all of it come to at last!–––– He paid
well, did he not, to teach you to Know the
World!––– Ad's Life, Nephew! hadst thou been a
born Fool, or a raw Greenhead, or a doating Greyhead–––– 
What then, Sir Jacob? 
What then?–– Why, then, thou wouldst have done
just as thou hast done! 
Come, come, Sir Jacob, you know not my Inducements. 
You know not what an Angel I have
in Person and Mind. Your Eyes shall by-and-by
be blest with the Sight of her: Your Ears with hearing
her speak:––– And then you'll call all you have said,
Profanation. 
What is it I hear! What is it I hear!–––– You talk
in the Language of Romance; and from the Housekeeper
to the Head of the House, you're all starkstaring
mad. By my Soul, Nephew, I wish, for thy
own Credit, thou wert.–––– But what signifies Wishing! 
––––I hope you'll not bring your Syren into my
Company. 
Yes, I will, Sir, because I love to give you Pleasure. 
And say not a Word more, for your own
sake, till you see her––––You'll have the less to unsay,
Sir Jacob; and the less to repent of. 
The Devil!–––– I'm in an inchanted Castle, that's
certain. What a Plague has this little Witch done
to you all! –––And how did she bring it about? 
The Ladies and Lord Davers laugh'd, it seems,
and Mr. B. begging him to sit down, and answer him
some Family Questions, he said, (for it seems he is
very captious at times) What, a Devil! am I to be 

laugh'd at! Lord Davers, I hope you're not bewitch'd
too, are you? 
Indeed; Sir, Jacob, I am. My Sister B. is my
Doating-piece. 
Whew! whistled he, with a wild Stare: And how
is it with you, Youngster? 
With me, Sir Jacob, said Mr. H. I'd give all I'm
worth in the World, and ever shall be worth, for such
another Wife. 
He ran to the Window, and throwing up the Sash,
looking into the Court-yard, said, Hollo–––So-ho––– 
Groom –––– Jack––– Jonas––– Get me my Horse! — 
I'll keep no such Company! –––I'll be gone! Why,
Jonas! calling again. 
You're not in Earnest, Sir Jacob, said Mr. B. 
I am, by my Soul! –––I'll away to the Village this
Night! Why, you're all upon the High-Game! ––– 
I'll–––But who comes here? –––For just at that Instant,
the Chariot brought me into the Court-yard–––– 
Who's this? Who is she? 
One of my Daughters, started up the Countess, my
youngest Daughter Jenny! –––She's the Pride of my
Family, Sir Jacob! 
By my Soul, said he, I was running; for I thought
it was the grand Inchantress. 
Out stept Lady Davers to me: Dear Pamela, said
she, humour all that's said to you. Here's Sir Jacob
come. You're the Countess of C&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;'s youngest
Daughter Jenny––– That's your Cue. 
Ah! but Madam, said I, Lady Jenny is not marry'd
–––looking (before I thought) on a Circumstance
that I think too much of sometimes, tho' I carry it
off as well as I can. 
She laugh'd at my Exception: Come, Lady Jenny,
said she, (for I just then enter'd the great Door) I hope
you've had a fine Airing? 

A very pretty one, Madam, said I, as I enter'd the
Parlour. This is a pleasant Country, Lady Davers. ––– 
(Wink when I'm wrong, whisper'd I–––) Where's
Mrs. B.? –––Then, as seeing a strange Gentleman, I
started half back, into a more reserv'd Air; and
made him a low Court'sy. 
Sir Jacob look'd as if he did not know what to
think of it, now at me, now at Mr. B.–––– But the
dear Gentleman put him quite out of Doubt, by
taking my Hand: Well, Lady Jenny, did you meet
my Fugitive in your Tour? 
No, Mr. B. said I. Did she go my Way? I told
you I would keep the great Road. 
Lady Jenny C&sblank;&blank;&blank;, said Mr. B. presenting me to his
Uncle. A charming Creature! added the dear Gentleman:
Have you never a Son worthy of such an
Alliance? 
Ay, marry, Nephew, this is a Lady indeed! Why,
the Plague, whisper'd he, could you not have pitch'd
your Tent here?–– Miss, by your Leave: And saluting
me, turn'd to the Countess: By my Soul, Madam,
you've a charming Daughter! Had my rash Nephew
seen this lovely Creature, and you'd have condescended,
he'd never have stoop'd to the Cottage,
as he has done. 
You're right, Sir Jacob, return'd Mr. B.; but I
always ran too fast for my Fortune: Yet, these Ladies
of Family never bring out their Jewels into
Batchelors Company; and when, too late, we see
what we've miss'd, we are vex'd at our Precipitation. 
Well said, however, Boy. By my Soul, I wish
thee Repentance, tho' 'tis out of thy Power to
amend. Be that one of thy Curses, when thou
seest this Lady; as I make no doubt it is. 
Again taking my Hand, and surveying me from
Head to Foot, and turning me round, which, it 

seems, is a mighty Practice with him to a Stranger-Lady,
(and a modest one too, you'll say, Miss)––– 
Why, truly, you're a charming Creature, Miss–––– 
Lady Jenny, I would say––– By your Leave, once
more! Upon my Soul, my Lady Countess, she
is a Charmer–––But–––But–––staring at me, Are you
marry'd, Madam? 
I look'd a little silly; and my new Mamma came
up to me, and took my Hand: Why, Jenny, you
are dress'd oddly to Day!––– What a Hoop you wear! 
It makes you look I can't tell how! 
Upon my Soul, Madam, I thought so; what signifies
Lying? –––But 'tis only the Hoop, I see. ––– 
Really and truly, Lady Jenny, your Hoop is enough
to make half an hundred of our Sex despair, for fear
you should be marry'd. I thought it was something! 
Few Ladies escape my Notice. I always kept a
good Look-out; for I have two Daughters of my
own: But 'tis the Hoop, I see plainly enough. You
are so slender every where but here; putting his
Hand upon my Hip, which quite dash'd me; and I
retir'd behind my Lady Countess's Chair. 
Fie, Sir Jacob! said Mr. B.; before us young Gentlemen,
to take such Liberties with a Maiden Lady! 
–––You give a bad Example. 
Hang him that sets you a bad Example, Nephew. 
But I see you're right; I see Lady Jenny's a Maiden
Lady, or she would not have been so shamefac'd. I'll
swear for her, on Occasion. Ha, ha, ha–––I'm sure,
repeated he, she's a Maiden–––For our Sex give the
married Ladies a freer Air in a Trice. 
How, Sir Jacob! said Lady Davers. 
O fie, said the Countess! –––Can't you praise the
Maiden Ladies, but at the Expence of the marry'd
ones? What do you see of Freedom in me? 
Or in me? said Lady Davers. 

Nay, for that Matter, you are very well, Ladies,
I must needs say. –––But will you pretend to blush
with that Virgin Rose? –––Will ye? Od's my Life,
Miss, –––Lady Jenny, I would say, taking my Hand,
come from behind your Mamma's Chair, and you
two Ladies stand up now together. –––There, so you
do––– Why now, Blush for Blush, and Lady Jenny
shall be three to one, and a deeper Crimson by half. 
Look you there, look you there else! An hundred
Guineas to one against the Field. –––Then stamping
with one Foot, and lifting up his Hands and Eyes––– 
O Christ! Lady Jenny has it all to nothing–––By my
Soul, she has–––Ha, ha, ha–––You may well sit down
both of you; but you're a Blush too late, I can tell
ye that. –––Well hast thou done, Lady Jenny. 
I was hastening away, and he said, But let's see you
again, Miss; for now I will stay, if they bring nobody
else. –––And away I went, for I never was more out
of Countenance. ––––– What a strange Creature,
thought I, is this? 
Supper being near ready, he continued calling out
for Lady Jenny; for, he said, the Sight of her did
him good. But he was resolv'd he would not sit
down at Table with somebody else. 
The Countess said, She would fetch her Daughter; 
and stepping out, return'd, saying, Mrs. B. understands,
that Sir Jacob is here, and that he does not
chuse to see her; so she begs to be excus'd; and my
Jenny and she desire to sup together. 
The very worst Tidings I have heard this Twelvemonth. 
Why, Nephew, let your Girl sup with any
body, so we may have Lady Jenny back with us.––– 
I know, said the Countess, (who was desirous to
see how far he would carry it) Jenny won't leave
Mrs. B. so if you see one, you must see t'other. 
Nay, then, if it must be so, I must sit down contented. 
–––But yet, I should be glad to see Lady Jenny, 

that I should. But I will not sit down at Table with
Mr. B.'s Girl–––that's positive. 
Well, well, let 'em sup together, and there's an
End of it, said Mr. B. –––I see my Uncle has as good
a Judgment as any body of fine Ladies (That I have,
Nephew): ––– But he can't forego his Humour, in
Compliment to the finest Lady in England. 
Consider, Nephew, consider–––'Tis not thy doing
a foolish Thing, and calling a Girl Wife, shall cram
a Niece down my Throat, that's positive. The
Moment thy Girl comes down to take place of these
Ladies, I am gone, that's most certain. 
Well then, shall I go up, and oblige Pamela to
sup by herself, and persuade Lady Jenny to come
down to us? 
With all my Soul, Nephew–––A good Motion. — 
But, Pamela—did you say? –––A queer sort of Name! 
I've heard of it somewhere! –––Is it a Christian or a
Pagan Name? ––Linsey-wolsey––half one, half t'other–– 
like thy Girl–––Ha, ha, ha. 
Let me be hang'd, whisper'd Mr. H. to his Aunt,
if Sir Jacob has not a Power of Wit; tho' he's so
whimsical with it. I like him much. 
But hark ye, Nephew, said Sir Jacob, as Mr. B.
was going out of the Parlour–––one Word with you. 
Don't fob upon us your Girl with the Pagan Name
for Lady Jenny. I have set a Mark upon her, and
should know her from a Thousand, altho' she had
chang'd her Hoop.––– Then he laugh'd again, and
said, He hoped Lady Jenny would come––And come
without any body with her–––But I smell a Plot, said
he–––By my Soul I won't stay, if they both come
together. I won't be put upon–––But here comes
one or both–––Where's my Whip? –––I'll go. 
Indeed Mr. B. I had rather have staid with Mrs.
B.—said I, as I enter'd–––as he had bid me. 

'Tis she, 'tis she–––You've no body behind you?–– 
No, she han't. –––Why now, Nephew, you're right. 
I was afraid you'd have put a Trick upon me. ––– 
You'd rather, repeated he, have stay'd with Mrs.
B.! –––Yes, I warrant. –––But you shall be plac'd in
better Company, my dear Child. 
Sister, said Mr. B. will you be pleased to take
that Chair; for Pamela does not chuse to give my
Uncle Disgust, who so seldom comes to see us. 
My Lady took the upper End of the Table, and
I sat next below my new Mamma: So, Jenny, said
she, How have you left Mrs. B.? 
A little concern'd, said I–––But she was the easier,
as Mr. B. himself desir'd I'd come down. 
My Lord Davers sat next me, and Sir Jacob said,
Shall I beg a Favour of you, my Lord; to let me
sit next to Lady Jenny? 
Mr. B. said, Won't it be better to sit over-against
her, Uncle? 
Ay, that's right. I'faith, Nephew, thou know'st
what's right. Well, so I will. –––He accordingly removed
his Seat, and I was very glad of it; for tho'
I was sure to be star'd at sufficiently by him, yet I
was afraid, if he sat next me, he would not keep his
Hands off my Hoop. 
He run on a deal in my Praises, after his manner,
but so rough at times, that he gave me Pain. 
After Supper, the Gentlemen sat down to their
Bottle, and the Ladies and I withdrew, and about
Twelve they broke up, Sir Jacob talking of nothing
but Lady Jenny, and wishing Mr. B. had marry'd
so happily as with such a charming Creature; One, he
said, that carried Tokens of her high Birth in her
Face, and whose every Feature, and Look, shew'd
her nobly descended. 
They let him go to Bed with his Mistake: But the
Countess said next Morning, She thought she never 

saw a greater Instance of stupid Pride, and Churlishness,
and she should be sick of the Advantage of
Birth or Ancestry, if this was the natural Fruit of
it. For a Man, said her Ladyship, to come to his
Nephew's House, and to suffer the Mistress of it
(as he thinks) to be closetted up, and not permitted
to appear, in order to humour his absurd and brutal
Insolence, and to behave as he has done; is such a
Ridicule upon the Pride of Descent, that I shall
think of it as long as I live. O Mrs. B. said she,
what Advantages have you over every one that sees
you; but most over those who pretend to treat you
unworthily! 
I expect to be called to Breakfast every Minute,
and shall then, perhaps, see how this Matter will
end. I wish when it is revealed, he is not in a Fury,
and think himself imposed on. I fear it won't end
so well as I wish; for every body seems to be grave
and angry at Sir Jacob. 




I Now proceed with my Tale. At Breakfast-time,
when every one was sat, and a Chair left for me,
Sir Jacob began to call out for Lady Jenny. But, said
he, I'll have none of your Girl, Nephew, altho' the
Chair at the Tea-Table is left for somebody. No,
said Mr. B. we'll get Lady Jenny to supply Mrs. B.'s
Place, as you don't care to see her. 
With all my Heart, reply'd he. 
But, Uncle, said Mr. B. Have you really no Desire,
no Curiosity to see the Girl I have marry'd? 
No, none at all, by my Soul. 
Just then I came in, and paying my Compliments
to the Company, and to Sir Jacob, Shall I, said I, 

supply Mrs. B.'s Place, in her Absence? And down
I sat. 
After Breakfast, and the Servants were withdrawn,
Lady Jenny, said Lady Davers, you are a young
Lady who have all the Advantages of Birth and Descent,
and some of the best Blood in the Kingdom
runs in your Veins; and here Sir Jacob Swynford
is your great Admirer: Cannot you, from whom it
will come with a double Grace, convince him, that
he does an unkind thing, at my Brother's House, to
keep the Person my Brother has thought worthy of
making the Mistress of it, out of Company? And let
us know your Opinion, Whether my Brother himself
does right, to comply with such an unreasonable
Distaste? 
Why how now, Lady Davers! This from you! I
did not expect it! 
My Uncle, said Mr. B. is the only Person in the
Kingdom that I would have humoured thus: And I
made no doubt, when he saw how willing I was to
oblige him in so high a Point, he would have acted
a more generous Part than he has yet done. But,
Lady Jenny, what say you to my Sister's Questions? 
If I must speak my Mind, reply'd I, I should take the
Liberty to be very serious with Sir Jacob, and to
say, That when a thing is done, and cannot be help'd,
he should take care how he sows the Seeds of Indifference
and Animosity between Man and Wife:
And how he makes a Gentleman dissatisfy'd with
his Choice, and perhaps unhappy as long as he lives. 
Nay, Miss, said he, if all are against me, and you,
whose good Opinion I value more than all, you may
e'en let the Girl come, and sit down, if you will. ––– 
If she is but half as pretty, and half as wise, and modest,
as you, I shall, as it cannot be help'd, as you
say, be ready to think better of the Matter. For
'tis a little hard, I must needs say, if she has hitherto 

appear'd before all the good Company, to have her
kept out of the way on my Account. 
Really, Sir Jacob, said the Countess, I have blush'd
for you more than once on this Occasion. But the
Mistress of this House is more than half as wise,
and modest, and lovely: And in hopes you will
return me back some of the Blushes I have lent you,
see there, in my Daughter Jenny, whom you have been
so justly admiring, the Mistress of the House, and
the Lady with the Pagan Name! 
Sir Jacob sat aghast, looking at one, and at another,
and at me, each in Turn, and then cast his
Eyes on the Floor. –––At last, up he got, and swore a
sad Oath, And am I thus trick'd and bamboozled,
that was his Word; am I? –––There's no bearing this
House, nor her Presence now, that's certain; and
I'll be gone. 
Mr. B. looking at me, and nodding his Head towards
Sir Jacob, as he was in a Flutter to be gone,
I arose from my Chair, and went to him, and took
his Hand. I hope, Sir Jacob, you will be able to
bear both, when you shall see that there is no other
Difference but that of Descent, between the supposed
Lady Jenny, whom you so kindly praised,
and the Girl your dear Nephew has so much exalted. 
Let me go, said he, I'm most confoundedly bit. ––– 
I cannot look you in the Face! –––By my Soul I cannot! 
–––For 'tis impossible you should forgive me. 
Indeed it is not, Sir; you have done nothing but
what I can forgive you for, if your dear Nephew
can; for to him was the Wrong, if any, and I'm
sure he can overlook it. –––And for his sake, to the
Uncle of so honoured a Gentleman, to the Brother
of my late good Lady, I can, with a bent Knee,
thus, ask your Blessing, and desire your Excuse for
joining to keep you in this Suspense. 

Bless you! –––O Christ! said he, and stamp'd––– 
Who can chuse but bless you? And he kneeled down,
and wrapp'd his Arms about me. –––But, curse me,
that was his strange Word, if ever I was so touched
before! 
My dear Mr. B. for fear my Spirits should be too
much affected, (for the rough Baronet, in his Transport,
had bent me down lower than I kneeled) came
to me, and held me by my Arm; but let Sir Jacob
raise me, only saying, How does my Angel? Now
she has made this Conquest, she has completed all
her Triumphs. 
Angel did you call her! –––By my Soul, I'm confounded
with her Goodness, and her sweet Carriage! 
–––Rise, and let me see if I can stand, myself! 
–––And, believe me, I am sorry I have acted so
much like a Bear as I have done; and the more I
think of it, the more I shall be asham'd of myself. ––– 
And the Tears, as he spoke, ran down his rough
Cheeks, which moved me a good deal; for to see
a Man with so rough and so hard a Countenance
weep, was a touching Sight. 
Mr. H. putting his Handkerchief to his Eyes, his
Aunt said, What's the Matter, Jackey? —The Matter!
answer'd he; I don't know how the D&sblank;&sblank;l 'tis— 
But here's strange Doings, as ever I knew—For here,
Day after Day, one's ready to cry, without knowing
whether it be for Joy or Sorrow! —What a Plague's
the Matter with me, I wonder! —And out he went,
the two Ladies, whose charming Eyes, too, glisten'd
with Pleasure, smiling at the Effect the Scene had
upon Mr. H. and at what he said. 
Well, Madam, said Sir Jacob, approaching me; 
for I had sat down, but then stood up—You will
forgive me; and from my Heart I wish you Joy. 
By my Soul I do—and saluted me—I could not have
believed there had been such a Person breathing. 

I don't wonder at my Nephew's loving you! — 
And you call her Sister, Lady Davers, don't you? ––– 
If you do, I'll own her for my Niece. 
Don't I! —Yes, I do, said her Ladyship, coming
to me, and am proud so to call her. And this I tell
you, for your Comfort, tho' to my own Shame, that
I used her worse than you have done, before I knew
her Excellence, and have repented of it ever since. 
I bow'd to her Ladyship—and kissing her Hand— 
My dearest Lady, said I, you have made me rich
Amends since. I am sure I may say, That it was
good for me that I was afflicted! 
Why, Nephew, she has the Fear of God, I perceive,
before her Eyes too! I'm sure I've heard those
Words. They are somewhere in the Scripture, I
believe! —Why, who knows, but she may be a means
to save your Soul? —Hay, you know! 
Ay, Sir Jacob, said Mr. B. she'll be a means to
save an hundred Souls, and might go a great way to
save yours, if you were to live with her but one
Month. 
Well, but, Nephew, I hope you forgive me, too; 
for, now I think of it, I never knew you take any
Matter so patiently in my Life. 
I knew, said the dear Gentleman, that every Extravagance
you insisted upon, was heightening my
Charmer's Triumph, and increasing your own Contrition; 
and as I was not indeed depriv'd of her
Company, I could bear with every thing you said or
did—Yet, don't you remember, that I caution'd
you, that the less you said against her, the less you'd
have to unsay, and the less to repent of? 
I do; and let me ride out, and call myself to Account
for all I said against her, in her own Hearing; 
and when I can think of but one half, and how she
has taken it, by my Soul, I believe 'twill make me
more than half mad. 

At Dinner (when we had Mr. Williams's Company)
the Baronet told me, he admir'd me now, as
much as he did when he thought me Lady Jenny;
but complain'd of the Trick put upon him by us
all, and seem'd now-and-then a little serious upon it. 
He took great Notice of the Dexterity which
he imputed to me, in performing the Honours of
the Table. And every now-and-then, he lifted up
his Eyes, God take me! Very clever, by my Soul!––– 
Why, Madam, you seem to me to be born to these
Things! —I will be help'd by nobody but you—And
you'll have a Task of it, I can tell you; for I have
a whipping Stomach, and were there fifty Dishes, I
always taste of every one. And indeed John was in a
manner wholly imploy'd in going to and fro between
the Baronet and me, for half an Hour together. 
He went from us afterwards to Mrs. Jervis, and
made her answer him abundance of Questions about
me, and how all these Matters had come about, as he
phrased it; and returning, when we drank Coffee,
said, I have been confabbing, that was his Word,
with Mrs. Jervis, about you, Niece. By my Soul,
I never heard the like! She tells me, you can play
on the Spinnet, and sing too: Will you let a body
have a Tune or so? My Mab can play pretty well,
and so can Dolly:—I'm a Judge of Musick, and
would fain hear you. I said, If he was a Judge, I
should be afraid to play before him; but I would
not be ask'd twice, when we had taken our Coffee. 
Accordingly, he repeating his Request, I gave him
a Tune, and sung to it; Od's my Life, said he, you
do it purely! —But I see where it is—My Girls have
got my Fingers! And then he held both Hands out,
and a fine Pair of Paws shew'd he! —Plague on't,
they touch two Keys at once; but those slender and
nimble Fingers, how they sweep along! My Eye
can't follow 'em—Whew—whistled he—They are 

here and there, and every-where at once! —Why,
Nephew, I believe you've put another Trick upon
me. My Niece is certainly of Quality! And Report
has not done her Justice. —One more Tune, one
more Song—By my Faith, your Voice goes sweetly
to your Fingers. 'Slife—I'll thresh my Jades—that
was his polite Phrase, when I come home. —Lady
Davers, you know not the Money they have cost
me to qualify them; and here is a mere Baby to
them, outdoes 'em by a Bar's Length, without any
Expence at all bestow'd upon her. Go over that
again—Confound me for a Puppy! I lost it, by my
Prating. —Ay, there you have it! —That's it, by my
Soul, it is! Oh! that I could but dance as well as
thou sing'st! I'd give you a Saraband, as old as I am. 
After Supper, we fell into a Conversation, of
which I must give you some Account, because it
was upon a Topick that Mr. B. has been blam'd for
in his marrying me, and which has stuck by some
of his Friends, even after they have, in Kindness to
me, acquitted him in every other respect; and that
is, The Example that he has set to young Gentlemen
of Family and Fortune to marry beneath them. 
It was begun by Sir Jacob, who said, I am in Love
with my new Niece, that I am: But still one thing
sticks with me in this Affair; and that is, What will
become of Degree or distinction, if this Practice of
Gentlemen marrying their Mothers Waiting-maids,
(Excuse me, Madam) should come into Vogue? 
Already, young Ladies and young Gentlemen are too
apt to be drawn away in this manner, and to disgrace
their Family. We have too many Instances of this. 
You'll forgive me, both of you. 
That, said Lady Davers, is the only Thing! — 
I must needs say, Sir Jacob has hit upon the Point,
that would make one wish this Example had not been
set by a Gentleman of such an antient Family; till 

one comes to be acquainted with this dear Creature; 
and then every body thinks it ought not to be otherwise
than it is. 
Ay, Pamela, said Mr. B. what can you say to this? 
Cannot you defend me from this Charge? This is
a Point that has been often objected to me: Try for
one of your pretty Arguments in my Behalf. 
Indeed, Sir, reply'd I, looking down, it becomes
not me to say any thing to this. 
But indeed it does, if you can: And I beg you'll
help me to some Excuse, if you have any at Hand. 
Won't you, Sir, dispense with me, on this Occasion? 
Indeed, I know not what to say. Indeed I should
not, if I may judge for myself, speak one Word to
this Subject. —For it is my absolute Opinion, that
Degrees in general should be kept up; altho' I must
always deem the present Case an happy Exception
to the Rule. 
Mr. B. looking as if he still expected I should say
something, Won't you, Sir, dispense with me, repeated
I? Indeed I should not speak to this Point, if
I may be my own Judge. 
I always intend, my Dear, you shall judge for
yourself; and you know, I seldom urge you farther,
when you use those Words. But if you have any
thing upon your Mind to say, let's have it: For
your Arguments are always new and unborrow'd. 
I would then, if I must, Sir, ask, If there be not
a Nation, or if there has not been a Law in some
Nation, That whenever a young Gentleman, be his
Degree what it would, has seduced a poor Creature,
be her Degree what it would, obliges the Gentleman
to marry that unhappy Person? 
I think there is such a Law in some Country, I
can't tell where, said Sir Jacob. 
And do you think, Sir, whether it be so, or not
that it is equitable it should be so? 

Yes, by my Troth—Tho', I must needs own, if
it were so in England, many Men, that I know, would
not have had the Wives they now have. 
You speak to your Knowlege, I doubt not, Sir
Jacob? said Mr. B. 
Why, indeed—Why, truly—I don't know but
I do. 
All then, said I, that I would infer is, Whether
another Law would not be a still more just and equitable
one, that the Gentleman who is repuls'd, from
a Principle of Virtue and Honour, should not be censur'd
for marrying a Person he could not seduce? 
And whether it is not more for both their Honours,
if he does; inasmuch as it is nobler to reward a Virtue,
than to repair a Shame, were that Shame to be
repair'd by Matrimony; which I take the Liberty to
doubt. But I beg Pardon; you commanded me,
Sir––Else this Subject should not have found a Speaker
to it, in me. 
This is admirably said—By my Soul, it is, said Sir
Jacob. 
But yet this comes not up to the Objection, said
Mr. B. The setting an Example to Waiting maids
to aspire, and to young Gentlemen to descend. And
I will enter into the Subject myself; and the rather,
because, as I go along, I will give Sir Jacob a faint
Sketch of the Merit and Character of my Pamela,
of which he cannot be so well inform'd, as he has
been of the Disgrace, which he imagin'd I had
brought upon myself by marrying her. 
In order to this, give me Leave to say, That I think
it necessary, that as well those Persons who are
afraid the Example should be taken, as those who
are inclin'd to follow it, should take all the material
Parts of it into their Consideration: Otherwise, I
think the Precedent may be justly cleared; and the
Fears of the one be judged groundless, and the Plea 

of the other but a Pretence, in order to cover a Folly,
into which they would have fallen, whether they had
this Example or not. 
for Instance: In order to lay Claim to the Excuses
which my Conduct, if I may suppose it of Force
enough to do either Good or Hurt, will furnish, it
is necessary, 
That the Object of their Wish should be a Girl
of exquisite Beauty, (and that not only in their own
blinded and partial Judgments, but in the Opinion
of every one who sees her, Friend or Foe) in order
to justify the Force that the first Attractions have
upon him. 
That she be descended of honest and conscientious,
tho' poor and obscure Parents; who having preserved
their Integrity, thro' great Trials and Afflictions,
have, by their Examples, as well as Precepts, laid
deep in the Girl's Mind the Foundations of Piety and
Virtue. 
It is necessary, that to the Charms of Person, this
Waiting-maid should have an humble, teachable
Mind, fine natural Parts, a sprightly, yet inoffensive
Wit, a Temper so excellent, and a Judgment so solid,
as should promise for her, (by the Love and
Esteem these Qualities should attract to herself from
her Fellow-servants, superior and inferior) that she
would become an higher Station, and be respected
in it. 
It is necessary, that after so good a Foundation
laid by her Parents, she should have all the Advantages
of Female Education conferred upon her: The Example
of an excellent Lady, improving and building
upon so worthy a Foundation. A Capacity surpriseingly
ready to take in all that is taught her: An Attention,
Assiduity and Diligence almost peculiar to
herself, at her Time of Life; insomuch as, at Fifteen
or Sixteen Years of Age, to be able to vie with any 

young Lady of Rank, as well in the natural Genteelness
of her Person, as in her Acquirements: And
that in nothing but her Humility she should manifest
any Difference between herself and the High-born. 
It will be necessary, moreover, that she should have
a Mind above Temptation; that she should resist the
Offers and Menaces of one upon whom all her worldly
Happiness seemed to depend; the Son of a Lady to
whom she owed the greatest Obligations; a Person
whom she did not hate, but greatly feared, and
whom her grateful Heart would have been glad to
oblige; and who sought to prevail over her Virtue,
by all the Inducements that could be thought of, to
attract a young unexperienced Virgin, at one time,
or to frighten her, at another, into his Purposes; who
offer'd her high, very high Terms, her Circumstances
consider'd, as well for herself, as for Parents she
loved better than herself, whose Circumstances at
the same Time were low and distressful. 
That she should shew, on requisite Occasions,
that she preferred her Virtue to her Life: That if
ever she should be cast wholly into the Power of one,
who, she had too much Reason to think, would
stick at nothing to gain his Ends, she should bear
Persecution from his Agents, withstand repeated Offers
from himself, tho' trying to influence her by Revenge,
when he could not move her other Passions,
(Revenge, the darling Passion of the Sex, so seldom
failing to answer a Tempter's Purpose, be he Man
or Devil, that was his Expression) in pretending to
put her Persecutor in her Power. –––And when she
saw no visible Way to escape, having been disappointed
in an hundred pretty Machinations she had
form'd, young and unassisted as she was, and threaten'd,
that if she yielded not to the high and alluring
Terms he offered, he would execute all his Purposes,
and she should not have one Advantage that 

he then tender'd to her; –––– yet to be able to answer
in such Words as these, which will always
dwell upon my Memory: ––– “*  I reject your Proposals
with all my Soul.” ––––“May God desert me,
whenever I make worldly Grandeur my chiefest
Good!” ––––“I know I am in your Power; I dread
your Will to ruin me is as great as your Power.” 
“–––Yet, will I dare to tell you, I will make no Freewill
Offering of my Virtue. All that I can do,
poor as it is, I will do, to shew you, that my Will
bore no Part in my Violation.” –––And when future
Marriage was intimated to her, to induce her to
yield, to be able to answer, “The Moment I yield
to your Proposals, there is an End of all Merit, if
now I have any.–––– And I should be so far from
expecting such an Honour, that I will pronounce,
I should be most unworthy of it.” 
If, I say, my dear Friends, such a Girl can be
found, thus beautifully attractive in every one's Eye,
and not partially so only in a young Gentleman's
own; and after that, (what good Persons would infinitely
prefer to Beauty) thus piously principled, thus
genteelly educated and accomplished, thus brilliantly
witty, thus prudent, modest, generous, undesigning; 
and having been thus tempted, thus try'd, by
the Man she hated not, pursued, (not intriguingly
pursing) be thus inflexibly virtuous, and Proof
against Temptation; Let her reform her Libertine,
and let him marry her: And were he of princely Extraction,
I dare answer for it, that no two Princes
in one Age, take the World through, would be in
Danger. For, altho' I am sensible it is not to my Credit,
I will say, that I never met with a Repulse, nor a
Conduct, like this; and yet I never sunk very low,
for the Subjects of my Attempts, either at Home or
Abroad. 

These are obvious Inferences, added the dear
Gentleman, and not Refinements upon my Pamela's
Story; and if the Gentleman were capable of Thought
and Comparison, would rather make such an Example,
as is apprehended, more, than less, difficult than
before. 
But if indeed, added he, the young Fellow be
such a Booby, that he cannot reflect and compare,
and take the Case with all its Circumstances together,
I think his good Papa or Mamma should get him a
Wife to their own Liking, as soon as possible; and
the poorest Girl in England, who is honest, would
rather have Reason to bless herself for escaping such
a Husband, than to glory in the Catch she would
have of him. For such a young Fellow as that,
would hardly do Honour to his Family in any one Instance. 
Indeed, said the Countess, it would be pity, after
all, that such an one should marry any Lady of Prudence
and Birth; for, 'tis enough in Conscience, that
he is a Disgrace to one worthy Family; it would be
pity he should make two unhappy. 
Why, really, Nephew, said Sir Jacob, I think
you have said a great deal to the Purpose. There is
not so much Danger from the Example, as I apprehended,
from sensible and reflecting Minds. I did
not consider this Matter thoroughly, I must needs
say. 
All the Business is, said Lady Davers –––– You'll
excuse me, Sister ––– There will be more People will
hear, that Mr. B. has marry'd his Mother's Waiting-maid,
than will know his Inducements. 
Not many, I believe, Sister –––– For when 'tis
known, I have some Character in the World, and
am not quite an Idiot, (And my Faults, in having not
been one of the most virtuous of Men, will stand
me in some Stead in this Case, tho' hardly in any 

other) they will naturally inquire into my Inducements. 
But see you not, when we go Abroad, to Church,
or elsewhere, what Numbers of People her Character
draws to admire the dear Creature? Does not
this shew, that her Virtue has made her more conspicuous,
than my Fortune had made me? For I pass'd
up and down quietly enough before, (handsome as
my Equipage always was) and attracted not any body's
Notice: And indeed I had as lieve these Honours
were not so publickly paid her; for even, were I fond
of Shew and Parade, what are they, but a Reproach
to me? —And can I have any Excellence, but a
secondary one, in having, after all my Persecutions
of her, done but common Justice to her Merit? 
This answers your Objection, Lady Davers, and
shews, that my Inducements and her Story must be
equally known. And, upon my Conscience, I think,
(every thing I have said considered, and every
thing that might still farther be urged, and the Conduct
of that dear Creature in the Station she adorns,
so much exceeding all I hoped, or could flatter
myself with, from the most promising Appearances)
that she does me more Honour than I have done her; 
and if I am capable of putting myself in a third Person's
Place, I think I should be of the same Opinion,
were I to determine upon such another Pair, exactly
circumstanc'd as we are. 
You may believe, Miss, how much this generous
Defence of the Step he had taken, attributing every
thing to me, and depreciating his worthy Self, affected
me. I play'd with a Cork now, with my
Rings another time, turning them round my Fingers,
looked down, and on one Side, and every Way I
looked, but on the Company; for they gazed too much
upon me all the time; so that I could only glance
a tearful Eye now-and-then upon the dear Gentleman; 

and when it would overflow, catch in my Handkerchief
the escaped Fugitives, that would start unhidden
beyond their proper Limits, tho' I often endeavoured,
by a twinkling Motion, to disperse the gathering
Water, before it had formed itself into Drops
too big to be restrained. 
All the Company praised the dear generous
Speaker, and he was pleased to say farther, Altho',
my good Friends, I can truly say, that with all the
Pride of Family, and the Insolence of Fortune,
which once made me doubt whether I should not
sink too low, if I made my Pamela my Mistress, (for
I should then have treated her not ungenerously, and
should have suffered her perhaps to call herself by
my Name) I have never once repented of what I
have done: On the contrary, I have always rejoiced
in it, and it has been, from the first Day
of our Marriage, my Pride and my Boast, (and
shall be, let others say what they will) that I can call
such an Excellence, and such a Purity, which I so
little deserve, mine; and I look down with Contempt
upon the Rashness of all such as reflect upon
me; for they can have no Notion of my Happiness,
or her Merit. 
O dear Sir! said I, how do you over-rate my poor
Merit! —Some Persons are happy in a Life of Comforts,
but mine's a Life of Joy! –––One rapturous
Instance follows another so fast, that I know not how
to bear them. 
Whew!—whistled Sir Jacob. —Whereabouts
am I? –––I hope, by and-by, you'll come down to
our Pitch, that one may put in a Word or two with
you. 
May you be long thus blest, and thus happy together!
said Lady Davers. I know not which to admire
most, the dear Girl, that never was bad, or the
dear Gentleman, that, having been bad, is now so
good! 

Said my Lord Davers, There is hardly any bearing
these moving Scenes, so quick, as my Sister says,
following one another! 
The Countess was pleased to say, That till now
she had been at a Loss to form any Notion of the
Happiness of the first Pair before the Fall: But now,
by so fine an Instance as this, she comprehended it in
all its Force. ––– God continue you to one another,
added her Ladyship, for a Credit to the State, and to
Human Nature. 
Mr. H. having his Elbows on the Table, folded
his Hands, shaking them, and looking down upon
the Table, Egad, this is uncommon Life, that it is! 
–––Your two Souls, I can see that, are like well-tun'd
Instruments: But they are too high-set for me
a vast deal. 
The best thing, said Lady Davers, always severe
upon her poor Nephew, thou ever saidst. The
Musick must be equal to that of Orpheus, which
can make such a Savage as thee dance to it. I charge
thee, say not another Word To-night. 
Why, indeed, Aunt, return'd he, laughing, I believe
it was pretty well said for your foolish Fellow:
Tho' it was by Chance, I must confess: I did
not think of it. 
That I believe, reply'd my Lady;––– if thou hadst,
thou'dst not have spoken so well. 
Sir Jacob and Mr. B. afterwards fell into a Family
Discourse; and Sir Jacob gave us an Account of two
or three Courtships by his three Sons, and to his two
Daughters, and his Reasons for disallowing them:
And I could observe, he is an absolute Tyrant in his
Family, tho' they are all Men and Women grown,
and he seem'd to please himself how much they stood
in Awe of him. 
One odd Piece of Conversation I must tell you,
Miss, because of the Inference that followed it. 

Sir Jacob asked Mr. B. If he did not remember
John Wilkins, his Steward? He was an honest
Fellow, said he, as ever liv'd. –––But he's dead. Alas
for him, poor Jack! –––He physicked himself out
of his Life. —He would be always taking Slops:
Had I done so, I should have gone to the Dogs long
ago. —But whom do you think, Nephew, I've got
in his Place? –––Nay, you can't know him neither. 
Why, 'tis Jerry Sherwood, a Boy I took upon Charity,
and taught to write and read, or paid for't, and
that's the same thing ––– Hay, you know! —And
now Jerry's a Gentleman's Fellow, and is much respected
by all our Hunters; for he's a keen Sportsman,
I'll assure you. I brought him up to that myself,
and many a Jirk has the Dog had from me, before I
could make any thing of him. Many and many a
good time have I whacked the Rascal's Jacket; and
he owes all he is, and will be, to me: And I now
suffer him to sit down at Table with me, when I have
no Guests. 
But is not this a bad Example, said Mr. B. to promote
so low a Servant to the Command of the Family,
under you? What do Gentlemen say to this? 
Gentlemen say to it! –––Why, what Gentlemen
have any thing to do with my Family Management? ––– 
Surely, I may do as I will in my own House, and in
my own Family; or else it would be very hard. 
True, Sir Jacob; but People will be meddling,
where they have least Business. But are not all the
Gentlemen uneasy, for fear their lowest Servants,
from the Example set by so leading a Man as you, a
Chairman of the Sessions, a Colonel of Militia, a
Deputy Lieutenant, and a Justice of Quorum, should
want to be made their Stewards? 
Why, I can't say that any body has taken it into their
Heads to question me upon this Subject. I should 

think 'em plaguy impertinent, if they had, and bid
them mind their own Business. 
But you'll allow, Sir Jacob, that every one who
knows you have rais'd your Foot-boy to be your
Steward, will not know your Inducements; altho', I
doubt not, they are very good ones. 
Lady Davers shook her Head at her Brother, saying,
Very well, Sir; very well! 
Sir Jacob cry'd out, O ho, Nephew! are you
thereabouts with your Bears? Why, I can't say, but
you're in with me now. –––Let's see, what have I
said? –––Ay, by my Soul, you have nabbed me
cleverly. Faith and Troth, you have convinc'd me
by an Example of my own, that I was impertinent
to trouble my Head about the Management of your
Family. –––Tho' near Kindred makes some Excuse
for me too. –––And, besides, a Steward and a Wife
are two Things. 
So I'd have 'em be, Sir Jacob: But a good Wife
is but a Steward to her Husband, in many Cases; and
mine is the best that ever Gentleman had. 
Pretty expensive ones, Nephew, for all that, as
the World runs. –––Most Gentlemen find, I believe,
these Sort of Stewards run 'em out more than they
save: But that's not your Case, I dare say. –––I'faith,
tho', you have nicked me cleverly, that you have. 
But, my witty Brother, said my Lady, I believe
you'd better, for all your Fling at me, as to Inducements,
stick to your first Defence, as to the Example
sake; for, who stands upon Birth or Degree in the
Office of a Steward? 
It will answer several Purposes, Sister, and come
nearer the Point in what you object, than you are
aware of, were we to dispute upon it. But I have
gain'd my End in the Observation: Sir Jacob takes
the Force of the Comparison, and is convinced, I
dare say, there is some Justice in it. 

Ay, ay, a great deal, said Sir Jacob; for a Wife is,
or ought to be, her Husband's Steward. I'm sure,
when mine was living, I made her so, and had no
other; for she made Memorandums, and I digested
them into Book; and yet she brought me a noble
Fortune too, as you all know. 

Here I conclude my tedious Narrations. —Be so
good as to skim them over lightly, that you may not
think the worse of me; and then return them to me,
(with some of your charming Penmanship) that I may
send them on to Kent. To be sure I would not
have been so tediously trifling, but for the Sake of
my dear Parents; And there is so much Self-praise,
as it may seem, from a Person repeating the fine
Things said of herself, that I am half of Opinion I
should send them to Kent only, and to think you
should be obliged to me for saving you so much
Trouble and Impertinence. 
Do, dear Miss, be so free as to forbid me to send
you any more long Journals, but common Letters
only, of How do you? and Who and who's
together, and of Respects to one, and to another,
and so forth—Letters that one might dispatch, as
Sir Jacob says, in a Twinkling, and perhaps be more
to the Purpose, than the tedious Scrawl, which kisses
your Hands, from, 
Dear Miss,
Yours most sincerely,
P.B. 
Do, dear good Sir Simon, let Miss Polly add to
our Delights, by her charming Company. Mr.
Murray, and the new Affair, will divert you, in
her Absence. —So pray, as my good Lady
Darnford has consented, and Miss is willing,
and her Sister can spare her, don't be so cross as
to deny me. 
