


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Wednesday, March 15. 
I Will not let you lose the substance of a very
agreeable conversation, which we had last night
after supper. You may be sure I thought it the more
agreeable, as Sir Charles was drawn in to bear a considerable
part in it. It would be impossible to give
you more than passages, because the subjects were
various, and the transitions so quick, by one person
asking this question, another that, that I could not,
were I to try, connect them as I endeavour generally
to do. 
Of one subject, Lucy, I particularly owe you some
account. Miss Grandison, in her lively way (and
lively she was, notwithstanding her trial so lately
over) led me into talking of the detested masquerade. 
She put me upon recollecting the giddy scene, which
those dreadfully interesting ones that followed it, had
made me wish to blot out of my memory. 
I spared you at the time, Harriet, said she. I asked
you no questions about the masquerade, when you flew
to us first, poor frighted bird! with all your gay
plumage about you. 
I coloured a deep crimson, I believe. What were
Sir Charles's first thoughts of me, Lucy, in that fantastic,
that hated dress? The fimile of the bird too,
was his, you know; and Charlotte looked very
archly. 
My dear Miss Grandison, spare me still. Let me 

forget, that ever I presumptuously ventured into such
a scene of folly. 
Do not call it by harsh names, Miss Byron, said Sir
Charles. We are too much obliged to it. 
Can I, Sir Charles, call it by too harsh a name,
when I think, how fatal, in numberless ways, the
event might have proved? But I do not speak only
with reference to that. Don't think, my dear Miss
Grandison, that my dislike to myself, and to this
foolish diversion, springs altogether from what befel
me: The same shocking villainy might have been attempted
by the same vile man from a more laudable
and reasonable diversion. I had on the spot the same
contempts, the same disdain of myself, the same dislike
of all those who seemed capable of joy on the light,
the foolish occasion. 
My good Charlotte, said Sir Charles smiling, is less
timorous than her younger sister. She might be persuaded,
I fancy, to venture— 
Under your conduct, Sir Charles. You know,
Lady L. and I, who have not yet had an opportunity
of this sort, were trying to engage you against the
next subscription-ball. 
Indeed, said Lady L. our Harriet's distress has led
me into reflexions I never made before on this kind of
diversion; and I fancy her account of it, will perfectly
satisfy my curiosity. 
Sir Ch. Proceed, good Miss Byron. I am as curious
as your sisters, to hear what you say of it. The
scene was quite new to you. You probably expected
entertainment from it. Forget for a while the accidental
consequences, and tell us how you were at the
time amused. 
Amused! Sir Charles! —Indeed I had no opinion of
the diversion, even before I went. I knew I should
despise it. I knew I should often wish myself at home
before the evening were over. And so indeed I did. 
I whispered my cousin Reeves more than once, O madam! 

this is sad! This is intolerable stuff! This place
is one great Bedlam! Good Heaven! Could there be
in this one town so many creatures devoid of reason,
as are here got together? I hope we are all here. 
Yet you see, said Miss Grandison, however Lady L.
is, or seems to be, instantaneously reformed, there
were two, who would gladly have been there: The
more, you may be sure, for its having been a diversion
prohibited to us, at our first coming to town. Sir
Charles lived long in the land of masquerades—Oh,
my dear! we used to please ourselves with hopes, that
when he was permitted to come over to England, we
should see golden days under his auspices. 
Sir Ch. (smiling) Will you accompany us to the
next subscription-ball, Miss Byron? 
I, Sir Charles, should be inexcusable, if I thought— 
Miss Gr. (interrupting, and looking archly) Not
under our brother's conduct, Harriet? 
Indeed, my dear Miss Grandison, had the diversion
not been prohibited, had you once seen the wild,
the senseless confusion, you would think just as I do:
And you would have one stronger reason against countenancing
it by your presence; for who, at this rate,
shall make the stand of virtue and decorum, if such
Ladies as Miss Grandison and Lady L. do not? —But
I speak of the common masquerades, which I believe
are more disorderly. I was disgusted at the freedoms
taken with me, tho' but the common freedoms of the
place, by persons who singled me from the throng,
hurried me round the rooms, and engaged me in
fifty idle conversations; and to whom, by the privilege
of the place, I was obliged to be bold, pert,
saucy, and to aim at repartee and smartness; the current
wit of that witless place. They once got me into
a country-dance. No prude could come, or if she
came, could be a prude, there. 
Sir Ch. Were you not pleased, Miss Byron, with the
first coup d' oeïl of that gay apartment? 

A momentary pleasure: But when I came to reflect,
the bright light, striking on my tinsel dress, made
me seem to myself the more conspicuous fool. Let
me be kept in countenance as I might, by scores of
still more ridiculous figures, what, thought I, are
other peoples follies to me? Am I to make an appearance
that shall want the countenance of the
vainest, if not the silliest part of the creation? 
What would my good grandfather have thought,
could he have seen his Harriet, the girl whose mind
he took pains to form and enlarge, mingling in a
habit so preposterously rich and gaudy, with a croud
of Satyrs, Harlequins, Scaramouches, Fauns, and
Dryads; nay, of Witches and Devils; the graver
habits striving which should most disgrace the characters
they assumed, and every one endeavouring
be thought the direct contrary of what they appeared
to be. 
Miss Gr. Well then, the Devils, at least, must
have been charming creatures! 
Lady L. But, Sir Charles, might not a masquerade,
if decorum were observed, and every one would support
with wit and spirit the assumed character— 
Mr. Gr. Devils and all, Lady L.? 
Lady L. It is contrary to decorum for such shocking
characters to be assumed at all: But might it not,
Sir Charles, so regulated, be a rational and an almost
instructive entertainment? 
Sir Ch. You would scarcely be able, my dear sister,
to collect eight or nine hundred people, all wits, and
all observant of decorum. And if you could, does
not the example reach down to those who are capable
of taking only the bad and dangerous part of a
diversion; which you may see by every common newspaper
is become dreadfully general? 
Mr. Gr. Well, Sir Charles, and why should not
the poor devils in low life divert themselves as well as
their betters? For my part, I rejoice when I see advertised 

an eighteen-peny masquerade, for all the
pretty 'prentice souls, who will that evening be Arcadian
Shepherdesses, Goddesses, and Queens. 
I blushed at the word Arcadian; yet Mr. Grandison
did not seem to have my masquerade dress in his
thoughts. 
Miss Gr. What low profligate scenes couldst thou
expatiate upon, good man! if thou wert in proper
company! I warrant those Goddesses have not wanted
an adorer in our cousin Everard. 
Mr. Gr. Dear Miss Charlotte, take care! I protest,
you begin to talk with the spite of an old maid. 
Miss Gr. There, brother! Do you hear the
wretch? Will not you, knight-errant like, defend
the cause of a whole class of distressed damsels,
with our good Yorkshire aunt at the head of them? 
Sir Ch. Those general prejudices and aspersions,
Charlotte, are indeed unjust and cruel. Yet I am for
having every-body marry. Bachelors, cousin Everard,
and maids, when long single, are looked upon as
houses long empty, which no-body cares to take. As
the house in time, by long disuse, will be thought by
the vulgar haunted by evil spirits, so will the others,
by the many, be thought possessed by no good ones. 
The transition was some-how made from hence to
the equitableness that ought to be in our judgments of
one another. We must in these cases, said Sir Charles,
throw merit in one scale, demerit in the other; and if
the former weigh down the latter, we must in charity
pronounce to the person's advantage. So it is humbly
hoped we shall finally be judged ourselves: For who
is faultless? 
Yet, said he, for my own part, that I may not be
wanting to prudence, I have sometimes where the
merit is not very striking, allowed persons, at first acquaintance,
a short lease only in my good opinion; 
some for three, some for six, some for nine, others for
twelve months, renewable or not, as they answer 

expectation. And by this means I leave it to every
one to make his own character with me; I preserve
my charity, and my complacency; and enter directly,
with frankness, into conversation with him; and generally
continue that freedom to the end of the respective
person's lease. 
Miss Gr. I wonder how many of your leases, brother,
have been granted to Ladies? 
Sir Ch. Many, Charlotte, of the friendly sort: But
the kind you archly mean, are out of the question
at present. We were talking of esteem. 
They insensibly led the conversation to Love and
Courtship; and he said [What do you think he said,
Lucy?] That he should not, perhaps, were he in
Love, be over-forward to declare his passion by words; 
but rather shew it by his assiduities and veneration,
unless he saw, that the suspense was painful to the object; 
and in this case it would be equally mean and insolent
not to break silence, and put himself in the
power of her, whose honour and delicacy ought to be
dearer to him than his own. 
What say you to this, Lucy? 
Some think, proceeded he, that the days of courtship
are the happiest days of life. But the man,
who, as a Lover, thinks so, is not to be forgiven. 
Yet it must be confessed, that hope gives an ardour
which subsides in certainty. 
Being called upon by Lord L. to be more explicit: 
I am not endeavouring, said he, to set up my particular
humour for a general rule. For my own sake, I
would not, by a too early declaration, drive a Lady
into reserves; since that would be to rob myself of
those innocent freedoms, and of that complacency, to
which an honourable Lover might think himself entitled; 
and which might help him [Don't be affrighted,
Ladies!] to develop the plaits and folds of the
female heart. 

This developement stuck with us women a little. 
We talked of it afterwards. And Miss Grandison
then said, It was well her cousin Everard said not
that. And he answered, Sir Charles may with more
safety steal an horse, than I look over the hedge. 
Miss Gr. Ay, cousin Grandison, that is because
you are a Rake. A name, believe me, of at least as
much reproach, as that of an Old Maid. 
Mr. Gr. Aspersing a whole class at once, Miss
Charlotte! 'Tis contrary to your own maxim: And
a class too (this of the Rakes) that many a generous-spirited
girl chooses out of, when she would dispose
of herself, and her fortune. 
Miss Gr. How malapert this Everard! 
What Sir Charles next said, made him own the
character more decently by his blushes. 
The woman who chooses a Rake, said he, does
not consider, that all the sprightly airs for which she
preferred him to a better man, either vanish in matrimony,
or are shewn to others, to her mortal disquiet. 
The agreeable will be carried abroad: The disagreeable
will be brought home. If he reform (and yet
bad habits are very difficult to shake off) he will probably,
from the reflexions on his past guilty life, be
an unsociable companion, should deep and true contrition
have laid hold on him: If not, what has she
chosen? He married not from honest principles: A
Rake despises matrimony: If still a Rake, what hold
will she have of him? A Rake in Passion is not a
Rake in Love. Such a one can seldom be in Love:
From a laudable passion he cannot. He has no delicacy. 
His Love deserves a vile name: And if so,
it will be strange, if in his eyes a common woman
excel not his modest wife. 
What he said, was openly approved by the Gentlemen; 
tacitly by the Ladies. 
The subject changing to marriages of persons of
unequal years; I knew, said Lord L. a woman of character, 

and not reckoned to want sense, who married
at twenty a man of more than fifty, in hopes of burying
him; but who lived with her upwards of twenty
years; and then dying, she is now in treaty with a
young Rake of twenty-two. She is rich; and, poor
woman! hopes to be happy. Pity, Sir Charles, she
could not see the picture you have been drawing. 
Retribution, said Sir Charles, will frequently take
its course. The Lady, keeping in view one steady
purpose; which was, That she would marry a young
man, whenever death removed the old one, forgot,
when she lost her husband, that she had been growing
older for the last twenty years; and will now very
probably be the despised mate to the young husband,
that her late husband was to her. Thirty years hence,
the now young man will perhaps fall into the error of
his predecessor, if he outlive the wife he is going to
take, and be punished in the same way. These are
what may be called punishments in kind. The violators
of the social duties are frequently punished by
the success of their own wishes. Don't you think,
my Lord, that it is suitable to the divine benignity, as
well as justice, to lend its sanctions and punishments
in aid of those duties which bind man to man? 
Lord L. said some very good things. Your Harriet
was not a mute: But you know, that my point is, to
let you into the character and sentiments of Sir Charles
Grandison: And whenever I can do them tolerable
justice, I shall keep to that point. You will promise
for me, you say, Lucy—I know you will. 
But one might have expected that Dr. Bartlett
would have said more than he did, on some of the
subjects: Yet Mr. Grandison, and he, and Miss
Emily, were almost equally, and attentively, silent,
till the last scene: And then the Doctor said, I must
shew you a little translation of Miss Emily's from the
Italian. She blushed, and looked as if she knew not
whether she should stay or go. I shall be glad to see 

any-thing of my Emily's, said Sir Charles. I know
she is a mistress of that language, and elegant in her
own. Pray, my dear (to her) let us be obliged, if
it will not pain you. 
She blushed, and bowed. 
I must first tell you, said the Doctor, that I was the
occasion of her choosing so grave a subject, as you will
find that of the sonnet from which hers is taken. 
A sonnet! said Miss Grandison. My dear little
Poetess, you must set it, and sing it to us. 
No, indeed, madam, said Miss Jervois, blushing
still more, Dr. Bartlett would by no means have me
a Poetess, I am sure: And did you not, dear madam,
speak that word, as if you meant to call me a name? 
I think she did, my dear, said Sir Charles: Nor
would I have my Emily distinguished by any name,
but that of a discreet, an ingenious, and an amiable
young woman. The title of Wit and Poetess, has
been disgraced too often by Sappho's and Corinna's ancient
and modern. Was not this in your head, sister? 
But do not be disturbed, my Emily [The poor girl's
eyes glistened]. I mean no check to liveliness and modest
ingenuity. The easy productions of a fine fancy,
not made the business of life, or its boast, confer no
denomination that is disgraceful, but very much the
contrary. 
I am very glad, for all that, said Miss Jervois, that
my little translation is in plain prose: Had it not, I
should have been very much afraid to have it seen. 
Even in that case, you need not to have been afraid,
my dear Miss Jervois, said the good Dr. Bartlett:
Sir Charles is an admirer of good poetry: And Miss
Grandison would have recollected the Philomela's,
the Orinda's, and other excellent names among her
own sex, whose fine genius does it honour. 
Your diffidence and sweet humility, my dear Emily,
said Lady L would, in you, make the most envied
accomplishments amiable. 

I am sure, said the lovely girl, hanging down her
head, tears ready to start, I have reason to be affected
with the subject. —The indulgent mother is described
with so much sweet tenderness—O what pleasures do
mothers lose, who want tenderness! 
We all, either by eyes or voices, called for the
Sonnet, and her translation. Dr. Bartlett shewed
them to us; and I send copies of both. 

SONNET of Vincenzo da Filicaja.

Qual madre i figli con pietoso affetto
 Mira, e d'amor si strugge a lor davante;
 E un bacia in fronte, ed un si stringe al petto,
Uno tien sù i ginocchi, un sulle piante,
E mentre agli atti, a i gemiti, all' aspetto
 Lor voglie intende sì diverse, e tante,
 A questi un guardo, a quei dispensa un detto,
E se ride, o s'adira è sempre amante:
Tal per noi Provvidenza alta infinita
 Veglia, e questi conforta, e quei provvede,
 E tutti ascolta, e porge a tutti aita.
E se nièga talor grazia, o mercede,
 O niega sol, perchè a pregar ne invita;
 O negar finge, e nel negar concede.


“See a fond mother incircled by her children:
With pious tenderness she looks around, and her
soul even melts with maternal Love. One she
kisses on the forehead; and clasps another to her
bosom. One she sets upon her knee; and finds a seat
upon her foot for another. And while, by their actions,
their lisping words, and asking eyes, she understands
their various numberless little wishes, to these
she dispenses a look; a word to those; and whether
she smiles or frowns, 'tis all in tender Love. 
“Such to us, tho' infinitely high and awful, is
Providence: So it watches over us; comforting
these; providing for those; listening to all; assisting 

every one: And if sometimes it denies the
favour we implore, it denies but to invite our more
earnest prayers; or, seeming to deny a blessing,
grants one in that refusal.” 
When the translation was read aloud, the tears that
before were starting, trickled down the sweet girl's
cheeks. But the commendations every one joined in,
and especially the praises given her by her guardian,
drove away every cloud from her face. 

