



My dearest Child,
Your Mother and I have as well considered
the Case you put, as we are able; and we think
your own Reasons very good; and it is pity, a
thousand Pities, your honoured Husband will not
allow them, as you, my Dear, make it such a Point
with you. Very few Ladies would give their Spouses,
we believe, the Trouble of this Debate; and few
Gentlemen are so very nice as yours in this respect; 
for I (but what signifies what such a mean Soul as I
think, compar'd to so learned and brave a Gentleman; 
yet I) always thought your dear Mother, and
she has been a pretty Woman too in her Time,
never look'd so lovely, as when I saw the dear Creature,
like the Pelican in the Wilderness, feeding her
young ones from her kind Breast:–––And had I had
ever so noble an Estate, I am sure I should have
thought so. 
But since the good 'Squire cannot take this Pleasure; 
since he so much values your Person; since
he gives you Warning, that it may estrange his Affections; 
since he is impatient of Denial, and thinks
so highly of his Prerogative; since he may, if disobliged,
resume some bad Habits, and so you may
have all your Prayers and Hopes in his perfect
Reformation frustrated, and find your own Power
to do Good more narrow'd, as I may say; we think,
besides the Obedience you have vowed to him, and
is the Duty of every good Wife, you ought to give
up the Point, and acquiesce; for this seemeth to us,
to be the lesser Evil; and God Almighty, if it
should be your Duty, will not be less merciful than 

Men; who, as his Honour says, by the Laws of the
Realm, excuse a Wife when she is faulty by the
Command of the Husband; and we hope, the Fault
he is pleased to make you commit, (if a Fault, for
he really gives very praise-worthy Motives for his
Dispensation) will not lie at his own Door. So
e'en resolve my dearest Child, to submit to it, and
with Chearfulness too. 
God send you an happy Hour! but who knows,
when the Time comes, whether it may not be proper
to dispense with this Duty, as you deem it, on
other Accounts? for every young Person is not
inabled to perform it. So, to shew his Honour,
that you will chearfullyacquiesce, your dear Mother
advises, that you would look out for a wholsome,
good-humour'd, honest Body, as near your Complexion,
and Temper, and Constitution, as may be; 
and it may not be the worse, she thinks, if she is
Twenty, or One or Two-and-twenty; for she will
have more Strength and Perfection, as one may say,
than even you can have at your tender Age: And,
above all, for the wise Reason you give from your
Reading, that she may be brought to-bed much about
your Time, if it be possible.––– We will look out, if
you please, about us for such an one. And as Mr.
B. is not averse to have the dear Child in the House
with you, you will have as much Delight, and the
dear Baby may fare as well, under your prudent and
careful Eye, as if you were to be obliged in the Way
you would chuse. 
So, God direct you, my dearest Child, in all your
Ways, and make you acquiesce in this Point with
Chearfulness, (altho', as you say, one cannot believe
as one pleases; for we verily are of Opinion you
safely may, at Matters stand) and continue to you,
and your beloved and honoured Husband, Health, 

and all manner of Happiness, are the Prayers
of 
Your most affectionate Father and Mother, J. and E. Andrews. 

I have privately shew'd our worthy Minister your
Letter: You know, my Dear, he is a learned
and judicious Gentleman: And he is of our
Opinion, that it is best for you, on all
Accounts, to acquiesce. Besides, it may
disoblige the 'Squire, and it will signify
nothing, after all; for he will have his Way,
that's sure enough. 
