


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Thursday Morn. Mar. 30. 
I send you now inclosed the doctor's fourth Letter. 
I believe I must desire my grandmamma and my
aunt Selby to send for me down. 
We shall all be in London this evening. 
Would to Heaven I had never come to it! —What
of pleasure have I had in it? —This abominable Sir
Hargrave Pollexfen! —But for him, I had been easy and
happy; since but for him, I had never wanted the relief
of Sir Charles Grandison; never had known
him. Fame might perhaps have brought to my ears,
in general conversation, as other persons of distinction
are talked of, some of his benevolent actions; and he
would have attracted my admiration without costing
me one sigh. And yet, had it been so, I should then
have known none of those lively sensibilities that have
mingled pleasure with my pain, on the pride I have
had in being distinguished as a sister to the sisters of so
extraordinary a man. O that I had kept my foolish
heart free! I should then have had enough to boast of
for my whole life, enough to talk of to every one. 
And when I had been asked by my companions and
intimates, What diversions, what entertainments, I
had been at? I should have said, ‘I have been in
company and conversed with Sir Charles Grandison;
and been favoured and distinguished by all
his family.’ And I should have passed many a happy
winter evening, when my companions came to work
and read with me at Selby-house, in answering their
questions about all these; and Sir Charles would have
been known among us principally by the name of
The Fine Gentleman; and my young friends would
have come about me, and asked me to tell them something
more of The Excellent Man. 

But now my ambition has overthrown me:
Aiming, wishing to be every-thing, I am nothing. 
If I am asked about him, or his sisters, I shall seek
to evade the subject; and yet, what other subject
can I talk of? For what have I seen; what have I
known, since I left Northamptonshire, but Him and
Them; and what must lead to Him and Them? 
And what indeed but Him and Them, since I have
known this family, have I wished to see, and to
know? 
On reviewing the above, how have I, as I see, suffered
my childish fancies to delude me into a short forgetfulness
of his, of every-body's distresses! —But, O my
Lucy, my heart is torn in pieces; and, I verily think,
more for the unhappy Clementina's sake, than for my
own! How severely do I pay for my curiosity! Yet it was
necessary that I should know the worst. So Sir Charles
seems to have thought, by the permission he has given
to Dr. Bartlett, to oblige me, and through me, his
sisters, and all you my own friends. 
Your pity will be more raised on reading the Letter
I inclose, not only for Clementina and Sir Charles,
but for the whole family; none of whom, tho' all
unhappy, are to be blamed. You will dearly love
the noble Jeronymo, and be pleased with the young
Lady's faithful Camilla: But, my dear, there is so
much tenderness in Sir Charles's woe—It must be
Love—But he ought to love Clementina: She is a
glorious, tho' unhappy, young creature. I must not
have one spark of generosity left in my heart, I must
be lost wholly in Self, if I did not equally admire
and love her. 

Dr. Bartlett's fourth Letter.
As I remember, madam, Sir Charles mentions to
you, in a very pathetic manner, the distress he
was in when the terms and conditions, on which he
was to be allowed to call the noble Clementina his, 

were proposed to him; as they were by the Bishop. 
He has briefly told you the terms, and his grief to be
obliged to disappoint the expectation of persons so deservedly
dear to him. But you will not, I believe, be
displeased, if I dwell a little more on these particulars,
tho' they are not commanded from me. 
The Bishop, when he had acquainted Mr. Grandison
with the terms, said, You are silent, my dear
Grandison: You hesitate. What, Sir! Is a proposal
of a daughter of one of the noblest families in Italy; 
that daughter a Clementina; to be slighted by a man
of a private family; a foreigner; of dependent fortunes; 
her dowry not unworthy of a Prince's acceptance? 
Do you hesitate upon such a proposal as this,
Sir? 
My Lord, I am grieved, rather than surprised, at
the proposal: I was apprehensive it would be made. 
My joy at receiving the condescending invitation, and
at the honours done me, on my arrival, otherwise
would have been immoderate. 
A debate then followed, upon some articles in
which the Church of Rome and the Protestant
Churches differ. Mr. Grandison would fain
have avoided it; but the Bishop, supposing he
should have some advantages in the argument,
which he met not with, would not permit him. 
He was very warm with Mr. Grandison more
than once, which did not help his cause. 
The particulars of this debate I will not at this
time give you: They would carry me into great
length; and I have much to transcribe, that I
believe, from what Sir Charles has let me see of
your manner of writing to your friends, you
would prefer. To that I will proceed; after a
passage or two, which will shew you how that
debate, about the difference in Religion, went
off. 
You will call to mind, Chevalier, said the Bishop, 

that your church allows of a possibility of salvation
out of its pale—Ours does not. 
My Lord, our church allows not of its members
indulging themselves in capital errors, against conviction:
But I hope that no more need to be said on
this subject. 
I think, replied the Bishop, we will quit it. I did
not expect that you were so firmly rooted in error, as
I find you: But to the point on which we began: I
should think it an extraordinary misfortune, were we
to find ourselves reduced to the necessity of reasoning
a private man into the acceptance of our sister Clementina. 
Let me tell you, Sir, that were she to know
that you but hesitate—He spoke with earnestness, and
reddened. 
Pardon an interruption, my Lord: You are disposed
to be warm. I will not so much as offer to defend myself
from any imputations that may, in displeasure, be
cast upon me, as if I were capable of slighting the honour
intended me of a Lady who is worthy of a
Prince. I am persuaded that your Lordship cannot
think such a defence necessary. I am indeed a private
man, but not inconsiderable; if the being able to enumerate
a long race of ancestors, whom hitherto I
have not disgraced, will give me consideration. But
what, my Lord, is ancestry? I live to my own heart. 
My principles were known before I had the condescending
invitation. Your Lordship would not persuade
me to change them, when I cannot think them
wrong; and since, as you have heard, I have something
to offer, when called upon, in support of them. 
You will consider this matter, my dear Chevalier. 
It is you, I think, that are disposed to be warm; but
you are a valuable man. We, as well as our sister,
wish to have you among us: Our church would wish
it. Such a proselyte will justify us to every other
consideration, and to all our friends. Consider of it,
Grandison; but let it not be known to the principals 

of our family, that you think consideration necessary:
The dear Clementina, particularly, must not know it. 
Your person, Chevalier, is not so dear to the excellent
creature, as your soul. Hence it is, that we are all willing
to encourage in her a flame so pure, and so bright. 
My distress, my Lord, is beyond the power of
words to describe. I revere, I honour, and will to my
last hour, the Marquis and Marchioness of Porretta,
and on better motives than for their grandeur or nobility. 
Their sons—You know not, my Lord, the
pride I have always had to be distinguished even by a
nominal relation to them: And give me your Clementina,
without the hard conditions you prescribe,
and I shall be happy beyond my highest wish. I desire
not dowry with her. I have a father on whose
generosity and affection I can rely. But I must repeat,
my Lord, that my principles are so well known,
that I hoped a compromise would be accepted—I
would not for the world compel your sister. The
same liberty that I crave, I would allow. 
And will you not take time, Sir, to consider? Are
you absolutely determined? 
If your Lordship knew the pain it gives me to say
that I am, you would pity me. 
Well, Sir, I am sorry for it. Let us go in to Signor
Jeronymo. He has been your advocate ever since he
knew you. Jeronymo has gratitude; but you, Chevalier,
have no affections. 
I thank God, said I, that your Lordship does not do
me justice. 
He led me into his brother's apartment. 
There, what did I not suffer, from the Friendship,
from the Love of that brother, and from the urgency
of the Bishop! But what was the result? 
The Bishop asked me, If he were to conduct me to
his father, to his mother, to his sister? Or to allow
me to depart without seeing them? —This was the alternative. 
My compliance or non-compliance was to 

be thus indicated. I respectfully bowed. I recommended
myself to the favour of the two brothers, and
thro' them to that of the three truly-respectable persons
they had named; and withdrew to my lodgings
with a heart sorely distressed. 
I was unable to stir out for the remainder of the
day. The same chair into which I threw myself, upon
my first coming in, held me for hours. 
In the evening Camilla, in disguise, made me a visit. 
On my servant's withdrawing, revealing herself, O
Sir, said she, what a distracted family have I left! 
They know not of my coming hither; but I could
not forbear this officiousness: I cannot stay. But
let me just tell you how unhappy we are; and your
own generosity will suggest to you, what is best to be
done. 
As soon as you were gone, my Lord Bishop acquainted
my Lady Marchioness with what had passed
between you. O Sir! you have an affectionate
friend in Signor Jeronymo. He endeavoured to soften
every-thing. My Lady Marchioness acquainted my
Lord with the Bishop's report. I never saw that good
nobleman in such a passion. It is not necessary to tell
you what he said— 
In a passion with me, Camilla! 
Yes. He thought the whole family dishonoured,
Sir. 
The Marquis della Porretta is the worthiest of men,
Camilla, said I. I honour him. —But proceed. 
The Marchioness, in the tenderest manner, broke
the matter to my young Lady: I was present. She
apprehended, that there might be occasion for my attendance,
and commanded me to stay. 
Before she could speak all she had to say, my young
Lady threw herself on her knees to her mamma, and
blessing her for her goodness to her, begged her to spare
the rest. I see, said she, that I, a daughter of the
Porretta family, your daughter, madam, am refused. 

Palliate not, I beseech you, the indignity. You need
not. It is enough, that I am refused. Surely, madam,
your Clementina is not so base in spirit, as to need
your maternal consolation on such a contempt as this. 
I feel for my papa, for you, madam, and for my brothers,
I feel the indignity. Blessings follow the man
where-ever he goes! It would be mean to be angry
with him. He is his own master; and now he has
made me my own mistress. Never fear, madam, but
this affair now will sit as light upon me, as it ought. 
His humility will allow him to be satisfied with a
meaner wife. You, madam, my papa, my brothers,
shall not find me mean. 
The Marchioness embraced, with tears of joy, her
beloved daughter. She brought my Lord to her, and
reported what her daughter had said: He also tenderly
embraced the dear young Lady, and rejoiced in her
assurances, that now the cure was effected. 
But, unseasonably, as the event shewed, Father
Marescotti, being talked with, was earnest to be allowed
to visit her: Then, he said, was the proper
time, the very crisis, to urge her to accept of the
Count of Belvedere. 
I was bid to tell her, that his Reverence desired to
attend her. 
O let me go, said she, to Florence; to my dear
Mrs. Beaumont! —To-morrow morning let me go; 
and not see Father Marescotti, till I can see him as I
wish to see him! 
But the good Father prevailed: He meant the best. 
He was with her half an hour. He left her in a
melancholy way. When her mamma went to her,
she found her spiritless, her eyes fixed, and as gloomy
as ever. She was silent to two or three of her mother's
questions; and when she did speak, it was with
wildness; but declaring, without being solicited in
the Count of Belvedere's favour, against marrying
him, or any man in the world. 

Her mother told her, she should go to Florence, as
soon as she pleased: But then the humour was off. 
Would to Heaven she had gone before she saw his
Reverence! So they all now wish. 
Camilla, said she to me, when we were alone,
Was it necessary to load the Chevalier Grandison? 
Was it necessary to inveigh against him? It was ungenerous
to do so. Was the man obliged to have the
creature whose forwardness had rendered her contemptible
in his eyes? I could not bear to hear him
inveighed against. But never, never, let me hear his
name mentioned. But, Camilla, I cannot bear being
despised, neither. 
She arose from her seat, and from that moment
her humour took a different turn. She now talks:
She raves: She starts: She neither sits nor stands with
quietness—She walks up and down her room, at other
times, with passion and hurry; yet weeps not, tho'
she makes every-body else weep. She speaks to herself,
and answers herself; and, as I guess, repeats part
of the talk that passed between Father Marescotti and
her: But still, To be despised! are the words she oftenest
repeats. —Jesu! once, said she—To be despised! — 
And by an English Protestant! Who can bear that? 
In this way, Sir, is Lady Clementina. The sweetest
creature! —I see, I see, you have compassion, Sir! 
You never wanted humanity! Generosity is a part of
your nature! I am sure you love her—I see you love
her—I pain your noble heart! —Indeed, indeed, Sir,
Lady Clementina's Love extended beyond the limits
of this world: She hoped to be yours to all eternity. 
Well might Camilla, the sensible, the faithful, the
affectionate Camilla, the attendant from infant years
of her beloved Clementina, thus run on, without interruption. 
I could not speak. And had I been able,
to what purpose should I have pleaded to Camilla the
superior attachment which occasioned an anguish that
words cannot describe? 

What can I say, but thank you, my good Camilla,
for your intention? I hope you have eased your own
heart; but you have loaded mine—Nevertheless, I
thank you. Would to Heaven that your Lady's own
wishes had been complied with; that she had been encouraged
to go to the excellent Mrs. Beaumont! The
first natural impulses of the distressed heart often point
out the best alleviation. Would to Heaven they had
been pursued! I have great dependence on the generous
friendship of Signor Jeronymo. All that is in my
power to do, I will do. I honour, I venerate, every
one of the truly-noble family: I never can deserve
their favour. On all occasions, Camilla, let them
know my devotion to them. 
I beg of God, said she, to put it into your heart to
restore the tranquillity of a family that was, till lately,
the happiest in Bologna. It may not be yet too late. 
I beg you to excuse my officiousness. Pray take no
notice that I have waited on you. I shall be wanted. 
She was hastening away. Good Camilla, said I,
taking a ring of some value from my finger, and
forcing it upon hers (she is above accepting of pecuniary
presents, and struggled against this), Accept this
as a remembrance, not acknowlegement. I may be
forbid the palace of the Marquis della Porretta, and
so have no opportunity again to see the equally faithful
and obliging Camilla. 
What other conditions could have been prescribed,
Dr. Bartlett, that I should have refused to comply
with? How was I anew distressed, at the account
Camilla gave me! But my great consolation in the
whole transaction is, that my own heart, on the maturest
deliberation, acquits me: And the rather, as
it is impossible for me to practise a greater piece of
self-denial: For can there be on earth a nobler Lady
than Clementina? 
The next morning, early, Mr. Grandison received
the following Letter from his friend Signor Jeronymo. 

I translated it, my good Miss Byron, at the time I
received it. I will send you the translation, only. 

My dear Chevalier!
Shall I blame you? —I cannot. Shall I blame
my father, my mother? —They blame themselves,
for the free access you were allowed to have to
their Clementina; yet they own, that you acted
nobly. But they had forgot that Clementina had
eyes. Yet who knew not her discernment? Who
knew not her regard for merit, where-ever she found
it? Can I therefore blame my sister? —Indeed, no. 
Has she a brother whom I can blame? —No. But
ought I not to blame myself? The dear creature
owned, it seems, to Mrs. Beaumont, that my declaration
in your favour, which was made long before
you knew it, was one of her influences. Must I
therefore accuse myself? —If I regard my intention,
gratitude, for a life preserved by you, and for a sense
of my social duties (soul as well as body indebted to
you, tho' a Protestant yourself) will not suffer it. 
Is there then nobody whom we can blame for the calamity
befallen us? —How strangely is that calamity
circumstanced! 
But is there so irreconcileable a difference between
the two religions? —There is: The Bishop says there
is: Clementina thinks there is: My father, my mother,
think there is. 
But does your father think so? Will you put the
whole matter on that issue, Chevalier? 
O no, you will not. You are as determined as we
are: Yet, surely, with less reason. 
But I debate not the matter with you. I know you
are a master of the question. 
But what is to be done? Shall Clementina perish? 
Will not the gallant youth, who ventured his life so
successfully to save a brother, exert himself to preserve
a sister? 

Come, and see the way she is in—Yet they will
not admit you into her presence while she is in that
way. 
The sense she has of her dignity debased, and the
perpetual expostulations and apprehensions of her
zealous confessor—Can the good man think it his duty
to wound and tear in pieces a mind tenacious of its
honour, and of that of the Sex? At last, you see, I
have found somebody to accuse. —But I come to my
motive of giving you this trouble. 
It is to request you to make me a visit. Breakfast
with me, my dear Chevalier, this morning. You
will perhaps see nobody else. 
Camilla has told me, and only me, that she attended
you last night: She tells me how greatly you are
grieved. I should renounce your friendship, were you
not. At my soul, I pity you, because I knew, long
since, your firm attachment to your religion; and because
you love Clementina. 
I wish I were able to attend you; I would save you
the pain of this visit; for I know it must pain you:
But come, nevertheless. 
You hinted to my brother, that you thought, as
your principles were so well known, a compromise
would be accepted—Explain yourself to me upon this
compromise. If I can smooth the way between you— 
Yet I despair that any-thing will do but your conversion. 
They love your soul; they think they love
it better than you do yourself. Is there not a merit
in them, which you cannot boast in return? 
The General, I hear, came to town last night:
We have not seen him yet. He had business with
the Gonfalionere. I think you must not meet. He is
warm. He adores Clementina. He knew not, till
last night, that the Bishop broke it to him at that magistrate's,
our unhappy situation. What a disappointment! 
One of the principal views he had in coming was,
to do you honour, and to give his sister pleasure. Ah, 

Sir! he came to be present at two solemn acts: The
one your Nuptials, in consequence of the other. — 
You must not meet. It would go to my heart, to
have offence given you by any of my family, especially
in our own house. 
Come, however; I long to see you, and to comfort
you, whether your hard heart (I did not use to
think it a hard one) will allow you, or not, to give
comfort to 
Your ever-affectionate
and faithful friend,
Jeronymo della Porretta. 


I accepted of the invitation. My heart was in this
family: I longed, before this Letter came, to see and
to hear from it. The face of the meanest servant belonging
to it would have been more than welcome to
me. What, however, were my hopes? Yet, do you
think, Dr. Bartlett, that I had not pain in going; a
pain that took more than its turn, with the desire I
had once more to enter doors that used to be opened
to me with so much pleasure on both sides? 


Dr. Bartlett's fifth Letter.
Mr. Grandison thus proceeds: I was introduced
to Signor Jeronymo. He sat expecting me. 
He bowed more stiffly than usual, in return to my freer
compliment. 
I see, said I, that I have lost my friend. 
Impossible, said he. It cannot be. 
Then speaking of his sister, Dear creature! said
he. A very bad night. My poor mother has been
up with her ever since Three o'clock: Nobody else
has any influence with her. These talking fits are
worse than her silent ones. 
What could I say? My soul was vexed. My friend
saw it, and was grieved for me. He talked of indifferent
things. I could not follow him in them. 

He then entered upon the subject that would not
long allow of any other. I expect the General, said
he. I will not, I think, have you see each other. I
have ordered notice to be given me before any one of
the family is admitted, while you are with me. If
you choose not to see the General, or my father or
mother, should they step in to make their morning
compliments, you can walk down the back-stairs into
the garden, or into the next chamber. 
I am not the least sufferer in this distress, replied I. 
You have invited me. If on your own account you
would have me withdraw, I will; but else I cannot
conceal myself. 
This is like you. It is you yourself. O Grandison!
that we could be real brothers! —In soul we are so. 
But what is the compromise you hinted at? 
I then told him, That I would reside one year in
Italy, another in England, by turns, if the dear Clementina
would accompany me; if not, but three
months in England, in every year. As to religion,
she should keep her own; her confessor only to be a
man of known discretion. 
He shook his head. I'll propose it as from yourself,
if you would have me do so, Chevalier. It would do
with me; but will not with any-body else. I have
undertaken for more than that already; but it will
not be heard of. Would to God, Chevalier, that
you, for my sake, for all our sakes. —But I know you
have a great deal to say on this subject, as you told
my brother. New converts, added he, may be zealous; 
but you old Protestants, Protestants by descent,
as I may say, 'tis strange you should be so very stedfast. 
You have not many young gentlemen, I believe,
who would be so very tenacious; such offers,
such advantages—And surely you must love my sister! 
All our family, you surely love. I will presume to
say, they deserve your love; and they give the strongest
proofs that can be given of their regard for you. 

Signor Jeronymo expected not an argumentative
answer to what he said. My stedfastness was best expressed; 
and surely it was sufficiently expressed (the
circumstances of the case so interesting) by silence. 
Just then came in Camilla. The Marchioness, Sir,
knows you are here. She desires you will not go till
she sees you. She will attend you here, I believe. 
She is persuading Lady Clementina to be blooded. 
She has an aversion to that operation. She begs it
may not be done. She has been hitherto, on that account,
bled by leaches. The Marquis and the Bishop
are both gone out. They could not bear her solicitations
to them to save her, as she called it. 
The Marchioness soon after entered—Care, melancholy,
yet tenderness, was in her aspect: Grief for
her daughter's malady seemed fixed in the lines of her
fine face. Keep your seat, Chevalier. She sat down,
sighed, wept; but would not have had her tears
seen. 
Had I not been so deeply concerned in the cause
of her grief, I could have endeavoured to comfort
her. But what could I say? I turned my head aside. 
I would also have concealed my emotion, but Signor
Jeronymo took notice of it. 
The poor Chevalier, kindly said he, with an accent
of compassion— 
I don't doubt it, answered she, as kindly, tho' he
spoke not out what he had to say. He may be obdurate; 
but not ungrateful. 
Excellent woman! How was I affected by her generosity! 
This was taking the direct road to my heart. 
You know that heart, Dr. Bartlett, and what a talk
it had. 
Jeronymo enquired after his sister's health; I was
afraid to enquire. 
Not worse, I hope; but so talkative! poor thing! 
She burst into tears. 
I presumed to take her hand—O Madam! Will
no compromise! Will no— 

It ought not, Chevalier. I cannot urge it. We
know your power, too well we know your power over
the dear creature. She will not be long a Catholic,
if she be yours; and you know what we then should
think of her precious soul! —Better to part with her
for ever—Yet, how can a mother—Her tears spoke
what her lips could not utter. 
Recovering her voice, I have left her, said she,
contending with the doctors against being let blood. 
She was so earnest with me to prevent it, that I could
not stay. It is over by this time—She rang. 
At that moment, to the astonishment of all three,
in ran the dear Clementina herself. —A happy escape! 
Thank God! said she—Her arm bound up. 
She had felt the lancet; but did not bleed more
than two or three drops. 
O my mamma! And you would have run away
from me too, would you! —You don't use to be
cruel; and to leave me with these doctors—See! see!
and she held out her lovely arm a little bloody, regarding
nobody but her mother; who, as well as we,
was speechless with surprize—They did attempt to
wound; but they could not obtain their cruel ends— 
And I ran for shelter to my mamma's arms (throwing
hers about her neck)—Dearest, dearest madam, don't
let me be sacrificed. What has your poor child done,
to be thus treated?— 
O my Clementina! 
And O my mamma, too! Have I not suffered
enough!— 
The door opened. She cast her fearful eye to it,
clinging faster to her mother. —They are come to
take me! Begone, Camilla (It was she) begone,
when I bid you! They sha'n't take me—My
mamma will save me from them—Won't you, my
mamma? clasping more fervently her arms about her
neck, and hiding her face in her bosom. Then lifting
up her face, Begone, I tell you, Camilla. They
sha'n't have me. —Camilla withdrew. 

Brother! my dear brother! you will protect me:
won't you? 
I arose. I was unable to bear this affecting scene— 
She saw me. 
Good God! said she. —Then in English breaking
out into that line of Hamlet, which she had taken
great notice of, when we read that play together— 

Angels, and ministers of grace, defend us!

She left her mother, and stept gently towards me,
looking earnestly with her face held out, as if she
were doubtful whether it were I, or not. 
I snatched her hand, and pressed it with my lips— 
O madam! —Dearest Lady! —I could say no more. 
It is he! It is he, indeed, madam! turning her
head to her mother, one hand held up, as in surprize,
as I detained the other. 
The son's arms supported the almost fainting mother; 
his tears mingling with hers. 
For God's sake! for my sake, dear Grandison!
said he, and stopt. 
I quitted Clementina's hand; Jeronymo's unhealed
wounds had weakened him, and I hastened to support
the Marchioness. 
O Chevalier! spare your concern for me, said she. 
My child's head is of more consequence to me, than
my own heart. 
What was it of distress that I did not at that moment
feel! 
The young Lady turning to us—Well, Sir, said
she, Here is sad work! Sad work, to be sure! Somebody
is wrong: I won't say who. —But you will not
let these doctors use me ill—Will you? —See here!
shewing her bound up arm to me—what they would
have done! —See! They did get a drop or two; but
no more. And I sprung from them, and ran for it. 
Her mother then taking her attention, My dearest
mamma! How do you!— 

O my child! and she clasped her arms about her
Clementina. 
Camilla came in. She added by her grief to the distressful
scene. She threw her arms, kneeling, about
the Marchioness: O my dearest Lady! said she. —The
Marchioness feeling for her salts, and taking them
out of her pocket, and smelling to them; Unclasp
me, Camilla, said she: I am better. Are the doctors
gone? 
No, madam, whispered Camilla: But they say, It is
highly proper; and they talk of blistering!— 
Not her head, I hope! —The dear creature, when
she used to value herself upon any-thing, took pride,
as well she might, in her hair. 
Now you are whispering, my mamma—And this
impertinent Camilla is come—Camilla, they shall not
have me, I tell you! —See, barbarous wretches!
what they have done to me already!—again holding
up her arm, and then with indignation tearing off the
fillet. 
Her brother begged of her to submit to the operation. 
Her mother joined her gentle command—Well,
I won't love you, brother, said she: You are in the
plot against me—But here is one who will protect me; 
laying her hand upon my arm, and looking earnestly
in my face, with such a mixture of woe and tenderness
in her eye, as pierced my very soul. 
Persuade her, Chevalier, said the Marchioness. 
My good young Lady, Will you not obey your
mamma? You are not well. Will you not be well? 
See how you distress your noble brother! 
She stroked her brother's cheek (It was wet with
his tears) with a motion inimitably tender, her voice
as inimitably soothing—Poor Jeronymo! My dearest
brother! And have you not suffered enough from
vile assassins? Poor dear brother!—and again stroked
his cheek—How was I affected! 
A fresh gush of tears broke from his eyes—Ah,
Grandison! said he! 

O why, why, said I, did I accept of your kind
invitation? This distress could not have been so deep,
had not I been present. 
See! see! Chevalier, holding out her spread hand
to me, Jeronymo weeps—He weeps for his sister, I
believe. —These—Look, my hand is wet with them!
are the tears of my dear Jeronymo! My hand—See!
is wet with a brother's tears! —And you, madam, are
affected too! turning to her mother. It is a grievous
thing to see men weep! What ail they? —Yet I cannot
weep—Have they softer hearts than mine? — 
Don't weep, Chevalier. —See, Jeronymo has done! — 
I would stroke your cheek too, if it would stop your
tears. —But what is all this for? —It is because of
these doctors, I believe. —But, Camilla, bid them begone:
They sha'n't have me. 
Dearest madam, said I, submit to your mamma's
advice. Your mamma wishes you to suffer them to
breathe a vein—It is no more—Your Jeronymo also
beseeches you to permit them. 
And do you wish it too, Chevalier? —Do you wish
to see me wounded? —To see my heart bleeding at
my arm, I warrant. Say, can you be so hard-hearted? 
Let me join with your mamma, with your brother,
to entreat it: For your father's sake! For— 
For your sake, Chevalier? —Well, will it do you
good to see me bleed? 
I withdrew to the window. I could not stand this
question; put with an air of tenderness for me, and
in an accent equally tender. 
The irresistible Lady (O what eloquence in her
disorder!) followed me; and laying her hand on my
arm, looking earnestly after my averted face, as if she
would not suffer me to hide it from her—Will it, will
it, comfort you to see me bleed? —Come then, be
comforted; I will bleed: But you shall not leave me. 
You shall see that these doctors shall not kill me
quite. 

O Dr. Bartlett! How did this address to me torture
my very soul! 
Camilla, proceeded she, I will bleed. Madam, to
her mother, Will it please you to have me bleed? 
Will it please you, my Jeronymo? turning to him— 
And, Sir, Sir, stepping to me with quickness, Will it
please you? —Why then, Camilla, bid the doctors
come in. —What would I not do to please such kind
friends? You grudge not your tears: And as I cannot
give you tears for tears, from my eyes, Shall not
my arm weep! —But do you stand by me, Chevalier,
while it is done. You will? Won't you?—seeking
again with her eye my averted face. 
O that my life, thought I, would be an effectual
offering for the restoring the peace of mind of this
dear Lady, and her family! and that it might be
taken by any hand but my own! —But my Conscience! 
—Prepossessed as I am in favour of my own
religion, and in disfavour of that I am wished to embrace; 
How, thought I, can I make a sacrifice of my
Conscience! 
The dear Lady was then as earnest for the operation,
as before she had been averse to it: But she did
and said every-thing in an hurry. 
The Marchioness and my friend were comforted, in
hopes that some relief would follow it. The doctors
were invited in. 
Do you stand by me, Sir, said she to me. —Come,
make haste. But it sha'n't be the same arm—Camilla,
see, I can bare my own arm—It will bleed at this
arm, I warrant—I will bid it flow. —Come, make
haste—Are you always so tedious? —The preparation
in all these things, I believe, is worse than the act. — 
Pray, pray, make haste. 
They did; tho' she thought they did not. 
Turn your face another way, madam, said the
doctor. 
Now methinks I am Iphigenia, Chevalier, going to
be offered—looking at me, and from the doctors. 

And is this all? —The puncture being made, and she
bleeding freely. 
The doctors were not satisfied with a small quantity. 
She fainted, however, before they had taken
quite so much as they intended; and her women carried
her out of her brother's apartment into her own,
in the chair she sat in. 
Dear Clementina! —My compassion and my best
wishes followed her. 
You see your power over the dear girl, Grandison,
said her brother. 
The Marchioness sighed; and looking at me with
kind and earnest meaning, withdrew to attend her
daughter's recovery. 

