


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Wednesday, Mar. 29. 
Sir Charles came hither this morning, time enough
to breakfast with us. 
Lady L. is not an early riser. I am sure this brother
of hers is: So is Miss Grandison. If I say I am,
my Lucy, I will not allow you to call it boasting,
because you will, by so calling it, acknowlege Early
rising to be a virtue; and if you thought it such, I
am sure you would distinguish it by your practice. 
Forgive me, my dear: This is the only point in
which you and I have differed—And why have I in
the main so patiently suffered this difference, and not
tried to teaze you out of it? Because my Lucy always
so well employs her time when she is alive. But would
not one the more wish that well-employed life to be
made as long as possible? 
I endeavoured to be very chearful at breakfast; 
but I believe my behaviour was aukward, and affected. 
After Sir Charles was gone, on my putting the question
to the two sisters, Whether it was not so? they
acquitted me—Yet my heart, when in his company,
laboured with a sense of constraint. 
My pride made me want to find out pity for me in
his looks and behaviour, on purpose to quarrel with
him in my mind; for I could not get out of my head
that degrading surmise, that he had permitted Dr. Bartlett
to hasten to me the history of Clementina, in
order generously to check any hopes that I might entertain,
before they had too strongly taken hold of my
foolish heart. 
But nothing of this was discoverable. Respect, tender
respect, appeared, as the Ladies afterwards took 

notice, in every word, when he addressed himself to
me; in every look that he cast upon me. 
He studiously avoided speaking of the Bologna family. 
We were not indeed any of us fond of leading
to the subject. 
I am sure, I pitied him. 
Pity, my dear, is a softer passion, I dare say, in
the bosom of a woman, than in that of a man. 
There is, there must be, I should fansy, more generosity,
more tenderness, in the pity of the one, than
in that of the other. In a man's pity (I write in the
first case from my own sensibilities, in the other from
my apprehensions) there is, too probably, a mixture
of insult or contempt. Unhappy, indeed, must the
woman be, who has drawn upon her the helpless pity
of the man she loves! 
The Ladies and Lord L. will have it, that Sir
Charles's Love, however, is not so much engaged for
Clementina as his Compassion. They are my sincere
friends: They see that I am pretty delicate in my notions
of a first Love; and they generously endeavour
to inculcate this distinction upon me: But to what
purpose, when we evidently see, from what we already
know of this story, that his engagements, be
the motive what it will, are of such a nature, that
they cannot be dispensed with while this Lady's destiny
is undetermined? 
Poor Lady Clementina! From my heart I pity her:
And tenderness, I am sure, is the sole motive of my
compassion for this fair Unfortunate. 
Sir Charles set out, immediately after breakfast, for
Sir Hargrave's. He will dine with him, and intends
to pass the evening with Lord W. We shall all go
to town to-morrow. 
* *
With this I send the doctor's second pacquet. O
my dear! What a noble young Lady is Clementina! 
What a purity is there in her passion! A Letter of 

Mrs. Beaumont (Mrs. Beaumont herself an excellent
woman) will shew you, that Clementina deserves
every good wish. Such a noble struggle did I never
hear of, between Religion and Love. O Lucy! you
will be delighted with Clementina: You will even,
for a while, forget your Harriet; or, if you are just,
will think of her but next after Clementina! Never
did a young Lady do more honour to her sex, than is
done it by Clementina! A flame, the most vehement,
suppressed from motives of piety, till, poor Lady! it
has devoured her intellects! 
Read the Letter, and be lost, as I was, for half an
hour after I had read it, in silent admiration of her
fortitude! O my dear! she must be rewarded with a
Sir Charles Grandison! My reason, my justice, compels
from me my vote in her favour. 
My Lord L. and the two Ladies admire her as
much as I do. They look at me with eyes of tender
concern. They say little. What can they say? — 
But they kindly applaud me for my unfeigned admiration
of this extraordinary young Lady, But where
is my merit? Who can forbear admiring her? 


Dr. Bartlett's second Letter.
Your fourth enquiry, madam, is, 
Whether the particularly chearful behaviour of
the young Lady, on the departure of Mr. Grandison
from Bologna, after a course of melancholy, is anywhere
accounted for? 
And your fifth is, What were the particulars of
Mrs. Beaumont's management of the Lady, at Florence,
by which she brought her to own her Love,
after she had so long kept it a secret from her mother,
and all her family? 
What I shall transcribe, in order to satisfy you,
madam, with regard to the fifth article, will include
all that you can wish to be informed of, respecting the
fourth. 

But let me premise, That Mrs. Beaumont, at the
request of the Marchioness, undertook to give an account
of the health of the young Lady, and what
effect the change of air, of place, and her advice,
had upon her mind, after she had been at Florence
for two or three days. She, on the fourth day of their
being together, wrote to that Lady the desired particulars. 
The following is a translation of her Letter: 

Your Ladyship will excuse me for not writing
till now, when you are acquainted that it was
not before last night that I could give you any tolerable
satisfaction on the subject upon which I had engaged
to do myself that honour. 
I have made myself mistress of the dear young
Lady's Secret. Your Ladyship guessed it, perhaps,
too well. Love, but a pure and laudable Love, is
the malady that has robbed her of her tranquillity for
so long a space, and your splendid family of all comfort:
But such a magnanimity, shewn or endeavoured
at, that she deserves to be equally pitied and admired. 
What is it that the dear young Lady has not suffered
in a conflict between her Duty, her Religion, and her
Love? 
The discovery, I am afraid, will not give pleasure
to your family; yet certainty, in what must be, is
better than suspense. You will think me a managing
person, perhaps, from the relation I have to give you:
But it was the task prescribed me; and you commanded
me to be very minute in the account of all
my dealings with her, that you might know how to
conduct yourselves to her for the cure of the unhappy
malady. I obey. 
The first and second days, after our return to Florence,
were passed in endeavouring to divert her, as
our guest, in all the ways we could think of: But
finding, that company was irksome to her, and that she
only bore with it for politeness sake; I told the Ladies, 

that I would take her entirely into my own
care, and devote my whole time to her service. 
They acquiesced. And when I told Lady Clementina
of my intention, she rejoiced at it, and did me
the honour to assure me, that my conversation would
be balm to her heart, if she could enjoy it without
mixt company. 
Your Ladyship will see, however, from what I have
mentioned of her regard for me, that I had made use
of my time in the two past days to ingratiate myself
into the favour of your Clementina. She will have
me call her nothing but Clementina: Excuse therefore,
madam, the freedom of my stile. 
She engaged me last night to give her a lesson, as
she called it, in an English author. I was surprised
at her proficiency in my native tongue. Ah my
dear! said I, what an admirable manner of teaching
must your tutor have had, if I am to judge by the
great progress you have made in so short a time, in
the acquiring of a tongue that has not the sweetness
of your own, tho' it has a force and expressiveness
that is more than equal, I think, to any of the modern
languages! 
She blushed—Do you think so? said she—And I
saw, by the turn of her eye, and her consciousness,
that I had no need to hint to her Count Marulli, nor
any other man. 
I took upon me, without pushing her, just then,
upon the supposed light dropt in from this little incident,
to mention the Count of Belvedere with distinction,
as the Marquis had desired I would. 
She said, She could not by any means think of him. 
I told her, that as all her family approved highly
of the Count, I thought they were intitled to know
her objections; and to judge of the reasonableness or
unreasonableness of them. Indeed, my dear, said I,
you do not, in this point, treat your father and mother
with the dutifulness that their indulgence deserves. 

She started. That is severely said, is it not,
madam? 
Consider of it, my dear, and if you pronounce it
so, after an hour's reflexion, I will call it so, and ask
your pardon. 
I am afraid, said she, I am in fault. I have the best
and most indulgent of parents. There are some
things, some secrets, that one cannot be forward to
divulge. One should perhaps be commanded out of
them with a high hand. 
Your acknowlegement, my dear, said I, is more
generous than the occasion given for it: But if you
will not think me impertinent— 
Don't, don't, ask me too close questions, madam,
interrupted she; I am afraid I can deny you nothing. 
I am persuaded, my dear Clementina, that the mutual
unbosoming of secrets is the cement of faithful
Friendship, and true Love. Whenever any new turn
in one's affairs happens, whenever any new lights
open, the friendly heart rests not, till it has communicated
to its fellow-heart the new lights, the interesting
events; and this communicativeness knits the
true Lover's knot still closer. But what a solitariness,
what a gloom, what a darkness, must possess
that mind that can trust no friend with its inmost
thoughts! The big secret, when it is of an interesting
nature, will swell the heart till it is ready to burst,
Deep melancholy must follow—I would not for the
world have it so much as thought, that I had not a
soul large enough for friendship. And is not the
essence of friendship communication, mingling of
hearts, and emptying our very soul into that of a true
friend? 
Why that's true. But, madam, a young creature
may be so circumstanced, as not to have a true friend; 
or, if she has near her a person to whom she might
communicate her whole mind without doubt of her
fidelity; yet there may be a forbiddingness in the 

person; a difference in years, in degree; as in my
Camilla, who is, however, a very good woman—We
people of condition, madam, have more courtiers
about us than friends: But Camilla's fault is teazing,
and always harping upon one string, and that by my
friends commands: It would be therefore more laudable
to open my mind to my mother, than to her; as
it would be the same thing. 
Very true, my dear: And as you have a mother,
who is less of the mother than she would be of the
sister, the friend; it is amazing to me, that you have
kept such a mother in the dark so long. 
What can I say? —Ah, madam! —There she stopt. 
At last said, But my mother is in the interest of the
man I cannot love. 
The question recurs—Are not your parents intitled
to know your objections to the man whose interest
they so warmly espouse? 
I have no particular objections. The Count of
Belvedere deserves a better wife than I can make him. 
I should respect him very much, had I a sister, and he
made his addresses to her. 
Well then, my dear Clementina, if I guess the
reason why you cannot approve of the Count of Belvedere,
will you tell me, with that candor, with that
friendship, of the requisites of which we have been
speaking, whether I am right or not? 
She hesitated. I was silent in expectation. 
She then spoke, I am afraid of you, madam. 
You have reason to be so, if you think me unworthy
of your friendship. 
What is your guess? 
That you are prejudiced in favour of some other
man; or you could not, if you had a sister, wish her
an husband that you thought unworthy of yourself. 
I don't think the Count of Belvedere unworthy
neither, madam. 
Then my conjecture has received additional strength. 

O Mrs. Beaumont! How you press upon me! 
If impertinently, say so; and I have done. 
No, no, not impertinently, neither; yet you distress
me. 
That could not be, if I were not right; and if the
person were not too unworthy of you, to be acknowleged. 
O Mrs. Beaumont! how closely you urge me! 
What can I say? 
If you have any confidence in me—If you think me
capable of advising you— 
I have confidence: Your known prudence—And
then she made me compliments, that I could not deserve. 
Come, my dear Clementina, I will guess again— 
Shall I? 
What would you guess? 
That there is a man of low degree—Of low fortunes
—Of inferior sense— 
Hold, hold, hold—And do you think that the Clementina
before you is sunk so low? —If you do, Why
don't you cast the abject creature from you? 
Well, then, I will guess again—That there is a man
of a royal house; of superior understanding; of whom
you can have no hope. 
O Mrs. Beaumont! And cannot you guess that this
prince is a Mahometan, when your hand is in? 
Then, madam, and from the hints your Ladyship
had given, I had little doubt that Clementina was in
Love; and that religion was the apprehended difficulty. 
Zealous Catholics think not better of Protestants,
than of Mahometans: Nor, indeed, are
zealous Protestants without their prejudices. Zeal
will be zeal, in persons of whatever denomination. 
I would not however, madam, like a sudden frost,
nip the opening bud. 

There is, said I, a young soldier of fortune, who
has breathed forth passionate wishes for Clementina. 
A soldier of fortune, madam! with an air of disdain. 
There cannot be such a man living, that can
have his wishes answered. 
Well, then, to say nothing of him; there is a
Roman nobleman—a younger brother—of the Borghese
house—Permit me to suppose him the man. 
With all my heart, madam. 
She was easy, while I was at a distance. 
But if the Chevalier Grandison [She coloured at his
name] has done him ill offices— 
The Chevalier Grandison, madam, is incapable of
doing any man ill offices. 
Are you sure, madam, that the Chevalier has not
art? —He has great abilities. Men of great abilities
are not always to be trusted. They don't strike till
they are sure. 
He has no art, madam. He is above art. He wants
it not. He is beloved where-ever he goes. He is
equally noted for his prudence and freedom of heart. 
He is above art, repeated she, with warmth. 
I own, that he deserves every-thing from your family. 
I don't wonder that he is caressed by you all:
But it is amazing to me, that, in contradiction to all
the prudent maxims and cautions of your country,
such a young gentleman should have been admitted— 
I stopt. 
Why, now, you don't imagine, that I—that I— 
She stopt, and hesitated. 
A prudent woman would not put it in any man's
power to give her a prejudice to persons of unexceptionable
honour; and to manage— 
Nay, madam, now has somebody prejudiced you
against your countryman—He is the most disinterested
of men. 
I have heard young Ladies, when he was here,
speak of him as an handsome man. 

An handsome man! And is not Mr. Grandison an
handsome man? Where will you see a man so handsome? 
And do you think he is so very extraordinary a
man, as to sense, as I have heard him reported to be? 
I was twice in his company—I thought, indeed, he
looked upon himself as a man of consequence. 
Nay, madam, don't say he is not a modest man. 
It is true, he knows when to speak, and when to be
silent: But he is not a confident man; nor is he, in
the least, conceited. 
Was there so much bravery in his relieving your
brother, as some people attribute to him in that happy
event? Two servants and himself, well armed; the
chance of passengers on the same road: The assassins
that appeared but two; their own guilt to encounter
with— 
Dear, dear Mrs. Beaumont, with what prejudiced
people have you conversed? The Scripture says, A
prophet has no honour in his own country; but Mr.
Grandison has not much from his own country-woman. 
Well, but did Mr. Grandison ever speak to you of
any one man as a man worthy of your favour? 
Did he! —Yes, of the Count of Belvedere. He
was more earnest in his favour— 
Really? 
Yes, really—than I thought he ought to be. 
Why so? 
Why so! —Why because—because—Why what
was it to him—you know? 
I suppose he was put upon it— 
I believe so. 
Or he would not— 
I believe, if the truth were known, you, Mrs.
Beaumont, hate Mr. Grandison. You are the only
person that I ever in my life heard speak of him, even
with indifference. 

Tell me, my dear Clementina, What are your sincere
thoughts of Mr. Grandison, person and mind? 
You may gather them from what I have said. 
That he is an handsome man; a generous, a prudent,
a brave, a polite man. 
Indeed I think him to be all you have said: And I
am not singular. 
But he is a Mahometan— 
A Mahometan! madam. —Ah, Mrs. Beaumont! 
And ah, my dear Clementina! —And do you think
I have not found you out? —Had you never known
Mr. Grandison, you would not have scrupled to have
been Countess of Belvedere. 
And can you think, madam— 
Yes, yes, my dear young Lady, I can. 
My good Mrs. Beaumont, you don't know what I
was going to say. 
Be sincere, my dear young Lady. Cannot a Lover,
talking to a second person, be sincere? 
What! madam, a man of another religion! A man
obstinate in his errors! A man who has never professed
Love to me! A man of inferior degree! A
man who owns himself absolutely dependent upon his
father's bounty! His father living to the height of his
estate! —Forbid it pride, dignity of birth, duty, religion— 
Well then, I may safely take up the praises of Mr.
Grandison: You have imputed to me, slight, injustice,
prejudice against him: Let me now shew
you, that the Prophet has honour with his country-woman. 
Let me collect his character from the mouth
of every man who has spoken of him in my hearing
or knowlege—His country has not in this age sent
abroad a private man who has done it more credit. 
He is a man of honour in every sense of the word. 
If moral rectitude, if practical religion (your brother
the Barone testifies this on his own experience) were
lost in the rest of the world, it would, without glare 

or ostentation, be found in him. He is courted by
the best, the wisest, the most eminent men, where-ever
he goes; and he does good without distinction of
religion, sects, or nation: His own country men boast
of him, and apply to him for credentials to the best
and most considerable men, in their travels thro' more
countries than one: In France, particularly, he is as
much respected as in Italy. He is descended from the
best families in England, both by father and mother; 
and can be a Senator of it, whenever he pleases. He
is heir to a very considerable estate, and is, as I am
informed, courted to ally with some of the greatest
families in it. Were he not born to a fortune, he
would make one. You own him to be generous,
brave, handsome— 
O my dear, dear Mrs. Beaumont! All this is too
much, too much! —Yet all this I think him to be! I
can no longer resist you. I own, I own, that I have
no heart but for Mr. Grandison. And now, as I
don't doubt but my friends set you to find out the
love-sick girl, how shall I, who cannot disown a
secret you have so fairly, and without condition, come
at, ever look them in the face? Yet let them know,
(I will enable you to tell them) how all this came
about, and how much I have struggled against a
passion so evidently improper to be encouraged by a
daughter of their house. 
He was, in the first place, as well you know, the
preserver of a beloved brother's life; and that brother
afterwards owned, that had he followed his friendly
advice, he never would have fallen into the danger
from which he rescued him. 
My father and mother presented him to me, and
bid me regard him as a fourth brother; and it was not
immediately that I found out that I could have but
three brothers. 
My brother's deliverer proved to be the most amiable
and humane, and yet bravest of men. 

All my friends caressed him. Neither family forms,
nor national forms, were stood upon. He had free
access to us all, as one of us. 
My younger brother was continually hinting to me
his wishes that I were his. Mr. Grandison was above
all other reward; and my brother considered me in a
kind light, as able to reward him. 
My confessor, by his fears and invectives, rather
confirmed than lessened my esteem for a man whom I
thought injured by them. 
His own respectful and disinterested behaviour to
me contributed to my attachment. He always addressed
me as his sister, when he put on the familiar
friend, in the guise of a tutor: I could not therefore
arm against a man I had no reason to suspect. 
But still I knew not the strength of my passion for
him, till the Count of Belvedere was proposed to me
with an earnestness that alarmed me: Then I considered
the Count as the interrupter of my hopes; and
yet I could not give the reason why I rejected him. 
How could I, when I had none to give but my prepossession
in favour of another man? A prepossession
entirely hidden in my own heart. 
But still I thought I would sooner die, than be the
wife of a man of a religion contrary to my own. I
am a zealous Catholic myself: All my relations are
zealous Catholics. How angry have I been at this
obstinate Heretic, as I have often called him; the first
heretic, my dear Mrs. Beaumont (for once I did not
love you) that my soul detested not! For he is as tenacious
a Protestant as ever came out of England. 
What had he to do in Italy? Why did he not stay at
home? Or why, if he must come abroad, did he stay
so long among us; yet hold his obstinacy, as if in defiance
of the people he was so well received by? 
These were the reproaches that my heart in silence
often cast upon him. 
I was at first concerned only for his soul's sake: 

But afterwards, finding him essential to my earthly happiness,
and yet resolving never to think of him if he
became not a Catholic, I was earnest for his conversion
for my own sake; hoping that my friends indulgence
to me would make my wishes practicable; for
on his part, I doubted not, if that point were got over,
he would think an alliance with our family an honour
to him. 
But when I found him invincible on this article, I
was resolved either to conquer my passion, or die. 
What did I not undergo in my endeavours to gain this
victory over myself! My confessor hurt me, by terrors; 
my woman teazed me; my parents, and two
elder brothers, and all my more distant relations,
urged me to determine in favour of the Count of Belvedere. 
The Count was importunate: The Chevalier
was importunate in the Count's behalf—Good
heaven! What could I do? —I was hurried, as I may
say: I had not time given me to weigh, ponder, recollect. 
How could I make my mother, how could
I make any-body my confident? My judgment was at
war with my passion; and I hoped it would overcome. 
I struggled; yet every day the object appearing more
worthy, the struggle was too hard for me. O that I
had had a Mrs. Beaumont to consult—Well might
melancholy seize me—Silent melancholy! 
At last the Chevalier was resolved to leave us. 
What pain, yet what pleasure, did this his resolution
give me! Most sincerely I hoped, that his absence
would restore my tranquillity. 
What a secret triumph did I give myself, on my
behaviour to him, before all my friends, on the parting
evening! —My whole deportment was uniform. I
was chearful, serene, happy in myself, and I made all
my friends so. I wished him happy where-ever he set
his foot, and whatsoever he engaged in. I thanked
him, with the rest of my friends, for the benefits we
had received from him, and the pleasure he had given 

us, in the time he had bestowed upon us; and I
wished that he might never want a friend so agreeable
and entertaining as he had been to us all. 
I was the more pleased with myself, as I was not
under a necessity of putting on stiffness or reserve to
hide a heart too much affected. I thought myself
secure, and stood out forwarder than he seemed to
hope for, and with more than my offered hand, at
the moment of his departure. I thought I read in his
eyes a concern, for the first time, that called for a
pity which I imagined I myself wanted not. Yet I
had a pang at parting—When the door shut out the
agreeable man, never again, thought I, to be opened
to give him entrance! I sighed at the reflexion: But
who perceived it? —I never could be insensible in a
parting scene, with less agreeable friends: It was the
easier for me to attribute to the gentleness of my
heart, the instant sensibility. My father clasped me to
his bosom: My mother embraced me, without mortifying
me by saying for what. My brother, the bishop,
called me twenty fond names; all my friends complimented
me, but only on my chearfulness, and said, I
was once more their own Clementina. I went to rest,
pleased that I had so happily acquitted myself, and
that possibly I contributed to the repose of dear
friends, whose repose I had been the cause of disturbing. 
But, alas! this conduct was too great for the poor
Clementina to maintain: My soul was too high set. — 
You know the rest; and I am lost to the joys of this
life: For I never, never, will be the wife of a man,
if I might, who by his religion is an enemy to the
faith I never wavered in; nor would ever change,
were an earthly crown on the head of the man I love
to be the reward; and a painful death, in the prime
of my life, the contrary. 
A flood of tears prevented farther speech. She hid
her face in my bosom. She sighed—Dear Lady! How
she sighed! 

This, madam, is the account I have to give of
what has passed between your beloved Clementina
and me. Never was there a more noble struggle between
duty and affection; tho' her heart was too
tender, and, in short, the man's merits too dazling,
to allow it to be effectual. She is unwilling that I
should send you the particulars: She shall be ashamed,
she says, to look her father, her mother, in the face; 
and she dreads still more, if possible, her confessor's
being made acquainted with the state of her heart,
and the cause of her disorder. But I tell her, it is
absolutely necessary for her mother to know everything
that I know, in order to attempt a cure. 
This cure, madam, I am afraid will never be
effected, but by giving her in marriage to the happy
man. I must think him so, who will be intitled, by
general consent, to so great a blessing. 
You, madam, will act in this affair as you judge
proper: But if you can at Bologna, at Urbino, and
Naples, get over your family objections, you will
perhaps find yourselves obliged, such are the young
Lady's own scruples, on the score of religion, to take
pains to persuade her to pursue her inclination, and
accept Mr. Grandison for an husband. 
Be this as it may, I would humbly recommend a
gentle and soothing treatment of her. She never
knew yet what the contrary was; and were she to
experience that contrary now upon an occasion so very
delicate, and in which her Judgment and her Love
are, as she hints, at variance; I verily think, she
would not be able to bear it. —That God direct you
for the best, whom you and yours have always served
with signal devotion! 
I will only add, That since the secret which had
so long preyed upon her fine spirits, is revealed, she
appears to be much more easy than before; but yet
she dreads the reception she shall meet with on her
return to Bologna. She begs of me, when that return 

shall be ordered, to accompany her, in order to enable
her, as she says, to support her spirits. She is very
desirous to enter into a nunnery. She says, She never
can be the wife of any other man; and she thinks she
ought not to be his, on whom her heart is fixed. 
A word of comfort on paper, from your honoured
hand, I know, madam, would do a great deal towards
healing her wounded heart. 
I am, madam, with the greatest veneration and
respect, 
Your Ladyship's
Most faithful humble servant,
Hortensia Beaumont. 

Let me add, my good Miss Byron, that the Marchioness
sent an answer to this Letter expressing the
highest obligation and gratitude to Mrs. Beaumont; 
and inclosed a Letter to her daughter, filled with tender
and truly-motherly consolation; inviting her back
to Bologna out of hand, and her amiable friend with
her: Promising, in the name of her father and brothers,
a most indulgent welcome; and assuring her,
that every-thing should be done that could be done, to
make her happy in her own way. 

