


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Bologna, Monday Night, May 15–26.
I Am just returned. You will expect
me to be particular. 
I went the earlier in the afternoon,
that I might pass half an hour with
my Jeronymo. He complains of the
aperture so lately made: But Mr. Lowther
gives us hopes from it. 
When we were alone, They will not let me see
my sister, said he; I am sure she must be very bad. 
But I understand, that you are to be allowed that
favour, by-and-by. O my Grandison! how I pity
that tender, that generous heart of yours! —But what
have you done to the General? He assures me, that 

he admires and loves you; and the Bishop has been
congratulating me upon it. He knew it would give
me pleasure. My dear Grandison, you subdue everybody; 
yet in your own way; for they both admire
your spirit. 
Just then came in the General. He saluted me in
so kind a manner, that Jeronymo's eyes overflowed; 
and he said, Blessed be God, that I have lived to see
you two, dearest of men to me, so friendly together. 
This sweet girl! said the General:—How, Grandison,
will you bear to see her? 
The Bishop entered: O Chevalier! my sister is insensible
to every-thing, and every-body. Camilla is
nobody with her to-day. 
They had forgot Jeronymo, tho' in his chamber; 
and their attention being taken by his audible sensibilities,
they comforted him; and withdrew with me
into Mr. Lowther's apartment; while Mr. Lowther
went to his patient. 
The Marchioness joined us in tears. This dear child
knows me not; heeds me not: She never was unmindful
of her mother before. I have talked to her
of the Chevalier Grandison: She regards not your
name. O this affecting silence! —Camilla has told
her, that she is to see you. My daughter-in-law has
told her so. O Chevalier! she has quite, quite lost
her understanding. Nay, we were barbarous enough
to try the name of Laurana. She was not terrified,
as she used to be, with that. 
Camilla came in with a face of joy: Lady Clementina
has just spoken! I told her, she must prepare to
see the Chevalier Grandison in all his glory, and that
every-body, the General in particular, admired him. 
Go, naughty Camilla, said she, tapping my hand; you
are a wicked deceiver. I have been told this story too
often, to credit it. This was all I could get her to say. 
Hence it was concluded, that she would take some
notice of me when she saw me; and I was led 

by the General, followed by the rest, into the Marchioness's
drawing-room. 
Father Marescotti had given me an advantageous
character of the General's Lady, whom I had not yet
seen. The Bishop had told me, that she was such
another excellent woman as his mother, and, like her,
had the Italian reserve softened by a polite French
education. The Marquis, the Count, Father Marescotti,
and this real fine Lady, were in the drawing-room. 
The General presented me to her. I do not,
madam, bid you admire the Chevalier Grandison:
But I forgive you if you do; because you will not be
able to do otherwise. 
My Lord, said she, you told me an hour ago, that I
must: And now, that I see the Chevalier, you will
have no cause to reproach me with disobedience. 
I bowed on her hand. Father Marescotti, madam,
said I, bid me expect from the Lady of the young Marchese
della Porretta every-thing that was condescending
and good. Your compassionate Love for an unhappy
new sister, who deserves every-one's Love, exalts
your character. 
Father Marescotti came in. We took our places. 
It was designed, I found, to try to revive the young
Lady's attention, by introducing her in full assembly,
I one of it. But I could not forbear asking the Marchioness,
If Lady Clementina would not be too much
startled at so much company? 
I wish, said the Marquis, sighing, that she may be
startled. 
We meet, as only on a conversation-visit, said the
Marchioness. We have tried every other way to
awaken her attention. 
We are all near relations, said the Bishop. 
And want to make our observations, said the General. 
She has been bid to expect you among us, resumed
the Marchioness. We shall only be attended by Laura
and Camilla. 

Just then entered the sweet Lady, leaning upon Camilla,
Laura attending. Her movement was slow
and solemn. Her eyes were cast on the ground. Her
robes were black and flowing. A veil of black gause
half covered her face. What woe was there in it! 
What, at that moment, was my emotion! I arose
from my seat, sat down, and arose again, irresolute,
not knowing what I did, or what to do! 
She stopt in the middle of the floor, and made some
motion, in silence, to Camilla, who adjusted her
veil: But she looked not before her; lifted not up her
eyes; observed no-body. 
On her stopping, I was advancing towards her; but
the General took my hand: Sit still, sit still, dear
Grandison, said he: Yet I am charmed with your
sensibility. She comes! She moves towards us! 
She approached the table round which we sat, her
eyes more than half closed, and cast down. She turned
to go towards the window. Here, here, madam, said
Camilla, leading her to an elbow-chair that had been
placed for her, between the two Marchionesses. She
implicitly took her woman's directions, and sat down. 
Her mother wept. The young Marchioness wept. 
Her father sobbed; and looked from her. Her mother
took her hand: My Love, said she, look around
you. 
Pray, sister, said the Count, her uncle, leave her
to her own observation. 
She was regardless of what either said; her eyes
were cast down, and half closed. Camilla stood at
the back of her chair. 
The General, grieved and impatient, arose, and
stepping to her, My dearest sister, said he, hanging
over her shoulder, look upon us all. Do not scorn
us, do not despise us: See your father, your mother,
your sister, and every-body, in tears. If you love
us, smile upon us. He took the hand which her
mother had quitted, to attend her own emotions. 

She reared up her eyes to him, and, sweetly condescending,
tried to smile; but such a solemnity had
taken possession of her features, that she only could
shew her obligingness, by the effort. Her smile was
a smile of woe. And, still further to shew her compliance,
withdrawing her hand from her brother, she
looked on either side of her; and seeing which was
her mother, she, with both hands, took hers, and
bowed her head upon it. 
The Marquis arose from his seat, his handkerchief
at his eyes. Sweet creature! said he, never, never
let me again see such a smile as that. It is here, putting
his hand to his breast. 
Camilla offered her a glass of limonade; she accepted
it not, nor held up her head for a few moments. 
Obliging sister! you do not scorn us, said the General. 
See, Father Marescotti is in tears [The reverend
man sat next me]: Pity his grey hairs! See,
my Lord, your own father too—Comfort your father. 
His grief for your silence.— 
She cast her eyes that way. She saw me. Saw me
greatly affected. She started. She looked again; 
again started; and, quitting her mother's hand, now
changing pale, now reddening, she arose, and threw
her arms about her Camilla—O Camilla! was all
she said; a violent burst of tears wounding, yet giving
some ease to every heart. I was springing to her, and
should have clasped her in my arms before them all; 
but the General taking my hand, as I reached her
chair, Dear Grandison, said he, pronouncing in her
ear my name, keep your seat. If Clementina remembers
her English tutor, she will bid you welcome
once more to Bologna. —O Camilla, said she, faithful,
good Camilla! Now, at last, have you told me truth! 
It is, it is he! —And her tears would flow, as she hid
her face in Camilla's bosom. 
The General's native pride again shewed itself. He 

took me aside. I see, Grandison, the consequence
you are of to this unhappy girl: Every one sees it. 
But I depend upon your honour: You remember
what you said this morning— 
Good God! said I, with some emotion: I stopt— 
And resuming, with pride equal to his own, Know,
Sir, that the man whom you thus remind, calls himself
a man of honour; and you, as well as the rest of
the world, shall find him so. 
He seemed a little abashed. I was flinging from him,
not too angrily for him, but for the rest of the company,
had they not been attentive to the motions of
their Clementina. 
We, however, took the Bishop's eye. He came
to us. 
I left the General; and the Bishop led him out,
in order to enquire into the occasion of my warmth. 
When I turned to the company, I found the dear
Clementina, supported by the two Marchionesses, and
attended by Camilla, just by me, passing towards the
door, in order, it seems, at her motion, to withdraw. 
She stopt. Ah, Chevalier! said she; and reclining
her head on her mother's bosom, seemed ready to
faint. I took one hand, as it hung down lifelessly
extended (her mother held the other); and, kneeling,
pressed it with my lips—Forgive me, Ladies; forgive
me, Lady Clementina! —My soul overflowed with tenderness,
tho' the moment before it was in a tumult of
another kind; for she cast down her eyes upon me
with a benignity, that for a long time they all afterwards
owned they had not beheld. I could not say
more. I arose. She moved on to the door; and
when there, turned her head, straining her neck to
look after me, till she was out of the room. I was
a statue for a few moments; till the Count, snatching
my hand, and Father Marescotti's, who stood nearest
him, We see to what the malady is owing—Father,
you must join their hands! —Chevalier! you will be 

a Catholic! —Will you not? —O that you would! said
the Father—Why, why, joined in the Count, did
we refuse the so-earnestly requested interview, a year
and half ago? 
The young Marchioness returned, weeping—They
will not permit me to stay. My sister, my dear sister,
is in fits! —O Sir, turning graciously to me, you are
—I will not say what you are—But I shall not be in
danger of disobeying my Lord, on your account. 
Just then entered the General, led in by the Bishop. 
Now, brother, said the latter, if you will not be generous,
be, however, just—Chevalier, Were you not
a little hasty? 
I was, my Lord. But surely the General was unseasonable. 
Perhaps I was. 
There is as great a triumph, my Lord, said I, in a
due acknowlegement, as in a victory. Know me,
my Lords, as a man incapable of meanness; who will
assert himself; but who, from the knowlege he has
of his own heart, wishes at his soul to be received as
the unquestionably disinterested friend of this whole
family. Excuse me, my Lords, I am obliged to talk
greatly, because I would not wish to act petulantly. 
But my soul is wounded by those distresses, which
had not, I am sorry to say it, a little while ago, a first
place in your heart. 
Do you reproach me, Grandison? 
I need not, my Lord, if you feel it as such. But
indeed you either know not me, or forget yourself. 
And now, having spoken all my mind, I am ready to
ask your pardon for any-thing that may have offended
you in the manner. I snatched his hand so suddenly,
I hope not rudely, but rather fervently, that he started
—Receive me, my Lord, as a friend. I will deserve
your friendship. 
Tell me, brother, said he to the Bishop, what I shall
say to this strange man? Shall I be angry or pleased? 

Be pleased, my Lord, replied the Prelate. 
The General embraced me—Well, Grandison, you
have overcome. I was unseasonable. You were
passionate. Let us forgive each other. 
His Lady stood suspended, not being able to guess
at the occasion of this behaviour, and renewed friendship. 
The Count was equally surprised. Father
Marescotti seemed also at a loss. The Marquis had
withdrawn. 
We sat down, and reasoned variously on what had
passed, with regard to the unhappy Lady, according to
the hopes and fears which actuated the bosoms of each. 
But I cannot help thinking, that had this interview
been allowed to pass with less surprize to her, she
might have been spared those fits, with the affecting
description of which the young Marchioness alarmed
us, till Camilla came in with the happy news, that she
was recovering from them; and that her mother was
promising her another visit from me, in hopes it would
oblige her; tho' it was not what she required. 
I took this opportunity to put into the hands of the
young Marchioness, sealed up, the opinions of the
physicians I had consulted in England, on the case of
Clementina; requesting that she would give it to her
mother, in order to have it considered. 
The Bishop withdrew, to acquaint Jeronymo, in
the way he thought best, with what had passed in this
first interview with his sister; resolving not to take
any notice of the little sally of warmth between the
General and me. 
I hope to make the pride and passion of this young
nobleman of use to myself, by way of caution: For
am I not naturally too much inclined to the same
fault? O Dr. Bartlett! how have I regretted the
passion I suffered myself to be betray'd into, by the
foolish violence of O'Hara and Salmonet, in my own
house, when it would have better become me, to have
had them shewed out of it by my servants! 

And yet, were I to receive affronts with tameness
from those haughty spirits, who think themselves of
a rank superior to me, and from men of the sword,
I, who make it a principle not to draw mine but in
my own defence, should be subjected to insults, that
would be continually involving me in the difficulties
I am solicitous to avoid. 
I attended the General and his Lady to Jeronymo. 
The generous youth forgot his own weak state, in
the hopes he flatter'd himself with, of a happy result
to his sister's malady, from the change of symptoms
which had already taken place; tho' violent hysterics
disordered and shook her before-wounded frame. 
The General said, that if she could overcome this
first shock, perhaps it was the best method that could
have been taken to rouse her out of that stupidity and
inattention which had been for some weeks so disturbing
to them all. 
There were no hopes of seeing the unhappy Lady
again that evening. The General would have accompanied
me to the Casino (a) ; saying, that we
might both be diverted by an hour passed there: But
I excused myself. My heart was full of anxiety, for
the welfare of a brother and sister, both so much endeared
to me by their calamities: And I retired to
my lodgings. 

