


We are just come in here, to the Relations of
Mrs. Jewkes. The first Compliment I had,
was, in a very impudent manner, How I liked the
'Squire? —I could not help saying, Bold, forward
Woman! Is it for you, who keep an Inn, to treat
Passengers at this Rate? She was but in jest, she
said, and begg'd Pardon: And she came, and begg'd
Excuse again, very submissively, after Robin and Mr.
Colbrand had talk'd to her a little. 
The latter here, in great Form, gave me, before
Robin, the Letter, which I had given him back for
that purpose. And I retir'd, as if to read it; and so
I did; for I think I can't read it too often; tho',
for my Peace of Mind sake, I might better try to
forget it. I am sorry, methinks, I cannot bring you
back a sound Heart; but indeed it is an honest one,
as to any body but me; for it has deceived nobody
else: Wicked thing as it is! 
More and more surprizing Things still! ––– 
Just as I had sat down, to try to eat a bit of Victuals,
to get ready to pursue my Journey, came in
Mr. Colbrand, in a mighty Hurry. O Madam! Madam!
said he, Here be de Groom from de 'Squire
B. all over in a Lather, Man and Horse! O how
my Heart went pit-a-pat! —What now, thought I, is
to come next! He went out, and presently return'd
with a Letter for me, and another, inclosed, for Mr.
Colbrand. This seem'd odd, and put me all in a
Trembling. So I shut the Door; and, never, sure, was 
the like known! found the following agreeable Contents. 

‘In vain, my Pamela, do I find it to struggle
against my Affection for you. I must needs,
after you were gone, venture to entertain myself
with your Journal. When I found Mrs. Jewkes's
bad Usage of you, after your dreadful Temptations
and Hurts; and particularly your generous Concern
for me, on hearing how narrowly I escaped
drowning (tho' my Death would have been your
Freedom, and I had made it your Interest to wish
it); and your most agreeable Confession in another
Place, that notwithstanding all my hard Usage
of you, you could not hate me; and that expressed
in so sweet, so soft, and so innocent a
manner, that I flatter myself you may be brought
to love me, (together with the other Parts of your
admirable Journal) I began to repent my parting
with you. But, God is my Witness, for no unlawful
End, as you would call it; but the very
contrary. And the rather, as all this was improv'd
in your Favour, by your Behaviour at leaving my
House: For, Oh! that melodious Voice praying
for me at your Departure, and thanking me for
my Rebuke to Mrs. Jewkes, still hangs upon my
Ears, and quavers upon my Memory. And tho'
I went to-bed, I could not rest; but about Two
got up, and made Thomas get one of the best
Horses ready, in order to set out to overtake you,
while I sat down to write this to you. 
‘Now, my dear Pamela, let me beg of you, on
the Receipt of this, to order Robin to drive you
back again to my House I would have set out
myself, for the Pleasure of bearing you Company
back in the Chariot; but am really indisposed: I
believe, with Vexation that I should part thus 
with my Soul's Delight, as I now find you are,
and must be, in spight of the Pride of my own
Heart. 
‘You cannot imagine the Obligation your Return
will lay me under to your Goodness; and yet,
if you will not so far favour me, you shall be under
no Restraint, as you will see by my Letter inclosed
to Colbrand; which I have not sealed, that
you may read it. But spare me, my dearest Girl,
the Confusion of following you to your Father's; 
which I must do, if you persist to go on; for I
find I cannot live a Day without you. 
‘If you are the generous Pamela I imagine
you to be, (for hitherto you have been all Goodness,
where it has not been merited) let me see,
by this new Instance, the further Excellency of
your Disposition; let me see you can forgive the
Man who loves you more than himself; let me
see by it, that you are not prepossess'd in any other
Person's Favour: And one Instance more I would
beg, and then I am all Gratitude; and that is, That
you would dispatch Monsieur Colbrand with a Letter
to your Father, assuring him, that all will end
happily; and that he will send to you, at my House,
the Letters you found means, by Williams's Conveyance,
to send him: And when I have all my
proud, and, perhaps, punctilious Doubts answer'd,
I shall have nothing to do, but to make you
happy, and be so my self. For I must be 
‘Yours, and only Yours. 
‘Monday Morn. near
three o'Clock’ 

O my exulting Heart! how it throbs in my Bosom,
as if it would reproach me for so lately upbraiding
it for giving way to the Love of so dear a
Gentleman! —But, take care thou art not too credulous 
neither, O fond Believer! Things that we
wish, are apt to gain a too ready Credence with us. 
This sham Marriage is not yet clear'd up; Mrs.
Jewkes, the vile Mrs. Jewkes! may yet 
the Mind of this Master: His Pride of Heart, and
Pride of Condition, may again take place; and a
Man that could, in so little a Space, first love me,
then hate me, then banish me his House, and send
me away disgracefully; and now send for me again,
in such affectionate Terms; may still waver, may
still deceive thee. Therefore will I not acquit thee
yet, O credulous, fluttering, throbbing Mischief!
that art so ready to believe what thou wishest: And
I charge thee to keep better Guard than thou hast
lately done, and lead me not to follow too implicitly
thy flattering and desirable Impulses. Thus foolishly
dialogu'd I with my Heart; and yet all the time
this Heart is Pamela. 
I open'd the Letter to Monsieur Colbrand; which
was in these Words: 

‘Monsieur,
I am sure you'll excuse the Trouble I give you. 
I have, for good Reasons, changed my Mind; 
and I have besought it as a Favour, that Mrs.
Andrews will return to me the Moment Tom
reaches you. I hope, for the Reasons I have given
her, she will have the Goodness to oblige me. 
But if not, you are to order Robin to pursue his Directions,
and set her down at her Father's Door. 
If the will oblige me in her Return, perhaps she'll
give you a Letter to her Father, for some Papers
to be deliver'd to you for her. Which you'll be
so good, in that Case, to bring to her here. But
if she will not give you such a Letter, you'll return
with her to me, if she pleases to favour me so far; 
and that with all Expedition, that her Health and 
Safety will permit; for I am pretty much indisposed; 
but hope it will be but slight, and soon go
off. I am 
Yours, &c. 
‘On second Thoughts, let Tom go forward with
Mrs. Andrews's Letter, if she pleases to give
one, and you return with her, for her Safety.’ 

Now this is a dear generous Manner of treating
me. O how I love to be generously used! —Now,
my dear Parents, I wish I could consult you for your
Opinions, how I should act. Should I go back, or
should I not? —I doubt he has got too great Hold
in my Heart, for me to be easy presently, if I should
refuse: And yet this Gypsey Information makes me
fearful. 
Well, I will, I think, trust in his Generosity! Yet
is it not too great a Trust? —especially considering
how I have been used! —But then that was while he
vow'd his bad Designs; and now he gives great
Hope of his good ones. And I may be the means
of making many happy, as well as myself, by placing
a generous Confidence in him. 
And then, I think, he might have sent to Colbrand,
and to Robin, to carry me back, whether I would
or not. And how different is this Behaviour to that? 
And would it not look as if I am prepossess'd, as he
calls it, if I don't oblige him; and as if it was a silly
female Piece of Pride to make him follow me to
my Father's; and as if I would use him hardly in
my Turn, for his having used me ill in his? Upon
the whole, I resolved to obey him; and if he uses
me ill afterwards, double will be his ungenerous
Guilt! —Tho' hard will be my Lot, to have my
Credulity so justly blameable as it will then seem. 
For, to be sure, the World, the wife World, that 
never is wrong itself, judges always by Events. And
if he should use me ill, then I shall be blamed for
trusting him: If well, O then I did right, to be sure! ––– 
But how would my Censurers act in my Case,
before the Event justifies or condemns the Action,
is the Question? 
Then, I have no Notion of obliging by Halves; 
but of doing things with a Grace, as one may say,
where they are to be done; and so I wrote the desir'd
Letter to you, assuring you, that I had before me happier
Prospects than ever I yet had; and hoped all
would end well. And that I begg'd you would send
me, by Mr. Thomas, my Master's Groom, the Bearer
of it, those Papers, which I had sent you by Mr.
Williams's Conveyance: For that they imported me
much, for clearing up a Point in my Conduct, that
my Master was desirous to know, before he resolved
to favour me, as he had intended. ––– But you will
have that Letter, before you can have this; for I
would not send you this without the preceding; 
which now is in my Master's Hands. 
And so, having given the Letter to Mr. Thomas,
for him to carry to you, when he had baited and
rested, after his great Fatigue, I sent for Monsieur
Colbrand and Robin; and gave to the former his
Letter; and when he had read it, I said, You see
how things stand. I am resolved to return to our
Master; and as he is not so well as were to be wished,
the more Haste you make, the better: And don't
mind my Fatigue; but consider only yourselves, and
the Horses. Robin, who guess'd the matter, by his
Conversation with Thomas, (as I suppose) said, God
bless you, Madam, and reward you, as your Obligingness
to my good Master deserves; and may we all live
to see you triumph over Mrs. Jewkes. 
I wonder'd to hear him say so; for I was always
careful of exposing my Master, or even that naughty 
Woman, before the common Servants. But yet I
question whether Robin would have said this, if he
had not guessed, by Thomas's Message, and my resolving
to return, that I might stand well with his
Master. So selfish are the Hearts of poor Mortals,
that they are ready to change as Favour goes! 
So they were not long getting ready; and I am
just setting out, back again; and I hope in God, shall
have no Reason to repent it. 
Robin put on very vehemently; and when we
came to the little Town, where we lay on Sunday
Night, he gave his Horses a Bait; and said, he would
push for his Master's that Night, as it would be
Moon-light, if I should not: be too much fatigu'd; 
because there was no Place between that and the
Town adjacent to his Master's, fit to put up for the
Night. But Monsieur Colbrand's Horse beginning
to give way, made a Doubt between them: Wherefore
I said (hating to lie on the Road) If it could
be done, I should bear it well enough, I hoped; and
that Monsieur Colbrand might leave his Horse, when
it fail'd, at some House, and come into the Chariot. 
This pleased them both; and about twelve
Miles short, he left the Horse, and took off his
Spurs and Holsters, &c. and, with Abundance of
ceremonial Exculses, came into the Chariot; and I
sat the easier for it; for my Bones ached sadly with
the Jolting, and so many Miles travelling in so few
Hours, as I had done, from Sunday Night, Five
o'Clock. But, for all this, it was Eleven o'Clock
at Night when we came to the Village adjacent to
my Master's; and the Horses began to be very much
tired, and Robin too; but I said, It would be pity to
put up only three Miles short of the House. 
So about One we reach'd the Gate; but every
body was a-bed. But one of the Helpers got the 
Keys from Mrs. Jewkes, and open'd the Gates; and
the Horses could hardly crawl into the Stables. And
I, when I went to get out of the Chariot, fell down,
and thought I had lost the Use of my Limbs. 
Mrs. Jewkes came down, with her Cloaths huddled
on, and lifted up her Hands and Eyes, at my
Return. But shew'd more Care of the Horses than
of me. By that time the two Maids came; and I
made shift to creep in as well as I could. 
It seems my poor Master was very ill indeed, and
had been upon the Bed most part of the Day; and
Abraham (who succeeded Fohn) fat up with him. 
And he was got into a fine Sleep, and heard not
the Coach come in, nor the Noise we made; for
his Chamber lay towards the Garden, on the other
Side the House. Mrs. Jewkes said, He had a feverish
Complaint, and had been blooded; and, very
prudently, order'd Abraham, when he awaked, not
to tell him I was come, for fear of surprizing him,
and augmenting his Fever; nor, indeed, to say any
thing of me, till she herself broke it to him in the
Morning, as she should see how he was. 
So I went to-bed with Mrs. Jewkes, after she had
caused me to drink almost half a Pint of burnt Wine,
made very rich and cordial, with Spices; which I
found very refreshing, and set me into a Sleep I little
hoped for. 