



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;. 

I have found out by my watchful Spy almost as
many of my charmer's motions, as those of the
rest of her relations. It delights me to think how
the rascal is caressed by the uncles and nephew; and
let into their secrets; yet proceeds all the time by
my line of direction. I have charged him, however,
on forfeiture of his present weekly stipend, and my
future favour, to take care, that neither my beloved,
or any of the family, suspect him: I have told him,
that he may indeed watch her egresses and regresses; 
but that only to keep off other servants from her paths; 
yet not to be seen by her himself. 
The dear creature has tempted him, he told them,
with a bribe (which she never offered), to convey a
letter (which she never wrote) to Miss Howe; he believes,
with one inclosed (perhaps to me): But he declined
it: And he begged they would take no notice
of it to her. This brought him a stingy shilling; great 

applause; and an injunction followed it to all the servants,
for the strictest look-out, lest she should contrive
some way to send it—And, about an hour after,
an order was given him to throw himself in her way; 
and (expressing his concern for denying her request)
to tender his service to her, and to bring them her
letter: Which it will be proper for him to report, that
she has refused to give him. 
Now seest thou not, how many good ends this
contrivance answers? 
In the first place, The Lady is secured by it, against
her own knowlege, in the liberty allowed her of taking
her private walks in the garden: For this attempt
has confirmed them in their belief, that now they have
turned off her maid, she has no way to send a letter
out of the house: If she had, she would not have run
the risque of tempting a fellow who had not been in
her secret: So that she can prosecute, unsuspectedly,
her correspondence with me, and Miss Howe. 
In the next place, It will afford me an opportunity,
perhaps, of a private interview with her, which I am
meditating, let her take it as she will; having found
out by my Spy (who can keep off every-body else),
that she goes every morning and evening to a wood-house
remote from the dwelling-house, under pretence
of visiting and feeding a set of Bantam-poultry,
which were produced from a breed that was her
grandfather's, and which for that reason she is very
fond of; as also of some other curious fowls brought
from the same place. I have an account of all her
motions here. —And as she has owned to me in one
of her letters that she corresponds privately with
Miss Howe, I presume it is by this way. 
The interview I am meditating, will produce her
consent, I hope, to other favours of the like kind: 
For, should she not choose the place I am expecting
to see her in, I can attend her any-where in the rambling,
Dutch-taste garden, whenever she will permit 

me that honour: For my implement, hight Joseph
Leman, has given me the opportunity of procuring
two keys (one of which I have given him, for reasons
good) to the garden-door, which opens to the haunted
coppice, as tradition has made the servants think it; 
a man having been found hanging in it about twenty
years ago: And Joseph, upon the least notice, will
leave it unbolted. 
But I was obliged to give him, previously, my honour,
that no mischief shall happen to any of my adversaries,
from this liberty: For the fellow tells me,
that he loves all his master; and, only that he knows I
am a man of honour; and that my alliance will do
credit to the family; and, after prejudices are overcome,
every body will think so; or he would not for
the world act the part he does. 
There never was a rogue, who had not a salvo to
himself for being so. —What a praise to honesty, that
every man pretends to it, even at the instant that he
knows he is pursuing the methods that will perhaps
prove him a knave to the whole world, as well as to
his own conscience! 
But what this stupid family can mean, to make all
this necessary, I cannot imagine. My Revenge
and my Love are uppermost by turns. If the latter
succeed not, the gratifying of the former will be my
only consolation: And, by All that's good, they shall
feel it; altho', for it, I become an exile from my native
country for ever. 
I will throw myself into my charmer's presence: 
I have twice already attempted it in vain. I shall
then see what I may depend upon from her favour. 
If I thought I had no prospect of that, I should be
tempted to carry her off. —That would be a rape
worthy of a Jupiter! 
But all gentle shall be my movements: All respectful,
even to reverence, my address to her! —Her
hand shall be the only witness to the pressure of my 

lip—my trembling lip: I know it will tremble, if I
do not bid it tremble. As soft my sighs, as the sighs
of my gentle Rose-bud. By my humility will I invite
her confidence: The loneliness of the place shall give
me no advantage: To dissipate her fears, and engage
her reliance upon my honour for the future, shall be
my whole endeavour: But little will I complain of,
not at all will I threaten, those who are continually
threatening me: But yet with a view to act the part
of Dryden's lion; To secure my Love, or to let loose
my vengeance upon my hunters. 

What tho' his mighty soul his grief contains?
He meditates revenge, who least complains:
And, like a lion slumb'ring in his way,
Or sleep dissembling, while he waits his prey,
His fearless foes within his distance draws;
Constrains his roaring, and contracts his paws:
Till at the last, his time for fury found,
He shoots with sudden vengeance from the ground:
The prostrate vulgar passes o'er, and spares;
But, with a lordly rage, his hunters tears.