

The Editor of the following Letters
takes Leave to observe, that he has
now, in this Publication, completed
the Plan, that was the Object of his
Wishes, rather than of his Hopes, to accomplish. 
How such remarkable Collections of private
Letters fell into his hands, he hopes the Reader
will not think it very necessary to enquire. 
The first Collection, intitled PAMELA,
exhibited the Beauty and Superiority of Virtue
in an innocent and unpolished Mind, with the
Reward which often, even in this Life, a protecting
Providence bestows on Goodness. A
young Woman of low Degree, relating to 

her honest Parents the severe Trials she met
with from a Master who ought to have been the
Protector, not the Assailer, of her Honour,
shews the Character of a Libertine in its truly
contemptible Light. This Libertine, however,
from the Foundation of good Principles laid in
his early Years by an excellent Mother; by his
Passion for a virtuous young Woman; and by
her amiable Example, and unwearied Patience,
when she became his Wife; is, after a Length
of Time, perfectly reclaimed. 
The second Collection, published under the
Title of CLARISSA, displayed a more
melancholy Scene. A young Lady of higher
Fortune, and born to happier Hopes, is seen
involved in such Variety of deep Distresses, as
lead her to an untimely Death; affording a
Warning to Parents against forcing the Inclinations
of their Children in the most important
Article of their Lives; and to Children against
hoping too far from the fairest Assurances of a
Man void of Principle. The Heroine, however,
as a truly Christian Heroine, proves superior
to her Trials; and her Heart, always excellent,
refined and exalted by every one of
them, rejoices in the Approach of a happy
Eternity. Her cruel Destroyer appears wretched
and disappointed, even in the boasted Success of 

his vile Machinations: But still (buoyed up with
Self-conceit and vain Presumption) he goes on,
after every short Fit of imperfect, yet terrifying
Conviction, hardening himself more and
more; till, unreclaimed by the most affecting
Warnings, and repeated Admonitions, he perishes
miserably in the Bloom of Life, and sinks
into the Grave oppressed with Guilt, Remorse,
and Horror. His Letters, it is hoped, afford
many useful Lessons to the gay Part of Mankind
against that Misuse of Wit and Youth, of Rank
and Fortune, and of every outward Accomplishment,
which turns them into a Curse to the
miserable Possessor, as well as to all around
him. 
Here the Editor apprehended he should be
obliged to stop, by reason of his precarious
State of Health, and a Variety of Avocations
which claimed his first Attention: But it was
insisted on by several of his Friends who were
well assured he had the Materials in his Power,
that he should produce into public View the
Character and Actions of a Man of True
Honour. 
He has been enabled to obey these his
Friends, and to complete his first design: And
now, therefore, presents to the Public, in Sir 

Charles Grandison, the Example of
a Man acting uniformly well thro' a Variety of
trying Scenes, because all his Actions are regulated
by one steady Principle: A Man of Religion
and Virtue; of Liveliness and Spirit; 
accomplished and agreeable; happy in himself,
and a Blessing to others. 
From what has been premised, it may be
supposed, that the present Collection is not published
ultimately, nor even principally, any
more than the other two, for the Sake of Entertainment
only. A much nobler End is in
View. Yet it is hoped the Variety of Characters
and Conversations necessarily introduced
into so large a Correspondence, as these Volumes
contain, will enliven as well as instruct:
The rather, as the principal Correspondents are
young Ladies of polite Education, and of lively
Spirits. 
The Nature of Familiar Letters, written, as
it were, to the Moment, while the Heart is agitated
by Hopes and Fears, on Events undecided,
must plead an Excuse for the Bulk of a Collection
of this Kind. Mere Facts and Characters
might be comprised in a much smaller
Compass: But, would they be equally interesting? 
It happens fortunately, that an Account 

of the juvenile Years of the Principal Person
is narratively given in some of the Letters. 
As many, however, as could be spared, have
been omitted. There is not one Episode in
the Whole; nor, after Sir Charles Grandison
is introduced, one Letter inserted but what
tends to illustrate the principal Design. Those
which precede his Introduction, will not, it is
hoped, be judged unnecessary on the whole, as
they tend to make the Reader acquainted with
Persons, the History of most of whom is closely
interwoven with that of Sir Charles. 
