



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday, June 30. 
I am ruined, undone, blown up, destroyed, and
worse than annihilated, that's certain! —But was
not the news shocking enough, dost thou think, without
thy throwing into the too weighty scale reproaches,
which thou couldst have had no opportunity to make,
but for my own voluntary communications? At a time
too, when, as it falls out, I have another very sensible
disappointment to struggle with? 
I imagine, if there be such a thing as future punishment,
it must be none of the smallest mortifications,
that a new devil shall be punished by a worse old one. 
And, Take that! And, Take that! to have the old
satyr cry to the screaming sufferer, laying on with a
cat-o'-nine-tails, with a star of burning brass at the
end of each: And, For what! For what! —Why, if
the truth might be fairly told, for not being so bad a
devil as myself. 
Thou art, surely, casuist good enough to know (what
I have insisted upon (a)  heretofore) that the sin of seducing
a credulous and easy girl, is as great as that of
bringing to your lure an incredulous and watchful one. 
However ungenerous an appearance what I am going
to say may have from my pen, let me tell thee, That
if such a woman as Miss Harlowe chose to enter into
the Matrimonial State [I am resolved to disappoint thee
in thy meditated triumph over my rage and despair!] and,
according to the old Patriarchal system, to go on contributing
to get Sons and Daughters, with no other
view, than to bring them up piously, and to be good
and useful members of the commonwealth, what a devil 

had she to do, to let her fancy run a gadding after
a Rake? One whom she knew to be a Rake? 
O but truly, she hoped to have the merit of reclaiming
him. She had formed pretty notions how charming
it would look to have a penitent of her own making
dangling at her side to church, thro' an applauding
neighbourhood: And, as their family increased, marching
with her thither, at the head of their boys and girls,
processionally as it were, boasting of the fruits of their
honest desires, as my good Lord Bishop has it in his Licence. 
And then, what a comely sight, all kneeling
down together in one pew, according to eldership, as
we have seen in effigie, a whole family upon some old
monument, where the honest chevalier in armour is
presented kneeling, with uplift hands, and half a dozen
jolter-headed crop-eared boys behind him, ranged gradatim
or step-fashion according to age and size, all in
the same posture—Facing his pious dame, with a ruff
about her neck, and as many whey faced girls all
kneeling behind her: An Altar between them, and an
opened book upon it: Over their heads semilunary
rays darting from gilded clouds, surrounding an atchievement-motto,
In Coelo Salus—or Quies— 
perhaps, if they have happened to live the usual married
life of brawl and contradiction. 
It is certainly as much my misfortune to have fallen
in with Miss Clarissa Harlowe, were I to have valued
my reputation or ease, as it is that of Miss Harlowe to
have been acquainted with me. And, after all, what
have I done more than prosecute the maxims, by which
thou and I, and every Rake, are governed, and which,
before I knew this Lady, we have pursued from pretty
girl to pretty girl, as fast as we had set one down, taking
another up;—just as the fellows do with their flying
coaches and flying horses at a Country-fair—With
a Who rides next! Who rides next! 
But here, in the present case, to carry on the volant
metaphor (for I must either be merry, or mad) is a 

Pretty little Miss just come out of her hanging-sleeve
coat, brought to buy a pretty little Fairing; for the
world, Jack, is but a great Fair, thou knowest; and,
to give thee serious reflection for serious, all its Joys
but tinselled hobby-horses, gilt gingerbread, squeaking
trumpets, painted drums, and so forth. 
Now behold this pretty little Miss skimming from
booth to booth, in a very pretty manner. One pretty
little fellow called Wyerley perhaps; another jiggeting
rascal called Biron, and a third simpering varlet of the name
of Symmes, and a more hideous villain than any of the
rest, with a long bag under his arm, and parchment
Settlements tagged to his heels, ycleped Solmes; pursue
her from Raree-show to Raree-show, shouldering upon
one another at every turning, stopping when she stops,
and set a spinning again when she moves. And thus
dangled after, but still in the eye of her watchful guardians,
traverses the pretty little Miss thro' the whole
Fair, equally delighted and delighting: Till at last,
taken with the invitation of the laced-hat orator, and
seeing several pretty little bib-wearers stuck together
in the flying-coaches, cutting safely the yielding air,
in the One-go-up the Other-go-down picture-of-the-world
vehicle, and all with as little fear as wit, is
tempted to ride next. 
In then suppose she slily pops, when none of her
friends are near her: And if, after two or three ups and
downs, her pretty head turns giddy, and she throws
herself out of the coach when at its elevation, and so
dashes out her pretty little brains, who can help it? — 
And would you hang the poor fellow, whose professed
trade it was to set the pretty little creatures a flying? 
'Tis true, this pretty little Miss, being a very pretty
little Miss, being a very much-admired little Miss, being
a very good little Miss, who always minded her book,
and had passed thro' her 'samplar-doctrine with high
applause; had even stitched out in gaudy propriety of
colours, an Abraham offering up Isaac, a Samson and 

the Philistines, and Flowers, and Knots, and Trees,
and the Sun, and the Moon, and the Seven Stars, all
hung up in frames with glasses before them, for the
admiration of her future grandchildren: Who likewise
was entitled to a very pretty little estate: Who was descended
from a pretty little family upwards of one hundred
years gentility; which lived in a very pretty little
manner, respected a very little on their own accounts,
a great deal on hers:— 
For such a pretty little Miss as this to come to so
great a misfortune, must be a very sad thing: But, tell
me, would not the losing of any ordinary child, of any
other less considerable family, of less shining or amiable
qualities, have been as great and as heavy a loss to
that family, as the losing this pretty little Miss could
be to hers? 
To descend to a very low instance, and that only as
to personality; hast thou any doubt, that thy strong-muscled
bony face was as much admired by thy Mother,
as if it had been the face of a Lovelace, or any
other handsome fellow? And had thy picture been
drawn, would she have forgiven the painter, had he
not expressed so exactly thy lineaments, as that every
one should have discerned the likeness? The handsome
likeness is all that is wished for. Ugliness made familiar
to us, with the partiality natural to fond parents,
will be Beauty all the world over. —Do thou apply. 
* *
But, alas! Jack, all this is but a copy of my countenance,
drawn to evade thy malice! —Tho' it answer
thy unfriendly purpose to own it, I cannot forbear to
own it, that I am stung to the very soul with this unhappy
—Accident, must I call it? —Have I nobody,
whose throat, either for carelessness or treachery, I
ought to cut, in order to pacify my vengeance? 
When I reflect upon my last iniquitous intention,
the first outrage so nobly resented, as well as, so far as
she was able, so nobly resisted, I cannot but conclude, 

that I was under the power of fascination from these
accursed Circes; who, pretending to know their own
Sex, would have it, that there is in every woman a
yielding, or a weak-resisting moment to be met with: 
And that yet, and yet, and yet, I had not tried enough: 
But that, if neither Love nor Terror should enable me
to hit that lucky moment, when, by help of their cursed
arts, she was once overcome, she would be for ever
overcome: —Appealing to all my experience, to all my
knowledge of the Sex, for a justification of their assertion. 
My appealed to experience, I own, was but too favourable
to their argument: For dost thou think, I
could have held my purpose against such an angel as
this, had I ever before met with a woman so much in
earnest to defend her honour against the unwearied artifices
and perseverance of the man she loved? Why
then were there not more examples of a virtue so immoveable? 
Or, why was this singular one to fall to my
lot? Except indeed to double my guilt; and at the same
time to convince all that should hear her Story, that
there are angels as well as devils in the flesh? 
So much for confession; and for the sake of humouring
my conscience; with a view likewise of disarm
thy malice by acknowlegement: Since no one shall say
worse of me, than I will of myself on this occasion. 
One thing I will nevertheless add, to shew the sincerity
of my contrition—'Tis this, that if thou canst
by any means find her out within these three days, or
any time before she has discovered the Stories relating
to Captain Tomlinson and her Uncle to be what they
are; and if thou canst prevail upon her to consent; I
will actually, in thy presence and his (he to represent
her Uncle) marry her. 
I am still in hopes it may be so—She cannot be long
concealed—I have already set all engines at work to find
her out; and if I do, what indifferent persons [and no
one of her friends, as thou observest, will look upon her] 

will care to embroil themselves with a man of my
figure, fortune, and resolution? —Shew her this part
then, or any other part, of this Letter, at thy own
discretion, if thou canst find her: For after all, methinks I would be glad, that this affair, which is bad
enough in itself, should go off without worse personal
consequences to any-body else; and yet it runs in my
mind, I know not why, that sooner or later, it will
draw a few drops of blood after it; except she and I
can make it up between ourselves. And this may be
another reason why she should not carry her resentment
too far—Not that such an affair would give me
much concern neither, were I to chuse my man, or
men; for I heartily hate all her family but herself; 
and ever shall. 
* *
Let me add, that the Lady's plot to escape appears
to me no extraordinary one. There was much more
luck than probability that it should do: Since, to make
it succeed, it was necessary, that Dorcas and Will, and
Sinclair and her Nymphs, should be all deceived, or
off their guard. It belongs to me, when I see them,
to give them my hearty thanks that they were; and
that their selfish care to provide for their own future
security, should induce them to leave their outward
door upon their bolt-latch, and be curs'd to them. 
Mabell deserves a pitch-suit and a bonfire, rather
than the Lustring; and as her cloaths are returned,
let the Lady's be put to her others, to be sent to her,
when it can be told whither—But not till I give the
word neither; for we must get the dear Fugitive back
again, if possible. 
I suppose that my stupid villain, who knew not such
a goddess-shaped Lady with a mien so noble, from the
aukward and bent-shouldered Mabell, has been at
Hamstead to see after her. And yet I hardly think
she would go thither. He ought to go thro' every
street where bills for lodgings are up, to enquire after 

a new-comer. The houses of such as deal in womens
matters, and tea, coffee, and such-like, are
those to be enquired at for her. If some tidings be
not quickly heard of her, I would not have either
Dorcas, Will, or Mabell, appear in my sight, whatever
their superiors think fit to do. 
This, thro' written in character, is a very long Letter,
considering it is not a narrative one, or a journal
of proceedings, like most of my former; for such
will unavoidably and naturally, as I may say, run into
length. But I have so used myself to write a great
deal of late, that I know not how to help it. Yet I
must add to its length, in order to explain myself on
a hint I gave at the beginning of it; which was, that
I have another disappointment, besides this of Miss
Harlowe's escape, to bemoan. 
And what dost think it is? Why, the old Peer, pox
of his tough constitution (for that malady would have
helped him on) has made shift by fire and brimstone,
and the devil knows what, to force the Gout to quit
the Counterscarp of his Stomach, just as it had collected
all its strength, in order to storm the Citadel of
his Heart. In short, they have, by the mere force of
stink-pots, hand-granades, and pop-guns, driven the
slow-working pioneer quite out of the trunk into the
extremities; and there it lies nibbling and gnawing
upon his great toe; when I had hoped a fair end both
of the distemper and the distempered. 
But I, who could write to thee of Laudanum, and
the Wet Cloth, formerly, yet let 8000l. a year slip
thro' my fingers, when I had entered upon it more
than in imagination [for I had begun to ask the Stewards
questions, and to hear them talk of Fines and Renewals,
and such sort of stuff] deserve to be mortified. 
Thou canst not imagine, how differently the Servants,
and even my Cousins, look upon me since yesterday
to what they did before. Neither the one nor the
other bow or courtesy half so low. —Nor am I a quarter
so often his Honour, and your Honour, as I was 

within these few hours, with the former: And as to
the latter—It is Cousin Bobby again, with the usual
familiarity, instead of Sir, and Sir, and, If you please,
Mr. Lovelace. And now they have the insolence to
congratulate me on the recovery of the best of Uncles; 
while I am forced to seem as much delighted as they,
when, would it do me good, I could sit down and cry
my eyes out. 
I had bespoken my mourning in imagination, after
the example of a certain foreign minister, who, before
the death or even last illness of Charles II. as honest
White Kennet tells us, had half exhausted Blackwell-hall
of its Sables—An indication, as the historian would
insinuate, that the monarch was to be poisoned, and
the embassador in the secret—And yet, fool that I was,
I could not take the hint—What a devil does a man
read history for, if he cannot profit by the examples he
finds in it? 
But thus, Jack, is an observation of the old Peer's
verified, That one misfortune seldom comes alone: And
so concludes 
Thy doubly-mortified
Lovelace. 