


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Bologna, Thursday, Aug. 17–28.
I shall hereafter have a pretty large supplement
to give you to my literary journal; having found
it necessary, as much as possible, in the past month, to
amuse myself with subjects without myself. And I shall
send you now the copies of three Letters of mine,
written in Italian to Lady Clementina; and two of
hers, in answer to the first and second of them. 
I arrived here yesterday. But before I proceed to
acquaint you with my reception, I should mention,
that Lady Olivia arrived at her own palace at Florence,
on Friday last. I was then in that city, but
newly returned from Naples and Rome. She sent one
of her gentlemen to me the night of her arrival, to
acquaint me with it, and to desire me to attend her
next morning. I went. 
Her first reception of me was polite and agreeable. 
But the moment her aunt Maffei withdrew, and we 

were alone, her eyes darting a fiercer ray, Wretch,
said she, what disturbance, what anxieties, hast thou
given me! —But it is well, that thy ingratitude to the
creature who has risqued so much for thee, has been
rewarded, as it ought to be, by a repulse from a still
prouder heart, if possible, than thy own! 
You, Lady Olivia, answered I, have reason to impute
pride to me. You have given me many opportunities
to shew you, that I, a man, can keep my
temper; when you, a woman, have not been able to
keep yours; yet, in me, never met with an aggressor. 
Not an aggressor, Sir! —To say nothing of the contempts
you cast upon me here in my own Italy, what
was your treatment of me in your England—Paltry
island! I despise it! —To resolve to leave me there! 
To refuse to compliment me with a day, an hour! [O
my detested weakness! What a figure did I make
among your friends!] And declaredly to attend the
motions of the haughtiest woman in Europe! Thank
God, for your own sake; yes, Sir, I have the charity
to say, for your own sake; that you are disappointed! 
I pity you, Lady Olivia: From my soul I pity you! 
And should abhor myself, were I capable of mingling
insult with my pity. But I leave you. 
Forgive me, Chevalier, catching my arm as I was
going. I am more displeased with myself than with
you. A creature, that has rendered herself so cheap
to you (but, Sir, it is only to you) cannot but be uneasy
to herself; and when she is, she must misbehave
to every-body else. Say you forgive me— 
She held out her hand to me. But immediately,
on Lady Maffei's coming in, followed by servants,
withdrew it. 
Her behaviour afterwards was that of the true passionate
woman; now ready to rave, now in tears. 
I cannot, Dr. Bartlett, descend to particulars. A man,
who loves the Sex; who has more compassion than 

vanity in his nature; who can value (even generally
faulty) persons for the qualities that are laudable in
them, must be desirous to draw a veil over the weaknesses
of such. I left her distressed! There may be
cases in which sincerity cannot be separated from unpoliteness. 
I was obliged to be unpolite, or I could not
have been sincere; and must have given such answers,
as would, perhaps, in some measure, have intitled the
Lady to think herself amused. Poor woman! She
threatened to have me overtaken by her vengeance. 
But now, on the disappointment I had met with at
Bologna, it became absolutely necessary for me to encourage,
or to discourage, this unhappy Lady—I
could not have been just to her, had I not been just
to myself. 
A very extraordinary attempt was made, next day,
on my person; I am apt to believe, from this quarter. 
It succeeded not: And as I was on the Tuesday
to set out for Bologna, I let it pass off without complaint
or enquiry. 
I paid the Count of Belvedere a visit, as I had promised. 
The General at Naples, and the Count at
Parma, received me with the highest civilities; and
both from the same motive. The Count will hope. 
The General accompanied me, with his Lady, part
of my way to Florence. The motive of his journey
is to rejoice personally with his friends at Urbino and
Bologna, on the resolution his sister has taken; and
to congratulate her upon it; as he has already done
by Letter; the copy of which he shewed me. There
were high compliments made me in it. We may
speak handsomely of the man whom we neither envy
nor fear. He would have loaded me with presents; 
but I declined accepting any; in such a manner,
however, as he could not be dissatisfied with me for
my refusal. 
I paid also my respects at Urbino to the Altieri family,
and the Conte della Porretta, in my way to 

Rome and Naples, and met with a very polite reception
from both. For the rest of the time of my absence
from Bologna, my literary journal will account. 
On Wednesday afternoon I went to the palace of
Porretta. I hastened up to my Jeronymo, with whom,
as also with Mr. Lowther, I had held a correspondence,
in my absence, and received favourable intelligences
from them. 
Jeronymo rejoiced to see me. I was inexpressibly
delighted to find him so much recovered. His appetite,
he told me, was restored. His rest was balmy and
refreshing. He sat up several hours in the day; and
his sister and he gave joy to each other, and to all
their friends. But he hinted to me his wishes still, to
call me brother; and begged of God, in a very earnest
manner, snatching my hand, and wetting it with his
tears, that it still might be so. 
The Marquis, the Marchioness, the Bishop, and
Father Marescotti, joined to thank and applaud me
for my part of the correspondence with their beloved
daughter; for, on my declining to support her in her
wishes to be allowed to take the veil, she had shewed
them the copy of her second Letter, as well as my reply
to it. The blessings which they poured out upon
me, were mingled with their tears; and Father Marescotti
and the Bishop declared, that they would, in
every prayer they put up to Heaven for themselves
and the family, remember me, and beg of God to
supply to me, by another, and even, they said, a better
Clementina, the disappointment I had so unexpectedly
met with from theirs. The General and his Lady,
and the Count, arrived the day before: But they
were not present. 
While they were all complimenting and applauding
the almost silent man (for in so critical a situation what
could I say?) Camilla came in, and whispering the
Marchioness, Clementina, said the Marchioness, is
impatient to see her friend. Chevalier, I will introduce
you. I followed her. 

The young Lady, the moment she beheld me, flew
to me with open arms, as to her brother, her fourth
brother, as she called me; and thanked me, she said,
a thousand thousand times, for my Letters to her. My
mamma, said she, has seen them all. But, ah, Sir,
your third! —I did not think you would have refused
me your interest with my friends. I cannot, cannot
give up that point. It was always my wish, madam
(turning to her mother) to be God's child; that does
not make me less yours and my papa's. O, Chevalier!
you have not quieted, you have not convinced,
my heart! 
I promise myself, that I could have left you without
a plea, my dear correspondent, returned I, had my
heart been at ease, and the argument less affecting to
myself. And surely, if Lady Clementina had been
convinced, she would have acted up to her conviction. 
O, Sir, you are a dangerous man! I see, if a certain
event had taken place, I should have been a lost
creature! —Are not you, Sir, convinced, that I should,
in my notions of a lost creature? If you are, I hope
you will act up to your conviction. 
Was this necessary to be said to me? I think, on
recollection, she half-smiled when she said it. 
My dear Dr. Bartlett, you see Clementina could
be pleasant on an occasion so solemn! —But perhaps
she saw me only affectedly chearful. Little, at present,
as she imagines it, I think it not impossible that she
may in time be brought to yield to the sense of her
duty, laid down by such powerful advocates as she has
in her own family. Whatever happens, may it be
happy to her and this family, and then I cannot be
wholly joyless! What is there in this Life, worth— 
But let me not be too abstracted! This world, if we
can enjoy it with innocent chearfulness, and be serviceable
to our fellow-creatures, is not to be despised,
even by a Philosopher. 

I hope, madam, said I, to her, that at least you
suspend your wishes after the sequestred life. She
allowed the force of one or two of my arguments; 
but I could perceive, that she gave not up her hope
of being complied with in her wishes to assume the
veil. 
The General, and his Lady, and the Count, being
come in, hastened up to pay their compliments to me. 
How profuse were the two Gentlemen in theirs! 
At the Marchioness's motion, we went to Jeronymo,
and found the Marquis, the Bishop, and Father
Marescotti, coming to us. And then, every one joining
in their acknowlegements of obligation to me,
and wishing it in their power to make me as happy
as they declared I had made them, I said, It was in
their power, I hoped, to do me an unspeakable pleasure. 
They called upon me, as with one voice; It is, answered
I, that my dear friend Jeronymo may be prevailed
upon to accompany me to England. Mr. Lowther
would think himself very happy in his attendance
on him there, rather than to stay here; and yet, if
my request should not be granted, he is determined
not to leave him till he is supposed to be out of
danger. 
They looked upon one another with eyes of pleasure
and surprize. Jeronymo wept. I cannot, cannot
bear, said he, such a weight of obligation. Grandison,
we can do nothing for you: And you have
brought me your Lowther to heal me, that you might
have the killing of me yourself. 
Clementina's eyes were filled with tears. She went
from us with some little precipitation. 
O Chevalier, said the Marchioness, my Clementina's
heart is too susceptible for its own ease, to impressions
of gratitude. You will quite kill the poor
child—or make her repent her resolution. 
What is there but favour to me, replied I, if my 

request can be complied with? I hope my dear Jeronymo
will not be unattended by others of his friends:
I have had the promises of the two young Lords. 
Our baths are restorative. I will attend you to them,
my dear Jeronymo. The difference of air, of climate,
may, probably, be tried with advantage. Let me
have the honour of entertaining you in England, looking
all round me; and that I will consider, as a full
return of the obligations you think so highly of, and
are so solicitous to discharge. 
They looked upon one another, in silence. 
Would to God, proceeded I, that you, my Lord, and
you, madam (directing myself to the father and mother)
would honour me, as my guests, for one season—You
once had thoughts of it, had a certain happy event taken
place—I dare promise you both, after the fatigues you
have undergone, a renewal of health, from our salutary
springs. I should be but too happy, if, in such company,
a sister might be allowed to visit a brother! — 
But if this be thought too great a favour, that sister,
in your absence, cannot but give and receive pleasure,
sometimes in visiting Mrs. Beaumont at Florence; 
sometimes her Brother and his Lady at Naples. And
I will engage my two Sisters and their Lords to accompany
me in my attendance on you back to Bologna. 
My Sisters will be delighted with the opportunity
of visiting ltaly, and of paying their respects to
a young Lady whose character they revere, and to
whom once their brother had hoped to give them the
honour of a relation. 
They still continuing silent, but none of them seeming
displeased; You will, by such a favour, my dear
Lords, and you, madam, to the Marchioness, do
me credit with myself, as I may say. I shall return
to my native country, if I go alone, after the hopes
you had all given me, like a disappointed and rejected
man. My pride, as well as my pleasure, is concerned
on this occasion. My house in the country, my house 

in London, shall be yours. I will be either inmate or
visiter, at your pleasure. No man loves his country
better than I do: But you will induce me to love it
still better, if by your compliance with my earnest
request, you shall be able to obtain either health or
pleasure from a twelvemonth's residence in it. Oblige
me, my dear Lords; oblige me, madam; were
it but to give yourselves a new relish to your own
country and palace on your return. Our summers
have not your fervid sun: Our commerce gives us,
in the highest perfection, all your justly-boasted autumnal
fruits: Nor are our winters so cold as yours. 
Oblige me, for the approaching winter only; and stay
longer, as you shall find inclination. 
Dearest Grandison, said Jeronymo, I will accept of
your invitation the moment I am told that I may undertake
the journey— 
The journey, my Lord, interrupted I! —Your
cabin shall be made near as convenient to you, as
your chamber. You shall be set ashore within half a
league of my house in London. God give us a pleasant
voyage; and in a few days time, you will not know,
except by amended health and spirits, that you are not
in this your own chamber. 
Surely, said the General, my sister was right in her
apprehensions, that she should not be able to continue
a Catholic, had she been this man's. I wish you,
my Lord, you, madam, and Jeronymo, would go. 
You have had a long course of fatigues and troubles. 
You love the Chevalier. Winter with him, however. 
I have heard much of the efficacy of the English baths. 
Clementina must not go. My wife and I will make
her as happy as possible in your absence: And take
Grandison at his word. Bring him, and his sisters,
back with you. Their Lords, I understand; have
been among us. They will not be sorry to visit Italy
a second time, as, no doubt, they are men of taste— 
But when, Chevalier, do you think of going? 

The sooner the better, were it but to take advantage
of the fine season: It will be but what mariners
call a trip to England. You will make me very happy. 
You can have no other way of discharging the
obligations you are so solicitous about. I will return
with you: The health of Lady Clementina, I flatter
myself, will be quite confirmed by that time. Signor
Jeronymo, I hope, will be restored likewise: What
joy shall we be enabled to give one another!— 
They took only till the morning to consult, and give
me an answer. 

