



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe.
(Her last, not at the time received.) 

Friday, March 3. 
O my dear friend, I have had a sad conflict! trial
upon trial; conference upon conference! —But
what law, what ceremony, can give a man a right to
a heart which abhors him more than it does any of
God Almighty's creatures? 
I hope my mamma will be able to prevail for me.— 
but I will recount all, tho' I sit up the whole night
to do it; for I have a vast deal to write; and will be
as minute as you wish me to be. 
In my last, I told you, in a fright, my apprehensions; 
which were grounded upon a conversation that 

passed between my mamma and my aunt, part of
which Hannah overheard. I need not give you the
further particulars; since what I have to relate to you
from different conversations that have passed between
my mamma and me in the space of a very few hours
will include them all. I will begin then. 
I went down this morning, when breakfast was
ready, with a very uneasy heart, from what Hannah
had told me yesterday afternoon; wishing for an opportunity,
however, to appeal to my mamma, in hopes to
engage her interest in my behalf, and purposing to
try to find one, when she retired to her own apartment
after breakfast: —But, unluckily, there was the
odious Solmes sitting asquat between my mamma and
sister, with so much assurance in his looks! —But you
know, my dear, that those we love not, cannot do
any-thing to please us. 
Had the wretch kept his seat, it might have been
well enough: But the bent and broad-shoulder'd creature
must needs rise, and stalk towards a chair, which
was just by that which was set for me. 
I removed it at a distance, as if to make way for
my own: And down I sat, abruptly I believe; what
I had heard, all in my head. 
But this was not enough to daunt him: The man
is a very confident, he is a very bold, staring man! — 
Indeed, my dear, the man is very confident. 
He took the removed chair, and drew it so near
mine, squatting in it with his ugly weight, that he
press'd upon my hoop. —I was so offended (all I had
heard, as I said, in my head), that I removed to another
chair. I own I had too little command of myself: 
It gave my brother and sister too much advantage; 
I dare say they took it: —But I did it involuntarily,
I think: I could not help it. —I knew not
what I did. 
I saw my papa was excessively displeased. When
angry, no man's countenance ever shew'd it so much 

as my papa's. Clarissa Harlowe! said he, with a big
voice; and there he stopp'd. —Sir! said I, and courtesy'd. 
—I trembled; and put my chair nearer the
wretch, and sat down; my face I could feel all in a
glow. 
Make tea, child, said my kind mamma: Sit by
me, love; and make tea. 
I removed with pleasure to the seat the man had
quitted; and being thus indulgently put into employment,
soon recover'd myself; and in the course of
the breakfasting officiously asked two or three questions
of Mr. Solmes, which I would not have done,
but to make up with my papa. —Proud spirits may
be brought to; whisperingly spoke my sister to me,
over her shoulder, with an air of triumph and scorn: 
but I did not mind her. 
My mamma was all kindness and condescension. 
I asked her once, if she were pleased with the tea? 
she said, softly, and again called me dear, she was
pleased with all I did. I was very proud of this encouraging
goodness: And all blew over, as I hoped,
between my papa and me; for he also spoke kindly
to me two or three times. 
Small incidents these, my dear, to trouble you
with; only as they lead to greater; as you shall hear. 
Before the usual breakfast-time was over, my papa
withdrew with my mamma, telling her he wanted to
speak to her. My sister, and my aunt, who was with
us, next dropt away. 
My brother gave himself some airs of insult, that
I understood well enough; but which Mr. Solmes
could make nothing of: —And at last he arose from
his seat—Sister, said he, I have a curiosity to shew
you: I will fetch it: And away he went; shutting
the door close after him. 
I saw what all this was for. I arose; the man hemming
up for a speech, rising, and beginning to set
his splay-feet (indeed, my dear, the man in all his 

ways is hateful to me) in an approaching posture. — 
I will save my brother the trouble of bringing to me
his curiosity, said I. —I courtesy'd—Your servant, Sir— 
The man cry'd, Madam, Madam, twice, and look'd
like a fool. —But away I went—to find my brother,
to save my word. —But my brother was gone, indifferent
as the weather was, to walk in the garden with
my sister. A plain case, that he had left his curiosity
with me, and design'd to shew me no other. 
I had but just got into my own apartment, and began
to think of sending Hannah to beg an audience
of my mamma (the more encouraged by her condescending
goodness at breakfast), when Shorey, her
woman, brought me her commands to attend her in
her closet. 
My papa, Hannah told me, had just gone out of
it with a positive, angry countenance. Then I as
much dreaded the audience, as I had wished for it
before. 
I went down, however; but, apprehending the
subject, approached her trembling, and my heart in
visible palpitations. 
She saw my concern. Holding out her kind arms,
as she sat, Come kiss me, my dear, said she, with a
smile like a sun-beam breaking thro' the cloud that
overshadowed her naturally benign aspect. Why flutters
my jewel so? 
This preparative sweetness, with her goodness just
before, confirmed my apprehensions. My mamma
saw the bitter pill wanted gilding. 
O my mamma! was all I could say; and I clasp'd
my arms round her neck, and my face sunk into her
bosom. 
My child! my child! restrain, said she, your
powers of moving! —I dare not else trust myself with
you. —And my tears trickled down her bosom, as hers
bedew'd my neck. 

O the words of kindness, all to be express'd in
vain, that flow'd from her lips! 
Lift up your sweet face, my best child, my own
Clarissa Harlowe! —O my daughter, best-beloved of
my heart, lift up a face so ever-amiable to me! — 
Why these sobs? —Is an apprehended duty so affecting
a thing, that before I can speak—But I am glad,
my love, you can guess at what I have to say to you. 
I am spared the pains of breaking to you what was a
task upon me reluctantly enough undertaken to break
to you. 
Then rising, she drew a chair near her own, and
made me sit down by her, overwhelm'd as I was with
tears of apprehension of what she had to say, and of
gratitude for her truly maternal goodness to me; sobs
still my only language. 
And drawing her chair still nearer to mine, she put
her arms round my neck, and my glowing cheek,
wet with my tears, close to her own: Let me talk to
you, my child; since silence is your choice, hearken
to me, and be silent. 
You know, my dear, what I every day forego,
and undergo, for the sake of peace: Your papa is
a very good man, and means well; but he will not
be controuled; nor yet persuaded. You have seem'd
to pity me sometimes, that I am obliged to give up
every point. Poor man! his reputation the less for
it; mine the greater; yet would I not have this credit,
if I could help it, at so dear a rate to him and to
myself. You are a dutiful, a prudent, and a wise
child, she was pleased to say (in hope, no doubt, to
make me so): You would not add, I am sure, to
my trouble: You would not wilfully break that peace
which costs your mamma so much to perserve. Obedience
is better than sacrifice. O my Clary Harlowe,
rejoice my heart, by telling me I have apprehended
too much! —I see your concern! I see your perplexity! 
I see your conflict (loosing her arm, and 

rising, not willing I should see how much she herself
was affected). I will leave you a moment. —Answer
me not (for I was essaying to speak, and had, as soon
as she took her dear cheek from mine, dropt down
on my knees, my hands clasped and lifted up in a supplicating
manner): I am not prepared for your irresistible
expostulation, she was pleased to say. —I will
leave you to recollection: And I charge you, on my
blessing, that all this my truly maternal tenderness be
not thrown away upon you. 
And then she withdrew into the next apartment; 
wiping her eyes, as she went from me; as mine overflow'd; 
my heart taking in the whole compass of her
meaning. 
She soon returned, having recover'd more steadiness. 
Still on my knees, I had thrown my face cross the
chair she had sat in. 
Look up to me, my Clary Harlowe. No sullenness,
I hope! 
No, indeed, my ever-to be-revered mamma. — 
And I arose. —I bent my knee. 
She raised me, No kneeling to me, but with knees
of duty and compliance. —Your heart, not your knees,
must bend. —It is absolutely determin'd. —Prepare
yourself therefore to receive your papa, when he visits
you by-and-by, as he would wish to receive you: But
on this one quarter of an hour depends the peace of
my future life, the satisfaction of all the family, and
your own security from a man of violence: And I
charge you besides, on my blessing, that you think of
being Mrs. Solmes. 
There went the dagger to my heart, and down
I sunk; and when I recover'd, found myself in the
arms of my Hannah, my sister's Betty holding open
my reluctantly open'd palm, my laces cut, my linen
scented with harts-horn; and my mamma gone. — 
Had I been less kindly treated, the hated name still 

forborn to be mention'd, or mention'd with a little
more preparation and reserve, I had stood the horrid
found with less visible emotion—But to be bid, on
the blessing of a mother so dearly beloved, so truly
reverenc'd, to think of being Mrs. Solmes, what a
denunciation was that! 
Shorey came in with a message, deliver'd in her
solemn way: Your mamma, Miss, is concern'd for
your disorder: She expects you down again in an
hour; and bid me say, that she then hopes every thing
from your duty. 
I made no reply; for what could I say? And leaning
upon my Hannah's arm, withdrew to my own
apartment. There you will guess how the greatest
part of the hour was employed. 
Within that time, my mamma came up to me. 
I love, she was pleased to say, to come into this
apartment! —No emotions, child! No flutters! — 
Am I not your mother! —Am I not your fond, your
indulgent mother! Do not discompose me by discomposing
yourself! —Do not occasion me uneasiness,
when I would give you nothing but pleasure. Come,
my dear, we will go into your library! 
She took my hand, led the way, and made me sit
down by her: And after she had inquired how I did,
she began in a strain, as if she had supposed I had
made use of the intervening space, to overcome all
my objections. 
She was pleased to tell me, that my papa and she,
in order to spare my natural modesty, had taken the
whole affair upon themselves— 
Hear me out, and then speak (for I was going to
expostulate). You are no stranger to the end of Mr.
Solmes's visits. — 
O Madam— 
Hear me out; and then speak. He is not indeed
every thing I wish him to be: But he is a man of
probity, and has no vices— 

No vices, Madam!— 
Hear me out, child—You have not behaved much
amiss to him: We have seen with pleasure that you
have not.— 
O Madam, must I not now speak!— 
I shall have done presently—A young creature of
your virtuous and pious turn, she was pleased to say,
cannot surely love a profligate: You love your brother
too well, to wish to marry one who had like to have
killed him, and who threaten'd your uncles, and
defies us all. You have had your own way six or
seven times: We want to secure you against a man
so vile. Tell me; I have a right to know; whether
you prefer this man to all others? —Yet God forbid,
that I should know you do! for such a declaration
would make us all miserable. Yet, tell me, are your
affections engag'd to this man? 
I knew what the inference would be, if I had said
they were not. 
You hesitate: You answer me not: You cannot
answer me. —Rising—Never more will I look upon
you with an eye of favour.— 
O Madam, Madam! Kill me not with your displeasure: 
I would not, I need not, hesitate one moment,
did I not dread the inference, if I answer you
as you wish. —Yet be that inference what it will,
your threatened displeasure, will make me speak. And
I declare to you, that I know not my own heart, if
it be not absolutely free. And pray, let me ask, my
dearest mamma, in what has my conduct been faulty,
that, like a giddy creature, I must be forced to marry,
to save me from—From what? Let me beseech you,
Madam, to be the guardian of my reputation. —Let
not your Clarissa be precipitated into a state she wishes
not to enter into with any man! And this upon a
supposition that otherwise she shall marry herself, and
disgrace her whole family. 
Well then, Clary (passing over the force of my
plea), if your heart be free— 

O my beloved mamma, let the usual generosity of
your dear heart operate in my favour. Urge not upon
me the inference that made me hesitate. 
I won't be interrupted, Clary. —You have seen in
my behaviour to you, on this occasion, a truly maternal
tenderness; you have observ'd that I have
undertaken this task, with some reluctance, because
the man is not every thing; and because I know you
carry your notions of perfection in a man too high— 
Dearest Madam, this one time excuse me! —Is
there then any danger that I should be guilty of an
imprudent thing for the man's sake you hint at? 
Again interrupted! —Am I to be question'd, and
argued with? You know this won't do somewhere
else. You know it won't. What reason then, ungenerous
girl, can you have for arguing with me
thus, but because you think from my indulgence to
you, you may? 
What can I say? What can I do? What must that
cause be, that will not bear being argued upon? 
Again! Clary Harlowe!— 
Dearest Madam, forgive me: It was always my
pride and my pleasure to obey you. But look upon that
man—see but the disagreeableness of his person— 
Now, Clary, do I see whose person you have in
your eye! —Now is Mr. Solmes, I see, but comparatively
disagreeable; disagreeable only as another
man has a much more specious person. 
But, Madam, are not his manners equally so? — 
Is not his person the true representative of his mind? — 
That other man is not, shall not, be any thing to me,
release me but from this one man, whom my heart,
unbidden, resists. 
Condition thus with your papa. Will he bear, do
you think to be thus dialogu'd with? Have I not
conjur'd you, as you value my peace—What is it
that I do not give up? This very task, because I
apprehended you would not be easily persuaded, is a 

task indeed upon me. And will you give up nothing? 
Have you not refused as many as have been offer'd to
you? If you would not have us guess for whom,
comply; for comply you must, or be look'd upon as
in a state of defiance with your whole family. 
And saying this, she arose, and went from me. 
But at the chamber-door stopt, and turn'd back; I
will not say below, in what a disposition I leave you. 
Consider of every thing. The matter is resolv'd upon. 
As you value your father's blessing and mine,
and the satisfaction of all the family, resolve to comply. 
I will leave you for a few moments. I will
come up to you again: See that I find you as I wish
to find you; and since your heart is free, let your
duty govern it. 
In about half an hour, my mamma return'd: She
found me in tears. She took my hand; It is my part
evermore to be of the acknowledging side. I believe
I have needlessly exposed myself to your opposition, by
the method I have taken with you. I first began as
if I expected a denial, and by my indulgence brought
it upon myself. 
Do not, my dearest mamma! do not, say so! 
Were the occasion for this debate, proceeded she,
to have risen from myself; were it in my power to
dispense with your compliance; you too well know
what you can do with me— 
Would any-body, my dear Miss Howe, wish to
marry, when one sees a necessity for such a sweet
temper as my mamma's, either to be ruin'd, or depriv'd
of all power? 
—When I came to you a second time, knowing
that your contradiction would avail you nothing, I
refused to hear your reasons: And in This I was
wrong too, because a young creature, who loves to
reason, and used to love to be convinc'd by reason,
ought to have all her objections heard: I now, therefore,
this third time, see you; and am come resolv'd 

to hear all you have to say: And let me, my dear,
by my patience engage your gratitude; your generosity,
I will call it; because it is to You I speak, who used
to have a mind wholly generous: Let me, if your
heart be really free, let me see what it will induce
you to do to oblige me: And so as you permit your
usual discretion to govern you, I will hear all you
have to say; but with this intimation, that say what
you will, it will be of no avail elsewhere. 
What a dreadful saying is that! But could I engage
your pity, Madam, it would be somewhat. 
You have as much of my pity, as of my love. 
But what is person, Clary, with one of your prudence,
and your heart disengag'd?— 
Should the eye be disgusted, when the heart is to
be engag'd? —O Madam, who can think of marrying,
when the heart must be shock'd at the first appearance,
and where the disgust must be confirm'd
by every conversation afterwards? 
This, Clary, is owing to your prepossession. Let
me not have cause to regret that noble firmness of
mind in so young a creature, which I thought your
glory, and which was my boast in your character. 
In this instance it would be obstinacy, and want of
duty. —Have you not made objections to several— 
That was to their minds, their principles, Madam— 
But this man— 
Is an honest man, Clary Harlowe. He has a good
mind. —He is a virtuous man. 
He an honest man! His a good mind, Madam! 
He a virtuous man!— 
No-body denies him these qualities. 
Can he be an honest man who offers terms that
will rob all his own relations of their just expectations? 
—Can his mind be good— 
You, Clary Harlowe, for whose sake he offers so
much, are the last person that should make this observation. 

Give me leave, to say, Madam, that a person preferring
happiness to fortune, as I do; that want not
even what I have, and can give up the use of that,
as an instance of duty—. 
No more, no more of your merits! —You know
you will be a gainer by that chearful instance of your
duty; not a loser. You know you have but cast your
bread upon the waters—So no more of that! —For it
is not understood as a merit by every-body, I assure
you; tho' I think it a high one; and so did your
papa and uncles at the time— 
At the time, Madam!—How unworthily do my brother
and sister, who are afraid that the favour I was
so lately in— 
I hear nothing against your brother and sister— 
What family feuds have I in prospect, at a time when
I hoped most comfort from you all! 
God bless my brother and sister, in all their worthy
views! You shall have no family feuds, if I can
prevent them. You yourself, Madam, shall tell me
what I shall bear from them, and I will bear it: But
let my actions, not their misrepresentations (as I am
sure has been the case, by the disgraceful prohibitions
I have met with), speak for me— 
Just then, up came my Papa, with a sternness in
his looks, that made me tremble! —He took two or
three turns about my chamber—And then said to my
mamma, who was silent as soon as she saw him— 
My dear, you are long absent—Dinner is near
ready. What you had to say, lay in a very little
compass. Surely, you have nothing to do but to declare
your will, and my will! —But, perhaps, you
may be talking of the preparations—Let us have you
soon down—Your daughter in your hand, if worthy
of the name. 
And down he went, casting his eye upon me with a
look so stern, that I was unable to say one word to
him, or even, for a few minutes, to my mamma. 

Was not this very intimidating, my dear? 
My mamma, seeing my concern, seem'd to pity
me. She called me her good child, and kissed me; 
told me my papa should not know, that I had made
such opposition. He has kindly furnish'd us with an
excuse for being so long together. —Come, my dear,— 
Dinner will be upon table presently—Shall we go
down? And took my hand. 
This made me start: What, Madam, go down,
to let it be supposed we were talking of preparations! 
—O my beloved mamma, command me not
down upon such a supposition. 
You see, child, that to stay longer together, will
be owning that you are debating about an absolute
duty: And that will not be borne. Did not your
papa himself, some days ago, tell you, he would be
obey'd? I will a third time leave you. I must say
something by way of excuse for you: And that you
desire not to go down to dinner—That your modesty
on the occasion—. 
O Madam! say not my modesty on such an occasion: 
For that will be to give hope— 
And design you not to give hope? —Perverse
girl! —Rising, and flinging from me, take more time
for consideration! —Since it is necessary, take more
time—And when I see you next, let me know what
blame I have to cast upon myself, or to bear from
your papa, for my indulgence to you. 
She made, however, a little stop at the chamber-door; 
and seem'd to expect, that I would have besought
her to make the gentlest construction for me; 
for hesitating, she was pleased to say, I suppose, you
would not have me make a report— 
O Madam interrupted I, whose favour can I hope
for, if I lose my mamma's? 
To have desired a favourable report, you know, my
dear, would have been qualifying upon a point that
I was too much determin'd upon, to give room for 

any of my friends to think I have the least hesitation
about. And so my mamma went down stairs. 
I will deposite thus far; and as I know you will
not think me too minute in my relation of particulars
so very interesting to one you honour with your love,
proceed in the same way. As matters stand, I don't
care to have papers so freely written about me. 
Pray let Robert call every day, if you can spare
him, whether I have any thing ready or not. 
I should be glad you would not send him empty-handed. 
What a generosity in you, to write as frequently
from friendship, as I am forced to do from
misfortune! The letters being taken away will be an
assurance that you have them. As I shall write and deposite
as I have opportunity, the formality of super
and sub-scription, will be excused. For I need not
say how much I am, 
Your sincere and ever-affectionate,
Cl. Harlowe. 