



My dear Miss Darnford,
I hope you are happy and well. You kindly say
you can't be so, till you hear of my perfect Recovery. 
And this, blessed be God! you have heard
already from Mr. B. 
As to your Intimation of the fair Nun, 'tis all
happily over. Blessed be God, for that too! And
I have a better and more indearing Husband than
ever. Did you think that could be? 
My Billy too improves every Day: And my
dear Father and Mother seem to have their Youth
renew'd like the Eagle's. How many Blessings
have I to be thankful for! 
We are about to turn Travellers, to the Northern
Counties, I think, quite to the Borders; and afterwards
to the Western, to Bath, to Bristol, and I
know not whither myself: But among the rest, to 

Lincolnshire, that you may be sure of. Then how
happy shall I be in my dear Miss Darnford! 
I long to hear whether poor Mrs. Jewkes is
better or worse for the Advice of the Doctor, whom
I order'd to attend her from Stamford; and in what
Frame her Mind is. 
Do, my dear Miss, vouchsafe her a Visit, in my
Name; tell her, if she be low-spirited, what God
has done for me, as to my Recovery, and comfort
her all you can; and bid her spare neither Expence
nor Attendance, nor any thing her Heart can wish
for, nor the Company of any Relations or Friends
she may desire to be with her. 
If she is in her last Stage, poor Soul! how noble
will it be in you to give her Comfort and Consolation
in her dying Hours! 
Altho' we can merit nothing at the Hand of
God, yet I have a Notion, that we cannot deserve
more of one another, and, in some Sense, for that
Reason, of Him, than in our Charities on so trying
an Exigence! When the poor Soul stands shivering,
as it were, on the Verge of Death, and has
nothing strong, but its Fears and Doubts! —Then
a little Balm pour'd into the Wounds of the Mind,
a little comforting Advice to rely on God's Mercies,
from a good Person, how consolatory must it
be! And how, like Morning Mists before the Sun,
must all Diffidences, and gloomy Doubts, be chased
away by it! 
But, my dear Miss, the great Occasion of my
writing to you just now, is, by Lady Davers's Desire,
on a quite different Subject. She knows how we
love one another. And she has sent me the following
Lines by her Kinsman, who came to Kent, purposely 

to inquire how my Face fared in the Smallpox; 
and accompany'd us from Kent hither, [i. e.
to Bedfordshire] and sets out To-morrow for Lord
Davers's. 

My dear Pamela,
Jackey will tell you the reason of his
Journey; my Curiosity, on your own Account:
And I send this Letter by him; but he knows
not the Contents. My good Lord Davers wants
to have his Nephew marry'd, and settled in the
World: And his noble Father leaves the whole
Matter to my Lord, as to the Person, Settlements,
&c. 
‘Now I, as well as my Lord, think so highly of
the Prudence, the Person, and Family, of your
Miss Darnford, that we shall be obliged to you,
to sound that young Lady on this Score. 
‘I know Mr. H. would wish for no greater
Happiness. But if Miss is engag'd, or cannot
love my Nephew, I don't care, nor would my
Lord, that such a Proposal should be received
with undue Slight. His Birth, and the Title and
Estate he is Heir to, are Advantages that require
a Lady's Consideration. He has not indeed so
much Wit as Miss; but he has enough for a Lord,
whose Friends are born before him, as the Phrase
is; is very good-humour'd, no Fool, no Sot, no
Debauchee: And, let me tell you, these are Circumstances
not to be met with every Day in a
young Man of Quality. 
‘As to Settlements, Fortune, &c. I fansy there
would be no great Difficulties. The Business is,
If Miss could love him well enough for a Husband? 

That we leave to you to sound the young
Lady; and if she thinks she can, we will directly
begin a Treaty with Sir Simon on that Subject. I
am, my dearest Pamela, 
Your ever-affectionate Sister,
B. Davers.’ 

Now, my dear Miss, as my Lady has so well
stated the Case, I beg you to enable me to return
an Answer. I will not say one Word pro or con.
till I know your Mind—Only, that I think he is
good-humour'd, and might be easily persuaded to
any thing a Lady should think reasonable. 
And now, I must tell you another Piece of
News in the Matrimonial way. Mr. Williams has
been here to congratulate us, on our multiply'd
Blessings; and he has acquainted Mr. B. that an
Overture has been made him by his new Patron,
of a Kinswoman of his Lordship's, a Lady of Virtue
and Merit, and a Fortune of 3000l. to make him
Amends, as the Earl tells him, for quitting a better
Living to oblige him; and that he is in great
Hope of obtaining the Lady's Consent, which is all
that is wanting. Mr. B. is very much pleased with
so good a Prospect in Mr. Williams's Favour, and
has been in the Lady's Company formerly at a
Ball, at Gloucester; and he says, She is a prudent
and deserving Lady; and offers to make a Journey
on purpose to forward it, if he can be of Service
to him. 
I suppose you know, that all is adjusted, according
to the Scheme I formerly acquainted you with* , 

between Mr. Adams, and that Gentleman; and both
are settled in their respective Livings. But I ought
to have told you, that Mr. Williams, upon mature
Deliberation, declin'd the stipulated 80l. per Annum
from Mr. Adams, as he thought it would have a
Simoniacal Appearance. 
But now my Hand's in, let me tell you of a
Third Matrimonial Proposition, which gives me
more Puzzle and Dislike a great deal. And that
is, Mr. Adams has, with great Reluctance, and
after abundance of bashful Apologies, ask'd me, If
I have any Objection to his making his Addresses to
Polly Barlow? Which, however, he told me, he
had not mention'd to her, nor to any body living,
because he would first know whether I should take
it amiss, as her Service was so immediately about
my Person. 
This unexpected Motion perplex'd me a good
deal. The Gentleman is a worthy and a pious Man. 
He has now a very good Living; but is but just
enter'd upon it; and, I think, according to his accustom'd
Prudence in other respects, had better
have turned himself about first. 
But that is not the Point with me neither. I
have a great Regard to the Function. I think it is
as necessary, in order to preserve the Respect due
to the Clergy, that their Wives should be nearly,
if not quite, as unblemish'd, and as circumspect,
as themselves; and this, for the Gentleman's own
sake, as well as in the Eye of the World: For
how shall he pursue his Studies with Comfort to
himself, if he be made uneasy at home; or how
shall he expect his Female Parishioners will regard
his publick Preaching, if he cannot have a 

due Influence over the private Conduct of his
Wife? 
I can't say, excepting in the Instance of Mr. H.
but Polly is a good sort of Body enough; so far as
I know: But that is such a Blot in the poor Girl's
Escutcheon, a Thing not accidental, not surpris'd
into, not owing to Inattention, but to cool Premeditation,
after she had slept over and over upon
it; that, I think, I could wish Mr. Adams a Wife
more unexceptionable. 
'Tis true, Mr. Adams knows not this—but
that is one of my Difficulties. If I acquaint him
with it, I shall hurt the poor Maiden irreparably,
and deprive her of a Gentleman for a Husband, to
whom she may possibly make a good Wife—For
she is not very meanly descended—much better
than myself, as the World would say, were a Judgment
to be made from my Father's low Estate, when
I was exalted—I never, dear Miss, shall be asham'd
of these Retrospections. 
She is genteel, has a very innocent Look, a good
Face, is neat in her Person, and not addicted to any
Excess, that I know of. But, still, my dear Miss,
that one premeditated Fault, is so sad a one, that
tho' she might make a good Wife, for any middling
Man of Business—yet she wants, methinks, that
Discretion, that Purity, which I would always have
in the Wife of a good Clergyman. 
Then, she has not applied her Thoughts to that
sort of Oeconomy, which the Wife of a Country
Clergyman ought to know something of: And has
such a Turn to Dress and Appearance, that I can see,
if indulg'd, she would not be one that would help
to remove the Scandal which some severe Remarkers 

are apt to throw upon the Wives of Parsons, as
they call them. 
The Maiden, I believe, likes Mr. Adams not a
little. She is very courteous to every body, but
most to him of any body, and never has missed
being present at our Sunday Duties; and five or six
times, Mrs. Jervis tells me, she has found her desirous
to have Mr. Adams expound this Text, and
that Difficulty; and the good Man is taken with
her Piety: Which, and her Reformation, I hope,
are sincere: But, O Miss! she is very sly, very subtle,
as I have found in several Instances, as foolish
as she was in the Affair I hint at. 
So, sometimes, I say to myself, The Girl may
love Mr. Adams: Ay, but then I answer, So she
did Mr. H. and on his own very bad Terms too–––– 
In short—but I won't be too censorious neither. 
So I'll say no more, than that I was perplexed; 
and yet should be very glad to have Polly well
marry'd; for, since that Time, I have always had
some Diffidences about her—Because, you know,
Miss—her Fault was so enormous, and, as I have
said, so premeditated. I wanted you to advise with. 
—But this was the Method I took. 
I appointed Mr. Adams to drink a Dish of
Tea with me in the Afternoon. Polly attended,
as she generally does; for I can't say I love Men
Attendants in these womanly Offices—A Teakettle
in a Man's Hand, that would, if there was
no better Imployment for him, be fitter to hold a
Plough, or handle a Flail, or a Scythe, has such a
Look with it! —This is like my low Breeding,
some would say, perhaps—But I cannot call
Things polite, that I think unseemly; and, moreover, 



let me tell you, Lady Davers keeps me in
Countenance in this my Notion; and who doubts
her Politeness? 
Well, but Polly attended, as I said; and there
were strange Simperings, and Bowing, and Courtesying,
between them; the honest Gentleman seeming
not to know how to let his Mistress wait upon
him, while she behaved with as much Respect and
Officiousness, as if she could not do too much for
him. 
Very well, thought I; I have such an Opinion
of your Veracity, Mr. Adams, that I dare say you
have not, because you told me you have not mention'd
the Matter to Polly: But, between her Officiousness,
and your mutual Simperings, and Complaisance,
I see you have found out a Language between
you, that is full as significant as plain English
Words. Polly, thought I, sees no Difficulty in this
Text; nor need you, Mr. Adams, have much
Trouble to make her understand you, when you
come to expound upon this Subject. 
I was forced, in short, to put on a statelier and
more reserv'd Appearance than usual, to make them
avoid Acts of Complaisance for one another, that
might not be proper to be shewn before me, from
one who sat as my Companion, to my Servant. 
When she withdrew, the modest Gentleman
hem'd, and looked on one Side, and turn'd to the
Right and Left, as if his Seat was uneasy to him,
and I saw knew not how to speak; so I began, in
mere Compassion to him, and said, Mr. Adams, I
have been thinking of what you mention'd to me,
as to Polly Barlow. 

Hem! Hem! said he and pull'd out his
Handkerchief, and wip'd his Mouth—Very well,
Madam; I hope, no Offence, Madam! 
No, Sir, none at all. But I am at a Loss how
to distinguish in this Case; whether it may not be
from a Motive of too humble Gratitude, that you
don't think yourself above matching with Polly, as
you may suppose her a Favourite of mine; or whether
it be your Value for her Person and Qualities,
that makes her more agreeable in your Eyes, than
any other Person would be. 
Madam—Madam, said the bashful Gentleman
hesitatingly—I do—I must needs say— 
I can't but own—that—Mrs. Mary—is a
Person—whom I think very agreeable; and no
less modest and virtuous. 
You know, Sir, your own Circumstances. To
be sure you have a very pretty House, and a good
Living, to carry a Wife to. And a Gentleman of
your Prudence and Discretion wants not any Advice:
But you have reaped no Benefits by your
Living. It has been an Expence to you, rather,
which you will not presently get up: Do you propose
an early Marriage, Sir? Or were it not better,
that you suspended your Intentions of that sort
for a Year or two more? 
Madam, if your Ladyship chuse not to part
with— 
Nay, Mr. Adams, interrupted I, I say not any
thing for my own sake in this Point; that is out of
the Question with me. I can very willingly part with
Polly, were it To-morrow, for her Good and yours. 
Madam, I humbly beg Pardon; but—but— 
Delays—may breed Dangers. 

Oh! very well, thought I; I'll be further, if
the artful Girl has not let him know, by some
means or other, that she has another Humble Servant. 
And so, Miss, it has proved—For, dismissing
my Gentleman, with assuring him, that I had no
Objection at all to the Matter, or to parting with
Polly, as soon as it suited with their conveniency; 
I sounded her, and asked, If she thought Mr. Adams
had any Affection for her? 
She said, He was a very good Gentleman. 
I know it, Polly; and are you not of Opinion,
he loves you a little? 
Dear Ma'm, good your Ladyship—love me! 
—I don't know what such a Gentleman, as
Mr. Adams, should see in me, to love me! 
Oh! thought I, does the Doubt lie on that
Side then? —I see 'tis not of thine. 
Well, but, Polly, if you have another Sweetheart,
you should do the fair Thing; it would be
wrong, if you encouraged any body else, if you
thought of Mr. Adams. 
Indeed, Ma'm, I had a Letter sent me—A
Letter that I received—from—from a young
Man in Bedford; but I never gave an Answer to
it. 
Oh! thought I, then thou wouldst not encourage
Two at once. This was as plain a Declaration as I
wanted, that she had Thoughts of Mr. Adams. 
But how came Mr. Adams, Polly, to know of
this Letter? 
How came Mr. Adams to know of it, Ma'm!
—repeated she—half surpris'd—Why, I don't
know; I can't tell how it was—but I dropp'd it 

near his Desk—pulling out my Handkerchief, I
believe, Ma'am; and he brought it after me; and
gave it me again. 
Well thought I, thou'rt an intriguing Slut, I
doubt, Polly—Delays may breed Dangers, quoth
the poor Gentleman!—Ah! Girl, Girl! thought
I, but did not say so, thou deservest to be blown
up, and to have thy Plot spoiled, that thou dost— 
But if thy Forwardness should expose thee afterwards
to Evils, which thou mayst avoid, if thy
Scheme takes Place, I should very much blame myself. 
And I see he loves thee—So let the Matter
take its Course; I will trouble myself no more about
it. I only wish, that thou wilt make Mr. Adams
as good a Wife as he deserves. 
And so I dismiss'd her, telling her, That whoever
thought of being a Clergyman's Wife, should
resolve to be as good as himself; to set an Example
to all her Sex in the Parish, and shew how much
his Doctrines had Weight with her; should be humble,
circumspect, gentle in her Temper and Manners,
frugal, not proud, nor vying in Dress with
the Ladies of the Laity; should resolve to sweeten
his Labours, and to be obliging in her Deportment
to Poor as well as Rich, that her Husband got no
Diseredit thro' her means, which would weaken his
Influence upon his Auditors; and that she must be
most of all obliging to him, and study his Temper,
that his Mind might be more disengaged in order
to pursue his Studies with the better Effect. 
And so much, my dear Miss Darnford, for
your Humble Servant; and for Mr. Williams's and
Mr. Adams's matrimonial Prospects—And don't
think me disrespectful, that I have mention'd my 

Polly's Affair in the same Letter with yours; for in
High and Low, (I forget the Latin Phrase—I
have not had a Lesson a long, long while, from my
dear Tutor) Love is in all the same! —But whether
you'll like Mr. H. as well as Polly does
Mr. Adams, that's the Question. But, leaving that
to your own Decision, I conclude with One Observation; 
That altho' I thought ours was a House
of as little Intriguing as any body's, since the dear
Master of it has left off that Practice, yer I cannot
see, that any Family can be clear of some of it long
together, where there are Men and Women worth
plotting for, as Husbands and Wives. 
My best Wishes and Respects attend all your
worthy Neighbours. I hope, ere many Months are
past, to assure them, severally, (to wit, Sir Simon,
my Lady, Mrs. Jones, Mr. Peters, and his Lady,
and Niece; whose kind Congratulations make me
very proud, and very thankful) how much I am
obliged to them; and particularly, my dear Miss,
how much I am 
Your ever-affectionate and
faithful Friend and Servant,
P. B. 

