



In Answer to the preceding. 


My dear Mrs. B.
You charm us all, with your Letters. 
Mr. Peters says he will never go to bed,
nor rise, but he will pray for you, and desires I
will return his thankful Acknowlegements for
your favourable Opinion of him, and kind Allowances. 
If there be an Angel on Earth, he
says you are one. My Papa, altho' he has seen
your stinging Reflection upon his Refusal to protect
you, is delighted with you too; and says,
when you come down to Lincolnshire again, he
will be undertaken by you in good earnest; for
he thinks it was wrong in him, to deny you his
Protection. 
We are pleas'd with your Apology for
Mr. B. 'Tis so much the Part of a good Wife to
extenuate her Husband's Faults, and make the
best of his bad Qualities, in order to give the
World a good Opinion of him; that, together
with the affecting Instances of your Humility,
in looking back with so much true Greatness of
Mind, to what you were, make us all join to
admire you, and own, that nobody can deserve
what you deserve. 
Yet I am sorry, my dear Friend, to find,
notwithstanding your Defence of Mr. B. that
you have any Apprehensions about London. 'Tis
pity any thing should give you Concern. As to 

Mr. B.'s talking in Favour of Polygamy, you
cannot expect, that he can shake off all his bad
Notions at once. And it must be a great Comfort
to you, that his Actions do not correspond,
and that his Liberties have been reduced to Notions
only. In time, we hope that he will be
every thing you wish him. If not, with such
an Example before him, he will be the more
culpable. 
We all smiled at the Description of your own
uncommon Courtship. And as they say, the
Days of Courtship are the happiest Part of Life,
if we had not known, that your Days of Marriage
are happier by far, than any other body's Courtship,
we must needs have pity'd you. But as
the one were Days of Trial and Temptation,
the other are Days of Reward and Happiness:
May the last always continue to be so, and you
will have no Occasion to think any body happier
than Mrs. B. 
I Thank you heartily for your good Wishes
as to the Man of Sense. Mr. Murray has been
here, and continues his Visits. He is a lively
Gentleman, well enough in his Person, has a
tolerable Character, yet loves Company, and will
take his Bottle freely; my Papa likes him ne'er
the worse for that: He talks a good deal; dresses
gay, and even richly, and seems to like his own
Person very well: No great Pleasure this for a Lady
to look forward to; yet he falls far short of that
genteel Ease, and graceful Behaviour, which distinguish
your Mr. B. from any body I know. 

I Wish Mr. Murray would apply to my Sister. 
She is an ill-natur'd Girl; but would make a good
Wife, I hope; and I fansy she'd like him well
enough. I can't say I do. He laughs too much; 
has something boisterous in his Conversation; his
Complaisance is not a pretty Complaisance: He
is, however, well vers'd in Country Sports; and
my Papa loves him for that too, and says, He is
a most accomplish'd Gentleman: Yes, Sir, cry I,
as Gentlemen go—You must be saucy, says Sir
Simon, because the Man offers himself to your
Acceptance; a few Years hence, perhaps, if you
remain single, you'll alter your Note, Polly, and
be willing to jump at a much less worthy Tender. 
I Could not help answering, That altho' I
paid due Honour to every thing that my Papa was
pleased to say, I could not but hope he would be
mistaken in this. 
But I have broken my Mind to my dear, my
indulgent Mamma, who tells me, she will do me
all the Pleasure she can; but would be loth the
youngest Daughter should go first, as she calls it. 
But if I could come and live with you a little
now-and-then, I did not care who marry'd,
unless such a one offer'd, as I never expect. 
I have great Hope, the Gentleman will be
easily persuaded to quit me for Nancy; for I see
he has not Delicacy enough to love with any
great Distinction. He says, as my Mamma tells
me by the bye, that I am the handsomest and
best humour'd; and he has found out, as he
thinks, that I have some Wit, and have Ease and
Freedom (and he tacks Innocence to them) in 

my Address and Conversation. 'Tis well for
me, he is of this Opinion; for if he thinks justly,
which I much question, any body may think so
still much more; for I have been far from taking
Pains to engage his good Word, having been
under more Reserve to him, than ever I was
before to any body. 
Indeed, I can't help it; for the Gentleman
is forward without Delicacy; and (pardon me,
Sir Simon) my Papa has not one bit of it neither:
But is for pushing Matters on, with his rough
Raillery, that puts me out of Countenance, and
has already adjusted the sordid Part of the Preliminaries,
as he tells me. 
Yet I hope Nancy's 3000l. Fortune more
than I am likely to have*  , will give her the
wish'd-for Preference with Mr. Murray; and
then, as to a Brother-in-law, in Prospect, I can
put off all Restraint, and return to my usual
Freedom. 
This is all that occurs worthy of Notice from
us: But from you, we expect an Account of Lady
Davers's Visit, and of the Conversations that
offer among you; and you have so delightful a
way of making every thing momentous, either
by your Subject or Reflections, or both, that we
long for every Post-Day, in hopes of the Pleasure
of a Letter. —And yours I will always
carefully preserve, as so many Testimonies of
the Honour I receive in this Correspondence: 

Which will be always esteemed, as it deserves,
by, my dear Mrs. B. 
Your obliged and faithful
Polly Darnford. 
Mrs. Peters, Mrs. Jones, my Papa, Mamma,
and Sister, present their Respects. 
Mr. Peters I mentioned before. He continues
to give a very good Account of poor
Jewkes; and is much pleased with her. 

