



My dear Lady,
I will now acquaint you with the good Effect
my Behaviour to Mrs. Jewkes has had upon her,
as a further Justification of my Conduct towards the
poor Woman. 
That she began to be affected as I wish'd, appeared
to me before I left the Hall, not only in the
Conversations I had with her after my Happiness was
completed; but it still appears in her general Demeanor
to the Servants, to the Neighbours, and in
her devout Behaviour at Church; but still more particularly
in a Letter I have received from Miss Darnford. 
I dare say, your Ladyship will be pleased with
the Perusal of the whole Letter, altho' a Part of it
would answer my present Design: And in Confidence
that you will excuse, for the sake of its other
Beauties, the high and undeserved Praises which
Miss's Goodness makes her so lavishly to bestow
upon me, I will transcribe it all. 

From Miss Darnford to Mrs.  B.
‘My dear Neighbour that was,
I must depend upon your known Goodness, to excuse
me for not writing before now, in Answer
to your Letter of Compliment to us, for the Civilities
and Favours, as you call them, which you received
from us in Lincolnshire, where we were
infinitely more obliged to you, than you to us. 
‘The Truth is, my Papa has been much disordered
with a kind of rambling Rheumatism, to
which the Physicians, learnedly speaking, give the
Name of Arthritica vaga, or the Flying Gout; 

and when he ails ever so little, (It signifies nothing
concealing his Infirmities, where they are so well
known, and when he cares not who knows them)
he is so peevish, and wants so much Attendance,
that my Mamma, and her two Girls, (one of which
is as waspish as her Papa; you may be sure I don't
mean myself) have much ado to make his Worship
keep the Peace: And I being his Favourite,
when he is indisposed, because I have most Patience,
if I may give myself a good Word, he calls
upon me continually, to read to him when he is
grave, which is not often indeed, and to tell him
Stories, and sing to him, when he is merry; and so
I have been imploy'd as a principal Person about
him, till I have frequently become sad to make
him chearful, and happy when I could do it at any
Rate. For once, in a Pet, he flung a Book at my
Head, because I had not attended him for Two
Hours, and he could not bear to be slighted by
little Bastards, that was his Word, that were father'd
upon him for his Vexation! ;–––Ah!–––thought
I, but I durst not say it–––if thy Lady had been half
as lively as thou hast been in thy Day, my worthy
Vather, thou mightest have had some Reasons for
the Epithet! 
‘Forgive me, dear Friend; you know I'm a bold
Girl: But I love him dearly for all that, and honour
him too; and he knows I do;–––––––––and, what's
strange, if he did not love me again, would not
have flung his Book at my Head. –––O these Men! 
Fathers or Husbands, much alike! the one tyrannical,
the other insolent; so that, between one and
t'other, a poor Girl has nothing for it, but a few
Weeks Courtship, and perhaps a first Month's
Bridalry, if that; and then she's as much a Slave
to a Husband, as she was a Vassal to her Father–––I 

mean, if the Father be a Sir Simon Darnsord, and
the Spouse a Mr. B. 
‘But I will be a little more grave; for a graver
Occasion calls for it; and yet an Occasion that will
give you real Pleasure. It is the very great Change
that the Example you have left behind you has had
upon your Housekeeper. 
‘You desired her to keep up as much Regularity
as she could among the Servants there; and she is
next to exemplary in it; so that she has every one's
good Word. She speaks of her Lady not only
with Respect, but Reverence, and calls it a blessed
Day for all the Family, and particularly for herself,
that you came into Lincolnshire. She reads Prayers,
or makes one of the Servants read them, every
Sunday Night, and never misses being at Church,
Morning and Afternoon, and is preparing herself
by Mr. Peters's Advice and Direction, for receiving
the Sacrament, which she earnestly longs to
receive, and says it will be the Seal of her Reformation. 
‘Mr. Peters gives us this Account of her, and
says she is full of Contrition for her past mis-spent
Life, and is often asking him, If such and such Sins
can be forgiven? and among them names her vile
Behaviour to her Angel-Lady, as she calls you. 
‘It seems, she has written a Letter to you, which
passed Mr. Peters's Revisal before she had the
Courage to send it; and prides herself, that you
have favoured her with an Answer to it, which, she
says, when she is dead, will be found in a Cover of
black Silk next her Heart; for any thing from your
Hand, she is sure, will be efficacious to her to
make her keep her good Purposes; and for that
Reason she places it there: And when she has any
bad Thoughts, or is guilty of any faulty Word or
passionate Expression, she recollects her Lady's 

Letter, and that recovers her to a Calm, and puts
her again into a better Frame. 
‘As she has written to you, 'tis possible I might
have spar'd you the Trouble of reading this Account
of her; but yet you will not be displeased,
that so free a Liver and Speaker, should have some
Testimonial besides her own Assurances, to vouch
for the Sincerity of her Reformation. 
‘What a happy Lady are you, that Persuasion
dwells upon your Tongue, and Reformation follows
your Example! We all hear continually of
your Excellencies. Every body is proud of speaking
of you, and of having something to say of
what they observe in you. This makes us long
more and more to see you here again. My Papa
t'other Day said, he wish'd you'd undertake him. 
‘This is not the least of what is admirable in you,
that profess'd Rakes and Libertines, who take upon
themselves to ridicule Seriousness in every body
else, speak of you with Reverence; and while
they attribute Pharisaical Pride, or Affectation, or
Hypocrisy, to other good Persons, they say you
are a Credit to Religion, and that adorns you,
and you that. 
‘Happy, thrice happy Mrs. B.! May you long
live the Ornament of your Sex, and a Credit to all
your Acquaintance! Such Examples as you set,
how are they wanted in an Age so depraved! I
fear not making you proud, since Praise but puts
the Worthy upon inlarging their Deservings: For
who, as I heard you once say, can sit down easy
under imputed Attributes they do not deserve? — 
If they will not disclaim Praise they have not merited,
when apply'd to their Conduct, they give an
Earnest, by receiving it, that they will endeavour
to do it, and ought never to rest till they have made
themselves a Title to it. 

‘Happy Mr. B.! –––But why say I so; since,
with more Propriety, I may say, Happy Every-one
who sees, who knows, who converses with Mrs.
B. not more the Glory of the humble Cot, than
she is capable of adorning the princely Palace! 
‘If you knew how I love you, you would favour
me with your Presence and Conversation, if it was
in your own Power to do so; and then I would
rank myself among the Happies, and call myself, 
‘The Happy Polly Darnford.’ 

Your Ladyship will, as I said, forgive me what
may appear like Vanity in this Communication. 
Miss Darnford is a charming young Lady. I always
admir'd her; but her Letters are the sweetest,
kindest! –––But I am too much the Subject of their
Encomiums, and so will say no more; but add
here the Copy of the poor Woman's Letter to me; 
and your Ladyship will see what an ample Correspondence
you have open'd to yourself, if you go
on to countenance it. 

‘Honoured Madam,
I have been long labouring under two Difficulties; 
the Desire I had to write to you, and
the Fear of being thought presumptuous, if I did. 
But I will depend on your Goodness, so often try'd; 
and put Pen to Paper, in that very Closet, and on
that very Desk, which once were so much used by
your dear Self, when I was acting a Part, that now
cuts me to the Heart, to think of. But you forgave
me, Madam, and shew'd me you had too
much Goodness to revoke your Forgiveness. And
could I have silenc'd the Reproaches of my own
Heart, I should have had no Cause to think I
had ever offended. 

‘But, oh! Madam, how has your Goodness to
me, which once filled me with so much Gladness,
now, on Reflection, made me sorrowful,
and at times miserable! –––To think I should act
so barbarously as I did, by so much Sweetness, and
so much Forgivingness! Every Place that I remember
to have used you hardly in, how does it now
fill me with Sadness, and makes me often smite
my Breast, and sit down with Tears and Groans,
bemoaning my vile Actions, and my hard Heart! 
How many Places are there in this melancholy fine
House, that call one thing or other to my Remembrance,
that gives me Remorse! But the
Pond, and the Woodhouse, whence I dragged you
so mercilesly, after I had driven you to Despair
almost, what Thoughts do they bring to my Remembrance! 
–––Then my wicked Instigations;––– 
What an odious Wretch was I! 
‘Had his Honour been as abandoned as myself,
what a Virtue had been destroy'd between his
Orders, and my too rigorous Execution of them; 
nay, stretching them, to shew my wicked Zeal,
to serve a Master, that tho' I honour'd, I should not,
(as you more than once hinted to me, but with
no Effect at all, so impenetrably wicked was my
Heart) have so well obey'd in his unlawful Purposes. 
‘His Honour has made you Amends, has done
Justice to your Merits, and so aton'd his Fault. 
But as for me, it is out of my Power ever to
make Reparation! All that is left me, is, to let
your Ladyship see, that your pious Example has
made such an Impression upon me, that I am
miserable now in the Reflection upon my past
Guilt!––– 
‘You have forgiven me, and GOD will, I hope; 
for the Creature cannot be more merciful than 

the Creator; that is all my Hope! –––Yet sometimes,
I dread, that I am forgiven here, at least not
punish'd, in order to be punish'd the more here-after! 
––– What will then become of the unhappy
Wretch, that has thus lived in a State of Sin,
and had so qualify'd herself by a Course of Wickedness,
as to be thought a proper Instrument for
the worst Purposes that any one could be imploy'd
in? 
‘Good your Ladyship, let not my honour'd Master
see this Letter. He will think I have the Boldness
to reflect upon him; when, God knows
my Heart, I only write to condemn myself, and
my unwomanly Actions, as you were pleased often
most justly to call them. 
‘But I might go on thus for ever accusing myself,
not considering who I am writing to; and
whose precious Time I am taking up. –––But what
I chiefly write for, I am not come to yet; that
is, to beg your Ladyship's Prayers for me. For
oh, Madam, I fear I shall else be for ever miserable! 
We every Week hear of the Good you do,
and the Charity you extend to the Bodies of the
Miserable. Extend, I beseech you, good Madam,
to the unhappy Jewkes, the Mercy of your
Prayers, and tell me, if you think I have not
sinned beyond Hope of Pardon; for there is a
Woe denounced against the presumptuous Sinner. 
‘Your Ladyship assured me, at your Departure,
on the Confession of my Remorse for my Misdoings,
and my Promise of Amendment, that you
would take it for a Proof of my being in Earnest,
if I would endeavour to keep up a Regularity
among the Servants here; if I would subdue them
with Kindness, as I had owned myself subdued; 
and if I would endeavour to make every one 

think, that the best Security they could give of
their doing their Duty to their Master in his Absence,
was by doing it to God Almighty, whose
Omniscience made him always present. This,
I remember, your Ladyship told me, was the best
Test of Fidelity and Duty, that any Servants
could shew; since it was impossible without Religion,
but that worldly Convenience, or Self-Interest,
must be the main Tye; and when that
failed, the worst Actions might succeed, if Servants
thought they should find their sordid Advantage in
sacrificing their Duty. 
‘So well am I convinced of this Truth, that I
hope I have begun the Example to good Effect; 
and as no one in the Family was so wicked as I,
and so they had less Pains to take to be reformed,
you will take Pleasure to know, that you have now
Servants here, whom you need not be ashamed
to call yours. 
‘'Tis true, I found it a little difficult at first to
keep them within Sight of their Duty, after your
Ladyship departed: But when they saw I was in
Earnest, and used them courteously, as you advised,
and as your Usage of me convinced me
was the rightest Usage; when they were told I
had your Commands to acquaint you, how they
conformed to your Injunctions; the Task became
easy; and I hope we shall all be still more and
more worthy of the Favour of so good a Lady,
and so bountiful a Master. 
‘I dare not presume upon the Honour of a Line
to your unworthy Servant. Yet it would pride
me much, if I could have it. But I shall ever
pray for your Ladyship's and his Honour's Felicity,
as becomes 
‘Your undeserving Servant,
K. Jewkes.’ 


I have already, with these transcribed Letters of
Miss Darnford and Mrs. Jewkes, written a great
deal: But nevertheless, as there yet remains one
Passage in your Ladyship's Letter, relating to Mrs.
Jewkes, that seems to require an Answer, I will
take Notice of it, if I shall not quite tire your
Patience. 
That Passage is this; “Lady Betty rightly observes,
says your Ladyship, That he knew what
a vile Woman she [Mrs. Jewkes] was, when
he put you into her Power; and, no doubt, imploy'd
her, because he was sure, she would answer
all his Purposes: And that therefore she should
have had very little Opinion of the Sincerity of
his Reformation, while he was so solicitous in
keeping her there.” 
I make no doubt, Madam, that Mrs. Jewkes was
placed there, as one who would be subservient to
every bad Design; and that this was the Reason
of Mr. B.'s causing me to be carried off to that
House: But then this was a Proof too of my hopeless
Condition, and of my want of Power to make
his Reformation any Part of my Terms. 
Alas! Madam, I was to take him as I found
him, as I have already hinted, glad of my own
Safety; and had only to hope, that God (and HE
only could do it; for neither Law nor Justice had
stood in the naughty Gentleman's Way) would perfect
the good Work already begun in him; and
having first made him refrain from what he had
absolutely determin'd upon, would next let him
see his Error, and at last give him Grace to reform. 
But Lady Betty adds, “That had she been in
my Case, she would have had one Struggle for
Mrs. Jewkes's Dismission, let it have been taken
as it would; and he that was so well pleased 

with my Virtue, must have thought this a natural
Consequence of it, if he was in Earnest
to reclaim.” 
But, alas! Madam, he was not so well pleased
with my Virtue for Sake's sake, as Lady Betty
thinks he was. He would have been glad, at
that very Time, to have found me less resolved
on that score. He did not so much as pretend to
be in Earnest to reclaim: No, not he! 
He had entertained, as it proved, a strong Passion
for me. This Passion had been heighten'd by
my resisting of it. His Pride, and the Advantages
he had both of Person and Fortune, would not let
him brook Controul; and when he could not have
me upon his own Terms, God turn'd his evil
Purposes to good ones, and he resolved to submit
to my own, or rather to such as he found I would not
yield to him without. For all this time, I had no
Terms to propose. Neither my low Fortunes, my
unjust Captivity, nor my Sex, nor unexperienc'd
Youth, (not a Soul near me, whom I could call my
Friend, or whose Advice I could ask) permitted me
to offer at making Terms with him, had I been disposed
to have disputed his Will, or his Intercession for
the Woman; which, as I have said, I was not. I
had but one steady Purpose to adhere to, and having
Grace given me to adhere to that, he resolved,
since he could not conquer his Passion for me, to
make me his with Honour. But still, I doubt, as I
said, this was not for the Love of Virtue at that
time. That came afterwards, and I hope will be
always his governing Motive, in his future Actions; 
and then I shall be happy indeed! 
But Lady Betty thinks, “I was to blame to put
Mrs. Jewkes upon a Foot, in the Present I made
on my Nuptials, with Mrs. Jervis.” But the Case
was rather this, That I put Mrs. Jervis on a Foot with 

Mrs. Jewkes; for the dear Gentleman had named the
Sum he would have me give Mrs. Jewkes*  and I
would not give Mrs. Jervis less, because I loved her
better; nor more could I give her, on that Occasion,
without making such a Difference between two
Persons equal in Station, on a Solemnity too where
one was present and assisting, the other not, as
would have shewn such a Partiality, as might have
induced their Master to conclude, I was not so
sincere in my Forgiveness as he hoped from me,
and as I really was. 
But a stronger Reason still was behind; that I
could, in a much more agreeable manner, both to
Mrs. Jervis and myself, shew my Love and my
Gratitude to the dear good Woman: And this I
have taken care to do, in the manner I will submit
to your Ladyship; at the Tribunal of whose
Judgment I am willing all my Actions, respecting
your dear Brother, shall be try'd: And I hope, your
Ladyship will not think me a too profuse or lavish
Creature; I hope you won't have Reason for it: 
Yet if you think you have, pray, my dear Lady,
don't spare me; for if you shall judge me profuse
in one Article, I will endeavour to save it in
another. 
But I will make what I have to say on this Head
the Subject of a Letter by itself. And am, mean time, 
Your Ladyship's most obliged
and obedient Servant,
P. B. 

