



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday Night, July 13. 
Collins sets not out to-morrow. Some domestic
occasion hinders him. Rogers is but now returned
from you, and cannot well be spared. Mr.
Hickman is gone upon an affair of my Mother's, and
has taken both his servants with him, to do credit to
his employer: So I am forced to venture this by the
Post, directed by your assumed name. 
I am to acquaint you, that I have been favoured
with a visit from Miss Montague and her Sister, in
Lord M.'s chariot-and-six. My Lord's gentleman
rode here yesterday, with a request that I would receive
a visit from the two young Ladies, on a very
particular occasion; the greater favour, if it might be
the next day. 
As I had so little personal knowlege of either, I
doubted not but it must be in relation to the interests
of my dear friend; and so consulting with my Mother,
I sent them an invitation to favour me (because of the
distance) with their company at dinner; which they
kindly accepted. 
I hope, my dear, since things have been so very
bad, that their errand to me will be as agreeable to
you, as any-thing that can now happen. They came
in the name of Lord M. and Lady Sarah and Lady
Betty his two Sisters, to desire my interest to engage
you to put yourself into the protection of Lady Betty; 
who will not part with you till she sees all the justice
done you that now can be done. 
Lady Sarah had not stirred out for a twelve-month
before; never since she lost her agreeable
Daughter whom you and I saw at Mrs. Benson's: 
But was induced to take this journey by Lady Betty,
purely to procure you reparation, if possible. And 

their joint strength, united with Lord M's, has so far
succeeded, that the wretch has bound himself to them,
and to these young Ladies, in the solemnest manner,
to wed you in their presence, if they can prevail upon
you to give him your hand. 
This consolation you may take to yourself, that all
this honourable family have a due (that is, the highest)
sense of your merit, and greatly admire you. The
horrid creature has not spared himself in doing justice
to your virtue; and the young Ladies gave us such an
account of his confessions, and self-condemnation,
that my mother was quite charmed with you; and
we all four shed tears of joy, that there is one of our
Sex [I, that that one is my dearest friend] who has
done so much honour to it, as to deserve the exalted
praises given you by a wretch so self-conceited; tho'
pity for the excellent creature mixed with our joy. 
He promises by them to make the best of Husbands; 
and my Lord, and Lady Sarah, and Lady Betty, are
all three to be guarantees that he will be so. Noble
Settlements, noble Presents, they talked of: They
say, they left Lord M. and his two Sisters talking of
nothing else but of those Presents and Settlements,
how most to do you honour, the greater in proportion
for the indignities you have suffered; and of
changing of names by Act of Parliament, preparative
to the interest they will all join to make, to get the
Titles to go where the Bulk of the Estate must go, at
my Lord's death, which they apprehend to be nearer
than they wish. Nor doubt they of a thorough Reformation
in his morals, from your example and influence
over him. 
I made a great many objections for you—All, I
believe, that you could have made yourself had you
been present. But I have no doubt to advise you,
my dear, (and so does my Mother) instantly to put
yourself into Lady Betty's protection, with a resolution
to take the wretch for your Husband. All his future 

grandeur [He wants not pride] depends upon his sincerity
to you; and the young Ladies vouch for the
depth of his concern for the wrongs he has done you. 
All his apprehension is, in your readiness to communicate
to every one, as he fears, the evils you have
suffered; which he thinks will expose you both. 
But had you not revealed them to Lady Betty, you
had not had so warm a friend; since it is owing to
two Letters you wrote to her, that all this good, as
I hope it will prove, was brought about. But I advise
you to be more sparing in exposing what is past,
whether you have thoughts of accepting him or not: 
For what, my dear, can that avail now, but to give
a handle to vile wretches to triumph over you friends; 
since every one will not know how much to your honour
your very sufferings have been? 
Your melancholy Letter brought by Rogers (a) ,
with his account of your indifferent health, confirmed
to him by the woman of the house, as well as by your
looks, and by your faintness while you talked with
him, would have given me inexpressible affliction,
had I not been cheared by this agreeable visit from
the young Ladies. I hope you will be equally so on
my imparting the subject of it to you. 
Indeed, my dear, you must not hesitate. You
must oblige them. The alliance is splendid and honourable. 
Very few will know any-thing of his brutal
baseness to you. All must end, in a little while,
in a general Reconciliation; and you will be able to
resume your course of doing the good to every deserving
object, which procured you blessings where-ever
you set your foot. 
I am concerned to find, that your Father's inhuman
curse affects you so much as it does. Yet you
are a noble Creature, to put it, as you put it—I hope
you are indeed more solicitous to get it revoked for
their sakes than for your own. It is for them to be 

penitent, who hurried you into evils you could not well
avoid. You are apt to judge by the unhappy event,
rather than upon the true merits of your case. Upon
my honour, I think you faultless in almost every step
you have taken. What has not that vilely insolent
and ambitious, yet stupid, Brother of yours to answer
for? —That spiteful thing your Sister too!— 
But come, since what is past cannot be helped, let
us look forward. You have now happy prospects
opening to you: A family, already noble, prepared to
receive and embrace you with open arms, and joyful
hearts; and who, by their Love to you, will teach
another family (who know not what an excellence
they have confederated to persecute) how to value you. 
Your prudence, your piety, will crown all. You
will reclaim a wretch, that for an hundred sakes more
than for his own, one would wish to be reclaimed. 
Like a traveller, who has been put out of his way
by the overflowing of some rapid stream, you have
only had the fore-right path you were in overwhelmed. 
A few miles about, a day or two only lost, as I may
say, and you are in a way to recover it; and, by
quickening your speed, will get up the lost time. The
hurry upon your spirits, mean time, will be all your
inconvenience; for it was not your fault you were stopt
in your progress. 
Think of this, my dear; and improve upon the
allegory, as you know how. If you can, without
impeding your progress, be the means of asswaging the
inundation, of bounding the waters within their natural
chanel, and thereby of recovering the overwhelmed
path for the sake of future passengers who
travel the same way, what a merit will yours be! 
I shall impatiently expect your next Letter. The
young Ladies proposed, that you should put yourself,
if in town, or near it, into the Reading Stage-coach,
which inns somewhere in Fleet-street: And if you
give notice of the day, you will be met on the road, 

and that pretty early in your journey, by some of both
Sexes; one of whom you won't be sorry to see. 
Mr. Hickman shall attend you at Slough; and Lady
Betty herself, and one of the Miss Montagues, with
proper Equipages, will be at Reading to receive you; 
and carry you directly to the Seat of the former: 
For I have expresly stipulated, that the wretch himself
shall not come into your presence till your Nuptials
are to be solemnized, unless you give leave. 
Adieu, my dearest-friend. Be happy: And hundreds
will then be happy of consequence. Inexpressibly
so, I am sure, will then be 
Your ever-affectionate
Anna Howe. 