


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Wedn. Noon, Apr. 19. 
It would puzzle you to guess at a visiter I had this
morning. —Honest Mr. Fowler. I was very glad
to see him. He brought me a Letter from his worthy
uncle. Good Sir Rowland! I had a joy that I thought
I should not have had while I stay'd in London, on
its being put into my hand, tho' the contents gave
me sensible pain. I inclose it. It is dated from
Caermarthen. Be pleased to read it here. 

Caermarthen, April 11. 
How shall I, in fit manner, inscribe my Letter
to the loveliest of women! I don't mean because
of your loveliness; but whether as daughter or not,
as you did me the honour to call yourself. Really,
and truly, I must say, that I had rather call you by
another name, tho' a little more remote as to consanguinity. 
Lord have mercy upon me, how have I
talked of you! How many of our fine Caermarthen
girls have I filled with envy of your peerless perfections! 
Here am I settled to my heart's content, could I but
obtain You know whom I mean. —A town of gentry:
A fine country round us—A fine estate of our
own Esteemed, nay, for that matter, beloved, by all
our neighbours and tenants. Who so happy as Rowland
Meredith, if his poor boy could be happy! —Ah,
madam! —And can't it be so? I am afraid of asking. 
Yet! understand, that, notwithstanding all the Jack-a-dandies
that have been fluttering about you, you are
what you were when I lest town. Some whispers have 

gone out of a fine gentleman, indeed, who had a
great kindness for you; but yet that something was in
the way between you. The Lord bless and prosper
my dear daughter, as I must then call you, and not
niece, if you have any kindness for him. And if as
how you have, it would be wonderfully gracious if
you would but give half a hint of it to my nephew,
or if so be you will not to him, to me, your father
you know, under your own precious hand. The
Lord be good unto me! But I shall never see the She
that will strike my fancy, as you have done. But what
a dreadful thing would it be, if you, who are so much
courted and admired by many fine gallants, should at
last be taken with a man who could not be yours! 
God forbid that such a disastrous thing should happen! 
I profess to you, madam, that a tear or two have
strayed down my cheeks at the thoughts of it. For
why? Because you play'd no tricks with any man:
You never were a coquet, as they call 'em. You
dealt plainly, sincerely, and tenderly too, to all men; 
of which my nephew and I can bear witness. 
Well, but what now is the end of my writing? — 
Lord love you, cannot, cannot you at last give comfort
to two honest hearts? Honester you never knew! 
And yet, if you could, I dare say you would. Well,
then, and if you can't, we must sit down as contented
as we can; that's all we have for it. —But, poor
young man! Look at him, if you read this before him. 
Strangely altered! Poor young man! —And if as how
you cannot, why then, God bless my daughter; that's
all. And I do assure you, that you have our prayers
every Lord's day, from the bottom of our hearts. 
And now, if you will keep a secret, I will tell it
you; and yet, when I began, I did not intend it:
The poor youth must not know it. It is done in the
singleness of our hearts; and if you think we mean to
gain your Love for us by it, I do assure you, that you
wrong us. —My nephew declares, that he never will 

marry, if it be not Somebody: And he has made his
will, and so have I his uncle; and, let me tell you,
that if as how I cannot have a niece, my daughter shall
be the better for having known, and treated as kindly,
as power was lent her, 
Her true Friend, loving Father,
and obedient Servant,
Rowland Meredith. 
Love and Service to Mr. and Mrs. Reeves, and
all friends who enquire after me. Farewel. 
God bless you! Amen. 

Have you, could you, Lucy, read this Letter with
dry eyes? Generous, worthy, honest men! I read
but half way before Mr. Fowler—Glad I was, that
I read no further. I should not have been able to
have kept his uncle's secret, if I had; had it been but
to disclaim the acceptance of the generous purpose. 
The carrying it into effect would exceedingly distress
me, besides the pain the demise of the honest man
would give me; and the more, as I bespoke the fatherly
relation from him myself. If such a thing
were to be, Sir Charles Grandison's generosity to the
Danbys should be my example. 
Do you know, Mr. Fowler, said I, the contents
of the Letter you have put into my hand? 
No farther than that my uncle told me, it contained
professions of fatherly love; and with wishes only— 
But without so much as expressing his hopes. 
Sir Rowland is a good man, said I: I have not read
above half his Letter. There seems to be too much
of the father in it, for me to read further, before my
brother. God bless my brother Fowler, and reward
the fatherly love of Sir Rowland to his daughter Byron! 
I must write to him. 
Mr. Fowler, poor man! profoundly sighed; bowed; 
with such a look of respectful acquiescence—Bless 

me, my dear, how am I to be distressed on all sides!
by good men too; as Sir Charles could say by good
women. 
Is there nothing less than giving myself to either,
that I can do to shew Mr. Orme and Mr. Fowler my
true value for them? 
Poor Mr. Fowler! —Indeed he looks to be, as Sir
Rowland hints, not well. —Such a modest, such an
humble, such a silent Lover! —He cost me tears at
parting: I could not hide them. He heaped praises
and blessings upon me, and hurried away at last, to
hide his emotion, with a sentence unfinished—God
preserve you, dear and worthy Sir! was all I could
try to say. The last words stuck in my throat, till he
was out of hearing; and then I prayed for blessings
upon him and his uncle: And repeated them, with
fresh tears, on reading the rest of the affecting Letter. 
Mr. Fowler told Mr. Reeves, before I saw him,
that he is to go to Caermarthen for the benefit of his
native air, in a week. He let him know where he
lodged in town. He had been riding for his health
and diversion about the country, ever since his uncle
went; and has not been yet at Caermarthen. 
I wish Mr. Fowler had once, if but once, called me
sister: It would have been such a kind acquiescence,
as would have given me some little pleasure on recollection. 
Methinks I don't know how to have done
writing of Sir Rowland and Mr. Fowler. 
I sat down, however, while the uncle and nephew
filled my thoughts, and wrote to the former. 
I have enclosed the copy of my Letter. Adieu, my
Lucy. 

