



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

But, with all this dear creature's resentment
against me, I cannot, for my heart, think but she
will get all over, and consent to enter the Pale with
me. Were she even to die to-morrow, and to know
she should, would not a woman of her sense, of her
punctilio, and in her situation, and of so proud a family,
rather die married, than otherwise? —No doubt
but she would; altho' she were to hate the man ever
so heartily. If so, there is now but one man in the
world whom she can have—And that is Me. 
Now I talk [Familiar writing is but talking, Jack]
thus glibly of entering the Pale, thou wilt be ready to
question me, I know, as to my intentions on this head. 
As much of my heart, as I know of it myself, will
I tell thee. —When I am from her, I cannot still help
hesitating about Marriage; and I even frequently resolve 

against it, and determine to press my favourite
scheme for Cohabitation. But when I am with her,
I am ready to say, to swear, and to do, whatever I
think will be most acceptable to her: And were a
Parson at hand, I should plunge at once, no doubt
of it, into the State. 
I have frequently thought, in common cases, that it
is happy for many giddy fellows [There are giddy
fellows as well as giddy girls, Jack; and perhaps
those are as often drawn in, as these] that Ceremony
and Parade are necessary to the irrevocable Solemnity; 
and that there is generally time for a man to recollect
himself in the space between the heated over-night,
and the cooler next morning; or I know not who
could escape the sweet gypsies, whose fascinating powers
are so much aided by our own raised imaginations. 
A wife at any time, I used to say. I had ever
confidence and vanity enough, to think, that no woman
breathing could deny her hand, when I held out
mine. I am confoundedly mortified to find, that this
Lady is able to hold me at bay, and to refuse all my
honest vows. 
What force [Allow me a serious reflection, Jack: 
It will be put down! What force] have evil habits
upon the human mind! When we enter upon a devious
course, we think we shall have it in our power
when we will to return to the right path. But it is
not so, I plainly see: For, who can acknowlege with
more justice this dear creature's merits, and his own
errors, than I? Whose regret, at times, can be deeper
than mine, for the injuries I have done her? Whose
resolutions to repair those injuries stronger? —Yet
how transitory is my penitence! —How am I hurried
away—Canst thou tell by what? —O devil of Youth,
and devil of Intrigue, how do ye mislead me! — 
How often do we end in occasions for the deepest remorse,
what we begin in wantonness!— 
At the present writing, however, the turn of the 

scale is in behalf of Matrimony—For I despair of carrying
with her my favourite point. 
The Lady tells Dorcas, that her heart is broken; 
and that she shall live but a little while. I think nothing
of that, if we marry. In the first place, she
knows not what a mind unapprehensive will do for
her, in a State to which all the Sex look forward with
high satisfaction. How often have the whole sacred
Conclave been thus deceived in their choice of a Pope; 
not considering, that the new dignity is of itself sufficient
to give new life! A few months heart's-ease
will give my Charmer a quite different notion of
things: And I dare say, as I have heretofore said (a) ,
Once married, and I am married for life. 
I will allow, that her Pride, in one sense, has suffered
abasement: But her Triumph is the greater in
every other. And while I can think that all her trials
are but additions to her honour, and that I have laid
the foundations of her glory in my own shame, can
I be called cruel, if I am not affected with her grief
as some men would be? 
And for what should her heart be broken? Her
will is unviolated: —At present, however, her will is
unviolated. The destroying of good habits, and the
introducing of bad, to the corrupting of the whole
heart, is the violation. That her will is not to be
corrupted, that her mind is not to be debased, she
has hitherto unquestionably proved. And if she give
cause for further trials, and hold fast her integrity; 
what ideas will she have to dwell upon, that will be
able to corrupt her morals? What vestigia, what remembrances,
but such as will inspire abhorrence of
the attempter? 
What nonsense then to suppose, that such a mere
notional violation as she has suffered, should be able
to cut asunder the strings of life? 
Her Religion, married, or not married, will set 

her above making such a trifling accident, such an
involuntary suffering, fatal to her. 
Such considerations as these, they are, that support
me against all apprehension of bugbear consequences: 
And I would have them have weight with thee; who
art such a doughty advocate for her. And yet I allow
thee this; That she really makes too much of
it: Takes it too much to heart. To be sure she
ought to have forgot it by this time, except the
charming, charming consequence happen, that still
I am in hopes will happen, were I to proceed no
further. And, if she apprehend this herself, then has
the dear over-nice soul some reason for taking it so
much to heart: And yet would not, I think, refuse
to legitimate. 
O Jack! had I an imperial diadem, I swear to
thee, that I would give it up, even to my enemy, to
have one charming Boy by this Lady. And should
she escape me, and no such effect follow, my Revenge
on her family, and, in such a case, on herself, would
be incomplete, and I should reproach myself as long
as I lived. 
Were I to be sure, that this foundation is laid [And
why may I not hope it is?] I should not doubt to
have her still (should she withstand her day of grace)
on my own conditions: Nor should I, if it were so,
question that revived affection in her, which a woman
seldom fails to have for the father of her first
child, whether born in wedlock, or out of it. 
And pr'ythee, Jack, see in this my ardent hope,
a distinction in my favour from other Rakes; 
who, almost to a man, follow their inclinations, without
troubling themselves about consequences. In
imitation, as one would think, of the strutting villain
of a Bird, which from feathered Lady to feathered
Lady pursues his imperial pleasures, leaving it to his
sleek paramours to hatch the genial product in holes
and corners of their own finding out. 