



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Friday night, Aug. 4. 
I have actually delivered to the lady the extracts she requested
me to give her from thy letters. I do assure
thee, that I have made the very best of the matter for
thee, not that conscience, but that friendship, could oblige
me to make. I have changed or omitted some free words. 
The warm description of her person in the fire-scene, as I
may call it, I have omitted. I have told her, that I have
done justice to you, in the justice you have done to her
unexampled virtue. But take the very words which I
wrote to her immediately following the extracts: 
‘And now, Madam,’—See the paragraph marked with
inverted commas [‘ thus] p. 330. 
The lady is extremely uneasy at the thoughts of your
attempting to visit her. For Heaven's sake (your word
being given), and for Pity's sake (for she is really in a
very weak and languishing way), let me beg of you not
to think of it. 
Yesterday afternoon she received a cruel letter, as Mrs.
Lovick supposes it to be, by the effect it had upon her,
from her sister, in answer to one written last Saturday,
intreating a blessing and forgiveness from her parents. 
She acknowleges, that, if all thy letters are written
with equal decency and justice, as I have assured her they
are, she shall think herself freed from the necessity of writing
her own story: And this is an advantage to the accruing
from the extracts I have obliged her with; tho'
thou, perhaps, wilt not thank me for so doing. 
But what thinkest thou is the second request she had to
make to me? No other than that I would be her Executor! 
—Her motives will appear before thee in proper
time; and then, I dare answer for them, will be satisfactory. 
You cannot imagine how proud I am of this trust. I
am afraid I shall too soon come into the execution of it. 
As she is always writing, what a melancholy pleasure 

will the perusal and disposition of her papers afford me! 
Such a sweetness of temper, so much patience and resignation,
as she seems to be mistress of; yet writing of and in
the midst of present distresses! How much more lively
and affecting, for that reason, must her stile be, than all
that can be read in the dry, narrative, unanimated stile of
persons relating difficulties and dangers surmounted! The
minds of such not labouring in suspense, not tortured by
the pangs of uncertainty, about events still hidden in the
womb of fate; but, on the contrary, perfectly at ease; 
the relater unmoved by his own story, how then able to
move the hearer or reader? 
Saturday morning, Aug. 5. 
I am just returned from visiting the lady, and thanking
her in person for the honour she has done me; and
assuring her, if called to the sacred trust, of the utmost
fidelity and exactness. I found her very ill. I took notice
of it. She said, She had received a second hard-hearted
letter from her sister; and she had been writing a letter
(and that on her knees) directly to her mother; which before
she had not the courage to do. It was for a last blessing,
and forgiveness. No wonder, she said, that I saw her
affected. Now that I had accepted of the last charitable
office for her (for which, as well as for complying with
her other request, she thanked me) I should one day have
all these letters before me: And could she have a kind
one, in return to that she had been now writing, to counterbalance
the unkind one she had from her sister, she might
be induced to shew me both together. 
I knew she would be displeased, if I had censured the
cruelty of her relations; I therefore only said, That surely
she must have enemies, who hoped to find their account in
keeping up the resentments of her friends against her. 
It may be so, Mr. Belford, said she: The unhappy
never want enemies. One fault, wilfully committed, authorizes
the imputation of many more. Where the ear
is opened to accusations, accusers will not be wanting; 
and every-one will officiously come with stories against a
disgraced child, where nothing dare be said in her favour. 
I should have been wise in time, and not have
needed to be convinced, by my own misfortunes, of the 

truth of what common experience daily demonstrates. Mr.
Lovelace's baseness, my father's inflexibility, my sister's
reproaches, are the natural consequences of my own rashness; 
so I must make the best of my hard lot. Only, as
these consequences follow one another so closely, while
they are new, how can I help being anew affected? 
I asked, If a letter written by myself, by her doctor or
apothecary, to any of her friends, representing her low state
of health, and great humility, would be acceptable? Or
if a journey to any of them would be of service, I would
gladly undertake it in person, and strictly conform to her
orders, to whomsoever she would direct me to apply. 
She earnestly desired, that nothing of this sort might be
attempted, especially without her knowlege and consent. 
Miss Howe, she said, had done harm by her kindly-intended
zeal; and if there were room to expect favour by
mediation, she had ready at hand a kind friend, Mrs.
Norton, who for piety and prudence had few equals; 
and who would let slip no opportunity to do her service. 
I let her know, that I was going out of town till Monday: 
She wish'd me pleasure; and said, she should be
glad to see me on my return. 
Adieu! 