


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 
[Inclosed in the preceding.] 


Friday, Mar. 17. 
Last night I saw interred the remains of my
worthy friend Mr. Danby. I had caused his two
nephews and his niece to be invited: But they did
not attend. 
As the will was not to be opened till the funeral 

was over, about which the good man had given me
verbal directions; apprehending, I believe, expostulations
from me, had I known the contents; I sent
to them this morning to be present at the opening. 
Their attorney, Mr. Sylvester, a man of character,
and good behaviour, brought me a Letter, signed by
all three, excusing themselves on very slight pretences,
and desiring that he might be present for them. I took
notice to him, that the behaviour of his principals
over-night and now, was neither respectful to the memory
of their uncle, nor civil, with regard to me. 
He honestly owned, that Mr. Danby having acquainted
his two nephews, a little before he died, that
he had made his will, and that they had very little to
expect from him, they, who had been educated by
his direction, and made merchants, at his expence,
with hopes given them, that he would, at his death,
do very handsomely for them, and had never disobliged
him, could not be present at the opening of a will,
the contents of which they expected to be so mortifying
to them. 
I opened it in presence of this gentleman. The
preamble was an angry one; giving reasons for his
resentment against the father of these young persons,
who (tho' his brother) had once, as I hinted to you
at Colnebrooke, made a very shocking attempt upon
his life. I was hurt, however, to find a resentment
carried so far as against the innocent children of the
offender, and into the last will of so good a man; 
that will so lately made, as within three weeks
of his death; and he given over for three months
before. 
Will the tenderness due to the memory of a friend
permit me to ask, Where would that resentment have
stopt, had the private man been a monarch, which he
could carry into his last will? 
But see we not, on the other hand, that these 

children, had they power, would have punished their
uncle, for disposing, as he thought fit, of his own
fortune; no part of which came to him by inheritance? 
They had been educated, as I have said, at his
expence; and, in the phrase of business, well put
out. Expences their careless father would not have
been at: He is, in every light, a bad man. How
much better had these children's title been to a more
considerable part of their uncle's estate than he has
bequeathed to them, had they been thankful for the
benefits they had actually received! Benefits, which
are of such a nature, that they cannot be taken from
them. 
Mr. Danby has bequeathed to each of the three, one
thousand pounds; but on express condition, that they
signify to his executor, within two months after his
demise, their acceptance of it, in full of all demands
upon his estate. If they do not (tender being duly
made) the three thousand pounds are to be carried
to the uses of the will. 
He then appoints his executor; and makes him residuary
legatee; giving for reason, that he had been
the principal instrument in the hand of Providence, of
saving his life. 
He bequeaths some generous remembrances to three
of his friends in France; and requests his executor to
dispose of three thousand pounds to charitable uses,
either in France or England, as he thinks fit, and to
what particular objects he pleases. 
And, by an inventory annexed to the will, his effects
in money, bills, actions, and jewels, are made
to amount to upwards of thirty thousand pounds
sterling. 
Mr. Sylvester complimented me on this great windfall,
as he called it; and assured me, that it should
be his advice to his clients, that each take his and 

her legacy, and sit down contented with it: And he
believed, that they the rather would, as, from what
their uncle had hinted, they apprehended, that the
sum of an hundred pounds each, was all they had to
hope for. 
I enquired into the inclinations and views of the
three; and received a very good general account of
them; with an hint, that the girl was engaged in a
Love-affair. 
Their father, after his vile attempt upon his brother's
life, was detested by all his friends and relations,
and went abroad; and the last news they heard of him,
was, that he was in a very ill state of health, and in
unhappy circumstances, in Barbados: And very probably
by this time is no more. 
I desired Mr. Sylvester to advise the young people
to recollect themselves; and said, That I had a disposition
to be kind to them: And as he could give me
only general accounts of their views, prospects, and
engagements, I wish'd they would, with marks of
confidence in me, give me particular ones: But that,
whether they complimented me as I wished, or not,
I was determined, for the sake of their uncle's memory,
to do all reasonable services to them. Tell
them, in a word, Mr. Sylvester, and do you forgive
the seeming vanity, That I am not accustomed to
suffer the narrowness of other people's hearts to contract
mine. 
The man went away, very much pleased with
what I had said; and in about two hours, sent me a
note, in the names of all his clients, expressing gratitude
and obligation; and requesting me to allow
him to introduce them all three to me this afternoon. 
I have some necessary things to do, and persons to
see, in relation to my deceased friend, which will be
dispatched over a dish of tea. And therefore I have
invited the honest attorney, and his three clients, to
sup with me. 

I will not send this to Colnebrooke, where I hope
you are all happy [All must; for are they not all
good? And are not you with them?] till I accompany
it with the result of this evening's conversation. Yet
I am too fond of every occasion that offers to tell you,
what, however, you cannot doubt, how much I am
yours, not to sign to that truth the name of 
Charles Grandison. 

