



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

London, Aug. 21. Monday. 
I believe I am bound to curse thee, Jack. Nevertheless
I won't anticipate, but proceed to write
thee a longer Letter, than thou hast had from me for
some time past. So here goes. 
That thou mightest have as little notice as possible
of the time I was resolved to be in town, I set out in
my Lord's chariot-and-six yesterday, as soon as I had
dispatched my Letter to thee, and arrived in town
last night: For I knew I could have no dependence
on thy friendship where Miss Harlowe's humour was
concerned. 
I had no other place so ready, and so was forced to
go to my old lodgings, where also my wardrobe is; 
and there I poured out millions of curses upon the
whole crew, and refused to see either Sally or Polly; 
and this not only for suffering the Lady to escape,
but for the villainous Arrest, and for their detestable
insolence to her at the officer's house. 
I dressed myself in a never-worn suit, which I had
intended for one of my wedding-suits; and liked myself
so well, that I began to think with thee, that
my outside was the best of me. 
I took a chair to Smith's, my heart bounding in almost
audible thumps to my throat, with the assured
expectation of seeing my Beloved. I clasped my fingers,
as I was danced along: I charged my eyes to
languish and sparkle by turns: I talked to my knees,
telling them how they must bend; and, in the language
of a charming describer, acted my part in fancy,
as well as spoke it to myself: 


Tenderly kneeling, thus will I complain:
Thus court her pity; and thus plead my pain:
Thus sigh for fansy'd frowns, if frowns should rise;
And thus meet favour in her soft'ning eyes.
In this manner entertained I myself, till I arrived
at Smith's; and there the fellows set down their gay
burden. Off went their hats; Will. ready at hand
in a new livery; up went the head; out rushed my
Honour; the woman behind the compter all in flutters; 
—respect and fear giving due solemnity to her
features; and her knees, I doubt not, knocking
against the inside of her wainscot fence. 
Your servant, Madam—Will. let the fellows move
to some distance, and wait. 
You have a young Lady lodges here; Miss Harlowe,
Madam: Is she above? 
Sir, Sir, and please your Honour [The woman is
struck with my figure, thought I]: Miss Harlowe, Sir! 
There is, indeed, such a young Lady lodges here— 
But, but— 
But what, Madam? —I must see her. —One pair
of stairs; is it not? Don't trouble yourself—I shall
find her apartment. And was making towards the
stairs. 
Sir, Sir, the Lady, the Lady is not at home—She
is abroad—She is in the country— 
In the country! Not at home! —Impossible! You
will not pass this Story upon me, good woman. I
must see her. I have business of life and death with
her. 
Indeed, Sir, the Lady is not at home! Indeed, Sir,
she is abroad!— 
She then rung a bell: John, cried she, pray step
down! —Indeed, Sir, the Lady is not at home. 
Down came John, the good man of the house,
when I expected one of his journeymen, by her saucy
familiarity. 

My dear, said she, the gentleman will not believe
Miss Harlowe is abroad. 
John bowed to my fine cloaths: Your servant,
Sir—Indeed the Lady is abroad. She went out of
town this morning by Six o'clock—into the country
—by the Doctor's advice. 
Still I would not believe either John or his wife. I
am sure, said I, she cannot be abroad. I heard she
was very ill—She is not able to go out in a coach. 
Do you know Mr. Belford, friend? 
Yes, Sir; I have the honour to know 'Squire Belford. 
He is gone into the country to visit a sick
friend. He went on Saturday, Sir. 
This had also been told from thy lodgings to Will.
whom I sent to desire to see thee on my first coming
to town. 
Well, and Mr. Belford wrote me word that she was
exceeding ill. How then can she be gone out? 
O Sir, she is very ill; very ill, indeed—She could
hardly walk to the coach. 
Belford, thought I, himself knew nothing of the
time of my coming; neither can he have received my
Letter of yesterday: And so ill, 'tis impossible she
would go out. 
Where is her servant? Call her servant to me. 
Her servant, Sir, is her Nurse: She has no other. 
And she is gone with her. 
Well, friend, I must not believe you. You'll excuse
me; but I must go up stairs myself. And was
stepping up. 
John hereupon put on a serious, and a less respectful
face—Sir, this house is mine; and— 
And what, friend? not doubting then but she was
above. —I must and will see her. I have authority
for it. I am a Justice of peace. I have a Search-warrant. 
And up I went; they following me, muttering,
and in a plaguy flutter. 

The first door I came to was locked. I tapped at
it. 
The Lady, Sir, has the keep of her own apartment. 
On the inside, I question not, my honest friend; 
tapping again. And being assured, if she heard my
voice, that her timorous and soft temper would make
her betray herself, by some flutters, to my listening
ear, I said aloud, I am confident Miss Harlowe is
here: Dearest Madam, open the door: Admit me
but for one moment to your presence. 
But neither answer nor fluttering saluted my ear; 
and, the people being very quiet, I led on to the next
apartment; and, the key being on the outside, I
opened it, and looked all round it, and into the
closet. 
The man said, He never saw so uncivil a gentleman
in his life. 
Hark thee, friend, said I; Let me advise thee to be
a little decent; or I shall teach thee a lesson thou never
learnedst in all thy life. 
Sir, said he, 'tis not like a gentleman, to affront
a man in his own house. 
Then pr'ythee, man, replied I, don't crow upon
thine own dunghil. 
I stepped back to the locked door: My dear Miss
Harlowe, I beg of you to open the door, or I'll
break it open;—pushing hard against it, that it
cracked again. 
The man looked pale; and, trembling with his
fright, made a plaguy long face; and called to one
of his bodice-makers above, Joseph, come down
quickly. 
Joseph came down: A lion's-face grinning fellow; 
thick, and short, and bushy-headed, like an old oak-pollard. 
Then did master John put on a sturdier
look. But I only hummed a tune, traversed all the
other apartments, sounded the passages with my
knuckles, to find whether there were private doors, 

and walked up the next pair of stairs, singing all the
way; John, and Joseph, and Mrs. Smith, following
me trembling. 
I looked round me there, and went into two open-door
bed-chambers; searched the closets, the passages,
and peeped thro' the key-hole of another: No
Miss Harlowe, by Jupiter! What shall I do! —What
shall I do! as the girls say. —Now will she be grieved
that she is out of the way. 
I said this on purpose to find out whether these people
knew the Lady's Story; and had the answer I expected
from Mrs. Smith—I believe not, Sir. 
Why so, Mrs. Smith? Do you know who I am? 
I can guess, Sir. 
Whom do you guess me to be? 
Your name is Mr. Lovelace, Sir, I make no
doubt. 
The very same. But how came you to guess so
well, dame Smith? You never saw me before—Did
you? 
Here, Jack, I laid out for a compliment, and
missed it. 
'Tis easy to guess, Sir; for there cannot be two
such gentlemen as you. 
Well said, dame Smith—But mean you good or
bad? —Handsome was the least I thought she would
have said. 
I leave you to guess, Sir. 
Condemned, thought I, by myself, on this appeal. 
Why, father Smith, thy wife is a wit, man! — 
Didst thou ever find that out before? —But where is
widow Lovick, dame Smith? My Cousin John Belford
says she is a very good woman. Is she within? 
Or is she gone with Miss Harlowe too? 
She will be within by-and-by, Sir. She is not with
the Lady. 
Well, but my good dear Mrs. Smith, whither is
the Lady gone? And when will she return? 

I can't tell, Sir. 
Don't tell fibs, dame Smith; don't tell fibs, chucking
her under the chin: Which made John's upperlip,
with chin shortened, rise to his nose. —I am sure
you know! —But here's another pair of stairs: Let
us see; Who lives up there? —But hold, here's another
room locked up, tapping at the door—Who's
at home? cried I. 
That's Mrs. Lovick's apartment. She is gone out,
and has the key with her. 
Widow Lovick! rapping again, I believe you are
at home: Pray open the door. 
John and Joseph muttered and whispered together. 
No whispering, honest friends: 'Tis not manners
to whisper. Joseph, what said John to thee? 
John, Sir! disdainfully repeated the good woman. 
I beg pardon, Mrs. Smith: But you see the force
of example. Had you shewed your honest man more
respect, I should. Let me give you a piece of advice
—Women who treat their husbands irreverently,
teach strangers to use them with contempt. There,
honest master John; why dost not pull off thy hat to
me? —O, so thou wouldst, if thou hadst it on: But
thou never wearest thy hat in thy wife's presence, I
believe; dost thou? 
None of your fleers and your jeers, Sir, cried John. 
I wish every married pair lived as happily as we do. 
I wish so too, honest friend. But I'll be hanged
if thou hast any children. 
Why so, Sir? 
Hast thou? —Answer me, man: Hast thou, or
not? 
Perhaps not, Sir. But what of that? 
What of that? —Why I'll tell thee: The man who
has no children by his wife must put up with plain
John. Hadst thou a child or two, thou'dst be called 

Mr. Smith, with a courtesy, or a smile at least, at
every word. 
You are very pleasant, Sir, replied my dame. I
fansy, if either my husband or I had as much to answer
for as I know whom, we should not be so
merry. 
Why then, dame Smith, so much the worse for
those who were obliged to keep you company. But
I am not merry—I am sad! —Hey-ho! —Where shall
I find my dear Miss Harlowe? 
My beloved Miss Harlowe! [calling at the foot of
the third pair of stairs] if you are above, for Heaven's
sake answer me. I am coming up. 
Sir, said the good man, I wish you'd walk down. 
The servants rooms, and the working rooms, are up
those stairs, and another pair; and nobody's there
that you want. 
Shall I go up, and see if Miss Harlowe be there,
Mrs. Smith? 
You may, Sir, if you please. 
Then I won't; for, if she was, you would not be
so obliging. 
I am ashamed to give you all this attendance: You
are the politest traders I ever knew. Honest Joseph,
slapping him upon the shoulders on a sudden, which
made him jump, didst ever grin for a wager, man? — 
For the rascal seemed not displeased with me; and,
cracking his flat face from ear to ear, with a distended
mouth, shewed his teeth, as broad and as
black as his thumb-nails. —But don't I hinder thee? 
What canst earn a-day, man? 
Half a crown, I can earn a-day; with an air of
pride and petulance, at being startled. 
There then is a day's wages for thee. But thou
needest not attend me farther. 
Come, Mrs. Smith, come, John (Master Smith I
should say) let's walk down, and give me an account
where the Lady is gone, and when she will return. 

So down stairs led I. John and Joseph (tho' I had
discharged the latter) and my dame, following me,
to shew their complaisance to a stranger. 
I re-entered one of the first-floor rooms. I have a
great mind to be your lodger: For I never saw such
obliging folks in my life. What rooms have you to lett? 
None at all, Sir. 
I am sorry for that. But whose is this? 
Mine, Sir, chuffily said John. 
Thine, man! Why then I will take it of thee. 
This, and a bed-chamber, and a garret for one servant,
will content me. I will give thee thy own price,
and half a guinea a day over, for those conveniencies. 
For ten guineas a day, Sir— 
Hold, John! (Master Smith I should say)—Before
thou speakest, consider—I won't be affronted, man. 
Sir, I wish you'd walk down, said the good woman. 
Really, sir, you take— 
Great liberties I hope you would not say, Mrs.
Smith? 
Indeed, Sir, I was going to say something like it. 
Well, then, I am glad I prevented you; for such
words better become my mouth than yours. But I
must lodge with you till the Lady returns. I believe
I must. However, you may be wanted in the shop; 
so we'll talk that over there. 
Down I went, they paying diligent attendance on
my steps. 
When I came into the shop, seeing no chair or
stool, I went behind the compter, and sat down under
an arched kind of canopy of carved work, which
these proud traders, emulating the royal nich-fillers,
often give themselves, while a joint-stool, perhaps,
serves those, by whom they get their bread: Such
is the dignity of Trade in this mercantile nation! 
I looked about me, and above me; and told them,
I was very proud of my seat; asking, If John were
ever permitted to fill this superb nich? 
Perhaps he was, he said, very surlily. 

That is it, that makes thee look so like a statue, man. 
John looked plaguy glum upon me. But his man
Joseph and my man Will. turned round with their
backs to us, to hide their grinning, with each his
fist in his mouth. 
I asked, What it was they sold? 
Powder, and wash-balls, and snuff, they said; 
and gloves and stockens. 
O come, I'll be your customer. Will. do I
want wash-balls? 
Yes, and please your Honour, you can dispense
with one or two. 
Give him half a dozen, dame Smith. 
She told me she must come where I was, to serve
them. Pray, Sir, walk from behind the compter. 
Indeed but I won't. The shop shall be mine. 
Where are they, if a customer should come in? 
She pointed over my head, with a purse-mouth,
as if she would not have simpered, could she have
helped it. I reached down the glass, and gave Will.
six. There—put 'em up, sirrah. 
He did, grinning with his teeth out before; which
touching my conscience, as the loss of them was
owing to me, Joseph, said I, come hither. Come
hither, man, when I bid thee. 
He stalked towards me, his hands behind him,
half willing, and half unwilling. 
I suddenly wrapt my arm round his neck. Will.
thy penknife, this moment. D&wblank;n the fellow,
where's thy penknife? 
O Lord! said the pollard-headed dog, struggling
to get his head loose from under my arm, while my
other hand was muzzling about his cursed chaps, as
if I would take his teeth out. 
I will pay thee a good price, man: Don't struggle
thus! The penknife, Will! 
O Lord! cried Joseph, struggling still more and
more: And out comes Will's pruning-knife; for 

the rascal is a gardener in the country. I have only
this, Sir. 
The best in the world to launch a gum. D&wblank;n
the fellow, why dost struggle thus? 
Master and Mistress Smith being afraid, I suppose,
that I had a design upon Joseph's throat, because he
was their champion (and this, indeed, made me take
the more notice of him) coming towards me with
countenances tragi-comical, I let him go. 
I only wanted, said I, to take out two or three
of this rascal's broad teeth, to put them into my
servant's jaws—And I would have paid him his price
for them. —I would, by my Soul, Joseph. 
Joseph shook his ears; and with both hands
stroaked down, smooth as it would lie, his bushy
hair; and looked at me, as if he knew not whether
he should laugh or be angry: But, after a stupid stare
or two, stalked off to the other end of the shop,
nodding his head at me as he went, still stroaking
down his hair; and took his stand by his master,
facing about, and muttering, that I was plaguy strong
in the arms, and he thought would have throttled
him. Then folding his arms, and shaking his
bristled head, added, 'Twas well I was a gentleman,
or he would not have taken such an affront. 
I demanded where their rappee was? The good woman
pointed to the place; and I took up a scallop-shell
of it, refusing to let her weigh it, and filled my box. 
And now, Mrs. Smith, said I, where are your gloves? 
She shewed me; and I chose four pair of them,
and set Joseph, who looked as if he wanted to be
taken notice of again, to open the fingers. 
A female customer, who had been gaping at the
door, came in for some Scots snuff; and I would
serve her. The wench was plaguy homely; and I
told her so; or else, I said, I would have treated her. 
She in anger [No woman is homely in her own opinion]
threw down her peny; and I put it in my pocket. 

Just then, turning my eye to the door, I saw a
pretty genteel Lady, with a footman after her,
peeping in with a What's the matter, good folks? to
the starers; and I ran to her from behind the compter,
and, as she was making off, took her hand, and
drew her into the shop, begging that she would be
my customer; for that I had but just begun trade. 
What do you sell, Sir? said she, smiling; but a
little surprised. 
Tapes, ribbands, silk-laces, pins, and needles; 
for I am a pedlar: Powder, patches, wash-balls,
stockens, garters, snuffs, and pin-cushions—Don't
we, goody Smith? 
So in I gently drew her to the compter, running
behind it myself, with an air of great diligence and obligingness. 
I have excellent gloves and wash-balls,
Madam; Rappee, Scots, Portugal, and all sorts of snuff. 
Well, said she, in a very good humour, I'll encourage
a young beginner for once. Here, Andrew [to
her footman] you want a pair of gloves, don't you. 
I took down a parcel of gloves, which Mrs. Smith
pointed to, and came round to the fellow to fit
them on myself. 
No matter for opening them, said I: Thy fingers,
friend, are as stiff as drum-sticks. Push! —Thou'rt
an aukward dog! I wonder such a pretty Lady will
be followed by such a clumsy varlet. 
The fellow had no strength for laughing: And Joseph
was mightily pleased, in hopes, I suppose, I
would borrow a few of Andrew's teeth, to keep him
in countenance: And, Father and Mother Smith,
like all the world, as the jest was turned from themselves,
seemed diverted with the humour. 
The fellow said, the gloves were too little. 
Thrust, and be d&wblank;n'd to thee, said I: Why,
fellow, thou hast not the strength of a cat. 
Sir, Sir, said he, laughing, I shall hurt your Honour's
side. 
D&wblank;n thee, thrust, I say. 

He did; and burst out the sides of the glove. 
Will, said I, where's thy pruning-knife? By my
Soul, friend, I had a good mind to pare thy cursed
paws. But come, here's a larger pair: Try them,
when thou gettest home; and let thy sweetheart, if
thou hast one, mend the other; and so take both. 
The Lady laughed at the humour; as did my fellow
and Mrs. Smith, and Joseph: Even John laughed,
tho' he seemed by the force put upon his countenance
to be but half pleased with me neither. 
Madam, said I, and stept behind the compter,
bowing over it, now I hope you will buy something
for yourself. Nobody shall use you better, nor sell
you cheaper. 
Come, said she, give me six peny-worth of Portugal
snuff. 
They shewed me where it was, and I served her; 
and said, when she would have paid me, I took nothing
at my opening. 
If I treated her footman, she told me, I should
not treat her. 
Well, with all my heart, said I: 'Tis not for us
tradesmen to be saucy—Is it, Mrs. Smith? 
I put her sixpence in my pocket; and, seizing
her hand, took notice to her of the croud that had
gathered about the door, and besought her to walk
into the back-shop with me. 
She struggled her hand out of mine, and would
stay no longer. 
So I bowed, and bid her kindly welcome, and
thanked her, and hoped I should have her custom
another time. 
She went away smiling; and Andrew after her; 
who made me a fine bow. 
I began to be out of countenance at the croud,
which thickened apace; and bid Will. order the
chair to the door. 
Well, Mrs. Smith, with a grave air, I am heartily
sorry Miss Harlowe is abroad. You don't tell me
where she is? 

Indeed, Sir, I cannot. 
You will not, you mean. —She could have no notion
of my coming. I came to town but last night. 
I have been very ill. She has almost broken my
heart by her cruelty. You know my Story, I doubt
not. Tell her, I must go out of town to-morrow
morning. But I will send my servant, to know if
she will favour me with one half-hour's conversation; 
for, as soon as I get down, I shall set out for Dover,
in my way to France, if I have not a countermand
from her who has the sole disposal of my fate. 
And so, flinging down a Portugal Six-and-thirty,
I took Mr. Smith by the hand, telling him, I was
sorry we had not more time to be better acquainted; 
and bidding farewell to honest Joseph (who pursed up
his mouth as I passed by him, as if he thought his
teeth still in jeopardy) and Mrs. Smith adieu, and to
recommend me to her fair lodger, hummed an air,
and, the chair being come, whipt into it; the people
about the door seeming to be in good humour with
me; one crying, A pleasant gentleman, I warrant
him! And away I was carried to White's according
to direction. 
As soon as I came thither, I ordered Will. to go
and change his cloaths, and to disguise himself by
putting on his black wig, and keeping his mouth
shut; and then to dodge about Smith's, to inform
himself of the Lady's motions. 
* *
I give thee this impudent account of myself,
that thou mayst rave at me, and call me hardened,
and what thou wilt. For, in the first place, I, who
had been so lately ill, was glad I was alive; and then
I was so balked by my Charmer's unexpected absence,
and so ruffled by that, and by the bluff treatment
of father John, that I had no other way to
avoid being out of humour with all I met with. 
Moroever I was rejoiced to find, by the Lady's absence,
and by her going out at Six in the morning, 

that it was impossible she should be so ill as thou representest
her to be; and this gave me still higher
spirits. Then I know the Sex always love chearful
and humorous fellows. The dear creature herself
used to be pleased with my gay temper and lively
manner; and had she been told, that I was blubbering
for her in the back-shop, she would have despised
me still more than she does. 
Furthermore, I was sensible, that the people of the
house must needs have a terrible notion of me, as a
savage, bloody-minded, obdurate fellow; a perfect
woman-eater; and, no doubt, expected to see me
with the claws of a lion, and the fangs of a tyger; 
and it was but policy to shew them, what a harmless,
pleasant fellow I am, in order to familiarize the
John's and the Joseph's to me. For it was evident
to me, by the good woman's calling them down, that
she thought me a dangerous man. Whereas now,
John and I have shaken hands together, and dame
Smith having seen that I have the face, and hands,
and looks of a man, and walk upright, and prate, and
laugh, and joke, like other people; and Joseph, that
I can talk of taking his teeth out of his head, without
doing him the least hurt; they will all, at my
next visit, be much more easy and pleasant to me than
Andrew's gloves were to him; and we shall be as
thoroughly acquainted, as if we had known one
another a twelvemonth. 
When I returned to our mother's, I again cursed
her and all her nymphs together; and still refused to
see either Sally or Polly. I raved at the horrid Arrest; 
and told the old dragon, that it was owing to
her and hers, that the fairest virtue in the world was
ruined; my reputation for ever blasted; and that I
was not married, and happy in the Love of the most
excellent of her Sex. 
She, to pacify me, said, she would shew me a
New Face that would please me; since I would not
see my Sally, who was dying for grief. 

Where is this New Face? cried I: Let me see
her, tho' I shall never see any face with pleasure but
Miss Harlowe's. 
She won't come down, replied she. She will not
be at the word of command yet. She is but just in
the tramels; and must be waited upon, I'll assure
you; and courted much besides. 
Ay! said I, that looks well. Lead me to her this
instant. 
I followed her up: And who should she be, but
that little toad Sally! 
O curse you, said I, for a devil! Is it you? Is
yours the New Face? 
O my dear, dear Mr. Lovelace! cried she, I am
glad any-thing will bring you to me! —And so the
little beast threw herself about my-neck, and there
clung like a cat. Come, said she, what will you
give me, and I'll be virtuous for a quarter of an
hour, and mimic your Clarissa to the life? 
I was Belforded all over. I could not bear such an
insult upon the dear creature (for I have a soft and
generous nature in the main, whatever thou thinkest); 
and cursed her most devoutly, for taking my
Beloved's name in her mouth in such a way. But
the little devil was not to be balked; but fell a
crying, sobbing, praying, begging, exclaiming,
fainting, that I never saw my lovely girl so well aped. 
Indeed I was almost taken in; for I could have fansied
I had her before me once more. 
O this Sex! this artful Sex! There's no minding
them. At first, indeed, their grief and their concern
may be real: But give way to the hurricane,
and it will soon die away in soft murmurs, trilling
upon your ears like the notes of a well-tuned viol. 
And, by Sally, one sees, that Art will generally so
well supply the place of Nature, that you shall not easily
know the difference. Miss Clarissa Harlowe indeed
is the only woman in the world I believe that can 

say, in the words of her favourite Job (for I can
quote a text as well as she) But it is not so with me. 
They were very inquisitive about my Fair-one. 
They told me, that you seldom came near them; 
that, when you did, you put on plaguy grave airs; 
would hardly stay five minutes; and did nothing but
praise Miss Harlowe, and lament her hard fate. 
In short, that you despised them; was full of sentences; 
and they doubted not, in a little while,
would be a lost man, and marry. 
A pretty character for thee, is it not? Thou art
in a blessed way; yet hast nothing to do but to go on
in it; and then what a work hast thou to go through! 
If thou turnest back, these sorceresses will be like the
Czar's Cossacks [at Pultowa, I think it was] who
were planted with ready primed and cocked pieces,
behind the Regulars, in order to shoot them dead,
if they did not push on, and conquer; and then wilt
thou be most lamentably despised by every harlot thou
hast made—And, O Jack, how formidable, in that
case, will be the number of thy enemies! 
I intend to regulate my motions by Will's intelligence; 
for see this dear creature I must and will. 
Yet I have promised Lord M. to be down in two
or three days, at farthest; for he is grown plaguy
fond of me since I was ill. 
I am in hopes, that the word I left, that I am to
go out of town to-morrow morning, will soon bring
the Lady back again. 
Mean time, I thought I would write to divert
thee, while thou art of such importance about the
dying; and as thy servant, it seems, comes backward
and forward every day, perhaps I may send
thee another Letter to-morrow, with the particulars
of the interview between the dear creature and me; 
after which my soul thirsteth. 