



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Mrs. Hervey;
[Inclosed in her last to Miss Howe.] 

Thursday, April 20. 
Honoured Madam,
Having not had the favour of an Answer to a
Letter I took the liberty to write to you on the
14th, I am in some hopes that it may have miscarriod; 
for I had much rather it should, than to have the mortification
to think that my Aunt Hervey deemed me
unworthy of the honour of her notice. 
In this hope, having kept a copy of it, and not being
able to express myself in terms better suited to the
unhappy circumstance of things, I transcribe and inclose
what I then wrote (a) . And I humbly beseech you to
favour the contents of it with your interest. 
Hitherto it is in my power to perform what I undertake
for in this Letter; and it would be very grievous
to me to be precipitated upon measures, which may
render the desireable Reconciliation more difficult. 
If, Madam, I were permitted to write to you with 

the hopes of being answered, I could clear my intention
with regard to the step I have taken, altho' I could not
perhaps acquit myself to some of my severest judges, of
an imprudence previous to it. You, I am sure, would
pity me, if you knew all I could say, and how miserable
I am in the forfeiture of the good opinion of all my
friends. 
I flatter myself, that their favour is yet retrievable. 
But whatever be the determination at Harlowe-Place,
do not you, my dearest Aunt, deny me the favour of
a few lines, to inform me if there can be any hope of
a Reconciliation upon terms less shocking than those
heretofore endeavoured to be imposed upon me; or if
(which God forbid!) I am to be for ever reprobated. 
At least, my dear Aunt, procure for me the justice
of my wearing apparel, and the little money and other
things which I wrote to my Sister for, and mention in
the inclosed to you; that I may not be destitute of
common conveniencies, or be under a necessity to owe
an obligation for such, where (at present, however) I
would least of all owe it. 
Allow me to say, that had I designed what happened,
I might (as to the money and jewels at least) have saved
myself some of the mortifications which I have suffered,
and which I still further apprehend, if my request be
not complied with. 
If you are permitted to encourage an eclaircissement
of what I hint, I will open my whole heart to you,
and inform you of every-thing. 
If it be any pleasure to have me mortified, be pleased
to let it be known, that I am extremely mortified: 
And yet it is entirely from my own reflections that I
am so; having nothing to find fault with, in the behaviour
of the person from whom every evil was apprehended. 
The bearer having business your way, will bring me
your Answer on Saturday morning, if you favour me 

according to my hopes. I knew not that I should have
this opportunity till I had written the above. 
I am, my dearest Aunt, 
Your ever-dutiful
Cl. Harlowe. 
Be pleased to direct for me, if I am to be favoured
with a few lines, to be left at Mr. Osgood's near
Soho-square; and nobody shall ever know of your
goodness to me, if you desire it to be kept a secret. 