


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Friday Morn. Eight o'Clock, October 27.
The apprehensions with which I was so weak as
to trouble you, in the conclusion of my last,
laid so fast hold of my mind, that, going immediately
from my pen to my rest, I had it broken and
disturbed by dreadful, shocking, wandering dreams. 
The terror they gave me, several times awakened me; 
but still, as I closed my eyes, I fell into them again. 
Whence, my dear, proceed these ideal vagaries, which,
for the time, realize pain or pleasure to us, according
to their hue or complexion, or rather according to our
own? 

But such contradictory vagaries never did I know in
my slumbers. Incoherencies of incoherence! —For
example—I was married to the best of men: I was
not married: I was rejected with scorn, as a presumptuous
creature. I sought to hide myself in holes and
corners. I was dragged out of a subterraneous cavern,
which the sea had made when it once broke bounds,
and seemed the dwelling of howling and conflicting
winds; and when I expected to be punished for my
audaciousness, and for repining at my lot, I was turned
into an Angel of light; stars of diamonds, like a glory,
encompassing my head: A dear little baby was put into
my arms. Once it was Lucy's; another time it was
Emily's; and at another time Lady Clementina's! — 
I was fond of it, beyond expression. 
I again dreamed I was married: Sir Charles again
was the man. He did not love me. My grandmamma
and aunt, on their knees, and with tears,
besought him to love their child; and pleaded to him
my Love of him of long standing, begun in gratitude; 
and that he was the only man I ever loved. O
how I wept in my dream! My face and bosom were
wet with my real tears. 
My sobs, and my distress and theirs, awakened
me; but I dropt asleep, and fell into the very same
resverie. He upbraided me with being the cause that
he had not Lady Clementina. He said, and so sternly! 
I am sure he cannot look so sternly, that he thought
me a much better creature than I proved to be: Yet
methought, in my own heart, I was not altered. I
fell down at his feet. I called it my misfortune, that
he could not love me: I would not say it was his fault. 
It might, perhaps, be his misfortune too! —And then
I said, Love and Hatred are not always in one's power. 
If you cannot love the poor creature who kneels before
you, that shall be a cause sufficient with me for a
divorce: I desire not to fasten myself on the man who
cannot love me. Let me be divorced from you, Sir— 

You shall be at liberty to assign any cause for the separation,
but crime. I will bind myself never, never to
marry again; but you shall be free—And God bless
you, and her you can love better than your poor Harriet. 
—Fool! I weep as I write! —What a weak creature
I am, since I have not been well! 
In another part of my resverie he loved me dearly; 
but when he nearly approached me, or I him, he always
became a ghost, and flitted from me. Scenes
once changed from England to Italy, from Italy to
England: Italy, I thought, was a dreary wild, covered
with snow, and pinched with frost: England, on the
contrary, was a country glorious to the eye; gilded
with a sun not too fervid; the air perfumed with
odours, wasted by the most balmy Zephyrs from
orange-trees, citrons, myrtles, and jasmines. In Italy,
at one time, Jeronymo's wounds were healed; at another,
they were breaking out afresh. Mr. Lowther
was obliged to fly the country: Why, did not appear. 
There was a fourth brother, I thought; and he, taking
part with the cruel Laurana, was killed by the General. 
Father Marescotti was at one time a martyr
for his Religion; at another, a Cardinal; and talked
of for Pope. 
But still, what was more shocking, and which so
terrified me that I awoke in a horror which put an
end to all my resveries (for I slept no more that night)
—Sir Charles, I thought, was assassinated by Greville. 
Greville fled his country for it, and became a vagabond,
a Cain, the Accursed, I thought, of God and
Man—I, your poor Harriet, a widow; left in the
most calamitous circumstance that a woman can be
in—Good Heaven! —But, avaunt, recollection! — 
Painful, most painful recollection of ideas so terrible!
none of your intrusions— 
No more of these horrid, horrid incongruities, will
I trouble you with! How have they run away with
me! am hardly now recovered from the tremblings
into which they threw me! 

What, my dear, is the reason, that tho' we know
these dreams, these fleeting shadows of the night, to be
no more than dreams, illusions of the working mind,
fettered and debased as it is by the organs through
which it conveys its confined powers to the grosser
matter, body, then sleeping, inactive, as in the shades
of death; yet that we cannot help being strongly impressed
by them, and meditating interpretation of the
flying vapours, when reason is broad awake, and tells
us, that it is weakness to be disturbed at them? —But
Superstition is, more or less, I believe, in every mind,
a natural defect. Happily poised is that mind, which,
on the one hand, is too strong to be affected by the
slavish fears it brings with it; and, on the other, runs
not into the contrary extreme, Scepticism, the parent
of infidelity! 
You cannot imagine, my dear, the pleasure I had,
the more for my various dream, when your brother,
so amiably serene, Love, Condescension, Affability,
shining in his manly countenance, alighted, as I saw
him through my window, at the same time I had the
call to breakfast—Dear Sir! I could have said, Have
not you been disturbed by cruel, perplexing, contradictory
visions? Souls may be near, when Bodies are distant. 
But are we not one Soul? Could yours be unaffected,
when mine was so much disturbed? —But, thank
God, you are come! Come safe, unhurt, pleased with
me! My fond arms, were the ceremony passed, should
welcome you to your Harriet. I would tell you all
my disturbances from the absurd illusions of the past
night, and my mind should gather strength from the
confession of its weakness. 
He talked of setting out early to-morrow morning. 
His first visit, he said, should be to Sir Harry Beauchamp; 
his next to Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. Poor Sir
Harry! he said, and sighed for him. 
Tender-hearted man! as Clementina often called
your brother! he pitied Lady Beauchamp. His poor 

Beauchamp! —The loss of a father, he said, where a
great estate was to descend to the son, was the test of
a noble heart. He could answer for the sincerity of
his Beauchamp's grief, on this trying occasion. Of
what joy, said he [sitting between two of the best of
women, equally fond of him, speaking low] was I,
was my father, deprived! He had allowed me to think
of returning to the arms of his paternal love. I make
no doubt, but on looking into his affairs (his son, perhaps
his steward) he would have done for his daughters,
what I have done for my sisters. We should both of
us have had a new life to begin, and pursue: A happy
one, from my duty and his indulgence, it must have
been. I had planned it out. —With all humility I
would, by degrees, have laid it before him, first one
part, then another, as his condescension would have
countenanced me. 
Vile, vile resveries! —Must not this young man be
the peculiar care of Heaven? How could my disturbed
imagination terrify me but in a dream, that the machinations
of the darkest mind (as his must be [Greville
is not so bad a man] who could meditate violence
against virtue so sacredly guarded) could be permitted
to prevail against his life! 
My grandmamma once, with tears in her eyes, as
he talked of taking leave, laid her hand upon his,
and instantly withdrew it, as if she thought the action
too free. He took her hand, and, with both his, lifted
it to his lips—Venerable goodness! he called her. 
She looked so proud, and so comforted! every one so
pleased! —It is a charming thing to see blooming
youth fond of declining age! 
They dropt away one by one, and I found myself
left alone with him. Sweetly tender was his address
to me! —How shall I part with my Harriet? said he. 
My eyes were ready to overflow. By a twinkling
motion, I thought to disperse over the whole eye the
self-felt too ready tear: My upper-lip had the motion 

in it, throbbing, like the pulsation which we call
the life-blood—I was afraid to speak, for fear of bursting
into a fit of tenderness; yet was conscious that my
very silence was more expressive of tenderness than
speech could have been. With what delight did his
eager eye (as mine, now-and-then glancing upward,
discovered) meditate my downcast face, and silent concern! 
Yet such was his delicacy, that he took not that
notice of it, in words, which, if he had, would have
added to my confusion: It was enough for him, that
he saw it. As he was contented silently to enjoy the
apparent affection, I am not sorry he did see it. 
He merited even open and unreserved assurances of
Love. But I the sooner recovered my spirits, for his
delicate non-observance. I could not, circumstanced
as we were, say I wished for his speedy return; yet,
my dear, my purest wishes were, that he would not
be long absent. My grandmamma pleases herself with
having the dear man for her inmate, on his return:
There is therefore no need, for the sake of the world's
speech, to abridge my month; yet ought we to be shy
of giving consequence to a man who through delicacy
is afraid to let us see that he assumes consequence from
our speechless tenderness for him? —He restored me to
speech, by a change of subject— 
Two melancholy offices shall I have to perform,
said he, before I have the honour to attend again my
dearest Miss Byron: What must be the heart that
melts not at another's woe! —As to Sir Hargrave, I
don't apprehend that he is near his end; as is the case
of poor Sir Harry. Sir Hargrave labours under bodily
pains, from the attack made upon him in France,
and from a constitution ruined perhaps by riot: And,
having nothing of consolation to give himself from reflexions
on his past life, as we see by his Letter, his
fears are too strong for his hopes. But shall I tell him,
if I find it will give him comfort, that you wish his
recovery, and are sorry for his indisposition? Small 

crevices let in light, sometimes upon a benighted imagination. 
He must consider his attempt upon your
free-will (tho' not meant upon your honour) as one
of the enormities of his past life. 
I was overpowered with this instance of his generous
goodness. Teach me, Sir, to be good, to be
generous, to be forgiving—like you! —Bid me do
what you think proper for me to do—Say to the poor
man, whose insults upon you in his challenge were
then my terror (O how much my terror!) in my
name say, all that you think will tend to give him consolation. 
Sweet excellence! Did I ever hope to meet in woman
with such an enlargement of heart! —Clementina
only, of all the women I ever knew, can be set
in comparison with you: And had she been granted
to me, the union of minds between us from difference
of Religion, could not have been so perfect, as yours
and mine must be. 
Greatly gratified as I was by the compliment, I was
sorry, methought, that it was made me at the expence
of my Sex. His words, ‘Did I ever hope to meet in
woman with such an enlargement of heart!’ piqued
me a little. Are not women as capable as men,
thought I, of enlarged sentiments? 
The leave he took of me was extremely tender. I
endeavoured to check my sensibility. He departed
with the blessings of the whole family, as well as
mine. I was forced to go up to my closet: I came
not down till near dinner-time; I could not; and yet
my uncle accompanied my cousin James to North-hampton:
So that I had no apprehensions of his raillery. 
One wants trials sometimes, I believe, to make
one support one's self with some degree of outward
fortitude, at least. Had my uncle been at home, I
should not have dared to have given so much way to
my concern: But soothing and indulgence, sometimes,
I believe, add to our imbecility of mind, instead of
strengthening our reason. 

* *
My uncle made it near eleven at night before he
returned, with my cousin James. Not one of the
company, at his quitting it, seemed inclinable to move. 
He praised the elegance of the entertainment, and the
ease and chearfulness, even to vivacity, of Sir Charles. 
How could he be so lively! —How many ways have
men to divert themselves, when any-thing arduous
attacks them! —While we poor women! —But your
town-diversions—Your Ranelaghs, Vaux-halls—bid
fair to divert such of us as can carry ourselves out of our
ourselves! —Yet are we likely to pay dear for the privilege; 
since we thereby render our Sex cheap in the
eyes of men, harden our fronts, and are in danger of
losing that modesty, at least of outward behaviour,
which is the characteristic of women! 
Saturday Morning. 
He is gone: Gone indeed! Went early this morning. 
Every mouth was last night, it seems, full of his
praises: The men admire him as much as the women. 
I am glad of it, methinks; since that is an indirect
confession, that there are few among them like him. 
Not so much superiority over our Sex therefore, in the
other, in general, with their enlarged hearts. Have not we a Clementina, a Mrs. Shirley, and a long
&c. —I praise you not, my dear Lady L. and Lady
G. to your faces; so I leave the &c. untranslated. 
We do so look upon one another here! Are so unsatisfied
with ourselves! We are not half so good company
as we were before Sir Charles came among us. 
How can that be? But my grandmamma has left us
too!—that's one thing. She is retired to Shirley-manor,
to mortify, after so rich a regale: Those were
her words. 
I hope your brother will write to us. Should I not
have asked him? To be sure he will; except his next
Letters from Italy should be—But, no doubt, he will 

write to us. Mr. Greville vows to my uncle, he will
not come near me. He can less and less, he says,
bear to think of my marrying; tho' he does what he
can to comfort himself with reflecting on the extraordinary
merit of the man, who alone, he says, can
deserve me. He wishes the day were over; and the
D&wblank;l's in him, he adds, if the irrevocableness of the
event does not cure him. Mr. Fenwick had yesterday
his final answer from Lucy; and he is to set out on
Monday for Carlisle. He declares, that he will not
return without a wife: So, thank Heaven, his heart
is whole, notwithstanding his double disappointment. 
* *
But my heart is set on hearing how the excellent
Clementina takes the news of your brother's actual
address, and probability of succeeding. I should not
think it at all surprising, if, urged as she is, to marry
a man indifferent to her (the Lord of her heart unmarried)
she should retract—O my Charlotte! — 
What a variety of strange, strange, What-shall-I call
them? would result from such a retractation and renewal
of claim! I never thought myself superstitious; 
but the happiness before me is so much beyond my
merit, that I can hardly flatter myself, at times, that
it will take place. 
* *
What think you, my dear, made me write so apprehensively? 
—My aunt had just shewn me a Letter
she had written to you—desiring you—to exercise for
us your fancy, your judgment. I have no affectation
on this subject—I long ago gave affectation to the
winds—But so hasty! —So undoubting! —Are there
not many possibilities, and some probabilities, against
us? —Something presumptuous! —Lord bless me, my
dear, should any-thing happen—Jewels bought, and
already presented—Apparel—How would all these
preparations aggravate! My aunt says, he shall be
obliged: Lucy, Nancy, the Miss Holles's, join with 

her. They long to be exercising their fancies upon
the patterns which they suppose your Ladyship and
Lady L. will send down. My uncle hurries my aunt. 
So as something is going forward, he says, he shall be
easy. There is no resisting so strong a tide: So let
them take their course. They are all in haste, my
dear, to be considered as relations of your family; 
and to regard all yours as kindred of ours. Happy,
happy, the band, that shall tie both families together! 
Harriet Byron. 

