



I am now come to MONDAY, the 5th Day of
my Bondage and Misery. 

I was in Hope to have an Opportunity to see
John, and have a little private Talk with him before
he went away; but it could not be. The
poor Man's excessive Sorrow made Mrs. Jewkes
take it into her Head, to think he lov'd me, and so
she brought up a Message to me from him this Morning,
that he was going. I desir'd he might come up
to my Closet, as I call'd it; and she came with him: 
And the honest Man, as I thought him, was as full
of Concern as before, at taking Leave. And I gave
him my two Letters, the one for Mrs. Jervis, inclos'd
in that for my Master: But Mrs. Jewkes 

would see me seal them up, for fear of any other— 
I was surpriz'd, at the Man's going away, to see him
drop a Bit of Paper, just at the Head of the Stairs,
which I took up without Mrs. Jewkes's seeing me; 
but I was a thousand times more surpriz'd, when I
return'd to my Closet, and opening it, read as
follows: 

Good Mrs. Pamela,
I am griev'd to tell you how much you have
been deceiv'd and betray'd, and that by such
a vile Dog as I. Little did I think it would come to
this. But I must say, if ever there was a Rogue in
the World, it is me. I have all along shew'd your
Letters to my Master: He employ'd me for that
Purpose; and he saw every one before your Father
and Mother, and then seal'd them up, and
sent me with them. I had some Business that way; 
but not half so often as I pretended. And as soon
as I heard how it was with you, I was ready to
hang myself. You may well think I could not
stand in your Presence. O vile, vile Wretch, to
bring you to this! If you are ruin'd, I am the
Rogue that caus'd it. All the Justice I can do you,
is, to tell you, you are in vile Hands; and I am
afraid will be undone in spite of all your sweet
Innocence; and I believe I shall never live after
I know it. If you can forgive me, you are exceeding
good; but I shall never forgive myself,
that's certain. Howsomever, it will do you no good
to make this known; and may-hap I may live
to do you Service. If I can, I will. I am sure I
ought— Master kept your last two or three Letters,
and did not send them at all. I am the most
abandon'd Wretch of Wretches. 
‘J. Arnold. 

‘You see your Undoing has been long hatching. 
Pray take care of your sweet Self. Mrs.
Jewkes is a Devil. But in my Master's t'other
House you have not one false Heart, but
myself. Out upon me for a Villain!’ 

My dear Father and Mother, when you come to
this Place, I make no doubt your Hair will stand
an End, as mine does! —O the Deceitfulness of
the Heart of Man! —This John, that I took to be
the honestest of Men; that you took for the same; 
that was always praising you to me, and me to you,
and for nothing so much as for our honest Hearts; 
this very Fellow was all the while a vile Hypocrite,
and a perfidious Wretch, and helping to carry on
my Ruin! 
But he says enough of himself; and I can only sit
down with this sad Reflection, That Power and
Riches never want Tools to promote their vilest
Ends, and that there is nothing so hard to be known
as the Heart of Man! —Yet I can but pity the poor
Wretch, since he seems to have some Remorse, and
I believe it best to keep his Wickedness secret; 
and, if it lies in my way, to encourage his Penitence; 
for I may possibly make some Discoveries by it. 
One thing I should mention in this Place; he
brought down, in a Portmanteau, all the Cloaths and
Things my Lady and Master had presented me, and
moreover two Velvet Hoods, and a Velvet Scarf,
that used to be worn by my Lady; but I have no
Comfort in them! 
Mrs. Jewkes had the Portmanteau brought into my
Closet, and she shew'd me what was in it; but then
locked it up, and said, she would let me have what
I would out of it, when I asked; but if I had the
Key, it might set me a wanting to go abroad, maybe; 
and so the insolent Woman put it in her Pocket. 

I gave myself over to sad Reflections upon this
strange and surprizing Discovery of John's, and wept
much for him, and for myself too; for now I see,
as he says, my Ruin has been so long a hatching,
that I can make no Doubt what my Master's honourable
Professions will end in. What a Heap of
Names does the poor Fellow call himself! But what
must they deserve, who set him to work? O what has
this wicked Master to answer for, to be so corrupt
himself, and to corrupt others, who would have been
innocent; and all to carry on further a more corrupt
Scene, and to ruin a poor Creature, who never did
him Harm, nor wish'd him any; and who can still
pray for his Happines, and his Repentance? 
I can but wonder what these Gentlemen, as they
are called, can think of themselves for these vile
Doings? John had some Inducement; for he hoped
to please his Master, who rewarded him, and was
bountiful to him; and the same may be said, bad as
she is, for this same odious Mrs. Jewkes. But what
Inducement has my Master for taking so much Pains
to do the Devil's Work? —If he loves me, as 'tis
falsely called, must he therefore ruin me, and lay
Traps for me, and endeavour to make me as bad as
himself? I cannot imagine what good the Undoing
of such a poor Creature as I can procure him! —To
be sure, I am a very worthless Body. People indeed
say I am handsome; but if I was so, should not a Gentleman
prefer an honest Servant to a guilty Harlot? — 
And must he be more earnest to seduce me, because
I dread of all things to be seduced, and would rather
lose my Life than my Honesty! 
Well, these are strange things to me! I cannot
account for them, for my Share; but sure nobody
will say, that these fine Gentlemen have any Tempter
but their own wicked Wills! —This naughty Master 

could run away from me, when he thought none
but his Servants should know his base Attempts, in
that sad Closet Affair; but is it not strange, that he
should not be afraid of the All-seeing Eye, from
which even that black poisonous Heart of his, and
its most secret Motions, could not be hid? —But
what avail me these sorrowful Reflections? He is
and will be wicked; and I am, I fear, to be a
Victim to his lawless Attempts, if the God in whom
I trust, and to whom I hourly pray, prevent it not! 
