


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Wednesday, April 5. 
Miss Jervois came to me this morning by six; 
impatient, as she said, to communicate good
news to me. I was in my closet writing. I could
not sleep. 
I have seen my mother, said she; and we are good
friends. Was she ever unkind to me, madam? 
Dear creature! said I, and clasped her to my bosom,
you are a sweet girl! Oblige me with the particulars. 
Let me, Lucy, give you, as near as I can recollect,
the amiable young creature's words and actions
on this occasion. 
Sit down, my love, said I. —What! When I am
talking of a reconciled mother! And to dear Miss
Byton! —No, indeed. 

She often held out one open hand, while the forefinger
of the other, in full action, patted it; as at other
times both were spread, with pretty wonder and delight:
And thus she began: 
Why, you must know, it was about six o'clock yesterday
afternoon, that my mother and her husband, and
Captain Salmonet, came. I was told of their visit, but
two hours before: And when the coach stopped, and I
at the window saw them alight, I thought I should have
fainted away. I would have given half I was worth
in the world to have been an hundred miles off. 
Dr. Bartlett was there, and received them. My
guardian was unexpectedly engaged in answering a
Letter sent him by Lord W. for which a gentleman
waited: But they had not been there a quarter of an
hour, when he entered, and made apologies to them
in his usual gracious manner. Never, the doctor
says, did any-body look so respectful as the Major and
the Captain; and they would have made apologies to
my guardian, for their last behaviour to him; but he
would not let them. And my mother, the doctor
says, from the very first, behaved prettily. 
The moment she asked for me, my guardian himself
condescended to come up to me, and took my
hand—Was not that very good of him? —My dear,
said he, as he led me down stairs (and spoke so kindly)
don't tremble so: Am I not with you? —Your mother
is very calm and composed: You must ask her
blessing. I shall ease your tender heart of every pang. 
I shall hint to you what to do, and how to behave to
the gentlemen, as occasions arise. 
He had no sooner said the words, but the drawing-room-door
gave way to his hand, and I was in the
room with him. 
Down on my knees dropt I—as I now do to you:
But I could not speak. Thus I did [And she kissed
my hand, and bowed her face upon it]. And my mother
raised me—You must raise me, madam—Yes, 

just so—And she kissed me too, and wept on my neck; 
and called me pretty names; and encouraged me, and
said she loved me, as she loved her own soul—And I
was encouraged. 
My guardian then, with the air and manner of a
gracious prince, took my hand, and presented it first
to the Major, then to the Captain; and they each
kissed my hand, and spoke in my praise, I can't tell
how many fine things. 
Major, said my guardian, when he presented me
to him, you must excuse the dear child's weakness of
spirits: She wishes you all happiness on your nuptials:
She has let me know, that she is very desirous to do
you service for her mother's sake. 
The Major swore by his Soul, I was an angel! — 
Captain Salmonet said, that, by his Salvation, I was
a charming young lady! 
My mother wept—O Sir! said she to my guardian:
And dropping down in a chair by the window, not a
word more could she speak. 
I ran to her, and clasped my arms about her. She
wept the more: I wiped her eyes with her own handkerchief:
I told her, it went to my heart to see her
cry: I begged she would spare me this grief. 
She clasped her arms then about me, and kissed my
cheek, and my forehead. O thought I, it is very
good of you, my dear mother. 
Then came my guardian to us, and he kindly took
my mother's hand, and conducted her to the fire-side; 
and he led me, and placed me by her, at the tea-table; 
and he made the Major and the Captain sit down
by him: So much graciousness in his countenance. 
O madam, I shall be an idolater, I am afraid. And he
said, Emily, my dear, you will make tea for us. My
sister dined abroad, madam, to my mother. —Yes,
Sir, I will, said I: And I was as lively as a bird. 
But before the servants came in, Let me tell you,
madam, said he, what Miss Jervois has proposed to
me. —They were in silent expectation. 

She has desired that you, Major, will accept from
her, for your mutual use, of an additional 100l. a
year; which I shall order to be paid you quarterly,
during Mrs. O-Hara's life, not doubting but you will
make her as happy as it is in your power to make her. 
My mother bowed, coloured with gratitude, and
looked obliged. 
And she begs of you, madam, turning to my mother,
that you will accept, as from the Major, another
100l. a year, for pin-money, which he, or
which you, madam, will draw upon me for; also quarterly,
if you choose not to trouble him to do it: For
this 100l. a year must be appropriated to your sole
and separate use, madam; and not be subject to your
controul, Major O-Hara. 
Good God! Sir! said the Major! —What a wretch
was I, the last time I was here! —There is no bearing
of this! 
He got up, and went to the window: And the
Captain said, Blessed Jesu! and something else, which
I could not mind; for I was weeping like a baby. 
What, Sir, said my mother, 400l. a year! Do
you mean so? —I do, madam—And, Sir, to be so
generously paid me my 100l. of it, as if I received it
not from my child, but from my husband! —Good
God! How you overpower me, Sir! What shame,
what remorse, do you strike into my heart! 
And my poor mother's tears ran down as fast as
mine. 
O madam, said the dear girl to me, clasping her
arms about me, how your tender heart is touched! — 
It is well you were not there! 
Dr. Bartlett came in to tea. My guardian would
not permit Antony, who offered himself, to wait. 
Antony had been my own papa's servant, when my
mother was not so good. 
Nothing but blessings, nothing but looks and words
of admiration and gratitude, passed all the tea-time. 

How their hearts rejoiced, I warrant! —Is it not a
charming thing, madam, to make people's hearts
glad? —To be sure it is! How many hearts has my
guardian rejoiced! You must bid him be cross to me,
or I shall not know what to do with myself! —But
then, if he was, I should only get by myself, and
cry, and be angry with myself, and think be could
not be to blame. 
O my love, my Emily! said I, take care of your
gratitude: That drew in your true friend. 
Well, but how can it be helped, madam? Can a
right heart be ungrateful? Dr. Bartlett says, There is
no such thing as true happiness in this life: And is it
not better to be unhappy from good men and women,
than from bad? —Dear madam, why you have often
made me unhappy, because of your goodness to me; 
and because I knew, that I neither could deserve nor
return it. 
The dear prater went on—My guardian called me
aside, when tea was over. My Emily, said he— 
[I do love he should call me his Emily! —But all the
world is his Emily, I think] Let me see what you will
do with these two notes; giving me two Bank-notes
of 25l. each. —Present pin-money and cash may be
wanted. We will suppose that your mother has been
married a quarter of a year. Her pin-money and the
additional annuity may commence from the 25th of
December last. Let me Emily, when they go away,
see the graceful manner in which you will dispose of
the notes: And from Mr. O-Hara's behaviour upon
it, we shall observe whether he is a man with whom
your mother, if it be not her own fault (now you
have made it their interest to be kind to each other)
may live well: But the motion be all your own. 
How good this was! I could have kissed the hand
that gave me the notes, if I thought it would not have
looked too free. 
I understand you, Sir, said I. 

And when they went away, pouring out their very
hearts in grateful joy, I addressed myself to Mr.
O-Hara: Sir, said I, it is proper that the payment of
the additional annuity should have a commencement. 
Let it be from Christmas last. Accept of the first
payment from my own hands—And I gave him one
25l. note: And looking at my mother, with a look
of duty, for fear be should mistake, and discredit himself
in the eyes of the deepest discerner in the world,
gave him the other. 
He looked upon first one, then upon the other note
with surprize—And then bowing to the ground to
me, and to my guardian, he stept to my mother, and
presented them both to her. You, madam, said he,
must speak: I cannot as I ought: God send me with
a whole heart out of this house! He hurried out, and
when he was in the hall, wiped his eyes, and sobbed
like a child, as one of the servants told my Anne. 
My mother looked upon one note as her husband
had done, and upon the other; and, lifting up her
eyes, embraced me—And would have said something
to my guardian, but he prevented her, by saying— 
Emily will be always dutiful to you, madam, and respectful
to Mr. O-Hara: May you be happy together! 
And he led her out—Was ever such a condescension! 
He led her out to her husband, who, being a
little recovered, was just about to give some money
to the servant, who was retiring from the offer—Nobody,
said my guardian, graciously smiling, pays my
servants but myself, Mr. O-Hara. They are good
people, and merit my favour. 
And he went to the very door with my mother. I
could not. I ran back, crying for joy, into the drawing-room; 
when they went out of it. I could not
bear myself. How could I, you know, madam? — 
Captain Salmonet all the time wiped his eyes, shrugged
his shoulders, lifted up his hands, and cried out upon
Jesu; and once or twice he crossed himself: But all 

the time my guardian looked and acted, as if those
actions and praises were nothing to be proud of. 
When he came in to me, I arose, and threw myself
at his feet; but could only say, Thank you, Sir,
for your goodness to my mother. He raised me. He
sat down by me: See, child (said he, and he took
my hand: My heart was sensible of the favour, and
throbbed with joy) what it is in the power of people of
fortune to do. You have a great one. Now your
mother is married, I have hopes of her. They will
at least keep up appearances to each other, and to the
world. They neither of them want sense. You have
done an act of duty and benevolence both in one. 
The man who would grudge them this additional 200l.
a year out of your fortune, to make your parent happy,
shall not have my Emily—Shall he? 
Your Emily, your happy Emily, Sir, has not, cannot
have a heart that is worth notice, if it be not implicitly
guided by you. —This I said, madam; and it
is true. 
And did he not, said I, clasp his Emily to his generous
bosom, when you said so? 
No, madam; that would have been too great an
honour: But he called me, Good child! And said,
you shall never be put to pay me an implicit regard:
Your own reason (and he called me child again) shall
always be the judge of my conduct to you, and direct
your observances of my advice. Something like this
he said; but in a better manner than I can say it. 
He calls me oftener child, madam, than any-thing
else when we are alone together; and is not quite so
free, I think, at such times, in his behaviour to me
(yet is vastly gracious, I don't know how) as when we
are in company—Why is that? I am sure, I equally
respect him, at one time as at another—Do you think,
madam, there is any-thing in the observation? Is there
any reason for it? —I do love to study him, and to find
out the meaning of his very looks as well as words. 

Sir Charles Grandison's heart is the book of heaven— 
May I not study it? 
Study it, my love! while you have an opportunity. 
But he will soon leave us: He will soon leave England. 
So I fear: And I will love and pity the poor Clementina,
whose heart is so much wounded and oppressed. 
But my guardian shall be nobody's but yours. 
I have prayed night and day, the first thing and the
last thing, ever since I have heard of Lady Clementina,
that you, and nobody but you, may be Lady
Grandison: And I will continue my prayers. —But
will you forgive me: I always conclude them with
praying, that you will both consent to let the poor
Emily live with you. 
Sweet girl! The poor Emily, said she? —I embraced
her, and we mingled tears, both our hearts full, each
for the other; and each perhaps for herself. 
She hurried away. I resumed my pen. —Rum off
what had passed, almost as swift as thought. I quit it,
to prepare to attend my cousins to St. James's Square. 

