



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

This debate between the Captain and me was
hardly over, when the three women, led by
Miss Rawlins, entered, hoping No intrusion—But
very desirous, the Maiden said, to know if we were
likely to accommodate. 
O yes, I hope so. You know, Ladies, that your
Sex must, in these cases, preserve their Forms. They
must be courted to comply with their own happiness. 
A lucky expedient we have hit upon. The Uncle
has his doubts of our Marriage. He cannot believe,
nor will any-body, that it is possible that a man so
much in Love, the Lady so desirable— 
They all took the hint—It was a very extraordinary
case, the two widows allowed. Women, Jack,
[as I believe I have observed (a)  elsewhere] have a
high opinion of what they can do for us. —Miss Rawlins
desired, if I pleased, to let them know the Expedient; 
and looked as if there was no need to proceed
in the rest of my speech. 
I begged, that they would not let the Lady know
I had told them what this Expedient was; and they
should hear it. 
They promised. 
It was this: That to oblige and satisfy Mr. Harlowe,
the Ceremony was to be again performed. He
was to be privately present, and to give his Niece to
me with his own hands—And she was retired to consider
of it. 

Thou seest, Jack, that I have provided an excuse,
to save my veracity to the women here, in case I should
incline to Marriage, and she should chuse to have Miss
Rawlins's assistance at the Ceremony. Nor doubted I
to bring my Fair-one to save my credit on this occasion,
if I could get her to consent to be mine. 
A charming Expedient! cried the widow. They
were all three ready to clap their hands for joy upon
it. Women love to be married twice at least, Jack; 
tho' not indeed to the same man. And all blessed the
reconciliatory Scheme, and the proposer of it; and,
supposing it came from the Captain, they looked at
him with pleasure, while his face shined with the applause
implied. He should think himself very happy,
if he could bring about a general Reconciliation; and
he flourished with his head like my man Will. on his
victory over old Grimes; bridling by turns, like Miss
Rawlins in the height of a Prudish fit. 
But now it was time for the Captain to think of
returning to town, having a great deal of business to
dispatch before morning: Nor was he certain that he
should again be able to attend us at Hamstead before
he went home. 
And yet, as every-thing was drawing towards a
crisis, I did not intend that he should leave Hamstead
this night. 
A message to the above effect was carried up, at
my desire, by Mrs. Moore; with the Captain's compliments,
and to know if she had any commands for
him to her Uncle? 
But I hinted to the women, that it would be proper
for them to withdraw, if the Lady did come
down; lest she should not care to be so free before
them on a proposal so particular, as she would be to
us, who had offered it to her consideration. 
Mrs. Moore brought down word, that the Lady
was following her. They all three withdrew; and she
entered at one door, as they went out at the other. 

The Captain accosted her, repeating the contents of
the message sent up; and desired, that she would give
him her commands in relation to the report he was to
make to her Uncle Harlowe. 
I know not what to say, Sir, nor what I would
have you to say, to my Uncle—Perhaps you may have
business in town—Perhaps you need not see my Uncle,
till I have heard from Miss Howe; till after Lady
Betty—I don't know what to say. 
I implored the return of that value, which she had
so generously acknowleged once to have had for me. 
I presumed, I said, to flatter myself that Lady Betty,
in her own person, and in the name of all my family,
would be able, on my promised Reformation and
Contrition, to prevail in my favour; especially as our
prospects in other respects with regard to the general
Reconciliation wished for, were so happy. But let me
owe to your own generosity, my dearest creature, said
I, rather than to the mediation of any person on earth,
the forgiveness I am an humble suitor for. How much
more agreeable to yourself, O best beloved of my
Soul, must it be, as well as obliging to me, that your
first personal knowlege of my relations, and theirs of
you (for they will not be denied attending you) should
not be begun in recriminations and appeals! As Lady
Betty will be here so soon, it will not perhaps be possible
for you to receive her visit with a brow absolutely
serene. But, dearest, dearest creature, I beseech
you, let the misunderstanding pass as a slight
one—As a misunderstanding cleared up. Appeals
give Pride and Superiority to the persons appealed to,
and are apt to lessen the appellant, not only in their
eye, but in her own. Exalt not into judges those
who are prepared to take lessons and instructions from
you. The individuals of my family are as proud as
I am said to be. But they will chearfully resign to
your Superiority—You will be the first woman of the
family in every one's eyes. 

This might have done with any other woman in
the world but this; and yet she is the only woman in
the world of whom it may with truth be said. But
thus, angrily, did she disclaim the compliment. 
Yes, indeed!—[and there she stopt a moment,
her sweet bosom heaving with a noble disdain]— 
Cheated out of myself from the very first! —A fugitive
from my own family! Renounced by my relations! 
Insulted by you! —Laying humble claim to the protection
of yours! —Is not this the light in which I
must appear not only to the Ladies of your family,
but to all the world? —Think you, Sir, that in these
circumstances, or even had I been in the happiest, that
I could be affected by this plea of undeserved Superiority? 
—You are a stranger to the mind of Clarissa
Harlowe, if you think her capable of so poor and so
undue a pride! 
She went from us to the farther end of the room. 
The Captain was again affected—Excellent creature! 
I called her; and, reverently approaching her,
urged further the plea I had last made. 
It is but lately, said I, that the opinions of my relations
have been more than indifferent to me, whether
good or bad; and it is for your sake, more than
for my own, that I now wish to stand well with my
whole family. The principal motive of Lady Betty's
coming up, is, to purchase presents for the whole
family to make on the happy occasion. 
This consideration, turning to the Captain, with so
noble-minded a dear creature, I know, can have no
weight; only as it will shew their value and respect. 
But what a damp would their worthy hearts receive,
were they to find their admired new Niece, as they
now think her, not only not their Niece, but capable
of renouncing me for ever! They love me. They
all love me. I have been guilty of carelessness and
levity to them, indeed; but of carelessness and levity
only; and that owing to a Pride that has set me 

above meanness, though it has not done every-thing
for me. 
My whole family will be guaranties for my good
behaviour to this dear creature, their Niece, their
Daughter, their Cousin, their Friend, their chosen
Companion and Directress, all in one. —Upon my
Soul, Captain, we may, we must be happy. 
But, dearest, dearest creature, let me on my knees
[and down I dropt, her face all the time turned half
from me, as she stood at the window, her handkerchief
often at her eyes] on my knees, let me plead your
promised forgiveness; and let us not appear to them,
on their visit, thus unhappy with each other. Lady
Betty, the next hour that she sees you, will write
her opinion of you, and of the likelihood of our future
happiness, to Lady Sarah her Sister, a weak-spirited
woman, who now hopes to supply to herself,
in my Bride, the lost Daughter she still mourns for! 
The Captain then joined in, and re-urged her Uncle's
hopes and expectations, and his resolution effectually
to set about the general Reconciliation; the
mischief that might be prevented; and the certainty
that there was, that her Uncle might be prevailed
upon to give her to me with his own hand, if she
made it her choice to wait for his coming up. But,
for his own part, he humbly advised, and fervently
pressed her, to make the very next day, or Monday
at farthest, my happy Day. 
Permit me, dearest Lady, said he, and I could kneel
to you myself [bending his knee] tho' I have no interest
in my earnestness, but the pleasure I should have
to be able to serve you all; to beseech you to give me
an opportunity to assure your Uncle, that I myself
saw with my own eyes the happy knot tied! —All
misunderstandings, all doubts, all diffidences, will then
be at an end. 
And what, Madam, rejoined I, still kneeling, can
there be in your new measures, be they what they 

will, that can so happily, so reputably, I will presume
to say, for all round, obviate the present difficulties? 
Miss Howe herself, if she love you, and if she love
your fame, Madam, urged the Captain, his knee still
bent, must congratulate you on such a happy conclusion. 
Then turning her face, she saw the Captain half-kneeling
—O Sir! O Capt. Tomlinson!—Why this
undue condescension? extending her hand to his elbow,
to raise him. I cannot bear this! —Then casting her
eye on me, Rise, Mr. Lovelace—Kneel not to the
poor creature whom you have insulted! —How cruel
the occasion for it! —And how mean the submission! 
Not mean to such an angel! —Nor can I rise, but
to be forgiven!— 
The Captain then re-urged once more the Day— 
He was amazed, he said, if she ever valued me— 
O Captain Tomlinson, interrupted she, how much
are you the friend of this man! —If I had never valued
him, he never would have had it in his power to insult
me; nor could I, if I had never regarded him, have
taken to heart as I do the insult (execrable as it was)
so undeservedly, so ingratefully given—But let him
retire—For a moment let him retire. 
I was more than half afraid to trust the Captain by
himself with her. He gave me a sign that I might
depend upon him. And then I took out of my pocket
his Letter to me, and Lady Betty's, and Miss Montague's,
and Lord M's Letters (which last she had not
then seen); and giving them to him, Procure for me,
in the first place, Mr. Tomlinson, a re-perusal of these
three Letters; and of This, from Lord M. And I
beseech you, my dearest Life, give them due consideration: 
And let me on my return find the happy effects
of that consideration. 
I then withdrew; with slow feet however, and a
misgiving heart. 
The Captain insisted upon this re-perusal previously
to what she had to say to him, as he tells me. She 

complied, but with some difficulty; as if she was afraid
of being softened in my favour. 
She lamented her unhappy situation; destitute of
friends, and not knowing whither to go, or what to
do. She asked questions, sifting questions, about her
Uncle, about her Family, and after what he knew of
Mr. Hickman's fruitless application in her favour. 
He was well prepared in this particular; for I had
shewn him the Letters and Extracts of Letters of Miss
Howe, which I had so happily come at (a) . Might
she be assured, she asked him, that her Brother, with
Singleton, and Solmes, were actually in quest of her? 
He averred that they were. 
She asked, If he thought I had hopes of prevailing
on her to go back to town? 
He was sure I had not. 
Was he really of opinion, that Lady Betty would
pay her a visit? 
He had no doubt of it. 
But, Sir; but, Captain Tomlinson—[impatiently
turning from him, and again to him] I know not
what to do—But were I your Daughter, Sir—Were
you my own Father—Alas! Sir, I have neither Father
nor Mother!— 
He turned from her, and wiped his eyes. 
O Sir! you have humanity! [She wept too] There
are some men in the world, thank Heaven, that can
be moved. O Sir, I have met with hard-hearted
men—in my own family too—or I could not have
been so unhappy as I am—But I make every-body
unhappy! 
His eyes no doubt ran over. 
Dearest Madam! Heavenly Lady!—Who can— 
who can—hesitated and blubbered the dog, as he
owned. And indeed I heard some part of what passed,
tho' they both talked lower than I wished; for, from
the nature of their conversation, there was no room
for altitudes. 

Them, and BOTH, and THEY! —How it goes
against me to include this angel of a creature, and any
man on earth but myself, in one word! 
Capt. Who can forbear being affected? —But, Madam,
you can be no other man's. 
Cl. Nor would I be. But he is so sunk with me! 
—To fire the house! —An artifice so vile!—contrived
for the worst of purposes! —Would you have a Daughter
of yours—But what would I say? —Yet you see,
that I have nobody in whom I can confide! —Mr.
Lovelace is a vindictive man! —He could not love
the creature whom he could insult as he has insulted
me! 
She paused. And then resuming—In short, I never,
never can forgive him, nor he me. —Do you think,
Sir, I would have gone so far as I have gone, if I had
intended ever to draw with him in one yoke? —I left
behind me such a Letter— 
You know, Madam, he has acknowleged the justice
of your resentment— 
O Sir, he can acknowlege, and he can retract, fifty
times a day—But do not think I am trifling with myself
and you, and want to be persuaded to forgive him,
and to be his. There is not a creature of my Sex,
who would have been more explicit, and more frank,
than I would have been, from the moment I intended
to be his, had I had a heart like my own to deal with. 
I was always above Reserve, Sir, I will presume to
say, where I had no cause of Doubt. Mr. Lovelace's
conduct has made me appear, perhaps, over-nice, when
my heart wanted to be encouraged and assured; and
when, if it had been so, my whole behaviour would
have been governed by it. 
She stopt; her handkerchief at her eyes. 
I enquired after the minutest part of her behaviour,
as well as after her words. I love, thou knowest, to
trace human nature, and more particularly female
nature, thro' its most secret recesses. 

The pitiful fellow was lost in silent admiration of
her. And thus the noble creature proceeded. 
It is the fate in Unequal Unions, that tolerable creatures,
thro' them, frequently incur Censure, when,
more happily yoked, they might be entitled to Praise. 
And shall I not shun an union with a man, that might
lead into errors a creature who flatters herself that she
is blest with an inclination to be good; and who wishes
to make every one happy with whom she has any connexion,
even to her very servants? 
She paused, taking a turn about the room––the fellow,
devil fetch him, a mummy all the time: Then
proceeded: 
Formerly, indeed, I hoped to be an humble means
of reforming him. But, when I have no such hope, is
it right [You are a serious man, Sir] to make a venture
that shall endanger my own morals! 
Still silent was the varlet. If my advocate had
nothing to say for me, what hope of carrying my
cause? 
And now, Sir, what is the result of all? —It is this
—That you will endeavour, if you have that influence
over him which a man of your sense and experience
ought to have, to prevail upon him, and that
for his own sake, as well as for mine, to leave me free
to pursue my own destiny. And of this you may
assure him, that I never will be any other man's. 
Impossible, Madam! I know that Mr. Lovelace
would not hear me with patience on such a topic. And
I do assure you, that I have some spirit, and should
not care to take an indignity from him, or from any
man living. 
She paused—Then resuming—And think you, Sir,
that my Uncle will refuse to receive a Letter from me? 
[How averse, Jack, to concede a tittle in my favour!] 
I know, Madam, as matters are circumstanced, that
he would not answer it. If you please, I will carry
one down from you. 

And will he not pursue his intentions in my favour,
nor be himself reconciled to me, except I am married? 
From what your Brother gives out, and affects to
believe, on Mr. Lovelace's living with you in the
same— 
No more, Sir—I am an unhappy creature! 
He then re-urged, that it would be in her power
instantly, or on the morrow, to put an end to all her
difficulties. 
How can that be? said she: The Licence still to
be obtained? The Settlements still to be signed? Miss
Howe's Answer to my last unreceived? —And shall I,
Sir, be in such a HURRY, as if I thought my Honour
in danger if I delayed? Yet marry the man from whom
only it can be endangered! —Unhappy, thrice unhappy,
Clarissa Harlowe! —In how many difficulties has
one rash step involved thee! —And she turned from
him, and wept. 
The varlet, by way of comfort, wept too: Yet her
tears, as he might have observed, were tears that indicated
rather a yielding than a perverse temper. 
There is a sort of Stone, thou knowest, so soft in
the Quarry, that it may in a manner be cut with a
Knife; but if the opportunity be not taken, and it is
exposed to the Air for any time, it will become as hard
as Marble, and then with difficulty it yields to the
Chizel (a) . So this Lady, not taken at the moment,
after a turn or two cross the room, gained more resolution; 
and then she declared, as she had done once
before, that she would wait the issue of Miss Howe's
Answer to the Letter she had sent her from hence,
and take her measures accordingly—leaving it to him,
mean time, to make what report he thought fit, to her
Uncle—the kindest that truth could bear, she doubted
not from Captain Tomlinson: And she should be glad
of a few lines from him, to hear what that was. 

She wished him a good journey. She complained
of her head; and was about to withdraw: But I stept
round to the door next the stairs, as if I had but just
come in from the garden (which, as I entered, I called
a very pretty one) and took her reluctant hand, as she
was going out: My dearest Life, you are not going? 
—What hopes, Captain? —Have you not some hopes
to give me of Pardon and Reconciliation? 
She said, She would not be detained. But I would
not let her go, till she had promised to return, when the
Captain had reported to me what her resolution was. 
And when he had, I sent up, and claimed her promise; 
and she came down again, and repeated (as what
she was determined upon) that she would wait for Miss
Howe's Answer to the Letter she had written to her,
and take her measures according to its contents. 
I expostulated with her upon it, in the most submissive
and earnest manner. She made it necessary for me
to repeat many of the pleas I had before urged. The
Captain seconded me with equal earnestness. At last,
each fell down on our knees before her. 
She was distressed. I was afraid at one time she
would have fainted. Yet neither of us would rise
without some concessions. I pleaded my own sake; 
the Captain, his dear friend her Uncle's; and both
repleaded, the prevention of future mischief; and the
peace and happiness of the two families. 
She owned herself unequal to the conflict. She
sighed. She sobbed. She wept. She wrung her
hands. 
I was perfectly eloquent in my vows and protestations. 
Her tearful eyes were cast down upon me; a
glow upon each charming cheek; a visible anguish in
every lovely feature—At last, her trembling knees
seeming to fail her, she dropt into the next chair; her
charming face, as if seeking for a hiding-place (which
a Mother's bosom would have best supplied) sinking
upon her own shoulder. 

I forgot at the instant all my vows of Revenge. I
threw myself at her feet as she sat; and, snatching
her hand, pressed it with my lips. I besought Heaven
to forgive my past offences, and prosper my future
hopes, as I designed honourably and justly by the
Charmer of my heart, if once more she would restore
me to her favour. And I thought I felt drops of
scalding water [Could they be tears?] trickle down
upon my cheeks; while my cheeks, glowing like
fire, seemed to scorch up the unwelcome strangers. 
I then arose, not doubting of an implied pardon in
this silent distress. I raised the Captain. I whispered
him—By my Soul, man, I am in earnest. —Now
talk of Reconciliation, of her Uncle, of the Licence,
of Settlements—And raising my voice, If now at last,
Captain Tomlinson, my angel will give me leave to
call so great a blessing mine, it will be impossible that
you should say too much to her Uncle in praise of
my gratitude, my affection, and fidelity to his charming
Niece; and he may begin as soon as he pleases,
his kind schemes for effecting the desirable Reconciliation! 
—Nor shall he prescribe any terms to me,
that I will not comply with. 
The Captain blessed me with his eyes and hands— 
Thank God, whispered he. We approached the
Lady together. 
Capt. What hinders, dearest Madam, what now
hinders, but that Lady Betty Lawrance, when she
comes, may be acquainted with the truth of everything? 
And that then she may assist privately at your
Nuptials? —I will stay till they are celebrated; and
then shall I go down with the happy tidings to my
dear Mr. Harlowe. And all will, all must, soon be
happy. 
I must have an answer from Miss Howe, replied
the still trembling Fair one. I cannot change my
new measures, but with her advice. I will forfeit
all my hopes of happiness in this world, rather than 

forfeit her good opinion, and that she should think
me giddy, unsteady, or precipitate. All I will further
say on the present subject is this, That, when I
have her answer to what I have written, I will write
to her the whole state of the matter, as I shall then
be enabled to do. 
Lovel. Then must I despair for ever—O Captain
Tomlinson, Miss Howe hates me! —Miss Howe— 
Capt. Not so, perhaps—When Miss Howe knows
your concern for having offended, she will never advise,
that, with such prospects of general Reconciliation,
the hopes of so many considerable persons in
both families should be frustrated. Some little time,
as this excellent Lady has foreseen and hinted, will
necessarily be taken up, in actually procuring the Licence,
and in perusing and signing the Settlements. 
In that time Miss Howe's answer may be received; 
and Lady Betty may arrive; and she, no doubt, will
have weight to dissipate the Lady's doubts, and to
accelerate the Day. It shall be my part, mean time,
to make Mr. Harlowe easy. All I fear from delay is,
from Mr. James Harlowe's quarter; and therefore all
must be conducted with prudence and privacy;—as
your Uncle, Madam, has proposed. 
She was silent. I rejoiced in her silence. The
dear creature, thought I, has actually forgiven me in
her heart! —But why will she not lay me under obligation
to her, by the generosity of an explicit declaration? 
—And yet, as that would not accelerate anything,
while the Licence is not in my hands, she is
the less to be blamed (if I do her justice) for taking
more time to descend. 
I proposed, as on the morrow night, to go to
town; and doubted not to bring the Licence up with
me on Monday morning. Would she be pleased to
assure me, that she would not depart from Mrs.
Moore's? 
She should stay at Mrs. Moore's, till she had an
answer from Miss Howe. 

I told her, that I hoped I might have her tacit consent
at least, to the obtaining of the Licence. 
I saw by the turn of her countenance, that I should
not have asked this question. She was so far from
tacitly consenting, that she declared to the contrary. 
As I never intended, I said, to ask her to enter
again into a house, with the people of which she was
so much offended, would she be pleased to give orders
for her cloaths to be brought up hither? Or should
Dorcas attend her for any of her commands on that
head? 
She desired not ever more to see any-body belonging
to that house. She might perhaps get Mrs. Moore
or Mrs. Bevis to go thither for her, and take her keys
with them. 
I doubted not, I said, that Lady Betty would arrive
by that time. I hoped she had no objection to
my bringing that Lady and my Cousin Montague up
with me? 
She was silent. 
To be sure, Mr. Lovelace, said the Captain, the
Lady can have no objection to this. 
She was still silent. So silence in this case was assent. 
Would she be pleased to write to Miss Howe?— 
Sir! Sir! peevishly interrupting—No more questions: 
No prescribing to me. —You will do as
you think fit. So will I, as I please. I own no
obligation to you. Captain Tomlinson, your Servant. 
Recommend me to my Uncle Harlowe's favour. 
And was going. 
I took her reluctant hand, and besought her only
to promise to meet me early in the morning. 
To what purpose meet you? Have you more to
say, than has been said? —I have had enough of vows
and protestations, Mr. Lovelace. To what purpose
should I meet you to-morrow morning? 
I repeated my request, and that in the most fervent
manner, naming Six in the morning. 

“You know, that I am always stirring before
that hour, at this season of the year,” was the half-expressed
consent. 
She then again recommended herself to her Uncle's
favour; and withdrew. 
And thus, Belford, has she mended her markets, as
Lord M. would say, and I worsted mine. Miss
Howe's next Letter is now the hinge on which the
fate of both must turn. I shall be absolutely ruined
and undone, if I cannot intercept it. 