



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;. 

Sunday. 
Have been at church, Jack. —Behaved admirably
well too! —My charmer is pleased with
me now: —For I was exceedingly attentive to the
discourse, and very ready in the auditor's part of the
service. —Eyes did not much wander. How could
they? When the loveliest object, infinitely the loveliest,
in the whole church, was in my view. 
Dear creature! how fervent, how amiable, in her
devotions! —I have got her to own, that she pray'd
for me! —I hope a prayer from so excellent a mind
will not be made in vain. 
There is, after all, something beautifully solemn
in devotion! —The Sabbath is a charming institution
to keep the heart right, when it is right. One day in
seven, how reasonable! —I think I'll go to church once
a day often. I fancy it will go a great way towards
making me a reformed man. To see multitudes of
well-appearing people, all joining in one reverent
act: An exercise worthy of a sentient being! Yet it
adds a sting or two to my former stings, when I think
of my projects with regard to this charming creature. 
In my conscience, I believe, if I were to go constantly
to church, I could not pursue them. 
I had a scheme come into my head while there: But
I will renounce it, because it obtruded itself upon me
in so good a place. Excellent creature! How many 

ruins has she prevented by attaching me to herself!— 
by ingrossing my whole attention! 
But let me tell thee what passed between us in my
first visit of this morning; and then I will acquaint
thee more largely with my good behaviour at church. 
I could not be admitted till after eight. I found her
ready prepared to go out. I pretended to be ignorant
of her intention, having charged Dorcas not to
own, that she had told me of it. 
Going abroad, Madam?—with an air of indifference. 
Yes, Sir; I intend to go to church. 
I hope, Madam, I shall have the honour to attend you. 
No: She design'd to take a chair, and go to the next
church. 
This startled me: A chair to carry her to the next
church from Mrs. Sinclair's, her right name not Sinclair,
and to bring her back thither, in the face of
people who might not think well of the house! There
was no permitting That: —Yet I was to appear indifferent. 
—But said, I should take it for a favour, if
she would permit me to attend her in a coach, as
there was time for it, to St. Paul's. 
She made objections to the gaiety of my dress; and
told me, that, if she went to St. Paul's, she could go
in a coach without me. 
I objected Singleton and her brother, and offered to
dress in the plainest suit I had. 
I beg the favour of attending you, dear Madam,
said I. I have not been at church a great while: We
shall sit in different stalls: And the next time I go, I
hope it will be to give myself a title to the greatest
blessing I can receive. 
She made some further objections: But at last permitted
me the honour of attending her. 
I got myself placed in her eye, that the time might
not seem tedious to me; for we were there early. And
I gain'd her good opinion, as I mention'd above, by
my behaviour. 

The subject of the discourse was particular enough: 
It was about a prophet's story or parable of an ewelamb
taken by a rich man from a poor one, who dearly
loved it, and whose only comfort it was: Designed to
strike remorse into David, on his adultery with
Uriah's wife Bathsheba, and his murder of the husband. 
[These women, Jack, have been the occasion
of all manner of mischief from the beginning!] Now,
when David, full of indignation, swore [King David
would swear, Jack: But how shouldst thou know
who King David was? The story is in the Bible],
that the rich man should surely die; Nathan, which
was the prophet's name, and a good ingenious fellow,
cry'd out (which were the words of the text), Thou
art the man! —By my soul I thought the parson look'd
directly at me: And at that moment I cast my eye full
at my ewe-lamb. But I must tell thee too, that I
thought a good deal of my Rosebud. —A better man
than King David, in that point, however, thought I! 
When we came home, we talk'd upon the subject; 
and I shew'd my charmer my attention to the discourse,
by letting her know where the doctor made
the most of his subject, and where it might have been
touch'd to greater advantage (For it is really a very affecting
story, and has as pretty a contrivance in it as
ever I read). And this I did in such a grave way,
that she seemed more and more pleas'd with me; and
I have no doubt, that I shall get her to favour me tomorrow
night with her company at my collation. 
Sunday evening. 
We all dined together in Mrs. Sinclair's parlour! 
All ex-cessive-ly right! The two nieces have topp'd
their parts: Mrs. Sinclair hers. Never so easy yet as
now! —‘She really thought a little oddly of these
people at first, she said: Mrs. Sinclair seem'd very
forbidding! Her nieces were persons, with whom
she could not wish to be acquainted. But really we 

should not be too hasty in our censures. Some
people improve upon us. The widow seems tolerable.’ 
[She went no farther than tolerable]. ‘Miss
Martin and Miss Horton are young people of good
sense, and have read a good deal. What Miss Martin
particularly said of marriage, and of her humble
servant, was very solid. She believes, with such
notions, she cannot make a bad wife.’ —By the
way, Sally's humble servant is a woolen-draper of
great reputation; and she is soon to be marry'd. 
I have been letting her into thy character, and into
the characters of my other three Esquires, in hopes to
excite her curiosity to see you to-morrow night. I
have told her some of the worst, as well as best parts
of your characters, in order to exalt myself, and to
obviate any sudden surprizes, as well as to teach her
what sort of men she may expect to see, if she will
oblige me. 
By her observations upon each of you, I shall judge
what I may or may not do to obtain or keep her good
opinion: What she will like, what not; and so pursue
the one, or avoid the other, as I see proper. —So,
while she is penetrating into your shallow heads, I
shall enter her heart, and know what to bid my own
hope for. 
The house is to be taken in three weeks: All will
be over in three weeks, or bad will be my luck! — 
Who knows but in three days? —Have I not carry'd
that great point of making her pass for my wife to the
people below? And that other great one of fixing myself
here night and day? —What lady ever escaped
me, that lodg'd under one roof with me? —The
house too, THE house; the people, people after my
own heart: Her servants Will and Dorcas both my
servants. —Three days did I say! Pho! pho! —Three
hours! 
I have carried my third point, Jack; but extremely 

to the dislike of my charmer. Miss Partington
was introduced to her; and being engaged on
condition, that my beloved would honour me at my
collation, there was no denying her; so fine a young
lady! seconded by my earnest intreaties. 
I long to have your opinions of my fair prize! —If
you love to see features that glow, tho' the heart is
frozen, and never yet was thaw'd; if you love fine
sense, and adages flowing thro' tecth of ivory, and
lips of coral; an eye that penetrates all things; a
voice that is harmony itself; an air of grandeur,
mingled with a sweetness that cannot be described; a
politeness that, if ever equalled, was never excelled—You'll
see all these excellencies, and ten times more,
in this my Gloriana. 

Mark her majestic fabric!—She's a temple
Sacred by birth, and built by hands divine;
Her soul the deity that lodges there:
Nor is the pile unworthy of the god.
Or, to describe her in a softer stile, with Rowe, 

The bloom of op'ning flow'rs, unfully'd beauty,
Softness, and sweetness innocence, she wears,
And looks like nature in the world's first spring.
Adieu, varlets four! —At six on Monday evening,
I expect ye all. 
In the Lady's next letter, dated on Monday morning,
she praises his behaviour at church, his observations
afterwards. Likes the people of the house better
than she did. The more likes them by reason of the
people of condition that visit them. 
She dates again, and declares herself displeased at
Miss Partington's being introduced to her: And
still more for being obliged to promise to be present
at Mr. Lovelace's collation. She foresees, she
says, a murder'd evening. 