


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


Bologna, July 7–18.
It was late last night before I arrived at this place. 
I sent my compliments to the family. In the morning
I went to their palace, and was immediately conducted
to the chamber of Signor Jeronymo. He was
disposing himself to rise, that he might receive me up,
in order to rejoice me on his ability to do so. I sat
down by him, and received the overflowings of his
grateful heart. Every-body, he told me, was amended
both in health and spirits. 
Camilla came in soon after, congratulating me on
my arrival in the name of her young Lady. She let
me know, that in less than a quarter of an hour she
would be ready to receive my visit. 
O Sir, said the good woman, miracles! miracles! 
—We are all joy and hope! 

At going out, she whispered as she passed (I was
then at the window) My young Lady is dressing in
colours, to receive you. She will no more appear
to you, she says, in black—Now, Sir, will you soon
reap the reward of all your goodness; for the General
has signified to my Lord his entire acquiescence with
his sister's choice, and their determination. 
The Bishop came in: Chevalier, said he, you are
welcome, thrice welcome, to Bologna. You have
subdued us all. Clementina commands her own destiny. 
The man whom she chooses to call hers, be he
who he will, will have a treasure in her, in every
sense of the word. The Marquis, the Count, Father
Marescotti, all severally made me the highest compliments. 
The Count particularly taking my hand, said,
From us, Chevalier, nothing will be wanting to make
you happy: From you, there can be but one thing
wanting to make us so. 
The Marchioness entering, saved me any other return,
than by bowing to each. Before I could speak
to her, Welcome, Chevalier, said she: But you are
not come before you were wished for. You will find,
we have kept a more exact account of the days of
your absence, than we did before. I hope her joy to
see you will not be too much for her. Clementina
ever had a grateful heart. 
The Chevalier's prudence, said Father Marescotti,
may be confided in. He knows how to moderate his
own joy on his first address to her, on seeing her so
greatly amended: And then Lady Clementina's natural
delicacy will not have an example to carry her
joy above her reason. 
The Chevalier, madam, said the Bishop, smiling,
will, at this rate, be too secure. We leave him not
room for professions. But he cannot be ungenerous. 
The Chevalier Grandison, said the kind Jeronymo,
speaks by action: It is his way. His head, his heart,
his lips, his hands, are governed by one motion, and 

directed by one spring. When he leaves no room for
doubt, professions would depreciate his service. 
He then ascribed an extraordinary merit to me, on
my leaving my native country and friends, to attend
them in person. 
We may, perhaps, my reverend friend, be allowed
to repeat the commendations given us by grateful and
benevolent friends, when we cannot otherwise so well
do justice to the generous warmth of such exalted
spirits. The noble Jeronymo, I am confident, were
he in my place, and I in his, would put a more moderate
value on the like services, done by himself. 
What is friendship, if, on the like calls, and blessed
with power, it is not ready to exert itself in action? 
Grandison, replied the Bishop, were he one of us,
might expect canonization. In a better religion, we
have but few young men of quality and fortune so good
as he; tho' I think none so bad, as many of the pretended
Reformed, who travel, as if to copy our vices,
and not to imitate our virtues. 
I was overwhelmed with gratitude, on a reception
so very generous and unreserved. Camilla came in
seasonably with a message from the young Lady, inviting
my attendance on her in her dressing-room. 
The Marchioness withdrew just before. I followed
Camilla. She told me, as we went, that she thought
her not quite so sedate as she had been for some days
past; which she supposed owing to her hurrying in
dressing, and to her expectation of me. 
The mother and daughter were together. They
were talking, when I entered—Dear fanciful girl! 
I heard the mother say, disposing otherwise some flowers
that she had in her bosom. 
Clementina, when her mind was sound, used to
be all unaffected elegance. I never saw but one woman
who equalled her in that respect. Miss Byron
seems conscious, that she may trust to her native
charms; yet betrays no pride in her consciousness. 

Who ever spoke of her jewels, that beheld her face? 
For mingled dignity, and freedom of air and manner,
these two Ladies excel amongst women. 
Clementina appeared exceedingly lovely. But her
fancifulness in the disposition of her ornaments, and
the unusual lustre of her eyes, which every one was
wont to admire for their serene brightness, shewed an
imagination more disordered than I hoped to see; and
gave me pain at my entrance. 
The Chevalier, my Love! (said the Marchioness,
turning round to me) Clementina, receive your friend. 
She stood up, dignity and sweetness in her air. I
approached her: She refused not her hand. The General,
madam, and his Lady, salute you by me. 
They received you, I am sure, as the friend of our
family. But tell me, Sir, smiling, have you not exceeded
your promised time? 
Two or three days only. 
Only, Sir! —Well, I upbraid you not. No wonder
that a man so greatly valued, cannot always keep
his time. 
She hesitated, looked at her mother, at me, and on
the floor, visibly at a loss. Then, as sensible of her
wandering, turned aside her head, and took out her
handkerchief. 
Mrs. Beaumont, madam, said I, to divert her chagrin,
sends you her compliments. 
Were you at Florence? —Mrs. Beaumont, said you! 
—Were you at Florence! Then running to her mother,
she threw her arms about her neck, hiding her
face in her bosom—O, madam, conceal me! conceal
me from myself. I am not well. 
Be comforted, my best Love, wrapping her maternal
arms about her, and kissing her forehead; you
will be better presently. 
I made a motion to withdraw. The Marchioness,
by her head, approving, I went into the next apartment. 

She soon enquired for me, and, on notice from Camilla,
I returned. 
She sat with her head leaning on her mother's shoulder. 
She raised it—Excuse me, Sir, said she. I cannot
be well, I see—But no matter! I am better, and I am
worse, than I was: Worse because I am sensible of my
calamity. 
Her eyes had then lost all that lustre which had
shewn a too raised imagination: But they were as
much in the other extreme, overclouded with mistiness,
dimness, vapours; swimming in tears. 
I took her hand: Be not dishearten'd, madam. You
will be soon well. These are usual turns of the malady
you seem to be so sensible of, when it is changing
to perfect health. 
God grant it! —O Chevalier! what trouble have I
given my friends!—my mamma here! —You, Sir! — 
Every-body! O that naughty Laurana! But for her! 
—But tell me—Is she dead? —Poor cruel creature! 
Is she no more? 
Would you have her to be no more, my Love? said
her mother. 
O no! no! I would have had her to live, and to
repent. Was she not the companion of my childhood? 
She loved me once. I always loved her. Say, Chevalier,
is she living? 
I looked at the Marchioness, as asking, if I should
tell her she was; and receiving her approving nod,
She is living, madam, answered I—and I hope will repent— 
Is she, is she indeed, my mamma? interrupted
she. 
She is, my dear. 
Thank God! rising from her seat, clasping her
hands, and standing more erect than usual; then have
I a triumph to come! said the noble creature! Excuse
my pride! I will shew her that I can forgive her! 
—But I will talk of her when I am better. You say, 

Sir, I shall be better! You say that my malady is
changing—What comfort you give me! 
Then dropping down against her mother's chair,
on her knees, her eyes and hands lifted up, Great and
good God Almighty, heal, heal, I beseech thee, my
wounded mind, that I may be enabled to restore to the
most indulgent of parents, the happiness I have robbed
them of. Join your prayers with mine, Sir! You
are a good man—But you, madam, are a Catholic,
The Chevalier is not—Do you pray for me. I shall
be restored to your prayers. And may I be restored,
as I shall never more do any-thing, wilfully, to offend
or disturb your tender heart. 
God restore my child! sobbed the indulgent parent,
raising her. 
Camilla had not withdrawn. She stood weeping
in a corner of the room. Camilla, said the young
Lady, advancing towards her, lend me your arm. 
I will return to you again, Sir—Don't go—Excuse
me, madam, for a few moments. I find, putting
her hand to her forehead, I am not quite well—I will
return presently. 
The Marchioness and I were extremely affected by
her great behaviour: But tho' we were grieved for the
pain her sensibility gave her, yet we could not but
console and congratulate ourselves upon it, as affording
hopes of her perfect recovery. 
She returned soon, attended by Camilla; who
having been soothing her, appealed to me, whether I
did not think she would soon be quite well. 
I answered, That I had no question of it. 
Look you there, now, my dear Lady. 
I thought you said so, Chevalier; but I was not
sure. God grant it! My affliction is great, my mamma. 
I must have been a wicked creature—Pray for me. 
Her mother comforted her, praised her, and raised
her dejected heart. And then Clementina looking
down, a blush overspreading her face, and standing 

motionless, as if considering of something—What is in
my child's thoughts? said the Marchioness, taking her
hand. What is my Love thinking of? 
Why, madam, in a low, but audible voice, I should
be glad to talk with the Chevalier alone, methinks. 
He is a good man. But if you think I ought not,
I will not desire it. In every-thing I will be governed
by you: Yet I am ashamed. What can I have to
say, that my mother may not hear? —Nothing, nothing. 
Your Clementina's heart, madam, is a part
of yours. 
My Love shall be indulged in every-thing. You and
I, Camilla, will retire—Clementina was silent; and
both withdrew. 
She commanded me to sit down by her. I obeyed. 
It was not, in the situation I was in, for me to speak
first. I attended her pleasure in silence. 
She seemed at a loss. She looked round her; then
at me; then on the floor. I could not then forbear
speaking. 
The mind of Lady Clementina, said I, seems to
have something upon it, that she wishes to communicate. 
You have not, madam, a more sincere, a
more faithful friend, than the man before you. Your
happiness, and that of my Jeronymo, engross all my
cares. Honour me with your confidence. 
I had something to say: I had many questions to
ask—But pity me, Sir! my memory is gone: I have
lost it all—But this I know, that we are all under obligations
to you, which we never can return: And I
am uneasy under the sense of them. 
What, madam, have I done, but answered to the
call of friendship, which, in the like situation, not
any one of your family but would have obeyed?— 
This generous way of thinking adds to the obligation. 
Say but, Sir, in what way we can express
our gratitude, in what way I, in particular, can, and
I shall be easy. Till we have done it, I never shall. 

And can you, madam, think, that I am not highly
rewarded, in the prospect of that success which opens
to all our wishes? 
It may be so in your opinion: But this leaves the
debt still heavier upon us. 
How could I avoid construing the hint in my favour? 
And yet I did not think the Lady, even had she
not had parents in being, had she been absolutely independent,
well enough to determine for herself in a
situation so delicate. How then could I, in honour
(all her friends expecting that I should be entirely governed
by her motions, as they were resolved to be)
take direct advantage of the gratitude which at that
instant possessed her noble mind? 
If, madam, answered I, you will suppose yourselves
under obligations to me, and will not be easy till you
have acknowleged them, the return must be a family
act. Let me refer myself to your father, mother, brothers,
and to yourself: What you and they determine
upon must be right. 
After a short silence—Well, Sir, I believe you have
put the matter upon a right footing: But here is my
difficulty—You cannot be rewarded. I cannot reward
you. But, Sir, the subject begins to be too much for
me. I have high notions—My duty to God, and to
my parents; my gratitude to you—But I have begun
to write down all that has occurred to me on this important
subject. I wish to act greatly! You, Sir,
have set me the example. I will continue to write
down my thoughts: I cannot trust to my memory— 
No, nor yet to my heart! —But no more on a subject
that is at present too affecting to me. I will talk to
my mother upon it first; but not just now; tho' I
will ask for the honour of her presence. 
She then went from me into the next room; and
instantly returned, leading in the Marchioness. Don't,
dear madam, be angry with me. I had many things
to say to the Chevalier; which I thought I could best 

say, when I was alone with him; but I forget what
they were. Indeed, I ought not to remember them,
if they were such as I could not say before my mother. 
My child cannot do any-thing that can make me
displeased with her. The Chevalier's generosity, and
my Clementina's goodness of heart, can neither of
them be doubted. 
O, madam! What a deep sense have I of yours
and of my father's indulgence to me! How shall I
requite it! —How unworthy should I be of that returning
reason, which sometimes seems to enliven my
hope, if I were not to resolve, that it shall be wholly
employed in my duty to God, and to you both! But
even then, my gratitude to that generous man will
leave a burden upon my heart, that never can be removed. 
She withdrew with precipitation, leaving the Marchioness
and me, in silence, looking upon each other,
and admiring her. Camilla followed her; and instantly
returning—My dear young Lady—Don't be
frightened, madam—is not well. She seems to have
exhausted her spirits by talking. 
The Marchioness hastened in with Camilla. And
while I was hesitating, whether to withdraw to Jeronymo,
or to quit the palace, Camilla came to me— 
My young Lady asks for you, Sir. 
I followed her to her closet. She was in her mother's
arms, on a couch; just come out of a fit; but
not a strong one. She held out her hand to me. I
pressed it with my lips. I was affected with her nobleness
of mind, and weakness of spirit—O Chevalier,
said she, how unworthy am I of that tenderness which
you express for me! O that I could be grateful! —But
God will reward you. He only can. 
She desired her mother and me to leave her to her
Camilla. We both withdrew. 
What can be done with this dear creature, Chevalier? 

She is going to be bad again! —O, Sir! Her
behaviour is now different from what it ever was! 
She seems, madam, to have something on her mind,
that she has a difficulty to reveal. When she has revealed
it, she will be easier. You will prevail upon
her, madam, by your condescending goodness, to communicate
it to you. Allow me to withdraw to Signor
Jeronymo. Lady Clementina, when she is a little
recovered, will acquaint you with what passed between
her and me. 
I heard it all, replied she; and you are the most honourable
of men. What man would, what man
could, have acted as you acted, with regard to her,
with regard to us; yet not slight the dear creature's
manifest meaning; but refer it to us, and to her, to
make it a family act? A family act it must, it shall
be. Only, Sir, let me be assured, that my child's
malady will not lessen your Love for her: And permit
her to be a Catholic! —These are all the terms,
I, for my part, have to make with you. The rest of
us still wish, that you would be so, tho' but in appearance,
for the sake of our alliances. But I will not
expect an answer to the last. As to the first, you
cannot be ungenerous to one who has suffered so much
for her Love of you. 
The Marquis and the Bishop entering the room,
I leave it to you, madam, said I, to acquaint their
Lordships with what has passed. I will attend Signor
Jeronymo for a few moments. 
I went accordingly to his chamber; but being told,
that he was disposed to rest, I withdrew with Mr.
Lowther into his: And there Camilla coming to me,
Mr. Lowther retiring, she told me, that her young
Lady was pretty well recovered. It was evident to
her, she said, that she never would be well till the
marriage was solemnized. They are all, said she, in
close conference together, I believe upon that subject. 
My young Lady is endeavouring to compose 

herself in her closet. The Marchioness hopes you
will stay, and dine here. 
I excused myself from dining; and desired her to
tell her Lady, that I would attend them in the evening. 
I am now preparing to do so. 

