


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


Parma, Monday Night, Aug. 21. Sept. 1.
Here I am, my dear Dr. Bartlett. Just arrived. 
The Count of Belvedere allows me to be alone. 
I am not fit for company. 
The whole family, Jeronymo and Clementina excepted,
dined with me on Saturday. Clementina was
not well enough to leave her chamber. She would
endeavour, she said, on Sunday night, when I was to
take my leave of them all, to behave with as much
presence of mind as she did on a former occasion. All
the intervenient time, she said, was necessary to fortify
her heart. But, alas! the circumstances between 

us, then and now, were not the same. We had, for
some time past, been allowedly too dear to each other,
to appear, either of us, so politely distant, as we did
then. 
She never once asked me to suspend the day of my
departure. Every one else repeatedly did. We both
thought it best, as the separation was necessary, that
it should not be suspended. 
I had many things to do; many Letters to write; 
much to say to Mr. Lowther, and he to me. I declined
therefore their invitation to attend them home
in the evening, as well as to dine with them next day. 
The solemn visit was to be made yesterday in the
evening; and every visit near the time, would have
been as so many farewels. My own heart, at least,
told me so, and forbad me more than one parting
scene. The time so near, they themselves wished it
past. 
The Count had come from Urbino on purpose,
with the two young Lords, to take leave of me:
What blessings did that nobleman, and the Marquis
and Marchioness, invoke upon me! The General had
more than once tears in his eyes: He besought me to
forgive him for every-thing, in his behaviour, that
had been disagreeable to me. His Lady permitted me
to take leave of her in the most affectionate manner; 
and said, that she hoped to prevail on her Lord to
visit me himself, and to allow her to bear him company,
in my own country. The Bishop supplicated
Heaven to reward me, for what he called my goodness
to their family. Father Marescotti joined in his
supplications, with a bent knee. The Marquis and
Marchioness both wept; and called me by very endearing
names, vowing everlasting love and gratitude
to me. Jeronymo! my dear Jeronymo! one of the
most amiable of men! how precious to my soul will
ever be the remembrance of his friendly love! His
only consolation was, and it is mine, that, in a few 

months, we shall meet in England. They wanted to
load me with presents. They pained me with their
importunities, that I would accept of some very valuable
ones. They saw my pain; and, in pity to me,
declined their generous solicitations. 
Clementina was not present at this parting scene. 
She had shut herself up for the greatest part of the
day. Her mother, and her sister-in-law, had been her
only visiters: And she having declared that she was
afraid of seeing me, it was proposed to me, whether
it were not best for me to depart, without seeing her. 
I can well spare to myself, said I, the emotions which,
already so great, will, on taking leave of her, be too
powerful for my heart, if you think, that, when I am
gone, she will not wish (as once she was so earnest,
even to discomposure, for a farewel visit) that she had
allowed herself to see me. 
They all were then of opinion, that she should be
prevailed upon. Camilla at that instant came down
with her Lady's desire, that I would attend her. In
what way, Camilla, is my Clementina? asked the Marchioness:
Every-one attending the answer. In great
grief, madam: Almost in agonies. She was sending
me down with her warmest wishes to the Chevalier,
and with her excuses; but called me back, saying, she
would subdue herself: She would see him: And bid
me hasten for fear he should be gone. 
The two Marchionesses went up directly. I was
in tremors. Surely, thought I, I am the weakest of
men! —The Bishop and General took notice of my
emotion, and pitied me. They all joined in the wish
so often repeated, that I could yet be theirs. 
I followed Camilla. Lady Clementina, when I entered,
sat between the mother and sister; an arm
round each of their necks: Her face was reclined, as
if she were ready to faint, on the bosom of her mother,
who held her salts to her. I was half-way in
the room, before either mother or daughter saw me. 

The Chevalier Grandison, my best sister! said the
young Marchioness: Look up, my Love. 
She raised her head. Then stood up, courtesied; 
and, gushing into tears, turned her face from me. 
I approached her: Her mother gave me the hand
of her Clementina—Comfort her, comfort my Clementina,
good Chevalier—You only can—Sit down,
my Love. Take my seat, Sir. 
The young Lady trembled. She sat down. Her
mother seated herself; tears in her eyes. I sat down
by Clementina. The dear Lady sobbed; and the
more, as she endeavoured to suppress her emotion. 
I addressed myself to her sister-in-law, who had
kept her seat—Your Ladyship, said I, gives me a very
high pleasure, in the hope of seeing you, and your
Lord, a few months hence, in company with my Jeronymo. 
What a blessing is it to us all, that that dear
friend is so well recovered? I have no doubt but
change of climate, and our salutary springs, will do
wonders for him. Let us, by our patience and resignation,
intitle ourselves to greater blessings; the consequence,
as I hope, of those we have already received. 
Please God, I will see you in England, Chevalier,
said the young Marchioness, if my Lord is in the least
favourable to my wishes: And I hope my beloved
sister may be of the party. You, madam, and the
Marquis, I hope—looking at her mother-in-law. 
I hope you will not go without us, my dear,
replied the Marchioness. If our dear Clementina
shall be well, we will not leave her behind us. 
Ah, madam! —Ah, Sir!—said Clementina, how
you flatter me! But this, this night, if the Chevalier
goes early in the morning, is the last time I shall ever
see him. 
God forbid! replied I—I hope that we may, many,
many years rejoice, in each other's friendship. Let us
look forward with what pleasure we may. My heart,
madam, wants your comfortings. I have a greater 

opinion of your magnanimity, than I have reason to
have of my own. I depart not, but in consequence
of your will—Enable me, by your example, to sustain
that consequence. In every-thing you must be an
example to me. I could not have done, as you have
done: Bid me support my spirits in the hope of seeing
you again, and seeing you happy. Tell me, that
your endeavours shall not be wanting to be so: And
I shall then be so too: Dear Lady Clementina, my
happiness is bound up with yours. 
Ah, Sir, I am not greater than you: And I am less
than myself. I was afraid when I came to the trial— 
But is your happiness bound up with mine? O that I
may be happy for your sake! I will endeavour to make
myself so. You have given me a motive. Best of
men! How much am I obliged to you! Will you
cherish my remembrance? Will you forgive all my
foibles? —The trouble I have given you? —I know
you depart in consequence of my—Perverseness—perhaps
you think it, tho' you will not call it so—What
shall I do, if you think me either perverse or ungrateful? 
I do not, I cannot, think you either. May I be assured
of your correspondence, madam? Your Ladyship,
turning to her mother, will give it your countenance— 
By all means, answered the Marchioness. We
shall all correspond with you. We shall pray for you,
and bless you, every day that we live. You will be
to me, as you have always been, a fourth son—My
dearest Clementina, say, if your mind is changed, if
it be likely to change, if you think that you shall not
be happy, if the Chevalier— 
O madam, permit me to withdraw for one moment. 
She hurried to her closet. She shut the door, and
poured out her soul in prayer; and soon returning— 
It must be so—with an air of assumed greatness. Let 

thy steadiness, O Grandison, excuse and keep mine in
countenance—Bear witness, my sister; forgive me,
my mamma: But never did one mortal love another,
as I do the man before us. But you both, and you,
my dear Chevalier, know the competition; and shall
not the Unseen (casting up her eyes surcharged with
tears) be greater with me than the seen? Be you my
brother, my friend, and the lover of my soul. This
person is unworthy of you. The mind that animates
it, is broken, disturbed—Pray for me, as I will for
you— 
Then dropping down on one knee, God preserve
and convert thee, best of Protestants, and worthiest
of men! Guide thy footsteps, and bless thee in thy
future and better lot! But if the woman, whom thou
shalt distinguish by thy choice, loves thee not, person
and mind, as well as she before thee, she deserves
thee not. 
I would have raised her; but she would not be
raised—seeming full of some other great sentiments. 
I kneeled to her, clasping my arms about her: May
you, madam, be ever, ever happy! —I resign to your
will—And equally admire and reverence you for it,
though a sufferer by it. Lasting, as fervent, be our
friendship! —And may we know each other hereafter,
in a place where all is harmony and love; where no
difference in opinion can sunder, as now, persons
otherwise formed to promote each other's happiness! 
I raised her, and arose; and kissing first one hand,
then the other, and bowing to the two Marchionesses,
was hastening from her. 
She clapt her hands together—He is gone! —O
stay, stay, Chevalier—And will you go?— 
I was in too much emotion to wish to be seen— 
She hastened after me to the stairs—O stay, stay! I
have not said half I had to say— 
I returned, and, taking her hand, bowed upon it,
to conceal my sensibility—What further commands, 

with a faltering voice, has Lady Clementina for her
Grandison? 
I don't know—But will you, must you, will you
go? 
I go; I stay; I have no will but yours, madam. 
The two Marchionesses stood together, rapt in
silent attention, leaning on each other. 
Clementina sighed, sobbed, wept; then turning from
me, then towards me; but not withdrawing her hand; 
I thought, said she, I had a thousand things to say— 
But I have lost them all! —Go thou, in peace; and
be happy! And God Almighty make me so! Adieu,
dearest of men! 
She condescendingly inclined her cheek to me: I
saluted her; but could not utter to her what yet was
upon my lips to speak. 
She withdrew her hand. She seemed to want support. 
Her mother and sister hastened to her. I stopt
at the door. Her eyes pursued my motions. By her
uplifted hands she seemed praying for me. I was apprehensive
of her fainting. I hastened towards her; 
but restraining myself, just as I had reached her, again
hurried to the door: And on my knees, with clasped
hands, audibly there besought God to sustain, support,
preserve, the noble Clementina: And seeing her seated
in the arms of both Ladies, I withdrew to Mr.
Lowther's apartment; and shut myself in for a few
moments. When a little recovered, I could not but
step in to my Jeronymo. He was alone; drying his
eyes as he sat: But seeing me enter, he burst out into
fresh tears. Once more, my Jeronymo—I would have
comforted him; but wanted comfort myself. 
O my Grandison! embracing me, as I did him— 
Clementina! The angel Clementina! Ah, my
Jeronymo! —Grief again denied me further speech for a
moment. I saw that my emotion increased his—Love,
love, said I, the dear—I would have added Clementina; 

but my trembling lips refused distinct utterance
to the word. —I tore myself from his embrace,
and with precipitation left the tenderest of friends. 
About eleven, according to the English numbering
of the hours, I sent to know how the whole family
did. Father Marescotti returned with my servant. 
He told me, that the Lady fainted away after I was
gone: But went to rest as soon as recovered. They all
were in grief, he said. He was charged with the best
wishes, and with the blessings, of every one; with those
of the two Marchionesses in particular. Signor Jeronymo
was so ill, that one of his Italian surgeons proposed
to sit up with him all night; for Mr. Lowther
had desired to accompany me as far as Modena: And
him I charged with my compliments to each person
of the family; and with my remembrances to servants,
who well deserved kindness from me; and who, Father
Marescotti told me, were all in tears on my departure. 
I prevailed on the Father himself to make
my acknowlegements to the good Camilla. He offered,
and I thankfully accepted of, his prayers for my
health and happiness, which he put up in the most
fervent manner, on his knees; and then embracing
me, with a tenderness truly paternal, we parted, blessing
each other. 
This morning early, I set out. The Count of Belvedere
rejoiced to see me; and called me kind, for
being his guest, though but for one night; for I shall
pursue my journey in the morning. He assures me,
that he will make me a visit in England. 
You will hardly, till I arrive at Paris, have another
Letter, my dear Dr. Bartlett, from 
Your ever-affectionate
Charles Grandison. 

