



And now I am come to the Close of WEDNESDAY, the 27th Day of my Distress. 

Poor Mr. Williams is actually arrested,
and carried away to Stamford. So there
is an End of all my Hopes from him. Poor
Gentleman! his Over-security and Openness
have ruin'd us both! I was but too well convinc'd,
that we ought not to have lost a Moment's
time; but he was half angry, and thought
me too impatient; and then his fatal Confessions,
and the detestable Artifice of my Master! 
—But one might well think, that he who
had so cunningly, and so wickedly, contrived
all his Stratagems hitherto, that it was impossible
to avoid them, would stick at nothing to
complete them. I fear I shall soon find it so! 
But one Stratagem I have just invented, tho'
a very discouraging one to think of, because
I have neither Friends nor Money, nor know
one Step of the Way, if I was out of the House. 
But let Bulls, and Bears, and Lions, and Tygers,
and, what is worse, false, treacherous, deceitful
Men, stand in my Way, I cannot be in
more Danger than I am; and I depend nothing
upon his Three Weeks: For how do I know, now 

he is in such a Passion, and has already begun
his Vengeance on poor Mr. Williams, that he
will not change his Mind, and come down to
Lincolnshire before he goes to London. 
My Stratagem is this: I will endeavour to
get Mrs. Jewkes to go to-bed without me; 
as she often does, while I sit lock'd up in my
Closet; and as she sleeps very sound in her
first Sleep, of which she never fails to give Notice
by Snoring, if I can but then get out between
the Two Bars of the Window, (for you
know, I am very slender, and I find I can get
my Head thro') then I can drop upon the Leads
underneath, which are little more than my
Height, and which Leads are over a little Summer-parlour,
that juts out towards the Garden; 
and as I am light, I can easily drop from them; 
for they are not high from the Ground: Then I
shall be in the Garden; and then, as I have the
Key of the Back-door, I will get out. But I have
another Piece of Cunning still; good Heaven succeed
to me my dangerous, but innocent Devices! 
—I have read of a great Captain, who being
in Danger, leap'd over-board, into the Sea; and
his Enemies, as he swam, shooting at him with
Bows and Arrows, he unloosed his upper Garment,
and took another Course, while they
stuck that full of their Darts and Arrows; and
so he escaped, and lived to triumph over them
all. So what will I do, but strip off my upper
Petticoat, and throw it into the Pond, with
my Neck-handkerchief; for, to be sure, when
they miss me, they will go to the Pond first, 

thinking I have drown'd myself; and so, when
they see some of my Cloaths floating there, they
will be all employ'd in dragging the Pond,
which is a very large one; and as I shall not,
perhaps, be miss'd till the Morning, this will
give me Opportunity to get a great way off; 
and I am sure I will run for it when I am out. 
And so I trust, that Providence will direct my
Steps to some good Place of Safety, and make
some worthy Body my Friend; for sure, if I
suffer ever so, I cannot be in more Danger, nor
in worse Hands, than where I am; and with
such avowed bad Designs. 
O my dear Parents! don't be frighted when
you come to read this! —But all will be over
before you can see it; and so God direct me for
the best. My Writings, for fear I should not
escape, I will bury in the Garden; for, to be
sure, I shall be search'd, and used dreadfully,
if I can't get off. And so I will close here,
for the present, to prepare for my Plot. Prosper
thou, O gracious Protector of oppressed
Innocence! this last Effort of thy poor Handmaid; 
that I may escape the crafty Devices and
Snares that have begun to entangle my Virtue; 
and from which, but by this one Trial, I see no
way of escaping! And, Oh! whatever becomes
of me, bless my dear Parents, and protect poor
Mr. Williams from Ruin! for he was happy before
he knew me! 

Just now, just now! I heard Mrs. Jewkes,
who is in her Cups, own to the horrid Colbrand,
that the Robbing of poor Mr. Williams
was a Contrivance of hers, and executed by the
Groom and a Helper, in order to seize my Letters
upon him, which they miss'd. They are
now both laughing at the dismal Story, which
they little think I overheard,—O how my
Heart akes! for what are not such Wretches
capable of! Can you blame me for endeavouring,
thro' any Danger, to get out of such
Clutches? 
Past Eleven o'Clock.
Mrs. Jewkes is come up, and gone to-bed; 
and bids me not stay long in my Closet,
but come to-bed. O for a dead Sleep for the
treacherous Brute! I never saw her so tipsy,
and that gives me Hopes. I have try'd again,
and find I can get my Head thro' the Iron
Bars. I am now all prepared, as soon as I
hear her fast; and now I'll seal up these and
my other Papers, my last Work, and to thy
Providence, O my gracious God, commit the
rest! —Once more, God bless you both! and
send us a happy Meeting; if not here, in his
heavenly Kingdom! Amen. 
