



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Saturday, May 27. 
Mr. Lovelace, my dear, has been very ill. Suddenly
taken. With a vomiting of blood in
great quantities. Some vessel broken. He complained
of a disorder in his stomach over-night. I
was the more affected with it, as I am afraid it was
occasioned by the violent contentions between us. —But
was I in fault? 
How lately did I think I hated him! —But hatred
and anger, I see, are but temporary passions with me. 
One cannot, my dear, hate people in danger of death,
or who are in distress or affliction. My heart, I find,
is not proof against kindness, and acknowlegement of
errors committed. 

He took great care to have his illness concealed
from me as long as it could. So tender in the violence
of his disorder! —So desirous to make the best
of it! —I wish he had not been ill in my sight. I
was too much affected—Every-body alarming me
with his danger—The poor man, from such high
health, so suddenly taken! —And so unprepared!— 
He is gone out in a chair. I advised him to do so. 
I fear that my advice was wrong; since Quiet in such
a disorder must needs be best. We are apt to be so
ready, in cases of emergency, to give our advice,
without judgment, or waiting for it! —I proposed a
physician indeed; but he would not hear of one. I
have great honour for the faculty; and the greater,
as I have always observed, that those who treat
the professors of the Art of healing contemptuously,
too generally treat higher institutions in the same
manner. 
I am really very uneasy. For I have, I doubt, exposed
myself to him, and to the women below. They
indeed will excuse me, as they think us married. But
if he be not generous, I shall have cause to regret this
surprize; which (as I had reason to think myself unaccountably
treated by him) has taught me more than
I knew of myself. 
&dotup;'Tis true, I have owned more than once, that I
could have liked Mr. Lovelace above all men. I
remember the debates you and I used to have on
this subject, when I was your happy guest. You
used to say, and once you wrote (a) , that men of
his cast are the men that our Sex do not naturally
dislike: While I held, that such were not (however
that might be) the men we ought to like. But
what with my Relations precipitating of me, on
one hand, and what with his unhappy character,
and embarrassing ways, on the other, I had no more
leisure than inclination to examine my own heart 

in this particular. And this reminds me of a passage
in one of your former Letters, which I will
transcribe, tho' it was written in raillery. May it
not be, say you (a) , that you have had such persons
to deal with, as have not allowed you to attend to the
throbs; or, if you had them a little now-and-then,
whether, having had two accounts to place them to,
you have not by mistake put them to the wrong one? 
A passage, which, altho' it came into my mind
when Mr. Lovelace was least exceptionable, yet
that I have denied any efficacy to, when he has
teazed and vexed me, and given me cause of suspicion. 
For, after all, my dear, Mr. Lovelace is
not wise in all his ways. And should we not endeavour,
as much as is possible (where we are not
attached by natural ties) to like and dislike as reason
bids us, and according to the merit or demerit
of the object? If Love, as it is called, is allowed
to be an excuse for our most unreasonable follies,
and to lay level all the fences that a careful education
has surrounded us by, what is meant by the
doctrine of subduing our passions? —But, O my
dearest friend, am I not guilty of a punishable fault,
were I to love this man of errors? And has not my
own heart deceived me, when I thought I did not? 
And what must be that Love, that has not some
degree of purity for its object? I am afraid of recollecting
some passages in my Cousin Morden's
Letter (b) . —And yet why fly I from subjects that,
duly considered, might tend to correct and purify
my heart? I have carried, I doubt, my notions on
this head too high, not for practice, but for my
practice. Yet think me not guilty of Prudery neither; 
for had I found out as much of myself before,
or, rather, had he given me heart's-ease
enough before to find it out, you should have had
my confession sooner.&dotup; 

Nevertheless let me tell you (what I hope I may
justly tell you) that if again he give me cause to resume
distance and reserve, I hope my reason will gather
strength enough from his imperfections, to
enable me to keep my passions under. —What can we
do more than govern ourselves by the temporary
lights lent us? 
You will not wonder that I am grave on this detection
—Detection, must I call it? What can I call
it?— 
Dissatisfied with myself, I am afraid to look back
upon what I have written: And yet know not how
to have done writing. I never was in such an odd
frame of mind. —I know not how to describe it. — 
Was you ever so? —Afraid of the censure of her you
love—Yet not conscious that you deserve it? 
Of this, however, I am convinced, that I should
indeed deserve censure, if I kept any secret of my
heart from you. 
But I will not add another word, after I have assured
you, that I will look still more narrowly into
myself: And that I am 
You equally sincere and affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 