


Miss Harriet Byron, To Miss Lucy Selby. 


Sat. Mar. 4. 
This morning Sir Hargrave Pollexfen made Mr.
Reeves a visit. He said it was to him; but I was
unluckily below; and forced to hear all he had to say,
or to appear unpolite. 
He proposed visiting my grandmamma and aunt
Selby, in order to implore their forgiveness. But Mr.
Reeves diverted him from thinking of that. 
He had not sought me, he said, at Lady Betty Williams's,
but from his desire (on the character he had
heard of me) to pay his addresses to me, in preference
to every other woman. He had laid out for several
opportunities to get into my company, before he heard
I was to dine there. Particularly, he once had resolved
to pay a visit in form to my uncle Selby, in
Northamptonshire, and had got all his equipage in readiness
to set out; but heard that I was come to town
with Mr. and Mrs. Reeves. He actually then set out,
he said, for Peterborough, with intent to propose the
affair to my godfather Deane: But found that he was
gone to Cambridge: And then, being resolved to try
his fate with me, he came to town; and hardly questioned
succeeding, when he understood that my friends
left me to my own choice; and knowing that he could
offer such proposals, as none of the gentlemen who
had made pretensions to me, were able to make. His
intentions therefore were not sudden, and such as arose
upon what he saw of me at Lady Betty Williams's; 
tho' the part I supported in the conversation there, precipitated
his declaration. 
He was very unhappy, he said, to have so mortally
disobliged me; and repeated all his former pleas; his 

love [Rough love, I am sure] compassion, sufferings,
and I cannot tell what; insisting, that he had forgiven
much greater injuries, as was but too apparent. 
I told him, that I had suffer'd more than he could
have done, tho' his hurt was more visible than mine:
That nevertheless I forgave him; as no bad consequences
had followed between him and my protector
—[Protector! mutter'd he]—But that he knew my
mind, before he made that barbarous attempt: And I
besought him never more to think of me; and he
must excuse me to say, that this must be the very last
time I ever would see him. 
A great deal was said on both sides; my cousins remaining
attentively silent all the time: And at last he
insisted, that I would declare, that I never would be
the wife either of Mr. Greville or Mr. Fenwick: Assuring
me, that the rash step he had taken to make me
his, was owing principally to his apprehension, that
Mr. Greville was more likely to succeed with me than
any other man. 
I owed him, I told him, no such declaration. But
Mr. Reeves, to get rid of his importunity, gave it as
his opinion, that there was no ground for his apprehensions
that I would give my hand to either; and I
did not contradict him. 
Mr. Bagenhall and Mr. Jordan, before I could get
away from this importunate man, came to enquire for
him. He then owned, that they came in hope of
seeing me; and besought me to favour him and them
for one quarter of an hour only. I was resolved to
withdraw: But, at Sir Hargrave's command, as impertinently
given as officiously obeyed, Mr. Reeves's servant
led them (his master indeed not contradicting) into
the parlour where we were. 
The two strangers behaved with great respect. 
They came with a resolution to be pleased with me,
and would not suffer themselves to be disappointed. 
But never did men run praises higher, than both these 

gentlemen gave to Sir Charles Grandison. And indeed
the subject made me easier in their company than
I should otherwise have been. 
It is not possible, I believe, for the vainest mind to
hear itself profusely praised, without some pain: But it
is surely one of the sweetest pleasures in the world, to
hear a whole company join in applauding the absent
person who stands high in our opinion; and especially
if he be one to whose unexceptionable goodness we
owe, and are not ashamed to own, obligation. 
What further pleased me, was to hear Mr. Bagenhall
declare, which he did in a very serious manner,
that Sir Charles Grandison's great behaviour, as he
justly called it, had made such impressions not only
upon him, but upon Mr. Merceda, that they were
both determined to turn over a new leaf, was his
phrase; and to live very different lives from what they
had lived; tho' they were far, they blessed God, from
being before the worst of men. 
These gentlemen, with Mr. Merceda and Sir Hargrave,
are to dine with Sir Charles to-day. They both
mentioned it with great pleasure: But Sir Hargrave did
not seem so well pleased, and doubted of his being able
to persuade himself to go. The invitation was given
at Mr. Jordan's motion, who took hold of an indirect
invitation of Sir Charles's; Mr. Jordan declaring,
that he was resolved not to let slip any opportunity of
improving an acquaintance with so extraordinary a
man. 
The gentlemen took a very respectful leave. Sir
Hargrave shewed so much dejection, and is so really
mortified with the damage done to a face, that he used
to take pleasure to see reflected in the glass (never once
looking into either of those in the parlour he was in,
all the time he staid) that I could once or twice have
been concerned for him, had I not struggled to withhold
my pity. 
He talk'd of soon leaving town, and retiring to one 

of his country-seats; or of going abroad for a year or
two, if he must have no hopes—Hopes! a wretch! 
When I seriously reflect, I don't know whether
his mortification is not the happiest thing that could
have befallen him. It wants only to be attended with
patience. —He is not now an ugly man in his person. 
His estate will always give him consequence. He will
now think the better of others; and the worse of himself:
He may, much worse; and not want as much vanity
as comes to his share. 
But say you, my uncle (as I fansy you do) that I
also may spare some of my vanity, and not be the
worse girl? —Ah! no! —I am now very sensible of
my own defects. I am poor, low, silly, weak— 
Was I ever insolent? Was I ever saucy? Was I
ever—O my uncle, hide my faults. I am mortified. 
Let me not reproach myself with having deserved mortification. 
If I did, I knew it not. I intended not
to be saucy, vain, insolent—And if I was so, lay it to
a flow of health, and good spirits; to time of life; 
young, gay, and priding myself in every-one's love; 
yet most in the love, in the fond indulgence, of all you
my good friends: And then you will have some of
my faults to lay at your own doors; nor will you,
even you, my uncle, be clear of reproach, because
your correction was always mingled with so much
praise, that I thought you were but at play with your
niece, and that you levelled your blame more at the
Sex than at your Harriet. 
* *
But what have I written against myself? I believe
I am not such a low, silly, weak creature, as I had
thought myself. For just as I had laid down my pen
with a pensive air, and to look into the state of my
own heart, in order either to lighten, or to confirm,
the self-blame I had so glibly written down, Lady L.
in her chair, made us a visit. She came up directly
to me: I am come to dine with your cousins and you, 

Miss Byron, said she. Shall I be welcome? But don't
answer me: I know I shall. 
Mrs. Reeves enter'd; and acknowleged the favour. 
Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, and some of his brethren,
are to dine with my brother, said my Lady; and I,
not being obliged to do the honours of the table, with
my Lord's consent, made my escape. I cannot endure
the wretch who could make such a vile attempt
upon you, and who might have murder'd my brother. 
—Come, will you let me see what you are writeing? 
You can forgive Charlotte's freedom: Will you
excuse her sister's? 
I cannot shew your Ladyship all I have written; 
but I will read you some passages of the long letter before
me. 
I told her my subject, and read to her such as I
thought I could read. She raved at Sir Hargrave:
Wonder'd he had the confidence to approach me,
especially with hope. She praised me: Yet said to
my cousin Reeves, that he ought to have been denied
the house; and the rather, as I was myself very unwilling
to see him. 
I own, I thought so too. Both my cousins are too
good-natur'd. 
We had a great deal of talk about the duel that was
so happily prevented. Lady L. gave us an account of
the unhappy one which her father fought; and to the
issue of which they owed the loss of the best of mothers:
And at and after dinner she piously expatiated
on the excellencies of that mother; and demonstrated,
what I have often thought of great consequence (my
grandmamma's and aunt Selby's examples before me
affording the noblest proofs) that the conduct of women
in their families is of high importance; and that
they need not to look out of them so often as they do,
to employ themselves; and that not only in the most
useful, but in the most delightful manner. 

My-Lord L. having broke from the company at
Sir Charles's, did us the honour to drink tea with us. 
Every-thing, he said, passed very agreeably among
the gentlemen he had left; and it was his opinion, that
his brother's noble behaviour, and the conversation
that passed at table, and in which he left him and
them engaged, would make more than one convert
among them. 
He told Lady L. that Sir Charles was to set out on
Monday for Canterbury [For Canterbury, Lucy!]; 
and that he should take it for a favour, if she would
give him her company for a few days to Colnebrooke. 
Their house in Brook-street, he said, would be ready
to receive them in a week's time: It wanted nothing
but a thorough airing. And if, said he, you could prevail
upon Miss Grandison to be with us till her brother
returns, and both sisters could induce Miss Byron to
make a fourth, we shall be, said he, the happiest party
in the world; and perhaps may get Sir Charles among
us, on his return, for a day or two. I bowed. 
I must tell you, my Lord, that Charlotte and I
thought to offer our attendance on Miss Byron to some
of the public entertainments: But your Lordship's
pleasure shall determine me; and if we could be so
happy as to have Miss Byron for our guest, I am sure
of my sister; and it would be my preferable wish. 
Mr. Reeves, Mrs. Reeves, will you spare Miss Byron
to me? 
I looked, as if for their leave. They gave a smiling
assent. 
My Lord and Lady both expressed themselves overjoy'd. 
This Canterbury ran in my head. It was brought
in naturally enough; and Mrs. Reeves wonder'd, that
Sir Charles kept secret the motive of his journeying thither
backward and forward. The godlike man, said
Mr. Reeves, in the words of a great poet, has nothing
to conceal. For my part, replied my Lord, I conclude 

the motive is rather a painful than a pleasurable
one. Charlotte accuses her brother of reserves. I
never found him reserved: But he loves to play with
her curiosity, and amuse her: For she is very curious,
yet has her secret. —Has she not, Lady L.? 
Indeed she has, replied my Lady—Perhaps you, my
dear, will be intrusted with it, when you are at Colnebrooke
together. 
Pray, madam, said I to Lady L. may I ask? —Does
Sir Charles give Lord G. his interest in his addresses
to Miss Grandison? 
Lady L. My brother wishes Charlotte married. He
is a great friend to the married state, especially with
regard to our sex. 
Mr. Reeves could not miss this opportunity. It is
a wonder, said he, that Sir Charles himself does not
think of marriage? 
Lady L. That is a string that we but just touch
sometimes, and away. There is a Lady— 
There she stopt. Had she looked with earnestness
at me, I had been undone, I believe. 
[&rhand; Let me ask you, Lucy: You have passed the
fiery ordeal—Did you ever find in yourself a kind of
impatience, next to petulance; and in your heart
(only for fear of exposing yourself) that you were
ready to quarrel, or to be short with any-body that
came upon you of a sudden; yet have no business of
consequence to engage either your fingers or your
thoughts? —Of late, my dear, I have been very often
troubled with this odd sensation. But my whole temper
is altering, I believe. I shall grow peevish, perverse,
and gloomy, I doubt. O this wicked Sir Hargrave! &lhand;] 
Pray, my dear, attend for the future to those indexes
or hands; and forbear to read out the passages
inclosed by them, if you can—But if you come upon
them before you are aware, why then read on—with
all my heart. 

But to return to Lady L.'s alarming hint—“There
is a Lady”— 
Mrs. Reeves. That Sir Charles loves, I suppose? 
Lady L. That loves Sir Charles; and she has— 
But for the Lady's sake—Yet, if it be allowable for
any woman to be in love with any man, upon an uncertainty
of return, it is for one that is in love with
my brother. 
Harriet. And cannot Sir Charles make a return? 
—Poor Lady! 
My cousin afterwards told me, that my upper-lip
then quiver'd like an aspen leaf. I did not know that
it did. I felt not a trembling at my heart; and when
the lip trembles, the heart, I think, should be affected. 
There used to be a close connexion between mine. 
Mr. Reeves. Miss Grandison told me, that, if her
brother married, half a score women would break
their hearts. 
Lady L. The words half a score run as glibly off
the tongue as half a dozen: But I believe, let the envious,
the censorious, malign our sex, and charge us
with the love of rakes and libertines, as they will, if all
men were like my brother, there would not be a single
woman, and hardly a bad one, in the kingdom. What
say you, my Lord? 
Lord L. My dear life, you know I am all attention,
whenever you, or my sister Charlotte, make our
brother the subject of your panegyric. If, Miss Byron,
you do not choose to hear so much said of this
best of men, you will, I doubt, have an ill time of it
in the favour you will do us at Colnebrooke. 
Harriet. My Lord, I should be very ungrateful,
if I did not hear with pleasure every-thing that shall
be said in praise of Sir Charles Grandison. 
Lord L. When I am out of conceit with men, as
too often they give me cause to be, I think of my
brother, and forgive them. 
I wonder, Lucy, what every-body means by praising 

Sir Charles Grandison so much in my hearing! —Shall
I fly from town, to avoid hearing his praises? —Yes,
say you? —But whither? It must not be to Selby-house. 
Well then, I may as well go to Colnebrooke. 
I shall there be informed of the reasons for all those
general applauses; for hitherto I know nothing of his
history, to what they tell me I am to know. 
These general praises carried us away from a subject
that I thought we should once have made more
of—That one Lady—And I wanted to know, but had
no opportunity to inform myself, whether that Lady's
relations, or herself, live at Canterbury. On Monday,
it seems, Sir Charles sets out for that Canterbury! 
Our noble guests would not stay supper. They had
not been gone two hours before I had an humourous
letter from Miss Grandison. I inclose it. 

Sat. night, 10 o'clock. 
Lord and Lady L. rejoice me, by telling me, you
will accompany them to Colnebrooke on Monday. 
—That's my good girl! —I will go with them for
the sake of your company. Yet I had half-denied
them: And why? Because, if you must know—But
hush—and catch a mouse—Because, a certain Impertinent
proposes a visit there; and I had thoughts to take
the opportunity of being alone in town, to rid my hands
for ever, if possible, of another silly fellow, of whom,
for one month, a great while ago, I thought tolerably. 
You and I, Harriet, will open to each other all our
hearts. There is one chamber that has two beds in
it. We will have that. Our dressing-room shall be
common to both. Lady L. is a morning-killer: She
always loved her bed: So we shall have charming opportunities
for tête à tête conversation. 
I will drink tea with you to-morrow—No, but I
won't: You and your cousins shall drink tea with us— 
Do you hear? I won't be denied. And then we'll
settle how it shall be. I'll tell you what, my dear— 

If, on my brother's return from Canterbury, he comes
to us at Colnebrooke, we will call him to account for
all his reserves. Here is this affair of Pollexfen's:
How might it have ended! I tremble to think of it— 
You'll stand by me: Won't you? I cannot make
Lord and Lady L. of my party, or I would have rebelled
before now—But you and I, my dear, I warrant
you—Yet you are so grave. Were you always such a
grave, such a wise, such a very wise girl, Harriet? 
Was your grandfather a very sententious man? Was
his name Solomon Shirley? 
I love wisdom as well as any-body: But wisdom,
out of its place, is a prude, my dear. How I ramble! 
—You'll come to-morrow—I designed but two lines. 
Adieu. Believe me 
Ever Yours, C. G. 

I hope, Lucy, I was not wrong in so readily consenting
to go to Colnebrooke. My own inclination,
indeed, was in my compliance; and I begin to mistrust
myself; where-ever that strongly leads. Yet why
should I undervalue myself? I know my heart to be
good. In that I will not yield to any-body. I have
no littleness in my mind: Naturally I have not. 
Guard me, O my friends! by your prayers, that no
littleness, that is not natural to my heart, may depreciate
it, and make me unworthy of the love you have
ever shewn to 
Your Harriet Byron. 

