



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Cocoa-tree, Saturday, May 27. 
This Ipecacuanha is a most disagreeable medicine. 
That these cursed physical folks can find
out nothing to do us good, but what would poison
the devil! In the other world, were they only to
take physic, it would be punishment enough of itself
for a mis-spent life. A Doctor at one elbow, and an
Apothecary at the other, and the poor soul labouring
under their prescribed operations, he need no worse
tormentors. 
But now this was to take down my countenance. 
It has done it: For, with violent reachings, having
taken enough to make me sick, and not enough
water to carry it off, I presently looked as if I had
kept my bed a fortnight. Ill-jesting, as I thought in
the midst of the exercise, with edge-tools, and worse
with physical ones. 
Two hours it held me. I had forbid Dorcas to
let her Lady know any-thing of the matter; out of
tenderness to her; being willing, when she knew 

my prohibition, to let her see that I expected her to
be concerned for me.— 
Well, but Dorcas was nevertheless a woman, and
she can whisper to her Lady the secret she is enjoined
to keep! 
Come hither, Toad [sick as a devil at the instant]; 
Let me see what a mixture of grief and surprize may
be beat up together in thy pudden-face. 
That won't do. That dropt jaw, and mouth distended
into the long oval, is more upon the Horrible,
than the Grievous. 
Nor that pinking and winking with thy odious eyes,
as my Charmer once called them. 
A little better That; yet not quite right: But keep
your mouth closer. You have a muscle or two which
you have no command of, between your cheek-bone
and your lips, that should carry one corner of your
mouth up towards your crow's-foot, and that down to
meet it. 
There! Begone! Be in a plaguy hurry running up
stairs and down, to fetch from the Dining-room what
you carry up on purpose to fetch, till motion extraordinary
put you out of breath, and give you the sigh-natural. 
What's the matter, Dorcas? 
Nothing, Madam. 
My Beloved wonders she has not seen me this morning,
no doubt; but is too shy to say she wonders. 
Repeated What's the matter, however, as Dorcas runs
up and down stairs by her door, bring on, Oh!
Madam, my master! my poor master! 
What! How! When! —And all the monosyllables
of surprize. 
[Within Parentheses let me tell thee, that I have
often thought, that the little words in the Republic
of Letters, like the little folks in a nation, are the
most significant. The trisyllables, and the rumblers 

of syllables more than three, are but the good for
little magnates.] 
I must not tell you, Madam—My master ordered
me not to tell you—But he is in a worse way
than he thinks for! —But he would not have you
frighted. 
High concern took possession of every sweet feature. 
She pitied me! —By my soul, she pitied me! 
Where is he? 
Too much in a hurry for good-manners [Another
parenthesis, Jack! Good-manners are so little natural,
that we ought to be composed to observe them: 
Politeness will not live in a storm] I cannot stay to
answer questions, cries the wench—tho' desirous to
answer [A third Parenthesis—Like the people crying
proclamations, running away from the customers they
want to sell to]. This hurry puts the Lady in a hurry
to ask [A fourth, by way of embellishing the third!]
as the other does the people in a hurry to buy. And
I have in my eye now a whole street raised, and running
after a proclamation or express-crier, as if the
first was a thief, the other his pursuers. 
At last, O Lord! let Mrs. Lovelace know! — 
There is danger, to be sure! whispered from one
Nymph to another; but at the door, and so loud,
that my listening Fair-one might hear. 
Out she darts—As how! as how, Dorcas! 
O Madam—A vomiting of blood! A vessel broke,
to be sure! 
Down she hastens; finds every one as busy over
my blood in the entry, as if it were that of the Neapolitan
Saint. 
In steps my Charmer, with a face of sweet concern. 
How do you, Mr. Lovelace? 
O my best Love! —Very well! —Very well! — 
Nothing at all! Nothing of consequence! —I shall be
well in an instant! —Straining again! for I was indeed
plaguy sick, tho' no more blood came. 

In short, Belford, I have gained my end. I see
the dear soul loves me. I see she forgives me all that's
past. I see I have credit for a new score. 
Miss Howe, I defy thee, my dear—Mrs. Townsend! 
—Who the devil are you? —Troop away with
your contrabands. No Smuggling! Nor Smuggler,
but myself! Nor will the choicest of my Fair-one's
favours be long prohibited goods to me! 
* *
Every one now is sure that she loves me. Tears
were in her eyes more than once for me. She suffered
me to take her hand, and kiss it as often as I
pleased. On Mrs. Sinclair's mentioning, that I too
much confined myself, she pressed me to take an Airing; 
but obligingly desired me to be careful of myself. 
Wished I would advise with a physician. God
made physicians, she said. 
I did not think That, Jack. God indeed made us
All. But I fansy she meant physic instead of physicians; 
and then the phrase might mean what the vulgar
phrase means;—God sends meat, the Devil cooks. 
I was well already, on taking the Styptic from her
dear hands. 
On her requiring me to take the air, I asked, If I
might have the honour of her company in a coach; 
and this, that I might observe if she had an intention
of going out in my absence. 
If she thought a chair were not a more proper vehicle
for my case, she would with all her heart! 
There's a precious! 
I kissed her hand again! She was all goodness! — 
Would to Heaven I better deserved it, I said! —But
all were golden days before us! —Her presence and
generous concern had done every-thing. I was well! 
Nothing ailed me. But since my Beloved will have
it so, I'll take a little Airing! —Let a chair be called! 
—O my Charmer were I to have owed this indisposition
to my late harasses, and to the uneasiness I have 

had for disobliging you; all is infinitely compensated
by your goodness—All the Art of Healing is in
your smiles! —Your late displeasure was the only
malady! 
While Mrs. Sinclair, and Dorcas, and Polly, and
even poor silly Mabell [for Sally went out, as my angel
came in] with uplifted hands and eyes, stood
thanking Heaven that I was better, in audible whispers: 
See the power of Love, cried one! —What a
charming husband, another! —Happy couple, all! 
O how the dear creature's cheek mantled! —How
her eyes sparkled! —How sweetly acceptable is praise
to conscious merit, while it but reproaches when applied
to the undeserving! —What a new, what a gay
creation it makes at once in a diffident or dispirited
heart! 
And now, Belford, was it not worth while to be
sick? And yet I must tell thee, that too many pleasanter
expedients offer themselves, to make trial any
more of this confounded Ipecacuanha. 