


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Sat. Night, March 18. 
I Have furnished the Ladies, and my Lord, with
more letters. And so they have all my heart before
them! —I don't care. The man is Sir Charles
Grandison; and they railly me not so much as before, 

while they thought I affected reserves to them. Indeed
it would be cruel, if they did; and I should have run
away from them. 
I am glad you all think, that the two sisters used
me severely. They really did. But I have this gratification
of my pride in reflecting upon their treatment
of me—I would not have done so by them, had
situations been exchanged. And I think myself nearer
an equality with them, than I had thought myself
before. —But they are good ladies, and my sincere
friends and well-wishers; and I forgive them: And
so must my dear grandmamma. 
I am sorry, methinks, that her delicacy has been
offended on the occasion. And did she weep at the
hearing read my account of that attack made upon her
girl by the over-lively Charlotte? —O the dear, the indulgent,
parent! How tender was it of my aunt
too, to be concerned for the poor Harriet's delicacy,
so hard put to it as she was! It did indeed (as she distinguishes
in her usual charming manner) look, as if
they put a great price upon their intended friendship
to me, with regard to my interest in their brother's
heart: As if the favour done to the humbled girl,
if they could jointly procure for her their brother's
countenance, might well allow of their raillery. — 
Don't, pray don't, my dear grandmamma, call it by
a severer name. They did not, I am sure they did
not, mean to hurt me so much, as I really was hurt. 
So let it pass. Humour and raillery are very difficult
things to rein in. They are ever curveting like a
prancing horse; and they will often throw the rider
who depends more upon his skill in managing them,
than he has reason to do. 
My uncle was charmed with the scene; and thinks
the two ladies did just as he would have done. He
means it a compliment to their delicacy, I presume. 
But I am of my aunt Selby's opinion, that their generous 

brother would not have given them thanks for
their raillery to the poor frighted Harriet. I am very
happy, however, that my behaviour and frankness on
the occasion are not disapproved at Selby-house, and
Shirley-manor, and by you, my Lucy. And here
let that matter rest. 
Should I not begin to think of going back to you
all, my Lucy? I believe I blush ten times a day,
when alone, to find myself waiting and waiting as if
for the gracious motion; yet apprehending that it
never will, never can, be made; and all you, my
friends, indulging an absence, that your goodness
makes painful to you, in the same hope. It looks— 
Don't it, Lucy?—so like a design upon—I don't
know how it looks! —But at times, I can't endure
myself. And yet while the love of virtue (a little too
lively indeed, and perhaps a little too personal) is the
foundation of these designs, these waitings, these emotions,
I think, I am not wholly inexcusable. 
I am sure I should not esteem him, were he not the
good man he is. —Pray, let me ask you—Do you
think he could not be put upon saying something affronting
to me; upon doing something unworthy of
his character? —O then I am sure I should hate him:
All the other instances of his goodness would then be
as nothing. I will be captious, I think, and study to
be affronted, whether he intends to affront me, or
not. —But what a multitude of foolish notions come
into the head of a silly girl, who little as she knows,
knows more of any-thing, or of any-body, than she
knows of herself! 
* *
I Wish my godfather had not put it in my head,
that Emily is cherishing (perhaps unknown to herself)
a flame that will devour her peace. For to be sure
this young creature can have no hope that—Yet
50,000l. is a vast fortune. But it can never buy her 

guardian. Do you think such a man as Sir Charles
Grandison has a price? —I am sure he has not. 
I watch the countenance, the words, the air of the
girl, when he is spoken of. And with pity I see, that
he cannot be named, but her eyes sparkle. Her eye
is taken off her work or book, as she happens to be
engaged in either, and she seems as if she would look
the person through who is praising her guardian. For
the life of her, she cannot work and hear. And then
she sighs—Upon my word, Lucy, there is no such
thing as proceeding with his praises before her—the
girl so sighs—So young a creature! —Yet how can
one caution the poor thing? 
But what makes me a little more observant of her,
than I should otherwise perhaps have been (additional
to my godfather's observation) is an hint given me by
Lady L. which perhaps she has from Miss Grandison,
and she not unlikely from the stollen letter: For
Miss Grandison hinted at it, but I thought it was
only to excite my curiosity [When one is not in good
humour, how one's very stile is encumbred!]: The
hint is this, That it is more than probable, it will be
actually proposed to me, to take down with me to
Northamptonshire this young lady—I, who want a
governess myself, to be—But let it be proposed. 
In a conversation that passed just now, between us
women, on the subject of Love (a favourite topic with
all girls), this poor thing gave her opinion unasked; 
and, for a young girl, was quite alert, I thought. 
She used to be more attentive than talkative. 
I whispered Miss Grandison once, Don't you think
Miss Jervois talks more than she used to do, madam? 
I think she does, madam, re-whispered the arch
lady. 
I beg your pardon—Charlotte, then. 
You have it, Harriet, then. —But let her prate. 
She is not often in the humour. 

Nay, with all my heart; I love Miss Jervois: But
I can't but watch when habits begin to change. And
I am always afraid of young creatures exposing themselves
when they are between girls and women. 
I don't love whispering, said Miss Jervois, more
pertly than ever: But my guardian loves me; and you,
ladies, love me; and so my heart is easy. 
Her heart easy! —Who thought of her heart? Her
guardian loves her! —Emily sha'n't go down with me,
Lucy. 
Sunday Morning, March 19. 
O But, Lucy, we are alarmed here on Miss Jervois's
account, by a letter which Dr. Bartlett received
a little late last night from Sir Charles; so shewed it
us not till this morning as we were at breakfast. The
unhappy woman, her mother, has made him a visit. 
Poor Emily! Dear child! what a mother she has! 
I have so much obliged the doctor by delivering
into his hands the papers that our other friends have
just perused (and, let me say, with high approbation)
that he made no scruple of allowing me to send this
letter to you. I asked the favour, as I know you will
all now be very attentive to whatever relates to Emily. 
Return every-thing the doctor shall intrust me with by
the first opportunity. 
By the latter part of this letter you will find, that
the doctor has acquainted Sir Charles with his sister's
wishes of a correspondence with him by letter. He
consents to it, you will all see; but upon terms that
are not likely to be complied with by any of his three
sisters; for he puts me in. Three sisters! His third
sister! —The repetition has such an officiousness in it. 
He is a good man; but he can be severe upon our
sex—It is not in woman to be unreserved. —You'll find
that one of the reflections upon us: He adds; And
to be impartial, perhaps they should not. Why so? — 
But is not this a piece of advice given to myself, to
make me more reserved than I am? But he gives not 

himself opportunity to see whether I am or am not
reserved. I won't be mean, Lucy, I repeat for the
twentieth time. I won't deserve to be despised by
him—No! tho' he were the sovereign of the greatest
empire on earth. In this believe 
Your Harriet Byron. 

