



Dear Father and Mother,
I am glad I desir'd you not to meet me, and
John says you won't; for he told you, he is
sure I shall get a Passage well enough, either
behind some one of my Fellow-servants on Horseback,
or by Farmer Nichols's means: But as for
the Chariot he talk'd to you of, I can't expect
that Favour, to be sure; and I should not care for
it, because it would look so much above me. But
Farmer Brady, they say, has a Chaise with one
Horse, and we hope to borrow that, or hire it
rather than fail; tho' Money runs a little lowish,
after what I have laid out; but I don't care to
say so here: tho' I warrant I might have what I
would of Mrs. Jervis, or Mr. Jonathan, or
Mr. Longman; but then how shall I pay it,
you'll say? And besides, I don't love to be beholden. 
But the chief Reason I'm glad you don't
set out to meet me, is the Uncertainty; for it
seems I must stay another Week still, and hope
certainly to go Thursday after. For poor Mrs.
Jervis will go at the same time, she says, and
can't be ready before. 
Oh! that I was once well with you! —Tho'
he is very civil too at present, and not so cross
as he was; and yet he is as vexatious another
way, as you shall hear. For Yesterday he had a
rich Suit of Cloaths brought home, which
they call a Birth-day Suit; for he intends to go 

to London against next Birth-day, to see the
Court; and our Folks will have it, he is to be
made a Lord. —I wish they would make him
an honest Man, as he was always thought; but
I have not found it so: Alas for me! 
And so, as I was saying, he had these
Cloaths brought home, and he try'd them on. 
And before he pull'd them off, he sent for
me, when nobody else was in the Parlour with
him: Pamela, said he, you are so neat and so
nice in your own Dress, (Alack-a-day, I didn't
know I was!) that you must be a Judge of ours. 
How are these Cloaths made? Do they fit me? 
—I am no Judge, said I, and please your
Honour; but I think they look very fine. 
His Waistcoat stood on End with Gold
Lace, and he look'd very grand. But what
he offer'd last, has made me very serious, and I
could make him no Compliments. Said he,
Why don't you wear your usual Cloaths? Tho'
I think every thing looks well upon you (For
I still continue in my new Dress). I said, I
have no Cloaths, Sir, I ought to call my own,
but these: And it is no matter what such an
one as I wears. Said he, Why, you look very
serious, Pamela: I see you can bear Malice. 
—Yes, so I can, Sir, said I, according to the
Occasion! Why, said he, your Eyes always
look red, I think. Are you not a Fool,
to take my last Freedom so much to Heart? 
I am sure, you, and that other Fool, Mrs. Jervis,
frighten'd me by your hideous Squalling, as
much as I could frighten you. That is all we 

had for it, said I; and if you could be so afraid
of your own Servants knowing of your Attempts
upon a poor unworthy Creature, that is under
your Protection while I stay, surely your Honour
ought to be more afraid of God Almighty, in
whose Presence we all stand, in every Action
of our Lives, and to whom the Greatest, as
well as the Least, must be accountable, let
them think what they list. 
He took my Hand, in a kind of good-humour'd
Mockery, and said, Well urg'd, my
pretty Preacher! When my Lincolnshire Chaplain
dies, I'll put thee on a Gown and Cassock,
and thou'lt make a good Figure in his Place! 
—I wish, said I, a little vex'd at his Jeer,
your Honour's Conscience would be your
Preacher, and then you would need no other
Chaplain. Well, well, Pamela, said he, no
more of this unfashionable Jargon. I did not
send for you so much for your Opinion of my
new Suit, as to tell you, you are welcome to
stay, since Mrs. Jervis desires it, till she goes. 
I welcome! said I; I am sure I shall rejoice
when I am out of the House! 
Well, said he, you are an ungrateful Baggage; 
but I am thinking it would be Pity, with
these fair soft Hands, and that lovely Skin, (as
he call'd it, and took hold of my Hand) that
you should return again to hard Work, as you
must, if you go to your Father's; and so I would
advise Mrs. Jervis to take a House in London,
and let Lodgings to us Members of Parliament,
when we come to Town; and such a pretty 

Daughter, as you may pass for, will always fill
her House, and she'll get a great deal of Money. 
I was sadly vex'd at this barbarous Joke; 
but being ready to cry before, the Tears gush'd
out, and (endeavouring to get my Hand away
from him, but in vain) I said, I can expect no
better: Your Behaviour, Sir, to me, has been
just of a Piece with these Words; nay, I will
say't, tho' you were to be ever so angry. — 
I angry, Pamela! No, no, said he, I have
overcome all that; and as you are to go away,
I look upon you now as Mrs. Jervis's Guest,
while you both stay, and not as my Servant; 
and so you may say what you will. But I'll
tell you, Pamela, why you need not take this
Matter in such high Disdain! —You have a very
pretty romantick Turn for Virtue, and all that. 
—And I don't suppose but you'll hold it still; 
and nobody will be able to prevail upon you. 
But, my Child, (fleeringly he spoke it) do but
consider what a fine Opportunity you will then
have, for a Tale every Day to good Mother
Jervis, and what Subjects for Letter-writing
to your Father and Mother, and what pretty
Preachments you may hold forth to the young
Gentlemen! Ad's my Heart! I think it would
be the best Thing you and she could do. 
You do well, Sir, said I, to even your Wit
to such a poor Maiden as me. But, permit me
to say, that if you was not rich and great, and
I poor and little, you would not insult me thus. 
—Let me ask you, Sir, if this becomes your
fine Cloaths, and a Master's Station? Why so 

serious, my pretty Pamela? said he; Why so
grave? And would kiss me; but my Heart was
full, and I said, Let me alone! I will tell you,
if you was a King, and insulted me as you
have done, that you have forgotten to act like
a Gentleman: And I won't stay to be used thus! 
I will go to the next Farmer's, and there wait
for Mrs. Jervis, if she must go: And I'd have
you know, Sir, that I can stoop to the ordinariest
Work of your Scullions, for all these
nasty soft Hands, sooner than bear such ungentlemanly
Imputations. 
I sent for you in, said he, in high good
Humour; but 'tis impossible to hold it with
such an Impertinent: However, I'll keep my
Temper. But while I see you here, pray don't
put on those dismal grave Looks! Why, Girl,
you should forbear 'em, if it were but for your
Pride-sake; for the Family will think you are
grieving to leave the House. Then, Sir, said
I, I will try to convince them of the contrary,
as well as your Honour; for I will endeavour
to be more chearful while I stay, for that very
Reason. 
Well, reply'd he, I will set this down by
itself, as the first Time that ever what I advis'd
had any Weight with you. And I will add,
said I, as the first Advice you have given me of
late, that was fit to be follow'd! —I wish,
said he, (I'm almost asham'd to write it, impudent
Gentleman as he is! I wish) I had thee as
quick another way, as thou art in thy Repartees! 
—And he laugh'd, and I snatch'd my Hand 

from him, and tripp'd away as fast as I could. 
Ah! thought I, marry'd! I'm sure 'tis time you
were marry'd, or at this Rate no honest Maiden
ought to live with you! 
Why, dear Father and Mother, to be sure
he grows quite a Rake! How easy it is to go
from bad to worse, when once People give way
to Vice! 
How would my poor Lady, had she liv'd,
have griev'd to see it! But may-be he would
have been better then! —Tho', it seems, he
told Mrs. Jervis, he had an Eye upon me in
his Mother's Life-time; and he intended to let
me know as much by-the-bye, he told her! 
Here's Shamelessness for you! Sure the World
must be near at an End! for all the Gentlemen
about are as bad as he almost, as far as I can
hear! —And see the Fruits of such bad Examples! 
There is 'Squire Martin in the Grove
has had three Lyings-in, it seems, in his House,
in three Months past; one by himself, and one
by his Coachman, and one by his Woodman; 
and yet he has turn'd none of them away. Indeed,
how can he, when they but follow his
own vile Example! There is he, and two or
three more such as he, within ten Miles of
us; who keep Company, and hunt with our
fine Master, truly; and I suppose, he's never
the better for their Examples. But, Heaven
bless me, say I, and send me out of this wicked
House! 
But, dear Father and Mother, what Sort
of Creatures must the Women-kind be, do 

you think, to give way to such Wickedness? 
Why, this it is that makes every one be thought
of alike: And, Alack-a-day! what a World we
live in! for it is grown more a Wonder, that
the Men are resisted, than that the Women
comply. This, I suppose, makes me such a
a Sauce-box, and Bold-face, and a Creature; 
and all because I won't be a Sauce box and
Bold-face indeed. 
But I am sorry for these Things; one don't
know what Arts and Stratagems Men may devise
to gain their vile Ends; and so I will think
as well as I can of these poor undone Creatures,
and pity them. For you see by my sad
Story, and narrow Escapes, what Hardships
poor Maidens go thro', whose Lot it is to go
out to Service; especially to Houses where
there is not the Fear of God, and good Rule
kept by the Heads of the Family. 
You see I am quite grown grave and serious: 
Indeed it becomes the present Condition of 
Your dutiful Daughter. 

