


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Tuesday, May 2. 
I Have no patience with you, Lady G. You are
ungenerously playful! Thank Heaven, if this be
wit, that I have none of it. But what signifies expostulating
with one who knows herself to be faulty,
and will not amend? How many stripes, Charlotte,
do you deserve? —But you never spared any-body, not
even your brother, when the humour was upon you. 
So make haste; and since you will lay in stores for repentance,
fill up your measure as fast as you can. 

‘Reveal to you the state of my heart!’ —Ah, my
dear! it is an unmanageable one. ‘Greatness of
mind!’ —I don't know what it is! —All his excellencies,
his greatness, his goodness, his modesty, his
chearfulness under such afflictions as would weigh
down every other heart that had but half the compassion
in it with which his overflows—Must not all
other men appear little, and, less than little, nothing,
in my eyes? —It is an instance of patience in me, that
I can endure any of them who pretend to regard me
out of my own family. 
I thought, that when I got down to my dear friends
here, I should be better enabled, by their prudent
counsels, to attain the desireable frame of mind which
I had promised myself: But I find myself mistaken. 
My grandmamma and aunt are such admirers of him,
take such a share in the disappointment, that their advice
has not the effect I had hoped it would have. 
Lucy, Nancy, are perpetually calling upon me to
tell them something of Sir Charles Grandison; and
when I begin, I know not how to leave off. My
uncle raillies me, laughs at me, sometimes reminds
me of what he calls my former brags. I did not brag,
my dear: I only hoped, that respecting as I did every
man according to his merit, I should never be greatly
taken with any one, before duty added force to the inclination. 
Methinks the company of the friends I am
with, does not satisfy me; yet they never were dearer
to me than they now are. I want to have Lord and
Lady L. Lord and Lady G. Dr. Bartlett, my Emily,
with me. To lose you all at once!—is hard! There
seems to be a strange void in my heart—And so much,
at present, for the state of that heart. 
I always had reason to think myself greatly obliged
to my friends and neighbours all around us; but never,
till my return, after these few months absence,
knew how much. So many kind visiters; such unaffected
expressions of joy on my return; that had I 

not a very great counterbalance on my heart, would
be enough to make me proud. 
My grandmamma went to Shirley manor on Saturday; 
on Monday I was with her all day: But she
would have it that I should be melancholy if I staid
with her. And she is so self-denyingly careful of her
Harriet! There never was a more noble heart in
woman. But her solitary moments, as my uncle calls
them, are her moments of joy. And why? Because
she then divests herself of all that is either painful or
pleasurable to her in this life: For she says, that her
cares for her Harriet, and especially now, are at least
a balance for the delight she takes in her. 
You command me to acquaint you with what passes
between me and the gentlemen in my neighbourhood; 
in your stile, my fellows. 
Mr. Fenwick invited himself to breakfast with my
aunt Selby yesterday morning. I would not avoid
him. 
I will not trouble you with the particulars: You
know well enough what men will say on the subject
upon which you will suppose he wanted to talk to me. 
He was extremely earnest. I besought him to accept
my thanks for his good opinion of me, as all the return
I could make him for it; and this in so very serious
a manner, that my heart was fretted, when he
declared, with warmth, his determined perseverance. 
Mr. Greville made us a tea-visit in the afternoon. 
My uncle and he joined to railly us poor women, as
usual. I left the defence of the Sex to my aunt and
Lucy. How poor appears to me every conversation
now with these men! —But hold, saucy Harriet, was
not your uncle Selby one of the railliers? —But he
does not believe all he says; and therefore cannot
wish to be so much regarded, on this topic, as he ought
to be by me, on others. 
After the run of raillery was over, in which Mr.
Greville made exceptions favourable to the women 

present, he applied to every one for their interest with
me, and to me to countenance his address. He set
forth his pretensions very pompously, and mentioned
a very considerable increase of his fortune; which before
was a very handsome one. He offered our own
terms. He declared his Love for me above all women,
and made his happiness in the next world, as well as
in this, depend upon my favour to him. 
It was easy to answer all he said; and is equally so
for you to guess in what manner I answered him:
And he, finding me determined, began to grow vehement,
and even affrontive. He hinted to me, that
he knew what had made me so very resolute. He
threw out threatenings against the man, be he whom
he would, that should stand in the way of his success
with me; at the same time intimating saucily, as I
may say (for his manner had insult in it) that it was
impossible a certain event could ever take place. 
My uncle was angry with him; so was my aunt:
Lucy was still more angry than they: But I, standing
up, said, Pray, my dear friends, take nothing amiss
that Mr. Greville has said. —He once told me, that he
would set spies upon my conduct in town. If, Sir,
your spies have been just, I fear nothing they can say. 
But the hints you have thrown out, shew such a total
want of all delicacy of mind, that you must not wonder
if my heart rejects you. Yet I am not angry: I
reproach you not: Every one has his peculiar way. 
All that is left me to say or to do, is to thank you for
your favourable opinion of me, as I have thanked
Mr. Fenwick; and to desire that you will allow me
to look upon you as my neighbour, and only as my
neighbour. 
I courtesied to him, and withdrew. 
But my great difficulty had been before with Mr.
Orme. His sister had desired that I would see her
brother. He and she were invited by my aunt to dinner
on Tuesday. They came. Poor man! He is 

not well! I am sorry for it. Poor Mr. Orme is not
well! He made me such honest compliments, as I
may say: His heart was too much in his civilities to
raise them above the civilities that justice and truth
might warrant in favour of a person highly esteemed. 
Mine was filled with compassion for him; and that
compassion would have shewn itself in tokens of tenderness,
more than once, had I not restrained myself
for his sake. How you, my dear Lady G. can delight
in giving pain to an honest heart, I cannot imagine. 
I would make all God Almighty's creatures happy, if
I could; and so would your noble brother. Is he not
crossing dangerous seas, and ascending, through almost
perpetual snows, those dreadful Alps which I have
heard described with such terror, for the generous end
of relieving distress? 
I made Mr. Orme sit next me. I was assiduous to
help him, and to do him all the little offices which I
thought would light up pleasure in his modest countenance; 
and he was quite another man. It gave delight
to his sister, and to all my friends, to see him
smile, and look happy. I think, my dear Lady G.
that when Mr. Orme looks pleasant, and at ease, he
resembles a little the good-natured Lord G.—O that
you would take half the pains to oblige him, that I do
to relieve Mr. Orme! —Half the pains, did I say? 
That you would not take pains to dis-oblige him; 
and he would be, of course, obliged. Don't be afraid,
my dear, that, in such a world as this, things will not
happen to make you uneasy, without your studying
for them. Excuse my seriousness: I am indeed too
serious, at times. 
But when Mr. Orme requested a few minutes audience
of me, as he called it, and I walked with him
into the cedar parlour, which you have heard me
mention, and with which I hope you will be one day
acquainted; he paid, poor man! for his too transient 

pleasure. Why would he urge a denial that he
could not but know I must give? 
His sister and I had afterwards a conference. She
pleaded too strongly her brother's health, and even
his life; both which, she would have it, depended on
my favour to him. I was greatly affected; and at
last besought her, if she valued my friendship as I did
hers, never more to mention to me a subject which gave
me a pain too sensible for my peace. 
She requested me to assure her, that neither Mr.
Greville, nor Mr. Fenwick, might be the man. 
They both took upon them, she said, to ridicule her
brother for the profound respect, even to reverence,
that he bore me; which, if he knew, might be attended
with consequences: For that her brother,
mild and gentle as was his passion for me, had courage
to resent any indignities that might be cast upon
him by spirits boistrous as were those of the two gentlemen
she had named. She never, therefore, told
her brother of their scoffs. But it would go to her
heart, if either of them should succeed, or have reason
but for a distant hope. 
I made her heart easy, on that score. 
I have just now heard, that Sir Hargrave Pollexfen
is come from abroad already. What can be the
meaning of it? He is so low-minded, so malicious a
man, and I have suffered so much from him—What
can be the meaning of his sudden return? I am told,
that he is actually in London. Pray, my dear Lady
G. inform yourself about him; and whether he
thinks of coming into these parts. 
Mr. Greville, when he met us at Stony-Stratford,
threw out menaces-against Sir Hargrave, on my account; 
and said, It was well he was gone abroad. I
told him then, that he had no business, even were
Sir Hargrave present, to engage himself in my quarrels. 

Mr. Greville is an impetuous man; a man of rough
manners; and makes many people afraid of him. He
has, I believe, indeed, had his spies about me; for he
seems to know every-thing that has befallen me in my
absence from Selby-house. 
He has dared also to threaten Somebody else. Insolent
wretch! But he hinted to me yesterday, that he
was exceedingly pleased with the news, that a certain
gentleman was gone abroad, in order to prosecute a
former amour, was the light wretch's as light expression. 
If my indignant eyes could have killed him, he
would have fallen dead at my feet. 
Let the constant and true respects of all my friends
to you and yours, and to my beloved Emily, be always,
for the future, considered as very affectionately
expressed, whether the variety of other subjects leaves
room for a particular expression of them, or not, by,
my dearest Lady G. 
Your faithful, and ever-obliged
Harriet Byron. 

