



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday Morn. May 22. 
No generosity in this lady. None at all. Wouldst
thou not have thought, that after I had permitted
her to withdraw, primed for mischief as I was,
that she would meet me next morning early; and
that with a smile; making me one of her best courtesies? 
I was in the dining-room before six, expecting her. 
She opened not her door. I went up-stairs and down,
and hemm'd, and called Will. called Dorcas: Threw
the doors hard to; but still she opened not her door. 
Thus till half an hour after eight, fooled I away my
time; and then, breakfast ready, I sent Dorcas to request
her company. 
But I was astonished, when, following the wench
at the first invitation, I saw her enter dressed, all but
her gloves, and those and her fan in her hand; in the 

same moment, bidding Dorcas direct Will to get her
a chair to the door. 
Cruel creature, thought I, to expose me thus to
the derision of the women below! 
Going abroad, Madam? 
I am, Sir. 
I looked cursed silly, I am sure. —You will breakfast
first, I hope, Madam, in a very humble strain! 
Yet with an hundred tenter-hooks in my heart. 
Had she given me more notice of her intention, I
had perhaps wrought myself up to the frame I was in
the day before, and begun my vengeance. And immediately
came into my head all the virulence that
had been transcribed for me from Miss Howe's letters,
and in that I had transcribed myself. 
Yes, she would drink one dish; and then laid her
gloves and fan in the window just by. 
I was perfectly disconcerted. I hemm'd and haw'd,
and was going to speak several times; but knew not
in what key. Who's modest now, thought I! Who's
insolent now! —How a tyrant of a woman confounds
a bashful man! —She was my Miss Howe, I thought; 
and I the spiritless Hickman. 
At last, I will begin, thought I. 
She a dish—I a dish. 
Sip, her eyes her own, she; like an haughty and
imperious sovereign, conscious of dignity, every look
a favour. 
Sip, like her vassal, I; lips and hands trembling,
and not knowing that I sipp'd or tasted. 
I was—I was—Issp'd—drawing in my breath and
the liquor together, tho' I scalded my mouth with
it—I was in hopes, Madam— 
Dorcas came in just then. —Dorcas, said she, is a
chair gone for? 
Damn'd impertinence, thought I, putting me out
of my speech! And I was forced to wait for the servant's
answer to the insolent mistress's question. 

William is gone for one, Madam. 
This cost me a minute's silence before I could begin
again. —And then it was with my hopes, and my
hopes, and my hopes, that I should have been early
admitted to— 
What weather is it, Dorcas? said she, as regardless
of me, as if I had not been present. 
A little lowering, Madam—The sun is gone in— 
It was very fine half an hour ago. 
I had no patience—Up I rose. Down went the
tea-cup, saucer and all. —Confound the weather, the
sunshine, and the wench! —Begone for a devil, when
I am speaking to your lady, and have so little opportunity
given me. 
Up rose the lady, half frighted; and snatched from
the window her gloves and fan. 
You must not go, Madam! —By my soul, you
must not—Taking her hand. 
Must not, Sir! —But I must—You can curse your
maid in my absence, as well as if I were present— 
Except—Except—you intend for me, what you direct
to her. 
Dearest creature, you must not go! —You must
not leave me! —Such determined scorn! Such contempts! —Questions ask'd your servant of no meaning
but to break in upon me; who could bear it? 
Detain me not, struggling. —I will not be withheld. 
—I like you not, nor your ways. —You sought
to quarrel with me yesterday, for no reason in the
world that I can think of, but because I was too
obliging. You are an ingrateful man; and I hate
you with my whole heart, Mr. Lovelace! 
Do not make me desperate, Madam. —Permit me
to say, that you shall not leave me in this humour. 
Where-ever you go, I will attend you. —Had Miss
Howe been my friend, I had not been thus treated. — 
It is but too plain to whom my difficulties are owing. 
I have long observed, that every letter you receive 

from her, makes an alteration in your behaviour to me. 
She would have you treat me, as she treats Mr. Hickman,
I suppose: But neither does that treatment become
your admirable temper to offer, nor me to receive. 
This startled her. She did not care to have me
think hardly of Miss Howe. 
But recollecting herself, Miss Howe, said she, is a
friend to virtue, and to good men. —If she like not
you, it is because you are not one of those. 
Yes, Madam; and therefore, to speak of Mr.
Hickman and Myself, as you both, I suppose, think of
each, she treats him as she would not treat a Lovelace. 
—I challenge you, Madam, to shew me but one
of the many letters you have received from her, where
I am mentioned. 
Whither will this lead us? replied she. Miss Howe
is just; Miss Howe is good. —She writes, she speaks,
of every-body as they deserve. If you point me out
but any one occasion, upon which you have reason to
build a merit to yourself, as either just or good, or
even generous, I will look out for her letter on that
occasion (if it be one I have acquainted her with); 
and will engage it shall be in your favour. 
Devilish severe! And as indelicate as severe, to put
a modest man upon hunting backward after his own
merits. 
She would have flung from me: I will go out, Mr.
Lovelace. I will not be detained. 
Indeed you must not, Madam, in this humour. 
And I placed myself between her and the door. — 
And then she threw herself into a chair, fanning herself,
her sweet face all crimsoned over with passion. 
I cast myself at her feet. —Begone, Mr. Lovelace,
said she, with a rejecting motion, her fan in her hand; 
for your own sake leave me! —My soul is above thee,
man! With both her hands pushing me from her! — 
Urge me not to tell thee, how sincerely I think my
soul above thee! —Thou hast a proud, a too proud 

heart, to contend with! —Leave me, and leave me for
ever! —Thou hast a proud heart to contend with! 
Her air, her manner, her voice, were bewitchingly
noble, tho' her words were so severe. 
Let me worship an angel, said I, no woman. Forgive
me, dearest creature! —Creature if you be, forgive
me! —Forgive my inadvertencies! Forgive my
inequalities! —Pity my infirmity! —Who is equal to
my Clarissa? 
I trembled between admiration and love; and wrapt
my arms about her knees, as she sat. She try'd to
rise at the moment; but my clasping round her thus
ardently, drew her down again; and never was woman
more affrighted. But free as my clasping emotion
might appear to her apprehensive heart, I had
not, at the instant, any thought but what reverence
inspired. And till she had actually withdrawn (which
I permitted under promise of a speedy return, and on
her consent to dismiss the chair), all the motions of my
heart were as pure as her own. 
She kept not her word. An hour I waited, before
I sent to claim her promise. She could not possibly
see me yet, was the answer. As soon as she could, she
would. 
Dorcas says, she still excessively trembled; and ordered
her to give her water and hartshorn. 
A strange apprehensive creature! —Her terror is
too great for the occasion. —Evils in apprehension are
often greater than evils in reality. Hast thou never
observed, that the terrors of a bird caught, and actually
in the hand, bear no comparison to what we might
have supposed those terrors would be, were we to
have formed a judgment of the same bird by its shyness
before taken? 
Dear creature! —Did she never romp? Did she
ever from girlhood to now, hoyden? The innocent
kinds of freedom taken and all owed  on these occasions,
would have familiarized her to greater. Sacrilege 

but to touch the hem of her garment! —Excess
of delicacy! —O the consecrated beauty! —How can
she think to be a wife! 
But how do I know till I try, whether she may not
by a less alarming treatment be prevailed upon, or
whether [Day, I have done with thee!] she may not
yield to nightly surprizes? This is still the burden of
my song, I can marry her when I will. And if I do,
after prevailing (whether by surprize or reluctant consent)
whom but myself shall I have injured? 
* *
It is now eleven o'clock. She will see me as soon
as she can, she tells Polly Horton, who made her a
tender visit, and to whom she is less reserved than to
any-body else. Her emotion, she assures her, was
not owing to perverseness, to nicety, to ill-humour; 
but to weakness of heart. She has not strength of
mind sufficient, she says, to enable her to support her
condition, and her apprehensions, under the weight
of a father's curse; which she fears is more than beginning
to operate. 
Yet what a contradiction! —Weakness of heart,
says she, with such a strength of will! —O Belford!
she is a lion-hearted lady, in every case where her honour,
her punctilio rather, calls for spirit. But I
have had reason more than once in her case, to conclude,
that the passions of the gentlest, slower to be
moved than those of the quick, are the most flaming,
the most irresistible, when raised. —Yet her charming
body is not equally organized. The unequal
partners pull two ways; and the divinity within her
tears her silken frame. But had the same soul informed
a masculine body, never would there have been a
truer hero. 
Monday, two o'clock. 
My beloved not yet visible. She is not well. 
What expectations had she from my ardent admiration 

of her! —More rudeness than revenge apprehended. 
Yet, how my soul thirsts for revenge upon
both these ladies! —I must have recourse to my master-strokes. 
This cursed project of Miss Howe and her
Mrs. Townsend, if I cannot contrive to render it
abortive, will be always a sword hanging over my
head. Upon every little disobligation my beloved
will be for taking wing; and the pains I have taken,
to deprive her of every other refuge or protection, in
order to make her absolutely dependent upon me, will
be all thrown away. But, perhaps, I shall find out a
Smuggler to counteract Miss Howe. 
Thou remembrest the contention between the Sun
and the North wind, in the fable; which should first
make an honest Traveller throw off his cloak. 
Boreas began first. He puffed away most vehemently; 
and often made the poor fellow curve and
stagger: But with no other effect, than to cause him
to wrap his surtout the closer about him. 
But when it came to Phœbus's turn, he so played
upon the traveller with his beams, that he made him
first unbutton, and then throw it quite off: —Nor
left he, till he obliged him to take to the friendly shade
of a spreading beech; where prostrating himself on
the thrown-off cloak, he took a comfortable nap. 
The victor-god then laughed outright, both at Boreas
and the Traveller, and pursued his radiant course,
shining upon, and warming and cherishing a thousand
new objects, as he danced along: And at night, when
he put up his fiery coursers, he diverted his Thetis
with the relation of his pranks in the passed day. 
I, in like manner, will discard all my boistrous
inventions; and if I can oblige my sweet Traveller to
throw aside, but for one moment, the cloak of her
rigid virtue, I shall have nothing to do, but, like the
sun, to bless new objects with my rays. —But my
chosen hours of conversation and repose, after all my
peregrinations, will be devoted to my goddess. 

* *
And now, Belford, according to my new system,
I think this house of Mrs. Fretchville an embarass
upon me. I will get rid of it; for some time at
least. Mennell, when I am out, shall come to her,
inquiring for me. What for? thou'lt ask. What
for! —Hast thou not heard what has befallen poor
Mrs. Fretchville? —Then I'll tell thee. 
One of her maids, about a week ago, was taken
with the small-pox. The rest kept their mistress
ignorant of it till Friday; and then she came to know
it by accident. —The greater half of the plagues poor
mortals of condition are tormented with, proceed
from the servants they take, partly for shew, partly
for use, and with a view to lessen their cares. 
This has so terrified the widow, that she is taken
with all the symptoms which threaten an attack from
that dreadful enemy of fair faces. —So must not think
of removing: Yet cannot expect, that we should be
further delayed on her account. 
She now wishes, with all her heart, that she had
known her own mind, and gone into the country at
first when I treated about the house: This evil then
had not happened! —A cursed cross accident for us,
too! —High-ho! Nothing else, I think, in this mortal
life! —People need not study to bring crosses upon
themselves by their petulancies. 
So this affair of the house will be over; at least,
for one while. But then I can fall upon an expedient
which will make amends for this disappointment. 
Since I must move slow, in order to be sure, I have a
charming contrivance or two in my head—Even supposing
she should get away, to bring her back again. 
But what is become of Lord M. I trow, that he
writes not to me, in answer to my invitation? If he
would send me such a letter, as I could shew, it might
go a great way towards a perfect reconciliation. I
have written to Charlotte about it. He shall soon 

hear from me, and that in a way he won't like, if he
writes not quickly. He has sometimes threatened to
disinherit me: But if I should renounce him, it would
be but justice, and would vex him ten times more,
than any thing he can do, will vex me. Then, the
settlements unavoidably delayed, by his neglect! — 
How shall I bear such a life of procrastination! I,
who, as to my will, and impatience, and so forth,
am of the true lady-make! and can as little bear controul
and disappointment as the best of them! 
* *
Another letter from Miss Howe. I suppose it is
that which she promises in her last to send her, relating
to the courtship between old Tony the uncle, and
Annabella the mother. I should be extremely rejoiced
to see it. No more of the smuggler-plot in it,
I hope. This, it seems, she has put in her pocket. 
But I hope I shall soon find it deposited with the rest. 
Monday evening. 
At my repeated request she condescended to meet
me in the dining-room to afternoon tea, and not before. 
She entered with bashfulness, as I thought; in a
pretty confusion, for having carried her apprehensions
too far. Sullen and slow moved she towards the tea-table. 
—Dorcas present, busy in tea cup preparations. 
I took her reluctant hand, and pressed it to my lips. — 
Dearest, loveliest of creatures, why this distance? 
Why this displeasure? —How can you thus torture
the faithfullest heart in the world? —She disengaged
her hand. Again I would have snatch'd it. 
Be quiet, peevishly withdrawing it; and down she
sat; a gentle palpitation in the beauty of beauties indicating
mingled sullenness and resentment; her
snowy handkerchief rising and falling, and a sweet
flush overspreading her charming cheeks. 

For God's sake, Madam! —And a third time I
would have taken her repulsing hand. 
And for the same sake, Sir; no more teazing. 
Dorcas retired; I drew my chair nearer hers, and
with the most respectful tenderness took her hand; 
and told her, that I could not, without the utmost
concern, forbear to express my apprehensions (from
the distance she was so desirous to keep me at), that
if any man in the world was more indifferent to her,
to use no harsher a word, than another, it was the
unhappy wretch before her. 
She looked steadily upon me for a moment, and
with her other hand, not withdrawing that I held,
pulled her handkerchief out of her pocket; and by a
twinkling motion, tried to dissipate a tear or two,
which stood ready in each eye, to meander themselves
a passage down her glowing cheeks; but answered
me only with a sigh, and an averted face. 
I urged her to speak; to look up at me; to bless
me with an eye more favourable. 
I had reason, she told me, for my complaint of her
indifference. She saw nothing in my mind that was
generous. I was not a man to be obliged or favoured. 
My strange behaviour to her since Saturday
night, for no cause at all that she knew of, convinced
her of this. Whatever hopes she had conceived
of me, were utterly dissipated: All my ways
were disgustful to her. 
This cut me to the heart. The guilty, I believe,
in every case, less patiently bear the detecting truth,
than the innocent do the degrading falshood. 
I bespoke her patience, while I took the liberty to
account for this change, on my part. —I re-acknowleged
the pride of my heart, which could not bear the
thought of that want of preference in the heart of a
lady, whom I hoped to call mine, which she had always
manifested. Marriage, I said, was a state that 

was not to be entered upon with indifference on either
side. 
It is insolence, interrupted she, it is presumption,
Sir, to expect tokens of value, without resolving to
deserve them. You have no whining creature before
you, Mr. Lovelace, overcome by weak motives, to
love where there is no merit. Miss Howe can tell
you, Sir, that I never loved the faults of my friend; 
nor ever wished her to love me for mine. It was a
rule with us, not to spare each other. And would a
man who has nothing but faults (for pray, Sir, what
are your virtues?) expect that I should shew a value
for him? Indeed, if I did, I should not deserve even
his value, but ought to be despised by him. 
Well have you, Madam, kept up to this noble
manner of thinking. You are in no danger of being
despised for any marks of tenderness or favour
shewn to the man before you. You have been
perhaps, you'll think, laudably studious of making
and taking occasions to declare, that it was far
from being owing to your choice, that you had
any thoughts of me. My whole soul, Madam, in
all its errors, in all its wishes, in all its views, had
been laid open and naked before you, had I been encouraged
by such a share in your confidence and
esteem, as would have secured me against your apprehended
worst constructions of what I should from
time to time have revealed to you, and consulted you
upon. For never was there a franker heart; nor a
man so ready to accuse himself. [This, Belford, is
true]. But you know, Madam, how much otherwise
it has been between us. —Doubt, distance, reserve,
on your part, begat doubt, fear, awe, on
mine. —How little confidence! as if we apprehended
each other to be a plotter rather than a lover. How
have I dreaded every letter that has been brought you
from Wilson's! —And with reason; since the last, 

from which I expected so much, on account of the
proposals I had made you in writing, has, if I may
judge by the effects, and by your denial of seeing me
yesterday (tho' you could go abroad, and in a chair
too, to avoid my attendance on you), set you against
me more than ever. 
I was guilty, it seems, of going to church, said the
indignant charmer; and without the company of a
man, whose choice it would not have been to go,
had I not gone. I was guilty of desiring to have the
whole Sunday to myself, after I had obliged you,
against my will, at a play; and after you had detained
me, equally to my dislike, to a very late hour over
night. —These were my faults: For these I was to be
punished; I was to be compelled to see you, and to
be terrified when I did see you, by the most shocking
ill-humour that was ever shewn to a creature in my
circumstances, and not bound to bear it. You have
pretended to find free fault with my father's temper,
Mr. Lovelace: But the worst that he ever shewed
after marriage, was not in the least to be compared
to what you have shewn twenty times beforehand. — 
And what are my prospects with you, at the very
best? —My indignation rises against you, Mr. Lovelace,
while I speak to you, when I recollect the many
instances, equally ungenerous and unpolite, of your
behaviour to one whom you have brought into distress
—And I can hardly bear you in my sight. 
She turned from me, standing up; and lifting up
her folded hands and charming eyes, swimming in
tears—O my dear papa, said the inimitable creature,
you might have spared your heavy curse, had you
known how I have been punished, ever since my
swerving feet led me out of your garden-doors to meet
this man! Then, sinking into her chair, a burst of
passionate tears forced their way down her glowing
cheeks. 

My dearest life, taking her still folded hands in
mine, who can bear an invocation so affecting, tho' so
passionate? [And, as I hope to live, my nose tingled,
as I once when a boy, remember it did (and indeed
once more very lately), just before some tears came
into my eyes; and I durst hardly trust my face in view
of hers] What have I done to deserve this impatient
exclamation? —Have I, at any time, by word, by
deeds, by looks, given you cause to doubt my honour,
my reverence, my adoration, I may call it, of
your virtues? —All is owing to misapprehension, I
hope, on both sides. —Condescend to clear up but your
part, as I will mine, and all must speedily be happy. — 
Would to heaven I loved that heaven as I love you! 
And yet, if I doubted a return in love, let me perish
if I should know how to wish you mine! —Give me
hope, dearest creature, give me but hope, that I am
your preferable choice! —Give me but hope, that you
hate me not; that you do not despise me. 
O Mr. Lovelace, we have been long enough together,
to be tired of each others humours and ways; 
ways and humours so different, that perhaps you
ought to dislike me, as much as I do you. —I think, I
think, that I cannot make an answerable return to the
value you profess for me. My temper is utterly
ruined. You have given me an ill opinion of all
mankind; of yourself in particular: And withal so
bad a one of myself, that I shall never be able to look
up, having utterly and for ever lost all that self-complacency,
and conscious pride, which are so necessary
to carry a woman through this life with tolerable
satisfaction to herself. 
She paused. I was silent. By my soul, thought I,
this sweet creature will at last undo me! 
She proceeded. —What now remains, but that you
pronounce me free of all obligation to you? And
that you will not hinder me from pursuing the destiny
that shall be allotted me? 

Again she paused. I was still silent; meditating
whether to renounce all further designs upon her; 
whether I had not received sufficient evidence of a
virtue, and of a greatness of soul, that could not be
questioned, or impeached. 
She went on: Propitious to me be your silence,
Mr. Lovelace! —Tell me, that I am free of all obligation
to you. You know, I never made you promises. 
—You know, that you are not under any to
me. —My broken fortunes I matter not.— 
She was proceeding. —My dearest life, said I, I have
been all this time, tho' you fill me with doubts of your
favour, busy in the nuptial preparations. —I am actually
in treaty for equipage. 
Equipage, Sir! —Trappings, Tinsel! —What is
Equipage; what is Life; what is Any-thing, to a creature
sunk so low, as I am in my own opinion! —Labouring
under a father's curse! —Unable to look backward
without reproach, or forward without terror! — 
These reflections strengthen'd by every cross accident! 
—And what but cross accidents befal me! —All
my darling schemes dashed in pieces; all my hopes at
an end; deny me not the liberty to refuge myself in
some obscure corner, where neither the enemies you
have made me, nor the few friends you have left me,
may ever hear of the supposed rash one, till those
happy moments are at hand, which shall expiate for all. 
I had not a word to say for myself. Such a war in
my mind had I never known. Gratitude, and admiration
of the excellent creature before me, combating
with villainous habit, with resolutions so premeditately
made, and with views so much gloried
in! —An hundred new contrivances in my head, and
in my heart, that, to be honest, as it is called; must
all be given up, by a heart delighting in intrigue and
difficulty—Miss Howe's virulences endeavoured to be
recollected—Yet recollection refusing to bring them
forward with the requisite efficacy—I had certainly 

been a lost man, had not Dorcas come seasonably in,
with a letter. —On the superscription written—Be
pleased, Sir, to open it now. 
I returned to the window—opened it. —It was from
herself. —These the contents—‘Be pleased to detain
my lady; a paper of importance to transcribe. —I
will cough when I have done.’ 
I put the paper in my pocket, and turned to my
charmer, less disconcerted, as she, by that time, had
also a little recovered herself. —One favour, dearest
creature—Let me but know, whether Miss Howe approves
or disapproves of my proposals? —I know her
to be my enemy. I was intending to account to you
for the change of behaviour you accused me of at the
beginning of this conversation; but was diverted from
it by your vehemence. —Indeed, my beloved creature,
you was very vehement. —Do you think, it must not
be matter of high regret to me, to find my wishes so
often delayed and postponed, in favour of your predominant
view to a reconciliation with relations, who
will not be reconciled to you? —To this was owing
your declining to celebrate before we came to town,
tho' you were so atrociously treated by your sister, and
your whole family; and tho' so ardently pressed to
celebrate by me? To this was owing the ready offence
you took at my four friends; and at the unavailing
attempt I made to see a dropt letter, little
imagining that there could be room for mortal displeasure
on that account, from what two such ladies
could write to each other. —To this was owing the
week's distance you held me at, till you knew the issue
of another application. —But when they had rejected
that; when you had sent my coldly-received proposals
to Miss Howe for her approbation or advice, as
indeed I advised, and had honoured me with your
company at the play on Saturday night (my whole
behaviour unobjectible to the last hour); must not,
Madam, the sudden change in your conduct, the very 

next morning, astonish and distress me? —And this
persisted in with still stronger declarations, after you
had received the impatiently-expected letter from Miss
Howe; must I not conclude, that all was owing to
her influence; and that some other application or project
was meditating, that made it necessary to keep
me again at distance till the result were known, and
which was to deprive me of you for ever? for was
not that your constantly proposed preliminary? —Well,
Madam, might I be wrought up to a half-frenzy by
this apprehension; and well might I charge you with
hating me. —And now, dearest creature, let me know,
I once more ask you, what is Miss Howe's opinion of
my proposals? 
Were I disposed to debate with you, Mr. Lovelace,
I could very easily answer your fine harangue. But
at present, I shall only say, that your ways have been
very unaccountable. You seem to me, if your
meanings were always just, to have taken great pains
to embarass them. Whether owing in you to the
want of a clear head, or a sound heart, I cannot determine; 
but it is to the want of one of them, I verily
think, that I am to ascribe the greatest part of your
strange conduct. 
Curse upon the heart of the little devil, said I, who
instigates you to think so hardly of the faithfullest
heart in the world! 
How dare you, Sir? —And there she stopt; having
almost overshot herself; as I designed she should. 
How dare I what, Madam? And I looked with
meaning. How dare I what? 
Vile man! —And do you—And there again she
stopt. 
Do I what, Madam? —And why vile man? 
How dare you to curse any-body in my presence? 
O the sweet receder! —But that was not to go off
so with a Lovelace. 

Why then, dearest creature, is there any body that
instigates you? —If there be, again I curse them, be
they who they will. 
She was in a charming pretty passion. —And this
was the first time that I had the odds in my favour. 
Well, Madam, it is just as I thought. And now
I know how to account for a temper, that I hope is
not natural to you. 
Artful wretch! And is it thus you would entrap
me? —But know, Sir, that I receive letters from nobody
but Miss Howe. Miss Howe likes some of your
ways as little as I do; for I have set every-thing before
her. —Yet she is thus far your enemy, as she is
mine: —She thinks I should not refuse your offers; but
endeavour to make the best of my lot. And now you
have the truth. Would to heaven you were capable
of dealing with equal sincerity! 
I am, Madam. And here, on my knee, I renew
my vows, and my supplication, that you will make
me yours—Yours for ever. —And let me have cause
to bless you and Miss Howe in the same breath. 
To say the truth, Belford, I had before begun to
think, that that vixen of a girl, who certainly likes
not Hickman, was in love with me. 
Rise, Sir, from your too-ready knees; and mock
me not. 
Too-ready knees, thought I! —Tho' this humble
posture so little affects this proud beauty, she knows
not how much I have obtained of others of her sex,
nor how often I have been forgiven the last attempts,
by kneeling. 
Mock you, Madam! —And I arose, and re-urged
her for the day. I blamed myself at the same time,
for my invitation to Lord M. as it might subject me
to delay, from his infirmities: But told her, that I
would write to him to excuse me, if she had no objection; 
or to give him the day she would give me,
and not wait for him, if he could not come in time. 

My day, Sir, said she, is never. Be not surprized. 
A person of politeness judging between us, would not
be surprized that I say so. But indeed, Mr. Lovelace,
and wept thro' impatience, you either know not how
to treat with a mind of the least degree of delicacy,
notwithstanding your birth and education, or you are
an ingrateful man; and (after a pause) a worse than
ingrateful one. But I will retire. I will see you again
to-morrow. I cannot before. I think I hate you— 
You may look—Indeed I think I hate you. And if,
upon a re-examination of my own heart, I find I do,
I would not for the world that matters should go on
farther between us. 
I was too much vex'd, disconcerted, mortify'd, to
hinder her retiring—And yet she had not gone, if
Dorcas had not cough'd. 
The wench came in, as soon as her lady had retired,
and gave me the copy she had taken. And
what should it be of, but the answer the truly admirable
creature had intended to give to my written proposals
in relation to settlements? 
I have but just dipt into this affecting paper. Were
I to read it attentively, not a wink should I sleep this
night. To-morrow it shall obtain my serious consideration. 