


Mr. Reeves, To George Selby Esq; 


Sat. Feb. 18. 
Dear Sir,
I Am just return'd from visiting my beloved cousin. 
You will be glad of every minute particular, as I
can give it to you, relating to this shocking affair; and
to her protector and his sister. There are not such
another brother and sister in England. 
I got to the hospitable mansion by nine this morning. 
I enquir'd after Miss Byron's health, and on giving
in my name, was shewn into an handsome parlour,
elegantly furnished. 
Immediately came down to me a very agreeable
young lady, Miss Grandison. I gave her a thousand
thanks for the honour of her letter, and the joyful information
it had given me of the safety of one so deservedly
dear to us. 
She must be an excellent young lady, answer'd she. 
I have just left her—You must not see her yet— 
Ah, madam, said I, and look'd surpris'd and griev'd,
I believe— 
Don't affright yourself, Sir. Miss Byron will do
very well. But she must be kept quiet. She has had
a happy deliverance—She— 
O madam, interrupted I, your generous, your noble
brother— 
Is the best of men, Mr. Reeyes: His delight is in
doing good. —And, as to this adventure, it has made
him, I am sure, a very happy man. 
But is my cousin, madam, so ill, that I cannot be
allow'd to see her for one moment? 
She is but just come out of a fit. She fell into it
in the relation she would have made of her story, on
mentioning the villain's name by whom she has suffered. 
She could give only broken and imperfect accounts 

of herself all day yesterday, or you had heard
from me sooner. When you see her, you must be
very cautious of what you say to her. We have a
skilful physician, by whose advice we proceed. 
God for ever bless you, madam! 
He has not long left her. He advises quiet. She
has had a very bad night. Could she compose herself,
could she get a little natural rest, the cure is performed. 
Have you breakfasted, Sir? 
Breakfasted, madam! My impatience to see my
cousin allowed me not to think of breakfast. 
You must breakfast with me, Sir. And when that
is over, if she is tolerable, we will acquaint her with
your arrival, and go up together. I read your impatience,
Sir: We will make but a very short breakfasting. 
I was just going to breakfast. 
She rang. It was brought in. 
I longed, I said, as we sat at tea, to be acquainted
with the particulars of the happy deliverance. 
We avoid asking any questions that may affect her. 
I know very little of the particulars myself. My brother
was in haste to get to town. The servants that
were with him at the time, hardly dismounted: He
doubted not but the lady (to whom he referr'd me for
the gratifying my curiosity) would be able to tell me
every-thing. But she fell into fits, and, as I told you,
was so ill, on the recollection of what she had suffered— 
Good God! said I, what must the dear creature
have suffered! 
—That we thought fit to restrain our curiosity, and
so must you, till we see Sir Charles. I expect him
before noon. 
I am told, madam, that there was a skirmish. I
hope Sir Charles— 
I hope so too, Mr. Reeves, interrupted she. I long
to see my brother as much as you can do to see your
cousin—But on my apprehensions, he assured me 

upon his honour, that he was but very slightly hurt. 
Sir Charles is no qualifier, Sir, when he stakes his honour,
be the occasion either light or serious. 
I said, I doubted not but she was very much surpris'd
at a lady's being brought in by Sir Charles, and
in a dress so fantastic. 
I was, Sir. I had not left my chamber: But
hastened down at the first word, to receive and welcome
the stranger. My maid, out of breath, burst
into my room—Sir Charles, madam, beseeches you
this moment to come down. He has saved a lady
from robbers (that was her report) a very fine lady!
and is come back with her. He begs that you will
come down this instant. 
I was too much surpris'd at my brother's unexpected
return, and too much affected with the lady's visible
grief and terror, to attend to her dress, when I
first went down. She was sitting, dreadfully trembling,
and Sir Charles next her, in a very tender manner,
assuring her of his and of his sister's kindest protection. 
I saluted her, continued the lady: Welcome,
welcome, thrice welcome to this house, and to me— 
She threw herself on one knee to me. Distress had
too much humbled her. Sir Charles and I raised her
to her seat. You see before you, madam, said she,
a strange creature, and look'd at her dress: But I hope
you will believe I am an innocent one. This vile appearance
was not my choice. Fie upon me! I must
be thus dress'd out for a Masquerade: Hated diversion! 
I never had a notion of it. Think not hardly, Sir,
turning to Sir Charles, her hands clasped and held up,
of her whom you have so generously delivered. Think
not hardly of me, madam, turning to me: I am not
a bad creature. That vile, vile man! and she could
say no more. 
Charlotte, said my broother, you will make it your
first care to raise the spirits of this injured beauty:
Your next, to take her directions, and inform her 

friends of her safety. Such an admirable young lady
as this, cannot be missed an hour, without exciting
the fears of all her friends for her. I, repeat, madam,
that you are in honourable hands. My sister will have
pleasure in obliging you. 
She wished to be conveyed to town; but looking
at her dress, I offered her cloaths of mine; and my
brother said, if she were very earnest, and thought
herself able to go, he would take horse, and leave the
chariot, and he was sure that I would attend her thither. 
But before she could declare her acceptance of this
offer, as she seemed joyfully ready to do, her spirits
failed her, and she sunk down at my feet. 
Sir Charles just staid to see her come to herself; 
and then—Sister, said he, the lady cannot be removed. 
Let Dr. Holmes be sent for instantly. I know you
will give her your best attendance. I will be with
you before noon to-morrow. The lady is too low,
and too weak, to be troubled with questions now. 
Johnson will be back from Windsor. Let him take
her commands to any of her friends. Adieu, dear
madam—[Your cousin, Sir, seemed likely to faint
again] Support yourself. Repeating, You are in safe
and honourable hands; bowing to her, as she bowed
in return, but spoke not—Adieu, Charlotte: And
away went the best of brothers. 
And God Almighty bless him, said I, where-ever he
goes! 
Miss Grandison then told me, that the house I was
in belonged to the Earl of L. who had lately married
her elder sister: About three months ago, they
set out, she said, to pay a visit to my Lord's estate and
relations in Scotland, for the first time, and to settle
some affairs there: They were expected back in a
week or fortnight: She came down but last Tuesday,
and that in order to give directions for every-thing to
be prepared for their reception. It was happy for 

your cousin, said she, that I obtained the favour of
my brother's company; and that he was obliged to be
in town this morning. He intended to come back to
carry me to town this evening. We are a family of
love, Mr. Reeves. We are true brothers and sisters— 
But why trouble I you, with these things now? We
shall be better acquainted. I am charmed with Miss
Byron. 
She was so good as to hurry the breakfast! and
when it was over, conducted me up stairs. She bid
me stay at the door, and stept gently to the bed-side,
and opening the curtain, I heard the voice of our
cousin. 
Dear madam, what trouble do I give! were her
words. 
Still talk of trouble, Miss Byron! answered Miss
Grandison, with an amiable familiarity; you will not
forbear—Will you promise me not to be surpris'd at
the arrival of your cousin Reeves? 
I do promise—I shall rejoice to see him. 
Miss Grandison called to me. I approached, and
catching my cousin's held-out hand, Thank God,
thank God, best beloved of an hundred hearts! said
I, that once more I behold you! that once more I
see you in safe and honourable hands! —I will not tell
you what we have all suffered. 
No don't, said she—You need not—But O my
cousin! I have fallen into the company of angels. 
Forbear, gently patting her hand, forbear these high
flights, said the kind lady, or I shall beat my charming
patient. I shall not think you in a way to be quite
well, till you descend. 
She whispered me, that the doctor had expressed
fears for her head, if she were not kept quiet. Then
raising her voice, Your cousin's gratitude, Mr. Reeves,
is excessive. You must allow me, smiling, to beat
her. When she is well, she shall talk of angels, and
of what she pleases. 

But, my dear Mr. Selby, we who know how her heart
overslows with sentiments of gratitude, on every common
obligation, and even on but intentional ones, can
easily account for the high sense she must have of those
she lies under for such a deliverance from the brother,
and of such kind treatment from the sister, both absolute
strangers, till her distresses threw her into their
protection. 
I will only ask my dear Miss Byron one question,
said I (forgetting the caution given me below by Miss
Grandison) Whether this villain, by his violence— 
[meant marriage, I was going to say] But interrupting
me, You shall not, Mr. Reeves, said Miss Grandison,
smiling, ask half a question, that may revive disagreeable
remembrances. Is she not alive, and here,
and in a way to be well? Have patience till she is able
to tell you all. 
My cousin was going to speak: My dear, said the
lady, you shall not answer Mr. Reeves's question, if
it be a question that will induce you to look backward. 
At present you must look only forward. And
are you not in my care, and in Sir Charles Grandison's
protection? 
I have done, madam, said I, bowing—The desire
of taking vengeance— 
Hush, Mr. Reeves! —Surely! —Smiling, and holding
her finger to her lip. 
It is a patient's duty, said my cousin, to submit to
the prescriptions of her kind physician. But were I
ever to forgive the author of my distresses, it must be
for his being the occasion of bringing me into the
knowlege of such a lady; and yet to lie under the
weight of obligations that I never can return—Here
she stopt. 
I took this as an happy indication that the last violence
was not offered: If it had, she would not have
mentioned forgiving the author of her distress. 
As to what you say of obligation, Miss Byron, returned 

Miss Grandison, let your heart answer for mine,
had you and I changed situation. And if, on such
a supposition, you can think, that your humanity
would have been so extraordinary a matter, then shall
you be at liberty, when you are recovered, to say a
thousand fine things: Till when, pray be silent on this
subject. 
Then turning to me, See how much afraid your
cousin Byron is of lying under obligations. I am
afraid she has a proud heart: Has she not a very proud
heart, Mr. Reeves? 
She has a very grateful one, madam, replied I. 
She turned to my cousin: Will you, Miss Byron,
be easy under the obligations you talk of, or will you
not? 
I submit to your superiority, madam, in every-thing,
replied my cousin, bowing her head. 
She then ask'd me, If I had let her friends in the
country know of this shocking affair? 
I had suspected Mr. Greville, I said, and had written
in confidence to her Uncle Selby— 
O my poor Grandmamma—O my good Aunt Selby,
and my Lucy—I hope— 
Miss Grandison interposed, humourously, interrupting
—I will have nothing said that begins with O. Indeed,
Miss Byron, Mr. Reeves, I will not trust you together
—Cannot you have patience— 
We both ask'd her pardon. My cousin desired
leave to rise—But these odious cloaths, said she— 
If you are well enough, child, replied Miss Grandison,
you shall rise, and have no need to see those
odious cloaths, as you call them. I told them Mrs.
Reeves had sent her some of her cloaths. The portmanteau
was ordered to be brought up. 
Then Miss Grandison, sitting down on the bed by
my cousin, took her hand; and, feeling her pulse, Are
you sure, my patient, that you shall not suffer if you are
permitted to rise? Will you be calm, serene, easy? 

Will you banish curiosity? Will you endeavour to
avoid recollection? 
I will do my endeavour, answered my cousin. 
Miss Grandison then rung, and a maid-servant
coming up, Jenny, said she, pray give your best
assistance to my lovely patient. But be sure don't
let her hurry her spirits. I will lead Mr. Reeves into
my dressing-room. And when you are dress'd, my
dear, we will either return to you hither, or expect
you to join us there, at your pleasure. 
And then she obligingly conducted me into her
dressing-room; and excused herself for refusing to let
us talk of interesting subjects. I am rejoiced, said
she, to find her more sedate and composed than hitherto
she has been. Her head has been greatly in danger. 
Her talk, for some hours, when she did talk, was so
wild and incoherent, and she was so full of terror, on
every one's coming in her sight, that I would not
suffer any-body to attend her but myself. 
I left her not, continued Miss Grandison, till eleven; 
and the housekeeper, and my maid, sat up in her room
all the rest of the night. 
I arose before my usual time to attend her. I slept
not well myself. I did nothing but dream of robbers,
rescues, and murders: Such an impression had the
distress of this young lady made on my mind. 
They made me a poor report, proceeded she, of
the night she had passed. And, as I told you, she
fainted away this morning a little before you came,
on her endeavouring to give me some account of her
affecting story. 
Let me tell you, Mr. Reeves, I am as curious as
you can be, to know the whole of what has befallen
her. But her heart is tender and delicate. Her spirits
are low; and we must not pull down with one hand,
what we build up with the other: My brother also
will expect a good account of my charge. 
I blessed her for her goodness. And finding her 

desirous of knowing all that I could tell her, of our
cousin's character, family, and lovers, I gave her a
brief history, which extremely pleased her. Good
God, said she, what an happiness is it, that such a
lady, in such a distress, should meet with a man as
excellent, and as much admired, as herself! My brother,
Mr. Reeves, can never marry but he must break
half a score hearts. Forgive me, that I bring him in,
whenever any good person, or thing, or action, is
spoken of. Every-body, I believe, who is strongly
possessed of a subject, makes every-thing seen, heard,
or read of, that bears the least resemblance, turn into
and illustrate that subject. 
But here I will conclude this letter, in order to
send it by the post. Besides, I have been so much
fatigued in body and mind, and my wife has also been
so much disturbed in her mind, that I must give way
to a call of rest. 
I will pursue the subject, the now agreeable subject,
in the morning; and perhaps shall dispatch what I shall
farther write, as you must be impatient for it, by an
especial messenger. 
Sir Rowland was here twice yesterday, and once today. 
My wife caused him to be told, that Miss Byron,
by a sudden call, has been obliged to go a little way
out of town for two or three days. 
He proposes to set out for Caermarthen the beginning
of next week. He hoped he should not be denied
taking his corporal leave of her. 
If our cousin has a good day to-morrow, and no
return of her fits, she proposes to be in town on Monday. 
I am to wait on her, and Sir Charles and his
sister, at breakfast on Monday morning, and to attend
her home; where there will be joy indeed, on her
arrival. 
Pray receive for yourself, and make for me to your
lady, and all friends, my compliments of congratulation. 

I have not had either leisure or inclination, to enquire
after the villain, who has given us all this disturbance. 
Ever, ever yours,
Archibald Reeves.
Saturday Night. 

