



From Mrs. B. to her Father and Mother. 



Ever dear, and Ever honoured,
I must write this one Letter to you, altho' I have
had the Happiness to see you so lately; because
Mr. B. is now about to honour me with the Tour
he so kindly promisedto me, when with you; and 

it may therefore be several Months, perhaps, before
I have again the Pleasure of paying you the like
dutiful Respects. 
You know his kind Promise, That he would, for
every dear Baby I present him with, take an Excursion
with me afterwards, in order to establish
and confirm my Health. 
The Task I have undertaken of dedicating all my
Writing Amusements to the dearest of Gentlemen; the
full Imployment I have, when at home; the frequent
Rambles he has been so often pleas'd to indulge
me in, with my dear Miss Goodwin, to Kent,
to London, to Bedfordshire, to Lincolnshire, and to
my Lady Daver's, take from me the Necessity of
writing to your honoured Selves, to my Miss Darnford
that was, and to Lady Davers, so often as I formerly
thought myself obliged to do, when I saw all my
worthy Friends so seldom; the same things, moreover,
occurring this Year, as to our Conversations,
Visits, Friends, Imployments, and Amusements, (with
little Variation) that fell out the last, as they must do
in a Family so uniform and methodical as ours. 
I have, for these Reasons, more Leisure to pursue
my domestick Duties, which are increas'd upon me; 
and when I have said, That I am every Day more
and more happy in my beloved Mr. B. in Miss
Goodwin; my Billy, and my Davers, and now,
newly, in my sweet little Pamela, (for so, you know,
Lady Davers. would have her called, rather than by
her own Name) what can I say more? 
As to the Tour I spoke of, you know, the first
Part of Mr. B.'s obliging Scheme is to carry me to
France; for he has already travell'd with me over
the greatest Part of England; and I am sure, by my
Passage last Year, to the Isle of Wight, I shall not
be afraid of crossing the Water from Dover thither; 
and he will, when we are at Paris, he says, take my 

further Directions (that was his kind Expression)
whither to go next. 
My Lord and Lady Davers are so good as to
promise to accompany us to Paris, provided Mr. B.
will give them his and my Company to Aix la
Chapelle, for a Month or six Weeks, whither my Lord
is advised to go. And Mr. H. if he can get over his
Fear of crossing the salt Water*  , is to be of the Party. 
Lady G. Miss Darnford that was, (who likewise
has lately lain in of a fine Daughter) and I, are to
correspond, as Opportunity offers; and she is so
good as to promise to send to you what I write, as
formerly: But I have refused to say one Word in
my Letters of the Manners, Customs, Curiosities, &c.
of the Places we see, because, first, I shall not have
Leisure; and, next, because those things are so much
better described in Books already printed, written by
Persons who made stricter and better Observations
than I can pretend to make: So that what I shall write
will relate only to our private Selves, and shall be as
brief as possible. 
If we are to do as Mr. B has it in his Thought,
he intends to be out of England two Years: –––But
how can I bear that, if for your sakes only, and for
those of my dear Babies! ––––But this must be my
Time, my only Time, Mr. B. tells me, to ramble
and see distant Places and Countries; for he is pleas'd
to say, That as soon as his Little-ones are capable
of my Instructions, and begin to understand my
Looks and Signs, he will not spare me from them
a Week together; and he is so kind as to propose,
that my dear bold Boy (for every one sees how
greatly he resembles his Papa in his dear forward
Spirit) shall go with us; and this pleases Miss Goodwin
highly, who is very fond of him, and my little 

Davers; but vows she will never love so well my
little black-ey'd Pamela. 
You see what a sweet Girl Miss is, and you admir'd
her much: Did I tell you, what she said to
me, when first she saw you both, with your silver
Hairs, and reverend Countenances? –––Madam, said
she, I dare say, your Papa and Mamma honoured
their Father and Mother: They did, my Dear; but
what is your Reason for saying so? –––Because, reply'd
she, they have lived so long in the Land
which the Lord their God has given them. I took the
dear Charmer in my Arms, and kiss'd her three or
four times, as she deserv'd; for was not this very
pretty in the Child? 
I must with inexpressible Pleasure write you Word,
how happily God's Providence has turn'd for the best,
that Affair, which once made me so uneasy, in relation
to the fine Countess, (who is gone abroad) of whom
you and my Father had heard, as you told me, some
Reports, which had you known at the Time, would
have made you very apprehensive for Mr. B.'s Morals,
as well as for my Repose. 
I will give you the Particulars of this dark Affair,
so far as shall make you Judges of my present Joy. 
There was but one thing wanting, my dear Parents,
to complete all the Happiness I wish'd for in
this Life; and that was the remote Hope I had entertain'd,
that one Day, my dear Mr. B. who from
a licentious Gentleman, became a Moralist, would
be so touch'd by the Divine Grace, as to become,
in time, more than a Moral, a Religious Gentleman,
and that he would, at last, join in the Duties which
he had the Goodness to countenance. 
For this Reason I began with mere Indispensables. 
I crouded not his Gate with Objects of Charity: I
visited them at their Homes, and reliev'd them; 
distinguishing the worthy Indigent (made so by unavoidable 

Accidents and Casualties) from the wilfully,
or perversly, or sottishly such, by greater Marks
of my Favour. 
I confin'd my Morning and Evening Devotions to
my own Closet, as privately as possible, lest I should
give Offence and Discouragement to so gay a Temper,
so unaccustom'd, poor Gentleman! to Acts of
Devotion and Piety; while I met his Houshold together,
only on Mornings and Evenings of the
Sabbath-day, to prepare them for their publick Duties
in the one, and in hopes to confirm them in what
they had heard at Church in the other; leaving
them to their own Reflections for the rest of the
Week; after I had suggested to them a Method I
wish'd to be follow'd by themselves, and in which
they constantly obliged me. 
This good Order had its desired Effect, and our
Sabbath-day Assemblies were held with so little
Parade, that we were hardly any of us miss'd. All,
in short, was done with chearful Ease and Composure; 
and every one of us was better dispos'd to our domestick
Duties by this Method: I to attend the good Pleasure of
my best Friend, and they to attend that of us both. 
In this manner, we went on, very happily, my
neighbourly Visits of Charity taking up no more
Time than common Airings, and passing, many of
them, for such; my private Duties being only between
my First, my Heavenly Benefactor,
and myself, and my Family ones (personally) confin'd
to the Day, separated for these best of Services:
And Mr. B. pleas'd with my Manner, beheld the
good Effects, and countenanc'd me by his Praises
and his Endearments, as acting discreetly, as not
falling into Enthusiasm, and (as he used to say) as
not aiming at being righteous over-much. 
But still I wanted, and I waited for, with humble
Impatience, and I made it part of my constant 

Prayers, that the Divine Grace would at last touch
his Heart, and make him more than a Countenancer,
more than an Applauder, of my Duties: That he
might, for his own dear sake, become a Partaker, a
Partner in them; and then, thought I, when we can
Hand in Hand, Heart in Heart, one Spirit, as well
as one Flesh, join in the same Closet, in the same
Prayers and Thanksgivings, what an happy Creature
shall I be! 
I say, Closet; for, I durst not aspire so high, as
to hope he would favour me with his Company
among his Servants, in our Sunday Devotions–––I
knew it would be going too far, in his Opinion, to
expect it from him. In me their Mistress, had I
been ever so high-born, it was not amiss, because
I, and they, every one of us, were his; I in one
Degree, Mr. Longman in another, Mrs. Jervis in
another–––But from a Gentleman of his lordly Temper,
and manner of Education, I knew I could never
hope for it; so would not lose every thing, by grasping
at too much. 
But in the midst of all these comfortable Proceedings,
and my further charming Hopes, a nasty
Masquerade threw into the dear Gentleman's Way
a Temptation, that, for a time, blasted all my Prospects,
and indeed made me doubt my own Head
almost. For, judge what my Disappointment must
be, when I found all my Wishes frustrated, all my
Prayers render'd ineffectual: His very Morality,
which I had flatter'd myself, in time, I should be
an humble Instrument to exalt into a religious Frame
of Mind, shock'd, and in Danger; and all the good
Work to begin again, if offended Grace should ever
again offer itself to the dear wilful Trespasser! 
But who shall pretend to scrutinize the Councils
of the Almighty? –––For out of this evil Appearance
was to proceed the real Good, I had been so long,
and so often, supplicating for! 

The dear Gentleman was to be on the Brink of
relapsing: It was proper, that I should be so very
uneasy, as to assume a Conduct not natural to my
Temper, and to raise his generous Concern for me:
And, in the very Crisis, Divine Grace interposed,
made him sensible of his Danger, made him resolve
against his Error, before it was yet too late; and his
sliding Feet, quitting the slippery Path he was in,
collected new Strength, and he stood the firmer,
and more secure, for his Peril. 
For, my dear Parents, having happily put an End
to that Affair, he was pleas'd, when we were at
Tunbridge together, and in very serious Discourse on
divine Subjects, to say to this Effect: Is there not,
my Pamela, a Text, That the unbelieving Husband
shall be saved by the believing Wife, while he beholds
her chaste Conversation coupled with Fear? 
I need not tell you, my dear Mr. B. that there
is, nor where it is. 
Then, my Dear, I begin to hope, that will be
my Case: For, from a late Affair, of which this
Spot of Ground puts me more in mind, I see so
much Reason to doubt my own Strength, which I
had built, and, as I thought, securely, on moral
Foundations, that I must look out for a better
Guide to conduct me, than the proud Word Honour
can be, in the general Acceptation of it among us
lively young Gentlemen. 
How often, my dearest Love, continued he,
have I promised, (and I never promised, but I intended
to perform) that I would be faithfully and
only yours! How often have I declar'd, that I did
not think I could possibly deserve my Pamela, till
I could shew her, in my own Mind, a Purity as
nearly equal to hers, as my past Conduct would
admit of! 
But I depended too much upon my own Strength: 
And I am now convinc'd, that nothing but 
RELIGIOUS CONSIDERATIONS,
and a Resolution to watch over the very first Appearances
of Evil, and to check them, as they arise, can
be of sufficient Weight to keep steady to his good
Purposes, a young vain Mind, too little accustom'd
to Restraint, and too much us'd to play upon the Brink
of Dangers, from a Temerity, and Love of Intrigue,
too natural to enterprising Minds. 
You shall therefore, my Pamela, from this Instant,
be my Guide; and, only taking care, that you
do not all at once, by too rigorous Injunctions, damp
and discourage the rising Flame, I will leave it to
you to direct it as you please, till, by degrees, it may
be deem'd worthy to mingle with your own. 
Judge, my dear Parents, how rapturous my Joy
was upon this Occasion, and how ready I was to bless
God for a Danger (so narrowly escap'd) which was
attended with the very Consequences, that I had so
long pray'd for; and which I little thought the
Divine Providence was bringing about by the very
Means, that, I apprehended, would put an End to all
my pleasing Hopes and Prospects of that Nature. 
It is in vain for me to think of finding Words to
express what I felt, and how I acted, on this Occasion. 
I heard him out with twenty different and
impatient Emotions; and then threw myself at his
Feet, embracing his Knees, with Arms the most
ardently clasping! My Face lifted up to Heaven,
and to his dear Face, by Turns, my Eyes overflowing
with Tears of Joy, which half choak'd up the Passage
of my Words–––At last, his kind Arms clasping
my Neck, and kissing my tearful Cheek, I could
only say–––My Prayers, my ardent Prayers, are at
last–––at last–––heard–––– May God Almighty, dear 

Sir, confirm your pious Purposes!––– And, Oh! what
an happy Pamela have you at your Feet! 
I wept for Joy, till I sobb'd again ––– and he raising
me to his kind Arms, when I could speak, I said,
To have this heavenly Prospect, O best Beloved of
my Heart! added to all my earthly Blessings! –––– 
how shall I contain my Joy!––– For, Oh! to think
that my dear Mr. B. is, and will be, mine, and I
his, thro' the Mercies of God, when this transitory
Life is past and gone, to all Eternity; what a rich
Thought is this!––– Methinks, I am already, dear
Sir, ceasing to be mortal, and beginning to taste the
Perfection of those Joys, which this thrice welcome
Declaration gives me Hope of, hereafter!— But,
what shall I say, oblig'd as I was beyond Expression
before, and now doubly oblig'd in the rapturous
View you have open'd to me, into an happy Fururity! 
He was pleas'd to say, He was delighted with me
beyond Expression; that I was his ecstatick Charmer! 
–––That the Love I shew'd for his future Good was
the moving Proof of the Purity of my Heart, and
my Affection for him! And that very Evening he
was pleas'd to join with me in my retired Duties; 
and at all proper Opportunities favours me with his
Company in the same manner; listening attentively
to all my Lessons, as he calls my fond chearful Discourses
on serious Subjects. 
And now, my dear Parents, do you not rejoice
with me, in this charming, charming Appearance? 
For, before, I had the most generous, the most beneficent,
the most noble, the most affectionate; 
but, now, I am likely to have the most pious of
Husbands! What an happy Wife, what an happy
Daughter, is his and your Pamela!––– God, of his
infinite Mercy, continue and improve the ravishing
Prospect! 

I was forc'd to leave off here, to enjoy the charming
Reflections, which this lovely Subject, and my
blessed Prospects, filled me with: And now proceed
to write a few Lines more. 
I am under some Concern on account of our
going to travel into Roman-catholick Countries,
for fear we should want the publick Opportunities
of Divine Service: For, I presume, the Embassador's
Chapel will be the only Protestant Place
of Worship allow'd of; and Paris the only City in
France where there is one. But we must endeavour
to make it up in our private and domestick Duties: 
For, as the Phrase is, when we are at Rome, we
must do as they do at Rome; that is to say, so far,
as not to give Offence, on one hand, to the People
we are among, nor Scandal, on the other, by Compliances
hurtful to one's Conscience. But my Protector
knows all these things so well, (no Place in
what is called the Grand Tour, being new to him)
that I have no Reason to be very uneasy on these
Accounts. 
And now, my dearest dear honoured Parents, let
me, by Letter, as I did on my Knees at Parting,
beg the Continuance of your Prayers and Blessings,
and that God will preserve us to one another, and
give us, and all our worthy Friends, a happy Meeting
again. 
Kent, you may be sure, will be our first Visit, on
our Return, for your sakes, for my dear Davers's
sake, and for my little Pamela's sake, who will be
both sent down, and put into your Protection; while
my Billy, and Miss Goodwin, (for since I began
this Letter, it is so determin'd) are to be my delightful
Companions; for Mr. B. declar'd, His Boy shall
not be one Day out of my Presence, if he can 

help it, because, he is pleased to say, his Temper
wants looking after, and his Notices of every thing
are strong and significant. 
Poor little Dear! he has indeed a little sort of
Perverseness and Headstrongness, as one may say, in
his Will: But he is but a Baby; and I shall, I hope,
manage him pretty well; for he takes great Notice
of all I say, and of every Look of mine, already––– 
He is, besides, very good-humour'd, and willing to
part with any thing for a kind Word; and this gives
me Hope of a docile and benevolent Disposition,
as he grows up. 
I thought, when I began the last Paragraph but
one, that I was within a Line of concluding; but
it is to You, and of my Babies, I am writing; so
shall go on to the Bottom of this new Sheet, if I
do not directly put an End to my Scribbling: Which
I do, with assuring you both, my dear good Parents,
that where-ever I am, I shall always be thoughtful
of you, and remember you in my Prayers, as
becomes 
Your ever dutiful Daughter,
P. B. 
My Respects to all your good Neighbours in
general. Mr. Longman will visit you now-and-then. 
Mrs. Jervis will take one Journey to Kent,
she says, and it shall be to accompany my
Babies, when they are carried down to you. 
Poor Jonathan, and she, good Folks! seem
declining in their Health, which much grieves
me.––– Once more, God send us all an happy
Meeting, if it be his blessed Will! Adieu,
Adieu, my dear Parents! 
Your ever dutiful, &c. 

