

GEORGE R.
George the Second, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all to whom these
Presents shall come, Greeting. 
Whereas our trusty and well-beloved Charles Rivington, Samuel Richardson, and
John Osborn, of our City of London, Stationers, have by their Petition humbly
represented unto Us, That they have at great Expence and Labour prepared for
the Press a Work, intituled, PAMELA: Or, VIRTUE REWARDED. 
In a Series of Familiar Letters from a beautiful young Damsel to ber Parents: And
afterwards, in ber exalted Condition, between Her and Persons of Figure and
Quality, upon the most Important and Entertaining Subjects, in Genteel Life. Publish'd in order to cultivate the Principles of Virtue and Religion in the Minds of
the Youth of Both Sexes. In Four Volumes; the Property whereof is wholly vested
in the said Petitioners; and which Work they, with the utmost Submission,
apprehend may be of great Service to the Publick; and being desirous of reaping
the Fruits of their great Expence and Labour, and of enjoying the full Profit and
Benefit that may arise from Printing and Vending the same, the said Petitioners
have prayed Us to grant them our Royal Privilege and Licence, for the sole Printing,
Publishing, and Vending the said Work, in as ample Manner and Form as has been
done in Cases of the like Nature: We, being willing to give Eacouragement to so
useful an Undertaking, are graciously pleased to condescend to their Request; and
do, by these Presents, so far as may be agreeable to the Statute in that Case made
and provided, grant unto them the said Charles Rivington, Samuel Richardson, and
John Osborn, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, Our Licence, for the
sole Printing, Publishing, and Vending the said Work, for the Term of Fourteen
Years, to be computed from the Date hereof; strictly forbidding all Our Subjects
within Our Kingdoms and Dominions to reprint or abridge the same, either in the
like, or in any other Volume or Volumes whatsoever, or to import, buy, vend,
utter, or distribute any Copies thereof reprinted beyond the Seas, during the aforesaid
Term of Fourteen Years, without the Consent or Approbation of the said Charles
Rivington, Sammel Richardson, and John Osborn, their Heirs, Executors, or Assigns,
under their Hands and Seals first had and obtained, as they will answer the Contrary
at their Peril: Whereof the Commissioners and other Officers of our Customs, the
Master, Wardens, and Company of Stationers, are to take Notice, that due Obedience
may be render'd to our Pleasure herein declared. Given at our Court at St. James's,
the Thirteenth Day of January 1741–2, in the Fifteenth Year of our Reign. 
By His Majesty's Command, 
Harrington.
