



Mr. John Harlowe, To Miss Cl. Harlowe. 
[In Answer to hers to her Mother. See No xxiv. 

Monday, Aug. 7. 
Poor ungrateful naughty Kinswoman,
Your Mother neither caring, nor being permitted,
to write, I am desired to set pen to paper,
tho' I had resolved against it. 
And so I am to tell you, that your Letters, joined
to the occasion of them, almost break the hearts of
us all. 
Were we sure you had seen your folly, and were
truly penitent, and, at the same time, that you were
so very ill as you pretend, I know now what might be
done for you. But we are all acquainted with your
moving ways when you want to carry a point. 
Unhappy girl! how miserable have you made us all! 
We, who used to visit with so much pleasure, now
cannot endure to look upon one another. 
If you had not known, upon an hundred occasions,
how dear you once was to us, you might judge of it
now, were you to know how much your folly has
unhinged us all. 
Naughty, naughty girl! You see the fruits of preferring
a Rake and Libertine to a man of sobriety and
morals. Against full warning, against better knowlege. 
And such a modest creature too, as you were! 
How could you think of such an unworthy preference? 
Your Mother can't ask, and your Sister knows not
in modesty how to ask; and so I ask you, If you have
any reason to think yourself with child by this villain? 
—You must answer this, and answer it truly, before
any-thing can be resolved upon about you. 

You may well be touched with a deep remorse for
your misdeeds. Could I ever have thought that my
doating-piece, as every one called you, would have
done thus? To be sure I loved you too well. But
that is over now. Yet, tho' I will not pretend to
answer for any-body but myself, for my own part
say, God forgive you! And this is all from 
Your afflicted Uncle,
John Harlowe. 
The following Meditation was stitched to the
bottom of this Letter, with black silk. 
MEDITATION.
O that thou wouldst hide me in the grave! That thou
wouldst keep me secret, till thy wrath be past! 
My face is foul with weeping; and on my eye-lid
is the shadow of death. 
My friends scorn me; but mine eye poureth out
tears unto God. 
A dreadful sound is in my ears; in prosperity the
destroyer came upon me! 
I have sinned! What shall I do unto thee, O thou
Preserver of men! Why hast thou set me as a mark
against thee; so that I am a burden to myself! 
When I say, My bed shall comfort me; My couch
shall ease my complaint; 
Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me
thro' visions. 
So that my soul chuseth strangling, and death rather
than life. 
I loath it! I would not live alway! —Let me alone; 
for my days are vanity! 
He hath made me a bye-word of the people; and aforetime
I was as a tabret. 
My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even
the thoughts of my heart. 
When I looked for good, then evil came unto me; and
when I waited for light, then came darkness. 

And where now is my hope?— 
Yet all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till
my change come. 