



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

M. Hall, Thursday, Sept. 14. 
Ever since the fatal seventh of this month, I have
been lost to myself, and to all the joys of life. I might
have gone farther back than that fatal seventh; which,
for the future, I will never see anniversarily revolve but
in sables; only till that cursed day I had some gleams of
hope now and then darting in upon me. 
They tell me of an odd letter I wrote to you (a) . I
remember I did write. But very little of the contents of
what I wrote do I remember. 
I have been in a cursed way. Methinks something has
been working strangely retributive. I never was such a
fool as to disbelieve a Providence: Yet am I not for resolving
into judgments every-thing that temporarily
chances to wear an avenging face. Yet if we must be
punished either here or hereafter for our misdeeds, better
here, say I, than hereafter. Have I not then an interest
to think my punishment already not only begun, but
completed; since what I have suffered, and do suffer,
passes all description? 
To give but one instance of the retributive—Here I,
who was the barbarous cause of the loss of senses for a
week together to the most inimitable of women, have
been punished with the loss of my own—Preparative to
—Who knows what? —When, O when, shall I know a
joyful hour? 
I am kept excessively low; and excessively low I am. 
This sweet creature's posthumous letter sticks close to
me. All her excellencies rise up hourly to my remembrance. 
Yet dare I not to indulge in these melancholy reflections. 
I find my head strangely working again? —Pen, begone! 
Friday, Sept. 15. 
I resume, in a sprightly vein, I hope—Mowbray and
Tourville have just now— 
But what of Mowbray and Tourville! —What's the
world? —What's any-body in it?— 

Yet are they highly exasperated against thee, for the
last letter thou wrotest to them (a) —Such an unfriendly,
such a merciless— 
But it won't do! —I must again lay down my pen—O
Belford, Belford! I am still, I am still, most miserably absent
from myself! Shall never, never, more be what I was! 
* *
Saturday, Sunday, Nothing done. Incapable of anything.— 
Monday, Sept. 18. 
Heavy, damnably heavy, and sick at soul, by Jupiter! 
—I must come into their expedient. I must see what
change of climate will do. 
You tell these fellows, and you tell me, of repenting
and reforming—But I can do neither. He who can, must
not have the extinction of a Clarissa Harlowe to answer
for. —Harlow!—Curse upon the name! —And curse upon
myself for not changing it, as I might have done! — 
Yet have I no need of urging a curse upon myself—I
have it effectually. 
‘To say I once respected you with a preference (b) ’— 
In what stiff language does maidenly modesty on these
nice occasions express itself! —To say I once loved you, is
the English; and there is truth and ease in the expression. 
–––‘To say I once loved you,’ then let it be; ‘is what I
ought to blush to own.’ 
And dost thou own it? —Excellent creature! and dost
thou then own it? –––What music in these words from such
an angel! –––What would I give that she were in being,
and could and would own that she loved me? 
‘But indeed, Sir, I have long been greatly above you.’ 
Long, my blessed charmer! –––Long indeed–––For you
have been ever greatly above me, and above your sex,
and above all the world. 
‘That preference was not grounded on ignoble motives.’ 
What a wretch was I, to be so distinguished by her,
and yet to be so unworthy of her hope to reclaim me! 
Then, how generous her motives! Not for her own
sake merely, not altogether for mine, did she hope to reclaim 

me; but equally for the sake of innocents who
might otherwise be ruined by me. 
And now, why did she write this letter, and why direct
it to be given me when an event the most deplorable had
taken place, but for my good, and with a view to the
safety of innocents she knew not? –––And when was this
letter written? Was it not at the time, at the very time,
that I had been pursuing her, as I may say, from place to
place; when her soul was bowed down by calamity and
persecution; and herself was denied all forgiveness from
relations the most implacable? 
Exalted creature! –––And couldst thou at such a time,
and so early, and in such circumstances, have so far subdued
thy own just resentments, as to wish happiness to the
principal author of all thy distresses? Wish happiness to
him who had robbed thee ‘of all thy favourite expectations
in this life?’ To him who had been the cause ‘that thou
wert cut off in the bloom of youth?’ 
Heavenly aspirer! —What a frame must thou be in,
to be able to use the word ONLY, in mentioning these
important deprivations! —And as this was before thou puttedst
off mortality, may I not presume, that thou now, 

— with pitying eye,
Not derogating from thy perfect bliss,
Surveyst all heaven and wishest for me?
‘Consider my ways’—Dear life of my life! Of what
avail is consideration now, when I have lost the dear creature,
for whose sake alone it was worth while to have consideration? 
—Lost her beyond retrieve—Swallowed up by
the greedy grave—For ever lost her-That, that's the sting. — 
Matchless woman! —How does this reflection wound me! 
‘Your golden dream cannot long last.’ —Divine prophetess!
my golden dream is already over. ‘Thought
and reflection are no longer to be kept off.’ —No longer
continues that ‘hardened insensibility’ thou chargest upon
me. —‘Remorse has broken in upon me.’ —‘Dreadful is
my condition!’ –––‘It is all conscience and horror with me! 
—A thousand vulturs in turn are preying upon my heart! 
But no more of these fruitless reflections–––Since I am
incapable of writing any-thing else; since my pen will 

slide into this gloomy subject, whether I will or not; I
will once more quit it; nor will I again resume it, till I
can be more its master, and my own. 
All I took pen to write for, is however unwritten. It
was, in few words, to wish you to proceed with your
communications, as usual. And why should you not? ––– 
Since, in her ever-to-be-lamented death, I know everything
shocking and grievous. –––Acquaint me, then, with
all thou knowest, which I do not know: How her relations,
her cruel relations take it; and whether, now, the
barbed dart of after-reflection sticks not in their hearts, as
in mine up to the very feathers. 
* *
I will soon quit this kingdom. For now my Clarissa
is no more, what is there in it (in the world indeed) worth
living for? –––But should I not first, by some masterly mischief,
avenge her and myself upon her cursed family? 
The accused woman, they tell me, has broken her leg. 
Why was it not her neck? –––All, all, but what is owing
to her relations, is the fault of that woman, and of her hellborn
nymphs. The greater the virtue, the nobler the triumph,
was a sentence for ever in their mouths. –––I have
had it several times in my head to set fire to the execrable
house; and to watch at the doors and windows, that not
a devil in it escape the consuming flames. Had the house
stood by itself, I had certainly done it. 
But, it seems, the old wretch is in the way to be rewarded,
without my help. A shocking letter is received
of somebody's, in relation to her–––Yours, I suppose—Too
shocking for me, they say, to see at present (a) . 
They govern me as a child in strings: Yet did I suffer
so much in my fever, that I am willing to bear with them,
till can get tolerably well. 
At present I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep. Yet are
my disorders nothing to what they were: For, Jack, my
brain was on fire day and night: And had it not been of
the asbestos kind, it had all been consumed. 
I had no distinct ideas, but of dark and confused misery: 
It was all conscience and horror indeed! Thoughts of hanging,
drowning, shooting; then rage, violence, mischief,
and despair, took their turns with me. My lucid intervals 

still worse, giving me to reflect upon what I was the
hour before, and what I was likely to be the next, and
perhaps for life–––The sport of enemies! the laughter of
fools! and the hanging-sleev'd, go-carted property of hired
slaves; who were perhaps to find their account in manacling, and (abhorr'd thought!) in personally abusing me
by blows and stripes! 
Who can bear such reflections as these? To be made to
fear only, to such a one as me, and to fear such wretches
too! –––What a thing was this, but remotely to apprehend! 
And yet, for a man to be in such a state, as to render it
necessary for his dearest friends to suffer this to be done
for his own sake, and in order to prevent further mischief! 
–––There is no thinking of these things! 
I will not think of them, therefore: But will either get
a train of chearful ideas, or hang myself, by to-morrow
morning. 

—To be a dog, and dead,
Were paradise, to such a life as mine.