



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

From my Apartments at Mrs. Moore's. 
Miss Rawlins at her Brother's; Mrs. Moore engaged
in houshold matters; Widow Bevis dressing; 
I have nothing to do but write. This cursed
Tomlinson not yet arrived! —Nothing to be done
without him. 
I think he shall complain in pretty high language of
the treatment he met with yesterday. ‘What are our
affairs to him? He can have no view but to serve us. 
Cruel, to send back to town, un-audienced, unseen,
a man of his business and importance. He never
stirs a foot, but something of consequence depends
upon his movements. A confounded thing to trifle
thus humoursomely with such a gentleman's moments! 
—These women think, that all the business 

of the world must stand still for their figaries [A
good female word, Jack!]: The greatest triflers in
the creation, to fansy themselves the most important
beings in it—Marry come up! as I have heard
Goodly Sorlings say to her servants, when she has
rated at them, with mingled anger and disdain.’ 
After all, methinks I want these tostications [Thou
seest how women, and womens words, fill my mind]
to be over, happily over, that I may sit down quietly,
and reflect upon the dangers I have passed thro', and
the troubles I have undergone. I have a reflecting
mind, as thou knowest; but the very word reflecting
implies All got over. 
What bryars and thorns does the wretch rush into
(a scratched face and tattered garments the unavoidable
consequence) who will needs be for striking out a new
path thro' overgrown Underwood; quitting that beaten
out for him by those who have travelled the same road
before him! 
* *
A visit from the widow Bevis, in my own apartment. 
She tells me, that my Spouse had thoughts last
night, after I was gone to my lodgings, of removing
from Mrs. Moore's. 
I almost wish she had attempted to do so. 
Miss Rawlins, it seems, who was applied to upon
it, dissuaded her from it. 
Mrs. Moore also, tho' she did not own that Will.
lay in the house (or rather sat up in it, courting) set
before her the difficulties, which, in he opinion, she
would have to get clear off, without my knowlege; 
assuring her, that she could be no-where more safe
than with her, till she had fixed whither to go. And
the Lady herself recollected, that if she went, she
might miss the expected Letter from her dear friend
Miss Howe; which, as she owned, was to direct her
future steps. 
She must also surely have some curiosity to know 

what her Uncle's friend had to say to her from her
Uncle, contemptuously as she yesterday treated a man
of his importance. Nor could she, I should think, be
absolutely determined to put herself out of the way of
receiving the visits of two of the principal Ladies of
my family, and to break entirely with me in the face
of them all. —Besides, whither could she have gone? 
—Moreover, Miss Howe's Letter coming (after her
elopement) so safely to her hands, must surely put her
into a more confiding temper with me, and with every
one else, tho' she would not immediately own it. 
But these good folks have so little charity! —Are
such severe censurers! —Yet who is absolutely perfect? 
—It were to be wished, however, that they would be
so modest as to doubt themselves sometimes: Then
would they allow for others, as others (excellent as
they imagine themselves to be) must for them. 
Saturday, One o'clock. 
Tomlinson at last is come. Forced to ride five
miles about (tho' I shall impute his delay to great and
important business) to avoid the sight of two or three
impertinent rascals, who, little thinking whose affairs
he was employed in, wanted to obtrude themselves
upon him. I think I will make this fellow easy, if he
behave to my liking in this affair. 
I sent up the moment he came. 
She desired to be excused receiving his visit till Four
this afternoon. 
Intolerable! —No consideration! —None at all in
this Sex, when their cursed humours are in the way! 
—Pay-day, pay-hour, rather, will come! —O that it
were to be the next! 
The Captain is in a pet. Who can blame him? 
Even the women think a man of his consequence, and
generously coming to serve us, hardly used. Would to
heaven she had attempted to get off last night! The
women not my enemies, who knows but the Husband's 

exerted authority might have met with such conniveance,
as might have concluded either in carrying her
back to her former lodgings, or in consummation at
Mrs. Moore's, in spite of exclamations, fits, and the
rest of the female obsecrations? 
My Beloved has not appeared to any-body this day,
except to Mrs. Moore. Is, it seems, extremely low: 
Unfit for the interesting conversation that is to be held
in the afternoon. Longs to hear from her dear friend
Miss Howe—Yet cannot expect a Letter for a day or
two. Has a bad opinion of all mankind. —No wonder! 
—Excellent creature as she is! with such a Father,
such Uncles, such a Brother, as she has! 
How does she look? 
Better than could be expected from yesterday's fatigue,
and last night's ill rest. 
These tender doves know not, till put to it, what
they can bear; especially when engaged in Love-affairs; 
and their attention wholly engrossed. But the
Sex love busy scenes. Still-life is their aversion. A
woman will create a storm, rather than be without one. 
So as they can preside in the whirlwind, and direct it,
they are happy. —But my Beloved's misfortune is, that
she must live in tumults; yet neither raise them herself,
nor be able to controul them. 