


On Thursday Morning my Lady set out for
her own Seat; and my best Friend and I,
attended by Mr. Colbrand, Abraham and Thomas,
for this dear House. Her Ladyship parted
with her Brother and me with great Tenderness,
and made me promise to send her my
Papers; which I find she intends to entertain
Lady Betty with, and another Lady or two,
her Intimates, as also her Lord; and hopes to
find, as I believe, in the Reading of them,
some Excuse for her Brother's Choice. 
My dearest Master has been all Love and
Tenderness, on the Road, as he is in every
Place, and on every Occasion. And Oh! what
a delightful Change was this Journey, to that
which, so contrary to all my Wishes, and so
much to my Apprehensions, carry'd me hence 

to the Lincolnshire House! And how did I bless
God at every Turn, and at every Stage! 
We did not arrive here till yesterday Noon. 
Abraham rode before, to let them know we
were coming. And I had the Satisfaction to
find every body there I wish'd to see. 
When the Chariot enter'd the Court-yard,
I was so strongly impress'd with the Favour and
Mercies of God Almighty, on remembring how
I was sent away the last time I saw this House; 
the Leave I took; the Dangers I had encounter'd; 
a poor cast-off Servant Girl; and now
returning a joyful Wife, and the Mistress, thro'
his Favour, of the noble House I was turn'd
out of; that I was hardly able to support the
Joy I felt in my Mind on the Occasion. He
saw how much I was moved, and tenderly
ask'd me, why I seem'd so affected? I told him,
and lifted his dear Hand to my Lips, saying,
O Sir! God's Mercies, and your Goodness to
me, on entring this dear, dear Place, are above
my Expression; I can hardly bear the Thoughts
of them! —He said, Welcome, thrice welcome,
Joy of my Life! to your own House:
And kiss'd my Hand in Return. All the common
Servants stood at the Windows, as unseen
as they could, to observe us. He took my
Hand, with the most condescending Goodness
in the World; and, with great Complaisance,
led me into the Parlour, and saluted me with
the greatest Ardour. Welcome again, my
dearest Spouse, said he, a Thousand times welcome, 

to the Possession of a House that is not
more mine than yours. 
I threw myself at his Feet: Permit me,
dear Sir, thus to bless God, and thank you, for
all His Mercies, and your Goodness. O may
I so behave, as not to be utterly unworthy; and
then, how happy shall I be! God give me, my
Dearest, said he, Life and Health to reward all
your Sweetness: And no Man can be then so
bless'd as I! 
Where (said he to Abraham, who pass'd
by the Door, Where) is Mrs. Jervis? —She
bolted in; Here, good Sir, said she, Here,
good Madam, am I, waiting impatiently, till
call'd for, to congratulate you both. —I ran
to her, and clasp'd my Arms about her Neck,
and kissed her: O my dear Mrs. Jervis! said
I, my other dear Mother! receive your happy,
happy Pamela: And join with me to bless
God, and bless our Master, for all these great
Things! —I was ready to sink in her Arms,
thro' Excess of Joy, to see the dear good Woman,
who had been so often a mournful Witness
of my Distress, as now of my Triumph. –––Dearest
Madam, said she, you do me too much Honour. 
Let my whole Life shew the Joy I take in your
deserved good Fortune, and in my Duty to you,
for the early Instance I received of your Goodness
in your kind Letter. O Mrs. Jervis, reply'd
I, There all Thanks are due, both from
you and me: For our dear Master granted me
this Blessing, as I may justly call it, the very
first Moment I begg'd it of him. Your Goodness, 

Sir, said she, I will for ever acknowlege
and I beg Pardon for the wrong Step I made,
in applying to my Lady Davers. —He was so
good as to salute her, and said, All is over
now, Mrs. Jervis; and I shall not remember
you ever disobliged me. I always respected
you, and shall now more and more value you,
for the sake of that dear good Creature, whom
with Joy unfeigned, I can call my Wife. God
bless your Honour, for ever! said she; and
many, many happy Years may ye live together,
the Envy and Wonder of all who know you! 
But where, said my dear Master, is honest
Longman? And where is Jonathan? — 
Come, Mrs. Jervis, said I, you shall shew me
them, and all the good Folks, presently; and
let me go up with you to behold the dear Apartments,
which I have seen before with such
different Emotions to what I shall now do. 
We went up; and in every Room, the
Chamber I took Refuge in, when my Master
pursued me, my Lady's Chamber, her Dressingroom,
Mrs. Jervis's Room, not forgetting her
Closet, my own little Bed chamber, the
Green-room, and in each of the others, I kneel'd
down severally, and bless'd God for my past
Escapes, and present Happiness; and the good
Woman was quite affected with the Zeal and
Pleasure with which I made my thankful Acknowlegements
to the Divine Goodness. O
my excellent Lady! said she, you are still the
same good, pious, humble Soul I knew you; 

and your Marriage has added to your Graces, as
I hope it will to your Blessings. 
Dear Mrs. Jervis, said I, you know not
what I have gone thro'! You know not what
God has done for me! You know not what a
happy Creature I am now! I have a Thousand,
Thousand Things to tell you; and a whole
Week will be too little, every Moment of it
spent in relating to you what has befallen me,
to make you acquainted with it all. We shall
be sweetly happy together, I make no doubt. 
But I charge you, my dear Mrs. Jervis, whatever
you call me before Strangers, that when
we are by ourselves, you call me nothing but
your Pamela. For what an ungrateful Creature
should I be, who have receiv'd so many
Mercies, if I attributed them not to the Divine
Goodness, but assumed to myself insolent Airs
upon them! No, I hope I shall be more and
more thankful, as I am more and more bless'd; 
and more humble, as God, the Author of all
my Happiness, shall more distinguish me. 
We went down again to the Parlour, to my
dear Master. Said he, Call in again Mr. Longman;
he longs to see you, my Dear. He
came in: God bless you, my sweet Lady! said
he; as now, Heaven be praised, I may call you! 
Did I not tell you, Madam, that Providence
would find you out? O Mr. Longman, said I,
God be praised for all his Mercies! —I am
rejoic'd to see you. And I laid my Hand on his,
and said, Good Mr. Longman, how do you
do? —I must always value you; and you don't 

know how much of my present Happiness I
owe to the Sheets of Paper, and Pens and Ink,
you furnish'd me with. I hope my dear Sir
and you are quite reconciled. —O Madam,
said he, how good you are! —Why, I cannot
contain myself for Joy! and then he wip'd
his Eyes, good Man! 
Said my Master, Yes, I have been telling
Mr. Longman, that I am obliged to him for
his ready Return to me; and that I will intirely
forget his Appeal to Lady Davers; and I hope
he will find himself quite as easy and happy as
he wishes. —My dear Partner here, Mr.
Longman, I dare promise you, will do all she
can to make you so. Heaven bless you both
together! said he. Tis the Pride of my Heart
to see this! —I return'd with double Delight,
when I heard the blessed News; and I am sure,
Sir, said he, (mark old Longman's Words) God
will bless you for this every Year more and
more! —You don't know how many Hearts
you have made happy by this generous Deed! 
—I am glad of it, said my dear Master; I am
sure I have made my own happy: And, Mr.
Longman, tho' I must think you Somebody,
yet, as you are not a young Man, and so will
not make me jealous, I can allow you to wish
my dear Wife Joy in the tenderest manner. 
Adad! Sir, said he, I am sure you rejoice me with
your Fayour: 'Twas what I long'd for, but
dar'd not presume. My Dear, said my Master,
receive the Compliment of one of the honestest
Hearts in England, that always revered your 

Virtues! —And the good Man saluted
me with great Respect; and said, (kneelng on
one Knee) God in Heaven bless you both! 
I must quit your Presence! Indeed I must! — 
And away he went. 
Your Goodness, Sir, said I, knows no
Bounds: O may my Gratitude never find any! 
—I saw, said my Master, when the good Man
approach'd you, that he did it with so much
Awe and Love mingled together, that I fansy'd
he long'd to salute my Angel; and I could not
but indulge his honest Heart. How bless'd am
I! said I, and kiss'd his Hand. —And indeed I
make nothing now of kissing his dear Hand, as
if it was my own! 
When honest old Mr. Jonathan came in
to attend at Dinner, so clean, so sleek, and so
neat, as he always is, with his silver Hair, I
said, Well, Mr. Jonathan, how do you do? 
I am glad to see you:—You look as well as
ever, thank God! O dear, Madam! said he,
better than ever, to have such a blessed Sight! 
God bless you, and my good Master! —And I
hope, Sir, said he, you'll excuse all my past
Failings. Ay, that I will, Jonathan, said he; 
because you never had any, but what your Regard
for my dear Spouse here, was the occasion
of. And now I can tell you, you can never
err, because you cannot respect her too much. 
O Sir, said he, your Honour is exceeding good. 
I'm sure I shall always pray for you both. 
After Dinner Mr. Longman coming in, and
talking of some Affairs under his Care, he said 

afterwards, All your Honour's Servants are now
happy; for Robert, who left you, had a pretty
little Fortune fallen to him, or he never would
have quitted your Service. He was here but
Yesterday, to inquire when you and my Lady
return'd hither; and hop'd he might have Leave
to pay his Duty to you both. Ay, said my
Master, I shall be glad to see honest Robin;
for that's another of your Favourites, Pamela. 
—It was high time, I think, I should marry
you, were it but to ingage the Respects of all
my Family to myself. There are, Sir, said I,
Ten thousand Reasons why I should rejoice in
your Goodness. 
But I was going to say, said Mr. Longman,
That all your Honour's old Servants are now
happy, but one. You mean John Arnold?
said my Master. I do, indeed, reply'd he,
if you'll excuse me, Sir. O said I, I have
had my Prayer for poor John answer'd, as favourably
as I could wish. —Why, said Mr.
Longman, to be sure poor John has acted no
very good Part, take it all together; but he so
much honour'd you, Sir, and so much respected
you, Madam, that he would have been glad to
have been obedient to both; and so was faithful
to neither. But indeed the poor Fellow's Heart
is almost broken, and he won't look out for any
other Place; and says, He must live in your
Honour's Service, or he must die wretched very
shortly. Mrs. Jervis was there when this was
spoken: Indeed, said she, the poor Man has been
here every Day since he heard the Tidings that 

have rejoiced us all; and he says, He hopes he
shall yet be forgiven. Is he in the House now?
said my Master. He is, Sir; and was here when your
Honour came in; and play'd at Hide-and-seek to
have one Look at you both, when you alighted; 
and was ready to go out of his Wits for Joy,
when he saw your Honour hand my Lady in. 
Pamela, said my dear Master, you are to do with
John as you please: You have full Power. 
Then, pray, Sir, said I, let poor John come
in. 
The poor Fellow came in, with so much
Confusion, that I have never seen a Countenance
that express'd so lively a Consciousness of
his Faults, and mingled Joy and Shame. How
do you do, John? said I; I hope you're very
well! —The poor Fellow could hardly speak,
and look'd with Awe upon my Master, and
Pleasure upon me. Said my Master, Well,
John, there is no room to say any thing to a
Man that has so much Concern already: I
am told you will serve me whether I will
or not; but I turn you over altogether to
my Spouse here: And she is to do by you as
she pleases. You see, John, said I, your good
Master's Indulgence. Well may I forgive, that
have so generous an Example. I was always
persuaded of your honest Intentions, if you had
known how to distinguish between your Duty
to your Master, and your Good-will to me:
You will now have no more Puzzles on that
account, from the Goodness of your dear Master. 
I shall be but too happy, said the poor 

Man. God bless your Honour! God bless you,
Madam! —I now have the Joy of my Soul,
in serving you both; and I will make the best
of Servants, to my Power. Well then, John,
said I, your Wages will go on, as if you had
not left your Master: May I not say so, Sir?
said I. Yes, surely, my Dear, reply'd he, and
augment them too, if you find his Duty to
you deserves it. A thousand Million of Thanks,
said the poor Man: I am very well satisfy'd, and
desire no Augmentation. And so he withdrew
overjoy'd; and Mrs. Jervis and Mr. Longman
were highly pleas'd; for tho' they were incens'd
against him for his Fault to me, when Matters
look'd badly for me, yet they, and all his Fellow-servants,
always lov'd John. 
When Mr. Longman and Mrs. Jervis had
din'd, they came in again, to know if he had
any Commands; and my dear Master, filling a
Glass of Wine, said, Mr. Longman, I am
going to toast the happiest and honestest Couple
in England, my dear Pamela's Father and Mother. 
—Thank you, dear Sir, said I. 
I think, continued he, that little Kentish
Purchace wants a Manager; and as it is a little
out of your Way, Mr. Longman, I have been
purposing, if I thought Mr. Andrews would
accept of it, that he should enter upon Hodges's
Farm that was, and so manage for me that
whole little Affair; and we will well stock the
Farm for him, and make it comfortable; and I
think, if he will take that Trouble upon him,
it will be an Ease to you, and a Favour to me. 

Your Honour, said he, cannot do a better
thing; and I have had some Inkling given me,
that you may, if you please, augment that
Estate, by a Purchace, of equal Amount, contiguous
to it; and as you have so much Money
to spare, I can't see your Honour can do better. 
Well, said he, let me have the Particulars another
time, and we will consider about it. 
But, my Dear, added he, you'll mention this
to your Father, if you please. 
I have too much Money, Mr. Longman,
continued he, lies useless; tho' upon this Occasion,
I shall not grudge laying out as much in
Liveries, and other things, as if I had marry'd a
Lady of a Fortune, equal, if possible, to my
Pamela's Merit; and I reckon you have a good
deal in Hand? Yes, Sir, said he, more than I
wish I had. But I have a Mortgage in View, if
you don't buy that Kentish thing, that I believe
will answer very well; and when Matters are
riper, will mention it to your Honour. 
I took with me to Lincolnshire, said my
Master, upwards of Six hundred Guineas, and
thought to have laid most of them out there
(Thank God, thought I, you did not! for he
offer'd me Five hundred of them, you know):
But I have not laid out above Two hundred and
Fifty of them; so Two hundred I left there in
my Escritoire; because I shall go again for a
Fortnight or so, before Winter; and Two hundred
I have brought with me. And I have
Money, I know not what, in Three Places 

here; the Account of which is in my Pocketbook,
in my Library. 
You have made some little Presents, Pamela,
to my Servants there, on our Nuptials; and
these Two hundred that I have brought up, I
will put into your Disposal, that, with some of
them, you shall do here, as you did there. 
I am ashamed, good Sir, said I, to be so
costly and so worthless! Pray, my Dear, reply'd
he, say not a Word of that. 
Said Mr. Longman, Why, Madam, with
Money in Stocks, and one thing or another,
his Honour could buy half the Gentlemen round
him. He wants not Money, and lays up every
Year. And it would have been pity, but his
Honour should have wedded just as he has. 
Very true, Mr. Longman, said my Master: And
pulling out his Purse, said, Tell out, my Dear,
Two hundred Guineas, and give me the rest. 
—I did so. Now, said he, take them yourself,
for the Purposes I mention'd. But, Mr.
Longman, do you, before Sun-set, bring my
dear-Girl Fifty Pounds, which is due to her this
Day, by my Promise; and every Three Months,
from this Day, pay her Fifty Pounds; which
will be Two hundred Pounds per Annum; and
this is for her to lay out at her own Discretion,
and without Account, in such a way, as
shall derive a Blessing upon us all: For she was
my Mother's Almoner, and shall be mine, and
her own too. —I'll go for it this Instant, said
Mr. Longman. 

When he was gone, I look'd upon my dear
generous Master, and on Mrs. Jervis; and he
gave me a Nod of Assent; and I took Twenty
Guineas, and said, Dear Mrs. Jervis, accept
of this, which is no more than my generous
Master order'd me to present to Mrs. Jewkes,
for a Pair of Gloves, on my happy Nuptials; 
and so you, who are much better intitled to
them by the Love I bear you, must not refuse
them. 
Said she, Mrs. Jewkes was on the Spot,
Madam, at the happy Time. Yes, said my
Master; but Pamela would have rejoiced to
have had you there instead of her. That I
should, Sir, reply'd I, or instead of any body,
except my own Mother. She gratefully accepted
them, and thank'd us both: But I don't
know what she should thank me for; for I was
not worth a Fourth Part of them myself. 
I'd have you, my Dear, said he, in some
handsome manner, as you know how, oblige
Longman to accept of the like Present. 
Mr. Longman return'd from his Office, and
brought me the Fifty Pounds, saying, I have
enter'd this new Article with great Pleasure:
To my Lady—Fifty Pounds: To be paid the
same Sum quarterly. O Sir, said I, what will
become of me to be so poor in myself, and so
rich in your Bounty? —It is a Shame to take
all that your profuse Goodness would heap upon
me thus: But indeed it shall not be without
Account. —Make no Words, my Dear, said
he: Are you not my Wife? And have I not 

indow'd you with my Goods? And, hitherto,
this is a very small Part. 
Mr. Longman, said I, and Mrs. Jervis,
you both see how I am even oppress'd with
unreturnable Obligations. God bless the Donor,
and the Receiver too! said Mr. Longman;
I am sure they will bring back good Interest; 
for, Madam, you had ever a bountiful Heart; 
and I have seen the Pleasure you used to take to
dispense my late Lady's Alms and Donations. 
I'll warrant, Mr. Longman, said I, notwithstanding
you are so willing to have me take
large Sums for nothing at all, I should affront
you, if I ask'd you to accept from me a Pair of
Gloves only, on account of my happy Nuptials. 
He seem'd not readily to know how to answer; 
and my Master said, If Mr. Longman refuse
you, my Dear, he may be said to refuse your
first Favour. On that I put Twenty Guineas
in his Hand; but he insisted upon it, that he
would take but but Five. I said, I must desire
you to oblige me, Mr. Longman, or I shall
think I have affronted you. Well, if I must,
said he, I know what I know. What is that,
Mr. Longman? said I. —Why, Madam, said
he, I will not lay it out till my young Master's
Birth-day, which I hope will be within this
Twelvemonth. 
Not expecting any thing like this from the
old Gentleman, I look'd at my Master, and
then blush'd so, I could not hold up my Head. 
Charmingly said, Mr. Longman! said my Master,
and clasp'd me in his Arms: O my dear 

Life! God send it may be so! —You have
quite delighted me, Mr. Longman! Altho' I
dar'd not to have said such a thing forthe World. 
—Madam, said the old Gentleman, I beg
your Pardon; I hope no Offence. But I'd
speak it Ten times in a Breath to have it so, take
it how you please, as long as my good Master
takes it so well. Mrs. Jervis, said my Master,
this is an over-nice dear Creature; you do not
know what a Life I have had with her, even on
this side Matrimony. —Said Mrs. Jervis, I
think Mr. Longman says very well; I am sure
I shall hope for it too. 
Mr. Longman, who had struck me of a
Heap, withdrawing soon after, my Master said,
Why, my Dear, you cannot look up: The old
Man said nothing shocking. I did not expect
it, tho', from him, said I: I was not aware but
of some innocent Pleasantry. Why, so it was,
said he, both innocent and pleasant: And I
will not forgive you, if you do not say as he
says. Come, speak before Mrs. Jervis. May
every thing happen, Sir, said I, that will give
you Delight! —That's my dear Love, said he,
and saluted me with great Tenderness. 
When the Servants had dined, I desired to
see the Maidens, and all Four came up together. 
You are welcome home, Madam, said Rachel;
we rejoice all to see you here, and more to see
you our Lady. O my good old Acquaintances,
said I, I joy to see you! How do you do,
Rachel? How do you do, Jane? How do you 

do, Hannah? How do you do, Cicely? And
I took each of them by the Hand, and could
have kiss'd them. —For, said I to myself, I
kissed you all, last time I saw you, in Sorrow; 
why should I not kiss you all with Joy? But I
forbore in Honour of their dear Master's Presence. 
They seem'd quite transported with me; 
and my good Master was pleased with the
Scene. See here, my Lasses, said he, your
Mistress! I need not bid you respect her; for
you always loved her; and she will have it as
much in her Power, as Inclination, to be kind
to the Deserving. Indeed, said I, I shall always
be a kind Friend to you; and your dear
good Master has order'd me to give each of
you this, that you may rejoice with me on my
Happiness. And so I gave them Five Guineas
apiece; and said, God bless you every one. I
am overjoy'd to see you! —And they withdrew
with the greatest Gratitude and Pleasure,
praying for us both. 
I turned to my dear Master, 'Tis to you,
dear Sir, said I, next to God, who put it into
your generous Heart, that all my Happiness is
owing! That my Mind, thus overflows with
Joy and Gratitude! And I would have kiss'd
his Hand; but he clasp'd me in his Arms, and
said, You deserve it, my Dear! You deserve it
all! Mrs. Jervis came in; said she, I have seen
a very affecting Sight: You have made your
Maidens quite happy, Madam, with your Kindness
and Condescension. I saw them all Four, 

as I came by the Hall-door, just got up from
their Knees, praising and praying for you both! 
Dear good Bodies! said I; and did Jane pray
too? May their Prayers be return'd upon themselves,
I say. 
My Master sent for Jonathan, and I held
up all the Fingers of my Two Hands; and my
Master giving a Nod of Approbation as he
came in, I said, Well, Mr. Jonathan, I could
not be satisfy'd without seeing you in Form, as
it were, and thanking you for all your past
Good-will to me. You'll accept of that for a
Pair of Gloves, on this happy Occasion. And I
gave him Ten Guineas, and took his honest
Hand between both mine: God bless you, said
I, with your silver Hairs, so like my dear Father! 
—I shall always value such a good old
Servant of the best of Masters! —He said, O
such Goodness! Such kind Words! —It is
Balm to my Heart! Blessed be God I have lived
to this Day! —And his Eyes swam in Tears,
and he withdrew. —My Dear, said my Master,
you make every one happy! —O Sir, said
I, 'tis you, 'tis you; and let my grateful Heart
always spring to my Lips, to acknowlege the
Blessings you heap upon me. 
Then in came Harry, and Isaac, and
Benjamin, and the Two Grooms of this House,
and Arthur the Gardener; for my dear Master
had order'd them by Mrs. Jervis thus to be
marshall'd out; and he said, Where is John?
Poor. John was asham'd, and did not come in
till he heard himself call'd for. I said to them, 

How do you do, Harry? How do you do, Isaac? 
How do you do, Benjamin? How do you do,
Arthur? And you and you, Richard and Roger? 
My Master said, I have given you a
Mistress, my Lads, that is the Joy of my Heart. 
You see her Goodness and Condescension. Let
your Respects to her be but answerable, and she
will be proportionably as great a Blessing to you
all, as she is to me. Harry said, In the Names
of all your Servants, Sir, I bless your Honour,
and your good Lady: And it shall be all our
Studies to deserve her Ladyship's Favour, as
well as your Honour's. And so I gave every
one Five Guineas, to rejoice, as I said, in my
Happiness. 
When I came to John, I said, I saw you
before, John; but I again tell you, I am glad
to see you. He said, He was quite asham'd and
confounded. O, said I, forget every thing
that's past, John! —Your dear good Master
will, and so will I. For God has wonderfully
brought about all these Things, by the very
Means I once thought most grievous. Let us
therefore look forward, and be only asham'd to
commit Faults for the Time to come. For
they may not always be attended with like happy
Consequences. 
Arthur, said my Master, I have brought
you a Mistress that is a great Gardener. She
will shew you a new way to plant Beans: And
never any body had such an Hand at improving
a Sun-flower, as she! —O Sir, Sir, said I,
(but yet a little dash'd) all my Improvements in 

every kind of Thing, are owing to you, I am
sure! —And so I think I was even with the
dear Man, and yet appear'd grateful before his
Servants. They withdrew, blessing us both,
as the rest had done. 
And then came in the Postilion, and Two
Helpers, (for my Master has both here, and at
Lincolnshire, fine Hunting-horses, and it is the
chief Sport he takes Delight in) as also the
Scullion-boy: And I said, How do you, all of
you? And how dost do, Tommy? I hope you
are very good. Here, your dear Master has
order'd you something apiece, in Honour of
me. And my Master holding Three Fingers to
me, I gave the Postilion and Helpers Three
Guineas each, and the little Boy Two; and
bad him let his poor Mother lay it out for him,
for he must not spend it idly. Mr. Colbrand,
Abraham, and Thomas, I had before presented
at t'other House. 
And when they were all gone but Mrs.
Jervis, I said, And now, dearest Sir, permit
me, on my Knees, thus, to bless you, and
pray for you. And Oh, may God crown you
with Length of Days, and Increase of Honour; 
and may your happy, happy Pamela, by her
grateful Heart, appear always worthy in your
dear Eyes, tho' she cannot be so in her own, nor
in those of any others! 
Mrs. Jervis, said my Master, you see the
Excellency of this sweet Creature! And when
I tell you, that the Charms of her Person, all
lovely as she is, bind me not so strongly to her 

as the Graces of her Mind, congratulate me,
that my Happiness is built on so stable a Basis! 
Indeed I do, most sincerely, Sir, said she: This
is a happy Day to me! 
I stepped into the Library, while he was
thus pouring out his Kindness for me to Mrs.
Jervis; and bless'd God there on my Knees,
for the Difference I now found, to what I had
once known in it. —And when I have done
the same in the first Scene of my Fears, the
once frightful Summer-house, I shall have gone
thro' most of my distressful Scenes with Gratitude; 
but shall never forbear thanking God in
my Mind, for his Goodness to me in every
one. Mrs. Jervis, I find, had whisper'd him
what I had done above, and he saw me upon
my Knees, with my Back towards him, unknown
to me; but softly put to the Door
again, as he had open'd it a little way. And I
said, not knowing he had seen me, You have
some charming Pictures here, Sir. —Yes, said
he, my dear Life, so I have; but none equal to
that which your Piety affords me! —And may
the God, you delight to serve, bless more and
more my dear Angel! Sir, said I, you are all
Goodness! —I hope, reply'd he, after your
sweet Example, I shall be better and better! 
Do you think, my dear Father and Mother,
there ever was so happy a Creature as I? To be
sure it would be very ingrateful to think with
Uneasiness, or any thing but Compassion, of
poor Miss Sally Godfrey. 

He order'd Jonathan to let the Evening be
passed merrily, but wisely, as he said, with
what every one liked, whether Wine or October. 
He was pleased afterwards to lead me up-stairs,
and gave me Possession of my Lady's
Dressing-room and Cabinet, and her fine Repeating-watch
and Equipage; and in short, of
a complete Set of Diamonds, that were his
good Mother's; as also of the Two Pair of
Diamond Ear-rings, the Two Diamond Rings,
and Diamond Necklace he mention'd in his
naughty Articles, which her Ladyship had intended
for Presents to Miss Tomlins, a rich
Heiress, that was proposed for his Wife, when
he was just come from his Travels; but which
went off, after all was agreed upon on both
the Friends Sides, because he approv'd not her
Conversation; and she had, as he told his Mother,
too masculine an Air; and he never could
be brought to see her but once, tho' the Lady
liked him very well. He presented me also
with her Ladyship's Books, Pictures, Linen,
Laces, &c. that were in her Apartments; and
bad me call those Apartments mine. O give
me, my good God, Humility and Gratitude! 
