



My dear Lady,
I will now pursue my last affecting Subject; 
for the Visit is over; but a sad Situation I am
in with Mr. B. for all that: But, bad as it is, I'll
try to forget it, till I come to it in course. 
At Four in the Afternoon Mr. B. came in to
receive his Guests, whom he expected at Five. He
came up to me. I had just closed my last Letter; 
but put it up, and set before me your Ladyship's
Play Subjects. 
So, Pamela! —How do you now? 
Your Ladyship may guess, by what I wrote
before, that I could not give any extraordinary 

Account of myself. —As well—As well, Sir,
as possible—Half out of Breath. 
You give yourself strange melancholy Airs of
late, my Dear. —You don't do well. —All that
Chearfulness which used to delight me whenever I
saw you, I'm sorry for it, is quite vanished of late. 
—You and I must shortly have a little serious
Talk together. 
When you please, Sir.—I believe it is only
not being used to this smoaky thick Air of London! 
—I shall be better when you carry me into
the Country. —I dare say, I shall. —But I never
was in London so long before, you know, Sir. 
All in good time, Pamela! —But is this
the best Appearance you chuse to make, to receive
such Guests? 
If it displease you, Sir, I will dress otherwise
in a Minute. 
You look well in any thing. —But I thought
you'd have had your Jewels—Yet they would
never have less become you; for of late your Eyes
have lost that Brilliancy that used to strike me with
a Lustre, much surpassing that of the finest Diamonds. 
I am sorry for it, Sir.—But as I never could
pride myself in deserving such a kind Compliment,
I should be too happy, forgive me, my dearest
Mr. B. if the Failure be not rather in your Eyes,
than in mine. 
He looked at me stedfastly. ––––I fear, Pamela–––– 
But, don't be a Fool. 
You are angry with me, Sir! 
No, not I. 
Would you have me dress better? 

No, not I—If your Eyes looked a little more
brilliant, you want no Addition. 
Down he went. 
Strange, short Speeches, these, my Lady,
to what you have heard from his dear Mouth!— 
Yet they shall not rob me of the Merit of a patient
Sufferer, I am resolved, thought I. 
Now, my Lady, as I doubted not, my Rival
would come adorn'd with every outward Ornament,
I put on only a white Damask Gown, having no
Desire to vie with her in Appearance; for a virtuous
and honest Heart is my Glory, I bless God! I wish
the Countess had the same to boast of! 
About Five, their Ladyships came in the
Countess's new Chariot; for she has not been long
out of her transitory Mourning, and dress'd as rich
as Jewels, and a Profusion of Expence, could make
her. 
I saw them from the Window alight. O how
my Heart throbbed! —Lie still, said I, busy
Thing! Why all this Emotion? —Those shining
Ornaments cover not such a guileless Flutterer as
thou. Why then all this Emotion? 
I would not be so officious as to be below to
receive them. Polly Barlow came up instantly,
from Mr. B. 
I hasten'd down; tremble, tremble, tremble,
went my Feet, in spite of all the Resolution
I had been endeavouring so long to collect together. 
Mr. B. presented the Countess to me, both of
us cover'd with Blushes; but from very different
Motives, as I imagine. 
The Countess of&wblank;, my Dear. 

She saluted me, and look'd, as I thought, half
with Envy, half with Shame: But one is apt to
form People's Countenances by what one judges
of their Hearts. 
O too lovely, too charming Rivaless! thought
I. —Would to Heaven I saw less Attractions in
you! —For indeed, indeed, Madam, she is a
charming Lady! —Yet she could not help calling
me Mrs. B. that was some Pride to me: Every
little Distinction is a Pride to me now—and said,
She had heard me so much praised, that she quite
long'd to see me. 
O these villainous Masquerades! thought I––––– 
You would never have wanted to see me, but for
them, poor naughty Nun, that was! 
Mr. B. presented also the Viscountess to me: I
saluted her Ladyship; her Sister saluted me. 
She is a graceful Lady; better, as I hope, in
Heart, but not equal in Person to her Sister. 
You have taken no Pains, my Dear, in your
Dress To-day. 
The Ladies will excuse it, Sir; I am so often in
the Nursery, when you are absent. 
Mrs. B. answers her Character, said the Countess; 
she wants no Ornaments. You have a charming
little Master, I am told, Madam; but no Wonder, from such a Pair! 
O dear Heart, thought I, i'n't it so! —Your
Ladyship may guess what I thought farther. 
Will your Ladyship see him now? said Mr. B. 
He did not look down, no, not one bit?— 
tho' the Countess play'd with her Fan, and look'd
at him, and look'd at me, and then look'd down,
by Turns, a little consciously: While I wrapp'd up 

myself in my Innocence, my first Flutters being
over, and thought I was superior, by reason of that,
even to a Countess. 
With all my Heart, Mr. B. said she. 
I rang. Polly, bid Nurse bring my Billy
down—My, said I, with an Emphasis. 
I met the Nurse at the Stairs Foot, and brought
in my dear Baby in my Arms: Such a Child, and
such a Mamma! said the Viscountess. 
Will you give Master to my Arms one Moment,
Madam? said the Countess. 
Yes, thought I, much rather than my dear naughty
Gentleman should any other. 
I yielded it to her: I thought she would
have stifled it with her warm Kisses. Sweet Boy! 
Charming Creature! And pressed it to her too
lovely Bosom, with such Emotion, looking on
the Child, and on Mr. B. that I liked it not by any
means. 
Go, you naughty Lady! thought I:—But I
durst not say so. And go, naughty Man, too!
thought I; for you seem to look too much gratify'd
in your Pride, by her Fondness for your Boy. 
I wish I did not love you so well as I do! —But
neither, your Ladyship may believe, did I say this. 
Mr. B. looked at me, but with a Bravery, I
thought, too like what I had been Witness to, in
some former Scenes, in as bad a Cause. —But,
thought I, God deliver'd me then: I will confide
in Him. —He will now, I doubt not, restore thy
Heart to my Prayers; untainted, I hope, for thy
own dear sake, as well as mine. 
The Viscountess took the Child from her Sister,
and kissed him with great Pleasure. She is a marry'd 



Lady. Would to God, the Countess was so too!
for Mr. B. never corresponded, as I told your
Ladyship once* , with marry'd Ladies: So I was
not afraid of her Love to my Billy. —But let me,
said the Viscountess, have the Pleasure of restoring
Master to his charming Mamma. I thought, added
she, I never saw a lovelier Sight in my Life, than
when in his Mamma's Arms. 
Why, I can't say, said the Countess, but Master
and his Mamma do Credit to one another. 
Dear Madam, let us have the Pleasure of seeing
him still on your Lap, while he is so good. 
I wonder'd the dear Baby was so quiet; tho',
indeed, he is generally so: But he might surely, if
but by Sympathy, have complained for his poor
Mamma, tho' she durst not for herself. 
How apt one is to engage every thing in one's
Distress, when it is deep! And one wonders too,
that Things animate and inanimate look with the
same Face, when we are greatly moved by any extraordinary
and interesting Event! 
I sat down with my Baby on my Lap, looking,
I believe, with a righteous Boldness, (I will call it
so; for well says the Text, The Righteous is as
bold as a Lion!) now on my Billy, now on his
dear Papa, and now on the Countess, with such a
Triumph in my Heart! for I saw her blush, and
look down, and the dear Gentleman seemed to
cye me with a kind of conscious Tenderness, as I
thought. 
A Silence of Five Minutes, I believe, succeeded,
we all Four looking upon one another; 
and the little Dear was awake, and stared full upon 

me, with such innocent Smiles, as if he promised
to love me, and make me Amends for all. 
I kissed him, and took his pretty little Hand
in mine—You are very good, my Charmer, in
this noble Company! said I. 
I remember'd, Madam, a Scene, which made
greatly for me in the Papers you have seen* , when,
instead of recriminating, as I might have done, before
Mr. Longman, for harsh Usage, (for, O my
Lady, your dear Brother has a hard Heart, indeed
he has, when he pleases) I only prayed for him on
my Knees. 
And I hope I was not now too mean; for I
had Dignity and a proud Superiority in my vain
Heart, over them all. —Then, it was not my
Part to be upon Defiances, where I loved, and
where I hoped to reclaim. Besides, what had I
done by it, but justified, seemingly, by After-acts
in a passionate Resentment, to their Minds, at
least, their too wicked Treatment of me? Moreover,
your Ladyship will remember, that Mr. B.
knew not, that I was acquainted with his Intrigue; 
for I must call it so. —If he had, he is too noble
to insult me by such a Visit; and he had told me,
I should see the Lady he was at Oxford with. 
And this, breaking Silence, he mention'd; 
saying, I gave you Hope, my Dear, that I should
procure you the Honour of a Visit from the Lady
who put herself under my Care at Oxford. 
I bow'd my Head to the Countess; but my
Tears being ready to start, I kissed my Billy:
Dearest Baby, said I, you are not going to cry,
are you? —I would have had him just then to cry,
instead of me. 

The Tea Equipage was brought in. Polly,
carry the Child to Nurse. I gave it another Kiss,
and the Countess desired another. I grudged it,
to think her naughty Lips should so closely follow
mine. Her Sister kissed it also, and carry'd him to
Mr. B. Take him away, Polly, said he: I owe
him my Blessing. 
O these young Gentlemen Papa's! said the
Countess—They are like young unbroken Horses,
just put into the Traces! —Are they so? thought
I:—Matrimony must not expect your good
Word, I doubt. 
Mr. B. after Tea, at which I was far from being
talkative, (for I could not tell what to say; tho' I
try'd, as much as I could, not to appear sullen) desir'd
the Countess to play one Tune upon the Harpsichord. 
She did; and sung, at his Request, an
Italian Song to it, very prettily; too prettily, I
thought. I wanted to find some Faults, some
great Faults in her: But, O Madam! she has too
many outward Excellencies! Pity she wants a
good Heart! 
He could ask nothing, that she was not ready to
oblige him in! Indeed he could not! 
She desired me to touch the Keys. I would
have been excus'd: but could not. And the Ladies
commended my Performance: But neither my
Heart to play, nor my Fingers in playing, deserv'd
their Praises. Mr. B. said indeed, You play better
sometimes, my Dear. —Do I, Sir? was all
the Answer I made. 
The Countess hoped, she said, I would return
her Visit; and so said the Viscountess. 

I reply'd, Mr. B. would command me whenever
he pleased. 
She said, She hoped to be better acquainted— 
(I hope not, thought I) and that I would give her
my Company for a Week or so, upon the Forest:
It seems she has a Seat upon Windsor Forest. 
Mr. B. says, added she, you can't ride a single
Horse; but we'll teach you there. 'Tis a sweet Place
for that Purpose. 
How came Mr. B. thought I, to tell you that,
Madam? I suppose you know more of me, than I
do myself. Indeed, my Lady, this may be too true; 
for she may know what is to become of me! 
I told her, I was very much oblig'd to her Ladyship; 
and that Mr. B. directed all my Motions. 
What say you, Sir? said the Countess. 
I can't promise that, Madam; for Mrs. B. wants
to go down to Kent, before we go to Bedfordshire;
and I am afraid I can't give her my Company thither. 
Then, Sir, I shan't chuse to go without you. 
I suppose not, my Dear. But, if you are
disposed to oblige the Countess for a Week, as
you never were at Windsor— 
I believe, Sir, interrupted I, what with my
little Nursery, and one thing or another, I must
deny myself that Honour, for this Season. 
Well, Madam, then I'll expect you in Pallmall. 
I bow'd my Head, and said, Mr. B. would
command me. 
They took Leave with a Politeness natural to
them. 
Mr. B. as he handed them to their Chariot, said
something in Italian to the Countess: The Word 

Pamela was in what he said: She answer'd him,
with a down-cast Look, in the same Language,
half pleas'd, half serious; and the Chariot drove
away. 
I would give, said I, a good deal, Sir, to
know what her Ladyship said to you; she look'd
with so particular a Meaning, if I may so say. 
I'll tell you, truly, Pamela: I said to her,
Well, now your Ladyship has seen my Pamela— 
Is she not the charming'st Girl in the World? 
She answer'd, Mrs. B. is very grave, for so
young a Lady: But I must needs say, She is a
lovely Creature. 
And did you say so, Sir? And did her Ladyship
so answer? —And my Heart was ready to leap out
of my Bosom for Joy. 
But my Folly spoil'd all again; for, to my
own Surprize, and great Regret, I burst out into
Tears; tho' I even sobb'd to have suppress'd them,
but could not; and so I lost a fine Opportunity to
have talked to him while he was so kind: For he
was more angry with me than ever. 
What made me such a Fool, I wonder! But
I had so long struggled with myself; and not expecting
so kind a Question from the dear Gentleman,
or such a favourable Answer from the Countess, I
had no longer any Command of myself. 
What ails the little Fool? said he, with a
wrathful Countenance. This made me worse, and
he added, Take care, take care, Pamela! —You
will drive me from you in spite of my own Heart. 
So he went into the best Parlour, and put on
his sword and took his Hat. —I follow'd him. 
Sir, Sir! with my Arms expanded, was all I could 

say; but he avoided me, putting on his Hat with
an Air; and out he went, bidding Abraham follow
him. 
This is the Dilemma, into which, as I hinted
at the Beginning of this Letter, I have brought myself
with Mr. B. How strong, how prevalent, is
the Passion of Jealousy, that thus it will shew itself
uppermost, when it is uppermost, in spite of one's
most watchful Regards! 
My Mind is so perplex'd, that I must lay down
my Pen: And, indeed, your Ladyship will wonder,
all Things consider'd, that I could write the
above Account, as I have done, in this cruel Suspense,
and with such Apprehensions. But Writing
is all the Diversion I have, when my Mind is
oppress'd. Tis a temporary Relief; and this Interview
was so interesting, that it took up a great deal
of my Attention while I wrote: But now I am
come to a Period of it, (and so unhappy an one,
as has resulted from my ungovern'd Passion) my
Apprehensions are return'd upon me with double
Strength. Why did I drive the dear Gentleman
from me upon such a promising Appearance?— 
Why did I? —But all this had been prevented,
had not this nasty Mr. Turner put into my Head
worse Thoughts. For now I can say with the
Poet: 

 Since Knowlege is but Sorrow's Spy,
'Twere better not to know.

How shall I do to look up to him now on his
Return! To be sure, he plainly sees, to what my
Emotion is owing! —Yet I dare not tell him
either my Information, or my Informant, because 

if he knows the one, he will know the other; and
then what may be the Consequence!— 
Past Ten o'Clock at Night. 
I have only Time to tell your Ladyship, (for
the Postman waits) that Mr. B. is just come in. 
He is gone into his Closet, and has shut the Door,
and taken the Key on the Inside; so I dare not go
to him there. In this Uncertainty and Suspense,
pity and pray for 
Your Ladyship's afflicted Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

