



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Saturday, 6 o'clock, June 10. 
The lady gave Will's sweetheart a letter last
night to be carried to the post-house as this
morning, directed for Miss Howe, under cover to 

Hickman. I dare say neither cover nor letter will
be seen to have been open'd. The contents but
eight lines—To own—‘The receipt of her double-dated
letter in safety: and referring to a longer letter,
which she intends to write, when she shall
have a quieter heart, and less trembling fingers. 
But mentions something to have happen'd [My
detecting her, she means], which has given her
very great flutters, confusions, and apprehensions: 
But which she will await the issue of [Some hopes
for me hence, Jack!] before she gives her fresh
perturbation or concern on her account. —She tells
her how impatient she shall be for her next, &c.’ 
Now, Belford, I thought it would be but kind
in me to save Miss Howe's concern on these alarming
hints; since the curiosity of such a spirit must have
been prodigiously excited by them. Having therefore
so good a copy to imitate, I wrote; and,
taking out that of my Beloved, put under the same
cover the following short billet; inscriptive and conclusive
parts of it in her own words. 

Hamstead, Tuesday evening. 
My ever-dear Miss Howe,
A few lines only, till calmer spirits and quieter
fingers be granted me, and till I can get over the
shock which your intelligence has given me—To acquaint
you—that your kind long letter of Wednesday,
and, as I may say, of Thursday morning, is come safe
to my hands. On receipt of yours by my messenger
to you, I sent for it from Wilson's. There, thank
heaven! it lay. May that heaven reward you for
all your past, and for all your intended goodness to 
Your for-ever obliged,
Cl. Harlowe. 
I took great pains in writing this. It cannot, I
hope, be suspected. Her hand is so very delicate. 

Yet hers is written less beautifully than she usually
writes: And I hope Miss Howe will allow somewhat
for hurry of spirits, and unsteady fingers. 
My consideration for Miss Howe's ease of mind
extended still farther than to the instance I have
mentioned. 
That this billet might be with her as soon as possible
(and before it could have reach'd Hickman by
the post), I dispatch'd it away by a servant of Mowbray's. 
Miss Howe, had there been any failure or
delay, might, as thou wilt think, have communicated
her anxieties to her fugitive friend; and she to me, perhaps,
in a way I should not have been pleased with. 
Once more wilt thou wonderingly question—All
this pains for a single girl? 
Yes, Jack! —But is not this girl a Clarissa? — 
And who knows, but kind Fortune, as a reward for
my perseverance, may toss me in her charming
friend? Less likely things have come to pass, Belford! 
—And to be sure I shall have her, if I resolve
upon it. 