


The foregoing Work having been published at
three different periods of time, the Author, in
the course of its publication, was favoured with
many anonymous Letters, in which the Writers differently
expressed their wishes with regard to the apprehended
catastrophe. 
Most of those directed to him by the gentler Sex,
turned in favour of what they called a Fortunate Ending. 
Some of the fair writers, enamoured, as they declared,
with the character of the Heroine, were warmly
solicitous to have her made happy: &dotup;And others, likewise
of their mind, insisted that Poetical Justice required
that it should be so. And when, says one ingenious
Lady, whose undoubted motive was good-nature
and humanity, it must concluded, that it is in
an author's power to make his piece end as he pleases,
why should he not give pleasure rather than pain to
the Reader whom he has interested in favour of his
principal characters? 

&dotup;Others, and some Gentlemen, declared against
Tragedies in general, and in favour of Comedies, almost
in the words of Lovelace, who was supported
in his taste by all the women at Mrs. Sinclair's, and
by Sinclair herself. ‘I have too much Feeling, said
he (a) . There is enough in the world to make our
hearts sad, without carrying grief into our diversions,
and making the distresses of others our own.’ 
&dotup;And how was this happy ending to be brought
about? Why, by this very easy and trite expedient; 
to wit, by reforming Lovelace, and marrying him to
Clarissa—Not, however, abating her one of her trials,
nor any of her sufferings [for the sake of the sport
her distresses would give to the tender-hearted reader
as she went along] the last outrage excepted: That
indeed, partly in compliment to Lovelace himself,
and partly for delicacy-sake, they were willing to spare
her. 
&dotup;But whatever were the fate of his work, the Author
was resolved to take a different method. He always
thought, that sudden Conversions, such especially,
as were left to the candour of the Reader to suppose and
make out, had neither Art, nor Nature, nor even
Probability, in them; and that they were moreover
of very bad example. To have a Lovelace for a series
of years glory in his wickedness, and think that he
had nothing to do, but as an act of grace and favour
to hold out his hand to receive that of the best of women,
whenever he pleased, and to have it thought,
that Marriage would be a sufficient amends for all his
enormities to others, as well as to her; he could not
bear that. Nor is Reformation, as he has shewn in
another piece, to be secured by a fine face; by a passion
that has sense for its object; nor by the goodness of a
Wife's heart, or even example, if the heart of the
Husband be not graciously touched by the Divine
Finger. 

&dotup;It will be seen by this time, that the Author had a
great end in view. He has lived to see Scepticism and
Infidelity openly avowed, and even endeavoured to be
propagated from the Press: The great doctrines of
the Gospel brought into question: Those of self-denial
and mortification blotted out of the catalogue of
christian virtues: And a taste even to wantonness for
out-door pleasure and luxury, to the general exclusion
of domestic as well as public virtue, industriously promoted
among all ranks and degrees of people. 
&dotup;In this general depravity, when even the Pulpit has
lost great part of its weight, and the Clergy are considered
as a body of interested men, the Author thought
he should be able to answer it to his own heart, be the
success what it would, if he threw in his mite towards
introducing a Reformation so much wanted: And he
imagined, that if in an age given up to diversion and
entertainment, he could steal in, as may be said, and
investigate the great doctrines of Christianity under
the fashionable guise of an amusement; he should be
most likely to serve his purpose; remembring that of
the Poet: 

&dotup;A verse may find him who a sermon flies,
&dotup;And turn delight into a sacrifice.
&dotup;He was resolved therefore to attempt something that
never yet had been done. He considered, that the
Tragic poets have as seldom made their heroes true objects
of pity, as the Comic theirs laudable ones of imitation: 
And still more rarely have made them in their
deaths look forward to a future Hope. And thus,
when they die, they seem totally to perish. Death,
in such instances, must appear terrible. It must be
considered as the greatest evil. But why is Death set
in shocking lights, when it is the universal lot? 
&dotup;He has indeed thought fit to paint the death of the
wicked as terrible as he could paint it. But he has endeavoured
to draw that of the good in such an amiable 

manner, that the very Balaams of the world should
not forbear to wish that their latter end might be like
that of the Heroine. 
&dotup;And after all, what is the Poetical Justice so much
contended for by some, as the generality of writers
have managed it,&dotup; but another sort of dispensation than
that with which God, by Revelation, teaches us, He
has thought fit to exercise mankind; whom placing
here only in a state of probation, he hath so intermingled
good and evil, as to necessitate us to look forward for a
more equal dispensation of both? 
The Author of the History (or rather Dramatic Narrative)
of Clarissa, is therefore well justified by the
Christian System, in deferring to extricate suffering Virtue
to the time in which it will meet with the Completion
of its Reward. 
But not absolutely to shelter the conduct observed in
it under the sanction of Religion [an authority perhaps
not of the greatest weight with some of our modern critics]
it must be observed, that the Author is justified in
its Catastrophe by the greatest master of reason, and the
best judge of composition, that ever lived. The learned
Reader knows we must mean Aristotle; whose
sentiments in this matter we shall beg leave to deliver
in the words of a very amiable writer of our own
Country. 
‘The English writers of Tragedy, says Mr. Addison (a) , are possessed with a notion, that when they
represent a virtuous or innocent person in distress, they
ought not to leave him till they have delivered him
out of his troubles, or made him triumph over his
enemies. 
‘This error they have been led into by a ridiculous
doctrine in Modern Criticism, that they are obliged to
an equal distribution of rewards and punishments, and
an impartial execution of Poetrical Justice. 

‘Who were the first that established this rule, I
know not; but I am sure it has no foundation in
Nature, in Reason, or in the Practice of
the Antients. 
‘We find, that good and evil happen alike unto
All Men on this side the grave: And as the principal
design of Tragedy is to raise commiseration and
terror in the minds of the audience, we shall defeat
this great end, if we always make Virtue and Innocence
happy and successful. 
‘Whatever crosses and disappointments a good man
suffers in the Body of the Tragedy, they will make
but small impression on our minds, when we know,
that, in the last Act, he is to arrive at the end of his
wishes and desires. 
‘When we see him engaged in the depth of his afflictions,
we are apt to comfort ourselves, because we
are sure he will find his way out of them, and that his
grief, how great soever it may be at present, will soon
terminate in gladness. 
‘For this reason, the antient Writers of Tragedy
treated men in their Plays, as they are dealt with in
the World, by making Virtue sometimes happy and
sometimes miserable, as they found it in the Fable
which they made choice of, or as it might affect their
Audience in the most agreeable manner. 
‘Aristotle considers the Tragedies that were written
in either of those kinds; and observes, that those
which ended unhappily had always pleased the people,
and carried away the Prize, in the public disputes of
the Stage, from those that ended happily. 
‘Terror and Commiseration leave a pleasing anguish
in the mind, and fix the Audience in such a serious
composure of thought, as is much more lasting and
delightful, than any little transient Starts of Joy and
Satisfaction. 
‘Accordingly we find, that more of our English
Tragedies have succeeded, in which the Favourites of 

the Audience sink under their calamities, than those
in which they recover themselves out of them. 
‘The best Plays of this kind are The Orphan, Venice
Preserved, Alexander the Great, Theodosius, All
for Love, Oedipus, Oroonoko, Othello, &c. 
‘King Lear is an admirable Tragedy of the same
kind, as Shakespeare wrote it: But as it is reformed
according to the chimerical notion of Poetical Justice,
in my humble opinion it has lost half its
beauty. 
‘At the same time I must allow, that there are very
noble Tragedies, which have been framed upon the
other Plan, and have ended happily; as indeed most
of the good Tragedies which have been written since
the starting of the above-mentioned Criticism, have
taken this turn: As The Mourning Bride, Tamerlane (a) , Ulysses, Phædra and Hippolytus, with most
of Mr. Dryden's. I must also allow, that many of
Shakespeare's, and several of the celebrated Tragedies
of Antiquity, are cast in the same form. I do not
therefore dispute against this way of writing Tragedies; 
but against the Criticism that would establish This as
the only method; and by that means would very much
cramp the English Tragedy, and perhaps give a wrong
bent to the genius of our writers.’ 
&dotup;This subject is further considered in a Letter to the
Spectator (b) . 
&dotup;‘I find your opinion, says the author of it, concerning
the late-invented term called Poetical Justice,
is controverted by some eminent critics. I have
drawn up some additional arguments to strengthen
the opinion which you have there delivered; having
endeavoured to go to the bottom of that matter.... 
&dotup;‘The most perfect man has vices enough to draw
down punishments upon his head, and to justify Providence 

in regard to any miseries that may befal him. 
For this reason I cannot think but that the instruction
and moral are much finer, where a man who is virtuous
in the main of his character falls into distress,
and sinks under the blows of fortune, at the end of
a Tragedy, than when he is represented as happy and
triumphant. Such an example corrects the insolence
of human nature, softens the mind of the beholder
with sentiments of pity and compassion, comforts him
under his own private affliction, and teaches him not
to judge of mens virtues by their successes (a) . I cannot
think of one real hero in all antiquity so far raised
above human infirmities, that he might not be very
naturally represented in a Tragedy as plunged in misfortunes
and calamities. The Poet may still find out
some prevailing passion or indiscretion in his character,
and shew it in such a manner as will sufficiently
acquit Providence of any injustice in his sufferings: 
For, as Horace observes, the best man is faulty, tho'
not in so great a degree as those whom we generally
call vicious men (b) . 
&dotup;‘If such a strict Poetical Justice (proceeds the Letter-writer)
as some gentlemen insist upon, were to be
observed in this art, there is no manner of reason why
it should not extend to heroic Poetry, as well as Tragedy. 
But we find it so little observed in Homer,
that his Achilles is placed in the greatest point of glory
and success, tho' his Character is morally vicious, and
only poetically good, if I may use the phrase of our
modern Critics. The Æneid is filled with innocent
unhappy persons. Nisus and Euryalus, Lausus and
Pallas, come all to unfortunate ends. The Poet takes
notice in particular, that, in the sacking of Troy,
Ripheus fell, who was the most just man among the
Trojans: 


&dotup;‘—Cadit & Ripheus, justissimus unus
&dotup;‘Qui fuit in Teucris, & servantissimus æqui.
&dotup;‘Diis aliter visum est.—
&dotup;‘The gods thought fit.—So blameless Ripheus fell,
&dotup;‘Who lov'd fair Justice, and observ'd it well.’
&dotup;‘And that Pantheus could neither be preserved by
his transcendent piety, nor by the holy fillets of
Apollo, whose priest he was: 

&dotup;‘—Nec te tua plurima, Pantheu,
&dotup;‘Labentem pietas, nec Apollinis infula texit. Æn. II. 
&dotup;‘Nor could thy piety thee, Pantheus, save,
&dotup;‘Nor ev'n thy priesthood, from an early grave.
&dotup;‘I might here mention the practice of antient Tragic
Poets, both Greek and Latin; but as this particular
is touched upon in the paper above-mentioned,
I shall pass it over in silence. I could produce passages
out of Aristotle in favour of my opinion: And if in
one place he says, that an absolutely virtuous man
should not be represented as unhappy, this does not
justify any one who should think fit to bring in an
absolutely virtuous man upon the stage. Those who
are acquainted with that author's way of writing,
know very well, that to take the whole extent of his
subject into his divisions of it, he often makes use of
such cases as are imaginary, and not reducible to
practice.... 
&dotup;‘I shall conclude, says this gentleman, with observing,
that tho' the Spectator above-mentioned is so far
against the rule of Poetical Justice, as to affirm, that
good men may meet with an unhappy Catastrophe
in Tragedy, it does not say, that ill men may go off
unpunished. The reason for this dinstinction is very
plain; namely, because the best of men [as is said
above] have faults enough to justify Providence for
any misfortunes and afflictions which may befal them,
but there are many men so criminal, that they can 

have no claim or pretence to happiness. The best of
men may deserve punishment; but the worst of men
cannot deserve happiness.’ 
&dotup;Mr. Addison, as we have seen above, tells us, that
Aristotle, in considering the Tragedies that were
written in either of the kinds, observes, that those
which ended unhappily had always pleased the people,
and carried away the prize, in the public disputes of
the Stage, from those that ended happily. And we
shall take leave to add, that&dotup; this preference was
given at a time when the entertainments of the Stage
were committed to the care of the magistrates; when
the prizes contended for were given by the State; when,
of consequence, the emulation among writers was ardent; 
and when learning was at the highest pitch of
glory in that renowned commonwealth. 
It cannot be supposed, that the Athenians, in this
their highest age of taste and politeness, were less humane,
less tender-hearted, than we of the present. But
they were not afraid of being moved, nor ashamed of
shewing themselves to be so, at the distresses they saw
well painted and represented. In short, they were of
the opinion, with the wisest of men, That it is was better
to go to the house of mourning than to the house of mirth; 
and had fortitude enough to trust themselves with their
own generous grief, because they found their hearts
mended by it. 
Thus also Horace, and the politest Romans in the
Augustan age, wished to be affected: 

Ac ne forte putes me, quæ facere ipse recusem,
Cum recte tractant alii, laudare maligne;
Ille per extentum funem mihi posse videtur
Ire poeta, meum qui pectus inaniter angit,
Irritat, mulcet; falsis terroribus implet,
Ut magus; & modo me Thebis, modo ponit Athenis.
Thus Englished by Mr. Pope: 
Yet, lest you think I railly more than teach,
Or praise malignly Arts I cannot reach;

Let me, for once, presume t'instruct the times
To know the Poet from the Man of Rhymes.
'Tis He who gives my breast a thousand pains:
Can make me feel each passion that he feigns;
Enrage—compose—with more than magic art,
With pity and with terror tear my heart;
And snatch me o'er the earth, or thro' the air,
To Thebes, to Athens, when he will, and where.
Our fair readers are also desired to attend to what
a celebrated Critic (a)  of a neighbouring nation says on
the nature and design of Tragedy, from the rules laid
down by the same great Antient. 
‘Tragedy, says he, makes man modest, by representing
the great masters of the earth humbled; and
it makes him tender and merciful, by shewing him
the strange accidents of life, and the unforeseen disgraces
to which the most important persons are subject. 
‘But because Man is naturally timorous and compassionate,
he may fall into other extremes. Too
much fear may shake his constancy of mind, and too
much compassion may enfeeble his equity. 'Tis the
business of Tragedy to regulate these two weaknesses. 
It prepares and arms him against disgraces, by shewing
them so frequent in the most considerable persons; 
and he will cease to fear extraordinary accidents,
when he sees them happen to the highest part
of Mankind. And still more efficacious, we may
add, the example will be, when he sees them hapen
to the best. 
‘But as the end of Tragedy is to teach men not to
fear too weakly common misfortunes, it proposes also
to teach them to spare their compassion for objects
that deserve it. For there is an injustice in being
moved at the afflictions of those who deserve to be
miserable. We may see, without pity, Clytemnestra
slain by her son Orestes in Æschylus, because she had 

murdered Agamemnon her husband; yet we cannot
see Hippolytus die by the plot of his Stepmother Phædra,
in Euripides, without compassion, because he
died not, but for being chaste and virtuous.’ 
&dotup;These are the great authorities so favourable to the
stories that end unhappily. And we beg leave to reinforce
this inference from them, That if the temporary
sufferings of the Virtuous and the Good can be
accounted for and justified on Pagan principles, many
more and infinitely stronger reasons will occur to a
Christian Reader in behalf of what are called unhappy
Catastrophes from the consideration of the doctrine
of future rewards; which is every-where strongly
enforced in the History of Clarissa. 
&dotup;Of this (to give but one instance) an ingenious
Modern, distinguished by his rank, but much more
for his excellent defence of some of the most important
doctrines of Christianity, appears convinced in the
conclusion of a pathetic Monody, lately published; in
which, after he had deplored, as a man without hope
(expressing ourselves in the Scripture phrase) the loss of
an excellent Wife; he thus consoles himself: 


 &dotup;Yet, O my soul! thy rising murmurs stay,
 &dotup;Nor dare th' All-wise Disposer to arraign,
   &dotup;Or against his supreme decree
    &dotup;With impious grief complain.
&dotup;That all thy full-blown joys at once should fade,
&dotup;Was his most righteous Will: And be that Will obey'd.

 &dotup;Would thy fond love his grace to her controul,
 &dotup;And in these low abodes of sin and pain
   &dotup;Her pure, exalted soul,
 &dotup;Unjustly, for thy partial good, detain?
 &dotup;No—rather strive thy grov'ling mind to raise
  &dotup;Up to that unclouded blaze,
 &dotup;That heav'nly radiance of eternal light,
 &dotup;In which enthron'd she now with pity sees,
  &dotup;How frail, how insecure, how slight
   &dotup;Is ev'ry mortal bliss.

&dotup;But of infinitely greater weight than all that has
been above produced on this subject, are the words of
the Psalmist. 
&dotup;‘As for me, says he (a) , my feet were almost gone,
my steps had well-nigh slipt: For I was envious at
the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. 
For their strength is firm: They are not in trouble
as other men; neither are they plagued like other
men—Their eyes stand out with fatness: They have
more than their heart could wish—Verily I have
cleansed mine heart in vain, and washed my hands
in innocence; for all the day long have I been plagued,
and chastened every morning. When I thought to
know this, it was too painful for me. Until I went
into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their
end—Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward
receive me to glory.’ 
&dotup;This is the Psalmist's comfort and dependence. And
shall man, presuming to alter the common course of
nature, and, so far as he is able, to elude the tenure
by which frail mortality indispensably holds, imagine,
that he can make a better dispensation; and by calling
it Poetical Justice, indirectly reflect on the Divine?&dotup; 
The more pains have been taken to obviate the objections
arising from the notion of Poetical Justice, as
the doctrine built upon it had obtained general credit
among us; and as it must be confessed to have the appearance
of humanity and good-nature for its supports. 
And yet the writer of the History of Clarissa is humbly
of opinion, that he might have been excused referring
to them for the vindication of his Catastrophe, even by
those who are advocates for the contrary opinion; since
the notion of Poetical Justice, founded on the modern
rules, has hardly ever been more strictly observed in
works of this nature, than in the present performance. 

For, Is not Mr. Lovelace, who could persevere in
his villainous views, against the strongest and most frequent
convictions and remorses that ever were sent to
awaken and reclaim a wicked man—Is not this great,
this wilful transgressor, condignly punished; and his punishment
brought on thro' the intelligence of the very
Joseph Leman whom he had corrupted (a) ; and by
means of the very women whom he had debauched (b) 
—Is not Mr. Belton, who has an Uncle's hastened death
to answer for (c) —Are not the whole Harlowe-family— 
Is not the vile Tomlinson—Are not the infamous Sinclair,
and her wretched partners—And even the wicked
Servants, who, with their eyes open, contributed their
parts to the carrying on of the vile schemes of their respective
principals—Are they not All likewise exemplarily
punished? 
On the other hand, Is not Miss Howe, for her noble
friendship to the exalted Lady in her calamities—Is not
Mr. Hickman, for his unexceptionable morals, and
integrity of life—Is not the repentant and not ungenerous
Belford—Is not the worthy Norton—made
signally happy? 
And who that are in earnest in their profession of
Christianity, but will rather envy than regret the triumphant
death of Clarissa; whose piety, from her
early childhood; whose diffusive charity; whose steady
virtue; whose Christian humility; whose forgiving spirit; 
whose meekness, and resignation, HEAVEN
only could reward (a) ? 
&dotup;We shall now, according to expectation given in
the Preface to this Edition, proceed to take brief notice
of such other objections as have come to our knowlege: 
For, as is there said, ‘This work being addressed 

to the Public as an History of Life and Manners,
those parts of it which are proposed to carry
with them the force of Example, ought to be as unobjectible
as is consistent with the design of the whole,
and with human Nature.’ 
&dotup;Several persons have censured the Heroine as too
cold in her love, too haughty, and even sometimes
provoking. But we may presume to say, that this
objection has arisen from want of attention to the
Story, to the Character of Clarissa, and to her particular
Situation. 
&dotup;It was not intended that she should be in Love, but
in Liking only, if that expression may be admitted. 
It is meant to be every-where inculcated in the Story,
for Example-sake, that she never would have married
Mr. Lovelace, because of his immoralities, had she
been left to herself; and that her ruin was principally
owing to the persecutions of her friends. 
&dotup;What is too generally called Love, ought (perhaps
as generally) to be called by another name. Cupidity,
or a Paphian Stimulus, as some women, even of condition,
have acted, are not words too harsh to be
substituted on the occasion, however grating they may
be to delicate ears. But take the word Love in the
gentlest and most honourable sense, it would have
been thought by some highly improbable, that Clarissa
should have been able to shew such a command of her
passions, as makes so distinguishing a part of her Character,
had she been as violently in Love, as certain
warm and fierce spirits would have had her to be. A
few Observations are thrown in by way of Note in
the present Edition, at proper places, to obviate this
Objection, or rather to bespeak the Attention of hasty
Readers to what lies obviously before them. For thus
the Heroine anticipates this very Objection, expostulating
with Miss Howe on her contemptuous treatment
of Mr. Hickman; which [far from being guilty
of the same fault herself] she did on all occasions, and 

declares she would do, whenever Miss Howe forgot
herself, altho' she had not a day to live: 
&dotup;‘O my dear, says she, that it had been my Lot (as
I was not permitted to live single) to have met with
a man, by whom I could have acted generously and
unreservedly! 
&dotup;‘Mr. Lovelace, it is now plain, in order to have a
pretence against me, taxed my behaviour to him with
stiffness and distance. You, at one time, thought me
guilty of some degree of Prudery. Difficult situations
should be allowed for; which often make seeming
occasions for censure unavoidable. I deserved not
blame from him, who made mine difficult. And if
I had had any other man to deal with than Mr. Lovelace,
or had he had but half the merit which Mr.
Hickman has, you, my dear, should have found,
that my Doctrine, on this subject, should have governed
my Practice.’ See this whole Letter (a) ; see
also Mr. Lovelace's Letter No lv. Vol. VIII. p. 236,
& seq. where, just before his Death, he entirely acquits
her conduct on this head. 
&dotup;It has been thought by some worthy and ingenious
persons, that if Lovelace had been drawn an Infidel or
Scoffer, his Character, according to the Taste of the
present worse than Sceptical Age, would have been
more natural. It is, however, too well known, that
there are very many persons, of his Cast, whose actions
discredit their belief. And are not the very Devils,
in Scripture, said to believe and tremble? 
&dotup;But the Reader must have observed, that great, and,
it is hoped, good Use, has been made throughout the
Work, by drawing Lovelace an Infidel only in Practice; 
and this as well in the arguments of his friend
Belford, as in his own frequent Remorses, when
touched with temporary Compunction, and in his last
Scenes; which could not have been made, had either 

of them been painted as sentimental Unbelievers. Not
to say, that Clarissa, whose great Objection to Mr.
Wyerley was, that he was a Scoffer, must have been
inexcuseable had she known Lovelace to be so, and had
given the least attention to his Addresses. On the contrary,
thus she comforts herself, when she thinks she
must be his—&dotup;‘This one consolation, however, remains: 
He is not an Infidel, an Unbeliever. Had he
been an Infidel, there would have been no room at all
for hope of him; but (priding himself as he does in
his fertile invention) he would have been utterly
abandoned, irreclaimable, and a Savage (a) .’ And it
must be observed, that Scoffers are too witty in their
own Opinion; in other words, value themselves too
much upon their profligacy, to aim at concealing it. 
&dotup;Besides, had Lovelace added ribbald jests upon Religion,
to his other liberties, the freedoms which would
then have passed between him and his friend, must
have been of a nature truly infernal. And this farther
hint was meant to be given, by way of inference,
that the man who allowed himself in those liberties
either of speech or action, which Lovelace thought
shameful, was so far a worse man than Lovelace. 
For this reason is he every-where made to treat jests
on sacred things and subjects, even down to the Mythology
of the Pagans, among Pagans, as undoubted
marks of the ill-breeding of the jesters; obscene images
and talk, as liberties too shameful for even Rakes to
allow themselves in; and injustice to creditors, and in
matters of Meum and Tuum, as what it was beneath
him to be guilty of. 
&dotup;Some have objected to the meekness, to the tameness,
as they will have it to be, of the character of
Mr. Hickman. And yet Lovelace owns, that he rose
upon him with great spirit in the interview between
them; once, when he thought a reflection was but
implied on Miss Howe (b) ; and another time, when 

he imagined himself treated contemptuously (a) . Miss
Howe, it must be owned (tho' not to the credit of
her own character) treats him ludicrously on several
occasions. But so she does her Mother. And perhaps
a Lady of her lively turn would have treated as
whimsically any man but a Lovelace. Mr. Belford
speaks of him with honour and respect (b) . So does
Colonel Morden (c) . And so does Clarissa on every
occasion. And all that Miss Howe herself says of him,
tends more to his reputation than discredit (d) , as
Clarissa indeed tells her (e) . 
&dotup;And as to Lovelace's treatment of him, the Reader
must have observed, that it was his way to treat every
man with contempt, partly by way of self-exaltation,
and partly to gratify the natural gaiety of his disposition. 
He says himself to Belford (f) , ‘Thou knowest
I love him not, Jack; and whom we love not, we
cannot allow a merit to; perhaps not the merit they
should be granted.’ ‘Modest and diffident men,’ 
writes Belford, to Lovelace, in praise of Mr. Hickman,
‘wear not soon off those little precisenesses, which
the confident, if ever they had them, presently get
over (g) .’ 
&dotup;But, as Miss Howe treats her Mother as freely as
she does her Lover; so does Mr. Lovelace take still
greater liberties with Mr. Belford, than he does with
Mr. Hickman, with respect to his person, air, and
address, as Mr. Belford himself hints to Mr. Hickman (h) . 
And yet he is not so readily believed to the
discredit of Mr. Belford, by the Ladies in general, as
he is when he disparages Mr. Hickman. Whence
can this partiality arise?— 
&dotup;Mr. Belford had been a Rake: But was in a way of reformation. 

&dotup;Mr. Hickman had always been a good man. 
&dotup;And Lovelace confidently says, That the women love
a man whose regard for them is founded in the
knowlege of them (a) . 
&dotup;Nevertheless, it must be owned, that it was not proposed
to draw Mr. Hickman, as the man of whom
the Ladies in general were likely to be very fond. Had
it been so, Goodness of heart, and Gentleness of manners,
great Assiduity, and inviolable and modest Love, would
not of themselves have been supposed sufficient recommendations. 
He would not have been allowed the
least share of preciseness or formality, altho' those defects
might have been imputed to his reverence for
the object of his passion: But in his character it was
designed to shew, that the same man could not be
every-thing; and to intimate to Ladies, that in chusing
companions for life, they should rather prefer the honest
heart of a Hickman, which would be all their own,
than to risque the chance of sharing, perhaps with
scores, (and some of those probably the most profligate
of the Sex) the volatile mischievous one of a Lovelace: 
In short, that they should chuse, if they wished
for durable happiness, for rectitude of mind, and not
for speciousness of person or address: Nor make a jest
of a good man in favour of a bad one, who would
make a jest of them and of their whole Sex. 
&dotup;Two Letters, however, by way of accommodation,
are inserted in this edition, which perhaps will give
Mr. Hickman's character some heightening with such
Ladies, as love spirit in a man; and had rather suffer
by it, than not meet with it.— 
 &dotup;Women, born to be controul'd,
 &dotup;Stoop to the Forward and the Bold,
Says Waller—And Lovelace too!
&dotup;Some have wished that the Story had been told in
the usual narrative way of telling Stories designed to 

amuse and divert, and not in Letters written by the
respective persons whose history is given in them. The
author thinks he ought not to prescribe to the taste of
others; but imagined himself at liberty to follow his
own. He perhaps mistrusted his talents for the narrative
kind of writing. He had the good fortune to
succeed in the Epistolary way once before. A Story
in which so many persons were concerned either principally
or collaterally, and of characters and dispositions
so various, carried on with tolerable connexion and
perspicuity, in a series of Letters from different persons,
without the aid of digressions and episodes foreign
to the principal end and design, he thought had novelty
to be pleaded for it: And that, in the present
age, he supposed would not be a slight recommendation. 
&dotup;But besides what has been said above, and in the
Preface, on this head, the following opinion of an ingenious
and candid Foreigner, on this manner of
writing, may not be improperly inserted here. 
&dotup;‘The method which the Author has pursued in the
History of Clarissa, is the same as in the Life of
Pamela: Both are related in familiar Letters by the
parties themselves, at the very time in which the
events happened: And this method has given the author
great advantages, which he could not have drawn
from any other species of narration. The minute particulars
of events, the sentiments and conversation of
the parties, are, upon this plan, exhibited with all the
warmth and spirit, that the passion supposed to be predominant
at the very time, could produce, and with
all the distinguishing characteristics which memory
can supply in a History of recent transactions. 
&dotup;‘Romances in general, and Marivaux's amongst
others, are wholly improbable; because they suppose
the History to be written after the series of events is
closed by the catastrophe: A circumstance which implies
a strength of memory beyond all example and 

probability in the persons concerned, enabling them,
at the distance of several years, to relate all the particulars
of a transient conversation: Or rather, it implies
a yet more improbable confidence and familiarity
between all these persons and the author. 
&dotup;‘There is, however, one difficulty attending the
Epistolary method; for it is necessary, that all the
characters should have an uncommon taste for this
kind of conversation, and that they should suffer no
event, nor even a remarkable conversation, to pass,
without immediately committing it to writing. But
for the preservation of the Letters once written, the
author has provided with great judgment, so as to
render this circumstance highly probable (a) .&dotup;’ 
&dotup;It is presumed that what this gentleman says of the
difficulties attending a Story thus given in the Epistolary
manner of writing, will not be found to reach the
History before us. It is very well accounted for in it,
how the two principal Female characters come to take
so great a delight in writing. Their subjects are not
merely subjects of amusement; but greatly interesting
to both: Yet many Ladies there are who now laudably
correspond, when at distance from each other, on
occasions that far less affect their mutual welfare and
friendships, than those treated of by these Ladies. The
two principal gentlemen had motives of gaiety and
vain-glory for their inducements. It will generally be
found, that persons who have talents for familiar writeing,
as these corespondents are presumed to have, will
not forbear amusing themselves with their pens, on
less arduous occasions than what offer to these. These
Four (whose Stories have a connexion with each 

other) out of a great number of characters which are
introduced in this History, are only eminent in the
Epistolary way: The rest appear but as occasional
writers, and as drawn in rather by necessity than
choice, from the different relations in which they stand
with the four principal persons.&dotup; 
The Length of the piece has been objected to by some,
who perhaps looked upon it as a mere Novel or Romance; 
and yet of these there are not wanting works of equal
length. 
They were of opinion, that the Story moved too
slowly, particularly in the first and second Volumes,
which are chiefly taken up with the Altercations between
Clarissa and the several persons of her Family. 
But is it not true, that those Altercations are the
Foundation of the whole, and therefore a necessary part
of the work? The Letters and Conversations, where
the Story makes the slowest progress, are presumed to be
characteristic. They give occasion likewise to suggest
many interesting Personalities, in which a good deal of
the instruction essential to a work of this nature is conveyed. 
And it will, moreover, be remembred, that
the Author, at his first setting out, apprised the Reader,
that the Story (interesting as it is generally allowed to
be) was to be principally looked upon as the Vehicle to
the Instruction. 
To all which we may add, that there was frequenrly
a necessity to be very circumstantial and minute, in order
to preserve and maintain that Air of Probability,
which is necessary to be maintained in a Story designed
to represent real Life; and which is rendered extremely
busy and active by the plots and contrivances formed and
carried on by one of the principal Characters. 
&dotup;Some there are, and Ladies too! who have supposed
that the excellencies of the Heroine are carried to an
improbable, and even to an impracticable height, in
this History. But the education of Clarissa from early
childhood ought to be considered, as one of her very 

great advantages; as, indeed, the foundation of all
her excellencies: And it is hoped, for the sake of the
doctrine designed to be inculcated by it, that it will. 
&dotup;She had a pious, a well-re'd, a not meanly-descended
woman for her Nurse, who with her milk,
as Mrs. Harlowe says (a) , gave her that nurture which
no other Nurse could give her. She was very early
happy in the conversation-visits of her learned and
worthy Dr. Lewen, and in her correspondencies,
not with him only, but with other Divines mentioned
in her last Will. Her Mother was, upon the whole,
a good woman, who did credit to her birth and her
fortune; and both delighted in her for those improvements
and attainments, which gave her, and them in
her, a distinction that caused it to be said, that when
she was out of the family, it was considered but as a
common family (b) . She was moreover a Country
Lady; and, as we have seen in Miss Howe's character
of her (c) , took great delight in rural and household
employments; tho' qualified to adorn the brightest
circle. 
&dotup;It must be confessed, that we are not to look for
Clarissa's among the constant frequenters of Ranelagh
and Vaux-hall, nor among those who may be called
Daughters of the Card-table. If we do, the character
of our Heroine may then indeed be justly thought not
only improbable, but unattainable. But we have neither
room in this place, nor inclination, to pursue a
subject so invidious. We quit it therefore, after we
have repeated, that we know there are some, and we
hope there are many, in the British dominions [or they
are hardly any-where in the European world] who,
as far as occasion has called upon them to exert the
like humble and modest, yet steady and useful, virtues,
have reached the perfections of a Clarissa. 

&dotup;Having thus briefly taken notice of the most material
objections that have been made to different parts of
this History, it is hoped we may be allowed to add,
That had we thought ourselves at liberty to give copies
of some of the many Letters that have been written on
the other side of the question, that is to say, in approbation
of the Catastrophe, and of the general Conduct
and Execution of the work, by some of the most eminent
judges of composition in every branch of Literature; 
most of what has been written in this Postscript
might have been spared. 
&dotup;But as the principal objection with many has lain
against the length of the piece, we shall add to what
we have said above on that subject, in the words of
one of those eminent writers:&dotup; ‘That, If, in the History
before us, it shall be found, that the Spirit is duly
diffused throughout; that the characters are various
and natural; well distinguished and uniformly supported
and maintained: If there be a variety of incidents sufficient
to excite Attention, and those so conducted,
as to keep the Reader always awake; the Length
then must add proportionably to the pleasure that every
Person of Taste receives from a well-drawn Picture of
Nature. But where the contrary of all these qualities
shock the understanding, the extravagant performance
will be judged tedious, tho' no longer than a Fairy-Tale.’ 