


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


By the time tea was ready, Lady Betty whisperingly
congratulated me on having made so considerable
a conquest, as she was sure I had, by Sir Hargrave's
looks, in which was mingled reverence with admiration,
as she expressed herself. She took notice also
of a galant expression of his, uttered, as she would
have it, with an earnestness that gave it a meaning
beyond a common compliment. My Cousin Reeves
had asked Miss Clements if she could commend to me
an honest, modest man-servant? I, said Sir Hargrave
can. I myself shall be proud to wear Miss Byron's
livery; and that for life. 
Miss Cantillon, who was within hearing of this, and
had seemed to be highly taken with the Baronet, could
hardly let her eyes be civil to me; and yet her really
pretty mouth occasionally work'd itself into forced smiles,
and an affectation of complaisance. 
Sir Hargrave was extremely obsequious to me, all
the tea-time; and seemed in earnest a little uneasy in
himself: And after tea he took my Cousin Reeves
into the next room; and there made your Harriet the
subject of a serious conversation; and desired his interest
with me. 
He prefaced his declaration to Mr. Reeves, with 

assuring him, that he had sought for an opportunity
more than once, to be admitted into my company,
when he was last at Northampton; and that he had
not intruded himself then into that company, had he
not heard I was to be there. He made protestations
of his honourable views; which look'd as if he
thought they might be doubted, if he had not given
such assurances. A tacit implication of an imagined
superiority, as well in consequence as fortune. 
Mr. Reeves told him, It was a rule which all my relations
had set themselves, not to interfere with my
choice, let it be placed on whom it would. 
Sir Hargrave called himself an happy man upon this
intelligence. He afterwards, on his return to company,
found an opportunity, as Mrs. Reeves and I were
talking at the farthest part of the room, in very vehement
terms, to declare himself to me an admirer of
perfections of his own creation; for he volubly enumerated
many; and begg'd my permission to pay his
respects to me at Mr. Reeves's. 
Mr. Reeves, Sir Hargrave, said I, will receive what
visits he pleases in his own house. I have no permission
to give. 
He bowed, and made me a very high compliment,
taking what I said for a permission. 
What can a woman do with these self-flatterers? 
Mr. Walden took his leave: Sir Hargrave his:
He wanted, I saw, to speak to me, at his departure; 
but I gave him no opportunity. 
Mr. Singleton seemed also inclined to go, but knew
not how; and having lost the benefit of their example
by his irresolution, sat down. 
Lady Betty then repeated her congratulations. How
many ladies, said she, and fine ladies too, have sigh'd
in secret for Sir Hargrave! You will have the glory,
Miss Byron, of fixing the wavering heart of a man
who has done, and is capable of doing, a great deal
of mischief. 

The ladies, Madam, said I, who can sigh in secret
for such a man as Sir Hargrave, must either deserve a
great deal of pity, or none at all. 
Sir Hargrave, said Miss Cantillon, is a very fine
gentleman; and so looked upon, I assure you: And
he has a noble estate. 
It is very happy, reply'd I, that we do not all of
us like the same person. I mean not to disparage Sir
Hargrave; but I have compassion for the ladies who
sigh for him in secret. One woman only can be his
wife; and perhaps she will not be one of those who
sigh for him; especially were he to know that she
does. 
Perhaps not, reply'd Miss Cantillon: But I do assure
you, that I am not one of those who sigh for Sir Hargrave. 
The ladies smiled. 
I am glad of it, Madam, said I. Every woman
should have her heart in her own keeping, till she can
find a worthy man to bestow it upon. 
Miss Barnevelt took a tilt in heroics. Well, ladies,
said she, you may talk of Love and Love as much as
you please; but it is my glory, that I never knew
what Love was. I, for my part, like a brave man,
a gallant man: One in whose loud praise fame has
crack'd half a dozen trumpets. But as to your milksops,
your dough-baked lovers, who stay at home
and strut among the women, when glory is to be
gain'd in the martial field; I despise them with all my
heart. I have often wish'd that the foolish heads of
such fellows as these were all cut off in time of war,
and sent over to the heroes to fill their cannon with,
when they batter in breach, by way of saving ball. 
I am afraid, said Lady Betty, humouring this romantic
speech, that if the heads of such persons were
as soft as we are apt sometimes to think them, they
would be of as little service abroad as they are at
home. 

O, Madam, replied Miss Barnevelt, there is a good
deal of lead in the heads of these fellows. But were
their brains, said the shocking creature, if any they
have, made to fly about the ears of an enemy, they
would serve both to blind and terrify him. 
Even Mr. Singleton was affected with this horrid
speech; for he clapt both his hands to his head, as if
he were afraid of his brains. 
Lady Betty was very urgent with us to pass the
evening with her; but we excused ourselves; and
when we were in the coach, Mr. Reeves told me, that
I should find the Baronet a very troublesome and resolute
lover, if I did not give him countenance. 
And so, Sir, said I, you would have me do, as I
have heard many a good woman has done, marry a
man, in order to get rid of his importunity. 
And a certain cure too, let me tell you, Cousin,
said he, smiling. 
We found at home, waiting for Mr. Reeves's return,
Sir John Allestree. A worthy sensible man, of
plain and unaffected manners, upwards of fifty. 
Mr. Reeves mentioning to him our past entertainment
and company, Sir John gave us such an account
of Sir Hargrave, as helped me not only in the character
I have given of him, but let me know that he is
a very dangerous and enterprising man. He says, that
laughing and light as he is in company, he is malicious,
ill-natured, and designing; and sticks at nothing to
carry a point on which he has once set his heart. He
has ruined, Sir John says, three young creatures already
under vows of marriage. 
Sir John spoke of him as a managing man, as to
his fortune: He said, That tho' he would at times be
lavish in the pursuit of his pleasures; yet that he had
some narrownesses which made him despised, and that
most by those for whose regard a good man would
principally wish; his neighbours and tenants. 
Could you have thought, my Lucy, that this laughing, 

fine-dressing man, could have been a man of
malice; of resentment; of enterprize; a cruel man? 
Yet Sir John told two very bad stories of him, besides
what I have mentioned, which proves him to be all I
have said. 
But I had no need of these stories to determine me
against receiving his addresses. What I saw of him
was sufficient; though Sir John made no manner of
doubt (on being told by Mr. Reeves, in confidence,
of his application to him for leave to visit me) that he
was quite in earnest; and, making me a compliment,
added, that he knew Sir Hargrave was inclined to
marry; and the more, as one half of his estate, on
failure of issue male, would go at his death to a distant
relation whom he hated; but for no other reason than
for admonishing him, when a school-boy, on his low
and mischievous pranks. 
His estate, Sir John told my Cousin, is full as considerable
as reported. And Mr. Reeves, after Sir
John went away, said, What a glory will it be to you,
Cousin Byron, to reform such a man, and make his
great fortune a blessing to multitudes; as I am sure
would be your endeavour to do, were you Lady Pollexfen! 
But, my Lucy, were Sir Hargrave king of one half
of the globe, I would not go to the altar with him. 
But if he be a very troublesome man, what shall I
say to him? I can deal pretty well with those, who
will be kept at arms length; but I own, I should be
very much perplex'd with resolute wretches. The civility
I think myself obliged to pay every one who professes
a regard for me, might subject me to inconveniencies
with violent spirits, which, protected as I have
been by my Uncle Selby, and my good Mr. Deane,
I never yet have known. O my Lucy, to what evils,
but for that protection, might I not, as a sole, an independent
young woman, have been exposed? Since
men, many men, are to be look'd upon as savages, 

as wild beasts of the desart; and a single and independent
woman they hunt after as prey. 
To have done with Sir Hargrave for the present, and
I wish I may be able to say for ever; early in the
morning, a billet was brought from him to Mr. Reeves,
excusing himself from paying him a visit that morning
(as he had intended) by reason of the sudden and
desperate illness of a relation, whose seat was near
Reading, with whom he had large concerns, and who
was desirous to see him before he died. As it was
impossible that he could return under three days,
which, he said, would appear as three years to him,
and he was obliged to set out that moment; he could
not dispense with himself for putting in his claim, as
he called it, to Miss Byron's favour, and confirming
his declaration of yesterday. In very high strains, he
professed himself her admirer; and begg'd Mr. and
Mrs. Reeves's interest with her. One felicity, he
said, he hoped for from his absence, which was, that
as Miss Byron, and Mr. and Mrs. Reeves, would have
time to consider of his offers; he presum'd to hope
he should not be subjected to a repulse. 
And now, my Lucy, you have before you as good
an account as I can give you of my two new lovers. 
How I shall manage with them, I know not: But I
begin to think that those young women are happiest,
whose friends take all the trouble of this sort upon
them; only consulting their daughters inclinations as
preliminaries are adjusting. 
My friends indeed pay an high compliment to my
discretion, when they so generously allow me to judge
for myself: And we young women are fond of being
our own mistresses: But I must say, that to me
this compliment has been and is a painful one; for
two reasons; That I cannot but consider their goodness
as a task upon me, which requires my utmost circumspection,
as well as gratitude; and that they have
shewn more generosity in dispensing with their authority, 

than I have done whenever I have acted so as to
appear, tho' but to appear, to accept of the dispensation:
Let me add besides, that now, when I find myself
likely to be addressed to by mere strangers, by
men who grew not into my knowlege insensibly, as
our neighbours Greville, Fenwick, and Orme, did,
I cannot but think it has the appearance of confidence,
to stand out to receive, as a creature uncontroulable,
the first motions to an address of this awful nature. 
Awful indeed might it be called, were one's heart to
incline towards a particular person. 
Allow me then for the future, my revered Grandmamma,
and you my beloved and equally honoured
Uncle and Aunt Selby, allow me, to refer myself to
you, if any person offers to whom I may happen to
have no strong objections. As to Mr. Fowler, and the
Baronet, I must now do as well as I can with them. 
It is much easier for a young woman to say No, than
Yes. But for the time to come I will not have the
assurance to act for myself. I know your partiality
for your Harriet, too well, to doubt the merit of your
recommendation. 
As Mr. and Mrs. Reeves require me to shew them
what I write, they are fond of indulging me in the
employment. You will therefore be the less surpris'd
that I write so much in so little a time. Miss Byron is
in her Closet; Miss Byron is writing; is an excuse
sufficient, they seem to think, to every-body, because
they allow it to be one to them: But besides, I know
they believe they oblige you all by the opportunity they
so kindly give me of shewing my Duty and Love,
where so justly due. 
I am, however, surpris'd at casting my eye back. 
—Two sheets! and such a quantity before! Unconscionable,
say; and let me, Echo-like, repeat, Unconscionable 
Harriet Byron. 

Sunday Night. 
Letters from Northamptonshire! by Farmer Jenkins. 
I kiss the seals. What agreeable things, now,
has my Lucy to say to her Harriet? Disagreeable
ones she cannot write, if all my beloved friends
are well. 

