



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, May 2. 
Just as I had sealed up the inclosed, comes a letter
to my beloved, in a cover to me, directed to
Lord M.'s. From whom, thinkest thou? —From
Mrs. Howe!— 
And what the contents! 
How should I know, unless the dear creature had
communicated them to me? But a very cruel letter
I believe it is, by the effect it had upon her. The
tears ran down her cheeks as she read it; and her colour
changed several times. No end of her persecutions,
I think. 
‘What a cruelty in her fate!’ said the sweet lamenter. 
—‘Now the only comfort of her life must
be given up!’ 
Miss Howe's correspondence, no doubt. 
But should she be so much grieved at this? This
correspondence was prohibited before, and that, to the
daughter, in the strongest terms: But yet carried on
by both: Altho' a brace of impeccables, and please
ye. Could they expect, that a mother would not
vindicate her authority? —And finding her prohibition
ineffectual with her perverse daughter, was it not reasonable
to suppose she would try what effect it would
have upon her daughter's friend? —And now I believe
the end will be effectually answer'd: For my
beloved, I dare say, will make a point of conscience
of it. 
I hate cruelty, especially in women; and should
have been more concerned for this instance of it in
Mrs. Howe, had I not had a stronger instance of the
same in my beloved to Miss Partington; for how did
she know, since she was so much afraid for herself, 

whom Dorcas might let in to that innocent and less
watchful young lady? But nevertheless I must needs
own, that I am not very sorry for this prohibition, let
it originally come from the Harlowes, or from whom
it will; because I make no doubt, that it is owing to
Miss Howe, in a great measure, that my beloved is
so much upon her guard, and thinks so hardly of me. 
And who can tell, as characters here are so tender,
and some disguises so flimsy, what consequences might
follow this undutiful correspondence? —I say, therefore,
I am not sorry for it: Now will she have nobody
to compare notes with: No-body to alarm her: 
And I may be saved the guilt and disobligation of inspecting
into a correspondence that has long made me
uneasy. 
How every thing works for me! —Why will this
charming creature make such contrivances necessary,
as will increase my trouble, and my guilt too, as some
would account it? But why, rather I would ask, will
she fight against her stars?— 