



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Feb. 24. 
They drive on here at a furious rate. The
man lives here, I think. He courts them, and
is more and more a favourite. Such Terms, such
Settlements! That's the cry. 
O my dear, that I had not reason to deplore the
family-fault, immensely rich as they all are! But this
I may the more unreservedly say to you, as we have
often joined in the same concern: I, for a Father and
Uncles; you, for a Mother; in every other respect
faultless. 

Hitherto, I seem to be delivered over to my Brother,
who pretends as great Love to me as ever. 
You may believe, I have been very sincere with
him. But he affects to railly me, and not to believe
it possible, that one so dutiful and so discreet as his
Sister Clary can resolve to disoblige all her friends. 
Indeed, I tremble at the prospect before me; for
it is evident that they are strangely determined. 
My Father and Mother industriously avoid giving
me opportunity of speaking to them alone. They ask
not for my approbation, intending, as it should seem,
to suppose me into their will. And with them I shall
hope to prevail, or with nobody. They have not
the interest in compelling me, as my Brother and Sister
have: I say less therefore to them, reserving my whole
force for an audience of my Father, if he will permit
me a patient ear. How difficult is it, my dear, to
give a negative where both duty and inclination join
to make one wish to oblige! 
I have already stood the shock of three of this
man's particular visits, besides my share in his more
general ones; and find it is impossible I should ever
endure him. He has but a very ordinary share of
understanding; is very illiterate; knows nothing
but the value of Estates, and how to improve them,
and what belongs to Land-jobbing and Husbandry. 
Yet am I as one stupid, I think. They have begun
so cruelly with me, that I have not spirit enough to
assert my own Negative. 
They had endeavoured it seems to influence my
good Mrs. Norton before I came home—So intent
are they to carry their point! And her opinion not
being to their liking, she has been told that she would
do well to decline visiting here for the present: Yet
she is the person of all the world, next to my Mother,
the most likely to prevail upon me, were the measures
they are engaged in reasonable measures, or such as
she could think so. 

My Aunt likewise having said that she did not think
her Niece could ever be brought to like Mr. Solmes,
has been obliged to learn another lesson. 
I am to have a visit from her to-morrow. And,
since I have refused so much as to hear from my Brother
and Sister what the noble Settlements are to be,
she is to acquaint me with the particulars; and to receive
from me my determination: For my Father, I
am told, will not have patience but to suppose that I
shall stand in opposition to his will. 
Mean time it has been signified to me, that it will
be acceptable if I do not think of going to church
next Sunday. 
The same signification was made me for last Sunday; 
and I obeyed. They are apprehensive that
Mr. Lovelace will be there with design to come home
with me. 
Help me, dear Miss Howe, to a little of your
charming spirit: I never more wanted it. 
The man, this Solmes, you may suppose, has no
reason to boast of his progress with me. He has not
the sense to say any-thing to the purpose. His courtship
indeed is to them; and my Brother pretends to
court me as his proxy, truly! —I utterly to my Brother
reject his address; but thinking a person so well
received and recommended by all my family, entitled
to good manners, all I say against him is affectedly
attributed to coyness: And he, not being sensible of
his own imperfections, believes that my avoiding him
when I can, and the reserves I express, are owing to
nothing else: —For, as I said, all his courtship is to
them; and I have no opportunity of saying No, to
one who asks me not the question. And so, with an
air of mannish superiority, he seems rather to pity the
bashful girl, than to apprehend that he shall not succeed. 
February 25. 
I have had the expected conference with my
Aunt. 

I have been obliged to hear the man's proposals
from her; and have been also told what their motives
are for espousing his interest with so much warmth. 
I am even loth to mention how equally unjust it is
for him to make such offers, or for those I am bound
to reverence to accept of them. I hate him more than
before. One great Estate is already obtained at the
expence of the relations to it, tho' distant relations; 
my Brother's, I mean, by his Godmother: And this
has given the hope, however chimerical that hope,
of procuring others; and that my own at least may
revert to the family. And yet in my opinion the
World is but one great family. Originally it was so. 
What then is this narrow selfishness that reigns in
us, but relationship remembred against relationship
forgot? 
But here, upon my absolute refusal of him upon any
terms, have I had a signification made me that wounds
me to the heart. How can I tell it you? Yet I must. 
It is, my dear, that I must not for a month to come,
or till licence obtained, correspond with any-body out
of the house. 
My Brother, upon my Aunt's report (made, however,
as I am informed, in the gentlest manner, and
even giving remote hopes, which she had no commission
from me to give) brought me, in authoritative
terms, the prohibition. 
Not to Miss Howe? said I. 
No, not to Miss Howe, Madam, tauntingly: For
have you not acknowleged, that Lovelace is a favourite
there? 
See, my dear Miss Howe!— 
And do you think, Brother, this is the way— 
Do you look to that. —But your Letters will be
stopt, I can tell you. —And away he flung. 
My Sister came to me soon after—Sister Clary, you
are going on in a fine way, I understand. But as
there are people who are supposed to harden you against 

your duty, I am to tell you, that it will be taken well
if you avoid visits or visitings for a week or two till
further order. 
Can this be from those who have authority— 
Ask them; ask them, child, with a twirl of her
finger. —I have delivered my message. Your Father
will be obeyed. He is willing to hope you to be all
obedience, and would prevent all incitements to refractoriness. 
I know my duty, said I; and hope I shall not find
impossible conditions annexed to it. 
A pert young creature, vain and conceited, she
called me. I was the only judge, in my own wise
opinion, of what was right and fit. She, for her part,
had long seen into my specious ways: And now I
should shew every-body what I was at bottom. 
Dear Bella, said I! hands and eyes lifted up—why
all this? —Dear, dear Bella, why— 
None of your dear, dear Bella's to me. —I tell you,
I see thro' your witchcrafts [That was her strange
word]. And away she flung; adding, as she went,
And so will every-body else very quickly, I dare say. 
Bless me, said I to myself, what a Sister have I! — 
How have I deserved this? 
Then I again regretted my Grandfather's too distinguishing
goodness to me. 
Feb. 25. in the Evening. 
What my Brother and Sister have said against me
I cannot tell: —But I am in heavy disgrace with my
Father. 
I was sent for down to Tea. I went with a very
chearful aspect: But had occasion soon to change it. 
Such a Solemnity in every-body's countenance! — 
My Mother's eyes were fixed upon the tea-cups; 
and when she looked up, it was heavily, as if her eyelids
had weights upon them; and then not to me. 
My Father sat half-aside in his elbow-chair, that his 

head might be turned from me; his hands clasped,
and waving, as it were, up and down; his fingers,
poor dear gentleman! in motion, as if angry to the
very ends of them. My Sister sat swelling. My
Brother looked at me with scorn, having measured me,
as I may say, with his eyes as I entered, from head to
foot. My Aunt was there, and looked upon me
as if with kindness restrained, bending coldly to my
compliment to her as she sat; and then cast an eye
first on my Brother, then on my Sister, as if to give
the reason [So I am willing to construe it] of her
unusual stiffness. —Bless me, my dear! that they should
chuse to intimidate rather than invite a mind, till now,
not thought either unpersuadable or ungenerous! 
I took my seat. Shall I make Tea, Madam, to
my Mother? —I always used, you know, my dear,
to make Tea. 
No! a very short sentence, in one very short word,
was the expressive answer. And she was pleased to
take the canister in her own hand. 
My Brother bid the Footman who attended, leave
the room. I, said he, will pour out the water. 
My heart was up at my mouth. I did not know what
to do with myself. What is to follow? thought I. 
Just after the second dish, out stept my Mother— 
A word with you, Sister Hervey! taking her in her
hand. Presently my Sister dropt away. Then my
Brother. So I was left alone with my Father. 
He looked so very sternly, that my heart failed me
as twice or thrice I would have addressed myself to
him: Nothing but solemn silence on all hands having
passed before. 
At last, I asked, If it were his pleasure that I should
pour him out another dish? 
He answered me with the same angry monosyllable,
which I had received from my Mother before; and
then arose, and walked about the room. I arose too,
with intent to throw myself at his feet; but was too 

much over-awed by his sternness, even to make such
an expression of my duty to him as my heart overflowed
with. 
At last, as he supported himself, because of his
gout, on the back of a chair, I took a little more
courage; and approaching him, besought him to
acquaint me in what I had offended him? 
He turned from me, and in a strong voice, Clarissa
Harlowe, said he, know, that I will be obeyed. 
God forbid, Sir, that you should not! —I have
never yet opposed your will— 
Nor I your whimsies, Clarissa Harlowe, interrupted
he. —Don't let me run the fate of all who
shew indulgence to your Sex; To be the more contradicted
for mine to you. 
My Father, you know, my dear, has not (any
more than my Brother) a kind opinion of our Sex; 
altho' there is not a more condescending Wife in the
world than my Mother. 
I was going to make protestations of duty—No
protestations, girl! No words! I will not be prated
to! I will be obeyed! I have no child, I will have no
child, but an obedient one. 
Sir, you never had reason, I hope— 
Tell me not what I never had, but what I have,
and what I shall have. 
Good Sir, be pleased to hear me—My Brother and
my Sister, I fear— 
Your Brother and Sister shall not be spoken against,
girl! —They have a just concern for the honour of
my Family. 
And I hope, Sir— 
Hope nothing. —Tell me not of hopes, but of facts. 
I ask nothing of you but what is in your power to
comply with, and what it is your duty to comply with. 
Then, Sir, I will comply with it—But yet I hope
from your goodness— 
No expostulations! No but's, girl! No qualifyings! 

I will be obeyed, I tell you; and chearfully too!— 
or you are no child of mine! 
I wept. 
Let me beseech you, my dear and ever-honoured
Papa (and I dropt down on my knees) that I may
have only yours and my Mamma's will, and not my
Brother's, to obey. 
I was going on; but he was pleased to withdraw,
leaving me on the floor; saying, That he would not
hear me thus by subtilty and cunning aiming to distinguish
away my duty; repeating, that he would be
obeyed. 
My heart is too full;—so full, that it may endanger
my duty, were I to try to unburden it to you on this
occasion: So I will lay down my pen. —But can— 
Yet, positively, I will lay down my pen!— 