


Miss Byron, To Lady G. 


Selby-house, Thursday, Oct. 12.
My dear Lady G.
I expect your brother every hour. I hope he comes
in pursuance of Letters from Italy! —May it be
so! and such as will not abate his welcome! 
We heard by accident of his approach, by a farmer,
tenant to my uncle; who saw a fine gentleman, very
handsomely attended, alight, as he left Stratford, at
the very inn where we baited on our return from London. 
As a dinner was preparing for him, perhaps,
my dear, he will dine in the very room we dined in
at that time. The farmer had the curiosity to ask 

who he was; and was answered by the most courteous
gentleman's servants he ever spoke to, that they
had the honour to serve Sir Charles Grandison. And
the farmer having said he was of Northampton; one
of them asked him, How far Selby-house was from
that town? The farmer was obliged to hurry home
on his own affairs; and meeting my uncle with Mr.
Deane, and my cousin James Selby, taking an airing
on horseback, told him the visiter he was likely to
have. My uncle instantly dispatched his servant to us
with the tidings, and that he was gone to meet him,
in hopes of conducting him hither. 
This news gave me so much emotion, being not
well before, that my aunt advised me to retire to my
closet, and endeavour to quiet my spirits. 
Here then I am, my dear Lady G. and the writing-implements
being always at hand in this place, I took
up my pen. It is not possible for me to write at this
time, but to you, and on this subject. It is good for
a busy mind to have something to be employed in; 
and I think, now I am amusing myself on paper, my
heart is a little more governable than it was. 
I am glad we heard of his coming before we saw
him. But surely Sir Charles Grandison should not
have attempted to surprise us: Should he, my dear? 
Does it not look like the pride of a man assured of a
joyful welcome? I have read of Princes, who, acquainted
with their Ladies by picture only, and having
been married by proxy, have set out to their frontiers
incognito, and in disguise have affected to surprise the
poor apprehensive bride. —But here, not only circumstances
differ, since there has been no betrothment; 
but were he of princely rank, I should have expected
a more delicate treatment from him.— 
* *
How will the consciousness of inferiority and obligation
set a proud and punctilious mind upon hunting
for occasions to justify its caprices! —A servant of 

Sir Charles is just arrived with a billet directed for my
uncle Selby. My aunt opened it. It is dated from
Stratford. The contents are, after compliments of
enquiry of our healths, to acquaint my uncle, that he
shall put up at the George at Northampton, this night; 
and hopes to be allowed to pay his compliments to us
to-morrow morning, at breakfast: So he did not intend
to give himself the consequence, of which my
capricious heart was so apprehensive. Yet then, as if
resolved to find fault, Is not this a little too parading
for his natural freedom? thought I: Or does he think
we should not be able to outlive our joyful surprize, if
he gave us not notice of his arrival in these parts before
he saw us? —O Clementina! —Goddess! Angel! 
What a mere mortal, what a woman, dost thou make
the poor Harriet Byron appear in her own eyes! How
apprehensive of coming after thee! The sense I have
of my own littleness, will make me little, indeed! 
Well, but I presume, that if my uncle and Mr.
Deane meet him, they will prevail on him to come
hither this night: Yet I suppose he must be allowed
to go to the proposed inn afterwards. —But here, he is
come! —Come, indeed! —My uncle in the chariot
with him! My cousin and Mr. Deane, Sally tells me,
just alighted. Sally adores Sir Charles Grandison— 
Begone, Sally. Thy emotions, foolish wench, add
to those of thy mistress!— 
* *
That I might avoid the appearance of affectation,
I was going down to welcome him, when I met my
uncle on the stairs. Niece Byron, said he, you have
not done justice to Sir Charles Grandison. I thought
your Love-sick heart (What words were these, my
dear! and at that moment too!) must have been partial
to him. He prevailed on me to go into his chariot. 
You may think yourself very happy. For fifteen
miles together did he talk of nobody but you. 
Let me go down with you: Let me present you to
him. 

I had before besought my spirits to befriend me, but
for one half-hour. Surely there is nothing so unwelcome
as an unseasonable jest. Present me to him! 
Love-sick heart! O my uncle! thought I. I was unable
to proceed. I hastened back to my closet, as
much disconcerted as a child could be, who, having
taken pains to get its lesson by heart, dashed by a
chiding countenance, forgot every syllable of it when
it came to say it. You know, my dear, that I had
not of some time been well. My spirits were weak,
and joy was almost as painful to me as grief could
have been. 
My aunt came up—My love, why don't you come
down? —What now! Why in tears? —You will appear,
to the finest man I ever saw in my life, very particular! 
—Mr. Deane is in love with him: Your cousin
James— 
Dear madam, I am already, when I make comparisons
between him and myself, humbled enough
with his excellencies. I did intend to avoid particularity; 
but my uncle has quite disconcerted me—Yet
he always means well: I ought not to complain. I
attend you, madam. 
Can you, Lady G. forgive my pride, my petulance? 
My aunt went down before me. Sir Charles
hastened to me, the moment I appeared, with an air
of respectful love. 
He took my hand, and bowing upon it, I rejoice to
see my dear Miss Byron; and to see her so well. How
many sufferers must there be, when you suffer! 
I bid him welcome to England: I hope he heard
me: I could not help speaking low: He must observe
my discomposure. He led me to a seat, and sat down
by me, still holding my hand. I withdrew it not
presently, lest he should think me precise: But, as
there were so many persons present, I thought it was
free in Sir Charles Grandison. Yet perhaps he could 

not well quit it, as I did not withdraw it; so that the
fault might be rather in my passiveness, than in his
forwardness. 
However, I asked my aunt afterwards, If his looks
were not those of a man assured of success; as indeed
he might be from my grandmother's Letter, and my
silence to his. She said, there was a manly freedom
in his address to me; but that it had such a mixture of
tenderness in it, that never, in her eyes, was freedom
so becoming. While he was restrained by his situation,
added she, no wonder that he treated you with
respect only, as a Friend; but now he finds himself at
liberty to address you, his behaviour ought, as a Lover,
to have just been what it was. 
Sir Charles led me into talk, by mentioning you and
Lady L. your two Lords, and my Emily. 
My uncle and aunt withdrew, and had some little
canvassings, it seems, [All their canvassings are those
of assured Lovers] about the propriety of my uncle's
invitation to Sir Charles to take up his residence, while
he was in these parts, at Selby-house. My uncle, at
coming in, had directed Sir Charles's servants to put
up their horses: But they, not having their master's
orders to do so, held themselves in readiness to attend
him; as they knew that Sir Charles had given directions
to his gentleman, Richard Saunders, who
brought the billet to my uncle, to go back to North-hampton,
and provide apartments for him at the
George inn there. 
My aunt, who you know is a perfect judge of
points of decorum, pleaded to my uncle, that it was
too well known among our select friends, by Mr. Greville's
means, that Sir Charles had never before made
his addresses to me; and that therefore, tho' he was
to be treated as a man whose alliance is considered as
an honour to us; yet that some measures were to be
kept, as to the look of the thing; and that the world
might not conclude that I was to be won at his very 

first appearance; and the rather, as Mr. Greville's violence,
as well as virulence, was so well known. 
My uncle was petulant. I, said he, am always in
the wrong: You women, never. He ran into all
those peculiarities of words, for which you have so
often raillied him—His adsheart, his female scrupulosities,
his What a pize, his hatred of shilly-shally's and
fiddle-faddles, and the rest of our female nonsenses, as
he calls them. He hoped to salute his niece, as Lady
Grandison, in a fortnight: What a duce was the matter
it could not be so, both sides now of a mind? — 
He warned my aunt, and bid her warn me, against
affectation, now the crisis was at hand. Sir Charles,
he said, would think meanly of us, if we were silly:
And then came in another of his odd words: Sir
Charles, he said, had been so much already bam-boozled,
that he would not have patience with us; 
and therefore, and for all these reasons, as he called
them, he desired that Sir Charles might not be suffered
to go out of the house, and to an inn; and this as
well for the propriety of the thing, as for the credit of
his own invitation to him. 
My aunt replied, that Sir Charles himself would expect
delicacy from us. It was evident, that he expected
not (no doubt for the sake of the world's eye)
to reside in the house with me on his first visit, by his
having ordered his servant who brought the billet, to
take apartments for him at Northampton, even not
designing to visit us over-night, had he not been met
by Mr. Deane and himself, and persuaded to come. 
In short, my dear, said my aunt, I am as much concerned
about Sir Charles's own opinion of our conduct,
as for that of the world: Yet you know, that every
genteel family around us expect examples from us, and
Harriet. If Sir Charles is not with us, the oftener he
visits us, the more respectful it will be construed. I
hope he will live with us all day, and every day: But
indeed it must be as a visiter, not as an inmate. 

Why then bring me off some-how, that I may not
seem the blunderer you are always making me by your
documents—Will you do that? 
When my uncle and aunt came in, they found Sir
Charles, and Mr. Deane, and me, talking. Our subject
was, the happiness of Lord and Lady W. and the
whole Mansfield family, with whom Mr. Deane, who
began the discourse, is well acquainted. Sir Charles
arose, at their entrance. The night draws on, said
he—I will do myself the honour of attending you,
madam, and this happy family, at tea in the morning. 
—My good Mr. Selby, I had a design upon you,
and Mr. Deane, and upon you, young gentleman (to
my cousin James) as I told you on the road; but it
is now too late. Adieu, till to morrow. —He bowed
to each, to me profoundly, kissing my hand, and went
to his chariot. 
My uncle whispered my aunt, as we all attended
him to that door of the hall which leads into the
court-yard, to invite him to stay. Hang punctilio!
he said. 
My aunt wanted to speak to Sir Charles; yet, she
owned, she knew not what to say: Such a conscious
aukwardness had indeed possession of us both, as made
us uneasy: We thought all was not right; yet knew
not that we were wrong. But when Sir Charles's
chariot drove away with him, and we took our seats,
and supper was talked of, we all of us shewed dissatisfaction; 
and my uncle was quite out of humour. 
He would give a thousand pounds, he said, with all his
heart and soul, to find in the morning, Sir Charles, instead
of coming hither to breakfast, had set out on his
return to London. 
For my part, Lady G. I could not bear these recriminations. 
I begged to be excused sitting down to
supper. I was not well; and this odd situation added
uneasiness to my indisposition: A dissatisfaction, that I
find will mingle with our highest enjoyments: Nor 

were the beloved company I left, happier. They canvassed
the matter, with so much good-natured earnestness,
that the supper was taken away, as it was brought,
at a late hour. 
What, my dear Lady G. in your opinion, should
we have done? Were we right, or were we wrong? 
Over-delicacy, as I have heard observed, is underdelicacy. 
You, my dear, your Lord, our Emily,
and Dr. Bartlett, all standing in so well-known a degree
of relation to Sir Charles Grandison, were our
most welcome guests: And was not the brother to be
received with equal warmth of respect? —O no! 
Custom, it seems, tyrant custom, and the apprehended
opinion of the world, obliged us (especially as so much
bustle had been made about me, by men so bold, so
impetuous) to shew him—Shew him what? —In
effect, that we had expectations upon him, which we
could not have upon the brother and sister; and therefore,
because we hoped he would be more near, we
were to keep him at the greater distance! —What an
indirect acknowlegement was this in his favour, were
there room for him to doubt! Which, however, there
could not be. What would I give, said my aunt to
me, this moment, to know his thoughts of the matter! 
Lucy and Nancy will be here at dinner; so will my
grandmamma. She has, with her usual enquiries
after my health, congratulated me by this line, sealed
up. 
‘I long, my best love, to embrace you, on the
joyful occasion. I need say no more, than that I
think myself, at this instant, one of the happiest of
women. I shall dine with you to-day. Adieu, till
then, joy of my heart, my own Harriet!’ 
Lucy, in a Billet just now brought, written for herself
and Nancy, on the intelligence sent her of Sir
Charles's arrival, expresses herself thus: 


‘Our joy is extreme! Blessings on the man! 
Blessings attend our Harriet! They must: Sir Charles
Grandison brings them with himself. Health now
will return to our lovely cousin. We long to see
the man of whom we have heard so much. We
will dine with you. Tell Sir Charles, before we
come, that you love us dearly: It shall make us
redouble our endeavours to deserve your love. Your
declared friendship, and love of us, will give consequence
to 
‘Lucy, Nancy Selby.’ 

We are now in expectation—My aunt and I, tho'
early risers, hurried ourselves to get every-thing, that
however is never out of order, in higher order. Both
of us have a kind of consciousness of defect, where
yet we cannot find reason for it: If we did, we should
supply it. Yet we are careful that every-thing has a
natural, not an extraordinary, appearance—Ease, with
propriety, shall be our aim. My aunt says, that were
the King to make us a visit, she is sure she could not
have a greater desire to please. —I will go down, that I
may avoid the appearance of parade and reserve, when
he comes. 
* *
Here, in her closet, again, is your poor Harriet. 
Surely the determined single state is the happiest of
lives, to young women, who have the greatness of
mind to be above valuing the admiration and flatteries
of the other Sex. What tumults, what a contrariety
of passions, break the tranquillity of the woman who
yields up her heart to Love? —No Sir Charles Grandison,
my dear! —Yet Ten o'clock! —He is a very
prudent man! —No expectations hurry or discompose
him! Charming steadiness of Soul! A fine thing for
himself, but far otherwise for the woman, when a
man is secure! He will possibly ask me, and hold 

again my passive hand, in presence of half a score of
my friends, Whether I was greatly uneasy because of
his absence? 
But let me try to excuse him. May he not have
forgot his engagement? May he not have overslept
himself? —Some agreeable dream of the Bologna family
—I am offended at him—Did he learn this tranquillity
in Italy? —O no, no, Lady G.! 
I now cannot help looking back for other faults in
him, with regard to me. My memory is not, however,
so malicious, as I would have it. But do you
think every man, in the like situation, would have
stopt at Stratford, to dine by himself? —Not but your
brother can be very happy in his own company. If he
cannot, who can? But, as to that, his horses might
require rest, as well as baiting: One knows not in
how short a time he might have prosecuted his journey
so far. He who will not suffer the noblest of all animals
to be deprived of an ornament, would be merciful
to them in greater instances. He says, that he
cannot bear indignity from superiors. Neither can we. 
In that light he appears to us. But why so? —My
heart, Lady G. begins to swell, I assure you; and it
is twice as big as it was last night. 
My uncle, before I came up, sat with his watch in
his hand, from half an hour after nine, till near ten,
telling the minutes as they crept. Mr. Deane often
looked at me, and at my aunt, as if to see how we
bore it. I blushed; looked silly, as if your brother's
faults were mine. —Over in a fortnight! cried my
uncle; ads-heart, I believe it will be half a year before
we shall come to the question. But Sir Charles,
to be sure, is offended. Your confounded female
niceties! 
My heart rose—Let him, if he dare, thought the
proud Harriet. 
God grant, added my uncle, that he may be gone
up to town again! 

Perhaps, said Mr. Deane, he is gone, by mistake,
to Mrs. Shirley's. 
We then endeavoured to recollect the words of his
self-invitation hither. My cousin James proposed to
take horse, and go to Northampton, to inform himself
of the occasion of his not coming: Some misfortune,
perhaps. 
Had he not servants, my aunt asked, one of whom
he might have sent? —Shall my cousin Jemmy go,
however, Harriet, said she? 
No, indeed, answered I, with an air of anger— 
My teazing uncle broke out into a loud laugh, which
however had more of vexedness than mirth in it. — 
He is certainly gone to London, Harriet! Just as I
said, dame Selby! —Certainly tearing up the road; his
very horses resenting, for their master, your scrupulosities. 
You'll hear from him next, at London, my
life for yours, niece—Hah, hah, hah! What will your
grandmamma say, by-and-by? Lucy, Nancy, how
will they stare! Last night's supper, and this-day's dinner,
will be alike served in, and taken away. 
I could not stand all this: I arose from my seat. 
Are you not unkind, Sir? said I to my uncle, courtesying
to him however; and, desiring his and Mr.
Deane's excuse, quitted the breakfasting parlour. 
Teazing man! said my aunt. Mr. Deane also
blamed him; gently, however; for every-body acknowleges
his good heart, and natural good temper. 
My aunt followed me to the door; and taking
my hand, Harriet, said she, speaking low, Not Sir
Charles Grandison himself shall call you his, if he is
capable of treating you with the least indifference. I
understand not this, added she: He cannot surely be
offended. —I hope all will be cleared up before your
grandmamma comes: She will be very jealous of the
honour of her girl. 
I answered not: I could not answer: But hastened
up to my place of refuge; and, after wiping from my 

cheeks a few tears of real vexation, took up my pen. 
You love to know my thoughts, as occasions arise. 
You bid me continue to write to the moment. —Here
comes my aunt. 
* *
My aunt came in, with a Billet in her hand—Come
down to breakfast, my dear: Sir Charles comes not
till dinner-time. Read this: It was brought by one
of his servants. He left it with Andrew. The dunce
let him go. I wanted to have asked him a hundred
questions. 

To Mrs. Selby.
Dear Madam,
I Am broke in upon by a most impertinent visiter. 
Such, at this time, must have been the dearest
friend I have in the world. You will be so good as
to excuse my attendance till dinner-time. For the
past two hours I thought every moment of disengaging
myself, or I should have sent sooner. 
Ever Yours, &c. 

What visiter, said I, can make a man stay, against
his mind? Who can get rid politely of an impertinent
visiter, if Sir Charles Grandison cannot, on a previous
engagement? —But come, madam, I attend you. — 
Down we went. 
My uncle was out of patience. I was sorry for it. 
I tried to make the best of it; yet, but to pacify him,
should, perhaps, have had petulance enough myself to
make the worst of it. —Oy, oy, with all my heart,
said he, in answer to my excuses, let us hear what Sir
Charles has to say for himself. But, old as I am,
were my dame Selby to give me another chance, no
man on earth, I can tell you, should keep me from a
previous engagement with my mistress. It is kind of
you, Harriet, to excuse him, however: Love hides a
multitude of faults. 

My aunt said not one syllable in behalf of Sir
Charles. She is vexed, and disappointed. 
We made a very short breakfasting; and looked
upon one another as people who would have helped
themselves, if they could. Mr. Deane, however,
would engage, he said, that we should be satisfied
with Sir Charles's excuses, when we came to hear
them. 
But, my dear, this man, this visiter, whoever he
is, must be of prodigious importance, to detain him,
from an engagement that I had hoped might have
been thought a first engagement;—yet owned to be
impertinent. And must not the accident be very uncommon,
that should bring such a one, stranger as Sir
Charles is, in his way? Yet this might very well
happen, my uncle observes, at an inn, whither we
thought fit to send him. 
Now I think of it, I was strangely disturbed last
night in my imperfect slumbers: Something, I
thought, was to happen to prevent me ever being his. 
But hence, Recollection! I chase thee from me. Yet
when realities disturb, shadows will officiously obtrude
on the busy imagination as realities. 
Friday, 12 o'Clock. 
My grandmamma is come—Lucy, Nancy, are
come—O how vexed at our disappointment and chagrin
are my two cousins! But my grandmamma joins
with Mr. Deane, to think the best. I have stolen up. 
But here, he is come! How shall I do to keep my
anger? He shall find me below. I will see how he
looks, at entrance among us—If he is careless—If he
makes slight excuses— 

