



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, April 20. 
Mr. Lovelace's servant is already returned with an
Answer from his friend Mr. Doleman, who has
taken pains in his enquiries, and is very particular. 
Mr. Lovelace brought me the Letter as soon as he had 

read it; and as he now knows that I acquaint you with
every-thing that offers, I desired him to let me send it
to you for your perusal. Be pleased to return it by the
first opportunity. You will see by it, that his friends
in town have a notion that we are actually married. 

To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
Tuesday Night, April 18. 
Dear Sir,
I am extremely rejoiced to hear, that we shall so
soon have you in town, after so long an absence. 
You will be the more welcome still, if what report
says, be true; which is, that you are actually married
to the fair Lady upon whom we have heard you make
such encomiums. Mrs. Doleman, and my Sister, both
wish you joy if you are; and joy upon your near prospect
if you are not. 
I have been in town for this week past, to get help,
if I could, from my paralytic complaints; and am in a
course for them. Which, nevertheless, did not prevent
me from making the desired enquiries. This is
the result. 
You may have a first floor, well-furnished, at a
Mercer's in Bedford-street, Covent-garden, with conveniencies
for servants: And these either by the quarter
or month. The terms according to the conveniencies
required. 
Mrs. Doleman has seen Lodgings in Norfolk-street,
and others in Cecil-street; but tho' the prospects to the
Thames and Surry-hills look inviting from both these
streets, yet I suppose they are too near the City. 
The owner of those in Norfolk-street would have
half the house go together. It would be too much for
your description therefore: And I suppose, that when
you think fit to declare your marriage, you will hardly
be in lodgings. 
Those in Cecil-street are neat and convenient. The
owner is a widow of good character; but she insists,
that you take them for a twelvemonth certain. 

You may have good accommodations in Dover-street,
at a widow's, the relict of an officer in the guards,
who dying soon after he had purchased his commission
(to which he had a good title by service, and which cost
him most part of what he had) she was obliged to lett
Lodgings. 
This may possibly be an objection. But she is very
careful, she says, that she takes no Lodgers, but of
figure and reputation. She rents two good houses, distant
from each other, only joined by a large handsome passage. 
The inner-house is the genteelest, and is very elegantly
furnished; but you may have the use of a very handsome
parlour in the outer-house, if you chuse to look into
the street. 
A little garden belongs to the inner-house, in which
the old gentlewoman has displayed a true female fancy; 
having crammed it with vases, flower-pots, and figures,
without number. 
As these Lodgings seemed to me the most likely to
please you, I was more particular in my enquiries about
them. The apartments she has to lett are in the inner-house: 
They are a dining-room, two neat parlours, a
withdrawing-room, two or three handsome bed-chambers; 
one with a pretty light closet in it, which looks
into the little garden; all furnished in taste. 
A dignified Clergyman, his wife, and maiden-daughter,
were the last who lived in them. They have but lately
quitted them, on his being presented to a considerable
Church-preferment in Ireland. The gentlewoman says,
that he took the Lodgings but for three months certain; 
but liked them and her usage so well, that he continued in
them two years; and left them with regret, tho' on so
good an account. She bragged, that this was the way of
all the Lodgers she ever had, who staid with her four
times as long as they at first intended. 
I had some knowlege of the Colonel, who was always
looked upon as a man of honour. His Relict I
never saw before. I think she has a masculine air, and 

is a little forbidding at first: But when I saw her behaviour
to two agreeable maiden gentlewomen, her
Husband's nieces, whom, for that reason, she calls
doubly hers, and heard their praises of her, I could impute
her very bulk to good humour; since we seldom
see your sour peevish people plump. She lives reputably,
and is, as I find, aforehand in the world. 
If these, or any other of the Lodgings I have mentioned,
be not altogether to your Lady's mind, she may
continue in them the less while, and chuse others for
herself. 
The widow consents that you should take them for a
month only, and what of them you please. The terms,
she says, she will not fall out upon, when she knows
what your Lady expects, and what her servants are to
do, or yours will undertake; for she observed, that servants
are generally worse to deal with, than their
masters or mistresses. 
The Lady may board or not, as she pleases. 
As we suppose you married, but that you have
reason, from family-differences, to keep it private for
the present, I thought it not amiss to hint as much to
the widow (but as uncertainty, however); and asked her,
if she could, in that case, accommodate you and your
servants, as well as the Lady and hers? She said, she
could; and wished, by all means, it were to be so; 
since the circumstance of a person's being single, if not
as well recommended as this Lady, was one of her usual
exceptions. 
If none of these Lodgings please, you need not doubt
very handsome ones in or near Hanover-Square, Soho-Square,
Golden-Square, or in some of the new streets
about Grosvenor-Square. And Mrs. Doleman, her
Sister, and myself, most cordially join to offer to your
good Lady the best accommodations we can make for
her at Uxbridge (and also for you, if you are the happy
man we wish you to be) till she fits herself more to her
mind. 

Let me add, that the Lodgings at the Mercer's,
those in Cecil-street, those at the widow's in Dover-street,
any of them, may be entered upon at a day's
warning. I am, my dear Sir, 
Your sincere and affectionate Friend and Servant,
Tho. Doleman. 
You will easily guess, my dear, when you have read
the Letter, which Lodgings I made choice of. But first,
to try him (as in so material a point I thought I could
not be too circumspect) I seemed to prefer those in
Norfolk-street, for the very reason the writer gives
why he thought I would not; that is to say, for its
neighbourhood to a City so well-governed as London is
said to be. Nor should I have disliked a Lodging in
the heart of it, having heard but indifferent accounts of
the liberties sometimes taken at the other end of the
town. —Then seeming to incline to the Lodgings in
Cecil-street—Then to the Mercer's. But he made no
visible preference: And when I asked his opinion of
the widow-gentlewoman's, he said, He thought those
the most to my taste and convenience: But as he hoped,
that I would think Lodgings necessary but for a very
little while, he knew not which to give his vote for. 
I then fixed upon the widow's; and he has written
accordingly to Mr. Doleman, making my compliments
to his Lady and Sister, for their kind offer. 
I am to have the dining-room, the bed-chamber
with the light closet (of which, if I stay any time at the
widow's, I shall make great use) and a servant's room; 
and we propose to set out on Saturday morning. As for
a maid-servant, poor Hannah's illness is a great disappointment
to me: But, as he observes, I can make
the widow satisfaction for one of hers, till I can get a
servant to my mind. And you know, I want not
much attendance. 
* *
Mr. Lovelace has just now, of his own accord,
given me five guineas for poor Hannah. I send them 

inclosed. Be so good as to cause them to be conveyed
to her; and to let her know from whom they came. 
He has obliged me much by this little mark of his
considerateness. Indeed I have had the better opinion
of him ever since he proposed her return to me. 
* *
I have just now another instance of his considerateness. 
He came to me, and said, that, on second thoughts,
he could not bear, that I should go up to town without
some attendant, were it but for the look of the thing
to the London widow and her nieces, who, according
to his friend's account, lived so genteelly; and especially
as I required him to leave me soon after I arrived there,
and so would be left alone among strangers. He therefore
thought, that I might engage Mrs. Sorlings to lend
me one of her two maids, or to let one of her Daughters
go up with me, and stay till I were provided. And
if the latter, the young gentlewoman, no doubt would
be glad of so good an opportunity to see the curiosities
of the town, and would be a proper attendant on the
same occasions. 
I told him, as I had done before, that the two young
gentlewomen were so equally useful in their way, and
servants in a busy farm were so little to be spared, that
I should be loth to take them off their laudable employments. 
Nor should I think much of diversions for one
while; and so the less want an attendant out of
doors. 
And now, my dear, lest any-thing should happen,
in so variable a situation as mine, to over-cloud my
prospects (which at present are more promising than
ever yet they have been since I quitted Harlowe-Place)
I will snatch the opportunity to subscribe myself. 
Your not unhoping, and
ever obliged Friend and Servant,
Cl. Harlowe. 