



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Monday, March 20. 
This Letter will account to you, my dear, for
my abrupt breaking off in the answer I was
writing to yours of yesterday; and which, possibly,
I shall not be able to finish, and send-you till to-morrow
or next day; having a great deal to say to the subjects
you put to me in it. What I am now to give
you are the particulars of another effort made by my
friends, thro' the good Mrs. Norton. 
It seems they had sent to her yesterday, to be here
this day, to take their instructions, and to try what she
could do with me. It would, at least, I suppose they
thought, have this effect; To render me inexcusable
with her; or to let her see, that there was no room for
the expostulations she had often wanted to make in
my favour to my Mother. 
The declaration, that my heart was free, afforded
them an argument to prove obstinacy and perverseness
upon me; since it could be nothing else that governed
me in my opposition to their wills, if I had no particular
esteem for another man: And now, that I have
given them reason (in order to obviate this argument)
to suppose that I have a preference to another, they 

are resolved to carry their schemes into execution as
soon as possible. And in order to this, they sent for
This good woman, for whom they know I have even
a filial regard. 
She found assembled my Father and Mother, my
Brother and Sister, my two Uncles, and my Aunt
Hervey. 
My Brother acquainted her with all that had passed
since she was last permitted to see me; with the contents
of my Letters avowing my regard to Mr. Lovelace
(as they all interpreted them); with the substance
of their Answers to them; and with their Resolutions. 
My Mother spoke next; and delivered herself to
this effect, as the good woman told me. 
After reciting how many times I had been indulged
in my refusals of different men, and the pains she had
taken with me, to induce me to oblige my whole family
in one instance out of five or six, and my obstinacy
upon it; ‘O my good Mrs. Norton, said the
dear Lady, could you have thought, that my Clarissa
and your Clarissa was capable of so determined
an opposition to the will of parents so indulgent to
her? But see what you can do with her. The matter
is gone too far to be receded from on our parts. 
Her Father had concluded every-thing with Mr.
Solmes, not doubting her compliance. Such noble
Settlements, Mrs. Norton, and such advantages to
the whole family! —In short, she has it in her power
to lay an obligation upon us all. Mr. Solmes, knowing
she has good principles, and hoping by his patience
now, and good treatment hereafter, to engage
her Gratitude, and by degrees her Love, is willing
to overlook All!—’ 
[Overlook All, my dear! Mr. Solmes to overlook
All! There's a word!] 
‘So, Mrs. Norton, if you are convinced, that it is
a Child's duty to submit to her Parents authority,
in the most important point as well as in the least, I 

beg you will try your influence over her: I have
none: Her Father has none: Her Uncles neither: 
Altho' it is her apparent interest to oblige us All; 
for, on that condition, her Grandfather's Estate is
not half of what, living and dying, is purposed to
be done for her. If any-body can prevail with her, it
is you; and I hope you will heartily enter upon this
task.’ 
The good woman asked, Whether she was permitted
to expostulate with them upon the occasion,
before she came up to me? 
My arrogant Brother told her, she was sent for to
expostulate with his Sister, and not with them. And
This, Goody Norton [She is always Goody with him!]
you may tell her, That the treaty with Mr. Solmes is
concluded: That nothing but her compliance with her
duty is wanting; of consequence, that there is no room
for your expostulation, or hers either. 
Be assured of This, Mrs. Norton, said my Father,
in an angry tone, that we will not be baffled by her. 
We will not appear like fools in This matter, and as
if we had no authority over our own Daughter. We
will not, in short, be bullied out of our child by a
cursed Rake, who had like to have killed our only
Son! —And so she had better make a merit of her
obedience: For comply she shall, if I live; independent
as she thinks my Father's indiscreet bounty
has made her of me, her Father. Indeed, since That,
she has never been what she was before. An unjust
bequest! —And it is likely to prosper accordingly! — 
But if she marry that vile Lovelace, I will litigate
every shilling with her: Tell her so; and that the
Will may be set aside, and shall. 
My Uncles joined, with equal heat. 
My Brother was violent in his declarations. 
My Sister put in with vehemence, on the same
side. 
My Aunt Hervey was pleased to say, There was 

no article so proper for Parents to govern in, as This
of Marriage: And it was very fit, mine should be
obliged. 
Thus instructed, the good woman came up to me. 
She told me all that had passed, and was very earnest
with me to comply; and so much justice did she to
the task imposed upon her, that I more than once
thought, that her own opinion went with theirs. But
when she saw what an immoveable aversion I had to
the man, she lamented with me their determined resolution: 
And then examined into the sincerity of my
declaration, that I would gladly compound with them
by living single. Of this being satisfied, she was so
convinced that this offer, which, carried into execution,
would exclude Lovelace effectually, ought to be
accepted, that she would go down (altho' I told her,
it was what I had tendered over-and-over to no purpose)
and undertake to be guaranty for me on that
score. 
She went accordingly; but soon returned in tears; 
being used harshly for urging this alternative: —They
had a right to my obedience upon their own terms,
they said: My proposal was an artifice, only to gain
time: Nothing but marrying Mr. Solmes should do: 
They had told me so before: They should not be at
rest till it was done; for they knew what an interest
Lovelace had in my heart: I had as good as owned it
in my Letters to my Uncles, and Brother and Sister,
altho' I had most disingenuously declared otherwise to
my Mother. I depended, they said, upon their indulgence,
and my own power over them: They would
not have banished me from their presence, if they had
not known that their consideration for me was greater
than mine for them. And they would be obey'd, or I
never should be restored to their favour, let the consequence
be what it would. 
My Brother thought fit to tell the good woman,
that her whining nonsense did but harden me. There 

was a perverseness, he said, in female minds, a Tragedy-pride,
that would make a romantic young creature,
such a one as me, risque any-thing to obtain pity. 
I was of an age, and a turn [the insolent said] to be
fond of a Lover-like distress: And my grief (which
she pleaded) would never break my heart: I should
sooner break That of the best and most indulgent of
Mothers. He added, That she might once more go
up to me: But that, if she prevailed not, he should
suspect, that the man they all hated had found a way
to attach her to his interest. 
Every-body blamed him for this unworthy reflection; 
which greatly affected the good woman. But
nevertheless he said, and no-body contradicted him,
that if she could not prevail upon her sweet child [as
it seems she had fondly called me] she had best withdraw
to her own home, and there tarry till she was
sent for; and so leave her sweet child to her Father's
management. 
Sure no-body ever had so insolent, so hard-hearted
a Brother, as I have! So much resignation to be expected
from me! So much arrogance, and to so good
a woman, and of so fine an understanding, to be
allowed in him! 
She nevertheless told him, that however she might
be ridiculed for speaking of the sweetness of my disposition,
she must take upon her to say, that there never
was a sweeter in the Sex: And that she had ever found,
that by mild methods, and gentleness, I might at any
time be prevailed upon, even in points against my own
judgment and opinion. 
My Aunt Hervey hereupon said, It was worth while
to consider what Mrs. Norton said: And that she had
sometimes allowed herself to doubt, whether I had
been begun with by such methods as generous tempers
are only to be influenced by, in cases where their
hearts are supposed to be opposite to the will of their
friends. 

She had both my Brother and Sister upon her for
This: Who referred to my Mother, whether she had
not treated me with an indulgence that had hardly any
example? 
My Mother said, She must own, that no indulgence
had been wanting from her: But she must
needs say, and had often said it, that the reception I
met with on my return from Miss Howe, and the
manner in which the proposal of Mr. Solmes was made
to me (which was such as left nothing to my choice)
and before I had had an opportunity to converse with
him, were not what she had by any means approved of. 
She was silenced, you will guess by whom,—with,
My dear!—my dear! —You have ever something to
say, something to palliate, for this rebel of a girl! — 
Remember her treatment of you, of me! —Remember,
that the wretch, whom we so justly hate, would
not dare to persist in his purposes, but for her encouragement
of him, and obstinacy to us. —Mrs. Norton
[angrily to her] go up to her once more—And if
you think gentleness will do—you have a commission
to be gentle. —If it will not, never make use of that
plea again. 
Ay, my good woman, said my Mother, try your
force with her. My Sister Hervey and I will go up
to her, and bring her down in our hands, to receive
her Father's Blessing, and assurances of every-body's
Love, if she will be prevailed upon: And, in that case,
we will all love you the better for your good offices. 
She came up to me, and repeated all these passages
with tears: But I told her, that after what had passed
between us, she could not hope to prevail upon me to
comply with measures so wholly my Brother's; and
so much to my aversion. —And then folding me to
her maternal bosom, I leave you, my dearest Miss,
said she—I leave you, because I must! —But let me
beseech you to do nothing rashly; nothing unbecoming
your character. If all be true that is said, Mr. 

Lovelace cannot deserve you. If you can comply,
remember it is your duty to comply. They take not,
I own, the right method with so generous a spirit. 
But remember, that there would not be any merit in
your compliance, if it were not to be against your
own liking. Remember also, what is expected from
a character so extraordinary as yours: Remember, it
is in your power to unite or disunite your whole
family for ever. Altho' it should at present be disagreeable
to you to be thus compelled, your prudence,
I dare say, when you consider the matter seriously,
will enable you to get over all prejudices against the
one, and all prepossessions in favour of the other; 
And then the obligation you will lay all your family
under, will be not only meritorious in you, with regard
to them, but in a few months, very probably,
highly satisfactory, as well as reputable, to yourself. 
Consider, my dear Mrs. Norton, said I, only consider,
that it is not a small thing that is insisted upon; 
nor for a short duration: It is for my Life: Consider
too, that all This is owing to an over-bearing Brother,
who governs every-body. Consider how desirous I am
to oblige them, if a single Life, and breaking all correspondence
with the man they hate because my Brother
hates him, will do it. 
I consider every-thing, my dearest Miss: And, added
to what I have said, do you only consider, that if,
by pursuing your own will, and rejecting theirs, you
should be unhappy, you will be deprived of all that
consolation which those have, who have been directed
by their Parents, altho' the event prove not answerable
to their wishes. 
I must go, repeated she: —Your Brother will say
[and she wept] that I harden you by my whining nonsense. 
'Tis indeed hard, that so much regard should
be paid to the humours of one child; and so little to
the inclination of another. But let me repeat, that it
is your duty to acquiesce, if you can acquiesce: Your 

Father has given your Brother's schemes his sanction; 
and they are now his. Mr. Lovelace, I doubt, is not
a man that will justify your choice so much as he will
their dislike. It is easy to see that your Brother has a
view in discrediting you with all your friends, with
your Uncles in particular: But for that very reason,
you should comply, if possible, in order to disconcert
his ungenerous measures. I will pray for you; and
that is all I can do for you. I must now go down,
and make a report, that you are resolved never to have
Mr. Solmes—Must I? —Consider, my dear Miss
Clary—Must I? 
Indeed you must! —But of This I do assure you,
that I will do nothing to disgrace the part you have
had in my education. I will bear every-thing that shall
be short of forcing my hand into his who never can
have any share in my heart. I will try, by patient duty
by humility, to overcome them. But death will I chuse,
in any shape, rather than That man. 
I dread to go down, said she, with so determined an
answer: They will have no patience with me. —But
let me leave you with one observation, which I beg of
you always to bear in mind:— 
‘That persons of prudence, and distinguished talents,
like yours, seem to be sprinkled through the
world, to give credit, by their example, to Religion
and Virtue. When such persons wilfully err, how
great must be the fault! How ungrateful to that
God, who blessed them with such talents! What a
loss likewise to the world! What a wound to Virtue! 
—But this, I hope, will never be to be said of
Miss Clarissa Harlowe!’ 
I could give her no answer, but by my tears. And
I thought, when she went away, the better half of my
heart went with her. 
I listened to hear what reception she would meet
with below; and found it was just such a one as she
had apprehended. 

Will she, or will she not, be Mrs. Solmes? None
of your whining circumlocutions, Mrs. Norton! — 
[You may guess who said this] Will she, or will she
not, comply with her Parents will? 
This cut short all she was going to say. 
If I must speak so briefly, Miss will sooner die, than
have— 
Any-body but Lovelace! interrupted my Brother. —This, Madam, This, Sir, is your meek Daughter! 
This is Mrs. Norton's sweet child! Well, Goody,
you may return to your own habitation. I am empowered
to forbid you to have any correspondence
with this perverse girl for a month to come, as you
value the favour of our whole family, or of any individual
of it. 
And saying this, uncontradicted by any-body, he
himself shewed her to the door—No doubt, with all
that air of cruel insult, which the haughty Rich can
put on to the unhappy Low, who have not pleased
them. 
So here, my dear Miss Howe, am I deprived of the
advice of one of the most prudent and conscientious
women in the world, were I to have ever so much occasion
for it. 
I might indeed write (as I presume, under your
cover)
and receive her answers to what I should write. 
But should such a correspondence be charged upon her,
I know she would not be guilty of a falshood for the
world; nor even of an equivocation: And should she
own it after this prohibition, she would forfeit my Mother's
favour for ever. And in my dangerous fever,
some time ago, I engaged my Mother to promise me,
that, if I died before I could do any-thing for the good
woman, she would set her above want for the rest of
her life, should her eyes fail her, or sickness befal her,
and she could not provide for herself, as she now so
prettily does by her fine needleworks. 
What measures will they fall upon next? —Will 

they not recede when they find that it must be a
rooted antipathy, and nothing else, that could make
a temper not naturally inflexible, so sturdy? 
Adieu, my dear. Be you happy! —To know that
it is in your power to be so, is all that seems wanting
to make you so. 
Cl. Harlowe. 