


Sir Charles Grandison, To Mr. Grandison. 


Bologna, June 4. N. S.
What can I do for my cousin? Why would
he oppress me with so circumstantial an account
of the heavy evil that has befallen him, and not
point out a way by which I could comfort or relieve
him? Don't be afraid of what you call the severity of
my virtue. I should be ready to question the rectitude
of my own heart, if, on examination, I had not reason
to hope, that charity is the principal of those virtues
which you attribute to me. You recriminate enough
upon yourself. In what way I can extricate or assist
you, is now my only question? 
You ask my advice, in relation to the payment of
the debts which the world call debts of honour; and
for which you have asked, and are granted three months
time. Have you not, Sir, strengthened your engagement
by your request? And have not they intitled themselves
to the performance, by their compliance with it? 

The obligation which rashness, and, perhaps, surprize,
laid you under, your deliberation has confirmed. 
You say, that your new creditors are men of the
town, sharpers, and gamesters. But, my cousin, how
came you among such? They came not to you. I
say not this to upbraid you: But I must not have you
deceive yourself. Who but a man's self is to suffer
by his rashness or inconsideration? They are reputed
to have been possessed of fortunes, however they came
by them, which would have enabled them to answer the
stakes they played for, had they been the losers: And
would you not have exacted payment from them, had
you been the winner? Did you at the time suspect
loaded dice, or foul play? You are not, Sir, a novice
in the ways of the town. If you had good proof of
what, from the ill success you seem only to suspect,
I should not account the debts incurred debts of honour;
and should hardly scruple, had I not indirectly
promised payment, by asking time for it, or had they
refused to give it, to call in to my aid the laws of my
country; and the rather, as the appeal to those laws
would be a security to me, against ever again being
seen in such company. 
Adversity is the trial of principle: Without it, a
man hardly knows whether he is an honest man. 
Two things my cousin, in his present difficulties, must
guard against; the one, that he do not suffer himself
to be prevailed upon, in hopes to retrieve his losses,
to frequent the tables by which he has suffered; and
so become one of the very men he has so much reason
to wish he had avoided [Who would not rather be the
sufferer than the defrauder? What must be the nature
of that man, who, having himself been ruined,
will endeavour to draw in other innocent men to their
ruin?]. 
The other, that he do not permit prior and worthier
creditors (creditors from valuable considerations)
to suffer by the distresses in which he has involved
himself. 

It is a hard decision: But were I my cousin, I
would divest myself of my whole estate (were it necessary)
for the satisfaction of my creditors; and leave
it to their generosity, to allow me what pittance they
pleased for subsistence; and within that pittance would
I live, not only for justice sake, but (were my difficulties
owing to my own inconsideration) as a just
punishment for not being satisfied with my own ampler
fortune, and for putting to hazard a certainty, in hopes
of obtaining a share in the property of others. Excuse
me, my dear Everard; I mean not particular
reflexion; but only to give you my notion of general
justice in cases of this nature. 
Acquit yourself worthily of these difficulties. I
consider you as my brother: And you shall be welcome
to take with me a brother's part of my estate,
till you can be restored to a competency. 
But with regard to the woman whom the infamous
Lord B. would impose upon you as a wife, that is an
imposition to which you must not submit. Had she
been the poorest honest girl in Britain, and you had
seduced her, by promises of marriage, I must have
made it the condition of our continued friendship, that
you had married her. But a kept-woman! —Let not
her, Let not the bad man, have such a triumph. I
know his character well: I know his dependence on
the skill of his arm. And I know his litigious spirit,
and the use he is capable of making of his privilege. 
But regard not these: Let me advise you, Sir, after
you have secured to your creditors the payment of their
just debts, to come over to me: The sooner the
better. By this means you will be out of the way
of being disturbed by the menaces of this Lord, and
the machinations of this woman. We will return together. 
I will make your cause my own. Both the
courage, and the quality, of the man who can be unjust,
are to be despised. Is not Lord B. an unjust
man in every article of his dealings with men? Do not 

you, my dear cousin, be so in any-one; and you will
ever command the true fraternal love of 
Your Charles Grandison. 

