



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

The fair Inexorable is actually gone to church,
with Mrs. Moore and Mrs. Bevis. But Will.
closely attends her motions; and I am in the way to
receive any occasional intelligence from him. 
She did not chuse [A mighty word with the Sex! as
if they were always to have their own wills!] that I
should wait upon her. I did not much press it, that
she might not apprehend, that I thought I had reason
to doubt her voluntary return. 
I once had it in my head to have found the widow
Bevis other employment. And I believe she would
have been as well pleased with my company as to go
to church; for she seemed irresolute when I told her,
that two out of a family were enough to go to church
for one day. But having her Things on (as the women
call every-thing) and her Aunt Moore expecting
her company, she thought it best to go—Lest it should
look oddly, you know, whispered she, to one who was
above regarding how it looked. 
&dotup;So here am I in my Dining-room; and have nothing
to do but write, till they return. 

&dotup;And what will be my subject, thinkest thou? — 
Why, the old beaten one, to be sure; Self-debate— 
thro' temporary remorse: For the blow being not
struck, her guardian angel is redoubling his efforts
to save her. 
&dotup;If it be not that [And yet what power should her
guardian angel have over me?] I don't know what
it is, that gives a check to my revenge, whenever I
meditate treason against so sovereign a virtue. Conscience
is dead and gone, as I told thee; so it cannot
be that. A young Conscience growing up,
like the phœnix, from the ashes of the old one, it
cannot be surely. But if it were, it would be hard,
if I could not overlay a young Conscience. 
&dotup;Well then, it must be Love, I fansy. Love
itself, inspiring Love of an object so adorable—Some
little attention possibly paid likewise to thy whining
arguments in her favour. 
&dotup;Let Love then be allowed to be the moving
principle; and the rather, as Love naturally makes
the Lover loth so disoblige the object of its flame; 
and knowing, that an offence of the meditated kind
will be a mortal offence to her, cannot bear that I
should think of giving it. 
&dotup;Let Love and me talk together a little on this
subject—Be it a Young Conscience, or Love, or Thyself,
Jack, thou seest that I am for giving every
whiffler audience. But this must be the last debate
on this subject; for is not her fate in a manner at
its crisis? And must not my next step be an irretrievable
one, tend it which way it will? 
* *
&dotup;And now the debate is over. 
&dotup;A thousand charming things (for Love is gentler
than Conscience) has this little urchin suggested
in her favour. 
&dotup;He pretended to know both our hearts: And he
would have it, that tho' my Love was a prodigious 

strong and potent Love; and tho' it has the merit
of many months faithful service to plead, and has
had infinite difficulties to struggle with; yet that it
is not the right sort of Love. 
&dotup;Right sort of Love! —A puppy!—But, with due
regard to your deityship, said I, what merits has she
with You, that you should be of her party? Is hers,
I pray you, a right sort of Love? Is it Love at all? 
She don't pretend that it is. She owns not your sovreignty. 
What a d&wblank;l moves you, to plead thus
earnestly for a rebel, who despises your power? 
&dotup;And then he came with his If's and And's—And
it would have been, and still, as he believed, would
be, Love, and a Love of the exalted kind, if I
would encourage it by the right sort of Love he
talked of: And, in justification of his opinion,
pleaded her own confessions, as well those of yesterday,
as of this morning: And even went so far
back as to my Ipecacuanha-illness. 
&dotup;I never talked so familiarly with his godship before: 
Thou mayest think therefore, that his dialect
sounded oddly in my ears. And then he told me,
how often I had thrown cold water upon the most
charming flame that ever warmed a Lady's bosom,
while yet but young and rising. 
&dotup;I required a definition of this right sort of Love. 
He tried at it: But made a sorry hand of it: Nor
could I, for the soul of me, be convinced, that
what he meant to extol, was Love. 
&dotup;Upon the whole, we had a notable controversy
upon this subject, in which he insisted upon the unprecedented
merit of the Lady. Nevertheless I got
the better of him; for he was struck absolutely
dumb, when (waving her present perverseness,
which yet was a sufficient answer to all his pleas) I
asserted, and offered to prove it, by a thousand instances
impromptu, that Love was not governed by
merit, nor could be under the dominion of prudence, 

or any other reasoning power: And that if the Lady
were capable of Love, it was of such a sort of Love,
as he had nothing to do with, and which never before
reigned in a female heart. 
&dotup;I asked him, What he thought of her flight from
me, at a time when I was more than half overcome
by the right sort of Love he talked of? —And then
I shewed him the Letter she wrote, and left behind
her for me, with an intention, no doubt, absolutely
to break my heart, or to provoke me to hang,
drown, or shoot myself; to say nothing of a multitude
of declarations from her, defying his power, and
imputing all that looked like Love in her behaviour
to me, to the persecution and rejection of her friends; 
which made her think of me but as a last resort. 
&dotup;Love then gave her up. The Letter, he said,
deserved neither pardon nor excuse. He did not
think he had been pleading for such a declared rebel. 
And as to the rest, he should be a betrayer of the
rights of his own sovereignty, if what I had alleged
were true, and he were still to plead for her. 
&dotup;I swore to the truth of all. And truly I swore: 
Which perhaps I do not always do. 
&dotup;And now what thinkest thou must become of the
Lady, whom Love itself gives up, and Conscience
cannot plead for?&dotup; 