


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


June 14–25.
Having the honour of an invitation to a conversation-visit,
to the Cardinal Legate, and to
meet there the Gonfalonier, I went to the palace of
Porretta in the morning. 
After sitting about half an hour with my friend Jeronymo,
I was admitted to the presence of Lady
Clementina. Her father, mother, and the Bishop,
were with her. Clementina, Chevalier, said her mother,
was enquiring for you. She is desirous to recover
her English. Are you willing, Sir, to undertake
your pupil again? 
Ay, Chevalier, said the young Lady, those were 

happy times, and I want to recover them. I want to
be as happy as I was then. 
You have not been very well, madam: And is it
not better to defer our lectures for some days, till you
are quite established in your health? 
Why, that is the thing. I know I have been very
ill: I know that I am not yet quite well; and I want
to be so: And that is the reason that I would recover
my English. 
You will soon recover it, madam, when you begin. 
But at present, the thought, the memory, it would
require you to exert, would perplex you. I am afraid
the study would rather retard, than forward your recovery. 
Why, now, I did not expect this from you, Sir.
My mamma has consented. 
I did, my dear, because I would deny you nothing,
that your heart was set upon: But the Chevalier has
given you such good reasons to suspend his lectures,
that I wish you would not be earnest in your request. 
But I can't help it, madam. I want to be happy. 
Well, madam, let us begin now. What English
book have you at hand? 
I don't know. But I will fetch one. 
She stept out, Camilla after her; and, poor Lady,
forgetting her purpose, brought down some of her
own work, the first thing that came to hand, out of
a drawer that she pulled out, in her dressing-room; 
instead of looking into her book-case. It is an unfinished
piece of Noah's ark, and the rising deluge; 
the execution admirable. And, coming to me, I
wonder where it has lain all this time. Are you a
judge of womens works, Chevalier? 
She went to the table—Come hither, and sit down
by me. I did. Madam, to her mother; my Lord,
to her brother (for the Marquis withdrew, in grief,
upon this instance of her wandering); come, and sit
down by the Chevalier and me. They did. She 

spread it on the table, and, in an attentive posture, her
elbow on the table, her head on one hand, pointing
with the finger of the other—Now tell me your opinion
of this work. 
I praised, as it deserved, the admirable finger of
the workwoman. Do you know, that's mine, Sir? said
she: But tell me; every-body can praise; Do you
see no fault? —I think that is one, said I; and pointed
to a disproportion that was pretty obvious—Why so it
is. I never knew you to be a flatterer. 
Men, who can find faults more gracefully, said the
Bishop, than others praise, need not flatter. Why
that's true, said she. She sighed; I was happy when
I was about this work. And the drawing was my own
too, after—after—I forget the painter—But you think
it tolerable—Do you? 
I think it, upon the whole, very fine. If you could
rectify that one fault, it would be a master-piece. 
Well, I think I'll try, since you like it. She rolled
it up—Camilla, let it be put on my toilette. I am
glad the Chevalier likes it. But, Sir, if I am not
at a loss; for my head is not as it should be— 
Poor Lady! She lost what she was going to say— 
She paused as if she would recollect it—Do you know,
at last, said she, what is the matter with my head?
putting her hand to her forehead—Such a strange confusion
just here! And so stupid! She shut her eyes. 
She laid her head on her mother's shoulder; who
dropt an involuntary tear on her forehead. 
The Bishop was affected. Can you, can you,
Chevalier, whispered he, suppose this dear creature's
reason in your power, and yet with-hold it from her? 
Ah, my Lord, said I, how cruel!— 
She raised her head; and, taking her mother's and
Camilla's offered salts, smelt to them in turn—I think
I am a little better. Were you, Chevalier, ever in
such a strange way? —I hope not—God preserve all
people from being as I have been! —Why now you 

are all affected. Why do you all weep? What have
a said? God forbid, that I should afflict any-body— 
Ah! Chevalier! and laid her hand upon my arm,
God will bless you. I always said, you were a tender-hearted
man. God will pity him, that can pity another! 
—But, brother, my Lord, I have not been at
church of a long time: Have I? How long is it? — 
Where is the General? Where is my Uncle? —Laurana!
poor Laurana! God forgive her. She is gone
to answer for all her unkindness! —And she said she
was sorry; Did she? 
Thus rambled the poor Lady! What, my dear
Dr. Bartlett, can be more affecting than these absences,
these resveries, of a mind once so sound and
sensible! 
She withdrew at her own motion, with Camilla; 
and we had no thoughts of communicating to her,
at that time, my intentional absence. But as I was
about taking my leave for the day, Camilla came into
Jeronymo's chamber, where I was; and told me, that
her young Lady was very sedate, and desired to see
me, if I were not gone. 
She led me into Clementina's dressing room, where
was present her mother only; who said, she thought
I might apprise her daughter of my proposed journey
to Naples; and she herself began the subject. 
My dear, said she, the Chevalier has been acquainting
my Lord and me with an engagement he
is under to visit your brother Giacomo, and his Lady,
at Naples. 
That is a vast journey, said she. 
Not for the Chevalier, my dear. He is used to
travel. 
Only for a visit! —Is it not better, Sir, for you to
stay here, where everybody loves you? 
The General, my dear, and his Lady, love the
Chevalier. 
May be so. But did you promise them, Sir? 
I did, madam. 

Why then you must perform your promise. But
it was not kind in them to engage you. 
Why so, my dear? asked her mother. 
Why so! Why what will poor Jeronymo do for
his friend? 
Jeronymo has consented, my dear. He thinks the
journey will do the Chevalier good. 
Nay, then—Will the journey do you good, Sir? 
If it will, I am sure Jeronymo would not, for the world,
detain you. 
Are you willing, my dear, that the Chevalier should
go? 
Yes, surely, madam, if it will do him good. I
would lay down my life to do him good. Can we
ever requite him for his goodness to us? 
Grateful heart! said her mother; tears in her eyes. 
Gratitude, piety, sincerity, and every duty of the
social life, are constitutional virtues in this Lady. No
disturbance of mind can weaken, much less efface them. 
Shall you not want to see him in his absence? 
Perhaps I may: But what then? If it be for his
good, you know— 
Suppose, my dear, we could obtain the favour of
Mrs. Beaumont's company, while the Chevalier is
gone? 
I should be glad. 
Mrs. Beaumont is all goodness, said I. I will endeavour
to engage her. I can go by sea to Naples; 
and then Florence will be in my way. 
Florence! Ay, and then you may see Olivia too,
you know. 
Olivia is not in Italy, madam. She is on her
travels. 
Nay, I am not against your seeing Olivia, if it will
do you good to see her. 
You don't love Olivia, my dear, said her mother. 
Why, not much—But will you send Mrs. Beaumont
to keep me company? 
I hope, madam, I may be able to engage her. 

And how long shall you be gone? 
If I go by sea, I shall return by the way of Rome:
And shall make my absence longer or shorter, as I
shall hear how my Jeronymo does, or as he will or
will not dispense with it. 
That is very good of you—But, but—Suppose—(a
sweet blush overspread her face)—I don't know what
I would say—But, for Jeronymo's sake, don't stay
longer than will do you good. No need of that, you
know. 
Sweet creature! said the mother. 
Did you call me so, madam? wrapping her arms
about her, and hiding her faintly-blushing face in her
bosom. Then raising it up, her arms still folded about
her mother: As long as I have my mamma with me,
I am happy. Don't let me be sent away from you
again, my mamma. I will do every-thing you bid
me do. I never was disobedient—Was I? Fie upon
me, if I was! 
No, never, never, my dearest Life. 
So I hoped. For when I knew nothing, this I used
to say over my beads; Gracious Father! let me never
forget my duty to thee, and to my parents! I was
afraid I might, as I remembred nothing—But that
was partly owing to Laurana. Poor Laurana! She
has now answered for it. I would pray her out of her
pains, if I could. Yet she did torment me. 
She has entertained a notion, that Laurana is dead:
And as it has removed that terror which she used to
have, at her very name, they intend not to undeceive
her. But, Dr. Bartlett, well or ill, did you ever know
a more excellent creature! 
Well, Sir, and so you must go—She quitted her mother,
and with a dignity like that which used to distinguish
her, she turned to me; and gracefully waving
one hand, while she held up the other—God preserve
you where-ever you go! You must go from
friend to friend, were it all the world over. You will 

let Jeronymo hear often from you—Won't you? — 
Pray do. And I will, in every visit I make to him,
enquire when he heard from his friend. Adieu, Sir:
Adieu. 
I had not intended then to take my leave of her; 
but, as she anticipated me, I thought it right to do so; 
and, respectfully bowing on her hand, withdrew, followed
by her eyes and her blessings. 
I went to Jeronymo. The Marchioness came to
me there; and was of opinion with me, that I should
take this as a farewel visit to her Clementina; and
to-morrow (sooner by two days than I intended) I
propose to set out for Florence, in hopes to engage
for them Mrs. Beaumont's company; of which they
are all extremely desirous. 
I took my leave of the whole family, and Mr. Lowther; 
who will write to me at all opportunities: And,
perhaps, you will not, for some weeks, hear further
from 
Your ever-affectionate
Charles Grandison. 

