



I am now come to SUNDAY. 

Well, here is a sad Thing! I am deny'd by this
barbarous Woman, to go to Church, as I had built
upon I might. And she has huffed poor Mr. Williams
all to pieces, for pleading for me. I find he
is to be forbid the House, if she pleases. Poor
Gentleman! all his Dependence is upon my Master,
who has a very good Living for him, if the Incumbent
die, and he has kept his Bed these four Months,
of old Age and Dropsy. 

He pays me great Respect; and I see pities me; 
and would perhaps assist my Escape from these
Dangers, but I have nobody to plead for me; and
why should I wish to ruin a poor Gentleman, by engaging
him against his Interest? Yet one would do
any thing to preserve one's Innocence; and God
Almighty would, may-be, make it up to him! 
O judge (but how shall you see what I write!)
my distracted Condition, to be reduc'd to such a Pass
as to desire to lay Traps for Mankind! —But he
wants sadly to say something to me, as he whisperingly
hinted. 
The Wretch (I think I will always call her the Wretch
henceforth) abuses me more and more. I was but
talking to one of the Maids just now, indeed a little
to tamper with her by degrees; and she popt upon
us, and said—Nay, don't offer, Madam, to tempt
poor innocent Country Maidens from doing their
Duty. You wanted, I hear, she should take a Walk
with you. But I charge you, Nan, never stir with
her, nor obey her, without letting me know it, in the
smallest Trifles. —I say, walk with you! why, where
would you go, I trow? Why, barbarous Mrs.
Jewkes, said I, only to look a little up the Elm-walk,
as you would not let me go to Church. 
Nan, said she, to shew me how much they were
all in her Power, pull off Madam's Shoes, and bring
them to me. I have taken care of her others— 
Indeed she shan't, said I—Nay, said Nan, but I
must, if my Mistress bids me; so pray, Madam,
don't hinder me: And so indeed, (would you believe
it?) She took my Shoes off, and left me barefoot:
And, for my Share, I have been so frighten'd at this,
that I have not Power even to relieve my Mind by
my Tears. I am quite stupify'd, to be sure! Here
I was forc'd to leave off. 

Now I will give you a Picture of this Wretch! She
is a broad, squat, pursy, fat Thing, quite ugly, if any
thing God made can be ugly; about forty Years old. 
She has a huge Hand, and an Arm as thick as my
Waist, I believe. Her Nose is flat and crooked, and
her Brows grow over her Eyes; a dead, spiteful,
grey, goggling Eye, to be sure, she has. And her Face
is flat and broad; and as to Colour, looks like as if it
had been pickled a Month in Salt-petre: I dare say
she drinks! —She has a hoarse man-like Voice, and
is as thick as she's long; and yet looks so deadly
strong, that I am afraid she would dash me at her
Foot in an Instant, if I was to vex her. —So that
with a Heart more ugly than her Face, she frightens
me sadly; and I am undone, to besure, if God does
not protect me; for she is very, very wicked— 
indeed she is. 
This is but poor helpless Spight to me! —But the
Picture is too near the Truth notwithstanding. She
sends me a Message just now, that I shall have my
Shoes again, if I will accept of her Company to walk
with me in the Garden—To waddle with me, rather,
thought I. 
Well, 'tis not my Business to quarrel with her
downright. I shall be watch'd the narrower, if I
do; and so I will go with the hated Wretch. —O
for my dear Mrs. Jervis! or rather, to be safe with
my dear Father and Mother! 
Oh I'm out of my Wits, for Joy! Just as I have got
my Shces on, I am told, John, honest John, is come,
on Horseback! —God bless him! What Joy is this! 
But I'll tell you more by-and-by. I must not let her
know, I am so glad to see this dear blessed John, to be
sure! —O but he looks sad, as I see him out of the
Window! What can be the Matter! —I hope my
dear Parents are well, and Mis. Jervis, and Mr. 

Longman, and every body, my naughty Master not
excepted—for I wish him to live and repent of all
his Wickedness to poor me. 
O dear Heart! what a World do we live in! — 
I am now to take up my Pen again! But I am in a
sad Taking truly! Another puzzling Tryal, to be
sure! 
Here is John, as I said; and the poor Man came
to me, with Mrs. Jewkes, who whisper'd, that I
would say nothing about the Shoes, for my own
sake, as she said. The poor Man saw my Distress,
and my red Eyes, and my haggard Looks, I suppose; 
for I had had a sad Time of it, you must needs
think; and he would have hid it, but his Eyes run
over. Oh Mrs. Pamela! said he; Oh Mrs. Pamela! 
—Well, honest Fellow-servant, said I, I cannot help
it at present! I am oblig'd to your Honesty and Kindness,
to be sure; and then he wept more. Said I, (for
my Heart was ready to break to see his Grief; for
it is a touching thing to see a Man cry) Tell me
the worst! Is my Master coming? No, no, said
he, and sobb'd. —Well, said I, is there any News of
my poor Father and Mother? how do they do? — 
I hope, well, said he; I know nothing to the contrary:
There is no Mishap, I hope, to Mrs. Jervis,
or Mr. Longman, or my Fellow servants! No— 
said he, poor Man! with a long N&wblank;o, as if his Heart
would burst. Well, thank God then! said I. 
The Man's a Fool, said Mrs. Jewkes, I think; 
what ado is here! why sure thou'rt in Love, John. 
Dost thou not see young Madam is well? what ails
thee, Man? Nothing at all, said he, but I am such
a Fool, as to cry for Joy to see good Mrs. Pamela: 
But I have a Letter for you. 
I took it, and saw it was from my Master; so I put
it in my Pocket. Mis. Jewkes, said I, you need not, 

I hope, see this. No, no, said she, I see who it
comes from, well enough; or else, may-be, I must
desire to see it. 
And here is one for you, Mrs. Jewkes, said he; 
but yours, said he to me, requires an Answer, which
I must carry back early in the Morning, or to night,
if I can. 
You have no more, John, said Mrs. Jewkes, for
Mrs. Pamela, have you? No, said he, I have not. 
But every body's kind Love and Service. Ay, to
us both, to be sure, said she. John, said I, I will
read the Letter, and pray take care of yourself; for
you are a good Man. God bless you; and I rejoice
to see you, and hear from you all. But I long'd to
say more, only that nasty Mrs. Jewkes— 
So I came up hither, and lock'd myself in my
Closet, and open'd the Letter; and this is a Copy
of it. 

My dearest Pamela,
I Send purposely to you on an Affair that concerns
you very much, and me something, but
chiefly for your sake. I am conscious that I have
proceeded by you in such a manner as may justly
alarm your Fears, and give Concern to your honest
Friends: And all my Pleasure is, that I can
and will make you Amends for all the Disturbance
I have given you. As I promis'd, I sent to your
Father the Day after your Departure, that he might
not be too much concern'd for you, and assured
him of my Honour to you; and made an Excuse,
such a one as ought to have satisfy'd him, for your
not coming to him. But this was not sufficient, it
seems; for he, poor Man! came to me next
Morning, and set my Family almost in an Uproar
about you. 

‘O my dear Girl, what Trouble has not your Obstinacy
given me, and yourself too! I had no
way to pacify him, but to promise, that he should
see a Letter wrote from you to Mrs. Jervis, to
satisfy him you were well. 
‘Now all my Care in this Case, is for your aged
Parents, lest they should be fatally touched with
Grief; and for you, whose Duty and Affection for
them I know to be so strong and laudable: For
this Reason I beg you will write a few Lines to
them, and let me prescribe the Form for it; which
I have done, putting myself as near as I can in
your Place, and expressing your Sense, with a
Warmth that I doubt will have too much possess'd
you. 
‘After what is done, and which cannot now be
help'd, but which, I assure you, shall turn out honourably
for you, I expect not to be refus'd; because
I cannot possibly have any View in it, but to
satisfy your Parents; which is more your Concern
than mine; and so I must beg you will not alter
one Tittle of the underneath. If you do, it will be
impossible for me to send it, or that it should answer
the good End I propose by it. 
‘I have promis'd to you, that I will not approach
you without your Leave: If I find you easy, and
not attempting to dispute or avoid your present
Lot, I will keep to my Word, tho' 'tis a Difficulty
upon me. Nor shall the present Restraint upon
you last long: For I will assure you, that I am
resolv'd very soon to convince you, how ardently
I am. 
Yours, &c.’ 


The Letter he prescribed for me was this: 

Dear Mrs. Jervis,
I Have, instead of being driven, by Robin, to my
dear Father's, been carry'd off, to where I have
no Liberty to tell. However, at present, I am not
us'd hardly; and I write to beg you to let my dear
Father and Mother, whose Hearts must be well-nigh
broken, know, that I am well; and that I am,
and, by the Grace of God, ever will be, their
dutiful and honest Daughter, as well as 
‘Your obliged Friend. 
‘I must neither send Date nor Place; but have
most solemn Assurances of honourable
Usage.’ 

I knew not what to do on this most strange
Request and Occasion. But my Heart bled so much
for you, my dear Father, who had taken the Pains to
go yourself and inquire after your poor Daughter,
as well as for my dear Mother, that I resolv'd to
write, and pretty much in the above*  Form, that it
might be sent to pacify you, till I could let you,
some how or other, know the true State of the
Matter. And I wrote this to this strange wicked
Master himself: 

Sir,
If you knew but the Anguish of my Mind, and
how much I suffer by your dreadfully strange
Usage of me, you would surely pity me, and consent 

to my Deliverance. What have I done, that
I should be the only Mark of your Cruelty! I can
possibly have no Hope, no Desire of living lest me,
because I cannot have the least Dependence, after
what has pass'd, upon your solemn Assurances — 
It is impossible, surely, they should be consistent
with the honourable Designs you profess. 
‘Nothing but your Promise of not seeing me
here in my deplorable Bondage, can give me
the least Ray of Hope. 
‘Don't drive the poor distressed Pamela upon a
Rock, I beseech you, that may be the Destruction
both of her Body and Soul! You don't know,
Sir, how dreadfully I dare, weak as I am of Mind
and Intellect, when my Virtue is in Danger. And,
oh! hasten my Deliverance, that a poor unworthy
Creature, below the Notice of so great a Man, may
not be made the Sport of a high Condition, for no
Reason in the World, but because she is not able to
defend herself, nor has a Friend that can right her. 
‘I have, Sir, in part to shew my Obedience to
you, but indeed, I own, more to give Ease to the
Minds of my poor distressed Parents, whose Poverty,
one would think, should screen them from Violences
of this sort, as well as their poor Daughter, follow'd
pretty much the Form you have prescrib'd
for me, to Mrs. Jervis; and the Alterations I have
made, (for I could not help a few) are of such a
Nature, as, tho' they shew my Concern a little, yet
must answer the End you are pleas'd to say you
propose by this Letter. 
‘For God's sake, good Sir, pity my lowly Condition,
and my present great Misery; and let me
join with all the rest of your Servants to bless that
Goodness, which you have extended to every one,
but the poor afflicted, heart-broken 
‘Pamela.’ 


I thought, when I had written this Letter, and that
which he had prescrib'd, it would look like placing
a Confidence in Mrs. Jewkes, to shew them to her; 
and I shew'd her at the same time my Master's
Letter to me; for I believ'd, the Value he express'd for
me, would give me Credit with one who profess'd
in every thing to serve him right or wrong; tho' I
had so little Reason, I fear, to pride myself in it: And
I was not mistaken; for it has seem'd to influence her
not a little, and she is at present mighty obliging,
and runs over in my Praises; but is the less to be
minded, because she praises as much the Author of
all my Miseries, and his honourable Intentions, as
she calls them; when I see, that she is capable of
thinking, as I fear he does, that every thing that
makes for his wicked Will, is honourable, tho' to the
Ruin of the Innocent. Pray God I may find it
otherwise. I hope, whatever the naughty Gentleman
may intend, that I shall be at least rid of her
impertinent bold Way of Talk, when she seems
to think, by his Letter, that he means honourably. 
