



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Saturday, May 20. 
Not one word will I reply to such an abandoned
wretch, as thou hast shewn thyself to be in
thine of last night. I will leave the Lady to the protection
of that Power who only can work miracles; 
and to her own merits. Still I have hopes that these
will save her. 
I will proceed, as thou desirest, to poor Belton's
case; and the rather, as it has thrown me into such
a train of thinking upon our past lives, our present
courses, and our future views, as may be of service
to both, if I can give due weight to the reflections
that arise from it. 
The poor man made me a visit on Thursday, in
this my melancholy attendance. He began with complaints 

of his ill health and spirits, his hectic cough,
and his encreased malady of spitting of blood; and
then led to his Story. 
A confounded one it is; and which highly aggravates
his other maladies: For it has come out, that
his Thomasine (who, truly, would be new-christened,
you know, that her name might be nearer in sound
to the christian name of the man whom she pretended
to doat upon) has for many years carried on an intrigue
with a fellow who had been hostler to her Father
(an innkeeper at Darking); of whom, at the expence
of poor Belton, she has made a gentleman; and managed
it so, that having the art to make herself his
cashier, she has been unable to account for large sums,
which he thought forthcoming at demand, and had
trusted to her custody, in order to pay off a mortgage
upon his paternal Estate in Kent, which his heart
had run upon leaving clear; but which cannot now
be done, and will soon be foreclosed. And yet she
has so long passed for his wife, that he knows not what
to resolve upon about her; nor about the two boys he
was so fond of, supposing them to be his; whereas
now he begins to doubt his share in them. 
So Keeping don't do, Lovelace. 'Tis not the
eligible life. ‘A man may keep a woman, said the
poor fellow to me, but not his Estate! —Two interests! —Then, my tottering fabric!’ pointing to his
emaciated carcase. 
We do well to value ourselves upon our Liberty, or,
to speak more properly, upon the Liberties we take! 
We had need to run down Matrimony as we do, and
to make that State the subject of our frothy jests; 
when we frequently render ourselves (for this of Tom's
is not a singular case) the dupes and tools of women
who generally govern us (by Arts our wise heads penetrate
not) more absolutely than a wife would attempt
to do. 
Let us consider this point a little; and that upon 

our own principles, as Libertines, setting aside what is
exacted from us by the Laws of our Country, and its
Customs; which, nevertheless, we cannot get over, till
we have got over almost all moral obligations, as
members of society. 
In the first place, let us consider (we, who are in
possession of Estates by legal descent) how we should
have liked to have been such naked destitute varlets,
as we must have been, had our Fathers been as wise as
ourselves; and despised Matrimony as we do—And
then let us ask ourselves, If we ought not to have the
same regard for our posterity, as we are glad our Fathers
had for theirs? 
But this, perhaps, is too moral a consideration. 
—To proceed therefore to those considerations which
will be more striking to us: How can we reasonably
expect Oeconomy or Frugality (or any-thing indeed
but Riot and Waste) from creatures who have an
interest, and must therefore have views, different from
our own? 
They know the uncertain tenure (our fickle humours)
by which they hold: And is it to be wondered
at, supposing them to be provident harlots, that
they should endeavour, if they have the power, to
lay up against a rainy day? or, if they have not the
power, that they should squander all they can come
at, when they are sure of nothing but the present
hour; and when the life they live, and the sacrifices
they have made, put Conscience and Honour out of
the question? 
Whereas a Wife, having the same family-interest
with her husband, lies not under either the same apprehensions
or temptations; and has not broken through
(of necessity, at least, has not) those restraints which
education has fastened upon her: And if she make a
private purse, which we are told by anti-matrimonialists,
all wives love to do, and has children, it goes
all into the same family at the long-run. 

Then, as to the great article of fidelity to your bed,
are not women of family, who are well-educated,
under greater restraints, than creatures, who, if they
ever had reputation, sacrifice it to sordid interest, or
to more sordid appetite, the moment they give up to
you? Does not the example you furnish, of having
succeeded with her, give encouragement for others to
attempt her likewise? For, with all her blandishments,
can any man be so credulous, or so vain, as to believe,
that the woman he could persuade, another may
not prevail upon? 
Adultery is so capital a guilt, that even Rakes and
Libertines, if not wholly abandoned, and, as I may
say, invited by a woman's levity, disavow and condemn
it: But here, in a State of Keeping, a woman
is in no danger of incurring (legally, at least) that
guilt; and you yourself have broken thro' and overthrown
in her all the fences and boundaries of moral
honesty, and the modesty and reserves of her Sex: 
And what Tie shall hold her against inclination, or
interest? And what shall deter an attempter? 
While a Husband has this security from legal sanctions,
that if his wife be detected in a criminal conversation
with a man of fortune (the most likely by
bribes to seduce her) he may recover very great damages,
and procure a Divorce besides: Which, to
say nothing of the ignominy, is a consideration that
must have some force upon both parties. And a wife
must be vicious indeed, and a reflection upon a man's
own choice, who, for the sake of change, and where
there are no qualities to seduce, nor affluence to corrupt,
will run so many hazards to injure her husband
in the tenderest of all points. 
But there are difficulties in procuring a divorce
[And so there ought]—And none, says the Rake, in
parting with a mistress whenever you suspect her; or
whenever you are weary of her, and have a mind to
change her for another. 

But must not the man be a brute indeed, who can
cast off a woman whom he has seduced [If he take
her from the town, that's another thing] without some
flagrant reason; something that will better justify him
to himself, as well as to her, and to the world, than
mere power and novelty? 
But I don't see, if we judge by fact, and by the
practice of all we have been acquainted with of the
Keeping Class, that we know how to part with them
when we have them. 
That we know we can if we will, is all we have
for it: And this leads us to bear many things from a
mistress, which we would not from a wife. But, if we
are good-natured and humane: If the woman has Art
[And what woman wants it, who has fallen by Art?
and to whose precarious situation Art is so necessary?]: 
If you have given her the credit of being called by
your name: If you have a settled place of abode, and
have received and paid visits in her company, as your
wife: If she has brought you children—You will allow,
that these are strong obligations upon you, in the
world's eye, as well as to your own heart, against
tearing yourself from such close connexions. She will
stick to you as your skin: And it will be next to slaying
yourself to cast her off. 
Even if there be cause for it, by Infidelity, she will
have managed ill, if she have not her defenders. Nor
did I ever know a cause or a person so bad, as to
want advocates, either from ill-will to the one, or
pity to the other: And you will then be thought a
hard-hearted miscreant: And even were she to go off
without credit to herself, she will leave you as little; 
especially with all those whose good opinion a man
would wish to cultivate. 
Well, then, shall this poor privilege, that we may
part with a woman if we will, be deemed a balance
for the other inconveniences? Shall it be thought by
us, who are men of family and fortune, an equivalent 

for giving up equality of degree; and taking for the
partner of our Bed, and very probably more than the
partner in our Estates (to the breach of all family-rule
and order) a low-born, a low-educated creature, who
has not brought any-thing into the Common Stock; 
and can possibly make no returns for the solid benefits
she receives, but those libidinous ones, which a man
cannot boast of, but to his disgrace, nor think of, but
to the shame of both? 
Moreover, as the man advances in years, the fury
of his Libertinism will go off. He will have different
aims and pursuits, which will diminish his appetite to
ranging, and make such a regular life as the matrimonial
and family-life, palatable to him, and every
day more palatable. 
If he had Children, and has reason to think them
his, and if his lewd courses have left him any Estate,
he will have cause to regret the restraint his boasted
liberty has laid him under, and the valuable privilege 
it has deprived him of; when he finds, that it must descend
to some relation, for whom, whether near or
distant, he cares not one farthing; and who perhaps
(if a man of virtue) has held him in the utmost contempt
for his dissolute life. 
And were we to suppose his Estate in his power to
bequeath as he pleases; why should a man resolve, for
the gratifying of his foolish humour only, to bastardize
his race? Why should he wish to expose his children
to the scorn and insults of the rest of the world? 
Why should he, whether they are Sons or Daughters,
lay them under the necessity of complying with proposals
of marriage, either inferior as to Fortune, or
unequal as to Age? Why should he deprive the children
he loves, who themselves may be guilty of no fault,
of the respect they would wish to have, and to deserve; 
and of the opportunity of associating themselves with
proper, that is to say, with reputable company? And
why should he make them think themselves under obligation 

to every person of character, who will vouchsafe
to visit them? What little reason, in a word,
would such children have to bless their Father's obstinate
defiance of the Laws and Customs of his Country; 
and for giving them a Mother, of whom they
could not think with honour; to whose Crime it was,
that they owed their very Beings, and whose Example
it was their duty to shun? 
If the Education and Morals of these children are
left to Chance, as too generally they are (for the man
who has humanity and a feeling heart, and who is capable
of fondness for his offspring, I take it for granted,
will marry); the case is still worse; his crime is perpetuated,
as I may say, by his children: And the
Sea, the Army, perhaps the Highway, for the Boys; 
the Common for the Girls; too often point out the
way to a worse Catastrophe. 
What therefore, upon the whole, do we get by
treading in these crooked paths, but danger, disgrace,
and a too late repentance? 
And after all, do we not frequently become the
Cullies of our own Libertinism; sliding into the very
State with those half-worn-out doxies, which perhaps
we might have entered into with their Ladies; at least
with their Superiors both in degree and fortune? 
And all the time, lived handsomely like ourselves; 
not sneaking into holes and corners; and, when we
crept abroad with our women, looking about us, and
at every one that passed us, as if we were confessedly
accountable to the censures of all honest people. 
My cousin Tony Jenyns, thou knewest. He had
not the actively mischievous spirit, that Thou, Belton,
Mowbray, Tourville, and myself, have: But he
imbibed the same notions we do, and carried them
into practice. 
How did he prate against wedlock! How did he
strut about as a Wit and a Smart! And what a Wit
and a Smart did all the boys and girls of our family 

(myself among the rest, then an urchin) think him,
for the airs he gave himself? —Marry! No, not for
the world; what man of sense would bear the insolences,
the petulances, the expensiveness of a wife! 
He could not for the heart of him think if tolerable,
that a woman of equal rank and fortune, and, as it
might happen, superior talents to his own, should look
upon herself to have a right to share the benefit of that
fortune which she brought him. 
So, after he had fluttered about the town for two
or three years, in all which time he had a better
opinion of himself than any-body else had, what does
he do, but enter upon an affair with his Fencing-master's
Daughter? 
He succeeds; takes private lodgings for her at
Hackney; visits her by stealth; both of them tender
of Reputations that were extremely tender, but
which neither had quite given up; for Rakes of either
Sex are always the last to condemn or cry down
themselves: Visited by nobody, nor visiting: The
life of a thief, or of a man beset by creditors, afraid
to look out of his own house, or to be seen abroad
with her. And thus went he on for twelve years,
and, tho' he had a good Estate, hardly making both
ends meet; for, tho' no Glare, there was no Oeconomy; 
and besides, he had every year a child, and
very fond of his children was he. But none of them
lived above three years: And being now, on the
death of the dozenth, grown as dully sober, as if he
had been a real husband, his good Mrs. Thomas (for
he had not permitted her to take his own name) prevailed
upon him to think the loss of their children a
judgment upon the parents for their wicked way of
life [A time will come, Lovelace, if we live to
advanced years, in which Reflection will take hold
of the enfeebled mind]; and then it was not difficult
for his woman to induce him, by way of compounding
with Heaven, to marry her. When this was 

done, he had leisure to sit down, and contemplate; 
and to recollect the many offers of persons of family
and fortune which he had declined in the prime of
life : His expences equal at least: His reputation not
only less, but lost: His enjoyments stollen: His partnership
unequal, and such as he had always been
ashamed of. But the women said, That after twelve
or thirteen years cohabitation, Tony did an honest
thing by her. And that was all my poor cousin got
by making his old mistress his new wife—Not a
drum, not a trumpet, not a fife, not a tabret, nor
the expectation of a new joy, to animate him on! 
What Belton will do with his Thomasine, I know
not; nor care I to advise him: For I see the poor
fellow does not like that any-body should curse her
but himself. This he does very heartily. And so
low is he reduced, that he blubbers over the reflection
upon his past fondness for her cubs, and upon
his present doubts of their being his: ‘What a
damn'd thing is it, Belford, if Tom and Hal should
be the hostler dog's puppies, and not mine!’ 
Very true! and I think the strong health of the
chubby-faced muscular whelps confirms the too great
probability. But I say not so to him. 
You, he says, are such a gay, lively mortal, that
this sad tale would make no impression upon you: 
Especially now, that your whole heart is engaged as
it is. Mowbray would be too violent upon it: He has
not, he says, a feeling heart. Tourville has no discretion: 
And, a pretty jest! although he and his Thomasine
lived without reputation in the world (people
guessing that they were not married, notwithstanding
she went by his name) yet ‘he would not too much
discredit the cursed ingrate neither!’ 
Could a man act a weaker part, had he been really
married; and were he sure he was going to separate
from the mother of his own children? 
I leave this as a lesson upon thy heart, without makeing 

any application: Only, with this remark, ‘That
after we Libertines have indulged our licentious appetites,
reflecting (in the conceit of our vain hearts)
both with our lips and by our lives, upon our ancestors,
and the good old ways, we find out, when
we come to years of discretion, if we live till then
(what all who knew us found out before, that is to
say; we find out) our own despicable folly; that
those good old ways would have been best for us,
as well as for the rest of the world; and that in
every step we have deviated from them, we have
only exposed our vanity, and our ignorance at the
same time.’ 
J. Belford. 