



My dearest Lady,
Your joyful Correspondent has obtained Leave
to get every thing ready to quit London by
Friday next, when your kind Brother promises to
carry me down to Kent, and allows me to take my
Charmer with me. There's Happiness for you,
Madam! To see, as I hope I shall see, upon One
blessed Spot, a dear faithful Husband, a beloved
Child, and a Father and Mother, whom I so much
love and honour! 
Mr. B. told me this voluntarily, this Morning
at Breakfast; and then, in the kindest manner,
took Leave of me, and set out for Bedfordshire. 
But I should, according to my Promise, give
your Ladyship a few Particulars of our Breakfast
Conference. 
I bid Polly withdraw, when her Master came up
to Breakfast; and I ran to the Door to meet him,
and threw myself on my Knees: O forgive me,
dearest, dear Sir, all my Boldness of Yesterday! — 
My Heart was strangely affected—or I could not
have acted as I did. But never fear, my dearest
Mr. B. that my future Conduct shall be different
from what it used to be, or that I shall keep up to
a Spirit, which you hardly thought had Place in the
Heart of your dutiful Pamela, till she was thus
severely tried. 
I have weighed well your Conduct, my dear
Life, raising me to his Bosom; and I find an Uniformity
in it, that is surprisingly just. 
There is in your Composition indeed, the
strangest Mixture of Meekness and high Spirit, that 

ever I met with. Never was a saucier dear Girl,
than you, in your Maiden Days, when you thought
your Honour in Danger: Never a more condescending
Goodness, when your Fears were at an
End. Now again, when you had Reason, as you
believed, to apprehend a Conduct in me unworthy
of my Obligations to you, and of your Purity, you
rise in your Spirit with a Dignity that becomes an
injured Person; and yet you forget not, in the
Height of your Resentments, that angelick Sweetness
of Temper, and Readiness to forgive, which
so well become a Lady who lives as you live, and
practises what you practise. My dearest Pamela, I
see, continued he, serves not God for nought: In
a better Sense I speak it, than the Maligner spoke it
of Job: Since in every Action of yours, the heavenly
Direction you so constantly invoke, shews
itself thus beautifully. 
And now again, this charming Condescension,
the Moment you are made easy, is an Assurance,
that your affectionate Sweetness is return'd: And I
cannot fear any thing, but that I shall never be able
to deserve it. 
He led me to the Tea-table, and sat down close
by me. Polly came in. If every thing, said he,
be here, that your Lady wants, you may withdraw; 
and let Mr. Colbrand and Abraham know,
I shall be with them presently. Nobody shall wait
upon me, but you, my Dear. 
Polly withdrew. 
You are all Goodness, Sir: And how generously,
how kindly, do you account for that Mixture in my
Temper you speak of! —Depend upon it, dear
Sir, that I will never grow upon this your Indulgence. 

I always lov'd you, my Dearest, said he, and
that with a pussionate Fondness, which has not, I
dare say, many Examples in the marry'd Life: But
I revere you now. And so great is my Reverence
for your Virtue, that I chose to sit up all Night, as
I now do, to leave you for a few Days, until, by
disengaging myself from all Intercourses that have
given you Uneasiness, I can convince you, that I
have render'd myself as worthy as I can be, of such
an Angel, even upon your own Terms. I will
account to you, continued he, for every Step I shall
take, and will reveal to you every Step I have taken:
For this I can do, because the Lady's Honour is untainted,
and wicked Rumour has treated her worse
than she could deserve. 
I told him, that since he had been pleased to
name the Lady, I would take the Liberty to say,
I was glad, for her own sake, to hear that. Changing
the Subject a little precipitately, as if it gave
him Pain, he told me, as above, that I might prepare
on Friday for Kent; and I parted with him
with greater Pleasure than ever I did in my Life. 
So necessary sometimes are Afflictions, not only to
teach one how to subdue one's Passions, and to
make us, in our happiest States, know we are still
on Earth, but even when they are over-blown, to
augment and redouble our Joys! 
I am now giving Orders, my dear Lady, for
my beloved Journey, and quitting this undelightful
Town, as it has been, and is, to me. My next
will be from Kent, I hope; and perhaps I shall
then have an Opportunity to acquaint your Ladyship
with the Particulars, and (if God answers
my Prayers) the Conclusion of the Affair which 

has given me so much Uneasiness. Mean time, I am,
with the greatest Gratitude, for the kind Share you
have taken in my past Afflictions, my good Lady, 
Your Ladyship's most obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

