


&dotup;Mrs. Howe, To Charles Hickman, Esq; 

&dotup;Thursday, March 30. 
&dotup;I cannot but say, Mr. Hickman, but you have
cause to be dissatisfied—to be out of humour— 
to be displeased—with Nancy—But, upon my word; 
But indeed—What shall I say? —Yet this I will
say, that you good young gentlemen know nothing
at all of our Sex. Shall I tell you—But why should
I? And yet I will say, That if Nancy did not think
well of you in the main, she is too generous to treat
you so freely as she does. —Don't you think she has
courage enough to tell me, She would not see you,
and to refuse at any time seeing you, as she knows
on what account you come, if she had not something
in her head favourable to you? —Fie! that I
am forced to say thus much in writing, when I
have hinted it to you twenty and twenty times by
word of mouth! 
&dotup;But if you are so indifferent, Mr. Hickman—If
you think you can part with her for her skittish
tricks—If my interest in your favour—Why, Mr.
Hickman, I must tell you, that my Nancy is worth
bearing with. If she be foolish—what is that owing
to? —Is it not to her Wit? Let me tell you, Sir,
you cannot have the convenience without the inconvenience. 
What workman loves not a sharp tool
to work with? But is there not more danger from a
sharp tool, than from a blunt one? And what workman
will throw away a sharp tool, because it may
cut his fingers? Wit may be likened to a sharp
tool. 
And there is something very pretty in wit,
let me tell you. Often and often have I been forc'd
to smile at her arch turns upon me, when I could
have beat her for them. And, pray, don't I bear
a great deal from her? —And why? Because I love 

her. And would you not wish me to judge of your
Love for her by my own? And would not you bear
with her? —Don't you love her (what tho' with another
sort of Love?) as well as I do? I do assure
you, Sir, that if I thought you did not—Well, but
it is plain that you don't! —And is it plain that you
don't? —Well, then, you must do as you think
best. 
&dotup;Well might the merit of your passion be doubted,
you say, if, like Mr. Solmes—Fiddle-faddle! — 
Why, you are a captious man, I think! —Has
Nancy been so plain in her repulses of you as Miss
Clary Harlowe has been to Mr. Solmes? —Does
Nancy love any man better than you, altho' she
may not shew so much Love to you as you wish for? 
—If she did, let me tell you, she would have let us
all hear of it. —What idle comparisons then! 
&dotup;But it may be you are tired out. It may be you
have seen somebody else—It may be you would wish
to change Mistresses with that gay wretch Mr.
Lovelace. It may be too, that, in that case, Nancy
would not be sorry to change Lovers—The truly
admirable Miss Clarissa Harlowe! And the excellent
Miss Clarissa Harlowe! —Good-lack! —But take
care, Mr. Hickman, that you do not praise any
woman living, let her be as admirable and as excellent
as she will, above your own Mistress. No polite
man will do that, surely. And take care too,
that you do not make her or me think you are in
earnest in your anger—Just tho' it may be, as anger
only—I would not for a thousand pounds, that
Nancy should know that you can so easily part with
her, if you have the Love for her which you declare
you have. Be sure, if you are not absolutely determined,
that you do not so much as whisper the contents
of this your Letter to your own heart, as I
may say. 
&dotup;Her treatment of you, you say, does no credit 

either to her education or fine sense. Very home
put, truly! Nevertheless, so say I. But is not hers
the disgrace, more than yours? I can assure you,
that every-body blames her for it. And why do
they blame her? —Why? Because they think you
merit better treatment at her hands: And is not
this to your credit? Who but pities you, and blames
her? Do the servants, who, as you observe, see
her skittish airs, disrespect you for them? Do they
not, at such times, look concerned for you? Are
they not then doubly officious in their respects and
services to you? —I have observed with pleasure,
that they are. 
&dotup;But you are afraid you shall be thought tame,
perhaps, when married. That you shall not be
thought manly enough, I warrant! —And this was
poor Mr. Howe's fear. And many a tug did this
lordly fear cost us both, God knows! —Many more
than needed, I am sure: —And more than ought to
have been, had he known how to bear and forbear; 
as is the duty of those who pretend to have most
sense—And, pray, which would you have to have
most sense, the woman or the man? 
&dotup;Well, Sir, and now what remains, if you really
love Nancy so well as you say you do? —Why, I
leave that to you. You may, if you please, come
to breakfast with me in the morning. But with no
full heart, nor resenting looks, I advise you; except
you can brave it out. That have I, when provoked,
done many a time with my Husband; but
never did I get any-thing by it with my Daughter: 
Much less will you. Of which, for your observation,
I thought fit to advertise you. As from 
Your Friend,
Annabella Howe.&dotup; 