



Mrs. Norton, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Monday, Aug. 14. 
All your friends here, my dear young Lady, now
seem set upon proposing to you to go to one of
the Plantations. This, I believe, is owing to some
misrepresentations of Mr. Brand; from whom they
have received a Letter. 
I wish with all my heart, that you could, consistently
with your own notions of honour, yield to
the pressing requests of all Mr. Lovelace's family in
his behalf. This, I think, would stop every mouth; 
and, in time, reconcile every-body to you. For
your own friends will not believe that he is in earnest
to marry you; and the hatred between the families
is such, that they will not condescend to inform
themselves better; nor would believe him, if he
were ever so solemnly to avow that he is. 
I should be very glad to have in readiness, upon
occasion, some brief particulars of your sad Story under
your own hand. But let me tell you, at the same
time, that no misrepresentations, nor even your own
confession, shall lessen my opinion either of your
piety, or of your prudence in essential points; because
I know it was always your humble way to
make light faults heavy against yourself: And well 

might you, my dearest young Lady, aggravate your
own failings, who have ever had so few; and those
few so slight, that your ingenuousness has turned
most of them into excellencies. 
Nevertheless, let me advise you, my dear Miss Clary,
to discountenance any visits, which, with the censorious,
may affect your character. As that has not
hitherto suffered by your wilful default, I hope you
will not, in a desponding negligence (satisfying yourself
with a consciousness of your own innocence) permit
it to suffer. Difficult Situations, you know,
my dear young Lady, are the tests not only of prudence,
but of virtue. 
I think, I must own to you, that, since Mr. Brand's
Letter has been received, I have a renewed prohibition
to attend you. However, if you will give me
leave, that shall not detain me from you. Nor
would I stay for that leave, if I were not in hopes,
that, in this critical Situation, I may be able to do
you service here. 
I have often had messages and enquiries after your
health from the truly reverend Dr. Lewen, who has
always expressed, and still expresses, infinite concern
for you. He entirely disapproves of the measures of
the family with regard to you. He is too much indisposed
to go abroad. But, were he in good health,
he would not, as I understand, visit at Harlowe-Place; 
having some time since been unhandsomely
treated by your Brother, on his offering to mediate
for you with your family. 
* *
I am just now informed that your Cousin Morden
is arrived in England. He is at Canterbury, it
seems, looking after some concerns he has there; and
is soon expected in these parts. Who knows what
may arise from his arrival? —God be with you, my
dearest Miss Clary, and be your Comforter and Sustainer. 
And never fear but he will; for I am sure,
I am very sure, that you put your whole trust in Him. 

And what, after all, is this world, on which we
so much depend for durable good, poor creatures that
we are! —When all the joys of it, and (what is a
balancing comfort) all the troubles of it, are but momentary,
and vanish like a morning dream? 
And be this remembred, my dearest young Lady,
that worldly joy claims no kindred with the joys we
are bid to aspire after. These latter we must be fitted
for by affliction and disappointment. You are therefore
in the direct road to glory, however thorny the
path you are in. And I had almost said, that it depends
upon yourself, by your patience, and by your
resignedness to the dispensation (God enabling you,
who never fails the true penitent, and sincere invoker)
to be an heir of a blessed immortality. 
But this glory, I humbly pray, that you may not be
permitted to enter into, ripe as you are so soon likely
to be for it, till with your gentle hand (a pleasure I
have so often, as you know, promised to myself)
you have closed the eyes of 
Your maternally-affectionate
Judith Norton. 