


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Sat, Night, Mar. 18. 
As soon as I had seen Mrs. Jervois to her chair, I
went to attend Lord W. 

He received me with great expressions of esteem and
affection. 
He commanded his attendants to withdraw, and
told me, taking my hand, that my character rose upon
him from every mouth. He was in love with me, he
said. I was my mother's son. 
He commended me for my oeconomy, and complimented
into generosity the justice I had done to some
of my friends. 
I frankly own, said he, that at your first arrival,
and even till now (that I am determined to be the man
you, cousin, would wish me to be) I had thought it
but prudent to hold back. For I imagined, that your
father had lived at such a rate, that you would have
applied to me, to extricate you from difficulties; and
particularly, for money to marry your elder sister,
at least. I took notice, young man, proceeded he,
and I heard others observe, that you had not eyes
to see any of your father's faults; either when he was
living, or departed; and this gave me reason to apprehend,
that you had your father's extravagant turn:
And I was resolved, if I were applied to, to wrap myself
close about in a general denial. Else, all I had
been gathering together for so many years past, might
soon have been dissipated; and I should only have
taken a thorn out of the foot of another, and put it
into my own. 
And then he threw out some disagreeable reflexions
on my father's spirit. 
To those I answered, That every man had a right
to judge for himself, in those articles for which he
himself only is accountable. My father, and your
Lordship, continued I, had very different ways of
thinking. Magnificence was his taste: Prudence (so
your Lordship must account it) is yours. There are
people in the world, who would give different names
to both tastes: But would not your Lordship think it
very presumptuous in any man to arraign you at the 

bar of his judgment, as mistaken in the measures of
your prudence? 
Look you, nephew, I don't well know what to
make of your speech; but I judge, that you mean not
to affront me. 
I do not, my Lord. While you was apprehensive
that you might be a sufferer by me, you acted with
your usual prudence to discourage an application. My
father had, in your Lordship's judgment, but one fault; 
and he was the principal sufferer by it himself: Had
he looked into his affairs, he would have avoided the
necessity of doing several things that were disagreeable
to him, and must ever be, to a man of spirit. His very
timber, that required, as I may say, the ax, would
have furnished him with all he wanted: And he paid
interest for a less sum of money than actually was in
the hands of his stewards, unaccounted for. 
But what a glory to you, cousin— 
No compliment to me, my Lord, I pray you, to
the discredit of my father's memory. He had a right
to do what he did. Your Lordship does what you
think fit. I too, now I am my own master, do as I
please. My taste is different from both. I pursue mine,
as he did his. If I should happen to be more right
than my father in some things, he might have the advantage
of me in others; and in those I happen to do,
that are generally thought laudable, what merit have
I? Since all this time (directed by a natural bias) I
am pursuing my own predominant passion; and that,
perhaps, with as much ardor, and as little power to
resist it, as my father had to restrain his. 
Bravo! bravo! said my Lord—Let me ask you,
nephew—May all young men, if they will, improve
by travelling, as you have done? —If they may, by my
troth nine parts in ten of those who go abroad, ought
to be hanged up at their fathers doors on their return. 
Very severe, my Lord. But thinking minds will
be thoughtful, whether abroad or at home: Unthinking
ones call for our pity. 

Well, Sir, I do assure you, that I am proud of my
nephew, whatever you are of your uncle. And there
are two or three things that I want to talk to you
about; and one or two that I would consult you
upon. 
He rang, and asked, What time dinner would be
ready? 
In half an hour, was the answer. 
Mrs. Giffard came in. Her face glowed with passion. 
My Lord seemed affected at her entrance. It
was easy to see, that they were upon ill terms with
each other; and that my Lord was more afraid of her,
than she was of him. 
She endeavoured to assume a complaisant air to me; 
but it was so visibly struggled for, that it sat very aukwardly
on her countenance; and her lips trembled
when she broke silence, to ask officiously, as she did,
after the health of my sister Charlotte. 
I would be alone with my nephew, said my Lord,
in a passionate tone. 
You shall be alone, my Lord, impertinently replied
she, with an air that looked as if they had quarrelled
more than once before, and that she had made
it up on her own terms. She pulled the door after
her with a rudeness that he only could take, and deserve,
who was conscious of having degraded himself. 
Foolish woman! Why came she in when I was
there, except to shew her supposed consequence, at
the expence of his honour? She knew what my opinion
was of her. She would, by a third hand, once,
have made overtures to me of her interest with my
Lord; but I should have thought meanly of myself,
had I not, with disdain, rejected the tender of her
services. 
A damned woman! said my lord; but looked,
first, as if he would be sure she was out of hearing. 
This woman, nephew, and her behaviour, is one of
the subjects I wanted to consult you upon. 

Defer this subject, my Lord, till you have recovered
your temper. You did not design to begin
with it. You are discomposed. 
And so I am: And he puffed, and panted, as if out
of breath. 
I asked him some indifferent questions. To have
followed him upon the subject at that time, whatever
resolutions he had taken; they would probably have
gone off, when the passion, to which they would have
owed their vigour, had subsided. 
When he had answered them, his colour and his
wrath went down together. 
He then ran out into my praises again, and, particularly,
for my behaviour to Mrs. Oldham; who,
he said, lived now very happily, and very exemplarily; 
and never opened her lips, when she was led to
mention me, but with blessings heaped upon me. 
That woman, my Lord, said I, was once good. A
recovery, where a person is not totally abandoned, is
more to be hoped for, than the reformation of one
who never was well-principled. All that is wished
for, in the latter, is, that she may be made unhurtful:
Her highest good was never more than harmlessness. 
She that was once good, cannot be easy, when she is
in a true state of penitence, till she is restored to that
from which she was induced to depart. 
You understand these matters, cousin: I don't. 
But if you will favour me with more of your company,
I shall, I believe, be the better for your notions. 
But I must talk about this woman, nephew. 
I am calm now. I must talk of this woman now—I
am resolved to part with her: I can bear her no
longer. Did you not mind how she pulled the door
after her, tho' you were present? 
I did, my Lord. But it was plain, that something
disagreeable had passed before; or she could not so intirely
have forgot herself. But, my Lord, we will
postpone this subject, if you please. If you yourself 

lead to it after dinner, I will attend to it, with all my
heart. 
Well, then, be it so. But now tell me, Have you,
nephew, any thoughts of marriage? 
I have great honour for the state; and hope to be
one day happy in it. 
Well said—And are you at liberty, kinsman, to
receive a proposal of that nature? 
And then, without waiting for my answer, he proposed
Lady Frances N. and said, he had been spoken
to on that subject. 
I answered, that the Lady was very deserving; but
that I should think myself under too great obligations
to a wife, for my own ease, if there were a woman in
the world whom I could prefer to her. 
Well, what think you of Lady Anne S.? I am told,
that she is likely to be the Lady. She has a noble
fortune. Your sisters, I hear, are friends to Lady
Anne. 
My sisters wish me happily married. I have such
an opinion of both those Ladies, that it would give
me some little pain, to imagine each would not, in her
turn, refuse me, were I offered to her, as I cannot,
myself, make the offer. I cannot bear, my Lord, to
think of returning slight for respect, to my own sex:
But as to Ladies; how can we expect that delicacy
and dignity from them, which are the bulwarks of
their virtue, if we do not treat them with dignity? 
Charming notions! If you had them not abroad,
you had them from your mother: She was all that
was excellent in woman. 
Indeed she was. Excellent woman! She is always
before my eyes. 
And excellent kinsman too! Now I know your
reverence for your mother, I will allow of all you say
of your father; because I see it is all from principle. 
I have known some men who have spoken with reverence
of their mothers, to give themselves dignity: 

That is to say, for bringing creatures so important as
themselves into the world; and who have exacted respect
to the good old women who were merely good
old women, as we call them, in order to take the incense,
offered the parent, into their own nostrils. This
was duty in parade. 
The observation, my good Dr. Bartlett, I thought
above my Lord W. I think I have heard one like it,
made by my father, who saw very far into men; but
was sometimes led, by his wit, into saying a severe
thing: And yet, whenever I hear a man praised highly
for the performance of common duties, as for being
a good husband, a good son, or a kind father; tho'
each is comparatively praise-worthy, I conclude, that
there is nothing extraordinary to be said of him. To
call a man a good Friend, is indeed comprizing all
the duties in one word. For friendship is the balm, as
well as seasoning, of life: And a man cannot be defective
in any of the social duties, who is capable of
it, when the term is rightly understood. 
Well, cousin, since you cannot think of either of
those Ladies, how should you like the rich and beautiful
Countess of R.? You know what an excellent
character she bears. 
I do. But, my Lord, I should not choose to marry
a widow: And yet, generally, I do not disrespect
widows, nor imagine those men to blame who marry
them. But as my circumstances are not unhappy,
and as riches will never be my principal inducement
in the choice of a wife, I may be allowed to indulge
my peculiarities; especially as I shall hope (and I
should not deserve a good wife if I did not) that, when
once married, I shall be married for my whole life. 
The Countess once declared, said my Lord, before
half a score in company, two of them her particular
admirers, That she never would marry any man in the
world, except he were just such another, in mind and
manners, as Sir Charles Grandison. 

Ladies, my Lord, who in absence speak favourably
of a man that forms not pretensions upon them, nor
is likely to be troublesome to them, would soon convince
that man of his mistake, were his presumption
to rise upon their declared good opinions. 
I wonder, proceeded my Lord, that every young
man is not good. I have heard you, cousin, praised
in all the circles where you have been mentioned. It
was certainly an advantage to you to come back to
us a stranger, as I may say. Many youthful follies
may perhaps be over-passed, that we shall never know
any-thing of: But, be that as it will, I can tell you,
Sir, that I have heard such praises of you, as have
made my eyes glisten, because of my relation to you. 
I was told, within this month past, that no fewer than
Five Ladies, out of one circle, declared, that they
would stand out by consent, and let you pick and
choose a wife from among them. 
What your Lordship has heard of this nature, let
me say, without affecting to disclaim a compliment
apparently too high for my merits, is much more to
the honour of the one sex, than of the other. I
should be glad, that policy, if not principle (principle
might take root, and grow from it) would mend us
men. 
So should I, nephew: But I [Poor man! he hung
down his head!] have not been a better man than I
ought to be. Do you not despise me, in your heart,
cousin? —You must have heard—That cursed woman—But
I begin to repent! And the truly good,
I believe, cannot be either censorious, or uncharitable. 
Tell me, however, Do you not despise me? 
Despise my mother's brother! No, my Lord. Yet
were a sovereign to warrant my freedom, and there
was a likelihood that he would be the better for it; I
would, with decency, tell him my whole mind. I am
sorry to say it; but your Lordship, if you have not
had virtue to make you worthy of being imitated, 

has too many examples among the great, as well as
among the middling, to cause you to be censured for
singularity. But your Lordship adds, to a confession
that is not an ungenerous one, that you begin to
repent. 
Indeed I do. And your character, cousin, has made
me half-ashamed of myself. 
I am not accustomed, my Lord, to harangue on
these subjects to men who know their duty: But let
me say, That your Lordship's good resolutions, to be
efficacious, must be built upon a better foundation
than occasional disgust or disobligation. But here,
again, we are verging to a subject that we are both
agreed to defer till after dinner. 
I am charmed with your treatment of me, cousin. 
I shall, for my own sake, adore my sister's son. Had
I consulted my chaplain, who is a good man too, he
would have too roughly treated me. 
Divines, my Lord, must do their duty. 
He then introduced the affair between Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen and me, of which, I found, he was more
particularly informed, than I could have imagined:
And after he had launched out upon that, and upon
my refusal of a Duel, he, by a transition that was very
natural, mentioned the rescued Lady, as he called her. 
I have heard, cousin, said he, that she is the most
beautiful woman in England. 
I think her so, my Lord, replied I: And she has
one excellence, that I never before met with in a
Beauty: She is not proud of it. 
I then gave my opinion of Miss Byron in such
terms, as made my Lord challenge me, as my sisters
once did, on the warmth of my description and praises
of her. 
And does your Lordship think, that I cannot do
justice to the merits of such a Lady as Miss Byron,
but with an interested view? I do assure you, that
what I have said, is short of what I think of her. 

But I can praise a Lady, without meaning a compliment
to myself. I look upon it, however, as one
of the most fortunate accidents of my life, that I have
been able to serve her, and save her from a forced
marriage with a man whom she disliked, and who could
not deserve her. There is hardly any-thing gives me
more pain, than when I see a worthy woman very
unequally yoked, if her own choice has not been at
first consulted; and who yet, tho' deeply sensible of
her misfortune, irreproachably supports her part of the
yoke. 
You are a great friend to the sex, kinsman. 
I am. I think the man who is not, must have fallen
into bad company; and deserves not to have been favoured
with better. Yet to unwomanly faults, to
want of morals, and even to want of delicacy, no man
is more quicksighted. 
I don't know how it is; but I have not, at this
rate, fallen into the best company: But perhaps it is for
want of that delicacy, in my own mind, which you
are speaking of. 
Were we men, my Lord, to value women (and
to let it be known that we do) for those qualities
which are principally valuable in the sex; the less
estimable, if they would not be reformed, would
shrink out of our company, into company more suitable
to their taste; and we should never want objects
worthy of our knowlege, and even of our admiration,
to associate with. There is a kind of magnetism in
goodness. Bad people will indeed find out bad people,
and confederate with them, in order to keep one another
in countenance; but they are bound together by
a rope of sand; while trust, confidence, love, sympathy,
and a reciprocation of beneficent actions, twist
a cord which ties good men to good men, and cannot
be easily broken. 
I have never had these notions, cousin; and yet they
are good ones. I took people as I found them; and 

to own the truth, meaning to serve myself, rather
than any-body else, I never took pains to look out for
worthy attachments. The people I had to do with,
had the same views upon me, as I had upon them; and
thus I went on in a state of hostility with all men; 
mistrusting and guarding, as well as I could, and not
doubting that every man I had to do with would impose
upon me, if I placed a confidence in him: But
as to this Miss Byron, nephew, I shall never rest till
I see her—Pray what is her fortune? They tell me, it
is not above 15000l. ––What is that, to the offers you
have had made you? 
Just then we were told, dinner was on the table. 
I am wishing for an inclination to rest; but it flies
me. The last Letter from Beauchamp, dated from
Bologna, as well as those from the Bishop, afflict me. 
Why have I such a feeling heart? Were the unhappy
situation of affairs there owing to my own enterprizing
spirit, I should deserve the pain it gives me. 
But I should be too happy, had I not these without-door
perplexities, as I may call them, to torment me. 
Thank God that they arise not from within, tho' they
make themselves too easy a passage to my heart! 
My paper is written out. If I am likely to find a
drowsy moment, I shall welcome its approach: If
not, I will rise, and continue my subject. 

