


I Thought I should have found no Time nor
Heart to write again this Day. But here are
three Gentlemen come, unexpectedly, to dine with
my Master; and so I shall not appear. He has done
all he could, civilly, to send them away; but they
will stay, tho', I believe, he had rather they would
not. And so I have nothing to do but to write till
I go to Dinner myself with Mrs. Jewkes: For my
Master was not prepared for this company; and it
will be a little latish to day. So I will begin with
my happy Story where I left off. 
When I came down to Breakfast, Mr. Peters and
Mr. williams were both there. And as soon as my
Master heard me coming down, he met me at the
Door, and led me in with great Tenderness. He
had kindly spoke to them, as he told me afterwards,
to mention no more of the Matter to me, than
needs must. I paid my Respects to them, I believe,
a little aukwardly, and was almost out of Breath; 
but said, I had come down a little too fast. 
When Abraham came in to wait, my Master said,
(that the Servants should not mistrust) 'Tis well,
Gentlemen, you came as you did: For my good
Girl and I were going to take an Airing till Dinnertime. 
I hope you'll stay and dine with me. Sir,
said Mr. Peters, we won't hinder you; I only came, 
having a little Time upon my Hands, to see your
Chapel; but must be at home at Dinner; and Mr.
Williams will dine with me. Well then, said my
Master, we will pursue our Intention, and ride out for
an Hour or two, as soon as I have shewed Mr. Peters
my little Chapel. Will you, Pamela, after Breakfast,
walk with us to it? If –––– if, said I, and had
like to have stammer'd, foolish that I was! if you
please, Sir. I could look none of them in the Face! 
Abraham looking at me; Why, Child, said my
Master, you have hardly recover'd your Fright yet:
How came your Foot to slip? 'Tis well you did not
hurt yourself. Said Mr. Peters, improving the Hint,
You han't sprain'd your Ankle, Madam, I hope? 
No, Sir, said I, I believe not! But 'tis a little painful
to me. And so it was; for I meant my Foolishness!––– Abraham, said my Master, bid Robin put
the Horses to the Coach, instead of the Chariot; 
and if these Gentlemen will go, we can set them
down. No matter, Sir, said Mr. Peters, I had as
lieve walk, if Mr. Williams chuses it. Well then, said
my Master, let it be the Chariot, as I told him. 
I could eat nothing, tho' I attempted it; and my
Hand shook so, I spilled some of my Chocolate, and
so put it down again; and they were all very good,
and looked another way. My Master said, when
Abraham was out, I have a quite plain Ring here,
Mr. Peters. And I hope the Ceremony will dignify
the Ring; and that I shall give my Girl Reason
to think it, for that Cause, the most valuable one
that can be presented her. Mr. Peters said, he was
sure I should set more by it, than the richest Diamond
in the World. 
I had bid Mrs. Jewkes not to dress herself, lest
she should give Cause of Mistrust; and she took my
Advice. 
When Breakfast was over, my Master said, before
Abraham, Well, Gentlemen, we will step into the
Chapel; and you must give me your Advice, as
to the Alterations I design. I am in the more
Haste, because the Survey you are going to take of
it, for the Alterations, will take up a little time; 
and we shall have but a small Space between that and
Dinner, for the Tour I design to make. ––– Pamela,
you'll give us your Opinion, won't you? Yes, Sir,
said I; I'll come after you. 
So they went out, and I sat down in the Chair
again, and fanned myself; I am sick at Heart, said
I, I think, Mrs. Jewkes. Said she, Shall I fetch you
a little Cordial? —No, said I, I am a sad Fool! I
want Spirits, that's all. She took her Smelling-bottle,
and would have given it me; but I said, Keep it in
your Hand; may-be, I may want it; but I hope
not. 
She gave me very good Words; and begg'd me
to go: And I got up, but my Knees beat so against
one another, I was forced to sit down again. But,
at last, I held by her Arm; and passing by Abraham,
I said, This ugly Slip, coming down Stairs,
has made me limp, tho'; so I must hold by you. 
Do you know, said I, what Alterations there are to
be in the Chapel, that we must all give our Opinions
of them? 
Nan, she told me, was let into the Secret; and
she had order'd her to stay at the Chapel Door, to
see that nobody came in. My dear Master came to
me, at entering the Chapel, and took my Hand,
and led me up to the Altar. Remember, my dear
Girl, whisper'd he, and be chearful. I am, I will, sir,
said I; but I hardly knew what I said; and so you
may believe, when I said to Mrs. Jewkes, Don't
leave me; pray, Mrs. Jewkes, don't leave me; as if
I had all Confidence in her, and none where it was 
most due. So she kept close to me. God forgive
me! but I never was so absent in my Life, as at first: 
Even till Mr. Williams had gone on in the Service,
so far as to the awful Words about requiring us, as
we should answer at the dreadful Day of Judgment; 
and then the solemn Words, and my Master's whispering,
Mind this, my Dear, made me start. Said
he, still whispering, Know you any Impediment? I
blush'd, and said, softly, None, Sir, but my great
Unworthiness. 
Then follow'd the sweet Words, Wilt thou have
this Woman to thy wedded Wife, &c. and I began to
take Heart a little, when my dearest Master answer'd,
audibly, to this Question, I will. But I could only
make a Curchee, when they asked me; tho', I
am sure, my Heart was readier than my Speech, and
answer'd to every Article of obey, serve, love and
honour. 
Mr. Peters gave me away, and I said after Mr.
Williams, as well as I could, as my dear Master did,
with a much better Grace, the Words of Betrothment; 
and the Ceremony of the Ring passing next,
I received the dear Favour at his worthy Hands,
with a most grateful Heart; and he was pleased to
say afterwards, in the Chariot, that when he had
done saying, With this Ring I thee wed, &c. I made
a Curchee, and said, Thank you, Sir. May-be, I
did; for, I am sure, it was a most grateful Part of
the Service; and my Heart was overwhelm'd with
his Goodness, and the tender Grace wherewith he
perform'd it. I was very glad, that the next Part
was the Prayer, and Kneeling; for I trembled so, I
could hardly stand, betwixt Fear and Delight. 
The joining of our Hands afterwards, the Declaration
of our being marry'd to the few Witnesses
present; for, reckoning Nan, whose Curiosity would
not let her stay at the Door, they were but Mr. 
Peters, Mrs. Jewkes, and she; the Blessing, the
Psalm, and the subsequent Prayers, and the concluding
Exhortation, were so many beautiful, welcome
and lovely Parts of this divine Office, that my Heart
began to be delighted with them, and my Spirits to
be a little freer. 
And thus, my dearest, dear Parents, is your happy,
happy, thrice happy Pamela, at last, marry'd; and
to who?––– Why, to her beloved, gracious Master!
the Lord of her Wishes! —And thus the dear, once
naughty Assailer of her Innocence, by a blessed
Turn of Providence, is become the kind, the generous
Protector and Rewarder of it. God be evermore
blessed and praised! and make me not wholly
unworthy of such a transcendent Honour!–– And bless
and reward the dear, dear good Gentleman, who
has thus exalted his unworthy Servant, and given her
a Place, which the greatest Ladies would think
themselves happy in! 
My Master saluted me most ardently, and said,
God give you, my dear Love, as much Joy on this
Occasion, as I have. And he presented me to Mr.
Peters, who saluted me; and said, You may excuse
me, dear Madam; for I gave you away, and you
are my Daughter. And Mr. Williams modestly
withdrawing a little way; Mr. Williams, said my Master,
pray accept my Thanks, and wish your Sister
Joy. So he saluted me too; and said, Most heartily,
Madam, I do. And I will say, that to see so much
Innocence and Virtue, so eminently rewarded, is one
of the greatest Pleasures I have ever known. This
my Master took very kindly. 
Mrs. Jewkes would have kissed my Hand at the
Chapel Door; but I put my Arms about her Neck,
for I had got a new Recruit of Spirits just then,
and kissed her; and said, Thank you, Mrs. Jewkes,
for accompanying me. I have behav'd sadly. No, 
Madam, said she, pretty well, pretty well! While
the Gentlemen were talking, I dropt down on my
Knees in a Corner, and once more blessed God for
this so signal a Mercy; and Mr. Peters afterwards
walked out with me; and Mr. Williams and my Master
talked together, and came out after us. 
Mr. Peters, when we came into the Parlour, said,
I once more, Madam, must wish you Joy of this
happy Occasion. I wish every Day may add to
your Comsorts; and may you very long rejoice in
one another; for you are the loveliest Couple I
ever saw join'd. I told him, I was infinitely oblig'd
to his kind Opinion, and good Wishes; and hoped
my future Conduct would not make me unworthy
of them. 
My good Benefactor came in with Mr. Williams: 
So, my dear Life, said he, How do you do? 
A little more compos'd, I hope! —Well, you see
this is not so dreadful an Affair as you apprehended. 
Sir, said Mr. Peters, very kindly, 'tis a very
solemn Circumstance, and I love to see it so reverently
and awfully enter'd upon. It is a most excellent
Sign; for the most thoughtful Beginnings make
the most prudent Proceedings. Mrs. Jewkes, of her
own accord, came in with a large silver Tumbler,
filled with Sack, and a Toast, and Nutmeg, and
Sugar; and my Master said, That's well thought of,
Mrs. Jewkes; for we have made but sorry Breakfastings. 
And he would make me take some of the
Toast; as they all did, and drank pretty heartily: 
And I drank a little, and it chear'd my Heart, I
thought, for an Hour after. 
My Master took a fine Diamond Ring from his
Finger, and presented it to Mr. Peters; who receiv'd
it very kindly. And to Mr. Williams he said, My
old Acquaintance, I have reserv'd for you, against
a Variety of Sollicitations, the Living I always design'd 
for you; and I beg you'll prepare to take
Possession of it; and as the doing it may be attended
with some Expence, pray accept of this towards it; 
and so he gave him (as he told me afterwards it
was) a Bank Note of 50l. 
So did this generous good Gentleman bless us all,
and me in particular; for whose sake he was as bounteous
as if he had marry'd one of the noblest Fortunes. 
So he took his Leave of the Gentlemen, recommending
Secrecy again, for a few Days, and they
left him; and none of the Servants suspected any
thing, as Mrs. Jewkes believes. And then I threw
myself at his Feet, blessing God, and blessing him
for his Goodness, and he overwhelm'd me with
Kindness; calling me his sweet Bride, and twenty
lovely Epithets, that swell my grateful Heart beyond
the Power of Utterance. 
He afterwards led me to the Chariot; and we
took a delightful Tour round the neighbouring Villages; 
and he did all he could, to dissipate those still
perverse Anxieties that dwell upon my Mind, and,
do what I can, spread too thoughtful an Air, as he
tells me, over my Countenance. 
We came home again by half an Hour after One; 
and he was pleasing himself with thinking, not to be
an Hour out of my Company this blessed Day, that
(as he was so good as to say) he might inspire me
with a Familiarity that should improve my Confidence
in him, when he was told, that a Footman
of Sir Charles Hargrave had been here, to let him
know, that his Master, and two other Gentlemen,
were on the Road to take a Dinner with him, in
their Way to Nottingham. 
He was heartily vex'd at this, and said to me,
He should have been glad of their Companies at any
other Time; but that it was a barbarous Intrusion 
now; and he wish'd they had been told he would
not be at home at Dinner: And besides, said he,
they are horrid Drinkers, and I shan't be able to
get them away to Night, perhaps; for they have
nothing to do, but travel round the Country, and
beat up their Friends Quarters all the Way; and 'tis
all one to them, whether they stay a Night, or a
Month, at a Place. But, added he, I'll find some way,
if I can, to turn them off, after Dinner.––– Confound
them, said he, in a violent Pet, that they
should come this Day, of all the Days in the
Year! 
We had hardly alighted, and got in, before they
came; three mad Rakes they seem'd to be, as I
looked out of the Window, setting up a Hunting-note,
as soon as they came to the Gate, that made
the Court-yard echo again, and smacking their
Whips in Concert. 
So I went up to my Chamber, and saw (what
made my Heart throb) Mrs. Jewkes's officious Pains
to put the Room in Order for a Guest, that however
welcome, as now my Duty teaches me to say,
is yet dreadful to me to think of. So I refuged
myself in my Closet, and had recourse to Pen and
Ink, for my Amusement, and to divert my Anxiety of
Mind. —If one's Heart is so sad, and one's Apprehensions
so great, where one so extremely loves, and
is so extremely obliged; What must be the Case of
those poor Maidens, who are forced, for sordid
Views, by their tyrannical Parents, or Guardians,
to marry the Man they almost hate, and, perhaps,
to the Loss of the Man they most love? O that is
a sad thing indeed!––– And what have not such cruel
Parents to answer for? and what do not such poor
innocent Victims suffer?––– But, blessed be God,
this Lot is far from being mine! 
My good Master, for I cannot yet have the Presumption
to call him by a more tender Epithet,
came up to me; and said, Well, I just came to ask
my dear Bride! (O the charming, charming Word!)
how she does? I see you are writing, my Dear, said
he: These consounded Rakes are half mad, I
think, and will make me so! However, said he,
I have order'd my Chariot to be got ready, as if I
was under an Engagement five Miles off, and will
set them out of the House, if possible; and then
ride round, and come back, as soon as I can get
rid of them. I find, said he, Lady Davers is full
of our Affairs. She has taken great Freedoms with
me before Sir Charles; and they have all been at
me, without Mercy; and I was forced to be very
serious with them, or else they would have come up
to have seen you, as I would not call you down.––– 
He kissed me, and said, I shall quarrel with them,
if I can't get them away; for I have lost two or
three precious Hours with my Soul's Delight; and
so he went down. 
Mrs. Jewkes ask'd me to walk down to Dinner
in the little Parlour. I went down, and she was so
complaisant as to offer to wait upon me at Table; 
and would not be persuaded, without Difficulty, to
sit down with me. But I insisted she should; For,
said I, it would be very extraordinary if one should
so soon go into such Distance, Mrs. Jewkes! ––– 
Whatever the Station of our good Master may
require of me, added I, I hope I shall always conduct
myself in such a manner, that Pride and Insolence
shall bear no Part in my Character. You are very
good, Madam, said she; but I will always know
my Duty to my Master's Lady. —Why then, reply'd I,
if I must take State upon me so early, Mrs. Jewkes,
let me exact from you what you call your Duty; 
and sit down with me when I desire you. This prevailed 
upon her; and I made shift to eat a bit of
Apple-pie, and a little Custard; but I had no Appetite
to any thing else. 
My good Master came in again, and said, Well,
thank my Stars! these Rakes are going now; but I
must set out with them; and I chuse my Chariot; 
for if I took Horse, I should have Difficulty to part
with them; for they are like a Snow-ball, and intend
to gather Company as they go, to make a merry
Tour of it for some Days together. We both got
up, when he came in; Fie, Pamela, said he! why
this Ceremony now? —Sit still, Mrs. Jewkes!––– 
Nay, Sir, said she, I was loth to sit down, but my
Lady would have me!––– She is very right, Mrs.
Jewkes, said my Master, and tapp'd me on the
Cheek; for we are not yet half marry'd; and so she
is not above half your Lady yet! —Don't look so
down, don't be so silent, my Dearest, said he; 
why, you hardly spoke twenty Words to me all the
time we were out together. Something I will allow
for your bashful Sweetness; but not too much. —Mrs.
Jewkes, have you no pleasant Tales to tell my Pamela,
to make her smile, till I return? —Yes, Sir,
said she, I could tell twenty pleasant Stories; but
my Lady is too nice to hear them; and yet, I hope,
I should not be shocking neither. Ah! poor Woman!
thought I; thy chastest Stories will make a
modest Person blush, if I know thee; and I desire
to hear none of them. My Master said, Tell her
one of the shortest you have, in my Hearing. Why,
Sir, said she, I knew a bashful young Lady, as Madam
may be, marry'd to ––––– Dear Mrs. Jewkes,
interrupted I, no more of your Story, I beseech you! I
don't like the Beginning of it. Go on, Mrs. Jewkes,
said my Master. No, pray, Sir, don't require it, said
I; pray don't. Well, said he, then we'll have it
another time, Mrs. Jewkes. 
And so Abraham coming to tell him, the Gentlemen
were going, and his Chariot was ready; Thank
God, said he; and went to them, and sat out with
them. I took a Turn in the Garden, with Mrs.
Jewkes, after they were gone: And having walked
a-while, I said, I should be glad of her Company
down the Elm-walk, to meet the Chariot: For, Oh! 
I know not how to look up at him, when he is with
me; nor how to bear his Absence, when I have
Reason to expect him! What a strange Contradiction
there is in this unaccountable Passion! 
What a different Aspect every thing in and about
this House bears now, to my thinking, to what it
once had! The Garden, the Pond, the Alcove, the
Elm-walk. But, Oh! my Prison is become my Palace; 
and no wonder every thing wears another
Face! We sat down upon the broad Style, leading
towards the Road, and Mrs. Jewkes was quite another
Person to me, to what she was the last time I
sat there! 
At last by best Beloved return'd, and alighted there. 
What, my Pamela! (said he, and kissed me) brings
you this way? I hope, to meet me? —Yes, Sir, said
I. That's kind, indeed, said he; but why that averted
Eye?—that down-cast Countenance, as if you was
afraid of me? You must not think so, Sir, said I. 
Revive my Heart then, said he, with a more chearful
Aspect; and let that over-anxious Sollicitude
which appears in the charmingest Face in the World,
be chased from it.––– Have you, my dear Girl, any
Fears that I can dissipate; any Doubts that I can
obviate; any Hopes that I can encourage; any Request
that I can gratify? Speak, my dear Pamela; 
and if I have Power, but speak, and to purchase
one Smile, it shall be done! 
I cannot, Sir, said I, have any Fears, any Doubts,
but that I shall never be able to deserve all your 
Goodness. I have no Hopes, but that my future
Conduct may be agreeable to you, and my determined
Duty well accepted. Nor have I any Request
to make, but that you will forgive all my Imperfections; 
and, among the rest, this foolish Weakness,
that makes me seem to you, after all the generous
Things that have passed, to want this further
Condescension, and these kind Assurances. But, indeed,
Sir, I am oppress'd by your Bounty; my Spirits
sink under the Weight of it; and the Oppression is
still the greater, as I see not how, possibly, in my
whole future Life, by all I can do, to merit the least
of your Favours. 
I know your grateful Heart, said he, but remember,
my Dear, what the Lawyers tell us, That Marriage
is the highest Consideration which the Law
knows. And this, my sweet Bride, has made you
mine, and me yours; and you have the best Claim
in the World to share my Fortune with me. But,
set that Consideration aside, what is the Obligation
you have to me? Your Mind is pure as that of an
Angel, and as much transcends mine. Your Wit
and your Judgment, to make you no Compliment,
are more than equal to mine: You have all the
Graces that Education can give a Woman; improv'd
by a Genius which makes those Graces natural
to you. You have a Sweetness of Temper, and
a noble Sincerity, beyond all Compare; and in the
Beauty of your Person, you excel all the Ladies I
ever saw. Where then, my Dearest, is the Obligation,
if not on my side to you? —But to avoid
these Comparisons, let us talk of nothing henceforth
but Equality; for if you will set the Riches of
your Mind, and your unblemished Virtue, against
my Fortune, (which is but an accidental Good, as I
may call it, and all I have to boast of) the Condescension
will be yours; and I shall not think I can 
possibly deserve you, till, after your sweet Example,
my future Life shall become nearly as blameless as
yours. 
O Sir, said I, what Comfort do you give me, that,
instead of my being in Danger of being insnared by
the high Condition to which your Goodness has
exalted me, you make me hope, that I shall be confirm'd
and improv'd by you; and that we may have
a Prospect of perpetuating each other's Happiness,
till Time shall be no more! —But, Sir, I will not,
as you once caution'd me, be too serious. I will
resolve, with these sweet Encouragements, to be, in
every thing, what you would have me be! And I
hope I shall, more and more, shew you that I have
no Will but yours. He kissed me very tenderly,
and thanked me for this kind Assurance, as he called
it. And so we enter'd the House, Mrs. Jewkes having
left us as soon as my Master alighted. 
Eight o'Clock at Night.
Now these sweet Assurances, my dear Father
and Mother, you will say, must be very Consolatory
to me, and voluntierly on his Side, all that
could be wish'd for on mine; and I was resolved,
if possible, to subdue my idle Fears and Apprehensions. 
Ten o'Clock at Night.
As we sat at Supper, he was generously kind to
me, as well in his Actions as Expressions. He
took notice, in the most delicate manner, of my
Endeavour to conquer my Foibles, and said, I see,
with Pleasure, my dear Girl strives to comport herself
in a manner suitable to my Wishes: I see even
thro' the sweet tender Struggles of your over-nice
Modesty, how much I owe to your Desire of obligeing 
me. As I have once told you, that I am the
Conquest more of your Virtue than your Beauty; 
so, not one alarming Word or Look shall my beloved
Pamela hear or see, to give her Reason to
suspect the Truth of what I aver. You may the
rather believe me, continued he, as you may see
the Pain I have to behold any thing that concerns
you, even tho' your Concern be causeless. And yet
I will indulge my dear Girl's bashful Weakness so
far, as to own that so pure a Mind may suffer from
Apprehension, on so important a Change as this; 
and I can therefore be only displeased with such
Part of your Conduct, as may make your Sufferings
greater than my own; when I am resolved, thro'
every Stage of my future Life, in all Events, to
study to make them less. 
After Supper, of which, with all his sweet Persuasions,
I could hardly taste, he made me drink two
Glasses of Champaign, and afterwards a Glass of
Sack; which he kindly forced upon me, by naming
your Healths: And as the Time of retiring drew on,
he took notice, but in a very delicate manner, how
my Colour went and came; and how foolishly I
trembled. Nobody, surely, in such delightful Circumstances,
ever behav'd so silly!––– And he said,
My dearest Girl, I fear you have had too much of
my Company for so many Hours together; and
would better recollect yourself, if you retir'd for
half an Hour to your Closet. 
I wished for this, but durst not say so much, lest
he should be angry; for, as the Hours grew on, I
found my Apprehensions increase, and my silly Heart
was the unquieter, every time I could lift up my
Eyes to his dear Face; so sweetly terrible did he appear
to my Apprehensions. I said, You are all Goodness,
dear Sir; and I boldly kissed his dear Hand,
and pressed it to my Lips, with both mine. And he 
saluting me very fervently, gave me his Hand, seeing
me hardly able to stand, and led me to my
Chamber-door, and then most generously withdrew. 
I went to my Closet; and the first thing I did, on
my Knees, again thanked God for the Blessing of the
Day; and besought his Divine Goodness to conduct
my future Life in such a manner, as should make
me a happy Instrument of his Glory. After this,
being now left to my own Recollection, I grew a
little more assured and lightsome; and the Pen and
my Paper being before me, I amused myself with
writing thus far. 
Eleven o'Clock Thursday Night.
Mrs. Jewkes being come up with a Message,
desiring to know, whether her Master may
attend upon me in my Closet; and hinting to me,
that, however, she believed, he did not expect to find
me there, I have sent Word, that I beg he would
indulge me one Quarter of an Hour.––– So, committing
myself to the Mercies of the Almighty, who
has led me thro' so many strange Scenes of Terror
and Affrightment, to this happy, yet awful Moment,
I will wish you, my dear Parents, a good Night; 
and tho' you will not see this in time, yet I know
I have your hourly Prayers; and therefore cannot
fail of them now. So, Good-night, Good-night! 
God bless you, and God bless me. Amen, Amen, if
it be his blessed Will, subscribes 
Your ever dutiful Daughter! 
