


Miss Byron, To Mrs. Reeves. 


Selby-house, Friday, Sept. 8.
Your kind Letter, my dear cousin, has, at the
same time, delighted and pained me. I rejoice
in the declared esteem of one of the best of men; 
and I honour him for his friendly love expressed to
you and my cousin, in the visit he made you: But I
am pained at your calling upon me (in pity to my
weakness, shall I call it? a weakness so ill concealed)
to rejoice, that the excellent man, when he has dispatched
all his affairs of consequence, and has nothing
else to do, may possibly, for you cannot be certain,
make me a visit in Northamptonshire. —O my cousin! 
And were his absence, and the apprehension of his
being the husband of another woman, think you, the
occasion of my indisposition; that I must now, that
the other affair seems determined in a manner so unexpected,
be bid at once to be well? 
Sir Charles Grandison, my dear cousin, may honour
us with the prognosticated visit, or not, as he
pleases: But were he to declare himself my Lover,
my heart would not be so joyful as you seem to expect,
if Lady Clementina is to be unhappy. What tho'
the refusal of marriage was hers; was not that refusal 

the greatest sacrifice that ever woman made to her superior
duty? Does she not still avow her Love to him? 
And must he not, ought he not, ever to love her? 
And here my pride puts in its claim to attention— 
Shall your Harriet sit down and think herself happy in
a second-place Love? Yet let me own to you, my
cousin, that Sir Charles Grandison is dearer to me
than all else that I hold most dear in this world: And
if Clementina could be not un-happy [Happy I have
no notion she can be without him] and he were to declare
himself my Lover; Affectation, be gone! I
would say; I will trust to my own heart, and to my
future conduct, to make for myself an interest in his
affections, that should enrich my content; in other
words, that should make me more than contented. 
But time will soon determine my destiny: I will
have patience to wait its determination. I make no
doubt but he has sufficient reasons for all he does. 
I am as much delighted, as you could be, at the
notice he took of your dear infant. The brave must
be humane: And what greater instance of humanity
can be shewn, than for grown persons to look back
upon the state they were once themselves in, with tenderness
and compassion? 
I am very sorry for the cause of Lady Betty's affliction. 
Pity! the good Lady took not—But I will
not be severe, after I have said, that childrens faults
are not always originally their own. 
Poor Miss Cantillon! —But she was not under age; 
and as her punishment was of her own choosing—I
am sorry, however, for both. I hope, after they have
smarted, something will be done for the poor wretches. 
Good parents will be placable; bad ones, or such as
have not given good examples, ought to be so. 
God continue to you, my dear cousins both, your
present comforts, and increase your pleasures! for all
your pleasures are innocent ones; prays 
Your ever-obliged and affectionate
Harriet Byron. 

