



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Saturday, Sept. 2. 
I write, my beloved Miss Howe, tho' very ill still: 
But I could not by the return of your messenger; 
for I was then unable to hold a pen. 
Your Mother's illness (as mentioned in the first part
of your Letter) gave me great distress for you, till I
re'd farther. You bewailed it as it became a Daughter
so sensible. May you be blessed in each other for
many, very many, happy years to come! I doubt
not, that even this sudden and grievous indisposition,
by the frame it has put you in, and the apprehension
it has given you of losing so dear a Mother, will contribute
to the happiness I wish you: For, alas! my
dear, we seldom know how to value the blessings we
enjoy, till we are in danger of losing them, or have
actually lost them: And then, what would we give
to have them restored to us! 
What, I wonder, has again happened between You
and Mr. Hickman? Altho' I know it not, I dare say
it is owing to some pretty petulance, to some half-ungenerous
advantage taken of his obligingness and
assiduity. Will you never, my dear, give the weight
You and all our Sex ought to give to the qualities of
Sobriety and Regularity of Life and Manners in that 

Sex? Must bold creatures, and forward spirits, for
ever, and by the best and wisest of us, as well as by
the indiscreetest, be the most kindly treated? 
My dear friends know not, that I have actually
suffered within less than an inch of my life. 
Poor Mr. Brand! He meant well, I believe. I
am afraid all will turn heavily upon him, when he
probably imagined, that he was taking the best method
to oblige. But were he not to have been so light of
belief, and so weakly officious; and had given a more
favourable, and, it would be strange if I could not
say, a juster report; things would have been, nevertheless,
exactly as they are. 
I must lay down my pen. I am very ill. I believe
I shall be better by-and-by. The bad writing
would betray me, altho' I had a mind to keep from
you, what the event must soon— 
* *
Now I resume my trembling pen. Excuse the
unsteady writing. It will be so— 
I have wanted no money: So don't be angry about
such a trifle as money. Yet am I glad of what you
inclined me to hope, that my friends will give up
the produce of my Grandfather's Estate since it has
been in their hands: Because, knowing it to be my
right, and that they could not want it, I had already
disposed of a good part of it; and could only hope
they would be willing to give it up at my last request. 
And now how rich shall I think myself in this my last
stage! —And yet I did not want before—Indeed I did
not—For who, that has many Superfluities, can be
said to want! 
Do not, my dear friend, be concerned that I call
it my last stage; for what is even the long life which
in high health we wish for? What, but, as we go
along, a life of apprehension, sometimes for our
friends, oftener for ourselves? And at last, when
arrived at the Old Age we covet, one heavy loss or 

deprivation having succeeded another, we see ourselves
stript, as I may say, of every one we loved; and find
ourselves exposed, as uncompanionable poor creatures,
to the slights, to the contempts, of jostling youth,
who want to push us off the stage, in hopes to possess
what we have: —And, superadded to all, our own
infirmities every day encreasing: Of themselves
enough to make the life we wished-for the greatest
disease of all! Don't you remember the lines of
Howard, which once you re'd to me in my Ivy-bower
(a) ? 
In the disposition of what belongs to me, I have
endeavoured to do every-thing in the justest and best
manner I could think of; putting myself in my relations
places, and, in the greater points, ordering my
matters, as if no misunderstanding had happened. 
I hope they will not think much of some bequests
where wanted, and where due from my gratitude: 
But if they should, what is done, is done; and I
cannot now help it. Yet I must repeat, that I hope,
I hope, I have pleased every one of them. For I
would not, on any account, have it thought, that,
in my last disposition, any-thing undaughterly, unsisterly,
or unlike a kinswoman, should have had place
in a mind that is so truly free (as I will presume to
say) from all resentment, that it now overflows with
gratitude and blessings for the good I have received, 

altho' it be not all that my heart wished to receive. 
Were it even an hardship that I was not favoured with
more, what is it but an hardship of half a year, against
the most indulgent goodness of Eighteen years and an
half, that ever was shewn to a Daughter? 
My Cousin, you tell me, thinks I was off my
guard, and that I was taken at some advantage. Indeed,
my dear, I was not. Indeed I gave no room
for advantage to be taken of me. I hope, one day,
that will be seen, if I have the justice done me which
Mr. Belford assures me of. 
I should hope, that my Cousin has not taken the
liberties, which you (by an observation not, in general,
unjust) seem to charge him with. For it is
sad to think, that the generality of that Sex should
make so light of crimes, which they justly hold so
unpardonable in their own most intimate relations of
ours—Yet cannot commit them without doing such
injuries to other families as they think themselves
obliged to resent unto death, when offered to their
own. 
But we women are too often to blame on this head; 
since the most virtuous among us seldom make Virtue
the test of their approbation of the other Sex: Insomuch
that a man may glory in his wickedness of this
sort without being rejected on that account, even to
the faces of women of unquestionable virtue. Hence
it is, that a Libertine seldom thinks himself concerned
so much as to save apperances: And what is it
not that our Sex suffers in their opinions on this very
score? And what have I, more than many others, to
answer for on this account, in the world's eye? 
May my Story be a warning to all, how they prefer
a Libertine to a man of True Honour; and how
they permit themselves to be misled (where they mean
the best) by the specious, yet foolish hope of subduing
riveted habits, and, as I may say, of altering natures! 
—The more foolish, as constant experience 

might convince us, that there is hardly one in ten, of
even tolerably happy Marriages, in which the Wife
keeps the hold in the Husband's affections, which she
had in the Lover's. What influence then can she hope
to have over the morals of an avowed Libertine, who
marries perhaps for conveniency, who despises the tie,
and whom, it is too probable, nothing but Old Age,
or Sickness, or Disease (the consequence of ruinous riot)
can reclaim? 
I am very glad you gave my Cous— 
Sunday Morning (Sept. 3.) Six o' Clock. 
Hither I had written, and was forced to quit my
pen. And so much weaker and worse I grew, that had
I resumed it, to have closed here, it must have been
with such trembling unsteadiness, that it would have
given you more concern for me, than the delay of sending
it away by last night's post can do. I deferred it
therefore, to see how it would please God to deal with
me. And I find myself, after a better night than I expected,
lively and clear; and hope to give you a proof
that I do, in the continuation of my Letter, which I
will pursue as currently as if I had not left off. 
I am glad you so considerately gave my Cousin Morden
favourable impressions of Mr. Belford; since, otherwise,
some misunderstanding might have happened between
them: For altho' I hope this Mr. Belford is an
altered man, and in time will be a reformed one, yet
is he one of those high spirits that has been accustomed
to resent imaginary indignities to himself, when, I believe,
he has not been studious to avoid giving real
offences to others; men of this cast acting as if they
thought all the world was made to bear with them, and
they with nobody in it. 
Mr. Lovelace, you tell me, thought fit to intrust
my Cousin with the copy of his Letter of penitence to
me, and with my Answer to it, rejecting him and his
suit: And Mr. Belford moreover acquaints me, how 

much concerned Mr. Lovelace is for his baseness, and
how freely he accused himself to my Cousin. This
shews, that the true bravery of spirit is to be above
doing a vile action; and that nothing subjects the human
mind to so much meanness, as the consciousness of having
done wilful wrong to our fellow-creatures. How low,
how sordid, are the submissions which elaborate baseness
compels! That that wretch could treat me as he did,
and then could so poorly creep to me for forgiveness of
crimes so wilful, so black, and so premeditated! How
my Soul despised him for his meanness on a certain occasion,
of which you will one day be informed (a) ! And
him whose actions one's heart despises, it is far from being
difficult to reject, had one ever so partially favoured
him once. 
Yet am I glad this violent spirit can thus creep; that,
like a poisonous serpent, he can thus coil himself, and
hide his head in his own narrow circlets; because this
stooping, this abasement, gives me hope that no further
mischief will ensue. 
All my apprehension is, what may happen when I
am gone; lest then my Cousin, or any other of my
family, should endeavour to avenge me, and risk their
own more precious lives on that account. 
If that part of Cain's curse were Mr. Lovelace's, To
be a fugitive and vagabond in the earth; that is to say,
if it meant no more harm to him, than that he should
be obliged to travel, as it seems he intends (tho' I wish
him no ill in his travels); and I could know it; then
should I be easy in the hoped-for safety of my friends
from his skilful violence—O that I could hear he was a
thousand miles off! 
When I began this Letter, I did not think I could
have run to such a length. But 'tis to You, my dearest
friend, and you have a title to the spirits you raise and 

support; for they are no longer mine, and will subside
the moment I cease writing to you. 
But what do you bid me hope for, when you tell me,
that if your Mother's health will permit, you will see
me in town? I hope your Mother's health will be perfected
as you wish; but I dare not promise myself so
great a favour; so great a blessing, I will call it—And
indeed I know not if I should be able to bear it now!— 
Yet one comfort it is in your power to give me; 
and that is, Let me know, and very speedily it must be,
if you wish to oblige me, that all matters are made up
between You and Mr. Hickman; to whom, I see, you
are resolved, with all your bravery of spirit, to owe a
multitude of obligations for his patience with your
flightiness. Think of this, my dear proud friend! and
think, likewise, of what I have often told you, That
Pride, in man or woman, is an Extreme that hardly
ever fails, sooner or later, to bring forth its mortifying
Contrary. 
May You, my dear Miss Howe, have no discomforts
but what you make to yourself! As it will be in
your own power to lessen such as these, they ought to
be your punishment if you do not. There is no such
thing as perfect happiness here, since the busy mind will
make to itself evils, were it to find none. You will
therefore pardon this limited wish, strange as it may appear
till you consider it: For to wish you no infelicities,
either within or without you, were to wish you
what can never happen in this world; and what perhaps
ought not to be wished-for, if by a wish one could
give one's friend such an exemption; since we are not
to live here always. 
We must not, in short, expect, that our Roses will
grow without Thorns: But then they are useful and instructive
Thorns; which, by pricking the fingers of the
too hasty plucker, teach future caution. And who knows
not that difficulty gives poignancy to our enjoyments; 

which are apt to lose their relish with us when they are
over-easily obtained? 
I must conclude— 
God for ever bless you, and all you love and honour,
and reward you here and hereafter for your kindness to 
Your ever-obliged and affectionate
Clarissa Harlowe. 