



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wedn. July 12. 
So, Jack, they think they have gained a mighty
point. But, were I to change my mind, were I
to repent, I fansy I am safe. —And yet this very moment
it rises to my mind, that 'tis hard trusting too; 
for surely there must be some embers, where there was
fire so lately, that may be stirred up to give a blaze to
combustibles strewed lightly upon them. Love (like 

some self-propagating plants or roots, which have
taken strong hold in the earth) when once got deep
into the heart, is hardly ever totally extirpated, except
by Matrimony indeed, which is the Grave of Love,
because it allows of the End of Love. Then these
Ladies, all advocates for herself, with herself, Miss
Howe at their Head, perhaps—Not in favour to me
—I don't expect That from Miss Howe—But perhaps
in favour to herself: For Miss Howe has reason to
apprehend vengeance from me, I ween. Her Hickman
will be safe too, as she may think, if I marry
her beloved friend: For he has been a busy fellow,
and I have long wished to have a slap at him! —The
Lady's case desperate with her friends too; and likely
to be so, while single, and her character exposed to
censure. 
A Husband is a charming cloak, a fig-leased apron,
for a Wife: And for a Lady to be protected in liberties,
in diversions, which her heart pants after—and
all her faults, even the most criminal, were she to be
detected, to be thrown upon the Husband, and the
ridicule too; a charming privilege for a Wife! 
But I shall have one comfort, if I marry, which
pleases me not a little. If a man's Wife has a dear
friend of her Sex, a hundred liberties may be taken
with that friend, which could not be taken, if the single
Lady (knowing what a title to freedoms Marriage has
given him with her friend) was not less scrupulous
with him than she ought to be, as to herself. Then
there are broad freedoms (shall I call them?) that may
be taken by the Husband with his Wife, that may
not be quite shocking, which if the Wife bears before
her Friend, will serve for a lesson to that Friend; and
if that Friend bears to be present at them without
check or bashfulness, will shew a sagacious fellow that
she can bear as much herself, at proper time and place. 
Chastity, Jack, like Piety, is an uniform thing. If
in look, if in speech, a girl gives way to undue levity, 

depend upon it, the devil has got one of his cloven
feet in her heart already—So, Hickman, take care of
thyself, I advise thee, whether I marry or not. 
Thus, Jack, have I at once reconciled myself to
all my relations—And if the Lady refuses me, thrown
the fault upon her. This, I knew, would be in my
power to do at any time: And I was the more arrogant
to them, in order to heighten the merit of my
compliance. 
But after all, it would be very whimsical, would it
not, if all my plots and contrivances should end in
wedlock? What a punishment would this come out
to be, upon myself too, that all this while I have
been plundering my own treasury? 
&dotup;And then, can there be so much harm done, if it
can be so easily repaired by a few magical words; 
as I, Robert, take thee, Clarissa; and I, Clarissa,
take thee, Robert, with the rest of the for-better
and for-worse Legerdemain, which will hocus pocus
all the wrongs, the crying wrongs, that I have done
to Miss Harlowe, into acts of kindness and benevolence
to Mrs. Lovelace?&dotup; 
But, Jack, two things I must insist upon with thee,
if this is to be the case. —Having put secrets of so
high a nature between me and my Spouse into thy
power, I must, for my own honour, and for the honour
of my Wife and my illustrious Progeny, first
oblige thee to give up the Letters I have so profusely
scribbled to thee; and, in the next place, do by thee,
as I have heard whispered in France was done by
the true father of a certain monarque; that is to say,
cut thy throat, to prevent thy telling of tales. 
I have found means to heighten the kind opinion
my friends here have begun to have of me, by communicating
to them the contents of the four last Letters
which I wrote to press my elected Spouse to solemnize. 
My Lord has repeated one of his phrases
in my favour, that he hopes it will come out, That
the devil is not quite so black as he is painted. 

Now pry'thee, dear Jack, since so many good consequences
are to flow from these our Nuptials (one of
which to thyself; since the sooner thou diest, the less
thou wilt have to answer for); and that I now-and-then
am apt to believe there may be something in the
old fellow's notion, who once told us, that he who
kills a man, has all that man's sins to answer for, as
well as his own, because he gave him not the time to
repent of them, that Heaven designed to allow him
[A fine thing for thee, if thou consentest to be knocked
of the head; but a cursed one for the manslayer!]; 
and since there may be room to fear, that Miss Howe
will not give us her help; I pr'ythee now exert thyself
to find out my Clarissa Harlowe, that I may make
a Lovelace of her. Set all the City Bellmen, and
the Country Criers, for ten Miles round the metropolis,
at work, with their “Oyes's! and if any
man, woman, or child, can give tale or tidings”— 
Advertise her in all the News-papers; and let her
know, “That if she will repair to Lady Betty Lawrance,
or to Miss Charlotte Montague, she may
hear of something greatly to her advantage.” 
* *
My two Cousins Montague are actually to set out
to-morrow, to Mrs. Howe's, to engage her vixen
Daughter's interest with her friend. They will flaunt
it away in a chariot and six, for the greater state and
significance. 
Confounded mortification to be reduced thus low! 
—My pride hardly knows how to brook it. 
Lord M. has engaged the two Venerables to stay
here, to attend the issue: And I, standing very high
at present in their good graces, am to gallant them
to Oxford, to Blenheim, and several other places. 