


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


I Was again like one frantic. Read no more! said
I; and in my frenzy, dashed the book out of the
minister's hand, if a minister he was. I beg your
pardon, Sir, said I; but you must read no further. I
am basely betrayed hither. I cannot, I will not, be
his. 

Proceed, proceed, said Sir Hargrave, taking my
hand by force; virago as she is, I will own her for
my wife—Are you the gentle, the civil Miss Byron,
madam? looking sneeringly in my face. 
Alas! my Lucy, I was no virago: I was in a perfect
frenzy: But it was not an unhappy frenzy; since
in all probability it kept me from falling into fits; and
fits, the villain had said, should not save me. 
Dearly beloved, again snuffled the wretch. O my
Lucy! I shall never love these words. How may
odious circumstances invert the force of the kindest
words! Sir Hargrave still detained my struggling hand. 
I stamp'd, and threw myself to the length of my
arm, as he held my hand. No dearly beloved's, said
I. I was just beside myself. What to say, what to
do, I knew not. 
The cruel wretch laughed at me; No dearly beloved's!
repeated he, Very comical, 'faith! and laugh'd
again: But proceed, proceed, doctor. 
We are gathered together here in the sight of God,
read he on. 
This affected me still more. I adjure you, Sir, to
the minister, by that God in whose sight, you read, we
are gathered together, that you proceed no further. 
I adjure you, Sir Hargrave, in the same tremendous
Name, that you stop further proceedings. My life
take: With all my heart, take my life: But my
hand never, never, will I join with yours. 
Proceed, doctor: Doctor, pray proceed, said the
vile Sir Hargrave. When the day dawns, she will be
glad to own her marriage. 
Proceed at your peril, Sir, said I. If you are
really and truly a minister of that God whose presence
what you have read supposes, do not proceed: Do not
make me desperate. —Madam, turning to the widow,
you are a mother, and have given me room to hope
you are a good woman; look upon me as if I were
one of those daughters, whom I see before me: Could 

you see one of them thus treated? Dear young women,
turning to each, can you unconcernedly look on, and
see a poor creature, trick'd, betray'd, and thus violently,
basely, treated, and not make my case your
own? Speak for me! Plead for me! Be my advocates! 
Each of you, if ye are women, plead for me,
as you would yourselves wish to be pleaded for, in
my circumstances, and were thus barbarously used! 
The young women wept. The mother was mov'd. 
I wonder I kept my head. My brain was on fire. 
Still, still the unmov'd Sir Hargrave cried out, Proceed,
proceed, doctor: To-morrow before noon, all
will be as it should be. 
The man who stood aloof (the sliest, sodden-fac'd
creature I ever saw) came nearer—To the question,
doctor, and to my part, if you please! —Am not I her
father? —To the question, doctor, if you please! — 
The gentlewomen will prepare her for what is to
follow. 
O thou man! Of heart the most obdurate and vile! 
And will ye, looking at every person, one hand held
up (for still the vile man griped the other quite benumbed
hand in his iron paw) and adjuring each,
Will ye see this violence done to a poor young creature? 
—A soul, gentlewoman, you may have to
answer for. I can die. Never, never, will I be his. 
Let us women talk to the lady by ourselves, Sir
Hargrave. Pray your honour, let us talk to her by
ourselves. 
Ay, ay, ay, said the parson, by all means: Let the
ladies talk to one another, Sir. She may be brought
to consider. 
He let go my hand. The widow took it. And
was leading me out of the room—Not up stairs, I
hope, madam, said I. 
You shan't then, said she. Come, Sally; come,
Deb; let us women go out together. 
They led me into a little room adjoining to the parlour: 

And then, my spirits subsiding, I thought I
should have fainted away. I had more hartshorn and
water poured down my throat. 
When they had brought me a little to myself, they
pleaded with me Sir Hargrave's great estate. —What
are riches to me? Dirt, dirt, dirt! I hate them. 
They cannot purchase peace of mind: I want not
riches. 
They pleaded his honourable love—I my invincible
aversion. 
He was an handsome man—The most odious in
my eyes of the human species. Never, never, should
my consent be had to sanctify such a baseness. 
My danger! And that they should not be able to
save me from worse treatment— 
How! —Not able! —Ladies, madam, is not this
your own house? Cannot you raise a neighbourhood? 
Have you no neighbours? A thousand pounds will I
order to be paid into your hands for a present before the
week is out; I pledge my honour for the payment; if
you will but save me from a violence, that no worthy
woman can see offered to a distress'd young creature! 
—A thousand pounds! —Dear ladies! Only to save
me, and see me safe to my friends! 
The wretches in the next room, no doubt, heard
all that passed. In at that moment came Sir Hargrave:
Mrs. Awberry, said he, with a visage swell'd with
malice, young ladies, we keep you up; we disturb
you. Pray retire to your own rest: Leave me to talk
with this perverse woman. She is mine. 
Pray, Sir Hargrave, said Mrs. Awberry— 
Leave her to me, I say:—Miss Byron, you shall be mine. 
Your Grevilles, madam, your Fenwicks, your Ormes,
when they know the pains and the expence I have been
at, to secure you, shall confess me their superior— 
Shall confess— 
In wickedness, in cruelty, Sir, you are every man's
superior. 

You talk of cruelty, Miss Byron! triumphing over
scores of prostrate lovers, madam! You remember
your treatment of me, madam! kneeling, like an
abject wretch, at your feet! Kneeling for pity! But
no pity could touch your heart, madam! —Ungrateful,
proud girl! —Yet am I not humbling you: Take
notice of that: I am not humbling you: I am proposing
to exalt you, madam. 
Vile, vile, debasement! said I. 
To exalt Miss Byron into Lady Pollexfen. And
yet if you hold not out your hand to me— 
He would have snatch'd my hand. I put it behind
me. He would have snatch'd the other: I put that
behind me too: And the vile wretch would then have
kiss'd my undefended neck: But, with both my hands,
I push'd his audacious forehead from me. Charming
creature! he called me, with passion in his look and
accent. Then, cruel, proud, ungrateful: And swore
by his Maker, that if I would not give my hand instantly,
instead of exalting me, he would humble me. 
Ladies, pray withdraw, said he. Leave her to me:
Either Lady Pollexfen, or what I please; rearing himself
proudly up! She may be happy if she will. Leave
her to me. 
Pray, Sir, said the youngest of the two daughters; 
and wept for me. 
Greatly hurt, indeed, to be the wife of a man of
my fortune and consequence! But leave her to me, I
say. —I will soon bring down her pride: What a devil,
am I to creep, beg, pray, entreat, and only for a
wife? But, madam, said the insolent wretch, you
will be mine upon easier terms perhaps.— 
Madam, pray, madam, said the widow to me, consider
what you are about, and whom you refuse. Can
you have a handsomer man? Can you have a man of
a greater fortune? Sir Hargrave means nothing but
what is honourable. You are in his power— 
In his power, madam! return'd I. I am in yours. 

You are mistress of this house. I claim the protection
of it. Have you not neighbours? Your protection I
put myself under. Then clasping my arms about her,
Lock me up from him till you can have help to secure
to you the privilege of your own house; and deliver
me safe to my friends, and I will share my fortune
with your two daughters. 
The wicked man took the mother and youngest
daughter each by her hand, after he had disengaged
the former from my clasping arms, and led them to
the door. The elder followed them of her own accord. 
They none of them struggled against going. 
I begg'd, pray'd, besought them not to go, and when
they did, would have thrust myself out with them. 
But the wretch, in shutting them out, squeezed me
dreadfully, as I was half in, half out; and my nose
gush'd out with blood. 
I screamed: He seemed frighted: But instantly recovering
myself—So, so, you have done your worst! — 
You have killed me, I hope. I was out of breath; 
my stomach was very much pressed, and one of my
arms was bruised. I have the marks still; for he clapt
to the door with violence, not knowing, to do him
justice, that I was so forward in the door-way. 
I was in dreadful pain. I talked half wildly, I remember. 
I threw myself in a chair—So, so, you
have killed me, I hope—Well, now I hope, now I
hope, you are satisfied. Now may you moan over
the poor creature you have destroyed: For he express'd
great tenderness, and consternation; and I,
for my part, felt such pains in my bosom, that having
never felt such before, I really thought I was bruised
to death: Repeating my foolish So, so. —But I forgive
you, said I—Only, Sir, call to the gentlewomen,
Sir—Retire, Sir. Let me have my own sex only
about me. My head swam; my eyes failed me; and
I fainted quite away. 

