


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Grandison-hall, Friday, May 11. 
I am sorry, my dearest grandmamma, you have all
been so much alarmed by an indisposition which is
already gone off. My Cousin James, foolish youth! 
I wish he had not called upon us on his return from
Portsmouth, or that he had staid at Grandison-hall
till now. Lady G. has given you, in her lively way,
an account of the girlish inconsideration, which might
have been attended with a fever, had not Mr. Lowther
been at hand; who thought it advisable that I 

should lose blood. But it was the joy on seeing Sir
Charles after an absence of eight days, and several
days sooner than I had expected that pleasure, which
overcame me. 
Never, never, was there so tender, so affectionate,
so indulgent a husband! –––Lady G. has told you that
I fainted away–––When recovered, I found myself in
his arms; all our friends and guests assembled round
me; every one expressing such a tender concern. 
Harriet, be grateful! But canst thou be enough so? 
How art thou beloved of hearts the most worthy! ––– 
And what new proofs hast thou received of that Love
of all other the dearest! Every hour do I experience
some new instance of his tender goodness. He stirred
not from my chamber for half an hour together, for
two whole days and nights. All the rest he took was
in a chair by my bed-side; and very little was his rest:
Yet, blessed be God! his health suffered not. Every
cordial, every medicine, did he administer to me with
his own hands. He regarded not any-body but his
Harriet. The world, he told me, was nothing to him
without his Harriet. So amiably has he appeared in
this new light, not in my fond eyes only, but in those
of all here; who are continually congratulating me
upon it; and every one telling me little circumstances
of his kind attention, and anxious fondness, as some
happened to observe one, some another, that tho' I
wanted not proofs before of his affection for me, I
cannot account my indisposition an unhappiness; especially
as it has gone off without the consequences,
of which you were so very apprehensive. –––“Dear
Sir, I obey you: But indeed, indeed, Sir, writing
to my grandmamma does me good. But I obey.” 
Only, let thus far as I have written, be dispatched to
my Northamptonshire friends, 
From their ever-dutiful
Harriet Grandison. 

