



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

London, Oct. 26. 
I cannot think, my dear Lovelace, that Colonel Morden
has either threatened you in those gross terms
mentioned by the vile, hypocritical, and ignorant Joseph
Leman, or intends to follow you. They are the
words of people of that fellow's class; and not of a gentleman: 
Not of Colonel Morden, I am sure. You'll observe,
that Joseph pretends not to say that he heard him
speak them. 
I have been very solicitous to found the Colonel, for
your sake, and for his own, and for the sake of the injunctions
of the excellent Lady to me, as well as to him,
on that subject. He is (and you will not wonder that he
should be) extremely affected; and owns, that he has
expressed himself in terms of resentment on the occasion. 
Once he said to me, That had his beloved Cousin's case
been that of a common seduction, her own credulity or
weakness contributing to her fall; he could have forgiven
you. But, in so many words, He assured me, 

that he had not taken any resolutions; nor had he declared
himself to the family in such a way as should bind
him to resent: On the contrary, he has owned, that
his Cousin's injunctions have hitherto had the force
upon him which I could wish they should have. 
He went abroad in a week after you. When he took
his leave of me, he told me, That his design was to go
to Florence; and that he would settle his affairs there; 
and then return to England, and here pass the remainder
of his days. 
I was indeed apprehensive, that if you and he were
to meet, something unhappy might fall out: And as I
knew that you proposed to take Italy, and very likely
Florence, in your return to France, I was very solicitous
to prevail upon you to take the Court of Spain into
your plan. I am still so. And if you are not to be
prevailed upon to do that, let me entreat you to avoid
Florence or Leghorn in your return, since you have visited
both heretofore. At least, let not the proposal of
a meeting come from you. 
It would be matter of serious reflection to me, if the
very fellow, this Joseph Leman, who gave you such an
opportunity to turn all the artillery of his masters against
themselves, and to play them upon one another to favour
your plotting purposes, should be the instrument
in the devil's hand (unwittingly too) to avenge them all
upon you: For should you even get the better of the
Colonel, would the mischief end there? —It would but
add remorse to your present remorse; since the interview
must end in death; for he would not, I am confident,
take his life at your hand. The Harlowes would,
moreover, prosecute you in a legal way. You hate
them; and they would be gainers by his death: Rejoicers
in yours—And have you not done mischief enough
already? 
Let me therefore (and thro' me all your friends) have
the satisfaction to hear, that you are resolved to avoid
this gentleman. Time will subdue all things. Nobody 

doubts your bravery. Nor will it be known, that your
plan is changed thro' persuasion. 
Young Harlowe talks of calling you to account. This
is a plain evidence, that Mr. Morden has not taken the
quarrel upon himself for their family. 
I am in no apprehension of any-body but Colonel
Morden. I know it will not be a means to prevail
upon you to oblige me, if I say, that I am well assured,
that this gentleman is a skilful swordsman; and that he
is as cool and sedate as skilful. But yet I will add, that
if I had a value for my life, he should be the last man,
except yourself, with whom I would chuse to have a
contention. 
I have, as you required, been very candid and sincere
with you. I have not aimed at palliation. If you seek
not Colonel Morden, it is my opinion he will not seek
you: For he is a man of principle. But if you seek
him, I believe he will not shun you. 
Let me re-urge [It is the effect of my love for you!]
that you know your own guilt in this affair, and should
not be again an aggressor. It would be pity, that so brave
a man as the Colonel should drop, were you and he to
meet: And, on the other hand, it would be dreadful,
that you should be sent to your account unprepared for
it; and pursuing a fresh violence. Moreover, seest thou
not, in the deaths of two of thy principal agents, the
hand-writing upon the wall against thee? 
My zeal on this occasion may make me guilty of repetition. 
Indeed I know not how to quit the subject. 
But if what I have written, added to your own remorse
and consciousness, cannot prevail, all that I might further
urge would be ineffectual. 
Adieu therefore! Mayst thou repent of the past!
and, May no new violences add to thy heavy reflections,
and overwhelm thy future hopes! are the wishes of 
Thy true Friend,
John Belford. 