



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wedn. Night, March 22. 
On my aunt's and sister's report of my obstinacy,
my assembled relations have taken an unanimous
resolution (as Betty tells me it is) against me. This
resolution you will find signify'd to me in the inclosed
letter from my brother, just now brought me. 
Be pleased to return it, when perused. I may have
occasion for it, in the altercations between my relations
and me. 

Miss Clary,
I am commanded to let you know, that my father
and uncles having heard your aunt Hervey's account
of all that has passed between her and you: Having
heard from your sister what sort of treatment she has
had from you? Having recollected all that has passed
between your mamma and you: Having weighed all
your pleas and proposals: Having taken into consideration
their engagements with Mr. Solmes; that gentleman's
patience, and great affection for you; and the little
opportunity you have given yourself to be acquainted
either with his merit, or his proposals: Having considered
two points more; to wit, The wounded authority of 

a father; and Mr. Solmes's continual intreaties (little
as you have deserved regard from him), that you may
be freed from a confinement to which he is desirous
to attribute your perverseness to him (averseness I
should have said, but let it go), he being unable to
account otherwise for so strong a one, supposing you
told truth to your mamma, when you asserted, that
your heart was free; and which Mr. Solmes is willing
to believe, tho' no-body else does. —For all these reasons,
it is resolved, that you shall go to your uncle
Antony's: And you must accordingly prepare yourself
so to do. You will have but short notice of the
day, for obvious reasons. 
I will honestly tell you the motive for your going: 
It is a double one; first, That they may be sure, that
you shall not correspond with any-body they do not
like; for they find from Mrs. Howe, that, by some
means or other, you do correspond with her daughter; 
and, thro' her, perhaps with somebody else: And next,
That you may receive the visits of Mr. Solmes; which
you have thought fit to refuse to do here; by which
means you have deprived yourself of the opportunity of
knowing whom and what you have hitherto refused. 
If after one fortnight's conversation with Mr. Solmes,
and after you have heard what your friends shall further
urge in his behalf, unharden'd by clandestine
correspondencies, you shall convince them, that Virgil's
amor omnibus idem (for the application of which
I refer you to the Georgic, as translated by Dryden)
is verify'd in you, as well as in the rest of the animal
creation; and that you cannot, or will not, forego
your prepossession in favour of the moral, the virtuous,
the pious Lovelace (I would please you if I could!), it
will then be considered, whether to humour you, or
to renounce you for ever. 
It is hoped, that, as you must go, you will go
chearfully. Your uncle Antony will make everything
at his house agreeable to you. But indeed he 

won't promise, that he will not, at proper times,
draw up the bridge. 
Your visitors, besides Mr. Solmes, will be myself,
if you permit me that honour; your sister; and, as
you behave to Mr. Solmes, your aunt Hervey, and
your uncle Harlowe; and yet the two latter will
hardly come neither, if they think it will be to hear
your whining vocatives. —Betty Barnes will be your
attendant: And, I must needs tell you, Miss, that
we none of us think the worse of the faithful maid,
for your dislike of her: Which Betty, however, who
would be glad to oblige you, laments as a misfortune. 
Your answer is required, whether you chearfully
consent to go? And your indulgent mamma bids me
remind you from her, That a fortnight's visits from
Mr. Solmes are all that is meant at present. 
I am, as you shall be pleased to deserve, 
Yours, &c.
James Harlowe, jun. 

So here is the master-stroke of my brother's policy! 
Called upon to consent to go to my uncle Antony's,
avowedly to receive Mr. Solmes's visits! —A chapel! 
—A moated house! —Deprived of the opportunity of
corresponding with you!—or of any possibility of
escape, should violence be used to compel me to be
that odious man's! 
Late as it was, when I received this insolent letter,
I wrote an answer to it directly, that it might be ready
for the writer's time of rising. I inclose the rough
draught of it. You will see by it how much his vile
hint from the Georgic, and his rude one of my
whining vocatives, have set me up. Besides, as the
command to get ready to go to my uncle's is in the
name of my father and uncles, it is but to shew a
piece of the art they accuse me of, to resent the vile
hint, I have so much reason to resent, in order to
palliate the refusal of obeying, what would otherwise 

be interpreted an act of rebellion by my brother and
sister: For, it seems plain to me, that they will
work but half their ends, if they do not deprive me
of my father's and uncles favour, altho' I should even
comply with terms, which it is impossible I should
ever comply with. 

You might have told me, Brother, in three lines,
what the determination of my friends was; only,
that then you would not have had room to display your
pedantry by so detestable an allusion or reference to
the Georgic. Give me leave to tell you, Sir, That
if humanity were a branch of your studies at the University,
it has not found a genius in you for mastering
it. Nor is either my Sex or my self, tho' a sister,
I see, intitled to the least decency from a brother, who
has studied, as it seems, rather to cultivate the malevolence
of his natural temper, than any tendency
which one would have hoped his parentage, if not his
education, might have given him, to a tolerable
politeness. 
I doubt not, that you will take amiss my freedom: 
But as you have deserved it from me, I shall be less and
less concerned on that score, as I see you are more
and more intent to shew your wit at the expence of
justice and compassion. 
The time is, indeed, come, that I can no longer
bear those contempts and reflections, which a brother,
least of all men, is intitled to give. And let me beg
of you one favour, officious Sir: —It is this, That
you will not give yourself any concern about a husband
for me, till I shall have the forwardness to propose
a wife to you. Pardon me, Sir; but I cannot
help thinking, that could I have the art to get my
papa of my side, I should have as much right to prescribe
for you, as you have for me. 
As to the communication you make me, I must
take upon me to say, That altho' I will receive, as 

becomes me, any of my papa's commands; yet, as
this signification is made me by a brother, who has
shewn of late so much of an unbrotherly animosity to
me (for no reason in the world that I know of, but
that he believes he has, in me, one sister too many
for his interest) I think myself intitled to conclude,
that such a letter as you have sent me, is all your
own—And of course to declare, that, while I so
think it, I will not willingly, nor even without violence,
go to any place avowedly, to receive Mr.
Solmes's visits. 
I think myself so much intitled to resent your infamous
hint, and this as well for the sake of my Sex,
as for my own, that I ought to declare, as I do, that
I will not receive any more of your letters, unless
commanded to do so, by an authority I never will
dispute; except in a case, where I think my future,
as well as present happiness concerned—And were
such a case to happen, I am sure my father's harshness
will be less owing to himself, than to you; and
to the specious absurdities of your ambitious and
selfish schemes. —Very true, Sir! 
One word more, provoked as I am, I will add: 
That had I been thought as really obstinate and perverse,
as of late I am said to be, I should not have
been so disgracefully treated as I have been—Lay
your hand upon your heart, Brother, and say, By
whose instigations—And examine what I have done
to deserve to be made thus unhappy, and to be obliged
to style myself, 
Your injured Sister,
Cl. Harlowe. 

When, my dear, you have read my answer to this
letter, tell me, what you think of me? —It shall
go!— 
