


I have this half-angry Answer; but, what is more
to me than all the Letters in the World could be,
yours, my dear Father, inclosed. 

‘Madam,
I Think you are too apprehensive by much. I
am sorry for your Uneasiness. You may depend
upon me, and all I can do. But I make no
doubt of the London Journey, nor of John's Contrition
and Fidelity. I have just received, from
my Gainsborough Friend, this Letter, as I suppose,
from your good Father, in a Cover, as directed
for me, as I had desired. I hope it contains nothing
to add to your Uneasiness. Pray, dearest
Madam, lay aside your Fears, and wait a few Days
for the Issue of Mrs. Jewkes's Letter, and mine of
Thanks to the 'Squire. Things, I hope, must be
better than you expect. God Almighty will not
desert such Piety and Innocence; and be this your
Comfort and Reliance. Which is the best Advice
that can at present be given, by 
‘Your most faithful humble Servant.’ 

N.B. The Father's Letter was as follows: 

‘My dearest Daughter,
God has at length heard our Prayers, and we
are overwhelmed with his Goodness. O
what Sufferings, what Trials hast thou gone thro'!
and, blessed be God, who enabled thee, what 

Temptations hast thou withstood! We have not
yet had Leisure to read thro' your long Accounts
of all your Hardships. I say long, because I wonder
how you could find Time and Opportunity
for them; but otherwise, they are the Delight of
our spare Hours; and we shall read them over and
over, as long as we live, with Thankfulness to
God, who has given us so virtuous and so discreet
a Daughter. How happy is our Lot, in the
midst of our Poverty! O let none ever think Children
a Burden to them; when the poorest Circumstances
can produce so much Riches in a Pamela! 
Persist, my dear Daughter, in the same excellent
Courfe; and we shall not envy the highest Estate,
but defy them to produce such a Daughter as ours. 
‘I said, we had not read thro' all yours in Course. 
We were too impatient, and so turn'd to the End; 
where we find your Virtue within View of its Reward; 
and your Master's Heart turn'd to see the
Folly of his Ways, and the Injury he had intended
to our dear Child. For, to be sure, my Dear,
he would have ruin'd you, if he could. But seeing
your Virtue, God has touched his Heart; and
he has, no doubt, been edisied by your good Example. 
‘We don't see that you can do any way so well,
as to come into the present Proposal, and make
Mr. Williams, the worthy Mr. Williams, God bless
him! &sblank;&sblank;&sblank;happy. And tho' we are poor, and can
add no Merit, no Reputation, no Fortune to our
dear Child, but rather must be a Disgrace to her,
as the World will think; yet I hope I do not sin
in my Pride, to say, that there is no good Man, of
a common Degree (especially as your late Lady's
Kindness gave you such good Opportunities, which,
by God's Grace, you have so well improv'd) but
may think himself happy in you. But, as you say, 

you had rather not marry at present, far be it from
us to offer Violence to your Inclinations: So
much Prudence as you have shewn in all your
Conduct, would make it very wrong in us to mistrust
it in this, or to offer to direct you in your
Choice. But, alas! my Child, what can we do
for you? –––To partake our hard Lot, and involve
yourself into as hard a Life, would not help us; 
but add to our Afflictions. But it is time enough
to talk of these things, when we have the Pleasure
you now put us in Hope of, of seeing you with us; 
which God grant. Amen, Amen, say 
‘Your most indulgent Parexts, Amen! 
‘Our humblest Service and Thanks to the worthy
Mr. Williams. Again, we say, God bless him
for ever! 
‘O what a deal have we to say to you! God
give us a happy Meeting! We understand
the 'Squire is setting out for London. He is
a fine Gentleman, and has Wit at Will: I
wish he was as good. But I hope he will now
reform.’ 

O what inexpressible Comfort, my dear Father,
has your Letter given me. You ask, What can you
do for me! –––What is it you cannot do for your
Child! –––You can give her the Advice she has so
much wanted, and still wants, and will always want; 
you can confirm her in the Paths of Virtue, into
which you first initiated her; and you can pray for
her, with Hearts so sincere and pure, that are not to
be met with in Palaces! –––Oh! how I long to throw
myself at your Feet, and receive, from your own Lips,
the Blessings of such good Parents! –––But, alas! how
are my Prospects again over-clouded to what they 

were when I closed my last Parcel! ––More Trials, more
Dangers, I fear, must your poor Pamela be engaged
in: But thro' God's Goodness, and your Prayers, I
hope, at last, to get well out of all my Difficulties; 
and the rather, as they are not the Effect of my
own Vanity or Presumption! 
But I will proceed with my hopeless Story. I saw
Mr. Williams was a little nettled at my Impatience; 
and so I wrote to assure him I would be as easy as
I could, and directed by him; especially as my Father,
whose Respects I mentioned, had assured me,
my Master was setting out for London; which he
must have some-how from his own Family, or he
would not have written me word of it. 
