


On Thursday Morning my Lady set out for her
own Seat; and my good Sir and I, attended
by Mr. Colbrand, Abraham and Thomas, for this
dear House. Her Ladyship parted with her Brother
and me with great Tenderness, and made me promise
to send her my Papers; which I find she intends
to entertain Lady Betty with, and another
Lady or two, her Intimates, as also her Lord; and
hopes to find, as I believe, in the Reading of them,
some Excuse for her Brother's Choice. 
My dearest Master has been all Love and Tenderness
on the Road, as he is in every Place, and
on every Occasion. And Oh! what a delightful
Change was this Journey, to that which, so contrary
to all my Wishes, and so much to my Apprehensions,
carry'd me hence to the Lincolnshire
House! And how did I bless God at every Turn,
and at every Stage! 
We did not arrive here till yesterday Noon. 
Abraham rode before, to let them know we were
coming. And I had the Satisfaction to find every
body there I wished to see. When the Chariot
enter'd the Court-yard, I was so strongly impress'd
with the Favour and Mercies of God Almighty, on
remembring how I was sent away the last time I saw
this House; the Leave I took; the Dangers I had
encounter'd; a poor cast-off Servant Girl; and now
returning a joyful Wife, and the Mistress, thro' his
Favour, of the noble House I was turn'd out of; 
that I was hardly able to support the Joy I felt in
my Mind on the Occasion. He saw how much I
was moved, and tenderly ask'd me, why I seem'd so
affected? I told him, and lifted his dear Hand to
my Lips, and said, O, Sir! God's Mercies, and
your Goodness to me, on entering this dear, dear
Place, are above my Expression! I can hardly bear
the Thoughts of them!&blank;&blank;&blank; He said, Welcome, thrice
welcome, Joy of my Life! to your own House: 
And kissed my Hand in Return. All the common
Servants stood at the Windows, as unseen as they
could, to observe us. He took my Hand, with the
most condescending Goodness in the World, and,
with great Complaisance, led me into the Parlour,
and kissed me with the greatest Ardour. Welcome
again, my dearest Spouse, said he, a thousand
times welcome, to the Possession of a House that
is not more mine than yours. 
I threw myself at his Feet: Permit me, dear Sir,
thus to bless God, and thank you, for all his Mercies,
and your Goodness. O may I so behave, as not to
be utterly unworthy; and then how happy shall I
be! God give me, my Dearest, said he, Life and
Health to reward all your Sweetness: And no Man
can be then so blest as I! 
Where (said he to Abraham, who passed by the
Door, Where) is Mrs. Jervis?&blank;&blank;&blank; She bolted in! 
Here, good Sir, said she, here, good Madam, am
I, waiting impatiently, till called for, to congratulate
you both!&blank;&blank;&blank; I ran to her, and clasp'd my Arms
about her Neck, and kissed her: O my dear Mrs.
Jervis! said I, my other dear Mother! receive your
happy, happy Pamela: And join with me to bless
God, and bless our Master, for all these great Things!&blank;&blank;&blank; 
I was ready to sink into her Arms thro' Excess
of Joy, to see the dear good Woman, who had been
so often a mournful Witness of my Distress, as now
of my Triumph!&blank;&blank;&blank; Dearest Madam, said she, you
do me too much Honour. Let my whole Life
shew the Joy I take in your deserv'd good Fortune,
and in my Duty to you, for the early Instance I
received of your Goodness in your kind Letter. O,
Mrs. Jervis, reply'd I, There all Thanks are due,
both from you and me: For our dear Master granted
me this Blessing, as I may justly call it, the very first
Moment I begg'd it of him. Your Goodness, Sir,
said she, I will for ever acknowledge; and I beg
Pardon for the wrong Step I made, in applying to
my Lady Davers.&blank;&blank;&blank; He was so good as to salute her,
and said, All's over now, Mrs. Jervis; and I shall
not remember you ever disoblig'd me. I always
respected you, and shall now, more and more, value
you, for the sake of that dear good Creature,
that, with Joy unfeign'd, I can call my Wife. God
bless your Honour, for ever! said she; and many,
many happy Years may ye live together, the Envy
and Wonder of all who know you! 
But where, said my dear Master, is honest Long-man?
and where is Jonathan? —Come, Mrs. Jervis,
said I, you shall shew me them, and all the
good Folks, presently; and let me go up with you
to behold the dear Apartments, which I have seen 

before with such different Emotions to what I shall
now do. 
We went up; and in every Room, the Chamber
I took Refuge in, when my Master pursu'd me,
my Lady's Chamber, her Dressing-room, Mrs. Jervis's
Room, not forgetting her Closet, my own little
Bed-chamber, the Green-room, and in each of the
others, I kneeled down severally, and blessed God
for my past Escapes, and present Happiness; and
the good Woman was quite affected with the Zeal
and Pleasure with which I made my thankful Acknowledgments
to the Divine Goodness. O my excellent
Lady! said she, you are still the same good,
pious, humble Soul I knew you; and your Marriage
has added to your Graces, as I hope it will to
your Blessings. 
Dear Mrs. Jervis, said I, you know not what I
have gone thro'! You know not what God has done
for me! You know not what a happy Creature I am
now! I have a thousand, thousand things to tell you; 
and a whole Week would be too little, every Moment
of it spent in relating to you what has befallen
me, to make you acquainted with it all. We shall be
sweetly happy together, I make no doubt. But I
charge you, my dear Mrs. Jervis, whatever you call
me before Strangers, that when we are by ourselves,
you call me nothing but your Pamela. For what
an ingrateful Creature should I be, who have receiv'd
so many Mercies at the Hand of God, if I attributed
them not to his Divine Goodness, but assumed to
myself insolent Airs upon them! No, I hope, I shall
be more and more thankful, as I am more and
more blest; and more humble, as God, the Author
of all my Happiness, shall more distinguish me. 
We went down again to the Parlour, to my dear
Master. Said he, Call in again Mr. Longman; he
ongs to see you, my Dear. He came in: God bless 

you, my sweet Lady, said he; as now, God be praised,
I may call you. Did I not tell you, Madam, that
Providence would find you out? O, Mr. Longman,
said I, God be praised for all his Mercies!–&blank;&blank;&blank; I
am rejoiced to see you; and I laid my Hand on his,
and said, Good Mr. Longman, how do you do!&blank;&blank;&blank; I
must always value you; and you don't know how
much of my present Happiness I owe to the Sheets
of Paper, and Pens and Ink you furnish'd me with. 
I hope, my dear Sir and you are quite reconciled. 
–––O Madam, said he, how good you are! &blank;&blank;&blank; Why,
I cannot contain myself for Joy! and then he wiped
his Eyes, good Man! 
Said my Master, Yes, I have been telling Mr.
Longman, that I am obliged to him for his ready
Return to me; and that I will intirely forget his
Appeal to Lady Davers; and I hope he'll find himself
quite as easy and happy as he wishes.–&blank;&blank;&blank; My
Partner here, Mr. Longman, I dare promise you,
will do all she can to make you so. God bless you
both together! said he. 'Tis the Pride of my Heart
to see this!&blank;&blank;&blank; I return'd with double Delight, when
I heard the blessed News; and I am sure, Sir, said
he, mark old Longman's Words, God will bless you
for this every Year more and more!&blank;&blank;&blank; You don't
know how many Hearts you have made happy by
this generous Deed!&blank;&blank;&blank; I am glad of it, said my dear
Master; I am sure I have made my own happy: 
And, Mr. Longman, tho' I must think you Somebody,
yet, as you are not a young Man, and
so won't make me jealous, I can allow you to
wish my dean Wife Joy in the tenderest manner. 
Adad, Sir, said he, I am sure you rejoice me
with your Favour: 'Twas what I long'd for, but
durst not presume. My Dear, said my Master,
receive the Compliment of one of the honestest
Hearts in England, that always rever'd your Virtues!––– 
And the good Man saluted me with great
Respect; and said, God in Heaven bless you both,
and kneeled on one Knee. I must quit your Presence! 
Indeed I must!&blank;&blank;&blank; And away he went. 
Your Goodness, Sir, said I, knows no Bounds! 
O may my Gratitude never find any!&blank;&blank;&blank; I saw, said
my Master, when the good Man approach'd you,
that he did it with so much Awe and Love mingled
together, that I fansied he long'd to salute my Angel; 
and I could not but indulge his honest Heart. 
How bless'd am I, said I, and kiss'd his Hand ––– 
And indeed I make nothing now of kissing his dear
Hand, as if it was my own! 
When honest old Mr. Jonathan came in to attend
at Dinner, so clean, so sleek, and so neat, as
he always is, with his silver Hair, I said, Well, Mr.
Jonathan, how do you? I am glad to see you?––– 
You look as well as ever, thank God! O dear, Madam!
said he, better than ever, to have such a blessed
Sight!&blank;&blank;&blank; God bless you and my good Master!––– 
and I hope, Sir, said he, you'll excuse all my past
Failings. Ay, that I will, Jonathan, said he; because
you never had any, but what your Regard for
my dear Spouse here was the Occasion of. And
now I can tell you, you can never err, because you
cannot respect her too much. O Sir, said he, your
Honour is exceeding good. I'm sure I shall always
pray for you both. 
After Dinner Mr. Longman coming in, and talking
of some Affairs under his Care, he said afterwards,
All your Honour's Servants are now happy; for Robert,
who left you, had a pretty little Fortune fallen
to him, or he never would have quitted your Service. 
He was here but Yesterday, to enquire when
you and my Lady return'd hither; and hop'd he
might have Leave to pay his Duty to you both. 
Ay, said my Master, I shall be glad to see honest 
Robin; for that's another of your Favourites, Pamela.&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; 
It was high time, I think, I should marry
you, were it but to engage the Respects of all my
Family to myself. There are, Sir, said I, ten thousand
Reasons why I should rejoice in your Goodness. 
But I was going to say, said Mr. Longman, That
all your Honour's old Servants are now happy,
but one. You mean John Arnold? said my Master. 
I do, indeed, said he, if you'll excuse me, Sir. 
O said I, I have had my Prayer for poor John answer'd,
as favourably as I could wish.&blank;&blank;&blank; Why, said
Mr. Longman, to be sure poor John has acted no
very good Part, take it all together; but he so much
honour'd you, Sir, and so much respected you,
Madam, that he would have been glad to have been
obedient to both; and so was faithful to neither. 
But indeed the poor Fellow's Heart's almost broke,
and he won't look out for any other Place; and says,
he must live in your Honour's Service, or he must
die wretched very shortly. Mrs. Jervis was there
when this was said; Indeed, says she, the poor Man
has been here every Day since he heard the Tidings
that have rejoiced us all; and he says, he hopes he
shall yet be forgiven. Is he in the House now? said
my Master. He is, Sir; and was here when your
Honour came in, and play'd at hide-and-seek to
have one Look at you both when you alighted; and
was ready to go out of his Wits for Joy, when he
saw your Honour hand my Lady in. Pamela, said
said my dear Master, you're to do with John as you
please. You have full Power. Then pray Sir, said
I, let poor John come in. 
The poor Fellow came in, with so much Confusion,
that I have never seen a Countenance that express'd
so lively Consciousness of his Faults, and
mingled Joy and Shame. How do you do, John? 
said I; I hope you're very well!––– The poor Fellow
could hardly speak, and look'd with. Awe upon my
Master, and Pleasure upon me. Said my Master,
Well, John, there is no room to say any thing to a
Man that has so much Concern already: I am told
you will serve me whether I will or not; but I turn
you over altogether to my Spouse here. And she is
to do by you as she pleases. You see, John, said I,
your good Master's Indulgence. Well may I forgive,
that have so generous an Example. I was always
persuaded of your honest Intentions, if you
had known how to distinguish between your Duty
to your Master, and your Good-will to me: You
will now have no more Puzzles on that Account,
from the Goodness of your dear Master. I shall
be but too happy said the poor Man. God bless
your Honour! God bless you, Madam!&blank;&blank;&blank; I now
have the Joy of my Soul, in serving you both; and
I will make the best of Servants, to my Power. 
Well then, John, said I, your Wages will go on, as
if you had not left your Master: May I not say so,
Sir? said I. Yes, surely, my Dear, reply'd he, and
augment them too, if you find his Duty to you deserves
it. A thousand Million of Thanks, said the
poor Man: I am very well satisfy'd, and desire no
Augmentation; and so he withdrew overjoy'd; and
Mrs. Jervis and Mr. Longman were highly pleas'd; 
for tho' they were incens'd against him for his Fault
to me, when Matters look'd badly for me, yet they,
and all his Fellow-servants, always lov'd John. 
When Mr. Longman and Mrs. Jervis had din'd,
they came in again, to know if he had any Commands; 
and my dear Master filling a Glass of Wine,
said, Mr. Longman, I am going to toast the happiest
and honestest Couple in England, my dear Pamela's
Father and Mother. —Thank you, dear Sir, said I. 
Said he, I think that little Kentish Purchase wants
a Manager; and as it is a little out of your Way,
Mr. Longman, I have been purposing, if I thought
Mr. Andrews would accept of it, that he should
enter upon Hodges's Farm, that was, and so manage
for me that whole little Affair; and we will well
stock the Farm for him, and make it comfortable; 
and I think, if he will take that Trouble upon him,
it will be an Ease to you, and a Favour to me. 
Your Honour, said he, cannot do a better thing; 
and I have had some Inkling given me, that you
might, if you pleased, augment that Estate, by a
Purchase, of equal Amount, contiguous to it; and
as you have so much Money to spare, I can't see
your Honour can do better. Well, said he, let me
have the Particulars another time, and we will consider
about it. But my Dear, added he, you'll mention
this to your Father, if you please. 
I have too much Money, Mr. Longman, continu'd
he, lies useless; tho', upon this Occasion, I shall not
grudge laying out as much in Liveries, and other
things, as if I had marry'd a Lady of a Fortune equal,
if possible, to my Pamela's Merit; and I reckon you
have a good deal in Hand. Yes, Sir, said he, more
than I wish I had. But I have a Mortgage in View,
if you don't buy that Kentish thing, that I believe
will answer very well; and when Matters are riper,
will mention it to your Honour. 
I took with me to Lincolnshire, said my Master,
upwards of Six hundred Guineas, and thought to
have laid most of them out there (Thank God,
thought I, you did not! for he offer'd me Five
hundred of them, you know!) But I have not laid
out above Two hundred and fifty of them; so Two
hundred I left there in my Escritoire; because I
shall go again for a Fortnight or so, before Winter; 
and Two hundred I have brought with me. 

And I have Money, I know not what, in three
Places here; the Account of which is in my Pocketbook,
in my Library. 
You have made some little Presents, Pamela, to
my Servants there, on our Nuptials; and these Two
hundred that I have brought up, I will put into your
Disposal, that, with some of them, you shall do here
as you did there. 
I am asham'd, good Sir, said I, to be so costly and
so worthless! Pray, my Dear, said he, say not a
Word of that. 
Said Mr. Longman, Why, Madam, with Money
in Stocks, and one thing or another, his Honour
could buy half the Gentlemen round him. He wants
not Money, and lays up every Year. And it would
have been pity, but his Honour should have wedded
just as he has. Very true, Mr. Longman, said my
Master; and pulling out his Purse, said, Tell out,
my Dear, Two hundred Guineas, and give me the
rest.––– I did so. Now, said he, take them yourself,
for the Purposes I mentioned. But, Mr. Longman,
do you, before Sunset, bring my dear Girl Fifty
Pounds, which is due to her this Day, by my Promise; 
and every three Months, from this Day, pay
her Fifty Pounds more; which will be Two hundred
Pounds per Annum; and this is for her to lay
out at her own Discretion, and without Account, in
such a way, as shall derive a Blessing upon us all: 
For she was my Mother's Almoner, and shall be
mine, and her own too.––– I'll go for it this Instant,
said Mr. Longman. 
When he was gone, I looked upon my dear generous
Master, and on Mrs. Jervis; and he gave me
a Nod of Assent; and I took Twenty Guineas, and
said, Dear Mrs. Jervis, accept of this; which is no
more than my generous Master order'd me to present
to Mrs. Jewkes, for a pair of Gloves, on my 
happy Nuptials, and so you, who are so much better
intitled to them, by the Love I bear you, must not
refuse them. 
Said she, Mrs. Jewkes was on the Spot, Madam,
at the happy Time. Yes, said my Master, but Pamela
would have rejoiced to have had you there instead
of her. That I should, Sir, reply'd I, or instead
of any body except my own Mother. She gratefully
accepted them, and thank'd us both: But I don't
know what she should thank me for; for I was not
worth a fourth Part of them myself. 
I'd have you, my Dear, said he, in some handsome
manner, as you know how, oblige Longman to accept
of the like Present. 
Mr. Longman return'd from his Office, and brought
me the fifty Pounds, saying, I have enter'd this new
Article with great Pleasure. To my Lady&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; Fifty
Pounds, to be paid the same Sum quarterly. O Sir,
said I, what will become of me to be so poor in
myself, and so rich in your Bounty. —It is a Shame
to take all that your profuse Goodness would heap
upon me thus: But indeed it shall not be without
Account. —Make no Words, my Dear, said he. Are
you not my Wife? And have I not endow'd you
with my Goods? and, hitherto, this is a very small
Part. 
Mr. Longman, said I, and Mrs. Jervis, you both
see how I am even oppress'd with unreturnable Obligations. 
God bless the Donor, and God bless the
Receiver! said Mr. Longman; I am sure they will
bring back good Interest; for, Madam, you had
ever a bountiful Heart; and I have seen the Pleasure
you used to take to dispense my late Lady's Alms
and Donations. 
I'll warrant, Mr. Longman, said I, notwithstanding
you are so willing to have me take large Sums
for nothing at all, I should affront you, if I asked 
you to accept from me a Pair of Gloves only, on
Account of my happy Nuptials. He seem'd not
readily to know how to answer, and my Master said,
If Mr. Longman refuse you, my Dear, he may be
said to refuse your first Favour, On that I put
twenty Guineas in his Hand; but he insisted upon it,
that he would take but Five. I said, I must desire
you to oblige me, Mr. Longman, or I shall think I
have affronted you. Well, if I must, said he, I
know what I know. What is that, Mr. Longman,
said I? ––– Why, Madam, said he, I will not lay it out
till my young Master's Birth Day, which I hope
will be within this Twelve-month. 
Not expecting any thing like this from the old
Gentleman, I look'd at my Master, and then blush'd
so, I could not hold up my Head. Charmingly said,
Mr. Longman, said my Master, and clasped me in
his Arms; O my dear Life! God send it may be
so. ––– You have quite delighted me, Mr. Longman! 
Tho' I durst not have said such a Thing for the
World.––– Madam, said the old Gentleman, I beg
your Pardon; I hope no Offence. But I'd speak it
ten times in a Breath to have it so, take it how you
please, as long as my good Master takes it so well. 
Mrs. Jervis, said my Master, this is an over-nice
dear Creature; you don't know what a Life I have
had with her, even on this side Matrimony.––– 
Said Mrs. Jervis, I think Mr. Longman says very
well; I am sure I shall hope for it too. 
Mr. Longman, who had struck me of a Heap,
withdrawing soon after, my Master said, Why, My
Dear, you can't look up! The old Man said nothing
shocking. I did not expect it, tho', from him, said
I. I was not aware but of some innocent Pleasantry. 
Why, so it was, said he, both innocent and pleasant. 
And I won't forgive you, if you don't say as he says. 
Come, speak before Mrs. Jervis. May every thing 
happen, Sir, said I, that will give you Delight! ––– 
That's my dear Love, said he, and kiss'd me with
great Tenderness. 
When the Servants had dined, I desired to see the
Maidens, and all Four came up together. You are
welcome home, Madam, said Rachel; We rejoice
all to see you here, and more to see you our Lady. 
O my good old Acquaintances, said I, you see how
good God, and the best of Gentlemen have been to
me! O I joy to see you! How do you do, Rachel? 
How do you, Jane? How do you do, Hannah? 
How do you do, Cicely? And I took each of them
by the Hand, and could have kissed them. ––– For,
said I to myself, I kissed you all last time I saw you,
in Sorrow; why should I not kiss you all with Joy? 
But I forbore in Honour of their dear Master's
Presence. 
They seem'd quite transported with me; and my
good Master was pleas'd with the Scene. See here,
my Lasses, said he, your Mistress! I need not bid
you respect her; for you always lov'd her; and
she'll have it as much in her Power as Inclination
to be kind to the Deserving. Indeed, said I, I shall
always be a kind Friend to you; and your dear good
Master, has order'd me to give each of you this, that
you may rejoice with me, on my Happiness. And
so I gave them five Guineas a-piece; and said God
bless you every one. I am overjoy'd to see you!––– 
And they withdrew with the greatest Gratitude and
Pleasure, praying for us both. 
I turn'd to my dear Master, 'Tis to you, dear Sir,
said I, next to God, who put it into your generous
Heart, that all my Happiness is owing! That my
Mind thus overflows with Joy and Gratitude! And
I would have kissed his Hand; but he clasped me
in his Arms, and said, You deserve it, my Dear! 

You deserve it all. Mrs. Jervis came in; said she,
I have seen a very affecting Sight; you have made
your Maidens quite happy, Madam, with your
Kindness and Condescension! I saw them all Four,
as I came by the Hall Door, just got up from their
Knees, praising and praying for you both! Dear
good Bodies, said I; and did Jane pray too? God
return their Prayers upon themselves, I say. 
My Maste sent for Jonathan, and I held up all
the Fingers of my two Hands; and my Master giving
a Nod of Approbation as he came in, I said,
Well, Mr. Jonathan, I could not be satisfy'd without
seeing you in Form, as it were, and thanking you
for all your past Good-will to me. You'll accept
of that for a Pair of Gloves, on this happy Occasion; 
and I gave him ten Guineas, and took his honest
Hand between both mine: God bless you, said I,
with your Silver Hairs, so like my dear Father!––– 
I shall always value such a good old Servant of the
best of Masters! ––– He said, O such Goodness! 
Such kind Words! ––– It is Balm to my Heart! 
Blessed be God I have lived to this Day! ––– And his
Eyes swam in Tears, and he withdrew. ––– My Dear,
said my Master, you make every one happy! ––– O
Sir, said I, 'tis you, 'tis you; and let my grateful
Heart always spring to my Lips, to acknowledge the
Blessings you heap upon me. 
Then in came Harry, and Isaac, and Benjamin,
and the two Grooms of this House, and Arthur the
Gardener, for my dear Master had order'd them by
Mrs. Jervis thus to be marshall'd out; and he said,
Where's John? Poor John was asham'd, and did not
come in till he heard himself call'd for. I said to them,
How do you do, Henry? How do you do, Isaac? 
How do you do, Benjamin? How do you do, Arthur? 
And you, and you, Rithard and Roger? 
God bless you every one. My Master said, I have 
given you a Mistress, my Lads, that is the Joy of my
Heart. You see her Goodness and Condescension! 
Let your Respects to her be but answerable, and
she'll be proportionably as great a Blessing to you all as
she is to me. Harry said, In the Names of all your
Servants, Sir, I bless your Honour and your good
Lady: And it shall be all our Studies to deserve her
Ladyship's Favour, as well as your Honour's. And
so I gave every one five Guineas, to rejoice, as I said,
in my Happiness. 
When I came to John, I said, I saw you before,
John; but I again tell you, I am glad to see you. 
He said, he was quite asham'd and confounded. 
O, said I, forget every thing that's past, John!–– 
Your dear good Master will, and so will I For God
has wonderfully brought about all these Things, by
the very Means I once thought most grievous. Let
us therefore look forward, and be only asham'd to
commit Faults for the Time to come. For they
may not always be attended with like happy Consequences. 
Arthur, said my Master, I have brought you a
Mistress that is a great Gardener. She'll shew you a
new Way to plant Beans. And never anybody had
such a Hand at improving a Sunflower, as she! ––– 
O Sir, Sir, said I; but yet a little dash'd; all my
Improvements in every kind of Thing are owing to
you, I am sure! ––– And so I think I was even with
the dear Man, and yet appear'd grateful before his
Servants They withdrew, blessing us both, as the
rest had done. 
And then came in the Postilion, and two Helpers,
(for my Master has both here, and at Lincolnshire,
fine Hunting horses, and it is the chief Sport he takes
Delight in) as also the Scullion-boy; And I said,
How do you, all of you? And how dost do, Tommy? 
I hope you're very good. Here, your dear Master has 
order'd you something a piece, in Honour of me. 
And my Master holding three Fingers to me, I gave
the Postilion and Helpers three Guineas each, and the
little Boy two; and bid him let his poor Mother lay
it out for him, for he must not spend it idly. Mr.
Colbrand, Abrabam and Thomas, I had before presented
at t'other House. 
And when they were all gone, but Mrs. Jervis,
I said, And now, dearest Sir, permit me on my
Knees, thus, to bless you, and pray for you. And
Oh, may God crown you with Length of Days, and
Increase of Honour; and may your happy, happy
Pamela, byher grateful Heart, appear always worthy
in your dear Eyes, tho' she cannot be so in her own,
nor in those of any others! 
Mrs. Jervis, said my Master, you see the Excellency
of this sweet Creature! And when I tell you,
that the Charms of her Person, all lovely as she is,
bind me not so strongly to her as the Graces of her
Mind, congratulate me, that my Happiness is built
on so stable a Basis!––– Indeed I do, most sincerely,
Sir, said she!––– This is a happy Day to me. 
I stept into the Library, while he was thus pouring
out his Kindness for me to Mrs. Jervis; and
bless'd God there on my Knees, for the Difference I
now found to what I had once known in it. ––– And
when I have done the same in the first Scene of
my Fears, the once frightful Summer-house, I
shall have gone thro' most of my distressful Scenes
with Gratitude; but shall never forbear thanking
God in my Mind, for his Goodness to me in every
one. Mrs. Jervis I find, had whisper'd him what
I had done above, and he saw me on my Knees,
with my Back towards him, unknown to me; but
softly put to the Door again, as he had open'd it a
little Way. And I said, not knowing he had seen
me, You have some charming Pictures here, Sir:–– 
Yes, said he, my dear Life, so I have; but none
equal to that, which your Piety affords me!––– 
And may the God you delight to serve bless more
and more my dear Angel. Sir, said I, you are all
Goodness!––– I hope, reply'd he, after your sweet
Example, I shall be better and better! ––– Do you
think, my dear Father and Mother, there ever was
so happy a Creature as I! To be sure it would be
very ingrateful to think with Uneasiness, or any
thing but Compassion, of poor Miss Sally Godfrey. 
He order'd Jonathan to let the Evening be pass'd
merrily, but wisely, as he said, with what every one
liked, whether Wine or October. 
He was pleased afterwards to lead me up Stairs,
and gave me Possession of my Lady's Dressingroom
and Cabinet, and her fine Repeating-watch
and Equipage; and in short of a complete Set of
Diamonds, that were his good Mother's; as also of
the two Pair of Diamond Earrings, the two Diamond
Rings, and Diamond Necklace he mention'd
in his naughty Articles, which her Ladyship had intended
for Presents to Miss Tomlins, a rich Heiress
that was proposed for his Wife, when he was just
come from his Travels; but which went off, after
all was agreed upon on both the Friends Sides, because
he approv'd not her Conversation; and she
had, as he told his Mother, too masculine an Air; 
and he never could be brought to see her but once,
tho' the Lady lik'd him very well. He presented
me also with her Ladyship's Books, Pictures, Linnen,
Laces, &c. that were in her Apartments, and bid
me call those Apartments mine. O give me, my
good God, Humility and Gratitude! 