



Miss Clarissa Harlowe; In Continuation. 

The Lady next gives an account, 
Of her recovery from her delirium and sleepy disorder: 
Of her attempt to get away in his absence: 
Of the conversations that followed, at his return,
between them: 
Of the guilty figure he made: 
Of her resolution not to have him: 
Of her several efforts to escape: 
Of her treaty with Dorcas, to assist her in it: 
Of Dorcas's dropping the promisory note, undoubtedly, as she says, on purpose to betray
her: 
Of her triumph over all the creatures of the house,
assembled to terrify her; and perhaps to commit
fresh outrages upon her: 
Of his setting out for M. Hall: 
Of his repeated Letters to induce her to meet him
at the Altar, on her Uncle's Anniversary: 
Of her determined silence to them all: 
Of her second Escape, effected, as she says, contrary
to her own expectation: That attempt
being at first but the intended prelude to a more
promising one, which she had formed in her
mind: 
And of other particulars; which being to be found in
Mr. Lovelace's Letters preceding, and the Letter of
his friend Belford, are omitted. She then proceeds: 
The very hour that I found myself in a place of
safety, I took pen to write to you. When I began,
I designed only to write six or eight lines, to enquire 

after your health: For, having heard nothing from
you, I feared indeed, that you had been, and still were,
too ill to write. But no sooner did my pen begin to
blot the paper, but my sad heart hurried it into length. 
The apprehensions I had lain under, that I should not
be able to get away; the fatigue I had in effecting
my escape: the difficulty of procuring a lodging for
myself; having disliked the people of two houses, and
those of a third disliking me; for you must think I made
a frighted appearance—These, together with the recollection
of what I had suffered from him, and my
farther apprehensions of my insecurity, and my desolate
circumstances, had so disordered me, that I remember
I rambled strangely in that Letter. 
In short, I thought it, on re-perusal, a half-distracted
one: But I then despaired (were I to begin again) of
writing better: So I let it go: And can have no excuse
for directing it as I did, if the cause of the incoherence
in it will not furnish me with a very pitiable
one. 
The Letter I received from your Mother was a
dreadful blow to me. But nevertheless it had the
good effect upon me (labouring, as I did just then,
under a violent Fit of vapourish despondency, and almost
yielding to it) which profuse bleeding and blisterings
have in paralytical or apoplectical strokes; reviving
my attention, and restoring me to spirits to
combat the evils I was surrounded by—Sluicing off,
and diverting into a new chanel (if I may be allowed
another metaphor) the overcharging woes which
threatened once more to overwhelm my intellects. 
But yet I most sincerely lamented (and still lament)
in your Mother's words, That I cannot be unhappy by
myself: And was grieved, not only for the trouble I
had given you before; but for the new one I had
brought upon you by my inattention. 

She then gives the Substance of the Letters she wrote
to Mrs. Norton, to Lady Betty Lawrence, and to
Mrs. Hodges; as also of their Answers; whereby
she detected all Mr. Lovelace's impostures. She
proceeds as follows: 
I cannot, however, forbear to wonder how the
vile Tomlinson could come at the knowlege of several
of the things he told me of, and which contributed
to give me confidence in him (a) . 
I doubt not, that the Stories of Mrs. Fretchville,
and her House, would be found as vile impostures as
any of the rest, were I to enquire; and had I not
enough, and too much, already against the perjured
man. 
How have I been led on! —What will be the end
of such a false and perjured creature! Heaven not less
profaned and defied by him, than myself deceived and
abused! This, however, against myself I must say,
That if what I have suffered be the natural consequence
of my first error, I never can forgive myself,
although you are so partial in my favour, as to say,
that I was not censurable for what passed before my
first Escape. 
And now, honoured Madam, and my dearest Miss
Howe, who are to sit in judgment upon my case, permit
me to lay down my pen with one request, which,
with the greatest earnestness, I make to you both: 
And that is, That you will neither of you open your
lips in relation to the potions and the violences I have
hinted at. —Not that I am solicitous, that my disgrace
should be hidden from the world, or that it should
not be generally known, that the man has proved a
villain to me: For this, it seems, every-body but myself 

expected from his Character. But suppose, as
his actions by me are really of a capital nature, it
were insisted upon, that I should appear to prosecute
him and his accomplices in a Court of Justice, how
do you think I could bear That? 
But since my Character, before the capital enormity,
was lost in the eye of the world; and That
from the very hour I left my Father's house; and
since all my own hopes of worldly happiness are entirely
over; Let me slide quietly into my grave; and
let it not be remembered, except by one friendly tear,
and no more, dropt from your gentle eye, mine own
dear Anna Howe, on the happy day that shall shut
up all my sorrows, that there was such a creature as 
Clarissa Harlowe. 
Saturday, July 8. 