


Dr. Bartlett, To Miss Byron. 


March 18. 
I Present to you, madam, the account you desired
to see, as extracted by my kinsman from my papers. 
You seemed to wish it to be hastened for you: It is
not what it might have been; but mere facts, I presume,
will answer your intention. Be pleased, therefore,
to accept it with your usual goodness. 
* *
“Dr. Bartlett went abroad as governor of a young
man of quality; Mr. Lorimer, I am to call him, to
conceal his real name. He was the very reverse of
young Mr. Grandison. He was not only rude and ungovernable; 
but proud, ill-natured, malicious, even
base. 
“The Doctor was exceedingly averse to take upon
him the charge of the wicked youth abroad; having
had too many instances of the badness of his nature
while in England: But he was prevailed upon by the
solicitations of his father (who represented it as an act
of the greatest charity to him and his family) as well
as by the solemn promises of good behaviour from the
young man; for he was known to regard the advice
of Dr. Bartlett more than that of any other person. 
“The Doctor and Mr. Lorimer were at Turin,
when young Mr. Grandison (who had been some
months in France) for the first time arrived in that
city; then in the eighteenth year of his age. 
“Dr. Bartlett had not a more profligate pupil, than
Mr. Grandison had a governor; tho' recommended
by General W. his uncle by the mother's side. It used 

to be observed in places where they made but a few
days residence, that the young gentleman ought to
have been the governor, Monsieur Creutzer the governed. 
Mr. Grandison had, in short, the happiness,
by his prudence, to escape several snares laid for his
virtue, by a wretch, who hoped, if he could betray
him into them, to silence the remonstrances of the
young man, upon his evil conduct; and to hinder him
from complaining of him to his father. 
“Mr. Grandison became acquainted with Dr.
Bartlett at Turin: Monsieur Creutzer, at the same
time, commenced an intimacy with Mr. Lorimer; 
and the two former were not more united from good
qualities, than the two latter were from bad. 
“Several riotous things were done by Creutzer and
Lorimer, who, whatever the Doctor could do to separate
them, were hardly ever asunder. One of their
enormities fell under the cognizance of the civil magistrate; 
and was not made easy to Lorimer without
great interest and expence: While Creutzer fled to
Rome, to avoid condign punishment; and wrote to
Mr. Grandison to join him there. 
“Then it was, that Mr. Grandison wrote (as he
had often ineffectually threatened to do) to represent
to his father the profligacy of the man; and to request
him to appoint him another governor; or to permit
him to return to England till he had made choice of
one for him; begging of Dr. Bartlett, that he would
allow him till he had an answer from his father, to
apply to him for advice and instruction. 
“The answer of his father was, That he heard of
his prudence from every mouth: That he was at liberty
to chuse what companion he pleased: But that he
gave him no governor but his own discretion. 
“Mr. Grandison then, more earnestly than before,
and with an humility and diffidence, suited to his natural
generosity of temper, that never grew upon indulgence,
besought the Doctor's direction: And when 

they were obliged to separate, they established a correspondence,
which never will end but with the life of
one of them. 
“Mr. Grandison laid before the Doctor all his plans; 
submitting his conduct to him, as well with regard to
the prosecution of his studies, as to his travels: But
they had not long corresponded in this manner, when
the Doctor let him know, that it was needless to consult
him aforehand; and the more so, as it often occasioned
a suspension of excellent resolutions: But he
besought him to continue to him an account of all he
undertook, of all he performed, and of every material
incident of his life; not only as his narrations
would be matter of the highest entertainment to him; 
but as they would furnish him with lessons from example,
that might be of greater force upon the unhappy
Lorimer, than his own precepts. 
“While the Doctor was passing thro' but a few of
the cities in Lombardy, Mr. Grandison made almost
the tour of Europe; and yet gave himself time to
make such remarks upon persons, places, and things,
as could hardly be believed to be the observations of
so young a man. Lorimer, mean time, was engaged
in shews, spectacles, and in the diversions of the places
in which he lived, as it might be said, rather, than
thro' which be passed. 
“The Doctor, at one time, was the more patient
with these delays, as he was willing that the carnival
at Venice should be over, before he suffered his pupil
to go to that city. But Lorimer, suspecting his intention,
slipt thither unknown to his governor, at the very
beginning of it; and the Doctor was forced to follow
him. And when there, had the mortification of hearing
of him (for the young man avoided his governor
as much as possible) as one of the most riotous persons
there. 
“In vain did the Doctor, when he saw his pupil,
set before him the example of Mr. Grandison; a much 

younger man. All the effect the Letters he used to
read to him had upon him, was, to make him hate
the more both his Governor and Mr. Grandison. By
one Letter only did he do himself temporary credit. 
It was written some months before it was shewn him,
in which Mr. Grandison described some places of note,
thro' which he had passed, and thro' which the Doctor
and his charge had also more lately passed. The mean
creature contrived to steal it; and his father having
often urged for a specimen of his son's observations
on his travels, he copied it almost verbatim, and
transmitted it as his own to his father; only letting
the Doctor know, after he had sent it away, that he
had written. 
“The Doctor doubted not, but Lorimer had exposed
himself; but was very much surprised, when he
received a congratulatory Letter from the father on his
son's improvements, mingled with some little asperity
on the Doctor, for having set out his son to his disadvantage:
“I could not doubt,” said the fond father,
“that a son of mine had genius: He wanted nothing
but to apply.” —And then he gave orders for
doubling the value of his next remittance. 
“The Doctor took the young gentleman to task
about it. He owned what he had done, and gloried in
his contrivance. But his governor thought it incumbent
upon him to undeceive the father, and to save
him the extraordinary part of his remittance. 
“The young man was enraged at the Doctor,
for exposing him, as he called it, to his father, and for
the check he was continually giving to his lawless appetites; 
and falling into acquaintance with a courtezan,
who was infamous for ruining many young travellers
by her subtle and dangerous contrivances, they
joined in a resolution to revenge themselves on the
Doctor, whom they considered as their greatest
enemy. 
“Several projects they fell upon: One, in particular, 

was, to suborn a spy, who went to the Inquisitors
of State, and accused the Doctor of having held
a free discourse upon the nature of the Venetian Government; 
a crime, which in that watchful Republic
is never overlooked. It is well known, that
the city of Venice swarms with these spies: Who are
employed by the government, in order to give it the
earliest information of liberties taken either by natives
or strangers, on subjects that are thought too high for
the discussion of private men; and this, as is supposed,
no less for the sake of the safety of individuals, than
for its own. 
“One of the three Inquisitors of State, who make a
dreadful Tribunal in that Republic, it was supposed,
got better information of the Doctor's innocence,
and had him warned of his danger. 
“The Doctor had been very solicitous to be acquitted
of his ungracious charge. In every Letter he
wrote to England, this was one of his prayers: But
still the father, who knew not what to do with his
son at home, besought his patience; and wrote to his
son in the strongest terms (after reproaching him for
his ungraciousness) to pay an implicit obedience to the
Doctor. 
“The father was a learned man. Great pains had
been taken with Lorimer, to make him know something
of the antient Greek and Roman histories. The
father was very desirous, that his son should see the
famous places of old Greece, of which he himself
had read so much: And, with great difficulty, the
Doctor got the young man to leave Venice, where the
vile woman, and the diversions of the place, had taken
scandalous hold of him. 
“Athens was the city, at which the father had desired
they would make some stay; and from thence
visit other parts of the Morea. And there the young
man found his woman got before him, according to
private agreement between them. 

“It was some time before the Doctor found out,
that the very woman who had acted so abandoned
a part with Lorimer at Venice, was his mistress at
Athens: And when he did, he applied, on some fresh
enormities committed by Lorimer, to the tribunal
which the Christians have there, consisting of eight
venerable men chosen out of the eight quarters of the
city, to determine causes among Christians; and they
taking cognizance of the facts, the wicked woman
suborned wretches to accuse the Doctor to the Cadi,
who is the Turkish judge of the place, as a dangerous
and disaffected person; and the Cadi, being, as it was
supposed, corrupted by presents, got the Vayvode, or
Governor, to interfere; and the Doctor was seized,
and thrown into prison: His Christian friends in the
place were forbidden to interpose in his favour; and
pen and ink, and all access to him, were prohibited. 
“The vile woman, having concerted measures
with the persons she had suborned, for continuing the
Doctor in his severe confinement, set out with her
paramour for Venice; and there they rioted as before. 
“Mr. Beauchamp, a young man of learning and
fine parts, happened to make an acquaintance with
Mr. Grandison in the island of Candia, where they
met as countrymen, which, from a sympathy of
minds, grew immediately into an intimacy that will
hardly ever end. This young gentleman, in the
course of his travels, visiting Athens, about this time,
was informed of the Doctor's misfortune, by one of
the eight Christians, who constituted the tribunal
above-mentioned, and who was an affectionate friend
of the Doctor, though forbidden to busy himself in
his cause: And Mr. Beauchamp (who had heard Mr.
Grandison speak of the Doctor with an uncommon
affection) knowing that Mr. Grandison was then at
Constantinople, dispatched a man on purpose, to acquaint
him with the affair, and with all the particulars
he could get of the case, authenticated as much as the
nature of the thing would admit. 

“Mr. Grandison was equally grieved and astonished
at the information. He instantly applied to the English
embassador at the Porte, as also to the French
minister there, with whom he had made an acquaintance:
They to the Grand Vizir: And an order
was issued for setting the Doctor at liberty. Mr.
Grandison, in order to urge the dispatch of the Chiaux,
who carried it, accompanied him, and arrived at
Athens, just as the Vayvode had determined to get rid
of the whole affair in a private manner (the Doctor's
finances being exhausted) by the bow-string. The
danger endeared the Doctor to Mr. Grandison; a relief
so seasonable endeared Mr. Grandison to the
Doctor; to them both Mr. Beauchamp, who would
not stir from Athens, till he had seen him delivered; 
having busied himself in the interim, in the best
manner he could (tho' he was obliged to use caution
and secrecy) to do him service, and to suspend the
fatal blow. 
“Here was a cement to a friendship (that had been
begun between the young gentlemen from likeness
of manners) between them and the Doctor, whom
they have had the goodness ever since to regard, as
their father: And to this day it is one of the Doctor's
delights to write to his worthy son Beauchamp all that
he can come at, relating to the life and actions of a
man, whom the one regards as an example; the
other as an honour to the human race. 
“It was some time before the Doctor knew for
certain, that the ungracious Lorimer had been consenting
to the shocking treatment he had met with; 
for the wretches whom the vile woman had suborned,
had made their escape from Athens before the arrival
of Mr. Grandison and the Chiaux; the flagitious
youth had written to his father, in terms of the
deepest sorrow, an account of what had befallen his
governor; and his father had taken the best measures
that could be fallen upon at so great distance, for 

the Doctor's succour and liberty: But in all probability,
he would have been lost before those measures
could have taken effect. 
“Lorimer's father, little thinking that his son had
connived at the plot formed against his governor, besought
him, when he had obtained his liberty, not to
leave his son to his own devices. The Doctor, as
little thinking then, that Lorimer had been capable of
a baseness so very villainous, in compassion both to
father and son, went to Venice, and got him out of
the hands of the vile woman; and then to Rome:
But there, the unhappy wretch continuing his profligate
courses, became at last a sacrifice to his dissoluteness; 
and his death was a deliverance to his Family,
to the Doctor, and to the Earth. 
“On his death-bed he confessed the plot, which
the infamous courtezan had meditated against the
Doctor at Venice, as well as his connivance at that
which she had carried into execution at Athens. He
died in horror not to be described; begging for longer
life, and promising reformation on that condition. 
The manner of his death, and the crimes he confessed
himself guilty of, by the instigation of the most abandoned
of women, beside those committed against his
governor, so shocked and grieved the Doctor, that he
fell ill, and his recovery was long doubted of. 
“Mean time Mr. Grandison visited some parts of
Asia and Afric, Egypt particularly; corresponding all
the time with Dr. Bartlett, and allowing the correspondence
to pass into the hands of Mr. Beauchamp; 
as he did that which he held with Mr. Beauchamp, to
be communicated to the Doctor. 
“When Mr. Grandison returned to Italy, finding
there his two friends, he engaged the Doctor to
accompany Mr. Beauchamp in that part of his tour
into some of the Eastern regions, which he himself
had been particularly pleased with, and, as he said,
wanted to be more particularly informed of: And 

therefore insisted, that it should be taken at his own
expence. He knew that Mr. Beauchamp had a step-mother,
who had prevailed on his father to take off
two-thirds of the allowance he made him on his
travels. 
“Mr. Beauchamp very reluctantly complied with
the condition so generously imposed on him by his beloved
friend; another of whose arguments was, That
such a tour would be the most likely means to establish
the health of a man equally dear to both. 
“Mr. Grandison never was at a loss for arguments
to keep in countenance the persons whom he benefited; 
and to make their acceptance of his favours appear
not only to be their duty, but an obligation laid
on himself. 
“Mr. Grandison himself, when the two gentlemen
set out on their tour, was engaged in some affairs at
Bologna and Florence, which gave him great embarrasment. 
“Dr. Bartlett and Mr. Beauchamp, visited the
principal islands of the Archipelago: After which, the
Doctor left the young gentleman pursuing his course
to Constantinople, with intention to visit some parts of
Asia, and took the opportunity of a vessel that was
bound for Leghorn, to return thither. 
“His health was happily established: and, knowing
that Mr. Grandison expected the long-desired call
from his father to return to England, and that it was
likely that he could be of use to his ward Miss Jervois,
and her affairs, in her guardian's absence, he was the
more desirous to return to Italy. 
“Mr. Grandison rejoiced at his arrival: And soon
after set out for Paris, in order to attend there the
expected call; leaving Emily, in the interim, to his
care. 
“Lorimer's father did not long survive his son. He
expressed himself in his last hours highly sensible of
the Doctor's care of his unhappy boy; and earnestly 

desired his Lady to see him handsomely rewarded for
his trouble. But not making a will; and the Lady
having, by her early over-indulgence, ruined the morals
of her child (never suffering him to be either corrected
or chidden, were his enormities ever so flagrant)
she bore a secret grudge to the Doctor for his honest
representations to her Lord of the young man's immoralities:
And not even the interposition of a Sir
Charles Grandison has hitherto been able to procure
the least acknowlegement to the Doctor; though
the loss as well of his reputation as life, might have
been the consequence of the faithful services he had
endeavoured to render to the profligate youth, and in
him to the whole family.” 

