



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sunday Morning, March 26. 
How soothing a thing is praise from those we
love! —Whether conscious or not of deserving
it, it cannot but give us great delight, to see ourselves
stand high in the opinion of those whose favour we
are ambitious to cultivate. An ingenuous mind will
make this farther use of it, that if it be sensible, that
it does not already deserve the charming attributes, it
will hasten (before its friend finds herself mistaken)
to obtain the graces it is complimented for: And this
it will do, as well in honour to itself, as to preserve
its friend's opinion, and justify her judgment. May
This be always my aim! —And then you will not
only give the praise, but the merit; and I shall be
more worthy of that friendship, which is the only
pleasure I have to boast of. 
Most heartily I thank you for the kind dispatch of
your last favour. How much am I indebted to you!
and even to your honest servant! —Under what obligations
does my unhappy situation lay me! 
But let me answer the kind contents of it, as well
as I may. 
As to getting over my disgusts to Mr. Solmes, it is
impossible to be done; while he wants Generosity,
Frankness of Heart, Benevolence, Manners, and every
qualification that distinguishes a worthy man. O my
dear! what a degree of Patience, what a Greatness
of Soul, is required in the Wife, not to despise a
Husband who is more ignorant, more illiterate, more
low-minded, than herself! —The wretch, vested with
prerogatives, who will claim rule in virtue of them
(and not to permit whose claim, will be as disgraceful
to the prescribing Wife as to the governed Husband); 
How shall such a Husband as This be borne, were 

he, for reasons of convenience and interest, even to
be our Choice? But, to compelled to have such a
one, and that compulsion to arise from motives as unworthy
of the prescribers as of the prescribed, who
can think of getting over an aversion so justly founded? 
How much easier to bear the temporary persecutions
I labour under, because temporary, than to resolve to
be such a man's for life? Were I to comply, must I
not leave my relations, and go to him? A month will
decide the one, perhaps: But what a duration of woe
will the other be! —Every day, it is likely, rising to
witness to some new breach of an altar-vowed duty! 
Then, my dear, the man seems already to be meditating
vengeance against me for an aversion I cannot
help: For yesterday my saucy gaoleress assured me,
That all my oppositions would not signify that pinch
of snuff, holding out her genteel finger and thumb: 
That I must have Mr. Solmes: That therefore I had
not best carry my jest too far; for that Mr. Solmes
was a man of spirit, and had told Her, that as I
should surely be his, I acted very unpoliticly; since,
if he had not more mercy [that was her word; I know
not if it were his] than I had, I might have cause to
repent the usage I gave him to the last day of my life. 
But enough of this man; who, by what you repeat
from Sir Harry Downeton, has all the insolence of his
Sex, without any one quality to make that insolence
tolerable. 
I have received two Letters from Mr. Lovelace,
since his visit to you; which make three that I have
not answered. I doubt not his being very uneasy; 
but in his last he complains in high terms of my
silence; not in the still small voice, or rather style of
an humble Lover, but in a style like that which would
probably be used by a slighted Protector. And his
pride is again touched, that like a thief, or eves-dropper,
he is forced to dodge about in hopes of a Letter, and
return five miles (and then to an inconvenient lodging)
without any. 

His Letters, and the copy of mine to him, shall
soon attend you: Till when, I will give you the
substance of what I wrote to him yesterday. 
I take him severely to task for his freedom in threatening
me, thro' you, with a visit to Mr. Solmes, or
to my Brother. I say, ‘That, surely, I must be
thought to be a creature fit to bear any thing; that
violence and menaces from some of my own family
are not enough for me to bear, in order to make
me avoid him; but that I must have them from
him too, if I oblige those whom it is both my inclination
and duty to oblige in every-thing that is
reasonable, and in my power. 
‘Very extraordinary, I tell him, that a violent
spirit shall threaten to do a rash and unjustifiable
thing, which concerns me but little, and himself a
great deal, if I do not something as rash, my Character
and Sex considered, to divert him from it. 
‘I even hint, that, however it would affect me,
were any mischief to happen on my account, yet
there are persons, as far as I know, who in my
case would not think there would be reason for
much regret, were such a committed rashness as he
threatens Mr. Solmes with, to rid her of two persons
whom had she never known, she had never
been unhappy.’ 
This is plain-dealing, my dear: And I suppose he
will put it into still plainer English for me. 
I take his Pride to task, on his disdaining to watch
for my Letters; and for his eves-dropping language: 
And say, ‘That, surely, he has the less reason to
think so hardly of his situation; since his faulty
morals are the cause of all; and since faulty morals
deservedly level all distinction, and bring down
Rank and Birth to the Canaille, and to the necessity
which he so much regrets, of appearing (if I must
descend to his language) as an eves-dropper and a
thief. And then I forbid him ever to expect another 

Letter from me that is to subject him to such disgraceful
hardships. 
‘As to the solemn vows and protestations he is so
ready, upon all occasions, to make, they have the
less weight with me, I tell him, as they give a kind
of demonstration, that he himself, from his own
character, thinks there is reason to make them. 
Deeds are to me the only evidences of Intentions. 
And I am more and more convinced of the necessity
of breaking-off a correspondence with a person,
whose addresses I see it is impossible either to expect
my friends to encourage, or him to appear to wish
that they should think him worthy of encouragement. 
‘What therefore I repeatedly desire is, That since
his Birth, Alliances, and Expectations, are such as
will at any time, if his immoral character be not
an objection, procure him at least equal advantages
in a woman whose taste and inclinations moreover
might be better adapted to his own; I insist upon it,
as well as advise it, that he give up all thoughts
of me: And the rather, as he has all along (by his
threatening and unpolite behaviour to my friends,
and whenever he speaks of them) given me reason
to conclude, that there is more malice to them, than
regard to me, in his perseverance.’ 
This is the substance of the Letter I have written
to him. 
The man, to be sure, must have the penetration
to observe, that my correspondence with him hitherto
is owing more to the severity I meet with, than to a
very high value for him. And so I would have him
think. What a worse than Moloch deity is That,
which expects an offering of Reason, Duty, and Discretion,
to be made to its shrine! 
Your Mother is of opinion, you say, that at last
my friends will relent. Heaven grant that they may! 
—But my Brother and Sister have such an influence 

over every-body, and are so determined; so pique
themselves upon subduing me, and carrying their
point; that I despair that they will: —And yet, if
they do not, I frankly own, I would not scruple to
throw myself upon any not disreputable protection, by
which I might avoid my present persecutions, on one
hand, and not give Mr. Lovelace advantage over me,
on the other—That is to say, were there manifestly
no other way left me: For, if there were, I should
think the leaving my Father's house, without his consent,
one of the most inexcuseable actions I could be
guilty of, were the protection to be ever so unexceptionable; 
and This notwithstanding the independent
fortune willed me by my Grandfather. And indeed
I have often reflected with a degree of indignation
and disdain, upon the thought of what a low, selfish
creature that child must be, who is to be reined in only
by the hopes of what a parent can or will do for her. 
But notwithstanding all this, I owe it to the sincerity
of friendship to confess, that I know not what
I should have done, had your advice been conclusive
any-way. Had you, my dear, been witness to my
different emotions, as I read your Letter, when, in
one place, you advise me of my danger, if I am
carried to my Uncle's; in another, when you own
you could not bear what I bear, and would do anything
rather than marry the man you hate; yet, in
another, represent to me my reputation suffering in
the world's eye; and the necessity I should be under
to justify my conduct, at the expence of my friends,
were I to take a rash step; in another, insinuate the
dishonest figure I should be forced to make, in so compelled
a Matrimony; endeavouring to cajole, fawn
upon, and play the hypocrite with a man to whom I
have an aversion; who would have reason to believe
me an hypocrite, as well from my former avowals,
as from the sense he must have (if common sense
he has) of his own demerits: —The necessity you 

think there would be for me, the more averse I really
was, to seem the fonder of him: A fondness (were I
capable of so much dissimulation) that would be imputable
to disgraceful motives; as it would be too
visible, that Love, either of person or mind, could be
neither of them—Then his undoubted, his even constitutional
narrowness: His too probable jealousy, and
unforgivingness, bearing in mind my declared aversion,
and the unfeigned despights I took all opportunities to
do him, in order to discourage his address: A preference
avowed against him from the same motive:
with the pride he professes to take in curbing and sinking
the spirits of a woman he had acquired a right to
tyrannize over: —Had you, I say, been witness of my
different emotions as I read; now leaning this way,
now that; now perplexed; now apprehensive; now
angry at one, then at another; now resolving; now
doubting;—you would have seen the power you
have over me; and would have had reason to believe,
that, had you given your advice in any determined or
positive manner, I had been ready to have been concluded
by it. So, my dear, you will find, from these
acknowlegements, that you must justify me to those
Laws of Friendship, which require undisguised frankness
of heart; altho' your justification of me in that
particular, will perhaps be at the expence of my prudence. 
But, upon the whole, This I do repeat—That nothing
but the last extremity shall make me abandon
my Father's House, if they will permit me to stay; 
and if I can, by any means, by any honest pretences,
but keep off my evil destiny in it till my Cousin
Morden arrives. As one of my Trustees, his is a
protection, into which I may without discredit throw
myself, if my other friends should remain determined. 
And This (altho' they seem too well aware of it) is
all my hope: For, as to Lovelace, were I to be sure
of his tenderness, and even of his reformation, must 

not the thoughts of embracing the offered protection
of his family, be the same thing in the world's eye,
as accepting of his own? —Could I avoid receiving
his visits at his own Relations? Must I not be his,
whatever (on seeing him in a nearer light) I should
find him out to be? For you know, it has always been
my observation, that very few people in courtship see
each other as they are. Oh! my dear! how wise
have I endeavoured to be! how anxious to chuse,
and to avoid every-thing, precautiously, as I may say,
that might make me happy, or unhappy; yet all my
wisdom now, by a strange fatality, likely to become
foolishness! 
Then you tell me, in your usual kindly-partial
manner, what is expected of me, more than would
be of some others. This should be a lesson to me. 
Whatever my motives were, the world would not
know them: To complain of a Brother's unkindness,
that, indeed, I might do: Differences between Brothers
and Sisters, where interests clash, but too commonly
arise: But where the severe Father cannot be
separated from the faulty Brother; who could bear to
lighten herself, by loading a Father? —Then, in this
particular case, must not the hatred Mr. Lovelace expresses
to every one of my family (altho' in return for
their hatred of him) shock one extremely? Must it
not shew, that there is something implacable, as well
as highly unpolite in his temper? —And what creature
can think of marrying so as to be out of all hopes ever to
be well with her own nearest and tenderest Relations? 
But here, having tired myself, and I dare say you,
I will lay down my pen. 
* *
Mr. Solmes is almost continually here: So is my
Aunt Harvey: So are my two Uncles. Something is
working against me, I doubt. What an uneasy state
is suspense! —When a naked sword, too, seems hanging
over one's head! 

I hear nothing but what this confident creature
Betty throws out in the wantonness of office. Now it
is, Why, Miss, don't you look up your Things. You'll
be called upon, depend upon it, before you are aware. 
Another time she intimates darkly, and in broken
sentences (as if on purpose to teaze me) what one says,
what another; with their enquiries how I dispose of
my time? And my Brother's insolent question comes
frequently in, Whether I am not writing a History
of my Sufferings? 
But I am now used to her pertness: And as it is
only thro' that, that I can hear of any-thing intended
against me, before it is to be put in execution; and
as, when she is most impertinent, she pleads a commission
for it; I bear with her: Yet, now-and-then,
not without a little of the heart-burn. 
I will deposit thus far. Adieu, my dear. 
Clarissa Harlowe. 
Written on the Cover, after she went down, with a
pensil: 
On coming down, I found your second Letter of
yesterday's date (a) . I have read it; and am in hopes
that the inclosed will in a great measure answer your
Mother's expectations of me. 
My most respectful acknowlegements to her for it,
and for her very kind admonitions. 
You'll read to her what you please of the inclosed. 