



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To MIss Howe. 

Sunday Night (April 16.) 
&dotup;I may send to you, altho' you are forbid to write
to me; may I not? —For that is not a cor-respondence
(Is it?) where Letters are not answered. 
&dotup;I am strangely at a loss what to think of this man. 
He is a perfect Proteus. I can but write according
to the shape he assumes at the time. Don't think
me the changeable person, I beseech you, if in one
Letter I contradict what I wrote in another; nay, 

if I seem to contradict what I said in the same Letter: 
For he is a perfect chameleon; or rather more variable
than the chameleon; for that, it is said, cannot
assume the red and the white; but this man can. 
And tho' black seems to be his natural colour, yet
has he taken great pains to make me think him nothing
but white. 
&dotup;But you shall judge of him, as I proceed. Only,
if I any-where appear to you to be credulous, I beg
you to set me right: For you are a stander-by, as
you say in a former (a) —Would to Heaven I were
not to play! For I think, after all, I am held to a
desperate game. 
&dotup;Before I could finish my last to you, he sent up
twice more to beg admittance. I returned for answer,
that I would see him at my own time: I would
neither be invaded, nor prescribed to. 
&dotup;Considering how we parted, and my delaying his
audience, as he sometimes calls it, I expected him to
be in no very good humour, when I admitted of
his visit; and by what I wrote, you will conclude
that I was not. Yet mine soon changed, when I
saw his extreme humility at his entrance, and heard
what he had to say. 
&dotup;I have a Letter, Madam, said he, from Lady Betty
Lawrance, and another from my Cousin Charlotte. 
But of these more by-and-by. I came now to make
my humble acknowlegements to you, upon the arguments
that passed between us so lately. 
&dotup;I was silent, wondering what he was driving at. 
&dotup;I am a most unhappy creature, proceeded he: 
Unhappy from a strange impatiency of spirit, which
I cannot conquer. —It always brings upon me deserved
humiliation. But it is more laudable to acknowlege,
than to persevere when under the power
of conviction. 
&dotup;I was still silent. 

&dotup;I have been considering what you proposed to me,
Madam, that I should acquiesce with such terms as
you should think proper to comply with, in order to
a Reconciliation with your friends. 
&dotup;Well, Sir. 
&dotup;And I find all just, all right, on your side; and
all impatience, all inconsideration, on mine. 
&dotup;I stared, you may suppose. Whence this change,
Sir? And so soon? 
&dotup;I am so much convinced, that you must be in the
right in all you think fit to insist upon, that I shall
for the future mistrust myself; and, if it be possible,
whenever I differ with you, take an hour's time for
recollection, before I give way to that vehemence,
which an opposition, to which I have not been accustomed,
too often gives me. 
&dotup;All this is mighty good, Sir: But to what does it
tend? 
&dotup;Why, Madam, when I came to consider what you
had proposed, as to the terms of Reconciliation with
your friends; and when I recollected, that you had
always referred to yourself to approve or reject me,
according to my merits or demerits; I plainly saw,
that it was rather a condescension in you, that you
were pleased to ask my consent to those terms, than
that you were imposing a new Law: And I now,
Madam, beg your pardon for my impatience: Whatever
terms you think proper to come into with your
Relations, which will enable you to honour me with
the conditional effect of your promise to me, to these be
pleased to consent: And if I lose you, insupportable
as that thought is to me; yet, as it must be by
my own fault, I ought to thank myself for it. 
&dotup;What think you, Miss Howe? —Do you believe
he can have any view in this? —I cannot see any he
could have; and I thought it best, as he put it in so
right a manner, to appear not to doubt the sincerity
of his confession, and to accept of it, as sincere. 

&dotup;He then read to me part of Lady Betty's Letter; 
turning down the beginning, which was a little too
severe upon him, he said, for my eye: And I believe,
by the stile, the remainder of it was in a corrective
strain. 
&dotup;It was too plain, I told him, that he must have
great faults, that none of his Relations could write to
him, but with a mingled censure for some bad action. 
&dotup;And it is as plain, my dearest creature, said he,
that you, who know not of any such faults, but by
surmise, are equally ready to condemn me. —Will
not charity allow you to infer, that their charges are
no better grounded? —And that my principal fault has
been carelesness of my character, and too little solicitude
to clear myself, when aspersed? Which I do
assure you is the case.&dotup; 
Lady Betty, in her Letter, expresses herself in the
most obliging manner, in relation to me. ‘She
wishes him so to behave, as to encourage me to make
him soon happy. She desires her compliments to
me; and expresses her impatience to see, as her
Niece, so celebrated a Lady [Those are her high
words]. She shall take it for an honour, she says,
to be put into a way to oblige me. She hopes I
will not too long delay the Ceremony; because That
performed, will be to her, and to Lord M. and Lady
Sarah, a sure pledge of her Nephew's merits, and
good behaviour.’ 
She says, ‘She was always sorry to hear of the hardships
I had met with on his account: That he will
be the most ingrateful of men, if he make not all up
to me: And that she thinks it incumbent upon all
their family to supply to me the lost favour of my
own: And, for her part, nothing of that kind, she
bids him assure me, shall be wanting.’ 
Her Ladyship observes, ‘That the treatment he had
received from my family, would have been more unaccountable 

than it was, with such natural and accidental
advantages as he had, had it not been owing to
his own careless manners. But she hopes, that he
will convince the Harlowe-family, that they had
thought worse of him than he had deserved; since
now it was in his power to establish his character for
ever. This she prays God to enable him to do, as
well for his own honour, as for the honour of their
house,’ was the magnificent word. 
She concludes, with ‘desiring to be informed of our
Nuptials the moment they are celebrated, that she
may be with the earliest in felicitating me on the
happy occasion.’ 
But her Ladyship gives me no direct invitation to
attend her before Marriage: Which I might have expected
from what he had told me. 
He then shewed me part of Miss Montague's more
sprightly Letter, ‘congratulating him upon the honour
he had obtained, of the confidence of so admirable a
Lady.’ Those are her words. Confidence, my dear! 
Nobody, indeed, as you say, will believe otherwise,
were they to be told the truth: And you see, that Miss
Montague (and all his family, I suppose) think the step
I have taken, an extraordinary one. ‘She also wishes
for his speedy nuptials; and to see her new Cousin at
M. Hall: As do Lord M. she tells him, and her
Sister; and in general all the well-wishers of their
family. 
‘Whenever his happy day shall be passed, she proposes,
she says, to attend me, and to make one in
my train to M. Hall, if his Lordship shall continue
as ill of the gout as he is at present. But that should
he get better, he will himself attend me, she is sure,
and conduct me thither: And afterwards quit either
of his three seats to us, till we shall be settled to our
mind.’ 
This young Lady says nothing in excuse for not
meeting me on the road, or at St. Alban's, as he had 

made me expect she would: Yet mentions her having
been indisposed. Mr. Lovelace had also told me, that
Lord M. was ill of the gout; which Miss Montague's
Letter confirms. 
&dotup;But why did not the man shew me these Letters
last night? Was he afraid of giving me too much
pleasure?&dotup; 