



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday Night, Mar. 23. 
I send you the boasted Confutation Letter, just now
put into my hands—My Brother and Sister, my
Uncle Antony and Mr. Solmes, are, I understand, exulting
over the copy of it below, as an unanswerable
performance. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Once again, my inflexible Sister, I write to you. 
It is to let you know, that the pretty piece of
Art you found out to make me the vehicle of your
whining pathetics to your Father and Mother, has
not had the expected effect. 
I do assure you, that your behaviour has not been
misrepresented—Nor need it. Your Mother, who
is solicitous to take all opportunities of putting the
most favourable constructions upon all you do, has
been forced, as you well know, to give you up, upon
full trial: No need then of the expedient of pursuing
your Needleworks in her sight. She cannot bear your
whining pranks: And it is for her sake, that you are
not permitted to come into her presence—Nor will
be, but upon her own terms. 
You had like to have made a simpleton of your
Aunt Hervey yesterday: She came down from you,
pleading in your favour: But when she was asked,
What concession she had brought you to? she looked
about her, and knew not what to answer. So your
Mother, when surprised into the beginning of your
cunning address to her and to your Father, under my
name (for I had begun to read it, little suspecting such
an ingenious subterfuge) and would then make me
read it thro', wrung her hands, Oh! her dear child,
her dear child, must not be so compelled! —But 

when she was asked, Whether she would be willing to
have for her Son-in-law the man who bids defiance
to her whole family; and who had like to have murdered
her Son? And what concessions she had gained
from her dear child to merit this tenderness? And
that for one who had apparently deceived her, in assuring
her that her heart was free? —Then could she
look about her, as her Sister had done before: Then
was she again brought to herself, and to a resolution
to assert her authority [Not to transfer it, witty presumer!]
over the rebel who of late has so ingratefully
struggled to throw it off. 
You seem, child, to have a high notion of the matrimonial
duty; and I'll warrant, like the rest of your
Sex (one or two, whom I have the honour to know,
excepted) that you will go to Church to promise what
you will never think of afterwards. But, sweet child!
as your worthy mamma Norton calls you, think a
little less of the matrimonial (at least, till you come
into that State) and a little more of the filial duty. 
How can you say, you are to bear all the misery,
when you give so large a share of it to your Parents,
to your Uncles, to your Aunt, to Myself, and to your
Sister; who all, for Eighteen years of your life, loved
you so well? 
If of late I have not given you room to hope for
my favour or compassion, it is because of late you
have not deserved either. I know what you mean,
little reflecting fool, by saying, it is much in my
power, altho' but your Brother (a very slight degree
of relationship with you) to give you that peace which
you can give yourself whenever you please. 
The liberty of refusing, pretty Miss, is denied you,
because we are all sensible, that the liberty of chusing,
to every one's dislike, must follow. The vile wretch
you have set your heart upon speaks This plainly to
every-body, tho' you won't. He says you are His,
and shall be His, and he will be the death of any man 

who robs him of his Property. So, Miss, we have
a mind to try this point with him. My Father, supposing
he has the right of a Father in his child, is absolutely
determined not to be bullied out of that right. 
And what must that child be, who prefers the Rake to
a Father? 
This is the light in which this whole debate ought
to be taken. Blush, then, Delicacy, that cannot bear
the Poet's Amor omnibus idem! —Blush, then, Purity! 
Be ashamed, Virgin modesty! And, if capable of conviction,
surrender your whole will to the will of the
honoured pair, to whom you owe your being: And
beg of all your friends to forgive and forget the part
you have of late acted. 
I have written a longer Letter, than ever I designed
to write to you, after the insolent treatment and prohibition
you have given me: And now I am commissioned
to tell you, that your friends are as weary
of confining you, as you are of being confined. And
therefore you must prepare yourself to go in a very
few days, as you have been told before, to your
Uncle Antony's; who, notwithstanding your apprehensions,
will draw up his Bridge when he pleases; 
will see what company he pleases in his own house; 
nor will he demolish his Chapel to cure you of your
foolish late-commenced antipathy to a place of Divine
Worship. —The more foolish, as, if we intended to
use force, we could have the Ceremony pass in your
Chamber as well as any-where else. 
Prejudice against Mr. Solmes has evidently blinded
you, and there is a charitable necessity to open your
eyes: Since no one but you thinks the gentleman so
contemptible in his person; nor, for a plain country
gentleman, who has too much solid sense to appear
like a coxcomb, justly blameable in his manners. — 
And as to his temper, it is necessary you should speak
upon fuller knowlege, than at present it is plain you
can have of him. 

Upon the whole, it will not be amiss, that you
prepare for your speedy removal, as well for the sake
of your own conveniency, as to shew your readiness,
in one point, at least, to oblige your friends; one of
whom you may, if you please to deserve it, reckon,
tho' but a Brother, 
James Harlowe. 
P. S. If you are disposed to see Mr. Solmes, and to
make some excuses to him for your past conduct,
in order to be able to meet him somewhere else with
the less concern to yourself for your freedoms with
him; he shall attend you where you please. 
If you have a mind to read the Settlements, before
they are read to you for your signing, they shall be
sent you up—Who knows, but they will help you
to some fresh objections? —Your heart is free you
know—It must—For, did you not tell your Mother
it was? And will the pious Clarissa fib to her
Mamma? 
I desire no Reply. The case requires none. Yet I
will ask you, Have you, Miss, no more proposals
to make? 
I was so vexed when I came to the end of this
Letter (the postscript to which, perhaps, might be
written after the others had seen the Letter) that I
took up my pen, with an intent to write to my Uncle
Harlowe about resuming my own Estate, in pursuance
of your advice: But my heart failed me, when I recollected,
that I had not one friend to stand by or support
me in my claim; and that it would but the
more incense them, without answering any good end. 
O that my Cousin were but come! 
Is it not a sad thing, beloved as I thought myself so
lately by every one, that now I have not one person
in the world to plead for me, to stand by me, or who
would afford me refuge, were I to be under the necessity 

of seeking for it? —I who had the vanity to
think I had as many friends as I saw faces, and flattered
myself too, that it was not altogether unmerited, because
I saw not my Maker's Image, either in man,
woman, or child, high or low, rich or poor, whom,
comparatively, I loved not as myself. —Would to
Heaven, my dear, that you were married! Perhaps,
then, you could have induced Mr. Hickman to afford
me protection, till these storms were over-blown. 
But then this might have involved him in difficulties
and dangers; and that I would not have had done for
the world. 
I don't know what to do, not I! —God forgive me,
but I am very impatient! I wish—but I don't know
what to wish, without a sin! —Yet I wish it would
please God to take me to his mercy! —I can meet
with none here—What a world is this! What is there
in it desirable? The good we hope for, so strangely
mixed, that one knows not what to wish for! And
one half of mankind tormenting the other, and being
tormented themselves in tormenting! —For here in
this my particular case, my relations cannot be happy,
tho' they make me unhappy! —Except my Brother and
Sister, indeed—and they seem to take delight in and
enjoy the mischief they make. 
But it is time to lay down my pen, since my ink
runs nothing but gall. 