


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Sunday Night, April 9. 
Sir Charles is already returned: He arrived at
Windsor on Friday morning; but found that Lord 

W. had set out the afternoon of the day before, for
the house of his friend Sir Joseph Lawrance, which is
but fifteen miles from Mansfield-house. 
Upon this intelligence, Sir Charles, wanting to return
to town as soon as he could, followed him to the
Knight's: And having time enough himself to reach
Mansfield-house that night, he, by his uncle's consent,
pursued his journey thither; to the great joy of the
family; who wished for his personal introduction of
my Lord to Miss Mansfield. 
My Lord arrived by breakfast-time, unfatigued, and
in high spirits: Staid at Mansfield-house all day; and
promised so to manage, as to be in town to-morrow,
in order to be present at his niece's nuptials on Tuesday. 
As for Sir Charles, he made the Mansfield family
happy in his company the whole Friday evening; enquiring
into their affairs relating to the oppression
they lay under; pointing out measures for redress; encouraging
Miss Mansfield; and informing the brothers,
that the Lawyers he had consulted on their deeds,
told him, that a new trial might be hoped for; the
result of which, probably, would be a means to do
them justice, so powerfully protected and assisted as
they would now be; for new lights had broke in upon
them, and they wanted but to recover a deed,
which they understood was in the hands of two gentlemen,
named Hartley, who were but lately returned
from the Indies. Thus prepared, the Mansfields also
were in high spirits, the next morning; and looked,
Sir Charles said, on each other, when they met, as if
they wanted to tell each other their agreeable dreams. 
Sir Charles, in his way to Sir Joseph Lawrance's,
had looked in upon Sir Harry Beauchamp, and his
Lady. He found Sir Harry in high spirits, expecting
the arrival of his son; who was actually landed from
Calais, having met there his Father's letter, allowing 

him to return to England, and wishing in his own,
and in Lady Beauchamp's name, his speedy arrival. 
Sir Charles's impatience to see his friend, permitted
him only to breakfast with my Lord and the Mansfields; 
and to know the opinion each party formed
of the other, on this first interview; and then he set
out to Sir Harry Beauchamp's. What an activity! — 
Heaven reward him with the grant of his own wishes,
whatever they be, and make him the happiest of men! 
My Lord is greatly taken with the Lady, and her
whole family, Well he may, Sir Charles says. He
blessed him, and called himself blessed in his sister's
son, for his recommendation of each to the other. 
The Lady thinks better of him, as her mother owned
to Sir Charles, than she thought she should, from
report. 
I begin to think, Lucy, that those who set out for
happiness are most likely to find it, when they live
single till the age of fancy is over. Those who marry
while it lasts, are often disappointed of that which they
propose so largely to themselves: While those who
wed for convenience, and deal with tolerable honesty
by each other, are at a greater certainty. Tolerable,
I repeat, since, it seems, we are to expect that both
parties will turn the best side of the old garment
outward. Hence arises consolation to old maidens,
and cautions against precipitation—Expatiate, my
dear, on this fruitful subject: I would, were I at
leisure. 
Sir Charles says, that he doubts not, but Lord W.
will be as happy a man as he wishes to be, in less than
a month. 
The duce is in this brother of mine, whispered
Miss Grandison, to me, for huddling up of marriages! 
He don't consider, that there may be two chances for
one, that his honest folks may in half a year's time,
bless him the contrary way. 
Sir Charles told us, that he had desired Lord W. 

to give out every-where (that the adversaries of the
Mansfield family might know it) his intended alliance; 
and that he and his nephew were both determined
to procure a retrospection of all former proceedings. 
Sir Charles got to Sir Harry Beauchamp's a little before
his friend arrived. Sir Harry took him aside at
his alighting, and told him, that Lady Beauchamp
had had clouds on her brow all the day, and he was
afraid, would not receive his son with the graciousness
that once he hoped for from her: But that he left
him to manage with her. She never, said he, had so
high an opinion either of man or woman as she has
of you. 
Sir Charles addressed himself to her, as not doubting
her goodness upon the foot of their former conversation; 
and praised her for the graces that however
appeared but faintly in her countenance, till his compliments
lighted them up, and made them shine full
out in it. He told her, that his sister and Lord G.
were to be married on the following Tuesday. He
himself, he said, should set out for Paris on Friday
after: But hoped to see a family intimacy begun between
his sisters and Lady Beauchamp; and between
their Lords, and Sir Harry, and Mr. Beauchamp. He
applauded her on the generosity of her intentions, as
declared to him in their former conference; and congratulated
her on the power she had, of which she
made so noble an use, of laying, at the same time,
an obligation on the tenderest of husbands, and the
most deserving of sons: Whose duty to her he engaged
for. 
All this set her in high good humour; and she
took to herself, and bridled upon it, to express myself
in Charlotte's manner, the praises and graces this
adroit manager gave her, as if they were her unquestionable
due. 
This agreeable way they were all in, Sir Harry 

transported with his Lady's goodness, when Mr. Beauchamp
arrived. 
The young gentleman bent his knee to his stepmother,
as well as to his father, and thanked her for
the high favours his father had signified to him by Letter,
that he owed to her goodness. She confirmed
them; but, Sir Charles observed, with an ostentation
that shewed she thought very highly of her own generosity. 
They had a very chearful evening. Not one cloud
would hang on Lady Beauchamp's brow, tho' once
or twice it seemed a little overshadowed, as Mr. Beauchamp
displayed qualities for which his father was too
ready to admire him. Sir Charles thought it necessary
to caution Sir Harry on this subject; putting it in this
light, that Lady Beauchamp loved her husband so well,
that she would be too likely to dread a rivalry in his
affections from a son so very accomplished. Sir Harry
took the hint kindly. 
Mr. Beauchamp was under a good deal of concern
at Sir Charles's engagements to leave England so soon
after his arrival; and asked his father's leave to attend
him. Sir Harry declared, that he could not part with
him. Sir Charles chid his friend, and said, It was not
quite so handsome a return to the joyful reception he had
met with from Lady Beauchamp, and his father, as
might have been expected from his Beauchamp; bowing
to the Lady. But she excused the young gentleman,
and said, She wonder'd not, that any-body who
was favoured with his friendship, should be unwilling
to be separated from him. 
Sir Charles expresses great satisfaction in Mr. Beauchamp's
being arrived before his departure, that he
may present to us, himself, a man with whom he is
sure we shall all be delighted, and leave him happy in
that beloved society, which he himself is obliged to
quit. 
A repining temper, Lucy, would consider only the 

hardship of meeting a long-absent friend, just to feel
the uneasiness of a second parting: But this man
views every-thing in a right light. When his own
happiness is not to be attained, he lays it out of his
thoughts, and, as I have heretofore observed, rejoices
in that of others. It is a pleasure to see how Sir
Charles seems to enjoy the love which Dr. Bartlett
expresses for this friend of them both. 
Sir Charles addressed himself to me, on several occasions,
in so polite, in so tender a manner, that every
one told me afterwards, they are sure he loves me. 
Dr. Bartlett at the time, as he sat next me, whispered,
on the regret expressed by all on losing him so soon— 
Ah, madam! —I know, and pity, my patron's struggles! 
—Struggles, Lucy! What could the doctor mean
by this whisper to me? But I hope he guesses not at
mine! If he does, would he have whispered his pity
of Sir Charles to me? —Come, Lucy, this is some
comfort, however; and I will endeavour to be brave
upon it, that I may not, by my weakness, lessen myself
in the doctor's good opinion. 
It was agreed for Charlotte, whose assent was given
in these words—‘Do as you will—or, rather, as my
brother will. —What signifies opposing him?’ that
the nuptials shall be solemnized, as privately as possible,
at St. George's church. The company is to drop
in at different doors, and with as few attendants as
may be. Lord W. the Earl of G. and Lady Gertrude,
Lord and Lady L. Miss Jervois, and your Harriet,
are to be present at the ceremony. I was very
earnest to be excused, till Miss Grandison, when we
were alone, dropt down on one knee, and held up
her hands, to beg me to accompany her. Mr. Everard
Grandison, if he can be found, is to be also there,
at Sir Charles's desire. 
Dr. Bartlett, as I before hinted, at her earnest request,
is to perform the ceremony. Sir Charles
wished it to be at his own Parish-church: But Miss 

Grandison thought it too near to be private. He was
indifferent, as to the place, he said—So it was at
church; for he had been told of the difficulty we had
to get Charlotte to desist from having it performed in
her chamber; and seemed surprised—Fie, Charlotte!
said he—An office so solemn! —Vows to receive and
pay as in the Divine Presence— 
She was glad, she told me, that she had not left
that battle to be fought with him. 
Monday, April 10. 
Lord W. is come. Lord and Lady L. are here. 
They, and Miss Grandison, received him with great
respect. He embraced his nieces in a very affectionate
manner. Sir Charles was absent. Lord W. is in
person and behaviour a much more agreeable man
than I expected him to be. Nor is he so decrepit
with the gout, as I had supposed. He is very careful
of himself, it seems. This world has been kind to
him; and I fansy he makes a great deal of a little
pain, for want of stronger exercises to his patience; 
and so is a sufferer by self-indulgence. Had I not
been made acquainted with his free living, and with
the insults he bore from Mrs. Giffard, with a spirit so
poor and so low, I should have believed I saw not
only the man of quality, but the man of sense, in his
countenance. I endeavoured, however, as much as
I could, to look upon him as the brother of the late
Lady Grandison. Had he been worthy of that relation,
how should I have reverenced him! 
But whatever I thought of him, he was highly taken
with me. He particularly praised me for the modesty
which he said was visible in my countenance. Free-livers,
Lucy, taken with that grace in a woman, which they
make it their pride to destroy! But all men, good and
bad, admire modesty in a woman: And I am sometimes
out of humour with our sex, that they do not as generally
like modesty in men. I am sure that this grace, in
Sir Charles Grandison, is one of his principal glories 

with me. It emboldens one's heart, and permits one
to behave before him with ease; and, as I may say,
with security, in the consciousness of a right intention. 
But what were Lord W.'s praises of his nephew! 
He called him, The glory of his sex, and of human
nature. How the cheeks of the dear Emily glowed
at the praises given to her guardian! —She was the
taller for them: When she moved, it was on tiptoe; 
stealing, as it were, cross the floor, lest she should
lose any-thing that was said on a subject so delightful
to her. 
My Lord was greatly pleased with her too. He
complimented her as the beloved ward of the best of
guardians. He lamented, with us, the occasion that
called his nephew abroad. He was full of his own engagements
with Miss Mansfield, and declared that his
nephew should guide and govern him as he pleased in
every material case, respecting either the conduct of
his future life, or the management and disposition of
his estate; declaring, that he had made his will, and,
reserving only his Lady's jointure, and a sew legacies,
had left every-thing to him. —How right a thing,
even in policy, is it, my dear, to be a good, and a
generous man! 
I must not forget, that my Lord wished, with all his
soul, that was his expression, that he might have the
honour of giving to his nephew my hand in marriage. 
I could feel myself blush. I half-suppressed a sigh:
I would have wholly suppressed it, if I could. I recovered
the little confusion, his too plainly expressed
wish gave me, by repeating to myself the word Clementina. 
This Charlotte is a great coward. But I dare not
tell her so, for fear of a retort. I believe I should be
as great a one in her circumstances, so few hours to
one of the greatest events of one's life! But I pretend
not to bravery: Yet hope, that in the cause of virtue
or honour I should be found to have a Soul. 

I write now at my cousins. I came hither to make
an alteration in my dress. I have promised to be with
the sweet Bully early in the morning of her important
day. 

