



My dear Lady,
Altho' I cannot tell how you receiv'd my
Observations on the Tragedy of The Distress'd
Mother, and the Comedy of The Tender Husband;
yet will I proceed to give your Ladyship my Opinion
of the Opera I was at last Night. 
But what can I say, when I have mention'd
(what you so well know) the fine Scenes the
genteel and splendid Company, the charming
Voices, and delightful Musick? 
If, Madam, one were all Ear, and lost to every
Sense but that of Harmony, surely the Italian
Opera would be a transporting Thing! —But
when one finds good Sense, and Instruction, and
Propriety, sacrific'd to the Charms of Sound, what
an unedifying, what a mere temporary Delight
does it afford! For what does one carry home, but
the Remembrance of having been pleas'd so many
Hours by the mere Vibration of Air, which being
but Sound, you cannot bring away with you; and
must therefore enter the Time passed in such a Diversion,
into the Account of those blank Hours,
from which one has not reap'd so much as one improving Lesson? 
I speak this with regard to myself, who know
nothing of the Italian Language: But yet I may
not be very unhappy, that I do not, if I may form
my Opinion of the Sentiments, by the enervating
Softness of the Sound, and the unmanly Attitudes
and Gestures made use of to express the Passions of
the Men-Performers, and from the amorous Complainings 

of the Women; as visible in the soft,
the too-soft, Action of each. 
Then, tho' I cannot but say, That the Musick
is most melodious, yet to see a Hero, as an Alexander,
or a Julius Cæsar, warbling out his Atchievements
in War, his military Conquests, as well
as his Love, in a Song, it seems to me to be making
a Jest of both. 
And how much more absurd is it still, to hear
some dying Chieftain, some unfortunate Hero,
chanting forth his Woes and his Calamities, and
taking his Leave of the World, with less Propriety
than our English Criminals at the fatal Tree! What
can this move, how can this pierce, be the Story
ever so dismal, any thing but one's Ears? 
Every Nation, Mr. B. says, has its peculiar
Excellence: The French Taste is Comedy and Harlequinery; 
the Italian, Musick and Opera; the
English, masculine and nervous Sense, whether in
Tragedy or Comedy. —Why can't one, methinks,
keep to one's own particular national Excellence, and
let others retain theirs? For Mr. B. observes, That
when once Sound is preferr'd to Sense, we shall
depart from all our own Worthiness, and, at best,
be but the Apes, yea, the Dupes, of those whom
we may strive to imitate; but never can reach,
much less excel. 
Mr. B. sometimes says, that this Taste is almost
the only good Fruit our young Nobility gather,
and bring home from their foreigh Tours; and that
he found the English Nation much ridicul'd on this
Score by those very People who are benefited by
the Depravity. And if this be the best, what must
the other Qualifications be, which they bring 

home? —Yet every one does not return with so
little Improvement, it is to be hoped. 
But what have I said, what can I say, of an
Italian Opera? —Only, little to the Purpose as
it is, I wonder how I have been able to say so
much: For who can describe Sound? Or what
Words shall be found to imbody Air? — 
And when we return, and are ask'd our Opinion
of what we have seen or heard, we are only able
to answer, as I hinted above, The Scenery is fine; 
The Company splendid and genteel; The Musick
charming for the Time;—The Action not extraordinary; 
The Language unintelligible; and, for
all these Reasons—The Instruction none at all. 
This is all that the Thing itself gives me Room
to say of the Italian Opera; very probably, for
want of a polite Taste, and a Knowlege of the
Language. 
In my next, I believe I shall give you, Madam,
my Opinion of a Diversion or Amusement, which,
I doubt, I shall like still less; and that is a Masquerade;
for I fear I shall not be excus'd going to one,
altho' I have no manner of Liking to it; especially
in my present Way. I am, Madam, 
Your Ladyship's most obliged and faithful
P. B. 
I must add another Half-sheet to this Letter on
the Subject-matter of it, the Opera; and am
sure your Ladyship will not be displeased with
the Addition. 
Mr. B. coming up, just as I had concluded my
Letter, asked me, What was my Subject? I told 

him, I was giving your Ladyship my Notions of
the Italian Opera. Let me see what they are, my
Dear; for this is a Subject, that very few of those
who admire these Performances, and fewer still of
those who decry them, know any thing of. 
He read the above, and was pleased to commend
it. Operas, said he, are very sad Things in
England, to what they are in Italy; and the Translations
given of them, abominable: And, indeed,
our Language will not do them Justice. 
Every Nation, as you take Notice, has its Excellencies; 
and you say well, that ours should not
quit the manly nervous Sense, which is the Distinction
of the English Drama. One Play of our celebrated
Shakespeare will give infinitely more Pleasure
to a sensible Mind, than a dozen English-Italian
Operas. But, my Dear, in Italy they are quite
another Thing: And the Sense is not, as here, sacrific'd
so much to the Sound, but that they are both
very compatible. 
Be pleased, Sir, to give me your Observation on
this Head in Writing, and then I shall have something
to send worthy of Lady Davers's Acceptance. 
Do, Sir, pray do. 
I will, my Dear; and he took a Pen, and
wrote the inclosed; which I beg your Ladyship to
return me, because I will keep it by me, for my
Instruction, if I should be led to talk of this Subject
in Company. You must let my Sister know,
said he, that I have given myself no Time to reperuse
what I have written: She will do well therefore
to correct it, and return it to you. 
‘In Italy, Judges of Operas are so far from thinking
the Drama a Poetical Part of their Operas 

Nonsense, as the Unskill'd in Italian rashly conclude
in England, that if the Libretto, as they
call it, is not approved, the Opera, not withstanding
the Excellence of the Musick, will be condemn'd. 
For the Italians justly determine, that
the very Musick of an Opera cannot be complete
and pleasing, if the Drama be incongruous, as I
may call it, in its Compolition; because, in order
to please, it must have the necessary Contraste
of the Grave and the Light, that is, the Diverting,
equally blended throughout the Whole. If
there be too much of the first, let the Musick be
composed ever so masterly in that Style, it will
become heavy and tiresome; if the latter prevail,
it will surfeit with its Levity. Wherefore it is the
Poet's Business to adapt the Words for this agreeable
Mixture: For the Musick is but secondary
and subsetvient to the Words; and if there be an
artful Contraste in the Drama, there will be the
same in the Musick, supposing the Composer to
be a skilful Master. 
‘Now, since in England the Practice has been
to mutilate, curtail, and patch up a Drama in
Italian, in order to introduce favourite Airs, selected
from different Authors, the Contraste has
always been broken thereby, and the Opera
damn'd, without every one's knowing the Reason:
And since ignorant mercenary Prompters,
tho' Italians, have been imploy'd in the Hotchpotch,
and in translating our Drama's from Italian
into English, how could such Operas appear
any other than incongruous Nonsense.’ 

Recitativos.
‘To avoid the natural Dissonance and Irregularity
in common Speech, Recitativo's in Musick
and Dramatical Performances were invented; and,
altho' the Time in pronouncing the Words contained
in them, is scarce longer, than in common
Conversation, yet the Harmony of the Chords of
the Thorough-Base, which then accompanies the
Voice, delights the Ears of discerning Judges:
Wherefore Recitative is a regular way of speaking
musically, as I may say, in order to avoid and
correct the Irregularities of Speech, often found in
Nature, and to express the Variety of the Passions,
without Offence to the Ear.’ 
Permit me, dear Madam, to repeat my Assurances,
that I am, and must ever be, 
Your obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

