


Alas-a-day! we have bad News from poor Mr.
Williams. He has had a sad Mischance; fallen
among Rogues in his Way home last Night; but
by good Chance has sav'd my Papers. This is the
Account he gives of it to Mrs. Jewkes. 

‘Good Mrs. Jewkes,
I Have had a sore Misfortune in going from you; 
when I had got as near the Town as the Dam,
and was going to cross the Wooden-bridge, two Fellows
got hold of me, and swore bitterly they would
kill me, if I did not give them what I had. They
romag'd my Pockets, and took from me my Snuff-Box,
my Seal-ring, and Half a Guinea, and some
Silver, and Half-pence; also my Handkerchief, 

and two or three Letters I had in my Pocket. By
good Fortune the Letter Mrs. Pamela gave me
was in my Bosom, and so that escap'd; but they
bruis'd my Head, and Face, and cursing me for
having no more Money, tipt me into the Dam,
Crying, Lie there, Parson, till to-morrow! My
Shins and Knees were bruis'd much in the Fall
against one of the Stumps; and I had like to have
been suffocated in Water and Mud. To be sure,
I shan't be able to stir out this Day or two. For
I am a fearful Spectacle! My Hat and Wig I
was forc'd to leave behind me, and go home a
Mile and a Half without; but they were found
next Morning, and brought me, with my Snuffbox,
which the Rogues must have dropt. My
Cassock is sadly torn, as is my Band. To be
sure, I was much frighted; for a Robbery in these
Parts has not been known many Years. Diligent
Search is making after the Rogues. My humblest
Respects to good Mrs. Pamela. If she pities my
Misfortunes, I shall be the sooner well, and fit to
wait on her and you. This did not hinder me in
writing a Letter, tho' with great Pain, as I do this;’ 
[To be sure this good Man can keep no Secret!]
and sending it away by a Man and Horse, this
Morning. I am, good Mrs. Jewkes, 
‘Your most obliged humble Servant. 
‘God be prais'd it is no worse! and I find I have
got no Cold, tho' miserably wet from Top to
Toe. My Fright, I believe, prevented me
catching Cold; for I was not rightly myself
for some Hours, and know not how I got home. 
I will write a Letter of Thanks this Night, if I
am able, to my kind Patron for his inestimable
Goodness to me. I wish I was enabled to 

say all I hope, with regard to the better Part
of his Bounty to me, incomparable Mrs. Pamela.’ 

The wicked Brute fell a laughing when she had
read this Letter, till her sat Sides shook; said she, I
can but think how the poor Parson look'd, after
parting with his pretty Mistress in such high Spirits,
when he found himself at the Bottom of the Dam! 
And what a Figure he must cut in his tatter'd Band
and Cassock, and without Hat and Wig, when he
got home. I warrant, said she, he was in a sweet
Pickle! –––I said, I thought it was very barbarous
to laugh at such a Misfortune: But she said, As he
was safe, she laughed; otherwise she should have
been sorry: And she was glad to see me so concern'd
for him ––– It look'd promising, she said. 
I heeded not her Reflection; but as I have been
used to Causes for Mistrusts, I cannot help saying,
that I don't like this thing: And their taking his
Letters most alarms me. –––How happy it was, they
miss'd my Pacquet! I know not what to think of
it! –––But why should I let every Accident break my
Peace? But yet it will do so while I stay here. 
Mrs. Jewkes is mightily at me, to go with her in
the Chariot, to visit Mr. Williams. She is so officious
to bring on the Affair between us, that being a
cunning, artful Woman, I know not what to make
of it: I have refused her absolutely; urging, that
except I intended to encourage his Suit, I ought not
to do it. And she is gone without me. 
I have strange Temptations to get away in her
Absence, for all these fine Appearances. 'Tis sad
to have no body to advise with! –––I know not what
to do. But, alas for me! I have no Money, if I
should, to buy any body's Civilities, or to pay for 

Necessaries or Lodging. But I'll go into the Garden,
and resolve afterwards.— 
I have been in the Garden, and to the Back-door; 
and there I stood, my Heart up at my Mouth. I
could not see I was watch'd; so this looks well. But
if any thing should go bad after wards, I should never
forgive myself, for not taking this Opportunity. 
Well, I will go down again, and see if all is clear, and
how it looks out at the Back-door in the Pasture. 
To be sure, there is Witchcraft in this House; 
and I believe Lucifer is bribed, as well as all about
me, and is got into the Shape of that nasty grim
Bull, to watch me! –––For I have been down again; 
and ventur'd to open the Door, and went out about
a Bow-shoot into the Pasture; but there stood
that horrid Bull, staring me full in the Face, with
fiery Saucer Eyes, as I thought. So, I got in again; 
for fear he should come at me. Nobody saw me,
however. –––Do you think there are such things as
Witches and Spirits? if there be, I believe in my Heart, Mrs. Jewkes has got this Bull of her Side. 
But yet, what could I do without Money or a Friend? 
–––O this wicked Woman! to trick me so! Every
thing, Man, Woman and Beast, is in a Plot
against your poor Pamela, I think! –––Then I know
not one Step of the Way, nor how far to any
House or Cottage; and whether I could gain Protection,
if I got to a House: And now the Robbers
are abroad too, I may run into as great Danger, as
I want to escape from; nay, greater much, if these
promising Appearances hold: And sure my Master
cannot be so black as that they should not! –––What
can I do? –––I have a good mind to try for it once
more; but then I may be pursued and taken; and
it will be worse for me; and this wicked Woman, 

will beat me, and take my Shoes away, and lock
me up. 
But after all, if my Master should mean well, he
can't be angry at my Fears, if I should escape; and
nobody can blame me; and I can more easily be
induced with you, when all my Apprehensions are
over, to consider his Proposal of Mr. Williams, than
I could here; and he pretends he will leave me at
my Choice: Why then should I be afraid? I will
go down again, I think! But yet my Heart misgives
me, because of the Difficulties before me, in escapeing; 
and being so poor and so friendless! ––––O
good God! the Preserver of the Innocent! direct me
what to do! –––Well, I have just now a sort of
strange Persuasion upon me, that I ought to try to
get away, and leave the Issue to Providence. So,
once more! –––I'll see, at least, if this Bull be still
there! 
Alack-a-day! what a Fate is this! I have not the
Courage to go, neither can I think to stay. But I
must resolve. The Gardener was in Sight last time!
so made me come up again. But I'll contrive to
send him out of the way, if I can! –––For if I never
should have such another Opportunity, I could not
forgive myself. Once more I'll venture. God direct
my Footsteps, and make smooth my Path and my
Way to Safety! 
Well, here I am, come back again! frighted like
a Fool, out of all my Purposes! O how terrible
every thing appears to me! I had got twice as far
again, as I was before, out of the Back-door; and
I looked, and saw the Bull, as I thought, between
me and the Door; and another Bull coming towards
me the other way: Well, thought I, here is double
Witchcraft, to be sure! Here is the Spirit of my 

Master in one Bull; and Mrs. Jewkes's in the other; 
and now I am gone, to be sure! O help! cry'd I,
like a Fool, and run back to the Door, as swift as
if I flew. When I had got the Door in my Hand,
I ventur'd to look back, to see if these supposed
Bulls were coming; and I saw they were only two
poor Cows, a grazing in distant Places, that my
Fears had made all this Rout about. But as every
thing is so frightful to me, I find I am not fit
to think of my Escape: For I shall be as much
frighted at the first strange Man that I meet with. 
And I am persuaded, that Fear brings one into more
Dangers, than the Caution, that goes along with it,
delivers one from. 
I then locked the Door, and put the Key in my
Pocket, and was in a sad Quandary; but I was soon
determined; for the Maid Nan came in Sight, and
asked, If any thing was the matter, that I was so
often up and down Stairs? God forgive me; but I
had a sad Lye at my Tongue's End; said I, Tho'
Mrs. Jewkes is sometimes a little hard upon me, yet
I know not where I am without her: I go up, and
I come down to walk about in the Garden; and
not having her, know scarcely what to do with myself. 
Ay, said the Idiot, she is main good Company,
Madam; no wonder you miss her. 
So here I am again; and here likely to be; for I
have no Courage to help myself any-where else. O
why are poor foolish Maidens try'd with such Dangers,
when they have such weak Minds to grapple
with them! –––I will, since it is so, hope the best: 
But yet I cannot but observe how grievously every
thing makes against me: For here are the Robbers; 
tho' I fell not into their Hands myself, yet they
gave me as much Terror, and had as great an Effect
upon my Fears, as if I had: And here is the 

Bull; it has as effectually frighten'd me, as if I had
been hurt by it instead of the Cook-maid; and so
they join'd together, as I may say, to make a very
Dastard of me. But my Folly was the worst of all; 
for that depriv'd me of my Money; for had I had
that, I believe I should have ventur'd the other
Two. 
