



From Lady Davers to Mrs. B. in Answer
to the preceding. 


My dear Pamela,
I am glad Miss Darnford is likely to be so happy
in a Husband, as Sir W. G. will certainly make
her. I was afraid, that the Proposal I made, would
not do with Miss, had she not had so good a Tender. 
I want too, to have the foolish Fellow marry'd–––– 
for several Reasons; one of which is, He is continually
teizing us to permit him to go up to Town,
in order for him to reside there for some Months,
to see the World, as he calls it. But we are convinc'd
he would feel it, as well as see it, if we gave
way to his Request: For, in Understanding, Dress,
and inconsiderate Vanity, he is so exactly siz'd and
cut out for a Town Fop, Coxcomb, or pretty Fellow,
as it is called, that he will undoubtedly fall into
all the Vices of those People; and, perhaps, having
such Expectations as he has, will be made the Property
of Rakes and Sharpers. He complains, that
we use him like a Child in a Go-cart, or a Baby
with Leading-strings, and that he must not be trusted
out of our Sight. 'Tis a sad thing, that these Bodies
will grow up to the Stature of Men, when the Minds
improve not at all with them, but are still those
of Boys and Children. Yet, he would certainly
make a fond Husband; for, at present, he has no
very bad Qualities. But is such a Narcissus! –––But
this between ourselves; for his Uncle is wrapt up in
the Fellow–––And why? Because he is good-humour'd,
that's all. He has vex'd me lately, which makes me 

write so angrily about him––––But 'tis not worth
troubling you with the Particulars. 
I hope Mrs. Jewkes is happy, as you say! ––––– 
Poor Woman! she seemed to promise for a longer
Life! But what shall we say? 
Your Compliment to me, of my Beck's Sister, is a
very kind one. I am greatly obliged to you for it. 
Mrs. Oldham is a sober, grave Widow, a little aforehand
in the World, but not much; has liv'd well; 
understands Household Management thoroughly; is
diligent, and has a Turn to serious Things, which
will make you like her the better. 
I'll order Beck and her to wait on you in a Chaise
and Pair, and she will satisfy you in every thing,
as to what you may, and may not, expect of her. 
You cann't think how kindly I take this Motion
from you. You forget nothing that can oblige your
Friends. Little did I think you would remember
me, of (what I had forgotten in a manner) my favourable
Opinion and Wishes for her, express'd so
long ago–––––But you are, what you are––––a dear,
obliging Creature. 
Beck is all Joy and Gratitude upon it; and her
Sister had rather serve you, than the Princess. You
need be under no Difficulties about Terms: She
would serve you for nothing, if you would accept
of her Service. 
I am glad, because it pleases you so much, that
Miss Goodwin will be soon put into your Care. It
will be happy for the Child, and I hope she will be
so dutiful to you, as to give you no Pain for your
generous Goodness to her. Her Mamma has sent
me a Present of some choice Products of that Climate,
with Acknowlegements of my Kindness to
Miss. I will send Part of it to you by your new
Servant; for so I presume to call her already. 

What a naughty Sister you are, however, to be
so far advanc'd again, as to be obliged to shorten
your intended Excursions, and yet not to send me
Word of it yourself? Don't you know how much I
interest myself in every thing that makes for my
Brother's Happiness and yours? –––More especially in
so material a Point, as is the Increase of a Family,
that it is my Boast to be sprung from––– Yet I must
find this out by Accident, and by other Hands! ––– 
Is not this very slighting? –––But never do so again,
and I'll forgive you now, because of the Joy it
gives me: Who am 
Your truly affectionate and obliged Sister,
B. Davers. 
I thank you for your Book upon the Plays you
saw. Inclosed is a List of some others, which
I desire you to read, and to oblige me with
your Remarks upon them at your Leisure; tho'
you may not perhaps have seen them by the
Time you will favour me with your Observations. 

