



My dear Father and Mother,
I was forc'd to break off; for I fear'd my
Master was coming; but it prov'd to be only
Mrs. Jervis. She said, I can't endure you
should be so much by yourself, Pamela. And 

I, said I, dread nothing so much as Company; 
for my Heart was up at my Mouth now, for
fear my Master was coming. But I always
rejoice to see my dear Mrs. Jervis. 
Said she, I have had a world of Talk with
my Master about you. I am sorry for it, said I,
that I am made of so much Consequence as to
be talk'd of by him. O, said she, I must not
tell you all; but you are of more Consequence
to him, than you think for.— 
Or wish for, said I; for the Fruits of being
of Consequence to him, would make me of
none to myself, or any body else. 
Said she, Thou art as witty as any Lady in
the Land: I wonder where thou gottest it. But
they must be poor Ladies, with such great Opportunities,
I am sure, if they have no more
Wit than I! —But let that pass. 
I suppose, said I, that I am of so much
Consequence to him, however, as to vex him,
if it be but to think, he can't make a Fool of
such a one as I; and that is nothing at all, but
a Rebuke to the Pride of his high Condition,
which he did not expect, and knows not how
to put up with. 
There is something in that, may-be, said
she; but indeed, Pamela, he is very angry
with you too; and calls you Twenty perverse
Things; wonders at his own Folly, to have
shewn you so much Favour, as he calls it; 
which he was first inclin'd to, he says, for his
Mother's sake, and would have persisted to shew 

you for your own, if you was not your own
Enemy. 
Nay, now I shan't love you, Mrs. Jervis,
said I; you are going to persuade me to ask to
stay, tho' you know the Hazards I run. — 
No, said she, he says you shall go; for he thinks
it won't be for his Reputation to keep you: But
he wish'd, (don't speak of it for the World, Pamela)
that he knew a Lady of Birth, just such
another as yourself, in Person and Mind, and
he would marry her To-morrow. 
I colour'd up to the Ears at this Word; 
but said, Yet if I was the Lady of Birth, and
he would offer to be rude first, as he has twice
done to poor me, I don't know whether I
would have him: For she that can bear an Insult
of that kind, I should think not worthy to
be a Gentleman's Wife; any more than he
wou'd to be a Gentleman, that could offer
it. 
Nay, now, Pamela, said she, thou carriest
thy Notions a great way. Well, dear Mrs.
Jervis, said I, very seriously, (for I could not
help it) I am more full of Fears than ever. I
have only to beg of you, as one of the best
Friends I have in the World, to say nothing of
my asking to stay. To say my Master likes
me, when I know what End he aims at, is
Abomination to my Ears; and I shan't think
myself safe, till I am at my poor Father's and
Mother's. 
She was a little angry with me, 'till I assur'd
her, that I had not the least Uneasiness on her 

Account, but thought myself safe under her
Protection and Friendship. And so we dropp'd
the Discourse for that Time. 
I hope to have finish'd this ugly Waistcoat
in Two Days; after which, I have only some
Linen to get up, and shall then let you know
how I contrive as to my Passage; for the heavy
Rains will make it sad travelling on Foot: But
may-be I shall get a Place to &wblank;, which is Ten
Miles of the Way, in Farmer Nichols's close
Cart; for I can't sit a Horse well at all; and
may-be nobody will be suffer'd to see me on
upon the Way. But I hope to let you know
more, 
From, &c. 

