



To Robert Lovelace, Esq; His Honner. 

Sat. April 15. 
&dotup;May it please your Honner,
This is to let your Honner kno', as how I have
been emploied in a bisness I would have been
excused from, if so be I could. For it is to gitt evidense
from a young man, who is of late com'd out
to be my Cuzzen by my Grandmother's side; and
but lately come to live in these partes, about a very
vile thing, as younge master calls it, relating to your
Honner. God forbid I should call it so without your
leave. It is not for so plane a man as I be, to tacks
my betters. It is consarning one Miss Batirton, of
Notingam; a very pritty crature, belike. 
&dotup;Your Honner got her away, it seems, by a false
Letter to her, macking believe as howe her She-cuzzen
that she derely loved, was coming to see her; 
and was tacken ill upon the rode: And so Miss
Batirton set out in a Shase, and one sarvant, to set
her Cuzzen from the Inne where she laid sick, as
she thote: And the sarvant was tricked, and braute
back the Shase; but Miss Batirton was not harde of
for a month, or so. And when it came to passe,
that her frends found her oute, and would have prossekutid
your Honner, your Honner was gone abroad: 
And so she was broute to bed, as one may say, before
your Honner's return: And she got colde in her
lyin-inn, and lanquitched, and soon died: And her 

child is living; but your Honner never troubles your
Honner's hedd about it in the least. And this and
some such other matters of verry bad reporte, Squier
Solmes was to tell my young Lady of, if so be she
would have harde him speke, before we lost her sweet
company, as I may say, from heere (a) . 
&dotup;I hope your Honner will excuse me: But I was
forsed to tell all I harde, because they had my Cuzzen
in to them, and he would have said he had tolde
me: So could not be melely-mouthed, for fere to be
blone up, and plese your Honner. 
&dotup;Your Honner helped me to a many ugly stories to
tell against your Honner to my younge Master, and
younge Mistriss; butt did not tell me about this. 
&dotup;I most humbelly beseche your Honner to be good
and kinde and fethful to my dearest younge Lady,
now you have her; or I shall brake my harte for
having done some dedes that have helped to bring
things to this passe. Pray youre dere good Honner,
be just! Prayey do! —As God shall love ye! prayey
do! —I cannot write no more for this pressent, for
verry fear and grief— 
&dotup;But now I am cumm'd to my writing agen, will
youre Honner be pleased to tell me, if as how there
be any danger to your Honner's life from this bisness; 
for my Cuzzen is actlie hier'd to go down to Miss
Batirton's frendes to see if they will stur in it: For
you must kno' your Honner, as how he lived in the
Batirton family at the time, and could be a good
evidence, and all that. 
&dotup;I hope it was not so verry bad, as Titus says it
was; for hee ses as how there was a Rape in the case
betwixt you at furste, and plese your Honner; and
my Cuzzen Titus is a very honift younge man as ever
brocke bred. This is his carackter; and this made
me willinger to owne him for my Relation, when
we came to talck.&dotup; 

If there should be danger of your Honner's life, I
hope your Honner will not be hanged like as one of us
common men: Only have your hedd cut off, or so: 
And yet it is pitty such a hedd should be lossed: But if as
how it shoulde be prossekutid to that furr, which God
forbid, he plesed natheless to thinck of youre fethful
Joseph Leman, before your hedd be condemned; for
after condemnation, as I have been told, all will be the
King's, or the Shreeve's. 
&dotup;I thote as how it was best to acquent your Honner
of this; and for you to let me kno' if I could do anything
to sarve your Honner, and prevent mischef
with my Cuzzen Titus, on his coming back from
Nottingam, before he mackes his reporte. 
&dotup;I have gin him a hinte already: For what, as I
sed to him, Cuzzin Titus, signifies stirring up the
coles, and macking of strief, to make rich gentil-folkes
live at varience, and to be cutting of throtes,
and such-like? 
&dotup;Verry trewe, sed little Titus. And this and plese
your Honner gis me hopes of him, if so be your
Honner gis me directions; sen', as God kno'es, I
have a poor, a verry poor invenshon; only a willing
mind to prevent mischef, that is the chief of my aim,
and always was, I bless my God! —Els I could have
made mutch mischef in my time; as indeed any sarvant
may. Your Honner natheless praises my invenshon
every now-and-then: Alas! and plese your
Honner, what in venshonshould suche a plane man as
I have? —But when your Honner sets me agoing by
your fine invenshon, I can do well enuff. And I am
sure I have a hearty good will to deserve your Honner's
faver, if I mought. 
&dotup;Two days, as I may say, off and on, have I been
writing this long Letter. And yet I have not sed all
I would say. For, be it knone unto your Honner,
as how I do not like that Capten Singelton, which I
told your of in my two last Letters. He is always laying 

his hedd and my young Master's hedd together; 
and I suspect much if so be some mischef is not going
on between them: And still the more, as because my
eldest young Lady semes to be joined to them sometimes. 
&dotup;Last week my young master sed before my fase,
My harte's blood boiles over, Capten Singelton, for
revenge upon this—And he called your Honner by a
name it is not for such a won as me to say what. 
Capten Singelton whispred my younge Master, being
I was by. So younge Master sed, You may say anything
before Joseph; for althoff he looks so seellie, he
has as good a harte, and as good a hedd, as any sarvante
in the worlde nede to have. My conscience
touched me just then. But why shoulde it? when
all I do, is to prevente mischeff; and seing your
Honner has so much patience, which younge Master
has not; so am not affeard of telling your Honner
any-thing whatsomever. 
&dotup;And furthermore, I have suche a desire to desarve
your Honner's bounty to me, as mackes me let nothing
pass I can tell you of, to prevent harm: And
too-besides your Honner's goodness about the Blew
Bore; which I have so good an accounte of! —I am
sure I shall be bounden to bless your Honner the
longest day I have to live.&dotup; 
And then the Blew Bore is not all neither; sen',
and plese your Honner, the pretty Sowe (God forgive
me for gesting in so serus a matter) runs in my hedd
likewise. I believe I shall love her mayhap more than
your Honner would have me; for she begins to be kind
and good-humered, and listens, and plese your Honner,
licke as if she was among beans, when I talke about the
Blew Bore, and all that. 
Prayey your Honner forgive the gesting of a poor
plane man. We common fokes have our joys, and
plese your Honner, lick as our betters have; and if we
be sometimes snubbed, we can find our underlings to 

snub them agen: And if not, we can get a Wife mayhap,
and snub her: So are Masters some how or other
oursells. 
&dotup;But how I try your Honner's patience! —Sarvants
will show their joiful hartes, tho'off but in partinens,
when encouredg'd. 
&dotup;Be plesed from the prems's to let me kno' if as how
I can be put upon any sarvice to sarve your Honner,
and to sarve my deerest younge Lady; which God
grant! For I begin to be affearde for her, hearing
what pepel talck—To be sure your Honner will not
do her no harme, as a man may say. But I kno'
your Honner must be good to so wonderous a younge
Lady. How can you help it? —But heere my conscience
smites me, that but for some of my stories,
which your Honner taute me, my old Master and my
old Lady, and the two old Squiers, would not have
been abell to be half so hard-harted as they be, for all
what my young Master and young Mistress sayes.&dotup; 
And here is the sad thing; they cannot come to clere
up matters with my deerest young Lady, because, as
your Honner has ordered it, they have these stories as if
bribed by me out of your Honner's sarvant; which must
not be known for fere you should kill'n and me too,
and blacken the briber! —Ah! your Honner! —I doute
as that I am a very vild fellow (Lord bless my soul, I
pray God) and did not intend it. 
But if my deerest younge Lady should come to harm,
and plese your Honner, the horsepond at the Blew
Bore—But Lord preserve us all from all bad mischeff,
and all bad endes, I pray the Lord! —For tho'ff your
Honner is kinde to me in worldly pelff, yet what shall
a man get to loos his soul, as holy Skrittuer says, and
plese your Honner? 
But natheless I am in hope of reppentence hereafter,
being but a younge man, if I do wrong thro' ignorrens; 
your Honner being a grate man, and a grate
wit; and I a poor crature, not worthy notice; and 

your Honner able to answer for all. But howsomever
I am 
Your Honner's fethful Sarvant in all dewtie,
Joseph Leman. 
April 15. and 16. 