


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


You see, my dear, how many important matters
depended on the conduct and determination
of the young Baronet. 
Lord L. was at this time in Scotland, where he
had seen married two of his three fisters; and was
busying himself in putting his affairs in such a way, as
should enable him to depend the less, either on the
justice or generosity of Sir Thomas Grandison,
whose beloved daughter he was impatient to call his. 
Miss Charlotte was absolutely dependent upon her
brother's generosity; and both sisters had reason to
be the more uneasy, as it was now, in the worldly-wise
way of thinking, become his interest to keep up
the distance which their unhappy father had been
sollicitous to create between them, from a policy low,
and entirely unworthy of him. 
The unhappy Mrs. Oldham had already received a
severe instance of the change of her fortune; and 

had no reason to doubt, but that the sisters, who had
always, from the time she was set over them as their
governess, look'd upon her with an evil eye; and
afterwards had but too just a pretence for their aversion; 
would incense against her a brother, whose
fortune had been lessen'd by his father's profusion. 
The few relations she had living, were people of
honour, who renounced all correspondence with her,
from the time she had thrown herself so absolutely into
the power of Sir Thomas Grandison: And she had
three sons to take care of. 
Bever and Filmer, the English and Irish stewards,
were attending Sir Charles's arrival with great impatience,
in hopes he would sign those accounts of
theirs, to which they had no reason to question but
his father would have set his hand, had he not been
taken so suddenly ill, and remained delirious almost to
the end of his life. 
Miss Obrien, her mother and aunt, I shall mention
in another place. 
Lord W. had a great dislike to his nephew, for no
other reason, as I have said, than because he was his
father's favourite. Yet were not his nieces likely to find
their uncle more their friend for that. He was indeed
almost entirely under the management of a woman,
who had not either the birth, the education, the sense,
or moderation of Mrs. Oldham, to put in the contrary
scale against her lost virtue; but abounded, it
seems, in a low selfish cunning, by which she never
failed to carry every point she set her heart upon: For,
as is usual, they say, with these keeping men, Lord
W. would yield up, to avoid her teazing, what he
would not have done to a wife of fortune and family,
who might have been a credit to his own: But the real
slave imagined himself master of his liberty; and sat
down satisfied with the sound of the word. 
The suspended treaty of marriage with Lord N.'s
sister was also to be taken into consideration, either 

to be proceeded with, or broken off, as should be
concluded by both parties. 
This was the situation of affairs in the family, when
Sir Charles arrived. 
He return'd not an answer to his sister's notification
of his father's danger; but immediately set out for
Calais, and the same day arrived at the house of his
late father in St. James's Square. His sisters concluded,
that he would be in town nearly as soon as a
letter could come. They therefore every hour, for
two days together, expected him. 
Judge, my dear, from the foregoing circumstances
(sisterly love out of the question, which yet it could
not be) how awful must be to them, after eight or
nine years absence, the first appearance of a brother,
on whom the whole of their fortunes depended; 
and to whom they had been accused by a father, now
so lately departed, of want of duty; their brother's
duty unquestionable! 
In the same moment he alighted from his postchaise,
the door was open'd; he enter'd; and his two
sisters met him, in the hall. 
The graceful youth of seventeen, with fine curling
auburn locks waving upon his shoulders; delicate in
complexion; intelligence sparkling in his fine free
eyes; and good humour sweetening his lively features; 
they remembred: And, forgetting the womanly beauties
into which their own features were ripen'd in the
same space of time, they seemed not to expect that
manly stature and air, and that equal vivacity and intrepidity,
which every one who sees this brother, admires
in his noble aspect: An aspect then appearing
more solemn than usual; an unburied and beloved
father in his thoughts. 
O my brother! said Caroline, with open arms:
But, shrinking from his embrace; May I say, my
brother? —and was just fainting. He clasped her in
his arms, to support her— 

Charlotte, surprised at her sister's emotion, and affected
with his presence, ran back into the room
they had both quitted, and threw herself upon a settee. 
Her brother followed her into the room, his arm
round Miss Caroline's waist, soothing her; and, with
eyes of expectation, My Charlotte! said he, his inviting
hand held out, and hastening towards the
settee. She then found her feet; and, throwing her
arms about his neck, he folded both sisters to his
bosom: Receive, my dearest sisters, receive your
brother, your friend; assure yourselves of my unabated
love. 
That assurance, they said, was balm to their
hearts; and when each was seated, he, sitting over-against
them, look'd first on one, then on the other; 
and taking each by the hand; Charming women!
said he: How I admire my sisters! You must have
minds answerable to your persons. What pleasure,
what pride, shall I take in my sisters! 
My dear Charlotte! said Miss Caroline, taking
her sister's other hand, has not our brother, now we
see him near, all the brother in his aspect? His
goodness only looks stronger, and more perfect:
What was I afraid of? 
My heart also sunk, said Charlotte; I know not
why. But we feared—Indeed, Sir, we both feared— 
O my brother! —Tears trickling down the cheeks of
each—we meant not to be undutiful— 
Love your brother, my sisters, as he will endeavour
to deserve your love. My mother's daughters could
not be undutiful! Mistake only! —Unhappy misapprehension! 
—We have all something—Shades as well
as lights there must be! —A kind, a dutiful veil— 
He pressed the hand of each with his lips, arose,
went to the window, and drew out his handkerchief. 
What must he have in his thoughts! No doubt, but
his father's unhappy turn, and recent departure! No
wonder, that such a son could not, without pious 

emotion, bear the reflexions that must croud into his
mind, at that instant! 
Then, turning towards them, Permit me, my
dear sisters, said he, to retire for a few moments. 
He turn'd his face from them. My father, said he,
demands this tribute. I will not ask your excuse,
my sisters. 
They joined in the payment of it; and waited on
him to his apartment, with silent respect. No ceremony,
I hope, my Caroline, my Charlotte. We
were true sisters and brother a few years ago. See
your Charles as you saw him then. Let not absence,
which has increased my love, lessen yours. 
Each sister took a hand, and would have kissed it. 
He clasped his arms about them both, and saluted
them. 
He cast his eye on his father's and mother's pictures
with some emotion, then on them; and again
saluted each. 
They withdrew. He waited on them to the stairs
head. Sweet obligingness! Amiable sisters! In a
quarter of an hour I seek your presence. 
Tears of joy trickled down their cheeks. In half
an hour he joined them in another dress, and re-saluted
his sisters, with an air of tenderness, that banished
fear, and left room for nothing but sisterly love. 
Mr. Grandison came in soon after. That gentleman,
who (as I believe I once before mentioned),
had affected, in support of his own free way of life,
to talk how he would laugh at his cousin Charles,
when he came to England, on his pious turn, as he
called it; and even to boast, that he would enter
him into the town-diversions, and make a man of
him; was struck with the dignity of his person, and
yet charmed with the freedom of his behaviour. 
Good God! said he to the ladies afterwards, what a
fine young man is your brother! —What a self-denier
was your father!— 

The ladies retiring, Mr. Grandison enter'd upon
the circumstances of Sir Thomas's illness and death; 
which, he told the sisters, he touch'd tenderly: As tenderly,
I suppose, as a man of his unfeeling heart
could touch such a subject. He inveighed against Mrs.
Oldham; and with some exultation over her, told his
cousin what they had done as to her; and exclaim'd
against her for the state she had lived in; and the
difficulty she made to resign Sir Thomas to his daughters
care in his illness; and particularly for presuming
to insist upon putting her seal with theirs to the cabinets
and closets, where they supposed were any
valuables. 
Sir Charles heard all this without saying one word,
either of approbation or otherwise. 
Are you not pleased with what we have done, as
to this vile woman, Sir Charles? 
I have no doubt, cousin, replied Sir Charles, that
every-thing was design'd for the best. 
And then Mr. Grandison, as he told the sisters,
ridiculed the unhappy woman on her grief, and mortified
behaviour, when she was obliged to quit the
house, where, he said, she had reigned so long
Lady Paramount. 
Sir Charles ask'd, If they had search'd for or found
a will? 
Mr. Grandison said, They had look'd in every
probable place; but found none. 
What I think to do, cousin, said Sir Charles, is,
to interr the venerable remains (I must always speak
in this dialect, Sir) with those of my mother. This,
I know, was his desire. I will have an elegant, but
not sumptuous monument erected to the memory of
both, with a modest inscription, that shall rather be
matter of instruction to the living, than a panegyric
on the departed. The funeral shall be decent, but
not ostentatious. The difference in the expence
shall be privately applied to relieve or assist distressed 

housekeepers, or some of my father's poor tenants,
who have large families, and have not been wanting
in their honest endeavours to maintain them. My
sisters, I hope, will not think themselves neglected,
if I spare them the pain of conferring with them on
a subject that must afflict them. 
These sentiments were new to Mr. Grandison. He
told the sisters what Sir Charles had said. I did not
contradict him, said he: But as Sir Thomas had so
magnificent a mind, and always lived up to it, I
should have thought he ought to have been honoured
with a magnificent funeral. But I cannot but own,
however, that what your brother said, had something
great and noble in it. 
The two ladies, on their brother's hinting his intentions
to them, acquiesced with all he proposed; 
and all was performed according to directions which
he himself wrote down. He allowed of his sisters
compliance with the fashion: But he in person saw
performed, with equal piety and decorum, the last
offices. 
Sir Charles is noted for his great dexterity in business. 
Were I to express myself in the language of
Miss Grandison, I should say, that a sun-beam is not
more penetrating. He goes to the bottom of an affair
at once, and wants but to hear both sides of a
question to determine; and when he determines, his
execution can only be staid by perverse accidents,
that lie out of the reach of human foresight: And
when he finds that to be the case, yet the thing right
to be done, he changes his methods of proceeding; 
as a man would do, who finding himself unable to
pursue his journey by one road, because of a sudden
inundation, takes another, which, tho' a little about,
carries him home in safety. 
As soon as the solemnity was over, Sir Charles,
leaving every-thing at Grandison-hall as he found it,
and the seals unbroken, came to town, and, in the 

presence of his sisters, broke the seals that had been
affixed to the cabinets and escrutoires in the house
there. 
The ladies told him, that their bills were ready for
his inspection; and that they had a balance in their
hands. His answer was, I hope, my dear sisters, we
shall have but one interest. It is for you to make the
demands upon me, and for me to answer them as I
shall be able. 
He made memorandums of the contents of many
papers, with surprising expedition; and then locked
them up. He found a bank note of 350l in the
private drawer of one of the bureaus in the apartment
that was his father's. Be pleased, my sisters, said he,
presenting it to Miss Caroline, to add that to the money
in your hands, to answer family calls. 
He then went with his sisters to the house in Essex:
When there, he told them, it was necessary for Mrs.
Oldham (who had lodgings at a neighbouring farmhouse)
to be present at the breaking of the seals, as
she had hers affixed; and accordingly sent for her. 
They desired to be excused seeing her. 
It will be a concern to me, said he, to see her:
But what ought to be done, must be done. 
The poor woman came with fear and trembling. 
You will not, Lucy, be displeased with an account
of what passed on the occasion. I was very attentive
to it, as given by Miss Grandison, whose memory
was aided by the recollection of her sister. And, as
I am used to aim at giving affecting scenes in the
very words of the persons, as near as I can, to make
them appear lively and natural, you will expect, that
I should attempt to do so in this case. 
Sir Charles, not expecting Mrs. Oldham would be
there so soon, was in his stud with his groom and
coachman, looking upon his horses: For there were
most of the hunters and racers, some of the finest
beasts in the kingdom. 

By mistake of Miss Caroline's maid, the poor woman
was shewn into the room where the two ladies
were. She was in great confusion; courtesied; wept; 
and stood, as well as she could stand; but leaned
against the tapestry-hung wall. 
How came this? said Miss Caroline to her maid. 
She was not to be shewn in to us. 
I beg pardon; courtesying, and was for withdrawing; 
but stopt on Charlotte's speech to her—My brother
sent for you, madam—Not we, I assure you. — 
He says it is necessary, as you thought fit to put your
seal with ours to the locked-up places, that you should
be present at the breaking them. Yet he will see you
with as much pain as you give us. Prepare yourself
to see him. You seem mighty unfit—No wonder! 
You have heard, Lucy, that Charlotte attributes a
great deal of alteration for the better in her temper,
and even in her heart, to the example of her
brother. 
Indeed, I am unfit, very unfit, said the poor woman. 
Let me, ladies, bespeak your generosity: A
little of your pity: A little of your countenance. 
I am, indeed, an unhappy woman! 
And so you deserve to be. 
I am sure we are the sufferers, said Caroline. 
Lord L. as she owned, was then in her head, as
well as heart. 
If I may withdraw without seeing Sir Charles, I
should take it for a favour. I find I cannot bear to see
him. I insist not upon being present at the breaking
the seals. I throw myself upon your mercy, ladies,
and upon his. 
Cruel girls! shall I call them, Lucy? I think I
will—Cruel girls! They ask'd her not to sit down,
tho' they saw the terror she was in: And that she
had the modesty to forbear sitting in their presence. 
What an humbling thing is the consciousness of
having lived faultily, when calamity seizes upon the 

heart! —But shall not virtue be appeased, when
the hand of God is acknowleged in the words,
countenance, and behaviour, of the offender? Yet,
perhaps, it is hard for sufferers—Let me consider— 
Have I, from my heart, forgiven Sir Hargrave Pollexfen? 
—I will examine into that another time. 
And so you have put yourself into mourning, madam? 
Shall I say, that Caroline said this, and what follows? 
Yet I am glad it was not Charlotte, methinks; for
Caroline thought herself a sufferer by her, in an especial
manner—However, I am sorry it was either. 
Pretty deep too! Your weeds, I suppose, are at
your lodgings— 
You have been told, Lucy, that Mrs. Oldham by
many was called Lady Grandison; and that her birth,
her education, good sense, tho' all was not sufficient
to support her virtue against necessity and temptation
(poor woman!) might have given her a claim to
the title. 
Indeed, ladies, I am a real mourner: But I never
myself assumed a character, to which it was never in
my thought to solicit a right. 
Then, madam, the world does you injustice, madam,
said Charlotte. 
Here, ladies, are the keys of the stores; of the
confectionary; of the wine-vaults: You demanded
them not, when you dismissed me from this house. 
I thought to send them: But by the time I could provide
myself with a lodging, you were gone; and left
only two common servants, besides the groom and
helpers: And I thought it was best to keep the
keys, till I could deliver them to your order, or Sir
Charles's. I have not been a bad manager, ladies,
consider'd as an housekeeper. All I have in the
world is under the seals. I am at yours and your
brother's mercy. 
The sisters order'd their woman to take the keys, 

and bring them to the foot of their thrones. Dear
ladies, forgive me, if you should, by surprize, see this. 
I know that you think and act in a different manner
now. 
Here comes my brother! said Caroline. 
You'll soon know, Madam, what you have to trust
to from him, said Charlotte. 
The poor woman trembled, and turned pale. O how
her heart must throb, I warrant! 

