



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Wednesday, May 17. 
I cannot conceal from you any-thing that relates to
yourself so much as the inclosed does. You will
see what the noble writer apprehends from you, and
wishes of you, with regard to Miss Harlowe, and how
much at heart all your relations have it that you do
honourably by her. They compliment me with an influence
over you, which I wish with all my soul you
would let me have in this article. 
Let me once more entreat thee, Lovelace, to reflect,
before it be too late (before the mortal offence
be given) upon the graces and merits of this Lady. 
Let thy frequent remorses at last end in one effectual
remorse. Let not pride and wantonness of heart ruin
thy fairer prospects. By my faith, Lovelace, there is
nothing but vanity, conceit, and nonsense, in our
wild schemes. As we grow older, we shall be wiser,
and looking back upon our foolish notions of the
present hour (our youth dissipated) shall certainly despise
ourselves when we think of the honourable engagements
we might have made: Thou, more especially,
if thou lettest such a matchless creature slide
thro' thy fingers. A creature pure from her cradle. 
In all her actions and sentiments uniformly noble. 
Strict in the performance of all her even unrewarded
duties to the most unreasonable of Fathers, what a
Wife will she make the man who shall have the honour
to call her his! 

&dotup;What apprehensions wouldst thou have had reason
for, had she been prevailed upon by giddy or
frail motives, for which one man, by importunity,
might prevail, as well as another? 
&dotup;We all know what an inventive genius thou art
master of: We are all sensible, that thou hast a
head to contrive, and a heart to execute. Have I
not called thine the plotting'st heart in the universe? 
I called it so upon knowlege. What wouldst thou
more? Why should it be the most villainous, as
well as the most able? —Marry the Lady; and,
when married, let her know what a number of contrivances
thou hadst in readiness to play off. Beg
of her not to hate thee for the communication; 
and assure her, that thou gavest them up from remorse,
and in justice to her extraordinary merit; 
and let her have the opportunity of congratulating
herself for subduing a heart so capable of what thou
callest glorious mischief. This will give her room
for triumph; and even thee no less: She for hers
over thee; thou, for thine over thyself.&dotup; 
Reflect likewise upon her sufferings for thee. 
Actually at the time thou art forming schemes to
ruin her (at least in her sense of the word) is she not
labouring under a Father's Curse laid upon her by thy
means, and for thy sake? And wouldst thou give
operation and completion to that curse, which otherwise
cannot have effect? 
And what, Lovelace, all the time is thy pride? 
—Thou that vainly imaginest, that the whole family
of the Harlowes, and that of the Howes too, are
but thy machines, unknown to themselves, to bring
about thy purposes, and thy revenge; what art thou
more, or better, than the instrument even of her
implacable Brother, and envious Sister, to perpetuate
the disgrace of the most excellent of Sisters, to which
they are moved by vilely low and sordid motives? 
—Canst thou bear, Lovelace, to be thought the 

machine of thy inveterate enemy James Harlowe? — 
Nay, art thou not the cully of that still viler Joseph
Leman, who serves himself as much by thy money,
as he does thee by the double part he acts by thy direction? 
—And further still, art thou not the devil's
agent, who only can, and who certainly will, suitably
reward thee, if thou proceedest, and if thou
effectest thy wicked purpose? 
Could any man but thee put together upon paper
the following questions with so much unconcern as
thou seemest to have written them? —Give them a reperusal,
O heart of adamant! ‘Whither can she fly
to avoid me? Her Parents will not receive her: 
Her Uncles will not entertain her: Her beloved
Norton is in their direction, and cannot: Miss
Howe dare not. She has not one friend in town
but Me: Is entirely a stranger to the town (a) .’ — 
What must that heart be that can triumph in a distress
so deep, into which she has been plunged by thy elaborate
arts and contrivances? And what a sweet,
yet sad reflection was that, which had like to have
had its due effect upon thee, arising from thy naming
Lord M. for her nuptial Father! Her tender
years inclining her to wish a Father, and to hope a
Friend. —O my dear Lovelace, canst thou resolve to
be, instead of the Father thou hast robbed her of, a
devil? 
Thou knowest, that I have no interest, that I can
have no view, in wishing thee to do justice to this
admirable creature. For thy own sake, once more I
conjure thee, for thy family's sake, and for the sake
of our common humanity, let me beseech thee to be just
to Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
No matter whether these expostulations are in character
from me, or not. I have been and am bad
enough. If thou takest my advice, which is (as the
inclosed will shew thee) the advice of all thy family, 

thou wilt perhaps have it to reproach me (and but
perhaps neither) that thou art not a worse man than
myself. But if thou dost not, and if thou ruinest such
a virtue, all the complicated wickedness of ten devils,
let loose among the innocent with full power
over them, will not do so much vile and base mischief
as thou wilt be guilty of. 
It is said, that the prince on his throne is not safe,
if a mind so desperate can be found, as values not its
own life. So may it be said, that the most immaculate
virtue is not safe, if a man can be met with, who
has no regard to his own honour, and makes a jest of
the most solemn vows and protestations. 
Thou mayest by trick, chicane, and false colours,
thou who art worse than a pickeroon in Love, overcome
a poor Lady so entangled as thou hast entangled
her; so unprotected as thou hast made her: But consider,
how much more generous and just to her, and
noble to thyself, it is, to overcome thyself. 
Once more, it is no matter, whether my past or
future actions countenance my preachment, as perhaps
thou'lt call what I have written: But this I promise
thee, that whenever I meet with a woman of but
one half of Miss Harlowe's perfections, who will favour
me with her acceptance, I will take the advice I
give, and marry. Nor will I offer to try her honour
at the hazard of my own. In other words, I
will not degrade an excellent creature in her own
eyes, by trials, when I have no cause for suspicion. 
And let me add, with respect to thy Eagleship's
manifestation, of which thou boastest, in thy attempts
upon the innocent and uncorrupted, rather
than upon those whom thou humourously comparest
to wrens, wagtails, and phyl-tits, as thou callest
them (a) , that I hope I have it not once to reproach
myself, that I ruined the morals of any one creature,
who otherwise would have been uncorrupted. Guilt 

enough in contributing to the continued guilt of
other poor wretches, if I am one of those who take
care she shall never rise again, when she has once
fallen. 
Whatever the capital devil, under whose banner
thou hast listed, will let thee do, with regard to
this incomparable woman, I hope thou wilt act with
honour in relation to the inclosed, between Lord M.
and me; since his Lordship, as thou wilt see, desires,
that thou mayest not know he wrote on the subject; 
for reasons, I think, very far from being creditable
to thyself: And that thou wilt take as meant, the
honest zeal for thy service, of 
Thy real Friend,
J. Belford. 