



My dear Lady,
I Will now pursue my last affecting Subject; for
the Visit is over: But a sad Situation I am in
with Mr. B. for all that: But I'll try to forget it,
till I come to it in course, bad as it is. 
At Four in the Afternoon Mr. B. came in to receive
his Guests, whom he expected at Five. He
came up to me. I had just closed my last Letter; 
but put it up, and set before me your Ladyship's
Play Subjects. 
So, Pamela! –––How do you now? 
Your Ladyship may guess, by what I wrote before,
that I could not give any extraordinary Account of
myself. –––As well–––As well, Sir, as possible. –––Half
out of Breath. 
You give yourself strange melancholy Airs of late,
my Dear! –––You don't do well! –––All that Chearfulness
which used to delight me whenever I saw you,
I'm sorry for it, is quite vanish'd of late. –––You and
I must shortly have a little serious Talk together. 
When you please, Sir. –––I believe it is only not being
us'd to this smoaky thick Air of London! –––I shall
be better when you carry me into the Country. –––I
dare say I shall! –––But I never was in London so long
before, you know, Sir. 
All in good time, Pamela. –––But is this the best
Appearance you chuse to make to receive such
Guests? 
If it displease you, Sir, I will dress otherwise in a
Minute. 
You look well in any thing. –––But I thought you'd
have had your Jewels––– Yet they would never have 

less become you; for of late your Eyes have lost
that Brilliancy that used to strike me with a Lustre,
much surpassing that of the finest Diamonds. 
I am sorry for it, Sir. –––But as I never could pride
myself in deserving such a kind Compliment, I should
be too happy, forgive me, my dearest Mr. B. if the
Failure be not rather in your Eyes than my own. 
He looked at me stedfastly! –––I fear, Pamela––– 
But, don't be a Fool! 
You are angry with me, Sir! 
No, not I. 
Would you have me dress better? 
No, not I—If your Eyes look'd a little more brilliant,
you want no Addition. 
Down he went. 
Strange, short Speeches, these, my Lady, to what
you have heard from his dear Mouth! –––Yet they
shall not rob me of the Merit of a patient Sufferer,
I am resolv'd, thought I. 
Now, my Lady, as I doubted not, my Rival
would come adorn'd with every outward Ornament,
I put on only a white Damask Gown, having no
Desire to vie with her in Appearance; for a virtuous
and honest Heart is my Glory, I bless God! I wish
the Countess had the same to boast of! 
About Five, their Ladyships came in the Countess's
new Chariot; for she has not been long out of
her transitory Mourning, and dress'd as rich as Jewels
and a Profusion of Expence could make her. 
I saw them from the Window alight. O how
my Heart throbb'd! –––Lie still, said I, busy Thing! 
Why all this Emotion? –––Those shining Ornaments
cover not such a guileless Flutterer as thou. Why
then, all this Emotion? 
I would not be so officious as to be below to receive
them. Polly Barlow came up instantly, from
Mr. B. 

I hastened down; tremble, tremble, tremble,
went my Feet, in spite of all the Resolution I had
been so long endeavouring to collect together. 
Mr. B. presented the Countess to me, both of us
cover'd with Blushes; but from very different Motives,
as I imagine. 
The Countess of &wblank;, my Dear. 
She saluted me, and looked, as I thought, half
with Envy, half with Shame: But one is apt to form
Peoples Countenances by what one judges of their
Hearts. 
O too lovely! too charming Rivaless! thought I. 
–––Would to Heaven I saw less Attractions in you! 
–––For indeed, indeed, Madam, she is a charming Lady! 
—Yet she could not help calling me Mrs. B. that
was some Pride; and said, She had heard me so much
praised, that she quite long'd to see me. 
Oh! these villainous Masquerades, thought I! — 
You would never have wanted to see me, but for
them, poor naughty Nun, that was! 
Mr. B. presented also the Viscountess to me: I saluted
her Ladyship; her Sister saluted me. 
She is a graceful Lady; better, as I hope, in Heart; 
but not equal in Person to her Sister. 
You have taken no Pains, my Dear, in your Dress
To-day. 
The Ladies will excuse it, Sir; I am so often in
the Nursery, when you are absent. 
Mrs. B. answers her Character, said the Countess; 
she wants no Ornaments. You have a charming
little Master, I am told, Madam; but no Wonder,
from such a Pair! 
O dear Heart, thought I, i'n't it so! —Your Ladyship
may guess, what I thought further. 
Will your Ladyship see him now? said Mr. B. 
He did not look down, no, not one bit!—tho'
the Countess play'd with her Fan, and looked at him, 

and looked at me, and then looked down, by Turns,
a little consciously: While I wrapt up myself in my
Innocence, my first Flutters being over, and thought
I was superior, by reason of that, to a Countess. 
With all my Heart, Mr. B. said she. 
I rang. Polly, bid Nurse bring my Billy down— 
My, said I, with an Emphasis. 
I met the Nurse at the Stairs Foot, and brought
in my dear Baby in my Arms: Such a Child, and
such a Mamma, said the Viscountess! 
Will you give Master to my Arms, one Moment,
Madam? said the Countess. 
Yes, thought I, much rather than my dear naughty
Gentleman should any other. 
I yielded it to her: I thought she would have stifled
it with her warm Kisses! Sweet Boy! Charming
Creature! And press'd it to her too lovely Bosom,
with such Emotion, looking on the Child, and on
Mr. B. that I liked it not by any means. 
Go, you naughty Lady! thought I:—But I durst
not say so. And go, naughty Man, too! thought I; 
for you seem to look too much gratify'd in your
Pride, by her Fondness for your Boy. I wish I did
not love you so well as I do! –––But neither, your
Ladyship may believe, did I say this. 
Mr. B. looked at me, but with a Bravery, I
thought, too like what I had seen him look in some
former Scenes, in as bad a Cause. –––But, thought I,
God delivered me then: I will confide in Him. — 
He will now, I doubt not, restore thy Heart to my
Prayers; untainted, I hope! for thy own dear sake,
as well as mine. 
The Viscountess took the Child from her Sister,
and kissed him with great Pleasure. She is a marry'd
Lady. Would to God! the Countess was too; 
for Mr. B. never corresponded, as I told your Ladyship 

once*  , with marry'd Ladies: So I was not
afraid of her Love to my Billy. –––But let me, said
the Viscountess, have the Pleasure of restoring Master
to his charming Mamma. I thought, added
she, I never saw a lovelier Sight in my Life, than
when in his Mamma's Arms. 
Why, I can't say, said the Countess, but Master
and his Mamma do Credit to one another. Dear
Madam let us have the Pleasure of seeing him still
on your Lap, while he is so good. 
I wonder'd the dear Baby was so quiet; tho' he
is generally so: But he might surely, if but by
Sympathy, have complained for his poor Mamma,
tho' she durst not for herself. 
How apt one is to ingage every thing in one's
Distress, when it is deep! And one wonders too,
that Things animate and inanimate look with the
same Face, when we are greatly moved by any extraordinary
and interesting Event! 
I sat down with my Baby on my Lap, looking, I
believe, with a righteous Boldness (I will call it so; 
for well says the Text, The Righteous is as bold as a
Lion!) now on my Billy, now on his dear Papa,
and now on the Countess, with such a Triumph in
my Heart! for I saw her blush, and look down, and
the dear Gentleman seem'd to eye me with a kind
of conscious Tenderness, as I thought. 
A Silence of five Minutes, I believe, succeeded,
we all Four looking upon one another, and the little
Dear was awake, and stared full upon me with such
innocent Smiles, as if he promised to love me, and
make me Amends for all. 
I kissed him, and took his pretty little Hand in
mine–––You are very good, my Charmer, in this
noble Company! said I. 

I remember'd, Madam, a Scene that made greatly
for me in the Papers you have seen *  , when, instead
of recriminating, as I might have done, before Mr.
Longman, for hard Usage, (for Oh! my Lady, your
dear Brother has a hard Heart, indeed he has, when
he pleases) I only prayed for him on my Knees. 
And I hope I was not now too mean; for I had
Dignity and a proud Superiority in my vain Heart,
over them all. –––Then it was not my Part to be upon
Defiances, where I lov'd, and where I hoped to
reclaim. Besides, what had I done by it, but justify'd,
seemingly, by After-Acts in a passionate Resentment,
to their Minds, at least, their too wicked
Treatment of me? Moreover, your Ladyship will
remember, that Mr. B. knew not, that I was acquainted
with his Intrigue, I must call it so! —If he
had, he is too noble to insult me by such a Visit; and
he had told me, I should see the Lady he was at
Oxford with. 
And this, breaking Silence, he mention'd; saying,
I gave you Hope, my Dear, that I should procure
you the Honour of a visit from the Lady who put
herself under my Care at Oxford. 
I bow'd my Head to the Countess; but my Tears
being ready to start, I kiss'd my Billy: Dearest Baby,
said I, you are not going to cry, are you? –––I would
have had him just then to cry, instead of me. 
The Tea Equipage was brought in. Polly, carry
the Child to Nurse. I gave it another Kiss, and the
Countess desired another. I grudged it, to think her
naughty Lips should so closely follow mine. Her
Sister kissed it also, and carry'd him to Mr. B. Take
him away, Polly, said he: –––I owe him my Blessing! 
Oh! these young Gentlemen Papa's! said the
Countess&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; They are like young unbroken Horses, 

just put into the Traces! –––Are they so, thought I! 
–––Matrimony must not expect your good Word! I
doubt! 
Mr. B. after Tea, at which I was far from being
talkative, (for I could not tell what to say; tho' I
try'd, as much as I could, not to appear sullen) desir'd
the Countess to play one Tune upon the Spinnet. 
She did, and sung, at his Request, an Italian Song
to it, very prettily; too prettily, I thought! I wanted
to find some Faults, some great Faults in her: But
Oh! Madam! she has too many outward Excellencies! 
Pity she wants a good Heart. 
He could ask nothing, that she was not ready to
oblige him in! Indeed he could not! 
She desired me to touch the Keys. I would have
been excus'd: but could not. And the Ladies commended
my Performance: But neither my Heart to
play, nor my Fingers in playing, deserv'd their
Praises. Mr. B. said indeed, You play better sometimes,
my Dear! –––Do I, Sir? was all the Answer I
made. 
The Countess hoped, she said, I would return her
Visit; and so said the Viscountess. 
I reply'd, Mr. B. would command me whenever
he pleas'd. 
She said, She hoped to be better acquainted ––– (I
hope not, thought I) and that I would give her my
Company for a Week or so, upon the Forest: It
seems she has a Seat upon Windsor Forest. 
Mr. B. says, added she, you can't ride a single
Horse; but we'll learn you there. 'Tis a sweet Place
for that Purpose. 
How came Mr. B. thought I, to tell you that,
Madam? I suppose you know more of me than I do
myself. Indeed, my Lady, this may be too true; 
for she may know what is to become of me! 

I told her, I was very much oblig'd to her Ladyship; 
but Mr. B. directed all my Motions. 
What say you, Sir? said the Countess. 
I can't promise that, Madam; for Mrs. B. wants
to go down to Kent, before we go to Bedfordshire,
and I am afraid I can't give her my Company
thither. 
Then, Sir, I shan't chuse to go without you. 
I suppose not, my Dear. But, if you are disposed
to oblige the Countess for a Week, as you
never were at Windsor–––– 
I believe, Sir, interrupted I, what with my little
Nursery, and one thing or another, I must deny myself
that Honour, for this Season. 
Well, Madam, then I'll expect you in Pallmall. 
I bow'd my Head, and said, Mr. B. would command me. 
They took Leave with a Politeness natural to
them. 
Mr. B. as he handed them to their Chariot, said
something in Italian to the Countess: The Word
Pamela was in what he said: She answer'd him,
with a downcast Look, in the same Language, half
pleas'd, half serious; and the Chariot drove away. 
I would give, said I, a good deal, Sir, to know
what her Ladyship said to you; she look'd with so
particular a Meaning, if I may so say. 
I'll tell you, truly, Pamela: I said to her, Well,
now your Ladyship has seen my Pamela! –––Is she
not the charming'st Girl in the World? 
She answer'd, Mrs. B. is very grave, for so young
a Lady: But I must needs say, She is a lovely Creature. 
And did you say so, Sir? And did her Ladyship
so answer? –––And my Heart was ready to leap out
of my Bosom for Joy. 

But my Folly spoil'd all again; for, to my own
Surprize and great Regret, I burst out into Tears; 
tho' I even sobb'd to have suppress'd them, but could
not; and so I lost a fine Opportunity to have talked
to him while he was so kind: For he was angry
with me. 
What made me such a Fool, I wonder! But I
had so long struggled with myself; and not expecting
so kind a Question from the dear Gentleman, or
such a favourable Answer from the Countess, I had
no longer any Command of myself. 
What ails the little Fool? said He, with a wrathful
Countenance, that made me worse. –––Take care,
take care, Pamela! –––You'll drive me from you in
spite of my own Heart. 
So he went into the best Parlour, and put on his
Sword, and took his Hat, –––Sir, Sir! with my Arms
expanded, was all I could say; but he avoided me,
putting on his Hat with an Air, and out he went,
bidding Abraham follow him. 
This is the Dilemma, into which, as I hinted at
the Beginning of this Letter, I have brought myself
with Mr. B. How strong, how prevalent, is the
Passion of Jealousy, that thus it will shew itself
uppermost, when it is uppermost, in spite of one's
most watchful Regards! 
My Mind is so perplex'd, that I must lay down
my Pen: And, indeed, your Ladyship will wonder,
all Things consider'd, that I could write the above
Account as I have done, in this cruel Suspense,
and with such Apprehensions. But Writing is all
the Diversion I have, when my Mind is oppress'd. 
'Tis a temporary Relief; and this Interview was so
interesting, that it took up a great deal of my Attention
while I wrote: But now I am come to a Period
of it, and so unhappy an one, as has resulted from my
ungovern'd Passion, my Apprehensions are return'd 

upon me with double Strength. Why did I drive
the dear Gentleman from me upon such a promising
Appearance? –––Why did I? –––But all this had been
prevented, had not this nasty Mr. Turner put into
my Head worse Thoughts. 
How shall I do to look up to him now on his
Return! To be sure, he plainly sees, to what my
Emotion is owing! –––Yet I dare not tell him either
my Information, or my Informant, because if he
knows the one, he will know the other; and then
what may be the Consequence! 
Past Ten o'Clock at Night.
I have only Time to tell your Ladyship, (for the
Postman waits) that Mr. B. is just come in; he is
gone into his Closet, and has shut the Door, and taken
the Key on the Inside; so I dare not go to him there. 
In this Uncertainty and Suspense, pity and pray for 
Your Ladyship's afflicted Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

