



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Friday Noon, March 31. 
Justice obliges me to forward This after my last
on the wings of the wind, as I may say. I really
believe the man is innocent. Of this one accusation,
I think, he must be acquitted; and I am sorry I was
so forward in dispatching away my intelligence by
halves. 

I have seen the girl. She is really a very pretty, a
very neat, and, what is still a greater beauty, a very
innocent young creature. He who could have ruined
such an undesigning home-bred, must have been indeed
infernally wicked. Her Father is an honest simple
man; entirely satisfied with his child, and with her
new acquaintance. 
I am almost afraid for your heart, when I tell you,
that I find, now I have got to the bottom of this enquiry,
something noble come out in this Lovelace's
favour. 
The girl is to be married next week; and This promoted
and brought about by him. He is resolved,
her Father says, to make one couple happy, and wishes
he could make more so [There's for you, my dear!] 
And having taken a liking also to the young fellow
whom she professes to love, he has given her an hundred
pounds: The grandmother actually has it in her
hands, to answer to the like sum given to the youth
by one of his own relations: While Mr. Lovelace's
companion, attracted by the example, has given
twenty-five guineas to the Father, who is poor, towards
cloaths to equip the pretty Rustic. 
Mr. Lovelace and his friend, the poor man says,
when they first came to his house, affected to appear
as persons of low degree; but now he knows the one
(but mentioned it in confidence) to be Colonel Barrow,
the other Captain Sloane. The Colonel he owns was at
first very sweet upon his girl: But upon her grandmother's
begging of him to spare her innocence, he vowed,
that he never would offer any-thing but good counsel
to her. He kept his word; and the pretty fool acknowleged,
that she never could have been better instructed
by the Minister himself from the Bible-book! 
—The girl pleased me so well, that I made her visit
to me worth her while. 
But what, my dear, will become of us now?— 
Lovelace not only reformed, but turned preacher! — 

What will become of us now? —Why, my sweet
friend, your Generosity is now engaged in his favour! — 
Fie upon this Generosity! I think in my heart, that it
does as much mischief to the noble-minded, as Love
to the ignobler. —What before was only a conditional
Liking, I am now afraid will turn to Liking unconditional. 
I could not endure to change my invective into panegyric
all at once, and so soon. We, or such as I
at least, love to keep ourselves in countenance for a
rash judgment, even when we know it to be rash. 
Every-body has not your generosity in confessing a
mistake. It requires a greatness of soul frankly to do
it. So I made still farther enquiry after his life and
manners, and behaviour there, in hopes to find something
bad: But all uniform! 
Upon the whole, Mr. Lovelace comes out with so
much advantage from this enquiry, that were there the
least room for it, I should suspect the whole to be a
plot set on foot to wash a blackmoor white. Adieu, my
dear. 
Anna Howe. 