



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 
[In continuation of the subject in Letter xxxviii]. 

I will now, tho' midnight (for I have no sleep
in my eyes) resume the subject I was forced so abruptly
to quit; and will obey yours, Miss Lloyd's,
Miss Campion's, and Miss Biddulph's call, with as
much temper as my divided thoughts will admit. The
dead stilness of this solemn hour will I hope contribute
to calm my disturbed mind. 
In order to acquit myself of so heavy a charge as
that of having reserves to so dear a friend, I will acknowlege
(and I thought I had over and over) that
it is owing to my particular situation, if Mr. Lovelace
appears to me in a tolerable light: And I take upon
me to say, that had they opposed to him a man of
sense, of virtue, of generosity; one who enjoyed his
fortune with credit; who had a tenderness in his nature
for the calamities of others, which would have
given a moral assurance, that he would have been still
less wanting in grateful returns to an obliging spirit: 
—Had they opposed such a man as this to Mr. Lovelace,
and been as earnest to have me married, as now
they are, I do not know myself, if they would have
had reason to tax me with that invincible obstinacy
which they lay to my charge: And this whatever had
been the Figure of the man; since the Heart is what
we women should judge by in the choice we make, as 

the best security for the party's good behaviour in
every relation of life. 
But, situated as I am, thus persecuted and driven; 
I own to you, that I have now-and-then had a little
more difficulty than I wished for, in passing by Mr.
Lovelace's tolerable qualities, to keep up my dislike to
him for his others. 
You say, I must have argued with myself in his favour,
and in his disfavour, on a supposition, that I
might possibly be one day his. I own that I have: 
And thus called upon by my dearest friend, I will set
before you both parts of the argument. 
And first, what occurred to me in his favour. 
At his introduction into our family, his negative
virtues were insisted upon: —He was no gamester; 
no horse-racer; no fox-hunter; no drinker: My
poor Aunt Hervey had, in confidence, given us to
apprehend much disagreeable evil (especially to a Wife
of the least delicacy) from a wine-lover: And common
sense instructed us, that Sobriety in a man is no
small point to be secured, when so many mischiefs
happen daily from excess. I remember, that my Sister
made the most of this favourable circumstance in his
character while she had any hopes of him. 
He was never thought to be a niggard: Not even
ungenerous: Nor, when his conduct came to be enquired
into, an extravagant, a squanderer: His pride
[So far was it a laudable pride] secured him from that. 
Then he was ever ready to own his errors. He was
no jester upon sacred things: Poor Mr. Wyerley's
fault; who seemed to think, that there was wit in
saying bold things, which would shock a serious mind. 
His conversation with us was always unexceptionable; 
even chastely so; which, be his actions what they
would, shewed him capable of being influenced by
decent company; and that he might probably therefore
be a led man, rather than a leader, in other company. 
And one late instance, so late as last Saturday 

evening, has raised him not a little in my opinion,
with regard to this point of good (and at the same
time, of manly) behaviour. 
As to the advantage of Birth, that is of his side,
above any man who has been found out for me. If
we may judge by that expression of his, which you
were pleased with at the time; ‘That upon true quality,
and hereditary distinction, if good sense were
not wanting, honour sat as easy as his glove;’ 
That, with as familiar an air, was his familiar expression; 
‘while none but the prosperous upstart,
Mushroom'd into rank (another of his peculiars)
was arrogantly proud of it’ —If, I say, we may
judge of him by this, we shall conclude in his favour,
that he knows what sort of behaviour is to be expected
from persons of Birth, whether he act up to it
or not. Conviction is half way to amendment. 
His fortunes in possession are handsome; in expectation,
splendid: So nothing need be said on that subject. 
But it is impossible, say some, that he should make
a tender or kind Husband. Those who are for imposing
upon me such a man as Mr. Solmes, and by
methods so violent, are not intitled to make this objection. 
But now, on this subject, let me tell you
how I have argued with myself —For still you must
remember, that I am upon the extenuating part of his
character. 
A great deal of the treatment a Wife may expect
from him, will possibly depend upon herself. Perhaps
she must practise as well as promise obedience, to a
man so little used to controul; and must be careful to
oblige. And what Husband expects not this? —The
more perhaps if he had not reason to assure himself of
the preferable Love of his Wife before she became
such. And how much easier and pleasanter to obey
the man of her choice, if he should be even unreasonable
sometimes, than one she would not have had,
could she have avoided it? Then, I think, as the men 

were the framers of the Matrimonial Office, and made
obedience a part of the woman's vow, she ought not,
even in policy, to shew him, that she can break thro'
her part of the contract (however lightly she may
think of the instance) lest he should take it into his
head (himself his judge) to think as lightly of other
points, which she may hold more important—But indeed
no point so solemnly vowed can be slight. 
Thus principled, and acting accordingly, what a
wretch must that Husband be, who could treat such a
Wife brutally! —Will Lovelace's Wife be the only
person, to whom he will not pay the grateful debt of
civility and good-manners? He is allowed to be brave: 
Who ever knew a brave man, if a man of sense, an
universally base man? And how much the gentleness
of our Sex, and the manner of our training up and
education, make us need the protection of the Brave,
and the countenance of the Generous, let the general
approbation which we are all so naturally inclined to
give to men of that character, testify. 
At worst, will he confine me prisoner to my chamber? 
Will he deny me the visits of my dearest friend,
and forbid me to correspond with her? Will he take
from me the Mistresly management, which I had not
faultily discharged? Will he set a servant over me,
with licence to insult me? Will he, as he has not a
Sister, permit his Cousins Montague, or would either
of those Ladies accept of a permission, to insult and tyrannize
over me? —It cannot be. —Why then, think
I often, do you tempt me, O my cruel friends, to
try the difference? 
And then has the secret pleasure intruded itself, to
be able to reclaim such a man to the paths of virtue and
honour: To be a secondary means, if I were to be his,
of saving him, and preventing the mischiefs so enterprising
a creature might otherwise be guilty of, if he
be such a one. 
When I have thought of him in these lights (and 

that as a man of sense he will sooner see his erros, than
another) I own to you, that I have had some difficulty
to avoid taking the path they so violently endeavour
to make me shun: And all that command of my passions
which has been attributed to me as my greatest
praise, and, in so young a creature, as my distinction,
has hardly been sufficient for me. 
And let me add, that the favour of his relations (all
but himself unexceptionable) has made a good deal of
additional weight, thrown into the same scale. 
But now, in his disfavour. When I have reflected
upon the prohibition of my parents: The giddy appearance,
disgraceful to our Sex, that such a preference
would have: That there is no manner of likelihood,
enflamed by the Rencounter, and upheld by art and
ambition on my Brother's side, that ever the animosity
will be got over: That I must therefore be at perpetual
variance with all my own family: That I must
go to him, and to his, as an obliged and half-fortuned
person: That his aversion to them all is as strong as
theirs to him: That his whole family are hated for his
sake; they hating ours in return: That he has a very
immoral character as to women: That knowing this,
it is a high degree of impurity, to think of joining in
wedlock with such a man: That he is young, unbroken,
his passions unsubdued: That he is violent in
his temper, yet artful: I am afraid, vindictive too: 
That such an Husband might unsettle me in all my
own principles, and hazard my future hopes: That his
own relations, two excellent Aunts, and an Uncle,
from whom he has such large expectations, have no
influence upon him: That what tolerable qualities
he has, are founded more in pride than in virtue: 
That allowing, as he does, the excellency of Moral
Precepts, and believing the doctrine of future Rewards
and Punishments, he can live as if he despised the one,
and defied the other: The probability that the taint
arising from such free principles, may go down into 

the manners of posterity: That I knowing these things,
and the importance of them, should be more inexcuseable
than one who knows them not; since an error
against judgment is worse, infinitely worse, than an
error in judgment: —Reflecting upon these things, I
cannot help conjuring you, my dear, to pray with me,
and to pray for me, that I may not be pushed upon
such indiscreet measures, as will render me inexcuseable
to myself: For that is the test, after all. The world's
opinion ought to be but a secondary consideration. 
I have said in his praise, that he is extremely ready
to own his errors: But I have sometimes made a great
drawback upon this article, in his disfavour; having
been ready to apprehend, that this ingenuousness may
possibly be attributable to two causes, neither of them, by
any means, creditable to him. The one, that his vices
are so much his masters, that he attempts not to conquer
them; the other, that he may think it policy,
to give up one half of his character, to save the other,
when the whole may be blameable: By this means,
silencing by acknowlegement the objections he cannot
answer; which may give him the praise of ingenuousness,
when he can obtain no other; and when the challenged
proof might bring out, upon discussion, other evils. 
These, you will allow, are severe constructions; but
every-thing his enemies say of him cannot be false. 
I will proceed by-and-by. 
* *
Sometimes we have both thought him one of the
most undesigning merely witty men we ever knew; at
other times one of the deepest creatures we ever conversed
with. So that when in one visit we have imagined
we fathomed him, in the next he has made us
ready to give him up as impenetrable. This Impenetrableness,
my dear, is to be put among the shades in
his character. —Yet, upon the whole, you have been
so far of his party, that you have contested, that his
principal fault is over-frankness, and too much regardlesness 

of appearances, and that he is too giddy to be
very artful: You would have it, that at the time he
says any thing good, he means what he speaks; That
his variableness and levity are constitutional, owing to
sound health, and to a soul and body [that was your
observation] fitted for and pleased with each other. 
And hence you concluded, that could this consentaneousness
[as you call it] of corporal and animal faculties
be pointed by discretion; that is to say, could
his vivacity be confined within the pale of but moral
obligations; he would be far from being rejectible as
a companion for life. 
But I used then to say, and I still am of opinion,
that he wants a heart: And if he does, he wants every-thing. 
A wrong head may be convinced, may have
a right turn given it: But who is able to give a heart,
if a heart be wanting? Divine Grace, working a miracle,
or next to a miracle, can only change a bad
heart. Should not one fly the man who is but suspected
of such a one? What, O what, do Parents do, when
they endeavour to force a child's inclination, but
make her think better than otherwise she would think
of a man obnoxious to themselves, and perhaps whose
character will not stand examination? 
I have said, that I think Mr. Lovelace a vindictive
man: Upon my word, I have sometimes doubted,
whether his perseverance in his addresses to me has
not been the more obstinate, since he has found himself
so disagreeable to my friends. From that time I verily
think he has been more fervent in them; yet courts
them not; but sets them at defiance. For this indeed
he pleads disinterestedness [I am sure he cannot politeness]; 
and the more plausibly, as he is apprised of the
ability they have to make it worth his while to court
them. 'Tis true he has declared, and with too much
reason (or there would be no enduring him) that the
lowest submissions on his part would not be accepted; 
and to oblige me, has offered to seek a reconciliation
with them, if I would give him hope of success. 

As to his behaviour at church, the Sunday before
last, I lay no stress upon that, because I doubt there
was too much outward pride in his intentional humility,
or Shorey, who is not his enemy, could not have mistaken
it. 
I do not think him so deeply learned in human Nature,
or in Ethics, as some have thought him. Don't
you remember how he stared at the following trite
observations, which every moralist could have furnished
him with? Complaining, as he did, in a half-menacing
strain, of the obloquies raised against him— 
‘That if he were innocent, he should despise the obloquy: 
If not, revenge would not wipe off his guilt.’ 
‘That no-body ever thought of turning a sword into
a sponge!’ ‘That it was in his own power by
reformation of an error laid to his charge by an enemy,
to make that enemy one of his best friends; 
and (which was the noblest revenge in the world)
against his will; since an enemy would not wish
him to be without the faults he taxed him with.’ 
But the intention, he said, was the wound. 
How so, I asked him, when That cannot wound
without the application? ‘That the adversary only
held the sword: He himself pointed it to his breast: 
—And why should he mortally resent that malice,
which he might be the better for as long as he
lived?’ —What could be the reading he has been said
to be master of, to wonder, as he did, at these observations? 
But, indeed, he must take pleasure in Revenge; 
and yet holds others to be inexcuseable for the same
fault. He is not, however, the only one who can see
how truly blameable those errors are in another,
which they hardly think such in themselves. 
From these considerations; from these over-balances; 
it was, that I said in a former, that I would
not be in Love with this man for the world: And it
was going further than prudence would warrant, when 

I was for compounding with you, by the words conditional
liking; which you so humourously railly. 
Well but, methinks you say, what is all this to the
purpose? This is still but reasoning: But, if you are
in Love, you are: And Love, like the vapours, is
the deeper rooted for having no sufficient cause assignable
for its hold. And so you call upon me again, to
have no reserves, and so-forth. 
Why then, my dear, if you will have it, I think,
that, with all his preponderating faults, I like him better
than I ever thought I should like him; and, those
faults considered, better perhaps than I ought to like
him. And I believe, it is possible for the persecution
I labour under, to induce me to like him still more— 
Especially while I can recollect to his advantage our
last Interview, and as every day produces stronger instances
of tyranny, I will call it, on the other side. — 
In a word, I will frankly own (since you cannot think
any-thing I say too explicit) that were he now but a
moral man, I would prefer him to all the men I ever
saw. 
So that This is but conditional liking still, you'll say. 
—Nor, I hope, is it more. I never was in Love as it
is called; and whether This be it, or not, I must submit
to you. But will venture to think it, if it be, no
such mighty monarch, no such unconquerable power,
as I have heard it represented; and it must have met
with greater encouragement than I think I have given
it, to be absolutely unconquerable—Since I am persuaded,
that I could yet, without a throb, most willingly
give up the one man to get rid of the other. 
But now to be a little more serious with you: If,
my dear, my particularly unhappy situation had driven
(or led me, if you please) into a Liking of the man; 
and if that Liking had, in your opinion, inclined me
to love him; should you, whose mind is susceptible
of the most friendly impressions; who have such high
notions of the delicacy which ought to be observed by 

our Sex in these matters; and who actually do enter
so deeply into the distresses of one you love—should
you have pushed so far that unhappy friend on so very
nice a subject? —Especially, when I aimed not (as you
could prove by fifty instances, it seems) to guard against
being found out. Had you raillied me by word of
mouth in the manner you do, it might have been more
in character; especially, if your friend's distresses had
been surmounted; and if she had affected Prudish airs
in revolving the subject: But to sit down to write it,
as methinks I see you, with a gladdened eye, and with
all the archness of exultation—Indeed, my dear (and I
take notice of it, rather for the sake of your own generosity,
than for my sake; for, as I have said, I love
your raillery) it is not so very pretty; the delicacy of
the subject, and the delicacy of your own mind, considered. 
I lay down my pen here, that you may consider of
it a little, if you please. 
* *
I resume, to give you my opinion of the force
which figure or person ought to have upon our Sex: 
And this I shall do both generally as to the other Sex,
and particularly as to this man: Whence you will be
able to collect how far my friends are in the right, or
in the wrong, when they attribute a good deal of prejudice
in favour of one man, and in disfavour of the
other, on the score of figure. But, first, let me observe,
That they see abundant reason, on comparing
Mr. Lovelace and Mr. Solmes together, to believe
that this may be a consideration with me; and therefore
they believe it is. 
There is certainly something very plausible and attractive,
as well as creditable to a woman's choice, in
figure. It gives a favourable impression at first sight,
in which we wish to be confirmed: And if, upon further
acquaintance, we find reason so to be, we are
pleased with our judgment, and like the person the 

better, for having given us cause to compliment our
own sagacity, in our first sighted impressions. But,
nevertheless, it has been generally a rule with me, to
suspect a fine figure, both in man and woman; and
I have had a good deal of reason to approve my rule; 
—With regard to Men especially; who ought to value
themselves rather upon their intellectual than personal
qualities. For, as to our Sex, if a fine woman should
be led by the opinion of the world, to be vain and
conceited upon her form and features; and that to such
a degree, as to have neglected the more material and
more durable recommendations; the world will be
ready to excuse her; since a pretty fool, in all she
says, and in all she does, will please, we know not why. 
But who would grudge this pretty fool her short
day! Since, with her summer's sun, when her butterfly
flutters are over, and the winter of age and furrows
arrives, she will feel the just effects of having
neglected to cultivate her better faculties: For then,
like another Helen, she will be unable to bear the reflexion
even of her own glass; and being sunk into
the insignificance of a mere old woman, she will be entitled
to the contempts which follow that character. 
While the discreet matron, who carries up [we will
not, in such a one's case, say down] into advanced
life, the ever-amiable character of virtuous prudence,
and useful experience, finds solid veneration take place
of airy admiration, and more than supply the want
of it. 
But for a man to be vain of his person, how effeminate! 
If such a one happens to have genius, it seldom
strikes deep into intellectual subjects. His outside
usually runs away with him. To adorn, and perhaps,
intending to adorn, to render ridiculous, that
person, takes up all his attention. All he does is
personal; that is to say, for himself: All he admires,
is himself: And in spite of the correction of the Stage,
which so often and so justly exposes a coxcomb, he 

usually dwindles down, and sinks into that character; 
and, of consequence, becomes the scorn of one Sex,
and the jest of the other. 
This is generally the case of your fine figures of
Men, and of those who value themselves on dress and
outward appearance: Whence it is, that I repeat,
that mere person in a man, is a despicable consideration. 
But if a man, besides figure, has learning, and
such talents, as would have distinguished him, whatever
were his form; then indeed person is an addition: 
And if he has not run too egregiously into self-admiration,
and if he has preserved his morals, he is
truly a valuable being. 
Mr. Lovelace has certainly taste; and, as far as I
am able to determine, he has judgment in most of
the politer arts. But altho' he has a humourous way
of carrying it off, yet one may see, that he values himself
not a little, both on his person and his parts, and
even upon his dress; and yet he has so happy an ease
in the latter, that it seems to be the least part of his
study. And as to the former, I should hold myself
inexcuseable, if I were to add to his vanity by shewing
the least regard for what is too evidently so much his. 
And now, my dear, let me ask you; Have I come
up to your expectation? If I have not, when my
mind is more at ease, I will endeavour to please you
better. For, methinks, my sentences drag; my style
creeps; my imagination is sunk; my spirits serve me
not; only to tell you, That whether I have more or
less, I am wholly devoted to the commands of my dear
Miss Howe. 
P. S. The insolent Betty Barnes has just now fired
me anew, by reporting to me the following expressions
of the hideous creature, Solmes—‘That he is sure of
the coy girl; and that with little labour to himself.’ 
‘That be I ever so averse to him beforehand, he can
depend upon my principles; and it will be a pleasure
to him to see by what pretty degrees I shall come to.’ 

[—Horrid wretch!] ‘That it was Sir Oliver's observation,
who knew the world perfectly well, that
Fear was a better security than Love, for a woman's
good behaviour to her Husband; altho', for
his part, to such a fine creature [truly] he would
try what Love would do; for a few weeks at least: 
Being unwilling to believe what the old Knight used
to averr, That fondness spoils more Wives than it
makes good.’ 
What think you, my dear, of such a wretch as this!
tutored, too, by that old surly Misogynist, as he was
deemed, Sir Oliver?— 