


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Monday, March 20. 
After we had taken leave of one another for
the night, I tapt at Emily's chamber-door; 
which being immediately opened by her maid, Is it
you, my dear Miss Byron? said she, running to me. 
How good this is! 

I am come, my dear, late as it is, to pass an agreeable
half-hour with you, if it will not be unseasonable. 
That it can never be. 
You must then let your Anne go to bed, said I:
Else, as her time is not her own, I shall shorten my
visit. I will assist you in any little services myself. I
have dismissed Jenny. 
God bless you, madam, said she. You consider
every-body. Anne tells me, that the servants, throughout
the house, adore you: And I am sure their principals
do. —Anne, you may go to your rest. 
Jenny, who attends me here, has more than
once hinted to me, that Miss Jervois loves to sit up
late, either reading, or being read to, by Anne; who,
tho' she reads well, is not fond of the task. 
Servants, said I, are as sensible as their masters
and mistresses. They speak to their feelings. I question
not but they love Miss Jervois as well as they do
me. I should as soon choose to take my measures of
the goodness of principals by their servants love of
them, as by any other rule. Don't you see, by the
silent veneration and assiduities of the servants of Sir
Charles Grandison, how much they adore their master? 
I am very fond of being esteemed by servants, said
she, from that very observation of my guardian's
goodness, and his servants worthiness, as well as from
what my maid tells me, all of them say of you. But
you and my guardian are so much alike in every thing,
that you seem to be born for one another. 
And then she sighed, involuntarily; yet seemed not
to endeavour to restrain or recal her sigh. 
Why sighs my dear young friend? Why sighs my
Emily? 
That's good of you, to call me your Emily. My
guardian calls me his Emily. I am always proud
when he calls me so—I don't know why I sigh: But
I have lately got a trick of sighing, I think. Will 

it do me harm? Anne tells me, it will; and says, I
must break myself of it. She says, it is not pretty in
a young Lady to sigh: But where is the un-prettiness
of it? 
Sighing is said to be a sign of being in Love; and
young Ladies— 
Ah! madam! And yet you sigh, very often— 
I felt myself blush. 
I often catch myself sighing, my dear, said I. It is
a trick, as you call it, which I would not have you
learn. 
But I have reason for sighing, madam; which you
have not—Such a mother! A mother that I wanted
to be good, not so much to me, as to herself: A
mother so unhappy, that one must be glad to run
away from her. My poor pappa! so good as he was
to every-body, and even to her, yet had his heart
broken—O madam!—(flinging her arms about me,
and hiding her face in my bosom) Have I not cause to
sigh? 
I wept on her neck; I could not help it: So dutifully
sensible of her calamity! and for such a calamity,
who could forbear? 
Such a disgrace too! said she, raising her head. 
Poor woman! —Yet she has the worst of it. Do you
think that that is not enough to make one sigh? 
Amiable goodness! (kissing her cheek) I shall love
you too well. 
You are too good to me: You must not be so good
to me: That, even that, will make me sigh. My
guardian's goodness to me gives me pain; and I think
verily, I sigh more since last I left Mrs. Lane, and
have seen more of his goodness, and how every-body
admires, and owns obligation to, him, than I did before. 
—To have a stranger, as one may say, and so
very fine a gentleman, to be so good to one, and to
have such an unhappy mother—who gives him so much
trouble—how can one help sighing for both reasons? 

Dear girl! said I, my heart overflowing with compassion
for her, you and I are bound equally, by the
tie of gratitude, to esteem him. 
Ah, madam! you will one day be the happiest of
all women—And so you deserve to be. 
What means my Emily? 
Don't I see, don't I hear, what is designed to be
brought about by Lord and Lady L. and Miss Grandison? 
And don't I hear from my Anne, what every
body expects and wishes for? 
And does every-body expect and wish, my Emily— 
I stopped. She went on. —And don't I see that my
guardian himself loves you? 
Do you think so, Emily? 
O how he dwells upon your words, when you
speak! 
You fansy so, my dear. 
You have not observed his eyes so much as I have
done, when he is in your company. I have watched
your eyes, too; but have not seen that you mind him
quite so much as he does you. —Indeed he loves you
dearly. —And then she sighed again. 
But why that sigh, my Emily? —Were I so happy
as you think, in the esteem of this good man, would
you envy me, my dear? 
Envy you! —I, such a simple girl as I, envy you! 
No, indeed. Why should I envy you? —But tell me
now; dear madam, tell me; Don't you love my
guardian? 
Every-body does. You, my Emily, love him. 
And so I do: But you love him, madam, with a
hope that no one else will have reason to entertain— 
Dear now, place a little confidence in your Emily. 
My guardian shall never know it from me, by the least
hint. I beg you will own it. You can't think how
you will oblige me. Your confidence in me will give
me importance with myself. 

Will you, Emily, be as frank-hearted with me, as
you would have me be with you? 
Indeed I will. 
I do, my dear, greatly esteem your guardian. 
Esteem! Is that the word? Is that the Ladies word
for Love? And is not the word Love, a pretty word
for women? I mean no harm by it, I am sure. 
And I am sure you cannot mean harm: I will be
sincere with my Emily. But you must not let any one
living know what I say to you of this nature. I would
prefer your guardian, my dear, to a king, in all his
glory. 
And so, madam, would I, if I were you. I should
be glad to be thought like you in every-thing. 
Amiable innocence! But tell me, Miss Jervois,
Would you not have me esteem your guardian? You
know he was my guardian too, and that at an exigence
when I most wanted one. 
Indeed I would. Would you have me wish such a
good young Lady, as Miss Byron, to be ungrateful? 
No, indeed. —And again she sighed. 
Why then sighed my Emily? You said you would
be frank-hearted. 
So I will, madam. But I really can't tell why I
sighed then. I wish my guardian to be the happiest
man in the world: I wish you, madam, to be the happiest
woman: And how can either be so, but in one
another? —But I am grieved, I believe, that there
seems to be something in the way of your mutual
happiness—I don't know whether that is all, neither— 
I don't know what it is—If I did, I would tell you— 
But I have such throbs sometimes at my heart, as
make me fetch my breath hard—I don't know what
it is—Such a weight here, as makes me sigh; and I
have a pleasure, I think, because I have an ease in
sighing—What can it be?— 
Go on, my dear: You are a pretty describer. 
Why now, if any-body, as Anne did last time my 

guardian came hither, was to run up stairs, in an
hurry; and to say, Miss, Miss, Miss, your guardian
is come! I should be in such a flutter! my heart
would seem to be too big for my bosom! I should sit
down as much out of breath, as if I had ran down an
high hill. —And, for half an hour, may be, so tremble,
that I should not be able to see the dear guardian
that perhaps I had wanted to see. And to hear him
with a voice of gentleness, as if he pitied me for
having so unhappy a mother, call me his Emily. — 
Don't you think he has a sweet voice? —And your
voice, too, madam, is also so sweet—Every-body
says, that even in your common speech your voice is
melody. —Now Anne says— 
O my agreeable little flatterer! 
I don't flatter, madam. Don't call me a flatterer. 
I am a very sincere girl: Indeed I am. 
I dare say you are: But you raise my vanity, my
dear. It is not your fault to tell me what people say
of me; but it is mine to be proud of their commendations
—But you were going to tell me what
Anne says, on your being so much affected, when she
tells you in an hurry that your guardian is come? 
Why Anne says, That all those are signs of Love. 
Foolish creature! —And yet so they may: But not of
such Love as she means. —Such a Love as she as good
as owns she had in her days of flutteration, as she
whimsically calls them; which, as she explains it,
were when she was two or three years older than I
am. In the first place, I am very young, you know,
madam; a mere girl: And such a simple thing! —I
never had a mother, nor sister neither; nor a companion
of my own sex. —Mrs. Lane's daughters, what
were they? —They looked upon me as a child as I
was. In the next place, I do love my guardian,
that's true; but with as much reverence, as if he
were my father. I never had a thought that had not
that deep, that profound reverence for him, as I remember
I had for my father. 

But you had not, my dear, any of those flutters,
those throbs, that you spoke of, on any returns of
your father, after little absences? 
Why, no; I can't say I had. Nor, tho' I always
rejoiced when my guardian came to see me at Mrs.
Lane's, had I, as I remember, any such violent
emotions, as I have had now of late. I don't know
how it is—Can you tell me? 
Do you not, Lucy, both love and pity this sweet
girl? 
My dear Emily! —These are symptoms, I doubt— 
Symptoms of what, madam? —Pray tell me sincerely. 
I will not hide a thought of my heart from
you. 
If encouraged, my dear— 
What then, madam?— 
It would be Love, I doubt. —That sort of Love that
would make you uneasy— 
No; that cannot be, surely. Why, madam, at
that rate, I should never dare to stand in your presence. 
Upon my word, I wish no one in the world,
but you, to be Lady Grandison. I have but one
fear— 
And what is that? 
That my guardian won't love me so well, when he
marries, as he does now. 
Are you afraid that the woman he marries will endeavour
to narrow so large an heart as his? 
No; not if that woman were you. —But, forgive
my folly! (and she looked down) he would not take
my hand so kindly as now he does: He would not
look in my face with pleasure, and with pity on my
mother's account, as he does now: He would not
call me his Emily: He would not bespeak every one's
regard for his ward. 
My dear, you are now almost a woman. He will,
if he remain a single man, soon draw back into his
heart that kindness and love for you, which, while you 

are a girl, he suffers to dwell upon his lips. You must
expect this change of behaviour soon, from his prudence. 
You yourself, my love, will set him the example:
You will grow more reserved in your outward
behaviour, than hitherto there was reason to be— 
O, madam! never tell me that! I should break my
heart, were I twenty, and he did not treat me with
the tenderness that he has always treated me with. If,
indeed, he find me an incroacher; if he find me forward,
and indiscreet, and troublesome; then let him
call me any-body's Emily, rather than his. 
You will have different notions, my dear, before
that time— 
Then, I think, I sha'n't desire to live to see the
time. Why, madam, all the comfort I have to set
against my unhappiness from my mother, is, that so
good, so virtuous, and so prudent a man as Sir Charles
Grandison, calls me his Emily, and loves me as his
child. Would you, madam, were you Lady Grandison
(now, tell me, would you) grudge me these instances
of his favour and affection? 
Indeed, my dear, I would not: If I know my own
heart, I would not. 
And would you permit me to live with you? — 
Now it is out—Will you permit me to live with my
guardian and you? —This is a question I wanted to
put to you; but was both ashamed and afraid, till you
thus kindly emboldened me. 
Indeed I would, if your guardian had no objection. 
That don't satisfy me, madam. Would you be my
earnest, my sincere advocate, and plead for me? He
would not deny you any-thing. And would you
(come, madam, I will put you to it—Would you) say,
‘Look you here, Sir Charles Grandison; This girl,
this Emily, is a good sort of girl: She has a great
fortune. Snares may be laid for her: She has no
papa but you: She has, poor thing! (I hope you
would call me by names of pity to move him) no 

mamma; or is more unhappy than if she had none. 
Where can you dispose of her so properly as to let
her be with us? I will be her protectress, her friend,
her mamma’ [Yes, do, madam, let me choose a
mamma! Don't let the poor girl be without a
mamma, if you can give her one. I am sure I will
study to give you pleasure, and not pain]—‘I insist
upon it, Sir Charles. It will make the poor girl's
heart easy. She is told of the arts and tricks of
men where girls have great fortunes; and she is always
in dread about them, and about her unhappy
mother. Who will form plots against her, if she
is with us?’—Dear, dear madam! you are moved in
my favour—Who could have forborn being affected
by her tender prattle? and she threw her arms about
me; I see you are moved in my favour! —And I will
be your attendant: I will be your waiting-maid: I
will help to adorn you, and to make you more and
more lovely in the eyes of my guardian. 
I could not bear this. 
No more, no more, my lovely girl, my innocent,
my generous, my irresistible girl! —Were it come to
that [It became me to be unreserved, for more reasons
than one, to this sweet child]—Not one request
should my Emily make, that heart and mind I would
not comply with: Not one wish that I would not
endeavour to promote and accomplish for her. 
I folded her to my heart, as she hung about my
neck. 
I grieve you—I would not, for the world, grieve
my young mamma, said she—Henceforth let me call
you my mamma. —Mamma, as I have heard the word
explained, is a more tender name even than mother— 
The unhappy Mrs. Jervois shall be Mrs. O-Hara, if
she pleases; and only mother: A child must not renounce
her mother, tho' the mother should renounce,
or worse than renounce, her child. 
I must leave you, Emily. 

Say then my Emily. 
I must leave you my, and more than my Emily. —You
have cured me of sleepiness for this night! 
O then I am sorry— 
No; don't be sorry. You have given me pain,
'tis true; but I think it is the sweetest pain that ever
entered into an human heart. Such goodness! such
innocence! such generosity! —I thank God, my love,
that there is in my knowledge so worthy a young heart
as yours. 
Now, how good this is! (and again she wrapped her
arms about me) And will you go? 
I must, I must, my dear! —I can stay no longer. — 
But take this assurance, that my Emily shall have a
first place in my heart for ever. I will study to promote
your happiness; and your wishes shall be the
leaders of mine. 
Then I am sure I shall live with my guardian and
you for ever, as I may say: And God grant, and down
on her knees she dropped, with her arms wrapped
about mine, that you may be the happiest of women,
and that soon, for my sake, as well as your own, in
marriage with the best of men—my guardian! (exultingly,
said she): And say, Amen—Do, God bless
you, madam, say Amen to my prayer. 
I struggled from her. —O my sweet girl! I cannot
bear you! —I hastened out at the door, to go to my
chamber. 
You are not angry, madam? following me, and
taking my hand, and kissing it with eagerness. Say
you are not displeased with me. I will not leave you
till you do. 
Angry! my love! Who can be angry? How you
have distressed me, by your sweet goodness of heart? 
Thank God, I have not offended you. And now
say, once more, my Emily—Say, Good rest to you,
my Emily—my love—and all those tender names— 
and say, God bless you, my child, as if you were my 

mamma; and I will leave you, and I shall in fancy go
to sleep with Angels. 
Angels, only, are fit company for my Emily—God
bless my Emily! Good night! Be your slumbers
happy! 
And I kissed her once, twice, thrice, with fervor; 
and away she tript; but stopt at the door, courtesying
low, as I, delighted, yet painfully delighted,
looked after her. 
Ruminating, in my retirement, on all the dear girl
had said, and on what might be my fate; so many
different thoughts came into my head, that I could
not close my eyes: I therefore arose before day; and,
while my thoughts were agitated with the affecting
subject, had recourse to my pen. 
Do, my Lucy, and do you, my grandmamma, my
aunt, my uncle, more than give me leave, bid me,
command me, if it shall be proposed, to bring down
with me my Emily: And yet she shall not come, if
you don't all promise to love her as well as you do 
Your for ever obliged
Harriet Byron. 

