



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday morning, past Two o'clock. 
Io Triumphe! Io Clarissa, sing! —One more,
what a happy man thy friend! —A silly dear novice,
to be heard to tell the coachman whither to carry
her! —And to go to Hampstead, of all the villages
about London! —The place where we had been together
more than once! 
Methinks I am sorry she managed no better! —I
shall find the recovery of her too easy a task, I fear! 
Had she but known, how much difficulty enhances the
value of any thing with me, and had she had the least
notion of obliging me, she would never have stopt short
at Hampstead, surely. 
Well, but after all this exultation, thou wilt ask, 

If I have already got back my charmer? —I have
not. —But knowing where she is, is almost the
same thing as having her in my power: And it delights
me to think, how she will start and tremble,
when I first pop upon her! How she will look with
conscious guilt, that will more than wipe off my guilt
of Wednesday night, when she sees her injured lover,
and acknowleged husband, from whom, the greatest
of felonies, she would have stollen herself. 
But thou wilt be impatient to know how this came
about. Read the inclosed here, and remember the
instructions, which, from time to time, I have given
my fellow, in apprehension of such an elopement; 
and that will tell thee all, and what I may reasonably
expect From the rascal's diligence and management, if
he wishes ever to see my face again. 
I received it about half an hour ago, just as I was
going to lie down in my cloaths: And it has made me
so much alive, that, midnight as it is, I have sent for
a Blunt's chariot, to attend me here by day-peep, with
my usual coachman, if possible; and knowing not
else what to do with myself, I sat down, and, in the
joy of my heart, have not only wrote thus far, but
have concluded upon the measures I shall take when
admitted to her presence: For well am I aware of the
difficulties I shall have to contend with from her perverseness. 

Honoured Sur,
This is to sertifie your honner, as how I am heer
at Hamester, wher I have found out my Lady to
be in logins at one Mrs. Moore's, near upon Hamestet
hethe. And I have so ordered matters, that her Ladiship
cannot stur but I must have notice of her goins
and comins. As I knowed I dursted not look into your
Honner's fase, if I had not found out my Lady, thoff
she was gone off the prems's in a quartir off an hour,
as a man may say; so I knowed you would be glad at 

heart to know I had found her out: And so I send
thiss Petur Partrick, who is to haf 5 shillins, it being
now nere 12 of the clock at nite; for he would not
stur without a hartie drinck too besides: And I was
willing all shulde be snug likewayes at the logins befoer
I sent. 
I have munny of youre Honner's, but I thout as
how if the man was payed by me beforend, he
mought play trix; so left that to youre Honner. 
My Lady knows nothing of my being hereaway. 
But I thoute it best not to leve the plase, because she
has tacken the logins but for a fue nites. 
If your Honner cum to the Upper Flax, I will be
in site all the day about the Tapp-house or the Hethe; 
I have borroued an othir cote, instead off your Honner's
liferie, and a blacke wigge; soe cannot be knoen
by my Lady, iff as howe she shuld see me: And
have made as if I had the toothe-ake; so with my hancriffe
at my mothe, the tethe which your Honner was
plesed to bett out with your honner's fyste, and my
dam'd wide mothe, as youre Honner notifys it to be,
cannot be knoen to be mine. 
The tow inner letters I had from my Lady, before
she went off the prems's. One was to be left at Mr.
Wilson's for Miss Howe. The next was to be for
your Honner. But I knew you was not at the plase
directed; and being afear'd of what fell out, so I kept
them for your Honner, and so could not give um to
you, until I seed you. Miss How's I only made belief
to her Ladiship as I carred it, and fed as how
there was nothing left for hur, as shee wished to knoe: 
So here they be bothe. 
I am, may it pless your Honner, 
Your Honner's most dutiful,
and, wonce more, happy servant,
Wm. Summers. 

The two inner letters, as Will. calls them, 'tis
plain, were wrote for no other purpose, but to send
him out of the way with them, and one of them to
amuse me. That directed to Miss Howe is only this: 

Thursday, June 8. 
I write this, my dear Miss Howe, only for a feint,
and to see if it will go current. I shall write at
large very soon, if not miserably prevented! ! ! 
Cl. H. 
Now, Jack, will not her feints justify mine? Does
she not invade my province, thinkest thou? And is it
not now fairly come to Who shall most deceive and
cheat the other? So, I thank my stars, we are upon
a par, at last, as to this point—Which is a great
ease to my conscience, thou must believe. And if
what Hudibras tells us is true, the dear fugitive has
also abundance of pleasure to come. 

Doubtless the pleasure is as great
In being cheated, as to cheat.
As lookers-on find most delight,
Who least perceive the juggler's sleight;
And still the less they understand,
The more admire the sleight of hand.
This is my dear juggler's letter to me; the other
inner letter sent by Will. 

Thursday, June 8. 
Mr. Lovelace,
Do not give me cause to dread your return. If you
would not that I should hate you for ever, send
me half a line by the bearer, to assure me that you
will not attempt to see me for a week to come. I cannot
look you in the face without equal confusion and
indignation. The obliging me in This is but a poor
atonement for your last night's vile behaviour. 
You may pass this time in a journey to your uncle's; 

and I cannot doubt, if the Ladies of your family are
as favourable to me, as you have assured me they are,
but that you will have interest enough to prevail with
one of them, to oblige me with her company. After
your baseness of last night, you will not wonder, that
I insist upon this proof of your future honour. 
If Captain Tomlinson comes mean time, I can hear
what he has to say, and send you an account of it. 
But in less than a week, if you see me, it must be
owing to a fresh act of violence, of which you know
not the consequence. 
Send me the requested line, if ever you expect to
have the forgiveness confirmed; the promise of which
you extorted from 
The Unhappy
Cl. H. 
Now, Belford, what canst thou say in behalf of this
sweet rogue of a Lady? What canst thou say for her? 
'Tis apparent, that she was fully determined upon an
elopement, when she wrote it: And thus would she
make me of party against myself, by drawing me in
to give her a week's time to compleat it in: And,
wickeder still, send me upon a fool's errand to bring
up one of my cousins: —When we came, to have
the satisfaction of finding her gone off, and me exposed
for ever! —What punishment can be bad enough for
such a little villain of a Lady! 
But mind, moreover, how plausibly she accounts
by this billet (supposing she had no opportunity of
eloping before I returned) for the resolution of not
seeing me for a week; and for the bread and butter
expedient! —So childish as we thought it! 
The chariot is not come; and if it were, it is yet
too soon for every-thing but my impatience. And as
I have already taken all my measures, and can think
of nothing but my triumph, I will resume her violent
letter, in order to strengthen my resolutions against 

her. I was before in too gloomy a way to proceed
with it: But now the subject is all alive to me, and
my gayer fancy, like the sun-beams, will irradiate it,
and turn the solemn deep green into a brighter verdure. 
When I have called upon my charmer to explain
some parts of her letter, and to atone for others, I
will send it, or a copy of it, to thee. 
Suffice it at present to tell thee, in the first place,
that she is determined never to be my wife. —To be sure,
there ought to be no compulsion in so material a case. 
Compulsion was her parents fault, which I have censured
so severely, that I shall hardly be guilty of the
same. And I am glad I know her mind as to this
essential point. 
I have ruined her, she says! —Now that's a fib,
take it in her own way: —If I had, she would not
perhaps have run away from me. 
She is thrown upon the wide world: Now I own,
that Hampstead-Heath affords very pretty, and very
extensive prospects; but 'tis not the wide world neither: 
And suppose that to be her grievance, I hope
soon to restore her to a narrower. 
I am the enemy of her soul, as well as of her honour! 
—Confoundedly severe! Nevertheless, another
fib! —For I love her soul very well; but think no
more of it in this case than of my own. 
She is to be thrown upon strangers! —And is not
that her own fault? —Much against my will, I am
sure! 
She is cast from a state of independency into one of obligation. 
She never was in a state of independency; nor
is it fit a woman should, of any age, or in any state
of life. And as to the state of obligation, there is no
such thing as living without being beholden to somebody. 
Mutual obligation is the very essence and soul
of the social and commercial life: —Why should she
be exempt from it? —I am sure the person she raves 

at, desires not such an exemption;—has been long
dependent upon her, and would rejoice to owe further
obligations to her, than he can boast of hitherto. 
She talks of her father's curse: —But have I not
repaid him for it an hundred-fold, in the same coin? 
But why must the faults of other people be laid at my
door? Have I not enow of my own? 
But the grey-eyed dawn begins to peep—Let me
sum up all. 
In short, then, the dear creature's letter is a collection
of invectives not very new to me; though the
occasion for them, no doubt, is new to her. A little
sprinkling of the romantic and contradictory runs thro'
it. She loves, and she hates: She encourages me to
pursue her, by telling me I safely may; and yet she
begs I will not: She apprehends poverty and want,
yet resolves to give away her estate: To gratify
whom? —Why, in short, those who have been the
cause of her misfortunes. And finally, tho' she resolves
never to be mine, yet she has some regrets at
leaving me, because of the opening prospects of a
reconciliation with her friends. 
But never did morning dawn so tardily as this! — 
The chariot not yet come neither. 
* *
A Gentleman to speak with me, Dorcas? — 
Who can want me thus early? 
Captain Tomlinson, sayst thou! Surely, he must
have travelled all night! —Early riser as I am, how
could he think to find me up thus early? 
Let but the chariot come, and he shall accompany
me in it to the bottom of the hill (tho' he return to
town on foot; for the Captain is all obliging goodness),
that I may hear all he has to say, and tell him
all my mind, and lose no time. 
Well, now am I satisfied, that this rebellious flight
will turn to my advantage, as all crush'd rebellions
do to the advantage of a Sovereign in possession. 

* *
Dear Captain, I rejoice to see you: Just in the
nick of time: —See! See! 

The rosy-finger'd morn appears,
And from her mantle shakes her tears;
The sun arising, mortals chears,
And drives the rising mists away,
In promise of a glorious day.
Excuse me, Sir, that I salute you, from my favourite
Bard. He that rises with the Lark, will sing with
the Lark. Strange news since I saw you, Captain! 
Poor mistaken Lady! —But you have too much goodness,
I know, to reveal to her uncle Harlowe the errors
of this capricious Beauty. It will all turn out for
the best. You must accompany me part of the way. 
I know the delight you take in composing differences. 
But 'tis the task of the Prudent to heal the breaches
made by the rashness and folly of the Imprudent. 
* *
And now (all around me so still, and so silent) the
rattling of the chariot-wheels at a street's distance, do
I hear! —And to this angel of a Lady I fly! 
Reward, O God of Love (the cause is thy own); 
reward thou, as it deserves, my suffering persevereance! 
—Succeed my endeavours to bring back to thy
obedience, this charming fugitive! —Make her acknowlege
her rashness; repent her insults; implore
my forgiveness; beg to be re-instated in my favour,
and that I will bury in oblivion the remembrance
of her heinous offence against thee, and against me,
thy faithful votary. 
* *
The chariot at the door! —I come! I come!— 
I attend you, good Captain— 
Indeed, Sir— 
Pray, Sir—Civility is not ceremony. 

And now, dressed like a bridegroom, my heart elated
beyond that of the most desiring one (attended by a
footman whom my Beloved never saw), I am already
at Hampstead! 