



My good Lady,
I now come to your Ladyship's Remarks on my
Conduct to Mrs. Jewkes; which you are pleased
to think too kind and forgiving, considering the
poor Woman's Baseness. 
Your Ladyship says, “That I ought not to have
borne her in my Sight, after the impudent Assistance
she gave to his lewd Attempts; much
less to have left her in her Place, and rewarded
her for her Vileness.” Alas! my dear Lady,
what could I do; a poor Prisoner, as I was made, for
Weeks together, in Breach of all the Laws of Civil
Society; not a Soul who durst be my Friend; and 

every Day expecting to be ruin'd and undone, by
one of the haughtiest and most determin'd Spirits in
England? —And when it pleased God to turn
his Heart, and incline him to abandon his wicked
Attempts, and to profess honourable Love to me,
his poor Servant, can it be thought I was to insist
upon Conditions with such a Gentleman, who had
me in his Power; and who, if I had provoked
him, might have resumed all his wicked Purposes
against me? 
Indeed, I was too much overjoy'd, after all my
Dangers past, (which were so great, that I could
not go to Rest, nor rise, but with such Apprehensions,
that I wish'd for Death rather than Life) to
think of refusing any Terms that I could yield to, and
keep my Honour. 
And tho' such noble Ladies, as your Ladyship
and Lady Betty, who are born to Independency,
and are hereditarily, as I may say, on a Foot with
the highest-descended Gentleman in the Land,
might have exerted Spirit, and would have had a
Right to pick and chuse your own Servants, and
distribute Rewards and Punishments to the Deserving
and Undeserving, at your own good Pleasure; 
yet what had I, a poor Girl, who ow'd my Title
even to common Notice, to the Bounty of my late
good Lady, and a kind of imputed Sightliness of
Person, which had made me only the Subject of vile
Attempts; who from a Situation of Terror and Apprehension
was lifted up to a Hope, beyond my
highest Ambition, and was bid to pardon the bad
Woman, as an Instance, that I could forgive his own
hard Usage of me; who had experienced so often
the Violence and Impetuosity of his Temper, which
even his beloved Mother never resisted till it subsided; 
and then indeed he was all Goodness and
Acknowlegement, (of which I could give your Ladyship 

more than one Instance) what, I say, had I
to do, to take upon me Lady-Airs, and resent? 
But, my dear Ladies, (let me, in this Instance,
bespeak both your Ladyships Attention) I should
be inexcusable, if I did not tell you all the Truth; 
and that is, that I not only forgave the poor Wretch,
in regard to his Commands, but from my own Inclination. 
If I am wrong in saying this, I must submit it to
your Ladyships; and, as I pretend not to Perfection,
am ready to take the Blame I shall be found to deserve
in your Ladyships Judgment; but indeed, were it to
do again, I verily think, I could not help forgiving her. 
And were I not able to say this, I should be thought
to have made a mean Court to my Master's Passions,
and to have done a wrong thing with my Eyes open:
Which, I humbly conceive, no one should do. 
When this poor Creature was put into my Power,
(seemingly at least, tho' it might possibly have been
resum'd, and I might have been re-committed to
hers, had I given him Reason to think I made an
arrogant Use of it) you cannot imagine what a
Triumph I had in my Mind on the mortify'd Guilt,
which (from the highest Degree of Insolence and
Imperiousness, that before harden'd her masculine
Features) appear'd in her Countenance, when she
found the Tables likely to be soon turn'd upon her. 
This Change of Behaviour, which at first operated
in sullen Awe, and afterwards in a kind of silent
Respect, shew'd me, what an Influence Power had
over her; and that when she could treat her late
Prisoner, when taken into Favour, so obsequiously,
it was the less Wonder the bad Woman could think
it her Duty to obey Commands so unjust, when her
Obedience to them was required from her Master. 
To be sure, if a Look could have killed her, after
some of her bad Treatment, she had been slain over 

and over, as I may say: But to me, who always
was taught to distinguish between the Person and
the Action, I could not hold my Resentment against
the poor passive Machine of Mischief, one Day together,
tho' her Actions were so odious to me. 
I should indeed except that Time of my grand
Trial, when she appear'd so much a Wretch to me,
that I saw her not (even after*  two Days that she
was kept from my Sight) without great Flutter
and Emotion of Heart; and I had represented to
your Brother before, how hard a Condition it was
for me to forgive so much unwomanly Wickedness†  . 
But, my dear Ladies, when I consider'd the Matter
in one particular Light, I could the more easily
forgive her; and having forgiven her, bear her in my
Sight, and act by her (as a Consequence of that
Forgiveness) as if she had not so horridly offended. — 
Else, how would it have been Forgiveness? Especially
as she was ashamed of her Crime, and there
was no Fear of a Repetition of it. 
Thus then I thought on the Occasion: Poor
wretched Agent, for Purposes little less than infernal! 
I will forgive thee, since thy Master and my
Master will have it so. And indeed thou art beneath
the Resentment even of such a poor Girl as I. I
will pity thee, base and abject, as thou art. And
she who is the Object of my Pity, is surely beneath
my Anger. My Eye, that used to quiver and tremble
at thy haughty Eye, shall now, with conscious
Worthiness, take a superior Steadiness, and look
down thy scouling guilty one into Self-Condemnation,
the State thou couldst never cast mine into,
nor from it wilt be able to raise thine own! Bear
the Reproach of thy own wicked Heart, low, vile 

Woman, unworthy as thou art of the Name, and
chosen, as it should seem, for a Foil to the Innocent,
and to make Purity shine forth the brighter,
the only good Use such Wretches as thou can be
of to others (except for Examples of Penitence and
Mercy): This will be Punishment enough for thee,
without my exposing myself to the Imputation of
descending so near to a Level with thee, as to resent
thy Baseness, when thou hast no Power to
hurt me!— 
Such were then my Thoughts, my proud Thoughts,
so far was I in my Heart, and, I hoped, in the very
Act that proceeded from that Heart, from intentional
Meanness in forgiving, at Mr. B.'s Interposition,
the poor, low, creeping, abject, Self-mortify'd,
and Master-mortify'd Mrs. Jewkes!— 
And do you think, Ladies, when you revolve in
your Thoughts, who I was, and what I was, and
what I was designed to be; when you revolve the
amazing Turn in my Favour, and the Prospects
before me (Prospects so much above my Hopes,
that I left them intirely to Providence to direct for
me, as it pleased, without daring to look forward
to what those Prospects seemed naturally to tend); 
when I could see my haughty Persecutor become
my repentant Protector; the lofty Spirit that used
to make me tremble, and to which I never could
look up without Awe, except in those animating
Cases, where his Guilt, and my Innocence, gave
me a Courage, more than natural to my otherwise
dastardly Heart: When this impetuous Spirit
could stoop to request one whom he had sunk beneath
even her usual low Character of his Servant, and
was his Prisoner, under Sentence of a Ruin worse
than Death, as he had intended it, and had seized
her for that very Purpose, could stoop to acknowledge
the Vileness of those Purposes: Could say, 

at one time, “That my Forgiveness of Mrs. Jewkes
should stand me in greater Stead than I was aware
of:” Could tell her, before me, “That she
must for the future shew me all the Respect that
was due to one he must love* :” At another,
acknowlege before her, “That he had been stark
naught, and that I was very forgiving†  :” Again‡  ,
to Mrs. Jewkes, putting himself on a Level with
her, as to Guilt, “We are both in generous Hands:
and indeed, if Pamela did not pardon you, I
should think she but half forgave me, because you
acted by my Instructions:” Another time to the
same§  , “We have been both Sinners, and must
be both included in one Act of Grace:” 
When I say, I was thus lifted up to the State of
a sovereign Forgiver, and my lordly Master became
a Petitioner for himself, and for the guilty Creature,
whom he put under my Feet; what a Triumph
was here for the poor Pamela! And could I have
been guilty of so mean a Pride, as to trample upon
the poor abject Creature, when I found her thus
lowly, thus mortify'd, and so much in my Power? 
For so she actually was, while I seemed to think so:
And would it have been good Manners with regard
to my Master, or Policy with respect to myself, to
doubt it, after he had so declared?— 
Then, my dear Ladies, while I was injoying the
Soul-charming Fruits of that Innocence which the
Divine Grace had inabled me to preserve, in spite
of so many Plots and Contrivances on my Master's
Side, and such wicked Instigations, and Assistances
on hers, and all my Prospects were improving upon
me beyond my Wishes; when all was Sunshine,
unclouded Sunshine, and I possessed my Mind in 

Peace, and had nothing to do but to be thankful
to Providence, which had been so gracious to my
Unworthiness; when I saw, as I said above, my
Persecutor become my Protector, my active Enemy,
no longer my Enemy, but creeping, with slow,
doubtful Feet, and speaking to me, with awful hesitating
Doubt of my Acceptation; a Stamp of an
insolent Foot, turned into court'sying half-bent
Knees; threatening Hands into supplicating Folds; 
and the Eye unpitying to Innocence, running over
with the Sense of her own Guilt, a faltering Accent
on her late menacing Tongue, and uplifted
Handkerchief,—“I see she will be my Lady: And
then I know how it will go with me* ;”—Was
not this, my Ladies, a Triumph of Triumphs to
the late miserable, now exalted Pamela?––– Could
I do less than pardon her? And having declared,
that I did so, was I not to shew the Sincerity of my
Declaration? 
Indeed, indeed, my dear good Ladies, I found
such a Subject for Exultation in this providential
Change of my Condition, that I had much ado to
subdue my rising Pride, and thought there was more
Danger of being lifted up, (every Moment, to see
such improving Contrition on the poor Creature's
Part) than to be supposed guilty of a Meanness of
Heart, in stooping (yes, Madam, that was then the
proudly proper Word, in the Elevation wherein I
found myself) to forgive her! ––––And, what!
should I not forgive a Creature for that very Baseness,
which, happily withstood, had so largely contributed
to exalt me? Indeed, my dear good Ladies,
permit me to repeat, I could not chuse but to forgive
her! –––How could I? –––And would it not
have been out of Character in me, and against all 

Expectation of my high-soul'd (tho' sometimes, as
in my Case, for a great while together, meanly-acting)
Master, if I had not?––– 
Would it not have shewn him, that the lowborn
Pamela was incapable of a generous Action,
had she refused the only Request her humble Condition
had given her the Opportunity of granting,
at that time, with Innocence? Would he not have
thought the humble Cottager as capable of Insolence,
and Vengeance too, in her Turn, as the betterborn? 
And that she wanted but the Power, to shew
that unrelenting Temper by which she had so grievously
suffer'd? ––––And might not this have given
him Room to think me (and to have resumed
and prosecuted his Purposes accordingly) fitter for
an arrogant kept Mistress, than an humble and
obliged Wife?––– 
I see, (might he not have said?) the Girl has
strong Passions and Resentments; and she that has,
will be acted, and sometimes govern'd, by them. 
–––I will improve upon the Hint she herself has now
given me, by her inexorable Temper:––––I will
gratify her Revenge, till I turn it upon herself: I
will indulge her Pride, till I make it administer to
her Fall: For a Wife I cannot think of, in the lowborn
Cottager; especially when she has lurking in
her all the Pride and Arrogance (you know, my
Ladies, his haughty way of speaking of our Sex)
of the better-descended. –––And by a little Perseverance,
and watching her unguarded Hours, and
applying Temptations to her Passions, I shall first
discover them, and then make my Advantage of
them.––– 
Might not this have been the Language, and this
the Resolution, of such a dear wicked Intriguer? 
–––For, my Lady, you can hardly conceive the Struggles
he apparently had to bring down his high Spirit 

to so humble a Level. And tho', I hope, all would
have been, even in this worst Case, ineffectual,
thro' Divine Grace, yet how do I know what lurking
Vileness might have appeared by Degrees in
this frail Heart, to have incouraged his Designs,
and to have augmented my Trials and my Dangers? 
And perhaps downright Violence might have
been used, if he could not on one hand have subdu'd
his Passion, nor on the other, have overcome
his Pride. A Pride, that every one, reflecting upon
the Disparity of Birth and Condition between us,
would have dignify'd with the Name of Decency;
a Pride that was become such an essential Part of
the dear Gentleman's Character, in this Instance of
a Wife, that altho' he knew he could not keep it
up, if he made me happy, yet it was no small Motive
in his chusing me, in one respect, because
he expected from me more Humility, more Submission,
than he thought he had Reason to flatter
himself would be paid him, by a Lady equally
born and educated: And of this I will send your
Ladyship an Instance, in a Transcription from that
Part of*  my Journal you have not seen, of his
Lessons to me, on the Occasion your Ladyship so
well remembers, of my incurring his Displeasure
by interposing between yourself and him†  , in your
Misunderstanding at the Hall; for, Madam, I intend
to send, at times, any thing I think worthy
of your Ladyship's Attention, out of those Papers
you were so kind as to excuse me from sending you
in the Lump, and many of which must needs have
appeared very impertinent to such Judges. 
Thus, could your Ladyship have thought it?––– 
have I ventur'd upon a strange Paradox, that even 

this strongest Instance of his Debasing himself, is
not the weakest Instance of his Pride; and he ventured
once at Sir Simon Darnford's to say, in your
Ladyship's Hearing, as you may remember, that in
his Conscience he thought he should hardly have
made a tolerable Husband to any body but Pamela* :
And why? For the Reasons you will see in the inclosed
Papers, which give an Account of the noblest
and earliest Curtain-lecture that ever Girl had:
One of which is, That he expects to be borne
with, (comply'd with, he meant) even when in the
wrong: Another, That a Wife should never so
much as expostulate with him, tho' he was in the
wrong, till by complying with all he insisted upon,
she should have shewn him, she designed rather to
convince him for his own sake, than for Contradiction's
sake: And then, another time, perhaps he
might take better Resolutions†  . 
I hope, from what I have said, it will appear to
your Ladyship, and to Lady Betty too, that I am
justify'd, or at least excusable, in pardoning Mrs.
Jewkes: And I have yet another Reason behind, for
doing so, had she been as absolutely in my Power, as
the Wish of the most resenting Person in the World
could have made her; and that is, the Hope I had,
that the poor Creature, by being continued in a Family
where the Gentleman gave Hopes of so desireable
a Reformation, and where the Example of the
Person he was about to honour in so eminent a Degree,
beyond all that could have been hoped for by
her a few Days before, might, possibly contribute
to make her change her Manner of Thinking, as well
as Acting. 
I looked upon the poor Wretch, in all her Deportment
to me, in my Days of Trial, as one devoted to
Perdition, by her own Act and Deed; as one who 

had no Regard to a future State; and who, while
she could live in Ease and Plenty for a wretched poor
Term of Years, the Remainder of an ill-spent Life,
cared not what she did, and was ready to undertake
any thing which Persons of Power and Riches would
put her upon: That even were she to be turned off
disgracefully, at my Desire, besides shewing myself
to be of an implacable Spirit, which some People
would have imputed to right, some to wrong Motives,
as they favoured me or not, she might be entertained
by some profligate Persons, to whose Baseness
such a Woman might be useful; and that then
her Power to do Mischief might be augmented, and
she might go on more successfully to do the Devil's
Work, and several innocent Creatures might be intangled,
like so many thoughtless Flies, in the insnaring
Web of this venomous-hearted Spider, which I had
so happily escaped. Is it not better then, thought I,
if I can impress Conviction upon the poor Wretch,
whom its hopeful Forerunner Shame had already taken
hold of, and add the delightful Hope of Mischiefs
prevented, to that of a Soul reclaimed? And may not
I, who have been so hardly used by her, for that
very Reason, have more Influence upon her, than
any other Person, even the best of Divines, could
have? –––––When I talk to her in a virtuous Way,
will she not see, that I talk from Example, (pardon
my Presumption, Madam, in saying so) as well as
Precept? Will she not see, that those Principles must
proceed from a right Direction, a Direction worthy
of being followed, which could make a Sufferer
by her, forgive as readily as she could err; and in
Hopes of reclaiming her to the Paths of Virtue, forget
that she was either her Enemy or her Superior,
tho' the one she had Reason to apprehend, and the
other she saw I was become? 

Nay, would not this Behaviour of mine, very probably,
operate on a much higher and nobler Subject,
her dear naughty Master, and let him see the Force
and Amiableness of a vircuous Habit? that there must
be something in those Laws, that could make so
young a Creature pursue them, in an Instance so difficult
to some Minds, (and especially to the Passionate
and High-born) that of forgiving Injuries, when
in one's Power to resent, and of returning Good for
Evil? 
And then, when no sullen Behaviour to the poor
Wretch, on my Side, took Place; no distant Airs
were affected, no angry Brow put on, nor Sharpness
of Speech, to one who might expect all these from
me; would it not shew him, that I was sincere in my
Forgiveness? that I was not able to bear Malice?
was a Stranger to Revenge? had truly that Softness
of Nature, and Placableness of Disposition, which he
would wish for in a Person he thought to honour; 
which he holds to be the greatest Merit in our
Sex; and which, I dare say, your Ladyship will join
with me in Opinion, is indispensably necessary for a
happy Life in the Person who is his Wife? 
Then I have no Notion of that slight Distinction I
have so often heard, between forgive and forget,
when Persons have a mind to split Hairs, and to distinguish
away their Christian Duties by a Word, and
say, I must forgive such an Action, but I will never
forget it: When I would rather say, I will remember
such an Action, in order for my future Guard; but I
will forgive it as often as I remember it, or else I
will try to forget it for ever, if it will occasion a
Breach in my Christian Charity. 
After what I have said, I will not name lesser
Considerations, such as that of my being forced to
accompany with the poor Woman, and my being
destitute of the Company of my own Sex, but of 

such as were too inferior and stupid for me to take
Notice of, in the Prospect before me. 
But one thing I may mention further: Might it
not, Ladies, be right, that by keeping her, I should
make the World think, that Mr. B. had not gone
such very wicked Lengths, as would have been imagin'd,
if she had not been supportable to me in the
same House? Which, moreover, those Persons, who
might not know those Reasons which it was not to
your dear Brother's Credit to give, might have imputed
to me as Arrogance, or Revenge; and so
brought still greater Disgrace upon the Choice he had
made of me, as if I would take as much upon me,
as tho' I were to be the Obliger instead of the
Obliged; and who knows, besides, what she might
have reported of both, had she been dismissed? 
How then, dearest Ladies, if these Considerations
have any Weight, could I act otherwise than I did,
either with respect to your honoured Brother, myself,
or the poor Woman? And when I tell your
Ladyship, that I have all the Reason in the World to
be pleased with this Manner of Acting, in the Confidence
it has given me with Mr. B. and his good Opinion
of the Sincerity of my Charity, and (in what
I was very desirous of) its Effects upon the poor
Woman, I dare say, both your Ladyships Opinions
will be in my Favour on this Head. 
But your dear Brother has just sent me Word,
that Supper waits for me; and the Post, moreover,
being going off, I defer till the next Opportunity
what I have to say as to these good Effects; and am,
mean time, 
Your Ladyship's most obliged
and faithful Servant,
P. B. 

