



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Thursday Night, Aug. 10. 
You have been informed by Tourville, how
much Belton's illness and affairs have engaged
me, as well as Mowbray and him, since my former. 
I called at Smith's on Monday, in my way to
Epsom. 
The Lady was gone to chapel: But I had the satisfaction
to hear she was not worse; and left my
compliments, and an intimation that I should be out
of town for three or four days. 
I refer myself to Tourville, who will let you know
the difficulty we had to drive out this meek mistress,
and frugal manager, with her cubs, and to give the
poor fellow's Sister possession for him of his own
house; he skulking mean while at an Inn at Croydon,
too dispirited to appear in his own cause. 
But I must observe, that we were probably but
just in time to save the shattered remains of his fortune
from this rapacious woman, and her accomplices: 
For, as he cannot live long, and she thinks
so, we found she had certainly taken measures to set
up a Marriage, and keep possession of all for herself
and her sons. 
Tourville will tell you how I was forced to chastise
the quondam hostler in her sight, before I could
drive him out of the house. He had the insolence to
lay hands on me: And I made him take but one step
from the top to the bottom of a pair of stairs. I 

thought his neck and all his bones had been broken. 
And then, he being carried out neck-and-heels,
Thomasine thought fit to walk out after him. 
Charming consequences of Keeping; the State we
have been so fond of extolling! —Whatever it may
be thought of in strong health, Sickness and declining
spirits in the Keeper, will bring him to see the difference. 
She should soon have him, she told a confident,
in the space of six foot by five; meaning his bed: 
And then she would let nobody come near him but
whom she pleased. The hostler-fellow, I suppose,
would then have been his physician; his Will ready
made for him; and Widows weeds, probably ready
provided; who knows, but she to appear in them in
his own sight? as once I knew an instance in a wicked
wife, insulting a husband she hated, when she thought
him past recovery: Tho' it gave the man such spirits,
and such a turn, that he got over it, and lived to see
her in her coffin, dressed out in the very weeds she
had insulted him in. 
So much, for the present, for Belton, and his
Thomasine. 
* *
I begin to pity thee heartily, now I see thee in
earnest, in the fruitless Love thou expressest to this
Angel of a woman; and the rather, as, say what
thou wilt, it is impossible she should get over her illness,
and her friends implacableness, of which she
has had fresh instances. 
I hope thou art not indeed displeased with the Extracts
I have made from thy Letters for her. The
letting her know the justice thou hast done to her virtue
in them, is so much in favour of thy ingenuousness
(a quality, let me repeat, that gives thee a superiority
over common Libertines) that I think in my
heart I was right; tho' to any other woman, and to 

one who had not known the worst of thee that she
could know, it might have been wrong. 
If the end will justify the means, it is plain, that I
have done well with regard to ye both; since I have
made her easier, and thee appear in a better light to
her, than otherwise thou wouldst have done. 
But if, nevertheless, thou art dissatisfied with my
having obliged her in a point, which I acknowlege
to be delicate, let us canvas this matter at our first
meeting: And then I will shew thee what the Extracts
were, and what connexions I gave them in thy
favour. 
But surely thou dost not pretend to say what I
shall, or shall not do, as to the Executorship. 
I am my own man, I hope. I think thou shouldst
be glad to have the justification of her Memory left
to one, who, at the same time, thou mayest be assured,
will treat thee, and thy actions, with all the
lenity the case will admit. 
I cannot help expressing my surprize at one instance
of thy self-partiality; and that is, where thou
sayest, She had need, indeed, to cry out for mercy
herself from her friends, who knows not how to
shew any. 
Surely thou canst not think the cases alike—For
she, as I understand, desires but a Last Blessing, and
a Last Forgiveness, for a fault in a manner involuntary,
if a fault at all; and does not so much as hope
to be received; Thou, to be forgiven premeditated
wrongs (which, nevertheless, she forgives, on condition
to be no more molested by thee); and hopest
to be received into favour, and to make the finest jewel
in the world thy absolute property in consequence of
that Forgiveness. 
I will now briefly proceed to relate what has passed
since my last, as to the excellent Lady. By the account
I shall give thee, thou wilt see, that she has
troubles enough upon her, all springing originally 

from thyself, without needing to add more to them
by new vexations. And as long as thou canst exert
thyself so very cavalierly at M. Hall, where every one
is thy prisoner, I see not but the bravery of thy spirit
may be as well gratified in domineering there over
half a dozen persons of rank and distinction, as it
could be over an helpless Orphan, as I may call this
Lady, since she has not a single friend to stand by her,
if I do not; and who will think herself happy, if she
can refuge herself from thee, and from all the world,
in the arms of death. 
My last was dated on Saturday. 
On Sunday, in compliance with her doctor's advice,
she took a little Airing. Mrs. Lovick, and Mr.
Smith and his wife, were with her. After being at
Highgate Chapel at Divine Service, she treated them
with a little repast; and in the afternoon was at
Islington Church, in her way home; returning tolerably
chearful. 
She had received several Letters in my absence, as
Mrs. Lovick acquainted me, besides yours. Yours,
it seems, much distressed her; but she ordered the
messenger, who pressed for an Answer, to be told,
that it did not require an immediate one. 
On Wednesday she received a Letter from her
Uncle Harlowe (a) , in answer to one she had written
to her Mother on Saturday on her knees. It must be
a very cruel one, Mrs. Lovick says, by the effects it
had upon her: For, when she received it, she was
intending to take an afternoon Airing in a coach; 
but was thrown into so violent a fit of hysterics upon
it, that she was forced to lie down; and (being
not recovered by it) to go to bed about eight
o'clock. 
On Thursday morning she was up very early; and
had recourse to the Scriptures to calm her mind, as
she told Mrs. Lovick: And, weak as she was, would 

go in a chair to Lincoln's-inn Chapel, about Eleven. 
She was brought home a little better; and then sat
down to write to her Uncle. But was obliged to
leave off several times—To struggle, as she told Mrs.
Lovick, for an humble temper. ‘My heart, said
she to the good woman, is a proud heart, and not
yet, I find, enough mortified to my condition; 
but, do what I can, will be for prescribing resenting
things to my pen.’ 
I arrived in town from Belton's this Thursday
Evening; and went directly to Smith's. She was
too ill to receive my visit. But on sending up my
compliments, she sent me down word, that she
should be glad to see me in the morning. 
Mrs. Lovick obliged me with the copy of a Meditation
collected by the Lady from the Scriptures. She
has entitled it, Poor mortals the cause of their own
misery; so entitled, I presume, with intention to take
off the edge of her repinings at hardships so disproportioned
to her fault, were her fault even as great
as she is inclined to think it. We may see by this,
the method she takes to fortify her mind, and to
which she owes, in a great measure, the magnanimity
with which she bears her undeserved persecutions. 
MEDITATION.
Poor mortals the cause of their own misery.
Say not thou, It is thro' the Lord that I fell away; 
for thou oughtest not to do the thing that he hateth. 
Say not thou, He hath caused me to err; for he hath
no need of the sinful man. 
He himself made man from the beginning, and left
him in the hand of his own counsel; 
If thou wilt, to keep the commandments, and to perform
acceptable faithfulness. 

He hath set fire and water before thee: Stretch forth
thine hand to whether thou wilt. 
He hath commanded no man to do wickedly: neither
hath he given any man licence to sin. 
And now, Lord, what is my hope? Truly my hope is
only in thee. 
Deliver me from all my offences; and make me not a
rebuke unto the foolish. 
When thou with rebuke dost chasten man for sin,
thou makest his beauty to consume away, like as it were
a moth fretting a garment: Every man therefore is
vanity. 
Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I
am desolate and afflicted. 
The troubles of my heart are enlarged. O bring thou
me out of my distresses! 
* *
Mrs. Smith gave me the following particulars of a
conversation that passed between herself and a young
Clergyman, on Tuesday afternoon, who, as it appears,
was employed to make enquiries about the
Lady by her friends. 
He came into the shop in a riding-habit, and asked
for some Spanish snuff; and finding only Mrs. Smith
there, he desired to have a little talk with her in the
back-shop. 
He beat about the bush in several distant questions,
and at last began to talk more directly about Miss
Harlowe. 
He said, He knew her before her fall [That was
his impudent word]; and gave the substance of the
following account of her, as I collected it from Mrs.
Smith. 
‘She was then, he said, the admiration and delight
of every-body: He lamented, with great solemnity,
her backsliding; another of his phrases. 
Mrs. Smith said, he was a fine Scholar; for he
spoke several things she understood not; and either 

in Latin or Greek, she could not tell which; but
was so good as to give her the English of them
without asking. A fine thing, she said, for a
Scholar to be so condescending!’ 
He said, ‘Her going off with so vile a Rake had
given great scandal and offence to all the neighbouring
Ladies, as well as to her friends.’ 
He told Mrs. Smith ‘how much she used to be followed
by every one's eye, whenever she went
abroad, or to church; and praised and blessed by
every tongue, as she passed; especially by the poor: 
That she gave the fashion to the fashionable, without
seeming herself to intend it, or to know she
did: That, however, it was pleasant to see Ladies
imitate her in dress and behaviour, who, being
unable to come up to her in grace and ease, exposed
but their own affectation and aukwardness,
at the time that they thought themselves secure of
a general approbation, because they wore the same
things, and put them on in the same manner, that
she did, who had every-body's admiration; little
considering, that were her person like theirs, or if
she had had their defects, she would have brought
up a very different fashion; for that Nature was
her guide in every-thing, and Ease her study; 
which, joined with a mingled dignity and condescension
in her air and manner, whether she received
or paid a compliment, distinguished her
above all her Sex. 
‘He spoke not, he said, his own sentiments only
on this occasion, but those of every-body: For that
the praises of Miss Clarissa Harlowe were such a favourite
topic, that a person who could not speak
well upon any other subject, was sure to speak well
upon That; because he could say nothing but what
he had heard repeated and applauded twenty times
over.’ 
Hence it was, perhaps, that this Novice accounted 

for the best things he said himself; tho' I must own
that the personal knowlege of the Lady which I am
favoured with, made it easy to me to lick into shape
what the good woman reported to me, as the character
given her by the young Levite: For who, even
now, in her decline of health, sees not that all these
attributes belong to her? 
I suppose he has not been long come from College,
and now thinks he has nothing to do, but to blaze
away for a Scholar among the ignorant; as such young
fellows are apt to think those who cannot cap verses
with them, and tell us how an antient author expressed
himself in Latin on a subject, upon which, however,
they may know how, as well as that author,
to express themselves in English. 
Mrs. Smith was so taken with him, that she would
fain have introduced him to the Lady, not questioning
but it would be very acceptable to her, to see one who
knew her and her friends so well. But this he declined
for several reasons, as he called them; which
he gave. One was, that persons of his Cloth should
be very cautious of the Company they were in, especially
where Sex was concerned, and where a woman
had slurred her reputation—[I wish I had been there
when he gave himself these airs]. Another, that he
was desired to inform himself of her present way of
life, and who her visitors were; for, as to the praises
Mrs. Smith gave the Lady, he hinted, that she seemed
to be a good-natured woman, and might (tho' for
the Lady's sake he hoped not) be too partial and short-sighted
to be trusted to, absolutely, in a concern of
so high a nature as he intimated the task was which
he had undertaken; nodding out words of doubtful
import, and assuming airs of great significance (as
I could gather) throughout the whole conversation. 
And when Mrs. Smith told him, that the Lady was
in a very bad state of health, he gave a careless shrug
—She may be very ill, says he: Her disappointments 

must have touched her to the quick: But she is not
bad enough, I dare say, yet, to atone for her very
great lapse, and to expect to be forgiven by those
whom she has so much disgraced. 
A starch'd conceited coxcomb! What would I
give he had fallen in my way? 
He departed, highly satisfied with himself, no doubt,
and assured of Mrs. Smith's great opinion of his Sagacity
and Learning: But bid her not say any-thing
to the Lady about him, or his enquiries. And I, for
very different reasons, enjoined the same thing. 
I am glad, however, for her peace of mind's sake,
that they begin to think it behoves them to enquire
about her. 