


About Twelve o'Clock came Sir Simon,
and his Lady and Two Daughters, and
Lady Jones, and a Sister-in-law of hers, and
Mr. Peters, and his Spouse, and Niece. Mrs.
Jewkes, who is more and more obliging, was
much concern'd I was not dress'd in some of my
best Cloaths, and made me many Compliments. 
They all went into the Garden for a Walk,
before Dinner, and, I understood, were so
impatient to see me, that my Master took them 

into the largest Alcove, after they had walk'd
two or three Turns, and stepp'd himself to me. 
Come, my Pamela, said he, the Ladies can't
be satisfied without seeing you, and I desire you
will come. I said, I was asham'd; but I would
obey him. Said he, The Two young Ladies
are dress'd out in their best Attire; but they
make not such an Appearance as my charming
Girl in this ordinary Garb. —Sir, said I, shan't
I follow you thither? for I can't bear you
should do me so much Honour. Well, said
he, I'll go before you. And he bid Mrs.
Jewkes bring a Bottle or two of Sack, and
some Cake. So he went down to them. 
This Alcove fronts the longest Gravel-walk
in the Garden, so that they saw me all the
Way I came, for a good Way; and my Master
told me afterwards, with Pleasure, all they said
of me. 
Will you forgive the little vain Slut your
Daughter, if I tell you all, as he was pleased to
tell me? He said, 'spying me first, Look there,
Ladies, comes my pretty Rustick! —They all,
I saw, which dash'd me, stood at the Windows
and in the Door-way, looking full at me. 
My Master told me, that Lady Jones said,
She is a charming Creature, I see that, at this
Distance. And Sir Simon, it seems, who has
been a sad Rake in his younger Days, swore he
never saw so easy an Air, so fine a Shape, and
so graceful a Presence. —The Lady Darnford
said, I was a sweet Girl. And Mr. Peters said
very handsome Things. Even the Parson said, 

I should be the Pride of the County. O dear
Sirs! all this was owing to the Light my good
Master's Favour placed me in, which made me
shine out in their Eyes, beyond my Deserts. 
He said, the young Ladies blush'd and envy'd
me. 
When I came near, he saw me in a little
Confusion, and was so kind as to meet me; 
Give me your Hand, said he, my good Girl; 
you walk too fast (for indeed I wanted to be
out of their gazing). I did so, with a Court'sy,
and he led me up the Steps of the Alcove, and
in a most Gentleman-like manner presented me
to the Ladies, and they all saluted me, and said,
They hoped to be better acquainted with me:
and Lady Darnford was pleas'd to say, I should
be the Flower of their Neighbourhood. Sir
Simon said, Good Neighbour, by your Leave; 
and saluting me, added, Now will I say, that I
have kissed the loveliest Maiden in England. 
But for all this, methought I ow'd him a Grudge
for a Tell-tale, tho' all had turn'd out so happily. 
Mr. Peters very gravely follow'd his
Example, and said, like a Bishop, God bless
you, fair Excellence. Said Lady Jones, Pray,
dear Madam, sit down by me. And they all
sat down; but I said, I would stand, if they
pleas'd. No, Pamela, reply'd my Master,
Pray sit down with these good Ladies, my
Neighbours:—They will indulge it to you,
for my sake, till they know you better; and for
your own, when they are acquainted with you. 

Sir, said I, I shall be proud to deserve their
Indulgence. 
They all so gaz'd at me, that I could not
look up; for I think it is one of the Distinctions
of Persons of Condition, and well-bred
People, to put bashful Bodies out of Countenance. 
Well, Sir Simon, said my Master, what say you
now to my pretty Rustick! —He swore a great
Oath, that he should better know what to say
to me, if he was as young as himself. Lady
Darnford said, You will never leave, Sir Simon. 
Said my Master, You are a little confus'd,
my good Girl, and out of Breath; but I have
told all my kind Neighbours here a good deal
of your Story, and your Excellence. Yes, said
Lady Darnford, my dear Neighbour, as I will
call you; we that are here present have all heard
of your uncommon Story. Madam, reply'd I,
you have then heard what must make your kind
Allowance for me very necessary. No, said
Mrs. Peters, we have heard what will always
make you valued as an Honour to our Sex, and
as a worthy Pattern for all the young Ladies in
the County. You are very good, Madam, return'd
I, to make me able to look up, and to
be thankful for the Honour you are all pleas'd to
do me. 
Mrs. Jewkes came in with the Canary,
brought by Nan, to the Alcove, and some
Cake on a Silver Salver; and I said, Mrs.
Jewkes, let me be your Assistant; I will serve
the Ladies with the Cake. And so I took the 

Salver, and went round to the good Company
with it, ending with my Master. The Lady
Jones said, she was never serv'd with such a
Grace, and it was giving me too much Trouble. 
O Madam, said I, I hope my good Master's
Favour will never make me forget, that it is my
Duty to wait upon his Friends. —Master! 
Sweet-one, said Sir Simon, I hope you won't
always call Mr. B. by that Name, for fear it
should become a Fashion for all our Ladies to do
the like through the County. I, Sir, said I,
shall have many Reasons to continue this Style,
which cannot affect your good Ladies. 
Sir Simon, said Lady Jones, you are very
arch upon us; but I see very well, that it will
be the Interest of all the Gentlemen, to bring
their Ladies into an Intimacy with one that
can give them such a good Example. I am sure
then, Madam, said I, it must be after I have
been polish'd and improv'd by the Honour of
such an Example as yours. 
They all were very good and affable, and
the young Lady Darnford, who had wish'd to
see me in this Dress, said, I beg your Pardon,
dear Miss, as she call'd me; but I had heard
how sweetly this Garb became you, and was
told the History of it; and I begg'd it, as a
Favour, that you might oblige us with your
Appearance in it. I am much obliged to your
Ladyship, said I, that your kind Prescription
was so agreeable to my Choice. Why, said
she, was it your Choice then? —I am glad of 

that: Tho' I am sure your Person must give,
and not take Ornament from any Dress. 
You are very kind, Madam, said I: But
there will be the less Reason to fear I should
forget the high Obligations I shall have to the
kindest of Gentlemen, when I can delight to
shew the humble Degree from which his Goodness
has raised me. —My dear Pamela, said
my Master, if you proceed at this Rate, I must
insist upon your first Seven Days. You know
what I mean. Sir, said I, you are all Goodness! 
They drank a Glass of Sack each, and Sir
Simon would make me do so too; saying, It
will be a Reflection, Madam, upon all the
Ladies, if you don't do as they do. No, Sir
Simon, said I, that can't be, because the Ladies
Journey hither makes a Glass of Canary a proper
Cordial for them. But I won't refuse; because
I will do myself the Honour of drinking good
Health to you, and to all this worthy Company. 
Said good Lady Darnford, to my Master,
I hope, Sir, we shall have Mrs. Andrews's
Company at Table. He said, very obligingly,
Madam, it is her Time now: and I will leave
it to her Choice. If the good Ladies, then, will
forgive me, Sir, said I, I had rather be excused. 
They all said, I must not be excused. I begg'd
I might. Your Reason for it, my dear Pamela?
said my Master: Since the Ladies request it, I
wish you would oblige them. Sir, reply'd I,
your Goodness will make me, every Day, worthier 

of the Honour the Ladies do me; and
when I can persuade myself, that I am more
worthy of it, than at present, I shall with great
Joy embrace all the Opportunities they will be
pleased to give me. 
Mrs. Peters whisper'd Lady Jones, as my
Master told me afterwards; Did you ever see
such Excellence, such Prudence and Discretion? 
Never in my Life, said the other good Lady. 
She will adorn, she was pleased to say, her
Distinction. Ay, said Mrs. Peters, she would
adorn any Station in Life. 
My good Master was highly delighted, generous
Gentleman as he is! with the favourable
Opinion of the Ladies; and I took the more
Pleasure in it, because their Favour seem'd to
lessen the Disgrace of his stooping so much beneath
himself. 
Lady Darnford said, We will not oppress
you; tho' we could almost blame your too
punctilious Exactness; but if we excuse Mrs.
Andrews from Dinner, we must insist upon
her Company at the Card-table, and at a Dish
of Tea; for we intend to pass the whole Day
with you, Sir, as we told you. What say you
to that, Pamela? said my Master. Sir, reply'd
I, whatever you and the Ladies please, I will
chearfully do. They said, I was very obliging. 
But Sir Simon rapp'd out an Oath, and said, that
they might dine together, if they would, but
he would dine with me, and nobody else. For,
said he, I say, Sir, as Parson Williams said, (by
which I found my Master had told them the 

Story) you must not think you have chosen one
that nobody can like but yourself. 
The young Ladies said, If I pleas'd, they
would take a Turn about the Garden with me. 
I answer'd, I would very gladly attend them; 
and so we Three, and Lady Jones's Sister-in-law,
and Mr. Peters's Niece, walk'd together. 
They were very affable, kind and obliging; 
and we soon enter'd into a good deal of Familiarity; 
and I found Miss Darnford a very
agreeable Person. Her Sister was a little more
on the Reserve; and I afterwards heard, that,
about a Year before, she would fain have had
my Master make his Addresses to her; but tho'
Sir Simon is reckon'd rich, she was not thought
a sufficient Fortune for him. And, now, to
have him look down so low as me, must be a
sort of Mortification to a poor young Lady! — 
and I pity'd her—Indeed I did! —I wish all
young Persons of my Sex could be as happy as I
am likely to be. 
My Master told me afterwards, that I left
the other Ladies, and Sir Simon and Mr. Peters,
full of my Praises; so that they could hardly
talk of any thing else: one launching out upon
my Complexion, another upon my Eyes, my
Hand, and, in short, (for you'll think me sadly
proud) upon my whole Person, and Behaviour; 
and they all magnified my Readiness and Obligingness
in my Answers, and the like: And I
was glad of it, as I said, for my good Master's
sake, who seem'd quite pleas'd and rejoiced. 
God bless him, for his Goodness to me! 

Dinner not being ready, the young Ladies
propos'd a Tune upon the Spinnet. I said,
I believ'd it was not in Tune. They reply'd,
they knew it was, but a few Months ago. If it
is, said I, I wish I had known it; tho' indeed,
Ladies, added I, since you know my Story, I
must own, that my Mind has not been long in
Tune to make use of it. So they would make
me play upon it, and sing to it; which I did,
a Song my dear good Lady made me learn; and
used to be pleased with, and which she brought
with her from Bath. And the Ladies were
much taken with the Song, and were so kind
as to approve my Performance: And Miss
Darnford was pleas'd to compliment me, that
I had all the Accomplishments of my Sex. I said,
I had had a good Lady, in my Master's Mother,
who had spar'd no Pains nor Cost to improve
me. She said, she wish'd Mr. B. could be
prevail'd upon to give a Ball on an approaching
happy Occasion, that we might have a Dancing-match,
&c. —But I can't say I do; tho' I did
not say so; for these Occasions, I think, are
too solemn for the Principals, at least, of our
Sex, to take Part in, especially if they have the
same Thoughts of the Solemnity that I have:
For indeed, tho' I have before me a Prospect of
Happiness, that may be envy'd by Ladies of
high Rank; yet I must own to you, my dear
Parents, that I have something very awful upon
my Mind, when I think of the Matter, and
shall more and more, as it draws nearer and
nearer. This is the Song: 



I.
Go, happy Paper, gently steal,
 And underneath her Pillow lie;
There, in soft Dreams, my Love reveal,
That Love which I must still conceal,
 And, wrapp'd in awful Silence, die.


II.
Should Flames be doom'd thy hapless Fate,
 To Atoms thou wouldst quickly turn:
My Pains may bear a longer Date;
For should I live, and should she hate,
 In endless Torments I should burn.


III.
Tell fair Aurelia, she has charms,
 Might in a Hermit stir Desire.
T' attain the Heav'n that's in her Arms,
I'd quit the World's alluring Harms,
 And to a Cell, content, retire.


IV.
Of all that pleas'd my ravish'd Eye
 Her Beauty should supply the Place;
Bold Raphael's Strokes, and Titian's Dye,
Should but in vain presume to vye
 With her inimitable Face.


V.
No more I'd wish for Phœbus' Rays,
 To gild the Object of my Sight;
Much less the Taper's fainter Blaze:
Her Eyes should measure out my Days;
 And when she slept, it should be Night.



About Four o'Clock. My Master just came
up to me, and said, If you should see Mr. Williams
below, do you think, Pamela, you
should not be surpris'd? —No, Sir, said I, I
hope not. Why should I? Expect, said he, a
Stranger then, when you come down to us in
the Parlour; for the Ladies are preparing themselves
for the Card-table, and they insist upon
your Company. —You have a mind, Sir, said
I, I believe, to try all my Courage. Why,
said he, does it want Courage to see him? No,
Sir, said I, not at all. But I was grievously
dash'd, to see all those strange Ladies and Gentlemen; 
and now to see Mr. Williams before
them, as some of them refus'd his Application
for me, when I wanted to get away, it will a
little shock me, to see them smile, in recollecting
what has pass'd of that kind. Well, said
he, guard your Heart against Surprizes, tho' you
shall see, when you come down, a Man that I
can allow you to love dearly, tho' hardly preferably
to me. 
This surprises me much. I am afraid he
begins to be jealous of me. What will become
of me, (for he look'd very seriously) if any
Turn should happen now! —My Heart akes! 
I know not what's the matter. But I will go
down as brisk as I can, that nothing may be imputed
to me. Yet I wish this Mr. Williams had
not been there now, when they are all there; 
because of their Fleers at him and me. Otherwise
I should be glad to see the poor Gentleman; 

for indeed I think him a good Man, and
he has suffer'd for my sake. 
So, I am sent for down to Cards. I'll go; 
but wish I may continue their good Opinions
of me: For I shall be very aukward. My Master,
by his serious Question, and bidding me
guard my Heart against Surprizes, tho' I should
see, when I came down, a Man he can allow
me to love dearly, tho' hardly better than himself,
has quite alarm'd me, and made me sad! 
—I hope he loves me! —But whether he
does or not, I am in for it now, over Head and
Ears, I doubt, and can't help loving him; 'tis a
Folly to deny it. But to be sure I cannot love
any Man preferably to him. I shall soon know
what he means. 
Now, my dear Mother, must I write to you. 
Well might my good Master say so mysteriously
as he did, about guarding my Heart against Surprizes. 
I never was so surpris'd in my Life; 
and never could see a Man I lov'd so dearly! — 
O my dear Mother, it was my dear, dear Father,
and not Mr. Williams, that was below
ready to receive and to bless your Daughter; and
both my Master and he injoin'd me to write
how the whole Matter was, and what my
Thoughts were on this joyful Occasion. 
I will take the Matter from the Beginning,
that Providence directed his Feet to this House,
to this Time, as I have had it from Mrs. Jewkes,
from my Master, my Father, the Ladies, and
my own Heart and Conduct, as far as I know 

of both; because they command it, and you
will be pleased with my Relation; and so, as
you know how I came by the Connection,
will make one uniform Relation of it. 
It seems then, my dear Father and you
were so uneasy to know the Truth of the Story
which Thomas had told you, that, fearing I
was betray'd, and quite undone, he got Leave
of Absence, and set out the Day after Thomas
was there; and so, on Friday Morning, he got
to the neighbouring Town; and there he heard,
that the Gentry in the Neighbourhood were at
my Master's, at a great Entertainment. He
put on a clean Shirt and Neckcloth, (which he
brought in his Pocket) at an Alehouse there,
and got shav'd; and so, after he had eat some
Bread and Cheese, and drank a Can of Ale,
he set out for my Master's House, with a heavy
Heart, dreading for me, and in much fear of
being brow-beaten. He had, it seems, asked
at the Alehouse, what Family the 'Squire had
down here, in hopes to hear something of me; 
and they said, A House-keeper, two Maids, and,
at present, two Coachmen, and two Grooms,
a Footman, and a Helper. Was that all? he
said. They told him, there was a young Creature
there, belike, who was, or was to be, his
Mistress, or some what of that nature; but had
been his Mother's Waiting-maid. This, he said,
grieved his Heart, and confirmed his Fears. 
So he went on; and, about Three o'Clock
in the Afternoon, came to the Gate; and ringing
there, Sir Simon's Coachman went to the Iron 

Gate; and he 'ask'd for the House-keeper; tho
from what I had written, in his Heart he could
not abide her. She sent for him in, little thinking
who he was, and ask'd him, in the little
Hall, what his Business with her was? —Only,
Madam, said he, whether I cannot speak one
Word with the 'Squire? No, Friend, said she; 
he is ingaged with several Gentlemen and Ladies. 
Said he, I have Business with his Honour of
greater Consequence to me than either Life or
Death; and Tears stood in his Eyes. 
At that she went into the great Parlour,
where my Master was talking very pleasantly
with the Ladies; and she said, Sir, here is a good
tight old Man, that wants to see you on Business
of Life and Death, he says, and is very earnest. 
Ay, said he, Who can that be! —Let
him stay in the little Hall, and I'll come to him
presently. They all seem'd to stare; and Sir
Simon said, No more nor less, I dare say, my
good Friend, but a Bastard Child. If it is, said
he, bring it in to us. I will, said he. 
Mrs. Jewkes tells me, my Master was much
surpris'd, when he saw who it was; and she
much more, when my dear Father said,—Good
God! give me Patience! but, as great as you are,
Sir, I must ask for my Child! and burst out into
Tears (O what Trouble have I given you both!). 
My Master said, taking him by the Hand, Don't
be uneasy, Goodman Andrews, your Daughter
is in the way to be happy! 
This alarm'd my dear Father, and he said,
What! then, is she dying? And trembled, he 

could scarce stand. My Master made him sit
down, and sat down by him, and said, No,
God be prais'd! she is very well; and pray be
comforted: I cannot bear to see you thus apprehensive; 
but she has written you a Letter
to assure you, that she has Reason to be well satisfied
and happy. 
Ah! Sir, said he, you told me once she was
in London, waiting on a Bishop's Lady, when
all the time she was a severe Prisoner here. — 
Well, that's all over now, Goodman Andrews,
said my Master: but the Times are alter'd; for
now the sweet Girl has taken me Prisoner; and,
in a few Days, I shall put on the most agreeable
Fetters that ever Man wore. 
O Sir, said he, you are too pleasant for my
Griefs. My Heart's almost broken. But may I
not see my poor Child? You shall presently,
said he, for she is coming down to us; and since
you won't believe me, I hope you will her. 
I will ask you, good Sir, said he, but one
Question till then, that I may know how to look
upon her when I see her. Is she honest? Is she
virtuous? —As the new-born Babe, Mr. Andrews,
said my good Master; and, in twelve
Days time, I hope, will be my Wife!— 
O flatter me not, good your Honour, said
he: It cannot be! it cannot be! —I fear you
have deluded her with strange Hopes; and would
make me believe Impossibilities! —Mrs. Jewkes,
said he, do you tell my dear Pamela's good Father,
when I go out, all you know concerning
me, and your Mistress that is to be. Mean time, 

make much of him, and set out what you have
and make him drink a Glass of what he likes best. 
If this be Wine, added he, fill me a Bumper. 
She did so; and he took my Father by the
Hand, and said, Believe me, good Man, and
be easy; for I can't bear to see you tortur'd in
this cruel Suspense: Your dear Daughter is the
Beloved of my Soul. I am glad you are come: 
For you'll see us all in the same Story. And
here's your Dame's Health; and God bless you
both, for being the happy Means of procuring
for me so great a Blessing! And so he drank a
Bumper to this most obliging Health. 
What do I hear! it cannot surely be! said
my Father. And your Honour is too good, I
hope, to mock a poor old Man! —This ugly
Story, Sir, of the Bishop, runs in my Head! — 
But you say I shall see my dear Child! —And
I shall see her honest! —If not, poor as I am,
I would not own her! 
My Master bid Mrs. Jewkes not let me
know yet, that my Father was come, and went
to the Company, and said, I have been agreeably
surpris'd. Here is honest old Goodman
Andrews come full of Grief to see his Daughter; 
for he fears she is seduc'd; and tells me,
good honest Man, that, poor as he is, he will
not own her, if she be not virtuous. O, said
they all, with one Voice almost, dear Sir! shall
we not see the good old Man you have so praised
for his plain good Sense and honest Heart? If,
said he, I thought Pamela would not be too
much affected with the Surprize, I would make 

you all witness to their first Interyiew; for never
did Daughter love a Father, or Father a Daughter,
as they two do one another. Miss Darnford,
and all the Ladies, and the Gentlemen too, begg'd
it might be so. But was not this very cruel, my
dear Mother? For well might they think I should
not support myself in such an agreeable Surprize. 
He said, kindly, I have but one Fear; that
the dear Girl may be too much affected. O, said
Lady Darnford, we'll all help to keep up her
Spirits. Says he, I'll go up and prepare her; 
but won't tell her of it. So he came up to me,
as I have said, and amus'd me about Mr. Williams,
to half prepare me for some Surprize,
tho' that could not have been any thing to this; 
and he left me, as I said, in some Suspense, at
his mystical Words, saying, he would send to
me, when they were going to Cards. 
My Master went from me to my Father, and
asked if he had eaten any thing. No, said Mrs.
Jewkes; the good Man's Heart's so full, he cannot
eat, nor do any thing, till he has seen his dear
Daughter. That shall soon be, said my Master. 
I will have you come in with me; for she is going
to sit down with my Guests to a Game at Quadrille; 
and I will send for her down. O, Sir, said
my Father, don't, don't let me; I am not fit to appear
before your Guests; let me see my Daughter
by myself, I beseech you. Said he, They all
know your honest Character, Goodman Andrews,
and long to see you, for Pamela's sake. 
So he took my Father by the Hand, and led
him in, against his Will, to the Company. 

They were all very good. My Master kindly
said, Ladies and Gentlemen, I present to you
one of the honestest Men in England; my good
Pamela's Father. Mr. Peters went to him,
and took him by the Hand, and said, We are all
glad to see you, Sir; you are the happiest Man
in the World in a Daughter; whom we never
saw before To-day; but cannot enough admire. 
Said my Master, This Gentleman, Goodman
Ardrews, is the Minister of the Parish; but
is not young enough for Mr. Williams. This
airy Expression, my poor Father said, made him
fear, for a Moment, that all was a Jest. —Sir
Simon also took him by the Hand, and said,
Ay, you have a sweet Daughter, Honesty; we
are all in Love with her. And the Ladies came,
and said very fine Things: Lady Darnford particularly,
That he might think himself the happiest
Man in England, in such a Daughter. If,
and please you, Madam, said he, she be but
virtuous, 'tis all in all: For all the rest is Accident. 
But, I doubt, his Honour has been too
much upon the Jest with me. No, said Mrs.
Peters, we are all Witnesses, that he intends
very honourably by her. —It is some Comfort,
said he, and wiped his Eyes, that such good
Ladies say so! —But I wish I could see her. 
They would have had him sit down by them,
but he would only sit behind the Door, in the
Corner of the Room, so that one could not soon
see him, as one came in; because the Door open'd
against him, and hid him almost. The Ladies
all sat down; and my Master said, Desire Mrs. 



Jewkes to step up; and tell Mrs. Andrews the
Ladies wait for her. So down I came. 
Miss Darnford rose, and met me at the
Door, and said, Well, Miss, we long'd for
your Company. I did not see my dear Father; 
and it seems his Heart was too full to speak; and
he got up, and sat down, three or four times
successively, unable to come to me, or to say
any thing. The Ladies looked that way; but
I would not, supposing it was Mr. Williams. 
And they made me sit down between Lady
Darnford and Lady Jones; and asked me,
what we should play at? I said, At what your
Lady ships please. I wonder'd to see them smile,
and look upon me, and to that Corner of the
Room; but I was afraid of looking that way,
for fear of seeing Mr. Williams; tho' my Face
was that way too, and the Table before me. 
Said my Master, Did you send your Letter
away to the Post-house, my good Girl, for your
Father? To be sure, Sir, said I, I did not forget
that: I took the Liberty to desire Mr. Thomas,
to carry it. What, said he, I wonder, will the
good old Couple say to it? O, Sir, said I, your
Goodness will be a Cordial to their dear honest
Hearts! At that, my dear Father, not able to
contain himself, nor yet to stir from the Place,
gush'd out into a Flood of Tears, which he, good
Soul! had been struggling with, it seems, and
cry'd out, O my dear Child! 
I knew the Voice, and lifting up my Eyes,
and seeing my Father, gave a Spring, overturn'd
the Table, without Regard to the Company, and 

threw myself at his Feet: O my Father! my
Father! said I, can it be! —Is it you? Yes, it is! 
It is! —O bless your happy—Daughter! I
would have said, and down I sunk. 
My Master seem'd concern'd—I fear'd, said he,
that the Surprize would be too much for her
Spirits; and all the Ladies ran to me, and made
me drink a Glass of Water; and I found myself
in the Arms of my dearest Father. —O tell
me, said I, every thing! How long have you
been here? When did you come? How does
my honour'd Mother? And half a dozen Questions
more, before he could answer one. 
They permitted me to retire, with my
Father; and then I pour'd forth all my Vows
and Thanksgivings to God for this additional
Blessing; and confirm'd all my Master's Goodness
to his scarce-believing Amazement. And
we kneeled together, blessing God, and one another,
for several ecstatick Minutes; and my Master
coming in soon after, my dear Father said, O,
Sir, what a Change is this! May God reward and
bless you both in this World and the next! 
May God bless us all! said he. But how
does my sweet Girl! I have been in Pain for
you! —I am sorry I did not apprise you beforehand. 
O Sir, said I, it was you! and all you do
must be good. —But this was a Blessing so
unexpected!— 
Well, said he, you have given Pain to all
the Company. They will be glad to see you,
when you can; for you have spoiled all their 

Diversion: And yet painfully delighted them at
the same time. Mr. Andrews, added he, do
you make this House your own; and the longer
you stay, the more welcome you'll be. After
you have a little compos'd yourself, my dear
Girl, step in to us again. I am glad to see you
so well already. And so he left us. 
See you, my dear Father, said I, what Goodness
there is in this once naughty Master! O
pray for him! and pray for me, that I may deserve it! 
How long has this happy Change been
wrought, my dear Child? —O, said I, several
happy Days! —I have written down every
thing; and you'll see, from the Depth of
Misery, what God has done for your Daughter! 
Blessed be his Name! said he. But do
you say, he will marry you? Can it be, that
such a brave Gentleman will make a Lady of the
Child of such a poor Man as I? O the Divine
Goodness! How will your poor dear Mother be
able to support these happy Tidings? I will set
out To-morrow, to acquaint her with them: 
For I am but half happy, till the dear good
Woman shares them with me! —To be sure,
my dear Child, we ought to go into some far
Country to hide ourselves, that we may not
disgrace you by our Poverty! 
O my dear Father, said I, now you are unkind
for the first time. Your Poverty has been
my Glory, and my Riches; and I have nothing
to brag of, but that I ever thought it an Honour, 

rather than a Disgrace; because you were always
so honest, that your Child might well boast of
such a Parentage! 
In this manner, my dear Mother, did we
pass the happy Moments, till Miss Darnford
came to me, and said, How do you do, dear
Miss? I rejoice to see you well! Pray let us
have your Company. And, said she, taking
my Father's Hand, And yours too, good Mr.
Andrews. 
This was very obliging, I told her; and we
went to the great Parlour; and my Master took
my Father by the Hand, and made him sit down
by him, and drink a Glass of Wine with him. 
Mean time, I made my Excuses to the Ladies,
as well as I could, which they readily granted
me. But Sir Simon, after his comical manner,
put his Hands on my Shoulders, Let me see, let
me see, said he, where your Wings grow; for
I never saw any body fly like you. —Why,
said he, you have broken Lady Jones's Shins
with the Table. Shew her else, Madam. 
His Pleasantry made them laugh. And I
said, I was very sorry for my Extravagancy: And
if it had not been my Master's Doings, I should
have said, it was a Fault to permit me to be so surprised,
and put out of myself, before such good
Company. They said, All was very excusable; 
and they were glad I suffer'd no more by it. 
They were so kind as to excuse me at Cards,
and play'd by themselves; and I went, by my
Master's Command, and sat on the other Side,
in the happiest Place I ever was bless'd with, 

between two of the dearest Men in the World
to me, and each holding one of my Hands!— 
my Father, every now-and-then, with Tears,
lifting up his Eyes, and saying, Could I ever
have hoped this! 
I ask'd him, if he had been so good as to
bring the Papers with him? He said, he had,
and looked at me, as who should say, Must I
give them to you now? —I said, Be pleased to
let me have them. He pull'd them from his
Pocket; and I stood up, and, with my best
Duty, gave them into my Master's Hands. He
said, Thank you, Pamela. Your Father shall
take all with him, to see what a sad Fellow I
have been, as well as the present happier Alteration. 
But I must have them all again, for the
Writer's sake. 
The Ladies and Gentlemen would make me
govern the Tea-table, whatever I could do; and
Abraham attended me, to serve the Company. 
My Master and my Father sat together, and
drank a Glass or two of Wine instead of Tea; 
and Sir Simon jok'd with my Master, saying, I
warrant you would not be such a Woman's Man
as to drink Tea, for ever so much, with the Ladies. 
But your Time's coming; and, I doubt
not, you'll be made as conformable as I. 
My Master was very urgent with them to stay
Supper; and, at last, they comply'd, on Condition
that I would grace the Table, as they
were pleased to call it. I begg'd to be excus'd. 
My Master said, Don't be excus'd, Pamela, since
the Ladies desire it. And besides, said he, we 

won't part with your Father; and so you may as
well stay with us. 
I was in hopes my Father and I might sup by
ourselves, or only with Mrs. Jewkes. And
Miss Darnford, who is a most obliging young
Lady, said, We will not part with you; indeed
we will not. 
When Supper was brought in, Lady Darnford
took me by the Hand, and said to my
Master, Sir, by your Leave; and would have
plac'd me at the Upper-end of the Table. Pray,
pray, Madam, said I, excuse me; I cannot do
it, indeed I cannot. Pamela, said my Master,
to the great Delight of my good Father, as I
could see by his Looks, oblige Lady Darnford,
since she desires it. It is but a little before your
Time, you know. 
Dear, good Sir, said I, pray don't command
it! Let me sit by my Father, pray! Why, said
Sir Simon, here's ado indeed; sit down at the
Upper-end, as you should do! and your Father
shall sit by you there. This put my dear Father
upon Difficulties. And my Master said, Come,
I'll place you all: And so put Lady Darnford
at the Upper-end, Lady Jones at her Righthand,
and Mrs. Peters on the other; and he
placed me between the two young Ladies; but
very genteelly put Miss Darnford below her
younger Sister; saying, Come, Miss, I put you
here, because you shall hedge in this little
Cuckow; for I take notice, with Pleasure, of
your Goodness to her; and besides, all you very
young Ladies should sit together. This seem'd 

to please both Sisters; for had the youngest Miss
been put there, it might have piqu'd her, as
Matters had been formerly, to be plac'd below
me; whereas Miss Darnford, giving Place to
her younger Sister, made it less odd she should
to me; especially with that handsome Turn of
the dear Man, as if I was a Cuckow, and to be
hedg'd in. 
My Master kindly said, Come, Mr. Andrews,
you and I will sit together. And so took his
Place at the Bottom of the Table, and set my
Father on his Right-hand; and Sir Simon would
sit on his Left. For, said he, Parson, I think
the Petticoats should sit together; and so do you
sit down by that Lady (his Sister). A boiled
Turkey standing by me, my Master said, Cut
up that Turkey, Pamela, if it be not too strong
Work for you, that Lady Darnford may not
have too much Trouble. So I carv'd it in
a trice, and helped the Ladies. Miss Darnford
said, I would give something to be so dextrous
a Carver. O Miss, said I, my late good Lady
would always make me do these Things, when
she entertain'd her Female Friends; as she used
to do on particular Days. 
Ay, said my Master, I remember my poor
Mother would often say, if I, or any body at
Table, happen'd to be out in Carving, I'll send
up for my Pamela, to shew you how to carve. 
Said Lady Jones, Mrs. Andrews has every
Accomplishment of her Sex. She is quite
wonderful for her Years. Miss Darnford said,
And I can tell you, Madam, that she plays 

sweetly upon the Spinnet, and sings as sweetly
to it; for she has a fine Voice. Foolish, said
Sir Simon, who, that hears her speak, knows
not that? And who, that sees her Fingers,
believes not that they were made to touch any
Key? O, Parson! said he, 'tis well you're by,
or I should have had a Blush from the Ladies. I
hope not, Sir Simon, said Lady Jones; for a
Gentleman of your Politeness would not say
any thing that would make Ladies blush. — 
No, no, said he, for the World: But if I had,
it would have been, as the Poet says, 

They blush, because they understand. 

When the Company went away, Lady
Darnford, Lady Jones, and Mrs. Peters, severally
invited my Master, and me with him, to
their Houses; and begg'd he would permit me,
at least, to come, before we left these Parts. 
And they said, We hope, when the happy
Knot is ty'd, you will induce Mr. B. to reside
more among us. We were always glad, said
Lady Darnford, when he was here; but now
shall have double Reason. O what grateful
things were these to the Ears of my good
Father! 
When the Company was gone, my Master
ask'd my Father, If he smoak'd? He answer'd,
No. He made us both sit down by him; and
said, I have been telling this sweet Girl, that,
in Fourteen Days (and Two of them are gone)
she must fix on One to make me happy: And 

have left it to her, to chuse either one of the
first, or the last Seven. My Father held up his
Hands and Eyes; God bless your Honour, said
he, is all I can say! Now, Pamela, said my
Master, taking my Hand, don't let a little wrongtim'd
Bashfulness take place, without any other
Reason, because I should be glad to go to Bedfordshire
as soon as I could; and I would not
return, till I carry my Servants there a Mistress,
who should assist me to repair the Mischiefs she
has made in it. 
I could not look up for Confusion. And
my Father said, My dear Child, I need not, I am
sure, prompt your Obedience in whatever will
most oblige so good a Gentleman. What says
my Pamela? said my Master: She does not use
to be at a loss for Expression. Sir, said I, were
I too sudden, it would look as if I doubted whether
you would hold in your Mind, and was
not willing to give you Time for Reflection. 
But otherwise, to be sure, I ought to resign myself
implicitly to your Will. 
Said he, I want not Time for Reflection. 
For I have often told you, and that long ago,
I could not live without you. And my Pride
of Condition made me both tempt and terrify
you to other Terms; but your Virtue was Proof
against all Temptation, and was not to be aw'd
by Terrors: Wherefore, as I could not conquer
my Passion for you, I corrected myself, and
resolv'd, since you would not be mine upon my
Terms, you should upon your own: And now
I desire you not on any other, I assure you 

And, I think, the sooner it is done, the better. 
What say you, Mr. Andrews? Sir, said he,
there is so much Goodness on your Side, and,
blessed be God! so much Prudence on my
Daughter's, that I must be quite silent. But
when it is done, I and my poor Wife shall have
nothing to do, but to pray for you both, and
to look back with Wonder and Joy, on the
Ways of Providence. 
This, said my Master, is Friday Night; 
and suppose, my Girl, it be next Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday Morning? — 
Say, my Pamela. 
Will you, Sir, said I, excuse me till Tomorrow
for an Answer? —I will, said he. 
And touch'd the Bell, and call'd for Mrs. Jewkes. 
Where, said he, does Mr. Andrews lie To-night? 
You'll take care of him: He's a very good Man; 
and will bring a Blessing upon every House he
sets his Foot in. 
My dear Father wept for Joy; and I could
not refrain keeping him Company. And my
Master, saluting me, bid us Good-night, and
rctir'd. And I waited upon my dear Father,
and was so full of Prattle, of my Master's Goodness,
and my future Prospects, that I believed
afterwards I was turned all into Tongue. But
he indulged me, and was transported with Joy; 
and went to-bed, and dreamt of nothing but
Jacob's Ladder, and Angels ascending and descending,
to bless him and his Daughter. 
