



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday, April 14. 
Never did I hear of such a parcel of foolish
toads as these Harlowes! —Why, Belford, the 

Lady must fall, if every hair of her head were a guardian
angel, unless they were to make a visible appearance
for her, or, snatching her from me at unawares,
would draw her after them into the starry regions. 
All I had to apprehend, was, that a Daughter so reluctantly
carried off, would offer terms to her Father,
and would be accepted upon a mutual concedence; 
They to give up Solmes; She to give up me. And so
I was contriving to do all I could to guard against the
latter. But they seem resolved to perfect the work
they have begun. 
What stupid creatures are there in the world! This
foolish Brother, not to know, that he who would be
bribed to undertake a base thing by one, would be
over-bribed to retort the baseness; especially when he
could be put into the way to serve himself by both! 
—Thou, Jack, wilt never know one half of my contrivances. 
He here relates the conversation between him and the
Lady (upon the subject of the noise and exclamations
his agent made at the garden-door) to the same effect
as in the Lady's Letter No xvii. and proceeds
exulting: 
What a capacity for glorious mischief has thy
friend! —Yet how near the truth all of it! The only
deviation, my asserting, that the fellow made the noises
by mistake, and thro' fright, and not by previous direction: 
Had she known the precise truth, her anger
to be so taken in, would never have let her forgive me. 
Had I been a military Hero, I shou'd have made
gunpowder useless; for I should have blown up all my
adversaries by dint of stratagem, turning their own
devices upon them. 
But these Fathers and Mothers—Lord help 'em! 
—Were not the powers of Nature stronger than those
of Discretion, and were not that busy Dea Bona to
afford her genial aids, till tardy Prudence qualified parents 

to manage their future offspring, how few people
would have children! 
James and Arabella may have their motives; but
what can be said for a Father acting as this Father has
acted? What for a Mother? What for an Aunt? What
for Uncles? —Who can have patience with such fellows
and fellow-esses? 
Soon will the Fair-one hear how high their foolish
resentments run against her: And then will she, it is
to be hoped, have a little more confidence in me. 
Then will I be jealous that she loves me not with the
preference my heart builds upon: Then will I bring
her to confessions of grateful Love: And then will I
kiss her when I please; and not stand trembling, as now,
like an hungry hound, who sees a delicious morsel
within his reach (the froth hanging about his vermilion
jaws) yet dares not leap at it for his life. 
But I was originally a bashful mortal. Indeed I am
bashful still with regard to this Lady—Bashful, yet
know the Sex so well! —But that indeed is the reason
that I know it so well: —For, Jack, I have had abundant
cause, when I have looked into myself, by way of
comparison with the other Sex, to conclude, that a
bashful man has a good deal of the soul of a woman; 
and so, like Tiresias, can tell what they think, and
what they drive at, as well as themselves. 
The modest ones and I, particularly, are pretty much
upon a par. The difference between us is only, What
They think, I act. But the immodest ones out-do
the worst of us by a bar's length, both in thinking and
acting. 
One argument let me plead in proof of my assertion; 
That even we Rakes love modesty in a woman; while
the modest women as they are accounted (that is to
say, the slyest) love, and generally prefer, an impudent
man. Whence can this be, but from a likeness in nature? 
And this made the poet say, That every woman
is a Rake in her heart. It concerns them, by their
actions, to prove the contrary, if they can. 

Thus have I read in some of the philosophers, That
no wickedness is comparable to the wickedness of a woman (a) . 
Canst thou tell me, Jack, who says this! 
Was it Socrates? for he had the devil of a Wife—Or
who? Or is it Solomon? —King Solomon—Thou remembrest
to have read of such a king, dost thou not? 
Sol-o-mon, I learned, in my infant state [My Mother
was a good woman] to answer, when asked, Who
was the wisest man? —But my indulgent questioner
never asked me, How he came by the un-inspired part
of his wisdom. 
Come, come, Jack, you and I are not so very bad,
could we but stop where we are. 
He then gives the particulars of what passed between
him and the Lady on his menaces relating to her
Brother and Mr. Solmes, and of his design to punish
Betty Barnes and Joseph Leman. 