


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Tuesday Night. 
You may guess what were my Lord's assurances
on this generous confidence in him. They
agreed upon a private correspondence by letters. —Ah!
Lady L. was this quite right, tho' it came out happily
in the event? Does not concealment always imply
somewhat wrong? Ought you not to have done your
duty, whether your father did his, or not? Were you
not called upon, as I may say, to a tryal of yours? 
And is not virtue to be proved by tryal? Remember
you not who says, “For what glory is it, if, when ye
be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? 
But if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye
take it patiently, this is acceptable with God.”— 

But you, Lady L. had lost your excellent mother very
early. 
The worthy young lady would not, however, be
prevailed upon to consent to a private marriage; and
my Lord took leave of her. Their parting was extremely
tender; and the amiable Caroline, in the softness
of her heart, overcome by my Lord's protestations
of everlasting love to her in preference to all the women
on earth, voluntarily assured him, that she never
would receive any other proposal, while he was living,
and single. 
Sir Thomas shew'd himself so much displeased with
Lord L. for the freedom of his last speech, that my
Lord chose not to desire another audience of him; 
and yet, being unwilling to widen the difference, he
took polite leave of the angry Baronet in a letter, which
was put into his hands just before he had commanded
Miss Caroline to attend him at dinner, which she had
begged to be excused doing. 
Don't you pity the young lady, Lucy, in this situation? 
Lord L. having but a little before taken leave
of her, and set out for London? 
Miss Charlotte told her sister, that, were it she, she
should hardly have suffer'd Lord L. to go away by himself
—Were it but to avoid an interview with a father
who seem'd to have been too much used to womens tears
to be moved by them; and who had such a satirical
vein, and such odd notions of love. 
I was very earnest to know what passed at this
dinner-time. 
Miss Grandison said, It is best for me to answer
Miss Byron's curiosity, I believe; as I was a stander-by,
and only my father and sister were the players. 
Players! repeated Lady L. —It was a cruel scene. 
And I believe, Miss Byron, it will make you not wonder,
that I liked Lord L. much the better for being
rather a man of understanding than a man of wit. 
Miss Grandison began as follows: 

I went up with my father's peremptory, as I may call
it, to my sister. 
O my dear mamma! said Caroline, when she found
she must go down, on what a new occasion do I want
your sweet mediation! But, Charlotte, I can neither
walk nor stand— 
You must then lean upon me, my dear, and creep:
Love will creep, they say, where it cannot go. 
Wicked girl! interrupted Lady L. I remember
that was what she said. 
I said it to make you smile, if I could, and take
courage: But you know I was in tears for you, notwithstanding. 
You thought of what might befal yourself, Charlotte. 
So I did. We never, I believe, properly feel for
others, what does not touch ourselves. 
A compassionate heart, said I, is a blessing, though a
painful one: And yet there would be no supporting
life, if we felt quite as poignantly for others as we do
for ourselves. How happy was it for my Charlotte, that
she could smile, when the father's apprehended lecture
was intended for the use of both! 
I thank you for this, Harriet. You will not be long
my creditor—But I will proceed. 
Caroline took my advice. She leaned upon me; 
and creep, creep, creep, down she crept. A fresh
stream of tears fell from her eyes, when she came to
the dining-room door. Her tremblings were increased:
And down she dropt upon a window-seat in the
passage: I can go no further, said she. 
Instantly a voice, that we knew must be observed,
alarmed our ears—Where are you, Caroline! Charlotte? 
Girls! where are you? The housekeeper was
in hearing, and ran to us: Ladies! Ladies! Your
papa calls! —And we, in spite of the weakness of the
one, and the unwillingness of the other, recovered our
feet; and, after half a dozen creeping motions more, 

found ourselves within the door, and in our father's
sight, my sister leaning upon my arm. 
What devil's in the wind now! What tragedy-movements
are here! —What measured steps! —In
some cases, all women are natural actresses. But
come, Caroline, the play is over, and you mistake
your cue. 
Good Sir! —Her hands held up—I wept for her; 
and for my own remoter case, if you will, Miss
Byron. 
The prologue is yours, Caroline. Charlotte, I
doubt not, is ready with her epilogue. But come,
come, it is time to close this farce—Take your places,
girls; and don't be fools. —A pretty caution, thought
I, said Miss Charlotte, when you make us both such! 
However, the servants entering with the dinner, we
hemm'd, handkerchief'd, twinkled, took up our knives
and forks, laid them down, and took them up again,
when our father's eye was upon us; piddled, sipp'd; 
but were more busy with our elbows than with our
teeth. As for poor sister Caroline, love stuck in her
throat. She tried to swallow, as one in a quinsey; a
wry face, and a strain'd neck, denoting her difficulty to
get down but a lark's morsel—And what made her more
aukward (I am sure it did me) was a pair of the sharpest
eyes that ever were seen in a man's head, and the
man a father (the poor things having no mother, no
aunt, to support their spirits) cast first on the one,
then on the other; and now and-then an overclouded
brow, adding to our aukwardness: Yet still more
apprehensive of dinner-time being over, and the withdrawing
of the servants. 
The servants loved their young ladies. They attended
with very serious faces; and seemed glad when
they were dismissed. 
Then it was that Caroline arose from her seat, made
her courtesy, aukwardly enough; with the air of a
boarding-school Miss, her hands before her. 

My father let her make her honours, and go to the
door, I rising to attend her; but then called her back; 
I dare say, on purpose, to enjoy her aukwardness, and
to punish her. 
Who bid you go? Whither are you going, Caroline? 
Come back, Charlotte. —But it will be always
thus: A father's company is despised, when a girl gets
a lover into her head. Fine encouragement for a father,
to countenance a passion that shall give himself
but a second or third place, who once had a first, in
his childrens affections! But I shall have reason to
think myself fortunate, perhaps, if my children do
not look upon me as their enemy. —Come back when
I bid you. 
We crept back more aukwardly than we went from
table. 
Sit down—We cross'd our hands, and stood like a
couple of fools. 
Sit down when I bid you. You are confoundedly
humble. I want to talk with you. 
Down sat the two simpletons, their faces and necks
all awry, and on the edge of their chairs. 
Miss Grandison then gave the following dialogue. 
She humourously, by her voice (an humble one for
her sister, a less meek one for herself, an imperious
one for Sir Thomas) marked the speakers. I will
prefix their names. 
Sir Thomas. What sort of leave has Lord L. taken
of you, Caroline? He has sent me a letter. Has he
sent you one? I hope he did not think a personal
leave due to the daughter, and not to the father. 
Charlotte. He thought you were angry with him,
Sir, said I [Poor Caroline's answer was not ready]. 
Sir Tho. And supposed that your sister was not. 
Very well! What leave did he take of you, girl?
woman? What do you call yourself? 
Charlotte. Sir, my Lord L. I dare say, intended
no disrespect to— 
I might as well have been silent, Harriet. 

Sir Tho. I like not your preface, girl, interrupted
he—Tell me not what you dare say. I spoke to your
sister. —Come, sit upright. None of your averted
faces, and wry necks. A little more innocence in
your hearts, and you'll have less shame in your countenances. 
I see what a league there is between you. 
A promising prospect before me, with you both! But
tell me, Caroline, do you love Lord L.? Have you
given him hope that you will be his, when you can get
the cross father to change his mind; or, what is still
better, out of your way for ever? All fathers are
plaguy ill-natur'd, when they do not think of their
girls fellows, as their foolish girls think of them! Answer
me, Caroline? 
Caroline (weeping, at his severe speech). What can
I say, Sir, and not displease you? 
Sir Tho. What! —Why, that you are all obedience
to your father. Cannot you say that? Sure you
can say that. 
Car. I hope, Sir— 
Sir Tho. And I hope too. But it becomes you to
be certain. Can't you answer for your own heart? 
Car. I believe you think, Sir, that Lord L. is not
an unworthy man. 
Sir Tho. A man is not more worthy, for making
my daughter forget herself, and behave like a fool to
her father. 
Car. I may behave like a fool, Sir, but not undutifully. 
You frighten me, Sir. I am unable to hold
up my head before you, when you are angry with me. 
Sir Tho. Tell me that you have broken with Lord
L. as I have commanded you. Tell me, that you will
never see him more, if you can avoid it. Tell me,
that you will not write to him— 
Car. Pardon me, Sir, for saying, that Lord L.'s
behaviour to me has been ever uniformly respectful:
He reveres my papa too: How can I treat him with
disrespect?— 

Sir Tho. So! I shall have it all out, presently—Go
on, girl—And do you, Charlotte, attend to the lesson
set you by your elder sister. 
Char. Indeed, Sir, I can answer for the goodness
of my sister's heart, and for her duty to you. 
Sir Tho. Well said! Now, Caroline, do you speak
up for Charlotte's heart: One good turn deserves another. 
But say what you will for each other, I will
be my own judge of both your hearts; and facts shall
be the test. Do you know, Caroline, whether Charlotte
has any lover that is to keep you in countenance
with yours? 
Car. I dare say, Sir, that my sister Charlotte will
not disoblige you. 
Sir Tho. I hope, Caroline, you can say as much
for Charlotte's sister. 
Car. I hope I can, Sir. 
Sir Tho. Then you know my will. 
Car. I presume, Sir, it is your pleasure, that I
should always remain single. 
Sir Tho. Hey-day! —But why, pray, does your ladyship
suppose so? —Speak out. 
Car. Because I think, forgive me to say it, that my
Lord L.'s character and his quality are such, that a
more creditable proposal cannot be expected. —Pray,
Sir, forgive me. And she held up her hands, pray-pray-fashion,
thus— 
Well said, Caroline! thought I—Pull up a courage,
my dear! —What a duce— 
Sir Tho. His quality!—Gewgaw! —What is a
Scotish peerage? —And does your silly heart beat after
a coronet? You want to be a Countess, do you? — 
But let me tell you, that if you have a true value for
Lord L. you will not, incumbred as he is with sisters
fortunes, wish him to marry you. 
Car. As to title, Sir, that is of very little account
with me, without the good character. —As to prudence; 

my Lord L. cannot see any-thing in me to
forfeit his prudence for. 
Well answered, Caroline! thought I. In such a laudable
choice, all should not be left upon the poor
Lov-yer! 
Sir Tho. So the difficulty lies not with you, I find. 
You have no objection to Lord L. if he has none to
you. You are an humbled and mortified girl, then. 
The woman must be indeed in love, who, once thinking
well of herself, can give a preference against herself
to her lover. 
What business had Sir Thomas to say this, my
Lucy? 
Sir Tho. Let me know, Caroline, what hopes you
have given to Lord L.—Or rather, perhaps, what
hopes he has given you? —Why are you silent? Answer
me, girl. 
Car. I hope, Sir, I shall not disgrace my father, in
thinking well of Lord L. 
Sir Tho. Nor will he disgrace himself, proud as
are the Scotish beggars of their ancestry, in thinking
well of a daughter of mine. 
Car. Lord L. tho' not a beggar, Sir, would think
it an honour, Sir— 
Sir Tho. Well said! Go on: Go on. Why stops the
girl? —And so he ought. But if Lord L. is not a beggar
for my daughter, let not my daughter be a beggar for
Lord L. But Lord L. would think it an honour, you
say—To be what? —Your husband, I suppose. Answer
my question; How stand matters between you
and Lord L.? 
Car. I cannot, such is my unhappiness! say anything
that will please my father. 
Sir Tho. How the girl evades my question! —Don't
let me repeat it. 
Car. It is not disgraceful, I hope, to own, that I
had rather be— 
There she stopt, and half-hid her face in her bosom. 

And I thought, said Miss Grandison, that she
never look'd prettier in her life. 
Sir Tho. Rather be Lord L.'s wife than my daughter—Well,
Charlotte, tell me, when are you to begin
to estrange me from your affections? When are you
to begin to think your father stands in the way of your
happiness? When do you cast your purveying eyes upon
a mere stranger, and prefer him to your father? — 
I have done my part, I suppose: I have nothing to do
but to allot you the fortunes that your lovers, as they
are called, will tell you are necessary to their affairs,
and then to lie me down and die. Your fellows then,
with you, will dance over my grave; and I shall be
no more remembred, than if I had never been—except
by your brother. 
I could not help speaking here, said Miss Grandison. 
O Sir! how you wound me! —Do all fathers— 
Forgive me, Sir— 
I saw his brow begin to lour. 
Sir Tho. I bear not impertinence. I bear not— 
There he stopt in wrath. —But why, Caroline, do you
evade my question? You know it. Answer it. 
Car. I should be unworthy of the affection of such
a man as Lord L. is, if I disowned my esteem for
him. Indeed, Sir, I have an esteem for Lord L.
above any man I ever saw. You, Sir, did not always
disesteem him—My brother— 
Sir Tho. So! Now all is out! —You have the forwardness
—What shall I call it? —But I did, and I do,
esteem Lord L.—But as what? —Not as a son-in-law. 
He came to me as my son's friend. I invited
him down in that character: He, at that time, knew
nothing of you. But no sooner came a smgle man
into a single woman's company, but you both wanted
to make a match of it. You were dutiful: And he
was prudent: Prudent for himself. I think you talk'd
of his prudence a while ago. He made his application
to you, or you to him, I know not which—[Then 

how poor Caroline wept! And I, said Miss Charlotte,
could hardly forbear saying Barbarous!] And when
he found himself sure of you, then was the fool the
father to be consulted: And for what? Only to know
what he would do for two people, who had left him
no option in the case. And this is the trick of you all:
And the poor father is to be passive, or else to be accounted
a tyrant. 
Car. Sir, I admitted not Lord L.'s address, but
conditionally, as you should approve of it. Lord L.
desired not my approbation upon other terms. 
Sir Tho. What nonsense is this? —Have you left
me any way to help myself? —Come, Caroline, let me
try you. I intend to carry you up to town: A young
man of quality has made overtures to me. I believe
I shall approve of his proposals. I am sure you will,
if you are not prepossessed. Tell me, Are you, have
you left yourself at liberty to give way to my recommendation? 
—Why don't you answer me? —You
know, that you received Lord L.'s addresses but conditionally,
as I should approve of them. And your spark
desired not your approbation upon other terms. Come,
what say you to this? —What! are you confounded? 
—Well you may, if you cannot answer me as I wish! 
If you can, why don't you? —You see, I put you but
to your own test. 
Car. Sir, it is not for me to argue with my father. 
Surely, I have not intended to be undutiful. Surely
I have not disgraced my family, by admitting Lord
L.'s conditional— 
Sir Tho. Conditional! —Fool! —How conditional! 
—Is it not absolute, as to the exclusion of me, or of
my option? But I have ever found, that the man who
condescends to argue with a woman, especially on certain
points, in which nature, and not reason, is concerned,
must follow her through a thousand windings,
and find himself farthest off when he imagines himself
nearest; and at last must content himself, panting for 

breath, to sit down where he set out; while she gambols
about, and is ready to lead him a new course. 
Car. I hope— 
Sir Tho. None of your hopes—I will have certainty. 
May I—Come, I'll bring you to a point, if I
can, woman as you are—May I receive proposals for
you from any other man? Answer me, Yes or No. 
Don't deal with me, as girls do with common fathers— 
Don't be disobedient, and then depend upon my weakness
to forgive you. I am no common father. I know
the world. I know your sex. I have found more
fools in it than I have made. —Indeed, no man makes,
or needs to make, you fools. You have folly deep-rooted
within you. That weed is a native of the soil. 
A very little watering will make it sprout, and choak
the noble flowers that education has planted. I never
knew a woman in my life, that was wise by the experience
of other people. But answer me: Say—Can
you receive a new proposal? or can you not? 
Caroline answer'd only by her tears. 
Sir Tho. Damnably constant, I suppose! —So you
give up real virtue, give up duty to a father, for fidelity,
for constancy, for a fictitious virtue, to a lover! 
Come hither to me, girl! —Why don't you come to
me when I bid you?— 

