


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Tuesday Night, April 4. 
Miss Grandison came to me just as we had
supped. She longed, she said, to see me; but
was prevented coming before, and desired to know
what had passed between her brother and me this
morning. I gave her the Letter, which I had but a
little while before concluded. He had owned, she
said, that he had breakfasted with me, and spoke of
me to her, and Lord and Lady L. with an ardor, that
gave them pleasure. She put my Letter into her bosom. 
I may, I hope, Harriet—If you please, madam,
said I. 
If you please, madam, repeated she; and with that
do-so-rous accent too, my Harriet! —My sister and I
have been in tears this morning: Lord L. had much
ado to forbear. Sir Charles will soon leave us. 
It can't be helped, Charlotte. Did you dine to day
in St. James's Square. 

No, indeed! —My brother had a certain tribe with
him; and the woman also. It is very difficult, I believe,
Harriet, for good people to forbear doing sometimes
more than goodness requires of them. 
Could you not, Charlotte, have sat at table with
them for one hour or two? 
My brother did not ask me. He did not expect it. 
He gives every-body their choice, you know. He
told me last night who were to dine with him to-day,
and supposed I would choose to dine with Lady L. or
with you, he was so free as to say. 
He did us an honour, which you thought too great
a one. But if he had asked you, Charlotte— 
Then I should have bridled. Indeed, I asked him,
If he did not over-do it. 
What was his answer? 
Perhaps he might. —But I, said he, may never see
Mrs. Oldham again. I want to inform myself of her
future intentions, with a view (over-do it again, Charlotte!)
to make her easy and happy for life. Her children
are in the world. I want to give her a credit that
will make her remembred by them, as they grow up,
with duty. I hope I am superior to forms. She is conscious. 
I can pity her. She is a gentlewoman; and
intitled to a place at any man's table to whom she
never was a servant. She never was mine. 
And what, Miss Grandison, could you say in answer?
asked I. 
What! —Why I put up my lip. 
Ungracious girl! 
I can't help it. That may become a man to do in
such cases as this, that would not a woman. 
Sir Charles wants not delicacy, my dear, said I. 
He must suppose, that I should have sat swelling, and
been reserved: He was right not to ask me—So be
quiet, Harriet—And yet perhaps, you would be as
tame to a husband's mistress, as you seem favourable
to a father's. 

She then put on one of her arch looks— 
The cases differ, Charlotte—But do you know
what passed between the generous man, and the mortified
woman and her children; mortified as they must
be by his goodness? 
Yes, yes; I had curiosity enough to ask Dr. Bartlett
about it all. 
Pray, Charlotte— 
Dr. Bartlett is favourable to every-body, sinners as
well as saints—He began with praising the modesty of
her dress, the humility of her behaviour: He said,
that she trembled and looked down, till she was reassured
by Sir Charles. Such creatures have all their
tricks, Harriet. 
You, Charlotte, are not favourable to sinners, and
hardly to saints. But pray proceed. 
Why, he re-assured the woman, as I told you. And
then proceeded to ask many questions of the elder
Oldham—I pitied that young fellow—to have a mother
in his eye, whose very tenderness to the young
ones kept alive the sense of her guilt. And yet what
would she have been, had she not been doubly tender
to the innocents, who were born to shame from her
fault? The young man acknowleged a military genius,
and Sir Charles told him, that he would, on his
return from a journey he was going to take, consider
whether he could not do him service in the way he
chose. He gave him, it seems, a brief lecture on
what he should aim to be, and what avoid, to qualify
himself for a man of true honour; and spoke very
handsomely of such gentlemen of the army as are real
gentlemen. The young fellow, continued Miss Grandison,
may look upon himself to be as good as provided
for, since my brother never gives the most distant
hope that is not followed by absolute certainty,
the first opportunity, not that offers, but which he can
make. 
He took great notice of the little boys. He dilated 

their hearts, and set them a prating; and was pleased
with their prate. The doctor, who had never seen him
before in the company of children, applauded him for
his vivacity, and condescending talk to them. The
tenderest father in the world, he said, could not have
behaved more tenderly, or shewed himself more delighted
with his own children, than he did with those
brats of Mrs. Oldham. 
Ah, Charlotte! And is it out of doubt, that you
are the Daughter of Lady Grandison, and Sister of Sir
Charles Grandison? —Well, but I believe you are— 
Some children take after the father, some after the
mother! —Forgive me, my dear. 
But I won't. I have a great mind to quarrel with
you, Harriet. 
Pray don't; because I could neither help, nor can
be sorry for, what I said. But pray proceed. 
Why he made presents to the children. I don't
know what they were; nor could the doctor tell me. 
I suppose very handsome ones; for he has the spirit
of a prince. He enquired very particularly after the
circumstances of the mother; and was more kind to
her than many people would be to their own mothers. 
—He can account for this, I suppose—tho' I cannot. 
The woman, it is true, is of a good family, and so
forth: But that enhances her crime. Natural children
abound in the present age. Keeping is fashionable. 
Good men should not countenance such wretches. 
—But my brother and you are charitable creatures! — 
With all my heart, child. Virtue, however, has at
least as much to say on one side of the question as on
the other. 
When the poor children are in the world, as your
brother said—When the poor women are penitents,
true penitents—Your brother's treatment of Mrs. Giffard
was different. He is in both instances an imitator
of the Almighty; an humbler of the impenitent, and
an encourager of those who repent. 

Well, well; He is undoubtedly a good sort of young
man; and, Harriet, you are a good sort of young
woman. Where much is given, much is required:
But I have not given me such a large quantity of charity,
as either of you may boast: And how can I help
it? —But, however, the woman went away blessing
and praising him; and that, the doctor says, more
with her eyes than she was able to do in words. The
elder youth departed in rapturous reverence: The
children hung about his knees, on theirs. The doctor
will have it, that it was without bidding—Perhaps
so—He raised them by turns to his arms, and kissed
them. —Why, Harriet! Your eyes glisten, child. 
They would have run over, I suppose, had you been
there! Is it, that your heart is weakened with your
present situation? I hope not. No, you are a good
creature! And I see that the mention of a behaviour
greatly generous, however slightly made, will have its
force upon a heart so truly benevolent as yours. You
must be Lady Grandison, my dear: Indeed you must. 
—Well, but I must be gone. You dine with us to-morrow,
my brother says? 
He did ask me; and desired me to engage my cousins. 
But he repeated not the invitation when he went
away. 
He depends upon your coming: And so do we. He
is to talk to me before you, it seems: I can't tell about
what: But by his hurrying on every-thing, it is plain
he is preparing to leave us. 
He is, madam. 
“He is, madam!” And with that dejected air, and
mendicant voice—Speak up like a woman! —The
sooner he sets out, if he must go, the sooner he will
return. Come, come, Harriet, you shall be Lady
Grandison still—Ay! and that sigh too! These lovesick
folks, have a language that nobody else can talk
to them in: And then she affectedly sighed—Is that
right, Harriet? —She sighed again—No, it is not: I 

never knew what a sigh was, but when my father
vexed my sister; and that was more for fear he should
one day be as cruel to me, than for her sake. We can
be very generous for others, Harriet, when we apprehend
that one day we may want the same pity ourselves. 
Our best passions, my dear, have their mixtures
of self-love. 
You have drawn a picture of human nature, Charlotte,
that I don't like. 
It is a likeness for all that. 
She arose, snatched my hand, hurried to the door— 
Be with us Harriet, and cousin Reeves, and cousin
Reeves, as soon as you can to-morrow. I want to talk
to you, my dear (to me) of an hundred thousand
things before dinner. Remember we dine early. 
Away she fluttered—Happy Miss Grandison! What
charming spirits she has! 

