



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday Morn. June 20. 
Well, Jack, now are we upon another foot
together. This dear creature will not let me
be good. She is now authorizing all my plots by her
own example. 
Thou must be partial in the highest degree, if
now thou blamest me for resuming my former
schemes, since in that case I shall but follow her
clue. No forced construction of her actions do I
make on this occasion, in order to justify a bad
cause, or a worse intention. A little pretence, indeed,
served the wolf, when he had a mind to quarrel
with the lamb; but this is not now my case. 
For here (Wouldst thou have thought it?), taking
advantage of Dorcas's compassionate temper, and of
some warm expressions, which the tender-hearted
wench let fall against the cruelty of men; and wishing
to have it in her power to serve her; has she
given her the following Note, signed by her maiden
name: For she has thought sit, in positive and plain
words, to own to the pitying Dorcas, that she is not
married. 

Monday, June 19. . . . 
I the underwritten do hereby promise, that, on my
coming into possession of my own estate, I will provide
for Dorcas Martindale in a gentlewoman-like
manner, in my own house: Or, if I do not soon obtain
that possession, or should first die, I do hereby bind myself,
my executors, and administrators, to pay to her, or
her order, during the term of her natural life, the 

sum of five pounds on each of the four usual quarterly
days in the year; that is to say, twenty pounds by the
year; on condition that she faithfully assist me in my
escape from an illegal confinement, which I now labour
under. The first quarterly payment to commence, and
be payable, at the end of three months immediately following
the day of my deliverance. And I do also promise
to give her, as a testimony of my honour in the
rest, a diamond ring, which I have shewed her. Witness
my hand, this nineteenth day of June, in the
year above-written. 
Clarissa Harlowe. 
Now, Jack, what terms wouldst thou have me to
keep with such a sweet corruptress? —Seest thou not
how she hates me? —Seest thou not, that she is resolved
never to forgive me? —Seest thou not, however,
that she must disgrace herself in the eye of the
world, if she actually should escape? —That she must
be subjected to infinite distress and hazard? —For
whom has she to receive and protect her? —Yet to
determine to risque all these evils! —And furthermore
to stoop to artifice, to be guilty of the reigning vice
of the times, of bribery and corruption! O Jack,
Jack! say not, write not, another word in her
favour!— 
Thou hast blamed me for bringing her to this
house: But had I carried her to any other in England,
where there would have been one servant or
inmate capable either of compassion or corruption,
what must have been the consequence? 
But seest thou not, however, that, in this flimsy
contrivance, the dear implacable, like a drowning
man, catches at a straw to save herself! —A straw
shall she find to be the refuge she has resorted to. 