


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


O Lucy, I have such a conversation to relate to
you! —But let me lead to it. 
Sir Charles met me at the opening of the door. He
was all himself. Such an unaffected modesty and politeness; 
yet such an ease and freedom! 

I thought by his address, that he would have taken
my hand; and both hands were so emulatively passive— 
How does he manage it to be so free in a first address,
yet so respectful, that a princess could not blame him? 
After breakfast, my cousins being sent for out to
attend Sir John Allestree and his Niece, Sir Charles
and I were left alone: And then, with an air equally
solemn and free, he addressed himself to me. 
The last time I had the honour of being alone
with my good Miss Byron, I told her a very tender
tale. I was sure it would raise in such a heart as hers
generous compassion for the noblest lady on the Continent; 
and I presumed, as my difficulties were not
owing either to rashness or indiscretion, that she would
also pity the relator. 
The story did indeed affect you; yet, for my own
sake, as well as yours, I referred you to Dr. Bartlett,
for the particulars of some parts of it, upon which I
could not expatiate. 
The doctor, madam, has let me know the particulars
which he communicated to you. I remember
with pain the pain I gave to your generous heart in
Lord L's study. I am sure you must have suffered
still more from the same compassionate goodness on the
communications he made you. May I, madam, however,
add a few particulars to the same subject, which
he then could not give you? Now you have been let
into so considerable a part of my story, I am desirous
to acquaint you, and that rather than any woman in
the world, with all that I know myself of this arduous
affair. 
He ceased speaking. I was in tremors. Sir, Sir— 
The story I must own, is a most affecting one. How
much is the unhappy lady to be pitied! You will do
me honour in acquainting me with farther particulars
of it. 
Dr. Bartlett has told you, madam, that the Bishop
of Nocera, second brother to Lady Clementina, has 

very lately written to me, requesting that I will make
one more visit to Bologna—I have the Letter. You
read Italian, madam. Shall I—Or will you—He held
it to me. 
I took it. These, Lucy, are the contents. 

‘The bishop acquaints him with the very melancholy
way they are in. The father and mother declining
in their healths. Signor Jeronymo worse
than when Sir Charles left them. His Sister also declining
in her health: Yet earnest still to see him. 
‘He says, That she is at present at Urbino; but is
soon to go to Naples to the General's. He urges
him to make them one visit more; yet owns, that
his family are not unanimous in the request: But
that he and Father Marescotti, and the Marchioness,
are extremely earnest that this indulgence should be
granted to the wishes of his dear Sister. 
‘He offers to meet him, at his own appointment,
and conduct him to Bologna; where, he tells him,
his presence will rejoice every heart, and procure an
unanimous consent to the interview so much desired:
And says, that if this measure, which he is sorry he
has so long withstood, answers not his hopes, he
will advise the shutting up of their Clementina
in a Nunnery, or to consign her to private hands,
where she shall be treated kindly, but as persons in
her unhappy circumstances are accustomed to be
treated.’ 

Sir Charles then shewed me a Letter from Signor Jeronymo; 
in which he acquaints him with the dangerous
way he is in. He tells him, ‘That his life is a
burden to him. He wishes it was brought to its
period. He does not think himself in skilful hands. 
He complains most of the wound which is in his
hip-joint; and which has hitherto baffled the art
both of the Italian and French surgeons who have
been consulted. He wishes, that himself and Sir
Charles had been of one country, he says, since 

the greatest felicity he now has to wish for, is to
yield up his life to the Giver of it, in the arms of his
Grandison.’ 
He mentions not one word in this melancholy Letter
of his unhappy sister: Which Sir Charles accounted
for, by supposing, that she not being at Bologna,
they kept from him, in his deplorable way, everything
relating to her, that was likely to disturb him. 
He then read part of a Letter written in English,
by the admired Mrs. Beaumont; some of the contents
of which were, as you shall hear, extremely affecting: 

‘Mrs. Beaumont gives him in it an account of the
situation of the unhappy young lady; and excuses
herself for not having done it before, in answer to
his request, by reason of an indisposition under
which she had for some time laboured, which had
hindered her from making the necessary enquiries. 
‘She mentions, that the Lady had received no benefit
from her journeyings from place to place; and
from her voyage from Leghorn to Naples, and back
again; and blames her attendants, who to quiet her,
unknown to their principals, for some time, kept
her in expectation of seeing her Chevalier, at the
end of each; for her more prudent Camilla, she
says, had been hinder'd by illness from attending her,
in several of the excursions. 
‘They had a second time, at her own request, put
her into a Nunnery. She at first was so sedate in it
as gave them hopes: But the novelty going off, and
one of the sisters, to try her, having officiously asked
her to go with her into the parlour, where she said,
she would be allowed to converse through the grate
with a certain English gentleman, her impatience,
on her disappointment, made her more ungovernable
than they had ever known her; for she had
been for two hours before meditating what she would
say to him. 

‘For a week together, she was vehemently intent
upon being allowed to visit England; and had
engaged her cousins, Sebastiano and Juliano, to
promise to escort her thither, if she could obtain
leave. 
‘Her mother brought her off this when nobody
else could, only by intreating her, for her sake, never
to think of it more. 
‘The Marchioness then, encouraged by this instance
of her obedience, took her under her own
care: But the young Lady going on from flight to
slight; and the way she was in visibly affecting the
health of her indulgent mother; a doctor was found,
who was absolutely of opinion, that nothing but
harsh methods would avail: And in this advice Lady
Sforza, and her daughter Laurana, and the General,
concurring, she was told, that she must prepare to
go to Milan. She was so earnest to be excused from
going thither, and to be permitted to go to Florence
to Mrs. Beaumont, that they gave way to her entreaties; 
and the Marquis himself, accompanying her
to Florence, prevailed on Mrs. Beaumont to take
her under her care. 
‘With her she staid three weeks: She was tolerably
sedate in that space of time; but most so, when she
was talking of England, and of the Chevalier Grandison,
and his sisters, with whom she wished to be
acquainted. She delighted to speak English, and to
talk of the tenderness and goodness of her tutor; 
and of what he said to her, upon such and such a
subject. 
‘At the three weeks end, the General made her a
visit, in company of Lady Sforza; and her talk being
all on this subject, they were both highly displeased; 
and hinted, that she was too much indulged
in it; and, unhappily, she repeating some
tender passages that passed in the interview her mother
had permitted her to hold with the Chevalier, 

the General would have it, that Mr. Grandison had
designedly, from the first, sought to give himself consequence
with her; and expressed himself, on the occasion,
with great violence against him. 
‘He carried his displeasure to extremity, and obliged
her to go away with his aunt and him that
very day, to her great regret; and as much to the
regret of Mrs. Beaumont, and of the Ladies her
friends; who tenderly loved the innocent visionary,
as sometimes they called her. And Mrs. Beaumont
is sure, that the gentle treatment she met with from
them, would in time, tho' perhaps slowly, have
greatly helped her.’ 

Mrs. Beaumont then gives an account of the harsh
treatment the poor young Lady met with. 
Sir Charles Grandison would have stopt reading
here. He said, he could not read it to me, without
such a change of voice, as would add to my pain, as
well as to his own. 
Tears often stole down my cheeks, when I read
the Letters of the Bishop and Signor Jeronymo, and
as Sir Charles read a part of Mrs. Beaumont's Letter:
And I doubted not but what was to follow would
make them flow. Yet, I said, Be pleased, Sir, to
let me read on. I am not a stranger to distress. I can
pity others, or I should not deserve pity myself. 
He pointed to the place; and withdrew to the
window. 
Mrs. Beaumont says, ‘That the poor mother was
prevailed upon to resign her child wholly to the
management of Lady Sforza, and her daughter Laurana,
who took her with them to their Palace in
Milan. 
‘The tender parent, however, besought them to
spare all unnecessary severity; which they promised:
But Laurana objected to Camilla's attendance. She
was thought too indulgent; and her servant Laura,
as a more manageable person, was taken in her place.’ 

And O how cruelly, as you shall hear, did they treat
her! 
Father Marescotti, being obliged to visit a dying relation
at Milan, was desired by the Marchioness to inform
himself of the way her beloved daughter was in,
and of the methods taken with her, Lady Laurana
having in her Letters boasted of both. The good Father
acquainted Mrs. Beaumont with the following
particulars: 

‘He was surprised to find a difficulty made of his
seeing the Lady: But insisting on it, he found her
to be wholly spiritless, and in terror; afraid to speak,
afraid to look, before her cousin Laurana; yet seeming
to want to complain to him. He took notice
of this to Laurana—O Father, said she, we are in
the right way, I assure you: When we had her
first, her Chevalier, and an interview with him,
were ever in her mouth; but now she is in such
order, that she never speaks a word of him. But
what, asked the compassionate Father, must she
have suffered, to be brought to this? Don't you,
Father, trouble yourself about that, replied the
cruel Laurana: The doctors have given their opinion,
that some severity was necessary. It is all for
her good. 
‘The poor Lady expressed herself to him, with
earnestness, after the veil; a subject on which, it
seems, they indulged her; urging, that the only
way to secure her health of mind, if it could be restored,
was to yield to her wishes. Lady Sforza
said, that it was not a point that she herself would
press; but it was her opinion, that her family sinned
in opposing a divine dedication; and, perhaps, their
daughter's malady might be a judgment upon them
for it.’ 

The Father, in his Letter to Mrs. Beaumont, ‘ascribes to Lady Sforza self-interested motives for her
conduct; to Laurana, envy on account of Lady 

Clementina's superior qualities: But nobody, he
says, till now, doubted Laurana's love of her.’ 
Father Marescotti then gives a shocking instance of
the barbarous Laurana's treatment of the noble sufferer
—All for her good—Wretch! how my heart rises
against her! Her servant Laura, under pretence of
confessing to her Bologna Father, in tears, acquainted
him with it. It was perpetrated but the day before. 

‘When any severity was to be exercised upon the
unhappy Lady, Laura was always shut out of her
apartment. Her Lady had said something that she
was to be chidden for. Lady Sforza, who was not
altogether so severe as her daughter, was not at
home. Laura listened, in tears: She heard Laurana
in great wrath with Lady Clementina, and threaten
her—and her young Lady break out to this effect— 
What have I done to you, Laurana, to be so used? 
—You are not the cousin Laurana you used to be? 
You know I am not able to help myself: Why do
you call me crazy, and frantic, Laurana? [Vilc
upbraider, Lucy!] If the Almighty has laid his hand
upon me, should I not be pitied?— 
‘It is all for your good! It is all for your good,
Clementina! You could not always have spoken so
sensibly, cousin. 
‘Cruel Laurana! You loved me once! I have no
Mother, as you have. My Mother was a good
Mother: But she is gone! Or I am gone, I know
not which! 
‘She threatened her then with the Strait Waistcoat,
a punishment which the unhappy Lady was always
greatly terrified at. Laura heard her beg and
pray; but, Laurana coming out, she was forced to retire. 
‘The poor young Lady apprehending her cruel
cousin's return with the threatened waistcoat, and
with the woman that used to be brought in when
they were disposed to terrify her, went down and 

hid herself under a stair-case, where she was soon
discovered by her cloaths, which she had not been
careful to draw in after her.’ 

O Lucy! how I wept! How insupportable to me,
said Sir Charles, would have been my reflexions, had
my conscience told me, that I had been the wilful
cause of the noble Clementina's calamity! 
After I had a little recovered, I read to myself the
next paragraph, which related, ‘that the cruel Laurana
dragged the sweet sufferer by her gown, from her
hiding-place, inveighing against her, threatening her:
She, all patient, resigned, her hands crossed on her
bosom, praying for mercy, not by speech, but by her
eyes, which, however, wept not: And causing her
to be carried up to her chamber, there punished her
with the Strait Waistcoat, as she had threatened. 
‘Father Marescotti was greatly affected with Laura's
relation, as well as with what he had himself
observed: But on his return to Bologna, dreading
to acquaint her mother, for her own sake, with the
treatment her Clementina met with, he only said,
he did not quite approve of it, and advised her not
to oppose the young Lady's being brought home, if
the Bishop and the General came into it: But he
laid the whole matter before the Bishop, who wrote
to the General to join with him out of hand, to release
their sister from her present bondage: And the
General meeting the Bishop on a set day at Milan,
for that purpose, the Lady was accordingly released. 
‘A breach ensued upon it, with Lady Sforza and
her daughter; who would have it, that Clementina
was much better for their management. They had
by terror broke her spirit, and her passiveness was
reckoned upon as an indication of amendment. 
‘The Marchioness being much indisposed, the
young Lady, attended by her Camilla, was carried
to Naples; where it is supposed she now is. Poor
young Lady, how has she been hurried about!— 

But who can think of her cousin Laurana without
extreme indignation? 
‘Mrs. Beaumont writes, that the Bishop would
fain have prevailed upon his brother, the General,
to join with him in an invitation to Sir Charles
Grandison to come over, as a last expedient, before
they locked her up either in a Nunnery, or in some
private house: But the General would by no means
come into it. 
‘He asked, What was proposed to be the end of
Sir Charles's visit, were all that was wished from it
to follow, in his sister's restored mind? —He never,
he said, would give his consent that she should be
the wife of an English protestant. 
‘The Bishop declared, that he was far from wishing
her to be so: But he was for leaving that to
after-consideration. Could they but restore his sister
to her reason, that reason, co-operating with her
principles, might answer all their hopes. 
‘He might try his expedient, the General said,
with all his heart: But he looked upon the Chevalier
Grandison to be a man of art; and he was sure he
must have entangled his sister by methods imperceptible
to her, and to them; but yet more efficacious
to his ends, than an open declaration. Had he not, he
asked, found means to fascinate Olivia, and as many
women as he came into company with? —For his
part, he loved not the Chevalier. He had forced
him by his intrepidity to be civil to him: But forced
civility was but a temporary one. It was his way
to judge of causes by the effects: And this he knew,
that he had lost a sister who would have been a jewel
in the crown of a prince: And would not be answerable
for consequences, if he and Sir Charles Grandison
were once more to meet, be it where it would. 
‘Father Marescotti, however, joining, as the Bishop
writes, with him, and the Marchioness, in a desire
to try this expedient; and being sure that the Marquis 

and Signor Jeronymo would not be averse to
it, he took a resolution to write over to him, as has
been related.’ 
This, Lucy, is the state of the unhappy case, as
briefly and as clearly as my memory will serve to give
it. And what a rememberer, if I may make a word, is
the heart! —Not a circumstance escapes it. 
And now it remained for me to know of Sir Charles
what answer he had returned. 
Was not my situation critical, my dear? Had Sir
Charles asked my opinion, before he had taken his
resolutions, I should have given it with my whole
heart, that he should fly to the comfort of the poor
Lady. But then he would have shewn a suspense
unworthy of Clementina; and a compliment to me,
which a good man, so circumstanced, ought not to
make. 
My regard for him (yet what a poor affected word
is regard!) was nevertheless as strong as ever. Generosity,
or rather justice, to Clementina, and that so
often avowed regard to him, pulled my heart two
ways. —I wanted to consider with myself for a few
moments: I was desirous to clear the conduct that I
was to shew on this trying occasion, as well of precipitance
as of affectation; and my cousin Reeves just
then coming in for something she wanted, I took the
opportunity, while he made a compliment to her, to
say, as to both, I will return immediately: And withdrew. 
I went up to my own apartment. I traversed my
antechamber, three or four times: Harriet Byron,
said I to myself, be not mean. Hast thou not the example
of a Clementina before thee? Her religion and
her love, combating together, have overturned the noble
creature's reason. Thou canst not be called to
such a tryal: But canst thou not shew, that if thou
wert, thou couldst have acted greatly, if not so greatly? 
—Sir Charles Grandison is just: He ought to prefer 

to thee the excellent Clementina. Priority of claim,
compassion for the noble sufferer, merits so superior! — 
I love him for his merits: Shall I not love merits
nearly as great in one of my own sex? The struggle
will cost thee something: But go down, and try to be
above thyself. 
Down I went, not displeased with myself for having
been able to resolve upon such an effort. Banish'd
to thy retirement, to thy pillow, thought I, be all the
girl. Often have I contended for the dignity of my
sex; let me now be an example to myself, and not
unworthy in my own eyes (when I come to reflect)
of an union, could it have been effected, with a man
whom a Clementina looked up to with hope. 
My cousin withdrew when I came in: Sir Charles
met me at the door: I hope he saw dignity in my
aspect, without pride. 
I spoke, while spirit was high in me, and to keep
myself up to it. —My heart bleeds, Sir, for the
distresses of your Clementina [Yes, Lucy, I said your
Clementina]. I could not but withdraw for a few moments
to contemplate her great behaviour; and I most
sincerely lament her distresses. What, that is in the
power of man, cannot Sir Charles Grandison do? 
You have honoured me, Sir, with the title of Sister. 
In the tenderness of that relation, permit me to say,
that I dread the effects of the General's petulance: I
feel next for you the pain that it must give to your
humane heart to be once more personally present to
the woes of the inimitable Clementina: But I am
sure you did not hesitate a moment about leaving all
your friends here in England, and resolving to hasten
over to try, at least, what can be done for the noble
sufferer. 
Had he praised me highly for this my address to him,
it would have looked, such was the situation on both
sides, as if he had thought this disinterested behaviour
in me, an extraordinary piece of magnanimity, and 

self-denial; and, of consequence, as if he had supposed
I had views upon him, which he wonder'd I could
give up. His is the most delicate of human minds. 
He led me to my seat, and taking his by me, still
holding my passive hand—Ever since I have had the
honour of Miss Byron's acquaintance, I have considered
her as one of the most excellent of women. 
My heart demands alliance with hers; and hopes to
be allowed its claim, tho' such are the delicacies of
situation, that I scarcely dare to trust myself to speak
upon the subject. From the first, I called Miss Byron
my sister; but she is more to me than the dearest
sister; and there is a more tender friendship that I
aspire to hold with her, whatever may be the accidents,
on either side, to bar a farther wish: And this I must
hope, that she will not deny me, so long as it shall
be consistent with her other attachments. 
He paused. I made an effort to speak: But speech
was denied me. My face, as I felt, glowed like the
fire before me. 
My heart, resumed he, is ever on my lips. It is
tortured when I cannot speak all that is in it. Professions
I am not accustomed to make. As I am not conscious
of being unworthy of your friendship, I will
suppose it; and farther talk to you of my affairs and
engagements, as that tender friendship may warrant. 
Sir, you do me honour, was all I could say. 
I had a Letter from the faithful Camilla. I hold not
a correspondence with her: But the treatment that her
young Lady met with, of which she had got some general
intimations, and some words that the Bishop
said to her, which expressed his wishes, that I would
make them one more visit at Bologna, urged her to
write, begging of me, for Heaven's sake, to go over. 
But unless one of the family had written to me, and
by consent of others of it, what hope had I of a welcome,
after I had been as often refused, as I had requested
while I was in Italy, to be admitted to the 

presence of the Lady, who was so desirous of one interview
more? —Especially, as Mrs. Beaumont gave
me no encouragement to go, but the contrary, from
what she observed of the inclinations of the family. 
Mrs. Beaumont is still of opinion, as in the conclusion
of the Letter before you, that I should not go,
unless the General and the Marquis join their requests
to those of the Marchioness, the Bishop, and Father
Marescotti. But I had no sooner perused the Bishop's
Letter, than I wrote, that I would most chearfully
comply with his wishes: But that I should be glad that
I might not be under any obligation to go farther than
Bologna; where I might have the happiness to attend
my Jeronymo, as well as his sister. 
I had a little twitch at my heart, Lucy. I was
sorry for it: But my judgment was entirely with him. 
And now, madam, you will wonder, that you see
not any preparations for my departure. All is prepared:
I only wait for the company of one gentleman,
who is settling his affairs with all expedition to go with
me. He is an able, a skilful surgeon, who has had
great practice abroad, and in the armies: And having
acquired an easy fortune, is come to settle in his native
country. My Jeronymo expresses himself dissatisfied
with his surgeons. If Mr. Lowther can be of service
to him, how happy shall I think myself! And
if my presence can be a means to restore the noble
Clementina—But how dare I hope it? —And yet I am
persuaded, that in her case, and with such a temper
of mind (unused to hardship and opposition as she had
been) the only way to recover her, would have been
by complying with her in every-thing that her heart
or head was earnestly set upon: For what controul
was necessary to a young Lady, who never, even in
the height of her malady, uttered a wish or thought
that was contrary to her duty either to God, or her parents; 
nor yet to the honour of her name, and, allow
me, madam, to say, the pride of her sex? 

I am under an obligation to go to Paris, proceeded
he, from the will of my late friend Mr. Danby. I shall
stop there for a day or two only, in order to put
things in a way for my last hand, on my return from
Italy. 
When I am in Italy, I shall perhaps be enabled to
adjust two or three accounts that stand out, in relation
to the affairs of my Ward. 
This day at dinner I shall see Mrs. Oldham, and
her sons; and in the afternoon, at tea, Mrs. O-Hara,
and her Husband, and Captain Salmonet. 
To-morrow, I hope for the honour of your company,
madam, and Mr. and Mrs. Reeves's at dinner; 
and be so good as to engage them, for the rest of the
day. You must not deny me; because I shall want
your influence upon Charlotte, to make her fix Lord
G's happy day, that I may be able to see their hands
united before I set out: As my return will be uncertain— 
Ah, Lucy, more twitches just then!— 
Thursday next is the day fixed for the triple marriage
of the Danby's. I have promised to give Miss
Danby to Mr. Galliard, and to dine with them and
their friends at Enfield. 
If I can see my Lord W. and Charlotte happy before
I go, I shall be highly gratified. 
It is another of my wishes, to see my friend Beauchamp
in England first, and to leave him in possession
of his father's love, and of his mother-in-law's civility. 
Dr. Bartlett and he will be happy in each other. 
I shall correspond with the doctor. He greatly admires
you, madam, and will communicate to you all you
shall think worthy of your notice, relating to the proceedings
of a man who will always think himself honoured
by your enquiries after him. 
Ah, Lucy! Sir Charles Grandison then sighed. He
seemed to look more than he spoke. I will not promise
for my heart, if he treats me with more than 

the tenderness of friendship: If he gives me room to
think that he wishes—But what can he wish? He
ought to be, he must be, Clementina's: And I will endeavour
to make myself happy, if I can maintain the
second place in his friendship: And when he offers
me this, shall I, Lucy, be so little as to be displeased
with the man, who cannot be to me all that I had
once hoped he could be? —No! —He shall be the same
glorious creature in my eyes; I will admire his goodness
of heart, and greatness of mind; and I will think
him intitled to my utmost gratitude for the protection
he gave me from a man of violence, and for the kindness
he has already shewn me. Is not friendship the
basis of my love? And does he not tender me that? 
Nevertheless, at the time, do what I could, I found
a tear ready to start. My heart was very untoward,
Lucy; and I was guilty of a little female turn. When
I found the twinkling of my eyes would not disperse
the too ready drop, and felt it stealing down my cheek,
I wiped it off—The poor Emily, said I—She will be
grieved at parting with you. Emily loves her guardian. 
And I love my ward. I once had a thought, madam,
of begging your protection of Emily: But as I
have two sisters, I think she will be happy under their
wings, and in the protection of my good Lord L.
and the rather, as I have no doubt of overcoming her
unhappy mother, by making her husband's interest a
guaranty for her tolerable, if not good, behaviour to
her child. 
I was glad to carry my thoughts out of myself, as I
may say, and from my own concerns. We all, Sir,
said I, look upon Mr. Beauchamp as a future— 
Husband for Emily, madam, interrupted he? — 
It must not be at my motion. My friend shall be intitled
to share with me my whole estate; but I will
never seek to lead the choice of my Ward. Let
Emily, some time hence, find out the husband she 

can be happy with; Beauchamp the wife he can love:
Emily, if I can help it, shall not be the wife of any
man's convenience. Beauchamp is nice, and I will
be as nice for my Ward. And the more so, as I
hope she herself wants not delicacy. There is a
cruelty in persuasion, where the heart rejects the person
proposed, whether the urger be parent or guardian. 
Lord bless me, thought I, what a man is this! 
Do you expect Mr. Beauchamp soon, Sir? 
Every day, madam. 
And is it possible, Sir, that you can bring all these
things to bear before you leave England, and go so
soon? 
I fear nothing but Charlotte's whimsies: Have you,
madam, any reason to apprehend that she is averse to
an alliance with Lord G.? His father and aunt are
very importunate for an early celebration. 
None at all, Sir. 
Then I shall depend much upon yours, and Lord
and Lady L.'s influence over her. 
He besought my excuse for detaining my attention
so long. Upon his motion to go, my two cousins
came in. He took even a solemn leave of me, and
a very respectful one of them. 
I had kept up my spirits to their utmost stretch: I
besought my cousins to excuse me for a few minutes. 
His departure from me was too solemn; and I hurried
up to my closet; and after a few involuntary sobs, a
flood of tears relieved me. I besought, on my knees,
peace to the disturbed mind of the excellent Clementina,
calmness and resignation to my own, and safety
to Sir Charles. And then, drying my eyes at the glass,
I went down stairs to my cousins; and on their enquities
(with looks of deep concern) after the occasion
of my red eyes, I said, All is over! All is over! my
dear cousins. I cannot blame him: He is all that is
noble and good—I can say no more just now. The
particulars you shall have from my pen. 

I went up stairs to write: And except for one half
hour at dinner, and another at tea, I stopt not till I
had done. 
And here, quite tired, uneasy, vexed with myself,
yet hardly knowing why, I lay down my pen. —Take
what I have written, cousin Reeves: If you can read
it, do: And then dispatch it to my Lucy. 
But, on second thoughts, I will shew it to the two
Ladies, and Lord L. before it is sent away. They will
be curious to know what passed in a conversation,
where the critical circumstances both of us were in,
required a delicacy which I am not sure was so well
observed on my side, as on his. 
I shall, I know, have their pity: But let nobody
who pities not the noble Clementina shew any for 
Harriet Byron. 

