


We set out at about half an Hour after Six,
accordingly; and driving pretty smartly,
got at this truly neat House at half an Hour after
Eight, and found Abraham there; and I was 

much pleas'd with the Neatness of the good
Woman, and her Daughter, and Maid; and he
was so good as to say, He would now-and-then
take a Turn with me to the same Place, and on
the same Occasion, as I seem'd to like it; for that
it would be a pretty Exercise, and procure us Appetites
to our Breakfasts, as well as our Return would
to our Dinners. But I find this was not, altho' a
very good Reason, the only one for which he gave
me this agreeable Airing; as I shall acquaint you. 
We were prettily receiv'd and entertain'd here,
and an Elegancy ran through every thing, Persons
as well as Furniture, yet all plain. And my
Master said to the good Housewife, Do your
young Boarding-school Ladies still at times continue
their Visits to you, Mrs. Dobson? Yes, Sir, said
she, I expect three or four of them every Minute. 
There is, my Dear, said he, within Three
Miles of this Farm, a very good Boarding-school
for Ladies. The Governess of it keeps a Chaise
and Pair, which is to be made a double Chaise
at Pleasure; and in Summer-time, when the
Misses perform their Tasks to Satisfaction, she favours
them with an Airing to this Place, three
or four at a time; and after they have breakfasted,
they are carried back: And this serves both for a
Reward, and for Exercise; and the Misses who
have this Favour, are not a little proud of it; and
it brings them forward in their respective Tasks. 
A very good Method, Sir, said I. And
just as we were talking, the Chaise came in with
Four Misses, all pretty much of a Size, and a
Maid-servant to attend them. They were shewn 

another little neat Apartment, that went thro'
ours; and made their Honours very prettily, as
they pass'd by us. I went into the Room to them,
and asked them Questions about their Work, and
their Lessons; and what they had done to deserve
such a fine Airing and Breakfasting: And they all
answer'd me very prettily. And pray, little Ladies,
said I, what may I call your Names? One
was called Miss Burdoff, one Miss Nugent, one
Miss Booth, and the fourth Miss Goodwin. I
don't know which, said I, is the prettiest; but
you are all best, my little Dears; and you have
a very good Governess, to indulge you with such
a fine Airing, and such delicate Cream, and
Bread and Butter. I hope you think so too. 
My Master came in, and I had no Mistrust in
the world; and he kissed each of them; but
look'd more wistfully on Miss Goodwin, than on
any of the others; but I thought nothing just
then: Had she been called Miss Godfrey, I had
hit upon it in a trice. 
When we went from them, he said, Which
do you think the prettiest of those Misses? Really,
Sir, reply'd I, it is hard to say: Miss Booth is
a pretty brown Girl, and has a fine Eye. Miss
Burdoff has a great deal of Sweetness in her Countenance,
but is not so regularly featur'd. Miss
Nugent is very fair: And Miss Goodwin has a
fine black Eye, and is, besides, I think, the genteelest
shap'd Child; but they are all pretty. 
The Maid led them into the Garden, to shew
them the Bee-hives; and Miss Goodwin made a
particular fine Court'sy to my Master. And I said, 

I believe Miss knows you, Sir. And taking her by
the Hand, I said, Do you know this Gentleman,
my pretty Dear? —Yes, Madam, said she; it is
my own dear Uncle. I clasp'd her in my Arms:
O, why did you not tell me, Sir, said I, that you
had a Niece among these little Ladies? And I
kiss'd her, and a way she tripp'd after the others. 
But pray, Sir, said I, how can this be? — 
You have no Sister nor Brother, but Lady Davers. 
—How can this be? 
He smiled; and then I said, O, my dearest
Sir, tell me now of a Truth, Does not this pretty
Miss stand in a nearer Relation to you, than as a
Niece? —I know she does! I know she does! 
And I embraced him as he stood. 
'Tis even so, my Dear, reply'd he; and you
remember my Sister's good-natur'd Hint of Miss
Sally Godfrey. I do, well, Sir, answer'd I: But
this is Miss Goodwin. Her Mother chose that
for her, said he, because she should not be called
by her own. 
Well, said I, excuse me, Sir; I must go
and have a little Prattle with her. I'll send for
her in again, reply'd he. And in she came, in a
Moment. I took her in my Arms, and said,
O my charming Dear! Will you love me? — 
Will you let me be your Aunt? Yes, Madam,
answer'd she, with all my Heart! And I will
love you dearly: But I mustn't love my Uncle. 
Why so? said he. Because, reply'd she, you
would not speak to me at first! —And because
you would not let me call you, Uncle (for it
seems she was bid not, that I might not guess at 



her presently); and yet, said the pretty Dear, I
hadn't seen you a great while, so I hadn't! 
Well, Pamela, said he, now can you allow
me to love this little Innocent? Allow you,
Sir! reply'd I; you would be very barbarous, if
you did not; and I should be more so, if I did
not further it all I could, and love the little Lamb
myself, for your sake, and for her own sake, and
in Compassion to her poor dear Mother, tho' unknown
to me. And Tears stood in my Eyes. 
Said he, Why, my Love, are your Words
so kind, and your Countenance so sad? —I
drew to the Window, from the Child; and said,
Sad it is not, Sir; but I have a strange Grief and
Pleasure mingled at once in my Breast, on this
Occasion: It is indeed a twofold Grief, and a
twofold Pleasure. As how? my Dear, said he. 
—Why, Sir, reply'd I, I cannot help being
grieved for the poor Mother of this sweet Babe,
to think, if she be living, that she must call her
chiefest Delight her Shame: If she be no more,
that she must have had sad Remorse on her poor
Mind, when she came to leave the World, and
her little Babe: And, in the second Place, I
grieve, that it must be thought a Kindness to the
dear little Soul, not to let her know how near
the dearest Relation she has in the World is to
her. —Forgive me, dear Sir; I say not this to
reproach you, in the least; indeed, I don't. And
I have a twofold Cause of Joy. First, that I have
had the Grace to escape the like Unhappiness
with this poor Gentlewoman; and next, That
this Discovery has given me an Opportunity to 

shew the Sincerity of my grateful Affection for
you, Sir, in the Love I will always express to
this dear Child. 
And then I stepp'd to her again, and kissed
her; and said, Join with me, my pretty Love,
to beg your dear Uncle to let you come and live
with your new Aunt: Indeed, my little Precious,
I'll love you dearly. 
Will you, Sir, said the little Charmer, will
you let me go and live with my Aunt? 
You are very good, my Pamela, said he. 
—And I have not once been deceived in the
Hopes my fond Heart had entertain'd of your
Prudence. —But will you, Sir, said I, will
you grant me this Favour? —I shall most sincerely
love the little Charmer; and all I am
capable of doing for her, both by Example and
Affection, shall most cordially be done. —My
dearest Sir, added I, oblige me in this thing! I
think already my Heart is set upon it! —What
a sweet Imployment and Companionship shall I
have! 
We will talk of this some other Time, reply'd
he; but I must, in Prudence, put some Bounds to
your amiable Generosity. I had always intended
to surprise you into this Discovery; but my Sister
led the Way to it, out of a Poorness in her Spite,
that I could not brook. And altho' you have
pleased me beyond Expression, in your Behaviour
on this Occasion, yet I cannot say, that you have
gone much beyond my Expectations: For I have
such an high Opinion of you, that I think nothing
could have shaken it, but a contrary Conduct 

to this you have expressed on so tender a
Circumstance. 
Well, Sir, said the dear little Miss, then
you will not let me go home with my Aunt,
will you? I am sure she will love me. When
you break up next, my Dear, said he, if you are
a good Girl, you shall pay your new Aunt a
Visit. She made a low Court'sy: Thank you,
Sir, answer'd she. Yes, my Dear, said I, and I
will get you some fine Things against the Time. 
I would have brought some now, had I known
I should have seen my pretty Love. Thank you,
Madam, return'd she. 
How old, Sir, said I, is Miss? Between Six
and Seven, answer'd he. Was she ever, Sir,
said I, at your House? My Sister, reply'd he,
carry'd her thither once, as a little Relation of
her Lord's. I remember, Sir, said I, a little
Miss; and Mrs. Jervis and I took her to be a
Relation of Lord Davers. 
My Sister, return'd he, knew the whole Secret
from the Beginning: And it made her a great
Merit with me, that she kept it from the Knowlege
of my Father, who was then living, and of
my Mother, to her Dying-day; altho' she descended
so low, in her Rage, to hint the Matter
to you. 
The little Misses took their Leaves soon
after: And I know not how, but I am strangely
affected with this dear Child. I wish he would
be so good as to let me have her home. It
would be a great Pleasure to have such a fine
Opportunity, obliged as I am, to shew my 

Love for himself, in my Fondness for this dear
Miss. 
As we came home together in the Chariot,
he gave me the following Particulars of this
Affair, additional to what he had before mention'd: 
That this Lady was of a good Family, and
the Flower of it: But that her Mother was a Person
of great Art and Address, and not altogether
so nice in the Particular between himself
and Miss, as she ought to have been. That, for
Instance, when she had Reason to find him unsettled
and wild, and her Daughter in more
Danger from him, than he was from her, yet
she incouraged their Privacies: And, even at
last, when she had Reason to apprehend, from
their being surprised together, in a way not so
creditable to the Lady. that she was far from
forbidding their private Meetings: On the contrary,
that on a certain Time, she had set one,
that had formerly been her Footman, and an
Half-pay Officer, her Relation, to watch an Opportunity,
and to frighten him into a Marriage
with the Lady. That, accordingly, when they
had surprised him in her Chamber, just as he
had been let in, they drew their Swords upon
him, and threaten'd instantly to kill him,
if he did not promise Marriage on the Spot; and
that they had a Parson ready below Stairs, as he
found afterwards. That then he suspected, from
some strong Circumstances, that Miss was in
the Plot; which so inraged him, with their
Menaces together, that he drew, and stood upon 

his Defence; and was so much in Earnest, that
the Man he pushed into the Arm, and disabled; 
and pressing pretty forward upon the other, as
he retreated, he rushed in upon him, near the
Top of the Stairs, and pushed him down one
Pair, and he was much hurt with the Fall. — 
Not but that, he said, he might have paid for
his Rashness; but that the Business of his Antagonists
was rather to frighten than to kill him. 
That, upon this, in the Sight of the old Lady,
the Parson she had provided, and her other
Daughters, he went out of their House, with
bitter Execrations against them all. 
That after this, designing to break off all
Correspondence with the whole Family, and
Miss too, she found means to ingage him to
give her a Meeting at Woodstock, in order to
clear herself. That, poor Lady! she was there
obliged, naughty Creature as he was! to make
herself quite guilty of a worse Fault, in order
to clear herself of a lighter. That they afterwards
met at Godstow often, at Woodstock, and
every neighbouring Place to Oxford, where he
was then studying, as it prov'd, guilty Lessons,
instead of improving ones; till at last, the Effect
of their frequent Interviews grew too obvious
to be concealed. That the young Lady then,
when she was not fit to be seen, for the Credit
of the Family, was confin'd, and all manner of
Means were used to induce him to marry her. 
That, finding nothing would do, they at last
resolved to complain to his Father and Mother. 
But that he made his Sister acquainted with the 

Matter, who then happen'd to be at home; and
by her Management and Spirit, their Intentions
of that sort were frustrated; and seeing no Hopes,
they agreed to Lady Davers's Proposals, and
sent poor Miss down to Marlborough, where, at
her Expence, which he answer'd to her again,
she was provided for, and privately lay-in. That
Lady Davers took upon herself the Care of the
Little-one, till it came to be fit to be put to the
Boarding-school, where it now is: And that he
had settled upon the dear little Miss such a Sum
of Money, as the Interest of it would handsomely
provide for her; and the Principal would be a
tolerable Fortune, fit for a Gentlewoman, when
she came to be marriageable. And this, my Dear,
said he, is the Story in brief. And I do assure
you, Pamela, added he, I am far from making
a Boast of, or taking a Pride in, this Affair: But
since it has happen'd, I cannot say but I wish the
poor Child to live, and be happy; and I must
endeavour to make her so. 
Sir, said I, to be sure you should; and I
shall take a very great Pride to contribute to the
dear little Soul's Felicity, if you will permit me
to have her home. —But, added I, does Miss
know any thing who are her Father and Mother? 
—I wanted him to say, if the poor
Lady was living or dead. —No, answer'd he. 
Her Governess has been told, by my Sister,
That she is the Daughter of a Gentleman and
his Lady, who are related, at a Distance, to
Lord Davers, and now live at Jamaica; and
she calls me Uncle, only because I am the Brother 

to Lady Davers, whom she calls Aunt,
and who is very fond of her; as is also my
Lord, who knows the whole Matter; and they
have her, at all her little School Recesses at
their House, and are very kind to her. 
I believe, added he, the Truth of the
Matter is very little known or suspected; for as
her Mother is of no mean Family, her Friends
endeavour to keep it secret, as much as I; and
Lady Davers, till her Wrath boil'd over, the
other Day, has managed the Matter very dextrously
and kindly. 
The Words, Mother is of no mean Family,
gave me not to doubt the poor Lady was living. 
And I said, But how, Sir, can the dear Miss's
poor Mother be content to deny herself the
Injoyment of so sweet a Child? Ay, Pamela,
reply'd he, now you come in; I see you want
to know what's become of the poor Mother. 
—'Tis natural enough you should; but I was
willing to see how the little Suspense would
operate upon you. —Dear Sir, said I—Nay,
reply'd he, 'tis very natural, my Dear! I think
you have had a great deal of Patience, and are
come at this Question so fairly, that you deserve
to be answer'd. 
You must know then, there is some Foundation
for saying, That her Mother, at least,
lives in Jamaica; for there she does live, and
very happily too. For I must observe, that she
suffer'd so much in Childbed, that nobody
expected her Life; and this, when she was up,
made such an Impression upon her, that she 

dreaded nothing so much as the Thoughts of
returning to her former Fault; and, to say the
Truth, I had intended to make her a Visit, as
soon as her Month was well up. And so, unknown
to me, she ingaged herself to go to
Jamaica, with Two young Ladies, who were
born there; and were returning to their Friends,
after they had been Four Years in England for
their Education; and recommending to me, by
a very moving Letter, her little Baby, and that
I would not suffer it to be called by her Name,
but Goodwin, that her Shame might be the less
known, for hers and her Family's sake; she got
her Friends to assign her Five hundred Pounds,
in full of all her Demands upon her Family,
and went up to London, and imbark'd, with
her Companions, at Gravesend, and so sail'd
to Jamaica; where she is since well and happily
marry'd; passing, to her Husband, for a
young Widow, with one Daughter, which her
first Husband's Friends take care of, and provide
for. And so, you see, Pamela, that in the
whole Story on both sides, the Truth is as much
preserv'd as possible. 
Poor Lady! said I; how her Story moves
me! —I am glad she is so happy at last: And,
my Dear, said he, are you not glad she is so far
off too? —As to that, Sir, said I, I cannot
be sorry, to be sure, as she is so happy; which
she could not have been here. For, Sir, I
doubt, you would have proceeded with your
Temptations, if she had not gone; and it shew'd 

she was much in Earnest to be good, that she
could leave her native Country, leave all her
Relations, leave you, whom she so well lov'd,
leave her dear Baby, and try a new Fortune, in
a new World, among quite Strangers, and hazard
the Seas; and all to preserve herself from
further Guiltiness! Indeed, indeed, Sir, said I,
I bleed for what her Distresses must be in this
Case: I am griev'd for her poor Mind's Remorse,
thro' her Childbed Terrors, which could have
so great and so worthy an Effect upon her afterwards; 
and I honour her Resolution, and
should rank such a returning dear Lady in the
Class of those who are most virtuous, and
doubt not God Almighty's Mercies to her; 
and that her present Happiness is the Result
of his gracious Providence, blessing her Penitence
and Reformation. —But, Sir, said I,
Did you not once see the poor Lady after her
Lying-in? 
I did not believe her so much in Earnest
answer'd he; and I went down to Marlborough,
and heard she was gone from thence to Calne. 
I went to Calne, and heard she was gone to
Reading, to a Relation's there. Thither I
went, and heard she was gone to Oxford. I
follow'd; and there she was; but I could not
come at her Speech. 
She at last receiv'd a Letter from me, begging
a Meeting with her; for I found her Departure
with the Ladies was resolv'd upon, and
that she was with her Friends, only to take
Leave of them, and receive her agreed-on Portion: 

And she appointed the Saturday following,
and that was Wednesday, to give me a
Meeting at the old Place, at Woodstock. 
Then, added he, I thought I was sure of
her, and doubted not I should spoil her intended
Voyage. I set out on Thursday to
Gloucester, on a Party of Pleasure; and on Saturday
I went to the Place appointed, at
Woodstock: But when I came thither, I found
a Letter instead of my Lady; and when I open'd
it, it was to beg my Pardon for deceiving me; 
Expressing her Concern for her past Fault, her
Affection for me; and the Apprehension she
had, that she should be unable to keep her good
Resolves, if she met me: That she had set out
the Thursday for her Imbarkation; for that she
fear'd nothing else could save her; and had
appointed this Meeting on Saturday, at the
Place of her former Guilt, that I might be suitably
impress'd upon the Occasion, and pity and
allow for her; and that she might get three or
four Days start of me, and be quite out of my
Reach. She recommended again, as upon the
Spot where the poor Little-one owed its Being,
my Tenderness to it for her sake: and that was
all she had to request of me, she said; but
would not forget to pray for me in all her own
Dangers, and in every Difficulty she was going
to incounter. 
I wept at this moving Tale: And did not
this make a deep Impression upon you, Sir?
said I: Surely, such an affecting Lesson as this,
on the very guilty Spot too, (I admire the dear 

Lady's pious Contrivance!) must have had a
great Effect upon you. One would have
thought, Sir, it was enough to reclaim you for
ever! All your naughty Purposes, I make no
doubt, were quite changed! 
Why, my Dear, reply'd he, I was much
mov'd, you may be sure, when I came to
reflect: But, at first, I was so assured of being a
successful Tempter, and spoiling her Voyage,
that I was vex'd, and much out of Humour; 
altho', when I came to reflect, as I said, I was
quite overcome with this Instance of her Prudence,
her Penitence, and her Resolution; and
more admired her than I had ever done. Yet
I could not bear she should so escape me neither; 
so much overcome me, as it were, in an
heroical Bravery; and I hasten'd away, and got
a Bill of Credit of Lord Davers, upon his
Banker in London, for Five hundred Pounds; 
and set out for that Place, having called at Oxford,
and got what Light I could, as to where I
might hear of her, there. 
When I arrived in Town, which was not
till Monday Morning, I went to a Place called
Crosby-square, where the Friends of the Two
Ladies lived. She had set out, in the Flying-coach,
on Tuesday, got to the Two Ladies
that very Night; and, on Saturday, had set
out, with them, for Gravesend, much about
the Time I was expecting her at Woodstock. 
You may suppose, that I was much affected,
my Dear, with this. However, I got my Bill
of Credit converted into Money; and I set 

out, with my Servant, on Monday Afternoon,
and reached Gravesend that Night; and there
I understood, that she and the Two Ladies had
gone on Board from the very Inn I put up at,
in the Morning; and the Ship waited only
for the Wind, which then was turning about
in its Favour. 
I got a Boat directly, and went on Board
the Ship, and ask'd for Mrs. Godfrey. But
judge you, my dear Pamela, her Surprize and
Confusion when she saw me. She had like to
have fainted away. I offer'd any Money to
put off the Sailing till next Day, but it would
not be comply'd with; and fain would I have
got her on Shore, and promised to attend her,
(if she would go) over Land, to any Part of
England the Ship would touch at. But she
was immoveable. 
Every one concluded me her humble Servant,
and were touch'd at the moving Interview; 
the young Ladies, and their Female
Attendants, especially. With great Difficulty,
upon my solemn Assurances of Honour, she
trusted herself with me in one of the Cabins; 
and there I try'd, what I could, to prevail upon
her to quit her Purpose: But all in vain: She
said, I had made her quite unhappy by this
Interview! She had Difficulties enough upon
her Mind before; but now I had imbitter'd all
her Voyage, and given her the deepest Distress. 
I could prevail upon her but for one Favour,
and that with the greatest Reluctance; 

which was, to accept of the Five hundred Pounds,
as a Present from me; and she promised, at my
earnest Desire, to draw upon me for a greater
Sum, as a Person that had her Effects in my
Hands, when she arriv'd, if she should find it
convenient for her. In short, this was all the
Favour I could procure; for she would not
promise so much as to correspond with me,
and was dotermin'd on going; and, I believe,
if I would have marry'd her, which yet I had
not in my Head, she would not have been diverted
from her Purpose. 
But how, Sir, said I, did you part? I would
have sail'd with her, answer'd he, and been
landed at the first Port, in England, or Ireland,
I cared not which, they should put in at. But
she was too full of Apprehensions to admit it; 
and the rough Fellow of a Master, Captain they
call'd him, (but, in my Mind, I could have
thrown him overboard) would not stay a Moment,
the Wind and Tide being quite fair; 
and was very urgent with me to go ashore, or to
go the Voyage; and being impetuous in my
Temper, spoil'd, you know, my Dear, by my
Mother, and not used to Controul, I thought it
very strange, that Wind and Tide, or any thing
else, should be preferr'd to me and my Money:
But so it was, I was forc'd to go, and so took
Leave of the Ladies and the other Passengers; 
wish'd them a good Voyage; gave Five Guineas
among the Ship's Crew, to be good to the
Ladies; and took such a Leave as you may better
imagine, than I express. She recommended,
once more, to me, the dear Guest, as she 

call'd her, the Ladies being present; and thank'd
me for all these Instances of my Regard, which,
she said, would leave a strong Impression on
her Mind; and, at parting, she threw her Arms
about my Neck, and we took such a Leave,
as affected every one present, Men as well as
Ladies. 
So, with a truly heavy Heart, I went down
the Ship's Side to my Boat; and stood up in it,
looking at her, as long as I could see her, and
she at me, with her Handkerchief at her Eyes; 
and then I gaz'd at the Ship, till and after I had
landed, as long as I could discern the least Appearance
of it; for she was under Sail, in a
manner, when I left her: And so I return'd
highly disturb'd, to my Inn. 
I went to-bed, but rested not; return'd to
London the next Morning; and set out that
Afternoon again, for the Country. And so
much, my Dear, for poor Sally Godfrey. — 
She sends, I understand, by all Opportunities,
with the Knowlege of her Husband, to learn
how her Child, by her first Husband, does; 
and has the Satisfaction to know she is happily
provided for. And, about half a Year ago,
her Spouse sent a little Negro Boy, of about
Ten Years old, as a Present, to wait upon her. 
But he was taken ill of the Small-pox, and
died in a Month after he was landed. 
Sure, Sir, said I, your generous Mind
must have been long affected with this melancholy
Case, and all its Circumstances. 
It hung upon me, indeed, some time, said
he; but I was full of Spirits and Inconsideration. 

I went soon after to travel; a Hundred new
Objects danc'd before my Eyes, and kept Reflection
from me. And, you see, I had, five or
six Years afterwards, and even before that, so
thoroughly lost all the Impressions you talk of,
that I doubted not to make my Pamela change
her Name, without either Act of Parliament or
Wedlock, and be Sally Godfrey the Second. 
O you dear naughty Gentleman! said I; 
this seems but too true! But I bless God, that it
is not so! —I bless God for your Reformation,
and that for your own dear sake, as well
as mine! 
Well, my Dear, said he, and I bless God
for it too! —I do most sincerely! —And 'tis
my greater Pleasure, because I have, as I hope,
seen my Error so early; and that with such a
Stock of Youth and Health on my Side, in all
Appearance, I can truly abhor my past Liberties,
and pity poor Sally Godfrey, from the same
Motives that I admire my Pamela's Virtues; 
and resolve to make myself as worthy of them
as possible: And I will hope, my Dear, your
Prayers for my Pardon and my Perseverance,
will be of no small Efficacy on this Occasion. 
These agreeable Reflections, on this melancholy,
but instructive, Story, brought us in
View of his own House; where we alighted,
and took a Walk in the Garden till Dinner was
ready. And now we are so busy about making
ready for our Appearance, that I shall hardly
have time to write till that be over. 
