



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Thursday Morning. 
I will now take some notice of your last favour. 
But being so far behind-hand with you, must be
brief. 
In the first place, as to your reproofs, thus shall I
discharge myself of that part of my subject: Is it
likely, think you, that I should avoid deserving them
now-and-then, occasionally, when I admire the manner
in which you give me your rebukes, and love you
the better for them? And when you are so well intitled
to give them? For what faults can you possibly
have, unless your relations are so kind as to find you
a few to keep their many in countenance? —But,
They are as kind to me in This, as to you; for I
may venture to affirm, That any one who should
read your letters, and would say, you were right,
would not, on reading mine, condemn me for being
quite wrong. 
Your resolution, not to leave your father's house,
is right—if you can stay in it, and avoid being
Solmes's wife. 
I think you answer'd Solmes's letter, as I should
have answer'd it. —Will you not compliment me and
yourself at once; by saying, that That was right? 

You have, in your letters to your uncle, and the
rest, done all that you ought to do. You are wholly
guiltless of the consequence, be it what it will. To
offer to give up your estate! —That would not I
have done! —You see, this offer stagger'd them: 
They took time to consider of it: They made my
heart ake in the time they took: I was afraid they
would have taken you at your word: And so, but
for shame, and for fear of Lovelace, I dare say, they
would. —You are too noble by half for them. This,
I repeat, is an offer I would not have made. Let me
beg of you, my dear, never to repeat the temptation
to them. 
I freely own to you, that their usage of you upon it,
and Lovelace's different behaviour in his letter received
at the same time, would have made me his, past redemption. 
The duce take the man, I was going to
say, for not having had so much regard to his character
and morals, as would have intirely justify'd
such a step in a Clarissa Harlowe, persecuted as she is! 
I wonder not at your appointment with him. I
may further touch upon some part of this subject by-and-by. 
Pray, pray, I pray you now, my dearest friend,
contrive to send your Betty Barnes to me! —Does
the Coventry-act extend to women, know ye? — 
The least I would do, should be, to send her home
well soused in, and dragged thro', our deepest horsepond. 
I'll engage, if I get her hither, that she shall
keep the anniversary of her deliverance as long as she
lives. 
I wonder not at Lovelace's saucy answer, saucy
as it really is. If he loves you as he ought, he must
be vex'd at so great a disappointment. The man must
have been a detestable hypocrite, I think, had he not
shewn his vexation. Your expectations of such a
Christian command of temper in him, in a disappointment
of this nature especially, are too early, by 

almost half a century, in a man of his constitution. 
But, nevertheless, I am very far from blaming you
for your resentment. 
I shall be all impatience to know how this matter
ends between you and him. But a few inches of
brick-wall between you so lately; and now such
mountains! —And you think to hold it! —May
be so!— 
You see the temper he shew'd in his preceding
letter was not natural to him, you say. And did
you before think it was? Insolent creepers and insinuators! 
Inch-allow'd, ell-taking incroachers! — 
This very Hickman, I make no doubt, will be as
saucy as your Lovelace, if ever he dare. He has
not half the arrogant bravery of the other, and can
better hide his horns; that's all. But whenever he
has the power, depend upon it, he will butt at one
as valiantly as the other. 
If ever I should be persuaded to have him, I shall
watch how the imperative Husband comes upon him; 
how the obsequious Lover goes off; in short, how he
ascends, and how I descend, in the matrimonial wheel,
never to take my turn again, but by fits and starts,
like the feeble struggles of a sinking state for is dying
liberty. 
All good-natured men are passionate, says Mr. Lovelace. 
A pretty plea to a beloved object in the plenitude
of her power! As much as to say, Greatly as
I value you, Madam, I will not take pains to curb
my passions to oblige you. —Methinks, I should be
glad to hear from Mr. Hickman such a plea for good-nature
as this! 
Indeed, we are too apt to make allowances for
such tempers as early indulgence has made uncontroulable; 
and therefore habitually evil. But if a
boistrous temper, when under obligation, is to be
thus allowed for, what, which the tables are turned,
will it expect? You know a husband, who, I fancy, 

had some of these early allowances made for him: 
And you see, that neither himself, nor any-body else,
is the happier for it! 
The suiting of the tempers of two persons who are
to come together, is a great matter: And yet there
should be boundaries fixed between them, by consent,
as it were, beyond which neither should go: And
each should hold the other to it; or there would probably
be incroachments in both. If the boundaries of
the Three Estates that constitute our Political Union
were not known, and occasionally asserted, what
would become of each? The two branches of the
Legislature would incroach upon each other; and the
Executive power would swallow up both. 
If two persons of discretion, you'll say, come tother— 
Ay, my dear, that's true: But, if none but persons
of discretion were to marry—And would it not
surprise you if I were to advance, that the persons of
discretion are generally single? —Such persons are apt
to consider too much, to resolve. —Are not you and
I complimented as such? —And would either of us
marry, if the fellows, and our friends, would let us
alone? 
But to the former point;—Had Lovelace made his
addresses to me (unless, indeed, I had been taken
with a liking for him more than conditional), I would
have forbid him, upon the first passionate instance of
his good-nature, as he calls it, ever to see me more: 
‘Thou must bear with me, honest friend, might I
have said (had I condescended to say any thing to
him), an hundred times more than This: —Begone,
therefore;—I bear with no passions that are predominant
to That thou hast pretended for me.’ 
But to one of your mild and gentle temper, it
would be all one, were you marry'd, whether the
man be a Lovelace or a Hickman in his spirit. —You
are so obediently principled, that perhaps you would 

have told a mild man, that he must not intreat, but
command; and that it was beneath him not to exact
from you the obedience you had so solemnly vow'd
to him at the altar. —I know of old, my dear, your
meek regard to that little piddling part of the marriage-vow,
which some prerogative-monger foisted
into the office, to make That a duty, which he knew
was not a right. 
Our way of training-up, you say, makes us need
the protection of the brave: Very true: And how extremely
brave and gallant is it, that this brave man
will free us from all insults, but Those which will go
nearest to us; that is to say, His own! 
How artfully has Lovelace, in the abstract you
give me of one of his letters, calculated to your meridian; 
Generous spirits hate compulsion! —He is certainly
a deeper creature by much than once we thought
him. He knows, as you intimate, that his own wild
pranks cannot be concealed; and so owns just enough
to palliate (because it teaches you not to be surprised
at) any new one, that may come to your ears; and
then, truly, he is (however faulty) a mighty ingenuous
man; and by no means an hypocrite: A character,
when found out, the most odious of all others,
to our sex, in the other; were it only because it
teaches us to doubt the justice of the praises such a
man gives us, when we are willing to believe them
to be our due. 
By means of this supposed ingenuity, Lovelace obtains
a praise, instead of a merited dispraise; and, like
an absolved confessionaire, wipes off, as he goes along,
one score, to begin another: For an eye favourable to
him will not magnify his faults; nor will a woman,
willing to hope the best, forbear to impute to ill-will
and prejudice all that charity can make so imputable. 
And if she even give credit to such of the unfavourable
imputations, as may be too flagrant to be doubted; 
she will be very apt to take in the future hope, 

which he inculcates, and which to question would be
to question her own power, and perhaps merit: And
thus may a woman be inclined to make a slight, or
even a fancied, virtue atone for the most glaring vice. 
I have a reason, a new one, for this preachment
upon a text you have given me. But, till I am better
inform'd, I will not explain myself. If it come out,
as I shrewdly suspect it will, the man, my dear, is a
devil; and you must rather think of—I protest I
had like to have said—Solmes, than him. 
But let This be as it will, shall I tell you, how,
after all his offences, he may creep in with you again? 
I will. —Thus then: It is but to claim for himself
the good-natur'd character: And This, granted,
will blot out the fault of passionate insolence: And so
he will have nothing to do, but This hour to accustom
you to insult; the Next, to bring you to forgive
him, upon his submission: The consequence will be,
that he will, by this see-saw teazing, break your resentment
all to pieces: And then, a little more of the
insult, and a little less of the submission, on his part,
will go down, till nothing else but the first will be
seen, and not a bit of the second: You will then be
afraid to provoke so offensive a spirit; and at last will
be brought so prettily, and so audibly, to pronounce
the little reptile word Obey, that it will do one's
heart good to hear you. The Muscovite wife takes
place of the managed mistress. —And, if you doubt
the progression, be pleased, my dear, to take your
mamma's judgment upon it. 
But no more of This just now. Your story is become
too arduous to dwell upon these sort of topics. 
And yet this is but an affected levity with me. My
heart, as I have heretofore said, is a sincere sharer in
all your distresses. My sunshine darts but thro' a
drizly cloud. My eye, were you to see it, when it
seems to you so gladden'd, as you mention in a former,
is more than ready to overflow, even at the 

very passages, perhaps, upon which you impute to
me the archness of exultation. 
But now the unheard of cruelty and perverseness
of some of your friends [Relations, I should say; I am
always blundering thus!]; the as strange determinedness
of others; your present quarrel with Lovelace; 
and your approaching interview with Solmes, from
which you are right to apprehend a great deal; are
such considerable circumstances in your story, that it
is fit they should ingross all my attention. 
You ask me to advise you how to behave upon
Solmes's visit. I cannot for my life. I know they
expect a great deal from it: You had not else had
your long day comply'd with. All I will say is, That
if Solmes cannot be prevailed for, now, that Lovelace
has so much offended you, he never will. When
the interview is over, I doubt not but that I shall
have reason to say, that All you did, that All you
said, was right, and could not be better: Yet, if I
don't think so, I won't say so; that I promise you. 
Only, let me advise you, to pull up a spirit, even
to your uncle, if there be occasion. Resent the vile
and foolish treatment you meet with, in which he
has taken so large a share, and make him asham'd of
it, if you can. 
I know not, upon recollection, but This interview
may be a good thing for you, however design'd. For
when Solmes sees (if that is to be so), that it is impossible
he should succeed with you; and your relations
see it too; the one must, I think, recede, and
the other come to terms with you; upon offers, that
it is my opinion, will go hard enough with you to
comply with; when the still harder are dispensed
with. 
There are several passages in your last letters, as
well as in your former, which authorize me to say
This. But it would be unseasonable to touch this
subject further just now. 

But, upon the whole, I have no patience to see
you thus made the sport of your brother's and sister's
cruelty: For what, after so much steadiness on your
part, in so many trials, can be their hope? 
I approve of your intention to send out of their
reach all the letters and papers you would not have
them see. Methinks, I would wish you to deposite
likewise a parcel of cloaths, linen, &c. before your
interview with Solmes; lest you should not have an
opportunity for it afterwards. Robin shall fetch it
away on the first orders, by day or by night. 
I am in hopes to procure from my mamma, if
things come to extremity, leave for you to be privately
with us. 
I will condition to be good-humour'd, and even
kind, to Her favourite, if she will shew me an indulgence,
that shall make me serviceable to Mine. 
It has been a good while in my head. But I cannot
promise that I shall succeed in it. 
Don't absolutely despair, however, my dear. Your
quarrel with Lovelace may be a help to it. And the
offers you made, in your answer to your uncle Harlowe's
letter of Sunday night last, may be another. 
I depend upon your forgiveness of all the, perhaps
unseasonable, flippancies of your naturally too lively,
yet most sincerely sympathizing, 
Anna Howe. 
