



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 
[After her Return from her.] 

Harlowe-Place, Feb. 20. 
I beg your excuse for not writing sooner. Alas,
my dear, I have sad prospects before me! My
Brother and Sister have succeeded in all their views. 
They have found out another Lover for me; an hideous
one! —Yet he is encouraged by every-body. 
No wonder that I was ordered home so suddenly. At 

an hour's warning! —No other notice, you know,
than what was brought with the chariot that was to
carry me back. —It was for fear, as I have been informed
[an unworthy fear!] that I should have entered
into any concert with Mr. Lovelace had I
known their motive for commanding me home; apprehending,
'tis evident, that I should dislike the man
they had to propose to me. 
And well might they apprehend so: —For who do
you think he is? —No other than that Solmes! — 
Could you have believed it? —And they are all determined
too; my Mother with the rest! —Dear, dear
excellence! how could she be thus brought over, when
I am assured, that on his first being proposed she was
pleased to say, That had Mr. Solmes the Indies in possession,
and would endow me with them, she should
not think him deserving of her Clarissa! 
The reception I met with at my return, so different
from what I used to meet with on every little absence
[And now I had been from them three weeks]
convinced me that I was to suffer for the happiness I
had had in your company and conversation for that
most agreeable period. I will give you an account
of it. 
My Brother met me at the door, and gave me his
hand when I stepped out of the chariot. He bowed
very low; Pray, Miss, favour me. —I thought it in
good humour; but found it afterwards mock-respect: 
And so he led me in great form, I prattling all the
way, enquiring of every-body's health (altho' I was so
soon to see them, and there was hardly time for answers)
into the Great Parlour; where were my Father,
Mother, my two Uncles, and Sister. 
I was struck all of a heap as soon as I entered, to
see a solemnity which I had been so little used to on
the like occasions in the countenance of every dear
relation. They all kept their seats. I ran to my
Father, and kneeled: Then to my Mother: And met 

from both a cold salute: From my Father a blessing
but half pronounced: My Mother indeed called me
Child; but embraced me not with her usual indulgent
ardor. 
After I had paid my duty to my Uncles, and my
compliments to my Sister, which she received with
solemn and stiff form, I was bid to sit down. But my
heart was full: And I said it became me to stand, if
I could stand, upon a reception so awful and unusual. 
I was forced to turn my face from them, and pull out
my handkerchief. 
My unbrotherly accuser hereupon stood forth, and
charged me with having received no less than five or
six visits at Miss Howe's from the man they had all
so much reason to hate [that was the expression]; notwithstanding
the commands I had had to the contrary. 
And he bid me deny it if I could. 
I had never been used, I said, to deny the truth; 
nor would I now. I owned I had in the three weeks
passed seen the person I presumed he meant oftener
than five or six times [Pray hear me, Brother, said I; 
for he was going to flame out]. But he always asked
for Mrs. or Miss Howe, when he came. 
I proceeded, That I had reason to believe, that
both Mrs. Howe and Miss, as matters stood, would
much rather have excused his visits; but they had
more than once apologized, that having not the same
reason my Papa had to forbid him their house, his
rank and fortune entitled him to civility. 
You see, my dear, I made not the pleas I might have
made. 
My Brother seemed ready to give a loose to his passion: 
My Father put on the countenance which always
portends a gathering storm: My Uncles mutteringly
whispered: And my Sister aggravatingly held
up her hands. While I begged to be heard out;— 
and my Mother said, Let the child, that was her kind
word, be heard. 

I hoped, I said, there was no harm done: That it
became not me to prescribe to Mrs. or Miss Howe
who should be their visiters: That Mrs. Howe was
always diverted with the raillery that passed between
Miss and him: That I had no reason to challenge her
guest for my visiter, as I should seem to have done had
I refused to go into their company when he was with
them: That I had never seen him out of the presence
of one or both of those Ladies; and had signified to
him once, on his urging for a few moments private
conversation with me, that unless a Reconciliation
were effected between my family and his, he must
not expect that I would countenance his visits, much
less give him an opportunity of that sort. 
I told them further, That Miss Howe so well understood
my mind, that she never left me a moment
while Mr. Lovelace was there: That when he came,
if I was not below in the Parlour, I would not suffer
myself to be called to him: Altho' I thought it would
be an affectation which would give him advantage rather
than the contrary, if I had left company when he
came in; or refused to enter into it when I found he
would stay any time. 
My Brother heard me out with such a kind of impatience
as shewed he was resolved to be dissatisfied
with me, say what I would. The rest, as the event
has proved, behaved as if they would have been satisfied,
had they not further points to carry by intimidating
me. All this made it evident, as I mentioned
above, that they themselves expected not my voluntary
compliance; and was a tacit confession of the disagreeableness
of the person they had to propose. 
I was no sooner silent than my Brother swore, altho'
in my Father's presence (swore, unchecked either by
eye or countenance) That for his part, he would never
be reconciled to that Libertine: And that he would
renounce me for a Sister, if I encouraged the addresses
of a man so obnoxious to them all.— 

A man who had like to have been my Brother's
murderer, my Sister said, with a face even bursting
with restraint of passion. 
The poor Bella has, you know, a plump high-fed
face, if I may be allowed the expression. You I
know, will forgive me for this liberty of speech sooner
than I can forgive myself: Yet how can one be such
a reptile as not to turn when trampled upon! 
My Father, with vehemence both of action and
voice [My Father has, you know, a terrible voice
when he is angry!] told me, that I had met with
too much indulgence in being allowed to refuse this
gentleman, and the other gentleman; and it was now
his turn to be obeyed. 
Very true, my Mother said: —And hoped his will
would not now be disputed by a child so favoured. 
To shew they were all of a sentiment, my Uncle
Harlowe said, He hoped his beloved Niece only
wanted to know her Father's will, to obey it. 
And my Uncle Antony, in his rougher manner,
added, That surely I would not give them reason to
apprehend, that I thought my Grandfather's favour
to me had made me independent of them all. —If I
did, he would tell me, the Will could be set aside, and
should. 
I was astonished, you must needs think. —Whose
addresses now, thought I, is this treatment preparative
to? —Mr. Wyerley's again?—or whose? And
then, as high comparisons, where self is concerned,
sooner than low, come into young peoples heads; 
Be it for whom it will, this is wooing as the English
did for the heiress of Scotland in the time of Edward
the Sixth. But that it could be for Solmes, how
should it enter into my head? 
I did not know, I said, that I had given occasion
for this harshness. I hoped I should always have a
just sense of every one's favour to me, superadded to
the duty I owed as a Daughter and a Niece: But 

that I was so much surprised at a reception so unusual
and unexpected, that I hoped my Papa and Mamma
would give me leave to retire, in order to recollect
myself. 
No one gainsaying, I made my silent compliments,
and withdrew;—leaving my Brother and Sister, as I
thought, pleased; and as if they wanted to congratulate
each other on having occasioned so severe a beginning
to be made with me. 
I went up to my chamber, and there with my faithful
Hannah deplored the determined face which the
new proposal it was plain they had to make me
wore. 
I had not recovered myself when I was sent for
down to Tea. I begged by my maid to be excused
attending; but on the repeated command, went down
with as much chearfulness as I could assume; and
had a new fault to clear myself of: For my Brother,
so pregnant a thing is determined ill-will, by intimations
equally rude and intelligible, charged my desire
of being excused coming down, to Sullens, because a
certain person had been spoken against, upon whom,
as he supposed, my fancy ran. 
I could easily answer you, Sir, said I, as such a
reflection deserves: But I forbear. If I do not find
a Brother in you, you shall have a Sister in me. 
Pretty meekness! Bella whisperingly said; looking
at my Brother, and lifting up her lip in contempt. 
He, with an imperious air, bid me deserve his
Love, and I should be sure to have it. 
As we sat, my Mother, in her admirable manner,
expatiated upon brotherly and sisterly love; indulgently
blamed my Brother and Sister for having taken up
displeasure too lightly against me; and politically, if
I may so say, answered for my obedience to my Father's
will. —Then it would be all well, my Father was
pleased to say: Then they should dote upon me, was my
Brother's expression: Love me as well as ever, was my 

Sister's: And my Uncles, That I then should be the
pride of their hearts. —But, alas! what a forfeiture of
all these must I make! 
This was the reception I had on my return from
you. 
Mr. Solmes came in before we had done Tea. My
Uncle Antony presented him to me, as a gentleman
he had a particular friendship for. My Uncle Harlowe
in terms equally favourable for him. My Father
said, Mr. Solmes is my friend, Clarissa Harlowe. 
My Mother looked at him, and looked at me, now-and-then,
as he sat near me, I thought with concern. 
—I at her, with eyes appealing for pity. At him,
when I could glance at him, with disgust little short
of affrightment. While my Brother and Sister Mr.
Solmes'd him, and Sirr'd him up, at every word. 
So caressed, in short, by all;—yet such a wretch! — 
But I will at present only add, My humble thanks
and duty to your honoured Mother (to whom I will
particularly write, to express the grateful Sense I have
of her goodness to me); and that I am 
Your ever obliged
Cl. Harlowe. 