



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 
With the preceding. 

Sat. Morn. April 22. 
I have just now received the inclosed from my Aunt
Hervey. Be pleased, my dear, to keep her secret
of having written to the unhappy wretch her Niece. 

I may go to London, I see, or where I will. No
matter what becomes of me. 
I was the willinger to suspend my journey thither,
till I heard from Harlowe-Place. I thought, if I could
be encouraged to hope for a Reconciliation, I would
let this man see, that he should not have me in his power,
but upon my own terms, if at all. 
But I find I must be his, whether I will or not; and
perhaps thro' still greater mortifications than those great
ones which I have already met with—And must I be so
absolutely thrown upon a man, with whom I am not
at all satisfied! 
My Letter is sent, you see, to Harlowe-Place. My
heart akes for the reception it may meet with there. 
One comfort only arises to me from its being sent; 
That my Aunt will clear herself by the communication,
from the supposition of having corresponded with the
poor creature whom they have all determined to reprobate. 
It is no small part of my misfortune that I have
weakened the confidence one dear friend has in another,
and made one look cool upon another. My poor Cousin
Dolly, you see, has reason for regret on this account,
as well as my Aunt. Miss Howe, my dear Miss Howe,
is but too sensible of the effects of my fault, having had
more words with her Mother on my account, than
ever she had on any other. Yet the man who has drawn
me into all this evil, I must be thrown upon! —Much
did I consider, much did I apprehend, before my fault,
supposing I were to be guilty of it: But I saw it not in
all its shocking lights. 
And now, to know that my Father, an hour before
he received the tidings of my supposed flight, owned
that he loved me as his life: That he would have been
all condescension: That he would—Oh! my dear,
how tender, how mortifyingly tender, now in him! 
My Aunt need not have been afraid, that it should be
known that she has sent me such a Letter as this! —A
Father to kneel to his child! —There would not indeed 

have been any bearing of that! —What I should
have done in such a case, I know not. Death would
have been much more welcome to me than such a sight,
on such an occasion, in behalf of a man so very, very
disgustful to me! —But I had deserved annihilation,
had I suffered my Father to kneel in vain. 
Yet, had but the sacrifice of inclination and personal
preference been all, less than kneeling should have
done. My duty should have been the conqueror of my
inclination. But an aversion—an aversion so very
sincere! —The triumph of a cruel and ambitious Brother,
ever so uncontroulable, joined with the insults of
an envious Sister, bringing wills to theirs, which otherwise
would have been favourable to me: The Marriage-duties,
so absolutely indispensable, so solemnly to be
engaged for: The Marriage-intimacies [Permit me to
say to you, my friend, what the purest, altho' with
apprehension, must think of] so very intimate: Myself
one, who never looked upon any duty, much less a
voluntarily-vowed one, with indifference; could it have
been honest in me to have given my hand to an odious
hand, and to have consented to such a more than reluctant,
such an immiscible union, if I may so call it? — 
For Life too! —Did I not think more and deeper than
most young creatures think; did I not weigh, did I not
reflect; I might perhaps have been less obstinate. —Delicacy
(may I presume to call it?) Thinking, Weighing,
Reflection, are not blessings (I have not found them
such) in the degree I have them. I wish I had been
able, in some very nice cases, to have known what Indifference
was; yet not to have my Ignorance imputable
to me as a fault. Oh! my dear! the finer Sensibilities,
if I may suppose mine to be such, make not happy! 
What a method had my friends intended to take
with me! This, I dare say, was a method chalked
out by my Brother. He, I suppose, was to have presented
me to all my assembled friends, as the daughter
capable of preferring her own will to the wills of them 

all. It would have been a sore trial, no doubt. Would
to Heaven, however, I had stood it—Let the issue
have been what it would, would to Heaven I had stood
it! 
There may be murder, my Aunt says. This looks
as if she knew of Singleton's rash plot. Such an upshot,
as she calls it, of this unhappy affair, Heaven avert! 
She flies a thought, that I can less dwell upon—A
cruel thought—But she has a poor opinion of the purity
she compliments me with, if she thinks that I am not,
by God's grace, above temptation from this Sex. 
Altho' I never saw a man, whose person I could like,
before this man; yet his faulty character allowed me
but little merit from the Indifference I pretended to on
his account. But, now I see him in nearer lights, I
like him less than ever. &dotup;Unpolite, cruel, insolent!— 
Unwise! —A trifler with his own happiness; the destroyer
of mine! —His last treatment—My fate too
visibly in his power—Master of his own wishes [Shame
to say it!] if he knew what to wish for.&dotup; —Indeed,
I never liked him so little as now. Upon my word, I
think I could hate him (if I do not already hate him)
sooner than any man I ever thought tolerably of—A
good reason why: Because I have been more disappointed
in my expectations of him; altho' they never were so
high, as to have made him my choice in preference to the
Single Life, had that been permitted me. Still, if the
giving him up for ever will make my path to Reconciliation
easy, and if they will signify as much to me,
they shall see that I never will be his: For I have the
vanity to think my soul his soul's superior. 
You will say I rave: Forbidden to write to my Aunt,
and taught to despair of Reconciliation, You, my dear,
must be troubled with my passionate resentments. What
a wretch was I to give him a meeting, since by that I
put it out of my power to meet my assembled friends! 
—All would now, if I had met them, have been over; 
and who can tell when my present distresses will? —Rid 

of both men, I had been now perhaps at my Aunt
Hervey's, or at my Uncle Antony's; wishing for my
Cousin Morden's arrival; who might have accommodated
all. 
I intended, indeed, to have stood it; and, if I had,
how know I by whose name I might now have been
called? For how should I have resisted a condescending,
a kneeling Father, had he been able to have kept his
temper with me? 
Yet my Aunt says, he would have relented, if I had
not. Perhaps he would have been moved by my humility,
before he could have shewn such undue condescension. 
Such temper as he would have received me
with, might have been improved upon in my favour. 
And that he had designed ultimately to relent, how it
clears my friends (at least to themselves) and condemns
me! O why were my Aunt's hints [I remember them
now] so very dark? —Yet I intended to have returned
after the Interview; and then perhaps she would have
explained herself. —O this artful, this designing Lovelace! 
—Yet I must repeat, that most ought I to blame
myself for meeting him. 
But far, far, be banished from me fruitless recrimination! 
Far banished, because fruitless! Let me wrap
myself about in the mantle of my own Integrity, and
take comfort in my unfaulty intention! Since it is now
too late to look back, let me collect all my Fortitude,
and endeavour to stand those shafts of angry Providence,
which it will not permit me to shun! That, whatever
the trials may be, which I am destined to undergo, I
may not behave unworthily in them; and may come
out amended by them. 
Join with me in this prayer, my beloved friend; 
for your own honour's sake, as well as for Love's sake,
join with me in it: Lest a deviation on my side should,
with the censorious, cast a shade upon a friendship,
which has no Levity in it; and the basis of which is improvement,
as well in the greater as lesser duties. 
Cl. Harlowe. 