



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday, May 23. 
Well did I, and but just in time, conclude to
have done with Mrs. Fretchville and the house: 
For here Mennell has declared, that he cannot in
conscience and honour go any farther. —He would
not for the world be accessory to the deceiving of
such a Lady! —I was a fool to let either you or him
see her; for ever since ye have both had scruples,
which neither would have had, were a woman to have
been in the question. 
Well, I can't help it! 
Mennell has, however, though with some reluctance,
consented to write me a Letter, provided
I will allow it to be the last step he shall take in this
affair. 
I presumed, I told him, that if I could cause Mrs.
Fretchville's woman to supply his place, he would have
no objection to that. 
None, he says—But is it not pity— 
A pitiful fellow! Such a ridiculous kind of pity
his, as those silly souls have, who would not kill
an innocent chicken for the world; but when killed
to their hands, are always the most greedy devourers
of it. 

Now this Letter gives the servant the Small-pox: 
And she has given it to her unhappy vapourish Lady. 
Vapourish people are perpetual subjects for diseases to
work upon. Name but the malady, and it is theirs
in a moment. Ever fitted for Inoculation. —The
physical tribe's milch-cows. —A vapourish of splenetic
patient is a Fiddle for the doctors; and they are eternally
playing upon it. Sweet music does it make
them. All their difficulty, except a case extraordinary
happens (as poor Mrs. Fretchville's, who has
realized her apprehensions) is but to hold their countenance,
while their patient is drawing up a Bill of
Indictment against himself;—and when they have
heard it, proceed to punish: —The right word for
prescribe. Why should they not, when the criminal
has confessed his guilt? —And punish they generally do
with a vengeance. 
Yet, silly toads too, now I think of it. For why,
when they know they cannot do good, may they not
as well endeavour to gratify, as to nauseate, the patient's
palate? 
Were I a physician, I'd get all the trade to myself: 
For Malmsey, and Cyprus, and the generous product
of the Cape, a little disguised, should be my
principal doses: As these would create new spirits,
how would the revived patient covet the physic, and
adore the doctor! 
Give all the paraders of the faculty whom thou
knowest, this hint. —There could but one inconvenience
arise from it. The Apothecaries
would find their medicines cost them something: But
the demand for quantities would answer that: Since
the honest Nurse would be the patient's taster; 
perpetually requiring repetitions of the last cordial
julap. 
Well, but to the Letter—Yet what need of further
explanation after the hints in my former? The
widow can't be removed; and that's enough: And 

Mennell's work is over; and his Conscience left to
plague him for his own sins, and not another man's: 
And, very possibly, plague enough will it give him
for those. 
This Letter is directed, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 
or, in his absence, To his Lady. She had refused
dining with me, or seeing me; and I was out when
it came. She opened it: So is my Lady by her own
consent, proud and saucy as she is. 
I am glad at my heart that it came before we entirely
make up. She would else perhaps have concluded
it to be contrived for a delay: And now,
moreover, we can accommodate our old and new
quarrels together; and that's contrivance, you know. 
But how is her dear haughty heart humbled to what
it was when I knew her first, that she can apprehend
any delays from me; and have nothing to do but to
vex at them! 
I came in to dinner. She sent me down the Letter,
desiring my excuse for opening it. —Did it before she
was aware. Lady-pride, Belford! —Recollection,
then Retrogradation! 
I requested to see her upon it that moment. —But
she desires to suspend our Interview till morning. I
will bring her to own, before I have done with her,
that she can't see me too often. 
My impatience was so great, on an occasion so
unexpected, that I could not help writing, to tell her,
‘How much vexed I was at the accident: But that
it need not delay my happy Day, as That did not
depend upon the house [She knew that before, she'll
think; and so did I]: And as Mrs. Fretchville, by
Mr. Mennell, so handsomely expressed her concern
upon it, and her wishes, that it could suit us
to bear with the unavoidable delay, I hoped, that
going down to the Lawn for two or three of the
Summer-months, when I was made the happiest of
men, would be favourable to all round.’ 

The dear creature takes this incident to heart, I
believe: She has sent word to my repeated request
to see her notwithstanding her denial, that she cannot
till the morning: It shall be then at Six o'clock,
if I please! 
To be sure I do please! 
Can see her but once a day now, Jack! 
Did I tell thee, that I wrote a Letter to my
Cousin Montague, wondering that I heard not from
Lord M. as the subject was so very interesting? In
it I acquainted her with the house I was about takeing; 
and with Mrs. Fretchville's vapourish delays. 
I was very loth to engage my own family, either
man or woman, in this affair; but I must take my
measures securely: And already they all think as bad
of me as they well can. You observe by my Lord
M's Letter to yourself, that the well-manner'd Peer
is afraid I should play this admirable creature one of
my usual dog's tricks. 
I have received just now an answer from Charlotte. 
Charlotte i'n't well. A Stomach-disorder! 
No wonder a Girl's stomach should plague her. 
A single woman; that's it. When she has a man
to plague, it will have something besides itself to
prey upon. Knowest thou not moreover, that Man
is the Woman's Sun; Woman is the Man's Earth? 
—How dreary, how desolate, the Earth, that the
Sun shines not upon! 
Poor Charlotte! But I heard she was not well: 
That encouraged me to write to her; and to express
myself a little concerned, that she had not of
her own accord thought of a visit in town to my
Charmer. 
Here follows a copy of her Letter. Thou wilt see
by it, that every little monkey is to catechise me. They
all depend upon my good-nature. 


M. Hall, May 22. 
Dear Cousin,
We have been in daily hope for a long time, I
must call it, of hearing that the happy knot was
tied. My Lord has been very much out of order: 
And yet nothing would serve him, but he would
himself write an Answer to your Letter. It was the
only opportunity he should ever have, perhaps, to
throw in a little good advice to you, with the hope
of its being of any signification; and he has been several
hours in a day, as his gout would let him,
busied in it. It wants now only his last revisal. He
hopes it will have the greater weight with you, if it
appear all in his own hand-writing. 
Indeed, Mr. Lovelace, his worthy heart is wrapt
up in you. I wish you loved yourself but half as well. 
But I believe too, that if all the family loved you less,
you would love yourself more. 
His Lordship has been very busy, at the times he
could not write, in consulting Pritchard about those
Estates, which he proposes to transfer to you on the
happy occasion, that he may answer your Letter in
the most acceptable manner; and shew, by effects,
how kindly he takes your invitation. I assure you,
he is mighty proud of it. 
As for myself, I am not at all well, and have not
been for some weeks past, with my old Stomach-disorder. 
I had certainly else before now have done
myself the honour you wonder I have not done myself. 
Lady Betty, who would have accompanied
me (for we had laid it all out) has been exceedingly
busy in her Law-affair; her antagonist, who is actually
on the spot, having been making proposals for
an accommodation. But you may assure yourself,
that when our dear Relation-elect shall be entered
upon the new habitation you tell me of, we will do
ourselves the honour of visiting her; and if any delay
arises from the dear Lady's want of courage (which, 

considering her man, let me tell you, may very well
be) we will endeavour to inspire her with it, and be
Sponsors for you;—for, Cousin, I believe you
have need to be christened over again before you are
entitled to so great a blessing. What think you? 
Just now, my Lord tells me, he will dispatch a
man on purpose with his Letter to-morrow: So I
needed not to have written. But now I have, let
it go; and by Empson, who sets out directly on his
return to town. 
My best compliments, and Sister's, to the most
deserving Lady in the world [You will need no other
direction to the person meant] conclude me 
Your affectionate Cousin and Servant,
Charl. Montague. 
Thou seest how seasonably this Letter comes. I
hope my Lord will write nothing but what I may
shew to my Beloved. I have actually sent her up
this Letter of Charlotte's; and hope for happy effects
from it. 
R. L. 
The Lady, in her next Letter, gives Miss Howe an
account of what has passed between Mr. Lovelace
and herself. She resents his behaviour with her
usual dignity: But when she comes to mention Mr.
Mennell's Letter, she re-urges Miss Howe to perfect
her scheme for her deliverance; being resolved
to leave him. But, dating again, on his
sending up to her Miss Montague's Letter, she
alters her mind, and desires her to suspend for the
present her application to Mrs. Townsend. 
I had begun, says she, to suspect all he had said of
Mrs. Fretchville and her house; and even Mr. Mennell
himself, though so well appearing a man. But
now that I find Mr. Lovelace had apprised his relations 

of his intention to take it, and had engaged
some of the Ladies to visit me there; I could hardly
forbear blaming myself for censuring him as capable
of so vile an imposture. But may he not
thank himself for acting so very unaccountably, and
taking such needlesly-awry steps, as he has done; 
embarrassing, as I told him, his own meanings, if
they were good? 