



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday, June 2. 
Notwithstanding my studied-for politeness and complaisance
for some days past; and though I have
wanted courage to throw the mask quite aside; yet I
have made the dear creature more than once look
about her, by the warm, tho' decent expression of
my passion. I have brought her to own, that I am
more than indifferent with her: But as to Love,
which I pressed her to acknowlege, What need of acknowlegements 

of that sort, when a woman consents to
marry? —And once repulsing me with displeasure,
The proof of the true Love I was vowing for her, was
Respect, not Freedom. And offering to defend
myself, she told me, that all the conception she had
been able to form of a faulty passion, was, that it
must demonstrate itself as mine sought to do. 
I endeavoured to justify my passion, by laying over-delicacy
at her door. Over-delicacy, she said, was
not my fault, if it were hers. She must plainly tell
me, that I appeared to her incapable of distinguishing
what were the requisites of a pure mind. Perhaps,
had the libertine presumption to imagine, that
there was no difference in Heart, nor any but what
proceeded from difference of Education and Custom,
between the Pure and the Impure—And yet Custom
alone, as she observed, if I did so think, would make
a Second Nature, as well in good as in bad habits. 
* *
I have just now been called to account for some
innocent liberties which I thought myself entitled to
take before the women; as they suppose us to be
married, and now within view of consummation. 
I took the lecture very hardly; and with impatience
wished for the happy day and hour when I
might call her all my own, and meet with no check
from a niceness that had no example. 
She looked at me with a bashful kind of contempt. 
I thought it contempt, and required the reason for it; 
not being conscious of offence, as I told her. 
This is not the first time, Mr. Lovelace, said she,
that I have had cause to be displeased with you, when
you, perhaps, have not thought yourself exceptionable. 
—But, Sir, let me tell you, that the Married
State, in my eye, is a State of Purity, and [I think
she told me] not of Licentiousness; so, at least, I understood
her. 
Marriage-Purity, Jack! —Very comical, 'faith— 

Yet, sweet dears, half the female world ready to run
away with a Rake, because he is a Rake; and for no
other reason; nay, every other reason against their
choice of such a one. 
But have not you and I, Belford, seen young
wives, who would be thought modest; and when
maids, were fantastically shy; permit freedoms in
public from their uxorious husbands, which have
shewn, that both of them have forgotten what belongs
either to prudence or decency? While every
modest eye has sunk under the shameless effrontery,
and every modest face been covered with blushes for
those who could not blush. 
I once, upon such an occasion, proposed to a circle
of a dozen, thus scandalized, to withdraw; 
since they must needs see that as well the Lady, as
the Gentleman, wanted to be in private. This motion
had its effect upon the amorous pair; and I
was applauded for the check given to their licentiousness. 
But, upon another occasion of this sort, I acted a
little more in character. For I ventured to make an
attempt upon a Bride, which I should not have had
the courage to make, had not the unblushing passiveness
with which she received her fond husband's public
toyings (looking round her with triumph rather
than with shame, upon every Lady present) incited
my curiosity to know if the same complacency might
not be shewn to a private friend. 'Tis true, I was
in honour obliged to keep the secret. But I never
saw the turtles bill afterwards, but I thought of
Number Two to the same female; and in my heart
thanked the fond husband for the lesson he had taught
his wife. 
From what I have said, thou wilt see, that I approve
of my Beloved's exception to public Loves. 
That, I hope, is all the charming Icicle means by
Marriage-Purity. But to return. 

From the whole of what I have mentioned to have
passed between my Beloved and me, thou wilt gather,
that I have not been a mere dangler, a Hickman,
in the passed days, though not absolutely active,
and a Lovelace. 
The dear creature now considers herself as my
Wife-elect. The unsaddened heart, no longer prudish,
will not now, I hope, give the sable turn to every address
of the man she dislikes not. And yet she must
keep up so much reserve, as will justify past inflexibilities. 
‘Many and many a pretty soul would yield,
were she not afraid that the man she favoured
would think the worse of her for it.’ This is also
a part of the Rake's Creed. But should she resent
ever so strongly, she cannot now break with me; 
since, if she does, there will be an end of the Family
Reconciliation; and that in a way highly discreditable
to herself. 
Saturday, June 3. 
Just returned from Doctors-Commons. I have
been endeavouring to get a Licence. Very true, Jack. 
I have the mortification to find a difficulty, as the
Lady is of rank and fortune, and as there is no consent
of father or next friend, in obtaining this all-fettering
instrument. 
I made report of this difficulty. ‘It is very right,
she says, that such difficulties should be made.’ — 
But not to a man of my known fortune, surely, Jack,
tho' the woman were the daughter of a Duke. 
I asked, If she approved of the Settlements? She
said, She had compared them with my Mother's, and
had no objection to them. She had written to Miss
Howe upon the subject, she owned; and to inform
her of our present situation (a) . 
* *

Just now, in high good-humour, my Beloved
returned me the draughts of the Settlements; a copy
of which I had sent to Captain Tomlinson. She complimented
me, ‘that she never had any doubt of my
honour in cases of this nature.’ 
In matters between man and man nobody ever had,
thou knowest. 
I had need, thou wilt say, to have some good
qualities. 
Great faults and great virtues are often found in the
same person. In nothing very bad, but as to women: 
And did not one of them begin with me (a) ? 
We have held, that women have no Souls. I am
a very Turk in this point, and willing to believe they
have not. And if so, to whom shall I be accountable
for what I do to them? Nay, if Souls they have,
as there is no Sex in Ethereals, nor need of any, what
plea can a Lady hold of injuries done her in her Lady-State,
when there is an end of her Lady-ship? 