

My eyes sparkled with pleasure at this unexpected interview,
and I willingly confessed my desire to communicate
all the knowledge of his brother's destiny which I possessed.
He told me, that, returning late to Baltimore, on the last
evening, he found his sister in much agitation and distress,
which, after a time, she explained to him. She likewise
put the packets I had left, into his hands.
I leave you to imagine, continued he, my surprise and
curiosity at this discovery. I was, of course, impatient to
see the bearer of such extraordinary tidings. This morning,
inquiring for one of your appearance at the taverns, I was,
at length, informed of your arrival yesterday in the stage;
of your going out alone in the evening; of your subsequent
return; and of your early departure this morning.
Accidentally I lighted on your footsteps; and, by suitable
inquiries on the road, have finally traced you hither.






You told my sister her husband was dead. You left
with her papers that were probably in his possession at the
time of his death. I understand from Miss Maurice that
the bills belonging to her mother, have just been delivered
to her. I presume you have no objection to clear up this
mystery.
To you I am anxious to unfold every thing. At this
moment, or at any time, but the sooner, the more agreeable
to me, I will do it.
This, said he, looking around him, is no place; there is
an inn, not a hundred yards from this gate, where I have
left my horse; will you go thither? I readily consented, and
calling for a private apartment, I laid before this man,
every incident of my life connected with Welbeck and
Watson; my full, circumstantial, and explicit story, appeared
to remove every doubt which he might have entertained
of my integrity.
In Williams, I found a plain good man, of a temper confiding
and affectionate. My narration being finished, he
expressed, by unaffected tokens, his wonder and his grief on
account of Watson's destiny. To my inquiries, which were
made with frankness and fervor, respecting his own and his
sister's condition, he said, that the situation of both was deplorable
till the recovery of this property. They had been
saved from utter ruin, from beggary and a jail, only by the
generosity and lenity of his creditors, who did not suffer the
suspicious circumstances attending Watson's disappearance
to outweigh former proofs of his probity. They had never
relinquished the hopes of receiving some tidings of their
kinsman.
I related what had just passed in the house of Mrs.
Maurice, and requested to know from him the history and
character of this family.
They have treated you, he answered, exactly as any one
who knew them would have predicted. The mother is
narrow, ignorant, bigotted, and avaricious. The eldest
daughter, whom you saw, resembles the old lady in many
things. Age, indeed, may render the similitude complete.
At present, pride and ill-humor are her chief characteristics.







The youngest daughter has nothing in mind or person in
common with her family. Where they are irascible, she
is patient; where they are imperious, she is humble; where
they are covetous, she is liberal; where they are ignorant
and indolent, she is studious and skilful. It is rare, indeed,
to find a young lady more amiable than Miss Fanny Maurice,
or who has had more crosses and afflictions to sustain.
The eldest daughter always extorted the supply of her
wants, from her parents, by threats and importunities; but
the younger could never be prevailed upon to employ the
same means, and, hence, she suffered inconveniences which,
to any other girl, born to an equal rank, would have been,
to the last degree, humiliating and vexatious. To her they
only afforded new opportunities for the display of her most
shining virtues—fortitude and charity. No instance of
their sordidness or tyranny ever stole a murmur from her.
For what they had given, existence and a virtuous education,
she said they were entitled to gratitude. What they
withheld was their own, in the use of which they were not
accountable to her. She was not ashamed to owe her subsistence
to her own industry, and was only held, by the
pride of her family—in this instance their pride was equal
to their avarice—from seeking out some lucrative kind of
employment. Since the shock which their fortune sustained,
by Watson's disappearance, she has been permitted to
pursue this plan, and she now teaches music in Baltimore
for a living. No one, however, in the highest rank, can
be more generally respected and caressed than she is.
But will not the recovery of this money make a favorable
change in her condition?
I can hardly tell; but I am inclined to think it will not.
It will not change her mother's character. Her pride may
be awakened anew, and she may oblige Miss Fanny to relinquish
her new profession, and that will be a change to be
deplored.
What good has been done, then, by restoring this
money?
If pleasure be good, you must have conferred a great
deal on the Maurices; upon the mother and two of the
daughters, at least. The only pleasure, indeed, which their
natures can receive. It is less than if you had raised them





from absolute indigence, which has not been the case, since
they had wherewithal to live upon besides their Jamaica property.
But how, continued Williams, suddenly recollecting
himself, have you claimed the reward promised to him who
should restore these bills?
What reward?
No less than a thousand dollars. It was publicly promised
under the hands of Mrs. Maurice and of Hemmings,
her husband's executor.
Really, said I, that circumstance escaped my attention,
and I wonder that it did; but is it too late to repair the
evil?
Then you have no scruple to accept the reward?
Certainly not. Could you suspect me of so strange a
punctilio as that?
Yes; but I know not why. The story you have just finished
taught me to expect some unreasonable refinement
upon that head.—To be hired, to be bribed to do our duty
is supposed by some to be degrading.
This is no such bribe to me. I should have acted just
as I have done, had no recompense been promised. In
truth, this has been my conduct, for I never once thought
of the reward; but now that you remind me of it, I
would gladly see it bestowed. To fulfil their engagements,
in this respect, is no more than justice in the Maurices. To
one, in my condition, the money will he highly useful. If
these people were poor, or generous and worthy, or if I myself
were already rich, I might less repine at their withholding
it; but, things being as they are with them and with
me, it would, I think be gross injustice in them to withhold,
and in me to refuse.
That injustice, said Williams, will, on their part, I fear,
be committed. 'Tis pity you first applied to Mrs. Maurice.
Nothing can be expected from her avarice, unless it be
wrested from her by a lawsuit.
That is a force which I shall never apply.
Had you gone first to Hemmings, you might, I think,
have looked for payment. He is not a mean man. A
thousand dollars he must know is not much to give for forty
thousand. Perhaps, indeed, it may not yet be too late.




I am well known to him, and if you please, will attend you
to him in the evening, and state your claim.
I thankfully accepted this offer, and went with him accordingly.
I found that Hemmings had been with Mrs.
Maurice in the course of the day; had received from her
intelligence of this transaction, and had entertained the expectation
of a visit from me for this very purpose.
While Williams explained to him the nature of my claim,
he scanned me with great intentness. His austere and inflexible
brow, afforded me little room to hope for success,
and this hopelessness was confirmed by his silence and perplexity,
when Williams had made an end.
To be sure, said he, after some pause, the contract was
explicit. To be sure, the conditions on Mr. Mervyn's side
have been performed. Certain it is, the bills are entire and
complete, but Mrs. Maurice will not consent to do her part,
and Mrs. Maurice, to whom the papers were presented, is
the person, by whom, according to the terms of the contract,
the reward must be paid.
But Mrs. Maurice, you know, sir, may be legally compelled
to pay, said Williams.
Perhaps she may; but I tell you plainly, that she never
will do the thing without compulsion. Legal process, however,
in this case, will have other inconveniences besides
delay. Some curiosity will naturally be excited, as to the
history of these papers. Watson disappeared a twelvemonth
ago. Who can avoid asking, where have these papers been
deposited all this while, and how came this person in possession
of them?
That kind of curiosity, said I, is natural and laudable, and
gladly would I gratify it. Disclosure or concealment in that
case, however, would no wise affect my present claim.
Whether a bond, legally executed, shall be paid, does not
depend upon determining whether the payer is fondest of
boiled mutton or roast beef. Truth, in the first case, has no
connexion with truth in the second. So far from eluding
this curiosity; so far from studying concealment, I am anxious
to publish the truth.
You are right, to be sure, said Hemmings. Curiosity is
a natural, but only an incidental consequence in this case. I




have no reason for desiring that it should be an unpleasant
consequence to you.
Well, sir, said Williams, you think that Arthur Mervyn
has no remedy in this case but the law.
Mrs. Maurice, to be sure, will never pay but on compulsion.
Mervyn should have known his own interest better.
While his left hand was stretched out to give, his right should
have been held forth to receive. As it is, he must be contented
with the aid of law. Any attorney will prosecute on
condition of receiving half the sum when recovered.
We now rose to take our leave, when, Hemmings desiring
us to pause a moment, said, to be sure, in the utmost
strictness of the terms of our promise, the reward was to be
paid by the person who received the papers; but it must be
owned that your claim, at any rate, is equitable. I have
money of the deceased Mr. Maurice in my hands. These
very bills are now in my possession. I will therefore pay
you your due, and take the consequences of an act of justice
on myself. I was prepared for you. Sign that receipt,
and there is a check for the amount.
