
In my Travels, as I walked through
many Regions and Countries, it was
my chance to happen into that famous
Continent of Universe; a very large
and spacious Countrey it is. It lieth between
the two Poles, and just amidst the
four points of the Heavens. It is a place
well watered, and richly adorned with
Hills and Valleys, bravely situate; and
for the most part (at least where I
was) very fruitful, also well peopled, and
a very sweet Air.
The people are not all of one complexion,
nor yet of one Language, mode, or
way of Religion; but differ as much as

('tis said) do the Planets themselves. Some
are right, and some are wrong, even as it
happeneth to be in lesser Regions.
In this Countrey, as I said, it was my
lot to travel, and there travel I did, and
that so long, even till I learned much of
their mother-tongue, together with the
Customs, and manners of them among
whom I was. And to speak truth, I was
much delighted to see,A natural state pleasing to the flesh. and hear many things
which I saw and heard among them: Yea
I had (to be sure) even lived and died a
Native among them, (so was I taken with
them and their doings) had not my Master
sent for me home to his House,Christ. there
to do business for him and to over-see business
done.
Now, there is in this gallant Country
of Universe, a fair and delicate Town, a
Corporation,Man. called Mansoul: a Town for
its Building so curious, for its Situation so
commodious, for its Priviledges so advantagious;
(I mean with reference to its Original)
that I may say of it, as was said
before, of the Continent in which it is placed,
There is not its equal under the whole Heaven.
As to the Situation of this Town, it
lieth just between the two worlds,Scriptures. and
the first founder, and builder of it, so far
as by the best,The Almighty. and most Authentick records
l can gather, was one Shaddai; and he built

it for his own delight. He made it the
mirrour, and glory of all that he made,  even
the Top-piece beyond any thing else that
he did in that Countrey: yea, so goodly a
Town was Mansoul, when first built,Created. that
it is said by some,Angels. the Gods at the setting
up thereof, came down to see it, and sang
for joy. And as he made it goodly to behold,
so also mighty to have Dominion over
all the Country round about. Yea all
was commanded to acknowledge Mansoul
for their Metropolitan, all was injoyned to
do homage to it. Ay, the Town it self
had positive commission, and power from
her King to demand service of all, and also to
subdue any, that any ways denied to do it.
There was reared up in the midst of thisThe heart.
Town, a most famous and stately Palace;
for strength, it might be called a Castle; for
pleasantness, a Paradise; for largeness, a
place so copious as to contain all the world. 
This place, the King Shaddai intended but
for himself alone, and not another with him:
partly because of his own delights, and
partly because he would not that the terror
of strangers should be upon the Town. This
place Shaddai made also a Garrison of, but
committed the keeping of it, only,The powers of the Soul. to the
men of the Town.
The wall of the Town was well built, yea so
fast and firm was it knit and compact together,
that had it not been for the Townsmen

themselves, they could not have been shaken,
or broken for ever.
The bodyFor here lay the excellent wisdom of him
that builded Mansoul, that the Walls could
never be broken down, nor hurt, by the
most mighty adverse Potentate, unless
the Towns-men gave consent thereto.
This famous Town of Mansoul had five
gates, in at which to come, out at which
to go, and these were made likewise answerable
to the Walls: to wit Impregnable,
and such as could never be opened nor forced,
but by the will and leave of those within.
The names of the Gates were these,
Ear-gate,The five Sences. Eye-gate, Mouth-gate, Nose-gate
and Feel-gate.
Other things there were that belonged
to the Town of Mansoul, which if you adjoyn
to these, will yet give farther demonstration
to all, of the glory and strength of
the place.The state of Mansoul at first. It had always a sufficiency of
provision within its Walls; it had the
best, most wholesome, and excellent Law
that then was extant in the world. There
was not a Rascal, Rogue, or Traiterous
person then within its Walls: They were all
true men, and fast joyned together; and this
you know is a great matter. And to all
these, it was always (so long as it had the
goodness to keep true to Shaddai the King)
his countenance, his protection, and it was
his delight, &c.

Well, upon a time there was one Diabolus,The Devil.
a mighty Gyant, made an assault
upon this famous Town of Mansoul, to take
it, and make it his own habitation. This
Gyant was King of the Blacks or Negroes,Sinners the fallen Angels. The Original of Diabolus.
and a most raving Prince he was. We
will if you please first discourse of the Original
of this Diabolus, and then of his
taking of this famous Town of Mansoul.
This Diabolus is indeed, a great and
mighty Prince, and yet both poor and beggerly.
As to his Original, he was at first,
one of the Servants of King Shaddai, made,
and taken and put by him into most high
and mighty place, yea was put into such
Principalities as belonged to the best of his
Territories and Dominions. This Diabolus
was made Son of the morning,  and a
brave place he had of it: It brought him
much glory, and gave him much brightness,
an income that might have contented his
Luciferian heart, had it not been insatiable,
and inlarged as Hell it self.
Well, he seeing himself thus exalted to
greatness and honour, and raging in his
mind for higher state, and degree, what
doth he but begins to think with himself,
how he might be set up as Lord over all,
and have the sole power under Shaddai.
(Now that did the King reserve for his Son, 
yea, and had already bestowed it upon him)

wherefore he first consults with himself what
had best to be done, and then breaks his
mind to some other of his companions, to
the which they also agreed. So in fine, they
came to this issue, that they should make
an attempt upon the Kings Son to destroy
him, that the Inheritance might be theirs.
Well, to be short, the Treason (as I said)
was concluded, the time appointed, the
word given, the Rebels rendezvouzed,
and the assault attempted. Now the King,
and his Son being All, and always Eye,
could not but discern all passages in his Dominions;
and he having always love for his
Son, as for himself, could not, at what he saw,
but begreatly provoked, and offended: wherefore
what does he, but takes them in the
very nick, and first Tripp that they made towards
their design, convicts them of the
Treason, horrid Rebellion, and Conspiracy
that they had devised, and now attempted
to put into practice: and casts them altogether
out of all place of trust, benefit,
honour, and preferment; this done, he banishes
them the Court, turns them down
into the horrible Pits, as fast bound in
Chains, never more to expect the least favour
from his hands, but to abide the judgment
that he had appointed: and that forever,
and yet,
Now they being thus cast out of all place
of trust, profit, and honour, and also

knowing that they had lost their Princes
favour for ever, (being banished his Court
and cast down to the horrible Pits: you
may be sure they would now add to their
former pride, what malice and rage against
Shaddai, and against his Son they
could. Wherefore roving,  and ranging in
much fury from place to place (if perhaps
they might find something that was
the Kings, to revenge, by spoiling of that,
themselves on him. At last they happened
into this spacious Countrey of Universe,
and steer their course towards the Town of
Mansoul; and considering that that Town
was one of the chief works, and delights
of King Shaddai: what do they, but after
Counsel taken, make an assault upon that.
I say they knew that Mansoul belonged unto
Shaddai, for they were there when he built
it, and Beautified it for himself. So when
they had found the place they shouted horribly
for joy, and roared on it as a Lyon upon
the prey: saying, now we have found the
prize, and how to be revenged on King
Shaddai for what he hath done to us. So
they sate down and called a Council of War,A Council of War held by Diabolus and his fellows against the Town of Mansoul.
and considered with themselves what ways
and methods they had best to ingage in, for
the winning to themselves this famous
Town of Mansoul: and these four things were
then propounded to be considered of.
First, Whether they had best, all of them to

shew themselves,Proposals. in this design to the Town of
Mansoul.
Secondly, Whether they had best to go and sit
down against Mansoul, in their now ragged, and
beggarly guise.
Thirdly, Whether they had best to shew to
Mansoul their intentions, and what design they
came about, or whether to assault it with words
and ways of deceit.
Fourthly, Whether they had not best, to some
of their Companions to give out private
orders to take the advantage, if they see one,
or more of the principal Townsmen, to shoot them:
if thereby they shall judge their cause and design
will the better be promoted.
It was answered to the first of these Proposals,
in the Negative, to wit, that it
To the first proposal.would not be best that all should shew themselves
before the Town: because the appearance
of many of them might alarm, and
fright the Town. Whereas, a few or but one of
them, was not so likely to do it. And to inforce
this advice to take place, 'twas added
further, that if Mansoul was frighted, or did
take the alarm. 'Tis impossible, said Diabolus
(for he spake now) that we should take the
Town: for that none can enter into it without
its own consent. Let therefore but few, or but
one assault Mansoul, and in mine opinion said
Diabolus,The second proposal. let me be he. Wherefore to this
they all agreed, and then to the second Proposal
they came, namely, Whether they had

best to go and sit down before Mansoul, in
their now ragged and beggarly guise. To
which it was answered also in the Negative,
by no means; and that because, though
the Town of Mansoul, had been made to
know, and to have to do before now, with
things that are invisible; they did never as
yet see any of their fellow Creatures in so
sad, and Rascal condition as they. And
this was the advice of that fierce Alecto.
Then said Apollyon, the advice is pertinent,Alecto. Apollyox.
for even one of us appearing to them as we
are now, must needs, both beget, and multiply
such thoughts in them, as will both
put them into a consternation of spirit, and
necessitate them to put themselves upon
their guard: And if so, said he, Then, as
my Lord Alecto said but now, 'tis in vain for
us to think of taking the Town. Then said
that mighty Gyant Beelzebub, The advice
that already is given is safe,Beelzebub. for though the
men of Mansoul have seen such things as we
once were, yet hitherto they did never behold
such things as we now are. And 'tis
best in mine opinion to come upon them in
such a guise, as is common to, and most
familiar among them. To this when they
had consented: The next thing to be considered
was, in what shape, hue or guise,
Diabolus had best to shew himself, when he
went about to make Mansoul his own. Then
one said one thing, and another the contrary,

at last Lucifer answered,Lucifer. that in his opinion,
'twas best that his Lordship should
assume the body of some of those Creatures
that they of the Town had dominion over.
For quoth he, these are not only familiar
to them, but being under them they will never
imagin that an attempt should by them
be made upon the Town; and to blind all,
let him assume the body of one of these beasts
that Mansoul deem's to be wiser than
any of the rest.  This advice was applauded
of all, so it was determined that the Giant Diabolus
should assume the Dragon, for that he
was in those days as familiar with the Town
of Mansoul as now is the bird with the Boy.
For nothing that was in its primitive state
was at all amazing to them. Then they
proceeded to the third thing which was,
3. Whether they had best to shew their intentions,The third proposal.
or the design of his coming to Mansoul,
or no? This also was answered in the
Negative; because of the weight that was
in the former reasons, to wit, for that
Mansoul were a strong people, a strong people
in a strong Town, whose Wall and
Gates were impregnable, (to say nothing
of their Castle) nor can they by any means
be won but by their own consent. Besides
said Legion,Legion. (for he gave answer to this)
A discovery of our intentions, may make
them send to their King for aid, and if that
be done, I know, quickly what time of

day 'twill be with us. Therefore let us
assault them in all pretended fairness, covering
of our intentions with all manner of
lies, flatteries, delusive words; feigning
of things that never will be, and promising of
that to them, that they shall never find:
This is the way to win Mansoul, and to
make them of themselves to open their
Gates to us; yea, and to desire us too, to
come in to them.
And the reason why I think that this project
will do, is, because the people of Mansoul
now, are every one simple and innocent;
all honest and true: nor do they as
yet know what it is to be assaulted with
Fraud, Guile, and Hypocrisy. They are
strangers to lying and desembling lips;&lhand; wherefore,
we cannot, if thus we be disguised,
by them at all be discerned, our Lies shall
go for true sayings, and our dissimulations
for upright dealings. What we promise
them, they will in that believe us: especially,
if in all our Lies and feigned words,
we pretend great love to them, and that our
design is only their advantage, and honour.
Now there was not one bit of a reply against
this, this went as currant down, as
doth the water down a steep descent: wherefore
they go to consider of the last Proposal
which was,
4. Whether they had not best to give out orders
to some of their Company, to shoot some

one or more of the principal of the Townsmen:The fourth Proposal
if they judge that their cause may be promoted
thereby.
This was carried in the Affirmative, and
the man that was designed by this Stratagem
to be destroyed, was one Mr. Resistance, otherwise
called Captain Resistance.Of Capt. Resistance And a
great man in Mansoul, this Captain Resistance
was;&rhand; and a man that the Giant Diabolus,
and his band, more feared than they feared
the whole Town of Mansoul besides. Now
who should be the Actor to do the murder;
that was the next, and they appointed one
Tisiphane, a fury of the Lake to do it.
The result of their Counsel.They thus having ended their Council
of War, rose up, and assay'd to do as they had
determined; they marched towards Mansoul,
but all in a manner invisible, save one
only one; nor did he approach the Town in
his own likeness, but under the shade, and
in the body of the Dragon.
So they drew up, and sate down before
Ear-gate, for that was the place of hearing
for all without the Town, as Eye gate was
the place of perspection. So, as I said,
he came up with his Train to the Gate, and
Diabolus marches up to the Town and calls for Audience. laid his ambuscado for Captain Resistance
within Bow-shot of the Town. This done,
the Giant ascended up close to the Gate,
and called to the Town of Mansoul for audience.
Nor took he any with him, but one
All-pause, who was his Orator in all difficult

matters. Now, as I said, he being come
up to the Gate, (as the manner of those
times was) founded his Trumpet for
Audience. At which the chief of the Town
of Mansoul,The Lords of Mansoul appeared. such as my Lord Innocent, my
Lord Willbewill, my Lord Mayor, Mr. Recorder,
and Captain Resistance came down
to the Wall to see who was there, and what
was the matter. And my Lord Willbewill,
when he had looked over and saw who stood
at the Gate, demanded, what he was,
wherefore he was come, and why he roused
the Town of Mansoul with so unusual a
sound.
Diab. Diabolus then,Diabolus his Oration. as if he had been a
Lamb, began his Oration and said, Gentlemen
of the famous Town of Mansoul, I am, as
you may perceive no far dweller from you, but
near, and one that is bound by the King to do
you my homage, and what service I can; wherefore
that I may be faithful to my self, and to
you, I have somewhat of concern to impart unto
you. Wherefore grant me your Audience
and hear me patiently. And first, I will assure
you, it is not my self but you; not mine, but
your advantage that I seek by what I now do,
as will full well be made manifest, by that I
have opened my mind unto you. For Gentlemen, I
am (to tell you the truth) come to shew you
how you may obtain great, and ample deliverance
from a bondage that unawares to your
selves, you are captivated and inslaved under.

Mansoul ingaged.At this the Town of Mansoul began to prick
up its ears, and what is it, pray what is it
thought they: and he said, I have somewhat to
say to you concerning your King, concerning his
Law, and also touching your selves. Touching your
King, I know he is great and potent, but yet, all
that he hath said to you, is neither true, nor
yet for your advantage. 1. 'Tis not true, for
that wherewith he hath hitherto awed you, shall
not come to pass, nor be fulfilled, though you do
the thing that he hath forbidden. But if there
was danger, what a slavery is it to live always
in fear of the greatest of punishments, for doing
so small and trivial a thing, as eating of
a little fruit is.Diabolus his subtilty made up of lies. 2. Touching his Laws, this
I say further, they are both unreasonable, intricate
and intolerable. Unreasonable as was
hinted before, for that the punishment is not proportioned
to the offence. There is great difference,
and disproportion betwixt the life, and
an Apple: yet the one must go for the other by
the Law of your Shaddai. But it is also intricate,
in that he saith, first, you may eat of all;
and yet after, forbids the eating of one.
And then in the last place, it must needs be
intolerable, for as much as that fruit which you
are forbidden to eat of (if you are forbidden
any) is that, and that alone, which is able by
your eating, to minister to you, a good, as yet
unknown by you. This is manifest by the very
name of the tree, it is called the Tree of knowledge
of good and evil, and have you that knowledge

as yet? No, no, nor can you conceive
how good, how pleasant, and how much to be
desired to make one wise it is, so long as you
stand by your Kings commandment. Why should
you be helden in ignorance and blindness? Why
should you not be enlarged in knowledge and understanding?
And now! Ah ye inhabitants of
the famous town of Mansoul, to speak more
particularly to your selves, you are not a free
people! You are kept both in bondage and slavery,
and that by a grievous threat; no reason
being anexed, but so I will have it, so it shall be.
And is it not grievous to think on, that that very
thing that you are forbidden to do, might you but
do it, would yield you both wisdom and honour: For
then your eyes will be opened, and you shall be as
Gods. Now since this is thus, quoth he, can
you be kept by any Prince in more slavery, and
in greater bondage than you are under, this
day? You are made underlings, and are wrapt
up in inconveniencies, as I have well made appear?
For what bondage greater than to be kept
in blindness, will not reason tell you, that it is
better to have eyes than to be without them;
and so to be at liberty, to be better than to be
shut up in a dark and stinking cave.
And just now while Diabolus was speaking
these words to Mansoul,Captain Resistance slain. Tisiphane shot
at Captain Resistance, where he stood on
the Gate, and mortally wounded him in the
head; so that he to the amazement of the
Townsmen, and the incouragement of Diabolus,

fell down dead quite over the Wall.
Now when Captain Resistance was dead
(and he was the only man of War in the
Town) poor Mansoul was wholly left naked
of Courage, nor had she now any
heart to resist. But this was as the Devil
would have it.Mr. Ill-pause his speech to the Town of Mansoul. Then stood forth that He,
Mr. Ill-pause, that Diabolus brought with
him, who was his Orator, and he addressed
himself to speak to the Town of Mansoul:
The tenure of whose Speech here
follows.
Ill-pause. Gentlemen, quoth he, it is my
Masters happiness, that he has this day a
quiet and teachable Auditory; and it is
hoped by us, that we shall prevail with
you not to cast off good advice: my Master
has a very great love for you, and
although, as he very well knows, that he
runs the hazzard of the anger of King
Shaddai, yet love to you will make him do
more than that. Nor doth there need that
a word more should be spoken to confirm
for truth what he hath said; there
is not a word but carries with it self-evidence
in its Bowels; the very name of
the Tree may put an end to all Controversie
in this matter. I therefore at this
time shall only add this advice to you,
under, and by the leave of my Lord,
(and with that he made Diabolus a very
low Congee.) Consider his words, look

on the Tree, and the promising Fruit
thereof; remember also that yet you
know but little, and that this is the way
to know more: And if your Reasons be not
conquered to accept of such good Council,
you are not the men that I took you to be. But
when the Towns-folk saw that the Tree was
good for food, and that it was pleasant to
the eye, and a Tree to be desired to make one
wise, they did as old Ill-pause advised, they
took and did eat thereof. Now, this I should
have told you before that even then, when this
Ill-pause was making of his speech to the
Towns-men, my Lord Innocency,My Lord Innocency's death. (whether
by a shot from the Camp of the Giant, or
from some sinking qualm that suddenly took
him, or whether by the stinking breath of that
Treacherous Villain old Ill-pause, for so I
am most apt to think) sunk down in the
place where he stood, nor could he be brought
to life again. Thus these two brave men
died; brave men I call them, for they were
the beauty and glory of Mansoul, so long as
they lived therein: nor did there now remain
any more, a noble spirit in Mansoul,
they all fell down, and yielded obedience to
Diabolus, and became his Slaves and Vassals
as you shall hear.
Now these being dead what do the rest
of the Towns-folk,The Town taken, and how. but as men that had
found a fools Paradise, they presently, as afore
was hinted, fall to prove the truth of the

Gyant's words, and first they did as Ill-pause
had taught them, they looked, they considered,
they were taken with the forbidden
fruit, they took thereof, and did eat:
and having eaten, they became immediately
drunken therewith; so they opened the
Gate, both Ear-gate, and Eye gate, and let
in Diabolus with all his bands, quite forgetting
their good Shaddai, his Law, and
the judgement that he had annexed with
solemn threatning to the breach thereof.
Diabolus, having now obtained entrance
in at the Gates of the Town, marches up to
the middle thereof, to make his conquest
as sure as he could, and finding by this time
the affections of the people warmly inclining
to him, he as thinking 'twas best striking
while the Iron is hot, made this further
deceivable speech unto them saying, Alas
my poor Mansoul! I have done thee indeed
this service, as to promote thee to honour, and to
greaten thy liberty, but Alas! Alas! Poor
Mansoul, thou wantest now one to defend thee,
for assure thy self that when Shaddai shall hear
what is done, he will come: for sorry will he
be that thou hast broken his bonds, and cast his
cords away from thee. What wilt thou do,
wilt thou after enlargement suffer thy priviledges
to be invaded and taken away? or
what wilt resolve with thy self. Then they all
with one consent said to this Bramble, do

thou Reign over us.He is, entertained for their King. So he accepted the
motion and became the King of the Town
of Mansoul. This being done, the next
thing was, to give him possession of the
Castle, and so, of the whole strength of
the Town. Wherefore,He is possessed of the Castle and fortified it for himself. into the Castle
he goes (it was, that which Shaddai built
in Mansoul for his own delight, and pleasure:
This now was become a Den, and
hold for the Giant Diabolus.
Now having got possession of this stately
Palace, or Castle, what doth he, but make
it a Garrison for himself, and strengthens
and fortifies it with all sorts of provision
against the King Shaddai, or those that
should endeavour the regaining of it, to him,
and his obedience again.
This done, but not thinking himself yet
secure enough, in the next place, he bethinks
himself of new modelling the Town;He new modelleth the Town. and so
he does, setting up one, and putting down
another at pleasure. Wherefore my Lord
Mayor, whose name was my Lord Understanding,
and Mr. Recorder whose name
was Mr. Conscience, those he puts out of
place, and power.
As for my Lord Mayor though he was
an undestanding man,My Lord Mayor put out of place. and one too that had
complied with the rest of the Town, of
Mansoul, in admitting of the Giant into the
Town; yet Diabolus thought not fit to let
him abide in his former lustre and glory,

because he was a seeing man. Wherefore he
darkned it not only by taking from him
his Office and power, but by building of
an high and strong Tower,  just between
the Suns reflections, and the Windows of my
Lords Palace: By which means his house
and all, and the whole of his habitation,
was made as dark as darkness it self.  And
thus being alienated from the light, he
became as one that was born blind. To
this his house, my Lord was confined, as
to a Prison; nor might he upon his parole
go further than within his own bounds.
And now had he had an heart to do for
Mansoul: What could he do for it, or
wherein could he be profitable to her? So
then, so long as Mansoul was under the
power and government of Diabolus: (And
so long it was under him, as it was obedient
to him; which was, even until by a War it
was rescued out of his hand.) So long my
Lord Mayor was rather an impediment in,
than an advantage to, the famous Town of
Mansoul.
As for Mr. Recorder, before the Town
was taken, he was a man well read in the
Laws of his King, and also a man of courage
and faithfulness to speak truth at every
occasion:The Recorder put out of place. And he had a tongue as bravely
hung, as he had an head filled with judgement.
Now this man, Diabolus could by no
means abide, because, though he gave his

consent to his coming into the Town, yet he
could not, by all wiles, trials, Stratagems,
and devices that he could use, make him wholly
his own. True, he was much degenerated
from his former King, and also much pleased
with many of the Giants Laws, and service:
but all this would not do for as much as he
was not wholly his. He would now and
then think upon Shaddai, and have dread of
his Law upon him,He sometimes speaks for his first King. and then he would
speak with a voice, as great against Diabolus,
as when a Lyon roareth. Yea, and
would also at certain times when his fits were
upon him (for you must know that some
times he had terrible fits) make the whole
Town of Mansoul shake with his voice: and
therefore the now King of Mansoul could not
abide him.
Diabolus therefore feared the Recorder more
than any that was left alive in the Town
of Mansoul, because, as I said his words did
shake the whole Town; they were like the
ratling-thunder, and also like Thunder-claps.
Since therefore the Giant could not make
him wholly his own, what doth he do but
studies all that he could, to debauch the old
Gentleman, and by debauchery,He is more debauched than before. to stupifie
his mind, and more harden his heart in ways
of vanity. And as he attempted, so he
accomplished his design: He debauched the
man, and by little and little, so drew him
into sin and wickedness, that at last he was

not only debauched as at first: and so by
consequence defiled, but was almost (at
last, I say) past all Conscience of sin. And
this was the farthest Diabolus could go.
Wherefore he be-thinks him of an other
project, and that was to perswade the
men of the Town that Mr. Recorder was mad,
and so not to be regarded. And for this he
urged his fits, and said, if he be himself, why
doth he not do thus always? but, quoth he, as
all mad folk have their fits, and in them their
raving language; so hath this old and doating
Gentleman.The Town taken off from heeding of him. Thus by one means or
another, he quickly got Mansoul to slight,
neglect, and despise what ever Mr. Recorder
could say. For besides what already you
have heard, Diabolus had a way to make
the old Gentleman, when he was merry,
unsay and deny what he in his fits had affirmed.
And indeed, this was the next
way to make himself ridiculous, and to cause
that no man should regard him. Also now
he never spake freely for King Shaddai,How conscience becomes so ridiculous, as with Carnal men it is. but
always by force and constraint. Besides,
he would at one time be hot against that,
at which at another he would hold his peace.
So uneven was he now in his doings. Sometimes
he would be, as if fast a sleep, and
again sometimes, as dead even then when
the whole Town of Mansoul was in her
career after vanity, and in her dance after
the Giants pipe.

Wherefore, sometimes when Mansoul did
use to be frighted with the thundring voice
of the Recorder that was, and when they did
tell Diabolus of it, he would answer, that
what the old Gentleman said, was neither
of love to him, nor pity to them, but of a
foolish fondness that he had to be prating:
and so would hush, still, and put all to quiet
again. And that he might leave no argument
unurged that might tend to make them
secure, he said, and said it often; O Mansoul!
Consider that notwithstanding the old
Gentlemans rage, and the rattle of his high
and thundring words, you hear nothing of
Shaddai himself (when lyar, and deceiver,
that he was, every out-cry of Mr. Recorder
against the sin of Mansoul, was the voice
of God in him to them.Satanical Rhetorick.) But he goes on
and sayes, You see that he values not the
loss, nor rebellion of the Town of Mansoul,
nor will he trouble himself with calling of his
Town to a reckoning for their giving of
themselves to me. He knows that though
ye were his, now you are lawfully mine; so
leaving us one to another, he now hath shaken
his hands of us.
Moreover O Mansoul! quoth he, Consider
how I have served you, even to the uttermost
of my power; and that with the
best that I have, could get, or procure for
you in all the world: Besides, I dare say, that
the Laws and customes that you now are

under, and by which you do homage to me,
do yield you more solace and content, than
did the Paradise that at first you possessed.
Your liberty also, as your selves do very
well know, has been greatly widened, and
enlarged by me; whereas I found you a
pen'd up people.His flatteries. I have not laid any restraint
upon you; you have no Law, Statute,
or Judgment of mine to fright you; I
call none of you to account for your doings,
except the Madman,Conscience. you know who I mean:
I have granted you to live, each man like a
Prince in his own, even with as little controul
from me, as I my self have from
you.
And thus would Diabolus hush up,Men sometimes angry with their Consciences. and
quiet the Town of Mansoul, when the Recorder
that was, did at times molest them:
Yea, and with such cursed Orations as these,
would set the whole Town in a rage, and
fury against the old Gentleman: Yea, the
Rascal crue, at sometimes would be for destroying
of him. They have often wished (in
my hearing) That he had lived a thousand
mlies off from them: his company, his
words, yea, the sight of him, and especially
when they remembred how in old
times he did use to threaten and condemn
them; (for all he was now so debauched)
did terrifie and afflict them
sore

But all wishes were vain, for I do not
know how, unless by the power of Shaddai,
and his wisdom, he was preserved in
being amongst them. Besides,Ill thoughts. his house
was as strong as a Castle, and stood hard to
a strong Hold of the Town: moreover, if
at any time any of the crue or rabble attemptedOf fears.
to make him away, he could pull up the
sluces, and let in such floods, as would drown
all round about him.
But to leave Mr. Recorder,The will. and to come to
my Lord Willbewill, another of the Gentry
of the famous Town of Mansoul. This
Willbewill was as high born, as any man in
Mansoul, and was as much if not more a
Freeholder than many of them were: besides,
if I remember my tale aright, he had some
priviledge peculiar to himself in the famous
Town of Mansoul: Now together with these,
he was a man of great strength, resolution,
and courage, nor in his occasion could any
turn him away. But I say, whether he was
proud of his estate, priviledges, strength
or what, (but sure it was through pride of
something) he scorns now to be a slave in
Mansoul; and therefore resolves to bear Office
under Diabolus, that he might (such
an one as he was) be a petty Ruler and
Governour in Mansoul. And (head-strong
man that he was) thus he began betimes;
for this man, when Diabolus did make his
Oration at Eargate, was one of the first that

was for consenting to his words, and for
accepting of his counsel as wholesome, and
that was for the opening of the Gate, and for
letting him into the Town: wherefore Diabolus
had a kindness for him; and therefore
he designed for him a place: And perceiving
the valour and stoutness of the man, he
coveted to have him for one of his great
ones, to act and do in matters of the highest
concern.
So he sent for him,The Will takes place under Diabolus. and talked with him
of that secret matter that lay in his breast,
but there needed not much perswasion in
the case. For as at first he was willing that
Diabolus should be let into the Town; so now
he was as willing to serve him there: When the
Tyrant therefore perceived the willingness of
my Lord to serve him, and that his mind stood
bending that way, he forthwith made him
the Captain of the Castle,Heart. Flesh. Senses. Governour of the
Wall, and keeper of the Gates of Mansoul:
Yea there was a Clause in his Commission,
That nothing without him shauld be done in
all the Town of Mansoul. So that now next
to Diabolus himself, who but my Lord Willbewill
in all the Town of Mansoul; nor could
any thing now be done, but at his Will and
Pleasure throughout the Town of Mansoul. 
He had also one Mr. Mind for his Clerk,Mr. Mind my Lords Clerk. a
man to speak on, every way like his Master:
For he and his Lord were in principle one,
and in practice not far asunder. And now

was Mansoul brought under to purpose,  and
made to fulfil the lusts of the will and of the
mind.
But it will not out of my thoughts, what
a desperate one this Willbewill was, when power
was put into his hand. First, he flatly
denyed that he owed any suit or service to
his former Prince, and Liege-Lord. This
done, in the next place he took an Oath,
and swore fidelity to his great Master Diabolus,
and then being stated and setled in his
places, offices, advancements and preferments;
oh! you cannot think unless you
had seen it, the strange work, that this
workman made in the Town of Mansoul.
First, he maligned Mr. Recorder to death,The carnal will opposeth conscience.
he would neither indure to see him, nor to
hear the words of his mouth; he would
shut his eyes when he saw him, and stop his
ears when he heard him speak: Also he could
not indure that so much as a fragment of the
Law of Shaddai should be any where seen in
the Town. For example, his Clerk Mr.
Mind had some old, rent,  and torn parchments
of the Law of good Shaddai in his
house, but when Willbewill saw them, he cast
them behind his back. True Mr. Recorder
had some of the Laws in his study,Corrupt will loves a dark understanding. but my
Lord could by no means come at them: He
also thought and said, That the windows of
my old Lord Mayor's house, were alwayes too

light for the profit of the Town of Mansoul.
The light of a candle he could not indure.
Now nothing at all pleased Willbewil, but what
pleased Diabolus his Lord.
There was none like him to trumpet about
the Streets, the brave nature, the wise
conduct, and great glory of the King Diabolus:
He would range and rove throughout all
the Streets of Mansoul, to cry up his illustrious
Lord,Vain thoughts. and would make himself even
as an abject, among the base and Rascal
crue, to cry up his valiant Prince. And I
say, when, and wheresoever he found
these Vassals, he would even make himself
as one of them. In all ill courses he would
act without bidding, and do mischief without
commandment.
The Lord Willbewill also had a Deputy under
him, and his name was Mr. Affection;
one that was also greatly debauched in his
principles,  and answerable thereto in his
life: He was wholly given to the flesh, and
therefore they called him Vile Affection: Now
there was he, and one Carnal Lust, the daughter
of Mr. Mind (like to like quoth the Devil
to the Collier) that fell in love,A match betwixt vile affection and carnal lust. and
made a match, and were married; and as I
take it, they had several children, as Impudent,
Blackmouth and Hate-reproof: these three
were black boyes: and besides these they
had three daughters, as Scorn-Truth, and
Slight-God, and the name of the youngest

was Revenge; these were all married in the
Town, and also begot and yielded many
bad brats, too many to be here inserted. But
to pass by this.
When the Gyant had thus ingarrisoned
himself in the Town of Mansoul, and had put
down and set up whom he thought good: he
betakes himself to defacing. Now there was
in the market place in Mansoul, and also upon
the Gates of the Castle, an image of the
blessed King Shaddai, this image was so exactly
ingraven (and it was ingraven in gold)
that it did the most resemble Shaddai himself
of any thing that then was extant in the
world. This he basely commanded to be
defaced,What No-Truth did. and it was as basely done by the
hand of Mr. No-Truth. Now you must
know, that as Diabolus had commanded,
and that by the hand of Mr. No-Truth the Image
of Shaddai was defaced, He likewise
gave order that the same Mr. No-Truth
should set up in its stead the horrid and
formidable Image of Diabolus: to the great
contempt of the former King, and debasing of
his Town of Mansoul.
Moreover,All Law books destroyed that could be so. Diabolus made havock of all
remains of the Laws and Statutes of Shaddai,
that could be found in the Town of
Mansoul: to wit, such as contained either the
Doctrines of Morals, with all Civil and Natural
Documents. Also relative severities he
sought to extinguish. To be short, there

was nothing of the remains of good in Mansoul
which he, and Willbewill sought not to destroy:
for their design was to turn Mansoul
into a bruit, and to make it like to the
sensual sow: by the hand of Mr. No-truth.
When he had destroyed what Law, and
good orders he could, then further to effect
his design, namely, to alienate Mansoul
from Shaddai her King, he commands
and they set up his own vain Edicts, Statutes
and Commandments,  in all places of resort,
or concourse in Mansoul, to wit such as
gave liberty to the lusts of the flesh, the lusts
of the eyes, and the pride of life which are
not of Shaddai, but of the world. He incouraged,
countenanced and promoted lasciviousness,
and all ungodliness there. Yea
much more did Diabolus to incourage wickedness
in the Town of Mansoul, he promised
them peace, content, joy, and bliss in
doing his commands, and that they should
never he called to an account for their
not doing the contrary. And let this serve
to give a taste to them that love to hear
tell of what is done beyond their knowledge,
a far off in other Countries.
Now Mansoul being wholly at his beck,
and brought wholly to his bowa nothing
was heard or seen therein but that which
tended to set up him.

But now,They have a new Lord Mayor and a new Recorder. he having disabled the Lord
Mayor, and Mr. Recorder from bearing of
Office in Mansoul: and seeing that the
Town, before he came to it, was the
most ancient of Corporations in the
world; and fearing, if he did not maintain
greatness, they at any time should object
that he had done them an injury: Therefore,
I say, (that they might see that he
did not intend to lessen their Grandeur,
or to take from them any of their advantagious
things) he did chuse for them a
Lord Mayor, and a Recorder, himself:
and such as contented them at the heart,
and such also as pleased him wondrous
well.
The name of the Mayor that was ofThe new Lord Mayor. of
Diabolus's making, was, the Lord Lustings.
A man that had neither Eyes nor Ears, all
that he did whether as a man, or as an Officer,
he did it naturally as doth the beast. And
that which made him yet the more ignoble,
though not to Mansoul, yet to them
that beheld, and were grieved for its
ruins, was, that he never could savour good,
but evil.
The Recorder,The new Recorder. was one whose name
was Forget-good. And a very sory fellow
he was. He could remember nothing but
mischief, and to do it with delight. He
was naturally prone to do things that were
hurtful; even hurtful to the Town of

Mansoul, and to all the dwellers there.
These two therefore, by their power, and
practice, example and smiles upon evil;
did much more Grammer, and settle the
common people in hurtful ways.Thoughts. For
who doth not perceive but when those
that sit aloft, are vile, and corrupt themselves;
they corrupt the whole Region and
Country where they are.
Besides these,He doth make them new Aldermen, and who. Diabolus made several Burgesses,
and Aldermen in Mansoul: such as
out of whom the Town, when it needed,
might chuse them Officers, Governours, and
Magistrates. And these are the names of
the chief of them Mr. Incredulity, Mr.
Haughty, Mr. Swearing, Mr. Whoreing, Mr.
Hard heart, Mr. Pitiless, Mr. Fury, Mr. No-truth,
Mr. Stand-to-lies, Mr. False Peace, Mr. Drunkenness,
Mr. Cheating, Mr. Atheism, Thirteen in
all. Mr. Incredulity, is the eldest, and Mr.
Atheism the youngest of the Company.
There was also an election of Common
Council men, and others; as Bailiffs, Serjeants,
Constables, and others, but all of
them like to those a forenamed, being either
Fathers, Brothers, Cousins, or Nephews
to them. Whose names, for brevities-sake
I omitt to mention.He buildeth three strong holds, their names, and Governours.
When the Giant had thus far proceeded in
his work, in the next place he betook
him to build some strong holds in the
Town. And he built three that seemed to be

impregnable. The first he called the Hold
of Defiance, because it was made to command
the whole Town, and to keep it
from the knowledge of its ancient King.
The second he called Midnight hold, because
it was builded on purpose to keep Mansoul
from the true knowledge of it self. The
third was called Sweet sin-hold, because by that
he fortified Mansoul against all desires of
good. The first of these Holds stood close by
Eyegate, that as much as might be, light
might be darkned there. The second was
builded hard to the Old Castle, to the end
that that might be made more blind (if
possible.) And the third stood in the Market
place.
He that Diabolus made Governour over
the first of these, was one Spite-God, a most
blasphemous wretch. He came with the
whole rabble of them that came against Mansoul
at first, and was himself one of themselves.
He that was made the Governour of
Midnight-hold was one Love-no-light. He was
also of them that came first against the Town.
And he that was made the Governour of the
Hold called Sweet-sin Hold, was one whose
name was Love-flesh, he was also a very leud
fellow, but not of that Country where the
other are bound. This fellow could find more
sweetness when he stood sucking of a lust,
than he did in all the Paradise of God.

And now Diabolus thought himself safe;
He had taken Mansoul; He had ingarrisoned
himself therein; He had put down the
old Officers, and had set up new ones;
He had defaced the Image of Shaddai, and
had set up his own;Diabolus has made his Nest. He had spoiled the old
Law Books, and had promoted his own vain
lies; He had made him new Magistrates,
and set up new Aldermen; He had builded
him new Holds, and had man'd them for
himself. And all this he did to make himself
secure in case the good Shaddai, or
his Son, should come to make an incursion
upon him.
Now you may well think, that long before
this time word,Tidings carried to the Court of what had happened to Mansoul. by some or other could not but be carried to the good King Shaddai,
how his Mansoul in the Continent of Universe
was lost; and that the Runagate
Giant Diabolus, once one of his Majesties
Servants, had in Rebellion against the King
made sure thereof for himself: Yea tidings
were carried and brought to the King
thereof, and that to a very circumstance.
As first, How Diabolus came upon Mansoul
(they being a simple people and innocent)
with craft, subtlety, lies and guile;
Item, That he had treacherously slain the
right noble and valiant Captain, their Captain
Resistance, as he stood upon the Gate
with the rest of the Townsmen; Item, How

my brave Lord Innocent fell down dead (with
grief some say, or with being poisoned
with the stinking breath of one Ill-pause, as
say others) at the hearing of his just Lord,
and rightful Prince Shaddai so abused by the
mouth of so filthy a Diabolian, as that Varlet
Ill-pause was. The Messenger further
told, That after this Ill-pause had made a
short Oration to the Townsmen, in behalf
of Diabolus his Master, the simple Town
believing that what was said was true, with
one consent did open Ear-gate, the chief
Gate of the Corporation, and did let him with
his Crue into a Possession of the famous
Town of Mansoul. He further shewed how
Diabolus had served the Lord Mayor, and
Mr. Recorder, to wit, That he had put them
from all place of power and trust; Item, He
shewed also that my Lord Willbewill, was
turned a very Rebel and Runagate, and that
so was one Mr. Mind his Clerk, and that
they two did range and revel it all the Town
over, and teach the wicked ones their wayes.
He said moreover, That this Willbewill was
put into great trust. And particularly that
Diabolus had put into Willbewills hand, all the
strong places in Mansoul: And that Mr. Affection
was made my Lord Willbewill's Deputy
in his most rebellious affairs. Yea, said
the Messenger, this monster, Lord
Willbewill, has openly disavowed his
King Shaddai, and hath horribly given

his faith and plighted his Troth to Diabolus.
Also said the Messenger, besides all this,
the new King or rather rebellious Tyrant over
the once famous, but now perishing
Town of Mansoul, has set up a Lord Mayor,
and a Recorder of his own. For Mayor he
has set up one Mr. Lustings, and for Recorder,
Mr. Forget-good: two of the vilest of
all the Town of Mansoul. This faithful
Messenger also proceeded and told what a
sort of new Burgesses, Diabolus had made,
also that he had builded several strong Forts,
Towers, and strong Holds in Mansoul. He
told too, the which I had almost forgot,
how Diabolus had put the Town of Mansoul
into Arms, the better to capacitate them on
his behalf to make resistance against Shaddai
their King, should he come to reduce them
to their former obedience.
Now this Tidings-teller did not deliver
his Relation of things in private but in open
Court,Grief at Court to hear the Tidings. the King and his Son, high Lords,
chief Captains, and Nobles, being all there
present to hear. But by that they had heard
the whole of the story, it would have amazed
one, to have seen, had he been there
to behold it, what sorrow and grief, and
compunction of spirit there was among all
sorts, to think that famous Mansoul was now
taken: only the King, and his Son foresaw
all this long before, yea, and sufficiently

provided for the relief of Mansoul, though
they told not every body thereof: Yet because
they also would have a share in condoling
of the misery of Mansoul, therefore
they also did, and that at a rate of the highest
degree, bewail the losing of Mansoul.
The King said plainly,  That it grieved him
at the heart, and you may be sure that his
Son was not a whit behind him. Thus gave
they conviction to all about them, that they
had love and compassion for the famous
Town of Mansoul. Well, when the King
and his Son were retired into the Privy-Chamber,
there they again consulted about
what they had designed before, to wit,The secret of his purpose. That as
Mansoul should in time be suffered to be lost;
so as certainly it should be recovered again; recovered
I say, in such a way as that both the
King and his Son would get themselves eternal
fame and glory thereby. Wherefore
after this consult, the son of Shaddai (a
sweet and comly person, and one that had
alwayes great affection for those that were inThe Son of God.
affliction, but one that had mortal enmity
in his heart against Diabolus, because he
was designed, for it, and because he sought
his Crown and Dignity. ) This Son of Shaddai,
I say, having stricken hands with his
Father, and promised that he would be his
servant to recover his Mansoul again, stood
by his resolution, nor would he repent of
the same. The purport of which agreement

was this;A brave design on foot for the Town of Mansoul. To wit, That at a certain
time prefixed by both, the Kings Son should
take a journey into the Countrey of Universe, and
there in a way of Justice and equity, by making
of amends for the follies of Mansoul, he should
lay a foundation of her perfect deliverance
from Diabolus, and from his Tyranny.
Moreover Emanuel resolved to make, at
a time convenient, a war upon the Giant
Diabolus, even while he was possessed of
the Town of Mansoul. And that he would
fairly by strength of hand drive him out of
his hold,By the Holy Ghost. his nest, and take it to himself, to be
his habitation.
This now being resolved upon,The Holy Scriptures. order was
given to the Lord chief Secretary, to draw
up a fair Record of what was determined,
and to cause that it should be published in
all the Corners of the Kingdom of
Universe. A short Breviat of the Contents
thereof, you may if you please take
here as follows.
Let all men know who are concerned, That
the Son of Shaddai the great King, is ingaged
by Covenant to his Father, to bring his Mansoul
to him again;The Contents. Yea and to put Mansoul too,
through the power of his matchless love, into
a far better, and more happy condition
than 'twas in before it was taken by Diabolus.

These papers therefore were published in
several places, to the no little molestation of
the Tyrant Diabolus, for now thought he,
I shall be molested, and my habitation will be
taken from me.
But when this matter, I mean this purpose
of the King and his Son, did at first take air
at Court: who can tell how the high Lords,
chief Captains, and noble Princes that were
there, were taken with the business. First,Among the Angels.
they whispered it one to another, and after
that it began to ring out throughout the
Kings Palace, all wondring at the glorious
design that between the King and his
Son was on foot for the miserable Town
of Mansoul. Yea the Courtiers could scarce
do any thing, either for the King or Kingdom,
but they would mix with the doing
thereof, a noise of the love of the King
and his Son, that they had for the Town of
Mansoul.
Nor could these Lords, high Captains,
and Princes, be content to keep this News
at Court, yea before the Records thereof
were perfected, themselves came down
and told it in Universe.Diabolus perplexed at the News. At last it
came to the ears, as I said, of Diabolus,
to his no little discontent. For you must
think it would perplex him to hear of such
a design against him: well, but after a few
casts in his mind, he concluded upon these
four things.

First that this News,He concluded on several things. this good tidings (if
possible) should be kept from the ears of
the Town of Mansoul: For said he, if they
shall once come to the knowledge that Shaddai
their former King, and Emanuel his Son,
are contriving of good for the Town of
Mansoul: what can be expected by me, but
that Mansoul will make a revolt from under
my hand and government, and return again
to him.
Now to accomplish this his design, he renews
his flattery with my Lord Willbewill,
and also gives him strict charge and command,First how to keep the News from Mansoul.
that he should keep watch by day,
and by night at all the gates of the Town,
especially Eargate and Eyegate: For I hear of
a design, quoth he, a design to make us all
Traytors, and that Mansoul must be reduced
to its first bondage again. I hope they are
but flying stories quoth he, however let no
such news by any means be let into Mansoul,The Will ingaged against the Gospel. Good thoughts must be kept out of the Town of Mansoul.
lest the people be dejected thereat: I think
my Lord it can be no welcome news to you,
I am sure it is none to me. And I think that
at this time it should be all our wisdoms and
care, to nip the head of all such rumors as
shall tend to trouble our people: Wherefore
I desire my Lord, that you will in this matter
do as I say, let there be strong guards
daily kept at every Gate of the Town. Stop
also and examine, from whence such come
that you perceive do from far come hither

to trade; nor let them by any means be
admitted into Mansoul, unless you shall
plainly perceive that they are favourers of
our excellent Government. I command
moreover, said Diabolus,All good thoughts and words in the Town are to be suppressed. that there he
spies continually walking up and down the
Town of Mansoul, and let them have power
to suppress, and destroy, any that they
shall perceive to be plotting against us, or that
shall prate of what by Shaddai and Emanuel is
intended.
This therefore was accordingly done, my
Lord Willbewill hearkned to his Lord and
Master, went willingly after the commandment,
and with all the diligence he could,
kept any that would, from going out
abroad, or that sought to bring this tidings
to Mansoul, from coming into the
Town.
Secondly, This done, in the next place,A new Oath imposed upon Mansoul.
Diabolus that he might make Mansoul as
sure as he could, frames and imposes a
new Oath, and horrible covenant upon the
Townsfolk:
To wit, That they should never desert him,
nor his Government, nor yet betray him, nor
seek to alter his Laws: but that they should own,
confess, stand by, and acknowledge him for
their rightful King in defiance to any that do or
hereafter shall, by any pretence, Law, or title
what ever lay claim to the Town of Mansoul.
Thinking belike that Shaddai had not

 power to above them from this Covenant
with death, and agreement with Hell. Nor
did the silly Mansoul stick or boggle at all
at this most monstrous ingagement, but
as if it had been a Sprat in the mouth of a
Whale,&rhand; they swallowed it without any
chewing. Were they troubled at it? Nay,
they rather bragged and boasted of their so
brave fidelity to the Tyrant their pretended
King, swearing that they would never be
Changlings, nor forsake their Old Lord for
a New.
Thus did Diabolus tye poor Mansoul fast,
but jealousie that never thinks it self strong
enough, put him in the next place upon another
exploit, which was yet more, if possible,
to debauch this Town of Mansoul:Odious Atheistical Pamphlets and filthy Ballads & Romances full of baldry.
wherefore he caused by the hand of one Mr.
Filth, an odious, nasty, lascivious piece of
beastliness to be drawn up in writing,
and to be set upon the Castle Gates: whereby
he granted, and gave licence to all his
true and trusty sons in Mansoul, to do whatsoever
their lustful appetites prompted
them to do, and that no man was to lett,
hinder, or controul them, upon pain
of incurring the displeasure of their
Prince.
Now this he did for these Reasons:
Reasons of his thus doing.1. That the Town of Mansoul might
be yet made weaker and weaker, and so
more unable, should tidings come, that their

redemption was designed: to believe, hope,
or consent to the truth thereof. For reason
sayes, The bigger the Sinner, the less grounds
of hopes of mercy.
2. The second reason was, If perhaps Emanuel
the Son of Shaddai their King, by
seeing the horrible, and prophane doings of
the Town of Mansoul, might repent, tho'
entred into a Covenant of redeeming them,
of pursuing that Covenant of their redemption;
for he knew that Shaddai was holy,
and that his Son Emanuel was holy, yea,
he knew it by woful experience: for, for
the iniquity and sin of Diabolus, was he cast
from the highest Orbs. Wherefore what
more rational than for him to conclude that
thus, for sin, it might fare with Mansoul.
But fearing also lest this knot should
break, he bethinks himself of another, to
wit:
3. Thirdly, To endeavour to possess all
hearts in the Town of Mansoul, that Shaddai
was raising of an Army, to come to overthrow,
and utterly to destroy this Town
of Mansoul, (and this he did to forestal any
tidings that might come to their ears, of
their deliverance) for thought he, if I first
brute this, the tidings that shall come after,
will all be swallowed up of this; for what
else will Mansoul say, when they shall hear that
they must be delivered, but that the true
meaning is, Shaddai intends to destroy them:

Wherefore, he summons the whole Town
into the Market place,The place of hearing and of considering. and there with deceitful
Tongue thus he addresses himself unto
them.
Gentlemen, and my very good Friends, You
are all as you know my legal Subiects, and
men of the famous Town of Mansoul; you know
how from the first day that I have been with you
until now, I have behaved my self among
you, and what liberty, and great priviledges
you have injoyed under my Government,
I hope to your honour, and mine, and also
to your content and delight; Now my famous
Mansoul, a noise of trouble there is abroad, of
trouble to the Town of Mansoul, sorry I am thereof
for your sakes. For I received but now by the
Post from my Lord Lucifer, (and he useth to
have good intelligence) That your old King
Shaddai, is raising of an Army to come against
you, to destroy you root and branch: and this
O Mansoul! is now the cause, that at this
time I have called you together; namely to advise
what in this juncture is best to be done; for
my part, I am but one, and can with ease shift
for my self, did I list to seek my own ease, and
to leave my Mansoul in all the danger: But my
heart is so firmly united to you, and so unwilling
am I to leave you; that I am willing to stand
and fall with you, to the utmost hazzard that
shall befal me. What say you? O my Mansoul!
will you now desert your old friend; or do
you think of standing by me. Then as one man,

with one mouth, they cried out together,
Let him die the death that will not.
Then said  Diabolus again, 'Tis in vain for
us to hope for quarter, for this King knows not
how to shew it: True perhaps,Very deciveable language. he at his first
sitting down before us, will talk of and pretend
to mercy, that thereby with the more ease,
and less trouble, he may again make himself the
master of Mansoul; what ever therefore he shall
say, believe not one syllable or tittle of it, for all
such language is but to overcome us, and to
make us while we wallow in our blood, the Trophies
of his merciless victory. My mind is therefore,
that we resolve to the last man, to resist him,
and not to believe him upon any terms, For in
at that door will come our danger. But
shall we be flattered out of our lives? I hope
you know more of the rudiments of Politicks
than to suffer your selves so pitifully to be
served.
But suppose he should, if he gets us to yield,
save some of our lives, or the lives of some of
them that are underlings in Mansoul, what help
will that be to you that are the chief of the Town,
especially of you whom I have set up, and whose
greatness has been procured by you through your
faithful sticking to me? And suppose again,Lying language. that
he should give quarter to every one of you, be
sure he will bring you into that bondage under
which you were captivated before, or a worse,
and then what good will your lives do you? Shall
you with him live in pleasure as you do now?

No, no, you must be bound by Laws that will
pinch you, and be maide to do that which at present
is hateful to you; I am for you if you
are for me, and it is better to dye valiantly, than
to live like pitiful Slaves,He is afraid of losing of Mansoul. But I say, the life
of a Slave, will be counted a life too good for
Mansoul now. Blood, blood, nothing but
blood is in every blast of Shaddai's Trumpet against
poor Mansoul now; Pray be concerned,
I hear he is coming, up, and stand to your
Armes, that now while you have any leisure, I
may learn you some feats of War. Armour for
you I have, and by me it is; Yea, and it is
sufficient for Mansoul from top to toe; nor can
you be hurt by what his force can do, if you
shall keep it well girt and fastned about you:
Come therefore to my Castle and welcome,He puts them upon Arming of themselves. and
harness your selves for the war. There is Helmet,
Breast-plate, Sword and Shield, and
what not, that will make you fight like
men.
1. My Helmet,His Helmet. otherwise called an head-piece,
is hope of doing well at last what lives
soever you live:  This is that which they had,
who said, That they should have peace tho'
they walked in the wickedness of their
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; A piece of
approved Armour this is, and who ever has it
and can hold it, so long no Arrow, Dart,
Sword or Shield can hurt him; this therefore
keep on, and thou wilt keep off many a blow my
Mansoul.

2. My Breast-Plate is a Breast-Plate ofHis Breast-plate.
Iron; I had it forged in mine own Countrey,
and all my Souldiers are armed therewith, 
in plain language it is an hard heart, an
heart as hard as Iron, and as much past
feeling as a stone, the which if you get, and
keep, niether mercy shall win yon, nor judgment
fright you. This therefore is a piece of
Armour, most necessary for all to put on that
hate Shaddai, and that would fight against him
under my Banner.
3. My Sword is a Tongue that is setHis Sword.
on fire of Hell,  and that can bend it self to
speak evil of Shaddai, his Son, his wayes,
and people; Use this, it has been tryed a thousand
times twice told; whoever hath it, keeps
it, and makes that use of it as I would have him,
can never be conquered by mine enemy.
4. My Shield is unbelief, or calling into
question the truth of the word,His Shield. or all the sayings
that speak of the judgment that Shaddai has appointed 
for wicked men, use this Shield; many
attempts he has made upon it, and sometimes,
'tis true, it has been bruised; but they that have
writ of the wars of Emanuel against my servants,
have testified that he could do no mighty work
there because of their unbelief: Now to handle
this weapon of mine aright, it is, not to believe
things, because they are true, of what sort or
by whom soever asserted; If he speaks of Judgment,
care not for it; if he speaks of mercy care
not for it; if he promises, if he swears that he

would do to Mansoul, if it turns, no hurt but
good; regard not what is said, question the truth
of all; for it is to wield the Shield of unbelief aright,
and as my servants ought and do: and he
that doth otherwise loves me not, nor do
I count him, but an Enemy to me.
5. Another part or piece, said Diabolus, of
mine excellent Armour is, a dumb and prayerless
Spirit, a spirit that scorns to cry for mercy;
wherefore be you my Mansoul, sure that you
make use of this: What! cry for quarter, never
do that, if you would be mine; I know you
are stout men, and am sure that I have clad you
with that which is Armour of proof; wherefore to
cry to Shaddai for mercy, let that be far from
you: Besides all this, I have a Maul, Fire-brands,
Arrows and Death, all good hand-weapons, and
such as will do execution.
He backs all with a speech to them.After he had thus furnished his men with
Armour and Armes, he addressed himself
to them in such like words as these, Remember
quoth he, that I am your rightful King, and
that you have taken an Oath, and entred into
Covenant to be true to me and my cause; I say
remember this, and shew your selves stout, and
valiant men of Mansoul. Remember also the
kindness that I have alwayes shewed to you, and
that without your petition; I have granted to you
external things, wherefore the Priviledges,
Grants, Immunities, Profits, and honours wherewith
I have indowed you, do call for at your
hands, returns of loyalty, my Lyon-like men

of Mansoul; And when so fit a time to shew it,
as when another shall seek to take my dominion
over you, into their own hands; One word more
and I have done: Can we but stand, and overcome
this one shock or brunt, I doubt not but in
little time, all the world will be ours; And
when that day comes, my true hearts, I will
make you Kings, Princes and Captains, and
what brave dayes shall we have then?
Diabolus having thus armed, and forearmed
his Servants and Vassals in Mansoul,
against their good and Lawful King Shaddai;
in the next place he doubleth his Guards,
at the Gates of the Town, and he takes himself
to the Castle,They of Mansoul shew their loyalty to the Gyant. which was his strong
Hold: His Vassals also to shew their wills,
and supposed (but ignoble) gallantry, exercise
themselves in their Arms every day,
and teach one another feats of War; they
also defied their Enemies, and sang up the
praises of their Tyrant; they threatned also
what men they would be, if ever things
should rise so high, as a War between
Shaddai and their King.
Now all this time, the good King, the
King Shaddai was preparing to send an Army
to recover the Town of Mansoul again
from under the Tyranny of their pretendedShaddai prepareth an Army for the recovery of Mansoul.
King Diabolus: But he thought good at the
first, not to send them by the hand and conduct
of brave Emanuel his Son, but under
the hand of some of his Servants, to see first

by them the temper of Mansoul; and whether
by them they would be won to the obedience
of their King. The Army consisted
of above forty thousand,The words of God. all true men:
For they came from the Kings own
Court, and were those of his own
chusing.
They came up to Mansoul under the conduct
of four stout Generals, each man being
a Captain of ten thousand men, and
these are their names,The Captains names. and their signs. The
name of the first was Boanerges. The name
of the second was Captain Conviction.
The name of the third was Captain
Judgment; And the name of the fourth
was Captain Execution: These were the
Captains that Shaddai sent to regain Mansoul.
These four Captains (as was said) the King
thought fit in the first place to send to Mansoul,
to make an attempt upon it; for indeed
generally in all his Wars he did use to send
these four Captains in the Van, for they
were very stout and rough-hewen men, men
that were fit to break the ice,  and to make
their way by dint of Sword, and their men
were like themselves.
To each of these Captains the King gave
a Banner that it might be displayed,
because of the goodness of his cause,
and because of the right that he had to Mansoul.

First to Captain Boanerges, for he was the
chief, to him, I say, was given ten thousand
men; His Ensign was Mr. Thunder, he bare
the black Colours, and his Scutcheon was
the three burning Thunder-Bolts. 
The second Captain was Captain Conviction,
to him also was given ten thousand
men; his Ensign's name was Mr. Sorrow, he
did bear the pale Colours, and his Scutcheon
was the Book of the Law wide open, from
whence issued a flame of fire. 
The third Captain was Captain Judgment,
to him was given ten thousand men; his Ensigns
name was Mr Terror, he bare the red
Colours, and his Scutcheon was a burning fiery
furnace. 
The fourth Captain was Captain Execution;
to him was given ten thousand men:
his Ensign was one Mr. Justice, he also
bare the red Colours, and his Scutcheon was
a fruitless tree with an Ax laying at the root
thereof. 
These four Captains, as I said, had every
one of them under his command ten thousand
men, all of good fidelity to the King, and
stout at their Military actions.
Well, the Captains and their forces, their
men and Under-Officers, being had upon a
day by Shaddai into the Field, and there
called all over by their names, were then
and there put into such harness, as became
their degree and that service that now

they were going about for their King.
Now when the King had mustered his
Forces, (for it is he that mustereth the Host to
the Battel) he gave unto the Captains their
several Commissions: with charge and commandment
in the audience of all the Souldiers
that they should take heed faithfully and
couragiously to do and execute the same.
Their Commissions were for the substance of
them the same in form, though as to name,
title, place and degree of the Captains there
might be some, but very small variation:
And here let me give you an account of
the matter and summ contained in their
Commission.
A Commission from the great Shaddai King of
Mansoul, to his trusty and noble Captain, the
Captain Boanerges, for his making War
upon the Town of Mansoul.
O!Their Commission. thou Boanerges, one of my stout
and thundring Captains, over one
ten thousand of my valiant and faithful Servants: 
Go thou in my name with this thy
Force to the miserable Town of Mansoul,
and when thou comest thither, offer them
first conditions of peace; and command
them, that casting off the yoke and tyranny
of the wicked Diabolus, they return to me
their rightful Prince and Lord; command
them also that they cleanse themselves from

all that is his in the Town of Mansoul, (and
look to thy self that thou hast good satisfaction
touching the truth of their obedience.)
Thus when thou hast commanded
them (if they in truth submit thereto) then
do thou to the uttermost of thy power,
what in thee lies, to set up for me a Garrison
in the famous Town of Mansoul; Nor
do thou hurt the least Native that moveth
or breatheth therein, if they will submit
themselves to me, but treat thou such as if
they were thy Friend or Brother; for all
such I love, and they shall be dear unto me:
And tell them that I will take a time to 
come unto them, and to let them know that
I am merciful.
But if they shall notwithstanding thy
Summons and the producing of thy Authority,
resist, stand out against thee, and
rebel: then do I command thee to make
use of all thy cunning, power, might, and
force to bring them under by strength of
hand. Farewel.
Thus you see the summ of their Commissions,
for as I said before, for the substance
of them, they were the same that the rest of
the noble Captains had.
Wherefore they having received each
Commander his authority, at the hand of
their King. The day being appointed,They prepare for a March. and
the place of their Rendezvouz prefixed;

each Commander appeared in such gallantry,
as became his cause and calling. So after
a new entertainment from Shaddai: With
flying Colours, they set forward to march
towards the Famous Town of Mansoul. Captain
Boanerges led the Van: Captain Conviction
and Captain Judgment made up the
main Body: And Captain Execution brought
up the Rere. They then having a great way
to go,  (for the Town of Mansoul was far off
from the Court of Shaddai) they marched
through the Regions and Countries of many
people, not hurting, or abusing any, but
blessing where ever they came. They also
lived upon the Kings cost in all the way
they went.
Having travelled thus for many dayes, at
last they came within sight of Mansoul:
the which when they saw, the Captains could
for their hearts do no less than for a while
bewail the condition of the Town; for they
quickly saw how that it was prostrate to
the will of Diabolus, and to his wayes and
designs.
Well, to be short, the Captains came up
before the Town, march up to Eargate, sit
down there (for that was the place of hearing).
So when they had pitched their
Tents, and intrenched themselves, they
addressed themselves to make their Assault.

Now the Townsfolk at first,The world are convinced by the well ordered life of the godly. beholding
so gallant a Company, so bravely accoutred,
and so excellently disciplined, having on
their glittering Armour, and displaying of
their flying Colours: could not but come
out of their Houses and gaze. But the cunning
Fox Diabolus, fearing that the people,
after this sight should on a suddain Summons,
open the Gates to the Captains, came down
with all haste from the Castle, and made
them retire into the body of the Town,
who when he had them there, made this lying
and deceivable speech unto them.
Gentlemen, quoth he, although you
are my trusty and well beloved Friends,Diabolus alienates their minds from them. yet
I cannot but (a little) chide you for your
late uncircumspect action: in going out to
gaze on that great and mighty force, that
but yesterday sat down before (and have
now intrenched themselves in order to the
maintaining of a Siege against the famous)
Town of Mansoul. Do you know who
they are? whence they come? and what
is their purpose in sitting down before the
Town of Mansoul? They are they of
whom I have told you long ago,That's false Satan. that they
would come to destroy destroy this Town,
and against whom I have been at the cost to
arm you with cap-a-pe for your body, besides
great fortifications for your mind;
Wherefore then did you not rather, even at
the first appearance of them, cry out, fire

the Beacons, and give the whole Town an Alarm
concerning them, that we might all
have been in a posture of defence, and a been
ready to have received them with the highest
acts of defiance,Satan greatly afraid of Gods Ministers, that they will set Mansoul against him. then had you shewed
your selves men to my liking, whereas by
what you have done, you have made me half
afraid; I say half afraid, that when they
and we shall come to push a Pike, I shall find
you want courage to stand it out any longer.
Wherefore have I commanded a
watch, and that you should double your
Guards at the Gates? Wherefore have I
indeavoured to make you as hard as Iron,
and your hearts as a piece of the nether
Milstone? was it think you, that you might
shew your selves Women, and that you
might go out like a company of Innocents
to gaze on your mortal foes! Fy, fy,
put your selves into a posture of defence,He stirs them up to bid defiance to the Ministers of the Word.
beat up the Drum, gather together in
warlike manner, that our Foes may know
that, before they shall conquer this Corporation,
there are valiant men in the Town
of Mansoul.
I will leave off now to chide, and will
not further rebuke you: but I charge you,
that hence forwards, you let me see no
more such actions. Let not hence forward
a man of you, without order first obtained
from me, so much as shew his head over
the Wall of the Town of Mansoul: You

have now heard me, do as I have commanded,
and you shall cause me that I dwell
securely with you, and that I take care as
for my self, so for your safety and honour
also. Farewel.
Now were the Townsmen strangely altered:When Sinners hearken to Satan they are set in a rage against godliness.
they were as men stricken with a
panick fear: they ran to and fro through the
Streets of the Town of Mansoul crying out,
help, help, The men that turn the World
upside down are come hither also; nor
could any of them be quiet after, but still
as men bereft of wit, they cryed out, The
destroyers of our peace and people are come:
this went down with Diabolus. Ay!
quoth he to himself, this I like well, now
it is as I would have it, now you shew your
obedience to your Prince; hold you but
here, and then let them take the Town if
they can.
Well, before the Kings Forces had sat before
Mansoul three dayes, Captain Boanerges
commanded his Trumpeter to go down toThe Kings Trumpet sounded at Eargate.
Eargate, and there in the name of the great
Shaddai to summons Mansoul to give audience
to the message that he in his Masters
name was to them commanded to deliver.
So the Trumpeter, whose name was, Take
heed what you hear, went up as he was commanded
to Eargate, and there sounded his
Trumpet for a hearing:They wil not hear. but there was none
that appeared, that gave answer or regard;

For so had Diabolus commanded. So the
Trumpeter returned to his Captain, and
told him what he had done, and also how
he had sped. Whereat the Captain was
grieved, but bid the Trumpeter go to his
Tent.
A second Summons repulsed.Again Captain Boanerges sendeth his
Trumpeter to Eargate, to sound as before
for an hearing; But they again kept close,
came not out, nor would they give him an
answer, so observant were they of the command
of Diabolus their King.
Then the Captains, and other Field-Officers,
A Council of War.called a Council of War to consider
what further was to be done for the gaining
of the Town of Mansoul, and after some close
and through debate upon the contents of their
Commissions; they concluded yet to give
to the Town by the hand of the forenamed
Trumpeter, another Summons to hear;
but if that shall be refused said they,
and that the Town shall stand it out
still: Then they determined, and bid the
Trumpeter tell them so,  that they would
indeavour, by what means they could, to
compel them by force to the obedience of their
King.
So Captain Boanerges commanded his Trumpeter
to go up to Eargate again,A third Summons. and in the
name of the great King Shaddai to give it a very
loud Summons to come down without delay
to Eargate, there to give audience to the

Kings most noble Captains. So the Trumpeter
went, and did as he was commanded:
he went up to Eargate, and sounded his
Trumpet, and gave a third Summons to
Mansoul: He said moreover,  That if
this they should still refuse to do, the Captains
of his Prince would with might come
down upon them, and indeavour
to reduce them to their obedience by
force.
Then stood up my Lord Willbewill, who
was the Governour of the Town:The Lord Willbewell his Speech to the Trumpeter. (this
Willbewill was that Apostate of whom mention
was made before) and the keeper of
the Gates of Mansoul. He therefore with
big and ruffling words demanded of the
Trumpeter who he was? whence he came?
and what was the cause of his making so hideous
a noise at the gate, and speaking such
insufferable words against the Town of
Mansoul.
The Trumpeter answered,The Trumpeter. I am servant
to the most noble Captain, Captain Boanerges,
General of the Forces of the great
King Shaddai, against whom both thy self
with the whole Town of Mansoul have rebelled,
and lift up the heel; and my Master
the Captain hath a special message to
this Town, and to thee as a member thereof:
The which if you of Mansoul shall
peaceably hear, so: and if not, you must take
what follows.

Then said the Lord Willbewill,Willbewill. I will carry
thy words to my Lord, and will know
what he will say.
But the Trumpeter soon replyed,The Trumpeter. saying,
Our message is, not to the Gyant Diabolus,
but to the miserable Town of Mansoul,
nor shall we at all regard what answer
by him is made; nor yet by any for him.
We are sent to this Town to recover it
from under his cruel Tyranny, and to perswade
it to submit, as in former times it did,
to the most excellent King Shaddai.
Then said the Lord Willbewill, I will do
your errand to the Town.Willbewil.
The trumpeter then replyed, Sir, do
not deceive us,The Trumpeter. lest in so doing, you deceive
your selves much more. He added
moreover, For we are resolved, if in peaceable
manner you do not submit your selves:
then to make a War upon you, and to bring
you under by force. And of the truth of
what I now say, this shall be a sign unto
you, you shall see the black Flag with its
hot burning-thunderbolts set upon the
mount to morrow, as a token of defiance
against your Prince, and of our resolutions
to reduce you to your Lord, and rightful
King.
The Trumpeter returns to the Camp.So the said Lord Willbewill returned from
off the Wall, and the Trumpeter came into
the Camp. When the Trumpeter was come
into the Camp, the Captains and Officers of

the mighty King Shaddai, came together to
know, if he had obtained a hearing, and
what was the effect of his errand: So the
Trumpeter told, saying, When I had sounded
my Trumpet, and had called aloud to
the Town for a hearing: My Lord Willbewill
the Governour of the Town, and he that
hath charge of the Gates came up, when
he heard me sound, and looking over the
wall, he asked me what I was? whence I
came? and what was the cause of my making
this noyse? so I told him my errand,
and by whose Authority I brought it.
Then, said he, I will it to the Governnour
and to Mansoul: and then I returned to
my Lords.
Then said the brave Boanerges, Let us
yet for a while, lie still in our Trenches,Carnal Souls make a wrong interpretation of the design of a Gospel Ministry.
and see what these Rebels will do.
Now when the time drew nigh that audience
by Mansoul must be given to the brave
Boanerges and his companions: It was commanded
that all the men of war throughout
the whole Camp of Shaddai, should as one
man stand to their Arms, and make themselves
ready, if the Town of Mansoul shall
hear, to receive it forthwith to mercy; but if
not, to force a subjection. So the day being
come, the Trumpeters sounded, and
that throughout the whole Camp, that the
men of War might be in a readiness for that
which then should be the work of the day.

But when they that were in the Town of
Mansoul, heard the sound of the Trumpets
throughout the Camp of Shaddai, and thinking
no other, but that it must be in order to
storming the Corporation: they at first were
put to great consternation of Spirit, but after
they a little were setled again, they
also made what preparation they could for
a War, if they did storm; else to secure
themselves.
Well, when the utmost time was come,
Boanerges was resolved to hear their answer;
wherefore he sent out his Trumpeter again
 to summons Mansoul to a hearing of the message
that they had brought from Shaddai. So
he went and sounded, and the Townsmen
came up, but made Eargate as sure as they
could. Now when they were come up to
the top of the Wall, Captain Boanerges desired
to see the Lord Mayor,Boanerges refuses to make Incredulity a Judge of what he had to deliver to the famous Town of Mansoul. but my Lord Incredulity
was then Lord Mayor, for he came
in the room of my Lord Lustings. So Incredulity,
he came up and shewed himself over
the Wall; but when the Captain Boanerges
had set his eyes upon him, he cryed out
aloud, This is not he, where is my Lord Understanding,
the ancient Lord Mayor of the
Town of Mansoul, for to him I would deliver
my message?
Then said the Gyant, (for Diabolus was
also come down) to the Captain; Mr. Captain,
You have by your boldness given to Mansoul

at least four Summons to subject herself to your
King: by whose Authority I know not; nor will
I dispute that now. I ask therefore what is the reason
of all this ado, or what would you be at if you
knew your selves?
Then Captan Boanerges, whose was the
black Colours,Boanerges obtains a hearing. and whose Scutcheon was the three
burning-thunder-bolts, (taking no notice of the
Gyant or of his speech, thus addressed himself
to the Town of Mansoul;His Speech. Be it known
unto you, O unhappy and rebellious Mansoul!
That the most Gracious King, the
great King Shaddai my Master, hath sent
me unto you with Commission (and so he
shewed to the Town his broad Seal) to
reduce you to his obedience. And he hath
commanded me, in case you yield, upon
my Summons, to carry it to you as if you
were my Friends, or Brother; but he also
hath bid, that if after Summons to submit,
you still stand out and rebel, we should
indeavour to take you by force.
Then stood forth Captain Conviction and
said, (his was the pale Colours, and for a
Scutcheon he had the Book of the Law wideThe Speech of Captain Conviction.
open &c.) Hear O Mansoul! Thou, O
Mansoul,  wast once famous for innocency,
but now thou art degenerated into lies and
deceit: Thou hast heard what my Brother,
the Captain Boanerges hath said, and it is
your wisdom, and will be your happiness to
stoop to, and accept of conditions of peace

and mercy when offered;  specially when offered
by one, against whom thou hast rebelled,
and one who is of power to tear thee
in pieces, for so is Shaddai our King, nor
when he is angry, can any thing stand before
him. If you say you have not sinned,
or acted rebellion against our King, the
whole of your doings since the day that you
cast off his service (and there was the beginning
of your sin) will sufficiently
testify against you: what else means your
harkning to the Tyrant, and your receiving
him for your King? what means else
your rejecting of the Laws of Shaddai, and
your obeying of Diabolus? yea, what means
this your taking up of Arms against, and
the shutting of your gates upon us, the
faithful servants of your King? Be ruled
then, and accept of my Brothers invitation,
and overstand not the time of mercy, 
but agree with thine adversary quickly. Ah
Mansoul, suffer not thy self to be kept from
mercy, and to be run into a thousand miseries,
by the flattering wiles of Diabolus:
Perhaps that piece of deceit may attempt
to make you believe that we seek our own
profit in this our service; but know 'tis
obedience to our King, and love to your
happiness, that is the cause of this undertaking
of ours.
Again, I say to thee O Mansoul, consider
if it be not amazing grace that Shaddai

should so humble himself as he doth,  now
he by us reasons with you, in a way of intreaty
and sweet perswasions, that you
would subject your selves to him. Has he
that need of you, that we are sure you have
of him? No, no, but he is merciful, and
will not that Mansoul should dye, but turn to
him and live.
Then stood forth Captain Judgment,Captain Judgment his speech to Mansoul. whose
was the red Colours, and for a Scutcheon he had
the burning fiery Furnace, and he said: O
ye the Inhabitants of the Town of Mansoul!
that have lived so long in rebellion and acts
of Treason against the King Shaddai:
Know that we come not to day to
this place, in this manner, with our message
of our own minds, or to revenge our
own quarrel; it is the King my Master that
hath sent us to reduce you to your obedience
to him, the which if you refuse, in a
peaceable way to yield, we have Commission
to compel you thereto. And never think
of your selves, nor yet suffer the Tyrant
Diabolus to perswade you to think, that our
King by his power is not able to bring you
down, and to lay you under his feet, for he is
the Former of all things, and if he touches
the Mountains they smoak. Nor will the
Gate of the Kings clemency stand alwayes
open, for the day that shall burn like an
Oven is before him, yea it hasteth greatly,
it slumbreth not.

O Mansoul!  is it little in thine eyes that
our King doth offer thee mercy, and
that after so many provocations? yea he
still holdeth out his golden Scepter to thee,
and will not yet suffer his Gate to be shut
against thee, wilt thou provoke him to do
it?  If so, consider of what I say; To thee it
is opened no more for ever. If thou sayest thou
shalt not see him, yet judgment is before him;
therefore trust thou in him: Yea, because
there is wrath, beware, lest he take thee away
with his stroak; then a great ransome cannot
deliver thee. Will he esteem thy riches? no, not
gold, nor all the forces of strength. He hath
prepared his Throne for Judgment; for he will
come with fire, and with his Chariots like a
whirl-wind, to render his anger with fury,
and his rebukes with flames of fire. Therefore
O Mansoul take heed, lest after thou
hast fulfilled the judgment of the wicked.
Justice and Judgment should take hold of
thee. Now while the Captain Judgment
was making of this Oration to the Town of
Mansoul, it was observed by some that Diabolus
trembled: But he proceeded in his
parable and said, O thou woful Town of
Mansoul! wilt thou not yet set open
thy Gate to receive us, the Deputies
of thy King, and those that would
rejoyce to see thee live? Can thine
heart endure,  or can thy hands be strong in the
day that he shall deal in Judgment with thee?

I say canst thou indure to be forced to drink
as one would drink sweet Wine, the Sea
of wrath that our King has prepared for
Diabolus and his Angels? Consider, betimes
consider.
Then stood forth the fourth Captain,
the noble Captain Execution, and said:The Speech of Captain Execution. O
Town of Mansoul! once famous, but now
like the fruitless bough; once the delight of
the high ones, but now a Den for Diabolus:
Hearken also to me, and to the words
that I shall speak to thee in the name of the
great Shaddai. Behold the Ax is laid to the
root of the Trees,  every Tree therefore that
bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewen down and
cast into the fire.
Thou, O Town of Mansoul! hast hitherto
been this fruitless Tree, thou barest
nought but Thorns and Bryers. Thy evil
fruit fore-bespeaks thee not to be a good 
Tree: Thy Grapes are Grapes of Gall,
thy clusters are bitter. Thou hast rebelled
against thy King, and lo we, the Power and
Force of Shaddai, are the Ax that is laid
to thy roots; What saist thou, wilt thou
turn? I say again, tell me before the first
blow is given, wilt thou turn? Our Ax
must first be laid to thy root, before it be
laid at thy root; it must first be laid to thy
root in a way of threatning, before it is laid
at thy root by way of Execution; and between
these two is required thy repentance,

and this is all the time that thou hast. What
wilt thou do? wilt thou turn? or shall I
smite? If I fetch my blow Mansoul, down
you go: For I have Commission to lay my
Ax at, as well as to thy roots, nor will any
thing, but yielding to our King, prevent
doing of Execution. What art thou fit for
O Mansoul, if mercy preventeth not, but
to be hewn down, and cast into the fire and
burned?
O Mansoul! patience and forbearance
do not act for ever: a year or two, or
three they may; but if thou provoke by a
three years rebellion, and thou hast already
done more than this, Then what follows,
but cut it down, nay after that thou shalt cut
it down.  And dost thou think that these
are but threatnings, or that our King has
not power to execute his words? O Mansoul!
thou wilt find that in the words of
our King, when they are by sinners made
little or light of, there is not only
threatning, but burning Coals of
fire.
Thou hast been a cumber ground long
already, and wilt thou continue so still? thy
sin has brought this Army to thy Walls,
and shall it bring it in Judgment to do
Execution into thy Town? Thou hast heard
what the Captains have said, but as yet
thou shuttest thy Gates, speak out Mansoul,
wilt thou do so still? or wilt thou accept of
conditions of peace?

These brave speeches of there four noble
Captains, the Town of Mansoul refused to
hear, yet a sound thereof did beat against
Eargate, though the force thereof could not
break it open.Mansoul desires time to make answer. In fine the Town desired a
time to prepare their answer to these demands.
The Captains then told them, That
if they would throw out to them one Ill-pause,
that was in the Town, that they might
reward him according to his works; then
they would give them time to consider:
but if they would not cast him to them
over the Wall of Mansoul, then they would
give them none: for said they,Upon what conditions the Captain; would give them time. we know
that so long as Illpause draws breath in Mansoul,
all good consideration will be confounded,
and nothing but mischief will
come thereon.
Then Diabolus, who was there present,
being loth to lose his Ill-pause,Diabolus interrupts them and sets Incredulity to answer them. because he
was his Orator (and yet be sure he had,
could the Captains have laid their fingers
on him) was resolved at this instant to give
them answer by himself, but then changing
his mind, he commanded the then Lord Mayor,
the Lord Incredulity to do it: saying,
My Lord do you give these Runagates an
answer, and speak out that Mansoul may hear
and understand you.
So Incredulity at Diabolus's command beganHis Speech
and said: Gentlemen, you have here,
as we do behold, to the disturbance of our

Prince, and the molestation of the Town
of Mansoul, camped against it: but from
whence you come, we will not know; and
what you are, we will not believe. Indeed
you tell us in your terrible Speech, that
you have this Authority from Shaddai,
but by what right he commands you
to do it, of that we shall yet be ignorant.
You have also by the Authority aforesaid,
Summoned this Town to desert her
Lord, and for protection, to yield up herself
to the great Shaddai your King: flatteringly
telling her, that if she will do it,
he will pass by and not charge her with her
past offences.
Further, You have also to the terror of
the Town of Mansoul, threatned with great
and sore destructions to punish this Corporation
if she consents not to do as your wills
would have her.
Now Captains,The true picture of unbelief. from whence soever
you come, and though your designs be never
so right; yet know ye, that neither my
Lord Diabolus, nor I his servant Incredulity,
nor yet our brave Mansoul, doth regard
either your persons, message, or the King
that you say hath sent you: His power,
his greatness, his vengeance we fear
not; nor will we yield at all to your
Summons.
As for the War that you threaten to

make upon us, we must therein defend our
selves as well as we can: and know ye, that
we are not without wherewithal to bid
defiance to you. And in short, for I will
not be tedious: I tell you that we take
you to be some Vagabond Runagate
Crew, that having shaken off all obedience
to your King, have gotten together in tumultuous
manner, and are ranging from
place to place to see, if, through the flatteries
you are skilled to make, on the one
side, and threats wherewith you think to
fright, on the other; to make some silly
Town, City, or Country, to desert their
place and leave it to you: But Mansoul is
none of them.
To conclude, we dread you not, we fear
you not, nor will we obey your summons:
Our gates we keep shut upon you, our
place we will keep you out of: Nor will we
long thus suffer you to sit down before
us. Our people must live in quiet: your
appearance doth disturb them:  wherefore
arise with Bag and Baggage, and be
gone, or we will let fly from the ** Flesh, Walls against
you.
This Oration made by Old Incredulity,
was seconded by desperate Willbewill, in
words to this effect. Gentlemen, we have
heard your demands,The speech of the Lord Willbewill. and the noise of your
threats, and have heard the sound of your
summons, but we fear not your force,

we regard not your threats, but will still abide
as you found us. And we command
you, that in three days time you cease to
appear in these parts, or you shall know,
what it is, once to dare offer to rouze the
Lion Diabolus, when asleep in his Town of
Mansoul.
The Recorder whose name was Forget-good,The speech of Forget-good the Recorder.
he also added as followeth. Gentlemen,
My Lords, as you see, have with
milde and gentle words, answered your
rough and angry speeches; they have
moreover, in my hearing, given you leave
quietly to depart as you came. Wherefore
take their kindness and be gone, we
might have come out with force upon you,
and have caused you to feel the dint of our
Swords: but as we love ease and quiet
our selves; so we love not to hurt or molest
others.
Then did the Town of Mansoul shout for
joy,The Town resolved to to withstand the Captains. as if by Diabolus and his Crew, some
great advantage had been gotten of the
Captains. They also rang the Bells, and
made merry, and danced upon the Walls.
Diabolus also returned to the Castle, and
the Lord Mayor and Recorder to their place:
But the Lord Willbewill took special care
that the Gates should be secured with
double guards, double bolts, and double
locks and bars. And that Eargate (especially)
might the better be looked to, for

that was the Gate in at which the Kings
forces sought most to enter; The Lord
Willbewill made one old Mr. Prejudice (an
angry and ill-conditioned fellow) Captain
of the Ward at that Gate,The band of Deaf-men set to keep Eargate. and put under
his power sixty men, called Deaf-men: men
advantagious for that service, for as much
as they mattered no words of the Captains,
nor of their Souldiers.
Now when the Captains saw the answerThe Captains resolved to give them Battel.
of the great ones, and that they could
not get an hearing from the old Natives
of the Town, and that Mansoul was resolved
to give the Kings Army battel: they
prepared themselves to receive them, and
to try it out by the power of the arm. And
first they made their force more formidable
against Eargate. For they knew that unless
they could penetrate that, no good
could be done upon the Town. This
done, they put the rest of their men in
their places. After which they gave out
the word, which was, ye must be born again.
Then they sounded the Trumpet,The Battel begun. then
they in the Town made them answer, with
shout against shout, charge against charge,
and so the Battel began. Now they in the
Town had planted upon the Tower over
Eargate, two great Guns, the one called
High-mind, and the other Heady.Two guns planted upon Eargate. Unto
these two Guns they trusted much, they
were cast in the Castle by Diabolus's founder,

whose name was Mr. Puff-up, and mischievous
pieces they were. But so vigilant
and watchful, when the Captains saw
them, were they, that though sometimes
their shot would go by their ears with a
Whizz, yet they did them no harm. By
these two Guns the Towns-folk made no
question but greatly to annoy the Camp of
Shaddai, and well enough to secure the Gate,
but they had not much cause to boast of what
execution they did, as by what follows will
be gathered.
The famous Mansoul had also some other
small pieces in it, of the which they made
use against the Camp of Shaddai.
They from the Camp also, did as stoutly,
and with as much of that as may (in truth) be
called Valour, let fly as fast at the Town, and
at Eargate: For they saw that unless they could
break open Eargate,The sentence and power of the word. 'twould be but in vain to
batter the Wall. Now the Kings Captains
had brought with them several slings and two
or three Battering-Rams; with their slings
therefore they battered the houses and people
of the Town, and with their Rams they
sought to break Eargate open.
The Camp and the Town had several
skirmishes, and brisk encounters, while the
Captains with their Engins made many
brave attempts to break open or beat down
the Tower that was over Eargate, and at
the said Gate to make their entrance:

But Mansoul stood it out so lustily, through
the rage of Diabolus, the valour of the
Lord Willbewill,The Town stoutly stands out and the Captains return to their Winter Quarters. and the conduct of old Incredulity
the Mayor, and Mr. Forgetgood, the
Recorder, That the charge and expence of
that Summers Wars, (on the Kings side)
seemed to be almost quite lost, and the advantage
to return to Mansoul: But when
the Captains saw how it was, they made a fair
retreat, and intrenched themselves in their
Winter Quarters. Now in this War, you must
needs think there was much loss on both sides,
of which be pleased to accept of this brief account
following.
The Kings Captains when they marchedAn account of this War with reference to the loss on both sides.
from the Court to come up against Mansoul
to War; as they came crossing over the
Country, they happened to light upon three
young fellows that had a mind to go for
Souldiers; proper men they were, and men
of courage, (and skill) to appearance.
Their names were Mr. Tradition, Mr. Human-wisdom,Three new Souldiers.
and Mr. Mans Invention. So they
came up to the Captains, and proffered
their service to Shaddai. The Captains
then told them of their design, and bid
them not to be rash in their offers: But
the young men told them, they had considered
the thing before, and that hearing
they were upon their march for such a
design, came hither on purpose to meet
them, that they might be listed under their

Excellencies. Then Captain Boanerges,
for that they were men of Courage, listed
them into his company, and so away they
went to the War.
Now when the War was begun, in one of
the briskest skirmishes, so it was, that a
Company of the Lord Willbewills men sallyed
out at the Sallyport, or Postern of the
Town, and fell in upon the Rear of Captain
Boanerges men, where these three fellows
happened to be, so they took them
Prisoners,They are taken prisoners. and away they carried them into
the Town; where they had not lain long in
durance, but it began to be noised about
the Streets of the Town, what three notable
Prisoners the Lord Willbewills men had
taken, and brought in Prisoners out of the
Camp of Shaddai. At length tidings thereof
was carried to Diabolus to the Castle,
to wit, what My Lord Willbewills men had
done, and whom they had taken prisoners.
Then Diabolus called for Willbewill,They are brought before Diabolus, and are content to fight under his banner. to
know the certainty of this matter. So he
asked him and he told him; then did the
Gyant send for the prisoners, who when they
were come, demanded of them who they
were, whence they came, and what they
did in the Camp of Shaddai; and they told
him. Then he sent them to ward again.
Not many days after he sent for them to him
again, and then asked them if they would be

willing to serve him against their former
Captains: They then told him, that they did
not so much live by Religion, as by the fates
of Fortune. And that since his Lordship
was willing to entertain them, they should
be willing to serve him. Now while things
were thus in hand, there was one Captain
Anything, a great doer in the Town of Mansoul,Anything.
and to this Captain Anything did Diabolus
send these men,He therefore sends them to Captain Anything with a Letter. with a note under his
hand to receive them into his Company;
the Contents of which Letter were
thus.
Anything, my Darling, the three men that
are the bearers of this Letter, have a desire to
serve me in the War; nor know I better to whose
conduct to commit them, than to thine: Receive
them therefore in my name, and as need
shall require make use of them against Shaddai
and his men. Farewell. So they came and he
received them,Anything receives them into his service and he made of two of them
Serjeants, but he made Mr. Mans invention,
his Ancient-Bearer. But thus much for
this, and now to return to the Camp.
They of the Camp did also some execution
upon the Town, for they did beat down
the roof of the old Lord Mayors house,The roof of old Incredulities house beat down. and so
laid him more open than he was before.
They had almost (with a sling) slain My
Lord Willbewill outright: But he made a shift
to recover again. But they made a notable
slaughter among the Aldermen, for with one

only shot they cut off six of them:Six Aldermen slain. To wit,
Mr. Swearing, Mr. Whoring, Mr. Fury,
Mr. Stand-to lies, Mr. Drunkenness, and Mr.
Cheating.
They also dismounted the two Guns that
stood upon the Tower over Eargate,The two great Guns dismounted. and
laid them flat in the dirt. I told you before
that the Kings noble Captains had drawn
off to their Winter-Quarters, and had
there intrenched themselves and their carriages,
so as with the best advantage to
their King, and the greatest annoyance to
the enemy, they might give seasonable and
warm alarms to the Town of Mansoul.
And this design of them did so hit, that I
may say they did almost what they would
to the molestation of the Corporation.
For now could not Mansoul sleep securely
as before,Continual alarms given to Mansoul. nor could they now go to
their debaucheries with that quietness
as in times past. For they had from the
Camp of Shaddai such frequent, warm, and
terrifying alarms;The effects of convictions though common if abiding. yea, alarms upon alarms,
first at one Gate and then at another,
and again, at all the Gates at once, that they
were broken as to former peace. Yea, they
had their alarms so frequently, and that
when the nights were at longest, the weather
coldest, and so consequently the season
most unseasonable; that that Winter was to
the Town of Mansoul a Winter by it self.
Sometimes the Trumpets would sound, and

sometimes the slings would whorle the stones
into the Town. Sometimes ten thousand of
the Kings Souldiers would be running round
the Walls of Mansoul at midnight, shouting,
and lifting up the voice for the battel.The Town much molested. Sometimes
again, some of them in the Town would
be wounded, and their cry and lamentable
voice would be heard, to the great molestation
of the now languishing Town of Mansoul.
Yea so distressed, with those that laid
siege against them, were they, that I dare
say, Diabolus their King had in these days
his rest much broken.
In these days, as I was informed,Change of thoughts in Mansoul. new
thoughts, and thoughts that began to run counter
one to another, began to possess the minds
of the men of the Town of Mansoul. Some
would say, there is no living thus: others would
then reply, this will be over shortly: then would
a third stand up and answer, let us turn to the
King Shaddai, and so put an end to these troubles:
And a fourth would come in with a fear saying,
I doubt he will not receive us.Conscience speaks. The old
Gentleman too, the Recorder, that was so
before Diabolus took Mansoul; he also began
to talk aloud, and his words were now
to the Town of Mansoul, as if they were
great claps of thunder. No noise now, so
terrible to Mansoul, as was his, with the noise
of the Souldiers and shoutings of the Captains.

Also things began to grow scarce in Mansoul;A famin in Mansoul.
now the things that her soul lusted
after,  were departing from her. Upon all her
pleasant things there was a blast, and burning
in stead of beauty. Wrinkles now, and
some shews of the shadow of death, were upon
the inhabitants of Mansoul. And now,
O how glad would Mansoul have been to have
injoyed quietness, and satisfaction of mind,
though joyned with the meanest condition in
the world!
The Captains also,They are summoned again to yield. in the deep of this
Winter, did send by the mouth of Boanerges
Trumpeter, a summons to Mansoul to
yield up her self to the King, the great
King Shaddai. They sent it once, and twice,
and thrice: Not knowing but that at some
times there might be in Mansoul some willingness
to surrender up themselves unto
them, might they but have the colour of an
invitation to do it under. Yea, so far as I
could gather, the Town had been surrendred
up to them before now, had it not
been for the opposition of old Incredulity, and
the Fickleness of the thoughts of My Lord
Willbewills. Diabolus also began to rave, wherefore
Mansoul as to yielding was not yet all
of one mind,Mansoul in distress. therefore they still lay distressed
under these perplexing fears.
I told you but now that they of the Kings
Army had this Winter sent three times to
Mansoul, to submit her self.

The First time the Trumpeter went,The contents of the first summons. he went
with words of peace, telling of them,
that the Captains, the Noble Captains of Shaddai,
did pity and bewail the misery of the
now perishing Town of Mansoul; and was
troubled to see them so much to stand in the way
of their own deliverance. He said moreover,
that the Captains bid him tell them, that if now
poor Mansoul would humble her self, and turn,
her former Rebellions, and most notorious treasons
should by their merciful King be forgiven
them, yea and forgotten too. And having bid
them beware that they stood not in their own way,
that they opposed not themselves, nor made themselves
their own losers; He returned again into
the Camp.
Secondly,The contents of the second summons. the second time the Trumpeter
went, he did treat them a little more roughly.
For after sound of Trumpet he told them,
That their continuing in their Rebellion did but
chafe, and heat the spirit of the Captains, and that
they were resolved to make a Conquest of Mansoul,
or to lay their bones before the Town Walls.
Thirdly, He went again the third time,The contents of the third summons.
and dealt with them yet more roughly;
telling of them, That now, since they had
been so horribly prophane, he did not know, not certainly
know, whether the Captains were inclining
to mercy or judgment; only, said he, they
commanded me to give you a summons to open the
Gates unto them: So he returned, and went into
the Camp.

These three summons,The Town sounds for a parly. and especialy the
two last, did so distress the Town, that
they presently call a consultation, the result
of which was this, That My Lord Willbewill
should go up to Eargate, and there with
sound of Trumpet, call to the Captains of
the Camp for a parly. Well, the Lord
Willbewill sounded upon the Wall, so the
Captains came up in their Harness with their
ten thousands at their feet. The Townsmen
then told the Captains, that they had
heard and considered their summons, and
would come to an agreement with them,
and with their King Shaddai, upon such
certain Terms,They propound conditions of agreement. Articles, and Propositions
as, with and by the order of their Prince,
they to them, were appointed to propound.
To wit, they would agree upon these grounds
to be one people with them.
1. If that those of their own company,Proposition the first.
as the now Lord Mayor, and their Mr. Forgetgood,
with their brave Lord Willbewill,
might under Shaddai be still the Governours
of the Town, Castle, and Gates of Mansoul.
2. Provided that no man that now serveth
under their great Gyant Diabolus,Proposition the second. be by Shaddai
cast out of house, harbor, or the freedom
that he hath hitherto enjoyed in the famous
Town of Mansoul.
3. That it shall be granted them,Proposition the third. that they
of the Town of Mansoul shall enjoy certain of

their Rights, and priviledges: To wit, such as
have formerly been granted them; and that
they have long lived in the enjoyment of, under
the Reign of their King Diabolus, that now is and
long has been their only Lord, and great defender.
4. That no new Law, Officer,Proposition on the fourth. or Executioner
of Law or Office, shall have any power over
them, without their own choice and consent.
These be our Propositions, or conditions of
peace: And upon these terms, said they, we
will submit to your King.
But when the Captains had heard this
weak and feeble offer of the Town of Mansoul,
and their high and bold demands:
they made to them again by their noble
Captain, the Captain Boanerges, this speech
following.
O ye inhabitants of the Town of Mansoul,Boanerges his answer
when I heard your Trumpet sound for a
Parley with us, I can truly say, I was glad;
but when you said you were willing to submit
your selves to our King and Lord,
then I was yet more glad: But when by your
silly provisoes, and foolish cavils, you lay
the stumbling-block of your inquity before
your own faces; then was my gladness turned
into sorrows, and my hopeful beginnings
of your return, into languishing, fainting
fears.
I count, that old Illpause, the ancient enemy
of Mansoul, did draw up those proposals
that now you present us with, as

terms of an agreement, but they deserve not
 to be admitted to sound in the ear of any
man that pretends to have service for Shaddai
We do therefore joyntly, and that
with the highest disdain, refuse, and reject
such things as the greatest of iniquities.
But O Mansoul, if you will give your
selves into our hands, or rather into the
hands of our King; and will trust him to
make such terms with, and for you, as
shall seem good in his eyes, (and I dare
say they shall be such as you shall find to be
most profitable to you) then we will receive
you, and be at peace with you: But
if you like not to trust your selves in the
arms of Shaddai our King, then things are
but where they were before, and we know
also what we have to do.
Old Incredulity's reply.Then cryed out old Incredulity the Lord
Mayor, and said, And who, being out of
the hands of their Enemies, as ye see we
are now, will be so foolish as to put the
staff out of their own hands, into the hand of
they know not who? I for my part will never
yield to so unlimited a proposition. Do we
know the manner and temper of their King?
'Tis said by some,Unbelief never is profitable in talk, but always speaks mischievously. that he will be angry with
his Subjects, if but the breadth of an hair
they chance to step out of the way: And of others,
that he requireth of them much more
than they can perform. Wherefore it seems O

Mansoul, to be thy wisdom, to take good
heed what thou dost in this matter. For if
you once yield, you give up your selves
to another, and so you are no more your
own. Wherefore to give up your selves to
an unlimited power, is the greatest folly in
the world. For now you indeed may repent;
but can never justly complain. But do
you indeed know, when you are his, which
of you he will kill, and which of you he will
save alive? Or whether he will not cut off
every one of us, and send out of his own
country another new people, and cause them
to inhabit this Town.
This speech of the Lord Mayor, undid all,This speech undid all, but it did please the Devil.
and threw flat to the ground their hopes of
an accord: Wherefore the Captains returned
to their Trenches, to their Tents, and
to their Men, as they were: and the Mayor
to the Castle, and to his King.
Now Diabolus had waited for his return, for
he had heard that they had been at their
points. So when he was come into the
Chamber of State, Diabolus saluted him,
with, Welcome My Lord: How went matters
betwixt you to day? So the Lord Incredulity
(with a low congy) told him the whole
of the matter, saying, Thus and thus, said the
Captains of Shaddai, and thus and thus said
I. The which when 'twas told to Diabolus,
he was very glad to hear it, and said,
My Lord Mayor, my faithful Incredulity, I

have proved thy fidelity above ten times already,
but never yet found thee false. I do promise
thee, if we rub over this brunt, to prefer thee
to a place of honour, a place far better than to
be Lord Mayor of Mansoul. I will make thee
my Universal Deputy, and thou shalt, next to
me, have all Nations under thy hand; yea,
and thou shalt lay bands upon them that they
may not resist thee,&rhand; nor shall any of our Vassals
walk more at liberty, but those that shall be content
to walk in thy Fetters.
Now came the Lord Mayor out from Diabolus,
as if he had obtained a favour indeed;
wherefore to his habitation he goes in
great state, and thinks to feed himself well
enough with hopes, until the time came
that his greatness should be enlarged.
But now, though the Lord Mayor and
Diabolus did thus well agree, yet this repulse
to the brave Captains put Mansoul
into a Mutiny. For while Old Incredulity went
into the Castle to congratulate his Lord
with what had passed, the Old Lord Mayor
The Understanding and Conscience begin to receive conviction, and they set the soul in a hubbub.that was so before Diabolus came to the
Town, to wit, My Lord Understanding,
and the old Recorder Mr. Conscience, getting
intelligence of what had passed at Eargate
(for you must know that they might
not be suffered to be at that debate, lest
they should then have mutinied, for the
Captains) But, I say, they got intelligence
what had passed there, and were much concerned

therewith) wherefore they, getting
some of the Town together, began to possess
them with the reasonableness of the noble Captains
demands, and with the bad consequences
that would follow upon the speech of old Incredulity,
the Lord Mayor: To wit, how little
reverence he shewed therein, either to the
Captains, or to their King; also how he implicitly
charged them with unfaithfulness,
and treachery: For what less, quoth they,
could be made of his words, when he said
he would not yield to their proposition;
and added moreover a supposition, that he
would destroy us, when before, he had sent
us word that he would shew us mercy. The
multitude being now possessed with the
conviction of the evil that old IncredulityA mutiny in Mansoul.
had done, began to run together by companies
in all places, and in every corner of
the Streets of Mansoul, and first they began
to mutter, then to talk openly, and after
that they run to and fro, and cried as
they run, O the brave Captains of Shaddai!
Would we were under the Government of the
Captains, and of Shaddai their King. When
the Lord Mayor had intelligence that Mansoul
was in an uproar, down he comes to
appease the people, and thought to have
quashed their heat with the bigness and
the shew of his countenance. But when
they saw him, they came running upon him,
and had doubtless done him a mischief, had

he not betaken himself to house. However
they strongly assaulted the house where
he was, to have pulled it down about his
ears; but the place was too strong, so they
failed of that. So he taking some courage
addressed himself, out at a Window, to
the people in this manner.Incredulity seeks to quiet the people.
Gentlemen, what is the reason, that there
is here such an uproar to day?
My Lord Understanding answers him.Und. Then answered My Lord Understanding:
It is even because that thou and
thy Master have carried it not rightly,
and as you should, to the Captains of Shaddai;
for in three things you are faulty, First,
in that you would not let Mr. Conscience
and my self be at the hearing of your discourse.
Secondly, In that you propounded
such terms of peace, to the Captains, that
by no means could be granted, unless they
had intended that their Shaddai, should have
been only a Titular Prince, and that Mansoul
should still have had power by Law, to
have lived in all lewdness and vanity before
him, and so by consequence Diabolus
should still here be King in power, and the
other, only King in name. Thirdly, for
that thou didst thy self, after the Captains
had shewed us upon what conditions they
would have received us to mercy, even undo
all again with thy unsavory, and unseasonable,
and ungodly speech.

Incred. When old Incredulity had heard thisSin, and the Soul at odds.
speech, He cried out, Treason, Treason. To
your Arms, to your Arms, O ye; the trusty
friends of Diabolus in Mansoul.
Und. Sir, you may put upon my words,
what meaning you please, but I am sure that
the Captains of such an high Lord as theirs
is, deserved a better treatment at your
hands.
Incred. Then said old Incredulity, This is
but little better. But Sir, quoth he, what I spake,They chide on both sides.
I spake for my Prince, for his Government, and the
quieting of the people, whom by your unlawfull
actions, you have this day set to mutiny against
us.
Cons. Then replyed the old Recorder,
whose name was Mr. Conscience, and said,
Sir, you ought not thus to retort upon what
My Lord Understanding hath said. 'Tis evident
enough that he hath spoken the truth,
and that you are an enemy to Mansoul, be
convinced then of the evil of your saucy and
malapert language, and of the grief that
you have put the Captains to; yea, and of
the damages that you have done to Mansoul
thereby. Had you accepted of the conditions,
the sound of the Trumpet, and the
alarm of War had now ceased about the
Town of Mansoul; but that dreadful sound
abides, and your want of wisdom in your
speech has been the cause of it.

Incred. Then said old Incredulity: Sir, If
I live I will do your errand to Diabolus,
and there you shall have an answer to your
words. Mean while we will seek the good of
the Town, and not ask Counsel of you.
Understand. Sir, your Prince and you are
both Foreigners to Mansoul, and not the
Natives thereof. And who can tell but
that when you have brought us into greater
straits (when you also shall see that your
selves can be safe by no other means than
by flight) you may leave us and shift for
your selves, or set us on fire, and go away
in the smoak, or by the light of our burning,
and so leave us in our ruins.
Incred. Sir, you forget that you are under
a Governor, and that you ought to demean
your self like a Subject, and know ye, when
my Lord the King shall hear of this days
work, he will give you but little thanks
for your labour.
Now while these Gentlemen were thus
in their chiding words, down comes from
the Walls and Gates of the Town, the
Lord Willbewill,Men of Arms, come down. Mr. Prejudice, Old Illpause,
and several of the new made Aldermen and
Burgesses, and they asked the reason of the
hubbub, and tumult. And with that every
man began to tell his own tale, so that nothing
could be heard distinctly: Then was a
silence commanded, and the old Fox Incredulity
began to speak; My Lord, quoth he,

here are a couple of peevish Gentlemen, that have, as
a fruit of their bad dispositions, & as I fear, through
the advice of one Mr. Discontent, tumultuously
gathered this Company against me this day; and
also atempted to run the Town into acts of Rebellion
against our Prince.
Then stood up all the Diabolonians that were
present,A great confusion. and affirmed these things to be true.
Now when they that took part with my
Lord Understanding, and with Mr. Conscience,
perceived that they were like to come
to the worst, for that force and power was
on the other side; they came in for their
help and relief: so a great company
was on both sides. Then they on Incredulities
side, would have had the two old Gentlemen,
presently away to prison; but they on
the other side said they should not. Then
they began to cry up parties again: The
Diabolonians cried up old Incredulity, Forget-good,
the new Aldermen, and their great one
Diabolus; and the other party, they as fast
cried up Shaddai, the Captains, his Laws,
their mercifulness, and applauded their conditions
and ways. Thus the bickerment went a
while,They fall from words to blows. at last they passed from words to
blows, and now there were knocks on both
sides. The good old Gentleman, Mr. Conscience,
was knockt down twice by one of the
Diabolonians, whose name was Mr. Benumming.
And my Lord Understanding had like to
have been slain with an Harquebus, but that

he that shot wanted to take his aim aright.
Nor did the other side wholly escape, for
there was one Mr. Rashhead, a Diabolonian,
that had his brains beaten out by Mr. Mind,
the Lord Willbewills servant; and it made
me laugh to see how old Mr. Prejudice was
kickt and tumbled about in the dirt.A hot Skirmish. For
though a while since he was made Captain
of a Company of the Diabolonians, to the
hurt and damage of the Town; yet now
they had got him under their feet; and I'll
assure you he had by some of the Lord Understandings
party, his crown soundly crackt
to boot. Mr. Anything also, he became a
brisk man in the broyle, but both sides were
against him, because he was true to none.
Yet he had for his malapertness, one of
his legs broken, and he that did it, wisht
it had been his neck.Harm done on both sides. Much harm more
was done on both sides, but this must not
be forgotten; it was now a wonder to see My
Lord Willbewill so indifferent as he was, he did
not seem to take one side more than another,
only it was perceived that he smiled to see
how old Prejudice was tumbled up and down
in the dirt. Also when Captain Anything came
halting up before him,The two old Gentlemen put in prison as the authors of this revelrout. he seemed to take
but little notice of him.
Now when the uproar was over, Diabolus
sends for My Lord Understanding, and
Mr. Conscience, and claps them both up
in prison as the ringleaders and managers

of this most heavy riotous Rout in Mansoul.
So now the Town began to be quiet again,
and the prisoners were used hardly, yea,
he thought to have made them away, but
that the present juncture did not serve for
that purpose: For that War was in all their
Gates. But let us return again to our story:
The Captains, when they were gone back
from the Gate, and were come into the
Camp again, called a Council of War,The Captains call a Council and consult what to do. to
consult what was further for them to do.
Now some said, let us go up presently and
fall upon the Town, but the greatest part
thought, rather better 'twould be, to give
them another summons to yield; and the
reason why they thought this to be best,
was, because, that so far as could be perceived,
the Town of Mansoul now, was more
inclinable than heretofore. And if, said
they, while some of them are in a way of
inclination, we should by ruggedness give
them distast, we may set them further from
closing with our summons, than we would be
willing they should.
Wherefore to this advice they agreed,
and called a Trumpeter,The result is, they send another Trumpeter, to summon the Town to yield. put words into
his mouth, set him his time, and bid him God
speed. Well, many hours were not expired
before the Trumpeter addressed himself to
his journey. Wherefore coming up to the
Wall of the Town, he steareth his course to
Eargate; and there sounded, as he was commanded;

They then that were within, came
out to see what was the matter, and the
Trumpeter made them this speech following.
O hard-harted,The summons it self. and deplorable Town
of Mansoul, how long wilt thou love thy
sinful, sinful simplicity, and ye fools delight
in their scorning? As yet despise you
the offers of peace, and deliverance? As
yet will ye refuse the golden offers of Shaddai,
and trust to the lies and falshoods of
Diabolus? Think you when Shaddai shall
have conquered you, that the remembrance
of these your carriages towards him,
will yield you peace, and comfort: or that
by ruffling language, you can make
him afraid as a Grass-hopper? Doth he intreat
you, for fear of you? Do you think
that you are stronger than he? Look to
the Heavens, and behold, and consider the
Stars, how high are they? Can you stop
the Sun from running his course, and hinder
the Moon from giving her light? Can
you count the number of the Stars, or stay
the bottles of heaven? Can you call for
the Waters of the Sea, and cause them
to cover the face of the ground? Can
you behold every one that is proud, and
abase him? And bind their faces in secret?
Yet these are some of the works of our King,
in whose name, this day, we come up unto
you: That you may be brought under

his authority. In his name therefore I
summon you again, to yield up your selves
to his Captains.
At this summons the Mansoulians seemed
to be, at a stand, and knew not
what answer to make:The Town at a stand. Wherefore Diabolus
forthwith appeared, and took upon him to
do it, himself, and thus he begins, but
turns his speech to them of Mansoul.
Gentlemen, quoth he, and my faithful
Subjects,Diabolus makes a speech to the Town, and indeavours to terrifie it with the greatness of God. if it is true that this Summoner hath
said, concerning the greatness of their
King, by his terror you will always be
kept in bondage, and so be made to sneak.
Yea, how can you now, though he is at
a distance, indure to think of such a mighty
one? And if not to think of him, while
at a distance, how can you indure to be
in his presence? I, your Prince, am familiar
with you, and you may play with
me, as you would with a Grass-hopper.
Consider therefore, what is for your profit,
and remember the immunities that I
have granted you.
Farther, if all be true that this man hath
said, how comes it to pass that the Subjects
of Shaddai, are so inslaved in all places
where they come? None in the Universe so
unhappy as they, none so trampled upon
as they.
Consider, my Mansoul: would thou wert
as loth to leave me, as I am loth to leave

thee. But consider I say, the ball is yet
at thy foot, liberty you have, if you know
how to use it: Yea, a King you have too,
if you can tell how to love and obey him.
Upon this speech, the Town of Mansoul did
again harden their hearts,He drives Mansoul into despair. yet more, against
the Captains of Shaddai. The thoughts of
his greatness did quite quash them, and the
thoughts of his holiness, sunk them in despair.
Wherefore after a short consult they
(of the Diabolonian party they were) sent
back this word by the Trumpeter, That
for their parts,Mansoul grow; worse and worse. they were resolved to stick to
their King, but never to yield to Shaddai. So
it was but in vain to give them any further
summons, for they had rather die upon the
place than yield. And now things seemed
to be gone quite back, and Mansoul to be
out of reach, or call; yet the Captains who
knew what their Lord could do, would not
yet be beat out of heart: they therefore
send them another summons, more sharp and
severe than the last, but the oftener they
were sent to, to reconcile to Shaddai, the further
off they were.  As they called them, so
they went from them, yea though they called
them to the most high.
The Captains leave off to summons and betake themselves to prayer.So they ceased that way to deal with them
any more, and inclined to think of another
way. The Captains therefore did gather
themselves together, to have free conference
among themselves, to know what was yet

to be done to gain the Town, and to deliver
it from the Tyranny of Diabolus: And one
said after this manner, and another after
that. Then stood up the right noble, the
Captain Conviction, and said my Brethren,
mine opinion is this:
First, That we continually play our slings
into the Town, and keep it in a continual
alarm, molesting of them day and night; by
thus doing we shall stop the growth of
their rampant spirit. For a Lion may be
tamed, by continual molestation.
Secondly, This done, I advise that in the
next place we with one consent draw up
a Petition to our Lord Shaddai, by which,
after we have shewed our King the condition
of Mansoul, and of affairs here, and
have begged his pardon for our no better
success; we will earnestly implore his Majesties
help, and that he will please to send
us more force and power, and some gallant
and well spoken Commander to head them,
that so his Majesty may not lose the benefit
of these his good beginnings, but may compleat
his conquest upon the Town of Mansoul.
To this Speech of the Noble Captain
Conviction, they, as one man, consented, and
agreed that a Petition should forthwith be
drawn up, and sent by a fit man, away to
Shaddai with speed. The contents of the
Petition were thus.
Most gracious, and glorious King, the

Lord of the best world, and the builder of the
Town of Mansoul. We have, dread Soveraign,
at thy commandment, put our
lives in Jeopardy, and at thy bidding made
a War, upon the famous Town of Mansoul.
When we went up against it, we did according
to our Commission, first offer conditions
of peace unto it.  But they, Great
King, set light by our Counsel, and would
none of our reproof: They were for shutting
of their Gates, and for keeping us out
of the Town. They also mounted their
Guns, they sallied out upon us, and have
done us what damage they could, but we
pursued them, with alarm, upon alarm,
requiting of them with such retribution
as was meet, and have done some execution
upon the Town.
Diabolus, Incredulity, and Willbewill, are
the great doers against us; now we are in our
Winter quarters, but so as that we do yet
with an high hand molest, and distress the
Town.
Once, as we think, had we had but one
substantial friend in the Town, such as
would but have seconded the sound of our
summons, as they ought, the people
might have yielded themselves: But there
were none but Enemies there, nor any to
speak in behalf of our Lord, to the Town:
Wherefore though we have done as we
could, yet Mansoul abides in a state of rebellion
against thee.

Now King of Kings, let it please thee
to pardon the unsuccessfulness of thy servants,
who have been no more advantageous
in so desirable a work, as the conquering
of Mansoul is: And send, Lord,
as we now desire more forces to Mansoul,
that it may be subdued; and a man to
head them, that the Town may both love
and fear.
We do not thus speak, because we are
willing to relinquish the Wars (for we
are for laying of our bones against the
place) but that the Town of Mansoul may
be won for thy Majesty. We also pray thy
Majesty, for expedition in this matter,
that, after their conquest, we may be at
liberty, to be sent about other thy gracious
designs. Amen.
The Petition thus drawn up,Who carried this Petition. was sent away
with hast to the King, by the hand of
that good man, Mr. Love to Mansoul.
When this Petition was come to the PalaceTo whom it was delivered.
of the King, who should it be delivered
to, but to the Kings Son. So he took it
and read it, and because the Contents of it
pleased him well, he mended, and also in
some things, added to the Petition himself.
So after he had made such amendments, and
additions as he thought convenient, with
his own hand, he carried it in to the King:
To whom when he had with obeysance deliveredThe King receives it with gladness.
it, he put on authority, and spake to it
himself.

Now the King, at the sight of the Petition,
was glad; but how much more think
you, when it was seconded by his Son. It
pleased him also to hear that his servants
that camped against Mansoul, were so hearty
in the work, and so stedfast in their resolves,
and that they had already got some
ground upon the famous Town of Mansoul.
The King calls his Son, and tells him that he shall go to conquer the Town of Mansoul, and he is pleased at it. Wherefore the King called to him Emanuel
his Son, who said here am I, my Father.
Then said the King, thou knowest,
as I do my self, the condition of the Town
of Mansoul, and what we have purposed,
and what thou hast done to redeem it. Come
now therefore my Son, and prepare thy self
for the War, for thou shalt go to my Camp
at Mansoul. Thou shalt also there prosper,
and prevail, and conquer the Town of
Mansoul.
Then said the Kings Son: Thy Law is
within my heart. I delight to do thy will.
This is the day that I have longed for,  and
the work that I have waited for all this while.He sollaceth himself in the thoughts of this work.
Grant me therefore what force thou shalt in
thy wisdom think meet, and I will go, and
will deliver from Diabolus, and from his
power thy perishing Town of Mansoul. My
heart has been often pained within me, for
the miserable Town of Mansoul. But now
'tis rejoyced, but now 'tis glad; and with
that he leaped over the Mountains for joy,
saying:

I have not, in my heart, thought any
thing too dear for Mansoul, the day of vengance
is in mine heart, for thee my Mansoul,
and glad am I, that thou my Father, hast made
me the Captain of their Salvation:  And I
will now begin to plague all those that have
been a plague to my Town of Mansoul, and
will deliver it from their hand.
When the Kings Son had said thus to his
Father,The highest Peer in the Kingdom covets to go on this design. it presently flew like lightning round
about at Court: Yea, it there became the
only talk, what Emanuel was to go to do
for the famous Town of Mansoul. But you
cannot think how the Courtiers too, were
taken with this design of the Prince. Yea,
so affected were they with this work, and
with the justness of the War, that the highest
Lord, and greatest Peer of the Kingdom
did covet to have Commissions under
Emanuel, to go to help to recover again
to Shaddai, the miserable Town of Mansoul.
Then was it concluded that some should
go and carry tidings to the Camp, that
Emanuel was to come to recover Mansoul,
and that he would bring along with him so
mighty, so impregnable a force that he could
not be resisted. But oh, how ready were the
high ones at Court, to run like Lacquies to
carry these tidings to the Camp, that was at
Mansoul. Now when the Captains perceived
that the King would send Emanuel his

Son, and that it also delighted the Son to
be sent on this errand by the great Shaddai
his Father: They also to shew, how they
were pleased at the thoughts of his coming,The Camp shouts for joy when they hear the tidings.
gave a shout that made the Earth rent, at the
sound thereof. Yea, the Mountains did
answer again by Echo, and Diabolus himself
did totter and shake.
For you must know, that though the
Town of Mansoul it self, was not much, if at
all, concerned with the project (for, alas
for them, they were wofully besotted, for
they chiefly regarded their pleasure and their
lusts:Diabolus afraid at the News of his coming.) Yet Diabolus their Governour was,
For he had his spies continually abroad,
who brought him intelligence of all things,
and they told him what was doing at Court
against him, and that Emanuel would shortly
certainly come with a power to invade him.
Nor was there any man at Court, nor Peer
of the Kingdom, that Diabolus so feared, as
he feared this Prince. For if you remember,
I shewed you before that Diabolus had felt
the weight of his hand already. So that, since
it was he that was to come, this made him
the more afraid. Well, you see how I have
told you that the Kings Son was ingaged to
come from the Court to save Mansoul, and
that his father had made him the Captain of
the forces:The Prince addresses himself for his Journey.  The time therefore of his setting
forth, being now expired, he addressed
himself for his march, and taketh with

him for his power, five Noble Captains and
their forces.
1. The first was that famous Captain,
the Noble Captain Credence,  his were the
Red colours; and Mr. Promise bare them: and
for a Scutcheon, he had the Holy Lamb, and
Golden Shield. And he had ten thousand men
at his feet.
2. The second was that famous Captain, 
the Captain Good-hope, his were the Blue Colours:
His Standard Bearer was Mr. Exectation;
and for a Scutcheon he had the Three
Golden Anchors. And he had ten thousand
men at his feet.
3. The third Captain was that Valiant 
Captain, the Captain Charity: His Standard
Bearer was Mr. Pitiful, his were the
Green Colours; and for his Scutcheon,
he had three naked Orphans imbraced in the bosom.
And he had ten thousand men at his feet.
4. The fourth was that Gallant Commander,
the Captain Innocent:  His Standard
Bearer was Mr. Harmless; his were the White
Colours, and for his Scutcheon, he had
the three Golden Doves.
5. The fifth was the truly Loyal, and
well beloved Captain, the Captain Patience:
His Standard Bearer was Mr. Suffer long,
his were the Black Colours; and for a
Scutcheon, he had three Arrows through the
Golden Heart.

These were Emanuels Captains,Faith and Patience do the work. these
their Standard Bearers, their Colours, and
their Scutcheons, and these the men under
their command.  So as was said, the
brave Prince took his march, to go to the
Town of Mansoul. Captain Credence led
the Van, and Captain Patience brought up
the Rere. So the other three with their men
made up the main body. The Prince himself
riding in his Chariot at the head of
them.
But when they set out for their march,
Oh how the Trumpets sounded; their Armor
glittered, and how the Colours waved in the
wind. The Princes Armor was all of Gold,
and it shone like the Sun in the Firmament.
The Captains Armor was of proof and was
in appearance like the glittering Stars.Their march.
There were also some from the Court that
rode Reformades, for the love that they had
to the King Shaddai, and for the happy deliverance
of the Town of Mansoul.
The holy Bible containing 66. Books.Emanuel also when he had thus set forwards
to go to recover the Town of Mansoul;
took with him at the Commandment
of his Father, forty four Battering Rams,
and twelve slings, to whirle stones withal.
Every one of these was made of pure Gold,
and these they carried with them in the
heart and body of their Army, all along
as they went to Mansoul.

So they marched till they came within
less than a League of the Town: And there
they lay till the first four Captains came thither,
to acquaint him with matters.The forces joyned with rejoycing. Then
they took their Journey, to go to the Town
of Mansoul, and unto Mansoul they came,
but when the old Souldiers that were in the
Camp saw that they had new forces to joyn
with, they again gave such a shout before
the Walls of the Town of Mansoul, that it
put Diabolus into another fright. So they
sat down before the Town, not now as the
other four Captains did, to wit, against the
Gates of Mansoul only: but they invironed it
round on every side; and beset it behind and
before, so that now let Mansoul look which
way it will,Mansoul beleaguered round. it saw force and power lie in
Siege against it. Besides, there were mounts
cast up against it.
The mount Gracious was on the one side,Mounts cast up against it.
and Mount Justice was on the other. Farther,
there were several small banks, and advance
ground, as Plain-truth-hill, and No sin-banks,
where many of the Slings were placed against
the Town. Upon Mount Gracious
were planted four, and upon Mount Justice
were placed as many: and the rest were
conveniently placed in several parts round
about the Town. Five of the best Battering
Rams, that is of the biggest of them, were
placed upon Mount Harken, a Mount cast up
hard by Eargate with intent to break that
open.

Now when the men of the Town saw
the multitude of the Souldiers that were come
up against the place, and the Rams and Slings,
and the Mounts on which they were planted;
together with the glittering of the Armour
and the waving of their Colours: they were
forced to shift, and shift, and again to shift
their thoughts; but they hardly changed for
thoughts more stout, but rather for
thoughts more faint.The heart of Mansoul begins to fail. For though before,
they thought themselves sufficiently
guarded; yet now they began to think that
no man knew what would be their hap or
lot.
The White Flag hung out.When the good Prince Emanuel had thus beleaguered
Mansoul: In the first place he hangs
out the White Flag, which he caused to be set
up among the Golden slings that were planted
upon Mount Gracious. And this he did
for two reasons: 1. To give notice to Mansoul
that he could and would yet be gracious
if they turned to him. 2. And that he
might leave them the more without excuse,
should he destroy them, they continuing in
their rebellion.
So the White Flag, with the three Golden
Doves in it, was hanged out for two
days together, to give them time, and space
to consider. But they, as was hinted before,
as if they were unconcerned, made no
reply to the favourable Signal of the Prince.

Then he commanded,The Red Flag hung out. and they set the
Red Flag, upon that Mount called Mount Justice.
'Twas the Red Flag of Captain Judgment,
whose Scutcheon was the Burning Fiery
Furnace. And this also stood waving before
them in the wind, for several days together.
But look, how they carried it under
the White Flag, when that was hanged out,
so did they also when the Red one was: And
yet he took no advantage of them.
Then he commanded again that his servantsThe Black Flag hung out.
would hang out the Black Flag of defiance
against them, whose Scutcheon was
the three burning Thunder-bolts. But as unconcerned
was Mansoul at this, as at those
that went before. But when the Prince saw
that neither mercy nor Judgment, nor execution
of Judgment, would, or could come
near the heart of Mansoul: He was touched
with much compunction, and said surely
this strange carriage of the Town of Mansoul,
doth rather arise from ignorance of
the manner, and feats of War; than from
a secret defiance of us, and abhorrence of
their own lives. Or if they know the manner
of the War of their own;Christ makes not War as the World does. yet not the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Wars in
which we are concerned, when I make
Wars upon mine enemy Diabolus.
Therefore he sent to the Town of Mansoul,
to let them know what he meant by
those signs, and Ceremonies of the Flag,

and also to know of them which of the things
they will chuse, whether Grace and Mercy,
or Judgment,He sends to know if they would have mercy or Justice. and the Execution of judgment.
All this while they kept there Gates shut with
Locks, Bolts and Bars, as fast as they could.
Their Guards also were doubled, and their
Watch made as strong as they could. Diabolus
also did pluck up what heart he could,
to incourage the Town to make resistance.
The Towns-men also made answer to
the Prince's messenger, in substance, according
to that which follows.
Great Sir,The Townsfolks answer. As to what, by your messenger
you have signified to us, Whether we will accept
of your mercy, or fall by your Justice, we
are bound by the Law and Custome of this place,
and can give you no positive answer. For it
is against the Law, Government, and the Prerogative
Royal of our King, to make either
Peace or War without him. But this we will
do, we will petition that our Prince will come
down to the Wall, and there give you such treatment
as he shall think fit, and profitable for
us.
When the good Prince Emanuel heard this
answer,Emanuel grieved at the folly of Mansoul. and saw the Slavery and Bondage
of the people, and how much content they
were to abide in the Chains of the Tyrant Diabolus:
It grieved him at the heart. And indeed,
when at any time he perceived that
any were contented under the Slavery of the

Gyant, he would be affected with it.
But to return again to our purpose. After
the Town had carried this News to Diabolus,
and had told him moreover, that the
Prince that lay in the Leaguer, without the
Wall, waited upon them for an answer: He
refused, and huffed as well as he could,Diabolus afraid. but
in heart he was afraid.
Then said he, I will go down to the Gates
myself, and give him such an answer as I think
fit. So he went down to Mouth-gate, and
there addressed himself to speak to Emanuel
(but in such language as the Town understood
not) the Contents whereof were as
follow.
O thou great Emanuel, Lord of all the world,
I know thee,His speech to the Prince. that thou art the Son of the great
Shaddai! Wherefore art thou come to torment
me, and to cast me out of my possession? This
Town of Mansoul, as thou very well knowest,
is mine, and that by a twofold Right. 1. It
is mine by right of Conquest, I won it in the
open field. And shall the prey be taken from
the mighty, or the lawful Captive, be delivered?
2. This Town of Mansoul is mine also by their
subjection. They have opened the Gates
of their Town unto me. They have sworn fidelity
to me, and have openly chosen me to be
their King.Heart. They have also given their Castle into
my hands; yea, they have put the whole strength
of Mansoul under me.

Moreover, this Town of Mansoul hath dis-a
vowed thee: Yea, they have cast thy Law, thy
name, thy image and all that is thine, behind
their back: And have accepted, and set up in
their room my Law, my name, mine image and
all that ever is mine. Ask else thy Captains,
and they will tell thee, that Mansoul hath,
in answer to all their summons, shown Love,
and Loyalty to me; but always disdain, despite,
contempt, and scorn to thee, and thine: now
thou art the just one, and the holy (and
shouldest do no iniquity) depart then, I pray
thee therefore from me, and leave me to my
just inheritance, peacably.
This Oration was made in the Language
of Diabolus himself. For although he can,
to every man, speak in their own language
(else he could not tempt them all as he does)
yet he has a language, proper to himself,
and it is the language of the infernal cave, or
black pit.
Wherefore the Town of Mansoul (poor
hearts) understood him not, nor did they
see how he crouched, and cringed, while
he stood before Emanuel their Prince.
Yea, they all this while took him to be
one of that power and force that by no
means could be resisted. Wherefore while
he was thus intreating that he might have
yet his residence there, and that Emanuel
would not take it from him by force: The
inhabitants boasted even of his valour, saying,

Who is able to make War with him.
Well, when this pretended King, had
made an end of what he would say: Emanuel,
the Golden Prince stood up and spake:
the Contents of whose words follow.
Thou deceiving one, said he, I have in my
Fathers name, in mine own name, and on the
behalf, and for the good of this wretched
Town of Mansoul, somwhat to say unto thee.
Thou pretendest a right, a lawful rieght to
the deplorable Town of Mansoul, when it is
most apparent to all my Fathers Court, that
the entrance which thou hast obtained in at
the gates of Mansoul, was through thy lie &
false-hood, Thou beliedst my Father, thou beliedst
his Law, and so deceivedst the people
of Mansoul. Thou pretendest that the
people have accepted thee for their King,
their Captain, and right Liege-Lord, but that
also was by the exercise of deceit, and guile.
Now if lying, wiliness, sinful craft and
all manner of horrible hypocrisie, will go, in
my Fathers Court (in which Court thou must
be tryed) for equity and right, then will
I confess unto thee that thou hast made a
lawful conquest. But alas! What Thief
what Tyrant, what Devil is there that may
not conquer after this sort: But I can make
it appear O Diabolus, that thou in all thy
pretences to a conquest of Mansoul, hast nothing
of truth to say. Thinkest thou this
to be right, that thou didst put the ly

upon my Father and madest him (to Mansoul)
the greatest deluder in the world.
And what saiest thou to thy perverting,
knowingly, the right purport and intent of
the Law? Was it good also that thou madest
a prey of the innocency, and simplicity
of the now miserable Town of Mansoul?
Yea, thou didst overcome Mansoul by promising
to them happiness in their transgressions,
against my Fathers Law, when thou
knewest, and couldest not but know, hadst
thou consulted nothing but thine own experience,
that that was the way to undo them.
Thou hast also thy self (O! Thou Master
of enmity) of spite, defaced my Fathers
image in Mansoul, and set up thy own in its
place; to the great contempt of my Father,
the heightening of thy sin, and to
the intolerable damage of the perishing
Town of Mansul.
Thou hast moreover, (as if all these were
but little things with thee) not only deluded
& undone this place; but by thy lies, and
fraudulent carriage hast set them against
their own deliverance. How hast thou stired
them up against my Fathers Captains, and
made them to fight against those that were
sent of him to deliver them from their
bondage? All these things and very many
more thou hast done against thy light,
and in contempt of my Father, and of his
Law: Yea, and with design to bring under

his displeasure for ever, the miserable Town
of Mansoul. I am therefore come to avenge
the wrong that thou hast done to my Father,
and to deal with thee for the Blasphemies,
wherewith thou hast made poor Mansoul
Blaspheme his name. Yea upon thy head,
thou Prince of the infernal Cave, will I requite
it.
As for my self, O Diabolus, I am come
against thee by lawful power, and to take
by strength of hand, this Town of Mansoul
out of thy burning fingers. For this Town
of Mansoul is mine, O Diabolus, and that
by undoubted right, as all shall see that
will diligently search the most ancient,
and most authentick Records, and I will
plead my title to it, to the confusion of
thy face.
First, for the Town of Mansoul, my Father
built and did fashion it with his hand. The
Palace also that is in the midst of that Town,
he built it for his own delight, This Town
of Mansoul therefore is my Fathers, and that
by the best of titles: And he that gainsays
the truth of this, must lie against his soul.
Secondly, O thou Master of the lie, this
Town of Mansoul is mine.
1. For that I am my Fathers heir,  his
first-born, and the only delight of his heart.
I am therefore come up against thee in mine
own right, even to recover mine own inheritance
out of thine hand.

2. But further, as I have a right and title
to Mansoul, by being my Fathers heir, so I
have also by my Fathers donation. His it was,
and he gave it me;  nor have I at any time
offended my Father that he should take it
from me and give it to thee. Nor have I
been forced by playing the Bankrupt to sell, 
or set to sale to thee, my beloved Town of
Mansoul. Mansoul is my desire, my delight,
and the joy of my heart. But,
3. Mansoul is mine by right of purchase.
I have bought it (O Diabolus) I have
bought it to my self. Now since it was my Fathers
and mine, as I was his heir, and since
also I have made it mine by vertue of a great
purchase, it followeth, that by all lawful
right the Town of Mansoul is mine, and that
thou art an Usurper, a Tyrant & Traytor in
thy holding possession thereof. Now the
cause of my purchasing of it was this: Mansoul
had trespassed against my Father, now
my Father had said, That in the day that
they broke his Law, they should die. Now
  it is more possible for Heaven and earth to
pass away, than for my Father to break his
word. Wherefore when Mansoul had sinned
indeed by harkening to thy lye, I put in and
became a surety to my Father, body for body,
and soul for soul, that I would make amends
for Mansoul's transgressions; and my Father
did accept thereof.O sweet Prince Emanuel! So when the time appointed
was come, I gave body for body,

soul for soul, life for life, blood for blood,
and so redeemed my beloved Mansoul.
4. Nor did I do this to the halves, my Fathers
Law and Justice that were both concerned
in the threatning upon transgression,
are both now satisfied, and very well content
that Mansoul should be delivered.
5. Nor am I come out this day against
thee, but by commandment of my Father,
'twas he that said unto me, Go down and
deliver Mansoul.
Wherefore be it known unto thee (O thou
fountain of deceit) and be it also known to
the foolish Town of Mansoul, that I am not
come against thee this day without my
Father.
And now (said the Golden-headed Prince)
I have a word to the Town of Mansoul (but
so soon as mention was made that he had a
word to speak to the besotted Town of Mansoul,
the Gates were double guarded, and all
men commanded not to give him audience) so
he proceeded, and said, O unhappy Town
of Mansoul, I cannot but be touched with pity
and compassion for thee. Thou hast accepted
of Diabolus for thy King, and art
become a nurse and minister of Diabolonians
against thy Soveraign Lord. Thy Gates thou
hast opened to him, but hast shut them fast
against me; thou hast given him a hearing,
but hast stopt thine ears at my cry; he
brought to thee thy destruction, and thou

didst receive both him and it: I am come
to thee bringing Salvation, but thou regardest
me not. Besides, thou hast as with Sacrilegious
hands taken thy self with all that
was mine in thee, and hast given all to my
foe, and to the greatest enemy my Father
has. You have bowed and subjected your
selves to him, you have vowed and sworn
your selves to be his. Poor Mansoul! what
shall I do unto thee? shall I save thee, shall I
destroy thee? What shall I do unto thee?
shall I fall upon thee and grind thee to powder,
or make thee a monument of the richest
grace? What shall I do unto thee? Hearken
therefore thou Town of Mansoul, hearken
to my word, and thou shalt live. I am merciful,
Mansoul, and thou shalt find me so; shut
me not out at thy Gates. 
O Mansoul, neither is my Commission, nor
inclination at all to do thee hurt;  why flyest
thou so fast from thy friend, and stickest so
close to thine enemy? Indeed I would have
thee, because it becomes thee, to be sorry for
thy sin; but do not despair of life, this great
force is not to hurt thee, but to deliver thee
from thy bondage, and to reduce thee to thy
obedience.
My Commission indeed is to make a war
upon Diabolus thy King, and upon all Diabolonians
with him; for he is the strong man
armed that keeps the house, and I will have
him out; his spoils I must divide, his armour

I must take from him, his hold I must cast
him out of, and must make it an habitation
for my self. And this, O Mansoul, shall Diabolus
know, when he shall be made to follow
me in chains, and when Mansoul shall rejoice
to see it so.
I could, would I now put forth my might,
cause, that forthwith he should leave you and
depart; but I have it in my heart so to deal
with him, as that the justice of the war that
I shall make upon him, may be seen and acknowledged
by all. He hath taken Mansoul
by fraud, & keeps it by violence and deceit,
and I will make him bare and naked in the
eyes of all observers.
All my words are true, I am mighty to
save, and will deliver my Mansoul out of his
hand. This speech was intended chiefly for
Mansoul, but Mansoul would not have the hearing
of it. They shut up Ear-gate, they barricado'd
it up, they kept it lockt and boulted,
they set a guard thereat, and commanded
that no Mansolonian should go out to him, nor
that any from the Camp should be admitted
into the Town; all this they did, so horribly
had Diabolus inchanted them to do, and
seek to do for him, against their rightful
Lord and Prince; wherefore no man, nor
voice, nor sound of man that belonged to
the glorious Host, was to come into the
Town.

Emanuel prepares to make war upon Mansoul.So when Emanuel saw that Mansoul was
thus involved in sin, he calls his Army together
(since now also his words were despised)
and gave out a commandment throughout
all his host to be ready against the time appointed.
Now forasmuch as there was no
way lawfully to take the Town of Mansoul,
but to get in by the Gates, and at Ear-gate
as the chief, therefore he commanded his
Captains and Commanders to bring their
Rams, their Slings, and their men, and place
them at Eye-gate and Ear-gate, in order to
his taking the Town.
When Emanuel had put all things in a readiness
to bid Diabolus Battel, he sent again
to know of the Town of Mansoul, it in
peaceable manner they would yield themselves?
or whether they were yet resolved
to put him to try the utmost extremity?Diabolus sends by the hand of his servant Mr. Loth-to-stoop, and by him he propounds conditions of peace.
They then together with Diabolus their King
called a Council of War, and resolved upon
certain Propositions that should be offered
to Emanuel, if he will accept thereof, so
they agreed, and then the next was, who
should be sent on this Errand. Now there
was in the Town of Mansoul an old man a
Diabolonian, and his name was Mr. Loth-to-stoop,
a stiff man in his way, and a great doer
for Diabolus; him therefore they sent, and
put into his mouth what he should say. So he
went and came to the Camp to Emanuel, and
when he was come, a time was appointed to

give him audience. So at the time he came,
and after a Diabolonian Ceremony or two, he
thus began and said, Great Sir,  that it may
be known unto all men how good natured a Prince
my master is, he hath sent me to tell your Lordship
that he is very willing rather than to go to
war,Mark this. to deliver up into your hands one half of
the Town of Mansoul. I am therefore to know
if your mightiness will accept of this Proposition.
Then said Emanuel, the whole is mine by
gift and purchase, wherefore I will never lose
one half.
Then said Mr.Loth-to-stoop, Sir,Mark this. my master
hath said,  that he will be content that you shall
be the nominal and titular Lord of all, if he may
possess but a part.
Then Emanuel answered, The whole is
mine really; not in name and word only:
wherefore I will be the sole Lord and possessor
of all, or of none at all of Mansoul.
Then Mr. Loth-to-stoop said again, Sir, behold
the condescension of my master!Mark this. He says
that he will be content,  if he may but have assigned
to him some place in Mansoul as a place
to live privately in, and you shall be Lord of all
the rest.
Then said the Golden Prince, All that the
Father giveth me shall come to me; and of
all that he hath given me I will lose nothing,
no not a hoof, nor a hair. I will not therefore
grant him, no not the least corner in Mansoul

to dwell in, I will have all to my self.
Then Loth-to-stoop said again, But, Sir,
suppose that my Lord should resign the whole Town
to you, only with this proviso, that he sometimes
when he comes into this Country,Mark this. may for old acquaintance
sake be entertained as a way-faring
man for two days, or ten days, or a month, or so;
may not this small matter be granted?
Then said Emanuel,  No. He came as a
way-faring man to David, nor did he stay
long with him, and yet it had like to have
cost David his soul. I will not consent that
he ever should have any harbour more there.
Then said Mr. Loth-to-stop, Sir, you seem to
be very hard. Suppose my master should yield to
all that your Lordship hath said, provided that
Sins and carnal lusts. his friends and kindred in Mansoul may have
liberty to trade in the Town, and to enjoy their
present dwellings; may not that be granted,
Sir?
Then said Emanuel, No; that is contrary
to my Fathers will;  for all, and all manner
of Diabolonians that now are, or that at any
time shall be found in Mansoul, shall not only
lose their lands and liberties, but also their
lives.
Then said Mr. Loth-to-stoop again, But,
Sir, may not my master, and great Lord, by
Letters,Mark this. by passengers, by accidental opportunities,
and the like,  maintain, if he shall deliver
up all unto thee, some kind of old friendship with
Mansoul.

Emanuel answered, No, by no means; for
as much as any such fellowship, friendship,
intimacy or acquaintance in what way, sort
or mode soever maintained, will tend to the
corrupting of Mansoul, the alienating of
their affections from me, and the endangering
of their peace with my Father.
Mr. Loth-to-stoop yet added further, saying,
But great Sir, since my master hath many friends,
and those that are dear to him in Mansoul,Mark this. may
he not, if he shall depart from them,  even of
his bounty and good nature, bestow upon them,
as he sees fit, some tokens of his love and kindness,
that he had for them, to the end that Mansoul,
when he is gone, may look upon such tokens of
kindness once received from their old friend, and
remember him who was once their King, and the
merry times that they sometimes enjoyed one with
another, while he and they lived in peace together.
Then said Emanuel, No; for if Mansoul
come to be mine, I shall not admit of, nor
consent that there should be the least scrap,
shred, or dust of Diabolus left behind, as
tokens or gifts bestowed upon any in Mansoul,
thereby to call to remembrance the
horrible communion that was betwixt them
and him.
Well Sir, said Mr. Loth-to-stoop, I have one
thing more to propound, and then I am got to the
end of my commission:Mark this. suppose that when my master
is gone from Mansoul,  any that yet shall

live in the Town, should have such business of high
concerns to do, that if they be neglected the party
shall be undone; and suppose Sir, that no body can
help in that case so well as my master and Lord;
may not now my master be sent for upon so urgent
an occasion as this? or if he may not be admitted
into the Town, may not he and the person
concerned, meet in some of the Villages near
Mansoul, and there lay their heads together,
and there consult of matters?
This was the last of those ensnaring Propositions
that Mr. Loth-to-stoop had to propound
to Emanuel on behalf of his master Diabolus;
but Eman. would not grant it, for he said,
There can be no case,  or thing, or matter fall
out in Mansoul, when thy master shall be gone,
that may not be salved by my Father; besides,
'twill be a great disparagement to my Fathers
wisdom and skill to admit any from
Mansoul to go out to Diabolus for advice, 
when they are bid before, In every thing by
prayer and supplication to let their requests
be made known to my Father. Further
this, should it be granted, would be to
grant that a door should be set open for Diabolus,
and the Diabolonians in Mansoul to
hatch and plot and bring to pass treasonable
designs to the grief of my Father and me,
and to the utter destruction of Mansoul.
When Mr.Loth-to-stoop had heard this answer,Lothtostoop departs.
he took his leave of Emanuel and departed,
saying, that he would do word to his

master concerning this whole affair. So he
departed and came to Diabolus to Mansoul,
and told him the whole of the matter, and
how Emanuel would not admit, no not by
any means, that he when he was once gone
out, should for ever have any thing more to
do, either in, or with any that are of the
Town of Mansoul. When Mansoul, and Diabolus
had heard this relation of things, they
with one consent concluded to use their best
endeavour to keep Emanuel out of Mansoul,
and sent old Illpause, of whom you have
heard before, to tell the Prince and his Captains
so. So the old Gentleman came up to
the top of Eargate, and called to the Camp
for a hearing: who when they gave audience
he said, I have in commandment from my
high Lord to bid you to tell it to your PrinceA speech of old Ill-pause to the Camp.
Emanuel, That Mansoul and their King are resolved
to stand and fall together, and that it is
in vain for your Prince to think of ever having
of Mansoul in his hand, unless he can take it by
force. So some went and told to Emanuel
what old Illpause, a Diabolonian in Mansoul, had
said. Then said the Prince, I must try the
power of my sword, for I will not (for all
the rebellions and repulses that Mansoul has 
made against me) raise my siege and depart,They must fight.
but will assuredly take my Mansoul and deliver
it from the hand of her enemy.Preparations to the Battel. And with
that he gave out a commandment that Captain
Boanerges, Captain Conviction, Captain

Judgment, and Captain Execution should
forthwith march up to Eargate with Trumpets
sounding, Colours flying, and with
shouting for the battel. Also he would that
Captain Credence should join himself with
them. Emanuel moreover gave order that
Captain Goodhope, and Captain Charity should
draw themselves up before Eye-gate. He bid
also that the rest of his Captains and their
men should place themselves for the best of
their advantage against the enemy round about
the Town, and all was done as he had
commanded. Then he bid that the word
should be given forth, and the word was at
that time, Emanuel. Then was an alarm
sounded, and the battering Rams were plaid,
and the slings did whirl stones into the Town
amain, and thus the battel began. Now
Diabolus himself did manage the Townsmen
in the war, and that at every gate; wherefore
their resistance was the more forcible,
hellish, and offensive to Emanuel. Thus was
the good Prince engaged and entertained by
Diabolus and Mansoul for several days together.
And a sight worth seeing it was to behold
how the Captains of Shaddai behaved
themselves in this war.
Boanerges plays the man.And first for Captain Boanerges (not to undervalue
the rest) he made three most fierce
assaults, one after another, upon Eargate, to
the shaking of the Posts thereof. Captain
Conviction he also made up as fast with Boanerges

as possibly he could, and both discerning
that the Gate began to yield, they commanded
that the Rams should still be played
against it.Conviction wounded. Now Captain Conviction going
up very near to the Gate, was with great
force driven back, and received three wounds
in the mouth. And those that rode Reformades,Angels.
they went about to encourage the Captains.
For the valour of the two Captains made
mention of before, the Prince sent for them
to his Pavilion, and commanded that a while
they should rest themselves, and that with
somewhat they should be refreshed. Care
also was taken for Captain Conviction, that
he should be healed of his wounds, the Prince
also gave to each of them a chain of gold,
and bid them yet be of good courage.
Nor did Captain Goodhope,Goodhope and Charity play the men at Eyegate. nor Captain
Charity come behind in this most desperate
fight, for they so well did behave themselves
at Eyegate, that they had almost broken it
quite upon. These also had a reward from
their Prince, as also had the rest of the Captains,
because they did valiantly round about
the Town.
In this Engagement several of the Officers
of Diabolus were slain, and some of the
Townsmen wounded. For the Officers there
was one Captain Boasting slain.Captain Boasting slain. This Boasting
thought that no body could have shaken
the Posts of Eargate, nor have shaken the

heart of Diabolus. Next to him there was
one Captain Secure slain; this Secure used to
 say that the blind and lame in Mansoul were
Captain Secure slain.able to keep the Gates of the Town against
Emanuel's army. This Captain Secure did
Captain Conviction cleave down the head
with a two handed-sword, when he received
himself three wounds in his mouth.
Besides these there was one Captain Bragman,
a very desperate fellow, and he was
Captain over a band of those that threw fire-brands,Captain Bragman slain.
arrows and death, he also received
by the hand of Captain Goodhope at Eyegate a
mortal wound in the breast.
There was moreover one Mr. Feeling, but
he was no Captain but a great stickler to
encourage Mansoul to rebellion, he received
Mr. Feeling hurt.a wound in the eye by the hand of one
of Boanerges souldiers, and had by the Captain
himself been slain, but that he made a
sudden retreat.
But I never saw Wilbewill so danted in all
my life, he was not able to do as he was
wont, and some say that he also received
a wound in the leg,Wilbewill hurt. and that some of
the men in the Princes army have certainly
seen him limp as he afterwards walked on
the wall.
I shall not give you a particular account of
the names of the souldiers that were slain in
the Town, for many were maimed and
wounded, and slain; for when they saw

that the Posts of Eargate did shake,Many of the Souldiers in Mansoul slain. and Eye-gate
was well nigh broken quite open; and
also that their Captains were slain; this
took away the hearts of many of the Diabolonians,
they fell also by the force of the shot
that were sent by the golden slings into the
midst of the Town of Mansoul.
Of the Townsmen there was one Love nogood,Lovenogood wounded.
he was a Townsman, but a Diabolonian,
he also received his mortal wound in
Mansoul, but he died not very soon.
Mr. Illpause also,Illpause wounded. who was the man that
came along with Diabolus when at first he attempted
the taking of Mansoul, he also received
a grievous wound in the head, some
say that his brain-pan was crackt; this I have
taken notice of that he was never after this
able to do that mischief to Mansoul as he had
done in times past. Also old Prejudice, and
Mr. Anything fled.
Now when the battel was over, the Prince
commanded that yet once more the White-flagThe White flag hung out again.
should be set upon mount Gracious in
sight of the Town of Mansoul; to shew that
yet Emanuel had grace for the wretched
Town of Mansoul.
When Diabolus saw the White-flag hanged
out again,Diabolus's new prank. and knowing that it was not
for him but Mansoul; he cast in his mind to
play another prank, to wit to see if Emanuel
would raise his siege and be gone upon
promise of a reformation. So he comes down

to the Gate one evening, a good while after
the Sun was gone down, and calls to speak
with Emanuel, who presently came down to
the Gate, and Diabolus saith unto him.
His speech to Emanuel.For as much as thou makest it appear by thy
White flag that thou art wholly given to peace and
quiet; I thought meet to acquaint thee that we
are ready to accept thereof upon terms which thou
maist admit.
I know that thou art given to devotion, and
that holiness pleases thee; yea that thy great end
in making a war upon Mansoul, is, that it may
be an holy habitation. Well, draw off thy forces
from the Town, and I will bend Mansoul to thy
bow.
Diabolus would be Emanuels Deputy, and he would turn reformer.First, I will lay down all acts of hostility against
thee, and will be willing to become thy deputy,
and will as I have formerly been against
thee, now serve thee in the Town of Mansoul.
And more particularly,
1. I will perswade Mansoul to receive thee for
their Lord, and I know that they will do it the
sooner when they shall understand that I am thy
deputy.
2. I will shew them wherein they have erred,
and that transgression stands in the way to life.
3. I will shew them the holy Law unto which
they must conform, even that which they have
broken.
4. I will press upon them the necessity of a reformation
according to thy Law.
5. And moreover that none of these things

may fail, I my self at my own proper cost and
charge will set up and maintain a sufficient Ministry,
besides Lecturers, in Mansoul.
6. Thou shalt receive as a token of our subjection
to thee continually year by year what thou
shalt think fit to lay and levy upon us, in token of
our subjection to thee.
Then said Emanuel to him, O full of deceit,
how movable are thy ways! how often
hast thou changed and rechanged,The Answer. if so be
thou mightest still keep possession of my
Mansoul, though as has been plainly declared
before, I am the right heir thereof? Often
hast thou made thy Proposals already, nor
is this last a whit better than they. And failing
to deceive when thou shewedst thy self in thy 
black; thou hast now transformed thy self into
an Angel of light, and wouldest to deceive, be
now as a minister of righteousness.
But know thou, O Diabolus, that nothing
must be regarded that thou canst
propound, for nothing is done by thee but
to deceive; thou neither hast conscience
to God,Diabolus has no conscience to God, nor love to Mansoul. nor love to the Town of Mansoul;
whence then should these thy savings
arise but from sinful craft and deceit? He
that can of list and will propound what he
pleases, and that wherewith he may destroy
them that believe him, is to be abandoned
with all that he shall say. But if righteousness
be such a beauty-spot in thine
eyes now, how is it that wickedness was so

closely stuck to by thee before. But this is
by the by.
Thou talkest now of a reformation in
Mansoul, and that thou thy self if I will
please, will be at the head of that reformation,
all the while knowing that the greatest
proficiency that man can make in the
Law, and the righteousness thereof, will
amount to no more for the taking away of
the curse from Mansoul, than just nothing
at all, for a Law being broken by Mansoul,
that had before upon a supposition of the
breach thereof, a curse pronounced against
him for it of God, can never by his obeying
of the Law deliver himself therefrom.He knows that that will do no good which yet he propounds for the health of Mansoul.
(To say nothing of what a reformation is
like to be set up in Mansoul, when the Devil
is become the corrector of vice.) Thou
know'st that all that thou hast now said in
this matter is nothing but guile and deceit;
and is as it was the first, so is it the last card
that thou hast to play. Many there be that do
soon discern thee when thou shewest them
thy cloven foot; but in thy white, thy light,
and in thy transformation thou art seen but
of a few. But thou shalt not do thus with
my Mansoul, O Diabolus, for I do still love
my Mansoul.
Besides, I am not come to put Mansoul upon
works to live thereby, (should I do so,
I should be like unto thee) but I am come
that by me, and by what I have and shall

do for Mansoul, they may to my Father
be reconciled, though by their sin they
have provoked him to anger, and though
by the Law they cannot obtain mercy.
Thou talkest of subjecting of this TownAll things must be new in Mansoul.
to good, when none desireth it at thy hands.
I am sent by my Father to possess it my self,
and to guide it by the skilfulness of my
hands into such a conformity to him as
shall be pleasing in his sight. I will therefore
possess it my self, I will dispossess and cast
thee out: I will set up mine own standard
in the midst of them: I will also govern
them by new Laws, new Officers, new motives,
and new ways: Yea, I will pull down
this Town, and build it again, and it shall
be as though it had not been, and it shall
then be the glory of the whole Universe.
When Diabolus heard this, and perceived
that he was discovered in all his deceits,Diabolus confounded. he
was confounded and utterly put to a nonplus;
but having in himself the fountain of iniquity,
rage, and malice against both Shaddai
and his Son, and the beloved Town of Mansoul,
what doth he but strengthen himself
what he could to give fresh Battel to the noble
Prince Emanuel? So then, now we must
have another fight before the Town of Mansoul
is taken. Come up then to the Mountains
you that love to see military actions,
and behold by both sides how the fatal blow
is given; while one seeks to hold, and the

New preparations for to fight.other seeks to make himself master of the
famous Town of Mansoul.
Diabolus therefore having withdrawn himself
from the wall to his force that was in the
heart of the Town of Mansoul, Emanuel
also returned to the Camp; and both of
them after their divers ways, put themselves
into a posture fit to bid Battel one to another.
Diabolus as filled with despair of retaining
in his hands the famous Town of Mansoul,
Diabolus despairs of holding of Mansoul, and therefore contrives to do it what mischief he can.resolved to do what mischief he could (if indeed
he could do any) to the army of the
Prince, and to the famous Town of Mansoul,
(For alas it was not the happiness of
the silly Town of Mansoul that was designed
by Diabolus, but the utter ruin and overthrow
thereof); as now is enough in view.
Wherefore he commands his Officers that
 they should then when they see that they
could hold the Town no longer, do it what
harm and mischief they could, renting and
tearing of men, women and children. For,
said he, we had better quite demolish the
place, and leave it like a ruinous heap, than
so leave it that it may be an habitation for
Emanuel.
Emanuel again knowing that the next Battel
would issue in his being made master of
the place, gave out a Royal Commandment
to all his Officers, high Captains, and men
of War, to be sure to shew themselves men

of War against Diabolus, and all Diabolonians;
but favourable, merciful, and meek to
all the old inhabitants of Mansoul. Bend
therefore, said the Noble Prince, the hottest
front of the Battel against Diabolus and his
men.
So the day being come, the command was
given, and the Princes men did bravely
stand to their arms; and did as before, bend
their main force against Eargate, and Eye-gate.The Battel joined, and they fight on both sides fiercely.
The word was then, Mansoul is Won; so
they made their assault upon the Town. Diabolus
also as fast as he could with the main of
his power, made resistance from within, and
his high Lords, and chief Captains for a time
fought very cruelly against the Princes
Army.
