


More and more Greatness, unparallelled
in History or Romance. 
In Order to accomplish this great and
noble Scheme, which the vast Genius
of Wild had contrived, the first necessary
Step seemed to regain the Confidence of
Heartfree. He determined therefore to undertake
it, how impossible soever it appeared. 
The chief Requisite on this Occasion,
was that steady Countenance in
which he was superior to all Mankind. He
went to Newgate, and burst resolutely into
the Presence of Heartfree, whom he eagerly
embraced and kissed; and then, first arraigning
his own Rashness, and afterwards
lamenting his unfortunate want of Success, 

he acquainted him with the Particulars of
what had happened; concealing only that
single Incident of his Attack on the other's
Wife, the Lies he had told her concerning
her Husband's Commands; and his Motive
to the Undertaking, which he assured Heartfree
was a Desire to preserve his Effects from
a Statute of Bankruptcy. 
The frank Openness of this Declaration,
with the Composure of Countenance
with which it was delivered; his seeming
only ruffled by the Concern for his Friend's
Misfortune; the Probability of Truth attending
it, joined to the Boldness and disinterested
Appearance of this Visit, together
with his many Professions of immediate
Service, at a Time when he could not
have the least visible Motive from Self-Love; 
and above all, his offering him Money, the
last and surest Token of Friendship, rushed
with such united Force on the well-disposed
Heart, as it is vulgarly called, of this
simple Man, that they instantly staggered
and soon subverted all the Determination
he had before made in Prejudice of Wild: 
Who perceiving the Ballance to be turning 

in his Favour, presently threw in a hundred
Imprecations on his own Folly and ill-advised
Forwardness to serve his Friend, which had
thus unhappily produced his Ruin; he added
as many Curses on the Count, whom
he vowed to pursue with Revenge all over
Europe: Lastly, he cast in some Grains of
Comfort, assuring Heartfree that his Wife
was fallen into the gentlest Hands, that she
would be carried no farther than Dunkirk,
whence she might be very easily redeemed. 
Heartfree, to whom the lightest Presumption
of his Wife's Fidelity would have
been more delicious than the absolute Restoration
of all his Jewels, and who, indeed,
had with the utmost Difficulty been
brought to entertain the slightest Suspicion
of her Inconstancy, immediately abandoned
all Distrust of both her and his
Friend, whose Sincerity (luckily for Wild's
Purpose) seemed to him to depend on the
same Evidence. He then embraced our
Hero, who had in his Countenance all the
Symptoms of the deepest Concern, and
begged him to be comforted; saying, that
the Intentions rather than the Actions of 

Men conferred Obligations; that as to the
Event of human Affairs, it was governed
either by Chance or some superior Agent,
that Friendship was concerned only in the
Direction of it. And suppose it failed
of Success, or produced an Event never so
contrary to its Design, the Merit of a good
Intention was not in the least lessened,
but was rather entitled to Compassion. 
Wild having thus, with admirable and
truly laudable Conduct, atchieved the first
Step, began to discourse on the Badness of
the World; and particularly to blame the
Severity of Creditors, who seldom or never
attended to any unfortunate Circumstances,
but without Mercy inflicted Confinement
on the Debtor, whose Body the Law, with
very unjustifiable Rigour, delivered into
their Power. He added, that for his Part,
he looked on this Restraint to be as heavy
a Punishment as any appointed by Law
for the greatest Offenders. That the Loss
of Liberty was, in his Opinion, equal to,
if not worse, than the Loss of Life; that
he had always determined, if by any
Accident or Misfortune he had been subjected 

to the former, he would run the
greatest Risque of the latter to rescue himself
from it; which he said, if Men did not
want Resolution, was always easy enough
to do; for that it was ridiculous to conceive
that two or three Men could confine two
or three hundred, unless the Prisoners were
either Fools or Cowards, especially when
they were neither chained nor fettered. He
went on in this Manner, till perceiving the
utmost Attention in Heartfree, he ventured
to propose to him an Endeavour to
make his escape, which he said might easily
be executed; that he would himself raise
a Party in the Prison, and that, if a Murther
or two should happen in the Attempt,
he (Heartfree) might keep free from any
Share either in the Guilt or in the Danger. 
There is one Misfortune which attends
all great Men and their Schemes, viz. That
in order to carry them into Execution, they
are obliged in proposing their Purpose to
their Tools, to discover themselves to be of
that Disposition, in which certain little Writers
have advised Mankind to place no Confidence: 

An Advice which hath been sometimes
taken. Indeed many Inconveniencies
arise to the said great Men from these
Scriblers publishing without Restraint their
Hints or Alarms to Society; and many great
and glorious Schemes have been thus frustrated; 
wherefore it were to be wished that
in all well regulated Governments, such Liberty
should be by some wholesome Laws
restrained; and all Writers inhibited from
venting any other Instructions to the People
than what should be first approved and
licensed by the said great Men, or their
proper Instruments or Tools; by which
Means nothing would ever be published but
what made for the advancing their most
noble Projects. 
Heartfree, whose Suspicions were again
raised by this Advice, viewing Wild
with inconceivable Disdain, spoke as follows. 
“There is one thing, the Loss of
which I should deplore infinitely beyond
that of Liberty and of Life also, I mean
that of a good Conscience. A Blessing
which he who possesses can never be
thoroughly unhappy; for the bitterest Potion 

of Life is by this so sweetned, that
it soon becomes palatable; whereas without
it, the most delicate Enjoyments
quickly lose all their Relish, and Life itself
grows insipid, or rather nauseous to
us. Would you then lessen my Misfortunes
by robbing me of what hath been
my only Comfort under them, and on
which I place my Dependence of being
relieved from them? I have read that
Socrates refused to save his Life by breaking
the Laws of his Country, and departing
from his Prison, when it was
open. Perhaps my Virtue would not go
so far; but God forbid Liberty should
have such Charms, to tempt me to the
Perpetration of so horrid a Crime as
Murther. As to the poor Evasion of
committing it by other Hands, it might
be useful indeed to those who seek only
the Escape from temporal Punishment; 
but can be of no Service to excuse me to
that Being whom I chiefly fear offending; 
nay, it would greatly aggravate my
Guilt by so impudent an Endeavour to
impose upon him, and by so wickedly
involving others in my Crime. Give me 

therefore no more Advice of this Kind; 
for this is my great Comfort in all my
Afflictions, that it is in the Power of no
Enemy to rob me of my Conscience, nor
will I ever be so much my own Enemy
to destroy it.” 
Though our Hero heard all this with
proper Contempt, he made no direct Answer; 
but endeavoured to evade his Proposal
as much as possible, and promising
to use all honest Means for his Service,
since he was so scrupulous, he took his
Leave of his Friend for the present. Heartfree,
having indulged himself an Hour
with his Children, repaired to Rest, which
he enjoyed quiet and undisturbed; whilst
Wild, disdaining Repose, sat up all Night,
consulting how he might bring about the
final Destruction of his Friend, without
being beholden to any Assistance from
himself; which he now despaired of procuring. 
With the Result of these Consultations
we shall acquaint our Reader in good time; 
but at present we have Matters of much
more Consequence to relate to him. 