


What happened to Julian in the
Person of a Taylor. 
‘Fortune now stationed me in a Character,
which the Ingratitude of Mankind
hath put them on ridiculing, tho'
they owe to it not only a Relief from the
Inclemencies of Cold, to which they would
otherwise be exposed, but likewise a considerable
Satisfaction of their Vanity. The
Character I mean, was that of a Taylor; 

which, if we consider it with due Attention,
must be confessed to have in it great
Dignity and Importance. For in reality,
who constitutes the different Degrees between
Men but the Taylor? The Prince indeed
gives the Title, but it is the Taylor who
makes the Man. To his Labours are owing
the Respect of Crouds, and the Awe which
Great Men inspire into their Beholders, tho'
these are too often unjustly attributed to other
Motives. Lastly, the Admiration of
the Fair is most commonly to be placed to
his Account. 
‘I Was just set up in my Trade, when
I made three Suits of fine Clothes for King
Stephen's Coronation. I question whether the
Person who wears the rich Coat, hath so much
Pleasure and Vanity in being admired in
it, as we Taylors have from that Admiration; 
and perhaps a Philosopher would say,
he is not so well entitled to it. I bustled on
the Day of the Ceremony through the
Croud, and it was with incredible Delight,
I heard several say, as my Clothes walked
by, Bless me was ever any thing so fine
as the Earl of Devonshire! Sure he and 

Sir Hugh Bigot are the two best-drest Men
I ever saw. Now both those Suits were
of my making. 
‘There would indeed be infinite Pleasure
in working for the Courtiers, as they are
generally genteel Men, and shew one's
Clothes to the best advantage, was it not
for one small Discouragement; this is, that
they never pay. I solemnly protest, tho' I
lost almost as much by the Court in my
Life as I got by the City, I never carried
a Suit into the latter with half the Satisfaction
which I have done to the former; 
tho' from that I was certain of ready Money,
and from this almost as certain of no Money
at all. 
‘Courtiers may, however, be divided
into two sorts, very essentially different from
each other; into those who never intend to
pay for their Clothes; and those who do intend
to pay for them, but never happen to
be able. Of the latter sort, are many of
those young Gentlemen whom we equip
out for the Army, and who are unhappily
for us, cut off before they arrive at Preferment. 

This is the Reason that Taylors in
time of War are mistaken for Politicians, by
their Inquisitiveness into the Event of Battles,
one Campaign very often proving the Ruin
of half a dozen of us. I am sure I had
frequent Reason to curse that fatal Battle of
Cardigan, where the Welsh defeated some
of King Stephen's best Troops, and where
many a good Suit of mine, unpaid for,
fell to the ground. 
‘The Gentlemen of this honourable Calling
have fared much better in later Ages
than when I was of it: for now it seems the
Fashion is, when they apprehend their Customer
is not in the best Circumstances, if
they are not paid as soon as they carry home
the Suit, they charge him in their Book as
much again as it is worth, and then send a
Gentleman with a small Scrip of Parchment
to demand the Money. If this be
not immediately paid, the Gentleman takes
the Beau with him to his House, where he
locks him up till the Taylor is contented:
but in my Time, these Scrips of Parchment
were not in use; and if the Beau
disliked paying for his Clothes, as very often 

happened, we had no Method of compelling
him. 
‘In several of the Characters which I
have related to you, I apprehend, I have
sometimes forgot my self, and considered
my self as really interested, as I was when
I personated them on Earth. I have just
now caught my self in the Fact: for I
have complained to you as bitterly of my
Customers as I formerly used to do, when
I was the Taylor: but in reality, tho' there
were some few Persons of very great Quality,
and some others, who never paid their
Debts; yet those were but a few, and I
had a Method of repairing this Loss. My
Customers I divided under three Heads:
those who paid ready Money, those who
paid slow, and those who never paid at all. 
The first of these, I considered apart by
themselves, as Persons by whom I got a
certain but small Profit. The two last I
lumped together, making those who paid
slow, contribute to repair my Losses by
those who did not pay at all. Thus upon
the whole I was a very inconsiderable Loser,
and might have left a Fortune to my Family, 

had I not launched forth into Expences
which swallowed up all my Gains. I had a
Wife and two Children. These indeed I kept
frugally enough; for I half starved them:
but I kept a Mistress in a finer way, for
whom I had a Country House, pleasantly
situated on the Thames, elegantly fitted up
and neatly furnished. This Woman might
very properly be called my Mistress: for
she was most absolutely so, and tho' her
Tenure was no higher than by my Will,
she domineered as tyrannically, as if my
Chains had been rivetted in the strongest
manner. To all this I submitted, not through
any Adoration of her Beauty, which was
indeed but indifferent. Her Charms consisted
in little Wantonnesses, which she
knew admirably well to use in Hours of
Dalliance, and which, I believe, are of all
Things the most delightful to a Lover. 
‘She was so profusely extravagant, that
it seemed as if she had an actual Intent to
ruin me. This I am sure of, if such had
been her real Intention, she could have
taken no properer Way to accomplish it; 
nay, I my self might appear to have had 

the same View: for besides this extravagant
Mistress, and my Country House, I kept
likewise a Brace of Hunters, rather for that
it was fashionable so to do, than for any
great Delight I took in the Sport, which I
very little attended; not for want of Leisure; 
for few Noblemen had so much. All
the Work I ever did was taking Measure,
and that only of my greatest and best Customers. 
I scarce ever cut a Piece of Cloth
in my Life, nor was indeed much more
able to fashion a Coat than any Gentleman
in the Kingdom. This made a skilful Servant
too necessary to me. He knew I must
submit to any Terms with, or any Treatment
from him. He knew it was easier for
him to find another such a Taylor as me,
than for me to procure such another Workman
as him: for this Reason, he exerted
the most notorious and cruel Tyranny, seldom
giving me a civil Word; nor could
the utmost Condescension on my side, tho'
attended with continual Presents and Rewards,
and raising his Wages, content or
please him. In a word, he was as absolutely
my Master, as was ever an ambitious,
industrious Prime-Minister over an indolent 

and voluptuous King. All my other Journeymen
paid more Respect to him than to
me: for they considered my Favour as a
necessary Consequence of obtaining his. 
‘These were the most remarkable Occurrences
while I acted this Part. Minos
hesitated a few Moments, and then bid me
get back again, without assigning any Reason.’ 