


In which Mrs. Orgueil feels some Compassion, and Orgueil does a generous Action. 
Orgueil, as soon as David had taken
his Leave, fell into a long and serious
Debate with himself, whether or no his
Rule of Rectitude would give him leave to
send his Friend any Relief. He was sure it
was reasonable to avoid all rash Proceedings,
and that his Friend ought to be driven to
suffer great Distress, in order to cure him
of his Imprudence; for it was one of Mr.
Orgueil's most settled Maxims, that Man,
by the Use of his own Reason alone, has a
Power to prevent or heal any Misfortune. 
He so implicitly worshiped Human Reason,
that it appeared to him no less than Idolatry
to dispute its Omnipotence; he, therefore,
must necessarily condemn every Man,
who is unfortunate whilst this powerful God
is Part of him. To have a Deity at his
Command, and yet be miserable, how absurd!
for, according to Mr. Orgueil's Way
of thinking, this all-powerful God, Human 

Reason, is yet subject to the Will of Man,
and he may use it or not, worship it, abuse
it, or do whatever he please with it. But
in the Veneration of this his darling Idol,
all Thoughts of relieving David Simple fell
to the Ground. David was voluntarily miserable,
for he could not be unavoidably so
whilst he had a God at his Command. 
Sometimes, indeed, the Consideration of
the old Gentleman's Age and Infirmities a little
staggered Orgueil; but then the Thought
of the Chariot immediately succeeded, and
the immense Imprudence of riding about in
a Chariot, in such Circumstances, glared
full in his View. He concealed, as much
as possible, from himself, David's true Motive
to it, and cherished no other Idea but
that of the very Action itself; or if ever
any Notion intruded, that it was done
in order to save little Cynthia, it was always
accompanied with the Reflection, that she
was not his own Child; and it was a Shame
for a Man, in David's Circumstances, to
spend his Substance on Strangers. 
St. Paul says, that a Man who does not
provide for his own Family, is worse than
an Infidel; and Orgueil allowed St. Paul to
be a very fine Writer; for he, indeed, had 

human Learning before he became a Teacher
of the Christian Doctrines: and beside,
when any Text suited Mr. Orgueil's Purpose
or Inclinations, no one was more ready
to quote the sacred Writings, provided he
might be admitted to judge them by his
own Rule of Rectitude. That Paul at such
a Time became a Teacher of the Christian
Doctrine, was a favourite Phrase with Mr.
Orgueil; nor could he endure the Expression
of St. Paul's being called to the Apostleship. 
And, as he believed not the Miracle
of his Conversion (or, indeed, any Miracle
at all) he made such Conversion the common
Subject of his Ridicule. 
But whilst Mr. Orgueil was in this Debate
with himself, his Wife entered the Room:
the Conversation naturally turned on the
Subject Mr. Orgueil was before meditating
on. The Chariot had always been a most
boiling Grief in the Heart of Mrs. Orgueil,
more especially as it was for the Service of
the hated Cynthia's Child. Mr. Orgueil
blamed David for his Imprudence, and acting
contrary to the Rule of Rectitude. 
Mrs. Orgueil condemned him for his Pride
and Insolence; for she insisted on it, that
he only made a Pretence of little Cynthia's
Illness, in order to keep Equipages, and 

put himself on a Footing with Persons of
Fortune. “What could you have done
more, Mr. Orgueil (said she) if my poor
little Babe had been ill?” And then she
sighed as if her Heart would break, at the
very Idea, that it was possible for Miss
Cassy to be seized with any Distemper; for
she thought it was very hard, that any
thing so dignified as to belong to her,
should be subject to human Infirmities. 
But when Mrs. Orgueil entered on the
Topic, how much it is a Man's Duty to
provide for his own Family, she was never
tired of the Repetition of the Word own; 
and her Eloquence burst forth in an almost
inexhaustible Torrent of Words. She too,
perfectly remembered St. Paul on this
Head; as I believe she did every Word on
the Side of this Question, from the Time
she became a Wife; and although she never
had any other Child but Henrietta, yet she
was always fancying herself with-child, to
keep up the Idea in Orgueil's Mind, of a
growing Family. 
It is almost incredible into what a Perplexity
of Mind Mrs. Orgueil was continually
throwing herself, to prevent her Husband's
ruining himself by Generosity to 

David and his Family. She had, indeed,
the Curse of the Psalmist, of being afraid
where no Fear was; but she would not have
been so extremely anxious to have prevented
Mr. Orgueil from relieving David and
Camilla in some very small Degree, had she
not known it impossible for any Part of that
Family to have any Enjoyment, without
the hated Cynthia's having an equal Share
at least in the Pleasure. 
But Mr. Orgueil's Rule of Rectitude
would by no Means suffer him to take his
Wife's Advice; therefore Mrs. Orgueil never
gave him any Advice at all, but by an
artful Method of making him fancy he acted
by the Dictates of his own idolized Reason,
she prevailed on him to gratify her
Inclinations: and in this Conversation concerning
a Man's providing for his own Family,
Hints were strowed about very thick,
that Mr. Orgueil was very much in the
right; as if all this Eloquence first took its
Rise from his own much valued, reverenced
Wisdom. 
But now the old Gentleman, Camilla's
Father, weakened with Age, and bowing
downward to his native Earth with Infirmities,
took to his Bed, in which he languished 

three Weeks, every Day lessening a small
Degree of his yet remaining Strength. He
did not appear to labour under any violent
Pains, which the better enabled his Children
to struggle through his Illness; but the necessary
additional Expence of his Sickness
they knew not how to support. Saleable
Things, all but Camilla's Wedding Ring,
had long been disposed of; for David and
his Camilla could look down on the Distress
of parting with any Thing administering
only to Shew or Luxury, as unworthy their
least Regard. This Ring, indeed, had a
Circumstance annexed to it, which made
the keeping it some Indulgence to Camilla,
but no Indulgence to herself had any the
least Chance of withstanding her Father's
Wants, and therefore, on this Occasion,
she parted with it without Hesitation. 
Suspicion of any Alteration in David's
Love, or that she preserved it by any Charm,
was far from her Thoughts: she knew his
Love was built on too strong a Foundation
to be shaken by any accidental Occurrences; 
and when she attended her Father with this
her only remaining Treasure, her filial Piety
rendered her more lovely in her dear Husband's
Eyes, than did even her blooming
Youth and beautiful Person, adorned with 

all the Elegance of Neatness, when first
she received that much-valued Gift from
his Hands. 
Camilla knelt at her Father's Bed-side,
David on the opposite Side, a Witness to
her tender Behaviour. She concealed her
Tears, and stifled, as much as possible,
every Emotion of Grief, till she could make
some Pretence for retiring by herself, and,
by giving a little Vent to her Sorrow, enable
herself to appear again more chearful; 
for on such Occasions alone did she ever
chuse to be absent from her Husband. 
The old Gentleman, as if he was only
falling into a refreshing Slumber, felt so
little Pain at his Departure from this Life,
that his Children were saved that most
shocking of all Circumstances, beholding
him in Agonies; the Course of his Years
made it no unexpected Event, and the Consideration
that they were disabled by their
Circumstances tolerably to support his
drooping Remains of Life, had he held
it longer, enforced by David's Understanding,
in a small Time revived the usual
Chearfulness in Camilla's Countenance. And
now every Distress that could possibly befal
her, must bring some Alleviation with it, 

by raising in her Mind a secret Joy, that
her Father was escaped from the Possibility
of partaking in her Misfortune. 
But on the old Gentleman's Death, both
Mr. and Mrs. Orgueil joined in the Opinion,
that they might allow themselves in the Expence
of his Burial. Many were Mrs. Orgueil's
Reasons for this Opinion; first, Cynthia
could not possibly have any Share in what
was spent on the Dead; secondly, the
Word Death itself struck her with a kind
of Horror, which a little damped and broke
the Chain of those grand Points she was always
forming to bring about; such as that
her poor little Thing should not, during
her whole Life, have one Jewel less for Mr.
Orgueil's Generosity; or that Cynthia should
be made to feel some poignant Grief, in
Revenge for her daring to have an Understanding
superior to her own. 
And lastly, Mrs. Orgueil had one Grain
of what is commonly called Compassion for
the Dead: for although the Impossibility of
her ever falling into Poverty was strongly
fixed in her Mind, as if she had never seen
or heard of any of the Vicissitudes or Chances
of this mortal Life, yet sometimes she could
not help being struck with the Image, that 

both herself and her Miss Cassy must, one
time or other, share the common Fate, and
fall a Sacrifice to Death. 
Mr. Orgueil's Rule of Rectitude not only
gave him Leave, but absolutely commanded
him to bury the Dead with Decency, in
order to pay all due Respect even to the
Clay that had been once animated by his
Idol, Human Reason. But this Agreement
of Orgueil and his Wife, to bury Camilla's
Father with Decency, by the Pleasure
it gave her, renewed David's former
Blindness, again enslaved his Mind to Orgueil,
and fixed his Chain as strong as ever. 
To inform my Reader, that a proud
Man was blinded by Flattery, or an ambitious
Man by the most distant Prospect
of Favour from the Great, would be rehearsing
a Matter of Fact very little worth
relating: but that the same Blindness may
be caused from Fears and Apprehensions of
our Friends Miseries, and ardent Wishes for
their Happiness, is, perhaps, not so generally
known; and the Reason I leave to be
discovered by the judicious Reader. 