


The Proceedings of Judge Minos, at
the Gate of Elysium. 
I Now got near enough to the Gate, to hear
the several Claims of those who endeavoured
to pass. The first, among other Pretensions,
set forth, that he had been very liberal
to an Hospital; but Minos answered,
Ostentation, and repulsed him. The second
exhibited, that he had constantly frequented
his Church, been a rigid Observer of Fast-Days. 

He likewise represented the great Animosity
he had shewn to Vice in others,
which never escaped his severest Censure; and
as to his own Behaviour, he had never been
once guilty of Whoring, Drinking, Gluttony,
or any other Excess. He said, he had disinherited
his Son for getting a Bastard. —Have
you so, said Minos, then pray return into
the other World and beget another; for such
an unnatural Rascal shall never pass this Gate. 
A dozen others, who had advanced with very
confident Countenances, seeing him rejected,
turned about of their own accord, declaring, if
he could not pass, they had no Expectation,
and accordingly they followed him back to
Earth; which was the Fate of all who were
repulsed, they being obliged to take a farther
Purification, unless those who were guilty of
some very heinous Crimes, who were hustled
in at a little back Gate, whence they
tumbled immediately into the Bottomless
Pit. 
The next Spirit that came up, declared,
he had done neither Good nor Evil in the
World: for that since his Arrival at Man's
Estate, he had spent his whole Time in search 

of Curiosities; and particularly in the Study
of Butterflies, of which he had collected an
immense Number. Minos made him no Answer,
but with great Scorn pushed him back. 
There now advanced a very beautiful
Spirit indeed. She began to ogle Minos the
moment she saw him. She said, she hoped,
there was some Merit in refusing a great Number
of Lovers, and dying a Maid, tho' she
had had the Choice of a hundred. Minos
told her she had not refused enow yet, and
turned her back. 
She was succeeded by a Spirit, who told
the Judge, he believed his Works would
speak for him. What Works? answered Minos. 
My Dramatic Works, replied the other,
which have done so much Good in recommending
Virtue and punishing Vice. —Very
well, said the Judge, if you please to stand
by, the first Person who passes the Gate, by
your means, shall carry you in with him:
but if you will take my Advice, I think,
for Expedition sake, you had better return
and live another Life upon Earth. The Bard
grumbled at this, and replied, that besides 

his Poetical Works, he had done some other
good Things: for that he had once lent the
whole Profits of a Benefit Night to a Friend,
and by that Means had saved him and his
Family from Destruction. Upon this, the
Gate flew open, and Minos desired him to
walk in, telling him, if he had mentioned
this at first, he might have spared the Remembrance
of his Plays. The Poet answered,
he believed, if Minos had read his Works,
he would set a higher Value on them. He
was then beginning to repeat, but Minos
pushed him forward, and turning his Back
to him, applied himself to the next Passenger; 
a very genteel Spirit, who made a very
low Bow to Minos, and then threw himself
into an erect Attitude, and imitated the Motion
of taking Snuff with his right Hand. — 
Minos asked him, what he had to say for himself? 
He answered, he would dance a Minuet
with any Spirit in Elysium: that he
could likewise perform all his other Exercises
very well, and hoped he had in his Life deserved
the Character of a perfect fine Gentleman. 
Minos replied, it would be great pity
to rob the World of so fine a Gentleman,
and therefore desired him to take the other 

Trip. The Beau bowed, thanked the Judge,
and said he desired no better. Several Spirits
expressed much Astonishment at this his Satisfaction; 
but we were afterwards informed,
he had not taken the Emetic above mentioned. 
A Miserable old Spirit now crawled
forwards, whose Face I thought I had formerly
seen near Westminster-Abbey. He entertained
Minos with a long Harangue of
what he had done when in the House; and
then proceeded to inform him how much he
was worth, without attempting to produce a
single Instance of any one good Action. Minos
stopt the Career of his Discourse, and
acquainted him, he must take a Trip back again. 
—What, to S&wblank; House, said the Spirit
in an Extasy? But the Judge without making
him any Answer, turned to another, who
with a very solemn Air and great Dignity,
acquainted him, he was a Duke. —To the
Right about, Mr. Duke, cried Minos, you
are infinitely too great a Man for Elysium; 
and then giving him a Kick on the B&wblank;ch,
he addressed himself to a Spirit, who with
Fear and Trembling begged he might not
go to the Bottomless Pit: he said, he hoped 

Minos would consider, that tho' he had gone
astray, he had suffered for it, that it was Necessity
which drove him to the Robbery of
eighteen Pence, which he had committed,
and for which he was hanged: that he had
done some good Actions in his Life, that he
had supported an aged Parent with his Labour,
that he had been a very tender Husband
and a kind Father, and that he had ruined
himself by being Bail for his Friend. At
which Words the Gate opened, and Minos
bid him enter, giving him a slap on the Back
as he past by him. 
A Great Number of Spirits now came
forwards, who all declared they had the same
Claim, and that the Captain should speak for
them. He acquainted the Judge, that they
had been all slain in the Service of their
Country. Minos was going to admit them,
but had the Curiosity to ask who had been
the Invader, in order, as he said, to prepare the
back Gate for him. The Captain answered,
they had been the Invaders themselves, that
they had entered the Enemies Country, and
burnt and plundered several Cities. —And for
what Reason? said Minos. —By the Command 

of him who paid us, said the Captain, that is
the Reason of a Soldier. We are to execute
whatever we are commanded, or we should
be a Disgrace to the Army, and very little
deserve our Pay. You are brave Fellows indeed,
said Minos, but be pleased to face about,
and obey my Command for once, in returning
back to the other World: for what
should such Fellows as you do, where there
are no Cities to be burnt, nor People to be destroy'd? 
But let me advise you to have a
stricter Regard to Truth for the future, and
not call the depopulating other Countries the
Service of your own. The Captain answered,
in a Rage, D&wblank;n me, do you give me the
Lye? and was going to take Minos by the
Nose, had not his Guards prevented him,
and immediately turned him and all his Followers
back the same Road they came. 
Four Spirits informed the Judge, that
they had been starved to death through Poverty; 
being the Father, Mother, and two
Children. That they had been honest, and
as industrious as possible, till Sickness had
prevented the Man from Labour. —All
that is very true, cried a grave Spirit, who 

stood by: I know the Fact; for these poor
People were under my Cure. —You was, I
suppose, the Parson of the Parish, cries Minos; 
I hope you had a good Living, Sir. That
was but a small one, replied the Spirit: but
I had another a little better. —Very well, said
Minos, let the poor People pass. —At which
the Parson was stepping forwards with a stately
Gait before them; but Minos caught hold
of him, and pulled him back, saying, Not
so fast, Doctor; you must take one step more
into the other World first; for no Man enters
that Gate without Charity. 
A Very stately Figure now presented
himself, and informing Minos he was a Patriot,
began a very florid Harangue on public
Virtue, and the Liberties of his Country. 
Upon which, Minos shewed him the utmost
Respect, and ordered the Gate to be opened. 
The Patriot was not contented with this Applause
–––he said, he had behaved as well in Place
as he had done in the Opposition; and that,
tho' he was now obliged to embrace the Court-Measures,
yet he had behaved very honestly
to his Friends, and brought as many in as was
possible. —Hold a moment, says Minos, on 

second Consideration, Mr. Patriot, I think a
Man of your great Virtue and Abilities will
be so much miss'd by your Country, that if
I might advise you, you should take a Journey
back again. I am sure you will not decline
it, for I am certain you will with great Readiness
sacrifice your own Happiness to the
public Good. The Patriot smiled, and told
Minos, he believed he was in jest; and was
offering to enter the Gate, but the Judge laid
fast hold of him, and insisted on his Return,
which the Patriot still declining, he at last
ordered his Guards to seize him, and conduct
him back. 
A Spirit now advanced, and the Gate
was immediately thrown open to him, before
he had spoken a Word. I heard some
whisper,—That is our last Lord Mayor. 
It now came to our Company's turn. 
The fair Spirit, which I mentioned with so
much Applause, in the Beginning of my
Journey, past through very easily; but the
grave Lady was rejected on her first Appearance,
Minos declaring, there was not a
single Prude in Elysium. 

The Judge then address'd himself to me,
who little expected to pass this fiery Trial. I
confess'd I had indulged myself very freely with
Wine and Women in my Youth, but had never
done an Injury to any Man living, nor avoided
an Opportunity of doing good; that I pretended
to very little Virtue more than general
Philanthropy, and private Friendship. —I
was proceeding, when Minos bid me enter
the Gate, and not indulge myself with trumpeting
forth my Virtues. I accordingly past
forward with my lovely Companion, and
embracing her with vast Eagerness, but spiritual
Innocence, she returned my Embrace in
the same manner, and we both congratulated
ourselves on our Arrival in this happy Region,
whose Beauty, no Painting of the Imagination
can describe. 