

Gives an explanation of the former,
with other particulars, more agreeable
to the reader in the repetition, than
to the persons concerned in them. 
It was near ten o'clock when miss Betsy
came home, and mr. Goodman, who
had been very uneasy at her staying out
so late, especially as she was alone, was
equally rejoiced at her return; but, as well
as lady Mellasin, was surprized on hearing
by what accident she had been detained: 
—they knew not how to judge of
it,—there was no circumstance in the
whole affair, which could make them
think mr. Bloomacre had any designs of
that sort lord &wblank; had suggested; 
yet did mr. Goodman think himself obliged,
as the young lady's guardian, to
go to that gentleman, and have some
talk with him concerning what had passed. 
—Accordingly he went the next morning
to his house, but not finding him at
home, left word with his servant, that he
desired to speak with him as soon as possible:
—he came not, however, the whole
day, nor sent any message to excuse his 
not doing so, and this neglect gave mr.
Goodman, and miss Betsy herself, some
room to suspect, he was no less guilty
than he had been represented, since had
he been perfectly innocent, it seemed reasonable
to them, to think he would have
come, even of his own accord, to have
learned of miss Betsy the motive of her
leaving him in so abrupt and odd a manner; 
—but how much they wronged him
will presently appear, and they were afterwards
convinced. 
There was an implacable animosity between
lord &wblank; and mr. Bloomacre,
on account of the former's pretending a
right to some lands which the other held,
and could not be dispossessed of by law. — 
As his lordship knew mr. Bloomacre was
not of a disposition to bear an affront
tamely, he had no other way to vent his
spleen against him, than by villifying and
traducing him in all companies he came
into; but this he took care to do in so
artful a manner as to be enabled, either
to evade or render what he said impossible
to be proved, in case he were called
to an account for it. 
The affair of miss Betsy, innocent as it
was, he thought gave him an excellent
opportunity of gratifying his malice;— 
he went early the next morning to the
dean, complained of an insult offered to
his house by mr. Bloomacre, on the score
of his sister having brought in a young
lady, whom that gentleman had detained
in the cloisters, and was going to carry
off, by the assistance of some friends he
had with him, in a hackney coach. 
The dean, who was also a bishop, was
extremely incensed, as well he might, at
so glaring a prophanation of that sacred
place, and the moment lord &wblank; had
taken his leave, sent for mr. Bloomacre
to come to him. —That gentleman immediately
obeying the summons, the bishop
began to reprimand him in terms, which
the occasion seemed to require from a person
of his function and authority:—mr.
Bloomacre could not forbear interrupting
him, though with the greatest respect,
saying nothing could be more false and
base, than such an accusation;—that
whoever had given such an information
was a villain, and merited to be used as
such. —The Prelate seeing him in this
heat, would not mention the name of his
accuser; but replyed coolly, that it was
possible he might be wronged, but to convince
him that he was so, he must relate
to him the whole truth of the story, and
on what grounds a conjecture so much to 
the disadvantage of his reputation had
been formed: —on which mr. Bloomacre
repeated every thing that had passed; and
added, that he was well acquainted with
the family where the young lady was
boarded, and that he was certain she
would appear in person to justify him in
this point, if his lordship thought it proper; 
—“but,” said the bishop, “I hear
you affronted the lord &wblank;, by
thundering at his door, and abusing his
servants.” —“No, my lord,” answered
mr. Bloomacre, “lord &wblank;, though
far from being my friend, will not dare
to alledge any such thing against me. 
—We were indeed a little surprized to
see the young lady, who was with us,
snatched away in so odd a fashion by
his sister, who we easily perceived had
not the least acquaintance with her. 
—We continued walking, however, in
the cloister, till the man whom we
had sent for a coach returned, and
told us, he had got one, and that it
waited at the gate. —We then, indeed,
knocked at lord &wblank;'s door,
and being answered from the windows
by the servants, in a very impertinent
manner, I believe we might utter some
words not very respectful, either of his
lordship or his sister, whose behaviour 
in this affair I am as yet intirely ignorant
how to account for.” 
The bishop paused a considerable time,
but on mr. Bloomacre's repeating what
he had said before, concerning bringing
the lady herself to avouch the truth of
what he had related to his lordship, replyed,
that there was no occasion for
troubling either her or himself any farther; 
—that he believed there had been
some mistake in the business, and that
he should think no more of it; on which
mr. Bloomacre took his leave. 
Though the bishop had not mentioned
the name of lord &wblank; to mr. Bloomacre,
as the person who had brought
this complaint against him, yet he was
very certain, by all circumstances, that he
could be indebted to no other for such a
piece of low malice; and this, joined to
some other provocations he had received
from the ill-will of that nobleman, made
him resolve to do himself justice. 
He went directly from the deanery in
search of the two gentlemen, who had
been with him in the abbey when he
happened to meet miss Betsy, and having
found them both, they went to a tavern
together, in order to consult on what was 
proper to be done, for the chastisement of
lord &wblank;'s folly and ill nature. 
Both of them agreed with mr. Bloomacre,
that he ought to demand that satisfaction,
which every gentleman has a right
to expect from any one who has injured
him, of what degree soever he be, excepting
those of royal blood. —Each of
them was so eager to be his second in
this affair, that they were obliged to draw
lots for the determination of the choice; 
—he who had the ill-luck, as he called
it, to draw the shortest cut, would needs
oblige them to let him be the bearer of
the challenge, that he might at least have
some share in inflicting the punishment,
which the behaviour of that unworthy lord
so justly merited. 
The challenge was wrote,—the place
appointed for meeting was the field behind
Montague house; but the gentleman who
carried it brought no answer back,—his
lordship telling him only that he would
consider on the matter, and let mr. Bloomacre
know his intentions. 
Mr. Bloomacre as the principal, and
the other as his second, were so enraged
at this, that the latter resolved to go himself,
and force a more categorical answer. 
—He did so, and lord &wblank; having
had time to consult his brother, and, as
it is said, some other friends, told him,
he accepted the challenge, and would be
ready with his second at the time and
place appointed in it. 
Mr. Bloomacre did not go home that
whole day, therefore knew nothing of the
message had been left for him by mr.
Goodman, till it was too late to comply
with it; but this seeming remissness in
him, was not all that troubled the mind
of that open and honest-hearted guardian
of miss Betsy. —Mr. Trueworth and mr.
Staple had both been at his house the day
before: —the former on hearing his mistress
was abroad, left only his compliments,
and went away, though very much
pressed to come in by miss Flora, who
seeing him through the parlour-window,
ran to the door herself, and intreated he
would pass the evening there;—mr.
Staple came the moment after, and met
his rival coming down the steps that led
up to the door;—mr. Trueworth saluted
him in passing with the usual complaisance,
which the other returned in a very
cool manner, and knocked hastily at the
door, “I imagine,” said he to the footman
who opened it, “that miss Betsy is
not at home, by that gentleman's having 
so early taken leave; but I would
speak with mr. Goodman if he be at
leisure.” 
He was then shewed into the back parlour,
which was the room where mr.
Goodman generally received those persons
who came to him upon business;— 
on hearing who it was that asked for
him, he was a little surprized, and desired
he would walk up stairs; but mr.
Staple not knowing but there might be
company above, returned for answer,
that he had no more than a word or two
to say to him, and that must be in private; 
on which the other immediately
came down to him. 
This young lover having by accident
been informed, not only that mr. Trueworth
made his addresses to miss Betsy, but
also that it was with him she had been
engaged during all that time he had been
deprived of seeing her, thought it proper
to talk with mr. Goodman, concerning
this new obstacle to his wishes:—that
worthy gentleman was extremely troubled
to be questioned on an affair, on which
he had given miss Betsy his word not to
interfere, but finding himself very much
pressed by a person whose passion he had
encouraged, and who was the son of one 
with whom he had lived in a long friendship,
he frankly confessed to him, that
mr. Trueworth was indeed recommended
to miss Betsy by her brother;—told him,
he was sorry the thing had happened so,
but had nothing farther to do with it;— 
that the young lady was at her own difposal,
as to the article of marriage;— 
that he was ignorant how she would determine,
and that it must be from herself
alone he could learn what it was he might
expect or hope. 
Mr. Staple received little satisfaction
from what mr. Goodman had said, but
resolved to take his advice, and, if possible,
bring miss Betsy to some eclaircisement
of the fate he was to hope or fear. 
—Accordingly he came the next morning
to visit her:—a liberty he had never
taken, nor would now, if he had not despaired
of finding her in an afternoon. 
She gave herself, however, no airs of
resentment on that account, but when he
began to testify his discontent concerning
mr. Trueworth, and the apprehensions he
had of his having gained the preference
in her heart, though the last who had sollicited
that happiness, she replied, in the
most haughty tone, that she was surprized
at the freedom he took with her;—that 
she was, and ever would be, mistress of
her actions and sentiments, and no man
had a right to pry into either; and concluded
with saying, that she was sorry the
civilities she had treated him with, should
make him imagine he had a privilege of
finding fault with those she shewed to others. 
It is not to be doubted but that he
made use of all the arguments in his power
to convince her; that a true and perfect
passion was never unaccompanied with
jealous fears;—he acknowleged the merits
of mr. Trueworth; “but,” added he,
“the more he is possessed of, the more
dangerous is he to my hopes;”—and
then begged her to consider the torments
he had suffered, while being so long deprived
of her presence, and knowing, at
the same time, a rival was blessed with it. 
Miss Betsy was not at this time in a
humour either to be perswaded by the
reasons, or softened by the submissions of
her lover, and poor mr. Staple, after
having urged all that love, wit, despair,
and grief could dictate, was obliged to
depart more dissatisfied than he came. 
In going out, he saw mr. Goodman in the
parlour, who gave him the good morning
as he passed;—“A sad one it has been
to me,” answered he, with somewhat 
of horror in his countenance; “but I
will not endure the rack of many such.” 
—With these words he flung out of the
house, in order to go about what perhaps
the reader is not at a loss to guess at. 