

It was not in this Manner the Baroness pass'd her
Time, believing herself secure of the Heart she so
ardently had wish'd to gain, revell'd in full Delight,
and wanton'd in the Assurance of her Happiness; 
proud, vain, and self-sufficient, she now defy'd all
Fears of ever losing what she had acquir'd, despis'd her
Rival's Charms, and not only spoke of her, but also
really consider'd her as a Creature incapable of giving
her any Pain on Beauclair's Account, nay, tho' he
should discover by what Arts he had been betray'd
to treat her in the Manner he had lately done. She
hated her, however, for the Engagements she had
with him, and being naturally of a most malicious
Disposition to all aimable Persons of her own Sex,
took an inexpressible Pleasure in having it in her
Power to mortify 'em. This base Woman thought
it not Misery enough to have alienated the Affections
of her Lover, but must study to inflict yet
more: She could not think herself truly bless'd in the
Possession of Beauclair, without triumphing in the
Conquest she had made; it was not sufficient for 

her Pride, that Montamour was abandon'd; there
wanted, to compleat her Happiness, the making
that afflicted Lady sensible for whom she had been
abandon'd. She was now grown above the Care of
her Reputation, and thought it beneath her to regard
any Thing but the pleasing herself; and, entirely ignorant
that Madamoiselle Bellfleur had, in part, perform'd
the Work she aim'd at, communicated her
Desires to Du Lache: He who was always ready to
serve her on all Occasions, was far from being backward
in complying with her in this; and he approv'd
of it the more, because that he imagin'd, that when
Montamour should know her Rival, it would encrease
her Resentment to Beauclair, and render it
impossible for them ever to be reconcil'd, and consequently
prevent any Discovery of those villainous
Impositions which had been made use of to disunite
them. Madamoiselle Sansfoy came immediatly into
his Head, as the most proper Engine upon Earth to
manage this Affair, who would infallibly do all, yet
be ignorant herself of the Cause of what she did:
And as soon as he had consulted with the Baroness
after what Manner he should set this eternal Clack
a-going, went to visit her with a Packet of Tidings,
which he knew would render him a welcome Guest
to a Lady of her inquisitive Temper. He gave her
a full Account of all the several Meetings of Beauclair
and the Baroness, the Manner of their Conversation; 
and, because it happen'd to suit best with his Purpose,
spoke Truth in every thing, but when he said the
Passion was wholly on his Side, the Desire of coming
acquainted his, and that all the Assiduity he had paid
cou'd engage no other Return than Gratitude from
the cold inexorable Tortillée. But the main Business
of his Errand was to tell her, That the Baron being
out of Town, the Baroness had consented to pass the
Evening with himself and Beauclair, and that they
were to meet in the Tuilleries at Ten a-Clock. He told
her this, to the end, that if Montamour shou'd question
the Truth of what she shou'd hear from Sansfoy, her 

Curiosity might, perhaps, lead her to satisfy herself
by watching at that Place, where he and the Baroness
had contriv'd to make Things appear in such a View,
as should distract her very Soul. As he had no other
Design in visiting her, than to make her the Instrument
in tormenting Montamour, so soon as he had
said all that he thought wou'd be conducive to his
Purpose, he took his Leave: Nor did she press him
to stay, being as impatient to reveal what she had
promis'd to keep secret, as he was for her to do so,
tho' he had artfully engag'd her to the contrary, well
knowing that nothing is a greater Incitement to stir
up a busy Temper, than to adjure it to be passive. 
Tho' Montamour liv'd but a Street or two off; she
thought the Distance was too great; and, as she went
the few Steps there was between 'em, had a thousand
Dreads that the Person she was going to, might
be abroad, or engag'd with Company, or some Accident
should happen which wou'd retard the Recital
she had to make: But she labour'd not long under
these Apprehensions; she found her at home, and
alone; and being receiv'd with the usual Familiarity
which that Lady always treated her Intimates with,
soon disburden'd herself of that Load of Secrets she
had been so big with: She forgot not the minutest
Circumstance she had been told by Du Lache, to
which her natural Propensity to Scandal made her
add a thousand more. Montamour, with an aching
Heart, listen'd attentively to all she said, and long'd
to hear something improbable enough to make her
hope that all the rest was false; but most of the Particulars
that Sansfoy mention'd, and especially the Place
of their Assignation, agreed so exactly with what
she had been inform'd by Madamoiselle Bellfleur,
that she no longer had the Power of doubting. She
bore it, however, with a Presence of Mind, which
very few, if any Woman, beside herself, could boast
of on the like Occasion. She vented no Extravagancies,
–––she curs'd not,––––she revil'd not;––––and
when Sansfoy, surpris'd, and vex'd to find her of a 

Humour so different from her Sex, began to testify
her Friendship by some Expressions which
sounded like Condolement, Pity not me, (interrupted
she, turning her Mouth to a half disdainful Smile,
while her Eyes trembled to restrain their Tears,)
pity not me; rather commiserate the unhappy Beauclair,
whose easy Nature, and whose frank Belief,
makes him the Property of such Wretches as Du
Lache and his Companions. The Reputation of
having an Intrigue with a Woman of the Baroness's
Quality, will never ballance the disgraceful Means by
which he has attain'd it; Nor perhaps, (continu'd
she with a deep Sigh) will he be always of Opinion,
that to have possess'd her is a sufficient Recompence
for the eternal Loss of Montamour. It was impossible
for Sansfoy, who in such a Circumstance wou'd
have behav'd in a Manner vastly different, to forbear
expressing her Sentiments in such Terms as Women
commonly make use of:––––Good God! said she, is
this all? ––––Can you sit down so tamely with your
Wrongs! ––––I know you love the Villain,––––and can
you bear to lose him! –––Shall a Woman, so infamous
as Tortillée, deprive you of him? ––––Will you not be
reveng'd? –––Will you not expose them both? –––The
one to the Ridicule of the whole World; the other to
her Husband's just Resentment? ––––I am not so ignorant
of her Character, as to imagine (whatever her
Pander Du Lache wou'd perswade me) that her Conversation
with Beauclair is no more than a Platonick
one;––––and if you please, (continu'd she, after a
Pause, and finding the other was silent,) I will join
with you to ruin her: I am acquainted with the
whole History of her several Amours,––––can prove
that d' Esperanse, tho' he maintain'd her, was not
the only favour'd Lover;––––and that since her Marriage
with this foolish Baron, she has been had by
half the Town,––––nay, at this very Time, St. Aumar
and the young amorous Marquis de Sonville enjoy an
equal Share with the perfidious Beauclair. ––––I know
where and when both of 'em have had Assignations 

with her. ––––Count De la Torre has also experienc'd
how liberal she is of her Favours: When he went
out of Town the other day, his Sister found, among
some Papers he had left behind him, Letters which
by the Hand we knew to be Tortillée's, and the Contents
were such, as are scarce fit for modest Ears:––– 
I'll bring you acquainted with her; she'll furnish you
with Stories, such as will enable you to revenge
yourself on this unworthy Rival. She wou'd doubtless
have run on a great deal more, if Montamour
(whose Soul was incapable of harbouring any mean
Notions, and glow'd in her Bosom with a generous
Disdain at this Proposition) had not put a Stop to
the Career of her Revilings. She blush'd to think
how justly her Sex was reflected on by the other; 
and looking on Sansfoy with an Air of Scorn, which
she was very rarely seen to wear, No, Madam! no,
said she, I never will enter into any such Measures,
nor can be pleas'd that others shou'd so far interest
themselves in my Quarrel, as to make 'em forget
that Decorum and Mildness of Behaviour, which
ought to be the distinguishing Character of Womanhood:
––––The greatest Proof you can give me of
your Friendship, is to let this Story die. –––I need not
fear my Injuries will go for ever unreveng'd: The
Crime itself will bring on Stings far worse than I
cou'd wish, much more have Power to inflict. If
Beauclair, after so many Vows of an unalterable Affection,
can be so basely perfidious to quit me for
the Baroness, he will also quit her for another;–––– 
her Empire will be of short Continuance. And to be
forsaken, to a Woman of her vain Humour, will
be a Punishment the most adequate of any to her
Guilt; or if she be really so vicious as the World believes,
her Artifice will not always serve her to conceal
it from the discerning Beauclair: Remorse will then
be sufficiently my Avenger. But if neither of these
shou'd happen, shou'd he be ever blind, she ever cunning,
I am resolv'd, in Justice to myself, to continue entirely
passive; for sure a Woman, such as she, is as much below 

my Hate, as he by loving her, has render'd himself
of my Esteem; both equally unworthy of my
Thoughts, and only fit for one another. And is it
possible (interrupted Sansfoy, more and more confounded)
that you really are Mistress of so much Philosophy
as you pretend? ––––Will Love, and Pride,
and Grief, in such a stabbing Circumstance, be always
over-power'd by Prudence? Could you endure
to behold what yet you have but heard of? –––Cou'd
you bear to see the Man who has ador'd you,–––– 
the Man on whom (in spite of your boasted Moderation)
I know your Soul still doats, kneel to another,
and pay those soft Submissions due only to
you? –––Could you, I say, support a Sight like this,
and yet contain your Temper? –––No, 'tis impossible!
––––'tis against Nature! ––––And, if I could perswade
you to go with me in some Disguise, and be
a Witness of their meeting, I believe I should find
your Behaviour at such a View far different from
what the hearing it occasions. I do not think you
wou'd, reply'd Montamour coldly: I have already so
many Proofs of his Perfidy and Ingratitude, that to
see 'em in the most strict Embrace cou'd not give
me more. Yet, resum'd Sansfoy, eager to engage her
to an Enterprize, in which she promis'd herself so
much Diversion, there is something that more nearly
touches the Passions in an Ocular Demonstration. –––– 
It may be so, interrupted Montamour, (who knew
the other's Humour too well, not to guess at the
Cause which made her pressing.) and for that Reason
I will not endeavour to convince you, by putting
my Temper to any hazardous Tryals, for the
vain Glory of surmounting a Difficulty which few
of my Sex would have Resolution enough to do. 
But (cried Sansfoy, vex'd to the Heart to find her still
so calm) I advise you to it by all means: It wou'd
rather be an Argument of Stupidity than Prudence
to lose such an Opportunity of upbraiding him, and
detecting your Rival: Should you but mention the
Story now, it might be disbeliev'd;––––both might 

deny it,––––and you only be call'd perverse and jealous:
––––But if you meet them at this shameful Assignation,
and Face to Face confront 'em, you boldly
may proclaim him for a Villain, and enjoy that inexpressible
Satisfaction of having your Rival in your
Power. She said a great deal more to the same Purpose; 
but all her Reasons had no Effect on Montamour:
That discreet Lady reflected within herself
on the Weakness of Humanity, and how little sufficient
Reason at some Times, and in some Cases, is to
vanquish Passion: She knew not how far she might
be transported at such a killing Interview; and easily
perceiving it was more the Pleasure of having something
to talk of, than any Interest she took in her
Affairs, which made her Adviser so importunate, resolv'd
she shou'd rather want a Theme for the Entertainment
of her next Visiting-Day, than furnish her
with one, which she was not certain might not be
to the Disadvantage of the Reputation of that Moderation,
she had hitherto taken so much Care to preserve. 
It was something wonderful, indeed, that a
Woman who lov'd to that prodigious Degree of Tenderness
as she did, and had such Appearances how
much that Tenderness was abus'd, cou'd so well dissemble
the Disorders of her Soul. The whole Time
that Sansfoy staid with her, she continu'd Mistress of
the same steddy Resolution she had always profess'd; 
and that busy Woman had the Mortification, after
all the Pains she had taken, to find herself disappointed,
and that all she had done was able to draw nothing
from her which might be a Subject of Ridicule! But
what the unhappy Montamour suffer'd while under
so cruel a Constraint can hardly be imagin'd! As
soon as she was alone, she shut herself into her Chamber,
and gave a Loose to the long labouring pent-up
Passions of her Soul:–––Her Couch,––––her Bed,
were now no longer able to sustain the Force of her
wild Grief;–––she grovell'd on the Floor;––––she beat
her Breast;––––she wrung her lovely Hands;–––the ceebrated
Lustre of her shining Eyes was now extinct 

in Tears; and whoever had seen her in this Condition
wou'd have believ'd it impossible she cou'd, but some
Moments before, have worn such an Appearance of
Serenity. As it grew nearer to the Hour, in which
her Rival was to enjoy the Presence of her ador'd
Beauclair, her Agonies encreas'd: O God! cry'd she,
now is the happy Tortillée preparing to receive a
Heaven I have for ever lost! –––Now, now, she summons
all her Charms, adorns her Face with Smiles,
and practises a thousand Arts, a thousand Graces, to
secure her Conquest! ––––And what, (O torturing
Thought!) what gives Addition to her Beauty, and
makes her Eyes sparkle with an unusual Splendor, is
the Knowledge that she triumphs over the forsaken
Montamour! Whenever this Reflection came across
her Thoughts, all that she had of Woman in her Soul
exerted itself; No, wou'd she say, starting up and
wiping away her Tears, with an Air of Derision,–––– 
I am not, will not be unhappy;–––I scorn the Wretch
who yields his Heart, where neither Virtue, Wit,
nor Beauty claim the Prize, where Novelty is alone
the Charm. ––––He that can love Tortillée, the infamous
the often abandon'd Tortillée! shall henceforth
be the Object of of my Mirth, equally unworthy of
my Love or Anger. But how long she continu'd in
this Mind, those who have ever felt the Force of true
Affection, need not be inform'd: To them it may seem
superfluous to say, Tenderness soon got the better of
Resentment; but the Insensibles, or those who love
only because they are belov'd, will perhaps condemn
her, when they shall know those Resolutions were
no sooner made than broke; and sinking from that
Air of Haughtiness she had assum'd, into one wholly
compos'd of Softness, And yet, said she, among the
Race of Man, where is there one whose Charms can
vie with those, this dear, this false Protestor boasts? ––– 
How harsh, and how untunable wou'd sound the Name
of Love from any other Mouth! and with what Harmony
it flows from his! ––––His Voice,––––his
Looks,––––his soft enchanting Mein, adorn the tender 

Passion, and make Desire a Virtue. In this Manner
was she hurry'd by the various Agitations of her
Mind, till the Clock striking Ten, put her in mind,
that if she did design to be a Witness of this Meeting,
it was time she shou'd prepare herself. In spite of all
the Temperance she had maintain'd in the Presence
of Sansfoy, the Woman's Curiosity now gain'd the
Victory: She cou'd not be assur'd, that the Man who
had made so many Vows to her, was that Moment
about to offer 'em to another, without a Desire to
know in what Manner he wou'd do it; and, perhaps,
was not without a secret Hope she shou'd discover
a Difference in his Behaviour; and as wretched
as she thought herself, found a kind of Pleasure, a
sullen Satisfaction in this Thought. Enabled by it,
she got on her Cloaths, and muffling herself up in her
Hoods, so as it was impossible for her to be known,
stole out of the House alone, without letting even
her own Woman into the Secret. ––––What is not
Love, when instigated by Jealousy, capable of performing! 
She, who at another Time, or on any
other Occasion, wou'd not have ventur'd where there
was the least Appearance of Danger, or to her Person
or Reputation, now had either forgot, or had Courage
to despise the most eminent ones; and led by the
Emotions of her tumultuous Passions went, when it
was dark, unguarded, and unattended to the Place
which she was told was destin'd for the Rendevous
of those ungenerous Destroyers of her Peace. She
had not been long in the Tuilleries before she discern'd
a Man and Woman coming down a Walk opposite
to that she was in: She imagin'd it might be those
she sought, and immediately cross'd, making only a
little Stand to let them pass, and follow'd at a convenient
Distance, so near as to be able to distinguish
what was said, but far enough, as she thought, not
to have them believe they were observ'd. The Baroness
(for it was she, indeed, who, accompany'd by
Du Lache, had prevented the Hour appointed by Beauclair,
that she might have the Opportunity of executing 

that Design before concerted with her assisting
Villain) presently perceiv'd her, but finding she was
alone, cou'd not be assur'd whether it was her Rival
or Sansfoy herself, who she knew had Curiosity
enough for such an Enterprize, if she cou'd not prevail
on the other: But not doubting, but whatever
she shou'd discover wou'd be carry'd immediately to
Montamour, began to talk to Du Lache in the Manner
they had contriv'd for the insulting her: I think
(said she, raising her Voice, that she that follow'd
might lose nothing of what was said) I ought no
longer to doubt the Sincerity of my charming Friend:
He has made no Scruple of revealing to me the dearest
Secrets of his Soul: He confess'd that he formerly
had a Tenderness for Montamour, which, till he saw
me, he took for Love: He acknowledges a Pity for
the Impression which he finds his Vows of Courtship
have made on her too-easy yielding Heart; but
protests that he has of late desisted from giving her
any Proofs of that Affection she once flatter'd herself
with; and that since his Acquaintance with me, he
never has visited her. I am certain he has not, reply'd
Du Lache; and in my Opinion you cannot
have a greater Testimony of his Passion, than his
abandoning a Maid of her Quality and Fortune;–––– 
one, who in the Judgment of most People is Mistress
of a thousand Beauties and Accomplishments; and
unto whom, in spite of her Reserve, he knows himself
extremely dear. Poor Girl, (resum'd the malicious
Baroness,) I pity her: Her Condition is truly
deplorable; for the engaging Beauclair has sworn he
ne'er will see her more; and but this very Morn,
among a Million of tender Protestations, bound the
Promise he before had made me, with so solemn a
Vow, that 'tis impossible he should ever dare to
speak of her, to write to her, or even think of her
again, with any Thing beyond the common Civility
of a Stranger. What pass'd in the Soul of Montamour
at hearing this Discourse, and what she endur'd
in the Struggles of her Passions with her Discretion, 

can never be represented by Words: The Idea
which one ought to conceive of her Sufferings wou'd
be lessen'd by Description; therefore, I shall only say
that she supported them with Life, but that was all; 
while the Baroness went on with her Persecutions
in this Manner: Another Proof of his Affection, resum'd
she, and which I think a prodigious one, is the
Uneasiness he expresses at my but speaking to any
other Man: He fancies the whole Creation are his Rivals,
and envies even the Wind the Blessing of saluting
me. –––I will tell you a pleasant Thing of him, (continu'd
she, laughing:) He came to visit me the other
day, and found the Marquis de Sonville with me. I
knew his Thoughts, and could not forbear smiling,
to see how aukwardly he counterfeited a Cheerfulness,
till the Marquis's Page happening to bring him
a Letter, he retir'd to the farther End of the Room
to read it, and gave my impatient Lover an Opportunity
to vent some Part of his Chagrin. A Pen
and Ink standing upon the Table, he immediately
writ, blotting it out as soon as he had done,––––O
Tortillée! Tortillée! Divine as you are in all Things
else, in the Affairs of Love I fear you are but mortal,
and liable to change! What, O what must then become
of the unfortunate Beauclair! Her Invention,
which was seldom at a Loss, when prompted either
by her Interest or ill Nature, would certainly have
furnish'd her with many more Stories of this kind,
if the coming of Beauclair had not put a Stop to
'em. Tho' the Curiosity of seeing in what manner
he wou'd behave, had been the only Reason which
had brought Montamour there, she was now hinder'd
from the Gratification of it. As subterranean Fires
prey on their Mansion, and consume with certain,
tho' unseen Destruction, the various and violent Agitations
which rag'd in the Breast of this unhappy
Lady, not having Liberty to vent themselves, roll'd
stormy for a while, then growing too mighty for
Restraint disdain'd all Bounds, and would have burst
in Exclamations suited to their Cause, had not her 

gentle Soul, entirely unaccustom'd to such Struggles,
refus'd to obey the Dictates of her Fury; when she
was about to shew her self, to speak, and to upbraid,
she lost the Power; her Voice forsook her, and her
every Sense flew frighted at the Tempest, and left
her Body motionless on the Earth: She saw the dear
Undoer of her Quiet approach;–––She saw the detested
Pair, whose Discourse had plung'd her into
such Agonies, walk hastily from the Place they were
in to meet him; but what their Conversation was
after he join'd 'em, her Swoon depriv'd her of the
Means to observe. 
They staid not long in the Walk: The Baroness
little suspecting what had happen'd to Montamour
drew them immediately out of the Tuilleries; for
tho' Beauclair address'd her with all imaginable Complaisance,
and a vast deal of Gallantry, yet he was far
from expressing himself with that prodigious Tenderness
which she would have her Rival believe. 
Poor Montamour remain'd for a considerable Time
in the Condition they had left her, and for want of
Help, join'd to the Coldness of the Earth, might,
perhaps, never have recover'd, if an unexpected Accident
had not brought Monsieur Galliard to her Relief. 
He had been abroad that Night on an Intrigue,
which having met with a Disappointment in, he
came thither, thinking to indulge his Chagrin. Chance
led him to the very Place where she was lying: She
had fallen quite cross the Walk; so that dark as it
was, it was impossible for him to pass, without perceiving
something in his Way. The Oddness of the
Adventure at first a little surpris'd him: To find a
Person whom, though her Face was hid, by some
Jewels which glitter'd on her Breast, he guess'd to
be a Woman of Fashion, at such an Hour, in such a
Place, and in such a Posture, made him begin to imagine
that Fortune had design'd him a Reparation for
the Disappointment he had lately met with: But he
soon lost that Hope, tho' to the Encrease of his Amazement,
when kneeling down by her, and pulling 

back her Hoods, he discover'd who she was. The
fresh Air immediately restor'd her to Life, but it
was a good while before she regain'd her Senses; 
She knew not where she was, nor who was present; 
and remembring nothing but the Cause which had
thrown her into this Disorder, frequently repeated
the Names of Beauclair, Tortillée, and Du Lache, but
in so wild and incoherent a Manner, that if Galliard
had not been pretty well acquainted with the Reasons
she had for Jealousy, he cou'd not have been
able to guess 'em by her Words. The Respect he
always paid her, and which, indeed, her Conduct
exacted from every Body, made him behave himself
to her in a manner very different to what he wou'd
have us'd to any other Woman in the like Circumstance; 
and as he had a great deal of good Sense,
whenever he pleas'd to exert it, he made use of a
great many fine Reasonings to disswade her from
giving way to the Suggestions of her Passions. She
stood very little in need of his Advice, whenever she
had the Liberty of Thought; and now beginning to
resume it, was more angry with her self for the Indiscretion
her Curiosity had made her guilty of, than
with those who had occasion'd it. She knew Galliard
to be of a Temper not much different from
Sansfoy, and cou'd not hope that this Adventure
would be kept a Secret: She did not fail however to
conjure him to it; and 'tis possible his extraordinary
Esteem for her might have oblig'd him to put a Constraint
on his Inclinations, if an unexpected Accident had
not discover'd the whole Transaction without his Help. 
During the Time that Montamour was in her
Swoon, and that she pass'd in Discourse with Galliard,
which was several Hours, (for tho' she stole
out of the House without being taken notice of, she
knew not how to get into it, in the same manner,
and therefore was not over-hasty to be gone,) Beauclair
was entertain'd by the Baroness in the most
splendid manner that her Love, and the natural Profuseness
of her Temper cou'd invent; and knowing 

that Wine is no small Provocative to Desire, she had
provided a vast Variety of the most choice ones; 
but not all she cou'd do was able to drive the Idea of
Montamour from his Remembrance: In the Height
of all the Gaiety with which Tortillée endeavour'd to
divert him, he cou'd not forbear reflecting with how
much more solid Felicity he had pass'd his Hours
with the other; the more he saw of her Behaviour,
the less careful she grew of disguising it, and the
more he found in it to Disesteem. In spite of her
well-acted Tenderness, and in spite of all her Instrument
Du Lache had told him of her Sincerity, he
cou'd not consider with what Facility she had granted
him the greatest Favours, without a Suspicion that
others might also have the same Freedom. To enhance
his Admiration, she was perpetually telling
him how many had sought her Affection; and by
what he knew of her Humour, had little Reason to
believe their Labour had been in vain. ––––In fine, all
her Actions, all her Words, serv'd only to shew him
the prodigious Disproportion which was between
those Charms she wou'd be thought to have, and
those Montamour was really possest of. Tho' these
kind of Reflections came frequently into his Mind,
yet they had greater Force this Night than ever. 
He grew excessive melancholy on the sudden; and
tho' both the Baroness and Du Lache took all imaginable
Pains to exhilerate his Temper, their Endeavours
were in vain; and finding it impossible for
him to be any Company, begg'd Leave to retire. 
The Reader will easily imagine how much the Lady
was alarm'd at a Behaviour so distant from her Expectations:
She made use of all her Artifice, she
wept, entreated, counterfeited Swoonings, but all
fail'd of the Effect she aim'd at; and tho' Du Lache
reminded him how uncourtly it was to leave a Lady
who had receiv'd him in so generous a Fashon, he
persisted in his Resolution, and only making a slight
Excuse, took leave of her, accompany'd by Du Lache, 

who wou'd not part from him till he had found out
the Meaning of this Alteration. 
It seem'd as if the unusual Sadness which seiz'd the
Soul of Beauclair, and oblig'd him to quit the Baroness's
House so much sooner than he intended, was
influenc'd by Fate, on purpose to bring him to a
Place, where he shou'd have a View of what wou'd
give him Torments pretty near equal to those his
late Deportment had inflicted on the disconsolate
Montamour. He pass'd by the Tuilleries the very
Moment that Galliard was conducting her out: She
had too much Distraction in her Thoughts to have
remember'd to have pull'd down her Hoods, and it
being now just Day-break, her whole Face appear'd
to the Eyes of her impatient Lover. In spite of all
that Du Lache, Toncarr, and Le Songe, had told him
of her Perfidiousness, he never could bring himself to
a thorough Assurance of it; and there were some
Moments in which he could not help believing all he
had heard was false; but what Excuses now cou'd
his Passion alledge against so positive an Appearance? 
To see her in a loose Dishabillee, at so irregular an
Hour,––––in such a Place, and so accompany'd, was
sufficient to justify whatever her worst Enemies
cou'd suggest to her Prejudice. Du Lache, tho' he
was infinitely rejoic'd at an Encounter which so unexpectedly
favour'd his Designs, was unwilling that
Beauclair shou'd take notice of her; with reason,
fearing if they shou'd enter into a Conversation, it
might produce something which might ruin all, and
perswaded him to pass without speaking: But the
other was too full of Rage to listen to the Arguments
this artful Villain was preparing to prevent
him, and stepping hastily to her, 'Tis an early Hour,
Madam, said he, (with a Look and Gesture which
sufficiently testify'd his Disorders,) for Ladies, such
as Montamour, to be abroad! –––But I perceive you
are not without a Guard, else I shou'd make offer of
my Service to attend you. You have infinitely more
agreeable Engagements on your Hands, answer'd she, 

(counterfeiting an Air of Gaiety,) and I think my
self extremely happy in the Knowledge of your Humour,
because it gives me the Liberty of indulging
my own. She spoke no more, nor indeed had she
the Power: The Pain she suffer'd in restraining the
struggling Passions of her Soul, was very near throwing
her again into that Condition from which Galliard
had so lately recover'd her. These few Words,
however, had the Effect she aim'd at, to sting Beauclair
to the Quick; and wholly unable to contain
himself, If there be any Thing like a Change in my
Humour, (resum'd he impatiently,) Montamour ought,
indeed, to approve it, since I but follow an Example
she gave me. If she had heard this, it might
perhaps have made her reply in a manner, which
wou'd have given him some Light into the Arts by
which they both had been impos'd on: But her Agitations
were too violent to permit her to stay; she
was remov'd several Paces from him, and he thought
it would look like Mean-spiritedness to follow her,
after what he had seen, which seem'd to be so great
a Confirmation of all he had seen told. In short,
both believing themselves injur'd, each disdain'd to
do any Thing which might appear like a Desire of
Reconciliation: And this little Pride, fatal alike to
the Repose of both, gave the common Deceivers all
the Opportunity they could wish to compass their
pernicious Ends, of separating two Hearts, which, by
all the Ties of Gratitude and Tenderness, were
thought to be cemented. 
When Montamour was come home, and the first
Emotions of her Passions a little abated, she began to
consider with more Sedateness on this Adventure; 
and being unable to find any reasonable Excuse for
Beauclair's Behaviour, resolv'd to tear him from her
Heart: She foresaw it would cost her most terrible
Pangs, but yet it must be done; and therefore the
sooner she endeavour'd it, the better. But tho' she
found no great Difficulty in the forming this Resolution,
she did in fixing on what means she shou'd 

make choice of for the Execution of it. To think
to displace him by entertaining the Idea of any
other Man, was vain; there was none who in the Perfections
of either Mind or Body cou'd vie with the
charming Beauclair, much less exceed him: Neither
cou'd she hope that Variety of Company, or Diversions,
wou'd so far amuse her, as to make her forget
him, but, on the contrary, more remind her
how little, in Competition with the soft Hours of
mutual Love, are those pass'd in that Hurry which
the mistaken World calls Pleasure. Such an Alteration
in her Behaviour, she consider'd, might endanger
her Reputation, but ne'er restore her Quiet. Therefore,
after many disturb'd Reflections, a Cloister seem'd
the only Asylum where she cou'd hope for Peace; the
Duties of Religion so strictly practis'd in those Places,
the pious Examples, and heavenly Conversation of
the holy Sisterhood, she doubted not wou'd set her
Mind at ease, and raise her Wishes beyond worldly
Views. When she consider'd with what a Sublimity
of Tenderness she had regarded Beauclair, she look'd
upon it as a Sin, for which she was justly punish'd
in his Inconstancy: She accus'd herself of Sacrilege, in
paying to a Mortal that Adoration Heaven alone had
Claim to, and vow'd to devote the remaining Part
of her Life to Penitence for that Transgression. She
was extremely strengthen'd in this Design by her
Confessor: She had a large Fortune in her own Possession,
which, on her embracing a monastick Life,
wou'd be wholly employ'd in the Service of Mother
Church; of which he was too true a Son to let slip
so fair an Opportunity of Advantage: He magnify'd
the Comforts of Retirement, and the innate Contentment
which flows from an entire abandoning the
World, in so florid and perswasive a Stile, that in
spite of all that her Brother, and other Relations and
Acquaintance, cou'd do to disswade her, she went into
a Nunnery about four Leagues distant from Paris,
fully determin'd to take Orders as soon as her Year
of Probation shou'd be expir'd. 

While Montamour was thus employ'd in endeavouring
to vanquish an Inclination she thought so ill
plac'd, Beauclair was using his utmost Efforts for a
Conquest of the same Nature. Her Behaviour, when
he met her with Galliard, made her appear more
vile than even Du Lache and his Adherents had represented
her: He cou'd not think he had ever lov'd
her, without being asham'd of his Affection. ––––Tortillée
seem'd now less faulty in his Opinion:–––He
believ'd her guilty of no other Failings than what
were incident to her Sex; for if Montamour was
false, he imagin'd all Women must be so. An honourable
Passion was what, for the future, he resolv'd
to avoid, and being enter'd in an Amour with
the Baroness, fancy'd he might pass his Hours in
her Company with as much Felicity, as in any
others. To make the Favours he receiv'd from her
as great a Blessing as possible, he took abundance of
Pains to establish a Tenderness in his Soul on her
Account, like what he formerly had felt for Montamour:
But how much did he deceive himself in such
an Attempt! the lovely Maid, all guilty as she seem'd,
maintain'd her Empire still; the more he struggl'd
with his Chains, the more he found the Impossibility
of breaking them; and what he endur'd in the Conflict
between Passion and Resentment was almost insupportable. 
But, despising himself for what he thought
so great a Weakness, he resolv'd to do nothing that
shou'd give the World occasion to suspect what pass'd
within his Soul; and to that end, paid his Devoirs to
the Baroness in a more assiduous Manner than he
wou'd have done, perhaps, had Inclination only
prompted him. 
This mischievous Woman now exulted with a malicious
Joy at the Knowledge of her Rival's Grief; 
for, in spite of all that Lady's Caution, it was soon
blaz'd abroad, that she was miserable in the Loss of
Beauclair. The Condition in which Galliard had
found her in the Tuilleries was no Secret; for tho'
the Esteem he had for her oblig'd him to conceal her 

Name, it cou'd not restrain him from diverting himself
and Companions with the Relation of such an
Adventure; and Du Lache, being with Beauclair
when he was conducting her out, made him know
it was she herself, and not Sansfoy, who had come
thither to observe the Baroness; so that between them
the whole Affair soon grew the common Chat of
every Tea-Table: And it was the Knowledge of being
thus expos'd, which doubtless, more than any
Thing, made Montamour deaf to all the Perswasions
of her Friends from a monastick Life. Beauclair
was soon inform'd of her Resolution; but whatever
he felt within himself seem'd little to regard it, and
was in Reality not sorry she had taken Measures
which wou'd render it impossible for him ever to let
her know the Power she had over him; and being
allow'd, and indeed courted to take all imaginable Freedom
with the Baroness, whoever had seen him with
her wou'd have believ'd his Soul was wholly her's:
But in spite of all the Pleasure this wicked Woman
conceiv'd in the Opinion she was Mistress of a Heart,
the united Beauties of the whole Sex, without an
equal Proportion of Wit and Virtue, was insufficient
to deserve, in spite of the unequall'd, inexpressible
Graces he was possess'd of, she cou'd not resolve to
be his alone; Sonville, St. Aumar, Le Sourbe, and
others, had the same Liberties with her as before; 
but, as I have already taken Notice, she had her particular
Places of Assignation with them all, and Beauclair
had not the least Suspicion of any Rivals in his
Happiness, and was pretty near an Infatuation equal
to that her Artifices had wrought on the unhappy
Baron. 
Thus all Things for a while went smoothly on, till
one unhappy Day had like to have made a total Discovery
of her Falshood to him, whom it was most
her Interest to deceive. Beauclair, as well as others
of her Admirers, frequently visited her at Home; and
happening to come one Afternoon, and finding her
in her Bedchamber, no Company with her, the Baron 

abroad, and she in a loose Undress, (in which indeed
she look'd most amiable,) he could not resist a sudden
Inclination to make use of so favourable an Opportunity; 
and taking her in his Arms, and throwing
her on the Bed, was about to repeat at Home what
many Times she had condescended to Abroad: The
Violence of his present Desire, and the Extacy she
was in, to find him so much more than ordinarily
transported, depriv'd them both of that Caution they
were accustom'd to make use of: The Chamber-Door
was only carelesly put to; and the Baron
chancing to return, and come into that very Room,
was struck with a Sight, which no other Witnesses
but his own Eyes cou'd have convinc'd him had
been true. He wou'd have drawn his Sword, and
wash'd the Stain they cast upon his Honour with
the Blood of both, but Astonishment took from
him the Power. She was in a Posture, such as cou'd
have left no other Woman a Possibility of Excuse; 
but so ready was she at Invention, and so cunning
in deceiving, that even in this, the greatest Tryal
she cou'd meet, she brought herself off with a Dexterity
which prov'd how much she was Mistress of
the Art of Jilting: Her Face lying toward that Side
of the Room where her Husband enter'd, she had
an Opportunity of seeing him immediately, and before
Beauclair cou'd have any Imagination of the
Truth, the Person who in his Arms that Moment
was uttering Raptures, amaz'd him, on a sudden,
with struggling to get loose, and crying out, Help! 
O help!––––a Rape! –––Where are my Servants? ––– 
Will none come to my Assistance? –––For Heaven's
sake Monsieur desist:––––I'll rather die than live to
wrong the best of Men and Husbands. Then disengaging
herself from his Embrace, and running to
the Baron, (pretending not to have seen him before,)
O my dear Lord! said she, how opportunely
are you come to save me from Dishonour, from
Ruin, from Death; for sure I wou'd have flown
for Refuge to the latter, rather than have endur'd 

the former. The barbarous Man, (added she,
bursting into well-dissembled Tears,) wou'd have depriv'd
me of all I value Life for:––––He wou'd have
violated my Innocence,––––corrupted my Duty,–––– 
made me utterly unworthy of my dear Lord's Affection; 
–––and finding his impious Perswasions were
in vain, he wou'd have forc'd me to the horrid
Deed,––––a Deed my Soul abhors!––––a Deed which
must have made me hateful both to Heaven and
Earth! ––––Oh! had I not been inspir'd for some Moments
with an unusual Strength, and had not my
Heart's Treasure, my dear, dear Baron, come to my
Assistance just when that Strength began to fail, how
wretched had I been! ––––O be ever prais'd ye
Saints and Angels! ye ministring Spirits, the Guardians
of my Honour, for your Protection in this
dreadful Hour! ––––O still continue watchful o'er
your Charge, and save me ever from Infamy and
Guilt! She fell on her Knees, and pronounc'd these last
Words in so exotic a Manner, and with a Countenance
so exactly suited to every Thing she said, that Beauclair
was much more startled at her Impiety and Dissimulation
than he had been, when, rising from the
Bed, he perceiv'd who it was that occasion'd it. The
Scene must certainly have been pleasant enough to
observe, if any disinterested Person had been Witness
of it: To behold a couple of Men stand gazing on
each other without Power of Speech or Motion,
while a Woman was acting over a thousand various
Passions in Gestures and Grimaces, suited to them
all;–––sometimes rejoicing at the Deliverance she pretended
to have had;–––sometimes feigning to look
back with Horror on her past Danger;–––now weeping,
as it were, thro' Tenderness;–––then exclaiming
against the Baseness of Mankind;–––with one Breath
cursing her own Charms, for being the Occasion of
inspiring loose Desires;–––and with the next, blessing
Heaven for giving her the Means of resisting
them. The Surprise which both the Husband and
Lover were in, gave her sufficient Opportunity to 

exercise her Talent; but as Beauclair was Master of
a much greater Presence of Mind than the Baron, so
he recollected himself much sooner; and perceiving
the Lady was very capable of making her Party good
with her believing Husband, thought, in such a Circumstance,
the most prudent Action he cou'd do was
to retire. The first Thing he had done after he started
from the Bed was to snatch up his Sword, not doubting
but he shou'd have occasion to make use of it; 
but finding he was not immediately call'd to the Account
he expected, took the Advantage of the Baron's
Confusion, and left him to adjust Matters with his
Spouse, as they shou'd agree it between 'em, only
telling him, as he went out of the Room, that if he
imagin'd himself injur'd, he knew where to demand
Satisfaction. He staid not for an Answer; nor had
the other recover'd himself enough, as yet, to make
one. He continu'd, for some Moments after Beauclair
was gone, fix'd in the same stupid Posture he
had been in ever since he came into the Room; till,
at last, the hurried Spirits beginning by little and little
to resume their proper Stations, he fetch'd a deep
Sigh, and breaking from his Wife, who had all this
while been holding him in her Arms, walk'd hastily
to and fro, by that Action only discovering the inward
Disorders that oppress'd him: But what is it
that is not in the Power of a Person belov'd to accomplish? 
What a commanding Force there dwells in
Tears, when flowing from the Eyes we worship! 
They give the Lye to Reason, and make our very Senses
but unavailing Witnesses, when oppos'd to any Thing
they wou'd insinuate. The tender-hearted Baron at
first testify'd the secret Yieldings of his Soul but by
a Look; but she, who perfectly understood the Language
of the Eyes, immediately knew her Work was
more than half compleated; and assuming an Air all
full of Languishment and Softness, I have liv'd too
long, said she, (in a dying, trembling Accent,) I have
liv'd too long, since, my dear Lord, the only Man,
Heav'n knows, I ever wish'd to please, regards me 

with Indifference:––––Is this dumb Coldness, or this
distant Posture a Proof of that Passion you have sworn
shou'd be unchangeable, or a fit Welcome for a Wife,
rescued by Providence from threaten'd Ruin? O my
only Dear, my Love, my Life, my Husband, continu'd
she, (seizing his Hand, and clapping it to
her Mouth with a well counterfeited Transport,) take,
take me to your Breast, or kill me. There needed
no more to make the poor Baron quite besides himself; 
his Soul, before overcome by soft Emotions,
now quite dissolv'd and melted in a Sea of Tenderness:
He clasp'd the Syren in his faithful Arms, kiss'd her dissembling
Lips; and while he spoke the fondest, most endearing
Words that Tongue e'er utter'd, or Heart e'er
conceiv'd, a Flood of honest Tears stream'd from his
Eyes, and bath'd her treacherous Bosom. O thou art
all Divine, cry'd he, in a Rapture, all Angel! thy Mind,
like thy bright Body, charming! pure and untainted
with any of the Frailties of thy Sex! dear to Reason,
and ravishing to Sense! And then again, Let me
no longer live than I adore thee, (pursued the affectionate
Deluded,) thou Excellence!–––thou lovely Abstract
of all that's good in Woman! 'Tis not to be
doubted but that she answered those tender Expressions,
and return'd the Caresses he gave her, in a
Manner which seem'd to him to proceed from, at
least, an equal Ardency; and this Accident was so
far from lessening her in his Esteem, that it made
her, if possible, dearer than before. He was too little
acquainted with Artifice himself, to imagine there
was a Possibility for the woman he ador'd to be
Mistress of so much: The entire Confidence he always
had of her Love and Virtue was now in as full
Force as ever; and all those Notions which had
crowded into his Soul at his first coming into the
Chamber, and beholded so unexpected, and, indeed,
so distracting a Sight, now vanish'd, and were no
more remember'd. Love, now triumphant Love!
unmix'd with Fears, with Jealousies, or Doubts,
blaz'd with Almighty Lustre, and struck all other 

Remonstrances dead. He thought he look'd into her
very Soul, and found it all Perfection: Nothing that
he cou'd wish were alter'd, except a little too much
Freedom and Condescention in her Behaviour, which,
tho' he believ'd altogether innocent and undesign'd,
which he thought might have encourag'd Beauclair to
hope greater Favours. He did not fail to acquaint her
what his Sentiments were on that Score, and conjur'd
her for the sake of his eternal Quiet, and her
own Honour and Reputation, to endeavour to wear
a more distant and reserv'd Air in her Conversation
with those Men, whose Principles she was not perfectly
assur'd of. This Advice, tho' accompanied
with ten thousand soft Professions, and given with
the greatest Complaisance, relish'd but ill with her who
'twas apply'd to; but she had Policy enough to conceal
her Chagrin, pretended to think as he did, and
assur'd him, in all the seeming good Humour imaginable,
that for the future she would be more wary. 
But from that Moment she conceiv'd an inexpressible
Hatred for him: If he had Eyes to see a Failing in
her Conduct, she knew not, but in Time, he might
gather Courage to condemn, or to controul it; and
the bare Thoughts that there was a Possibility she
might one Day be debarr'd from taking the Liberties
she now enjoy'd, made her almost distracted: If
this meddling Husband was to be no longer blinded,
he must be remov'd. Murder was now the Employment
of her Thoughts, and seem'd so absolutely necessary
for the Security of her Pleasures, that she
found no Shock, or such as she could easily pass over,
in resolving to undertake it; and she would most
certainly have found some Means to perpetrate her
horrid Intentions, if her Agent in all mischevious
Enterprizes, Du Lache, had not advis'd her to another,
tho' almost as execrable, yet a less dangerous
Method of gettlng rid of him. He procur'd a Potion
compos'd of such pernicious Drugs, that tho' it wou'd
not absolutely destroy Life, and drive the Soul from
her tormented Habitation, yet it had that unhappy 

Effect on all the sensitive Faculties, as to reduce the
Person who shou'd swallow it to a Condition little
preferable to that of an Ideot. 
This cursed Mixture did that Monster of a Woman
give to her unsuspecting Husband; and while
his tender, truly generous Soul was wholly taken
up with the Study how to please her, himself was
sinking into the most miserable State that Hell-bred
Mischief could invent. At first he was seized with
a Lethargy of Thought; a kind of lazy Stupefaction
hung on his Spirits, which every Day encreasing, at
last overwhelm'd the Throne of Reason; Reflection
was unhing'd; the noble Seat of Memory fill'd with
Chimera's and disjointed Notions; wild and confus'd
Ideas whirl'd in his distracted Brain; and all the Man,
except the Form, was chang'd. 
The Baroness's shameful Conduct was too visible
to the World for any Body to wonder at her Husband's
Frenzy; and tho' every one pitied the Condition
they saw him in, yet there was none that had
the least Suspicion she had made use of any other
Means to bring him into it, than what was publick. 
She suffer'd him to continue a few Days in Town
after his Delirium; but then, under the Pretence that
Change of Air might be of Service, sent him down
to a little Village about forty Miles from Paris,
where she had him boarded at a cheap Rate, out of
his large Estate scarce affording him the common
Necessaries of Life. 
Now all the gay, loose Part of her Acquaintance
of both Sexes, which, to pleasure him for a little
Time, she had pretended to discard, return'd with
usual Freedom to her House: Her Drawing-Room
was every Day fill'd with Visitants, her Antichamber
with Musicians, and her Hall with Attendants:
The whole Dwelling became a Scene of Luxury;––– 
Dancing, Singing, Playing, Drinking, Feasting, all
that cou'd charm the Sense might here be found in full
Profuseness of Satiety. But tho' these Entertainments
were ravishing to most of the Company they were 

Prepar'd for, Beauclair had no Relish for 'em: His
Morals were too excellent, and his Soul too much
refin'd and delicate, to be pleas'd with those gross
Debaucheries he daily saw acted there. The Baroness,
whom a long time he had but little esteem'd,
especially since that monstrous Dissimulation with
which he was Witness she treated her Husband, now
appeared odious in his Eyes: His good Manners
would not permit him to desist wholly from visiting
her; but he never staid long, and went not
so often as he had been accustom'd. He made no
Scruple of letting Du Lache know his Sentiments,
when he was ask'd by him the Reason of estranging
himself. But the other took not now the Pains he
had done to conceal the Baroness's Vices: He knew
that Beauclair was now grown as indifferent to her
as any of his Predecessors, or Cotemporaries; and that
to preserve his good Opinion was a Thing she gave
herself not the least Concern about. All the Thoughts
of this inconstant Woman were at present taken up
with young La Branche, one of the most vain, conceited
Coxcombs in the Town; one who had no
other Merit, no other Charm, than his being a new
Conquest, to engage her; tho' worthless as he was,
there was a Girl, to whom he formerly had made
court, that valued his Conversation at a very high
Rate, and endeavour'd by Letters, Messages, and all
the Stratagems that her Passion could invent, to retrieve
the fickle Heart of this ungrateful Lover. The
Knowledge that there was a Rival in the Way, always
made the Baroness's Desires more eager: To give
Disquiet to her own Sex, heighten'd her Satisfaction
in the Enjoyment of the other. She was of that
malicious, one may justly say, indeed, devilish
Disposition, that her chief Pleasure consisted in the
inflicting Pain; wanting the Poignancy of Revenge,
not all the Joys that Love affords (warm as her Inclinations
were) had any Relish. The Embraces of a
God, unenvy'd, would have been tasteless and insipid:
No longer than his Engagement with another kept her 

in Suspence was the Marquis de Sonville, the Object of
her Affection: When the Continuance of St. Aumar's
Addresses to her, render'd him despis'd by all the
other Women of his Acquaintance, he became immediately
so by her; and her Apprehensions of
Montamour no sooner were remov'd, than Beauclair
was disregarded: A kind Look from that insignificant
Trifler, La Brance, was now of greater Value with
her than all the Caresses of these accomplish'd Gentlemen. 
The unfortunate young Creature that lov'd
him, was now the Sacrifice which her insatiate Pride
requir'd; and the whole Time and Invention of Du
Lache was now employ'd in Means to compass it. 
But how fond soever the Baroness was of a new
Intrigue, Heav'n never form'd a Man whose Charms
cou'd oblige her to discontinue any of her former
ones; nor was she ever so much overwhelm'd in
Passion as not to know how to conceal it, whenever
she found occasion: Whenever any one of her
Admirers took Notice, that she regarded another with
more Tenderness than he approv'd of, she had a Method
of silencing his Doubts as artful as it was base;
she pretended that the Person suspected was only indulg'd
by her in some little Freedoms, to take off all
Imagination of a real Amour between him and a certain
Lady of her Acquaintance; and then, if press'd
to it, wou'd frame a long Story of some Woman, no
matter who, but any body that came into her Head
at that Time was made the Property to bear her
Shame: The Truth is, indeed, she kept no Company,
whom any Thing she said cou'd make appear much
worse than in Reality they were. By this Means she
prevented any Quarrels from arising between her Lovers,
and preserv'd to herself a Reputation with them
which she was very far from deserving. She was also
extremely indebted to her good Fortune, that all this
while, among so many, she had hitherto to do only
with Men whose Honour wou'd not permit them to
boast of a Lady's Favours: And something too, I
think, she ow'd to their want of Penetration, as well 

as her own Artifice, that she cou'd so long and so
easily impose on their Judgments. 
If La Branche had been of the same Disposition
and Principles with the others, she might, perhaps,
have retain'd the good Opinion of them all something
longer than she did; but that Wretch was too much
elevated with his good Fortune, in being belov'd by
a Woman of the Baroness's Quality, to conceal it:
He talk'd of her wherever he came, toasted her as a
Mistress, read her Letters publickly, and was so careless
in putting them up, as to lose two of 'em; which
happening to fall into the Hands of an Intimate of
the Marquis de Sonville, were immediately brought
to him. Never was any Surprise superior to that
of this Gentleman, when he found what they contain'd; 
nor Rage equal to that he flew into, at reflecting
on the Indignity she offer'd to his Merit; 
for in the whole Course of his Amour with her,
never had she made a more passionate Declaration of
Love to him, then he now found she had done to
La Branche: The more he consider'd on the Worthlessness
of the Fellow, the more he grew enrag'd; 
and resolving to be reveng'd on her Meanness of Spirit,
on her Perfidy and Ingratitude, set himself to
study what Measures he shou'd take to expose her,
and make her appear as vile and as detestable to the
whole World, as she was grown to him. His Resentment
soon inspir'd him with a Thought lucky
enough for his Purpose: He knew that the next Day
was that on which she kept her Assembly, and had
generally a greater Affluence of Company on that
than any other Day: He went not till it was pretty
late, that he believ'd they were all met, because he
was desirous to have as many Witnesses as possible of
what he did. He came into the Room with his
usual Gaiety of Air, entirely dissembling his Chagrin; 
and stepping up to the Baroness, who was at a little
Table busily engag'd at Ombre with St. Aumar and
the young Count de la Torre, I thought, Madam,
(said he to her, after having look'd round the Room, 

and seen he was not there) to have found Monsieur
la Branche among this good Company: By Accident
some Letters directed for him have fallen into
my Possession, and I wou'd willingly have restor'd
'em. For Heaven's sake let me see them, cry'd the
jealous Baroness, presently imagining they had been
sent to him by her Rival. No, Madam, reply'd the
Marquis, since your Curiosity wou'd lead you to examine
the Contents, I will save you the Trouble,
and read them myself aloud, that all here may partake
of the Diversion they will afford. He had no
sooner spoke than all the Gentlemen and Ladies in
in the Room, among whom were Monsieur Beauclair
and old Le Sourbe, flock'd to the Place where he
was standing, and prepar'd to give Attention, while
he pull'd one of the Letters out of his Pocket, and
began to read as follows: 

To the Dearest of Mankind, the Lovely and
Accomplish'd La Branche.
How can you pretend to Love, and yet deny me
the only Joy I have in Life! what Excuse can
you make for not coming as you promis'd? The
Day, indeed, that curs'd detested Thing call'd Business
may engross, but Love and I might surely claim the
Night!––– 

He was not permitted to proceed: The Baroness,
who from the first Word had discover'd a strange
Uneasiness and Confusion in her Behaviour, now started
from her Chair, and running to him, and endeavouring
to snatch the Paper out of his Hand: Hold,
my Lord, said she, trembling with the inward Disorders
of her Soul; I conjure you by all you fear
above, or love below, not to expose the Contents of
that Letter. Your Ladyship is unkind, (interrupted
De la Torre, who knew her well enough to guess the
Reason of her Concern,) we all have cause to complain
of your Want of good Nature, in endeavouring 

to deprive us of an Entertainment which the Marquis
promises so much Diversion in. I cannot (resum'd
she, recollecting herself as much as possible)
suffer the Secret of my Friend to be divulg'd:–––– 
That Letter is from a Woman I entirely love; and
tho' I writ it for her to prevent any Discovery, yet
'tis possible some here, by the Contents, may guess
the Person. ––––I doubt not, Madam, (answer'd the
Marquis,) but that every body will; but, (pursu'd
he ironically,) I have so vast a Regard for the Baroness
de Tortillée, that I cannot consent to bury in Obscurity
so uncommon a Proof of her good Nature,
as the signing her own Name to a Complaint such as
this. How! cry'd all the Company with one Voice,
her own Name! and immediately a loud Laughter
ensu'd among the Women, and Signs of an universal
Consternation among the Men. The revengeful Marquis
observ'd it with Pleasure, and was about to go
on with the Letter; but the Baroness quite besides
herself with Passion, still struggling to get it from
him, for some Moments retarded his Design, till finding
her continue obstinate, he thought fit to shew
that he was resolv'd to be so too; and holding it
above her reach, and gently putting her off, 'Twere
too much, Madam, (resum'd he, with a malicious
Smile,) to do so much for the Service of a Friend, and
yet be deny'd the Praises due to so elevated a Sincerity! 
––––You must and shall receive the Glory which
your Actions merit; and if you now prevent me, the
publick News Papers to morrow shall proclaim your
Virtues. 'Twould be impossible to represent the
Violence of her Rage, when she found, that neither
Entreaties nor Commands were of force to oblige
him to stifle this Testimony of her Infamy: She rav'd
like one distracted; call'd him ten thousand Villains; 
and perceiving herself on the very Brink of being exposed
in the most shameful Manner imaginable, no
hope from Artifice, no Relief from Dissimulation,
she threw the Mask of Softness off; unheard-of Curses
issued from her Mouth; her Eyes shot Fire; in all 

her Air the Fury stood confess'd; and quitting the
Marquis, and looking wildly round on the rest of the
Company, (who waited with Impatience for the End
of this Adventure,) and seeing none offer to assist her
in wresting this fatal Paper from the Hand that held
it, she flew out of the Room, wishing eternal Damnation
on 'em all. The Indignation and Confusion
she express'd was so great a Gratification of the Marquis's
Spleen, that he had certainly follow'd her to
prosecute the Raillery he had so tormentingly began; 
but that to fully satiate his Revenge, it was necessary
he shou'd stay where he was, since he cou'd never
meet with a fitter Opportunity than what offer'd at
present for the making her appear what she really was
before so many Persons, some of which he knew wou'd
not fail to blaze it: And every Body crowding about him,
he immediately proceeded with the Letter, which continu'd
to declare the Passion it began with, in these Words: 

Languishing for your Approach, and all dissolving in
the pleasing Expectation of those Joys your dear-lov'd
Presence brings, some Hours slid soft away; 
but when the Time was pass'd, what Horror! what
inconceivable Inquietudes ensu'd! My Heart, so lately
the Seat of Rapture, was now fill'd with racking
Doubts, and torturing Jealousy! –––What shall I do? ––– 
I am wild with Apprehension;––––the Memory of past
Delights but heighten present Woes:–––O La Branche!
shou'd you, indeed, forsake me, not Hell contains a
Wretch more curst than I. –––But sure it cannot be! ––– 
That lovely Form can harbour no Deceit. –––'Twas my
ill Fortune, but not thy Fault, that all the Night my
longing Arms were stretch'd in vain to grasp thee. 
Thy Soul, I know, thy Wishes, all were mine! –––Make
haste my Love, my Life! My Angel, make haste to
give and take such Joys, as but in Idea to the vulgar
World are known, tho' real and substantial to the
charming La Branche, and his 
Passionately fond
Tortilée. 


Methinks, said the Marquis, here is neither want
of Passion or Softness in this Billet, to make the Author
asham'd of its being read; but this is nothing
to what this Prodigy of her Sex can do! –––Here is
(continu'd he) a Testimony of her Abilities, in which
several of this Company have some Concern. ––––In
speaking these Words he took out the other Letter,
and without staying to hear what Reply any Body
wou'd make, added to the Surprise they were already
in, by the Reading these Lines. 

To my Soul's Treasure, the most Adorable La Branche.
If Jealousy betokens Love, how happy should I think
myself in receiving so many Proofs of yours? But
say, thou dear Destroyer of my Peace! charming
Unbeliever! say, what must I do to convince thee that
I am,–––that I can be only thine! –––Oh! didst thou
know thyself, thy own unequall'd Charms were a sufficient
Security for my Truth! ––––What is there in Man
desirable, that my La Branche does not possess in so
eminently distinguish'd a Degree, that the whole Sex
beside are worthless Nothings when compar'd with him! ––– 
You seem to make it an Occasion of Complaint, that I
admit of so much Company; but tell me, how can I
avoid it? –––How can a Woman of my Quality, without
becoming the Subject of Ridicule, refuse the Visits
of Persons of her own Rank, and who call themselves
her Husband's Friends? That hated Fatal Tie, alas!
obliges me to many Things contrary to my Inclination. 
Besides, as he is now from Home, and under that unhappy
Indisposition which all, but me, lament, shou'd I
deny the Conversation of those he esteem'd, and those
whom I can find no plausible Pretence for breaking
with, wou'd it not be evident enough to the judging
World 'twas for the sake of some dear unknown Favourite
I did so? By a promiscuous Acquaintance I shun
the Infamy of being too fond of one; and 'tis by this 

Method alone that I can secure my Love and my
Reputation It is for thee!––––for thee! Lovely, cruel
Suspector, as thou art! for one dear, undisturb'd, untalk'd-of
Hour with thee, I under go the uneasy Task of
dissembling in Publick! and to conceal my real Tenderness
for thee, wear a pretended one to all! ––––Methinks you
shou'd approve an Act of Prudence so convenient for us
both, and ought to know me better than to imagine I
am so lost to Honour, or have a Soul so little delicate,
as to stoop to a Plurality of Amours. ––––No, no, I am
for nothing less than the most Excellent of his Sex!–––– 
to vanquish a Heart, till now a Foe profess'd to Love,
and all its tender Follies, and triumph over a Virtue
establish'd like mine, it was necessary there should be a
La Branche! Those whom your groundless Fears point
out as Rivals, either because their Quality obliges me
to treat them with a greater Share of Civility than I
do others, or because you consider them as Men of more
Merit than the Generality of those you have seen with
me, are in Reality the Objects of my Aversion and
Disdain; if there be any Thing like Perfection in any of
them, 'tis hid amidst a Crowd of Faults: The Count
de la Torre has indeed some Wit and Spirit, but then
he is insufferably Insolent, Robust, and Vain:–––Most
People allow that the Chevalier St. Aumar has good Nature,
and an agreeable Person, but at the same Time make
a Jest of his Understanding:–––Those who are pleas'd with
the bon Mein and Air of the Marquis de Sonville,
despise him for his Pride and Ostentation:––––Beauclair's
refin'd Manner of Conversation, good Address, and
Sublimity of Genius, can never make Amends for his
Want of Sincerity, and Affectation of a Passion for
all Women, which he has not Stability of Temper
enough to make him truly feel for one, any more
than old Le Sourbe's Wealth can counterballance his
other Deficiencies. ––––Wretches! Wretches! all unworthy
of your Fears, as they are of my Regard, and,
with my Husband, equally odious to my Soul's fond
Wishes. ––––Name them no more, unless you'd have all
Desire in me grow sick, and at your next Embrace 

receive into your Arms a senseless Log instead
of 
Your most Transported,
Melting, Longing, Dying
Tortilée. 

The Marquis had no sooner concluded the Reading
this Epistle, than every Mouth in the Company was
opening to express the various Sentiments which
the Hearing it inspir'd in each of them: But Count
de la Torre, whose Soul had burn'd with fierce Impatience
from the Mention made of him, got the
Start of all the rest, in revenging on her Character
the Reflection she had made on his; and as he was
naturally passionate, and a little regardless of the Reputation
of those Women that put themselves in his
Power, now thinking there was not the least Obligation
for Secrecy, said enough to let every Body
know, that she once took as much Pains to convince
him of her Sincerity, as now she did La
Branche. The Marquis de Sonville was not more generous; 
but Monsieur le Sourbe and the Chevalier
spoke not a Word. Both these Gentlemen had bore a
true Affection to the Baroness, and were too much
confounded at these strange and unexpected Discoveries
of her Perfidy, to be able to reply to any Thing
that was said. Beauclair observ'd it; and tho' he never
knew what 'twas to feel a serious Passion for her,
was as much nettled as the others; but he dissembled
his Chagrin, and putting on a Countenance which
had more in it of Disdain than Anger, For my part,
said he, I find no Cause of Wonder, but the Sight
of yours: My Acquaintance with this Lady has
been of a much shorter Date than most of yours, yet
in the little Time I have convers'd with her, I have
seen enough not to be surpris'd at this Testimony of
the Levity of her Temper: Those two Gentlemen
(continu'd he, pointed to St. Aumar and Le Sourbe)
have, perhaps, been ignorant of each other's Happiness: 

Each believ'd himself the only favour'd, and
glory'd in a Self-Sufficiency of being able to please the
Constant, the Distinguishing Tortillée. The Constant,
the Distinguishing Tortillée, as yourself once thought
her, good Monsieur, interrupted a pert Lady, (who
stood near him, and who from Sansfoy had learn'd
the whole Secret,) do not imagine that your Intrigue
with her has been invisible to all Eyes but
your own; the whole Town knows she has had
Arts to blind even the discerning Beauclair, or he
wou'd not, for her sake, have abandon'd so deserving
a Woman as Montamour. True, Madam, true, (said a
Gentleman that was by,) that unhappy Lady you
mention'd had not been reduc'd to so sad a Condition
as Monsieur Galliard found her in the Tuilleries,
if the Baroness had never seem'd more worthy of
Regard; nor had she forsook the World for a Cloyster,
if Monsieur Beauclair had always profess'd the same
Indifferency as now. That is an Affair of which no
body is ignorant, added another. Yet, resum'd the
Lady that spoke first, he has been as much deceiv'd
in believing it a Secret, as he was in the Fidelity of
his Mistress. There were several in the Room of
both Sexes that seconded the Raillery she had begun
on this Score; and Beauclair, who from the
first Mention of Montamour had been struck with
Remorse, and a kind of Self-Condemnation, cou'd
not presently recover his Presence of Mind, so far as
to be able to answer them; and it was but with an
half-assur'd Accent that he at last brought forth these
Words:––––I know not well what 'tis you mean,
(said he,) Madamoiselle Montamour, by all I ever saw
of her Behaviour, was never ambitious of becoming
a publick Chat: She is a Woman I ever did, and ever
shall esteem: The Town is sensible I shou'd have
marry'd her, had she been so dispos'd; but whatever
Accident has happen'd to occasion our eternal
Separation, I shou'd be sorry to think any one shou'd
imagine a Bar so weak as the Baroness de Tortillée's
Artifices shou'd have Power to do it. Notwithstanding 

his Belief to the contrary, there were too
many present that were acquainted with the Story
to have let it rest so, if the Marquis de Sonville, willing
in this grand Assembly of the best Part of her Acquaintance,
to expose the Baroness as much as possible,
had not turn'd the Conversation on the two
silent Gentlemen, St. Aumar and Le Sourbe. It
was a good while before one Word cou'd be got
from them; but when they spoke, it was in a
Fashion which convinc'd the whole Company of
what they before had Cause enough to suspect, that
the Gratitude for Favours she had conferr'd, and the
Astonishment at the Discovery of any others being
Partakers in that Happiness, each of them had the
Vanity to believe he had engross'd, had, till now,
depriv'd them of the Power of Utterance. If the
Marquis's Desire of Revenge had been rais'd by something
more injurious than the petty Misfortune of a
Mistress's Falshood, he found enough to gratify it:
Every body now took the Liberty of speaking what
they knew; and there being scarce one Person in the
Room that was not privy to one, or more of her
Intrigues, each now contributed their Part, and the
whole Scene of all her monstrous Actions was laid
open to them all. Never was Woman so expos'd
and ridicul'd,––––so despis'd and hated: Some took
so great a Pleasure in affronting her, and the rest so little
regarded her Resentment, that the being within her
House, and probably within her Hearing, did not in
the least hinder them from saying all that so ample
a Field of Scandal to indulge in, cou'd give room to; 
till Harriot the Baroness's chief Woman coming in,
told them her Lady was very much indispos'd, and
not being able to return to the Company, desir'd they
would dismiss. We'll send La Branche to comfort
her, said the Marquis tartly. Ay, my Lord! pursu'd
the Count, he has an Art of pleasing, to which,
it seems, we are Strangers. However, let us not
add to the Schedule of our Faults, that of Ingratitude:
Be sure you tell the Lady, continu'd he, turning 

to Harriot, That de la Torre, and the other Gentlemen,
she so handsomely gave a Description of, are
infinitely obligated to her for the Pains she has taken
to clear them of an Affair, of which none of them
wou'd be proud. No, no, cry'd Beauclair, let La
Branche possess alone the unenvy'd Happiness. Tortillée
and La Branche (resum'd the Marquis) are
only capable of pleasing each other, and indeed are
only fit for one another, as this Fellow! (continu'd
he, taking hold of Du Lache, who that Instant came
into the Room, and giving him a scornful Turn,)
this Pimp! this wretched Pander! is only fit for the
vile Offices he is employ'd in. ––––O forbear, my
Lord! interrupted De la Torre, (with an Air and
Voice full of Derision,) this ingenions Gentleman,
but wears the Livery of the munificent Baroness,
and must obey the Hand which feeds him! ––––If he
has made use of any Stratagems to deceive you, or
me, or any here, 'twas to serve a Mistress who liberally
rewarded the Procurer of her Pleasures: For
my Part, I confess, tho' he has favour'd me sometimes
with a Summons, not much unlike what just
now your Lordship read, I never had Gratitude
enough to make him any other Retribution than barren
Thanks: Nor, perhaps, have any of you, Messieurs,
been more bountiful: I think the least we
can do, to recompence the Obligations he has conferr'd
on us, is to recommend him to the Service of
some Italian Courtezan, in whose Amours he would
stand in admirable stead, and 'tis probable pick up
for himself a more lasting Subsistence, than he
can hope for from the precarious Dependance of
his present Benefactress, whose Charms begin now
to grow out of Date, and almost of as little Reputation
as her Virtue. As crafty as this Villain was in
making almost any Appearances subservient to his
Ends, when he had Time for Deliberation, these sudden
and unexpected Salutations entirely bereft him
of all Artifice; he was now as harmless, as undesigning
as a Fool: He was, indeed, two or three 

times about to speak, though he knew not what to
say: He found that the Secret of the Baroness's
Temper, and the Hand he had in her Conduct, were
discover'd; but had neither Time to guess by what
Means, nor to contrive any Expedient which might
evade the Obloquy such a Discovery must bring on. 
'Tis possible he might, at last, have muster'd Courage
enough to ask what 'twas they meant; but the Chevalier
St. Aumar, who, by the Reasons already mention'd,
had all this while been prevented from making
any outward Shew of his inward Disorders, having
now got the better of his Surprise and Confusion of
Thought, Rage took the whole Possession of his
Soul. The Sight of Du Lache, and the Reflection
how much he had suffer'd himself to be deceiv'd by
the Artifices of that Villain, put him beyond all Patience:
He drew his Sword, and running furiously
at him as he was about to speak, had certainly silenc'd
him for ever, if Beauclair, who happen'd to be
next him, had not been quick enough to lay hold of
his Arm. Hinder not, Monsieur, said he, the Hand
of Justice: That Wretch is unworthy of Life; and
since our Laws are but too deficient in punishing
Crimes such as his, those, who like me he has wrong'd,
have a Title to revenge themselves. It was with all
the Difficulty in the World that Beauclair, the Marquis,
and all the Company perswaded him to sheath
the Sword; and, perhaps, all they cou'd say, to represent
how much so despicable a Creature, both by
his Birth and Principles, was below the Resentment
of a Man of Honour, had been ineffectual, if Count
de la Torre had not catch'd hold of the cowardly
Wretch, who all this Time stood hanging down his
Head and trembling, and bringing him to the inrag'd
Chevalier, whose Arm he found Beauclair had still
Possession of; See here, Monsieur, said he, when once
Reflection gets the Mastery of Passion, how wou'd
you blush to think you must be question'd in the
King's Name why you depriv'd him of so worthless
a Subject! 'Tis thus, and thus, (pursu'd he, giving 

him two or three Kicks,) we shou'd chastise the Insolence
of such Wretches. In speaking these last
Words he turn'd him, who was glad of an Opportunity
to make use of his Heels, out of the Room. 
No Body staid long after: All had been said and done
that cou'd convince the Baroness her Reign was at
an End; and now the Company separated, every one
to think or talk of this Adventure as their several
Sentiments of it prompted them. To the Ladies it
was Matter enough of Diversion: Nothing can be
be more pleasing to those Women who set up for
being admir'd, of which sort were most of this
Assembly, than to see the Downfal of a reigning
Toast: The prodigious Power the Baroness had, till
now, maintain'd over so many Hearts, had long been
the Envy of each pretending Fair; and to behold it
sunk in a Moment,––––her Charms depriv'd of all
their wonted Force,–––her Arts, her Blandishments no
more effectual;–––Contempt in the place of Esteem,
and Detestation in the room of Love, gave a Joy too
exquisite to be describ'd by any Thing but itself:
Their Looks, the chearful Accent of their Voices,
whenever any Occasion offer'd to speak of this Affair,
cou'd only demonstrate the secret Satisfaction
glowing in their enliven'd Souls! 
Of all the Men interested in this Discovery, only
Le Sourbe was inconsolable: The Weakness of his Intellects,
together with the Meanness of his Spirit,
made him the most unfortunate Creature on Earth:
He had fancied himself superlatively blest, distinguish'd
from all the rest of Mankind, belov'd, admir'd,
ador'd, caress'd by the most Lovely, most Ingenuous,
most Faithful of her Sex; and now, at
once, to find his Happiness imaginary, the Woman
he had idoliz'd, he had worshipp'd as a Goddess, but
meer Mortal, with all her Sex's Failings, truly eminent
in nothing but Hypocrisy; the Favours he had
receiv'd only the Overflowings of a Luxurious Appetite,
or condescended to gratify a Mercenary one,
made him almost distracted. He seem'd either never 

to have known, or to have forgot his own Imperfections,
which if he had duly weigh'd, he could never
have been deceiv'd into an Opinion, that a Woman neither
old nor unlovely cou'd have been blind to 'em, and
consequently 'scap'd a Disappointment so grievous. 
Not a Person of his Acquaintance but he told the
Story to; making most pitiful Lamentations; saying
how dearly he had lov'd the Baroness; how much he
had studied to oblige her; what Presents he had made
her; the Pleasure with which she had seem'd to accept
of his Services; describ'd the a thousand-times repeated
Endearments which had pass'd between them; 
and then, (bursting into a Flood of Tears,) Yet she is
false! wou'd he cry, she is false! forsworn to all the
Gods and me! The poor Wretch, to his other Fopperies,
had also a passionate Affection for Rhiming, a
Vanity almost as unbecoming to one of his Age, as
Love: And now having two such Themes as Despair
and the Perfidy of a Mistress, Melpomene was every
Day invok'd; the whole Town was persecuted with
his Complaints in Metre; and 'tis hard to say, which
suffer'd most in his publishing them, the Baroness's
Reputation of Honour, or his own of Understanding. 
Not in this Manner behav'd the Marquis de Sonville,
the Count de la Torre, the Chevalier St. Aumar,
and Monsieur Beauclair: The three former immediately
enter'd into new Attachments, in the Pleasures
of which the Memory of the old one was easily
forgot; and the Condition of the latter was such as
wou'd neither permit him to complain, to rail, or to
condemn. He was not perhaps in so great a Surprise
at the late Discovery of the Baroness's Humour
as some others appeared to be, but the Treatment
which he was witness Du Lache had receiv'd; and
the Character he heard of him, was what involv'd
him in the greatest Perplexity: He now began to
imagine that there was more than a Probability that
all he had been told of Montamour was false; and the
Horror he conceiv'd at having suffer'd himself to be
impos'd on to the Prejudice of that Lady's Reputation, 

and his own Inclinations, was such as Language
is too weak to represent Once he believ'd nothing
could be a greater Misfortune than the Assurance she
was unworthy his Affection; now he dreaded that
he shou'd one Day be convinc'd she was but too meritorious. 
If she be innocent, said he to himself, what
a Villain, what a Monster, must I have all this while
appear'd? ––––Ignorant of the Arts by which I have
been deluded, she must despise and hate me. ––––What
shall I do to acquire a Knowledge of the Truth? –––– 
How find out the fatal Certainty of her Virtue? A
Certainty which must for ever damn me to Despair,
since Devil-like, I have renounc'd my Heaven; yet
frightful as the Precipice appears, I must plunge in,–––– 
must fathom the wild Abyss!–––must drag up Confirmation,
tho' she comes waited on by all the Terrors of Remorse,
Self-Condemnation, and the ever-during Sting of
Conscience. –––Hell, Hell itself, affords no Torture like
Suspence, cruel, distracting, sense-destroying Suspence! –––– 
Give, give me, Fate, some Means to ease the present
Anguish, and order all hereafter as thou pleasest. In
this Manner, whenever he was alone, did he torment
himself; and when in Company, no more appeared
the Man he was: A sudden Cloud hung ever on
his Brow; his once enlivening Conversation was now
exchang'd for Peevishness; his Gallantry for cold Neglect; 
his gay Address for silent Churlishness; perpetual
ill Nature and an incessant Gloom diffus'd itself thro'
all his Air, and darken'd every Grace. Whenever he
heard the Name of Tortillée, (as the prodigious Eclat
the Adventure of the Letter to La Branche had made
in Town, gave him frequent Occasions,) it fill'd him
with mortal Disquiets; if that of Montamour, he
was unable to contain himself. In this Confusion
of Thought he sought Du Lache, resolving to force
from him a Clue to guide him thro' a Labyrinth,
which, at present, seemed so intricate: But that Villain
was no where to be found, and to hope for any
from the Baroness, was ridiculous; besides, the Sight
of her was now grown insupportable; and 'tis possible
he would rather have remain'd for ever as he 

was, than have been oblig'd to her for an Eclaircissement,
had there been any Probability she would have
been prevail'd on to make one. In these Perturbations
let us leave him for a while, and see what became
of those who had occasion'd them. 
Du Lache, after receiving that contemptuous
Usage from the Marquis, quitted not the Baroness's
House; but being retir'd into an inner Room, a little
to recollect and consider what it should be that occasion'd
it, was seen by Harriot, and immediately
directed to her Lady, whom he found in a Disorder
scarce possible to conceive; yet wild and incoherent
as her tempestuous Passion was, he soon discover'd
what had happen'd, and join'd with her in exclaiming
on the Vanity and Neglect of La Branche, who
had so little Regard of a Lady's Reputation, as to suffer
her Letters to be expos'd. He had also another
Account to give of this unworthy Lover, which, if any
Thing could have heighten'd the Fury she was already
in, the Knowledge of would have done. Not all
those Artifices which had triumph'd over the Judgment
of so many Men of Sense, had been able to
work the desir'd Effect on La Branche: Stupid as
he was in every Thing else, in this he had the Advantage
of those of the best Understanding; and, in
spite of all that Du Lache and his politick Instructress
could do, the young Woman, whose Engagements
with him had perhaps been the greatest Motive
which entitled him to be lov'd by the Baroness, was
now going to take him from her for ever: They
were to be married in a few Days; and this vile Woman
had the just Mortification to be told, That to
make Reparation for his former Transgression, he
had bound himself in an Obligation never to see her
more. To represent in what Manner she receiv'd
this News, one had need be acquainted with the Inhabitants
of Bedlam: Her Words, her Looks, her Air
were all Distraction:––––She saw she was utterly
undone with the Marquis de Sonville, the Count
de la Torre, the Chevalier St. Aumar, Beauclair, and 

Le Sourbe; and to be abandon'd by the Man, for whose
sake she had lost the Esteem and good Opinion of
them all, was such a killing Stroke, as nothing cou'd
enable her to support. Wanting the Means of Vengeance
on those who had occasion'd it, her unavailing
Rage recoil'd upon itself: She tore her Hair and
Face, and bit her very Flesh in the Extremity of her
Passion: It was not now in the Power of her Emissary,
Du Lache, to say or do any Thing that could give
her Consolation: The Case was now too desperate
to admit Relief from any of those Stratagems he
had formerly so well succeeded in: His Artifices
were discover'd, and therefore no more effectual:
He was now a known Deceiver; a Villain proclaim'd,
as his Patroness was a Jilt; and all that either
of them could do, was to vent some Part of
their enervate Malice in Curses. After having rail'd
themselves almost out of Breath against La Branche;
the Marquis, and all who had seem'd to approve of
his Proceeding, they began, as 'tis the Custom of all
base People, when their Designs miscarry, to reflect
one on another: You might have prevented all this,
Madam, said he, but your ungovern'd Passion for
La Branche would suffer you to listen to no Reasons. 
–––Villain, cried she, to what End have I heaped
unnumber'd Obligations on thee, but to engage
thy subtle working Brain to procure my Pleasures,
and protect my Fame? But stupid or ungrateful, thou
hast ruin'd both:–––My Reputation's lost, my Love
undone: The Earth contains not so forlorn a Wretch; 
yet thou canst calmly tell me, This might have been
prevented:––––Yes, it might, had thy Management
been equal to thy Boasting. Madam, what could
I do? resum'd he; I never approv'd of your ent'ring
into an Engagement with La Branche; I knew he was
unfit, and therefore advis'd you. –––Thou Fool, interrupted
the impatient Baroness, what Lover ever took
Advice: His Humour, or his Principle being unsuited
to my Purpose, made not his Form less pleasing 

to my Eyes:––––'Twas thy Business to have
wound thyself into his Soul, chang'd every Movement
there, created it all a-new, and fashion'd it to
my Design. Thus did each endeavour to lay the
Blame of this Misfortune on the other; and the Dispute
growing higher, at last it came to a down-right
Quarrel, and they parted almost as ill satisfy'd with
one another, as both were with the World. 
Some Days past before they met again: The Baroness
shut herself into her Chamber, and would see no
Company; and Du Lache was beginning to think
what Course of Life he must now take up, believing
there was no more Profit to be expected from that
he had lately profess'd. But he was too skilful an
Engineer to be discarded so; when he had given over
all Hope of ever being employ'd by her again, a Messenger
came from the Baroness to let him know she
desir'd to speak with him immediately. The Summons
was too welcome not to be readily obey'd:
He went, but found not the Business, what he imagin'd,
to endeavour to reinstate her in the Affections
of any of her former Lovers, or to contrive some
plausible Pretence for the introducing her to a new
one, but to assist her once more to get rid of her
Husband, who was coming to call her to a dreadful
Account for her Behaviour. She had just receiv'd
News, that the Baron's Distemper having reach'd
the Ear of a skilful Physician, who happen'd to be
at that Time in the Country where she had dispos'd
him, he attempted to cure it; which he had accomplish'd,
to the Wonder of every Body who had been
Witness of his Phrenzy; that this much-wrong'd
Gentleman was preparing for Paris; and that the
Person who had restor'd him to Reason, had also
made him know, it was but by some supernatural
Means that he so long had languish'd in the Want
of it. This was a terrible Shock! a Blow, indeed,
which all the Artifice of this guilty Pair was at a
Loss for Means to parry. They spent some Time
in bewailing their common Misfortune: She upbraided 

Du Lache for his ill-tim'd Mercy, as she
call'd it: I would have put an End to my Fears,
said she, by taking away the Life of this Troubler
of my Repose: Had your Advice not interpos'd, I
had not now been so curs'd in the Apprehension that
I must be oblig'd to answer for my past Conduct,
and regulate the future:––––But for you, continu'd
she, I might have been blest as my utmost Wish
could make me, Mistress of myself, entire Possessor
of the whole Fortune of this foolish Baron, and independant
of the World's Opinion: Now I must
flatter, sooth, cajole, and all, perhaps, in vain, for a
precarious Subsistence. ––––Wretched, wretched Fool,
(cried she out, stamping, and biting her Nails,) to be
thus perswaded contrary to my Interest, to my Inclinations,
to my eternal Peace! –––Hold, Madam,
hold, (interrupted he,) have Patience, 'tis not yet too
late to prevent the Ills you dread; the Instruments
of Death are still at hand; and when, like Fate, you
give the Word, shall rush to Execution. The horrid
Deed being thus resolv'd on, all they had to do
was to contrive the Means to bring it about. After
several Inventions form'd and rejected, because they
were either unsafe, or unsure, it was at last pitch'd
on, That she should write a most tender and passionate
Letter, congratulating his Return of Health, and
pressing his coming Home; that it should be convey'd
to him by Le Songe and Toncarr, who were
to pass as Servants she had lately taken into the Family,
and recommended to attend him to Paris. 
This Way, said he, will certainly be the most
effectual; for it will prevent him from hiring any
Servants, who perhaps might be resolute enough
to defend their Master, if our Friends should attack
him on the Road; but being receiv'd by him in this
Manner, he will be entirely in their Power, and they
may have an easy Opportunity of dispatching him
in the Journey, whenever they find a Place convenient. 
The Baroness approv'd of it extremely; and 

thinking every Moment an Age till her wicked Designs
were brought about, immediately set down to
write, while Du Lache went to prepare his assisting
Villians for the Enterprize they were to undertake. 
Enough has been said of the Character of these
two Wretches, to make the Reader know they were
capable of any Mischief which had a Prospect of
Advantage: They readily agreed; and being equipp'd
in Habits proper for their Design, took Horse the
same Night, promising they would bring back a satisfactory
Account of what they had done. An Accident
happen'd immediately after, which convinc'd
the Baroness how necessary what she had contriv'd
was to the Conservation of her Fortune: Du Lache
was under an Arrest on the Account of some Riot
he had lately been guilty of; to redeem him from
which, there must be a good Sum of Money deposited. 
She sent to the Banker, in whose Hands lay
the best Part of the Baron's ready Cash; but he refus'd
to pay her any, saying, he had a Letter of Advice
to the contrary; and that he would disburse no
more till he either saw her Lord, or had Orders
from him to do it. This was enough to let her
know the Power she once had over him was at an
End; and that if he liv'd to return, she must expect
another sort of Treatment than she had been accustom'd,
or could endure to receive. Money, however,
must be rais'd; her Instrument must not remain
in Confinement; but having now no Credit, even
with a Lover, she procur'd some on her Jewels, and
releas'd him without giving herself much Trouble
about the Matter, believing she should soon be in a
Condion to redeem them, having a Will by her, which
the Baron, in the Time of his too-abundant Fondness,
had made, wherein she was left sole Executrix, and
full Mistress of every Thing he had in the World. 
This she design'd to produce as soon as the wish'd-for
News of his Death should arrive, to the Disappointment
of all his Relations, who were utterly
ignorant of his having been guilty of so much Injustice. 

Some Debts also, which the Extravagance
of this Fellow had contracted, now threat'ning to
come upon him, and the Impossibility there was at
present for the Baroness to discharge them, oblig'd
him, as soon as he was releas'd from his Confinement,
to take shelter in her House, till the happy
Hour was come in which they were to have all
Things in their Power. 
