
Is very proper to be read in an easy chair, either soon after dinner, or at night just going to rest. 
Those people who are justly look'd upon as the most fortunate, cannot pass through life without having their anxieties on some score or other,—frequent rubs in the way to our desires,—disappointments and vexations of various kinds attend the whole race of man; they are inherent to our very species, and none can 
be said to be always totally exempt from them:—it is a certain and establish'd maxim, that as no one was ever so completely wretched as not to have some intervals of joy, so no one was ever so happy as not to have some portion of bitter mingled with the sweets of life;—sir Robert Howard thus accounts for the fluctuating state of human affairs: 
One gains by what another is bereft,
The frugal destinies have only left
A common bank of happiness below,
Maintain'd like nature, by an ebb and flow.
The celebrated mr. Dryden also expresses himself on the same subject in this manner: 
Good after evil, after pain delight,
Alternate, like the scenes of day and night.
And another author of a more modern date, though no less worthy estimation than either of the former, tells us, and his words are true: 
Eternal changes on our beings wait,
Life's certain dow'r, the chequer-work of fate.

But though misfortunes are common to every one, yet they fall lighter or heavier according to the disposition of the person they lay hold on;—dull and sluggish minds are apt to sink beneath the weight of the most trifling ill; whereas the more active and spirituous, not only bear up with fortitude amidst the greatest, but also feel a pleasure in their deliverance from them, which they had never known had they been ignorant of affliction. 
To find ourselves triumphant over difficulties,—to have escaped some threatened calamity,—to be raised from a state of mourning into one of joy and gladness, enhances our sensibility of happiness, and gives us a double relish in the possession, as old Broome in one of his comedies observes: 
Past woes the present blessing more endear.
But I might have spared myself the trouble of quoting authors, to prove the truth which is in the experience of almost every one, in a more or less proportion;—the heroine of this history, however, must doubtless be sensible of it in a much higher degree than many others, as she 
was possess'd of a greater share of vivacity and sprightliness. 
The apprehensions,—the terrors, which this amiable young lady had lately labour'd under for the safety of Jemmy, being now entirely dissipated, by hearing from all hands that Belpine was perfectly recover'd; the satisfaction,—the transport, that succeeded those anxieties was such, as without having suffer'd the other she never would have experienced. 
Besides, without this accident she might possibly never have been acquainted with the true tenderness of her own heart for him, nor with the sincerity of his affection for her; and it was the full conviction of both these which could alone enable her to taste the douceurs of love and friendship in that elevated manner she now did. 
To this, therefore, though it seem'd the worst of mischiefs when it happen'd, did she owe the happiness she now enjoy'd; and to this also was Jemmy indebted for that soft communication of hearts which the volatileness of both their tempers had before deny'd them the blessing of partaking. 
Her heart, however, was not so much taken up with love and gladness, as not to afford some room for commiseration to the misfortunes she saw others suffer;—Sophia being now ready to depart, came to take her last farewel, and the dejection which appeared in the voice and countenance of that unhappy lady, touch'd her very deeply. 
‘Then you are resolved to leave us, my dear Sophia? said she embracing her;’—‘It was my fix'd determination when last I saw you, answer'd the other sighing; but if it had not been so I have met with enough to convince me I had no other part to take.’ —‘Can any new insults have been offer'd to you? demanded Jenny hastily.’ —‘None, replied she, that can exceed the baseness of those I had before received from that most consummate of all villains Willmore, and this last only serves to prove he is incorrigible.’ 
“Happening to have some business the other day to cross the Park, continued she, I met Willmore in the narrow passage leading from thence to Spring-Garden,—he had two persons with him, who I suppose, by their 
habits, were officers in the army;—they were all three arm in arm, and took up so much of the way that it was impossible for me to pass by them without brushing;—Willmore was next to me, and I could not, though I confess it was indiscreet, omit this opportunity of asking him, how he had the assurance to deny the debt he owed me?” —‘Child, don't expose yourself;—I wonder your friends let you go loose in this manner,’—cried he, and without staying to hear what farther I would say, went on:—just as they had pass'd by me, I heard one of those that were with him say,’—‘Who is she?’ —A poor distracted creature that follows me about,’ reply'd the monster, on which they all set up a horse-laugh. 
“I was frighted almost to death lest they should turn back, and also of being ill used by the populace, as I perceived several people, hearing what they had said, stood still to stare at me;—I pluck'd my hood over my face, and ran as fast as I was able to take shelter in a shop at the corner of the place, where I had certainly fainted away if the master of it, seeing the condition I was in, had not brought me a glass of water. 
“Judge now, my dear miss Jessamy, added she, if to remain in a place where I must expect to be made the public ridicule, would not be a folly in me even greater than that which has subjected me to it?” 
‘I have already testified, replied Jenny, how much I approved your resolution of retiring, at least for a time; but I would wish to see you do so without pain,—I would not have you stay, but would have you carry no sad ideas with you, and when you quit the scene of your misfortunes, quit the remembrance of them also.’ 
Tears were the only answer which the disconsolate Sophia was able to make for some time to this kind advice;—but recovering herself as soon as possible,—“Ah, my dear miss Jessamy, said she, a heart so perfectly at ease as yours, is little able to comprehend the horrors mine must feel, thus doubly oppress'd with shame and unavailing rage.” 
The good-natured Jenny then remonstrated to her, that as she had been guilty of no crime, she had no cause to take any shame to herself;—‘you have been 
cruelly imposed upon, indeed, said she; but if you have believed too much, it was the sincerity of your own heart that would not suffer you to suspect another's could be base;—and as for the loss of so considerable a part of your fortune by the injustice of Willmore, that misfortune will seem less to you when compared with what worse evils you might have sustain'd, if marriage had bestowed the whole of what you are mistress of, as well as your person, on a man of such abandon'd principles.’ 
The fair afflicted acknowledged the justice of these arguments, particularly the last; and confess'd that to a virtuous woman the lowest and most abject station in life was infinitely preferable to being the wife of a man who had neither honour nor humanity. 
In discourses of this nature did these two ladies pass most of the time they were together;—on parting, Jenny oblig'd the other to accept of a small diamond ring in token of her friendship,—conjured her to write often to her, and assured her that there were very few things which could afford her more real satisfaction 
than to hear that her tranquility was perfectly restored. 
The last embrace was accompanied with tears on both sides, and Jenny, after being left alone, could not restrain her eyes from letting fall a second shower; ‘—Poor Sophia, cried she, what cruel star presided at thy nativity, and subjected thee to such dreadful and undeserv'd misfortunes!’ 
But afterwards, on beginning to reflect more deeply on the source of that lady's unhappiness. —‘Yet how unjust and silly is it in us, said she, to lay the blame of our misdeeds on destiny?—'tis our own actions make our fate;—else to what end is reason given us?—wherefore are we endued with the power of thinking,—of judging,—of comparing, but to defend our hearts from any dangerous impressions? 
‘Fate,—fortune, continued she, the irresistible decrees of over-ruling powers, to which people impute whatever calamities they suffer, are only mention'd to excuse the inadvertencies they have been guilty of;—so strictly true is the inimitable Cowley's observation on this head:’ 

'Tis our own wisdom moulds our state,
Our faults or virtues make our fate.
Thus justly did the considerative Jenny reason within herself on the condition of Sophia; though she had always preserved a very tender friendship for that lady, and sincerely commiserated her present misfortunes, yet she could not absolve from blame the conduct which had reduced her to them;—for a young woman, who wanted not understanding, to have resign'd her heart,—trusted her fortune, and afterwards her person, in the hands of a man whom she had known but a short space of time, and whose character and principles she was utterly unacquainted with, seem'd to her an indiscretion no less inexcusable than it was strange. 
‘I do not like that sort of love, said she, which comes at once upon us, and is inspired merely by exterior perfections:—beauty may attract the eye; but, in my opinion, is not sufficient to engage the heart:—the face is not always the index of the mind;—those qualifications, which alone merit our affections, are not presently to be discover'd; 
and I am amazed how any woman can resolve to give up her liberty to a man, without being able to alledge something farther in justification of her choice than his having an agreeable person.’ 
These were the dictates of her severer reason; but they were soon overpower'd by the more prevailing softness of her nature, and swallow'd up amidst a flood of pity. —‘Yet—why do I think this way, cried she again, the circumstances of my fortune have render'd me no competent judge of the passion I pretend to condemn?—much certainly may be said in defence of poor Sophia,—her heart was tender, unprepossess'd, and ready to receive the first impression;—she had convers'd little with the world, was entirely ignorant of the artifices which the villainous part of mankind are capable of putting in practice to deceive our sex, and had no friend to advise or warn her against the danger;—I should therefore, perhaps, be no less inexcusable in censuring this unhappy creature, than she is in having yielded to that fatal impulse, by which so many, and some too of the best understanding, have been seduced.’ 
She was in the depth of these meditations, when a servant from lady Wingman came to acquaint her, that her company was immediately desir'd at her house; and also that her ladyship insisted, that, putting off all other engagements, she would resolve to pass the whole evening with her. 
Jenny dismiss'd the fellow with her compliments, and an assurance that she would accept the invitation her ladyship favour'd her with as soon as she could get herself ready, she being then in an entire deshabille, not having intended to go abroad that day. 
Accordingly she call'd her maid that same moment to her assistance, and as she never wasted much time in dressing, was soon equipp'd for the performance of her promise; but remembering it was post day, would not, on any consideration, omit answering her dear Jemmy's letter, therefore sat down and wrote to him in the following terms: 


To James Jessamy, Esq;
My dear Jemmy,
I Always receive every thing that comes from you with an inexpressible satisfaction; but your last afforded me a more than double potion, as the strain in which you write assures me that the air of Paris has already begun to dissipate some part of those melancholy ideas you carry'd with you, which I shall love it for as long as I live. 
“I flatter myself that by the time this reaches your hand you will have visited some of those fine places which are so much talk'd of here, and expect you will give me a short sketch of every thing you see, in order to prepare my attention for a more particular description of it hereafter;—in the mean time I shall bottle up all the occurrences that shall happen to fall in my way, to entertain you with on your return. 
“I have nothing worth your notice at present to acquaint you with, except that I am happy in the frequent visits of your two very sincere friends,—mr. Ellwood and mr. Morgan;—I need 
not tell you, when either of them are with me, on what the conversation chiefly turns;—they easily perceive they can talk on no subject so pleasing to me as yourself; and I am perfectly well convinced, by the warmth with which they speak of you, that it is not altogether owing to their complaisance to me, but in a great measure to gratify their own inclinations, that your name and virtues are so often mentioned. 
“Lady Wingman has just now sent for me in very great haste,—I know not as yet on what occasion, but would not disoblige her ladyship by being too tardy in complying with her request,—so must bid you adieu for this time: be assured I am, and ever shall be, 
“With the sincerest, tenderest affection,
My dear Jemmy,
As much as you can wish or expect,
Yours,
J. Jessamy. 
“P.S. The accounts I have concerning Belpine are very favourable;—but let not this intelligence hasten your return one moment sooner than you are quite weary of the place you are in.” 

She had but just seal'd this up and order'd her servant to carry it to the post, when a second messenger from lady Wingman arrived, and presented her with a little billet from lord Huntley, folded in the shape of a true lover's knot, and contained these lines: 

To miss Jessamy.
“Madam, 
“Come,—charmer come,—but leave your cares behind,
To your friends happiness be all resign'd:
Haste to congratulate rewarded love;
A bliss you'll one day give,—and Jemmy prove,
“In the same manner as does
Madam,
Your most obedient servant,
The transported
Huntley. 

Jenny easily found by this rhapsody, that his lordship's marriage with miss Wingman was agreed upon, if not already celebrated, and as she had a very great respect both for the one and the other of them, bid her chairmen make all the haste they could to carry her to the scene of joy. 
