
Treats of more things than one. 
After thanking sir Thomas Welby for the trouble he had given himself in satisfying their curiosity, and congratulating lord Huntley on the ease he had found in removing the aspersion cast upon him, this amiable company began 
to enquire what methods had been taken to find out where the impostor and his associates had concealed themselves, in order that they might be brought to justice. 
Lord Huntley reply'd, that nothing had been left undone for that purpose;—that not only all the suspected places in London had been search'd, but also letters sent to all those ports in the kingdom which open'd either towards France, Holland or Ireland, with a description of their persons, and affidavits of the frauds they had been guilty of; but that all this had been of no effect, so that those wretches, if they took any of these routes, must have escaped before the intelligence arrived. 
‘I cannot but confess, said mr. Lovegrove, that the impostor shew'd a good deal of address in the management of this affair; for as he had assumed the character of a nobleman whose person he must needs believe was well known, he took care not to be seen by any one but the master of the house where the scene of his villainy was to be transacted, and even by him but just enough to give him room to say he had such a one for his lodger.’ 
‘It certainly requires abundance both of courage and policy to form a compleat villain, said lady Wingman; and I have often wonder'd that men endued with such great talents should not rather employ them for ends more laudable, as well as more safe for themselves.’ 
‘All good qualities, madam, reply'd mr. Lovegrove, lose their very nature when accompanied with a vicious disposition;—some men are born with such an unhappy propensity,—such an innate love of wickedness, that they will do nothing at all unless they can do mischief;—it is in that alone they are capable of exerting the talents they are possessed of;—nothing is more frequent than for a lawyer, who might make a very good figure in a just cause, to chuse to engage himself only in those which require chicanery and artifice; nor for a soldier drummed out of his regiment for cowardice, to become a most bold and hardened villain in robbing on the highway.’ 
‘Yet there is a way to correct this propensity you talk of, cried lady Speck, otherwise vice would rather be a misfortune 
than a fault, and consequently deserve less blame than pity.’ 
‘Doubtless, madam, answer'd mr. Lovegrove; but it must be done in the most early years of life, and requires more pains than either tutor or pupil are sometimes inclined to take.’ 
This gentleman would perhaps have gone on with some discourse concerning the mistakes of education, and the little care that is too generally taken in giving a right bent to the minds of youth, which might have been of very great service to many of my readers, if it had not been prevented by the sudden entrance of sir Robert Manley, on which the conversation immediately turn'd on other subjects. 
The trusty Landy, according to his promise, having reach'd London pretty early that morning, lady Wingman took it into her head to surprise her daughters with the sight of lord Huntley in a place where they could so little expect to find him; and willing also that their common friends should be witnesses of this meeting, made an invitation at the same time to sir Thomas Welby and sir Robert Manley; but the latter of these gentlemen not being at home when the message was 
deliver'd heard not of it till some hours afterwards, which was the cause that he came not with the others. 
Welcomes,—congratulations, and all the compliments befitting the present occasion were now renew'd; after which, ‘—What I have lost, said sir Robert Manley, by not being here before, will I hope be made up to the company by the intelligence I bring. —You know, my lord, continued he turning to lord Huntley, that we met Celandine in the Park yesterday.’ 
‘Yes, reply'd that nobleman laughing, he was all alert and gay, talking to some ladies, when we met him; but I shall never forget how his countenance changed on perceiving us, and how silly and sheepish he look'd as we pass'd by him.’ 
‘The secret of his doing so, resumed sir Robert, is easy to guess;—the fight of us two doubtless made him imagine that the terrible mr. Lovegrove was also in town; for I have just now heard that he has pack'd up all his fardles of fopperies, and is gone this very morning to make a second tour, and display 
them to the best advantage he can among his brethren, the petit-maitress.’ 
‘What! gone to Paris! cried mr. Lovegrove: —Aye verily, reply'd the other, his diamond tassel now ceases to sparkle in St. James's sun, and his musk and amber to perfume the Mall;—your dreadful idea has driven hence the hero of the mode.’ 
To the great grief of many a charming toast,
Who sighs and mourns her dear Pulvilio lost.
‘Fye upon you, sir Robert, said miss Wingman, giving him a slap over the shoulder with her fan,—I cannot have so mean an opinion of my sex as to believe that there is even one woman in the world that will regret the absence of such a coxcomb.’ 
‘Yes, sister, rejoin'd lady Speck, just as one would regret the loss of a squirrel or a monkey who has diverted one with its tricks; for I dare answer no woman ever consider'd him in any other light.’ 
‘Perhaps not, madam, said lord Huntley; but as the animals you mention 
are sometimes very mischievous, so there may be danger in encouraging the follies of Celandine, which every one is not aware of;—there is a certain young lady in this town, by some cried up for one of the greatest beauties in it, who has received a wound in her reputation which will not easily be healed, on account of her acquaintance with him.’ 
‘I know who your lordship means, cried Jenny, who was always ready to take part with the absent;—but dare believe that whoever censures her of having the least tendre for that unworthy trifler does her a great deal of injustice;—it is true he has had the impudence and vanity to follow her to all public places, and even to take some liberties in company, which her excess of good nature kept her from resenting so much as perhaps she ought to have done; yet, in spite of these appearances, I think I may be pretty positive that she heartily hates and despises him.’ 
Mr. Lovegrove, who in all probability had more concern in this discourse than any one of the company except lady Speck, join'd not in it, but affected to be wholly unattentive during the time lasted, and seem'd taken up with admiring 
a fine gold headed cane sir Thomas Welby had in his hand. 
The good baronet, who had all this while been silent, as knowing nothing either of Celandine or the lady mention'd by lord Huntley, could not now, on hearing what Jenny said, forbear testifying his admiration of her generosity in expressions no less polite than they were sincere. 
‘It is no new thing, sir Thomas, said mr. Lovegrove, to hear miss Jessamy plead the cause of the accused:—strong as was the indictment laid against lord Huntley in your letter, I can assure you, it lost half its force by the arguments which this fair advocate urg'd in opposition to it;—scarce could the supposed criminal himself have defended his innocence with more zeal, or in terms more pathetic and efficacious.’ 
It cannot be doubted but that lord Huntley made the most grateful acknowledgements to that young lady, on being told the part she had taken in his justification. —‘But how, madam, said he to her, did my charming judge receive the pleas you were so good to offer in my behalf?’ 
‘Oh, my lord, answer'd she with a smile, this is not a fair question;—a barrister you know never pretends to dive into the sentiments of the court.’ —He then was about to address something to miss Wingman, who seem'd in a good deal of confusion at this discourse; but her blushes were instantly reliev'd by the butler coming in to tell lady Wingman that supper was on the table; on which they all adjourn'd into the next room, and sat down to partake of a very elegant collation which that lady had prepar'd for their entertainment. 
What pass'd during the time of eating would be superfluous to repeat; so I shall only say, that soon after the cloth was taken away, lady Speck, knowing her mother went early to bed, made a motion to retire, and by, doing so engaged the company to break up to the no small satisfaction of Jenny, who was impatient to get home for reasons which will presently appear. 
