

Shews what effects the transactions of
the preceding night had on the minds
of miss Betsy and mr. Trueworth. 
Mr. Goodman and lady Mellasin were
gone to bed when miss Betsy came
home; but miss Flora sat up for her, in
complaisance as she pretended, but in
reality to see who it was came home
with her. —This malicious creature had
been extremely fawning, for some days
past, to miss Betsy; but this night was
more so than usual, doubtless, in the hope
of being able to draw something out of
her, which her cruel wit might turn to
her disadvantage; but the other knew too
well the dispositions she had towards her,
to communicate any thing to her, which
she would not wish should be made public. 
Never did any one pass a night in
greater inquietudes, than this young lady
sustained; and she felt them the more
terribly, as she had no friend, to whom
pride and shame would suffer her to impart
the cause:—she looked back with 
horror on the precipice she had fallen
into, and considered it as a kind of miracle,
that she had recovered from it unhurt; 
—she could not reflect on what
had passed, that by the levity of her conduct
she had been thought a common
prostitute, had been treated as such, and
preserved from irrecoverable ruin, by the
meer mercy of a man, who was a perfect
stranger to her, without feeling anew
that confusion, which the most shocking
moments of her distress inflicted. —The
most bitter of her enemies could not have
passed censures more severe than she did
on herself, and in this fit of humiliation,
and repentance, would even have asked
mr. Trueworth pardon for the little regard
she had paid to his advice. 
The agitations of her mind would not
suffer her to take one moment of repose
for the whole night, nor did the morning
afford any more tranquility:—the disturbance
of her heart flew up into her
head, and occasioned so violent a pain there,
that she was as unable as unwilling to get
out of bed. —She lay 'till some hours
after the time in which they usually breakfasted,
nor would take any refreshment,
though the tea was brought to her bedside. 
—Amongst the crowd of tormenting
ideas, the remembrance, that she owed 
all the vexation she laboured under, entirely
to the acquaintance she had with
miss Forward, came strong into her
thoughts, and she had not rose the whole
day, if not moved to it by the impatience
of venting her spleen on that unfortunate
woman, which she did, in a letter to her
containing these lines: 

To miss Forward.
‘I am sorry that the compassion,
which your feigned contrition for
one false step obliged me to take in
your misfortunes, should make you imagine
I would continue any conversation
with you, after knowing you had abandoned
yourself to a course of life, which
I blush to think any of my sex can descend
to brook the thoughts of, much
more to be guilty of. —If you had retained
the least spark of generosity, or
good-will towards me, you would rather
have avoided than coveted my
company, as you must be sensible that
to be seen with you must render me, in
some measure, partaker of your infamy,
though wholly innocent of your crimes. 
—How base,—how cruel is such a
behaviour, especially to one, who had
a real regard for you, even after you
had confessed yourself unworthy of it; 
—but I have been often told, and now
I find the observation just, that women
of your wretched principles, being lost
to all hope of happiness themselves,
take a malicious pleasure in endeavouring
to destroy it in others. 
‘But, for heaven's sake, what could
induce you to desire a continuation of
a correspondence with me? —What
did you take me for? —Did you imagine
me so blind, as not to see into
the shameful means by which you are
supported, or so weak as to forfeit all
the reputation and respect I have in the
world, merely to comply with your request. 
—No!—your conduct is too
barefaced, to give me even the shadow
of an excuse for ever seeing you again:
do not, therefore, go about to varnish
over actions, whose foulness will appear
through all the colours you can daub
them with. —The friendship I once had
for you has already pleaded all that
yourself could urge in your defence,
but the cause is too bad, and I must
leave you to the miseries which attend
remorse, and which a little time will
infallibly bring on. —Heavens! to be
a common prostitute! —To earn precarious
bread by being the slave of
every man's licentious will. —What is 
digging in the mines! —What is
begging! —What is starving, when
compared to this? —But the idea is
too shocking,—modesty shudders at it,
—I shall drive both that and you as
distant from my thoughts as possible,
so be assured this is the last time you
will ever hear from the 
‘Much deceived,
And ill-treated,
B. Thoughtless.’ 
She was just going to seal up the above
letter, when a sudden thought coming
into her head, she added, to what she
had already wrote, this postscript: 
‘P.S. You may perhaps be instigated to
answer this, either through resentment
for the reproaches it contains,
or through some remains of modesty,
to attempt an apology for the occasion; 
but I would not wish you should
give yourself that trouble, for be assured
I shall read nothing that comes
from you, and that whatever you
send, will be returned to you again
unopened.’ 

She immediately sent this away by
a porter, and having satisfied the dictates
of her indignation against miss Forward,
she had now done with her, and resolved
to think of her no more;—yet was the
confusion of her mind far from being
dissipated. —“What will mr. Trueworth
say,” cried she to herself, “if ever
the ridiculous adventure of last night
should reach his ears, as nothing is
more probable, than that it may?— 
What will my brother Frank say, on
hearing such a story? —What mr.
Goodman and lady Mellasin say? — 
What a triumph for the envious miss
Flora? —And what can I answer for
myself, either to my friends, or enemies?” 
Little care as this young lady had
seemed to have taken of her reputation,
it was notwithstanding very dear to her. 
—Honour was yet still more dear, and
she could not reflect, that what she had
done might call the one in question, and
how near she had been to having the
other irrecoverably lost, without feeling
the most bitter agonies; she was not able
to dress, or to go down stairs that day,
and gave orders to be denied to whoever
should come to visit her. 
In this perplexed situation of mind let
us leave her for a while, and see with
what sort of temper mr. Trueworth behaved,
after having seen her go to the
very woman he had so much conjured
her to avoid. 
All the love he had for her, would not
keep him from resenting this last rebuff; 
—he thought he had not deserved such
usage, nor that his having professed himself
her lover, gave her the privilege of
treating him as her slave:—the humour
he was in making him unfit for company,
he went directly to his lodgings; but
had not been long there before it came
into his head, that possibly the manner
in which she had behaved was only a fit
of contradiction, and, that after all, she
might, when she was out of hearing,
have given counter-orders to the chairmen,
and was neither gone to miss Forward's,
nor would accompany her to the
play. —With such vain imaginations
does love sometimes flatter its votaries,
and the sincere and ardent flame, which
filled the heart of mr. Trueworth, made
him greedily catch at every supposition,
in favour of the darling object. 
Willing, however, to be more assured,
he bethought him of a stratagem, which
would either relieve all the doubts remaining
in him of her obstinacy, or
convince him, they were but too just:
—he sent immediately to his barber for
a black perriwig, and muffled up in a
cloak, so as to render it almost an impossibility
for him to be known by any one,
went to the theatre, and with a heart divided
betwixt hope and fear, placed himself
in a part of the middle gallery, which
had the full command of more than half
the boxes;—he saw a very brilliant
circle, but not she whom he so much
dreaded to find shine among them. 
Having scrutinously examined all within
the reach of his view, he quitted his present
post, and removed to the other side
of the house, where he soon discovered
the persons he came in search of:—he
saw miss Forward earnest in discourse with
a gentleman that sat behind her, and miss
Betsy receiving fruit from another, with
the same freedom and gaiety of deportment
she could have done, if presented
by himself;—he saw the nods,—the
winks,—and the grimaces, which several
in the pit made to each other, when
looking towards these two ladies,— 
every moment brought with it some fresh
matter for his mortification, yet would
not his curiosity stop here. —When the
play was ended, he went hastily down
stairs, and mingled with the crowd that
stood about the door, in hope of seeing
miss Betsy quit her company, take a
chair, and go home;—but how cruel a
stab was it to a man, who loved as he
did, to find her go with her dissolute
companion, and two gentlemen, who, he
had reason to believe, by the little he saw
of their behaviour, were utter strangers
to her, into a hackney coach;—he was
once about to appear himself through
his disguise, and tell miss Betsy, that he
thought he had more right to the honour
of conducting her, than those to whom
she gave permission; but the greatness of
his spirit assisted his prudence, in restraining
him from so rash an action. 
After this sight, it is not in the power
of words to represent what it was he felt. 
Reason was too weak to combat against
the force of such various emotions, as for
a time had the entire possession of his
soul;—he thought miss Betsy unworthy
of his love, yet still he loved her, and
had she been witness of his present distracted
state, she would have seen the
power she had over him, no less manifest 
in the moments of his rage, than in those
in which he had behaved with the greatest
tenderness and respect. 
His good sense, however, at last convinced
him, that as no solid happiness
could be expected with a woman of miss
Betsy's temper, he ought to conquer his
passion for her. —This he resolved to attempt,
yet thought before he did so, it
would become him to see her once more,
—to argue gently with her, and try, at
least, if there were not a possibility of
making her see the errors she was guilty
of. 
With this intent he went the next day
to visit her, but being told she could see
no company that day, was going from
the door, when miss Flora, who had
watched for him at the parlour window,
came and desired him to walk in;—his
complaisance would not permit him to
refuse her request, and after the usual
compliments, said, he was sorry miss
Betsy was so ill. —“You need not be
in much pain,” replied she, with a
look which he thought had more than an
ordinary meaning in it, “she is not
greatly indisposed.” —“Perhaps,” 
cried mr. Trueworth, with some warmth,
“she is only so to me,”—“I cannot 
“say any thing to that,” returned miss
Flora, “but her orders were in general
to all that came; and I believe, indeed,
she is not perfectly well,—she
came home extremely late last night,
and seemed in a good deal of disorder.” 
—“Disorder, madam,” interrupted mr.
Trueworth, impatiently, “for heaven's
sake, on what occasion?” —“I wish
I could inform you,” answered she; 
“but at present I am not favoured with
her confidence, though there was a
time, when I was made partaker of
her dearest secrets: —I wish those she
now intrusts them with, may be no less
faithful to her than I have been.” —“I
hope,” said he, “she has none which to
be betrayed in would give her pain.” — 
With these words he rose up to go away,
—miss Flora fain would have perswaded
him to drink tea; but he excused himself,
saying, he was engaged,—that he came
only to enquire after the health of her
fair friend, and could not have stayed,
if so happy as to have seen her. 
Scarce could this passionate lover contain
himself, 'till he got out of the house:
—the manner in which miss Flora had
spoke of miss Betsy, added fresh fuel to
the jealousies he was before possessed of; 
but how great soever his disturbance was, 
he found on his return home, somewhat
which made all he had known before
seem light and trifling. 