

Is a medley of various particulars, which
pave the way for matters of more consequence. 
Miss Flora had now nothing in her
head, but the many hearts she expected
to captivate, when she should arrive
in L&wblank;e; and lady Mellasin,
who soothed her in all her vanities, resolved
to spare nothing which she imagined would
contribute to that purpose. Miss Betsy,
who had the same ambition, though for
different ends, made it also pretty much her
study to set off, to the best advantage, the
charms she had received from nature. 
The important article of dress now engrossed 
the whole conversation of these
ladies. The day after that in which lady
Trusty had made the invitation to the
two young ones, lady Mellasin went with
them to the mercer's to buy some silks:
she pitched on a very genteel new-fashioned
pattern for her daughter; but chose one
for miss Betsy, which, though rich, seemed
to her not well fancied; she testified her
disapprobation, but lady Mellasin said so
much in the praise of it, and the mercer,
either to please her, or because he was desirous
of getting it sold, assured miss Betsy
that it was admired by every body, that
it was the newest thing he had in his shop,
and had already sold several pieces to ladies
of the first quality: all this did not
argue miss Betsy into a linking of it; yet
between them she was over-perswaded to
have it. When these purchases were made,
they went home, only stopped at the mantua-maker's
in their way, to order her to
come that afternoon; lady Mellasin did no
more than set them down, and then went
on in the coach to make a visit. 
The young ladies fell to reviewing their
silks; but miss Betsy was no way satisfied
with her's: the more she looked upon it,
the worse it appeared to her. “I shall
never wear this with any pleasure,” 
said she; “I wish the man had it in his 
“shop again, for I think it quite ugly.” 
Miss Flora told her, that she wondered at
her, that the thing was perfectly handsome,
and that my lady's judgment was never
before called in question. “That may be,” 
replied miss Betsy, “but certainly every
one ought to please their own fancy in
the choice of their cloaths; for my part
I shall never endure to see myself in it.” 
“Not when their fancy happens to differ
from that of those who know better than
themselves what is fit for them,” cried
miss Flora; “and, besides, have the power
over them.” She spoke this with so much
pertness, that miss Betsy, who had a violent
spirit, was highly provoked. “Power over
them!” cried she, “I do not know what
you mean, miss Flora; mr. Goodman is
one of my guardians indeed, but I don't
know why that should entitle his lady to
direct me in what I shall wear.” 
Mr. Goodman, who happened to be
looking over some papers in a little closet
he had within his parlour, hearing part of
this dispute, and finding it was like to
grow pretty warm, came out, in hopes of
moderating it. On hearing miss Betsy's
complaint, he desired to see the silk; which
being shewn him, “I do not pretend,” 
said he, “to much understanding in these
things; but, methinks, it is very handsome.” 
“It would do well enough for
winter, sir,” replied miss Betsy; “but
it is too hot and heavy for summer; 
besides, it is so thick and clumsy, it
would make me look as big again as I
am: I'll not wear it, I am resolved, in
the country, whatever I do when I come
to town, in the dark weather.” 
“Well,” said mr. Goodman, “I will
speak to my lady to get it changed
for something else.” “Indeed, sir,” 
cried miss Flora. “I am sure my mamma
will do no such thing, and take it very
ill to hear it proposed.” “You need
not put yourself in any heat,” replied
miss Betsy, “I don't desire she should be
troubled any farther about it; but, sir,” 
continued she, turning to mr. Goodman,
“I think I am now at an age capable of
choosing for myself, in the article of
dress; and as it has been settled between
you and sir Ralph Trusty, that out of
the income of my fortune, thirty pounds
a year should be allowed for my board,
twenty pounds for my pocket expences,
and fifty for my cloaths, I think I ought
to have the two latter entirely at my own
disposal, and to lay it out as I think
fit, and not be obliged, like a charity-child,
to wear whatever livery my benefactor
shall be pleased to order.” She 
spoke this with so much spleen, that mr.
Goodman was a little nettled at it, and
told her, that what his wife had done was
out of kindness and good-will, which since
she did not take as was meant, she should
have her money to do with as she would. 
“That is all I desire,” answered she,
“therefore bepleased to let me have twenty
guineas now, or, if there does not remain
so much in your hands, I will
ask sir Ralph to advance it, and you
may return it to him when you
settle accounts.” “No, no,” cried
the merchant hastily, “I see no reason to
trouble my good friend, sir Ralph, on
such a frivolous matter. You shall
have the sum you mention, miss Betsy,
whether so much remains out of the
hundred pounds a year set apart for
your subsistance, or not, as I can but
deduct it out of the next payment; but
I would have you manage with discretion,
for you may depend, that the surplus
of what was at first agreed upon,
shall not be broke into, but laid up to
increase your fortune, which, by the
time you come of age, I hope, will be
pretty handsomely improved.” 
Miss Betsy then assured him, that she
doubted not of his zeal for her interest, 
and hoped she had not offended him in
any thing she had said. “No, no,” replied
he, “I always make allowances for
the little impatiencies of persons of
your sex and age, especially when dress
is concerned.” In speaking these words,
he opened his bureau, and took out twenty
guineas, which he immediately gave her,
making her first sign a memorandum of
it. Miss Flora was all on fire to have
offered something in opposition to this,
but durst not do it, and the mantua-maker
that instant coming in, she went up
staits with her into her chamber, leaving
miss Betsy and mr. Goodman together; 
the former of whom, being eager to go
about what she intended, ordered a hackney
coach to be called, and taking the silk
with her, went directly to the shop where
it was bought. 
The mercer at first seemed unwilling to
take it again; but on her telling him, she
would always make use of him, for every
thing she wanted in his way, and would
then buy two suits of him, he at last consented. 
As she was extremely curious in
every thing relating to her shape, she
made choice of a pink coloured French
lustring, to the end, that the plaits lying
flat, would shew the beauty of her waiste
to more advantage; and to atone for the 
slightness of the silk, purchased as much
of it as would flounce the sleeves, and the
petticoat from top to bottom: she made
the mercer also cut off a sufficient quantity
of a rich green Venetian sattin, to
make her a riding habit; and as she came
home bought a silver trimming for it of
Point D' Espagne; all which, with the
silk she disliked in exchange, did not
amount to the money she had received
from mr. Goodman. 
On her return, she asked the footman,
who opened the door, if the mantua-maker
was gone; but he not being able to inform
her, she ran hastily up stairs, to miss
Flora's chamber, which, indeed, was also
her own; for they lay together: she was
about to bounce in, but found the door
was locked, and the key taken out on the
inside. This very much surprised her, especially
as she thought she had heard miss
Flora's voice, as she was at the top of the
stair-case: wanting, therefore, to be satisfied
who was with her, she went as softly
as she could into lady Mellasin's dressing-room,
which was parted from the chamber
but by a slight wainscot: she put her
ear close to the pannel, in order to discover
the voices of them that spoke, and finding,
by some light that came through a
crack or flaw in the boards, her eyes, as 
well as ears, contributed to a discovery she
little expected. In fine, she plainly perceived
miss Flora, and a man rise off the
bed; she could not at first discern who he
was, but, on his turning to go out of the
room, knew him to be no other than Gayland. 
They went out of the chamber together,
as gently as they could; and tho'
miss Betsy might, by taking three steps,
have met them in the passage, and have
had an opportunity of revenging herself on
miss Flora for the late airs she had given
herself, by shewing, how near she was to
the scene of infamy she had been acting; 
yet the shock she felt herself, on being
witness of it, kept her immoveable for some
time, and she suffered them to depart
without the mortification of thinking any
one knew of their being together, in the
manner they were. 
This young lady, who though, as I have
already taken notice, was of too volatile
and gay a disposition, hated any thing
that had the least tincture of indecency,
was so much disconcerted at the discovery
she had made, that she had not power to
stir from the place she was in, much less
to resolve how to behave in this affair; 
that is, whether it would be best, or not,
to let miss Flora know she was in the secret 
of her shame, or to suffer her to think
herself secure. 
She was, however, beginning to meditate
on this point, when she heard miss
Flora come up stairs, calling at every step,
“miss Betsy!—miss Betsy!—where are
you?” Gayland was gone, and his
young mistress being told miss Betsy was
come home, guessed it was she who had
given an interruption to their pleasures,
by coming to the door; she, therefore, as
she could not imagine her so perfectly convinced,
contrived to disguise the whole,
and worst of the truth, by revealing a part
of it; and as soon as she had found her,
“Lord, miss Betsy!” cried she, with an
unparalell'd assurance, “where have you
been?—how do you think I have been
served by that cursed toad Gayland?
he came up into our chamber, where
the mantua-maker and I were, and as
soon as she was gone, locked the door,
and began to kiss and touze me so, that
I protest I was frighted almost out of
my wits. The devil meant no harm
though, I believe, for I got rid of him
easy enough; but I wish you had rapped
heartily at the door, and obliged him
to open it, that we both might have
rated him for his impudence.” “Some
people have a great deal of impudence, 
indeed,” replied miss Betsy, astonished
at her manner of bearing it off. “Aye,
so they have, my dear, rejoined the
other, with a careless air; but, prithee,
where have you been rambling by your
self?” “No farther than Bedford-street,” 
answered miss Betsy: “you may
see on what errand,” continued she,
pointing to the silks, which she had laid
down on a chair. Miss Flora presently
ran to the bundle, examined what it contained,
and either being in a better humour,
or affecting to be so, than when
they talked on this head in the parlour,
testified no disapprobation of what she had
done; but, on the contrary, talked to her
in such soft obliging terms, that miss Betsy,
who had a great deal of good-nature, when
not provoked by any thing that seemed
an affront to herself, could not find in her
heart to say any thing to give her confusion. 
When lady Mellasin came home, and
was informed how miss Betsy had behaved,
in relation to the silk, she at first put
on an air full of resentment; but finding
the other wanted neither wit nor spirit to
defend her own cause, and not caring to
break with her, especially as her daughter
was going with her to L&wblank;e, soon
grew more moderate, and, at length, 
affected to think no more of it. Certain
it is, however, that this affair, silly as it
was, and, as one would think, insignificant
in itself, lay broiling in the minds of
both mother and daughter, and they waited
only for an opportunity of venting
their spite, in such a manner, as should
not make them appear to have the least
tincture of so foul and mean a passion; 
but as neither of them were capable of a
sincere friendship, and had no real regard
for any one beside themselves, their displeasure
was of little consequence. 
Preparations for the journey of the
young ladies, seemed, for the present, to
employ all their thoughts, and diligence
enough was used to get every thing ready
against the time prefixed, which wanted
but three days of being expired, when an
unforeseen accident put an entire stop
to it. 
Miss Betsy received a letter from her
brother, mr. Francis Thoughtless, accompanied
with another to mr. Goodman, acquainting
them, that he had obtained
leave from the head of the college, to pass
a month in London; that he should set
out from Oxford in two days, and hoped
to enjoy the satisfaction of being with them
in twelve hours after his letter. What 
could she now do? it would have been a
sin, not only against natural affection, but
against the rules of common good manners,
to have left the town, either on the
news of his arrival, or immediately after
it; nor could lady Trusty expect, or desire
she should entertain a thought of doing
so: she was too wise, and too good
not to consider the interest of families very
much depended on the strict union among
the branches of it; and that the natural affection
between brothers and sisters, could
not be too much cultivated. Far, therefore,
from insisting on the promise miss
Betsy had made of going with her into
the country, she congratulated her on the
happy disappointment, and told her, that
she should receive her with a double satisfaction,
if, after mr. Francis returned to
Oxford, she would come and pass what
then remained of the summer season with
her. This, miss Betsy assured her ladyship,
she would do; so that, according to all
appearance, the benefits she might have
received, by being under the eye of so excellent
an instructress, were but delayed,
not lost. 