

With the true genius of a political
castle-builder, Mr. Falconer began to
add story after story to the edifice, of
which he had thus promptly and successfully
laid the foundation. Having by a
lucky hit provided for one of his sons,
that is to say, put him in a fair way of
being provided for, the industrious father
began to form plans for the advancement
of his two other sons, Buckhurst
and John.—Buckhurst was destined by
his father for the church: John for the
army. The Commissioner, notwithstanding
he had been closetted for some
hours with Lord Oldborough, and notwithstanding
his son Cunningham was
to be one of his Lordship's secretaries,
was well aware that little or no progress
had been made in Lord Oldborough's

real favor or confidence. Mr. Falconer
knew, that he had been literally paid by
the job, that he was considered and treated
accordingly: yet upon the whole he
was well pleased that it should be so, for
he foresaw the possibility of his doing for
his Lordship many more jobs, public and
private. He lost no time in preparing
for the continuity of his secret services,
and in creating a political necessity for his
being employed in future, in a manner
that might ensure the advancement of the
rest of his family. In the first place, he
knew that Lord Oldborough was desirous,
for the enlargement of the demesne at
Clermont-Park, to purchase certain adjoining
lands, which, from some ancient
pique, the owner was unwilling to sell.
The proprietor was a tenant of Mr. Falconer's,
he undertook to negotiate the
business, and to use his influence to bring
his tenant to reason. This offer, made
through Cunningham, was accepted by
Lord Oldborough, and the negotiation
led to fresh communications.—There

was soon to be a county meeting, and an
address was to be procured in favor of
certain measures of government, which
it was expected would be violently opposed.
In the Commissioner's letters to
his son, the private secretary, he could
say and suggest whatever he pleased; he
pointed out the gentlemen of the country
who ought to be conciliated, and he offered
his services to represent things properly
to some with whom he was intimate.— 
The sheriff and the undersheriff
also should know, without being informed
directly from ministry, what
course in conducting the meeting would
be agreeable in a certain quarter—who so
proper to say and do all that might be
expedient as Mr. Falconer, who was on
the spot, and well acquainted with the
country?—The Commissioner was informed
by the private secretary, that his services
would be acceptable.—There happened
also, at this time, to be some disputes
and grievances in that part of the
country about tax-gatherers.—Mr. Falconer

hinted, that he could soften and
accommodate matters, if he were empowered
to do so—and he was so empowered.— 
Besides all this, there was a borough
in that county, in which the interest
of government had been declining; 
attempts were made to open the borough—Mr.
Falconer could be of use in keeping
it close—and he was commissioned to do
every thing in his power in this business.
In a short time Mr. Falconer was acting
on all these points as an agent and partisan
of Lord Oldborough's. But there
was one thing which made him uneasy; 
he was acting here, as in many former
instances, merely upon vague hopes of
future reward.
Whilst his mind was full of these
thoughts, a new prospect of advantage
opened to him in another direction.
Colonel Hauton, Lord Oldborough's
nephew, stayed during his uncle's absence
at Clermont-Park, to be in readiness
for the races, which, this year, were
expected to be uncommonly fine. Buckhurst

Falconer had been at school and at
the university with the colonel, and had
frequently helped him in his Latin exercises.
The colonel having been always
deficient in scholarship, he had early
contracted an aversion to literature,
which at last amounted to an antipathy
even to the very sight of books, in consequence,
perhaps, of his uncle's ardent
and precipitate desire to make him apply
to them, whilst his head was full of tops
and balls—kites and ponies.—Be this as
it may, Commissioner Falconer thought
his son Buckhurst might profit by this
school friendship, and might now renew
and improve the connexion. Accordingly
Buckhurst waited upon the colonel,
was immediately recognised and received
with promising demonstrations of joy.
It would be difficult, indeed impossible,
to describe Colonel Hauton, so as
to distinguish him from a thousand other
young men of the same class, except,
perhaps, that he might be characterized
by having more exclusive and inveterate

selfishness. Yet this was so far from
appearing or being suspected on a first
acquaintance, that he was generally
thought a sociable, good-natured fellow.
It was his absolute dependence upon
others for daily amusement and ideas, or
rather for knowing what to do with himself,
that gave him this semblance of
being sociable; the total want of proper
pride and dignity in his whole deportment
—a certain slang and familiarity of
tone, gave superficial observers the notion
that he was good-natured.—It was
Colonel Hauton's great ambition to look
like his own coachman; he succeeded
only so far, as to look like his groom:
but though he kept company with
jockeys and coachmen, grooms and
stable-boys, yet not the stiffest,
haughtiest, flat-backed Don of Spain, in Spain's
proudest days, could be more completely
aristocratic in his principles, or more
despotic in his habits.—This could not
break out to his equals, and his equals
cared little how he treated his inferiors.

His present pleasure, or rather his present
business, for no man made more a business
of pleasure than Colonel Hauton,
was the turf. Buckhurst Falconer could
not here assist him as much as in making
Latin verses, but he could admire and
sympathize; and the colonel, proud of
being now the superior, proud of his
knowing style and his capital stud, enjoyed
Buckhurst's company particularly,
pressed him to stay at Clermont-Park
and to accompany him to the races.— 
There was to be a famous match between
Colonel Hauton's High-Blood and Squire
Burton's Wildfire.—And the preparations
of the horses and of their riders occupied
the intervening days. With all
imaginable care, anxiety, and solemnity,
these important preparations were conducted.
At stated hours Colonel Hauton,
and with him Buckhurst, went to see
High-Blood rubbed down, and fed, and
watered, and exercised, and minuted,
and rubbed down, and littered.—Next
to the horse, the rider, Jack Giles, was

to be attended to with the greatest solicitude; 
he was to be weighed—and
starved—and watched—and drammed— 
and sweated—and weighed again—and
so on, in daily succession; and harder
still, through this whole course he was
to be kept in humor—“None that ever
sarved man or beast,” as the stable-boy
declared, “ever worked harder for their
bread, than his master and master's commission
did this week for their pleasure.”
At last the great the important day
arrived—and Jack Giles was weighed
for the last time in public, and so was
Tom Hand, Squire Burton's rider—and
High-Blood and Wildfire were brought
out; and the spectators assembled in the
stand, and about the scales, were brought
out; and the spectators assembled in the
stand, and about the scales, were all impatience,
especially those who had betted
on either of the horses.—And— 
Now Hauton!—Now Burton!—Now
High-Blood!—Now Wildfire!—Now
Jack Giles!—And—Now, Tom Hand!
—resounded on all sides—The gentlemen
on the race-ground were all on tiptoe

in their stirrups. The ladies in the
stand, stretched their necks of snow, and
nobody looked at them.—Two men were
run over, and nobody took them up.— 
Two ladies fainted, and two gentlemen
betted across them. This was no time
for nice observances—Jack Giles's spirit
began to flag—and Tom Hand's judgment
to tell—High-Blood, on the full
stretch, was within view of the winning
post, when Wildfire, quite in wind, was
put to his speed by the judicious Tom
Hand—he sprang forward, came up
with High-Blood—passed him—Jack
Giles strove in vain to regain his ground
—High-Blood was blown, beyond the
power of whip or spur—Wildfire reached
the post, and squire Burton won the
match hollow.
His friends congratulated him and
themselves loudly, and extolled Tom
Hand and Wildfire to the skies—In the
moment of disappointment, Colonel
Hauton, out of humor, said something
that implied a suspicion of unfairness on

the part of Burton or Tom Hand, which
the honest squire could not brook, either
for self or rider. He swore, “that his
Tom Hand was as honest a fellow as any
in England, and he would back him for
such!”—The Colonel, depending on his
own and his uncle's importance, on his
party and his flatterers, treated the
squire with some of the haughtiness of
rank, which the squire retorted with
some rustic English humor. The Colonel,
who had not wit at will, to put
down his antagonist, became still more
provoked to see that such a low-born
fellow as the squire should and could
laugh, and make others laugh. For the
lack of wit the Colonel had recourse to
insolence, and went on from one impertinence
to another, till the squire enraged,
declared “that he would not be
brow-beat by any Lord's nephew, or
Jackanapes Colonel that ever wore a
head, and as he spoke, tremendous in
his ire, squire Burton brandished high
the British horse-whip. At this critical

moment, as it has been asserted by some
of the by-standers, the Colonel quailed
and backed a few paces, but others pretend
that Buckhurst Falconer pushed
before him.—It is certain that Buckhurst
stopped the blow, wrested the
horse-whip from the squire—was challenged
by him on the spot—accepted
challenge—fought the squire—winged
him—appeared on the race ground
afterwards, and was admired by the
ladies in public, and by his father in
private, who looked upon the duel and
horse-whipping, from which he thus
saved his patron's nephew, as the most
fortunate circumstance that could have
happened to his son upon his entrance
into life.
“Such an advantage as this gives us!
Such a claim upon the Colonel—and,
indeed, upon the whole family. Lord
Oldborough, having no children of his
own, looks to the nephew as his heir— 
and though he may be vexed now and
then by the Colonel's extravagance,

and angry that he could not give this
nephew more of a political turn, yet
such as he is, depend upon it, he can do
what he pleases with Lord Oldborough.
—Whoever has the nephew's ear, has the
uncle's heart, or I should say, whoever
has the nephew's heart has the uncle's
ear.”—
“Mayn't we as well put hearts out
of the question on all sides, Sir?” said
Buckhurst.
“With all my heart,” said his father
laughing, “provided we don't put a
good living out of the question on our
side.”—
Buckhurst looked averse, and said he
did not know there was any such thing
in question.—
“No!” said his father—“was it then
from the pure and abstract love of being
horse-whipped, or shot at, that you took
this quarrel off his hands?”
“Faith! I did it from spirit, pure
spirit,” said Buckhurst, “I could not
stand by, and see one who had been my

schoolfellow horse-whipped—no, damn it,
if he did not stand by himself, yet I could
not but stand by him, for you know I
was there as one of his party—and as I
backed his bets on High-Blood, I could
do no less than back his cause altogether.— 
Oh! I could not stand by and
see a chum of my own horse-whipped.”
“Well, that was all very spirited and
generous; but now, as you are something
too old for mere school-boy notions,” 
said the Commissioner—“let us look a
little farther, and see what we can make
of it.—It's only a silly boyish thing as
you consider it, but I hope we can turn
it to good account.”
“I never thought of turning it to account,
Sir.”—
“Think of it now,” said the father, a
little provoked by the careless disinterestedness
of the son—“In plain English,
here is a colonel in his Majesty's service
saved from a horse-whipping—a whole
noble family saved from disgrace—these
are things not to be forgotten. That is,

not to be forgotten, if you force people to
remember them—otherwise ... my word
for it—I know the great—the whole
would be forgotten in a week.—Therefore,
leave me to follow the thing up
properly with the uncle, and do you
never let it sleep with the nephew. ...
Sometimes a bold stroke, sometimes a
delicate touch, just as the occasion
serves, or as may suit the company present.
... All that I trust to your
own address and judgment.”
“Trust nothing, Sir, to my address
or judgment, for in these things I have
neither.—I always act just from impulse
and feeling, right or wrong—I have no
talents for finesse—leave them all to
Cunningham—that's his trade, and he
likes it luckily, and you should be content
with having one such genius in your
family—No family could bear two—”
“Come, come, pray be serious, Buckhurst.
—If you have not, or will not use
any common sense and address to advance
yourself, leave that to me.—You

see how I have pushed up Cunningham
already, and all I ask of you is to be
quiet, and let me push you up.”
“Oh! dear Sir, I am very much
obliged to you: if that is all, I will be
quite quiet—so that I am not to do any
thing shabby or dirty for it. I should
be vastly glad to get a good place, and
be provided for handsomely—”
“No doubt—and let me tell you that
many I could name, have with inferior
claims, and without any natural connexion
or relationships, from the mere
favor of proper friends, obtained church
benefices of much greater value, than
the living we have in our eye ... you
know—”
“I do not know, indeed,”—said Buckhurst,
“I protest I have no living in my
eye.”
“What! not know, that the living of
Chipping-Friars is in the gift of Colonel
Hauton—and the present incumbent has
had one paralytic stroke already.— 
There's a prospect for you, Buckhurst!”

“To be frank with you, Sir, I have
no taste for the church.”
“No taste for nine-hundred a year,
Buckhurst? No desire for fortune, Mr.
Philosopher?”
“Pardon me, a very strong taste for
that, Sir—Not a bit of a philosopher— 
As much in love with fortune as any
man, young or old—is there no way to
fortune but through the church?”—
“None for you so sure and so easy,
all circumstances considered,”—said his
father—“I have planned and settled it,
and you have nothing to do but to get
yourself ordained as soon as possible. I
shall write to my friend the Bishop—for
that purpose this very night.”
“Let me beg, father, that you will
not be so precipitate.—Upon my word,
Sir, I cannot go into orders.—I am not
... in short, I am not fit for the church.”
The father stared with an expression,
between anger and astonishment.
“Have not you gone through the
University?”—“Yes, Sir ... but ...

but I am scarcely sober, and staid, and
moral enough for the church ... Such
a wild fellow as I am ... I really could
not in conscience. ... I would not
upon any account, for any living upon
Earth, or any emolument, go into the
church, unless I thought I could do credit
to it.”—
“And why should not you do credit
to the church? I don't see that you are
wilder than your neighbors, and need
not be more scrupulous.—There is G—,
who at your age was wild enough, but
he took up in time, and is now a plump
dean.—Then, there is the bishop that is
just made.—I remember him such a
youth as you are.—Come, come, these
are idle scruples. Let me hear no more,
my dear Buckhurst, of your conscience.”
“Dear Sir, I never pleaded my conscience
on any occasion before—You
know that I am no puritan—but really
on this point I have some conscience,
and I beg you not to press me farther.— 
You have other sons—and if you cannot

spare Cunningham,—that treasure of diplomacy!
—there's John, surely you
might contrive to spare him for the
church.”
“Spare him I would, and welcome.
... But you know I could never get
John into orders.”
“Why not, Sir? John, I'll swear,
would have no objection to the church,
provided you could get him a good fat
living.”
“But I am not talking of his objections.
—To be sure he would make no objection
to a good fat living, nor would
any body in his senses, except yourself.
—But I ask you, how I could possibly get
your brother John into the church— 
John's a dunce,—and you know it.”
“Nobody better, Sir; but are there
no dunces in the church?—And as you
are so good as to think that I'm no
wilder than my neighbors, you surely
will not say that my brother is more a
dunce than his neighbors.—Put him
into the hands of a clever grinder, or

crammer, and they would soon cram the
necessary portion of latin and greek into
him, and they would get him through
the university for us readily enough; and
a degree once obtained, he might snap his
fingers at latin and greek all the rest of
his life.—Once in orders, and he might
sit down upon his fat living, or lie down
content, all his days, only taking care
to have some poor devil of a curate up
and about, doing duty for him.”
“So I find you have no great scruples
for your brother, whatever you may
have for yourself.”. ... “Sir, I am
not the keeper of my brother's conscience.
—Indeed, if I were, you might
congratulate me in the words of Sir
B.R. upon the possession of a sinecure
place.”
“It is a pity, Buckhurst, that you
cannot use your wit for yourself as well
as for other people. Ah! Buckhurst!
Buckhurst! you will, I fear, do worse
in the world than any of your brothers,

for wits are always unlucky—Sharp-sighted
enough to every thing else, but
blind, stone blind to their own interest.
—Wit is folly, when one is talking of
serious business.”
“Well, my dear father, be agreeable,
and I will not be witty.—In fact, in
downright earnest, the sum total of the
business is, that I have a great desire to
go into the army, and I entreat you to
procure me a commission.”
“Then the sum total of the business
is, that I will not, for I cannot afford to
purchase you a commission, and to
maintain you in the army—”
“But by using interest, perhaps, Sir,” 
—said Buckhurst.
“My interest must be all for your
brother John; for I tell you I can do
nothing else for him but put him into
the army.—He's a dunce.—I must get
him a commission, and then I have done
with him.”
“I wish I was a dunce,” said Buckhurst,

sighing, “for then I might go
into the army—instead of being forced
into the church.”
“There's no force upon your inclinations,
Buckhurst,” said his father in a
soft tone;—“I only show you, that it is
impossible I should maintain you in the
army, and, therefore, beg you to put the
army out of your head. And I don't
well see what else you could do. You
have not application enough for the bar,
nor have I any friends among the attorneys
except Sharpe, who, between you
and me, might take your dinners, and
leave you without a brief afterwards.— 
You have talents, I grant,” continued
the Commissioner, “and if you had but
application, and if your uncle the judge
had not died last year—”
“Oh, Sir, he is dead, and we can't
help it,” interrupted Buckhurst.—“And
as for me, I never had, and never shall
have, any application.—So pray put the
bar out of your mind.”
“Very cavalier indeed!—but I will

make you serious at once, Buckhurst.
—You have nothing to expect from my
death—I have not a farthing to leave
you—my place, you know, is only for
life—your mother's fortune is all in annuity,
and two girls to be provided for— 
and to live as we must live—up to and
beyond my income—shall have nothing
to leave.—Though you are my eldest
son, you see it is in vain to look to my
death—so into the church you must go,
or be a beggar—and get a living, or
starve.—Now I have done—” concluded
the Commissioner, quitting his son; “and
I leave you to think of what has been
said.”
Buckhurst thought and thought, but
still his interest and his conscience were
at variance, and he could not bring himself
either to be virtuous or vicious
enough, to comply with his father's
wishes.—He could not decide to go into
the church merely from interested motives,
—from that his conscience revolted
—he could not determine to make himself

fit to do credit to the sacred profession; 
against this his habits and his
love of pleasure revolted. He went to
his brother John, to try what could be
done with him. Latin and greek were
insuperable objections with John, besides,
though he had a dull imagination
in general, John's fancy had been smitten
with one bright idea of an epaulette,
from which no considerations, fraternal,
political, moral, or religious, could
distract his attention.—His genius, he
said, was for the army, and into the
army he would go.—So to his genius,
Buckhurst, in despair, was obliged to
leave him.—The Commissioner neglected
not to push the claim which he had on
Colonel Hauton, and he chose his time
so well, when proper people were by,
and when the Colonel did not wish to
have the Squire, and the horse-whip, and
the duel brought before the public, that
he obtained, if not a full acknowledgment
of obligation, a promise of doing
any thing and every thing in his power

for his friend Buckhurst.—Any thing
and every thing, were indefinite, unsatisfactory
terms, and the Commissioner,
bold in dealing with the timid temper of
the Colonel, though he had been cautious
with the determined character of
the uncle, pressed his point—named the
living of Chipping-Friars—showed how
well he would be satisfied, and how well
he could represent matters, if the promise
was given, and at the same time, made
it understood how loudly he could complain,
and how disgraceful his complaints
might prove to the Oldborough
family, if his son was treated with ingratitude.
The Colonel particularly dreaded
that he should be suspected of want
of spirit, and that his uncle should have
the transaction laid before him in this
improper point of view.—He pondered
for a few moments, and the promise for
the living of Chipping-Friars was given.
—The Commissioner, secure of this, next
returned to the point with his son, and
absolutely insisted upon his ... going into

orders. Buckhurst, who had tried wit
and raillery in vain, now tried persuasion
and earnest entreaties, but these
were equally fruitless; his father, though
an easy, good-natured man, except where
his favorite plans were crossed, was peremptory,
and, without using harsh
words, he employed the harshest measures
to force his son's compliance.
Buckhurst had contracted some debts at
the University, none of any great consequence,
but such as he could not pay
immediately.—The bets he had laid
and lost upon High-Blood were also to
be provided for; debts of honor claimed
precedency, and must be directly discharged.
His father positively refused
to assist him, except upon condition of
his compliance with his wishes; and so
far from affording him any means of
settling with his Oxford creditors, it has
been proved, from the Commissioner's
private answers to some of their applications,
that he not only refused to pay
a farthing for his son, but encouraged

the creditors to threaten him in the
strongest manner with the terrors of law
and arrest. Thus pressed and embarrassed,
this young man, who had many
honorable and religious sentiments, and
genuine feelings, but no power of adhering
to principle or reason, was miserable
beyond expression one hour— 
and the next he became totally forgetful
that there was any thing to be thought
of but the amusement of the moment.— 
Incapable of coming to any serious decision,
he walked up and down his room
talking, partly to himself, and partly, for
want of a better companion, to his brother
John.
“So I must pay Wallis to morrow, or
he'll arrest me.—And I must give my
father an answer about the church to
night—for he writes to the Bishop—and
will wait no longer.—Oh! hang it!
hang it, John! what the devil shall I
do?—My father won't pay a farthing
for me, unless I go into the church!”
“Well then, why can't you go into

the church,” said John—“since you are
through the University the worst is over?”
“But I think it so wrong, so base ...
for money ... for emolument ... I cannot do
it. ... I am not fit for the church—I know
I shall disgrace it”—said Buckhurst,
striking his forehead—I cannot do it ...
I can not—it is against my conscience.”
John stopped, as he was filling his
shooting-pouch, and looked at Buckhurst
(his mouth half open), with an
expression of surprise at these demonstrations
of sensibility. He had some
sympathy for the external symptoms of
pain which he saw in his brother, but
no clear conception of the internal
cause.
“Why, Buckhurst,” said he—“if
you cannot do it, you can't you know,
Buckhurst;—but I don't see why you
should be a disgrace to the church more
than another—as my father says.—If I
was but through the University, I had
as lieve go into the church as not—that's
all I can say.—And if my genius was

not for the military line, there's nothing
I should relish better than the living of
Chipping-Friars, I'm sure.—The only
thing that I see against it is, that that
paralytic incumbent may live many a
year.—But, then, you get your debts
paid now by only going into orders, and
that's a great point. ... but if it goes
against your conscience—you know best
—if you can't—you can't.”—
“After all, I can't go to jail—I can't let
myself be arrested—I can't starve—I can't
be a beggar,” said Buckhurst,—“and
as you say, I should be so easy if these
cursed debts were paid—and if I got this
living of nine hundred a year, how comfortable
I should be.—Then I could
marry, by Jove; and I'd propose directly
for Caroline Percy, for I'm confoundedly
in love with her—such a
sweet-tempered good creature!—not a
girl so much admired! Col. Hauton— 
and G&wblank;and P. and D&wblank;asked me,
—‘Who is that pretty girl?’—She certainly
is a very pretty girl.”—

“She certainly is,” repeated John,— 
This devil of a fellow never cleans my
gun.”—
“Not regularly handsome neither,” 
pursued Buckhurst.—“But, as Hauton
says, fascinating and now, and a new
face in public is a great matter.— 
Such a fashionable looking figure too— 
though she has not come out yet—dances
charmingly—would dance divinely, if
she would let herself out—and she sings
and plays like an angel, fifty times better
than our two precious sisters, who
have been at it from their cradles, with
all the Signor Squalicis at their elbows— 
Caroline Percy never exhibits in public.
—The mother does not like it, I suppose.”
“So I suppose,” said John.—“Curse
this flint!—flints are growing worse and
worse every day—I wonder what in the
world are become of all the good flints
there used to be—”
“Very unlike our mother, I am sure” 
—continued Buckhurst.—“There are

Georgiana and Bell at all the parties and
concerts as regularly as any of the professors,
standing up in the midst of the
singing men and women, favoring the
public in as fine a bravura style, and
making as ugly faces as the best of them.—Do
you remember the Italian's compliment
to Miss &wblank;?—“I vish,
Miss, I had your assurance.”—
“Very good, ha!—very fair, faith,” 
said John—“do you know what I've
done with my powder-horn?”—
“Not I—put it in the oven, may be,
to dry,” said Buckhurst.—“But as I
was saying of my dear Caroline ... My
Caroline!—She is not mine yet.”
“Very true,” said John.
“Very true! Why, John, you are
enough to provoke a saint!”
“I was agreeing with you, I thought,” 
said John.
“But nothing is so provoking as always
agreeing with one—and I can tell
you, Mr. Verytrue, that though Caroline
Percy is not mine yet, I have nevertheless

a little suspicion, that, such
even as I am, she might readily be
brought to love, honor, and obey me.”
“I don't doubt it, for I never yet
knew a woman that was not ready
enough to be married”—quoth John.— 
“But this is not the right ramrod after
all.”—
“There you are wrong, John, on the
other side,” said Buckhurst—“for I
can assure you, Miss Caroline Percy is
not one of your young ladies who would
marry any body. And even though she
might like me, I am not at all sure that
she would marry me—for obedience to
the best of fathers might interfere.”
“There's the point,” said John,— 
“for thereby hangs the fortune, and it
would be a deused thing to have the girl
without the fortune.”
“Not so deused a thing to me, as
you think,” said Buckhurst, laughing— 
“for poor as I am, I can assure you, the
fortune is not my object—I am not a
mercenary dog.”

“By the by,” cried John—“now
you talk of dogs ... I wish to Heaven
above! you had not given away that fine
puppy of mine to that foolish old man,
who never was out a shooting in his
days, the dog's just as much thrown
away, as if you had drowned him.—Now,
do you know, if I had had the making
of that puppy—”
—“Puppy!” exclaimed Buckhurst
—“is it possible you can be thinking
of a puppy, John, when I am talking
to you of what is of so much consequence?
—When the whole happiness
of my life is at stake?”—
—“Stake!—Well, but what can I
do more?” said John—“have not I been
standing here this half hour with my
gun in my hand this fine day, listening
to you prosing about I don't know
what?”—
“That's the very thing I complain
of—that you do not know what—a pretty
brother,” said Buckhurst.
John made no further reply, but left

the room, sullenly, whistling as he
went.
Left to his own cogitations, Buckhurst
fell into a reverie upon the charms
of Caroline Percy, and upon the probable
pleasure of dancing with her at
the race-ball; after this, he recurred to
the bitter recollection, that he must decide
about his debts, and the church.
A bright idea came into his mind, that
he might have recourse to Mr. Percy,
and, perhaps, prevail upon him to persuade
his father not to force him to a
step, which he could not reconcile either
to his conscience or his inclination.— 
No sooner thought than done.—He
called for his horse and rode as hard as
he could to Percy-Hall.—When a boy,
he had been intimate in the Percy family; 
but he had been long absent at
school and at the University; they had
seen him only during the vacations, and
since his late return to the country.
Though Mr. Percy could not entirely approve
of his character, yet he thought

there were many good points about
Buckhurst; the frankness and candor
with which he now laid his whole mind
and all his affairs open to him—debts— 
love—fears—hopes—follies—faults— 
without reserve or extenuation, interested
Mr. Percy in his favor.—Pitying his distress,
and admiring the motives from
which he acted, Mr. Percy said, “that
though he had no right to interfere in
Mr. Falconer's family affairs, yet that
he could, and would, so far assist Buckhurst,
as to lend him the money for
which he was immediately pressed, that
he might not be driven by necessity to
go into that profession, which ought to
be embraced only from the highest and
purest motives.” Buckhurst thanked him
with transports of gratitude for this generous
kindness, which was far beyond
his expectations, and which, indeed,
had never entered into his hopes. Mr.
Percy seized the moment when the
young man's mind was warmed with
good feelings, to endeavour to bring him

to serious thoughts and rational determinations
about his future life. He represented,
that it was unreasonable to
expect that his father should let him go
into the army, when he had received an
education to prepare himself for a profession,
in which his literary talents
might be of advantage both to himself
and his family; that Mr. Falconer was
not rich enough to forward two of his
sons in the army; that if Buckhurst,
from conscientious motives, declined the
provision which his father had in view
for him in the church, he was bound to
exert himself to obtain an independent
maintenance in another line of life—that
he had talents which would succeed at
the bar, if he had application and perseverance
sufficient to go through the
necessary drudgery at the commencement
of the study of the law.—
Here Buckhurst groaned.—But Mr.
Percy observed, “that there was no
other way of proving that he acted from
conscientious motives respecting the

church, for otherwise it would appear,
that he preferred the army only because
he fancied it would afford a life of idleness
and pleasure.—That this would also
be his only chance of winning the approbation
of the object of his affections,
and of placing himself in a situation in
which he could marry.—Buckhurst,
who was capable of being strongly influenced
by good motives, especially
from one who had obliged him, instantly,
and in the most handsome manner,
acknowledged the truth and justice of
Mr. Percy's arguments, and declared
that he was ready to begin the study of
the law directly, if his father would consent
to it; and that he would submit to
any drudgery rather than do what he
felt to be base and wrong. Mr. Percy,
at his earnest request, applied to Mr.
Falconer, and with all the delicacy that
was becoming, claimed the right of relationship
to speak of Mr. Falconer's
family affairs, and told him what he had
ventured to do about Buckhurst's debts;

and what the young man now wished
for himself.—The Commissioner looked
much disappointed and vexed.
“The bar!” cried he—“Mr. Percy,
you don't know him as well as I do. I
will answer for it, he will never go
through with it—and then he is to
change his profession again!—and all
the expense and all the trouble is to fall
on me!—and I am to provide for him at
last!—In all probability, by the time
Buckhurst knows his own mind, the paralytic
incumbent will be dead, and the
living of Chipping-Friars given away.— 
And where am I to find nine hundred
a year, I pray you, at a minute's notice,
for this conscientious youth, who, by
that time, will tell me his scruples were
all nonsense, and that I should have
known better than to listen to them.
Nine hundred a year does not come in
a man's way at every turn of his life;— 
and if he gives it up now it is not my
fault, let him look to the consequences.”
Mr. Percy replied, “that Buckhurst

had declared himself ready to abide by
the consequences, and that he promised
he would never complain of the lot he
had chosen for himself, much less reproach
his father for his compliance,
and that he was resolute to maintain
himself at the bar.”
“Yes: very fine.—And how long
will it be before he makes nine hundred
a year at the bar?”
Mr. Percy, who knew that none but
worldly considerations made any impression
upon this father, suggested that
he would have to maintain his son during
the life of the paralytic incumbent,
and the expense of Buckhurst's being at
the bar would not probably be greater; 
and though it might be several years before
he could make nine hundred or,
perhaps, one hundred a year, at the
bar, yet that if he succeeded, which,
with Buckhurst's talents, nothing but
the want of perseverance could prevent,
he might make nine thousand a year by
the profession of the law,—more than in

the scope of human probability, and
with all the patronage his father's address
could procure, he could hope to
obtain in the church.
“Well, let him try—let him try,” 
repeated the Commissioner, who, vexed
as he was, did not choose to run the risk
of disobliging Mr. Percy, losing a good
match for his son, or undergoing the
scandal of it's being known that he forced
his son into the church.
For obtaining this consent, however
reluctantly granted by the Commissioner,
Buckhurst warmly thanked Mr. Percy,
who made one condition with him, that
he would go up to town immediately to
commence his studies.
This Buckhurst faithfully promised to
do, and only implored permission to declare
his attachment to Caroline.—Caroline
was at this time not quite eighteen,
too young, her father said, to
think of forming any serious engagement,
even were it with a person suited to her
in fortune and in every other respect.—

Buckhurst declared, that he had no
idea of endeavoring, even to obtain
from Miss Caroline Percy, any promise
or engagement.—He had been treated,
he said, too generously by her father, to
attempt to take any step without his
entire approbation.
He knew he was not, and could not,
for many years, be in circumstances
that would enable him to support a
daughter of Mr. Percy's in the station to
which she was, by her birth and fortune,
entitled.—All he asked, he repeated,
was, to be permitted to declare to her
his passion.
Mr. Percy thought it was more prudent
to let it be declared openly than to
have it secretly suspected, therefore he
consented to this request, trusting much
to Buckhurst's honor and to Caroline's
prudence.—Even at this early age she
had raised in the minds of those who
knew her best a confidence in her judgment
and discretion.
To this first declaration of love Caroline

listened with a degree of composure,
which astonished and mortified her lover.
He had flattered himself that, at least,
her vanity or pride would have been apparently
gratified by her conquest.— 
But there was none of the flutter of vanity
in her manner, nor any of the repressed
satisfaction of pride. There was
in her looks and words only simplicity
and dignity.—She began by assuring
Buckhurst, that she knew nothing of
love, and that she wished, whilst she
was still so young, to keep her affections
disengaged. She said, that she was at
present occupied happily in various
ways, endeavoring to improve herself,
and that she should be sorry to have her
mind turned from these pursuits; she
desired to secure time to compare and
judge of her own tastes, and of the characters
of others, before she should make
any engagement, or form an attachment
on which the happiness of her life must
depend. She said, she was equally desirous
to keep herself free, and to avoid

injuring the happiness of the man who
had honored her by his preference:
therefore she requested he would discontinue
a pursuit, which she could not encourage
him to hope would ever be successful.
—Long before the time when she
should think it prudent to marry, even
if she were to meet with a character perfectly
suited to hers, she hoped that her
cousin, Buckhurst, would be united to
some woman who would be able to return
his affection.
The manner in which all this was said
convinced Buckhurst, that she spoke the
plain and exact truth. From the ease
and frankness with which she had hitherto
conversed with him, he had flattered
himself, that it would not be difficult
to prepossess her heart in his favor; 
but now, when he saw the same ease
and simplicity unchanged in her manner,
he was convinced that he had been mistaken.
—He had still hopes that in time
he might make an impression upon her,
and he urged that she was not yet sufficiently

acquainted with his character
to be able to judge whether or not it
would suit hers. She frankly told him
all she thought of him, and in doing so
impressed him with the conviction, that
she had both discerned the merits and
discovered the defects of his character:
she gave him back a representation of
himself, which he felt to be exactly just,
and yet which struck him with all the
force of novelty.
“It is myself,”—he exclaimed—“But
I never knew myself till now.”
He had such pleasure in hearing Caroline
speak of him, that he wished even
to hear her speak of his faults—of these
he would, however, have been better
pleased, if she had spoken with less calmness
and indulgence.
“She is a great way from love as yet,” 
thought Buckhurst.—“It is astonishing,
that with powers and knowledge on all
other subjects so far above her age, she
should know so little even of the common
language of sentiment—very extraordinary,

that with so much kindness,
and such an amiable disposition, she
should have so little sensibility.”—
The novelty of this insensibility, and
of this perfect simplicity, so unlike all
he had observed in the manners and
minds of other young ladies to whom he
had been accustomed, had, however, a
great effect upon her lover. The openness
and unaffected serenity of Caroline's
countenance at this moment appeared
to him more charming, than any other
thing he had ever beheld in the most
finished coquet, or the most fashionable
beauty.
What a divine creature she will be a
few years hence! thought he.—The
time will come, when Love may waken
this Psyche!—And what glory it would
be to me to produce to the world such
perfection!—
With these mixed ideas of love and
glory, Buckhurst took leave of Caroline; 
still he retained hope in spite of her calm
and decided refusal. He knew the

power of constant attentions, and the
display of ardent passion, to win the female
heart. He trusted also in no slight
degree to the reputation he had already
acquired of being a favorite with the
fair sex.