

Things were in this situation, when,
one day, Marriott made her appearance
at her lady's toilette, with a face, which
at once proclaimed, that something had
discomposed her; and that she was impatient
to be asked what it was.
“What is the matter, Marriott?” said
lady Delacour; “for I know you want me
to ask.”
“Want you to ask! O dear, my lady,
no!—for I'm sure, it's a thing that goes
quite against me to tell; for I thought,
indeed, my lady, superiorly of the person

in question; so much so, indeed, that I
wished, what, I declare, I should now be
ashamed to mention, especially in the presence
of miss Portman, who deserves the
best that this world can afford of every
denomination. Well, ma'am, in one
word,” continued she, addressing herself
to Belinda, “I am extremely rejoiced,
that things are as they are; though, I confess,
that was not always my wish or opinion,
for which I beg Mr. Vincent's pardon
and yours; but I hope to be forgiven,
since I'm now come entirely round to my
lady Anne Percival's way of thinking,
which I learnt, from good authority, at
Oakly-park; and I am now convinced, and
confident, miss Portman, that every
thing is for the best.”
“Marriott will inform us, in due course
of time, what has thus suddenly and happily
converted her,” said lady Delacour
to Belinda, who was thrown into some surprise
and confusion by Marriott's address
but Marriott went on with much warmth—
“Dear me! I'm sure I thought we had

got rid of all double-dealers, when the
house was cleared of Mr. Champfort; but,
O mercy! there's not traps enough in
the world for them all; I only wish they
were all caught, as finely as some people
were, in a trap t'other night—'Tis what all
double-dealers, and Champfort at the head
of the whole regiment, deserves; that's
certain.”
“We must take patience, my dear
Belinda,” said lady Delacour, calmly,
“till Marriott has exhausted all the expletives
in and out of the English language; 
and presently, when she has fought
all her battles with Champfort over again,
we may hope to get at the fact.”
“Dear! my lady, it has nothing to do
with Mr. Champfort, nor any such style
of personage, I can assure you; for, I'm
positive, I'd rather think contemptibly of
a hundred million Mr. Champforts, than
of one such gentleman as Mr. Clarence
Hervey.”
“Clarence Hervey!” exclaimed lady
Delacour. Taking it for granted, that Belinda

blushed, though in fact she did not,
her ladyship, with superfluous address, instantly
turned, so as to hide her friend's
face from Mrs. Marriott. “Well, Marriott,
what of Mr. Hervey?”
“O! my lady, something you'll be
surprised to hear, and miss Portman too.
It is not, by any means, that I am more
of a prude than is becoming, my lady; 
nor, that I take upon me to be so innocent,
as not to know, that young gentlemen
fortune will, if it be only for
fashion's sake, have such things as kept
mistresses, (begging pardon for mentioning
such trash.) But no one, that has lived
in the world, thinks any thing of that; 
except,” added she, catching a glimpse of
Belinda's countenance,—“except, to be
sure, ma'am, morally speaking, it's very
wicked and shocking, and makes one blush
before company, till one's used to it, and
ought certainly to be put down by act of
parliament, ma'am; but, my lady, you
know, in point of surprising any body, or
being discreditable in a young gentleman

of Mr. Hervey's fortune and pretensions,
it would be mere envy and scandal, to
deem it any thing—worth mentioning.”
“Then, for mercy's sake, or mine,” 
said lady Delacour, “go on to something
that is worth mentioning.”
“Well, my lady, you must know, then,
that yesterday I wanted some hempseed
for my bullfinch—miss Helena's bullfinch,
I mean; for it was she found it by
accident, you know, miss Portman, the
day after we came here; poor thing, it got
itself so entangled in the net over the morello
cherry tree, in the garden, that it
could neither get itself in nor out; but
very luckily, miss Helena saw it, and saved,
and brought it in: it was almost dead,
my lady.”
“Was it?—I am very sorry for it:—I
mean—that is what you expect me to say.
—Now, go on—get us once passed the
bullfinch, or tell us what it has to do with
Clarence Hervey.”
“That is what I am aiming at, as fast

as possible, my lady.—So, I sent for some
hempseed for the bullfinch, and along
with the hempseed they brought me,
wrapped round it, as it were, a printed
handbill, as it might be, or advertisement,
which I threw off, disregardingly, taking it
for granted, it might have been some of
those advertisements for lozenges or razorstraps,
that meet one wherever one goes; 
but miss Delacour picked it up, and
found it was a kind of hue and cry after a
stolen or strayed bullfinch. Ma'am, I
was so provoked, I could have cried, when
I learnt it was the exact description of our
little Bobby to a feather—gray upon the
back, and red on—”
“O! spare me the description to a
feather.—Well, you took the bird, bullfinch,
or Bobby, as you call it, home to
it's rightful owner, I presume.—Let me get
you so far on your way.”
“No, I beg your pardon, my lady,
that is not the thing.”
“Then you did not take the bird home

to it's owner—and you are a bird-stealer?— 
With all my heart—be a dog-stealer, if you
will—only go on.”
“But, my lady, you hurry me so, it
puts every thing topsyturvy in my head; 
I could tell it as fast as possible my own
way.”
“Do so, then.”
“I was ready to cry, when I found our
little Bobby was claimed from us, to be
sure; but miss Delacour observed, that
those, with whom it had lived till it was
gray, must be sorrier still to part with it,
so I resolved to do the honest and genteel
thing by the lady who advertised for it,
and to take it back myself, and to refuse
the five guineas reward offered. The
lady's name, according to the advertisement,
was Ormond.”
“Ormond!” repeated lady Delacour,
looking eagerly at Belinda; “was not that
the name sir Philip Baddely mentioned to
us—you remember?”—
“Yes; Ormond was the name, as well
as I recollect,” said Belinda, with a degree

of steady composure, that provoked
her ladyship.—“Go on, Marriott.”
“And the words were, to leave the bird
at a perfumer's in Twickenham, opposite to
—; but that's no matter.—Well, my
lady, to the perfumer's I went with the bird,
this morning. Now, I had my reasons for
wishing to see this Mrs. Ormond myself,
because, my lady, there was one thing
rather remarkable about this bullfinch,
that it sings a very particular tune, which
I never heard any bullfinch, or any human
creature sing any thing like before; 
so I determined, in my own cogitations,
to ask this Mrs. Ormond to name the tunes
her bullfinch could sing, before I produced
it; and if she made no mention of it's
knowing any one out of the common way,
I resolved to keep my bird to myself, as
I might very conscientiously and genteelly
too. So, my lady, when I got to the
perfumer's, I inquired where Mrs. Ormond
was to be found? I was told, that
she received no visits from any, at least
from the female sex; and that I must

leave the bird there till called for. I was
considering what to do, and the strangeness
of the information made about the
female sex, when in there came, into the
shop, a gentleman, who saved me all the
indelicacy of asking particulars. The bullfinch
was at this time piping away at a
fine rate, and, as luck would have it, that
very remarkable strange tune that I mentioned
to you.—Says the gentleman, as
he came into the shop, fixing his eyes on
the bullfinch as if they would have come
fairly out of his head—‘How did that
bird come here?’—‘I brought it here,
sir,’ said I. Then he began to offer me
mountains of gold, in a very strange way,
if I could tell him any tidings of the lady,
to whom it belonged. The shopman,
from behind the counter, now bent forward,
and whispered the gentleman, that
he could give him some information, if he
would make it worth his while; and they
both went together to a little parlour behind
the shop, and I saw no more of
them. But, my lady, very opportunely

for me, that was dying with curiosity, out
of the parlour they turned a young woman
in, to attend the shop, who proved to be
an acquaintance of mine, whom I had
done some little favours to when in service
in London.—And this young woman,
when I told her my distress about the
advertisement and the bullfinch, let me
into the whole of the affair.—‘Ma'am,’ 
said she, ‘all that is known about Mrs.
Ormond, in this house, or any where else,
is from me; so there was no occasion for
turning me out of the parlour. I lived
with Mrs. Ormond, ma'am,’ says she,
‘for half a year, in the very house she now
occupies, and consequently nobody can
be better informed than I am:’—to which
I agreed. Then she told me, that the
reason that Mrs. Ormond never saw any
company of any sort was, because she is
not fit to see company—proper company
—for she's not a proper woman. She has
a most beautiful young creature there,
shut up, who has been seduced, and is
now deserted in a most cruel manner by

a Mr. Hervey. O, my lady! how the
name struck upon my ear!—I hoped,
however, it was not our Mr. Hervey, but
it was the identical Mr. Clarence Hervey.
I made the young woman describe him,
for she had often and often seen him, when
he visited the unfortunate creature; and
the description could suit none but our
Mr. Hervey; and besides, it put it beyond
a doubt, she told me his linen was
all marked C. H.—So our Mr. Hervey,
ma'am;” added Marriott, turning to Belinda,
“it certainly proved to be, to my
utter dismay and confusion.”
“O, Marriott! my poor head!” exclaimed
lady Delacour, starting from
under her hands—“that cruel comb went
at least half an inch into my head: heads
have feeling as well as hearts, believe me.” 
And, as she spoke, she snatched out the
comb, with which Marriot had just fastened
up her hair, and flung it on a sofa, at some
yards distance. Whilst Marriot went to
fetch it, lady Delacour thought that Belinda
would have time to recover from

that utter dismay and confusion, into
which she hoped that she must now be
thrown. Her ladyship was again disappointed,
when she examined Belinda's countenance.
—Come, Marriott, make haste,
I have done at least you a great favour, for
you have all this hair to perform upon again,
and you will have leisure to finish this story
of yours—which, at all events, if it is not
in any other respects wonderful, we must
allow, is wonderfully long.”
“Well, my lady, to be short, then— 
I was more curious than ever, when I heard
all this, to hear more; and asked my
friend, how she could ever think of staying
in a house with ladies of such a description?
Upon which she justified herself,
by assuring me, upon her honour, that
at first she believed the young lady was
married privately to Mr. Harvey, for that
a clergyman came in secret, and read
prayers, and she verily believes, that the
unfortunate young creature was deceived
babarously, and made to fancy herself married
to all intents and purposes, till at

once Mr. Hervey threw off the mask, and
left off visiting her, pretending a necessity
to take a journey, and handing her
over to that vile woman, that Mrs. Ormond,
who bid her be comforted, and
all the things that are said by such women,
on such occasions, by all accounts. But
the poor deluded young thing saw how it
was now too plain, and she was ready to
break her heart; but not in a violent,
common sort of way, ma'am, but in silent
grief, pining and drooping. My
friend could not stand the sight, nor endure
to look upon Mrs. Ormond, now she
knew what she was, and so she left the
house, without giving any reason, immediately.
I forgot to mention, that the
unfortunate girl's maiden name was St.
Pierre, my lady; but her christian name,
which was rather an out o' the way name,
I quite forget.”
“No matter,” said lady Delacour, “we
can live without it; or we can imagine it.”
“To be sure, I beg pardon, such sort
of people's names can't be of any consequence,

and, I'm sure, I blame myself
now for going to the house, after all I had
heard.”
“You did go to the house, then?”
“To my shame be it spoken; my curiosity
got the better of me, and I went— 
but only on account of the bullfinch, in
the eyes of the world. It was a great while
before I could get in; but I was so firm,
that I would not give up the bird to no
one but the lady herself, that I got in at
last. O! never did my eyes light upon
so beautiful a creature, nor so graceful,
nor so innocent to look at!”—Belinda
sighed—Marriott echoed the sigh, and
continued: “She was by herself, and in
tears, when I was shown in, ma'am, and
she started as if she had never seen any
body before in her life. But when she saw
the bullfinch, ma'am, she clapped her
hands, and, smiling through her tears like
a child, she ran up to me, and thanked
me again and again, kissing the bird between
times, and putting it into her bosom.
Well, I declare, if she had talked to all

eternity, she could never have made me
pity her half so much as all this did, for
it looked so much like innocence. I'm
sure, nobody that was not—or, at least,
that did not think themselves innocent,
could have such ways, and such an innocent
affection for a little bird. Not
but what I know, ladies of a certain description
often have birds; but, then, their
fondness is all affectation and fashion; but
this poor thing was all nature. Ah! poor
unfortunate girl, thought I—but it's no
matter what I thought now,” said Marriott,
shutting her eyes, to hide the tears
that came into them at this instant; “I
was ashamed of myself, when I saw Mrs.
Ormond just then come into the room,
which made me recollect what sort of company
I was in. La! my lady, how I detested
the sight of her! She looked at me,
too, more like a dragon than any thing
else; though in a civil way, and as if she
was frightened out of her wits, she asked
miss St. Pierre, as she called her, how I
had got in, (in a whisper)? and she made

all sort of signs afterward to her, to go
out of the room. Never having been in
such a situation before, I was quite robbed
of all fluency, and could not,—what with
the anger I felt for the one, and sorrow for
the other,—get out a word of common
sense, or even recollect what pretence
brought me into the room, till the bird
very luckily put it into my head, by beginning
to sing: so, then, I asked, whether
they could certify it to be theirs by any
particular tune of its own? ‘O! yes,’ 
said miss St. Pierre; and she sung the
very same tune. I never heard so sweet
a voice; but, poor thing, something came
across her mind in the middle of it, and
she stopped; but she thanked me again
for bringing back the bird, which she
said, had been hers for a great many years,
and that she loved it dearly. I stood, I
believe, like one stupified, till I was roused
by the woman's offering to put the five
guineas reward, mentioned in the advertisement,
into my hand. The touch of
her gold made me start, as if it had been a

snake, and I pushed it from me; and when
she pressed it again, I threw it on the table,
scarce knowing what I did; and just
then, in her iniquitous hand, I saw a letter,
directed to Clarence Hervey, esq. O!
how I hated the sight of his name, and
every thing belonging to him, ma'am, at
that minute. I'm sure, I could not have
kept myself from saying something quite
outrageous, if I had not taken myself out
of the house, as I did, that instant.
“When there are women enough born
and bred good for nothing—and ladies
enough to flirt with, that would desire no
better, that a gentleman like Mr. Clarence
Hervey, ma'am, should set his wits, as
one may say, to be the ruin of such a
sweet, innocent looking young creature; 
and then desert her in that barbarous way,
after bringing a clergyman to deceive her
with the mock ceremony, and all—O!
there's no fashion, nor nothing can countenance
such wickedness! 'tis the worst of
wickedness and cruelty—and I shall think
and say so to the latest hour of my life.”

“Well said, Marriott,” cried lady
Delacour.
“I always thought, that Marriott had
a great deal of true spirit and feeling,” 
said Belinda.
“And now you know the reason,
ma'am,” added Marriott, “that I said,
I was glad things are as they are. To be
sure, I and every body once thought—but
that's all over now—and I am glad things
are as they are.”
Lady Delacour once more turned her
quick eyes upon Belinda, and was much
disappointed to see, by her countenance,
that she approved of Marriott's philosophy,
even more than she sympathised in
her indignation.
“Not jealous!” thought her ladyship; 
“then it is all over with Clarence. If one
latent spark of love for him had remained
in her mind, anger, in spite of prudence,
would have blown it to a flame—but she
is not jealous, alas!—her love for Hervey
has been smothered by cold philosophy—

but I cannot yet think it possible, that it
is utterly extinguished.”
In the evening, when they were alone,
lady Delacour touched upon the subject
again, and observed, that as they should
now, in all probability, see Mr. Harvey in
a few days, they might be able to form a
better judgment of this affair, which,
she doubted not, had been exaggerated.
“You should judge from the whole of
Clarence's conduct and character, and not
from any particular part,” said her ladyship.
“Do not his letters breathe a spirit
of generosity?”
“But,” interrupted miss Portman, “I
am not called upon to judge of Mr. Hervey's
whole conduct and character, nor of
any part of it; his letters and his generosity
are nothing—”
“To you?” said lady Delacour, with
a smile.
“This is no time, and no subject for raillery,
my dear friend,” said Belinda; “you
assured me, and I believed you, that the
idea of Mr. Hervey's return was entirely
out of the question, when you prevailed

upon me to delay my journey to Oakly park.
As I now understand, that your
ladyship has changed your mind, I
must request your ladyship will permit
me—”
“I will permit you to do what you
please, dearest Belinda, except to call me
your ladyship, twice in one minute. You
shall go to Oakly-park the day after to
morrow: will that content you, my dear?
I admire your strength of mind—you are
much fitter to conduct yourself, than I am
to conduct you. I have done with raillery
—my first, my only, object is your happiness
—I respect and esteem as much as I
love you, and I love you better than any
thing upon earth—power excepted, you
will say—power not excepted, believe me; 
and, if you are one of those strange people,
that cannot believe without proof,
you shall have proof positive upon the
spot,” added she, ringing the bell as she
spoke. “I will no longer contend for
power over your mind, with your friend at
Oakly-park. I will give orders, in your
presence, to Marriott, to prepare for our

march—I did not call it retreat; but
there is nothing shows so much generalship
as a good retreat, unless it be a great
victory. I am, I confess, rather prejudiced
in favour of victory.”
“So am I,” said Belinda, with a smile.
“I am so strongly prejudiced in favour of
victory, that rather than obtain no other,
I would even be content with a victory
over myself.”
Scarcely had Belinda pronounced these
words, when lord Delacour, who had
dined in town, entered the room, accompanied
by Mr. Vincent.
“Give me leave, lady Delacour, to
introduce to you,” said his lordship, “a
young gentleman, who has a great, and, I
am sure, a most disinterested desire to cultivate
your ladyship's further acquaintance.”
Lady Delacour received him with all
the politeness imaginable; and even her
prepossessions in favour of Clarence Hervey
could not prevent her from being
struck with his appearance. “ll à infiniment

l'air d'un heros, de roman,” thought
she, and Belinda is not quite to great a
philosopher as I imagined. In due time
her ladyship recollected, that she had orders
to give to Marriott about her journey,
that made it absolutely necessary she should
leave miss Portman to entertain Mr. Vincent,
“if possible, without her,” for a few
minutes; and lord Delacour departed, contenting
himself with the usual excuse of
—letters to write.
“I ought to be delighted with your
gallantry, Mr. Vincent,” said Belinda, “in
travelling so many miles, to remind me of
my promise about Oakly-park; but, on
the contrary, I am sorry you have taken so
much unnecessary trouble: lady Delacour
is, at this instant, preparing for our journey
to Mr. Percival's. We intend to set
out the day after to morrow.”
“I am heartily glad of it—I shall be
infinitely overpaid for my journey, by
having the pleasure of going back with
you.”
“More gallantry!—But come,” said Belinda,

“tell me, seriously, the real motive
of your visit; for I see, that something
passes in your mind, which you have
not told me.”
“Nothing, dear Belinda, is so agreeable
to me as perfect openness and sincerity.
I admire it in you, and I am proud of it
in myself; but may it not be carried too
far? Is it wise, to say what must give
pain, when it is not absolutely necessary?
For instance, if you heard any thing injurious
to my character, would you think it
kind to repeat it, when you were not in
the least inclined to believe it?”
“Yes; I should think it not only kind; 
but, I should now consider it as absolutely
incumbent upon me. You may, therefore,
without hesitation, mention what
you have heard of me.”
Mr. Vincent put into her hands the following
anonymous letter.

“Rash young man! beware of connecting
yourself with the lady, to whom you
have lately been drawn in to pay your addresses.

She is the most artful of women.
She has been educated, as you may find upon
inquiry, by one, whose successful trade it
has been, to draw in young men of fortune
for her nieces, whence she has obtained the
appellation of the matchmaker general.
The only niece, whom she could not get
rid of any other way, she sent to the most
dissipated and unprincipled viscountess in
town. The viscountess fell sick, and, as
it was universally reported last winter, the
young lady was, immediately upon her
friend's death, to have been married to the
viscount widower. But the viscountess
detected the connexion, and the young
lady, to escape from her friend's rage,
and from public shame, was obliged to retreat
to certain shades in the neighbourhood
of Harrowgate; where she passed
herself for a saint upon those, who were
too honourable themselves to be suspicious
of others.
“At length the quarrel between her and
the viscountess was made up, by her address
and boldness, in declaring, that if

she was not recalled, she would divulge
some secrets respecting a certain mysterious
boudoir in her ladyship's house. This
threat terrified the viscountess, who sent off
express for her late discarded humble companion.
The quarrel was hushed up, and
the young lady is now with her noble
friend at Twickenham. The person, who
used to be let up the private stairs, into
the boudoir, by Mrs. Marriott, is now
more conveniently received at Twickenham.”
Much more was said by the letter-writer,
in the same strain. The name of Clarence
Hervey, in the last page, caught Belinda's
eye; and with a trepidation, which she did
not feel at the beginning of this epistle,
she read the conclusion.
“The viscount is not supposed to have
been unrivalled in the young lady's favour.
A young gentleman, of large fortune, great
talents, and uncommon powers of pleasing,
has, for some months, been her secret
object; but he has been prudent
enough to escape her matrimonial snares,

though he carries on a correspondence
with her, through the means of her friend,
the viscountess, to whom he privately
writes. The noble lady has bargained to
make over to her confidante all her interest
in Hervey's heart. He is expected every
day to return from his tour; and, if the
schemes upon him can be brought to bear,
the promised return to the neighbourhood
of Harrowgate will never be thought of.
Mr. Vincent will be left in the lurch; he
will not even have the lady's fair hand— 
her fair heart is Clarence Hervey's, at all
events. Farther particulars shall be communicated
to Mr. Vincent, if he pays due
attention to this warning from
“A SINCERE FRIEND.”

As soon as Belinda had finished this curious
production, she gave her hand to Mr.
Vincent, with more kindness than she had
ever before shown him.
“I thank you, Mr. Vincent, for showing
me this attempt to injure my reputation.
It was not only handsome, but

wise. If ever we are united, this will lay
a sure foundation for the confidence
which supports domestic happiness. The
mean author of this falsehood could never
have foreseen, that I should have told
you every thing, which it concerns you
to know, relative to my former life.
It has, indeed, mentioned Mr. Hervey's
name, which I did not think myself at
liberty to reveal, because I might, perhaps,
have seemed to impute some blame
to him. I am, however, glad of this discovery,
because I am sure he must appear
to you a man of worth and talents. His
name excites no emotion in my mind, that
could give you pain.”
Vincent's answer must be supposed:
the enraptured acknowledgments of a lover
are scarcely interesting upon the stage,
where action and the theatre support the
sympathy of the audience. Narration
feebly supports enthusiasm, without these
advantages.
It is sufficient to say, that Mr. Vincent
thought himself at the summit of felicity:

with the utmost alacrity, he consented to
show the anonymous letter to lady Delacour,
though he had previously dreaded
the effect, which it might have upon her
ladyship's feelings.
Her first exclamation was—“This is
one of Harriot Freke's frolics;” but as
her ladyship's indignation against Mrs.
Freke had long since subsided into utter
contempt, she did not waste another
thought upon the writer of this horrible
letter; but, instantly, the whole energy of
her mind, and fire of her eloquence, burst
forth in an eulogium upon her friend.
Careless of all that concerned herself, she
explained, without a moment's hesitation,
every thing that could exalt Belinda: she
described all the difficult circumstances, in
which her friend had been placed; she
mentioned the secret, with which she had
been entrusted; the honour with which,
even at the hazard of her own reputation,
she had kept her promise of secresy inviolable,
when lord Delacour, in a fit of
intoxication and jealousy, had endeavoured

to wrest from Marriott the key of the
mysterious boudoir. She confessed her
own absurd jealousy, explained how it
had been excited by the artifices of Champfort
and sir Philip Baddely, how slight
circumstances had worked her mind up
almost to phrenzy. “The temper, the dignity,
the gentleness, the humanity, with
which Belinda bore with me, during this
paroxysm of madness,” said lady Delacour,
“I never can forget; nor the spirit
with which she left my house, when she
saw me unworthy of her esteem, and ungrateful
for her kindness; nor the magnanimity
with which she returned to me,
when I thought myself upon my deathbed:
all this has made an impression upon
my soul, which never, whilst I have life
and reason, can be effaced. She has saved
my life. She has made my life worth saving.
She has made me feel my own
value. She has made me know my own
happiness. She has reconciled me to my
husband. She has united me with my
child. She has been my guardian angel.

—She, the confidante of my intrigues!— 
she leagued with me in vice!—No, I am
bound to her by ties stronger than vice
ever felt; than vice, even in the utmost
ingenuity of it's depravity, can devise.”
Exhausted by the vehemence with
which she had spoken, lady Delacour
paused; but Vincent, who sympathized in
her enthusiasm, kept his eyes fixed upon
her, in hopes that she had yet more to
say.—
“I might, perhaps, you will think,” 
continued she, smiling, “have spared you
this history of myself, and of my own
affairs, Mr. Vincent; but I thought it
necessary to tell you the plain facts, which
malice has distorted into the most odious
form. This is the quarrel, this is the reconciliation,
of which your anonymous
friend has been so well informed. Now
as to Clarence Hervey.”
“I have explained to Mr. Vincent,” 
interrupted Belinda, “every thing that he
could wish to know, with respect to him.
I now wish you to tell him, that I faithfully

remembered my promise to return to
Oakly-park, and that we were actually
preparing for the journey.”—
“Look here, sir,” cried lady Delacour,
opening the door of her dressing-room, in
which Marriott was upon her kness, locking
a trunk; “here's dreadful note of
preparation.”
Mr. Vincent renewed his thanks to Belinda,
and his protestations, that she was
wasting her time, by endeavouring to make
his assurance of her goodness ‘doubly secure.’
“You are a happier man than you yet
know, Mr. Vincent,” continued lady Delacour,
“for I can tell you, that some
persuasion, some raillery, and some wit,
I flatter myself, have been used, to detain
miss Portman from you.”
“From Oakly-park,” interrupted Belinda.
“From Oakly-park,” &c.—a few days
longer—Shall I be frank with you, Mr.
Vincent?—Yes, for I cannot help it.
—I am not of the nature of anonymous
letter-writers: I cannot, either secretly

or publicly, sign or say myself a sincere
friend, without being one to the utmost
extent of my influence. I never give my
vote without my interest, nor my interest
without my vote. Now, Clarence Hervey
is my friend. Start not at all, sir—you
have no reason; for if he is mine, miss
Portman is yours. Which has the better
bargain?—But as I was going to tell you,
Mr. Clarence Hervey is my friend, and I
am his. My vote, interest, and influence,
have consequently been all in his favour.
I had reason to believe, that he has long
admired the dignity of miss Portman's
mind, and the simplicity of her character,” 
continued her ladyship, with an
arch look at Belinda; “and though he
was too much a man of genius, to begin
with the present tense of the indicative
mood, ‘I love,’ yet I was, and am convinced,
that he does love her.”
Can you, dear lady Delacour,” cried
Belinda, “speak in this manner, and
recollect all we heard from Marriott yesterday?
And to what purpose all this?”

“To what purpose, my dear? To convince
your friend, Mr. Vincent, that I am
neither fool nor knave; but that I deal
fairly by you, by him, and by all the
world. Mr. Hervey's conduct towards
miss Portman has, I acknowledge, sir,
been undecided. Some circumstances have
lately come to my knowledge, which throw
doubts upon his honour and integrity:— 
doubts, which I firmly believe, he will
clear up to my satisfaction at least, as
soon as I see him, or as soon as it is in
his power; with this conviction, and believing
as I do, that no man upon earth
is so well suited to my friend, pardon
me, Mr. Vincent, if my wishes differ from
yours: though my sincerity may give you
present, it may save you from future, pain.”
“Your ladyship's sincerity, whatever
pain it may give me, I admire,” said Mr.
Vincent, with some pride in his manner; 
“but I see, that I must despair of the honour
of your ladyship's congratulations.”
“Pardon me,” interrupted lady Delacour; 
“there you are quite mistaken—the

man of Belinda's choice must receive my
congratulations—he must do more—he
must become my friend. I would never
rest till I had won his regard, nor should
I in the least be apprehensive, that he
would not have sufficient greatness of mind,
to forgive my having treated him with a
degree of sincerity, which the common
forms of politeness cannot justify, and at
which common souls would be scandalized,
past recovery.”
Mr. Vincent's pride was entirely vanquished
by this speech; and with that
frankness, by which his manners were usually
characterized, he thanked her for having
distinguished him from common souls; 
and assured her, that such sincerity as hers
was infinitely more to his taste, than that
refined politeness, of which, he was aware,
no one was more perfect mistress than
lady Delacour.
Here their conversation ended, and Mr.
Vincent, as it was now late, took his leave.
“Really, my dear Belinda,” said lady Delacour,
when he was gone, “I am not surprised

at your impatience to return to
Oakly-park; I am not so partial to my
knight, as to compare him, in personal accomplishments,
with your hero. I acknowledge
also, that there is something vastly
prepossessing in the frankness of his manners; 
he has behaved admirably well,
about this abominable letter; but, what is
better than all in a lady's eyes, he is
éperdument amoureux.”
“Not éperdument, I hope,” said Belinda.
“Then, as you do not think it necessary
for your hero to be éperdument amoureux,
I presume,” said lady Delacour, “you do
not think it necessary, that a heroine should
be in love at all. I hope Mr. Vincent is
of the same opinion.”
“I hope so,” said Belinda, “for we
shall then agree perfectly.”
“So love and marriage are to be separated
by philosophy, as well as by fashion.
This is lady Anne Percival's doctrine?
I give Mr. Percival joy. I remember

the time, when he fancied love essential
to happiness.”
“I believe, he not only fancies, but is
sure of it now, from experience.”
“Then he interdicts love only to his
friends? He does not think it essential,
that you should know any thing about the
matter. You may marry his ward, and
welcome, without being in love with
him.”
“But not without loving him,” said
Belinda.
“Absolutely you blushed, my dear, as
you pronounced those words. And you
can blush about loving Mr. Vincent?”
“I hope, and I believe, that I shall never
have any reason to blush for loving him,” 
said Belinda.
“A deeper crimson!—Good Heavens!
—Can I believe my senses? Was it the
blush of anger or of love?”
“Not of anger,” said Belinda. Lady
Delacour was silent some moments.
“And is it possible, that you are seriously
attached to this man?”

“Where is the impossibility? You will
see none, my dear friend, when you are as
thoroughly acquainted with his good qualities
as I am.”
“Good qualities! but we don't fall in
love with good qualities, my dear.”
“But we love them, and that is better,
I must be allowed to repeat, that there is a
great deal of difference between loving and
being in love.”
“As you know from experience? Why,
I protest, you do not change colour, much,
at the recollection of Clarence Hervey! You
have at length convinced me, that it is all
over with him. We all know ‘qu'un petit
nez retroussé peut renverser les loix d'un
empire.’ But what is un petit nez retroussé,
compared with an aquiline nose?”
“It is a comparison that I never made,” 
said Belinda.
“You confess, however, that you think
him handsome: and I candidly acknowledge,
as I told you at first, that Mr. Vincent
has much the advantage of Clarence
Hervey, in personal accomplishments.”

“Certainly. But were he an Adonis, he
would not have made any impression upon
me, instantly. We gradually acquire a
knowledge of the good qualities of those,
who endeavour to please us; and if they
are really amiable, their persons become
agreeable to us by degrees, we become
accustomed to their addresses, and time—”
“Accustomed!” said lady Delacour,
laughing; “forgive me, my dear—but I
cannot help laughing—you put me in mind
of Mr. Transfer, in Zeluco; the merchant,
who disliked his nephew, because
he was not accustomed to him; and afterward,
when he became accustomed to
him, if I remember right, liked him vastly
well. But you surpass Transfer: never
before did I hear a woman talk of liking a
lover, because she was accustomed to him.”
“And did you never hear of any body's
liking a husband better from being accustomed
to him?” said Belinda.
“One does grow accustomed to disagreeable
things, certainly; and it is well
one does,” said lady Delacour, a little embarrassed.
“But at this rate, my dear, I

do not doubt, but you might become accustomed
to Caliban.”
“My belief in the reconciling power
of custom does not go quite so far,” said
Belinda, laughing. “It does not extend
to Caliban, or even to la belle et la
bête. Though you have seen a french audience
applaud with raptures, and an english
audience tolerate, Zemire and Azor.”
“Faites moi le plaisirma chère d'orienter votre
royaume d'habitude,” said lady Delacour.
“Do me the favour, previously, to define
the boundaries of the realm of Novelty; 
you must allow, that Novelty has precedence; 
therefore, show me all her titles first.”
“I acknowledge,” said lady Delacour,
“that Novelty and Custom divide the
world of fancy. The young are subjects to
the one, the old to the other. You see,
that I myself yield to my proper sovereign; 
but the youthful Belinda should follow
the enterprising standard of Novelty.”
“If Novelty must at last abandon her
conquests, it is surely prudent,” said Belinda,
“to attach ourselves to the permanent
victor.”

“My dear Belinda, there can be no
custom without previous novelty; you
therefore begin at the wrong end.”
“I think not; for, saying that I begin
to be accustomed to Mr. Vincent, is in
terms granting, that he has been new to
me. Now, seriously I think, that beside
religion, morality, honour, prudence, and
all the satellites, which guard the virtue of
our sex; the force of custom is not to be
disregarded: I do not mean, merely the
customs of the world, but those which
prevent us from suddenly thinking of any
person as a lover.”
“You have been told so by your aunt
Stanhope, I will answer for it. Yes; what
her history may have been, I know not; 
but whenever her maxims do not revolt
against my feelings, I am glad to learn by her
experience. Your aunt Stanhope is not
wrong for once. Even Harriot Freke allows,
that, though new love is charming, there is
something awkward in the reception of a
new lover.”

“You will permit me, then, my dear
lady Delacour, to say, without being
laughed at, that I am accustomed to Mr.
Vincent; and that though I do not like
him merely from habit, I could not like
him as well as I do, without it.
“I am forced to acknowledge, that you
are right, my dear,” said lady Delacour,
“and I am sorry for it.”
Belinda sat down playfully at her piano-forte,
and sang that beautiful french air,
which concludes with,
“Un peu d'amour, un peu de soin,
Menent souvent un cœur bien loin.”