

Now for the visit to Hungerford-Castle
—a fine old place in a beautiful park,
which excelled many parks of greater
extent by the uncommon size of it's
venerable oaks. In the castle, which
was sufficiently spacious to accommodate
with ease and perfect comfort the troops
of friends, which it's owner's beneficent
character drew round her, there were
apartments that usually bore the name of
some of those persons, who were considered
as the most intimate friends of
the family.—The Percys were of this
number.—They found their own rooms
ready, the old servants of the house rejoicing
to see them again, and eager in
offering their services. Many things
showed that they had been thought of,
and expected; yet there was nothing

that could remind them, that any change
had taken place in their fortune; no
formal, or peculiar civilities from the
mistress of the house, from her daughter,
or nieces,—neither more, nor less
attention than usual; but by every thing
that marked old habits of intimacy and
confidence, the Percys were, as if undesignedly
and necessarily, distinguished
from other guests.—
Of these the most conspicuous was
the Lady Angelica Headingham.—Her
Ladyship had lately come to a large
estate, and had consequently produced a
great sensation in the fashionable world.
During the early part of her life she had
been much and injudiciously restrained.
The moment the pressure was taken off,
the spirit boiled with surprising rapidity.
—Immediately Lady Angelica Headingham
shone forth a beauty, a bel-esprit,
and a patroness, and though she appeared
as it were impromptu in these
characters, yet to do her justice, she
supported them with as much spirit,

truth, and confidence, as if she had been
in the habit of playing them all her life,
and as if she had trod the fashionable
stage from her teens. There was only
one point in which, perhaps, she erred.
From not having been early accustomed
to flattery, she did not receive it with
quite sufficient nonchalance. The adoration
paid to her in her triple capacity by
crowds of worshippers only increased
the avidity of her taste for incense, to
receive which, she would now and then
stoop lower, than became a goddess.— 
She had not yet been suspected of a real
partiality for any of her admirers, though
she was accused of giving each just as
much encouragement as was necessary
to turn his head.—Of these admirers,
two, the most eager and earnest in the
pursuit, had followed her Ladyship to
the country, and were now at Hungerford-Castle.
Sir James Harcourt, and
Mr. Barclay.
Sir James Harcourt was remarkably
handsome and fashionable—completely

a man of the world, and a courtier; who,
after having ruined his fortune by standing
for Government two contested county
elections, had dangled year after year
at court, living upon the hope and promise
of a pension, or a place, till his
creditors warning him, that they could
wait no longer, he had fallen in love with
Lady Angelica Headingham.—Her Ladyship's
other admirer, Mr. Barclay, was
a man of considerable fortune, of good
family, and of excellent sense and character.
He had arrived at that time of
life, when he wished to settle to the quiet
enjoyment of domestic happiness. But
he had seen so much misery arise from
unfortunate marriages, among some of
his particular friends, that he had been
afraid of forming any attachment, or at
least, engagement. His acquaintance
with fashionable life had still further rendered
him averse from matrimony; and
from love he had defended himself with
infinite caution, and escaped, till in an
unlucky moment he had met with Lady

Angelica. Against his better judgment,
he had been captivated by her charms
and talents: his reason, however, still
struggled with his passion, he had never
actually declared his love; but the lady
knew it probably better than he did, and
her caprice and coquetry cost him many
an agonizing hour.—All which he bore
with the silence and patience of a martyr.—
When the Percy family saw Lady
Angelica for the first time, she was in
all her glory,—fresh from a successful
toilette, conscious of renovated powers,
with an accumulated spirit of animation,
and inspired by the ambition to charm a
new audience. Though past the bloom
of youth, she was a handsome showy
woman, with the air of one who requires
and receives admiration. Her attitudes,
her action, and the varied expression she
threw into her countenance, were more
than the occasion required, and rather
too evidently designed to interest or to
fascinate. She was surrounded by a

group of gentlemen, Sir James Harcourt,
Mr. Barclay, Mr. Seebright, a young
poet; Mr. Grey, a man of science; and
others—personnages muets.—Arduous as
was the task, Lady Angelica's various
powers, and indefatigable exertion proved
capable of keeping each of these different
minds in full play, and in high
admiration, even at the most difficult and
dangerous of all times, the critical half
hour before dinner.
Beauties are always curious about
beauties, and wits about wits.—Lady
Angelica had heard, that one of the Miss
Percys was uncommonly handsome.
Quick as eye could glance, her Ladyship's
passed by Mrs. Percy and Rosamond
as they entered the room, fixed
upon Caroline, and was satisfied.—There
was beauty enough to alarm, but simplicity
sufficient to remove all fears of
rivalship.—Caroline entered, without any
prepared grace or practised smile, but
merely as if she was coming into a room.
—Her two friends, the Lady Pembrokes,

instantly placed her between them, her
countenance expressing just what she
felt, affectionate pleasure at seeing them.
“A sweet pretty creature, really!”— 
whispered Lady Angelica, to her admirer
in waiting, Sir James Harcourt.—
“Ye ... ye ... yes—but nothing
marquante,” replied Sir James.—
Mr. Barclay's eye followed, and fixed
upon Caroline with a degree of interest.
—The room was so large, and they were
at such a distance from Caroline, who
was now occupied in listening to her
friends, that Lady Angelica could continue
her observations without fear of
being overheard.
“There is something so interesting in
that air of simplicity!” pursued her Ladyship,
addressing herself to Mr. Barclay— 
“Don't you think there is a wonderful
charm in simplicity?—'tis a pity
it can't last—it is like those delicate
colors, which always catch the taste the
moment they are seen, by which I've
been taken in a hundred times, and have

now forsworn for ever—treacherous colors
that fade, and fly even while you look at
them.”
“That is a pity,” said Mr. Barclay,
withdrawing his eyes from Miss Caroline
Percy.
“A thousand pities,” said Lady Angelica.
“Perhaps, in the country, this
delicate charm might possibly, and with
infinite care and caution, last a few
years, but in town it would not last a
season.”
“True—too true,”—said Mr. Barclay.—
“For which reason,” pursued Lady
Angelica, “give me something a little
more durable, something that can stand
what it must meet with in the world.
Fashion for instance, though not half
so charming till we are used to it
... or knowledge, though often dearbought; 
or genius, though doubly taxed
with censure; or wit, though so hard to
be had genuine ... any thing is better

than a faded charm, a has-been-pretty
simplicity.”
“When it comes to that, it is lamentable
indeed,” said Mr. Barclay.—He
seemed to wish to say something more
in favor of simplicity, but to be overpowered
by wit.—
Sir James shrugged his shoulders, and
protested that “simplicity had something
too fade in it, to suit his taste.”—
All this time, where was Colonel Hungerford?
—He had been expected to arrive
this day—but a letter came to tell
his mother, that he was detained by indispensable
military business, and that,
he feared, he could not for some weeks
have the pleasure of being at home.— 
Every one looked and felt disappointed.—
“So,” thought Rosamond, “we shall
be gone before he comes, and he will
not see Caroline!”—
“So!”—said Lady Angelica, to herself
—“He will not see me.”—

Rosamond was somewhat comforted
for her disappointment, by observing,
that Caroline was not quite lost upon
Mr. Barclay, preoccupied though he
was with his brilliant mistress.—
She thought he seemed to notice the
marked difference there was in their
manner of passing the day.—
Lady Angelica, though she would
sometimes handle a pencil, touch the
harp, or take up a book, yet never was
really employed.—
Caroline was continually occupied.
In the morning, Caroline usually sat
with Rosamond and the two Lady Pembrokes,
in a little room called the Oriel,
which opened into the great library.
Here in happy retirement Caroline and
Rosamond looked over Mrs. Hungerford's
select library, and delighted to read the
passages, which Mrs. Hungerford had
marked with approbation. At other
times, without disturbing the rest of the
company, or being disturbed by them,
Caroline enjoyed the opportunity of cultivating

her talents for music and painting,
with the assistance of her two
friends, who eminently excelled in these
accomplishments.
All this time Lady Angelica spent in
talking to show her wit, or lounging to
show her grace. Now and then her
Ladyship condescended to join the young
people, when they went out to walk, but
never, unless they were attended by gentlemen.
—The beauties of nature have
come into fashion of late, and Lady Angelica
Headingham could talk of bold
outlines, and sublime mountains, the
charming effects of light and shade, fine
accidents, and rich foliage—spring verdure
and autumnal tints,—whilst Caroline
could enjoy all these things, without
expecting to be admired for admiring
them. Mrs. Mortimer was planting a
new shrubbery, and laying out a ride
through the park. Caroline took an unaffected
interest in all her plans;— 
whilst Lady Angelica was interested
only in showing how much she remembered

of Price, and Repton, and Knight.
She became too hot or too cold, or she
was tired to death the moment she ceased
to be the principal object of attention.
—But, though her Ladyship was
thus idle by day, she sometimes worked
hard by night ... hard as Butler is
said to have toiled in secret, to support
the character of an idle universal genius,
who knows every thing without studying
any thing.—From dictionaries and
extracts, abridgments and beauties of various
authors,—here, and there, and every
where, she picked up shining scraps, and
often by an ostentation of superficial
knowledge succeeded in appearing in
conversation to possess a vast extent of
literature, and to be deeply skilled in
matters of science, of which she knew
nothing, and for which she had no
taste.
Mr. Seebright, the poet, was easily
duped by this display; he expressed the
most flattering astonishment, and pronounced
her Ladyship to be a universal

genius. He looked up to Lady Angelica
for patronage. He was so weak, or
so ignorant of the world, as to imagine,
that the patronage of a fashionable literary
lady of high rank would immediately
guide the opinion of the public,
and bring a poet forward to fortune and
fame.—With these hopes he performed
his daily, hourly duty of admiration to
his fair patroness, with all possible zeal
and assiduity—but it was observed by
Rosamond, that, in conversation, whenever
Mr. Seebright had a new idea or a
favorite allusion to produce, his eye involuntarily
turned, first to Caroline; and
though he professed, on all points of
taste and criticism, to be implicitly governed
by Lady Angelica Headingham,
there was “a small still voice, to which
he more anxiously listened.”
As to Mr. Grey, the man of science
—he soon detected Lady Angelica's ignorance; 
smiled in silence at her blunders,
and despised her for her arts of
pretence. In vain, to win his suffrage,

she produced the letters of various men
of note and talents, with whom she was
in correspondence; in vain she talked of
all the persons of rank, who were her
relations or dear friends.
“She should be so happy to introduce
him to this great man, or to mention
him to that great lady—She should
be so proud, on her return to town, to
have Mr. Grey at her esprit parties—She
would have such and such celebrated
characters to meet him, and would have
the pleasure and honor of introducing
him to every person worth knowing in
town.”
With all due civility Mr. Grey declined
these offers. There were few persons,
the pleasure or honor of whose
company could compensate to him for
the loss of his time, or equal the enjoyment
he had in his own occupations; 
and those few he was so happy to have
for his friends—he did not wish to form
new acquaintance—he never went to
conversaziones—he was much obliged to

her Ladyship, but he did not want to
be introduced or mentioned to great
men or great women. The nature of
his fame was quite independent of fashion.
—In this respect men of science
have much the advantage of men of
taste. Works of taste may, to a certain
degree, be cried up or cried down by
fashion. The full-fledged bard soars superior,
and looks down at once upon the
great and little world: but the young
poet, in his first attempts to rise, is
often obliged, or thinks himself obliged,
to have his wing imp'd by patronage.
With all her resources, however, both
of patronage and of bel-esprit, Lady Angelica
was equally surprised and mortified,
to find herself foiled at her own
arms by a girl whom nobody knew—She
changed her manœuvres—she thought
she could show Miss Caroline Percy,
that, whatever might be her abilities,
her knowledge, or her charms, these
must all submit to a superior power— 
the power of fashion. Caroline having

lived in the country, could not know
much of the world of fashion.—This
was a world from which she thought she
could move every other at pleasure.
Her conversation was no longer of books,
of which all of equal talents were competent
to form a judgment; but her talk
was now of persons, with whom no one,
who had not lived in the great world,
could pretend to be acquainted, much
less could presume to judge. Her Ladyship
tried in vain to draw Mrs. Hungerford
and Mrs. Mortimer to her aid; 
they were too well-bred, to encourage
this exclusive and unprofitable conversation.
But her Ladyship knew, that
she could be sufficiently supported by
Sir James Harcourt; he prided himself
upon knowing and being known to every
body, that is anybody, in London; he had
an inexhaustible fund of town and court
anecdote; was always au courant du jour.
What an auxiliary for Lady Angelica!
—But though their combined operations
were carried on with consummate skill,

and though the league offensive was
strictly kept with every demonstration of
mutual amity that could excite jealousy,
or express contempt for rival powers; 
yet the ultimate purpose was not gained
—Caroline was not mortified, and Mr.
Barclay was not jealous.—At least, if he
was, he did not show it sufficiently to
afford any triumph—He sometimes
looked as if his heart would break, but
never as if it would bend.—As to Caroline,
in vain her Ladyship blazoned
forth her fashionable titles to distinction; 
Caroline was not amazed at the Right
Honorable array that was mustered before
her. She was absolutely content,
without being able to tell who were, or
were not, to be married this year, or
who had been, or who were to be divorced.
She could even employ herself,
or be amused with her own thoughts,
just as well and as happily whilst all
this fashionable technical tattle was going
on, as if nothing was said, and as if nobody
was present. This strange power

of abstraction, this stupid deficiency of
curiosity, this bliss of ignorance, and
quietude in silence, Lady Angelica
could not comprehend; but she felt that
it baffled all her “eloquence to vex,” and
rendered nugatory her whole system of
exclusive conversation.—
One morning Lady Angelica and Sir
James Harcourt were looking over some
portraits of the beauties of King Charles
the Second's time: Caroline was looking
at them also, and for some time a conversation
was carried on with the express
intent of mortifying her. Every portrait,
whose style of beauty at all resembled
hers, Sir James and Lady Angelica depreciated,
and affected to dislike or to
despise: every face, which by any means
could be likened to Lady Angelica, Sir
James never failed to extol as fascinating.
Caroline was so free from all ideas of rivalship,
that she did not suspect them in
others. She was surprised at the extraordinary
judgments she heard pronounced,
and honestly expressed her own

different taste and opinion—Mrs. Mortimer
and Mr. Barclay both smiled at
this ingenuous simplicity—at length a
glance of Sir James Harcourt's, from one
of the portraits to Lady Angelica's face,
told the secret to Caroline, who, though
quite unsuspicious, was not, as Sir James
began to believe, dull of apprehension.
It was hoped, that she would now, when
she understood the meaning of what
passed, feel some degree of vexation; 
but, on the contrary, she submitted with
so good a grace, that it was evident she
was not in the least mortified by having
her own style of beauty undervalued by
this acknowledged and fashionable connoisseur.
—Mr. Barclay observed this,
and Lady Angelica saw that he observed
it.—Provoked by not being able to provoke
Caroline, and exasperated by Mr.
Barclay's look, her Ladyship continued
in exclusive conversation with Sir James
Harcourt, determined to excite Mr.
Barclay's jealousy, and to bend or break
his proud heart. Sir James admired her

in every Proteus form of affectation.
Mr. Barclay, as she thought, evidently
pained by her coquetry, retired from the
sofa where she sat, and went to Mrs.
Hungerford's table, where he took up a
book and began to read.—Lady Angelica
spared no art to distract his attention
—She contrived for herself an employment,
which called forth continual
exclamations of admiration, joy, despair,
which at first made Mr. Barclay turn
to see by what they could be caused; 
but when he found, that they were occasioned
only by the rise or fall of a
house of cards which she was building,
he internally said, “Pshaw!”—and,
afterwards kept his eyes fixed upon his
book.—Sir James continued to serve the
fair architect with the frail materials for
her building—her Folly, as she called it
—and for his services he received much
encouragement of smiles, and many
marked commendations&wblank;Mrs. Hungerford
called upon Mr. Barclay to read
a favorite poem of hers.

Mr. Barclay read remarkably well,
and soon fixed the attention of all the
company, except that of Lady Angelica
and her knight, Sir James Harcourt,
whom she detained in her service.
She could not be so flagrantly rude as to
interrupt the reader by audible exclamations,
but by dumb-show, by a variety
of gestures and pretty looks of delight
at every fresh story added to her
card edifice, and at every motion of
terror lest her tower should fall, her Ladyship
showed Mr. Barclay, that she was
not listening to that which she knew he
was particularly desirous that she should
hear—The moment the reader's voice
ceased, Lady Angelica approached the
table.
“Ten millions of pardons!” said she,
drawing some cards from beneath Miss
Caroline Percy's elbow which rested on
them.—“Unpardonable wretch that I
am, to have disturbed such a reverie!
and such an attitude!—Mr. Barclay,” 
continued her Ladyship, “now if you

have leisure to think of me, may I trouble
you for some of your little cards for
the attic of my dear Folly.”
Mr. Barclay coolly presented the cards
to her Ladyship. Then looked out of
the window, observed that his horse was
at the door, and was following Mr.
Percy out of the room, when Lady Angelica,
just as Mr. Barclay passed, blew
down her tower, and exclaimed—
“There's an end of my Folly, of one
of my follies I mean—I wish I could
blow them all away as easily.”
The sigh, and look of penitence, with
which she pronounced these words, were
accepted as explanation—Mr. Barclay
stopped, and returned; while sweeping
the wreck of her tower from the table,
she repeated:

“Easy, as when ashore an infant stands,
And draws imagin'd houses on the sands,
The sportive wanton, pleas'd with some new play,
Sweeps the slight works and fancied domes away:
Thus vanish at thy touch the tow'rs and walls,
The toil of mornings in a moment falls.”

“Beautiful lines,” said Mr. Barclay.
“And charmingly repeated!” said
Sir James Harcourt—“Are they your
Ladyship's own?”
“No; Homer's,” said she, smiling
—“Pope's Homer's, I mean.”
To cover his blunder as fast as possible,
Sir James went on to something
else, and asked, What her Ladyship
thought of Flaxman's Sketches from the
Iliad and Odyssey—“He had seen the
book lying on the library table yesterday
—indeed, his eye had been caught,
as it lay open, by a striking resemblance
 ... he knew it was very rude to talk of
likenesses ... but, really, the resemblance
was striking between a lady he
had in his view, and one of the figures in
Flaxman, of Venus, or Penelope, he
could not say which, but he would look
for the book and see in a moment.”
The book was not to be found on the
library table—Mrs. Hungerford said,
she believed it was in the Oriel—Sir

James went to look—Miss Caroline Percy
was drawing from it—that was unlucky,
for Mr. Barclay followed, stayed
to admire Miss Percy's drawings, which
he had never seen before—and in looking
over these sketches of hers from
Flaxman's Homer, and from Euripides
and Æschylus, which the Lady Pembrokes
showed him, and in speaking of
these, he discovered so much of Caroline's
taste, literature, and feeling, that he
could not quit the Oriel. Lady Angelica
had followed to prevent mischief,
and Mrs. Hungerford had followed to
enjoy the pleasure of seeing Caroline's
modest merit appreciated. Whilst Mr.
Barclay admired in silence, Sir James
Harcourt, not with his usual politeness,
exclaimed:
“I protest I had no notion, that Miss
Caroline Percy drew in this style.”—
“That's possible,” cried Lady Mary
Pembroke, coloring, with that prompt
indignation which she was prone to feel
when any thing was said that seemed

derogatory to her friends—“That's possible,
Sir James, and yet you find Miss
Caroline Percy does draw in this very
superior style—Yes: and it is the
perfection of her accomplishments, that
they are never exhibited.”
“You have always the pleasure of
discovering them,” said Mrs. Hungerford,
“they are as a woman's accomplishments
and acquirements ought to
be, more retiring than obtrusive; or as
my old friend, Dr. South, quaintly, but
aptly expresses it—more in intaglio than
in cameo.”
At this instant a sudden scream was
heard from Lady Angelica Headingham,
who caught hold of Mr. Barclay's arm,
and writhed as if in agony.
“Good Heavens! What is the matter?” 
—cried Mr. Barclay.
“Oh, cramp! cramp! horrid cramp!
in my foot—in my leg.”
“Rest upon me,” said Mr. Barclay
—“and stretch your foot out.”—
“Torture!—I can't”—It was

impossible that she could stand, without
the support of both gentlemen.
“Carry me to the sofa—There!”—
When they had carried her out of the
Oriel to the sofa in the library, and when
her Ladyship found, that she had excited
sufficient interest, and drawn the
attention of Mr. Barclay away from Caroline; 
her Ladyship began to grow a
little better, and by graceful degrees
recovered the use of her pretty limbs.— 
And now, as she had reason to be satisfied
with the degree of feeling, which Mr.
Barclay had involuntarily shown for her
when he thought she was ill, if her vanity
had had any touch of gratitude or
affection mixed with it, she would not
have taken this moment to torment the
heart of the man, ...the only man who
ever really loved her—But all in her
was vanity—She began to coquet with
Sir James Harcourt—she let him put
on her sandal and tie it's strings—She
sent him for her shawl, for she had

a mind to walk in the park—and when
Mr. Barclay offered to attend her, and
when she found that Caroline and the
Lady Pembrokes were going, she had a
mind not to go, and she resolved to detain
them all in admiration of her. She
took her shawl from Sir James, and
throwing it round her in graceful drapery,
she asked Sir James “if he had
ever seen any of Lady Hamilton's attitudes,
or rather scenic representations
with shawl drapery.”
“Yes, he had; but, he should be
charmed to see them in perfection from
her Ladyship.”—
Notwithstanding the hint Mrs. Hungerford
had given about exhibiting, and
notwithstanding Mr. Barclay's grave
looks, Lady Angelica, avowedly to
please Sir James Harcourt, consented to
give the exhibition of the passions.—She
ran into the Oriel—attired herself in a
most appropriate manner, and appeared
first in the character of Fear—then of

Hope—She acted admirably, but just
as
“Hope, enchanted, smil'd and wav'd her golden
hair,”
her Ladyship's auburn tresses caught
on some ornament in the room. The
whole fabric was raised a little from the
fair head on which it seemed to grow— 
Caroline sprang forward instantly, and
dexterously disentangling the accomplished
actress, relieved her from this
imminent and awkward peril.
“She is a sweet creature!”—cried
Mrs. Hungerford—“I beg pardon for
the exclamation—it was forced from my
heart,”—continued she, addressing herself
to Mrs. Percy—“A mother will
forgive me.”
“Every body thinks what Mrs. Hungerford
has expressed, I believe,” said
Mr. Barclay.
“I am sure I'm exceedingly obliged
to Miss Caroline Percy,” said her Ladyship,

adjusting her head-dress. “There,
now, all's right again—Thank you, Miss
Percy—Don't trouble yourself, pray”—
The heartless manner of these thanks,
and her Ladyship's preparing to go on
again with her exhibition, so displeased
and disgusted Mr. Barclay, that he left
her to the flattery of Sir James Harcourt,
and, sighing deeply, quitted the
room.—
Lady Angelica, proud of showing her
power of tormenting a man of his sense,
smiled victorious, and, in a half whisper,
said to Mrs. Hungerford—
“Exit Mr. Barclay, jealous, because
he thinks I did the shawl-attitudes for
Sir James, and not for him—Poor man,
he's very angry—But he'll ride it off
 ... or, I'll smile it off.”—
Mrs. Hungerford shook her head.— 
When her Ladyship's exhibition had
finished, and when Sir James had continued,
repeating, either with his words
or his looks—“Charming!—Is not
she charming!”—till the time of dressing;

an hour to which he was always
punctual; he retired to his toilette, and
Lady Angelica found herself alone with
Mrs. Hungerford.
“Oh! how tired I am!” cried her
Ladyship, throwing herself on a sofa
beside her. My spirits do so wear me
out—I am sure I'm too much for you,
Mrs. Hungerford; I am afraid you think
me a strange wild creature—But, dear
Madam, why do you look so grave?”
“My dear Lady Angelica Headingham,” 
said Mrs. Hungerford, in a serious
but affectionate tone, laying her
hand upon Lady Angelica's as she spoke,
“I was, you know, your mother's most
intimate friend—I wish to be your friend
—Considering this and my age, I think
I may venture to speak to you with more
freedom than any one else now living
could with propriety—It grieves me to
see such a woman as you are, spoiling
by adulation.”
“Thank you, my dear Mrs. Hungerford,
and now do tell me all my

faults,” said Lady Angelica—“Only
first let me just say, that if you are
going to tell me that I am a coquet, and
a fool, I know I am—both—and I can't
help it—And I know I am what some
people call odd—But I would not for the
world be a common character.”—
“Then you must not be a conquet,” 
said Mrs. Hungerford, “for that is a
common character—the hacknied character
of every play, of every novel.
And whatever is common is vulgar, you
know—airs and affectation are common
and paltry—throw them aside, my dear
Lady Angelica—disdain flattery—prove
that you value your own esteem above
vulgar admiration, and then, with such
beauty and talents as you possess, you
may be, what you admire, an uncommon
character.”
“May be!” repeated Lady Angelica,
in a voice of vexation—“Well I know I
have a hundred faults, but I never before
heard any body, friend or enemy, deny
that I am an uncommon character—

Now, Mrs. Hungerford, do you know
any one of a more uncommon character?”
“Yes,” said Mrs. Hungerford, smiling
— “I know the thing that's most
uncommon,
“I know a reasonable woman,
Handsome and witty, yet a friend.”—
“Oh! your friend, Miss Caroline
Percy, I suppose—Well! though she is
so great a favorite of yours, I must say,
that, to my fancy, she is as little of an
uncommon character as any girl I ever
saw—uncommon beauty, I acknowledge,
she has, though not the style of face I
like.”
“And an uncommonly good understanding.”
“May be so, I don't dispute it, and
uncommon learning for any thing I know
to the contrary—but all this is not what
I call character.”
“Nor I,” said Mrs. Hungerford.

“Then, what makes her an uncommon
character?”
“Her having this knowledge, understanding,
and beauty, without one grain
of vanity, affectation, or envy.”
“Stay till you see her tried,” said
Lady Angelica; stay till she has gone
through one winter's campaign in London
—Stay, till she has as many admirers
as ...”
“As you have,” ... said Mrs. Hungerford,
smiling—“she seems to be in a
fair way of soon trying that experiment
to your satisfaction.”
—A considerable pause ensued; 
during which many conflicting passions
appeared in Lady Angelica's countenance.
—
“After all—Mrs. Hungerford,” resumed
she, “do you think Mr. Barclay
is really attached to me?”
“I think he was really attached to
you, and strongly—But you have been
doing all you can ... forgive me, I

would not speak so harshly, but to secure
your future happiness ... you have
been doing all you can, to weaken and
destroy his attachment—I fear”. ...
“Fear nothing!”—“I fear nothing,” 
exclaimed Lady Angelica, “now you
tell me—Dear Mrs. Hungerford!—that
you do not doubt the reality of his love
—All the rest I will answer for—Trust
to me, I know my game.”
Mrs. Hungerford sighed—and replied
—“I am old, have stood by, and seen
this game played and lost so often, and
by as able players as Lady Angelica
Headingham—take care—Remember I
warn you.”
Miss Caroline Percy came into the
room at this instant—Lady Angelica
went to her toilette to repair her charms.