

Letter from Godfrey Percy to Mrs. Percy.
London, the British Hotel.
“You will be surprised, my dear mother,
to find that I am in London, instead
of being, as I had hoped I should
have been by this time, with the army
on the Continent. Just as we were going
to embark, we were countermanded,
and ordered to stay at our quarters.
Conceive our disappointment&wblank;To remain
in garrison at the most stupid, idle
country town in England.—
“You ask, how I like my brother-officers,
and what sort of men they are?
—Major Gascoigne, son to my father's
friend, I like extremely; he is a man of

a liberal spirit, much information, and
zeal for the army.—But what I particularly
admire in him is his candor.—He
says it is his own fault that he is not
higher in the army—that when he was
a very young man, he was of too unbending
a temper—mistook bluntness for
sincerity—did not treat his superior officer
with proper deference—lost a good
friend by it.—
“A fine lesson for me!—and the better
because not intended.—
“Next to Gascoigne I like Captain
Henry,—a young man of my own age,
uncommonly handsome, but quite free
from conceit. There is something in his
manners so gentlemanlike, and he is of
so frank a disposition, that I was immediately
prepossessed in his favor.—I don't
like him the worse for having a tinge of
proper pride, especially in the circumstances
in which he is placed. I understand,
that it is suspected he is not of a
good family; but I am not intimate or
impertinent enough to inquire into particulars.

I have been told, that when
he first came into the regiment, some of
the officers wanted to make out what
family of the Henrys he belongs to, and
whether he is, or is not, one of the Irish
Henrys. They showed their curiosity
in an unwarrantable manner, and Henry,
who has great feeling, and a spirit as
quick to resent injury as to be won by
kindness, was going to call one of these
gentlemen to account for their impertinence.
He would have had half a dozen
duels upon his hands, if Gascoigne had
not settled them. I have not time to
tell you the whole story—but it is
enough to say, that Major Gascoigne
showed great address and prudence, as
well as steadiness, and you would all
love Captain Henry for his gratitude— 
he thinks Gascoigne a demigod.
“The rest of my brother officers are
nothing supernatural—just what you
may call mere red-coats—some of them
fond of high play—others fond of drinking—so
I have formed no intimacy but

with Gascoigne and Henry,—my father
will see, that I do not yet think that the
officers of my own mess must all be the
first men in the Universe.—
“Love to all at home—I hope we
shall sail soon, and I hope Rosamond
will give me credit for the length of this
letter.—She cannot say, with all her malice,
that my lines are at hooting distance,
or that my words are stretched out like
a lawyer's—two good pages, count which
way you will!—and from Godfrey, who
is not a letter-writer, as Alfred is!—Two
good pages did I say? why, here's the
best part of a third for you, if you allow
me to be,
My dear Mother,
with much respect,
Your dutiful, obedient,
and affectionate Son,
Godfrey Percy.”
Whilst Godfrey remained in quarters
at this most idle and stupid of country
towns, some circumstances occurred in

the regiment, which put his prudence to
trial, and, sooner than he expected, called
upon him for the exercise of that spirit
of forbearance and temper, which he had
promised his mother he would show.— 
It was the more difficult to him to keep
his temper, because it was an affair
which touched the interest of his friend,
Major Gascoigne. The Lieutenant-colonel
of the regiment having been promoted,
Major Gascoigne had reasonable
expectations of succeeding him, but, to
his disappointment, a younger man than
himself, and a stranger to the regiment,
was put over his head. It was said, that
this appointment was made in consequence
of the new Colonel's being a nephew
of Lord Skreenes, and of his also
having it in his power to command two
votes in parliament.
For the truth of this story we cannot
pretend to vouch. But the credit the
report gained in the regiment created
great discontents; which the behaviour
of the new Lieutenant-colonel unfortunately

was not calculated to dissipate.— 
He certainly did not bear his honors
meekly, but, on the contrary, gave himself
airs of authority, and played the
martinet to a useless and ridiculous degree.
This, from a mere parade officer,
who had never been out of London, to a
man like the Major—who had seen service
and could show wounds, was, to use
the mildest expression, ill judged.—Captain
Henry said it was intolerable—and
Godfrey thought so.—
The Lieutenant-colonel certainly did
not know his own interest, for, by a little
proper attention, he might readily have
conciliated Major Gascoigne, who was
a man of a generous and good temper.
But the new sprung Colonel was more
severe upon Gascoigne, with whom he
was always finding fault, to show his
knowledge, and always in the wrong, as
Major Gascoigne very quietly and satisfactorily
proved.—Every parade day
something unpleasant occurred, and,
when it was talked over, some of the

officers took part with Gascoigne, and
some with the Lieutenant-colonel—very
few, however, with the latter, only those
who wanted to keep in favor—Officers in
quarters, as these were, had not much to
do, therefore, they had the more time
for disputes, which became of more and
more consequence every hour. Major
Gascoigne behaved incomparably well,
never failing in respect towards his superior
officer when he was present, and
when he was absent, doing all that was
possible to restrain the imprudent zeal
and indignation of his young friends.
One day, when Godfrey, Captain
Henry, and Major Gascoigne, were
alone together, the Major actually knelt
down to Henry, to prevail upon him
to give up a mad design of challenging
his Colonel.
That very day, not an hour afterwards,
the Lieutenant-colonel took occasion
to thwart the Major about some
circumstance of no consequence.—Godfrey's
blood boiled in his veins—his promise

to his mother, that he would be as
gentle as a lamb, he recollected at this
instant—with difficulty he restrained
himself—still his blood boiled.—Major
Gascoigne's fear, that Godfrey and Henry
should embroil themselves for his sake,
increased, for he saw what passed in
their hearts, and he had no peace of
mind by day, or rest by night. Godfrey
slept in the next room to the Major,
there was only a wooden partition between
the heads of their beds. In the
middle of the night, Godfrey heard Major
Gascoigne cry out vehemently in his
sleep, and utter at different times the
following broken sentences:
“Captain Percy!—Henry! if you do,
I will never forgive it! You'll ruin yourself—Shoot
me at once rather!”—
Then floundering about, thump went
his head against the wooden partition,
and this wakened him. The generous
anxiety he thus sleeping and waking
showed, lest his friends should get into
difficulties on his account, particularly

touched Godfrey. Generous people are,
of all others, the most touched by generosity,
either of feeling or action.—In
this state of irritation it was not possible,
that things should long go on without
coming to a crisis. Major Gascoigne
proposed, as the measure that would be
most likely to restore and preserve peace,
to quit the regiment.—It was a great
sacrifice on his part, and, at first, none
of his friends would consent to his making
it; but, at last, he brought them all
to acknowledge that it was, upon the
whole, the best thing that could be done.
Gascoigne had a friend, a Major, in another
regiment then in England, who
was willing to make an exchange with
him, and he thought that the business
could be arranged without much difficulty.
However, from caprice, the love
of showing his power, or from some unknown
reason, the Lieutenant-colonel
made it his pleasure to oppose the exchange,
and said that it could not be
done, though, as Captain Henry said,

every body knew, that by his writing a
line to Lord Skreene, it would have been
accomplished directly. It now recurred
to Godfrey, that Cunningham Falconer,
being secretary to Lord Oldborough,
might be of use in this affair. Cunningham
had always professed the greatest
regard for Godfrey, and he was determined,
at least, to make this trial of
his sincerity.
The secretary sent a civil answer in
an official style, explaining “that his
Office was not the War-Office, concluding
by an assurance, that if Captain Percy
could point out how he could do so with
propriety, nothing could give Mr. C.
Falconer greater pleasure, than to have
an opportunity of obliging him.”
Now Captain Percy, having a sort of
generous good faith about him, believed
this last assurance; fancied that as he
was no great writer, he had not explained
himself well by letter, and, that he
should make Cunningham understand
him better viva voce. Keeping his own

counsel, and telling only Major Gascoigne
and Captain Henry his object,
he asked for a fortnight's leave of absence,
and, with some difficulty, obtained
it.—He went to London, waited on Secretary
Falconer, and found him ten
times more official in his style of conversation,
than in his letters. Godfrey recollected,
that his cousin Cunningham
had always been solemnly inclined, but
he now found him grown so mysterious,
that he could scarcely obtain a plain
answer to the simplest question. “The
whole man, head and heart, seemed” as
Godfrey said, “to be diplomatically
closed.” It was clear, from the little
that Cunningham did articulate, that he
would do nothing in furthering the exchange
desired for Major Gascoigne; 
but, whether this arose from his having
no influence with Lord Oldborough, or
from his fear of wearing it out, our
young officer could not determine. He
left the Secretary in disgust and despair,
and went to wait on Commissioner Falconer,

who gave him a polite invitation
to dinner, and overwhelmed him with
professions of friendship; but, as soon
as Godfrey explained his business, the
Commissioner protested that he could
not venture to speak to Lord Oldborough
on such an affair, and he earnestly
advised him not to interest himself so
much for Major Gascoigne, who, though
doubtless a very deserving officer, was,
in fact, nothing more: “What selfish
cowards all these courtier people are!” 
—said Godfrey to himself.—He next had
recourse to Buckhurst Falconer, and
asked him to persuade Colonel Hauton
to speak to his uncle upon the subject.
This Buckhurst immediately promised
to do, and kept his promise. But Colonel
Hauton swore that his uncle never,
on any occasion, listened to his representations,
therefore, it was quite useless
to speak to him.—After wandering
from office to office, wasting hour after
hour, and day after day, waiting for
people who did him no good, when he

did see them, Godfrey at last determined
to do what he should have done at first
—apply to Lord Oldborough. It is always
better to deal with principals than
with secondaries.—Lord Oldborough had
the reputation of being inaccessible,
haughty, and peremptory in the extreme; 
the secretaries, clerks, and under-clerks,
trembled at his name, each
under each, through all their ranks of
venality. But to Captain Percy's surprise,
the moment his name was announced,
the minister immediately recognised
him, and received him most
graciously. His Lordship inquired after
his old friend Mr. Percy—said that Mr.
Percy was one of the few really independent
men he had ever known.—
“Mr. Percy is an excellent country
gentleman, and, for England's sake, I
wish there were many, many more such.
—Now, Sir, how can I serve his son?”—
With frankness and brevity which
suited the minister and the man, Godfrey
told his business, and Lord Oldborough

with laconic decision, equally
pleasing to the young soldier, replied,
“that if it was possible, the thing should
be done for Major Gascoigne,”—inquired
how long Captain Percy purposed
to stay in town—desired to see him the
day before he should leave London, and
named the hour.
All the diplomacy of Cunningham
Falconer's face could not disguise his
astonishment, when he saw the manner
in which his master treated Godfrey.— 
The next day the Commissioner invited
Captain Percy in a pressing manner
to dine with him: “We shall have
a very pleasant party,” said Mr. Falconer,
“and Mrs. Falconer insists upon
the pleasure of your company—you
have never seen my girls since they were
children—your own near relations!—you
must be better acquainted—Come—I
will take no denial.”—
Godfrey willingly accepted the invitation:
he would, perhaps, have found
means to have excused himself, had he

known whom he was to meet at this dinner&wblank;Miss
Hauton—the dangerous
fair one, whom he had resolved to avoid.
But he was in the room with her, and
beyond all power of receding, before he
knew his peril. The young lady looked
more beautiful than ever, and more melancholy.
One of the Miss Falconers
took an opportunity of telling him, in
confidence, the cause of her poor friend's
dejection. “Her uncle, Lord Oldborough,
wants to marry her to the Marquis
of Twickenham, the eldest son of
the Duke of Greenwich, and Miss Hauton
can't endure him.”
The Marquis was also at this dinner— 
Godfrey did not much wonder at the lady's
dislike—for he was a mean, peevish-looking
man, had no conversation, and
appeared to be fond of drinking.
“But Lord Oldborough, who is all for
ambition,” whispered Miss Falconer,
“and who maintains that there is no such
thing as love, except in novels, says, that
his niece may read foolish novels after

marriage as well as before, if she pleases,
but that she must marry like a reasonable
woman.”
Godfrey pitied her&wblank;and whilst he
was pitying, Mrs. Falconer arranged a
party for the Opera for this night, in which
Godfrey found himself included.—Perhaps
he was imprudent—but he was a
young man, and human nature is ...
human nature—
At the Opera Godfrey felt his danger
increase every moment. Miss Hauton
was particularly engaging, and many circumstances
conspired to flatter his vanity,
and to interest him for this fair victim
of ambition. Her Marquis was in the box,
smelling of claret, and paying his devoirs to
his intended bride, apparently very little to
her satisfaction. Commissioner Falconer,
leaning from the back row, complimented
Miss Hauton upon her appearance
this night, and observed, “that though
it was a new opera, all fashionable eyes
were turned from the stage to Lady Oldborough's
box.”

Miss Hauton smiled civilly upon the
Commissioner, then turning to Godfrey,
in a low soft voice repeated,
“And ev'n when fashion's brightest arts decoy,
The heart distrusting asks, if this be joy.”
Godfrey was touched, she saw it,— 
and sighed—A short time afterwards
her Marquis left the box.—Miss Hauton
recovered from her languor, and became
animated in conversation with Godfrey.— 
He felt the whole power of her charms,
the immediate force of the temptation.— 
But he recollected who she was, he recollected,
that she had not shown any instances
of discretion which could redeem
her from the consequences of a mother's
disgrace—The songs he had heard from
Miss Hauton's lips—Captain Bellamy and
the waltzing came full upon his mind.
“No”—said he to himself—“as a wife I
cannot think of her—were the Marquis of
Twickenham out of the question, my wife
she cannot be.—Then honor forbids me
to trifle with her affections merely to gratify

my vanity, or the feelings of the moment.”
Captain Percy well knew, that some
men can satisfy their consciences, by calling
a certain sort of treachery by the
soft name of gallantry. He was aware,
that he could, like many others in similar
circumstances, deceive by equivocal looks
and expressions, and then throw the
blame from themselves, by asking why
the woman was such a fool as to believe,
protesting that they never had a thought
of her, and swearing that they had not
the least idea she had ever understood
them to mean any thing serious; but
Godfrey had too much good feeling, and
good principle, to follow such examples.
Miss Hauton had a copy of the new
opera before her, and as she turned over
the leaves, she pointed out to him the
passages that she liked. Some were peculiarly
applicable to her own situation,
representing a heroine forced to marry a
man she hates, whilst she tenderly loves
another. Godfrey could not, or would not,

understand the Italian.—It was perfectly
well explained to him, and then perceiving
the applications made of certain
lines by Miss Hauton's voice and eyes,
he had no resource but in a new singer,
to whom he became suddenly so attentive,
that nothing could distract him from
the stage. When the actress ceased to
sing, he found means to engage the Miss
Falconers in a discussion of her merits,
which, with all the nonsense, and compliments
to their taste, the occasion required,
filled up the dangerous interval till
the opera was over—Then—more
dangerous still ... waiting for carriages
in the crush room; but through all
these perils, Godfrey passed so dexterously,
as to leave Miss Hauton in doubt
whether she had been understood or not.
Thus he hoped that her conscience
would in future, if she should ever after
her marriage reflect on the opera of this
night, be as much at ease as his own— 
though, perhaps, not with so good reason.—

After this night, Godfrey would not
expose himself to a repetition of similar
danger, and that he might avoid meeting
this fair lady again, he refused two
invitations from Mrs. Falconer to a ball
at her house, and to a musical party.— 
This deserves to be recorded to his credit,
because he was very fond both of
music and dancing.
The day before he was to leave town,
at the hour and minute appointed, Godfrey
waited upon Lord Oldborough—But
not such his reception now as it had been
on his first visit to this minister. He was
kept two hours waiting alone in an antichamber.
At last the cabinet door opened,
and Lord Oldborough appeared with
a dark cold countenance, and a haughty
stiffness in his whole frame. His Lordship
walked deliberately forward; till he
came within a yard of our young officer,
and then, without speaking, bent his
head and body slowly, and so remained
as if waiting to be informed who Captain
Percy was, and what his business might

be. Astonishment, and offended pride,
flashed successively in Godfrey's countenance.—Lord
Oldborough, after fixing
his interrogating eyes upon him ineffectually,
receiving no explanation, seemed
to come a little to his recollection, and
condescended to say,
“Captain Percy, I believe!—your
commands with me, Captain Percy.”
“My Lord, I have the honor to be
here by your Lordship's appointment on
Major Gascoigne's business.”
“Sir, you had a note from me yesterday,
I believe, which contained all that
I have it in my power to say on Major
Gascoigne's business.”
“Pardon me, my Lord,—I never had
the honor of receiving any note from
your Lordship.”
“Very extraordinary! I sent it by
my own man. You are at Batt's Hotel,
Sir?”
“No, my Lord, at the British Hotel.”
“Ha!—that is the cause of the mistake.

You will find my note, Sir, at
Batt's.”—
Captain Percy bowed,—Lord Oldborough
bowed,—not a word more passed,
—Lord Oldborough walked on to his carriage,
which rolled him away with glorious
rapidity, whilst Godfrey, his face
flushed with resentment, looked after him
for an instant, then putting on his hat,
which the porter held to him, he walked
off as fast as possible to Batt's Hotel, impatient
to see the note, which was to explain
the meaning of this extraordinary
conduct. The note he found.—But it
threw little light upon the business. It
was written in Secretary Cunningham
Falconer's hand, and was as follows:
“Lord Oldborough will inform Captain
Percy when any thing shall be decided
upon relative to the business on
which Captain Percy spoke to Lord Oldborough:
and as communication by letter
will answer every purpose, his Lordship

hopes, that he shall not be the means
of detaining Captain Percy longer from
his regiment.
Tuesday &wblank;”
A civil dismission!—After three attempts
Godfrey obtained a sight of Secretary
Cunningham, who as he thought
was at the bottom of the affair; but this
suspicion was at first dissipated by the
unusual openness with which the secretary
looked and spoke. Apparently without
fear of committing himself, he said
at once that—“It was a very extraordinary
proceeding—that he could no way
account for it, but by supposing that
the Lieutenant-Colonel in question had,
through his relation, Lord Skreene, influenced
his Grace of Greenwich, and
that Lord Oldborough could not in the
present conjuncture make any movement
in direct opposition to the Duke.”—
“In all these things, in all transactions
with politicians,” said Godfrey, “there
are wheels within wheels, which we simple

people never suspect: And by awkwardly
interfering with them, when they
are in motion, we are hurt, we know not
how or why.”—
Cunningham smiled significantly, but
was silent—his air of frankness vanished,
and his solemn reserve returned— 
“Cunningham will never be hurt in that
way”—thought Godfrey—“I never saw
a fellow so careful of himself. I am convinced
he would not hazard his little finger
to save the whole British empire,
much less to serve a private friend like
me, or a poor honest man like Gascoigne.”
Godfrey was too proud to make any
further attempts to interest his diplomatic
cousin in the affair. He rose and bade
the Secretary adieu, who, with proper
smiles and bows, attended him to the very
door.
“Thank Heaven!”—thought Godfrey,
as he left the Secretary's office–“I am
not forced to dance attendance upon any
great man, or any great man's secretary.

I am ... like my father—independent,
and will keep myself so; and if ever I
live upon a smile for years, it shall not
be upon the smiles of a minister, but on
those of a fair lady.”
Godfrey left town immediately, and
returned to his regiment.—