

SIR, – As in my first journey I went over the eastern counties of ENGLAND, and took my course on that side the River Thames, to view the sea-coasts, harbours, &c. so being now to traverse the southern counties, I begin with the other side of the Thames, and shall surround the sea-coast of KENT, as I did that of NORFOLK and SUFFOLK, and perhaps it is as fruitful of instructing and diverting observations as any of the other.
I took boat at Tower-Wharf, sending my horses round by land to meet me at Greenwich, that I might begin my journey at the beginning of the county, and here I had the advantage of making my first step into the county of Kent, at a place which is the most delightful spot of ground in Great-Britain; pleasant by situation, those pleasures increased by art, and all made completely agreeable by the accident of fine buildings, the continual passing of fleets of ships up and down the most beautiful river in Europe; the best air, best prospect, and the best conversation in England.
The Royal Hospital for Seamen, though not yet finished; the park, the Queen’s House, the Observatory on the hill, commonly called Flamstead-House, are all things so well known, they need no particular description. The ground, part of this hospital now stands upon, and is to stand upon, is the same on which formerly stood the royal palace of our kings. Here Henry VIII held his royal feasts with jousts and tournaments, and the ground which was called the Tilt-yard, is the spot on which the easternmost wing of the hospital is built; the park, (for it was even then a park also) was enlarged, walled about, and planted with beautiful rows, or walks of trees by King Charles II soon after the Restoration; and the design or plan of a royal palace was then laid out, one wing of which was finished and covered in a most magnificent manner, and makes now the first wing of the hospital as you come to it from London. The building is regular, the lower part a strong Doric, the middle part a most beautiful Corinthian, with an Attic above all, to complete the height; the front to the water-side is extremely magnificent and graceful; embellished with rich carved work and fine devices, such as will hardly be outdone in this, or any age for beauty or art.
But the beauty of Greenwich is owing to the lustre of its inhabitants, where there is a kind of collection of gentlemen, rather than citizens, and of persons of quality and fashion, different from most, if not all, the villages in this part of England. Here several of the most active and useful gentlemen of the late armies, after having grown old in the service of their country, and covered with the honours of the field, are retired to enjoy the remainder of their time, and reflect with pleasure upon the dangers they have gone through, and the faithful services they have performed both abroad and at home.
Other gentlemen still in service, as in the navy ordnance, docks, yards, &c. as well while in business, as after laying down their employments, have here planted themselves, insomuch, that the town of Greenwich begins to out-swell its bounds, and extends itself not only on this side the park to the top of the heath, by the way called Crum-Hill, but now stretches out on the east-side, where Sir John Vanburg has built a house castlewise, and where in a little time ’tis probable, several streets of like buildings will be erected, to the enlarging and beautifying the town, and increasing the inhabitants; who, as I have said, are already the chief beauty and ornament of the place.
The country behind Greenwich adds to the pleasure of the place: Black-Heath, both for beauty of situation, and an excellent air, is not out-done by any spot of ground so near the river and so near land in England. On the east-side stands an hospital  very particular for its foundation or design, though through the misfortunes of the times, the generous design of the founder has been much straitened, and in great part, defeated. It was built by Sir John Morden, a Turkey merchant of London; his first design, as I had it from his own mouth the year before he began to build, was to make apartments for forty decayed merchants, to whom he resolved to allow 40l. per annum, each; with coals, a gown, (and servants to look after their apartments) and many other conveniences so as to make their lives as comfortable as possible, and that, as they had lived like gentlemen, they might die so. Sir John Morden and his lady lie buried in a vault in the chancel of the chapel of this hospital. The chapel is a very neat building facing the entrance into the court; the lodgings for the merchants, are on either side two apartments in each stair case, with cellars for their conveniences, coals, beer, &c. and each apartment consists of a bed-chamber, and a study, or large closet, for their retreat, and to divert themselves in with books, &c. There is a velvet pall given, by her ladyship in particular, to be laid up in the chapel for the use of the gentlemen; as also a large quantity of communion-plate; and the chaplain is obliged to read prayers twice every day, viz. at eleven a clock, and at three at which all the pensioners are obliged to attend.
On the other side of the heath, north, is Charleton, a village famous, or rather infamous for the yearly collected rabble of mad-people, at Horn-Fair; the rudeness of which I cannot but think, is such as ought to be suppressed, and indeed in a civilized well governed nation, it may well be said to be unsufferable. The mob indeed at that time take all kinds of liberties, and the women are especially impudent for that day; as if it was a day that justified the giving themselves a loose to all manner of indecency and immodesty, without any reproach, or without suffering the censure which such behaviour would deserve at another time. The introduction of this rude assembly, or the occasion of it, I can meet with very little account of, in antiquity; and I rather recommend it to the public justice to be suppressed, as a nuisance and offence to all sober people, than to spend any time to inquire into its original. There are some very good houses lately built in this town, and abating the rabble and hurry of the 19th of October, as above, ’tis indeed a very pleasant village.
Through this town lies the road to Woolwich, a town on the bank of the same river, wholly taken up by, and in a manner raised from, the yards, and public works, erected there for the public service; here, when the business of the royal navy increased, and Queen Elizabeth built larger and greater ships of war than were usually employed before, new docks, and launches were erected, and places prepared for the building and repairing ships of the largest size; because, as here was a greater depth of water and a freer channel, than at Deptford, (where the chief yard in the river of Thames was before) so there was less hazard in the great ships going up and down.
At this dock the Royal-Sovereign
 was built, once the largest ship in the whole royal navy, and in particular esteemed, for so large a ship, the best sailor in the world. Here also was rebuilt the Royal Prince, now called the Queen, a first rate, carrying a hundred guns, and several others. Close under the south-shore from the west-end of Woolwich, the Thames is very deep, and the men of war lie there moored, and as we call it, laid up; their topmasts, and all their small rigging taken down and laid in ware-houses; this reaches as high as the point over-against Bow-River and is called Bugby’s-Hole.
Besides the building-yards, here is a large rope-walk where the biggest cables are made for the men of war; and on the east or lower part of the town is the gun-yard, or place set apart for the great guns belonging to the ships, commonly called the Park, or the Gun-Park; where is a prodigious quantity of all manner of ordnance-stores, such as are fit for sea-service, that is to say, cannon of all sorts for the ships of war, every ship’s guns by themselves; heavy cannon for batteries, and mortars of all sorts and sizes. Here also is the house where the firemen and engineers prepare their fireworks, charge bombs, carcasses, and grenades for the public service, in time of war and here (if I remember right, it was in the time of a Dutch war) by mischance, the fire in the laboratory took hold of some combustibles, which spreading fired first a bomb or shell, and the bursting of that shell blew up all the works with such a terrible blast and noise, as shook and shattered the whole town of Woolwich almost in pieces, and terrified the people to the last degree, but killed no person as I heard of, except about eleven men who were in or near the fireworking house, where it first took hold.
In this park, close on the south bank of the river, a large battery of forty pieces of heavy cannon was raised, to have saluted the Dutch, if they had thought fit to have ventured up the river in 1667, as was given out they would when they burnt our ships at Chatham; and large furnaces and forges were erected to have furnished the gunners with red hot bullets for that service; but the Dutch had no design that way and did their business with far less hazard, and as much to our disgrace in another place.
From this town there is little remarkable upon the river, till we come to Gravesend, the whole shore being low, and spread with marshes and unhealthy grounds, except with small intervals, where the land bends inward as at Erith, Greenwhich, North-Fleet, &c. in which places the chalk hills come close to the river, and from thence the city of London, the adjacent countries, and even Holland and Flanders, are supplied with lime, for their building, or chalk to make lime, and for other uses. Thus the barren soil of Kent, for such the chalky grounds are esteemed, make the Essex lands rich and fruitful, and the mixture of earth forms a composition, which out of two barren extremes, makes one prolific medium; the strong clay of Essex and Suffolk is made fruitful by the soft meliorating melting chalk of Kent, which fattens and enriches it.
On the back-side of these marshy grounds in Kent at a small distance, lies the road from London to Dover, and on that highway, or near it, several good towns; for example, Eltham, formerly a royal palace when the Court was kept at Greenwich; and Queen Elizabeth, who was born at Greenwich, was often carried, as they say, to Eltham by her nurses to suck in the wholesome air of that agreeable place; but at present there are few or no signs of the old palace to be seen.
It is now a pleasant town, very handsomely built, full of good houses, and many families of rich citizens inhabit here. So it is here, they bring a great deal of good company with them: also abundance of ladies of very good fortunes dwell here, and one sees at the church such an appearance of the sex, as is surprising. But ’tis complained of that the youths of these families where those beauties grow, are so generally or almost universally bred abroad, either in Turkey, Italy, or Spain, as merchants, or in the army or court as gentlemen; that for the ladies to live at Eltham, is, as it were, to live recluse and out of sight; since to be kept where the gentlemen do not come, is all one as to be kept where they cannot come. This they say threatens Eltham with a fatal turn, unless the scene alters in a few years, and they tell us, that all the ladies will abandon the place.
From this side of the country all pleasant and gay, we go over Shooter’s Hill, where the face of the world seems quite altered; for here we have but a chalky soil, and indifferently fruitful, far from rich, much overgrown with wood, especially coppice-wood, which is cut for faggots and bavins, and sent up by water to London. Here they make those faggots which the wood-mongers call ostrey wood, and here in particular those small light bavins which are used in taverns in London to light their faggots, and are called in the taverns a brush, the woodmen call them pimps; ’tis incredible what vast quantities of these are laid up at Woolwich, Erith and Dartford; but since the taverns in London are come to make coal fires in their upper rooms, that cheat of a trade declines.
As I passed, I saw Gravesend from the hills, but having been often in the town, I know enough to be able to say, that there is nothing considerable in it; except first that it is the town where the great ferry (as they call it) is kept up between London and East-Kent, it is hardly credible what numbers of people pass here every tide, as well by night as by day, between this town and London. About 25 years ago one of these tilt-boats was cast away, occasioned by the desperate obstinacy and rudeness of the steersman or master, as they call him, who would tack again and stand over upon a wind, in the reach called Long-Reach, contrary to the advice and entreaties not of the passengers only but of his own rowers, who told him it blew a storm and she would founder; but he called them fools, bid the wind blow-devil, (a rude sailor’s proverb) the more wind the better boat, till coming into the channel where the sea ran very high, he took in a wave, or a sea, as they call it, which run her down, and foundered her, as was foretold; and himself and three and fifty passengers were all drowned, only about five escaping by swimming.
The other thing for which this town is worth notice, is, that all the ships which go to sea from London, take, as we say, their departure from hence; for here all outward-bound ships must stop, come to an anchor, and suffer what they call a second clearing, (viz.) here a searcher of the customs comes on board, looks over all the coquets or entries of the cargo, and may, if he pleases, rummage the whole loading, to see if there are no more goods than are entered; which however they seldom do, though they forget not to take a compliment for their civility, and besides being well treated on board, have generally three or five guns fired in honour to them when they go off.
When a merchant-ship comes down from London ... as soon as they come among the ships that are riding in the road, the sentinel at the block-house, as they call it, on Gravesend side fires his musket, which is to tell the pilot he must bring too; if he comes on, as soon as the ship passes broad side with the block-house, the sentinel fires again, which is as much as to say, Why don’t you bring too? if he drives a little farther, he fires a third time, and the language of that is, Bring to immediately, and let go your anchor, or we will make you. If the ship continues to drive down, and does not let go her anchor, the gunner of the fort is fetched, and he fires a piece of cannon though without ball; and that is still a threat, though with some patience, and is to say, Will you come to an anchor or won’t you? If he still ventures to go on, by which he gives them to understand he intends to run for it; then the gunner fires again, and with a shot, and that shot is a signal to the fortress over the river, (viz.) Tilbury Fort, and they immediately let fly at the ship from the guns on the east bastion and after from all the guns they can bring to bear upon her; it is very seldom that a ship will venture their shot, because they can reach her all the way unto the Hope, and round the Hope-Point almost to Hole-Haven.
Yet I happened once to be upon the shore just by Tilbury-Fort, when a ship ventured to run off in spite of all those firings; and it being just at the first shoot of the ebb, and when a great fleet of light colliers and other ships were under sail too. By that time, the ship escaping came round the Hope-Point, she was so hid among the other ships, that the gunners on the bastion hardly knew who to shoot at; upon which they manned out several boats with soldiers, in hopes to overtake her or make signals to some men of war at the Nore, to man out their boats, and stop her, but she laughed at them all; for as it blew a fresh gale of wind at south-west, and a tide of ebb strong under her foot, she went three foot for their one, and by that time the boats got down to Hole Haven, the ship was beyond the Nore, and as it grew dark, they soon lost sight of her, nor could they ever hear to this day what ship it was, or on what account she ventured to run such a risk.
Another time I was with some merchants in a large yacht, bound to France; they had a great quantity of block-tin on board, and other goods, which had not been entered at the custom-house; and the master or captain told us, he did not doubt but he would pass by Gravesend without coming to an anchor. He lay, when this thought came into his head, at an anchor in Gray’s Reach just above the Old Man’s Head, which is a point or head of land on the Essex shore, which makes the upper end of Gravesend Reach. He observed that the mornings were likely to be exceeding foggy; particularly on the morning next after his resolution of trying there was so thick a fog, that it was scarce possible to see from the main-mast to the bow-sprit, even of a hoy; it being high water, he resolved to weigh and drive, as he called it, and so he did. When he came among the other ships and over against the town, his greatest danger was running foul of them, to prevent which he kept a man lying on his belly at the bow-sprit end, to look out, and so, though not without some danger too, he went clear. As for Gravesend or Tilbury-Fort, they could see no more of us than they could of London-Bridge; and we drove in this fog undiscerned by the forts of the custom-house men, as low as Hole-Haven, and went afterwards clear away to Caen in Normandy without being visited.
But such attempts as these, are what would very hardly be brought to pass again now, nor is the risk worth any body’s running if the value be considerable that may be lost. As for ships coming in, they all go by here without any notice taken of them, unless it be to put waiters on board them, if they are not supplied before.
From Gravesend we see nothing remarkable on the road but GAD’S-HILL, a noted place for robbing of sea-men after they have received their pay at Chatham. Here it was that famous robbery was committed in the year 1676 or thereabouts; it was about four a clock in the morning when a gentleman was robbed by one Nicks on a bay mare, just on the declining part of the hill, on the west-side, for he swore to the spot and to the man. Mr Nicks who robbed him, came away to Gravesend, immediately ferried over, and, as he said, was stopped by the difficulty of the boat, and of the passage, near an hour; which was a great discouragement to him, but was a kind of bait to his horse. From thence he rode cross the county of Essex, through Tilbury, Hornden, and Bilerecay to Chelmsford. Here he stopped about half an hour to refresh his horse, and gave him some balls; from thence to Braintre, Bocking, Wethersfield; then over the downs to Cambridge, and from thence keeping still the cross roads, he went by Fenny Stanton to Godmanchester, and Huntingdon, where he baited himself and his mare about an hour; and, as he said himself, slept about half an hour, then holding on the North Road, and keeping a full larger gallop most of the way, he came to York the same afternoon, put off his boots and riding clothes, and went dressed as if he had been an inhabitant of the place, not a traveller, to the bowling-green, where, among other gentlemen, was the Lord Mayor of the city; he singling out his lordship, studied to do something particular that the Mayor might remember him by, and accordingly lays some odd bets with him concerning the bowls then running, which should cause the Mayor to remember it the more particularly; and then takes occasion to ask his lordship what a clock it was; who, pulling out his watch, told him the hour, which was a quarter before, or a quarter after eight at night. Some other circumstances, it seems, he carefully brought into their discourse, which should make the Lord Mayor remember the day of the month exactly, as well as the hour of the day.
Upon a prosecution which happened afterwards for this robbery, the whole merit of the case turned upon this single point. The person robbed swore as above to the man, to the place, and to the time, in which the fact was committed: namely, that he was robbed on Gad’s-Hill in Kent, on such a day, and at such a time of the day, and on such a part of the hill, and that the prisoner at the bar was the man that robbed him. Nicks, the prisoner, denied the fact, called several persons to his reputation, alleging that he was as far off as Yorkshire at that time, and that particularly the day whereon the prosecutor swore he was robbed, he was at bowls on the public green in the city of York; and to support this, he produced the Lord Mayor of York to testify that he was so, and that the mayor acted so and so with him there as above.
This was so positive, and so well attested, that the jury acquitted him on a bare supposition, that it was impossible the man could be at two places so remote on one and the same day. There are more particulars related of this story, such as I do not take upon me to affirm; namely, that King Charles II prevailed on him on assurance of pardon, and that he should not be brought into any further trouble about it, to confess the truth to him privately, and that he owned to his majesty that he committed the robbery, and how he rode the journey after it, and that upon this the king gave him the name or title of Swift Nicks, instead of Nicks; but these things, I say, I do not relate as certain: I return to the business in hand.
From Gad’s-Hill we come to Rochester Bridge, the largest, highest, and the strongest built of all the bridges in England, except London-Bridge. Rochester, Stroud, and Chatham, are three distinct places, but contiguous, except the interval of the river between the two first, and a very small marsh or vacancy between Rochester and Chatham.
There’s little remarkable in Rochester, except the ruins of a very old castle, and an ancient but not extraordinary cathedral; but the river, and its appendices are the most considerable of the kind in the world. This being the chief arsenal of the royal navy of Great-Britain. The buildings here are indeed like the ships themselves, surprisingly large, and in their several kinds beautiful. The ware-houses, or rather streets of ware-houses, and store-houses for laying up the naval treasure are the largest in dimension, and the most in number, that are any where to be seen in the world. The rope-walk for making cables, and the forges for anchors and other ironwork, bear a proportion to the rest as also the wet-dock for keeping masts, and yards of the greatest size, where they lie sunk in the water to preserve them, the boat-yard, the anchor yard; all like the whole, monstrously great and extensive, and are not easily described.
We come next to the stores themselves, for which all this provision is made; and first, to begin with the ships that are laid up there. The sails, the rigging, the ammunition, guns, great and small-shot, small-arms, swords, cutlasses, half pikes, with all the other furniture belonging to the ships that ride at their moorings in the river Medway. These take up one part of the place, where the furniture of every ship lies in particular ware-houses by themselves, and may be taken out on the most hasty occasion without confusion, fire excepted. N.B. The powder is generally carried away to particular magazines to avoid disaster. Besides these, there are store-houses for laying up the furniture and stores for ships; but which are not appropriated, or do not belong (as it is expressed by the officers) to any particular ship; but lie ready to be delivered out for the furnishing other ships to be built, or for repairing and supplying the ships already there, as occasion may require.
The particular government of these yards, as they are called is very remarkable, the commissioners, clerks, accomptants, &c. within doors, the store-keepers, yard-keepers, dock-keepers, watchmen, and all other officers without doors, with the subordination of all officers one to another respectively, as their degree and offices require, is admirable. In the river there is a guard-boat, which, as the main guard in a garrison, goes the grand-rounds at certain times, to see that every sentinel does his duty on board the ships; these go by every ship in the river, and see that the people on board are at their post. If the ship does not challenge, that is to say, if the man placed to look out does not call, Who comes there? the guard-boat boards them immediately, to examine who is deficient in their duty.
They told us an odd story of a guard-boat which having not been challenged by the person who ought to have been walking on the forecastle of the ship, boarded them on the bow, and as the boat’s crew was entering the ship by the fore-chains they found a man fallen over board, but the lap of his coat catching in a block, was drawn so hard in by the running of the rope in the block, that it held the man fast; but he was fallen so low, that his head and arms hung in the water, and he was almost drowned. However it seems he was not quite dead; so that catching hold of him, and pulling him out of the water, they saved his life. But they added, as the main part of the story, that the man could never give any account of his disaster, or how he came to fall over-board, only said that it must be the Devil that threw him over-board, for nothing else could do it. How true this passage may be, I do not undertake to enter upon the debate of.
The expedition that has been sometimes used here in fitting out men of war, is very great, and as the workmen relate it, ’tis indeed incredible; particularly, they told us, that the Royal Sovereign, a first rate of 106 guns, was riding at her moorings, entirely unrigged, and nothing but her three masts standing, as is usual when a ship is laid up, and that she was completely rigged, all her masts up, her yards put to, her sails bent, anchors and cables on board, and the ship sailed down to Black-Stakes in three days, Sir Cloudesly Shovell being then her captain. I do not vouch the thing, but when I consider, first, that every thing lay ready in her store-houses, and wanted nothing but to be fetched out and carried on board; a thousand or fifteen hundred men to be employed in it and more if they were wanted; and every man, knowing his business perfectly well, boats, carriages, pullies, tacklers, cranes, and hulk all ready, I do not know, but it might be done in one day if it was tried; certain it is, the dexterity of the English sailors in those things is not to be matched by the world.
The building-yards, docks, timber-yard, deal-yard, mast-yard, gun-yard, rope-walks and all the other yards and places, set apart for the works belonging to the navy, are like a well ordered city; and though you see the whole place as it were in the utmost hurry, yet you see no confusion, every man knows his own business; the master builders appoint the working, or converting, as they call it, of every piece of timber; and give to the other head workmen, or foremen their moulds for the squaring and cutting out of every piece, and placing it in its proper berth (so they call it) in the ship that is in building, and every hand is busy pursuing those directions, and so in all the other works.
It is about sixteen or eighteen miles from Rochester Bridge to Sheerness Fort by water on the River Medway, of this it is about fourteen miles to Black-Stakes, the channel is so deep all the way, the banks soft, and the reaches of the river so short, that in a word, ’tis the safest and best harbour in the world; and we saw two ships of eighty guns, each riding afloat at low water within musket-shot of Rochester Bridge. ’Tis as safe as in a wet-dock, nor did I ever hear of any accident that befell any of the king’s ships here, I mean by storms and weather; except in that dreadful tempest in 1703, when one ship, (viz) the Royal Catherine was driven on shore, and receiving some damage sunk, and the ship also being old, could not be weighed again; but this was such a storm as never was known before, and ’tis hoped the like may never be known again.
There are two castles on the shore of this river, the one at Upnore, which guards two reaches of the river, and is supposed to defend all the ships which ride above, between that and the bridge; also on the other shore is Gillingham Castle, formed for the same purpose, and well furnished with guns which command the river, besides which there is a fort or platform of guns at a place called the swamp and another at Cockham Wood. But all these are added, or at least additions made to them, since the time that the Dutch made that memorable attempt upon the royal navy in this river (viz.) on the 22d of June, in the year 1667; for at that time all was left unguarded, and as it were, secure; there were but four guns that could be used at Upnore, and scarce so many at Gillingham, the carriages being rotten and broke; and in a word, every thing concurring to invite the enemy. There were about twelve guns at the Isle of Shepey, where since, Sheerness Fort is built; but the Dutch soon beat them from those guns, after which they went boldly up to Black-Stakes with their whole squadron; and after that seven of their biggest men of war went up as high as Upnore, where they did what mischief they could, and went away again, carrying off the Royal Charles, a first rate ship of 100 guns, and burning the London, and several others, besides the damaging most of the ships which were within their reach; and all things considered, it was a victory, that they went away without ruining all the rest of the navy that was in that river.
But as this is a dull story in it self, so it is none of my present business farther than to introduce what follows; namely, that this alarm gave England such a sense of the consequence of the river Medway, and of the docks and yards at Chatham, and of the danger the royal navy lay exposed to there, that all these doors which were open then, are locked up and sufficiently barred since that time; and ’tis not now in the power of any nation under heaven, no, though they should be masters at sea, unless they were masters at land too at the same time, to give us such another affront. For besides all the castles, lines of guns, and platforms on each side the river Medway, as we go up, as above there is now a royal fort built at the point of the Isle of Shepey, called Sheerness, which guards that entrance into the river. This is a regular, and so complete a fortification, and has such a line of heavy cannon commanding the mouth of the river, that no man of war, or fleet of men of war, would attempt to pass by as the Dutch did; or at least could not effect it without hazard of being torn to pieces by those batteries.
SHEERNESS is not only a fortress, but a kind of town, with several streets in it, and inhabitants of several sorts; but chiefly such whose business obliges them to reside here. The officers of the ordnance have here apartments, and an office, they being often obliged to be here many days together. This fort commands only the entrance into the Medway, or that branch of the Medway, properly, which they call West-Swayle. The East-Swayle, not navigable by ships of force, goes in by the town of Queenborough, passes east, makes the Isle of Shepey, parting it on the south side, and opens to the sea, near Feversham, and Swale-Cliff, and is therefore of small consequence.
At the south-west point of the Isle of Shepey, where the East-Swayle parts from the West, and passes on, as above, stands a town memorable for nothing, but that which is rather a dishonour to our country than otherwise: namely, Queenborough, a miserable, dirty, decayed, poor, pitiful, fishing town; yet vested with corporation privileges, has a mayor, aldermen, &c. and his worship the mayor has his mace carried before him to church, and attended in as much state and ceremony as the mayor of a town twenty times as good. I remember when I was there, Mr Mayor was a butcher, and brought us a shoulder of mutton to our inn himself in person, which we bespoke for our dinner, and afterwards he sat down and drank a bottle of wine with us. But that which is still worse, and which I meant in what I said before, is, that this town sends two burgesses to Parliament, as many as the borough of Southwark, or the city of Westminster: though it may be presumed all the inhabitants are not possessed of estates answerable to the rent of one good house in either of those places I last mentioned. The chief business of this town, as I could understand, consists in ale-houses, and oystercatchers.
Here we took boat, and went up the East-Swayle to a town, which lies, as it were hid, in the country, and among the creeks; for ’tis out of the way, and almost out of sight, as well by water as by land, I mean Milton; it lies up so many creeks and windings of the water, that nobody sees it by water, but they who go on purpose out of the way to it; and yet it is a large town, has a considerable market, and especially for corn, and fruit and provisions, which they send to London by water.
From hence following the coast, and the great road together, for they are still within view of one another, we come to Feversham, a large populous, and as some say, a rich town: the principal business we found among them, was fishing for oysters, which the Dutch fetch hence in such extraordinary quantities, that when I was there, we found twelve large Dutch hoys and doggers lying there to load oyster; and some times, as they told us, there are many more.
It was at the mouth of this Swayle, namely, at Shell-Ness, so called from the abundance of oyster-shells always lying there, that the smack in which the late King James II was embarked for his escape into France, ran on shore, and being boarded by the fishermen, the king was taken prisoner; and I must mention it to the reproach of the people of Feversham, let the conduct of that unfortunate prince be what it will, that the fishermen and rabble can never be excused, who treated the king, even after they were told who he was, with the utmost indecency, using his majesty; (for he was then their sovereign, even in the acknowledged sense of his enemies) I say, using him with such indignity in his person, such insolence in their behaviour, and giving him such opprobrious and abusive language, and searching him in the rudest and most indecent manner, and indeed rifling him; that the king himself said, he was never more apprehensive of his life than at that time. He was afterwards carried by them up to town, where he was not much better treated for some time, till some neighbouring gentlemen in the county came in, who understood their duty better, by whom he was at least preserved from farther violence, till coaches and a guard came from London, by the Prince of Orange’s order, to bring him with safety and freedom to London; where he was at least for the present much better received.
While I was near this town some years ago, a most surprising accident happened, namely, the blowing up of a powder-mill, which stood upon the river, close to the town; the blast was not only frightful, but it shattered the whole town, broke the windows, blew down chimneys, and gable-ends not a few; also several people were killed at the powder-house it self, though not any, as I remember, in the town. I know nothing else this town is remarkable for, except the most notorious smuggling trade, carried on partly by the assistance of the Dutch, in their oyster-boats, and partly by other arts, in which they say, the people hereabouts are arrived to such a proficiency, that they are grown monstrous rich by that wicked trade; nay, even the owling trade (so they call the clandestine exporting of wool) has seemed to be transposed from Rumney Marsh to this coast. As to the landing goods here from Holland and France, such as wine and brandy from the latter, and pepper, tea, coffee, callicoes, tobacco, and such goods, (the duties of which being very high in England, had first been drawn back by debentures) that black trade has not only been carried on here, as I was informed, but on both sides the river, on the Essex as well as the Kentish shores.
From this East Swale, and particularly from these last three towns, Queenborough, Milton, and Feversham, the fish-market at Billingsgate is supplied with several sorts of fish; but particularly with the best and largest oysters, such as they call stewing oysters: which are generally called also Milton Oysters; some of which are exceeding large.
This leads me to cross the hills from Milton to Maidstone, about ten miles distant. This is a considerable town, very populous, and the inhabitants generally wealthy; ’tis the county town, and the river Medway is navigable to it by large hoys, of fifty to sixty tons burthen, the tide flowing quite up to the town. Round this town are the largest cherry orchards, and the most of them that are in any part of England; and the gross of the quantity of cherries, and the best of them which supply the whole city of London come from hence, and are therefore called Kentish cherries.
Here likewise, and in the country adjacent, are great quantities of hops planted, and this is called the Mother of Hop Grounds in England; being the first place in England where hops were planted in any quantity, and long before any were planted at Canterbury, though that be now supposed to be the chief place in England. These were the hops, I suppose, which were planted at the beginning of the Reformation, and which gave occasion to that old distich:

Hops, Reformation, bays, and beer,
Came into England all in a year.


From this town, and the neighbouring parts, London is supplied with more particulars than from any single market town in England.
1. From the wild of Kent, which begins but about six miles off, and particularly from that part which lies this way; they bring the large Kentish bullocks, famed for being generally all red, and with their horns crooked inward, the two points standing one directly against the other, they are counted the largest breed in England.
2. From the same country are brought great quantities of the largest timber for supply of the king’s yards at Chatham, and often to London; most of which comes by land carriage to Maidstone.
3. From the country adjoining to Maidstone also, is a very great quantity of corn brought up to London, besides hops and cherries, as above.
4. Also a kind of paving stone, about eight to ten inches square, so durable that it scarce ever wears out; ’tis used to pave court-yards, and passages to gentlemen’s houses, being the same the Royal Exchange at London is paved with, which has never yet wanted the least repair.
5. Also fine white sand for the glass-houses, esteemed the best in England for melting into flint-glass, and looking glass-plates; and for the stationer’s use also, vulgarly called writing-sand.
6. Also very great quantities of fruit, such as Kentish pippins, runnets, &c. which come up as the cherries do, whole hoy-loads at a time to the wharf, called the Three Cranes, in London; which is the greatest pippin market perhaps in the world.


At Maidstone you begin to converse with gentlemen, and persons of rank of both sexes, and some of quality. All that side of the county which I have mentioned already, as it is marshy, and unhealthy, by its situation among the waters; so it is embarrassed with business, and inhabited chiefly by men of business, such as ship-builders, fisher-men, seafaring-men, and husband-men, or such as depend upon them, and very few families of note are found among them. But as soon as we descend from the poor chalky downs, and deep foggy marshes, to the wholesome rich soil, the well wooded, and well watered plain on the banks of the Medway, we find the country every where spangled with populous villages, and delicious seats of the nobility and gentry; and especially on the north-side of the river, beginning at Aylesford, on the Medway, and looking east towards the sea.
This neighbourhood of persons of figure and quality, makes Maidstone a very agreeable place to live in, and where a man of letters, and of manners, will always find suitable society, both to divert and improve himself; so that here is, what is not often found, namely, a town of very great business and trade, and yet full of gentry, of mirth, and of good company. It is to be recorded here for the honour of the gentry in this part of England; that though they are as sociable and entertaining as any people are, or can be desired to be, and as much famed for good manners, and good humour; yet the new mode of forming assemblies so much, and so fatally now in vogue, in other parts of England, could never prevail here; and that though there was an attempt made by some loose persons, and the gentlemen, and ladies, did for a little while appear there; yet they generally disliked the practice, soon declined to give their company, as to a thing scandalous, and so it dropped of course.
There is not much manufacturing in this county; what is left, is chiefly at Canterbury, and in this town of Maidstone, and the neighbourhood. At Cranbrook, Tenterden, Goudhurst, and other villages thereabout, on the other side the Medway, there was once a very considerable clothing trade carried on, and the yeomen of Kent, of which so much has been famed, were generally the inhabitants on that side, and who were much enriched by that clothing trade; but that trade is now quite decayed, and scarce ten clothiers left in all the county. These clothiers and farmers, and the remains of them, upon the general elections of members of parliament for the county, show themselves still there, being ordinarily 14 or 1500 freeholders brought from this side of the county; and who for the plainness of their appearance, are called the gray coats of Kent; but are so considerable, that who ever they vote for is always sure to carry it, and therefore the gentlemen are very careful to preserve their interest among them.
In prosecution of my journey east, I went from hence to Canterbury; of which town and its antiquities so much has been said, and so accurately, that I need do no more than mention it by recapitulation. However I observe here.
1. That the first Christian bishop, if not the first Christian preacher, that ever came to England, (for I know not what to say to the story of Joseph of Arimathea, and his holy thorn at Glassenbury) landed in this country, and settled in this place; I mean St Augustin, sent over by Gregory, Bishop of Rome. This Gregory it seems was a true primitive Christian Bishop of Rome; not such as since are called so; long before they assumed the title of popes, or that usurped honour of Universal Bishop.
2. That, seven Bishops of Canterbury, from St Augustine, inclusive of himself, lie buried here in one vault.
3. That Thomas Becket, or Thomas a Becket, as some call him, archbishop of this see, and several archbishops before him, plagued, insulted, and tyrannized over the Kings of England, their sovereigns, in an unsufferable manner.
4. That the first of these, having made himself intolerable to King Henry II, by his obstinacy, pride and rebellion, was here murthered by the connivance, and as some say, by the express order of the king, and that they show his blood upon the pavement to this day.
5. That he was afterwards canonized, and his shrine made the greatest idol of the world; and they show the stone-steps ascending to his shrine, worn away to a slope, by the knees of the pilgrims, and ignorant people who came thither to pray to him, and to desire him to pray for them.
6. That the bodies of King Henry IV and of Edward the Black Prince are buried here, and the magnificent effigies of the latter very curiously carved and engraved, lies on his tomb, or monument; also that King Stephen  should have lain here, but on some scruple of the monks, the corpse was stopped short on the road, and was afterwards buried at Feversham, about seven miles off. What the monks objected, or whether they had no money offered them, is not recorded with the rest of the story.
7. That the immense wealth offered by votaries, and pilgrims, for several ages to the altar, or shrine of this mock saint, Thomas Becket, was such, that Erasmus Roterdamus, who was in the repository and saw it, relates of it, that the whole place glittered and shone with gold and diamonds.
8. That all this immense treasure, with the lands and revenues of the whole monastery were seized upon, and taken away by King Henry VIII, at the general suppression of religious houses, except such as are annexed to the Dean and Chapter, and to the revenue of the arch-bishopric, which are not large.

Under the church is a large Protestant French church, given first by Queen Elizabeth to the Walloons, who fled hither from the persecution of the Duke D’Alva, and the King of France; and whose number has been since very much increased by the particular cruelty of Louis XIV.
As for the town, its antiquity seems to be its greatest beauty. The houses are truly ancient, and the many ruins of churches, chapels, oratories, and smaller cells of religious people, makes the place look like a general ruin a little recovered. The city will scarce bear being called populous, were it not for two or three thousand French Protestants, which, including men, women and children, they say there are in it, and yet they tell me the number of these decreases daily. The employment of those refugees was chiefly broad silk weaving; but that trade was so decayed before the first Act for Prohibiting the Wearing of East India Silks passed, that there were not twenty broad looms left in the city, of near three hundred, that had formerly been there; upon the passing that Act, the trade revived again and the number of master workmen increased, and the masters increased; and the masters which were there before, increasing their works also, the town filled again, and a great many looms were employed; but after this by the encroaching of the printed callicoes, chintz, &c. and the prevailing of the smuggling trade as above, the silk trade decayed a second time. But now the use and wear of printed callicoes and chintz, being by Act of Parliament severely prohibited, ’tis expected the silk trade at Canterbury will revive a third time, and the inhabitants promise themselves much from it.
But the great wealth and increase of the city of Canterbury, is from the surprising increase of the hop-grounds all round the place. It is within the memory of many of the inhabitants now living, and that none of the oldest neither, that there was not an acre of ground planted with hops in the whole neighbourhood, or so few as not to be worth naming; whereas I was assured that there are at this time near six thousand acres of ground so planted, within a very few miles of the city; I do not vouch the number, and I confess it seems incredible, but I deliver it as I received it. The river Stour was made navigable to this city, by virtue of an Act of Parliament in the reign of King Henry VIII, but the person who undertook it, not meeting with encouragement, and failing in the carrying it on, the locks and sluices are all run to decay.
In the neighbourhood of this city are some ancient families, as Sir Tho. Hales, the Lord Strangford, Sir Henry Oxenden, and several others, the two former Roman; also Sir George Rook, famous for his services at sea against the French; the last of which was in the Streights, where the French fleet was commanded by the Count de Tourville, Admiral of France; where both sides fought with such equal gallantry, and resolution, and the strength of the fleets were so equal, though the French the most in number of the two, that neither seemed to seek a second engagement; and of which the following lines were made by some of the merry wits of that time.

The great Tourville Sir George did beat,
   The great Sir George beat him;
But if they chance again to meet,
   George will his jacket trim:
They both did fight, they both did beat,
   They both did run away;
They both did strive again to meet,
   The clean contrary way.

On the north-east point of this land, is the promontory, or head-land, called the North Foreland; which, by a line drawn due north to the Nase in Essex, about six miles short of Harwich, makes the mouth of the river of Thames, and the Port of London. As soon as any vessels pass this Foreland from London, they are properly said to be in the open sea.
From this point westward, the first town of note is Ramsgate, a small port, the inhabitants are mighty fond of having us call it Roman’s-Gate; pretending that the Romans under Julius Caesar made their first attempt to land here, when he was driven back by a storm; but soon returned, and coming on shore, with a good body of troops beat back the Britains, and fortified his camp, just at the entrance of the creek, where the town now stands. All which may be true for ought any one knows, but is not to be proved, either by them or any one else; and is of so little concern to us, that it matters nothing whether here or at Deal, where others pretend it was.
It was from this town of Ramsgate, that a fellow of gigantic strength, though not of extraordinary stature, came abroad in the world, and was called the English Sampson, and who suffered men to fasten the strongest horse they could find to a rope, and the rope round his loins, sitting on the ground, with his feet straight out against a post, and no horse could stir him; several other proofs of an incredible strength he gave before the king, and abundance of the nobility at Kensington, which no other man could equal; but his history was very short, for in about a year he disappeared, and we heard no more of him since.
Sandwich is the next town, lying in the bottom of a bay, at the mouth of the river Stour, an old, decayed, poor, miserable town, of which when I have said that it is an ancient town, one of the Cinque Ports, and sends two members to Parliament; I have said all that I think can be worth anybody’s reading of the town of Sandwich.
From hence to Deal is about —— miles. This place is famous for the road for shipping, so well known all over the trading world, by the name of the Downs, and where almost all ships which arrive from foreign parts for London, or go from London to foreign parts, and who pass the Channel, generally stop; the homeward-bound to dispatch letters, send their merchants and owners the good news of their arrival, and set their passengers on shore, and the like; and the outward-bound to receive their last orders, letters, and farewells from owners, and friends, take in fresh provisions, &c.
This place would be a very wild and dangerous road for ships, were it not for the South Foreland, a head of land, forming the east point of the Kentish shore; and is called, the South, as its situation respects the North Foreland; and which breaks the sea off, which would otherwise come rolling up from the west. And yet on some particular winds, and especially, if they over-blow, the Downs proves a very wild road; ships are driven from their anchors, and often run on shore, or are forced on the said sands, or into Sandwich-Bay, or Ramsgate-Peer, as above, in great distress; this is particularly when the wind blows hard at S.E. or at E. by N. or E.N.E. and some other points; and terrible havoc has been made in the Downs at such times.
But the most unhappy account that can be given of any disaster in the Downs, is in the time of that terrible tempest, which we call by way of distinction, the Great Storm, being on 27th of November 1703, unhappy in particular; for that there chanced just at that time to be a great part of the royal navy under Sir Cloudesly Shovel, just come into the Downs, in their way to Chatham, to be laid up. There remained in the Downs about twelve sail when this terrible blast began, at which time England may be said to have received the greatest loss that ever happened to the royal navy at one time; either by weather, by enemies, or by any accident whatsoever; the short account of it, as they showed it me in the town, I mean of what happened in the Downs, is as follows.
The Northumberland, a third rate, carrying 70 guns, and 353 men; the Restoration, a second rate, carrying 76 guns, and 386 men; the Sterling-Castle, a second rate, carrying 80 guns, and 400 men, but had but 349 men on board; and the Mary, a third rate, of 64 guns, having 273 men on board; these were all lost, with all their men, high and low; except only one man out of the Mary, and 70 men out of the Sterling-Castle, who were taken up by boats from Deal. All this was besides the loss of merchants’ ships, which was exceeding great, not here only, but in almost all the ports in the south, and west of England; and also in Ireland, which I shall have occasion to mention again in another place.
From hence we pass over a pleasant champaign country, with the sea, and the coast of France, clear in your view; and by the very gates of the ancient castle (to the town) of Dover. As we go, we pass by Deal Castle, and Sandown Castle, two small works, of no strength by land, and not of much use by sea; but however maintained by the government for the ordinary services of salutes, and protecting small vessels, which can lie safe under their cannon from picaroons, privateers, &c. in time of war.
Neither Dover nor its castle has any thing of note to be said of them, but what is in common with their neighbours; the castle is old, useless, decayed, and serves for little; but to give the title and honour of government to men of quality, with a salary, and sometimes to those that want one. The town is one of the Cinque Ports, sends members to Parliament, who are called barons, and has it self an ill repaired, dangerous, and good for little harbour and pier, very chargeable and little worth. The packets for France go off from here, as also those for Nieuport, with the mails for Flanders, and all those ships which carry freights from New-York to Holland, and from Virginia to Holland, come generally hither, and unlade their goods, enter them with, and show them to the custom-house officers, pay the duties, and then enter them again by certificate, reload them, and draw back the duty by debenture, and so they go away for Holland.
From this place the coast affords nothing of note; but some other small Cinque-Ports, such as Hith and Rumney, and Rye; and as we pass to them Folkstone, eminent chiefly for a multitude of fishing-boats belonging to it, which are one part of the year employed in catching mackerel for the city of London. The Folkstone men catch them, and the London and Barking mackerel-smacks, of which I have spoken at large in Essex, come down and buy them, and fly up to market with them, with such a cloud of canvas, and up so high that one would wonder their small boats could bear it and should not overset.
As I rode along this coast, I perceived several dragoons riding, officers, and others armed and on horseback, riding always about as if they were huntsmen beating up their game; upon inquiry I found their diligence was employed in quest of the owlers, as they call them, and sometimes they catch some of them; but when I came to enquire farther, I found too, that often times these are attacked in the night, with such numbers, that they dare not resist, or if they do, they are wounded and beaten, and sometimes killed; and at other times are obliged, as it were, to stand still, and see the wool carried off before their faces, not daring to meddle. But I find so many of these desperate fellows are of late taken up, by the courage and vigilance of the soldiers, that the knots are very much broken, and the owling-trade much abated, at least on that side the French also finding means to be supplied from Ireland with much less hazard, and at very little more expense.
From Rumney-Marsh the shore extends it self a great way into the sea, and makes that point of land, called Dengey-Ness. Between this point of land and Beachy, it was that the French in the height of their naval glory took the English and Dutch fleets at some disadvantage, offering them battle, when the French were so superior in number, that it was not consistent with human prudence to venture an engagement, the French being ninety-two ships of the line of battle, and the English and Dutch, put together, not sixty sail; the French ships also generally bigger: yet such was the eagerness of both the English and Dutch seamen, and commanders, that it was not without infinite murmurings, that Admiral Herbert stood away, and called off the Dutch, who had the van, from engaging; the English it seems believed themselves so superior to the French when they came to lie broad-side and broad-side, yard-arm and yard-arm, as the seamen call it in an engagement, that they would admit of no excuse for not fighting; though according to all the rules of war, no admiral could justify hazarding the royal navy on such terms; and especially the circumstances of the time then considered, for the king was in Ireland, and King James ready in France, if the English and Dutch fleets had received a blow, to have embarked with an army for England, which perhaps would have hazarded the whole Revolution; so that wise men afterwards, and as I have been told the king himself upon a full hearing justified the conduct of Admiral Herbert, and afterwards created him Earl of Torrington.
The towns of Rye, Winchelsea, and Hastings, have little in them to deserve more than a bare mention; Rye would flourish again, if her harbour, which was once able to receive the royal navy, could be restored; but as it is, the bar is so loaded with sand cast up by the sea, that ships of 200 ton choose to ride it out under Dengey or Beachy, though with the greatest danger, rather than to run the hazard of going into Rye for shelter.
From a little beyond Hastings to Bourn, we ride upon the sands in a straight line for eighteen miles, all upon the coast of Sussex, passing by Pemsey, or Pevensey Haven. This is that famous strand where William the Norman landed with his whole army; and near to which, namely, at the town of Battle, which is about nine miles off, he fought that memorable fight with Harold, then King of England; in which the fate of this nation was determined, and where victory gave the crown to the Conqueror and his race, of the particulars of all which, our histories are full; this town of Battle is remarkable for little now, but for making the finest gun-powder, and the best perhaps in Europe.
From hence it was that, turning north, and traversing the deep, dirty, but rich part of these two counties, I had the curiosity to see the great foundries, or iron-works, which are in this county, and where they are carried on at such a prodigious expense of wood, that even in a country almost all over-run with timber, they begin to complain of the consuming it for those furnaces, and leaving the next age to want timber for building their navies. I must own however, that I found that complaint perfectly groundless, the three counties of Kent, Sussex, and Hampshire, (all which lie contiguous to one another) being one inexhaustible store-house of timber never to be destroyed, but by a general conflagration, and able at this time to supply timber to rebuild all the royal navies in Europe, if they were all to be destroyed, and set about the building them together.
After I had fatigued my self in passing this deep and heavy part of the country, I thought it would not be foreign to my design, if I refreshed my self with a view of Tunbridge-Wells, which were not then above twelve miles out of my way. When I came to the wells, I found a great deal of good company there, and that which was more particular, was, that it happened to be at the time when his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales was there with abundance of the nobility, and gentry of the country, who to honour the prince’s coming, or satisfy their own curiosity, thronged to that place; so that at first I found it very difficult to get a lodging. The prince appeared upon the walks, went into the raffling shops, and to every public place, saw every thing, and let every body see him, and went away, with the Duke of Dorset, and other of his attendance for Portsmouth; so in two or three days, things returned all to their ancient channel, and Tunbridge was just what it used to be.
The ladies that appear here, are indeed the glory of the place; the coming to the Wells to drink the water is a mere matter of custom; some drink, more do not, and few drink physically. But company and diversion is in short the main business of the place; and those people who have nothing to do any where else, seem to be the only people who have any thing to do at Tunbridge. After the appearance is over at the Wells, (where the ladies are all undressed) and at the chapel, the company go home; and as if it was another species of people, or a collection from another place, you are surprised to see the walks covered with ladies completely dressed and gay to profusion; where rich clothes, jewels, and beauty not to be set out by (but infinitely above) ornament, dazzles the eyes from one end of the range to the other.
Here you have all the liberty of conversation in the world, and any thing that looks like a gentleman, has an address agreeable, and behaves with decency and good manners, may single out whom he pleases, that does not appear engaged, and may talk, rally, be merry, and say any decent thing to them; but all this makes no acquaintance, nor is it taken so, or understood to mean so; if a gentleman desires to be more intimate, and enter into any acquaintance particular, he must do it by proper application, not by ordinary meeting on the walks, for the ladies will ask no gentlemen there, to go off the walk, or invite any one to their lodgings, except it be a sort of ladies of whom I am not now speaking.
As for gaming, sharping, intriguing; as also fops, fools, beaux, and the like, Tunbridge is as full of these, as can be desired, and it takes off much of the diversion of those persons of honour and virtue, who go there to be innocently recreated. However a man of character, and good behaviour cannot be there any time, but he may single out such company as may be suitable to him, and with whom he may be as merry as heart can wish. In a word, Tunbridge wants nothing that can add to the felicities of life, or that can make a man or woman completely happy; always provided they have money; for without money a man is no-body at Tunbridge, any more than at any other place; and when any man finds his pockets low, he has nothing left to think of, but to be gone, for he will have no diversion in staying there any longer.
And yet Tunbridge also is a place in which a lady however virtuous, yet for want of good conduct may as soon shipwreck her character as in any part of England; and where, when she has once injured her reputation, ’tis as hard to restore it; nay, some say no lady ever recovered her character at Tunbridge, if she first wounded it there. But this is to be added too, that a lady very seldom suffers that way at Tunbridge, without some apparent folly of her own; for that they do not seem so apt to make havoc of one another’s reputation here, by tattle and slander, as I think they do in some other places in the world; particularly at Epsome, Hampstead, and such like places; which I take to be, because the company who frequent Tunbridge, seem to be a degree or two above the society of those other places, and therefore are not so very apt, either to meddle with other people’s affairs, or to censure if they do; both which are the properties of that more gossiping part of the world.
In this I shall be much misunderstood, if it is thought I mean the ladies only, for I must own I look just the other way; and if I may be allowed to use my own sex so coarsely, it is really among them that the ladies’ characters first, and oftenest receive unjust wounds; and I must confess the malice, the reflections, the busy meddling, the censuring, the tattling from place to place, and the making havoc of the characters of innocent women, is found among the men gossips more than among their own sex, and at the coffee-houses more than at the teatable; then among the women themselves, what is to be found of it there, is more among the chambermaids, than among their mistresses; slander is a meanness below persons of honour and Quality, and to do injustice to the ladies, especially, is a degree below those who have any share of breeding and sense. On this account you may observe, ’tis more practised among the citizens than among the gentry, and in country towns and villages, more than in the city, and so on, till you come to the mere canail, the common mob of the street, and there, no reputation, no character can shine without having dirt thrown upon it every day: but this is a digression.
I left Tunbridge, for the same reason that I give, why others should leave it, when they are in my condition; namely, that I found my money almost gone; and though I had bills of credit to supply my self in the course of my intended journey; yet I had none there; so I came away, or as they call it there, I retired; and came to Lewes, through the deepest, dirtiest, but many ways the richest, and most profitable country in all that part of England. The timber I saw here was prodigious, as well in quantity as in bigness, and sometimes I have seen one tree on a carriage, which they call there a tug drawn by two and twenty oxen, and even then, ’tis carried so little a way, and then thrown down, and left for other tugs to take up and carry on, that sometimes ’tis two or three year before it gets to Chatham; for if once the rains come in, it stirs no more that year, and sometimes a whole summer is not dry enough to make the roads passable. Here I had a sight, which indeed I never saw in any other part of England : namely, that going to church at a country village, not far from Lewis, I saw an ancient lady, and a lady of very good quality, I assure you, drawn to church in her coach with six oxen; nor was it done in frolic or humour, but mere necessity, the way being so stiff and deep, that no horses could go in it.
Lewis is a fine pleasant town, well built, agreeably situated in the middle of an open champaign country, and on the edge of the South Downs, the pleasantest, and most delightful of their kind in the nation; it lies on the bank of a little wholesome fresh river, within twelve miles of the sea; but that which adds to the character of this town, is, that both the town and the country adjacent, is full of gentlemen of good families and fortunes, of which the Pelhams may be named with the first. Here are also the ancient families of Gage, Shely, &c. formerly Roman, but now Protestant, with many others.
From this town, following still the range of the South Downs, west; we ride in view of the sea, and on a fine carpet ground for about twelve miles to Bright Helmston, commonly called Bredhemston, a poor fishing town, old built, and on the very edge of the sea. The sea is very unkind to this town, and has by its continual encroachments, so gained upon them, that in a little time more they might reasonably expect it would eat up the whole town, above 100 houses having been devoured by the water in a few years past; they are now obliged to get a brief granted them, to beg money all over England, to raise banks against the water; the expense of which, the brief expressly says, will be eight thousand pounds which if one were to look on the town, would seem to be more than all the houses in it are worth.
From hence, still keeping the coast close on the left, we come to Shoreham, a sea-faring town, and chiefly inhabited by ship-carpenters, ship-chandlers, and all the several trades depending upon the building and fitting up of ships, which is their chief business; and they are famed for neat building, and for building good sea-boats. Here in the compass of about six miles are three borough towns, sending members to Parliament, (viz) Shoreham, Bramber, and Stenning: and Shoreham, Stenning are tolerable little market-towns; but Bramber (a little ruin of an old castle excepted) hardly deserves the name of a town, having not above fifteen or sixteen families in it, and of them not many above asking you an alms as you ride by; the chiefest house in the town is a tavern, and here, as I have been told, the vintner, or alehouse-keeper rather, for he hardly deserved the name of a vintner, boasted, that upon an election, just then over, he had made 300l. of one pipe of canary.
This is the second town in this country, where the elections have been so scandalously mercenary; and of whom it is said, there was in one king’s reign more money spent at elections, than all the lands in the parishes were worthy, at twenty years purchase. The other town I mean is Winchelsea, a town, if it deserves the name of a town, which is rather the skeleton of an ancient city than a real town, where the ancient gates stand near three miles from one another over the fields, and where the ruins are so buried, that they have made good corn fields of the streets, and the plough goes over the foundations, nay over the first floors of the houses, and where nothing of a town but the destruction of it seems to remain; yet at one election for this town the strife was such between Sir John Banks, father-in-law to the Earl of Aylesford, and Colonel Draper, a neighbouring gentleman, that I was told in the country the latter spent 11000l. at the election, and yet lost it too; what the other spent who opposed him, may be guessed at, seeing he that spent most was always sure to carry it in those days.
Near Steyning, the famous Sir John Fagg had a noble ancient seat, now possessed with a vast estate by his grandson, Sir Robert Fagg; but I mention the ancient gentleman on this occasion, that being entertained at his house, in the year 1697, he showed me in his park four bullocks of his own breeding, and of his own feeding, of so prodigious a size, and so excessively overgrown by fat, that I never saw any thing like them. While I continued at Sir John’s some London butchers came down to see them, and in my hearing offered Sir John six and twenty pound a head for them, but he refused it; and when I moved him afterward to take the money, he said No, he was resolved to have them to Smithfield himself, that he might say he had the four biggest bullocks in England at market.
He continued positive, and did go up to Smithfield-Market with them; but whether it was that they sunk a little in the driving, or that the butchers played a little upon him, I cannot tell; but he was obliged to sell them for twenty five pound a head when he came there. I knew of one of the butchers that bought them, and on a particular occasion enquired of him what they weighed when killed, and he assured me that they weighed eighty stone a quarter, when killed and cutout; which is so incredible, that if I had not been well assured of the truth of it, I should not have ventured thus to have recorded it. But by this may be judged something of the largeness of the cattle in the Wild of Kent and Sussex.
From hence we come to Arundel, a decayed town also; but standing near the mouth of the good river, called Arun, which signifies, says Mr Cambden, the swift, though the river it self is not such a rapid current as merits that name; at least it did not seem to be so to me. This river, and the old decayed, once famous castle at Arundel, which are still belonging to the family of Howards, Earls of Arundel, a branch of the Norfolk family, is all that is remarkable here; except it be that in this river are catched the best mullets, and the largest in England, a fish very good in it self, and much valued by the gentry round, and often sent up to London.
From hence to the city of Chichester are twelve miles, and the most pleasant beautiful country in England, whether we go by the hill, that is the Downs, or by the plain, (viz.) the enclosed country. To the north of Arundel, and at the bottom of the hills, and consequently in the Wild, is the town of Petworth, a large handsome country market-town, and very populous, and as it stands upon an ascent, and is dry and healthy, it is full of gentlemen’s families, and good well built houses both in the town and neighbourhood. But the beauty of Petworth, is the ancient seat of the old family of Peircy, Earls of Northumberland, now extinct; whose daughter, the sole heiress of all his vast estates, married the present Duke of Somerset: of the noble and ancient family of Seymour, and among other noble seats brought his grace this of Petworth.
The Duke pulled down the ancient house, and on the same spot has built from the ground, one of the finest piles of building, and the best modelled houses then in Britain. It has had the misfortune to be once almost demolished by fire, but the damage is fully repaired; but another disaster to the family can never be repaired, which has happened to it, even while these sheets were writing; namely, the death of the Duchess, who died in November 1722, and lies buried in the burying place of the family of Seymor, Dukes of Somerset, in the cathedral church of Salisbury.
The Duke’s house at Petworth, is certainly a complete building in it self, and the apartments are very noble, well contrived, and richly furnished; but it cannot be said, that the situation of the house is equally designed, or with equal judgement as the rest; the avenues to the front want space, the house stands as it were with its elbows to the town, its front has no visto answerable, and the west front looked not to the parks or fine gardens, but to the old stables. To rectify this, when it was too late to order it any other way, the duke was obliged to pull down those noble buildings; I mean the mews, or stables, the finest of their kind in all the south of England, and equal to some noblemen’s whole houses, and yet even the demolishing the pile has done no more than opened a prospect over the country.
From Petworth west, the country is a little less woody than the Wild, and there begin to show their heads above the trees, a great many fine seats of the nobility and gentlemen of the country, as the Duke of Richmond’s seat at Goodwood, near Chichester. (This family also in tears, at the writing these sheets, for the death of her grace the duchess, who died the beginning of the month of December, and is buried in Westminster Abbey; and since the above was written, and sent to the press, the Duke of Richmond himself is also dead.) These and a great many more lying so near together, make the country hereabout much more sociable and pleasant than the rest of the woody country, called the Wild, and yet I cannot say much for the city of Chichester, in which, if six or seven good families were removed, there would not be much conversation, except what is to be found among the canons, and dignitaries of the cathedral.
The cathedral here is not the finest in England, but is far from being the most ordinary. The spire is a piece of excellent workmanship, but it received such a shock about —— years ago, that it was next to miraculous, that the whole steeple did not fall down; which in short, if it had, would almost have demolished the whole church.
It was a fire-ball, if we take it from the inhabitants, or, to speak in the language of nature, the lightning broke upon the steeple, and such was the irresistible force of it, that it drove several great stones out of the steeple, and carried them clear off, not from the roof of the church only, but of the adjacent houses also, and they were found at a prodigious distance from the steeple, so that they must have been shot out of the places where they stood in the steeple, as if they had been shot out of a cannon, or blown out of a mine. One of these stones of at least a ton weight, by estimation, was blown over the south side, or row of houses in the West-Street, and fell on the ground in the street at a gentleman’s door, on the other side of the way; and another of them almost as big was blown over both sides of the said West-Street, into the same gentleman’s garden, at whose door the other stone lay, and no hurt was done by either of them whereas if either of those stones had fallen upon the strongest built house in the street, it would have dashed it all to pieces, even to the foundation. This account of the two stones, I relate from a person of undoubted credit, who was an eye-witness, and saw them, but had not the curiosity to measure them, which he was very sorry for. The breach it made in the spire, though within about forty five foot of the top, was so large, that as the workmen said to me, a coach and six horses might have driven through it, and yet the steeple stood fast, and is now very substantially repaired; withal, showing that it was before, an admirable sound and well finished piece of workmanship.
They have a story in this city, that when ever a bishop of that diocese is to die, a heron comes and sits upon the pinnacle of the spire of the cathedral. This accordingly happened, about —— when Dr —— Williams was bishop. A butcher standing at his shop-door, in the South-Street, saw it, and ran in for his gun, and being a good marks-man shot the heron, and killed it at which his mother was very angry with him, and said he had killed the bishop, and the next day news came to the town that Dr Williams, the last bishop was dead; this is affirmed by many people inhabitants of the place.
This city is not a place of much trade, nor is it very populous; but they are lately fallen into a very particular way of managing the corn trade here, which it is said turns very well to account; the farmers generally speaking, carried all their wheat to Farnham, to market, which is very near forty miles by land-carriage, and from some parts of the country more than forty miles. But some monied men of Chichester, Emsworth, and other places adjacent, have joined their stocks together, built large granaries near the Crook, where the vessels come up, and here they buy and lay up all the corn which the country on that side can spare; and having good mills in the neighbourhood, they grind and dress the corn, and send it to London in the meal about by Long Sea, as they call it; nor now the war is over do they make the voyage so tedious as to do the meal any hurt, as at first in the time of war was sometimes the case for want of convoys.
From hence we descend gradually to Portsmouth, the largest fortification, beyond comparison, that we have in England. The situation of this place is such, that it is chosen, as may well be said, for the best security to the navy above all the places in Britain; the entrance into the harbour is safe, but very narrow, guarded on both sides by terrible platforms of cannon, particularly on the Point; which is a suburb of Portsmouth properly so called, where there is a brick platform built with two tier of guns, one over another, and which can fire so in cover, that the gunners cannot be beaten from their guns, or their guns easily dismounted; the other is from the point of land on the side of Gosport, which they call Gil-kicker, where also they have two batteries.
Before any ships attempt to enter this port by sea, they must also pass the cannon of the main platform of the garrison, and also another at South-Sea-Castle; so that it is next to impossible that any ships could match the force of all those cannon, and be able to force their way into the harbour; in which I speak the judgment of men well acquainted with such matters, as well as my own opinion, and of men whose opinion leads them to think the best of the force of naval batteries too; and who have talked of making no difficulty to force their way through the Thames, in the teeth of the line of guns at Tilbury; I say, they have talked of it, but it was but talk, as any one of judgment would imagine, that knew the works at Tilbury, of which I have spoken in its place. The reasons, however, which they give for the difference, have some force in them, as they relate to Portsmouth, though not as they relate to Tilbury. But to avoid comparing of strengths, or saying what may be done in one place, and not done in another; ’tis evident, in the opinion of all that I have met with, that the greatest fleet of ships that ever were in the hands of one nation at a time, would not pretend, if they had not an army also on shore, to attack the whole work, to force their entrance into the harbour at Portsmouth.
As to the strength of the town by land, the works are very large and numerous, and besides the battery at the Point aforesaid, there is a large hornwork on the south-side, running out towards South-Sea Castle; there is also a good counterscarp, and double moat, with ravelins in the ditch, and double pallisadoes, and advanced works to cover the place from any approach, when it may be practicable. The strength of the town is also considerably augmented on the land-side, by the fortifications raised in King William’s time about the docks and yards, which are now perfected, and those parts made a particular strength by themselves. These docks and yards are now like a town by themselves, and are a kind of marine corporation, or a government of their own kind within themselves; there being particular large rows of dwellings, built at the public charge, within the new works, for all the principal officers of the place. The tradesmen likewise have houses here, and many of the labourers are allowed to live in the bounds as they can get lodging.
The town of Portsmouth, besides its being a fortification, is a well inhabited, thriving, prosperous corporation; and hath been greatly enriched of late by the fleet’s having so often and so long lain there, as well as large fleets of merchantmen, as the whole navy during the late war; besides the constant fitting out of men here, and the often paying them at Portsmouth, has made a great confluence of people thither on their private business, with other things, which the attendance of those fleets hath required. These things have not only been a great advantage to the town, but has really made the whole place rich, and the inhabitants of Portsmouth are quite another sort of people than they were a few years before the Revolution; it may be said, there is as much to do at Portsmouth now in time of peace, as there was then in time of war, and more too.
There is also this note to be put upon the two great arsenals of England, Portsmouth, and Chatham; namely, that they thrive by a war, as the war respects their situation (viz.) that when a war with France happens, or with Spain, then Portsmouth grows rich, and when a war with Holland, or any of the powers of the north, then Chatham, and Woolwich, and Deptford are in request.
The government of the place is by a mayor and aldermen, &c. as in other corporations, and the civil government is no more interrupted by the military, than if there was no garrison there, such is the good conduct of the governors, and such it has always been, since our sovereigns have ceased to encourage the soldiery to insult the civil magistrates. And we have very seldom had any complaint on either side, either of want of discipline among the soldiers, or want of prudence in the magistrates. The inhabitants indeed necessarily submit to such things as are the consequence of a garrison town, such as being examined at the gates, such as being obliged to keep garrison hours, and not be let out, or let in after nine o’clock at night, and the like; but these are things no people will count a burthen, where they get their bread by the very situation of the place, as is the case here.
From Portsmouth west, the country lies low and flat, and is full of creeks and inlets of the sea and rivers, all the way to Southampton, so that we ferry over three times in about eighteen miles; besides going over on bridge, namely, at Tichfield. From hence when we come opposite to Southampton, we pass another creek, being the mouth of the river Itchen which comes down from Winchester, and is both very broad and deep, and the ferry men having a very sorry boat, we found it dangerous enough passing it. On the other bank stands the ancient town of Southampton, and on the other side of Southampton comes down another large river, entering Southampton Water by Red-Bridge; so that the town of Southampton stands upon a point running out into the sea, between two very fine rivers, both navigable, up some length into the country, and particularly useful for the bringing down timber out of one of the best wooded counties in Britain; for the river on the west side of the town in particular comes by the edge of the great forest, called New-Forest.
In riding over the south part of Hampshire, I made this observation about that growth of timber, which I mention in supplement to what I said before concerning our timber being wasted and decayed in England (viz.) that notwithstanding the very great consumption of timber in King William’s reign, by building or rebuilding almost the whole navy; and notwithstanding so many of the king’s ships were built hereabouts, besides abundance of large merchant ships, which were about that time built yet I saw the gentlemen’s estates, within six, eight, or ten miles of Southampton, so over-grown with wood, and their woods so full of large full grown timber, that it seemed as if they wanted sale for it, and that it was of little worth to them. In one estate at Hursely in particular near Winchester, the estate since bought by Mr Cardonell, late manager for the Duke of Marlborough, and formerly belonging to Mr Cromwell, grandson to Oliver Cromwell, the whole estate not above 800l. per ann. in rent, they might have cut twenty thousand pounds worth of timber down, and yet have left the woods in a thriving condition. Farther west it is the like, and as I rode through New-Forest, I could see the ancient oaks of many hundred years standing, perishing with their withered tops advanced up in the air, and grown white with age, and that could never yet get the favour to be cut down, and made serviceable to their country. These in my opinion are no signs of the decay of our woods, or of the danger of our wanting timber in England; on the contrary, I take leave to mention it again, that if we were employed in England, by the rest of the world, to build a thousand sail of three deck ships, from 80 to 100 guns, it might be done to our infinite advantage, and without putting us in any danger of exhausting the nation of timber.
Southampton is a truly ancient town, for ’tis in a manner dying with age; the decay of the trade is the real decay of the town; and all the business of moment that is transacted there, is the trade between us and the islands of Jersey and Guernsey, with a little of the wine trade, and much smuggling. The building of ships also is much stopped of late; however, the town is large, has many people in it, a noble fair High-Street, a spacious quay; and if its trade should revive, is able to entertain great numbers of people. There is a French church, and no inconsiderable congregation, which was a help to the town, and there are still some merchants who trade to Newfoundland, and to the Streights with fish; but for all other trade, it may be said of Southampton as of other towns, London has eaten it up.
Whatever the fable of Bevis of Southampton, and the giants in the woods thereabouts may be derived from, I found the people mighty willing to have those things pass for true; and at the north gate of the town, the only entrance from the land side, they have the figures of two eminent champions, who might pass for giants if they were alive now, but they can tell us very little of their history, but what is all fabulous like the rest, so I say no more of them.
I was now at the extent of my intended journey west, and thought of looking no farther this way for the present, so I came away north east, leaving Winchester a little on the left, and came into the Portsmouth road at Petersfield, a town eminent for little, but its being full of good inns, and standing in the middle of a country, still over-grown with a prodigious quantity of oak-timber. From hence we came to Alton, and in the road thither, began a little to taste the pleasure of the Western Downs, which reach from Winchester almost to Alton.
Alton is a small market-town, of no note, neither is there any considerable manufacture in all this part of England; except a little drugget and shalloon making, which begins hereabout, otherwise the whole counties of Kent, Sussex, Surrey, and Hampshire, are not employed in any considerable woollen manufacture.
From Alton we came to Farnham, of which I can only say, that it is a large populous market-town, the farthest that way in the county of Surrey, and without exception the greatest corn-market in England, London excepted; that is to say, particularly for wheat, of which so vast a quantity is brought every market-day to this market, that a gentleman told me, he once counted on a market-day eleven hundred teams of horse, all drawing waggons, or carts, loaden with wheat at this market; every team of which is supposed to bring what they call a load, that is to say, forty bushel of wheat to market; which is in the whole, four and forty thousand bushel; but I do not take upon me to affirm this relation, or to say whether it be a probable opinion or not.
At this town is a castle eminent for this, that it was built by a Bishop of Winchester. Here the said Bishops of Winchester usually keep their ordinary residence, and though the county of Surrey, be generally speaking within the diocese, they may be truly said to reside in the middle of their ecclesiastical dominion. The Farnham people it seems, or some of the country folks, notwithstanding the liberality and bounty of the several bishops, who, if some people may be believed, have been very good benefactors to the town; I say, notwithstanding all this, have of late been very unkind to the bishop, in pulling down the pale of his park, and plundering it of the deer, killing, wounding, and disabling, even those they could not carry away.
From Farnham, that I might take in the whole county of Surrey, I took the coach-road, over Bagshot-Heath, and that great forest, as ’tis called, of Windsor. Those that despise Scotland, and the north part of England, for being full of waste and barren land, may take a view of this part of Surrey, and look upon it as a foil to the beauty of the rest of England; or a mark of the just resentment showed by Heaven upon the Englishmen’s pride; I mean the pride they show in boasting of their country, its fruitfulness, pleasantness, richness, the fertility of the soil, &c. whereas here is a vast tract of land, some of it within seventeen or eighteen miles of the capital city; which is not only poor, but even quite sterile, given up to barrenness, horrid and frightful to look on, not only good for little, but good for nothing. Much of it is a sandy desert, and one may frequently be put in mind here of Arabia Deserta, where the winds raise the sands, so as to overwhelm whole caravans of travellers, cattle and people together; for in passing this heath, in a windy day, I was so far in danger of smothering with the clouds of sand, which were raised by the storm, that I could neither keep it out of my mouth, nose or eyes; and when the wind was over, the sand appeared spread over the adjacent fields of the forest some miles distant, so as that it ruins the very soil. This sand indeed is checked by the heath, or heather, which grows in it, and which is the common product of barren land, even in the very Highlands of Scotland; but the ground is otherwise so poor and barren, that the product of it feeds no creatures, but some very small sheep, who feed chiefly on the said heather, and but very few of these, nor are there any villages worth remembering, and but few houses, or people for many miles far and wide; this desert lies extended so much, that some say, there is not less than a hundred thousand acres of this barren land that lies all together, reaching out every way in the three counties of Surrey, Hampshire and Berkshire.
Through this desert, for I can call it no less, we come into the great western road, leading from London to Salisbury, Exeter, &c. and pass the Thames at Stanes; and here upon viewing the beautiful prospect of the river, and of the meadows, on the banks of the river, on the left hand of the road, I could not but call to mind those two excellent lines of Sir John Denham, in his poem, called Cooper’s Hill, viz.


Tho’ deep, yet clear, tho’ gentle, yet not dull,
Strong without rage, without o’erflowing full.


Here I remembered that I had yet left the inland towns of the two counties of Kent and Sussex, and almost all the county of Surrey out of my account; and that having as it were taken a circuit round the coast only, I had a great many places worth viewing to give an account of; I therefore left Windsor, which was within my view, on one side of the river, and Hampton Court on the other, as being the subject of another letter; and resolved to finish my present view, in the order I had begun it; that is to say, to give an account of the whole country as I come on; that I may make no incongruous transitions from one remote part of England to another, at least as few as may be.
From Stanes therefore I turned S. and S.E. to Chertsey, another market-town, and where there is a bridge over the Thames. This town was made famous, by being the burial place of Henry VI till his bones were after removed to Windsor by Henry VII, also by being the retreat of the incomparable Cowley, where he lived withdrawn from the hurries of the Court and town, and where he died so much a recluse. From this town wholly employed, either in malting, or in barges to carry it down the river to London; I went away south to Woking, a private country market-town, so out of all road, or thorough-fare, as we call it, that ’tis very little heard of in England; it claims however some honour, from its being once the residence of a royal branch of the family of Plantagenet, the old Countess of Richmond, mother to King Henry VII, who made her last retreat here.
From hence we came to Guilford, a well known and considerable market-town. It has the name of being the county town, though it cannot properly be called so; neither the county gaol being here, or the assizes, any more than in common with other towns. But the election indeed for Parliament men for the county is always held here. The river which according to Mr Camden is called the Wey, and which falls into the Thames at Oatlands, is made navigable to this town, which adds greatly to its trade. This navigation is also a mighty support to the great cornmarket at Farnham, which I have mentioned so often.
Here is a small remainder of an old manufacture, that is to say, of the clothing trade, and it extends it self to Godalming, Haselmeer, and the vale country, on the side of the Holm-wood. This clothing trade, however small, is very assistant to the poor of this part of the country, where the lands, as I have noted, are but indifferent.
From this town of Guilford, the road to Farnham is very remarkable, for it runs along west from Guilford, upon the ridge of a high chalky hill, so narrow that the breadth of the road takes up the breadth of the hill, and the declivity begins on either hand, at the very hedge that bounds the highway, and is very steep, as well as very high. From this hill is a prospect either way, so far that ’tis surprising; and one sees to the north, or N.W. over the great black desert, called Bagshot-Heath, mentioned above, one way, and the other way south east into Sussex, almost to the South Downs, and west to an unbounded length, the horizon only restraining the eyes. This hill being all chalk, a traveller feels the effect of it in a hot summer’s day, being scorched by the reflection of the sun from the chalk, so as to make the heat almost insupportable; and this I speak by my own experience. This hill reaches from Guilford town’s end to within a mile and half of Farnham. The hill, or the going up to it from Guilford rather, is called St Katharine’s-Hill, and at the top of the ascent from the town stands the gallows, which is so placed, respecting the town, that the towns people from the High-Street may sit at their shop doors, and see the criminals executed.
The ten miles from Guilford to Leatherhead make one continued line of gentlemen’s houses, lying all, or most of them, on the west side of the road, and their parks, or gardens almost touching one another. Here are pleasantly seated several very considerable persons, as the posterity of Sir Tho. Bludworth, once Lord Mayor of London, a person famous for the implacable passion he put the people of London in, by one rash expression at the time of the Great Fire: (viz.) ‘That is nothing, and they might piss it out’; which was only spoken at the beginning of the fire, when neither Sir Thomas or the citizens themselves could foresee the length it would go; and without any design to lessen their endeavours to quench it. But this they never forgot, or forgave to him, or his family after him; but fixed the expression on him, as a mark of indelible reproach, even to this day.
At the north east end of this range of fine seats, is Letherhead, a little thorough-fare town, with a stone-bridge over the river Mole; this river is called the Mole, from its remarkable sinking into the earth, at the foot of Box-Hill, near a village called Mickleham, and working its way under ground like a mole, rising again at or near this town of Leatherhead, where its wandering streams are united again, and form a pretty large river, as they were before, running together under Leatherhead Bridge, and from thence to Cobham, and so it pursues its course to the Thames, which it joins at Molesy, which takes its name to be sure from the name of the river Mole.
And here I cannot but take notice of an unaccountable error, which all the writers I have met with fall unwarily into, on account of this little river hiding itself in the earth, and finding its way under ground, from the foot of Beechworth, more properly Betsworth-Castle, near Box-Hill, and then rising again at Letherhead, as above; as if the water had at once engulfed itself in a chasm of the earth, or sunk in a whirlpit, as is said of the Caspian-Sea, which they say rises again in the Persian Gulph with the same violence that it engulfs it self. ’Tis strange this error should prevail in this manner, and with men of learning too, and in a case so easily discovered and so near. But thus it is, nor is it at all remote from the true design of this work, to undeceive the world in the false or mistaken accounts, which other men have given of these things, especially when those mistakes are so demonstrably gross; and when the subject is significant too, as in this part now in hand.
The accounts are so positive, that many curious people have rid thither to see this place, called Swallow, and to see this Beechworth Castle, at the foot of which the river is swallowed up, not doubting but they should see some wonderful gulf, in which a whole river should be at once as it were buried alive; for Mr Camden says, ‘Swallow is the place’. The bishop says, ‘near Beechworth-Castle the river is swallowed up’; nay, and to make the wonder appear more conformable to the relation, the map of the county of Surrey, placed in Mr Camden, makes a large blank between the river as swallowed up, a little off at Darking, and is rising again as at Leatherhead, breaking the river off abruptly, as if pouring its waters all at once into a great gulf, like one of the common-shores of the streets of London, and bringing it out again at once, just as the water of the brook running into Fleet-Ditch, comes out from under Holbourn-Bridge.
Now after all these plausible stories, the matter of fact is this, and no more; and even of this, the thing is wonderful enough too. But I say, it is thus, and no more, (viz.)
The River Mole passes by Beechworth Castle in a full stream; and for near a mile further on the west of the castle, it takes into its stream Darking-Brook, as they call it, and has upon it a large cornmill, called Darking-Mill; below this it runs close at the foot of Box-Hill, near that part of the hill, which is called the Stomacher; then, as if obstructed by the hill, it turns a little south, and runs cross the road which leads from Darking to Leatherhead, where it is apparently rapid and strong; and then fetches a circuit round a park, within sight of Leatherhead, and so keeps a continued channel to the very town of Leatherhead; so that there is no such thing as a natural bridge, or a river lost, no, not at all; and in the winter, in time of floods the stream will be very large, and rapid all the way above ground, which I affirm of my own knowledge, having seen it so, on many occasions.
But the true state of the case is this, the current of the river being much obstructed by the interposition of those hills, called Box-Hill, which though descending in a kind of vale, as if parted to admit the river to pass, and making that descent so low as to have the appearance of a level, near a village called Mickleham; I say, these hills yet interrupting the free course of the river, it forces the waters as it were to find their way through as well as they can; and in order to this, beginning, I say, where the river comes close to the foot of the precipice of Box-Hill, called the Stomacher, the waters sink insensibly away, and in some places are to be seen (and I have seen them) little channels which go out on the sides of the river, where the water in a stream not so big as would fill a pipe of a quarter of an inch diameter, trills away out of the river, and sinks insensibly into the ground.
In this manner it goes away, lessening the stream for above a mile, near two, and these they call the Swallows; and the whole ground on the bank of the river, where it is flat and low, is full of these subterraneous passages; so that if on any sudden rain the river swells over the banks, it is observed not to go back into the channel again when the flood abates, but to sink away into the earth in the meadows, where it spreads.
But now take this with you as you go, that these Swallows, though they diminish the stream much, do not so drink it up as to make it disappear. But that, where it crosses the road near Mickleham, it runs, as I have said, very sharp and broad, nor did I ever know it dry in the driest summer in that place, though I lived in the neighbourhood several years. On the contrary I have known it so deep, that waggons and carriages have not dared to go through, but never knew it, I say, dry in the greatest time of drought.
Below this place the hills rise again on the other side very high, and particularly on the ridge, which the country people call the Ashcom-Hills, and they seem to force the river again west; so it surrounds most of the park I mentioned above, and has several bridges upon it, and by this time indeed, so much of it is sunk away, that in a very dry summer the channel, though full of water in pits and holes cannot be perceived to run; but this must be, I say, in a very dry season, and still there is the channel visible where it runs at other times fiercely enough.
This part which I say has the least water, continuing about half a mile, we then perceive the channel insensibly to have more water than before. That is to say, that as it sunk in gradually and insensibly, so it takes vent again in the like manner in thousands of little springs, and unseen places, very few in any quantity, till in another half mile, it is a full river again, and passes in full streams under Leatherhead-Bridge, as above, and for the truth of this, I appeal to the knowledge of the inhabitants of Darking, Mickleham, Leatherhead, and all the country round.

The town of Darking is eminent for several little things worth observation; as first, for the great Roman highway, called Stonny-street, which Mr Cambden says, passes through the very church-yard of this town. Secondly, for a little common or heath, called the Cottman Dean, or the dean or heath of poor cottagers, for so the word signifies, belonging to the town; and where their alms-house stands; which some learned physicians have singled out for the best air in England. Thirdly, for Mr Howard’s house and garden, called Deaden, the garden is so naturally mounded with hills, that it makes a complete amphitheatre, being an oblong square, the area about eighty yards by forty, and at the south end, the ancient possessor, Mr Howard, by what we call perforation, caused a vault or cave to be made quite through the hill, which came out again into a fine vineyard, which he planted the same year, on the south side, or slope of the hill, and which they say has produced since most excellent good wines, and a very great quantity of them.
At this town lived another ancient gentleman and his son, of a very good family; (viz.) Augustin Bellson, Esq : the father was measured seven foot and half an inch high, allowing all that he might have sunk, for his age, being seventy one years old; and the son measured two inches taller than his father.
The market of Darking ... is of all the markets in England famous for poultry; and particularly for the fattest geese, and the largest capons, the name of a Darking Capon being well known among the poulterers in Leaden-Hall Market. In a word, they are brought to this market from as far as Horsham in Sussex; and ’tis the business of all the country, on that side for many miles, to breed and fatten them up, insomuch, that ’tis like a manufacture to the country people; and some of these capons are so large, as that they are little inferior to turkeys; and I have seen them sold for 4s. to 4s. 6d. each, and weighing from 4l to 5 or 6l. a piece.
On the top of Box-Hill, and in view of this town, grows a very great beech-tree, which by way of distinction is called the Great Beech, and a very great tree it is; but I mention it on the following account, under the shade of this tree, was a little vault or cave, and here every Sunday, during the summer season, there used to be a rendezvous of coaches and horsemen, with abundance of gentlemen and ladies from Epsome to take the air, and walk in the box-woods; and in a word, divert, or debauch, or perhaps both, as they thought fit, and the game increased so much, that it began almost on a sudden, to make a great noise in the country.
A vintner who kept the King’s-Arms-Inn, at Darking, taking notice of the constant and unusual flux of company thither, took the hint from the prospect of his advantage, which offered, and obtaining leave of Sir Adam Brown whose manor and land it was, furnished this little cellar or vault with tables, chairs, &c. and with wine and eatables to entertain the ladies and gentlemen on Sunday nights, as above; and this was so agreeable to them as that it increased the company exceedingly. In a word, by these means, the concourse of gentry, and in consequence of the country people, became so great, that the place was like a little fair; so that at length the country began to take notice of it, and it was very offensive, especially to the best governed people; this lasted some years, I think two or three, and though complaint was made of it to Sir Adam Brown, and the neighbouring justices; alleging the revelling, and the indecent mirth that was among them, and on the Sabbath Day too, yet it did not obtain a suitable redress. Whereupon a certain set of young men, of the town of Darking, and perhaps prompted by some others, resenting the thing also, made an unwelcome visit to the place once on a Saturday night, just before the usual time of their wicked mirth, and behold when the coaches and ladies, &c. from Epsome appeared the next afternoon, they found the cellar and vault, and all that was in it, blown up with gun-powder; and so secret was it kept, that upon the utmost enquiry it could never be heard, or found out who were the persons that did it. That action put an end to their revels for a great while; nor was the place ever repaired that I heard of, at least it was not put to the same wicked use that it was employed in before.
The vale beneath this hill is for many miles east and west, called the Holmward, by some the Holm-Wood, others Holms-dale but more vulgarly the Homeward: in the woody part of which are often found outlying red deer, and in the days of King James II or while he was Duke of York, they have hunted the largest stags here that have been seen in England; the Duke took great care to have them preserved for his own sport, and they were so preserved for many years; but have since that been most of them destroyed.
It is suggested that this place was in ancient times so unpassable a wild, or overgrown waste, the woods so thick, and the extent so large, reaching far into Sussex, that it was the retreat for many ages of the native Britons, who the Romans could never drive out; and after that it was the like to the Saxons, when the Danes harrassed the nation with their troops, and ravaged the country wherever they came. But this is a piece of history, which I leave as I find it; the country though wild still, and perhaps having the same countenance now in many places, as it had above a thousand years ago; yet in other places is cultivated, and has roads passable enough in the summer quite through it, on every side, and the woods are cleared off in a great measure as above.
Here travelling east at the foot of the hills, we came to Rygate, a large market-town with a castle, and a mansion-house, inhabited for some years by Sir John Parsons, once Lord Mayor of London, and whose son is in a fair way to be so also; being one of the aldermen and sheriffs of the said city at the writing these sheets. Here are two miserable borough towns too, which nevertheless send each of them two members to Parliament, to wit, Gatton under the side of the hill, almost at Rygate; and Bleechingly, more eastward on the same cross-road, which we were upon before. The last was for many years, the estate of Sir Robert Clayton, a known citizen, and benefactor to the city of London, whose posterity still enjoy it; and at either town the purchasers seem to buy the election with the property.
From hence, crossing still the roads leading from London into Sussex, keeping on (east) we come to Westerham, the first market town in Kent on that side. This is a neat handsome well built market-town, and is full of gentry, and consequently of good company. All this part of the country is very agreeably pleasant, wholesome and fruitful, I mean quite from Guilford to this place; and is accordingly overspread with good towns, gentlemen’s houses, populous villages, abundance of fruit, with hop-grounds and cherry orchards, and the lands well cultivated; but all on the right-hand, that is to say, south, is exceedingly grown with timber, has abundance of waste and wild grounds, and forests, and woods, with many large iron-works, at which they cast great quantities of iron cauldrons, chimney-backs, furnaces, retorts, boiling pots, and all such necessary things of iron; besides iron cannon, bomb-shells, stink-pots, hand-grenadoes, and cannon ball, &c. in an infinite quantity, and which turn to very great account; though at the same time the works are prodigiously expensive, and the quantity of wood they consume is exceeding great, which keeps up that complaint I mentioned before; that timber would grow scarce, and consequently dear, from the great quantity consumed in the iron-works in Sussex.
From hence going forward east, we come to Riverhead, a town on the road from London to Tunbridge; and then having little to speak of in Kent, except some petty market-towns, such as Wrotham, commonly called Rootham, Town-Malling, Cranbrook, and the like; I turned north, and came to Bromley, a market-town, made famous by an hospital, lately built there by Dr Warner, Lord Bishop of Rochester, for the relief of the widows of clergy-men, which was not only well endowed at first, but has had many gifts and charities bestowed on it since, and is a very noble foundation for the best of charities in the world; besides it has been an example, and an encouragement to the like in other places, and has already been imitated, by the Bishops of Winchester and Salisbury in their dioceses.
Near this town we turned away by Beckenham, and through Norwood to Croydon; in the way we saw Dullige or Sydenham Wells, where great crowds of people throng every summer from London to drink the waters, as at Epsome and Tunbridge, they go more for the diversion of the season, for the mirth and the company; for gaming, or intriguing, and the like, here they go for mere physic, and this causes another difference; namely, that as the nobility and gentry go to Tunbridge, the merchants and rich citizens to Epsome; so the common people go chiefly to Dullwich and Stretham; and the rather also, because it lies so near London, that they can walk to it in the morning, and return at night; which abundance do; that is to say, especially of a Sunday, or on holidays, which makes the better sort also decline the place; the crowd on those days being both unruly and unmannerly.
Croydon is a great corn-market, but chiefly for oats and oatmeal, all for London still; the town is large and full of citizens from London, which makes it so populous. It is the ancient palace of the Archbishops of Canterbury, and several of them lie buried here; particularly that great man, Archbishop Whitgift, who not only repaired the palace, but built the famous hospital and school, which remains there to this day, to the singular honour of the giver. In the gardens of this episcopal palace, the Lady Dowager Onslow, mother of the present lord of that name, was very unhappily drowned about two year since, in one of the fish-ponds, whether she did it herself, or whether by accident, or how, ’tis not the business of such a work as this to enquire.
I am sorry to record it to the reproach of any person in their grave, that the ancestor of this family, though otherwise a very honest gentleman, if fame lies not, was so addicted to gaming, and so unfortunately over-matched in his play, that he lost this noble seat and parks, and all the fine addenda which were then about it, at one night’s play, some say, at one cast of dice, to Mr Harvey of Comb, near Kingston. What misery had befallen the family, if the right of the winner had been prosecuted with rigour, as by what I have heard it would have been, is hard to write. But God had better things in store for the gentleman’s posterity than he took thought for himself; and the estate being entailed upon the heir, the loser died before it came into possession of the winner, and so it has been preserved, and the present gentleman has not only recovered the disaster, but as above, has exceedingly improved it all.
From hence it is but a little mile to Cashalton, a country village situate among innumerable springs of water, which all together, form a river in the very street of the town, and joining the other springs which come from Croydon and Bedington, make one stream, which are called the river Wandell. This village seated among such delightful springs, is yet all standing upon firm chalk; and having the Downs close adjoining, makes the most agreeable spot on all this side of London, as is abundantly testified by its being, as it were, crowded with fine houses of the citizens of London; some of which are built with such a profusion of expense, that they look rather like seats of the nobility, than the country houses of citizens and merchants; particularly those of Sir William Scawen, lately deceased; who besides an immense estate in money has left, as I was told, one article of nine thousand pounds a year to his heir; and was himself since the Fire of London, only Mr Scawen, a Hamborough merchant, dealing by commission, and not in any view of such an increase of wealth, or any thing like it.
The other house is that of Sir John Fellows, late sub-governor of the South-Sea Company, who having the misfortune to fall in the general calamity of the late directors, lost all his unhappy wealth, which he had gained in the company, and a good and honestly gotten estate of his own into the bargain: I cannot dwell on the description of all the fine houses in this and the neighbouring villages; but I must take a trip here cross the downs of Epsome.
Banstead Downs need no description other than this, that their being so near London, and surrounded as they are with pleasant villages, and being in themselves perfectly agreeable, the ground smooth, soft, level and dry; (even in but a few hours after rain) they conspire to make the most delightful spot of ground, of that kind in all this part of Britain.
When on the public race days they are covered with coaches and ladies, and an innumerable company of horsemen, as well gentlemen as citizens, attending the sport; and then adding to the beauty of the sight, the racers flying over the course, as if they either touched not, or felt not the ground they run upon; I think no sight, except that of a victorious army, under the command of a Protestant King of Great Britain could exceed it.
About four miles, over those delicious downs, brings us to Epsome, and if you will suppose me to come there in the month of July, or thereabouts, you may think me to come in the middle of the season, when the town is full of company, and all disposed to mirth and pleasantry; for abating one unhappy stock jobbing year, when England took leave to act the frantic, for a little while; and when every body’s heads were turned with projects and stocks, I say, except this year, we see nothing of business in the whole conversation of Epsome. Even the men of business, who are really so when in London; whether it be at the Exchange, the Alley, or the Treasury-Offices, and the Court; yet here they look as if they had left all their London thoughts behind them, and had separated themselves to mirth and good company; as if they came hither to unbend the bow of the mind, and to give themselves a loose to their innocent pleasures; I say, innocent, for such they may enjoy here, and such any man may make his being here, if he pleases.
As, I say, this place seems adapted wholly to pleasure, so the town is suited to it; ’tis all rural, the houses are built at large, not many together, with gardens and ground about them; that the people who come out of their confined dwellings in London, may have air and liberty, suited to the design of country lodgings. You have no sooner taken lodgings, and entered the apartments, but if you are any thing known, you walk out, to see who and who’s together; for ’tis the general language of the place, Come let’s go see the town, folks don’t come to Epsome to stay within doors. The next morning you are welcomed with the music under your chamber window; but for a shilling or two you get rid of them, and prepare for going to the Wells.
Here you have the compliment of the place, are entered into the list of the pleasant company, so you become a citizen of Epsome for that summer; and this costs you another shilling, or if you please, half a crown. Then you drink the waters, or walk about as if you did; dance with the ladies, though it be in your gown and slippers; have music and company of what kind you like, for every man may sort himself as he pleases; the grave with the grave, and the gay with the gay, the bright, and the wicked; all may be matched if they seek for it, and perhaps some of the last may be over-matched, if they are not upon their guard.
After the morning diversions are over, and every one are walked home to their lodgings, the town is perfectly quiet again; nothing is to be seen, the Green, the Great Room, the raffling-shops all are (as if it was a trading town on a holiday) shut up; there’s little stirring, except footmen, and maid servants, going to and fro of errands, and higglers and butchers, carrying provisions to people’s lodgings.
This takes up the town till dinner is over, and the company have reposed for two or three hours in the heat of the day; then the first thing you observe is, that the ladies come to the shady seats, at their doors, and to the benches in the groves, and covered walks; (of which, every house that can have them, is generally supplied with several). Here they refresh with cooling liquors, agreeable conversation, and innocent mirth.
Those that have coaches, or horses (as soon as the sun declines) take the air on the downs, and those that have not, content themselves with staying a little later, and when the air grows cool, and the sun low, they walk out under the shade of the hedges and trees, as they find it for their diversion. In the mean time, towards evening the bowling-green begins to fill, the music strikes up in the Great Room, and company draws together a-pace. And here they never fail of abundance of mirth, every night being a kind of ball; the gentlemen bowl, the ladies dance, others raffle, and some rattle; conversation is the general pleasure of the place, till it grows late, and then the company draws off; and, generally speaking, they are pretty well as to keeping good hours; so that by eleven a clock the dancing generally ends, and the day closes with good wishes, and appointments to meet the next morning at the Wells, or somewhere else.
The retired part of the world, of which also there are very many here, have the waters brought home to their apartments in the morning, where they drink and walk about a little, for assisting the physical operation, till near noon, then dress, dinner, and repose for the heat as others do; after which they visit, drink tea, walk abroad, come to their lodgings to supper, then walk again till it grows dark, and then to bed. The greatest part of the men, I mean of this grave sort, may be supposed to be men of business, who are at London upon business all the day, and thronging to their lodgings at night, make the families, generally speaking, rather provide suppers than dinners; for ’tis very frequent for the trading part of the company to place their families here, and take their horses every morning to London, to the Exchange, to the Alley, or to the warehouse, and be at Epsome again at night; and I know one citizen that practised it for several years together, and scarce ever lay a night in London during the whole season. Nor are these which I call the more retired part of the company, the least part of those that fill up the town of Epsome, nor is their way of living so retired, but that there is a great deal of society, mirth, and good manners, and good company among these too.
The pleasures of nature are so many round the town, the shady trees so every where planted, and now generally well grown, that it makes Epsome like a great park filled with little groves, lodges and retreats for coolness of air, and shade from the sun; and I believe, I may say, it is not to be matched in the world, on that account; at least, not in so little a space of ground.
In the winter this is no place for pleasure indeed; as it is full of mirth and gaiety in the summer, so the prospect in the winter presents you with little, but good houses shut up, and windows fastened; the furniture taken down, the families removed, the walks out of repair, the leaves off of the trees, and the people out of the town; and which is still worse, the ordinary roads both to it, and near it, except only on the side of the downs, are deep, stiff, full of sloughs, and, in a word, unpassable; so that there’s no riding in the winter without the utmost fatigue, and some hazard, and this is the reason that Epsome is not (like Hampstead or Richmond) full of company in winter as well as summer.
From Epsome that I might thoroughly visit the county of Surrey, I rode over those clays, and through very bad roads to Kingstone, and from thence to Oatland, that I might see the famous place where Julius Caesar passed the river Thames in the sight of the British army, and notwithstanding they had stuck the river full of sharp stakes for three miles together.
The people said several of those stakes were still to be seen in the bottom of the river, having stood there for now above 1760 years; but they could show me none of them, though they call the place Coway Stakes to this day; I could make little judgment of the thing, only from this, that it really seems probable, that this was the first place where Caesar at that time could find the river fordable, or any way passable to him, who had no boats, no pontoons, and no way to make bridges over, in the teeth of so powerful, and so furious an enemy; but the Roman valour and discipline surmounted all difficulties, and he passed the army, routing the Britons; whose king and general, Cassibellanus, never offered a pitched battle to the Romans afterward.
Satisfied with what little I could see here, which indeed was nothing at all, but the mere place, said to be so; and which it behoved me to believe, only because it was not unlikely to be true; I say, satisfied with this, I came back directly to Kingstone, a good market-town, but remarkable for little, only that they say, the ancient British and Saxon kings were usually crowned here in former times, which I will neither assert or deny.
But keeping the river now on my left, drawing near to London, we came to Hame and Peterson, little villages; the first, famous for a most pleasant palace of the late Duke of Lauderdale, close by the river; a house King Charles II used to be frequently at, and be exceedingly pleased with; the avenues of this fine house to the land side, come up to the end of the village of Peterson, where the wall of New Park comes also close to the town, on the other side; in an angle of which stood a most delicious house, built by the late Earl of Rochester, Lord High Treasurer in King James II’s reign, as also in part of Queen Ann’s reign, which place he discharged so well, that we never heard of any misapplications, so much as suggested, much less inquired after.
I am obliged to say only, that this house stood here; for even while this is writing the place seems to be but smoking with the ruins of a most unhappy disaster, the whole house being a few months ago burnt down to the ground with a fire, so sudden, and so furious, that the family who were all at home, had scarce time to save their lives.
Nor was the house, though so exquisitely finished, so beautiful within and without, the greatest loss sustained; the rich furniture, the curious collection of paintings; and above all, the most curious collection of books, being the library of the first Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England, and author of that most excellent History of the Rebellion, of which the world knows so much; I say, this library, as I am assured, was here wholly consumed; a loss irreparable, and not to be sufficiently regretted by all lovers of learning, having among other valuable things, several manuscripts relating to those times, which both for their rarity, antiquity, and authority, were of an inestimable value.
From hence we come to Richmond, the delightful retreat of their royal highnesses, the Prince and Princess of Wales, and where they have spent the fine season every summer for some years. The prince’s court being so near must needs have filled Richmond, which was before a most agreeable retreat for the first and second rate gentry, with a great deal of the best company in England. This town and the country adjacent, increase daily in buildings, many noble houses for the accommodation of such, being lately raised and more in prospect: but ’tis feared should the prince come, for any cause that may happen to quit that side of the country, those numerous buildings must abate in the value which is now set upon them.
Here are wells likewise, and a mineral-water, which though not so much as that at Epsome and Tunbridge, are yet sufficient to keep up the forms of the place, and bring the company together in the morning, as the music does in the evening; and as there is more of quality in and about the place than is ordinarily to be seen at Epsome, the company is more shining, and sometimes even illustriously bright. Mr Temple created Baron Temple, of the kingdom of Ireland, even since this circuit was performed; and who is the son and successor to the honour, estate, and great part of the character of the great Sir William Temple, has a fine seat and gardens (hard by) at Shene. The gardens are indeed exquisitely fine, being finished, and even contrived by the great genius of Sir William, his father; and as they were his last delight in life, so they were every way suited to be so, to a man of his sense and capacity, who knew what kind of life was best fitted to make a man’s last days happy.
It is not easy to describe the beauty with which the banks of the Thames shine on either side of the river, from hence to London, much more than our ancestors, even of but one age ago, knew any thing of. If for pleasant villages, great houses, palaces, gardens, &c. it was true in Queen Elizabeth’s time, according to the poet, that

The Thames with royal Tyber may compare.


I say, if this were true at that time, what may be said of it now? when for one fine house that was to be seen then, there are a hundred; nay, for ought I know, five hundred to be seen now, even as you sit still in a boat, and pass up and down the river.
First beginning from Ham-House, as above, the prince’s palace salutes the eye, being formerly no more than a lodge in the park. I have seen many of the seats of the nobility in France, and some larger, but none finer than this, except such as had been laid out at the royal expense.
From Richmond to London, the river sides are full of villages, and those villages so full of beautiful buildings, charming gardens, and rich habitations of gentlemen of quality, that nothing in the world can imitate it; no, not the country for twenty miles round Paris, though that indeed is a kind of prodigy. To enumerate the gentlemen’s houses in their view, would be too long for this work to describe them, would fill a large folio; it shall suffice to observe something, concerning the original of the strange passion, for fine gardens, which has so commendably possessed the English gentlemen of late years, for ’tis evident it is but of late years.
It is since the Revolution that our English gentlemen, began so universally, to adorn their gardens with those plants, we call ever greens, which leads me to a particular observation that may not be improper in this place; King William and Queen Mary introduced each of them two customs, which by the people’s imitating them became the two idols of the town, and indeed of the whole kingdom; the queen brought in (1.) the love of fine East-India callicoes, such as were then called Masslapatan chintz, atlasses, and fine painted callicoes, which afterward descended into the humours of the common people so much, as to make them grievous to our trade, and ruining to our manufacturers and the poor; so that the Parliament were obliged at last to prohibit the use of them: (2.) The queen brought in the custom or humour, as I may call it, of furnishing houses with china-ware, which increased to a strange degree afterwards, piling their china upon the tops of cabinets, scrutores, and every chimney-piece, to the tops of the ceilings, and even setting up shelves for their china-ware, where they wanted such places, till it became a grievance in the expense of it, and even injurious to their families and estates.
The good queen far from designing any injury to the country where she was so entirely beloved, little thought she was in either of these laying a foundation for such fatal excesses, and would no doubt have been the first to have reformed them had she lived to see it.
The king on his part introduced (1.) the love of gardening; and (2.) of painting. In the first his majesty was particularly delighted with the decoration of ever greens, as the greatest addition to the beauty of a garden, preserving the figure in the place even in the roughest part of an inclement and tempestuous winter.
With the particular judgment of the king, all the gentlemen in England began to fall in; and in a few years fine gardens, and fine houses began to grow up in every corner; the king began with the gardens at Hampton-Court and Kensington, and the gentlemen followed every where, with such a gust that the alteration is indeed wonderful throughout the whole kingdom.
But I find none has spoken of what I call the distant glory of all these buildings. There is a beauty of these things at a distance, taking them en passant, and in perspective, which few people value, and fewer understand; and yet here they are more truly great, than in all their private beauties whatsoever. Here they reflect beauty, and magnificence upon the whole country, and give a kind of a character to the island of Great Britain in general. The banks of the Sein are not thus adorned from Paris to Roan, or from Paris to the Loign above the city: the Danube can show nothing like it above and below Vienna, or the Po above and below Turin; the whole country here shines with a lustre not to be described. Take them in a remote view, the fine seats among the trees as jewels’shine in a rich coronet; in a near sight they are mere pictures and paintings; at a distance they are all nature, near hand all art; but both in the extremest beauty. In a word, nothing can be more beautiful; here is a plain and pleasant country, a rich fertile soil, cultivated and enclosed to the utmost perfection of husbandry, then bespangled with villages; those villages filled with these houses, and the houses surrounded with gardens, walks, vistas, avenues, representing all the beauties of building, and all the pleasures of planting. It is impossible to view these countries from any rising ground and not be ravished with the delightful prospect. For example, suppose you take your view from the little rising hills about Clapham, there you see the pleasant villages of Peckham and Camberwell, with some of the finest dwellings about London; with all the villages mentioned above, and the country adjoining filled with the palaces of the British nobility and gentry already spoken of; looking north, behold, to crown all, a fair prospect of the whole city of London it self; the most glorious sight without exception, that the whole world at present can show, or perhaps ever could show since the sacking of Rome in the European, and the burning the Temple of Jerusalem in the Asian part of the world.
Add to all this, that these fine houses and innumerable more, which cannot be spoken of here, are not, at least very few of them, the mansion houses of families, the ancient residences of ancestors, the capital messuages of the estates; nor have the rich possessors any lands to a considerable value about them; but these are all houses of retreat, like the Bastides of Marseilles, gentlemen’s mere summer-houses, or citizen’s country-houses; whither they retire from the hurries of business, and from getting money, to draw their breath in a clear air, and to divert themselves and families in the hot weather; and they that are shut up, and as it were stripped of their inhabitants in the winter, who return to smoke and dirt, sin and seacoal, (as it was coarsely expressed) in the busy city; so that in short all this variety, this beauty, this glorious show of wealth and plenty, is really a view of the luxuriant age which we live in, and of the over-flowing riches of the citizens, who in their abundance make these gay excursions, and live thus deliciously all the summer, retiring within themselves in the winter, the better to lay up for the next summer’s expense.
If this then is produced from the gay part of the town only, what must be the immense wealth of the city it self, where such a produce is brought forth? where such prodigious estates are raised in one man’s age; instances of which we have seen in those of Sir Josiah Child, Sir John Lethulier, Sir James Bateman, Sir Robert Clayton, Sir William Scawen, and hundreds more; whose beginnings were small, or but small compared, and who have exceeded even the greatest part of the nobility of England in wealth, at their death, and all of their own getting.
It would also take up a large chapter in this book, to but mention the overthrow, and catastrophe of innumerable wealthy city families, who after they have thought their houses established, and have built their magnificent country seats, as well as others, have sunk under the misfortunes of business, and the disasters of trade, after the world has thought them passed all possibility of danger; such as Sir Joseph Hodges, Sir Justus Beck, the widow Cock at Camberwell, and many others; besides all the late South-Sea directors, all which I choose to have forgotten, as no doubt they desire to be, in recording the wealth and opulence of this part of England, which I doubt not to convince you infinitely out-does the whole world.
I am come now to Southwark, a suburb to, rather than a part of London; but of which this may be said with justice.

A royal city were not London by.

To give you a brief description of Southwark, it might be called a long street, of about nine miles in length, as it is now built on eastward; reaching from Vaux-Hall to London-Bridge, and from the bridge to Deptford, all up to Deptford-Bridge, which parts it from Greenwich, all the way winding and turning as the river winds and turns; except only in that part, which reaches from Cuckold’s-Point to Deptford, which indeed winds more than the river does. In the centre, which is opposite to the bridge, it is thickened with buildings, and may be reckoned near a mile broad; (viz.) from the bridge to the end of Kent-street and Blackman-street, and about the Mint; but else the whole building is but narrow, nor indeed can it be otherwise; considering the length of it.
The principal beauty of the borough of Southwark, consists in the prodigious number of its inhabitants. Take it as it was anciently bounded, it contained nine parishes; but as it is now extended, and, as I say, joins with Deptford, it contains eleven large parishes. According to the weekly bills, for the year 1722, the nine parishes only buried 4166, which is about one sixth part of the whole body, called London; the bill of mortality for that year, amounting in all to 25750.
The first thing we meet with considerable, is at the Spring-Garden, just at the corner, where the road turns away to go from Vaux-Hall Turnpike, towards Newington, there are the remains of the old lines cast up in the times of the Rebellion, to fortify this side of the town; and at that corner was a very large bastion, or rather a fort, and such indeed they call it; which commanded all the pass on that side, and farther on, where the openings near St George’s-Fields are, which they now call the Ducking-Pond, there was another. From hence they turned south east, and went to the windmill, at the end of Blackman-street, where they crossed the road, and going to the end of Kent-street, we see another great bastion; and then turning S.E. till they come to the end of Barnaby-street, or rather beyond, among the tanners, and there you see another fort, so plain, and so undemolished, the grass growing now over the works, that it is as plain as it was, even when it was thrown down. Here is also another remain of antiquity, the vestiges of which are easy to be traced; (viz.) the place where by strength of men’s hands, they turned the channel of this great river of Thames, and made a new course for the waters, while the great bridge, which is now standing, was built: here it is evident they turned the waters out. A farther description of Southwark, I refer till I come to speak of London, as one general appellation for the two cities of London and Westminster; and all the borough of Southwark, and all the buildings and villages included within the bills of mortality, make but one London, in the general appellation, of which in its order. I am, &c.
