


Lady G. In Continuation. 


Well, my dear—Aunt Nell and I have made
up. I have been pacified by her apologies, and
promises never again to interfere between man and 

wife. As I told the forlorn soul, You maiden Ladies,
tho' you have lived a great while in the world, cannot
know what strange creatures these husbands are,
and how many causes (that cannot be mentioned by
the poor wife to her friends) a woman may have to
be displeased with her man, in order to keep the creature
in some little decorum—Indeed, madam—There
I stopt—This excited her prudery; and she made out
the rest, and, perhaps, a great deal more than the rest. 
She looked down, to shew she was sensible, tried for
a blush; and, I verily believe, had she been a young
woman, would have succeeded. “Why, truly, niece,
I believe you are right. These men are odious creatures!” 
—And then she shuddered, as if she had said,
Lord defend me from them!—a prayer, that, being a
good creature, she need not doubt will be answered. 
But for Lord G. there lies no forgiveness. To
complain of his wife to her aunt! A married man to
submit matrimonial squabbles (and every honest pair
has some) to others! to an old maid, especially! and
to authorize her to sit in judgment on his wife's little
whimsies, when the good woman wants to make herself
important to him; and thereby endeavour to destroy
the wife's significance; there's no bearing of that. 
He had made Lord L. and Lady L. judges over me
before. Nay, this infant Emily has taken her seat on
the same bench; and, in her pretty manner, has, by
beseeching me to be good, supposed me bad. And
to some one of them (who knows but to the telltale
himself, tho' he denies it?) my brother's hint is
owing, on which you so sagely expostulate: My reputation,
therefore, as an obedient wife, with all those
whose good opinion was worth courting, is gone:
And is not this enough to make one careless? 
* *
Bless me, my dear! This man of errors has committed,
if possible, a still worse fault. He regards me
not as any-body. The Earl and he have been long 

uneasy, it seems, that we live at the expence of my
brother, to whom there is no making returns; and
a house offering in Grosvenor-square, he has actually
contracted for it, without consulting me. I must own,
that I cannot in my heart disapprove either of the motive,
or the house, as I have the latter described to me:
But his doing it of his own head, is an insolent act
of prerogative. Don't you in conscience think so? 
Does he not, by this step, make me his chattels, a
piece of furniture only, to be removed as any other
piece of furniture, or picture, or cabinet, at his pleasure? 
He came to me—I hope, madam, in a reproaching
accent, I have done something now that will please
you: Ought his stiff air, and the reflecting word
NOW, to have gone unpunish'd? Hast thou found
out any other old maid, to sit in judgment on the behaviour
of thy wife? But what hast thou done? —I
was astonished when the man told me. 
And who is to be thy housekeeper? Is this done, in
hope I'll follow thee? Or dost thou intend to exclude
from thy habitation the poor woman who met thee at
church a few weeks ago? 
Just then came in Lady L. I asked her, What she
thought of this step? 
Had she vindicated him, I never would have regarded
a word she said between us. But she owned,
that she thought I should have been consulted. And
then he began to see that he had done a wrong thing. 
I acquainted her with his former fault, unatoned
for as it was—Why, as to that, she did not know
what to say; only, that it became my character, and
good sense, so to behave, as that Lord G. should have
no reason to complain of me to any-body. A hard
thing, Harriet, to be reflected upon by an own sister! 
* *
Lady L. prevailed upon me, unknown to Lord G.
to go with her to see this house. 'Tis a handsome 

house. I have but the one aforesaid objection to it— 
But let me ask you again: Is not the slight he has put
upon me, in taking it without consulting me, an
inexcusable thing? —I know you will say it is. But
I'll tell you how I think to do—I will make him give
up the contract; and when he has done so, unknown
to him, take the same house myself. This will be
returning the compliment. His excuse is, He was
sure I should like the house and the terms. If he is
sure of my liking it, and has chosen it himself, the
duce is in it, if I may not be sure of his—Would he
dislike it, because I liked it? —Say so, if you dare Harriet; 
and suppose me blameable. 
* *
O my dear! What shall I do with this passionate
man? I could not, you know, forgive him for the
two unatoned-for steps which he had taken, without
some contrition: And do you think he would shew
any? —Not he! —I said something that set him up; 
something bordering upon the whimsical—No matter
what. He pranced upon it. I, with my usual meekness,
calmly rebuked him; and then went to my
harpsichord: And, what do you think? How shall I
tell it? Yet to you I may—Why then he whisked his
hat from under his arm (he was going out); and
silenced, broke, demolished, my poor harpsichord. 
I was surprized: But instantly recovering myself; 
You are a violent wretch, Lord G. said I, quite calmly:
How could you do so? —Suppose (and I took the
wicked hat) I should throw it into the fire? But I
gave it to him, and made him a fine courtesy. There
was command of temper! I thought, at the instant,
of Epictetus and his snapt leg. Was I not as great
a Philosopher? 
* *
He is gone out. Dinner is ready; and no Lord
G. Aunt Nell is upon the fret: But she remembers 

her late act of delinquency; so is obliged to be silent. 
I have her under my thumb. 
* *
The man came in after we had dined. I went to
him, as if nothing had been the matter between us. 
You look vexed, my Lord! —It was a very violent
action: It vexed me at first: But you see how soon
I recovered my temper. I wish you would learn patience
of me. But come, I forgive you; I will not
be angry with you, for an evil that a little money will
repair. I see you are vexed. 
So I am, madam, at my very soul! But it is not— 
Now to be helped—True, my Lord, and I forgive
you— 
But curse me, if I forgive you, madam— 
O fie! that's wickedly said: But I know you will,
when I ask you. 
Aunt Nell sat by the window; her eyes half shut; 
her mouth as firmly closed, as if her lips were glewed
together. 
Madam, addressing himself to her, I shall set out
to-morrow for Windsor. 
Windsor, my Lord? said I. —He answered me not. 
Ask my good Lord G. madam, said I, in a sweet
humble voice, how long he shall stay at Windsor? 
How long, my Lord? mumbled out aunt Nell— 
From Windsor I shall go to Oxford. 
Ask him, madam, how long he shall be before he
returns? 
How long, my Lord, shall you be absent from us? 
When I find I can return, and not be the jest of
my own wife—I may, perhaps—There he stopt, and
looked stately. 
Tell my Lord, that he is too serious, madam. Tell
him, that hardly any other man but would see I was
at play with him, and would play again. 
You hear what my niece says, my Lord. 
I regard nothing she says. 

Ask him, madam, who is to be of his party. 
Who, my Lord, is to be of your party? 
Nobody; turning himself half round, that he
might not be thought to answer me, but her. 
Ask him, madam, whether it be business or pleasure,
that engages him to take this solitary tour? 
She looked the question to him. 
Neither, madam, to her. I left my pleasure some
weeks ago, at St. George's Church. I have never
found it since. 
A strange forgetful man! and as ungrateful as forgetful. 
And I stept to him, and looked in his face, so
courteously! and with such a sweet smile! 
He sullenly turned from me, and to aunt Nell. 
Ask my Lord, If he takes this journey, thinking to
oblige me? 
Ask him your own questions, niece. 
My Lord won't answer me. 
He strutted, and bit his lip with vexation. 
Come, I'll try once more if you think me worth
answering—I think, my Lord, if you shall be gone a
month or two, I may take a little trip to Northamptonshire. 
Emily shall go with me. The girl is very
uneasy to see Miss Byron: And Miss Byron will rejoice
to see us both. A visit from us will do her good. 
He took it, that I was not desirous of a short absence. 
And he pouched his mouth, and reared himself up,
and swelled; but answered me not. 
See, madam, my Lord is sullen; he won't answer
me. I must get you to ask my questions. I think it
my duty to ask leave to go. My Lord may go where
he pleases, without my leave—Very fit he should,
He is a man. I once could have done so; high-ho!
but I have vowed obedience and vassalage. I will not
break my vow. Ask him, If I have his consent for a
visit to Miss Byron, of a month or two? Ask him, madam,
If he can make himself happy in my absence? 
I should otherwise be loth to go for so long a time. 

I should be as welcome, said he, to Miss Byron,
as her— 
As her! As she! you should say, I believe, if you
won't say As you, madam, and bow to me—I believe
so, my Lord. Miss Byron would rejoice to see any
of my friends. Miss Byron is very good. 
Would to God— 
That somebody were half as good, interrupted I. 
Somebody understands you, my Lord, and wishes so
too—Pray, madam, ask my Lord, If I may go? — 
His new house will be putting in order mean time— 
I will ask none of your questions for you—New
house, niece! You harp too much on one string. 
I mean not offence. I have done with that subject. 
My Lord, to be sure, has dominion over his bird. He
can choose her cage. She has nothing to do, but sit
and sing in it—when her instrument is mended, and
in tune—He has but one fault. He is too good-natured
to his bird. But would he take your advice, madam— 
Now, tho' this may sound to you, Harriet, a little
recriminating; yet, I do assure you, I spoke it in
a very sweet accent: Yet up got aunt Nell, in a passion:
My Lord too was all alive. I put myself between her
and the door; and throwing my arms about her, You
shan't go, madam—Smiling sweetly in her glowing
face. Upon my honour you shan't. 
Wicked trifler! she called me, as I led her to a chair. 
Perverse girl! and two or three other names;—apropos
enough: My character is not difficult to hit; that's
the beauty of it. 
My Lord withdrew in wrath; and then the old
Lady said, she would now tell me a piece of her mind:
And she made me sit down by her; and thus she addressed
me: 
Niece, it is my opinion, that you might be, if you
would, one of the happiest women in the world. 
You don't hear me complain, madam. 
Well, if Lord G. did complain to me; it was to me: 

And you should be sorry for the occasion, and not for
the complaint. 
I may be sorry for both, madam. 
Well, but Lord G. is one of the best-natured men
in the world— 
The man's well enough. Passionate men, they
say, are good-natured. 
Why won't you be happy, niece? 
I will. I am not now un-happy. 
More shame for you then, that you will not make
Lord G. happy. 
He is captious. I am playful. That's all. 
What do you think your brother would say— 
He would blame me, as you do. 
Dear creature, be good. Dear creature, make
Lord G. happy. 
I am like a builder, madam. I am digging for a
foundation. There is a good deal of rubbishy humours
to remove; a little swampiness of soil: And I
am only removing it, and digging deeper, to make
my foundation sure. 
Take care, take care, niece: You may dig too
deep. There may be springs: You may open, and
never be able to stop them, till they have sapped your
foundation. Take care, niece. 
Thank you, madam, for your caution. Pity you
had not been a builder yourself! 
Had such a fellow-labourer as Lord G. offered, I
should not have refused a partnership with him, I do
assure you. 
Fairly answered, aunt Nell! thought I. I was
pleased with her. 
Don't you think Lord G. loves you dearly? 
As to dearly, I can't say: But I believe he loves
me as well as most husbands love their wives. 
Are you not ungrateful then? 
No. I am only at play with him. I don't hate
him. 

Hate him! Dreadful if you did! But he thinks you
despise him. 
That is one of the rubbishy notions I want to remove. 
He would have it that I did, when he could
have helped himself. But he injures me now, if he
thinks so. I can't say I have a very profound reverence
for him. He and my brother should not have
been allied. But had I despised him in my heart, I
should have thought myself a very bad creature for
going to church with him. 
That's well said. I love you now. Your brother,
is, indeed, enough to put all other men down with
one. But may I tell Lord G. that you love him? 
No, madam. 
No! I am sorry for that. 
Let him find it out. But he ought to know so much
of human nature, and of my sincerity, as to gather
from my behaviour to him, that had I either hated or
despised him, I would not have been his; and it would
have been impossible for me to be so playful with him; 
to be so domestic, and he so much at home with me. 
Am I fond of seeking occasions to carry myself from
him? What delights, what diversions, what public
entertainments, do I hunt after? —None. Is not he,
are not all my friends, sure of finding me at home,
whenever they visit me? 
So far, so good, said aunt Eleanor. 
I will open my heart to you, madam. You are my
father's sister. You have a right to my sincerity. But
you must keep my secret. 
Proceed, my dear. 
I know my own heart, madam, If I thought I
could not trust it (and I wish Lord G. had a good
opinion of it) I would not dance thus, as you suppose,
on the edge of danger. 
Good creature! —I shall call you good creature by-and-by. 
Let me call Lord G. to us. 
I was silent. I contradicted her not. She rang. 

She bid the servant tell Lord G. that she desired his
company. Lord G. was pranced out. She regretted
(I was not glad) that he was. 
I will tell you what, my dear, said she. I have
heard it suggested, by a friend of yours, that you would
much rather have had Mr. Beauchamp— 
Not a word more of such a suggestion, madam. I
should hate myself, were I capable of treating Lord G.
meanly, or contemptibly, with a thought of preference
to any man breathing, now I am his. I have
a great opinion of Mr. Beauchamp. He deserves it. 
But I never had the shadow of a wish, that I had been
his. I never should have spoken of my brother's excellencies,
as outshining those of Lord G. had he not
been my brother, and therefore could not be more to
me; and had they not been so conspicuous, that no
other man could be disgraced by giving place to him. 
No, madam, let me assure you, once for all, that I
am so far from despising my Lord G. that, were any
misfortune to befal him, I should be a miserable
woman. 
She embraced me. Why then— 
I know your inference, madam. It is a just one. 
I am afraid I think as well of my own understanding
as I do of Lord G's. I love to jest, to play, to make
him look about him. I dislike not even his petulance. 
You see I bear all the flings and throws, and peevishness,
which he returns to my sauciness. I think I ought. 
His complaints of me to you, to Lord and Lady L.
which bring upon me their and your grave lecturings,
and even anger, I can forgive him for; and this I shew,
by making those complaints matter of pleasantry rather
than resentment. I know he intended well, in taking
the house, tho' he consulted me not first. It was surely
wrong in him; yet I am not mortally offended with
him for it. His violence to my poor harpsichord
startled me; but I recollected myself; and had he
buffetted me instead of that, as I was afraid he would, 

I should have thought I ought to have borne it, whether
I could or not, and to have returned him his hat with a
courtesy. Believe me, madam, I am not a bad, I am
only a whimsical creature. I tried my brother once. 
I set him up. I was afraid of him, indeed. But I tried
him again. Then he called it constitution, and laughed
at me, and run me out of breath in my own way. So
I let him alone. Lord L. Lady L. had it in turn. Lord
G. has a little more than his turn perhaps: And why?
because he is for ever fitting the cap to his head; and
because I don't love him less than those I am less free
with. Come, madam, let me demand your kind
thoughts. I will deserve them. Contradiction and
opposition, mediators and mediatrices, have carried my
playfulness further than it would otherwise have gone. 
But henceforth your precepts, my brother's, and Miss
Byron's, shall not want their weight with me, whether
I may shew it or not at the instant. My reign, I am
afraid, will be but short. Let the man bear with me
a little now-and-then. I am not absolutely ungenerous. 
If he can but shew his love by his forbearance,
I will endeavour to reward his forbearance with my
love. 
She embraced me, and said, That now she attributed
to the gaiety of my spirits, and not to perverseness, my
till-now unaccountable behaviour. I was sure, said
she, that you were more your mother's, than your
father's daughter. Let me, when my Lord comes in,
see an instance of the behaviour you bid me hope for. 
I will try, said I, what can be done—We parted. 
I went up to my pen; and scribbled down to this
place. 
This moment my Lord is come in. Into my brother's
study is he directly gone. Not a question asked
about me. Sullen! I warrant. He used to pay his
duty to me, and ask blessing the moment he came in,
if admissible [Is that a word, Harriet?]: But times are
altered. Ah, Harriet! when I know I am saucy, I 

can bear negligence and slight: But when I intend to
be good, knowing my own heart to be right, I shall be
quite saucy if he is sullen. Is not the duty of wedded
people reciprocal? —Aunt Eleanor and he are talking
together. She is endeavouring, I suppose, to make a
Philosopher of him. “Promise nothing for me, aunt
Nell. I will have the whole merit of my own reformation.” 

