


Not going to Chapel this Morning, the
Reason of which I told you, I bestow'd
the Time, from the Hour of my Beloved's
Rising, to Breakfast, in Prayer and Thanks-giving,
in my Closet; and now I begin to be
quite easy, chearful and free in my Spirits; and
the rather, as I find myself incouraged by the
Tranquillity, and pleasing Vivacity in the Temper
and Behaviour of my beloved Spouse; who
thereby shews he does not repent of his Goodness
to me. 
I attended him to Breakfast, and drank
my Chocolate with great Pleasure, and eat Two 

Bits of Toast; and he seem'd quite pleas'd with
me, and said, Now does my Dearest begin to
look upon me with an Air of Serenity and
Satisfaction: It shall be always, added he, my
Delight to give you Occasion for this sweet
becoming Aspect of Confidence and Pleasure
in me. —My Heart, dear Sir, said I, is quite
easy, and has lost all its foolish Tumults, which
combating with my Gratitude, might give an
unacceptable Appearance to my Behaviour:
But now your Goodness, Sir, has inabled it
to get the better of its uneasy Apprehensions,
and my Heart is all of one Piece, and devoted
to you, and grateful Tranquillity. And could
I be so happy as to see you and my good Lady
Davers reconciled, I have nothing in this
World to wish for more, but the Continuance
of your Favour. He said, I wish this Reconciliation,
my Dearest, as well as you; and I do
assure you, more for your sake than my own:
And if she would behave tolerably, I would
make the Terms easier to her for that Reason. 
He said, I will lay down one Rule for you,
my Pamela, to observe in your Dress, and I
will tell you every thing I like or dislike, as it
occurs to me; and I would have you do the
same, on your Part, that nothing may lie upon
either of our Minds, that may occasion the least
Reservedness. 
I have often observ'd in marry'd Folks,
that, in a little while, the Lady grows careless
in her Dress; which, to me, looks as if she
would take no Pains to secure the Affection 

she had gained; and shews a Slight to her
Husband, that she had not to her Lover: Now,
you must know, this has always given me
great Offence; and I should not forgive it,
even in my Pamela; tho' she would have this
Excuse for herself, that Thousands could not
make, That she looks lovely in every thing. 
So, my Dear, I shall expect of you always, to
be dress'd by Dinner-time, except something
extraordinary happens; and this, whether you
are to go abroad, or to stay at home. For this,
my Love, will continue to you that sweet Ease
in your Dress and Behaviour, which you are so
happy a Mistress of; and whomsoever I bring
home with me to my Table, you will be in
Readiness to receive them; and will not want
to make those foolish Apologies, to unexpected
Visitors, that carry with them a Reflection on the
Conduct of those who make them; and besides,
will convince me, that you think yourself obliged
to appear as graceful to your Husband, as you
would to Persons less familiar to your Sight. 
This, dear Sir, said I, is a most obliging
Injunction; and I most heartily thank you for
it, and will always take care to obey it. — 
Why, my Dear, said he, you may better do
this than half your Sex: Because they too
generally act in such a manner, as if they
seem'd to think it the Privilege of Birth and
Fortune, to turn Day into Night, and Night
into Day, and are seldom stirring till 'tis time
to sit down to Dinner; and so all the good old
Family Rules are revers'd: for they breakfast 

when they should dine; dine, when they
should sup; and sup, when they should go to-bed; 
and by the Help of dear Quadrille, sometimes
go to-bed when they should rise. — 
In all things but these, my Dear, continued
he, I expect you to be a Lady. And my good
Mother was one of this old-fashion'd Cut, tho',
in all other respects, as worthy a Lady as any
in the Kingdom. And so you have not been
used to the new Way, and may the easier practise
the other. 
Dear Sir, said I, pray give me more of
your sweet Injunctions. Why then, continued
he, I shall, in the usual Course, and generally,
if not hinder'd by Company, like to go to-bed
with my Dearest, by Eleven; and if I don't,
shan't hinder you. I ordinarily now rise by
Six, in Summer: I will allow you to lie half
an Hour after me, or so. 
Then you'll have some time you may call
your own, till you give me your Company to
Breakfast; which may be always so, as that we
may have done at a little after Nine. 
Then will you have several Hours, again,
at your Disposal, till Two o'Clock, when I
shall like to sit down at Table. 
You will then have several useful Hours
more to imploy yourself in, as you shall best
like; and I would generally go to Supper by
Eight: And when we are resolv'd to stick to
these old-fashion'd Rules, as near as we can,
we shall make our Visitors conform to them
too, and expect them from us, and suit themselves 

accordingly: For I have always observ'd,
that it is in every one's Power to prescribe Rules
to himself. It is only standing a few ridiculous
Jests at first, and that too from such, generally,
as are not the most worthy to be minded; and,
after a while, they will say, It signifies nothing
to ask him: He will have his own Way. There
is no putting him out of his Byass. He is a
regular Piece of Clock-work, will they sneer,
and all that. And why, my Dear, should we
not be so? For Man is as frail a Piece of Machinery,
as any Clock-work whatever; and, by
Irregularity, is as subject to be disorder'd. 
Then, my Dear, continued the charming
Man, when they see they are receiv'd, at my
own Times, with an open Countenance and
chearful Heart; when they see Plenty and Variety
at my Board, and meet a kind and hearty
Welcome from us both, they will not offer to
break in upon my Conditions, nor grudge me
my regular Hours: And as most of these People
have nothing to do, except to rise in a
Morning, they may as well come to Breakfast
with us, at half an Hour after Eight in Summer,
as at Ten or Eleven; to Dinner at Two, as
at Four, Five, or Six; and to Supper at Eight,
as at Ten or Eleven. And then our Servants
too will know, generally, the Times of their
Business, and the Hours of their Leisure or
Recess; and we, as well as they, shall reap
the Benefit of this Regularity. And who knows,
my Dear, but we may revive the good old
Fashion in our Neighbourhood, by this means? 

—At least, it will be doing our own Parts
towards it; and answering the good Lesson I
learn'd at School, Every one mend one. And
the worst that will happen will be, that when
some of my Brother Rakes, such as those who
broke in upon us, so unwelcomely, last Thursday,
are got out of the Way, if that can ever
be, and begin to consider, whom they shall
go to dine with in their Rambles, they will
only say, We must not go to him, for his
Dinner-time is over; and so they'll reserve me
for another time, when they happen to suit
it better; or, perhaps, they will take a Supper
and a Bed with me instead of it. 
Now, my Dearest, continued the kind
Man, you see here are more of my Injunctions,
as you call them; and tho' I will not be so set,
as to quarrel, if they are not always exactly
comply'd with; yet, as I know you won't think
them unreasonable, I shall be glad they may,
as often as they can; and you will give your
Orders accordingly, to your Mrs. Jervis, who
is a good Woman, and will take Pleasure in
obeying you. 
O dearest, dear Sir, said I, have you no
more of your sweet Injunctions to honour me
with? They oblige and improve me at the
same time! —What a happy Lot is mine! 
Why, let me see, my Dearest, said he— 
But I think of no more at present: For it would
be needless to say, how much I value you for
your natural Sweetness of Temper, and that
open Chearfulness of Countenance, which 

adorns you, when nothing has given my Fairest
Apprehensions for her Virtue: A Sweetness,
and a Chearfulness, that prepossesses in your
Favour, at first Sight, the Mind of every one
that beholds you. —I need not, I hope, say,
that I would have you diligently preserve this
sweet Appearance: Let no thwarting Accident,
no cross Fortune, (for we must not expect to be
exempt from such, happy as we now are in
each other!) deprive this sweet Face of this its
principal Grace: And when any thing unpleasing
happens, in a quarter of an Hour, at farthest,
begin to mistrust yourself, and apply to your
Glass; and if you see a Gloom arising or arisen,
banish it instantly, smooth your dear Countenance,
resume your former Composure; and
then my Dearest, whose Heart must always be
seen in her Face, and cannot be a Hypocrite,
will find this a means to smooth her Passions
also; and if the Occasion be too strong for so
sudden a Conquest, she will know how to do
it more effectually, by repairing to her Closet,
and begging that gracious Assistance, which has
never yet fail'd her: And so shall I, my Dear,
who, as you once but too justly observ'd, have
been too much indulged by my good Mother,
have an Example from you, as well as a Pleasure
in you, which will never be palled. 
One thing, continued he, I have frequently
observ'd, at the House of many a Gentleman,
That when we have unexpectedly visited,
or broken in upon the Family Order, laid
down by the Lady; and especially if any of 

bus have lain under the Suspicion of having
occasionally seduced our marry'd Companion
into bad Hours, or given indifferent Examples,
the poor Gentleman has been oddly affected at
our coming; tho' the good Breeding of the
Lady has made her just keep up Appearances. 
He has look'd so conscious, has been so afraid,
as it were, to disoblige, has made so many
Excuses for some of us, before we have been
accused, as have always shewn me how unwelcome
we have been; and how much he is obliged
to compound with his Lady for a tolerable
Reception of us; and perhaps she too, in proportion
to the honest Man's Concern to court
her Smiles, has been more reserv'd, stiff, and
formal; and has behav'd with an Indifference,
and Slight, that has often made me wish myself
out of her House; for too plainly have I seen,
that it was not his. 
This, my Dear, you will judge by my
Description, has afforded me Subject for Animadversion
upon the marry'd Life; for a Man may
not (tho', in the main, he is willing to flatter
himself, that he is Master of his House, and
will assert his Prerogative, upon great Occasions,
when it is strongly invaded) be always
willing to contend; and such Women as those
I have described, are always ready to take the
Field, and are worse Enemies than the old Parthians,
who annoy most, when they seem to
retreat; and never fail to return to the Charge
again, and carry on the offensive War, till
they have tired out Resistance, and made the 

Husband willing, like a vanquish'd Enemy, to
compound for small Matters, in order to preserve
something. At least, the poor Man does
not care to let his Friends see his Case, and so
will not provoke a Fire to break out, that he
sees, (and so do his Friends too) the meek Lady
has much ado to smother; and which, very
possibly, burns with a most comfortable Ardour,
after we are gone. 
You smile, my Pamela, said he, at this
whimsical Picture; and I am sure, I never shall
have Reason to include you in these disagreeable
Out-lines; but yet I will say, that I expect
from you, whoever comes to my House, that
you accustom yourself to one even, uniform
Complaisance: That no Frown take place on
your Brow: That however ill or well provided
we may be for their Reception, you shew no
Flutter or Discomposure: That whoever you
may have in your Company at the time, you
signify not, by the least reserv'd Look, that
the Stranger is come upon you unseasonably,
or at a time you wish'd he had not. But be
facetious, kind, obliging to all; and if to any
one more than another, to such as have the
least Reason to expect it from you, or who are
most inferior at the Table: for thus will you,
my Pamela, chear the doubting Mind, quiet
the uneasy Heart, and diffuse Ease, Pleasure,
and Tranquillity around my Board. 
And, be sure, my Dear, continued he, let
no little Accidents ruffle your Temper. I shall
never forget, once, that I was at Lady Arthur's; 

and a Footman happen'd to stumble, and let
fall a fine China Dish, and broke it all to
pieces: It was grievous to see the Uneasiness it
gave the poor Lady; and she was so sincere
in it, that she suffer'd it to spread all over the
Company; and it was a pretty large one too; 
and not a Person in it, but turn'd either her
Consoler, or fell into Stories of the like Misfortunes; 
and so we all became, for the rest of
the Evening, nothing but blundering Footmen,
and careless Servants, or were turn'd into broken
Jars, Plates, Glasses, Tea-cups, and such-like
brittle Substances. And it affected me
so much, that when I came home, I went to-bed,
and dreamt, that Robin, with the Handle
of his Whip, broke the Fore-glass of my Chariot; 
and I was so solicitous, methought, to
keep the good Lady in Countenance for her
Anger, that I broke his Head in Revenge, and
stabb'd one of my Coach-horses. And all the
Comfort I had when it was done, methought,
was, that I had not exposed myself before
Company; and there were no Sufferers but
guilty Robin, and one innocent Coach-horse; 
for when my Hand was in, I might as reasonably
have kill'd the other Three. 
I was exceedingly diverted with these facetious
Hints, and the pleasant Manner in which
he gave them; and I promis'd to improve by
the excellent Lessons contain'd in them. 
I then went up, and dress'd myself, as
like a Bride as I could, in my best Cloaths; and,
on Inquiry, hearing my dearest Master was gone 

to walk in the Garden, I went to find him out. 
He was reading in the little Alcove; and I said,
Sir, am I licens'd to intrude upon you? —No,
my Dear, said he, because you cannot intrude. 
I am so wholly yours, that where-ever I am,
you have not only a Right to join me; but
you do me a very acceptable Favour at the same
time. 
I have, Sir, said I, obey'd your first kind
Injunction; as to dressing myself before Dinner; 
but, may-be, you are busy, Sir? He put
up the Paper he was reading, and said, I can
have no Business or Pleasure of equal Value to
your Company, my Dear. What were you
going to say? —Only, Sir, to know if you
have any more kind Injunctions to give me? 
I could hear you talk a whole Day together. 
You are very obliging, Pamela, said he; 
but you are so perfectly what I wish, that I
might have spar'd those I gave you; but I was
willing you should have a Taste of my Freedom
with you, to put you upon the like with me. 
For I am confident there can be no Friendship
lasting without Freedom, and without communicating
to one another, even the little Caprices,
if my Pamela can have any such, which may
occasion Uneasiness to either. 
Now, my Dear, said he, be so kind as to
find some Fault with me, and tell me what you
would wish me to do, to appear more agreeable
to you. O, Sir, said I, and I could have kiss'd
him, but for Shame, (to be sure I shall grow
a sad fond Hussy!) I have not one single thing 

to wish for; no, not one! —He saluted me
very kindly, and said, he should be sorry if I
had, and forbore to speak it. Do you think,
my dear Sir, said I, that your Pamela has no
Conscience? Do you think, that, because you
so kindly oblige her, and delight in obliging
her, she must rack her Invention for Trials
of your Goodness, and knows not when she's
happy? —O my dearest Sir, added I, less than
one half of the Favours you have so generously
conferr'd upon me, would have exceeded my
utmost Wishes! 
My dear Angel, said he, and saluted me
again, I shall be troublesome to you with my
Kisses, if you continue thus sweetly obliging,
in your Actions and Expressions. O Sir, said
I, I have been thinking, as I was dressing myself,
what an excellent Example you have given
me of the Lessons you teach me. For here,
Sir, you are most charmingly dress'd yourself,
as you have commanded me, before Dinner. 
Then, Sir, when you command me, at
your Table, to chear the doubting Mind, and
comfort the uneasy Heart, and to behave most
kindly to those who have least Reason to
expect it, and are most inferior; how sweetly,
in every Instance that could possibly occur,
have you done this yourself, by your poor,
unworthy Pamela, till you have diffus'd, in
your own dear Words, Ease, Pleasure and
Tranquillity around my glad Heart! 
Then again, Sir, when you bid me not
be disturb'd by little Accidents, or by Strangers 

coming in upon me unexpectedly, how noble an
Instance did you give me of this, when, on our
dear Wedding-day, the Coming of Sir Charles
Hargrave, and the other Two Gentlemen, (for
which you were quite unprovided, and which
hinder'd our Happiness of dining together on that
chosen Day) did not so disturb you, but that you
entertained the Gentlemen pleasantly, and parted
with them civilly and kindly! What charming
Instances are these, I have been recollecting
with Pleasure, of your pursuing the Doctrine
you deliver! 
My Dear, said he, these Observations are
very kind in you, and much to my Advantage:
But if I do not always (for I fear these were too
much Accidents) so well pursue the Doctrines I
lay down, my Pamela must not expect, that my
Imperfections will be a Plea for her Non-observance
of my Lessons, as you call them; for, I
doubt, I shall never be half so perfect as you; 
and so I cannot permit you to recede in your
Goodness, altho' I may find myself unable to
advance, as I ought, in my Duty. 
I hope, Sir, said I, by God's Grace, I never
shall. I believe it, said he; but I only mention
this, knowing my own Defects, lest my future
Lessons should not be so well warranted by my
Practice, as in the Instances you have kindly
recollected. 
He was pleased to take Notice of my Dress; 
and, spanning my Waist with his Hands, said,
What a sweet Shape is here! It would make
one regret to lose it: and yet, my beloved Pamela, 

I shall think nothing but that Loss wanting,
to complete my Happiness. —I put my
bold Hand before his Mouth, and said, Hush,
hush! O fie, Sir! —The freest thing you have
ever yet said, since I have been yours! —He
kissed my Hand, and said, Such an innocent
Wish, my Dearest, may be permitted me, because
it is the End of the Institution. —But, say,
Would such a Case be unwelcome to my Pamela? 
—I will say, Sir, said I, and hid my blushing
Face on his Bosom, that your Wishes, in
every thing, shall be mine; but pray, Sir, say
no more! —He kindly saluted me, and thank'd
me, and chang'd the Subject. —I was not too
free, I hope! 
Thus we talked, till we heard the Coaches; 
and then he said, Stay here, in the Garden, my
Dear, and I'll bring the Company to you. And
when he was gone, I passed by the Back-door,
and blessed God for not permitting my then
so much desired Escape. I went to the Pond,
and on the mossy Bank, again blessed God
there, for his Mercy in my Escape from myself,
my then worst Enemy, tho' I thought I
had none but Enemies, and no Friend near
me. And so I ought to do in almost every
Part of this Garden, and every Room in this
House! —And I was bending my Steps to the
dear little Chapel to make my Acknowlegement
there; but I saw the Company coming
towards me. 
Miss Darnford said, So, Miss, how do you
do? O, you look so easy, so sweetly, so pleased, 

that I know you'll let me dance at your Wedding; 
for I shall long to be there. Lady Jones
was pleased to say, I look'd like an Angel. And
Mrs. Peters said, I improved upon them every
time they saw me. Lady Darnford was also
pleased to make me a fine Compliment, and
said, I look'd freer and casier every time she
saw me. Dear-heart! I wish, thought I, you
would spare these Compliments; for I shall
have some Joke, I doubt, past upon me by-and-by,
that will make me suffer for all these fine
things. 
Mr. Peters said, softly, God bless you, dear
Daughter! —But not so much as my Wife
knows it. —Sir Simon came in last, and took
me by the Hand, and said, Mr. B. by your
Leave. And kissed my Hand five or six times,
as if he was mad; and held it with both his,
and made a very free Jest, by way of Compliment,
in his Way. Well, I think a young Rake
is hardly tolerable; but an old Rake, and an
old Beau, are two very sad Things! —And
all this before Daughters Women-grown! — 
I whisper'd my Beloved, a little after, and said,
I fear I shall suffer much from Sir Simon's rude
Jokes, by-and-by, when you reveal the Matter. 
—'Tis his Way, my Dear, said he; you must
now grow above these things. —Miss Nanny
Darnford said to me, with a sort of half-grave,
ironical Air,—Well, Miss, I hope, from
your easy Deportment now, to what it was
when I last saw you, that you will let my
Sister, if you won't me, see the happy Knot ty'd: 

For she is quite wild about it. —I court'sy'd
and only said, You are all very good to me,
Ladies. —Mr. Peters's Niece said, Well, Miss, I
hope, before we part, we shall be told the happy
Day. My good Master heard her, and said, You
shall, you shall, Madam. —That's pure! said
Miss Darnford. 
He took me aside, and said, softly, Shall I
lead them to the Alcove, and tell them there,
or stay till we go in to Dinner? —Neither, Sir,
I think, said I; I fear I shan't stand it. —Nay,
said he, they must know it; I would not have
invited them else. —Why, then, Sir, said I,
let it alone till they are going away. —Then
reply'd he, you must pull off your Ring. No,
no, Sir, said I, that I must not. —Well, said
he, do you tell Miss Darnford of it yourself. — 
Indeed, Sir, answer'd I, I cannot. 
Mrs. Jewkes came officiously to ask my
Master, just then, If she should bring a Glass of
Rhenish and Sugar before Dinner for the Gentlemen
and Ladies? And he said, That's well
thought of; bring it, Mrs. Jewkes. 
And she came with Nan attending her, with
Two Bottles and Glasses, and a Salver; and must
needs, making a low Court'sy, offer first to me,
saying, Will your Ladyship begin? I colour'd
like Scarlet, and said, No!—my Master, to
be sure! 
But they all took the Hint; and Miss Darnford
said, I'll be hang'd if they have not stolen a
Wedding. Said Mrs. Peters, It must certainly
be so! Ah! Mr. Peters. 

I'll assure you, said he, I have not marry'd
them. Where were you, reply'd she, and
Mr. Williams, last Thursday Morning? Said
Sir Simon, Let me alone, let me alone; if any
thing has been stolen, I'll find it out; I'm a
Justice of the Peace, you know. And so he
took me by the Hand, and said, Come, Madam,
answer me, by the Oath you have taken: Are
you marry'd, or not? 
My Master smiled to see me look so like a
Fool; and I said, Pray, Sir Simon—Ay,
ay, said he, I thought you did not look so
smirking upon us for nothing. —Well, then,
Pamela, said my Master, since your Blushes
discover you, don't be ashamed, but confess the
Truth. 
Now, said Miss Darnford, I am quite angry. 
And, said Lady Darnford, I am quite pleased; 
let me give you Joy, dear Madam, if it be so. 
And so they all said, and saluted me round. — 
I was vexed it was before Mrs. Jewkes; for she
shook her fat Sides, and seem'd highly pleas'd to
be a Means of discovering it. 
Nobody, said my Master, wishes me Joy. 
No, said Lady Jones, very obligingly, nobody
need; for, with such a matchless Spouse, you
want no good Wishes! —And he saluted them; 
and, when he came last to me, said before them
all, Now, my sweet Bride, my Pamela, let me
conclude with you; for here I began to love,
and here I desire to end loving, but not till my
Life ends. 
This was sweetly said, and taken great Notice
of; and it was doing Credit to his own generous
Choice, and vastly more than I merited. 
But I was forced to stand many more Jests
afterwards. For Sir Simon said, several times,
Come, come, Madam, now you are become
one of us, I shall be a little less scrupulous than
I have been, I'll assure you. 
When we came in to Dinner, I made no
Difficulty of what all offered me, the Upperend
of the Table; and performed the Honours
of it with pretty tolerable Presence of Mind,
considering. And, with much ado, my good
Benefactor promising to be down again before
Winter, we got off the Ball; but appointed Tomorrow
Evening, at Lady Darnford's, to take
Leave of all this good Company, who promised
to be there, my Master designing to set out on
Wednesday Morning for Bedfordshire. 
The Company intended to have staid Supper; 
but soon after we had dined, a Man and
Horse came Express from a Gentleman of Mr. B.'s
Acquaintance, whose Name is Carlton, and
who being taken dangerously ill, begg'd to see
him as soon as possible; and so they all took
Leave of us, with abundance of Wishes for the
Continuance of our mutual Happiness; and my
Master desired Mr. Peters to answer for him
to the Ringers at the Town, (if they should hear
we were marry'd) till our Return into this Country,
and that then he would be bountiful to
them; because he would not publickly declare
it, till he had first done so in Bedfordshire. 

Mr. B. order'd Two of the best Horses, for
Expedition-sake, to be got ready, one for himself,
the other for a Servant, being told, that
the Gentleman (upon Part of whose Estate he
had a Mortgage) was impatient to see him. He
said, My Dearest, I shall be very uneasy, if I
am obliged to tarry all Night from you; but lest
you should be alarm'd, if I don't come home by
Eleven, don't expect me: For poor Mr. Carlton
and I have pretty large Concerns together,
and if he should be very ill, and would be comforted
by my Presence, (as I know he loves me,
and his Family will be more in my Power, if
he dies, than I wish for) Charity will not let
me refuse. 
I could only beg he would not fatigue
himself too much, in attempting to return that
Night, the Gentleman living about Sixteen or
Eighteen Miles off, and giving him all my best
Wishes and Prayers along with him. 
It is now Eleven o'Clock at Night, and I fear
he will not return. I fear for the sake of his
poor sick Friend; who, I doubt, is worse. Tho'
I know not the Gentleman, I am sorry for his
own sake, for his Family's sake, and for my dear
Master's sake, who, by his kind Expressions,
I find, loves him: And methinks I should be
sorry any Grief should touch his generous Heart; 
tho' yet there is no living in this World without
too many Occasions for Concern, even in
the most prosperous State. And it is fit it should
be so; or else, poor Wretches as we are! we 

should look no further; but be like sensual Travellers
on a Journey homeward, who, meeting
with good Entertainment at some Inn on the
Way, put up their Rest there, and never think
of pursuing their Journey to their proper Home. 
—This, I remember, was often a Reflection
of my good Lady, to whom I owe it. 
Twelve o'Clock.
Mrs. Jewkes has been with me, and ask'd,
If I will have her for a Bedfellow in want
of a better? I said, I thank'd her; but I would
see how it was to lie by myself one Night. 
I might have mention'd, that I made
Mrs. Jewkes sup with me, and she was much
pleased with it, and with my Behaviour to her. 
And I could see by her Manner, that she was a
little struck in wardly at some of her former Conduct
to me. But, poor Wretch! it is much, I
fear, because I am what I am; for she has otherwise
very little Remorse, I doubt. —Her Talk
and Actions are intirely different from what they
us'd to be, quite circumspect, and decent; and
I should have thought her virtuous, and even
pious, had I never known her in another Light. 
By this we may see, my dear Father and Mother,
of what Force Example is; and what is
in the Power of the Heads of Families to do: 
And this shews, that evil Examples, in Superiors,
are doubly pernicious, and doubly culpable; 
because such Persons are bad themselves, and 

not only do no Good, but much Harm, to others;
and the Condomnation of such must, to be sure,
be so much the greater. —And how much the
greater still must my Condemnation be, who
have had such a religious Education under you,
and been so well nurtur'd by my good Lady, if
I should forget, with all these Mercies heap'd
upon me, what belongs to the Station I am preferr'd
to! —O how I long to be doing some
Good! For all that is past yet, is my dear, dear
Master's; God bless him, and return him safe to
my Wishes! for methinks already every Hour is
Two since I saw him. If my Love would not
be troublesome and impertinent, I should be
nothing else; for I have a true grateful Spirit:
and I had need to have such an one; for I am
poor in every thing but Will. 
