



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

It was now high time to acquaint my Spouse, that
Captain Tomlinson was come. And the rather, as
the maid told us, that the Lady had asked her, If
such a gentleman [describing him] was not in the
parlour? 
Mrs. Moore went up, and requested, in my name,
that she would give us audience. 
But she returned, reporting my Beloved's desire,
that Captain Tomlinson would excuse her for the
present. She was very ill. Her spirits were too weak 

to enter into conversation with him; and she must lie
down. 
I was vexed, and at first extremely disconcerted. 
The Captain was vexed too. And my concern, thou
mayest believe, was the greater on his account. 
She had been very much fatigued, I own. Her
Fits in the morning must have disordered her: And
she had carried her resentment so high, that it was the
less wonder she should find herself low, when her
raised spirits had subsided. Very low, I may say; if
sinkings are proportioned to risings; for she had been
lifted up above the standard of a common mortal. 
The Captain, however, sent up in his own name,
that if he could be admitted to drink one dish of Tea
with her, he should take it for a favour: and would go
to town, and dispatch some necessary business, in order,
if possible, to leave his morning free to attend her. 
But she pleaded a violent head-ach; and Mrs.
Moore confirmed the plea to be just. 
I would have had the Captain lodge there that
night, as well in compliment to him, as introductory
to my intention of entering myself upon my new-taken
apartment: But his hours were of too much importance
to him to stay the evening. 
It was indeed very inconvenient for him, he said, to
return in the morning; but he was willing to do all in
his power to heal this breach, and that as well for the
sakes of me and my Lady, as for that of his dear friend
Mr. John Harlowe; who must not know how far this
misunderstanding had gone. He would therefore only
drink one dish of Tea with the Ladies and me. 
And accordingly, after he had done so, and I had
had a little private conversation with him, he hurried
away. 
His fellow had given him, in the interim, a high
character to Mrs. Moore's servants: And this reported
by the Widow Bevis (who, being no proud woman, is
hail fellow, well met, as the saying is, with all her 

Aunt's servants) he was a fine gentleman, a discreet
gentleman, a man of sense and breeding, with them
all: And it was pity, that, with such great business
upon his hands, he should be obliged to come again. 
My life for yours, audibly whispered the widow
Bevis, There is humour as well as head-ach in Somebody's
declining to see this worthy gentleman. —Ah,
Lord! how happy might some people be if they
would! 
No perfect happiness in this world, said I, very
gravely, and with a sigh; for the widow must know
that I heard her. If we have not real unhappiness,
we can make it, even from the overflowings of our
good fortune. 
Very true, and, Very true, the two widows. A
charming observation! Mrs. Bevis. Miss Rawlins
smiled her assent to it; and I thought she called me in
her heart, Charming man! For she professes to be a
great admirer of moral observations. 
I had hardly taken leave of the Captain, and sat
down again with the women, when Will. came; and
calling me out, ‘Sir, Sir,’ said he, grinning with a
familiarity in his looks as if what he had to say entitled
him to take liberties; ‘I have got the fellow
down! —I have got old Grimes—Hah, hah, hah,
hah! —He is at the Lower-Flask—Almost in the
condition of David's Sow, and please your Honour
—[The dog himself not much better] Here is his
Letter—from—from Miss Howe—Ha, ha, ha, ha,’ 
laughed the varlet; holing it fast, as if to make conditions
with me, and to excite my praises, as well as
my impatience. 
I could have knocked him down; but he would
have his Say out—‘Old Grimes knows not that I
have the Letter—I must get back to him before he
misses it—I only made a pretence to go out for a
few minutes—But—but’—and then the dog laughed 

again—‘He must stay—Old Grimes must stay—till I
go back to pay the reckoning.’ 
D&wblank;n the prater! —Grinning rascal! —The Letter! 
—The Letter!— 
He gathered in his wide mothe, as he calls it, and
gave me the Letter; but with a strut, rather than a
bow; and then sidled off like one of Widow Sorlings's
dunghil cocks, exulting after a great feat performed. 
And all the time that I was holding up the billet to
the light, to try to get at its contents without breaking
the seal [for, dispatched in a hurry, it had no
cover] there stood he, laughing, shrugging, playing
off his legs; now stroking his shining chin; now
turning his hat upon his thumb; then leering in my
face, flourishing with his head—O Christ! now-and-then
cried the rascal— 
What joy has this dog in mischief! —More than I
can have in the completion of my most favourite purposes! 
—These fellows are ever happier than their
masters. 
I was once thinking to rumple up this billet till I
had broken the Seal. Young families [Miss Howe's
is not an antient one] love ostentatious Sealings: And
it might have been supposed to have been squeezed in
pieces, in old Grimes's breeches pocket. But I was
glad to be saved the guilt as well as suspicion of having
a hand in so dirty a trick; for thus much of the
contents (enough for my purpose) I was enabled to
scratch out in character, without it; the folds depriving
me only of a few connecting words; which I
have supplied between hooks. 
My Miss Harlowe, thou knowest, had before
changed her name to Miss Lætitia Beaumont. Another
alias now, Jack, to it; for this billet was directed
to her by the name of Mrs. Harriot Lucas. 
I have learned her to be half a Rogue, thou seest. 


‘I congratulate you, my dear, with all my heart
and soul, upon [your escape] from the villain. 
[I long] for the particulars of all. [My Mother]
is out: But, expecting her return every minute, I
dispatched [your] messenger instantly. [I will endeavour
to come at] Mrs. Townsend without loss
of time; and will write at large in a day or two,
if in that time I can see her. [Mean time I] am
excessively uneasy for a Letter I sent you yesterday
by Collins, [who must have left it at] Wilson's
after you got away. [It is of very] great importance. 
[I hope the] villain has it not. I would
not for the world [that he should.] Immediately
send for it, if by so doing, the place you are at
[will not be] discovered. If he has it, let me know
it by some way [out of] hand. If not, you need
not send.’ 
June 9. 
Ever, Ever Yours,
A. H. 
O Jack, what heart's-ease does this interception give
me! —I sent the rascal back with the Letter to old
Grimes, and charged him to drink no deeper. He
owned, that he was half seas over, as he phrased it. 
Dog! said I, are you not to court one of Mrs.
Moore's maids to-night?— 
Cry your mercy, Sir! —I will be sober. —I had forgot
that—But old Grimes is plaguy tough—I thought
I should never have got him down. 
Away, villain! —Let old Grimes come; and on
horseback, too, to the door— 
He shall, and please your Honour, if I can get him
on the saddle, and if he can sit— 
And charge him not to have alighted, nor to have
seen any-body— 
Enough, Sir! familiarly nodding his head, to shew
he took me. And away went the villain—Into the
parlour, to the women, I. 

In a quarter of an hour came old Grimes on horseback,
waving to his saddle-bow, now on this side, now
on that; his head, at others, joining to that of his
more sober beast. 
It looked very well to the women, that I made no
effort to speak to old Grimes (tho' I wished before
them, that I knew the contents of what he brought); 
but, on the contrary, desired that they would instantly
let my Spouse know, that her messenger was returned. 
Down she flew, violently as she had the head-ach! 
O how I prayed for an opportunity to be revenged
of her for the ingrateful trouble she had given to her
Uncle's friend! 
She took the Letter from old Grimes with her own
hands, and retired to an inner parlour to read it. 
She presently came out again to the fellow, who
had much ado to sit his horse—Here is your money,
friend. I thought you long. But what shall I do to
get somebody to go to town immediately for me? I
see you cannot. 
Old Grimes took his money; let fall his hat in
d'offing it; had it given him; and rode away; his
eyes Ising-glass, and set in his head, as I saw thro'
the window; and in a manner speechless; all his language
hiccoughs. My dog needed not to have gone so
deep with this tough old Grimes. But the rascal was
in his kingdom with him. 
The Lady applied to Mrs. Moore: She mattered
not the price. Could a man and horse be engaged for
her? —Only to go for a Letter left for her, at one
Mr. Wilson's in Pall-mall. 
A poor neighbour was hired. A horse procured
for him. He had his directions. 
In vain did I endeavour to engage my Beloved,
when she was below. Her head-ach, I suppose, returned. 
She, like the rest of her Sex, can be ill or
well when she pleases. 
I see her drift, thought I: It is to have all her lights 

from Miss Howe before she resolves; and to take her
measures accordingly. 
Up she went, expressing great impatience about the
Letter she had sent for; and desired Mrs. Moore to
let her know if I offered to send any of my servants
to town—To get at the Letter, I suppose, was her
fear: But she might have been quite easy on that head; 
and yet perhaps would not, had she known, that the
worthy Captain Tomlinson (who will be in town before
her messenger) will leave there the important
Letter: Which I hope will help to pacify her, and
to reconcile her to me. 
O Jack! Jack! thinkest thou that I will take all
this roguish pains, and be so often called villain, for
nothing? 
But yet, is it not taking pains to come at the finest
creature in the world, not for a transitory moment only,
but for one of our lives? The struggle only, Whether
I am to have her in my own way, or in hers? 
But now I know thou wilt be frightened out of thy
wits for me—What, Lovelace! wouldst thou let her
have a Letter that will inevitably blow thee up; and
blow up the Mother, and all her Nymphs!—yet not
intend to reform, not intend to marry? 
Patience, puppy! Canst thou not trust thy master? 