



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
[In answer to Letters lxxii. lxxvi. lxxvii.] 

Friday Night, July 21. 
I will throw away a few paragraphs upon the
contents of thy last shocking Letters, just brought
me; and send what I shall write by the fellow who
carries mine on the interview with Hickman. 
Reformation, I see, is coming fast upon thee. 
Thy Uncle's slow death, and thy attendance upon
him, thro' every stage towards it, prepared thee for
it. But go thou on in thy own way, as I will in
mine. Happiness consists in being pleased with what
we do: And if thou canst find delight in being sad,
it will be as well for thee, as if thou wert merry,
tho' no other person should join to keep thee in countenance. 
I am, nevertheless, exceedingly disturbed at the
Lady's ill health. It is entirely owing to the cursed
Arrest. She was absolutely triumphant over me and
the whole crew before. Thou believest me guiltless
of That: So, I hope, does she. —The rest, as I have
often said, is a common case; only a little uncommonly
circumstanced; that's all: Why, then, all
these severe things from her, and from thee? 
As to selling her cloaths, and her laces, and soforth,
it has, I own, a shocking sound with it. 
What an implacable as well as unjust set of wretches
are those of her unkindredly kin who have money of
hers in their hands, as well as large arrears of her own
Estate; yet with-hold both, avowedly to distress her! 
But may she not have money of that proud and saucy
friend of hers, Miss Howe, more than she wants? — 
And should I not be overjoyed, thinkest thou, to serve
her? —What then is there in the parting with her
apparel, but female perverseness? —And I am not 

sure, whether I ought not to be glad, if she does this
out of spite to me. —Some disappointed fair-ones would
have hanged, some drowned themselves. My Beloved
only revenges herself upon her cloaths. Different
ways of working has passion in different bosoms, as
humours or complexion induce. —Besides, dost think
I shall grudge to replace, to three times the value,
what she disposes of? So, Jack, there is no great
matter in this. 
Thou seest how sensible she is of the soothings of
the polite Doctor: This will enable thee to judge how
dreadfully the horrid Arrest, and her gloomy Father's
Curse, must have hurt her. I have great hope, if
she will but see me, that my behaviour, my contrition,
my soothings, may have some happy effects
upon her. 
But thou art too ready to give me up. Let me seriously
tell thee, that, all excellence as she is, I think
the earnest interposition of my relations; the implored
mediation of that little fury Miss Howe; and the commissions
thou actest under from myself; are such instances
of condescension and high value in them, and
such contrition in me, that nothing farther can be
done. —So here let the matter rest for the present, till
she considers better of it. 
But now a few words upon poor Belton's case. I
own I was at first a little startled at the disloyalty of
his Thomasine: Her hypocrisy to be for so many
years undetected! —I have very lately had some intimations
given me of her vileness; and had intended to
mention them to thee, when I saw thee. To say the
truth, I always suspected her Eye: The Eye, thou
knowest, is the Casement, at which the Heart generally
looks out. Many a woman, who will not shew
herself at the Door, has tipt the sly, the intelligible
wink from the Windows. 
But Tom had no management at all. A very
careless fellow. Would never look into his own 

affairs. The Estate his Uncle left him was his ruin: 
Wife, or Mistress, whoever was, must have had his
fortune to sport with. 
I have often hinted his weaknesses of this sort to
him; and the danger he was in of becoming the property
of designing people. But he hated to take pains. 
He would ever run away from his accounts; as now,
poor fellow! he would be glad to do from himself. 
Had he not had a woman to fleece him, his coachman,
or valet, would have been his prime minister, and
done it as effectually. 
But yet, for many years, I thought she was true to
his bed. At least, I thought the Boys were his own. 
For tho' they are muscular, and big-boned, yet I
supposed the healthy mother might have furnished
them with legs and shoulders: For she is not of a delicate
frame; and then Tom, some years ago, looked
up, and spoke more like a man, than he has done of
late; squeaking inwardly, poor fellow! for some time
past, from contracted quail-pipes, and wheezing from
lungs half spit away. 
He complains, thou sayest, that we all run away
from him. Why, after all, Belford, it is no pleasant
thing to see a poor fellow one loves, dying by inches,
yet unable to do him good. There are friendships
which are only bottle-deep: I should be loth to have it
thought, that mine for any of my vassals is such a one. 
Yet, with gay hearts, which became intimate because
they were gay, the reason for their first intimacy ceasing,
the friendship will fade: But may not this sort
of friendship be more properly distinguished by the
word Companionship? 
But mine, as I said, is deeper than this: I would
still be as ready as ever I was in my life, to the utmost
of my power, to do him service. 
As one instance of this my readiness to extricate
him from all his difficulties as to Thomasine, dost thou 

care to propose to him an expedient, that is just come
into my head? 
It is this: I would engage Thomasine and her Cubs
(if Belton be convinced they are neither of them his)
in a party of pleasure. She was always complaisant to
me. It should be in a boat, hired for the purpose,
to sail to Tilbury, to the isle of Shepey, or a pleasuring
up the Medway; and 'tis but contriving to turn
the boat bottom-upward. I can swim like a fish. 
Another boat should be ready to take up whom I
should direct, for fear of the worst: And then, if
Tom has a mind to be decent, one suit of mourning
will serve for all three: Nay, the hostler-cousin may
take his plunge from the steerage: And who knows
but they may be thrown up on the beach, Thomasine
and he, hand in hand? 
This, thou'lt say, is no common instance of friendship. 
Mean time, do thou prevail upon him to come
down to us: He never was more welcome in his life,
than he shall be now: If he will not, let him find me
some other service; and I will clap a pair of wings to
my shoulders, and he shall see me come flying in at his
windows at the word of command. 
&dotup;Mowbray and Tourville each intend to give thee
a Letter; and I leave to those rough varlets to handle
thee as thou deservest, for the shocking picture thou
hast drawn of their last ends. Thy own past guilt
has stared thee full in the face, one may see by it; 
and made thee, in consciousness of thy demerits,
sketch out these cursed out-lines. I am glad thou
hast got the old fiend to hold the glass (a)  before
thy own face so soon. Thou must be in earnest
surely, when thou wrotest it, and have severe convictions
upon thee: For what a hardened varlet
must he be, who could draw such a picture as this,
in sport?&dotup; 

As for thy resolution of repenting and marrying; 
I would have thee consider which thou wilt set about
first. If thou wilt follow my advice, thou shalt make
short work of it: Let Matrimony take place of the
other; for then thou wilt, very possibly, have Repentance
come tumbling in fast upon thee, as a consequence,
and so have both in one. 