


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


Bologna, July 7–18.
Now, my dear friend, are matters here drawing
to a crisis. I was conducted, as soon as I entered
this palace, to the presence of the Marquis and
Marchioness. The Marquis arose, and took my
hand, with great, but solemn kindness, and led me
to a chair placed between theirs. The Bishop, the
Count, and Father Marescotti, enter'd; and took their
places. 
My dear said the Marquis, referring to his Lady— 
After some little hesitation—We have no hope,
Sir, said she, of our child's perfect restoration, but
from—She stopt— 
Our compliance with every wish of her heart, said
the Bishop. 
Ay, do you proceed, said the Marchioness to the
Prelate. 
It would be to no purpose, Chevalier, questioned
the Bishop, to urge to you the topic so near to all
our hearts? 
I bowed my assent to what he said. 
I am sorry for it, replied the Bishop. 
I am very sorry for it, said the Count. 
What security can we ask of you, Sir, said the
Marquis, that our child shall not be perverted? —O
Chevalier! It is a hard, hard trial! 

Father Marescotti, answered I, shall prescribe the
terms. 
I cannot, in conscience, said the Father, consent
to this marriage: Yet the merits of the Chevalier
Grandison have taken from me the power of opposing
it. Permit me to be silent. 
Father Marescotti and I, said the Bishop, are in
one situation, as to scruples of conscience. But I will
forget the Prelate for the Brother. Dear Grandison,
will you permit us to say to enquirers, that we look
upon you as one of our church; and that prudential
reasons, with regard to your country, and friends in
it, deter you at present from declaring yourself? 
Let not terms be proposed, my good Lord, that
would lessen your opinion of me, should I comply
with them. If I am to be honoured with an admission
into this noble family, let me not in my own
eyes appear unworthy of the honour. Were I to find
myself capable of prevaricating in an article so important
as religion, no one could hate me so much as
I should hate myself, were even an imperial diadem
with your Clementina, the noblest of women, to be
the consideration. 
You have the example of great princes, Chevalier,
said Father Marescotti, Henry the Fourth of France,
Augustus of Poland— 
True, Father—But great Princes are not always,
and in every action of their lives, great men. They
might make the less scruple of changing their religion,
as they were neither of them strict in the practice of
it. They who can allow themselves in some deviations,
may in others. I boast not of my own virtue; but it
has been my aim to be uniform. I am too well satisfied
with my own religion, to doubt: If I were not,
it would be impossible but I must be influenced by the
wishes of friends so dear to me; whose motives are the
result of their own piety, and of the regard they have
for my everlasting welfare. 

The Chevalier and I, rejoined the Bishop, have carried
this argument to its full extent before. My honoured
Lord's question recurs; What security can we
have, that my sister shall not be perverted? The Chevalier
refers to Father Marescotti to propose it. The
Father excuses himself. I, as the brother of Clementina,
ask you, Chevalier, Will you promise never by
yourself, or your English divines, to attempt to pervert
her? —A confessor you have allowed her. Shall Father
Marescotti be the man? 
And will Father Marescotti— 
I will, for the sake of preserving to Lady Clementina
her faith; that faith by which only she can be
saved; and, perhaps, in hope of converting the man
who then will be dear to the whole family. 
I not only comply with the proposal, but shall think
Father Marescotti will do me a favour, in putting it
into my power to shew him the regard I have for him. 
One request I have only to make; That Father Marescotti
will prescribe his own conditions to me. And
I assure you all, that they shall be exceeded, as to the
consideration, be they ever so high. 
You and I, Chevalier, replied the Father, shall have
no difficulty, as to the terms. 
None you can have, said the Marquis, as to those. 
Father Marescotti will be still our spiritual director. 
Only one condition I will beg leave to make with
Father Marescotti; that he will confine his pious cares
to those only who are already of his own persuasion; 
and that no disputable points may ever be touched upon
to servants, tenants, or neighbours, in a country where
a different religion, from that to which he is a credit, is
established. I might, perhaps, have safely left this
to his own moderation and honour; yet, without such
a previous engagement, his conscience might have
been embarrassed; and had I not insisted on it, I should
have behaved towards my country in a manner for
which I could not answer to my own heart. 

Your countrymen, Chevalier, said the Count, complain
loudly of persecution from our church: Yet
what disqualifications do Catholics lie under in England! 
A great deal, my Lord, may be said on this subject. 
I think it sufficient to answer for myself, and my own
conduct. 
As to our child's servants, said the Marchioness,
methinks I should hope, that Father Marescotti might
have a small congregation about him, to keep their
Lady in countenance, in a country where her religion
will subject her to inconveniencies, perhaps to more
than inconveniencies. 
Her woman, and those servants, replied I, who will
immediately attend her person, shall always be chosen
by herself. If they behave well, I will consider them
as my servants for their benefit. If they misbehave,
I must be allowed to consider them also as my servants,
as well as their Lady's. I must not be subject to the
dominion of servants, the most intolerable of all dominion. 
Were they to know that they are independent
of me, I should be disobeyed, perhaps insulted; 
and my resentment of their insolence would be thought
a persecution on account of their religion. 
This article bore some canvassing. If Camilla, at
last, I said, were the woman; on her discretion I
should have great dependence. 
—And on Father Marescotti's you also may, Chevalier,
said the Bishop. I should hope, that when my
sister and you are in England together, you would not
scruple to consult him on the misbehaviour of any of
my sister's Catholic servants. 
Indeed, my Lord, I would. I will myself be judge in
my own house of the conduct and behaviour of all my
servants. From the independence of such people upon
me, disputes or uneasinesses might arise, that otherwise
would never happen between their Lady and me. The
power of dismission, on any flagrant misbehaviour, 

must be in me. My temper is not capricious: My
charity is not confined: My consideration for people
in a foreign country, and wholly in my power, will,
I hope, be even generous. I perhaps may bear with
them the more for having them in my power. But
my wife's servants, were she a sovereign, must be
mine. 
Unhappy! said Father Marescotti, that you cannot
be of one faith! But, Sir, you will allow, I hope,
if the case will bear it, of expostulation from me? 
Yes, Father: And should generally, I believe, be
determined by your advice and mediation. But I
would not condition to make the greatest saint, and
the wisest man on earth, a judge in my own family
over me. 
There is reason in this, rejoined the Bishop: You,
perhaps, would not scruple, Sir, to consult the Marchioness,
before you dismissed such a considerable servant
as a woman, if my sister did not agree to it? 
The Marquis and Marchioness will be judges of
my conduct, when I am in Italy. I should despise
myself, were it not to be the same in England as at
Bologna. I have in my travels been attended by Catholic
Servants. They never had reason to complain
of want of kindness, even to indulgence, from me. 
We Protestants confine not salvation within the pale
of our own church. Catholics do; and have therefore
an argument for their zeal in endeavouring to make
proselytes, that we have not. Hence, generally speaking,
may a Catholic servant live more happily with a
Protestant master, than a Protestant servant with a Catholic
master. Let my servants live but up to their
own professions, and they shall be indulged with all
reasonable opportunities of pursuing the dictates of
their own consciences. A truly religious servant, of
whatever persuasion, cannot be a bad one. 
Well, as to this article, we must leave it, acquiesced
the Bishop, to occasions as they may arise. Nine 

months in the year, I think you propose to reside in
Italy— 
That, my Lord, was on a supposition that Lady
Clementina would not oblige me with her company
to my native country any part of the year; in that
case, I proposed to pass but three months in every
year in my native country: Otherwise, I hoped that
year and year, in turn, would be allowed me. 
We can have no wish to separate man and wife,
said the Marquis. Clementina will, no doubt, accompany
her husband. We will stipulate only for
year and year: But let ours be the first year: And
we cannot doubt but the dear child will meet with
all reasonable indulgence, for the sake of her tender
health. 
Not one request that you, my Lord, and you, madam,
shall think reasonable, shall be denied to the
dear Lady. 
Let me propose one thing, Chevalier, said the Marchioness; 
that in the first year, which is to be ours,
you endeavour to prevail upon your sisters, amiable
women, as we have heard they are, to come over, and
be of our acquaintance: Your Ward also, who may
be looked upon as a little Italian. You love your
sisters; and I should be glad, so would Clementina,
I make no doubt, to be familiarized to the Ladies of
your family before she goes to England. 
My sisters, madam, are the most obliging of women,
as their Lords are of men. I have no doubt
of prevailing upon them, to attend you and Lady Clementina
here. And as it will give them time to prepare
for the visit, I believe, if it be made in the latter part
of the first year, it will be most acceptable to them,
and to you; since then they will not only have
commenced a friendship with Lady Clementina,
and obtained the honour of your good opinion; 
but will attend the dear Lady in her voyage to England. 

They all approved of this. I added, that I hoped,
when the second year arrived, I should have the honour
of finding in the party some of this noble family
(looking round me) which could not fail of giving
delight, as well as affiance, to the tender heart of
their beloved Clementina. 
My Lord and I, said the Marchioness, will probably,
if well, be of the party. We shall not know
how to part with a child so dear to us—But these
seas— 
Well, well, said the Bishop, this is a contingence,
and must be left to time, and to the Chevalier and my
sister, when they are one. As his is the strongest
mind, it will, in all reasonable matters, yield to the
weaker—Now, as to my sister's fortune— 
It is a large one, said the Count. We shall all take
pleasure in adding to it. 
Should there be more sons than one by the marriage,
rejoined the Bishop, as the estate of her two grandfathers
will be an ample provision for one of them,
and your English estate for another, I hope we may
expect that the education of one of them may be left
to us. 
Every one said, this was a very reasonable expectation. 
I cannot condition for this, my Lord. The education
of the sons was to be left to me; that of the
daughters, to the mother. I will consent, that the
Italian estate shall be tied up for daughters portions; 
and that they shall be brought up under your own
eyes, Italians. The sons shall have no benefit by
the Italian estate— 
Except they become Catholics, Chevalier, added
the Bishop. 
No, my Lord, replied I: That might be a temptation
—Tho' I would leave posterity as free, as I myself
am left, in the article of religion; yet would I
not lay any snares for them. I am for having them 

absolutely secluded from any possibility of enjoying
that estate, as they will be Englishmen. Cannot this
be done by the laws of your country, and the tenure
by which these estates are held? 
If Clementina marry, said the Marquis, whether
there be issue or not, Laurana's claim ceases. But,
Chevalier, can you think it just to deprive children
unborn of their natural right? 
I have a very good estate: It is improving. I have
considerable expectations besides. That is not mine
which I do not possess, and shall have no right to, but
by marriage; and which, therefore, must and ought to
be subject to marriage-articles. Riches never made
men happy. If my descendants will not be so with
a competence, they will not with a redundance. I
hope Signor Jeronymo may recover, and marry: Let
the estate here, from the hour that I shall be honoured
with the hand of your dear Clementina, be Jeronymo's,
and his posterity's, for ever. If it shall be
thought proper for him, on taking possession, to make
his sister any brotherly acknowlegement, it shall be
to her sole and separate use, and not subject to any
controul of mine. If Signor Jeronymo marry not,
or if he do, and die without issue, let the estate in
question be the General's. He and his Lady deserve
every-thing. The estate shall not, by my consent,
go out of the name. 
They looked upon each other—Brother, said the
Count, I see not, but we may leave every-thing to
the generosity of such a young man as this. he quite
overcomes me. 
A disinterested and generous man, rejoined the
Bishop, is born a ruler; and he is, at the same time,
the greatest of politicians, were policy only to be considered. 
The most equitable medium, I think, resumed the
Marchioness, is what the Chevalier hinted at—and
most answerable to the intention of the dear child's 

grandfathers: It is, that the estate in question be secured
to the daughters of the marriage. Our sons
will be greatly provided for: And it will be rewarding,
in some measure, the Chevalier for his generosity,
that the sons of the marriage shall not have their patrimony
lessened, by the provision to be made for
daughters. 
They all generously applauded the Marchioness; 
and proposing this expedient to me, I bowed my grateful
assent—See, Chevalier, said Father Marescotti,
what a generous family you are likely to be allied with! 
O that you could be subdued by a goodness so much
like your own, and declare yourself a Catholic! His
Holiness himself (my Lord the Bishop could engage)
would receive you with blessings, at the footstool of
his throne. You allow, Sir, that salvation may be
obtained in our church: Out of it, we think it cannot. 
Rejoice us all. Rejoice, Lady Clementina— 
and let us know no bound in our joy. 
What opinion, my dear Father Marescotti, would
you all have of the man who could give up his conscience,
tho' for the highest consideration on earth? 
—Did you, could you, think the better of the two
princes mentioned to me, for the change of their religion? 
One of them was assassinated in the streets of
his metropolis, by an ecclesiastic, who questioned the
sincerity of his change. Could the matter be of indifference
to me—But, my dear Father Marescotti, let
us leave this to be debated hereafter between you and
me, as father and son. Your piety shall command
my reverence: But pain not my heart, by putting me
on denial of any-thing that shall be asked of me, by
such respectable and generous persons, as those I am
before; and when we are talking on a subject so delicate,
and so important. 
Father Marescotti, we must give up this point, said
the Bishop. The Chevalier and I have discussed it
heretofore. He is a determined man. If you hereafter 

can gain upon him, you will make us all happy. 
But now, my Lord, to the Marquis, let the Chevalier
know, what he will have with my sister, besides the
bequests of her Grandfathers, from your bounty; and
from yours, madam, to his mother, as a daughter of
your house. 
I beg, my Lord, one word, said I, to the Marquis,
before you speak. Let not a syllable of this be mentioned
to me now. Whatever you shall be pleased to
do of this nature, let it be done annually, as my behaviour
to your daughter may deserve. Do I not know
the generosity of every one of this noble family? Let
me be in your power. I have enough for her, and for
me, or I do not know the noble Clementina. Whatever
you do, for the sake of your own magnificence,
that do: But let us leave particulars unmentioned. 
What would Lady Sforza say, were she present?
rejoined the Count. Averse as she is to the alliance,
she would admire the man. 
Are you earnest in your request, Chevalier, asked
the Bishop, that particulars shall not be mentioned? 
I beg they may not. I earnestly beg it. 
Pray let the Chevalier be obliged, returned the Prelate
—Sir, said he, and snatched my hand, brother,
friend, what shall I call you? —We will oblige you; 
but not in doubt of your kind treatment of Clementina. 
She must, she will, deserve it; but that we may have
it in our power to be revenged of you: Sir, we will
take great revenge of you: And now let us rejoice
Jeronymo's heart with an account of all that has
passed. We might have held this conference before
him. All that is further necessary to be said, may be
said in his presence. 
Who, said Father Marescotti, can hold out against
the Chevalier Grandison? I will tell every one who
shall question me on this alliance, zealous Catholics,
with a Protestant so determined, what a man he is; 
and then they will allow of this one particular exception
to a general rule. 

All we have now to do, said the Marquis, is to
gain his Holiness's permission. That has not been
refused in such cases, where either the sons or daughters
of the marriage are to be brought up Catholics. 
The Count then took the Marchioness's hand; the
Marquis that of the Father. They whispered together
as they walked; as I could hear, not to my disadvantage. 
The Bishop took mine, and we entered Jeronymo's
chamber together. I stept into Mr. Lowther's
apartment, while they related to him all that had passed. 
He was impatient to see me. The Bishop led me in
to him. He embraced me as his brother. Now,
now, my dear Grandison, said he, I am indeed happy. 
This is the point to which I have long directed all my
wishes. God grant that our dear Clementina's malady
may be no drawback upon your felicities; and
you must both then be happy. 
I was sensible of a little abatement, on the Bishop's
saying to his mother, not knowing I heard him, Ah,
madam! the poor Count of Belvedere—How will he
be affected! —But he will go to Madrid; and I hope
make himself happy there with some Spanish Lady. 
The poor Count of Belvedere! returned the Marchioness,
with a sigh—But he will not know how to
blame us— 
To-morrow morning I am to drink chocolate with
Lady Clementina. We shall be left together, perhaps,
or only with her mother or Camilla. 
“What, my dear Dr. Bartlett, would I give, to
be assured, that the most excellent of English-women
could think herself happy with the Earl of
D. the only man of all her admirers, who is, in any
manner, worthy of calling so bright a jewel his? 
Should Miss Byron be unhappy, and through my
means, the remembrance of my own caution and
self-restraint could not appease the grief of my
heart. 
“But so prudent a woman as she is, and as the 

Countess of D. is—What are these suggestions of
tenderness—Are they not suggestions of vanity and
presumption? They are. They must be so. I
will banish them from my thoughts, as such. Ever
amiable Miss Byron! friend of my Soul! forgive
me for them! —Yet if the noble Clementina is to
be mine, my heart would be greatly gratified, if,
before she receive my vows, I could know, that
Miss Byron had given her hand, in compliance
with the entreaties of all her friends, to the deserving
Earl of D.” 
Having an opportunity, I dispatch this, and my two
former. In you I include remembrances to all my
beloved friends—Adieu, my dear Dr. Bartlett. “In
the highest of our pleasures, the sighing heart will
remind us of imperfection.” It is fit it should be
so—Adieu, my dear friend! 
Charles Grandison. 


Continuation of Lady G's Letter to Lady L. No. XIV.
Begun page 77, and dated July 24.
Well, my dear sister! —And what say you to
the contents of the three inclosed Letters? I
wish I had been with you, and Lord L. at the time you
read them, that I might have mingled my tears with
yours, for the sweet Harriet! Why would my brother
dispatch these Letters, without staying till, at least, he
could have informed us of the result of the next day's
meeting with Clementina? What was the opportunity
that he had to send away these Letters, which he must
be assured would keep us in strange suspense? Hang
the opportunity that so efficiously offered! —But, perhaps,
in the tenderness of his nature, he thought that
this dispatch was necessary, to prepare us for what was
to follow, lest, were he to acquaint us with the event
as decided, our emotion would be too great to be 

supported—We sisters, to go over to attend Lady
Clementina Grandison, a twelvemonth hence! 
—Ah the poor Harriet! And will she give us leave? 
But it surely must not, cannot be! —And yet—Hush,
hush, hush, Charlotte! —And proceed to facts. 
Dr. Bartlett, when these Letters were brought him
post from London, was with us at table. We had
but just dined. He arose, and retired to his own apartment
with them. We were all impatient to know the
contents. When I thought he had withdrawn long
enough to read dispatches of a mile long, and yet found
that he returned not, my impatience was heightened; 
and the dear Harriet said, Bad news, I fear! I hope
Sir Charles is well! I hope Lady Clementina is not
relapsed! The good Jeronymo! I fear for him. 
I then stept up to the Doctor's room. He was sitting
with his back towards the door, in a pensive mood; 
and when, hearing somebody enter, he turned about,
I saw he had been deeply affected— 
My dear Dr. Bartlett! —For God's sake! —How
is my brother?— 
Don't be affrighted, madam! All are well in Italy
—In a way to be well—But, alas! —Tears started
afresh—I am grieved for Miss Byron! 
How, how, Doctor! Is my brother married? — 
It cannot, it shall not be! —Is my brother married? 
O no, not married, by these Letters! But all is
concluded upon! Sweet, sweet, Miss Byron! Now,
indeed, will her magnanimity be put to the test! — 
—Yet Lady Clementina is a most excellent woman! 
—You, madam, may read these Letters: Miss Byron,
I believe, must not. You will see, by the concluding
part of the last, how greatly embarrassed my Patron
must be between his honour to one Lady, and his
tenderness for the other. Which-soever shall be his,
how much will the other be to be pitied! 
I ran over, with a weeping eye, as the paragraphs
struck me, the passages most affecting. O Dr. Bartlett, 

said I, when I had done, how shall we break
this news to Mrs. Selby, to Mrs. Shirley, to my Harriot! 
—A trial, indeed, of her magnanimity! —Yet,
to have received Letters from my brother, and to delay
going down, will be as alarming as to tell it. Let
us go down. 
Do you, madam, take the Letters. You have tenderness:
Your prudence cannot be doubted—I will
attend you by-and-by. His eyes were ready to run
over. 
I went down. I met my Lord at the stairs foot. 
How, how, madam, does Sir Charles? —O my Lord!
we are all undone. My brother, by this time, is the
husband of Lady Clementina. 
He was struck, as with a thunderbolt: God forbid!
were all the words he could speak; and turned as pale
as death. 
I love him, for his sincere Love to my Harriet. I
wrung his hand—The Letters do not say it. But
every-body is consenting; and, if it be not already
so, it soon will—Step, my Lord, to Mrs. Selby, and
tell her, that I wish to see her in the flower-garden. 
Miss Byron and Nancy, said he, are gone to walk
in the garden. She was so apprehensive, on your
staying above, and the Doctor not coming down, that
she was forced to walk into the air. I left Mr. Selby,
his Lady, Emily, and Lucy, in the dining-parlour,
to find you, and let you know, how every-body was
affected. Tears dropt on his cheeks. 
I gave him my hand in love. I was pleased with
him. I called him my dear Lord. 
I think our sweet friend once said, that fear made
us loving. Ill-news will oblige us to look about us
for consolation. 
I found the persons named, just rising from their
seats to walk into the garden—O my dear Mrs. Selby,
said I, all is agreed upon in Italy. 
They were all dumb but Emily. Her sorrow was 

audible: She wrung her hands; she was ready to
faint; her Anne was called to take care of her; and
she retired. 
I then told Mr. and Mrs. Selby what were the contents
of the last Letter of the three. Mr. Selby broke
out into passionate grief—I know not what the honour
is, said he, that could oblige Sir Charles, treated
as he had been by the proud Italians, to go over at the
first invitation. One might have guessed that it would
have come to this—Oh! the poor Harriet! flower of
the world! She deserved not to be made a second
woman, to the stateliest minx in Italy: But this is
my comfort, she is superior to them both. Upon my
soul, madam, she is. The man, were he a king, that
could prefer another woman to our Harriet, does not
deserve her. 
He then rose from his seat, and walked up and
down the room in anger; and afterwards sitting down,
My dear Mrs. Selby, said he, we shall now see what
the so often pleaded for dignity of your Sex, in the
noblest-minded, will enable you to do. But, O the
dear soul! She will find a difference between theory
and practice! 
Lucy wept. Her grief was silent. Mrs. Selby dried
her eyes several times. My dear Lady G. said she,
at last, how shall we break this to Harriet? You must
do it; and she will apply to me for comfort—Pray,
Mr. Selby, be patient. You must not reflect upon
Sir Charles Grandison. 
Indeed you should not, Sir, said I. He is to be
pitied. I will read you the concluding part of his
last Letter. 
I did. 
But Mr. Selby would not be pacified. He tried to
blame my brother. 
After all, my dear, these Lords of the creation are
more violent, more unreasonable, and, of consequence,
more silly and perverse, more babies, if you please, 

than we women, when they are disappointed in anything
they set their hearts upon. But in every case,
I believe, one extreme borders on another. What a
fool has Otway made of Castalio, raving against the
whole sex, by a common-place invective, on a mere
temporary disappointment; when the fault, and all
the dreadful consequences that attended it, were owing
to his own baseness of heart, in being ashamed to
acquaint his brother, that he meant honourable Love
to the unhappy orphan, who was intitled to inviolable
protection! Whenever I saw this play, I pitied the
impetuous Polydore, more than I did the blubbering
great boy Castalio; tho' I thought both brothers deserved
to be hanged. 
As we were meditating how to break this matter
to our lovely friend, Mrs. Shirley came to Selby-house,
in her chariot. We immediately acquainted her with
it. No surprizes affect her steady soul. This can't be
helped, said she. Our dear girl herself expects it. May
I read the Letter that contains the affecting tidings? She
took it. She run it over slightly, to enable herself to
speak to the contents—Excellent man! —How happy
should we have been, blessed with the enjoyment of
our wishes! But you, Mrs. Selby, and I, have always
pitied Lady Clementina. His generous regard for our
child is too apparent for his own tranquillity. God
comfort him, and our Harriet! O the dear creature! 
Her fading cheeks have shewn the struggles of her
heart, in such an expectation—Where is my child? 
I was running out to see for her; and met her just
ascending the steps that lead from the garden into the
house. Your grandmamma, my love, said I— 
I hear she is come, answered she. I am hastening
to pay my duty to her. 
But how do you, Harriet? 
A little better for the air! I sent up to Dr. Bartlett,
and he has let me know, that Sir Charles is well, and
every-body better: And I am easy. 

She hurried in to her grandmother, rejoicing, as
she always does to see her. She kneeled; received
her tender blessing. And what brings my grandmamma
to her girl? 
The day is fine; the air, and the sight of my Harriet,
I thought would do me good—You have Letters,
I find, from Italy, my Love? 
I, madam, have not: Dr. Bartlett has: But I am
not to know the contents, I suppose. Something, I
doubt not, that will be thought unwelcome to me, by
their not being communicated. But as long as everybody
there is well, I can have patience. Time will
reveal all things. 
Dr. Bartlett, who admires the old Lady, and is as
much admired by her, came down, and paid his respects
to her. Mrs. Shirley had returned me the Letters. 
I slid them into the Doctor's hand, unperceived
by Miss Byron. 
I am told, said she, that my Emily is not well; 
I will just ask how she does—And was going from
us—No, don't, my love, said her aunt, taking her
hand; Emily shall come down to us. 
I see, said she, by the compassionate looks of everyone,
that something is the matter. If it be any-thing
that most concerns me to know, don't, through a mistaken
tenderness, let me be the last to whom it is
communicated. But I guess—with a forced smile. 
What does my Harriet guess? said her aunt. 
Dr. Bartlett, replied she, has acquainted me, that
Sir Charles Grandison is well; and that his friends are
on the recovery: Is it not then easy to guess, by everyone's
silence on the contents of the Letters brought
to Dr. Bartlett, that Sir Charles is either married, or
near being so? What say you, my good Dr. Bartlett? 
He was silent; but tears were in his eyes. She
turned round, and saw us with our handkerchiefs at
ours. Her uncle, rising from his seat, stood with his
back to us, at one of the windows. 

Well, my dear friends, and you are all grieved for
me. It is kind, and I can thank you for your concern
for me, because the man is Sir Charles Grandison— 
And so, Doctor, laying her hand upon his, he is
actually married? God Almighty, piously bending
one knee, make him and his Clementina happy! — 
Well, my dearest dear friends, and what is there in
this, more than I expected? 
Her aunt embraced her. 
Her uncle ran to her, and clasped his arms about
her; Now, now, said he, have you overcome me,
my niece: For the future I never will dispute with
you on some of the arguments I have heretofore held
against your Sex. Were all women like you— 
Her grandmother, as she sat, held out her open
arms: My own Harriet! child of my heart! let me
fold you to it! —She ran to her, and clasped her
knees, as the old Lady threw her arms about her neck
—Pray for me, however, my grandmamma—that I
may act up to my judgment, and as your child, and
my aunt Selby's! —It is a trial—I own it—But permit
me to withdraw for a few moments. 
She arose, and was hastening out of the room; but
her aunt took her hand; My dearest love, said she,
Sir Charles Grandison is not married—But— 
Why, why, interrupted she, if it must be so, is it
not so? 
At that moment in came Emily. She had been trying
to suppress her concern; and fansied, it seems,
that she had recovered her presence of mind: But the
moment she saw her beloved Miss Byron, her fortitude
forsook her. She gushed into tears, and, sobbing,
would have quitted the room; but Miss Byron, stepping
after her, caught her arm; My Emily, my Love, my
Friend, my Sister! fly me not: Let me give you an
example, my dear! —I am not ashamed to own myself
affected: But I have fortitude, I hope! —Sir
Charles Grandison, when he could not be happy from 

his own affairs, made himself a partaker in the happiness
of others; and shall not you and I, after so
great an example, rejoice in his? 
I am, I am—grieved, replied the sobbing girl, for
my Miss Byron. I don't love Italian Ladies! Were
you, madam, turning to her, Lady Grandison, I should
be the happiest creature in the world. 
But, Dr. Bartlett, said I, may we not, now that
Miss Byron knows the worst, communicate to her the
contents of these Letters? 
I hope you will, Sir, said Mrs. Shirley. You see
that my Harriet is a noble girl. 
I rely upon your judgments, Ladies, answered the
Doctor; and put the Letters into Mrs. Shirley's hands. 
I have read them, said I. We will leave Mrs. Shirley,
Mrs. Selby, and Miss Byron, together. We,
Lucy, Nancy, Emily, will take a walk in the garden. 
Shall we have your company, Dr. Bartlett? I saw he
was desirous to withdraw. Lucy desired to stay behind. 
Harriet looked, as if she wished Lucy to stay; 
and I led the other two into the garden, Dr. Bartlett
leaving us at the entrance into it; and I told them
the contents of the Letters, as we walked. 
They were greatly affected, as I thought they would
be; which made me lead them out. Lord G. joined
us in our walk, as well as in our concern; so that the
dear Harriet had none but comforters left about her; 
who enabled her to support her spirits; for Mrs. Shirley
and Mrs. Selby had always applauded the preference
their beloved child was so ready to give to Clementina,
because of her malady; tho' it is evident, against their
wishes. There never were three nobler women related
to each other than Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby, and
Miss Byron. But Mr. Selby is by no means satisfied,
that my brother, loving Harriet, as he evidently
does, should be so ready to leave her, and go to Italy. 
His censure arises from his Love to my brother and to
his niece: But I need not tell you, that, tho' a man, 

he has not a soul half so capacious as that of either of
the three Ladies I have named. 
At our return from our little walk, it was lovely to
see Harriet take her Emily aside, to comfort her, and
to plead with her in favour of my brother's obligations; 
as afterwards she did against her uncle. How
the generous creature shone in my eyes, and in those
of every-one present! 
When she and I were alone, she took grateful notice
of the concluding part of the third Letter; where
she is mentioned with so much tenderness, and in a
manner so truly worthy of the character of the politest
of men, as well respecting herself as her Sex,
charging himself with vanity and presumption, but to
suppose to himself, that Miss Byron wanted his compassion,
or had the tender regard for him, that he
avows for her. She pleased herself, that he had not
seen the very great esteem she had for him, as you and
I had done: And how could he, you know? said she; 
for he and I were not often together; and I was under
obligation enough to him to make him attribute my
regard to gratitude: But it is plain, proceeded she,
that he loves the poor Harriet—Don't you think so?
and perhaps would have given her a preference to all
other women, had he not been circumstanced as he
was. Well, God bless him, added she; he was my
first Love; and I never will have any other—Don't
blame me for this declaration, my dear Lady G. My
Grandmamma, as well as you, once chid me for saying
so, and called me romancer—But is not the man
Sir Charles Grandison? 
But, alas! with all these appearances, it is easy
to see, that this amiable creature's solitary hours are
heavy ones. She has got a habit of sighing. She
rises with swelled eyes: Sleep forsakes her: Her appetite
fails: And she is very sensible of all this; as she
shews, by the pains she takes to conceal the alteration. 
And must Harriet Byron, blessed with beauty so 

unequalled; health so blooming; a temper so even; 
passions so governable; generous and grateful, even
to heroism! —Superior to every woman in frankness
of heart, in true delicacy; and in an understanding
and judgment beyond her years—Must she be offered
up, as a victim on the altar of hopeless Love! —I deprecate
such a fate;—I cannot allow the other Sex
such a triumph, tho' the man be my brother. It is,
however, none; on the contrary, it is apparently
a grief to his noble and truly manly heart, that so excellent
a creature cannot be the sole mistress of it. 
Mr. Deane came hither this morning. He is a valuable
man. He opened his heart to me about an
hour ago. He always, he says, designed Miss Byron
for the heiress of the principal part of his possessions; 
and he let me know his circumstances; which are
great. It is, I am convinced, true policy to be good. 
Young and old, rich and poor, dote upon Miss Byron. 
You remember what her uncle says in his ludicrous
Letter to her, covertly praising her, by pretending to
find fault with her, that he is more noted for being the
uncle of Miss Byron, than she is for being his niece; 
tho' of so long standing in the county: And I assure
you, he is much respected too. But such beauty, such
affability, a character so benevolent, so frank, so pious,
yet so chearful and unaffected, as hers is, must command
the veneration and love of every one. 
Mr. Deane is extremely apprehensive of her declining
health. He believes her in a consumption; and
has brought a physician of his intimate acquaintance to
visit her: But she, and we all are convinced, that
medicine will not reach her case: And she affected to
be startled at his supposing she was in so bad a way,
on purpose, as she owned, to avoid his kind importunity
to take advice in a malady that nothing but time
and patience can cure. 
A charming correspondence is carried on between
Harriet and the Countess of D. Harriet is all frankness 

in it; so is Lady D. One day I hope to procure
you a sight of their Letters. I am allowed to inclose
a copy of the Countess's last. You will see the force
of the reasoning, on Harriet's declaration, that she
will never think of a second Lover. Her grandmother
is entirely with the Countess. So am I—Tho' the
first was Sir Charles Grandison. 
What will become of Lady Olivia, if the alliance
between my brother and the Bologna family take
effect? —She has her emissaries, who I suppose will
soon apprise her of it. How will she flame out! I
suppose you, who correspond with her, will soon be
troubled with her invectives on this subject. 
All here wish for you and Lord L. For my part,
I long to see you both, and to be seen by you. You
never could see me more to my advantage than now. 
We have nothing between us. But—“What your
Lordship pleases.” “My dearest life, you have no
choice.” “You prevent me, my Lord, in all my
wishes.” 
I have told him, in Love, of some of his foibles:
And he thanks me for my instruction; and is resolved
to be all I wish him to be. 
I have made discoveries in his favour—More wit,
more humour, more good sense, more learning, than
I had ever till now, that I was willing to enquire after
those qualities in him, imagined he had. He allows
me to have a vast share of good understanding; and
so he ought, when I have made such discoveries to his
advantage. 
In short, we so monstrously improve upon each
other, that if we go on thus, we shall hardly know
ourselves to be the same man and woman, that made
such aukward figures in the eyes of all beholders a few
months ago at St. George's church; and must be married
over again, to be sure of each other; for you
must believe, that we would not be the same odd
souls we then were, on any account. 

What raises him with me, is the good opinion
every-body here has of him. They also have found
him out to be a man of sense, a good-natured man,
nay, would you believe it, a handsome man; and
all these people having deservedly the reputation of
good sense, penetration, and so-forth, I cannot contradict
them with credit to myself. When we married
folks have made a silly choice, we should in policy,
you know, for the credit of our judgment, try
to make the best of it. I could name you half a score
people who are continually praising, the man his wife,
the woman her husband, who, were they at liberty
to choose again, would be hanged before they would
renew their bargain. 
Let me tell you, that Emily will make an excellent
wife, and mistress of a family. Miss Byron is one
of the best oeconomists, and yet one of the finest Ladies,
in the county. As soon as she came down, she
resumed the family direction, in ease of her aunt; 
which was her province before she came to London. 
I thought myself a tolerable manager: But she has
for ever stopt my mouth on this subject Such a succession
of orderliness, if I may so call it! One right
thing is an introduction to another; and all is in such
a method, that it seems impossible for the meanest servants
to mistake their duty. Such harmony, such observance,
yet such pleasure in every countenance! — 
But she is mistress of so much ease, so much dignity, and
so much condescension, that she is worshiped by all
the servants; and it is observable, hardly ever was
heard to direct twice the same thing to be done, or
remembred. 
The servants have generally time for themselves,
an hour or two in a day. Her orders are given over
night; and as the family live in a genteel manner,
they are never surprised, or put out of course, by company. 
The poor only have the less of the remnants,
if visiters or guests come in unexpectedly; and in 

such case, she says, they shall fare better another day. 
Emily is taking minutes of all her management: She
is resolved to imitate her in every-thing. Hence it is,
that I say, the girl will make one of the best wives in
England: Yet, how the dear Harriet manages it, I
cannot tell; for we hardly ever miss her. But early
hours, and method, and ease, without hurry, will do
every-thing. 
Postscript.
Lord bless me, my dear Lady L.! I have been frightened
out of my wits. This Lord G. —What do we
do by marriage, but double our cares? —He was taken
very ill two hours ago; a kind of fit. The first reflexion
that crossed me, when he was at worst, was
this—What a wretch was I, to vex this poor man as
I have done! —Happy, happy is the wife, in the depth
of her affliction, on the loss of a worthy husband; 
happy the husband, if he must be separated from a good
wife; who has no material cause for self-reproach to
imbitter reflexion, as to his or her conduct to the departed. 
Ah, Caroline, how little do we know of ourselves,
till the hour of trial comes! I find, I find, I
have more Love for Lord G. than I thought I had, or
could have, for any man! 
* *
How have I exposed myself! —But they none of
them upbraid me with my apprehensions for the honest
man. He did fright me! —A wretch! —In his childhood
he was troubled with these oddities, it seems! — 
He is so well, that I had a good mind to quarrel with
him for terrifying me as he did. For better and for
worse! —A cheat! —He should have told me that he
had been subject to such an infirmity! —And then,
from his apprehended fits, tho' involuntary, I should
have claimed allowance for my real, tho' wilful ones. 
In which, however, I cheated not him. He saw me
in them many and many a good time, before marriage. 

I have this moment yours. I thought what would
be the case with Olivia. She has certainly heard of
the happy turn at Bologna; or she would not think
of leaving England so soon, when she had resolved to
stay here till my brother's return. Unhappy woman! 
Harriet pities her! —But she has pity for every one
that wants it. 
Repeatedly all here are earnest to get you and your
Lord with us. Do, come if you can—Were it but
for one week; and perhaps we will go up together. 
If you don't come soon, your folks will not suffer you
to come one while. After all, my dear, these men
are, as aunt Nell would say, odious creatures. You
are a good forgiving soul; but that am not I. In a
few months time I shall be as grave as a cat, I suppose:
But the sorry fellow knows nothing of the matter
as yet. 
Adieu, Lady L. 

