



From the same. 


My honour'd Papa and Mamma,
We have nothing but Joy and Festivity in this
House; and it would be endless to tell you
the Congratulations the happy Family receives every
Day, from Tenants and Friends. Mr. B. you
know, was always deem'd one of the kindest Landlords
in England; and his Tenants are overjoy'd
at the happy Event which has given them a young
Landlord of his Name: For all those who live in
that large Part of the Estate, which came by Lady B.
his Mother, were much afraid of having any of
Sir Jacob Swynford's Family for their Landlord, 

who, they say, are all made up of Pride and Cruelty,
and would have rack'd them to Death: Insomuch
that they had a voluntary Meeting of about Twenty
of the principal of them, to rejoice on the Occasion; 
and it was unanimously agreed to make a
Present of a Piece of gilt Plate to serve as a Bason
for the Christening, to the Value of One hundred
Guineas; on which is to be engraven the following
Inscription: 
In Acknowlegement of the Humanity and Generosity
of the Best of Landlords, and as a Token
of his Tenants Joy on the happy Birth of
a Son and Heir, who will, it is hoped, inherit
his Father's Generosity, and his Mother's
Virtues, this Piece of Plate is, with all
due Gratitude, presented, as a Christening
Bason to all the Children that shall proceed
from such worthy Parents, and their Descendants,
to the End of Time, 
By the obliged and joyful Tenants of the maternal
Estate in Bedfordshire and Gloucestershire,
the Initials of whose Names are under-engraven; 
viz.— 
Then are to follow the first Letters of each
Persons Christian and Surname. 
What an Honour is this to a Landlord! In my
Opinion far, very far, surpassing the mis-nomer'd
Free-gifts, which we read of in some Kingdoms
on extraordinary Occasions, some of them like
this! For here it is all truly spontaneous—A Freegift
indeed: —And Mr. B. took it very kindly,
and has put off the Christening for a Week, to 

give Time for its being completed and inscribed as
above. 
Such good Tenants, such a good Wife, such
Blessings from Heaven following him, nobody, I
tell Mr. B. has so much Encouragement to be
good, as he has; and if hereafter he should swerve,
he would not have the least Excuse, and would be
the ungratefullest Man breathing. 
The Earl and Countess of C&wblank;, and Lord and
Lady Davers, are here, to stand in Person at the
Christening; and you cannot conceive how greatly
my Lady Davers is transported with Joy, to have
a Son and Heir to the Estate: She is, every Hour
almost, thanking her dear Sister for him; and reads
in the Child all the great Qualities she forms to herself
in him. 'Tis, indeed, a charming Boy, and has
a great deal (if one may judge of a Child so very
young) of his Father's manly Aspect. The dear
Lady herself is still but weak; but the Joy of all
around her, and her Spouse's Tenderness and Politeness,
give her chearful and free Spitits, and she is all
Serenity, Ease, and Thankfulness. 
Mrs. B. as soon as the Danger was over, ask'd
me for her Letter with the black Seal. I had been
very earnest to get it from Mr. B.; but to no Purpose:
So I was forced to tell her who had it. She
said, but very composedly, She was sorry for it,
and hoped he had not open'd it. 
He came into her Chamber soon after, and I demanded
it before her. He said, He had design'd to
ask her Leave to break the Seal, which he had not
yet done; nor would, without her Consent. 
You will see nothing in it, Sir, said the dear
Lady, but a grateful Heart, a faithful Love, and 

my Prayers, that God will be as good to You, as
you have been to Me. 
Will you give me Leave, my Dear, said he,
to break the Seal? If you do, Sir, let it not be in
my Presence; but it is too serious. Not, my Dear,
now the Apprehension is so happily over: It may
now add to my Joy and my Thankfulness on that
Account. Then do as you please, Sir: But I had
rather you would not. 
Then here it is, Miss Darnford; I had it from
you: It was put into your Hands; and there I
place it again. That's something like, said I, considering
the Gentleman. Mrs. B. I hope we shall
bring him into good Order between us, in time. 
So I return'd it to the dear Writer, who lifted
up her Eyes, and her Lips moving, shew'd a thankful
Ejaculation, that she was spared to receive it back
again; and put it into her Bosom. 
I related to Lady Davers, when she came,
this Circumstance; and she, I believe, has got
Leave to take it with her. She is very proud of
all Opportunities now of justifying her Brother's
Choice, and doing Honour to his Spouse, with
Lady Betty C. who is her great Favourite, and
who delights to read Mrs. B.'s Letters. 
You desire to know, my honour'd Papa, how
Mr. B. passes his Time, and whether it be in his
Lady's Chamber? No, indeed! Catch Gentlemen,
the best of them, in too great a Complaisance that
way, if you can. What then, does he pass his Time
with me? you are pleased to ask: What a Disadvantage
a Man lies under, who has been once a
Rake! But I am so generally with Mrs. B. that
when I tell you, Sir, that his Visits to her are 

pretty much of the polite Form, I believe I answer
all you mean by your Questions; and especially
when I remind you, Sir, that Lord and Lady Davers,
and the Earl and Countess, and your unworthy
Daughter, are at Dinner and Supper-time generally
together; for Mrs. Andrews, who is not yet
gone back to Kent, breakfasts, dines, and sups with
her beloved Daughter, and is hardly ever out of
her Room. 
Then, Sir, Mr. B. and the Earl, and Lord
Davers, give pretty constant Attendance to the
Business of Parliament; and, now-and-then, sup
abroad—So, Sir, we are all upon Honour; and
I could wish, (only that your Facetiousness always
gives me Pleasure, as it is a Token, that you have
your much-desired Health, and Freedom of Spirits)
that, even in Jest, my Mamma's Daughter might
pass unquestion'd. 
But I know why you do it: It is only to put
me out of Heart to ask to stay longer. Yet I
wish—But I know you won't permit me to go
thro' the whole Winter here. —Will my dear
Papa grant it, do you think, my honoured Mamma,
if you were to lay the highest Obligation upon
your dutiful Daughter, and petition for me? And
should you care to try? 
I dare not hope it myself, you see, Madam:
But when one sees a Gentleman here, who denies
his Lady nothing that she asks, it makes one be
ready to wish, methinks, that Lady Darnford was
as happy in that Particular as Lady B. 
Your Indulgence for this Winter, this one
Winter, or, rather this small Remainder of Winter,
I make not so much doubt of, you see, Madam. 

I know you'll call me a bold Girl; but then you
always, when you do, condescend to grant my
Request. And I will be as good as ever I can be
afterwards: I will fetch up all the lost Time; rise
an Hour sooner in the Morning, go to-bed an Hour
sooner at Night; flower my Papa any thing he
pleases; read him to sleep, when he pleases; put
his Gout into good Humour, when it will be
soothed—And Mrs. B. to crown all, will come
down with me, by Permission of her sovereign
Lord, who will attend her, you may be sure: And
will not all this do, to procure me a Month or two
more? —If it won't, why then I will thank you
for your past Goodness to me, and, with all Duty
and Chearfulness, bid Adieu to this dear London,
this dearer Family, and attend a still dearer Papa
and Mamma; whose dutiful Daughter I will ever
be, whilst 
Polly Darnford. 

