



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Friday Night, Sept. 8. past Ten. 
I will not take up the account of our proceedings
from my Letter of last night, which contained the
dying words of this incomparable Lady. 
As soon as we had seen the last scene closed (so blessedly
for herself!) we left the body to the care of the good
women, who, according to the orders she had given
them that very night, removed her into that last house
which she had display'd so much fortitude in providing. 
In the morning, between 7 and 8 o'clock, according
to appointment, the Colonel came to me here. He
was very much indisposed. We went together, accompanied
by Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith, into the deceased's
chamber. We could not help taking a view of
the lovely corpse, and admiring the charming serenity
of her noble aspect. The women declared, they never
saw death so lovely before; and that she looked as if in
an easy slumber, the colour having not quite left her
cheeks and lips. 
I unlocked the drawer, in which (as I mentioned in
a (a)  former) she had deposited her papers. I told you
in mine of Monday last, that she had the night before
sealed up with three black seals a parcel inscribed, As
soon as I am certainly dead, this to be broke open by Mr. 

Belford. I accused myself for having not done it over-night. 
But really I was then incapable of any-thing. 
I broke it open accordingly, and found in it no less
than Eleven Letters, each sealed with her own seal
and black wax, one of which was directed to me. 
I will inclose a copy of it. 

To John Belford, Esq;
Sunday Evening, Sept. 3. 
SIR,
I take this last and solemn occasion to repeat to you
my thanks for all your kindness to me at a time
when I most needed countenance and protection. 
A few considerations I beg leave, as now at your
perusal of This, from the dead, to press upon you,
with all the warmth of a sincere friendship. 
By the time you will see This, you will have had an
instance, I humbly trust, of the comfortable importance
of a pacified conscience, in the last hours of one,
who, to the last hour, will wish your eternal welfare. 
The great Duke of Luxemburgh, as I have heard,
on his death-bed, declared, That he would then much
rather have had it to reflect upon, that he had administred
a cup of cold water to a worthy poor creature
in distress, than that he had won so many battles as he
had triumphed for—And, as one well observes, All
the sentiments of worldly grandeur vanish at that unavoidable
moment which decides the destiny of men. 
If then, Sir, at the tremendous hour, it be thus with
the conquerors of armies, and the subduers of nations,
let me in very few words (many are not needed) ask,
What, at That period, must be the reflections of those
(if capable of reflection) who have lived a life of sense
and offence; whose study and whose pride most ingloriously
have been to seduce the innocent, and to ruin
the weak, the unguarded, and the friendless; made
still more friendless by their base seductions? —Oh!
Mr. Belford, weigh, ponder, and reflect upon it,
now, that in health, and in vigour of mind and body, 

the reflections will most avail you—What an ungrateful,
what an unmanly, what a meaner than reptile
pride is this! 
In the next place, Sir, let me beg of you, for my
sake, who AM, or, as now you will best read it, have
been, driven to the necessity of applying to you to be
the Executor of my Will, that you will bear, according
to that generosity which I think to be in you,
with all my friends, and particularly with my Brother
(who is really a worthy young man, but perhaps a little
too headstrong in his first resentments and conceptions
of things) if any-thing, by reason of this Trust, should
fall out disagreeably; and that you will study to make
peace, and to reconcile all parties; and more especially,
that you, who seem to have a great influence upon
your still more headstrong friend, will interpose, if occasion
be, to prevent further mischief—For surely, Sir,
that violent spirit may sit down satisfied with the evils he
has already wrought; and, particularly, with the wrongs,
the heinous and ignoble wrongs, he has in me done to my
family, wounded in the tenderest part of its honour. 
For your compliance with this request I have already
your repeated promise. I claim the observance of it,
therefore, as a debt from you: And tho' I hope I need
not doubt it, yet was I willing, on this solemn, this
last occasion, thus earnestly to re-enforce it. 
I have another request to make to you: It is only,
That you will be pleased, by a particular messenger,
to forward the inclosed Letters as directed. 
And now, Sir, having the presumption to think,
that an useful member is lost to society by means of the
unhappy step which has brought my life so soon to its
period, let me hope, that I may be an humble instrument
in the hands of Providence, to reform a man of
your abilities; and then I shall think that loss will be
more abundantly repaired to the world, while it will
be, by God's goodness, my gain: And I shall have
this farther hope, that once more I shall have an opportunity, 

in a blessed Eternity, to thank you, as I
now repeatedly do, for the good you have done to, and
the trouble you will have taken for, Sir, 
You obliged Servant,
Clarissa Harlowe. 
The other Letters are directed, To her Father, To
her Mother, One to her two Uncles, To her Brother,
To her Sister, To her Aunt Hervey, To her Cousin
Morden, To Miss Howe, To Mrs. Norton, and lastly
one to You, in performance of her promise, that a
Letter should be sent you when she arrived at her Father's
house! —I will with-hold this last till I can be
assured, that you will be fitter to receive it than Tourville
tells me you are at present. 
Copies of all these are sealed up, and entitled, Copies
of my Ten posthumous Letters, for J. Belford, Esq; 
and put in among the bundle of papers left to my direction,
which I have not yet had leisure to open. 
No wonder, while able, that she was always writing,
since thus only of late could she employ that time which
heretofore, from the long days she made, caused so many
beautiful works to spring from her fingers. It is my
opinion, that there never was a woman so young,
who wrote so much, and with such celerity. Her
thoughts keeping pace, as I have seen, with her pen,
she hardly ever stopp'd or hesitated; and very seldom
blotted out, or altered. It was a natural talent she
was mistress of, among many other extraordinary ones. 
I gave the Colonel his Letter, and ordered Harry
instantly to get ready to carry the others. 
Mean time (retiring into the next apartment) we
opened the Will. We were both so much affected in
perusing it, that at one time the Colonel, breakingoff,
gave it to me to read on; at another, I gave it back
to him to proceed with; neither of us being able to
read it through without such tokens of sensibility as
affected the voices of each. 

Mrs. Lovick, Mrs. Smith, and her Nurse, were
still more touched, when we read those articles in which
they are respectively remembred: But I will avoid
mentioning the particulars (except in what relates to
the thread of my narration) as in proper time I shall
send you a copy of it. 
The Colonel told me, he was ready to account with
me for the Money and Bills he had brought up from
Harlowe-Place; which would enable me, as he said,
directly to execute the Legacy-parts of the Will; and
he would needs at that instant force into my hands a
paper relating to that subject. I put it in my pocketbook,
without looking into it; telling him, That as
I hoped he would do all in his power to promote a literal
performance of the Will, I must beg his advice and
assistance in the Execution of it. 
Her request to be buried with her ancestors, made a
Letter of the following import necessary, which I prevailed
upon the Colonel to write; being unwilling myself
(so early at least) to appear officious in the eye of
a family which probably wishes not any communication
with me. 

To James Harlowe jun. Esq;
Sir,
The Letter which the bearer of this brings with
him, will, I presume, make it unnecessary to acquaint
You and my Cousins with the death of the most
excellent of women. But I am requested by her Executor,
who will soon send you a copy of her last Will,
to acquaint her Father (which I chuse to do by your
means) that in it she earnestly desires to be laid in the
family-vault, at the feet of her Grandfather. 
If her Father will not admit of it, she has directed
her body to be buried in the church-yard of the parish
where she died. 
I need not tell you, that a speedy answer to This is
necessary. 

Her Beatification commenced yesterday afternoon,
exactly at 40 minutes after Six. 
I can write no more, than that I am 
Yours, &c.
Wm. Morden. 
Friday Morn. Sept. 8. 
By the time this was written, and by the Colonel's
leave transcribed, Harry came booted and spurred, his
horse at the door; and I delivered him the Letters to
the family, with those to Mrs. Norton and Miss Howe
(Eight in all) together with the above of the Colonel
to Mr. James Harlowe; and gave him orders to make
the utmost dispatch with them. 
The Colonel and I have bespoke mourning for ourselves
and servants. 