



From Miss Darnford to her Father and Mother. 


My ever-honoured Papa and Mamma,
I arrived safely in London on Thursday,
after a tolerable Journey, considering Deb. and
I made Six in the Coach, (Two having been taken
up on the Way, after you left me) and none of the
Six highly agreeable. Mr. B. and his Lady, who
looks very stately upon us, (from the Circumstance
of Person, rather than of Mind, however) were
so good as to meet me at St. Albans, in their Coach
and Six. They have a fine House here, richly furnish'd
throughrout, and have allotted me the best
Apartment in it. 
We are happy beyond Expression: Mr. B. is a
charming Husband; so easy, so pleas'd with, and
so tender of his Lady; and she so much All that
we saw her in the Country, as to Humility and Affability, 

and improv'd in every thing else, which
we hardly thought possible she could be—that I
never knew so happy a Matrimony. —All that
Prerogative Sauciness, which we apprehended
would so eminently display itself in his Behaviour
to his Lady, had she been ever so distinguished by
Birth and Fortune, is vanished, and no Traces of
it left. I did not think it was in the Power of an
Angel, if our Sex could have produc'd one, to have
made so tender and so fond a Husband of Mr. B.
as he makes. And should I have the Sense to follow
Mrs. B.'s Example, if ever I marry, I should
not despair of making myself happy, let it be to
whom it would, provided he was not a Brute, nor
sordid in his Temper; which Two Characters are
too obvious to be conceal'd, if Persons take due
Care, and make proper Inquiries, and if they are
not led by blind Passion. May Mr. Murray, and
Miss Nancy, make just such a happy Pair! 
You commanded me, my honoured Mamma
to write to you an Account of every thing that
pleas'd me—I said I would: But what a Task
should I then have! —I did not think I had undertaken
to write Volumes. —You must therefore
allow me to be more brief than I had intended. 
In the first Place, It would take up Five or Six
long Letters to do Justice to the Oeconomy observ'd
in this happy Family. You know, that Mrs. B.
has not changed one of the Servants of the Family,
and only added her Polly to the Number. This is
an unexampled thing, especially as they were all
her Fellow-servants, as we may say: But since
they have the Sense to admire so good an Example,
and are proud to follow it, each to his and her 

Power, I think it one of her peculiar Felicities to
have continued them, and to chuse to reform such
as were exceptionable, rather than dismiss them. 
Their Mouths, Deb tells me, are continually
full of their Lady's Praises, and Prayers, and Blessings,
utter'd with such Delight and Fervour for
the happy Pair, that it makes her Eyes, she says,
ready to run over to hear them. 
Moreover, I think it an extraordinary Piece
of Policy, (whether design'd or not) to keep them,
as they were honest and worthy Folks; for had she
turn'd them all off, what had she done but made
as many Enemies as she had discarded Servants; 
and as many more, as those had Friends and Acquaintance? 
And we all know, how much the
Reputation of Families lies at the Mercy of Servants; 
and 'tis easy to guess, to what Cause each
would have imputed his or her Dismission. And
so she has escaped, as she ought to escape, the Censure
of Pride; and has made every one, instead of
reproaching her with her Descent, find those Graces
in her, which turn that very Disadvantage to her
Glory. 
She is exceeding affable to every one of them; 
always speaks to them with a Smile; but yet has
such a Dignity in her Manner, that it secures her
their Respect and Reverence; and they are ready to
fly at a Look; and seem proud to have any Commands
of hers to execute: Insomuch that the Words,
My Lady commands so or so, from one Servant to
another, are sure to meet with an indisputable Obedience,
be the Duty required what it will. 
If any of them are the least indisposed, her Care
and Tenderness for them engage the Veneration 

and Gratitude of all the rest, who see, in that Instance,
how kindly they will be treated, should
they ail any thing themselves. And in all this, I
must needs say, she is very happy in Mrs. Jervis,
who is an excellent Second to her admirable Lady; 
and is treated by her with as much Respect and
Affection, as if she were her Mother. 
You may remember, Madam, that in the Account
she gave us of her benevolent Round, as
Lady Davers calls it, she says, That, as she was
going to London, she should leave Directions with
Mrs. Jervis about some of her Clients, as I find
she calls her Poor, to avoid a Word, which her
Delicacy accounts harsh with regard to them, and
ostentatious with respect to herself. I ask'd her,
How (since, contrary to her then Expectation,
Mrs. Jervis was permitted to be in Town with her)
she had provided to answer her Intention as to those
her Clients, whom she had referr'd to the Care of
that good Woman? 
She said, That Mr. Barlow her Apothecary
was a very worthy Man, and she had given him a
plenary Power in that Particular, and likewise desired
him to recommend any new and worthy Case
to her, that no deserving Person among the destitute
sick Poor, might be unreliev'd by reason of her
Absence. 
And here in London she has applied herself to
Dr.&wblank;(her Parish-minister, a fine Preacher, and
sound Divine, who promises on all Opportunities
to pay his Respects to Mr. B.) to recommend to
her any poor Housekeepers, who will be glad to
accept of some private Benefactions, and yet,
having lived creditably, till reduced by Misfortunes, 

are ashamed to apply for publick Relief:
And she has several of these already on her benevolent
List, to some of whom she sends Coals now
at the Entrance on the wintry Season; to some a
Piece of Irish or Scotish Linen, or so many Yards
of Norwich Stuff, for Gowns and Coats for the
Girls, or Yorkshire Cloth for the Boys; and Money
to others, who being Persons of Prudence, can
best judge how to lay it out for their own Service. 
And she has moreover mortify'd, as the Scots call
it, 150l. as a Fund for Loans, without Interest,
of 5, 10, or 15, but not exceeding 20l. to answer
present Exigences in some honest Families; 
who find the best Security they can, to repay it in
a given Time: And this Fund she purposes, (as she
grows richer, she says) to increase; and prides herself
every now-and-then, for having sav'd so much
Money already; and estimates pleasantly her Worth
by this Sum, saying sometimes, Who would ever
have thought I should have been worth 150l. so
soon? I shall be a rich Body in time. But in all
these things she injoins Secrecy, which the Doctor
has promis'd. 
She told the Doctor, what Mr. Adams's Office
is in her Family; and hoped, she said, he would
give her his Sanction to it; assuring him, That she
thought it her Duty to ask it, as she was one of his
Flock, and he, on that account, her principal
Shepherd, which made a spiritual Relation between
them, the Requisites of which, on her Part, were
not to be dispens'd with. You may be sure, the
good Gentleman very chearfully and applaudingly
gave her his Consent; and when she told him, how
well Mr. Adams was provided for, and that she 

should apply to him to supply her with a Town
Chaplain, when she was depriv'd of him, he wish'd,
that the other Duties of his Function (for he has a
large Parish) would permit him to be the happy Person
himself; saying, That till she was supply'd to
her Mind, either he or his Curate would take care,
that so laudable a Method should be kept up. 
You will do me the Justice, Madam, to believe,
that I very chearfully join in my dear Friend's Sunday
Duties; and I am not a little edify'd with the
good Example, and with the Harmony and Good-will,
that this excellent Method contributes to keep
up in the Family. 
I must own, I never saw such a Family of
Love in my Life: For here, under the Eye of the
best and most respected of Mistresses, they twice
every Sunday see one another all together, (as they
used to do in the Country) superior as well as inferior
Servants; and Deb. tells me, after Mrs. B. and
I are withdrawn, there are such friendly Salutations
among them, that she never heard the like.— 
Your Servant, good Master Longman; Your Servant,
Master Colbrand, cries one and another: How
do you, John? I'm glad to see you, Abraham! 
—All blessedly met once more! cries Jonathan
the venerable Butler, with his silver Hairs, as Mrs. B.
always distinguishes him. Good Madam Jervis,
cries another, you look purely this blessed Day,
thank God! —And they return to their several
Vocations, so light, so easy, so pleas'd, so eventemper'd
in their Minds, as their chearful Countenances,
as well as Expressions, testify, that it is a
Heaven of a House: And being wound up thus
constantly once a Week, like a good Eight-day 

Clock, no Piece of Machinery that ever was made,
is so regular and uniform, as this Family is. 
What an Example does this dear Lady set to
all who see her, to all who know her, and to all
who hear of her! and how happy are they who
have the Grace to follow it! —What a publick
Blessing would such a Mind as hers be, could it
be vested with the Robes of Royalty, and adorn
the Sovereign Dignity! But what are the Princes of
the Earth, look at them in every Nation, and what
have they been for Ages past, compar'd to this Lady?
who acts from the Impulses of her own Heart, unaided,
in most Cases, by any human Example. In
short, when I contemplate her innumerable Excellencies,
and that Sweetness of Temper, and universal
Benevolence, which shine in every thing she
says and does, I cannot sometimes help looking
upon her in the Light of an Angel, dropp'd down
from Heaven, and receiv'd into bodily Organs, to
live among Men and Women, in order to shew
what the first of the Species was design'd to be. 
This reminds me of what my honour'd Papa
said once at our own House to Mr. B.*  That there
was but one such Angel descended from Heaven in
a thousand Years, and he had her. 
And yet, here is the Admiration, That one
sees all the Duties performed in such an easy and
pleasant manner, as any body may perform them; 
for they interfere not with any Parts of the Family
Management; take up no Time from the necessary
Imployments; but rather aid and inspirit every
one in the Discharge of all their domestick Services; 
and, moreover, keep their Minds in a State of 

Preparation for the more solemn Duties of the
Day; and all without the least Intermixture of Affectation,
Enthusiasm, or Ostentation. O my dear
Papa and Mamma, permit me but to tarry here till
I am perfect in all these good Lessons, and how
happy shall I be! 
I am mindful, my dear Mamma, of Yours and
our good Neighbours Requests to Mrs. B. to oblige
you with the Conversations she mentioned, the one
with the young Ladies related to Mrs. Towers and
Mrs. Arthur; the other with Mr. B. on her Father
and Mother; a Subject, which always, however
humble, raises her Pen, and of Consequence our
Expectations; and I will prevail upon her to let me
transcribe them for your Entertainment. She writes
down every thing that passes, which she thinks may
one Day be of Use to Miss Goodwin, and to her
own Children, if she shall live to have any, and
to see them grown up. What a charming Mamma,
as well as Wife and Mistress, will this dear Lady
make! 
As to the Town, and the Diversions of it, I
shall not trouble you with any Accounts of them,
because you know the one, and from the Time we
pass'd here last Winter, as well as your former thorough
Knowlege of both, you will want no Information
about the other; for, generally speaking,
all who reside constantly in London, allow, that
there is little other Difference in the Diversions of
one Winter and another, than such as are in Cloaths; 
a few Variations of the Fashions only, which are
mostly owing to the ingenious Contrivances of
Persons who are to get their Bread by diversifying
them. 

Mrs. B. has undertaken to give Lady Davers
an Account of Matters as they pass, and her Sentiments
on what she sees. There must be something
new in her Observations, because she is a Stranger
to these Diversions, and unbiassed intirely by Favour
or Prejudice; and so will not play the partial
Critick, but give to a Beauty its due Praise, and to
a Fault its due Censure, according to that Truth
and Nature, which are the unerring Guides of her
Actions, as well as Sentiments. These I will procure
for you, as she gives me Leave to transcribe
what she writes; and you'll be so good as to return
them when perus'd, because I will lend them, as
I used to do her Letters, to her good Parents; and
so I shall give her a Pleasure at the same time, in
the accommodating them with the Knowlege of all
that passes, which she makes it a Point of Duty to
do, because they take Delight in her Writings. 
My Papa's Observation, that a Woman never
takes a Journey, that she don't forget something,
is justify'd by me; for, with all my Care, I have
forgot my Diamond Buckle, which Miss Nancy
will find in the inner Till of my Bureau, wrapp'd
up in Cotton; and I beg it may be sent me, by
the first Opportunity. With my humble Duty to
you both, my dear indulgent Papa and Mamma,
Thanks for the Favour I now rejoice in, and affectionate
Respects to Miss Nancy, (I wish she would
love me as well as I love her) and Service to Mr. Murray,
and all our good Neighbours, conclude me 
Your dutiful and highly favour'd Daughter,
M. Darnford. 

Mr. B. and Mrs. B. desire their Compliments
of Congratulation to Mr. and Mrs. Peters,
on the happy Marriage of their worthy Niece,
which they knew nothing of till I told them
of it: Also to your honoured Selves they
desire their kind Respects and Thanks for the
Loan of your worthless Daughter. 
I experience every Hour some new Token of
their Politeness and Affection; and I make
no Scruple to think I am with just such a Brother,
and such a Sister, as any happy Creature
may rejoice in, and be proud of. —Mr. B.
I cannot but repeat, is a charming Husband,
and a most polite Gentleman. His Lady is
always accusing herself to me of Aukwardness
and Insufficiency; but not a Soul who sees
her, can find it out: She is all genteel Ease; 
and the Admiration of every one who beholds
her. —Only I tell her, with such Happiness
in Possession, she is a little of the gravest
sometimes. 

&line;
[The Letter which contains the Account of the
Conversation, requested by Miss Darnford, Letter
XL. Vol. III. and mentioned by Miss in the
preceding Letter, will be found the last Letter but
one of this Volume. For Miss Darnford, having
mislaid the first Copy of it, requested another, two
or three years after this, when married herself, for
the sake of Two young Ladies in her Neighbourhood,
whose inconsiderate Rashness had given
great Affliction to their honourable Parents. And
Mrs. B. with a View to their particular Case, haveing 

made divers Additions and Improvements to it,
it will come in more properly, as we conceive, in
the Course of these Letters, at or near the Time
when those Improvements were made to it.] 
