


I Have been hinder'd, by this wicked Woman's
watching me too close, from writing on Tuesday;
and so I will put both these Days together. I have
been a little Turn with her, for an Airing, in the
Chariot, and walked several times in the Garden; 
but have always her at my Heels. 
Mr. Williams came to see us, and took a Walk
with us once; and while her Back was just turn'd,
(encourag'd by the Hint he had before given me)
I said, Sir, I see two Tiles upon that Parsley bed; 
cannot one cover them with Mould, with a Note
between them, on Occasion? —A good Hint, said
he; let that Sun-flower by the Back-door of the
Garden be the Place; I have a Key to that; for it
is my nearest way to the Town. 
So I was forced to begin. O what Inventions
will Necessity be the Parent of! I hugg'd myself
with the Thought; and she coming to us, he said,
as if he was continuing the Discourse we were in; 
No, not extraordinary pleasant. What's that? what's
that? said Mrs. Jewkes–––Only, said he, the Town,
I'm saying, is not very pleasant. No, indeed, said
she, 'tis not; 'tis a poor Town, to my thinking. 

Are there any Gentry in it? said I. And so we chatted
on about the Town, to deceive her. But my
Deceit intended no Hurt to any body. 
We then talked of the Garden, how large and
pleasant, and the like; and sat down on the tursted
Slope of the fine Fish-pond, to see the Fishes play
upon the Surface of the Water; and she said, I
should angle if I would. 
I wish, said I, you'd be so kind to fetch me a
Rod and Baits. Pretty Mistress! said she–––I know
better than that, I'll assure you! at this time! –––I
mean no Harm, said I, indeed. Let me tell you,
said she, I know nobody has their Thoughts more
about them than you. A body ought to look to it,
where you are. But we'll angle a little to-morrow. 
Mr. Williams, who is much afraid of her, turn'd
the Discourse to a general Subject. I saunter'd in,
and left them to talk by themselves; but he went
away to Town, and she was soon after me. 
I had got to my Pen and Ink; and I said, I want
some Paper (putting what I was about in my Bosom):
You know I have wrote two Letters, and sent
them by John (O how his Name, poor guilty Fellow!
grieves me). Well, said she, you have some
left; one Sheet did for those two Letters. Yes, said
I, but I used half another for a Wrapper, you know; 
and see how I scribbled the other Half; and so I
shewed her a Parcel of broken Scraps of Verses,
which I had try'd to recollect, and which I had
wrote purposely that she might see, and think me
usually employ'd to such idle Purposes. Ay, said
she, so you have; well, I'll give you two Sheeos
more; but let me see how you dispose of them,
either written or blank. Well, thinks I, I hope still,
Argus, to be too hard for thee. Now Argus, the
Poets say, had an hundred Eyes, and was made to
watch with them all, as she is. 

She brought me the Paper, and said, Now, Madam,
let me see you write something. I will, said
I; and took the Pen, and wrote, “I wish Mrs.
Jewkes would be as good to me, as I would be to
her, if I had it in my Power!” —That's pretty
now! said she; well, I hope I am; but what then? 
“Why then (wrote I) she would do me the Favour
to let me know, what I have done to be
made her Prisoner; and what she thinks is to
become of me.” Well, and what then, said she? 
Why then, of Consequence, (scribbled I) she
would let me see her Instructions, that I may
know how far to blame her, or acquit her.” 
Thus I fooled on, to shew her my Fondness for
scribbling; for I had no Expectation of any Good
from her; that so she might suppose I employ'd myself,
as I said, to no better Purpose at other times:
For she will have it, that I am upon some Plot, I
am so silent, and love so much to be by myself. — 
She would have had me go on a little further. No,
said I, you have not answer'd me. Why, said she,
what can you doubt, when my Master himself assures
you of his Honour? Ay, says I; but lay your Hand
to your Heart, Mrs. Jewkes, and tell me, if you yourself
believe him. Yes, said she, to be sure I do. 
But, said I, what do you call Honour? —Why, said
she, what does he call Honour, think you? —Ruin! 
Shame! Disgrace! said I, I fear! —Pho, pho, said
she; if you have any Doubt about it, he can best
explain his own Meaning! —I'll send him word to
come to satisfy you, if you will! —Horrid Creature!
said I, all in a Fright! —Can'st thou not stab
me to the Heart? I'd rather thou wouldst, than say
such another Word! –––But I hope there is no Thought
of his coming. 
She had the Wickedness to say, No, no; he don't
intend to come, as I know of–––But if I was he, 

I would not be long away! —What means the Woman,
said I? —Mears! said she (turning it off); why
I mean, I would come, if I was he, and put an
End to all your Fears–––by making you as happy as
you wish. 'Tis out of his Power, said I, to make
me happy, great and rich as he is, but by leaving
me innocent, and giving me Liberty to go to my
dear Father and Mother. 
She went away soon after, and I ended my Letter,
in Hopes to have an Opportunity to lay it in the appointed
Place. So I went to her, and said; I suppose,
as it is not dark, I may take another Turn in
the Garden. 'Tis too late, said she; but if you will
go, don't stay, and, Nan, see and attend Madam,
as she called me. 
So I went towards the Pond, the Wench following
me, and dropt purposely my Hussy: And
when I came near the Tiles, I said, Mrs. Ann, I
have dropt my Hussy; be so kind to look for it. I
had it by the Pond-side. The Wench went to look,
and I slipt the Note between the Tiles, and cover'd
them as quick as I could with the light Mould,
quite unperceiv'd; and the Maid finding the Hussy,
I took it, and saunter'd in again, and met Mrs.
Jewkes coming to see after me. What I wrote
was this: 

‘Reverend Sir,
The want of Opportunity to speak my Mind
to you, I am sure will excuse this Boldness
in a poor Creature that is betray'd hither, I have
Reason to think, for the worst Purposes. You
know something, to be sure, of my Story, my
native Poverty, which I am not ashamed of, my
late Lady's Goodness, and my Master's Designs upon
me. 'Tis true, he promises Honour, and all that; 
but the Honour of the Wicked is Disgrace and 

Shame to the Virtuous. And he may think he
may keep his Promises according to the Notions
he may allow himself to hold; and yet, according
to mine, and every good Body's beside, quite ruin
me. 
‘I am so wretched, and ill treated by this Mrs.
Jewkes, and she is so ill-principled a Woman, that
as I may soon want the Opportunity which the
happy Hint of this Day affords to my Hopes; so
I throw myself at once upon your Goodness, without
the least Reserve; for I cannot be worse than
I am, should that fail me; which, I dare say, to
your Power, it will not: For I see it, Sir, in your
Looks, I hope it from your Cloth, and I doubt it
not from your Inclination, in a Case circumstanced
as my unhappy one is. For, Sir, in helping me
out of my present Distress, you perform all the
Acts of Religion in one; and the highest Mercy
and Charity, both to a Body and a Soul of a
poor Wretch, that, believe me, Sir, has, at present,
not so much as in Thought, swerv'd from her Innocence. 
‘Is there not some way to be found out for my
Escape, without Danger to yourself? Is there no
Gentleman or Lady of Virtue in this Neighbourhood,
to whom I may fly, only till I can find a way
to get to my poor Father and Mother? Cannot
Lady Davers be made acquainted with my sad Story,
by your conveying a Letter to her? My poor Parents
are so low in the World, they can do nothing
but break their Hearts for me; and that, I fear,
will be the End of it. 
‘My Master promises, if I will be easy, as he
calls it, in my present Lot, he will not come down
without my Consent. Alas! Sir, this is nothing. 
For what's the Promise of a Person, who thinks
himself at Liberty to act as he has done by me? 

If he comes, it must be to ruin me; and come, to
be sure, he will, when he thinks he has silenc'd the
Clamours of my Friends, and lulled me, as no
doubt he hopes, into a fatal Security. 
‘Now, therefore, Sir, is all the Time I have to
work and struggle for the Preservation of my Honesty. 
If I stay till he comes, I am undone. You
have a Key to the back Garden-door; I have great
Hopes from that. Study, good Sir, and contrive
for me. I will faithfully keep your Secret. –––Yet
I should be loth to have you injur'd for me! 
‘I say no more, but commit this to the happy
Tiles, and to the Bosom of that Earth from which
I hope my Deliverance will take Root, and bring
forth such Fruit, as may turn to my inexpressible
Joy, and your eternal Reward, both here and
hereafter. As shall ever pray, 
‘Your most oppressed humble Servant.’ 

