


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


I Understood afterwards that he was in the most
dreadful consternation. He had fastened the door
upon me and himself; and for a few moments was not
enough present to himself to open it. Yet crying out
upon his God to have mercy upon him, and running
about the room, the women hastily rapped at the door. 
Then he ran to it, opened it, cursed himself, and
besought them to recover me, if possible. 
They said I had death in my face: They lamented
over me: My nose had done bleeding: But, careful
of his own safety in the midst of his terror, he took
my bloody handkerchief; if I did not recover, he said,
that should not appear against him; and he hasted into
the next room, and thrust it into the fire; by which
were sitting, it seems, the minister and his helper, over
some burnt brandy. 
O gentlemen! cried the wretch, nothing can be
done to night. Take this; and gave them money. 
The lady is in a fit. I wish you well home. 
The younger daughter reported this to me afterwards,
and what follows: They had desired the maid,
it seems, to bring them more firing, and a jug of ale; 
and they would sit in the chimney-corner, they said,
till peep of day: But the same young woman who
was taken off from her errand, to assist me, finding
me, as they all thought, not likely to recover, ran in
to them, and declared, that the lady was dead, certainly
dead; and what, said she, will become of us
all? This terrified the two men. They said, It was
then time for them to be gone. Accordingly taking
each of them another dram, they snatch'd up their
hats and sticks, and away they hurried; hoping, the
doctor said, that, as they were innocent, and only 

meant to serve the gentleman, their names, whatever
happen'd, would not be called in question. 
When I came a little to myself, I found the three
women only with me. I was in a cold sweat, all
over shivering. There was no fire in that room:
They led me into the parlour, which the two men had
quitted; and sat me down in an elbow chair; for I
could hardly stand, or support myself; and chased my
temples with Hungary-water. 
Wretched creatures, men of this cast, my Lucy,
thus to sport with the healths and happiness of poor
creatures whom they pretend to love! I am afraid I
never shall be what I was. At times I am very sensible
at my stomach of this violent squeeze. 
The mother and elder sister left me soon after, and
went to Sir Hargrave. I can only guess at the result of
their deliberations by what followed. 
The younger sister, with compassionate frankness,
answered all my questions, and let me know all the
above particulars. Yet she wonder'd that I could refuse
so handsome and so rich a man as Sir Hargrave. 
She boasted much of their reputation. Her mother
would not do an ill thing, she said, for the world:
And she had a brother who had a place in the Customhouse,
and was as honest a man, tho' she said it, as
any in it. She own'd that she knew my new vile servant; 
and praised his fidelity to the masters he had
served, in such high terms, as if she thought all duties
were comprised in that one, of obeying his principals,
right or wrong. Mr. William, she said, was
a pretty man, a genteel man, and she believed he was
worth money; and she was sure would make an excellent
husband. I soon found that the simple girl
was in love with this vile, this specious fellow. She
could not bear to hear me hint any-thing in his disfavour,
as, by way of warning to her, I would have
done. But she was sure Mr. William was a down-right
honest man; and that if he were guilty of any 

bad thing, it was by command of those to whom he
owed duty: And they are to be answerable for that,
you know, madam. 
We were broke in upon, as I was intending to ask
more questions (for I find this Wilson was the prime
agent in all this mischief) when the elder sister called
out the younger: And instantly came in Sir Hargrave. 
He took a chair, and sat down by me, one leg
thrown over the knee of the other; his elbow upon
that knee, and his hand supporting his bow'd-down
head; biting his lips; looking at me, then from me,
then at me again, five or six times, as in malice. 
Ill-natured, spiteful, moody wretch! thought I,
trembling at his strange silence, after such hurt as he
had done me, and what I had endur'd, and still felt in my
stomach and arm, what an odious creature thou art! 
At last I broke silence. I thought I would be as
mild as I could, and not provoke him to do me farther
mischief. Well have you done, Sir Hargrave,
(have you not?) to commit such a violence upon a poor
young creature that never did nor thought you evil! 
I paused. He was silent. 
What distraction have you given to my poor cousin
Reeves's! How my heart bleeds for them! 
I stopt. He was still silent. 
I hope, Sir, you are sorry for the mischief you have
done me; and for the pain you have given to my
friends! —I hope, Sir— 
Cursed! said he. 
I stopt, thinking he would go on: But he said no
more; only changing his posture; and then resuming
it. 
These people, Sir, seem to be honest people. I
hope you design'd only to terrify me. Your bringing
me into no worse company is an assurance to me that
you meant better than— 
Devils all! interrupted he— 

I thought he was going on; but he grinned, shook
his head, and then again reclined it upon his hand. 
I forgive you, Sir, the pain you have given me. — 
But my friends—As soon as day breaks (and I hope
that is not far off) I will get the women to let my
cousin Reeves— 
Then up he started—Miss Byron, said he, you
are a woman; a true woman—And held up his
hand, clench'd. I knew not what to think of his intention. 
Miss Byron, proceeded he, after a pause, you are
the most consummate hypocrite that I ever knew in
my life: And yet I thought that the best of you all
could fall into fits and swoonings whenever you
pleased. 
I was now silent. I trembled. 
Damned fool! ass! blockhead! woman's fool! — 
I ought to be d&wblank;n'd for my credulous folly! —I tell
you, Miss Byron—Then he look'd at me as if he
were crazy; and walked two or three times about the
room. 
To be dying one half-hour, and the next to look
so provoking— 
I was still silent. 
I could curse myself for sending away the parson. I
thought I had known something of womens tricks— 
But yet your arts, your hypocrisy, shall not serve you,
madam. What I failed in here, shall be done else-where. 
By the great God of Heaven it shall. 
I wept. I could not then speak. 
Can't you go into fits again? Can't you? said the
barbarian; with an air of a piece with his words; 
and using other words of the lowest reproach. 
God deliver me, pray'd I to myself, from the hands
of this madman! 
I arose, and as the candle stood near the glass, I
saw in it my vile figure, in this abominable habit, 

to which till then, I had paid little attention. O how
I scorned myself! 
Pray, Sir Hargrave, said I, let me beg that you will
not terrify me further. I will forgive you for all you
have hitherto done, and place it to my own account,
as a proper punishment for consenting to be thus
mark'd for a vain and foolish creature. Your abuse,
Sir, give me leave to say, is low and unmanly. But
in the light of a punishment I will own it to be all
deserved: And let here my punishment end, and I
will thank you; and forgive you with my whole
heart. 
Your fate is determined, Miss Byron. 
Just then came in a servant-maid with a capuchin,
who whispered something to him: To which he answered,
That's well— 
He took the capuchin: The maid withdrew; and
approach'd me with it. I started, trembled, and was
ready to faint. I caught hold of the back of the
elbow chair. 
Your fate is determined, madam, repeated the savage
—Here, put this on—Now fall into fits again
—Put this on! 
Pray, Sir Hargrave— 
And pray, Miss Byron: What has not been completed
here, shall be completed in a safer place; and
that in my own way—Put this on, I tell you. Your
compliance may yet befriend you. 
Where are the gentlewomen? —Where are— 
Gone to rest, madam—John, Frank, called he out. 
In came two men-servants. 
Pray, Sir Hargrave—Lord protect me—Pray, Sir
Hargrave—Where are the gentlewomen? —Lord
protect me! 
Then running to the door, against which one of
the men stood—Man, stand out of the way, said I. 
But he did not: He only bowed. 
I cried out, Mrs.&wblank;I forget your name: Miss&wblank; 

And t'other Miss&wblank; I forget your names—If you
are good creatures, as I hoped you were— 
I called as loud as my fears would let me. 
At last came in the elder sister—O madam! good
young gentlewoman! I am glad you are come, said I. 
And so am I, said the wicked man. —Pray, Miss
Sally, put on this lady's capuchin. 
Lord bless me, for why? for what? I have no
capuchin! 
I would not permit her to put it on, as she would
have done. 
The savage then wrapt his arms about mine, and
made me so very sensible by his force, of the pain I
had had by the squeeze of the door, that I could not
help crying out. The young woman put on the capuchin
whether I would or not. 
Now, Miss Byron, said he, make yourself easy; 
or command a fit, it is all one: My end will be better
served by the latter—Miss Sally, give orders. 
She ran out with the candle. Frank, give me
the cloak, said Sir Hargrave. 
The fellow had a red cloak on his arm. His barbarous
master took it from him. To your posts,
said he. 
The two men withdrew in haste. Now, my dearest
life, said he, with an air of insult, as I thought, you
command your fate, if you are easy. 
He threw the cloak about me. 
I begg'd, pray'd, would have kneeled to him; but
all was in vain. The tyger-hearted man, as Mr.
Greville had truly called him, muffled me up in it,
and by force carried me thro' a long entry to the fore-door. 
There was ready a chariot-and-six; and that
Sally was at the door with a lighted candle. 
I called out to her. I called out for her mother; 
for the other sister. I besought him to let me say
but six words to the widow. 

But no widow was to appear; no younger sister:
She was perhaps more tender-hearted than the elder:
And in spite of all my struggles, prayers, resistance, he
lifted me into the chariot. 
Men on horseback were about it. I thought that
Wilson was one of them; and so it proved. Sir
Har grave said to that fellow, You know what tale to
tell, if you meet with impertinents. And in he came
himself. 
I screamed. Scream on, my dear, upbraidingly
said he; and barbarously mock'd me, imitating, low
wretch! the bleating of a sheep [Could you not have
killed him for this, my Lucy?] Then rearing himself
up, Now am I lord of Miss Byron, exulted he! 
Still I screamed for help; and he put his hand before
my mouth, tho' vowing honour, and such sort of
stuff; and, with his unmanly roughness, made me
bite my lip. And away lash'd the coachman with
your poor Harriet. 

