



Dear Father and Mother,
I have great Trouble, and some Comfort,
to acquaint you with. The Trouble
is, that my good Lady died of the Illness
I mention'd to you, and left us
all much griev'd for her Loss; for she
was a dear good Lady, and kind to all
us her Servants. Much I fear'd, that as I was taken
by her Goodness to wait upon her Person, I should
be quite destitute again, and forc'd to return to you 

and my poor Mother, who have so much to do to
maintain yourselves; and, as my Lady's Goodness
had put me to write and cast Accompts, and made
me a little expert at my Needle, and other Qualifications
above my Degree, it would have been no
easy Matter to find a Place that your poor Pamela
was fit for: But God, whose Graciousness to us
we have so often experienc'd at a Pinch, put it into
my good Lady's Heart, on her Death-bed, just an
Hour before she expir'd, to recommend to my
young Master all her Servants, one by one; and
when it came to my Turn to be recommended,
for I was sobbing and crying at her Pillow, she could
only say, My dear Son! –––and so broke off a little,
and then recovering–––Remember my poor Pamela! 
—And these were some of her last Words! 
O how my Eyes run! —Don't wonder to see the
Paper so blotted! 
Well, but God's Will must be done!—and so
comes the Comfort, that I shall not be oblig'd to return
back to be a Clog upon my dear Parents! For
my Master Taid, I will take care of you all, my
Lasses; and for you, Pamela, (and took me by the
Hand; yes, he took me by the Hand before them
all) for my dear Mother's sake, I will be a Friend
to you, and you shall take care of my Linen. God
bless him! and pray with me, my dear Father and
Mother, for God to bless him: For he has given
Mourning and a Year's Wages to all my Lady's Servants; 
and I having no Wages as yet, but what my
Lady said she would do for me as I deserv'd, order'd
the House-keeper to give me Morning with the
rest, and gave me with his own Hand Four golden
Guineas, besides lesser Money, which were in my old
Lady's Pocket when she dy'd; and said, If I was a
good Girl, and faithful and diligent, he would be a
Friend to me, for his Mother's sake. And so I send 

you these four Guineas for your Comfort; for God
will not let me want: And so you may pay some
old Debt with Part; and keep the other Part to
comfort you both. If I get more, I am sure it is
my Duty, and it shall be my Care to love and cherish
you both; for you have lov'd me and cherish'd me,
when I could do nothing for myself: And so you
have for us all, or what must have become of us! 
I send it by John our Footman, who goes your
way; but he does not know what he carries; because
I seal it up in one of the little Pill-boxes
which my Lady had, wrapt close in Paper, that it
mayn't chink; and be sure don't open it before him. 
I know, dear Father and Mother, I must give you
both Grief and Pleasure; and so I will only say,
Pray for your Pamela; who will ever be, 
Your most dutiful Daughter. 
I have been scared out of my Senses; for just
now, as I was folding this Letter, in my late
Lady's Dressing-room, in comes my young
Master! Good Sirs! how was I frightned! I
went to hide the Letter in my Bosom, and he
seeing me frighted, said, smiling, Who have
you been writing to, Pamela? —I said, in my
Fright, Pray your Honour forgive me! —Only
to my Father and Mother. He said, Well
then, Let me see how you are come on
in your Writing! O how I was sham'd! — 
He, in my Fright, took it, without saying more,
and read it quite thro', and then gave it me
again;—and I said, Pray your Honour forgive
me;—yet I know not for what. For he was
always dutiful to his Parents; and why should
he be angry, that I was so to mine! And indeed
he was not angry; for he took me by the  

Hand, and said, You are a good Girl,
Pamela, to be kind to your aged Father and
Mother. I am not angry with you. Be
faithful, and diligent; and do as you should
do, and I like you the better for this. And
then he said, Why, Pamela, you write a very
pretty Hand, and spell tolerably too. I see my
good Mother's Care in your Learning has not
been thrown away upon you. My Mother used
to say, you lov'd reading; you may look into
any of her Books to improve yourself, so you
take care of them. To be sure I did nothing
but curchee and cry, and was all in Confusion,
at his Goodness. Indeed he is the best of
Gentlemen, I think! But I am making another
long Letter. So will only say more, I shall
ever be, 
Your dutiful Daughter,
Pamela Andrews. 

