



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Wednesday, 11 o'Clock. 
Dr. H. has just been here. He tarried with me till
the minister had done praying by the lady; and then
we were both admitted. Mr. Goddard (who came while the
doctor and the clergyman were with her) went away with
them when they went. They took a solemn and everlasting
leave of her, as I have no scruple to say, blessing her, and
being blessed by her; and wishing (when it came to be
their lot) for an exit as happy as hers is likely to be 
She had again earnestly requested of the doctor, his
opinion how long it was now probable that she could
continue: And he told her, that he apprehended she
would hardly see to-morrow night. She said, She should
number the hours with greater pleasure than ever she numbered
any in her life, on the most joyful occasion. 
How unlike poor Belton's last hours, hers! See the infinite
difference in the effects, on the same awful and affecting
occasion, between a good and a bad conscience! 
This moment a man is come from Miss Howe with a
letter. Perhaps I shall be able to send you the contents. 
* *
She endeavoured several times with earnestness, but in
vain, to read the letter of her dear friend. —The writing,
she said, was too fine for her grosser sight, and the lines
staggered under her eye. And indeed she trembled so, she
could not hold the paper: And at last, desired Mrs. Lovick
to read it to her, the messenger waiting for an answer. 
Thou wilt see, in Miss Howe's letter, how different the
expression of the same impatiency, and passionate love, is,
when dictated by the gentler mind of a woman, from that
which results from a mind so boisterous and knotty, as 

thine. For Mrs. Lovick will transcribe it; and I shall
send it—To be read in this place, if thou wilt. 

Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Tuesday, Sept. 5. 
O my dearest friend!
What will become of your poor Anna Howe! 
I see by your writing, as well as read by your own
account, (which, were you not very, very ill, you would
have touched more tenderly) how it is with you! —Why
have I thus long delayed to attend you! —Could I think,
that the comfortings of a faithful friend were as nothing to
a gentle mind in distress, that I could be prevailed upon
to forbear visiting you so much as once in all this time! — 
I, as well as every-body else, to desert and abandon my
dear creature to strangers! —What will become of me, if
you be as bad as my apprehensions make you! 
I will set out this moment, little as the encouragement
is, that you give me to do so! —My mother is willing I
should! —Why, O why, was she not before willing! 
Yet she persuades me too (lest I should be fatally affected
were I to find my fears too well justified) to wait the return
of this messenger, who rides our swiftest horse—God
speed him with good news to me—Else—But, Oh! my
dearest, dearest friend, what else! —One line from your
hand by him! —Send me but one line to bid me attend
you! —I will set out the moment, the very moment, I
receive it. —I am now actually ready to do so! —And if you
love me, as I love you, the sight of me will revive you
to my hopes. But why, why, when I can think this,
did I not go up sooner? 
Blessed heaven! deny not to my prayers, my friend,
my monitress, my adviser, at a time so critical to myself! 
But methinks, your stile and sentiments are too well
connected, too full of life and vigor, to give cause for so
much despair, as the staggering pen seems to threaten. 
I am sorry I was not at home [I must add thus much
tho' the servant is ready mounted at the door] when Mr.
Belford's servant came with your affecting letter. I was
at Miss Lloyd's. My mamma sent it to me; and I came
home that instant. But he was gone. He would not stay,
it seems. Yet I wanted to ask him an hundred thousand 

questions. But why delay I thus my messenger? I have
a multitude of things to say to you. To advise with you
about! —You shall direct me in every thing. I will obey
the holding up of your finger. But, if you leave me— 
what is the world, or any thing in it, to 
Your Anna Howe? 
The effect this letter had on the lady, who is so near the
end which the fair writer so much apprehends and deplores,
obliged Mrs. Lovick to make many breaks in reading it,
and many changes of voice. 
This is a friend, said the divine lady, (taking the letter
in her hand, and kissing it) worth wishing to live for. —O
my dear Anna Howe! How uninterruptedly sweet and noble,
has been our friendship! —But we shall one day, I
hope (and that must comfort us both) meet, never to part
again! Then, divested of the shades of body, shall we be
all light and all mind—Then how unalloyed, how perfect,
will be our friendship! Our Love then will have one and
the same adorable object, and we shall enjoy it and each
other to all Eternity! 
She said, her dear friend was so earnest for a line or two,
that she would fain write, if she could: And she tried; 
but to no purpose. She could dictate, however, she believed,
and desired Mrs. Lovick would take pen and paper. 
Which she did, and then she dictated to her. I would
have withdrawn; but at her desire staid. 
She wandered a good deal, at first—She took notice
that she did—And when she got into a little train, not
pleasing herself, she apologized to Mrs. Lovick for making
her begin again and again; and said, That third time
should go, let it be as it would. 
She dictated the farewel part, without hesitation; and
when she came to the blessing and subscription, she took
the pen, and dropping on her knees, supported by Mrs.
Lovick, wrote the conclusion; but Mrs. Lovick was forced
to guide her hand. 
You will find the sense surprizingly intire, her weakness
considered. 
I made the messenger wait, while I transcribed it. I
have endeavoured to imitate the subscriptive part. 


Wedn. near 3 o'Clock. 
My dearest Miss Howe,
You must not be surprized—nor grieved—that Mrs.
Lovick writes for me. Altho' I cannot obey you,
and write with my pen, yet my heart writes by hers—Accept
it so—It is the nearest to obedience I can! 
And now, what ought I to say? What can I say? — 
But why should you not know the truth? Since soon you
must—very soon. 
Know then, and let your tears be those, if of pity, of
joyful pity! for I permit you to shed a few, to imbalm, as
I may say, a fallen blossom—Know then, that the good
doctor, and the pious clergyman, and the worthy apothecary,
have just now, with joint benedictions, taken their
last leave of me: And the former bids me hope—Do, my
dearest, let me say hope—for my enlargement before tomorrow
sun-set. 
Adieu, therefore, my dearest friend! Be this your consolation,
as it is mine, that in God's good time we shall
meet in a blessed Eternity, never more to part! —Once
more, then, adieu and be happy! —Which a generous nature
cannot be, unless to its power, it makes others so too. 
God for ever bless you! prays, dropt on my bended
Knees, altho' supported upon them, 
Your Grateful, Obliged, Affectionate,
Clar. Harlowe. 
When I had transcribed and sealed this letter, by her
direction, I gave it to the messenger myself; who told me
that Miss Howe waited for nothing but his return, to set
out for London. 
Thy servant is just come; so I will close here. Thou
art a merciless master. The two fellows are battered to
death by thee, to use a female word; and all female words,
tho' we are not sure of their derivation, have very significant
meanings. I believe, in their hearts, they wish the
angel in the heaven that is ready to receive her, and thee
at thy proper place, that there might be an end of their
flurries; another word of the same gender. 

What a letter hast thou sent me! —Poor Lovelace!— 
is all the answer I will return. 
Five o'clock.] Colonel Morden is this moment arrived. 