



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Tuesday, July 25. 
Your two affecting Letters were brought to me
(as I had directed any Letter from you should be)
to the Colonel's, about an hour before we broke up. 
I could not forbear dipping into them there; and
shedding more tears over them than I will tell you of; 
altho' I dried my eyes as well as I could, that the
company I was obliged to return to, and my Mother,
should see as little of my concern as possible. 
I am yet (and was then still more) excessively fluttered. 
The occasion I will communicate to you by-and-by: 
For nothing but the flutters given by the
stroke of death could divert my first attention from
the sad and solemn contents of your last favour. 
These therefore I must begin with. 
How can I bear the thoughts of losing so dear a
friend! I will not so much as suppose it. Indeed I
cannot! Such a mind as yours was not vested in humanity
to be snatched away from us so soon. There
must be still a great deal for you to do for the good
of all who have the happiness to know you. 
You enumerate in your Letter of Thursday last (a) ,
the particulars in which your situation is already
mended: Let me see by effects that you are in earnest
in that enumeration; and that you really have the
courage to resolve to get above the sense of injuries you
could not avoid; and then will I trust to Providence
and my humble prayers for your perfect recovery: 
And glad at my heart shall I be, on my return from
the little Island, to find you well enough to be near
us, according to the proposal Mr. Hickman has to
make to you. 

You chide me in yours of Sunday on the freedom
I take with your friends (a) . 
I may be warm. I know I am. —Too warm. Yet
warmth in friendship, surely, cannot be a crime; 
especially when our friend has great merit, labours
under oppression, and is struggling with undeserved
calamity. 
I have no notion of coolness in friendship, be it
dignified or distinguished by the name of Prudence,
or what it will. 
You may excuse your relations. It was ever your
way to do so. But, my dear, other people must be
allowed to judge as they please. I am not their
Daughter, nor the Sister of your Brother and Sister
—I thank Heaven, I am not. 
But if you are displeased with me for the freedoms
I took so long ago as you mention, I am afraid, if
you knew what passed upon an application I made to
your Sister very lately (in hopes to procure you the
absolution your heart is so much set upon) that you
would be still more concerned. But they have been
even with me—But I must not tell you all. I hope,
however, that these Unforgivers [my Mother is
among them] were always good, dutiful, passive
children to their parents. 
Once more, forgive me. I owned I was too warm. 
But I have no example to the contrary, but from
You: And the treatment you meet with is very little
encouragement to me to endeavour to imitate you in
your dutiful meekness. 
You leave it to me, to give a negative to the
hopes of the noble family, whose only disgrace is,
that so very vile a man is so nearly related to them. 
But yet—Alas! my dear, I am so fearful of consequences,
so selfishly fearful, if this negative must be
given—I don't know what I should say—But give 

me leave to suspend, however, this negative, till I
hear from you again. 
This earnest courtship of you into their splendid
family is so very honourable to you—They so justly
admire you—You must have had such a noble triumph
over the base man—He is so much in earnest— 
The world knows so much of the unhappy affair— 
You may do still so much good—Your will is so inviolate
—Your relations are so implacable—Think,
my dear, and re-think. 
And let me leave you to do so, while I give you the
occasion of the flutter I mentioned at the beginning of
this Letter; in the conclusion of which you will find
the obligation I have consented to lay myself under,
to refer this important point once more to your discussion,
before I give, in your name, the negative
that cannot, when given, be with honour to yourself
repented of or recalled. 
* *
Know then, my dear, that I accompanied my
Mother to Colonel Ambrose's, on the occasion I
mentioned to you in my former. Many Ladies and
Gentlemen were there whom you know; particularly
Miss Kitty D'Oily, Miss Lloyd, Miss Biddy
D'Ollyffe, Miss Biddulph, and their respective admirers,
with the Colonel's two Nieces, fine women
both; besides many whom you know not; for they
were strangers to me, but by name. A splendid
company, and all pleased with one another, till Colonel
Ambrose introduced one, who, the moment he
was brought into the great hall, set the whole Assembly
into a kind of agitation. 
It was your villain. 
I thought I should have sunk, as soon as I set my
eyes upon him. My Mother was also affected; and,
coming to me, Nancy, whispered she, can you bear
the sight of that wretch without too much emotion? 
—If not, withdraw into the next apartment. 

I could not remove. Every-body's eyes were
glanced from him to me. I sat down, and fanned
myself, and was forced to order a glass of water. O
that I had the eye the Basilisk is reported to have,
thought I, and that his life were within the power of
it! —Directly would I kill him. 
He entered with an air so hateful to me, but so
agreeable to every other eye, that I could have looked
him dead for that too. 
After the general salutations, he singled out Mr.
Hickman, and told him, He had recollected some
parts of his behaviour to him when he saw him last,
which had made him think himself under obligation
to his patience and politeness. 
And so, indeed, he was. 
Miss D'Oily, upon his complimenting her, among
a knot of Ladies, asked him, in their hearing, How
Miss Clarissa Harlowe did? 
He heard, he said, you were not so well as he
wished you to be, and as you deserved to be. 
O Mr. Lovelace, said she, what have you to answer
for, on that young Lady's account, if all be true
that I have heard? 
I have a great deal to answer for, said the unblushing
villain: But that dear Lady has so many excellencies,
and so much delicacy, that little Sins are
great ones in her eye. 
Little Sins! replied Miss D'Oily: Mr. Lovelace's
character is so well known, that nobody believes he
can commit little Sins. 
You are very good to me, Miss D'Oily. 
Indeed I am not. 
Then I am the only person to whom you re not
very good: And so I am the less obliged to you. 
He turned, with an unconcerned air, to Miss
Playford, and made her some genteel compliments. 
I believe you know her not. She visits his Cousins
Montague. Indeed, he had something in his specious 

manner to say to every-body: And this too soon
quieted the disgust each person had at his entrance. 
I still kept my seat, and he either saw me not, or
would not yet see me; and addressing himself to my
Mother, taking her unwilling hand, with an air of
high assurance, I am glad to see you here, Madam. 
I hope Miss Howe is well. I have reason to complain
greatly of her: But hope to owe to her the
highest obligation that can be laid on man. 
My Daughter, Sir, is accustomed to be too warm
and too zealous in her friendships for either my tranquility,
or her own. 
There had indeed been some late occasion given for
mutual displeasure between my Mother and me: But
I think she might have spared this to him; tho' nobody
heard it I believe but the person to whom it was
spoken, and the Lady who told it to me; for my Mother
spoke it low. 
We are not wholly, Madam, to live for ourselves,
said the vile hypocrite. It is not every one who has
a Soul capable of friendship: And what a heart must
that be, which can be insensible to the interests of a
suffering friend? 
This sentiment from Mr. Lovelace's mouth! said
my Mother—Forgive me, Sir; but you can have no
end, surely, in endeavouring to make me think as
well of you as some innocent creatures have thought
of you, to their cost. 
She would have flung from him. But, detaining
her hand—Less severe, dear Madam, said he, be less
severe, in this place, I beseech you. You will allow,
that a very faulty person may see his errors; and
when he does, and owns them, and repents, should
he not be treated mercifully? 
You are, Sir, seems not to be that of a penitent. 
But the place may as properly excuse this subject, as
what you call my severity. 
But, dearest Madam, permit me to say, that I 

hope for your interest with your charming Daughter
(was his sycophant word) to have it put into my
power to convince all the world, that there never was
a truer penitent. And why, why this anger, dear
Madam? (for she struggled to get her hand out of
his) these violent airs—so maidenly! [Impudent fellow!] 
—May I not ask, if Miss Howe be here? 
She would not have been here, replied my Mother,
had she known whom she had been to see. 
And is she here, then? —Thank Heaven! —He
disengaged her hand, and stept forward into company. 
Dear Miss Lloyd, said he, with an air (taking her
hand, as he quitted my Mother's) tell me, tell me, is
Miss Arabella Harlowe here? Or will she be here? 
I was informed she would—And this, and the opportunity
of paying my compliments to your friend Miss
Howe, were great inducements with me to attend the
Colonel. 
Superlative assurance! Was it not, my dear? 
Miss Arabella Harlowe, excuse me, Sir, said Miss
Lloyd, would be very little inclined to meet you here,
or any-where else. 
Perhaps so, my dear Miss Lloyd: But, perhaps,
for that very reason, I am more desirous to see her. 
Miss Harlowe, Sir, said Miss Biddulph, with a
threatening air, will hardly be here without her Brother. 
I imagine, if one come, both will come. 
Heaven grant they both may! said the wretch. 
Nothing, Miss Biddulph, shall begin from me to disturb
this Assembly, I assure you, if they do. One
calm half-hour's conversation with that Brother and
Sister, would be a most fortunate opportunity to me,
in presence of the Colonel and his Lady, or whom
else they should chuse. 
Then turning round, as if desirous to find out the
one or the other, or both, he 'spied me, and, with a
very low bow, approached me. 

I was all in a flutter, you may suppose. He would
have taken my hand. I refused it, all glowing with
indignation: Every-body's eye upon us. 
I went from him to the other end of the room,
and sat down, as I thought, out of his hated sight: 
But presently I heard his odious voice, whispering,
behind my chair (he leaning upon the back of it, with
impudent unconcern) Charming Miss Howe! looking
over my shoulder: One request—I started up from
my seat; but could hardly stand neither, for very indignation
—O this sweet, but becoming disdain! whispered
on the insufferable creature—I am sorry to give
you all this emotion: But either here, or at your
own house, let me entreat from you one quarter of
an hour's audience. —I beseech you, Madam, but
one quarter of an hour, in any of the adjoining apartments. 
Not for a kingdom, fluttering my fan. —I knew not
what I did. —But I could have killed him. 
We are so much observed—Else on my knees, my
dear Miss Howe, would I beg your interest with your
charming friend. 
She'll have nothing to say to you. 
I had not then your Letters, my dear. 
Killing words! —But indeed I have deserved them,
and a dagger in my heart besides. I am so conscious
of my demerits, that I have no hope, but in your interposition
—Could I owe that favour to Miss Howe's
mediation, which I cannot hope for on any other account— 
My mediation, vilest of men!—My mediation!—I
abhor you! —From my soul, I abhor you, vilest of
men! —Three or four times I repeated these words,
stammering too. —I was excessively fluttered. 
You can call me nothing, Madam, so bad as I
will call myself. I have been, indeed, the vilest of
men: But now I am not so. Permit me—Every-body's
eyes are upon us!—but one moment's audience 

—To exchange but ten words with you, dearest
Miss Howe—in whose presence you please—for your
dear friend's sake—but ten words with you in the
next apartment. 
It is an insult upon me, to presume, that I would
exchange one with you, if I could help it! —Out of
my way! —Out of my sight—fellow! 
And away I would have flung: But he took my
hand. I was excessively disordered. —Every-body's
eyes more and more intent upon us. 
Mr. Hickman, whom my Mother had drawn on
one side, to enjoin him a patience, which perhaps
needed not to have been enforced, came up just then,
with my Mother, who had him by his leading-strings
—By his sleeve, I should say. 
Mr. Hickman, said the bold wretch, be my advocate
but for ten words in the next apartment with
Miss Howe, in your presence, and in yours, Madam,
to my Mother. 
Hear, Nancy, what he has to say to you. To
get rid of him, hear his ten words. 
Excuse me, Madam! His very breath—Unhand
me, Sir! 
He sighed and looked—O how the practised villain
sighed and looked! He then let go my hand,
with such a reverence in his manner, as brought blame
upon me from some, that I would not hear him. — 
And this incensed me the more. O my dear, this
man is a devil! This man is indeed a devil! —So
much patience, when he pleases! So much gentleness! 
—Yet so resolute, so persisting, so audacious! 
I was going out of the Assembly in great disorder. 
He was at the door as soon as I. 
How kind this is! said the wretch; and, ready to
follow me, opened the door for me. 
I turned back, upon this; and, not knowing what
I did, snapped my fan just in his face, as he turned
short upon me; and the powder flew from his wig. 

Every-body seemed as much pleased, as I was
vexed. 
He turned to Mr. Hickman, nettled at the powder
flying, and at the smiles of the company upon him; 
Mr. Hickman, you will be one of the happiest men
in the world, because you are a good man, and will
do nothing to provoke this passionate Lady; and
because she has too much good sense to be provoked
without reason: But else, the Lord have mercy upon
you! 
This man, this Mr. Hickman, my dear, is too
meek for a man. Indeed he is. —But my patient
Mother twits me, that her passionate Daughter ought
to like him the better for that. But meek men abroad
are not always meek men at home. I have observed
that in more instances than one: And if they were,
I should not, I verily think, like them the better for
being so. 
He then turned to my Mother, resolved to be even
with her too: Where, good Madam, could Miss get
all this spirit? 
The company round smiled; for I need not tell
you, that my Mother's high-spiritedness is pretty well
known; and she, sadly vexed, said, Sir, you treat me,
as you do the rest of the world—But— 
I beg pardon, Madam, interrupted he: I might
have spared my question—And instantly (I retiring to
the other end of the hall) he turned to Miss Playford: 
What would I give, Miss, to hear you sing
that song you obliged us with at Lord M's? 
He then, as if nothing had happened, fell into a
conversation with her, and Miss D'Ollyffe, upon
music; and whisperingly sung to Miss Playford,
holding her two hands, with such airs of genteel unconcern,
that it vexed me not a little, to look round,
and see how pleased half the giddy fools of our Sex
were with him notwithstanding his notorious wicked
character. To this it is, that such vile fellows owe 

much of their vileness; whereas, if they found themselves
shunned, and despised, and treated as beasts
of prey, as they are, they would run to their caverns; 
there howl by themselves; and none but such
as sad accident, or unpitiable presumption, threw in
their way, would suffer by them. 
He afterwards talked very seriously, at times, to
Mr. Hickman: At times, I say; for it was with such
breaks and starts of gaiety, turning to this Lady, and
to that, and then to Mr. Hickman again, resuming a
serious or a gay air at pleasure, that he took every-body's
eye, the womens especially; who were full
of their whispering admirations of him, qualified with
If's, and But's, and What pity's, and such sort of
stuff, that shewed in their very dispraises too much
liking. 
Well may our Sex be the sport and ridicule of
such Libertines! Unthinking eye-governed creatures! 
—Would not a little reflection teach us, that a man
of merit must be a man of modesty, because a diffident
one? And that such a wretch as this must have
taken his degrees in wickedness, and gone thro' a
course of vileness, before he could arrive at this impenetrable
effrontery? An effrontery which can proceed
only from the light opinion he has of us, and
the high one of himself. 
But our Sex are generally modest and bashful themselves,
and are too apt to consider that which in the
main is their principal grace, as a defect: And finely
do they judge, when they think of supplying that defect
by chusing a man who cannot be ashamed. 
His discourse to Mr. Hickman turned upon you,
and his acknowleged injuries of you; tho' he could so
lightly start from the subject, and return to it. 
I have no patience with such a devil—Man he cannot
be called. To be sure he would behave in the
same manner any-where, or in any presence, even at
the Altar itself, if a woman were with him there. 

It shall ever be a rule with me, that he who does
not regard a woman with some degree of reverence,
will look upon her and occasionally treat her with
contempt. 
He had the confidence to offer to take me out; 
but I absolutely refused him, and shunned him all I
could, putting on the most contemptuous airs: But
nothing could mortify him. 
I wished twenty times I had not been there. 
The gentlemen were as ready as I to wish he had
broken his neck, rather than been present, I believe: 
For nobody was regarded but he. So little of the
top; yet so elegant and rich in his dress: His person
so specious: His air so intrepid: So much meaning
and penetration in his face: So much gaiety, yet so
little of the monkey: Tho' a travelled gentleman, yet
no affectation; no mere toupet-man; but all manly; 
and his courage and wit, the one so known, the other
so dreaded, you must think the petits-maîtres (of
which there were four or five present) were most deplorably
off in his company: And one grave gentleman
observed to me (pleased to see me shun him as I
did) that the poet's observation was too true, That
the generality of Ladies were Rakes in their hearts,
or they could not be so much taken with a man who
had so notorious a character. 
I told him, The reflection both of the poet and
applier was much too general, and made with more
ill-nature than good manners. 
When the wretch saw how industriously I avoided
him (shifting from one part of the hall to another) he
at last boldly stept up to me, as my Mother and Mr.
Hickman were talking to me; and thus before them
accosted me: 
I beg your pardon, Madam; but, by your Mother's
leave, I must have a few moments conversation
with you, either here, or at your own house; 
and I beg you will give me the opportunity. 

Nancy, said my Mother, hear what he has to say
to you. In my presence you may: And better in the
adjoining apartment, if it must be, than to come to
you at our own house. 
I retired to one corner of the hall, my Mother
following me, and he, taking Mr. Hickman under
the arm, following her—Well, Sir, said I, what
have you to say? —Tell me here. 
I have been telling Mr. Hickman, said he, how
much I am concerned for the injuries I have done to
the most excellent woman in the world: And yet,
that she obtained such a glorious triumph over me
the last time I had the honour to see her, as, with
my penitence, ought to have abated her former
resentments: But that I will, with all my Soul, enter
into any measures to obtain her forgiveness of me. 
My Cousins Montague have told you this. Lady
Betty, and Lady Sarah, and my Lord M. are engaged
for my honour. I know your power with the
dear creature. My Cousins told me, you gave them
hopes you would use it in my behalf. My Lord M.
and his two Sisters are impatiently expecting the fruits
of it. You must have heard from her before now: 
I hope you have. And will you be so good, as to
tell me, if I may have any hopes? 
If I must speak on this subject, Let me tell you,
that you have broken her heart. You know not the
value of the Lady you have injured. You deserve her
not. And she despises you, as she ought. 
Dear Miss Howe, mingle not passion with denunciations
so severe. I must know my fate. I will go
abroad once more, if I find her absolutely irreconcileable. 
But I hope she will give me leave to attend
upon her, to know my doom from her own mouth. 
It would be death immediate for her to see you. 
And what must You be, to be able to look her in the
face? 
I then reproached him (with vehemence enough 

you may believe) on his baseness, and the evils he
had made you suffer: The distress he had reduced
you to: All your friends made your enemies: The vile
house he had carried you to: Hinted at his villainous
arts; the dreadful Arrest: And told him of your present
deplorable illness, and resolution to die rather
than to have him. 
He vindicated not any part of his conduct, but
that of the Arrest; and so solemnly protested his sorrow
for his usage of you, accusing himself in the
freest manner, and by deserved appellations, that I
promised to lay before you this part of our conversation. 
And now you have it. 
My Mother, as well as Mr. Hickman, believes,
from what passed on this occasion, that he is touched
in conscience for the wrongs he has done you: But,
by his whole behaviour, I must own, it seems to me,
that nothing can touch him for half an hour together. 
Yet I have no doubt, that he would willingly marry
you; and it piques his pride, I could see, that he should
be denied: As it did mine, that such a wretch had
dared to think it in his power to have such a woman
whenever he pleased; and that it must be accounted a
condescension, and matter of obligation (by all his
own family at least) that he would vouchsafe to think
of Marriage. 
Now, my dear, you have before you the reason
why I suspend the decisive Negative to the Ladies of
his family: My Mother, Miss Lloyd, and Miss Biddulph,
who were inquisitive after the subject of our
retired conversation, and whose curiosity I thought it
was right, in some degree, to gratify (especially as
those young Ladies are of our select acquaintance)
are all of opinion, that you should be his. 
You will let Mr. Hickman know your whole
mind; and when he acquaints me with it, I will tell
you all my own. 

Mean time, may the news he will bring me of
the state of your health, be favourable! prays, with
the utmost fervency, 
Your ever-faithful and affectionate
Anna Howe. 