



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Friday, April 14. 
Thou hast often reproached me, Jack, with
my vanity, without distinguishing the humorous
turn that accompanies it; and for which, at the same
time that thou robbest me of the merit of it, thou admirest
me highly. Envy gives thee the indistinction: 
Nature inspires the admiration: Unknown to thyself
it inspires it. But thou art too clumsy and too short-sighted
a mortal, to know how to account even for
the impulses by which thou thyself art moved. 
Well, but this acquits thee not of my charge of vanity,
Lovelace, methinks thou sayst: 
And true thou sayst: For I have indeed a confounded
parcel of it. But, if men of parts may not
be allowed to be vain, who should? And yet, upon
second thoughts, men of parts have the least occasion
of any to be vain; since the world [so few of them are
there in it] are ready to find them out, and extol
them. If a fool can be made sensible, that there is a
man who has more understanding than himself, he is
ready enough to conclude, that such a man must be a
very extraordinary creature. 

And what, at this rate, is the general conclusion to
be drawn from the premises? —Is it not, That no man
ought to be vain? But what if a man can't help it? — 
This, perhaps, may be my case. But there is nothing
on which I value myself so much as upon my inventions. 
And, for the soul of me, I cannot help letting
it be seen, that I do. Yet this vanity may be a means,
perhaps, to overthrow me with this sagacious lady. 
She is very apprehensive of me, I see. I have studied
before her and Miss Howe, as often as I have
been with them, to pass for a giddy thoughtless fellow. 
What a folly then to be so expatiatingly sincere,
in my answer to her home Put, upon the noises within
the garden? —But such success having attended that
contrivance [Success, Jack, has blown many a man
up!], my cursed vanity got uppermost, and kept down
my caution. The menace to have secreted Solmes,
and that other, that I had thoughts to run away with
her foolish brother, and of my project to revenge her
upon the two servants, so much terrified my beloved,
that I was forced to sit down to muse how to retrieve
myself with her. 
Some favourable incidents, at the time, tumbled in
from my agent in her family; at least such as I was
determined to make favourable: And therefore I desired
admittance; and this before she could resolve
any thing against me; that is to say, while her admiration
of my intrepidity kept resolution in suspense. 
Accordingly, I prepared myself to be all gentleness,
all obligingness, all serenity; and as I have now-and-then,
and always had, more or less, good motions
pop up in my mind, I encouraged and collected
every thing of this sort that I had ever had from novicehood
to maturity, [not long in recollecting, Jack!]
in order to bring the dear creature into good humour
with me: And who knows, thought I, if I can hold
it, and proceed, but I may be able to lay a foundation 

fit to build my grand scheme upon? —Love, thought
I, is not naturally a doubter: Fear is: I will try to
banish the latter: Nothing then but Love will remain. 
Credulity is the God of Love's prime minister; and
they never are asunder. 
He then acquaints his friend with what passed between
him and the Lady, in relation to his advices from
Harlowe-Place, and to his proposal about lodgings,
pretty much to the same purpose as in hers
preceding. 
When he comes to mention his proposal of the Windsor
lodgings, thus he expresses himself. 
Now, Belford, can it enter into thy leaden head,
what I meant by this proposal? —I know it cannot. 
And so I'll tell thee. 
To leave her for a day or two, with a view to serve
her by my absence, would, as I thought, look like
confiding in her favour. —I could not think of leaving
her, thou knowest, while I had reason to believe her
friends would pursue us; and I began to apprehend,
that she would suspect, that I made a pretence of that
intentional pursuit, to keep about her, and with her. 
But now that they had declared against it, and that
they would not receive her, if she came back again
[a declaration she had better hear first from me, than
from Miss Howe, or any other]; what should hinder
me from giving her this mark of my obedience; especially
as I could leave Will, who is a clever fellow,
and can do any thing but write and spell, and my
uncle's Jonas [not as guards, to be sure, but as attendants
only]; the latter to be dispatch'd to me occasionally
by the former, whom I could acquaint with
my motions? 
Then I wanted to inform myself, why I had not
congratulatory letters from my aunts, and from my
cousins Montague, to whom I had written, glorying
in my beloved's escape; which letters, as they should 

be worded, might possibly be made necessary to shew,
as matters proceed. 
As to Windsor, I had no design to carry her particularly
thither: But somewhere it was proper to name,
as she condescended to ask my advice about it. London,
I durst not; but very cautiously; and so as to
make it her own option: For I must tell thee, that
there is such a perverseness in the sex, that, when they
ask your advice, they do it only to know your opinion,
that they may oppose it; tho', had not the thing in
question been your choice, perhaps it had been theirs. 
I could easily give reasons against Windsor, after I
had pretended to be there; and this would have looked
the better, as it was a place of my own nomination; 
and shewn her, that I had no fixed scheme. —Never
was there in woman such a sagacious, such an all-alive
apprehension, as in this. —Yet it is a grievous thing to
an honest man to be suspected. 
Then, in my going or return, I can call upon Mrs.
Greme. She and my beloved had a great deal of talk
together. If I knew what it was about; and that
Either, upon their first acquaintance, was for benefiting
herself by the Other, I might contrive to serve
them both, without hurting myself: For these are the
most prudent ways of doing friendships, and what are
not followed by regrets, tho' the serve-ed should prove
ingrateful. Then Mrs. Greme corresponds by pen
and ink with her farmer sister, where we are: Something
may possibly arise that way, either of a convenient
nature, which I may pursue; or an inconvenient,
which I may avoid. 
Always be careful of back-doors, is a maxim with me
in all my exploits. Whoever knows me, knows that
I am no proud man. I can talk as familiarly to servants
as to principals, when I have a mind to make it
worth their while to oblige me in any thing. —Then
servants are but as the common soldiers in an army: 

They do all the mischief; frequently without malice,
and merely, good souls! for mischief-sake. 
I am most apprehensive about Miss Howe. She
has a confounded deal of wit, and wants only a
subject, to shew as much roguery: And should I
be out-witted, with all my sententious, boasting conceit
of my own nostrum-mongership—[I love to plague
thee, who art a pretender to accuracy, and a surface-skimmer
in learning, with out-of-the-way words and
phrases] I should certainly hang, drown, or shoot
myself. 
Poor Hickman! —I pity him for the prospect lie has
with such a virago! —But the fellow's a fool, God
wot! And now I think of it, it is absolutely necessary
for complete happiness in the marry'd state, that
one should be a fool; an argument I once held with
this very Miss Howe. —But then the fool should
know that he is so, else the obstinate one will disappoint
the wise one. 
But my agent Joseph has help'd me to secure this
quarter. 