


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 
[The Letter which Miss Byron refused to read, or hear read.] 


Friday Night, Mar. 17. 
I Hope my Lord L. and my sisters will be able
to make Colnebrooke so agreeable to Miss Byron, 

that I may have the pleasure of finding her there in
the beginning of the week. 
My Lord W. is in town. He has invited me to
dine with him to-morrow; and must not be denied,
was a part of his message, brought me by Halden his
steward, who says, That his lordship has something of
consequence to consult me upon. 
When, my dear friend, shall I find time for myself? 
Pray make my compliments to my Lord L. and to
my three sisters; and tell them from me, that when I
have the happiness of being in their company, then it
is that I think I give time to myself. 
I have a letter from Bologna: From the faithful
Camilla. The contents of it give me great concern. 
She urges me to make one more visit there. She tells
me, that the Bishop said in her hearing, it would be
kind, if I would. Where such a visit to be requested generally;
and it were likely to be of service; you may
believe that I would chearfully make it. 
I should go, for a fortnight at least, to Grandison-hall. 
Burgess has let me know, that the workmen
have gone almost as far as they can go without my
farther orders. And the churchwardens have signified
to me, that the church is completely beautified, according
to my directions; so that it will be ready to
be opened on the Sunday after next, at farthest; and
intreat my presence, both as patron, and benefactor. 
I will now hasten my designed alterations at the Hall. 
I had rather not be present at the opening. Yet
the propriety of my being there will probably prevail
upon me to comply with the intreaties of the churchwardens; 
who in their letter signify the expectations
of Sir Samuel Clarke, Sir William Turner, and Mr.
Barnham, of seeing me, and my sister Charlotte. 
You will be pleased to mention this to her. 
I wish, without putting a slight upon good Mr.
Dobson, that you, my dear friend, could oblige us
with the first sermon. All then would be decent, and 

worthy of the occasion; and the praise would be given
properly, and not to the agent. But as it would be a
little mortifying to Mr. Dobson (of whose praise only
I am apprehensive) so much as to hint such a wish, I
will write to him, that he will oblige me if he say
not one word, that shall carry the eyes of the audience
to my seat. 
The execution of the orders I gave, that five other
pews should be equally distinguished and ornamented
with mine, carries not with it the appearance of affectation; 
does it, my good Dr. Bartlett? especially
as so many considerable families have seats there? 
I would not seem guilty of a false modesty, which,
breaking out into singularity, would give the suspicion
of a wrong direction, in cases where it may be of use
to suppose a right one. 
What can I do in relation to my Emily? She is of
the stature of woman. She ought, according to the
present taste, to be introduced into public life. I am
not fond of that life. And what knowlege she will
gain by the introduction, she had better be without. 
Yet I think we should conform something to the taste
of the times in which we live. Women's minds have
generally a lighter turn than those of men. They
should be innocently indulged. And on this principle
it was, that last winter I attended her, and my sisters,
very often to the places of public entertainment; 
that she, having seen every-thing that was the general
subject of polite conversation, might judge of
such entertainments as they deserve; and not add expectation
(which runs very high in young minds, and
is seldom answered) to the ideal scenes. This indulgence
answered as I wish. Emily can now hear talk
of the emulation of actors and managers, and of the
other public diversions, with tranquillity; and be satisfied,
as she reads, with representing over again to
herself the parts in which the particular actors excelled. 
And thus a boundary is set to her imagination; and 

that by her own choice; for she thinks lightly of
them, when she can be obliged by the company of my
two sisters and Lord L. 
But new scenes will arise, in an age so studious as
this, to gratify the eye and the ear. From these a
young woman of fortune must not be totally excluded. 
I am a young man; and as Emily is so well grown
for her years, I think I cannot so properly he her introducer
to them, as I might, were I fifteen or twenty
years older. 
I live to my own heart; and I know (I think I do)
that it is not a bad one: But as I cannot intend anything
with regard to my Emily, I must, for her sake,
be more observant of the world's opinion, than I hope
I need to be for my own. You have taught me, that
it is not good manners to despise the world's opinion,
tho' we should regard it only in the second place. 
Emily has too large a fortune. I have an high opinion
of her discretion. But she is but a girl. Womens
eyes are wanderers: And too often bring home
guests that are very troublesome to them, and whom,
once introduced, they cannot get out of the house. 
I wish she had only ten thousand pounds. She
would then stand a better chance for happiness, than
she can do, I doubt, with five times ten; and would
have five persons, to one that she has now, to choose
out of: For how few are there who can make proposals
to the father or guardian of a girl who has
50,000l? 
Indeed there are not wanting in our sex forward
spirits, who will think that sum not too much for
their merits, tho' they may not deserve 5000l. nor
even one. And hence arises the danger of a woman
of great fortune from those who will not dare to make
proposals to a guardian. After an introduction (and
how easy is that now made, at public places!) a woman
of the greatest fortune is but a woman, and is to
be attacked, and prevailed upon, by the same methods 

which succeed with a person of the slenderest; 
and perhaps is won with equal, if not with greater
ease; since, if the lady has a little romance in her
head, and her Lover a great deal of art and flattery,
she will call that romantic turn generosity, and, thinking
she can lay the man who has obtained her attention,
under obligation, she will meet him her full halfway. 
Emily is desirous to be constantly with us. My
sister is very obliging. I know she will comply with
whatever I shall request of her, in relation to Emily. 
But where the reputation of a lady is concerned, a
man should not depend too much upon his own character,
especially a young man, be it ever so unexceptionable. 
Her mother has already given out foolish
hints. She demands her daughter. The unhappy
woman has no regard to truth. Her own character
lost, and so deservedly, will she have any tenderness
for that of Emily? Who will scruple to believe, what
a mother, tho' ever so wicked, will report of her
daughter under twenty, and her guardian under thirty,
if they live constantly together? Her guardian, at the
same time, carrying his heart in his countenance,
and loving the girl; though with as much innocence
as if she were his sister. Once I had thoughts of
craving the assistance of the Court of Chancery for the
protection of her person and fortune: But an hint of
this nature distressed her for many days, unknown to
me. Had I been acquainted that she took it so heavily,
I would not have made her unhappy for one day. 
I have looked out among the quality for a future
husband for her: But, where can I find one with whom
I think she will be happy? There are many who
would be glad of her fortune. As I said, her fortune
is too large. It is enough to render every man's address
to her suspected; and to make a guardian apprehensive,
that her person, agreeable as it is, and
every day improving, and her mind opening to advantage 

every hour of her life, would be but the second,
if the second, view of a man professing to love
her. And were she to marry, what a damp would
the slights of an husband give to the genius of a young
lady, whose native modesty would always make her
want encouragement! 
I have also cast an eye over the gentry within my
knowlege: But have not met with one whom I could
wish to be the husband of my Emily. So tender, so
gentle, so ductile, as she is, a fierce, a rash, an indelicate,
even a careless or indifferent man, would
either harden her heart, or shorten her life: And as
the latter would be much more easy to be effected than
the former, what must she suffer before she could return
indifference for disrespect; and reach the quiet
end of it! 
See what a man Sir Walter Watkyns is! My sister
only could deal with such an one. A superiority in
her so visible, he must fear her: Yet a generosity so
great, and a dignity so conspicuous, in her whole behaviour,
as well as countenance, he must love her:
Every-body's respect to her, would oblige love and
reverence from him. But my weak-hearted, diffident
Emily, what would she do with such a man? 
What would she do with a Sir Hargrave Pollexfen? 
What with such a man, as Mr. Greville, as Sir Hargrave
describes him? I mention these men; for are
not there many such? 
I am not apt to run into grave declamations against
the times: And yet, by what I have seen abroad, and
now lately since my arrival, at home, and have heard
from men of greater observation, and who have lived
longer in the world, than I have, I cannot but think,
that Englishmen are not what they were. A wretched
effeminacy seems to prevail among them. Marriage
itself is every day more and more out of fashion; and
even virtuous women give not the institution so much
of their countenance, as to discourage by their contempt 

the free-livers. A good woman, as such, has
therefore but few chances for happiness in marriage. 
Yet shall I not endeavour, the more endeavour, to
save and serve my Emily? 
I have one encouragement, since my happy acquaintance
with Miss Byron, to think that the age is
not entirely lost to a sense of virtue and goodness. See
we not how every-body reveres her? Even a Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen, a Greville, a Fenwick, men of free
lives, adore her. And at the same time she meets
with the love of all good men, and the respect of
women, whether gay or serious. But I am afraid,
that the first attraction with men, is her beauty. I
am afraid, that few see in that admirable young lady
what I see in her: A mind great and noble: A sincerity
beyond that of women: A goodness unaffected,
and which shews itself in action, and not merely in
words, and outward appearance: A wit lively and
inoffensive: And an understanding solid and useful:
All which render her a fit companion, either in the
social or contemplative hour: And yet she thinks
herself not above the knowlege of those duties, the
performance of which makes an essential of the female
character. 
But I am not giving a character of Miss Byron to
you, my good Dr. Bartlett, who admire her as much
as I do. 
Do you think it impossible for me to procure for
my Emily such a guardian and companion as Miss Byron,
on her return to Northamptonshire, would make
her? —Such worthy relations as she would introduce
her to, would be a further happiness to my ward. 
I am far from undervaluing my sister's good
qualities: But if Emily lives with her, she must
live also with me. Indeed the affairs in which I am
engaged for other people (if I may call those who
have a claim upon me for every instance of my friendship,
other people) will occasion me to be often absent. 

But still, while Grandison-hall, and St. James's
Square, are the visible places of residence equally of
the guardian and ward, Emily's mother will tell the
world, that we live together. 
Miss Jervois does not choose to return to Mrs.
Lane; and indeed I don't think, she would be safe
there in a family of women, tho' very worthy ones,
from the attempts of one of the sex, who, having
brought her into the world, calls herself her mother; 
and especially now that the unhappy woman has begun
to be troublesome there. I beg of you, therefore,
my dear Dr. Bartlett, who know more of my
heart and situation than any one living (my dear
Beauchamp excepted) to consider what I have written,
and give me your opinion of that part of it,
which relates to Miss Byron and Emily. 
I was insensibly drawing myself in to enumerate
the engagements, which at present press most upon
me. Let me add to the subject—I must soon go to
Paris, in order finally to settle such of the affairs of
my late worthy friend, as cannot be so well done by
any other hand. The three thousand pounds, which
he has directed to be disposed of to charitable uses, in
France as well as in England, at the discretion of his
executor, is one of them. 
Perhaps equity will allow me to add to this limited
sum from what will remain in my hands after the
establishment of the nephews and niece. As they are
young, and brought up with the hope that they will
make a figure in the world by their diligence, I would
not, by any means, make them independent on that. 
The whole estate, divided among them, would not
be sufficient to answer that purpose happily, tho' it
might be enough to abate the edge of their industry. 
The charity that I am most intent upon promoting
in France, and in England too, is, that of giving little
fortunes to young maidens in marriage with honest
men of their own degree, who might, from such an 

outsetting, begin the world, as it is called, with some
hope of success. 
By this time, my dear Dr. Bartlett, you will guess
that I have a design upon you. It is, that you will
assist me in executing the Will of my late friend. 
Make enquiries after, and recommend to me, objects
worthy of relief. You was very desirous, some time
ago, to retire to the Hall: But I knew not how to
spare you; and I hoped to attend you thither. You
shall now set out for that place as soon as you please. 
And that neither may be (or as little as possible) losers
by the separation, every-thing that we would say to
each other, were we together, that, as we used to do,
we will say by pen and ink. We will be joint executors,
in the first place, for this sum of 3000l. 
Make enquiries then, as soon as you get down, for
worthy objects—The industrious poor, of all persuasions,
reduced either by age, infirmity, or accident; 
Those who labour under incurable maladies; 
Youth, of either sex, capable of beginning the world
to advantage, but destitute of the means; These, in
particular, are the objects we both think worthy of
assistance. You shall take 500l. down with you, for
a beginning. 
It is my pride, it is my glory, that I can say, Dr.
Bartlett and Charles Grandison, on all benevolent
occasions, are actuated by one soul. My dear friend,
adieu. 

