



In Answer to the preceding. 


Dear Pamela,
Your Letter was indeed a great Trouble,
and some Comfort, to me and your poor
Mother. We are troubled, to be sure, for
your good Lady's Death, who took such Care
of you, and gave you Learning, and for Three
or Four Years past has always been giving you
Cloaths and Linen, and every thing that a Gentlewoman
need not be asham'd to appear in. 
But our chief Trouble is, and indeed a very
great one, for fear you should be brought to
any thing dishonest or wicked, by being set so
above yourself. Every body talks how you
have come on, and what a genteel Girl you are; 
and some say, you are very pretty; and indeed,
Six Months since, when I saw you last, I should
have thought so myself, if you was not our
Child. But what avails all this, if you are to
be ruin'd and undone! —Indeed, my dear
Pamela, we begin to be in great Fear for you; 
for what signify all the Riches in the World,
with a bad Conscience, and to be dishonest? 
We are, 'tis true, very poor, and find it hard
enough to live; tho' once, as you know, it was
better with us. But we would sooner live
upon the Water, and, if possible, the Clay of
the Ditches I contentedly dig, than live better
at the Price of our dear Child's Ruin. 

I hope the good 'Squire has no Design; but
when he has given you so much Money, and
speaks so kindly to you, and praises your coming
on; and Oh! that frightful Word, that he
would be kind to you, if you would do as you
should do, almost kills us with Fears. 
I have spoken to good old Widow Mumford
about it, who, you know, has formerly
lived in good Families; and she puts us in some
Comfort; for she says, it is not unusual, when a
Lady dies, to give what she has about her Person,
to her Waiting-maid, and to such as sit up with
her in her Illness. But then, why should he
smile so kindly upon you? Why should he take
such a poor Girl as you by the Hand, as your
Letter says he has done twice? Why should he
stoop to read your Letter to us; and commend
your Writing and Spelling? And, why should
he give you Leave to read his Mother's Books? 
—Indeed, indeed, my dearest Child, our
Hearts ake for you; and then you seem so full
of Joy at his Goodness, so taken with his
kind Expressions, (which, truly, are very great
Favours, if he means well) that we fear— 
Yes, my dear Child, we fear—you should
be too grateful,—and reward him with that
Jewel, your Virtue, which no Riches, nor Favour,
nor any thing in this Life, can make
up to you. 
I, too, have written a long Letter; but will
say one Thing more; and that is, That in the
Midst of our Poverty and Misfortunes, we have
trusted in God's Goodness, and been honest, 

and doubt not to be happy hereafter, if we
continue to be good, tho' our Lot is hard here; 
but the Loss of our dear Child's Virtue would
be a Grief that we could not bear, and would
bring our grey Hairs to the Grave at once. 
If, then, you love us, if you wish for God's
Blessing, and your own future Happiness, we
both charge you to stand upon your Guard; and,
if you find the least Attempt made upon your
Virtue, be sure you leave every thing behind
you, and come away to us; for we had rather
see you all cover'd with Rags, and even follow
you to the Church-yard, than have it said, a
Child of ours preferr'd any worldly Conveniencies
to her Virtue. 
We accept kindly of your dutiful Present; 
but till we are out of our Pain, cannot make
use of it, for fear we should partake of the Price
of our poor Daughter's Shame: So have laid it
up in a Rag among the Thatch, over the Window,
for a while, lest we should be robbed. 
With our Blessings, and our hearty Prayers for
you, we remain, 
Your careful, but loving Father and Mother,
John and Elizabeth Andrews. 

