



My dear Miss Darnford,
At your Desire, and to oblige your honoured
Mamma, and your good Neighbours, I will
now acquaint you with the Arrival of Lady Davers,
and will write what passes between us: I will not say
worthy of Notice; for were I to do so, I should be
more brief, perhaps, by much, than you seem to expect. 
But as my Time is pretty much taken up, and I
find I shall be obliged to write a Bit now and a Bit then,
you must excuse, me if I dispense with some Forms,
which I ought to observe, when I write to one I so
dearly love; and so I will give it Journal-wise, as it
were, and have no Regard, when it would fetter or
break in upon my Freedom of Narration, to Inscription
or Subscription; but send it as I have Opportunity:
And if you please to favour me so far, as
to lend it me, after you have read the Stuff, for the
Perusal of my Father and Mother, to whom my
Duty and Promise require me to give an Account of
my Proceedings, it will save me Transcription, for
which I shall have no Time; and then you will excuse
Blots and Blurs, and I will trouble myself no further
for Apologies on that score, but this one for all. 
If you think it worth while, when they have read
it, you shall have it again. 
Wednesday Morning, Six o'Clock.
For my dear Friend permits me to rise an Hour
sooner than my Wont, that I may have Time
to scribble; for he is always pleased to see me so imploy'd,
or in Reading; often saying, when I am at
my Needle, (as his Sister once wrote)*  Your Maids 

can do this, Pamela; but they cannot write as you
can. And yet, as he tells me, when I chuse to follow
my Needle, as a Diversion from too intense
Study, as he is pleased to call it, (but, alas! I know
not what Study is, as may be easily guessed by my
hasty writing, putting down every thing as it comes)
I shall then do as I please. But you must understand
I promised at setting out, what a good Wife I'd endeavour
to make*  And every honest body should try
to be as good as their Word, you know; and such
Particulars as I then mentioned, I think I ought to
dispense with as little as possible; especially as I promised
no more than what was my Duty to perform,
if I had not promised. —But what a Preamble is
here? —Judge by it what Impertinences you may
expect as I proceed. 
Yesterday about Six in the Evening arrived here
my Lord and Lady Davers, their Nephew, and the
Countess of C. Mother of Lady Betty, whom we
did not expect, but took it for the greater Favour. 
It seems her Ladyship long'd, as she said, to see me;
and this was her principal Inducement. The two
Ladies, and their two Women, were in Lord Davers's
Coach and Six, and my Lord and his Nephew
rode on Horseback, attended with a Train of Servants. 
We had expected them to Dinner; but they
could not reach Time enough; for the Countess being
a little incommoded with her Journey, the
Coach travelled slowly. My Lady would not suffer
her Lord, nor his Nephew, to come hither before
her, tho' on Horseback, because she would be present,
she said, when his Lordship first saw me, he having
quite forgot her Mother's Pamela; that was her
Word. 

It rained when they came in; so the Coach drove
directly to the Door, Mr. B. receiving them there:
But I was in a little Sort of Flutter, which Mr. B.
observing, made me sit down in the Parlour to compose
myself. Where's Pamela? said my Lady, as
soon as she alighted in the Passage. 
I stept out, lest she should take it amiss; and she
took my Hand, and kissed me: Here, my Lady
Countess, said she, presenting me to her ––– Here's
the Girl; see if I said too much in Praise of her Person. 
The Countess saluted me with a kind Pleasure in
her Eye, and said, Indeed, Lady Davers, you have
not. 'T would have been strange, (excuse me, Mrs.
B. for I know your Story) if such a fine Flower
had not been transplanted from the Field to the Garden. 
I made no Return but by a low Court'sy to her
Ladyship's Compliment. Then Lady Davers, taking
my Hand again, presented me to her Lord: See
here, my Lord, my Mother's Pamela! ––––And see
here, my Lord, said her generous Brother, taking
my other Hand most kindly, see here your Brother's
Pamela too! 
My Lord saluted me: I do, said he to his Lady; 
I do, said he to his Brother; and I see the first Person
in her, that has exceeded my Expectation, when
every Mouth had prepared me to expect a Wonder. 
Mr. H. whom every one calls Lord Jackey, after
his Aunt's Example when she is in good Humour
with him, and who is a very young Gentleman, tho'
about as old as my best Friend, came to me next,
and said, Lovelier and lovelier, by my Life! ––––I
never saw your Peer, Madam. 
Will you excuse me, Miss, all this seeming Vanity,
for the sake of repeating exactly what passed? 

Well but, said my Lady, taking my Hand, in her
free Quality Way, which quite dashed me, and
holding it at Distance, and turning me half-round,
her Eye fixed to my Waist, Let me observe you a
little, my sweet-fac'd Girl! –––I hope I am right:––– 
I hope you will do Credit to my Brother, as he has
done you Credit. –––Why do you let her lace so tight,
Mr. B.? 
I was unable to look up, as you may believe,
Miss; my Face, all over Scarlet, was hid in my
Bosom, and I looked so silly!––– 
Ay, said my naughty Lady, you may well look
down, my good Girl: For, to talk to thee in thy
own grave Way, thou hast verify'd the Scripture,
What is done in Secret, shall be known on the Housetop. 
Dear my Lady! said I ––– for still she kept looking
at me: And her dear Brother, seeing my Confusion,
in Pity to me, press'd my blushing Face a Moment
on his generous Breast; and said, Lady Davers, you
should not be thus hard upon my dear Girl, the Moment
you see her, and before so many Witnesses:
But look up, my best Love, take your Revenge of
my Sister, and tell her, you wish her in the same
Way. 
It is so then, said my Lady: I'm glad of it with
all my Heart. I will now love you still better: but I
almost doubted it, seeing her still so slender. But if,
my good Child, you lace too tight, I'll never forgive
you. And so she gave me a Kiss of Congratulation,
as she said. 
Do you think, Miss, I did not look very silly? —My
Lord, smiling, and gazing at me from Head to Foot,
Lord Jackey grinning and laughing, like an Oaf, as
I then, in my Spite, thought. Indeed the Countess
said, incouragingly to me, but severely on Persons of
Birth, ––– Lady Davers, you are as much too teizing, 

as Mrs. B. is too bashful. But you're a happy Man,
Mr. B. that your Lady's Modesty and Bashfulness
are the only Marks by which we can judge she is not
of Quality. Lord Jackey, in the Language of some
Character in a Play, cry'd out, A palpable Hit, by
Jupiter, and laughed egregiously, running about
from one to another, repeating the same Words. 
We talked only upon common Topicks till Supper-time,
and I was all Ear, as I thought it became
me; for the Countess had by her first Compliment,
and by an Aspect as noble as intelligent, obliged me
to Silence, in Awe of a Superiority so visible; as had
Lady Davers's free, though pleasant, Raillery, which
she could not help carrying on now-and-then. Besides,
Lady Davers's Letters had given me greater
Reason to revere her Wit and Judgment, (high as
my Respect for her before had carried my Notions
of her Excellence) than I had formed to myself,
when I reflected on her passionate Temper, and such
Parts of the Conversation I had had with her Ladyship
in your Neighbourhood; which (however to
be admired) sell short of her Letters. 
When we were to sit down at Table, I looked,
suppose, a little diffidently; for I really then thought of
my Lady's Anger at the Hall, when she would not
have permitted me to sit at Table with her*  and Mr.
B. saying, Take your Place, my Dear; you keep
our Friends standing; I sat down in my usual Place. 
And my Lady said, None of your reproaching Eye,
Pamela; I know what you hint at: And every Letter
I have receiv'd from you, has help'd to make me
censure myself for my Lady-Airs, as you call 'em,
you Saucebox you: I told you, I'd Lady-Airs you
when I saw you; and you shall have it all in good
Time. 

I'm sure, said I, I shall have nothing from your Ladyship,
but what will be very agreeable: But indeed I
never meant any thing particular by that, or any
other Word that I wrote; nor could I think of any
thing but what was highly respectful to your Ladyship. 
Lord Davers was pleased to say, that it was impossible
I should either write or speak any thing that
could be taken amiss. 
Lady Davers, after Supper, and the Servants were
withdrawn, began a Discourse on Titles, and said,
Brother, I think you should hold yourself obliged to
my Lord Davers; for he has spoken to Lord S.
who made him a Visit a few Days ago, to procure
you a Baronet's Patent. Your Estate, and the Figure
you make in the World, are so considerable,
and your Family besides is so antient, that, methinks,
you should wish for some Distinction of that Sort. 
Yes, Brother, said my Lord, I did mention it to
Lord S. and told him, withal, that it was without
your Knowlege or Desire, that I spoke about it; 
and I was not very sure you would accept of it; 
but 'tis a thing your Sister has wish'd for a good
while. 
What Answer did my Lord S. make to it? said
Mr. B. 
He said, We, meaning the Ministers, I suppose,
should be glad to oblige a Gentleman of Mr. B.'s
Figure in the World; but you mention it so slightly,
that you can hardly expect Courtiers will tender it
to any Gentleman that is so indifferent about it; 
for, Lord Davers, we seldom grant Honours without
a View, I tell you that, said he, smiling. 
My Lord S. might mention this as a Jest, return'd
Mr. B. but he spoke the Truth. But your Lordship
said well, that I was indifferent about it. 'Tis true,
'tis an hereditary Title: But the rich Citizens, who 

used to be satisfy'd with the Title of Knights, (till
they made it so common, that it was brought into as
great Contempt as the*  French Knights of St. Michael,
and nobody else cared to accept of it) now
are ambitious of this; and, I take it, it is hastening
apace into like Disrepute. Besides, 'tis a novel Honour,
and what our Ancestors, who lived at its Instiution,
would never accept of. But were it a Peerage they
would give me, which has some essential Privileges
and Splendors attached to it, that would make it
desirable to some Men, I would not enter into Conditions
for it. Titles at best, added he, are but Shadows; 
and he that has the Substance should be above
valuing them; for who that has the whole Bird,
would pride himself upon a single Feather? 
But, said my Lady, altho' I acknowlege, that the
Institution is of late Date, yet as abroad, as well as
at home, it is regarded as a Title of Dignity, and it
is supposed, that the best Families among the Gentry
are of it, I should be glad you would accept of it. 
And as to Citizens being of it, they are not many; 
and some of them, or their immediate Descendants
however, have bought themselves into the Peerage
itself of the one Kingdom or the other. 
As to what it is looked upon Abroad, said Mr. B.
that is of no Weight at all; for when an Englishman
travels, be he of what Degree he will, if he has an
Equipage, and squanders his Money away, he is a
Lord of course with Foreigners: And therefore Sir
Such-a-one is rather a Diminution to him, as it fixes
him down to a lower Title than his Vanity would
perhaps make him aspire to be thought in the Possession
of. Then, as to Citizens, in a Trading Nation
like this, I am not displeased in the main, with seeing 

the overgrown ones creeping into nominal Honours; 
and we have so many of our first Titled Families
who have ally'd themselves to Trade, (whose
Inducements were Money only) that it ceases to be
either a Wonder as to the Fact, or a Disgrace to
the Honour. 
Well, Brother, said my Lady, I will tell you further,
the Thing may be had for asking for: If you
will but go to Court, and desire to kiss the King's
Hand, that will be all the Trouble you'll have; and
pray now oblige me in it. 
If a Title would make me either a better or a
wiser Man, reply'd Mr. B. I would imbrace it with
Pleasure. Besides, I am not so intirely satisfied with
some of the Measures now pursuing, as to owe any
Obligation to the Ministers. Accepting of a small
Title from them, is but like putting on their Badge,
or listing under their Banners; like a certain Lord
we all know, who accepted of one Degree more of
Title to shew he was theirs, and would not have a
higher, lest it should be thought a Satisfaction tantamount
to half the Pension he demanded: And could
I be easy to have it supposed, that I was an ingrateful
Man for voting as I pleased, because they gave me
the Title of a Baronet? 
The Countess said, The World always thought
Mr. B. was a Gentleman of moderate Principles,
and not attached to any Party; and it was her Opinion,
that it was far from being inconsistent with
any Gentleman's Honour and Independency, to accept
of a Title from a Prince he acknowleged as his
Sovereign. 
'Tis very true, Madam, reply'd Mr. B. that I am
attach'd to no Party, and never will; and I have a
mean Opinion of many of the Heads of both: Nay,
I will say further, that I wish at my Heart, the
Gentlemen in the Administration would pursue such 

Measures, that I could give them every Vote; as I
always will every one that I can; and I have no very
high Opinion of those who, right or wrong, would
distress or imbarass a Government. For this is certain,
that our Governors cannot be always in the
wrong; and he therefore who never gives them a
Vote, must probably be as often out of the Way as
they, and must, moreover, have some View he will
not own. But in a Country like ours, where each of
the Legislative Powers is in a Manner independent,
and where they are designed as mutual Checks upon
each other, I have, notwithstanding, so great an Opinion
of the Necessity of an Opposition sometimes,
that I am convinc'd it is that which must preserve our
Constitution. I will therefore be a Country Gentleman,
in the true Sense of the Word, and will accept
of no Favour that shall make any one think I would
not be of the Opposition when I think it a necessary
one; as, on the other hand, I should scorn to make
myself a Round to any Man's Ladder of Preferment,
or a Caballer for the sake of my own. 
You say well, Brother, return'd Lady Davers; but
you may undoubtedly keep your own Principles and
Independency, and yet pay your Duty to the King,
and accept of this Title; for your Family and Fortune
will be a greater Ornament to the Title, than
the Title to you. 
Then, what Occasion have I for it, if that be the
Case, Madam? 
Why, I can't say but I should be glad you had it,
for your Family's sake, as it is an hereditary Honour. 
Then it would mend the Style of your Spouse here; 
for the good Girl is at such a Loss for an Epithet
when she writes, that I see the Constraint she lies under. 
It is, My dear Gentleman, My best Friend, My
Benefactor, My dear Mr. B.; whereas Sir William 

would turn off her Periods more roundly, and no
other softer Epithet would be wanting. 
To me, reply'd he, who always desire to be distinguished
as my Pamela's best Friend, and think it
an Honour to be called her dear Mr. B. and her dear
Gentleman, this Reason weighs very little, unless
there were no other Sir William in the Kingdom than
her Sir William; for I am very emulous of her Favour,
I can tell you, and think it no small Distinction. 
I blushed at this too great Honour, before such
Company, and was afraid my Lady would be a little
piqu'd at it. But, after a Pause, she said, Well
then, Brother, will you let Pamela decide upon this
Point? 
Rightly put, said the Countess. Pray let Mrs. B.
chuse for you, Sir. My Lady has hit the Thing. 
Very good, very good, by my Soul, says Lord
Jackey, let my young Aunt, that was his Word,
chuse for you, Sir. 
Well then, Pamela, said the dear Gentleman,
give us your Opinion, as to this Point. 
But, first, said Lady Davers, say you will be determin'd
by it; or else she will be laid under a Difficulty. 
Well then, reply'd he, be it so. I will be determined
by your Opinion, my Dear: Give it me
freely. 
Lord Jackey rubb'd his Hands together, Charming,
charming, as I hope to live! By Jove, this is
just as I wish'd! 
Well, now, Pamela, said my Lady, speak your
true Heart without Disguise: I charge you do. 
Why then, Gentlemen and Ladies, said I, if I
must be so bold as to speak on a Subject, upon which,
on several Accounts, it would become me to be
silent, I should be against the Title; but perhaps 

my Reason is of too private a Nature, to weigh
any thing; and if so, it would not become me to
have any Choice at all. 
They all called upon me for my Reason; and I said,
looking down, a little abash'd, It is this: Here my dear
Mr. B. has disparag'd himself by distinguishing, as he
has done, such a low Body as I; and the World will
be apt to say, he is seeking to repair one way the
Honour he has lost another; and then, perhaps, it
will be attributed to my Pride and Ambition: Here,
they will be apt to say, the proud Cottager will needs
be a Lady, in Hopes to conceal her Descent; whereas,
had I such a vain Thought, it would be but making
it the more remember'd against both my dear
Mr. B. and myself. And indeed, as to my own Part,
added I, I take too much Pride in having been listed
up into this Distinction, for the Causes to which I
owe it, your Brother's Bounty and Generosity, than
to be ashamed of what I was: Only now-and-then
I am concerned for his own sake, lest he should be
too much censur'd. –– But this would not be prevented
by the Title; but rather would be aggravated by it. 
–––So I am humbly of Opinion against the Title. 
The dear Gentleman had hardly Patience to hear
me out, but came to me, and folding his Arms
about me, said, Just as I wish'd, have you answer'd,
my beloved Pamela: I was never yet deceiv'd in
you; no, not once. 
My Lady Countess, my Lord Davers, my Lady
Davers, said the dear Gentleman, do we want any
Titles, think you, to make us happy, but what we
can confer upon ourselves? And he press'd my Hand
to his Lips, as he always honours me most in Company; 
and went to his Place, highly pleas'd; while
his fine Manner drew Tears from my Eyes, and
made his noble Sister's and the Countess's glisten
too. 

My Lady said, Well, for my Part, thou art a
strange Girl! Where, as my Brother once said*  ,gottest thou all this? Then, pleasantly humourous,
as if she was angry, she changed her Tone, What
signify thy meek Words, and humble Speeches, when
by thy Actions, as well as Sentiments, thou reflectest
upon us all? –––Pamela, said she, have less Merit, or
take care to conceal it better: I shall otherwise have
no more Patience with thee, than thy Monarch has
just now shewn. 
The Countess was pleased to say, You're a happy
Couple indeed! and I must needs repeat to you, Mr.
B. four Lines, that Sir William Davenant made
upon a Lady, who could not possibly deserve them
so much as yours does: 

She ne'er saw Courts; but Courts could have outdone,
 With untaught Looks, and an unpractis'd Heart:
Her Nets the most prepar'd could never shun;
 For Nature spread them in the Scorn of Art.

But, my dear Miss, how lucky one sometimes
is, in having what one says well accepted! Ay, that
is all in all. For the Reason for the Answer I gave
was so obvious, that one in my Circumstances could
not miss it. Yet what Compliments had I upon it! 
'Tis a Sign they were prepared to think well of me; 
and that's my great Pleasure and Happiness. 
Such sort of Entertainment as this you are to expect
from your Correspondent. I cannot do better
than I can; and it may appear such a Mixture of
Self-praise, Vanity and Impertinence, that I expect
you will tell me freely, as soon as this comes to your
Hand, whether it be tolerable to you. Yet I must
write on, for my dear Father and Mother's sake, 

who require it of me, and are prepared to approve
of every thing that comes from me, for no other
Reason but that: And I think you ought to leave
me to write to them only, as I cannot hope it will be
entertaining to any body else, without expecting as
much Partiality and Favour from others, as I have
from my dear Parents. Mean time I conclude here
my first Conversation-piece; and am, and will be, 
Always Yours, &c.
P. B. 

