


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Sunday, April 16. 
O What a blank, my dear! —But I need not say
what I was going to say. Poor Emily! —But
to mention her grief, is to paint my own. 
Lord W. went to Windsor yesterday. 
A very odd behaviour of Lady Olivia. Mr. Beauchamp
went yesterday, and offered to attend her to any
of the public places, at her pleasure; in pursuance of
Sir Charles's reference to him, to do all in his power
to make England agreeable to her: And she thought
sit to tell him before her aunt, that she thanked him
for his civility; but she should not trouble him during
her stay in England. She had gentlemen in her train; 
and one of them had been in England before—He left
her in disgust. 
Lady L. making her a visit in the evening, she told
her of Mr. Beauchamp's offer, and of her answer. 
The gentleman, said she, is a polite and very agreeable
man; and this made me treat his kind offer with
abruptness: For I can hardly doubt your brother's
view in it. I scorn his view: And if I were sure of
it, perhaps I should find a way to make him repent of
the indignity: Lady L. was sure, she said, that neither
her brother, nor Mr. Beauchamp, had any other
views than to make England as agreeable to her as
possible. 
Be this as it may, madam, said she, I have no service
for Mr. Beauchamp: But if your Ladyship, your
sister, and your two Lords, will allow me to cultivate
your friendship, you will do me honour. Dr. Bartlett's
company will be very agreeable to me likewise,
as often as he will give it me. To Miss Jervois I
lay some little claim. I would have had her for my 

companion in Italy; but your cruel brother—No
more, however, of him. Your English beauty too, I
admire her: But, poor young creature, I admire her
the more, because I can pity her. I should think myself
very happy to be better acquainted with her. 
Lady L. made her a very polite answer for herself
and her sister, and their Lords: But told her, that I
was very soon to set out for my own abode in North-hamptonshire; 
and that Dr. Bartlett had some commissions,
which would oblige him, in a day or two, to
go to Sir Charles's seat in the country. She herself
offered to attend her to Windsor, and to every other
place, at her command. 
* *
Lady L. took notice of her wrist being bound
round with a broad black ribband, and asked, If it
were hurt? A kind of sprain, said she. But you little
imagine how it came; and must not ask. 
This made Lady L. curious. And Olivia requesting
that Emily might be allowed to breakfast with her
as this morning; she has bid the dear girl endeavour
to know how it came, if it fell in her way: For
Olivia reddened, and looked up, with a kind of consciousness,
to Lady L. when she told her that she must
not ask questions about it. 
Lady G. is very earnest with me to give into the
town-diversions for a month to come: But I have
now no desire in my heart so strong, as to throw myself
at the feet of my grandmamma and aunt; and to
be embraced by my Lucy and Nancy, and all my
Northamptonshire Loves. I am only afraid of my
uncle. He will railly his Harriet; yet only, I know,
in hopes to divert her, and us all: But my jesting days
are over: My situation will not bear it. Yet if it
will divert himself, let him railly. 
I shall be so much importuned to stay longer than
I ought, or will stay, that I may as well fix a peremptory
day at once. Will you, my ever indulgent 

friends, allow me to set out for Selby-house on Friday
se'nnight?  Not on a Sunday, as Lady Betty Williams
advises, for fear of the odious waggons. But I have
been in a different school. Sir Charles Grandison, I
find, makes it a tacit rule with him, Never to begin a
journey on a Sunday; nor, except when in pursuit of
works of mercy or necessity, to travel in time of Divine
Service. And this rule he observed last Sunday,
tho' he reached us here in the evening. O my grandmamma! 
How much is he, what you all are, and
ever have been! —But he is now pursuing a work of
mercy. God succeed to him the end of his pursuit! 
But why tacit? you will ask. Is Sir Charles Grandison
ashamed to make an open appearance in behalf
of his Christian duties? He is not. For instance; I
have never seen him sit down at his own table, in the
absence of Dr. Bartlett, or some other clergyman, but
he himself says grace; and that with such an easy
dignity, as commands every one's reverence; and
which is succeeded by a chearfulness that looks as if
he were the better pleased for having shewn a thankful
heart. 
Dr. Bartlett has also told me, that he begins and
ends every day, either in his Chamber, or in his Study,
in a manner worthy of one who is in earnest in his
Christian profession. But he never frights gay company
with grave maxims. I remember, one day,
Mr. Grandison asked him, in his absurd way, Why
he did not preach to his company now-and-then? 
Faith, Sir Charles, said he, if you did, you would
reform many a poor ignorant sinner of us; since you
could do it with more weight, and more certainty of
attention, than any parson in Christendom. 
It would be an affront, said Sir Charles, to the understanding,
as well as education, of a man who took
rank above a peasant, in such a country as this, to
seem to question whether he knew his general duties,
or not, and the necessity of practising what he knew 

of them. If he should be at a loss, he may once a
week be reminded, and his heart kept warm. Let
you and me, cousin Everard, shew our conviction by
our practice; and not invade the clergyman's province. 
I remember, that Mr. Grandison shewed his conviction
by his blushes; and by repeating the three
little words, You and me! Sir Charles. 
Sunday Evening. 
O my dear friends! I have a strange, a shocking
piece of intelligence to give you! Emily has just been
with me in tears: She begged to speak with me in
private. When we were alone, she threw her arms
about my neck: Ah, madam! said she, I am come
to tell you, that there is a person in the world that
I hate, and must and will hate, as long as I live. 
It is Lady Olivia. —Take me down with you into
Northamptonshire, and never let me see her more. 
I was surprised. 
O madam! I have found out, that she would, on
Thursday last, have killed my guardian. 
I was astonished, Lucy. 
They retired together, you know, madam: My
guardian came from her, his face in a glow; and he
sent in his sister to her, and went not in himself till
afterwards. She would have had him put off his
journey. She was enraged because he would not; 
and they were high together; and at last she pulled
out of her stays, in fury, a poniard, and vowed to
plunge it into his heart. He should never, she said,
see his Clementina more. He went to her. Her
heart failed her. Well it might, you know, madam. 
He seized her hand. He took it from her. She
struggled, and in struggling her wrist was hurt; 
that's the meaning of the broad black ribband! — 
Wicked creature! to have such a thought in her
heart! —He only said, when he had got it from her,
Unhappy, violent woman! I return not this instrument 

of mischief! You will have no use for it in
England—And would not let her have it again. 
I shuddered. O my dear, said I, he has been a
sufferer, we are told, by good women; but this is not
a good woman. But can it be true? Who informed
you of it? 
Lady Maffei herself. She thought that Sir Charles
must have spoken of it: And when she found he had
not, she was sorry she had, and begged I would not
tell any-body: But I could not keep it from you. 
And she says, that Lady Olivia is grieved on the remembrance
of it; and arraigns herself, and her wicked
passion; and the more, for his noble forgiveness of her
on the spot, and recommending her afterwards to the
civilities of his sisters, and their Lords. But I hate
her, for all that. 
Poor unhappy Olivia! said I. But what, my
Emily, are we women, who should be the meekest
and tenderest of the whole animal creation, when we
give way to passion! But if she is so penitent, let not
the shocking attempt be known to his sisters, or their
Lords. I may take the liberty of mentioning it, in
strict confidence [Observe that, Lucy] to those from
whom I keep not any secret: But let it not be divulged
to any of the relations of Sir Charles. Their
detestation of her, which must follow, would not be
concealed; and the unhappy creature, made desperate,
might—Who knows what she might do? 
The dear girl ran on upon what might have been
the consequence, and what a loss the world would
have had, if the horrid fact had been perpetrated. 
Lady Maffei told her, however, that had not her heart
relented, she might have done him mischief; for he
was too rash in approaching her. She fell down on
her knees to him, as soon as he had wrested the poniard
from her. I forgive, and pity you, madam,
said he, with an air that had, as Olivia and her aunt
have recollected since, both majesty and compassion 

in it: But he would withdraw. Yet, at her request,
sent in Lady L. to her; and, going into his Study, told
not even Dr. Bartlett of it, tho' he went to him there
immediately. 
From the consciousness of this violence, perhaps,
the Lady was more temperate afterwards, even to the
very time of his departure. 
* *
Lord bless me, What shall I do? Lady D. has
sent a card to let me know, that she will wait upon
Mrs. Reeves and me to-marrow to breakfast. She
comes, no doubt, to tell me, that Sir Charles having
no thoughts of Harriet Byron, Lord D. may have
hopes of succeeding with her: And perhaps her Ladyship
will plead Sir Charles's recommendation and interest
in Lord D.'s favour. But should this plea be
made, good Heaven give me patience! I am afraid I
shall be uncivil to this excellent woman. 

