



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, March 16. 
Having met with such bad success in my application
to my Relations, I have taken a step
that will surprise you. It is no other than writing a
Letter to Mr. Solmes himself. I sent it; and have his
Answer. He had certainly help in it. For I have
seen a Letter of his; as indifferently worded, as poorly 

spelt. Yet the superscription is of his dictating, I dare
say; for he is a formal wretch. With these, I shall inclose
one from my Brother to me, on occasion of mine
to Mr. Solmes. I did think that it was possible to discourage
this man from proceeding; and if I could have
done that, it would have answered all my wishes. It
was worth the trial. But you'll see nothing will do. 
My Brother has taken his measures too securely. 

To Roger Solmes, Esq;
Wednesday, March 15. 
Sir,
You will wonder to receive a Letter from me; and
more still at the uncommon subject of it. But
the necessity of the case will justify me, at least in my
own apprehension; and I shall therefore make no other
apology for it. 
When you first came acquainted with our family,
you found the writer of This one of the happiest creatures
in the world; beloved by the best and most indulgent
of parents; and rejoicing in the kind favour
of two affectionate Uncles, and in the esteem of every
one. 
But how is this happy scene now changed! —You
was pleased to cast a favourable eye upon me. You
addressed yourself to my friends: Your proposals were
approved of by them—approved of without consulting
me; as if my choice and happiness were of the least signification. 
Those who had a right to all reasonable
obedience from me, insisted upon it without reserve. I
had not the felicity to think as they did; almost the
first time my sentiments differed from theirs. I besought
them to indulge me in a point so important to
my future happiness: But, alas, in vain! And then
(for I thought it was but honest) I told you my mind; 
and even that my affections were engaged. But, to
my mortification and surprize, you persisted, and still
persist. 

The consequence of all is too grievous for me to
repeat: You, who have such free access to the rest of
the family, know it too well—too well you know it,
either for the credit of your own generosity, or for my
reputation. I am used, on your account, as I never
before was used, and never before was thought to deserve
to be used; and this was the hard, the impossible
condition of their returning favour, that I must prefer
a man to all others, that of all others I cannot prefer. 
Thus distressed, and made unhappy, and all for your
sake, and thro' your cruel perseverance, I write, Sir,
to demand of you the peace of mind you have robbed
me of: To demand of you the Love of so many dear
friends, of which you have deprived me; and, if you
have the generosity that should distinguish a man, and
a gentleman, to adjure you not to continue an address
that has been attended with such cruel effects to the
creature you profess to esteem. 
If you really value me, as my friends would make
me believe, and as you have declared you do, must it
not be a mean and selfish value? A value that can have
no merit with the unhappy object of it, because it is
attended with effects so grievous to her? It must be
for your own sake only, not for mine. And even in this
point you must be mistaken; for, would a prudent
man wish to marry one who has not a heart to give? 
Who cannot esteem him? Who therefore must prove
a bad Wife? —And how cruel would it be to make a
poor creature a bad Wife, whose pride it would be to
make a good one? 
If I am capable of judging, our tempers and inclinations
are vastly different. Any other of my Sex will
make you happier than I can. The treatment I meet
with, and the obstinacy, as it is called, with which I
support myself under it, ought to convince you of
this; were I not able to give so good a reason for this
my supposed perverseness, as that I cannot consent to
marry a man whom I cannot value. 

But if, Sir, you have not so much generosity in your
value for me, as to desist for my own sake, let me
conjure you, by the regard due to yourself, and to your
own future happiness, to discontinue your suit, and
place your affections on a worthier object: For why
should you make me miserable, and yourself not
happy? By this means you will do all that is now in
your power to restore to me the affection of my
friends; and, if That can be, it will leave me in as
happy a state as you found me in. You need only
to say, That you see there are no Hopes, as you will
perhaps complaisantly call it, of succeeding with me
[And indeed, Sir, there cannot be a greater truth]; 
and that you will therefore no more think of me; but
turn your thoughts another way. 
Your compliance with this request will lay me under
the highest obligation to your generosity, and make
me ever 
Your Well-wisher, and humble Servant,
Clarissa Harlowe. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe,
These most humbly present. 
Dearest Miss,
Your Letter has had a very contrary effect upon
me, to what you seem to have expected from it. 
It has doubly convinced me of the excellency of your
mind, and of the honour of your disposition. Call it
selfish, or what you please, I must persist in my suit; 
and happy shall I be, if by patience and perseverance,
and a steady and unalterable devoir, I may at last overcome
the difficulty laid in my way. 
As your good Parents, your Uncles, and other
friends, are absolutely determined you shall never have
Mr. Lovelelace, if they can help it; and as I presume
no other person is in the way; I will contentedly wait
the issue of this matter. And forgive me, dearest 

Miss; but a person should sooner persuade me to give
up to him my Estate, as an instance of my generosity,
because he could not be happy without it, than I would
a much more valuable treasure, to promote the felicity
of another, and make his way easier to circumvent
myself. 
Pardon me, dear Miss; but I must persevere, tho'
I am sorry you suffer on my account, as you are pleased
to think; for I never before saw the woman I could
love: And while there is any hope, and that you remain
undisposed of to some happier man, I must and
will be 
Your faithful and obsequious Admirer,
Roger Solmes. 
March 16. 

Mr. James Harlowe, To Miss Cl. Harlowe
March 16. 
What a fine whim you took into your head,
to write a Letter to Mr. Solmes, to persuade
him to give up his pretensions to you! —Of all the
pretty romantic flights you have delighted in, this was
certainly one of the most extraordinary. But to say
nothing of what fires us all with indignation against
you (your owning your prepossession in a villain's favour,
and your impertinence to Me, and your Sister,
and your Uncles; one of which has given it you home,
child); how can you lay at Mr. Solmes's door the
usage you so bitterly complain of? —You know, little
fool as you are, that it is your fondness for Lovelace
that has brought upon you all these things; and which
would have happened whether Mr. Solmes had honoured
you with his addresses or not. 
As you must needs know This to be true, consider,
pretty witty Miss, if your fond love-sick heart can let
you consider, what a fine figure all your expostulations
with Us, and charges upon Mr. Solmes, make! — 
With what propriety do you demand of him to restore 

to you your former happiness (as you call it, and merely
call it; for if you thought our favour so, you would
restore it to yourself) since it is yet in your own power
to do so? Therefore, Miss Pert, none of your pathetics,
except in the right place. Depend upon it, whether
you have Mr. Solmes, or not, you shall never
have your heart's delight, the vile Rake Lovelace, if
our Parents, if our Uncles, if I, can hinder it. No!
you fallen angel, you shall not give your Father and
Mother such a Son, nor me such a Brother, in giving
yourself that profligate wretch for a Husband. And so
set your heart at rest, and lay aside all thoughts of him,
if ever you expect forgiveness, reconciliation, or a kind
opinion, from any of your family; but especially from
him, who, at present, styles himself 
Your Brother,
James Harlowe. 
P. S. I know your knack at Letter-writing. If you
send me an Answer to this, I will return it unopened; 
for I will not argue with your perverseness in so
plain a case—Only once for all, I was willing to
put you right as to Mr. Solmes; whom I think to
blame to trouble his head about you. 