



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Tuesday, April 25. 
Be comforted; be not dejected; do not despond,
my dearest and best-beloved friend. God Almighty
is just and gracious, and gives not his assent to
rash and inhuman curses. Can you think that Heaven
will seal to the black passions of its depraved Creatures? 
If it did, Malice, Envy, and Revenge would triumph; 
and the best of the human race, blasted by the malignity
of the worst, would be miserable in both worlds. 
This Outrageousness shews only what manner of Spirit
they are of, and how much their sordid Views exceed
their parental Love. 'Tis all owing to Rage and
Disappointment—Disappointment in designs proper to
be frustrated. 
&dotup;If you consider this Malediction as it ought to be
considered, a person of your piety must and will rather
pity and pray for your rash Father, than terrify
yourself on the occasion. None but God can curse. 
Parents, or others, whoever they be, can only pray
to Him to curse: And such Prayers can have no
weight with a just and all-perfect Being, the motives 

to which are unreasonable, and the end proposed by
them cruel. 
&dotup;Has not God commanded us to bless and curse not? 
Pray for your Father then, I repeat, that he incur
not the Malediction he has announced on you; since
he has broken, as you see, a command truly divine; 
while you, by obeying that other precept which enjoins
us to pray for them that persecute and curse us,
will turn the Curse into a Blessing.&dotup; 
My Mother blames them for this wicked Letter of
your Sister; and she pities you; and, of her own accord,
wished me to write to comfort you, for this once: For
she says, It is pity your heart, which was so noble (and
when the sense of your fault, and the weight of a Parent's
curse, are so strong upon you) should be quite broken. 
Lord bless me, how your Aunt writes! —Can there
be two rights and two wrongs in palpable cases! —But,
my dear, she must be wrong: So they all have been,
justify themselves now as they will. They can only
justify themselves to themselves from selfish principles,
resolving to acquit, not fairly to try themselves. Did
your unkind Aunt, in all the tedious progress of your
contentions with them, give you the least hope of their
relenting? —Her dark hints I now recollect, as well as
you. But why was any-thing good or hopeful to be
darkly hinted? —How easy was it for her, who pretended
always to love you; for her, who can give such
flowing licence to her pen for your hurt; to have given
you one word, one line (in confidence) of their pretended
change of measures! 
But do not mind their after-pretences, my dear— 
All of them serve but for tacit confessions of their vile
usage of you. I will keep your Aunt's Secret, never
fear. I would not, on any consideration, that my Mother
should see her Letter. 
You will now see, that you have nothing left, but
to overcome all scrupulousness, and marry as soon as
you have opportunity. Determine so to do, my dear. 

I will give you a motive for it, regarding myself. 
For this I have resolved, and this I have vowed [O
friend, the best beloved of my heart, be not angry with
me for it!] ‘That so long as your happiness is in suspense,
I will never think of marrying.’ In justice
to the man I shall have, I have vowed this: For, my
dear, must I not be miserable, if you are so? And
what an unworthy wife must I be to any man who
cannot have interest enough in my heart to make his
obligingness a balance for an affliction he has not caused? 
I would shew Lovelace your Sister's abominable
Letter, were it to me. I inclose it. It shall not have
a place in this house. This will enter him of course
into the subject which now you ought to have most in
view. Let him see what you suffer for him. He cannot
prove base to such an excellence. I should never
enjoy my head or my senses, should this man prove a
villain to you! —With a merit so exalted, you may
have punishment more than enough for your involuntary
fault, in that husband. 
I would not have you be too sure, that their project
to seize you is over. The words intimating, that it is
over, in the Letter of that abominable Arabella, seem
calculated to give you security. —She only says, she believes
that design is over. —And I do not yet find from
Miss Lloyd, that it is disavowed. So it will be best,
when you are in London, to be private, and, for fear
of the worst, to let every direction be to a third place; 
for I would not, for the world, have you fall into the
hands of such flaming and malevolent spirits, by surprize. 
I will myself be content to direct to you at some third
place; and I shall then be able to averr to my Mother, or
to any other, if occasion be, that I know not where you are. 
Besides, this measure will make you less apprehensive
of the consequences of their violence, should they resolve
to attempt to carry you off in spite of Lovelace. 
I would have you direct to Mr. Hickman, even your
Answer to this. I have a reason for it. Besides, my 

Mother, notwithstanding this particular indulgence, is
very positive. &dotup;They have prevailed upon her, I know,
to give her word to this purpose—Spiteful poor
wretches! How I hate in particular your foolish
Uncle Antony!&dotup; 
I would not have your thoughts dwell on the contents
of your Sister's shocking Letter; but pursue other
subjects—The subjects before you. And let me know
your progress with Lovelace, and what he says to this
diabolical Curse. So far you may enter into this hateful
subject. I expect that this will aptly introduce the grand
topic between you, without needing a mediator. 
Come, my dear, when things are at worst, they
will mend. Good often comes, when Evil is expected. 
—But if you despond, there can be no hopes of cure. — 
Don't let them break your heart; for that, it is plain
to me, is now what some people have in view to do. 
How poor, to with-hold from you your books, your
jewels, and your money! As money is all you can at
present want, since they will vouchsafe to send your
cloaths, I send fifty guineas by the bearer, inclosed in
single papers in my Norris's Miscellanies. I charge you,
as you love me, return them not. 
I have more at your service. So if you like not your
lodgings or his behaviour when you get to town, leave
both them and him out of hand. 
I would advise you to write to Mr. Morden without
delay. If he intends for England, it may hasten him. 
And you will do very well till he can come. But surely
Lovelace will be infatuated, if he secure not his happiness
by your consent, before that of Mr. Morden's is
made needful on his arrival. 
Once more, my dear, let me beg of you to be comforted. 
Manage with your usual prudence the Stake
before you, and all will still be happy. Suppose yourself
to be me, and me to be you [You may—for your distress 

is mine]; and then you will add full day to these but
glimmering lights which are held out to you by 
Your ever-affectionate and faithful
Anna Howe. 
I hurry this away by Robert. I will enquire into
the truth of your Aunt's pretences about the change
of measures which she says they intended, in case
you had not gone away. 