



Miss Arab. Harlowe, To Miss Cl. Harlowe. 
In answer to hers to her Uncle Antony of Aug. 13 (a). 



Monday, Aug. 21. 
Sister Clary,
I find by your Letters to my Uncles, that they, as
well as I, are in great disgrace with you for writing
our minds to you. 
We can't help it, Sister Clary. 
You don't think it worth your while, I find, a
second time to press for the Blessing you pretend to be 

so earnest about. You think, no doubt, that you
have done your duty in asking for it: So you'll sit
down satisfied with That, I suppose, and leave it to
your wounded parents to repent hereafter that they
have not done Theirs, in giving it to you, at the first
word; and in making such enquiries about you, as
you think ought to have been made. Fine encouragement
to enquire after a run-away Daughter! living
with her fellow, as long as he would live with her!
You repent also (with your full mind, as you modestly
call it) that you wrote to me. 
So we are not likely to be applied to any more, I
find, in this way. 
Well then, since This is the case, Sister Clary,
let me, with all humility, address myself with a proposal
or two to you; to which you will be graciously
pleased to give an answer. 
Now you must know, that we have had hints
given us from several quarters, that you have been
used in such a manner by the villain you ran away
with, that his life would be answerable for his crime,
if it were fairly to be proved. And, by your own
hints, something like it appears to us. 
If, Clary, there be any-thing but jingle and affected
period in what proceeds from your full mind,
and your dutiful consciousness; and if there be truth
in what Mrs. Norton and Mrs. Howe have acquainted
us with; you may yet justify your character to us,
and to the world, in every-thing but your scandalous
Elopement; and the Law may reach the villain: 
And, could we but bring him to the gallows, what
a meritorious revenge would that be to our whole
injured family, and to the innocents he has deluded,
as well as the saving from ruin many others! 
Let me, therefore, know (if you please) whether
you are willing to appear to do Yourself, and Us,
and your Sex, this justice? If not, Sister Clary, we
shall know what to think of you; for neither you 

nor we can suffer more than we have done from the
scandal of your fall: And, if you will, Mr. Ackland
and Counsellor Derham will both attend you
to make proper Enquiries, and to take Minutes of
your Story, to found a process upon, if it will bear
one with as great a probability of success as we are
told it may be prosecuted with. 
But, by what Mrs. Howe intimates, this is not
likely to be complied with; for it is what she hinted
to you, it seems, by her lively Daughter, but without
effect (a) ; and then, again, possibly, you may
not at present behave so prudently in some certain
points, as to entitle yourself to public justice; which
if true, the Lord have mercy upon you! 
One word only more as to the above proposal: — 
Your admirer, Dr. Lewen, is clear in his opinion
that you should prosecute the villain. 
But if you will not agree to this, I have another
proposal to make to you, and that in the name of
every one in the family; which is, that you will
think of going to Pensylvania to reside there for
some few years till all is blown over: And, if it
please God to spare you, and your unhappy parents,
till they can be satisfied, that you behave like a true
and uniform penitent; at least till you are One-and-twenty; 
you may then come back to your own
Estate, or have the produce of it sent you thither,
as you shall chuse. A period which my Father fixes,
because it is the Custom; and because he thinks your
Grandfather should have fixed it; and because, let
me add, you have fully proved by your fine conduct,
that you were not at Years of discretion at Eighteen. 
Poor doting, tho' good old man! —Your Grandfather,
he thought—But I would not be too severe. 
Mr. Hartley has a Widow-Sister at Pensylvania,
with whom he will undertake you may board, and
who is a sober, sensible, and well-re'd woman. And 

if you were once well there, it would rid your Father
and Mother of a world of cares, and fears, and
scandal; and I think is what you should wish for of all
things. 
Mr. Hartley will engage for all accommodations in
your passage suitable to your rank and fortune; and
he has a concern in a Ship, which will sail in a
month; and you may take your secret-keeping Hannah
with you, or whom you will of your newer acquaintance. 
'Tis presumed that your companions
will be of your own Sex. 
These are what I had to communicate to you; and
if you'll oblige me with an Answer (which the hand
that conveys this will call for on Wednesday Morning)
it will be very condescending. 
Arabella Harlowe. 