


Sir Charles Grandison, To Miss Byron. 


London, Monday Night, Oct. 30.
Your humanity, my dear and ever-dear Miss
Byron, was so much engaged by the melancholy
Letter of Sir Hargrave to Dr. Bartlett, which I
communicated to you; and by the distress of my
Beauchamp, on the desperate state of his father's
health; that I know you will be pleased to hear that I
have been enabled to give some consolation to both. 
Sir Harry, who is in town, wanted to open his mind
to me with regard to some affairs which made him extremely
uneasy; and which, he said, he could not reveal
to any-body else. He shewed some reluctance to
entrust the secrets to my bosom. There shall they
ever rest. He has found himself easier since. He rejoiced
to me on the good understanding subsisting, and
likely to subsist, between his Lady and Son. He desired
me to excuse him for joining me with them,
without asking my leave, in the trusts created by his
Will: And on this occasion, sending for his Lady, he
put her hand in mine, and recommended her, and her
interests, as those of the most obliging of wives, to my
care. 
I found Sir Hargrave at his house in Cavendish-Square. 

He is excessively low-spirited. Dr. Bartlett
visited him at Windsor, several times. The Doctor
prevailed on him to retain a worthy clergyman, as his
chaplain. 
The poor man asked after you, madam. He had
heard, he said, that I was soon likely to be the happiest
of men: Was it so? He wept at my answer; 
lamented the wretched hand, as he called it, that he
had made of it, blessed as he was with such prosperous
circumstances, in the prime of youth; and wished he
had his days to come over again, and his company to
choose. Unhappy man! He was willing to remove
from himself the load which lay upon him. No doubt
but this was the recourse of his companions, likewise,
in extremity. He blessed my dearest Miss Byron,
when I told him, she pitied him. He called himself
by harsh, and even shocking names, for having been
capable of offending so much goodness. 
What subjects are these, to entertain my Angel
with! —But tho' we should not seek, yet we ought
not perhaps to shun them, when they naturally, as I
may say, offer themselves to our knowlege. 
But another subject calls for the attention of my
dearest, loveliest of women: A subject that will lay a
still stronger claim to it than either of the solemn ones
I have touched upon. I inclose the Letter which contains
it. You will be so good as to read it in English
to such of our friends as read not Italian. 
This Letter was left to Mrs. Beaumont to dispatch
to me; whence its unwished-for delay: For she detained
it, to send with it an equally-obliging one of her
own. The contents of this welcome Letter, my dearest
Miss Byron, will render it unnecessary to wait for
an answer to my last to Signor Jeronymo; in which
I acquaint him with my actual address, and the hopes
I presume to flatter myself with. I humbly hope you
will think so. 
I am not afraid that one of the most generous of 

women will be affected with the passage in which
Signor Jeronymo expresses his pity for her, because
of the affection, he says, I must ever retain for his
noble sister(a) . He says right. And it is my happiness,
that you, the sister-excellence of the admirable
Clementina, will allow me to glory in my gratitude to
her. You will still more readily allow me so to do,
when you have perused this Letter. Shall not the
man who hopes to be qualified for the Supreme Love,
of which the purest Earthly is but a type, and who
aims at an universal benevolence, be able to admire,
in the mind of Clementina, the same great qualities
which shine out with such lustre in that of Miss
Byron? 
With what pride do I look forward to the visit that
several of this noble family intend to make us, because
of the unquestionable assurance that they will rejoice in
my happiness, and admire the Angel who is allowed
to take place in my affections of the Angel who
would not have scrupled to accept of my vows, had
it not been, as she expresses herself(b) , for the intervention
of invincible obstacles! 
Mrs. Beaumont, in her Letter, gives me the particulars
of the conversation between her and Clementina,
almost in the same words with those of Jeronymo,
in the Letter inclosed. She makes no doubt
that Lady Clementina will, in time, yield to the entreaties
of her friends in favour of a man against
whom, if she can be prevailed upon to forego her
wishes to assume the veil, she can have no one objection. 
You will see, madam, by the inclosed, what
they hope for in Italy from us; what Clementina,
what Jeronymo, what a whole excellent family, hope
for. You know how ardently my own family wish
you to accelerate the happy day: Yours refer themselves
wholly to you—Pardon me, my dearest Miss
Byron, I will tell you what are my hopes—They are, 

that, when I am permitted to return to Northamptonshire,
the happy day shall not be postponed three. 
And now, loveliest and dearest of women! allow
me to expect the honour of a line, to let me know
how much of the tedious month, from last Thursday,
you will be so good as to abate. Permit me to say,
that I can have nothing that needs to detain me from
the beloved of my heart, after Friday next. 
If, madam, you insist upon the whole month, I
beg to know, out of what part of our nuptial life,
the Last or the First (happy, as I hope it will be)
you would be willing to deduct the week, the fortnight,
that will be carried into the blank space of
courtship, by the delay? I hope, my dear Miss Byron,
that I shall be able to tell you, years and years after we
are One, that there is not an hour of those past, or
of those to come, that I would abate, or wish to throw
into that blank. Permit me so to call it. The days
of courtship cannot be our happiest. Who celebrates
the day of their first acquaintance, tho' it may
be remembred with pleasure? —Do not the happy pair
date their happiness from the day of marriage? How
justly then, when hearts are assured, when minds cannot
alter, are those which precede it, to be deemed a
blank! 
After all, your chearful compliance with my wishes,
is the great desireable. Whatever shall be your pleasure,
must determine me. My utmost gratitude will
be engaged by the condescension, whenever you shall
distinguish the day of the year, distinguished as it will
be to the end of my life, that shall give me the greatest
blessing of it, and confirm me 
For ever Yours.
Charles Grandison. 

