



My dear Miss,
One more Letter, and I have done for a
great while; because I hope your Presence
will put an End to the Occasion. I shall now tell
you of my second Visit to the Dairy-house, where
we went to Breakfast, in the Chariot and Four, because
of the Distance, which is Ten pretty long
Miles. 
I transcrib'd for you, from Letters written
formerly to my dear Parents, an *  Account
of my former Dairy-house Visit, and what the People
were, and whom I saw there; and altho' I
besought you to keep that Affair to yourself, as
too much affecting the Reputation of my Mr. B.
to be known any further, and even to destroy
that Account, when you had perused it; yet, I
make no doubt, you remember the Story, and
so I need not repeat any Part of it. 
When we arrived there, we found at the
Door, expecting us, (for they heard the Chariot-wheels
at a Distance) my pretty Miss Goodwin,
and Two other Misses, who had earned their
Ride, attended by the Governess's Daughter, a
discreet young Gentlewoman. As soon as I
stepp'd out, Miss ran into my Arms with great
Eagerness. and I as tenderly embraced her; and 

leading her into the Parlour, ask'd her abundance
of Questions about her Work and her Lessons; 
and among the rest, If she had merited this Distinction
of the Chaise and Dairy-house Breakfast,
or if it were owing to her Uncle's Favour, and to
that of her Governess? The young Gentlewoman
assur'd me it was to both, and shew'd me Miss's
Needle-works and Penmanship, and the Child
was highly pleased with my Commendations. 
I took a good deal of Notice of the other
Two Misses, for their School-fellow's sake, and
made each of them a Present of some little Toys; 
and my Miss, of a Number of pretty Trinkets,
with which she was highly delighted; and I told
her, That I would wait upon her Governess, when
I came from London into the Country again, and
see in what Order she kept her little Matters; 
for, above all things, I loved pretty housewifely
Misses; and then I would bring her more. 
Mr. B. observ'd, with no small Satisfaction,
the Child's Behaviour, which is very pretty; and
appeared as fond of her, as if he had been more
than her Uncle; and yet seemed under some Restraint,
lest it should be taken, that he was more. 
Such Power has secret Guilt, poor dear Gentleman!
to lessen and restrain a Pleasure, that would,
in a happier Light, have been so laudable to have
manifested! But how commendable is this his
Love to the dear Child, compar'd to that of most
wicked Libertines, who have no Delight, but
in destroying Innocence; and care not what becomes
of the unhappy Infants, or of the still more
unhappy Mothers! 

I am going to let you into a charming Scene,
resulting from this Perplexity of the dear Gentleman! 
A Scene that has afforded me high Delight
ever since; and always will, when I think of it:
But I will lead to it, as gradually as it happen'd. 
The Child was very fond of her Uncle, and
told him, She loved him dearly, and always
would love and honour him, for giving her such
a good Aunt. —You talked, Madam, said she,
when I saw you before, that I should come and
live with you—Will you let me, Madam? Indeed
I will be very good, and do every thing you
bid me, and mind my Book, and my Needle; 
indeed I will. 
Ask your Uncle, my dearest Miss, said I: I
should like your pretty Company of all things. 
She went to Mr. B. and said, Shall I, Sir, go
and live with my Aunt? Pray let me, when you
come from London again. 
You have a very good Governess, Miss, said
he; and she can't part with you. 
Yes, but she can, Sir; she has a great many
Misses, and can spare me well enough; and if
you please to let me ride in your Coach sometimes,
I can go and visit my Governess, and beg
a Holiday for the Misses, now-and-then, when I
am almost a Woman; and then all the Misses will
love me. 
Don't the Misses love you now, Miss Goodwin?
said he. Yes, they love me well enough,
for matter of that; but they'll love me better,
when I can beg them a Holiday. Do, dear Sir,
let me go home to my new Aunt, next time you
come into the Country. 

I was much pleased with the dear Child's Earnestness; 
and permitted her to have her full Argument
with her beloved Uncle; but was much
moved, and he himself was under some Concern,
when the dear Miss said—But you should, in
Pity, let me live with you, Sir; for I have no
Papa, nor Mamma neither: They are so far
off! —But I will love you both, as if you were
my own Papa and Mamma; so, dear now, my
good Uncle, promise the poor Girl, that has
never a Papa nor Mamma!— 
I withdrew to the Door: It will rain, I
believe, said I, and looked up. And, indeed, I
had almost a Shower in my Eye; and had I kept
my Place, could not have refrained shewing how
much I was affected. 
Mr. B. as I said, was a little mov'd; but for
fear the young Gentlewoman should take notice
of it, How! my Dear, said he, No Papa and
Mamma! —Did they not send you a pretty
Black Boy to wait upon you, a while ago? Have
you forgot that? —That's true, reply'd Miss: But
what's a Black Boy to living with my new Aunt?––– 
That's better a great deal than a Black Boy! 
Well, your Aunt and I will consider of it,
when we come from London. Be a good Girl,
mean time, and do as your Governess would have
you, and then you don't know what we may do
for you. Well then, Miss Bett, said she, to
her young Governess, let me be set Two Tasks
instead of One, and I will learn all I can, to deserve
to go to my Aunt. 
In this manner the little Prattler diverted herself. 
And as we returned from them, the Scene I hinted
at, open'd as follows: 

Mr. B. was pleased to say, What a poor Figure
does the proudest Man make, my dear Pamela,
under the Sense of a concealed Guilt, in
Company of the Innocent who know it, and
even of those who do not! Since the casual Expression
of a Baby shall overwhelm him with Shame,
and make him unable to look up without Confusion. 
I blush'd for myself, continued he, to see
how you were affected for me, and yet withdrew,
to avoid reproaching me so much as with a Look. 
Surely, Pamela, I must then make a most contemptible
Appearance in your Eye! —Did you
not disdain me at that Moment? 
Dearest Sir! how can you speak such a
Word? A Word I cannot repeat after you! For
at that very Time, I beheld you with the more
Reverence, for seeing your noble Heart touch'd
with a Sense of your Error; and it was such an
Earnest to me of the happiest Change I could ever
wish for, and in so young a Gentleman, that it
was one half Joy for that, and the other half Concern
at the little Charmer's accidental Plea, to her
best and nearest Friend, for coming home to her
new Aunt, that affected me so sensibly as you saw. 
You must not talk to me of the Child's coming
home, after this Visit, Pamela; for how, at this
rate, shall I stand the Reproaches of my own
Mind, when I see the little Prater every Day before
me, and think of what her poor Mamma has
suffer'd on my Account? 'Tis enough, that in
you, my Dear, I have an hourly Reproach before
me, for my Attempts on your Virtue; and I have
nothing to boast of, but that I gave way to the
Triumphs of your Innocence: And what then is
my Boast? 

What is your Boast, dearest Sir? You have
every thing to boast, that is worthy of being
boasted of:—Brought up to an affluent Fortune,
uncontrouled in your Will, your Passions uncurbed,
you have, nevertheless, permitted the
Divine Grace to operate upon your truly noble
Heart, and have seen your Error, at a Time of
Life, when others are rushing into Vices, in the
midst of which, perhaps they are cut off. 
You act generously, and with a laudable Affection,
to a deserving Baby, which some would
have left friendless to the wide World, and have
made more miserable, perhaps, than they had
made the very miserable Mother. And you have
the Comfort to think, that, thro' God's Goodness,
this Mother is not unhappy; and that there
is not a lost Soul, any more than a lost Body, to
lay to your Charge. 
You have inspirited, by your generous Example,
and enabled, by your splendid Fortune, another
Person, whom you have made the happiest
Creature in the World, to do Good to the Poor
and Destitute all around her; besides making
every one, who approaches you, easy and happy,
with the Bounty of your own Hands. 
You are the best of Husbands, the best of
Landlords, the best of Masters, the best of Friends; 
and with all these Excellencies, and a Mind, as I
hope, continually improving, and more and more
affected with the Sense of its past Mistakes, will
you ask, dear Sir, What is your Boast? 
O my dearest, dear Mr. B. and then I press'd
his Hand with my Lips, whatever you are to
yourself, when you give way to Reflections so 

hopeful, you are the Glory and the Boast of your
grateful Pamela! And, permit me to add, (Tears
standing in my Eyes, and holding his Hand between
mine) That I never beheld you in my Life,
in a more amiable Light, than when I saw that
noble Consciousness, which you speak of, manifest
itself in your Eyes, and your Countenance— 
O Sir! this was a Sight of Joy, of true Joy! to
one who loves you for your dear Soul's sake,
as well as for that of your Person; and who
looks forward to a Companionship with you, beyond
the Term of this transitory Life! 
The dear Gentleman look'd down sometimes,
and sometimes upon me, without offering to interrupt
me; and when I had done speaking, I
began to fear, by his Silence, that I had offended
him, remembering, just then, one of his former
*   Cautions to me, not to throw a Gloom upon
his Mind by my Over-seriousness; and I said, putting
my Arms round his Arm, as I sat, my tearful
Eye watching his, I fear, Sir, I have been too
serious! I have perhaps broken one of your Injunctions! 
Have cast a Gloominess over your
Mind! And if I have, dear Sir, forgive me! 
He clasped his Arm around me: O my beloved
Pamela, said he; thou dear Confirmer of
all my better Purposes! how shall I acknowlege
your inexpressible Goodness to me? I see every
Day more and more, my dear Love, what Confidence
I may repose in your Generosity and Discretion! 
You want no Forgiveness, and my Silence 

was owing to much better Motives, than
those you were apprehensive of. 
Judge ye, my honoured Parents, what Pleasure
must overspread my Heart, encouraged in a
manner so agreeable to my Wishes, and at the
hopeful Prospect of a thorough Reformation,
which I had so often pray'd for, and which so
happily began to open to my delighted Mind,
on this Occasion. 
Indeed I could not find Words to express
my Joy, and so was obliged to Silence in my
Turn, being only able to raise my swimming
Eyes to his encouraging ones, and to press his
Hand, between both mine, to my Lips, which,
by their quivering Motion, shew'd their Readiness
to perform their Part of Speech, could my
backwarder Tongue have given Utterance to my
Meanings. 
He saw my grateful Transport, and kindly
said, Struggle not, my beloved Pamela, for
Words to express Sentiments which your Eyes,
and your Countenance, much more significantly
express, than any Words can do. Every Day
produces new Instances of your affectionate Concern
for my future as well as present Happiness:
And I will endeavour to confirm to you all the
Hopes which the present Occasion has given
you of me, and which I see, by these transitory
Effects, are so desirable to you. 
If, my dear Miss, you are not at present able
to account for this speechless Rapture, as I may
call it, I am confident you will, if it should be
your Lot to marry such a Gentleman as Mr. B.
one who is capable of generous and noble Sentiments; 

and yet has not been so good as you
could wish, whenever it shall happen, that the
Divine Grace, and your unaffected Piety, shall
touch his Heart, and he shall give you Hopes like
those I have the Pleasure to rejoice in. —Hopes
so charming, that they must, if confirm'd, irradiate
many a gloomy Appearance, which, at
times, will cast a Shadow over the brightest and
happiest Prospects. 
The Chariot brought us home sooner than I
wished, and Mr. B. handed me into the Parlour. 
Here, Mrs. Jervis, said he, meeting her in the
Passage, receive your Angelick Lady. I must
take a little Tour without you, Pamela; for I
have had too much of your dear Company, and
must leave you, to descend again into myself; 
for you have raised me to such a Heighth, that it is
with Pain I look down from it. 
He kissed my Hand, and went into his Chariot,
for it was but half an Hour after Twelve; 
and said, He would be back by Two, at Dinner. 
He left Mrs. Jervis wondering at his Words,
and at the solemn Air with which he utter'd them. 
But when I told that good Friend the Occasion,
I had a new Joy in the Pleasure and Gratulations
of the dear good Woman, on what had passed. 
Were I, my dear Friends, to recount to you
every Conversation that gives me Delight, [when
we are alone, my Miss Darnford, as well as when
we are in Company] I should do nothing but
write. Imagine the rest from what I have (but as
so many Specimens of my Felicity) informed you
of, and think, if there can possibly be a happier
Creature on Earth, than I am at present. 

My next Letter will be from London, and to
You, my honoured Parents (for to You, my dear
Miss, I shall not write again, expecting to see
you soon). But I must now write seldomer, because
I am to renew my Correspondence with
Lady Davers; with whom I cannot be so free,
as I have been with Miss Darnford; and so I
doubt, my dear Father and Mother, you cannot
have the Particulars of that Correspondence; for
I shall never find Time to transcribe. But every
Opportunity that offers, you may assure yourself,
shall be laid hold of, by your ever-dutiful Daughter. 
And now, my dear Miss, as I inscribed this
Letter to you, let me conclude it, with the Assurance,
that I am, and ever will be, 
Your most affectionate Friend
and Servant,
P. B. 

