



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Tuesday Morn. 7 o'Clock. 
My Mother and Cousin are already gone off in
our chariot and four, attended by their doughty
'Squire on horseback, and he by two of his own servants,
and one of my Mother's. They both love
parade when they go abroad, at least in compliment
to one another; which shews, that each thinks the
other does. Robin is your servant and mine, and
no-body's else—And the day is all my own. 
I must begin with blaming you, my dear, for your
resolution not to litigate for your right, if occasion
were to be given you. Justice is due to ourselves, as
well as to every-body else. Still more must I blame
you for declaring to your Aunt and Sister, that you
will not: Since (as they will tell it to your Father
and Brother) the declaration must needs give advantage
to spirits who have so little of that generosity for
which you are so much distinguished. 
There never was a spirit in the world that would
insult where it dared, but it would creep and cringe
where it dared not. Let me remind you of a sentence
of your own, the occasion for which I have forgotten: 
‘That little Spirits will always accommodate
themselves to the temper of those they would work
upon: —Will fawn upon a sturdy-temper'd person: 
Will insult the meek:’ —And another given to
Miss Biddulph, upon an occasion you cannot forget: 
—‘If we assume a dignity in what we say and do,
and take care not to disgrace by arrogance our own
assumption, every-body will treat us with respect
and deference.’ 
I remember that you once made an observation,
which you said, you was obliged to Mrs. Norton for,
and she to her Father, upon an excellent preacher, 

who was but an indifferent liver: ‘That to excel in
theory, and to excel in practice, generally required
different talents; which did not always meet in the
same person.’ Do you, my dear (to whom theory
and practice are the same thing in almost every laudable
quality) apply the observation to yourself, in this
particular case, where Resolution is required; and
where the performance of the Will of the defunct is
the question—No more to be dispensed with by you in
whose favour it was made, than by any-body else
who have only Themselves in view by breaking
thro' it. 
I know how much you despise riches in the main: 
But yet it behoves you to remember, that in one instance
you yourself have judged them valuable—‘In
that they put it into our power to lay obligations; 
while the want of that power puts a person under
a necessity of receiving favours—Receiving them
perhaps from grudging and narrow Spirits, who
know not how to confer them with that grace,
which gives the principal merit to a beneficent
action’—Reflect upon this, my dear, and see how
it agrees with the declaration you have made to your
Aunt and Sister, that you would not resume your
Estate, were you to be turned out of doors, and reduced
to indigence and want. Their very fears that
you will resume, point out to you the necessity of resuming
upon the treatment you meet with. 
I own, that (at first reading) I was much affected
with your Mother's Letter sent with the patterns. A
strange measure however from a Mother; for she did
not intend to insult you; and I cannot but lament
that so sensible and so fine a woman should stoop to
so much Art as that Letter is written with: And
which also appears in some of the conversations you
have given me an account of. See you not in her
passiveness, what boistrous spirits can obtain from
gentler, merely by teazing and ill-nature? 

I know the pride they have always taken in calling
you an Harlowe—Clarissa Harlowe, so formal and so
set, at every word, when they are grave or proudly
solemn. —Your Mother has learnt it of them—And
as in Marriage, so in Will, has been taught to bury
her own superior name and family in theirs. I have
often thought that the same spirit governed them, in
this piece of affectation, and others of the like nature
(as Harlowe-Place, and so-forth, tho' not the elder
Brother's or Paternal Seat), as governed the tyrant
Tudor (a) , who marrying Elizabeth, the Heiress of
the House of York, made himself a title to a throne,
which he would not otherwise have had (being but a
base descendent of the Lancaster Line); and proved
a gloomy and vile Husband to her; for no other
cause, than because she had laid him under obligations
which his pride would not permit him to own. 
—Nor would the unprincely wretch marry her till he
was in possession of the Crown, that he might not be
supposed to owe it to her claim. 
You have chidden me, and again will, I doubt
not, for the liberties I take with some of your Relations. 
But, my dear, need I tell you, That pride in
ourselves must, and for ever will, provoke contempt,
and bring down upon us abasement from others? — 
Have we not, in the case of a celebrated Bard, observed,
that those who aim at more than their due,
will be refused the honours they may justly claim? — 
I am very loth to offend you; yet I cannot help
speaking of your Relations, as well as of others, as
I think they deserve. Praise or Dispraise, is the
Reward or Punishment which the world confers or
inflicts on Merit or Demerit; and, for my part, I
neither can nor will confound them in the application. 
I despise them All, but your Mother: Indeed I do: 
And as for her—But I will spare the good Lady for
your sake—And one argument, indeed, I think may 

be pleaded in her favour, in the present contention— 
She who has for so many years, and with such absolute
resignation, borne what she has borne, to the
sacrifice of her own will, may think it an easier task
than another person can imagine it, for her Daughter
to give up her's. But to think to whose instigation all
this is originally owing—God forgive me; but with
such usage I should have been with Lovelace before
now! Yet remember, my dear, that the step which
would not be wondered at from such an hasty-tempered
creature as me, would be inexcusable in such
a considerate person as you. 
After your Mother has been thus drawn in against
her judgment, I am the less surprised, that your Aunt
Hervey should go along with her; since the two
Sisters never separate. I have enquired into the nature
of the obligation which Mr. Hervey's indifferent conduct
in his affairs has laid him under—It is only, it
seems, that your Brother has paid off for him a mortgage
upon one part of his Estate, which the mortgagee
was about to foreclose; and taken it upon himself. 
A small favour (as he has ample security in his
hands) from kindred to kindred: But such a one, it
is plain, as has laid the whole family of the Hervey's
under obligation to the ungenerous lender, who has
treated him, and his Aunt too (as Miss Dolly Hervey
has privately complained) with the less ceremony
ever since. 
Must I, my dear, call such a creature your Brother? 
—I believe I must—Because he is your Father's Son. 
There is no harm, I hope, in saying That. 
I am concerned, that you ever wrote at all to him. 
It was taking too much notice of him: It was adding
to his self-significance; and a call upon him to treat
you with insolence—A call which you might have
been assured he would not fail to answer. 
But such a pretty master as this, to run riot against
such a man as Lovelace; who had taught him to put 

his sword into his scabbard, when he had pulled it out
by accident! —These in-door insolents, who, turning
themselves into bugbears, frighten women, children,
and servants, are generally cravens among men. 
Were he to come fairly cross me, and say to my face
some of the free things which I am told he has said of
me behind my back, or that (as by your account) he
has said of our Sex, I would take upon myself to ask
him two or three questions; altho' he were to send
me a challenge likewise. 
I repeat, You know that I will speak my mind,
and write it too. He is not my Brother. Can you
say, he is yours? —So, for your life, if you are just,
you can't be angry with me: For would you side
with a false Brother against a true Friend? A Brother
may not be a Friend: But a Friend will be always a
Brother—Mind That, as your Uncle Tony says! 
I cannot descend so low, as to take very particular
notice of the Epistles of those poor souls, whom you
call Uncles. Yet I love to divert myself with such
grotesque characters too. But I know them, and love
you; and so cannot make the jest of them which their
absurdities call for. 
&dotup;You chide me, my dear (a) , for my freedoms
with Relations still nearer and dearer to you, than
either Uncles or Brother or Sister. You had better
have permitted me (uncorrected) to have taken my
own way. Do not those freedoms naturally arise
from the subject before us? And from whom arises
that subject, I pray you? Can you for one quarter
of an hour put yourself in my place, or in the place
of those who are still more indifferent to the case
than I can be—If you can—But altho' I have you
not often at advantage, I will not push you. 
&dotup;Permit me, however, to subjoin, That well may
your Father love your Mother, as you say he does. 
A Wife who has no Will but his! But were there 

not, think you, some struggles between them at
first, Gout out of the question? —Your Mother,
when a maiden, had, as I have heard (and it is very
likely) a good share of those lively spirits which she
liked in your Father. She has none of them now. 
How came they to be dissipated? —Ah! my dear! 
—She has been too long resident in Trophonius's
Cave, I doubt (a) .&dotup; 
Let me add one reflection upon this subject, and
so intitle myself to your correction for all at once. — 
It is upon the conduct of those Wives (for you and I
know more than one such) who can suffer themselves
to be out-blustered and out-gloomed of their own
wills, instead of being fooled out of them by acts of
tenderness and complaisance. —I wish, that it does
not demonstrate too evidently, that, with some of the
Sex, insolent controul is a more efficacious subduer
than kindness or concession. Upon my life, my dear,
I have often thought, that many of us are mere Babies
in Matrimony: Perverse fools, when too much indulged
and humoured; creeping Slaves, when treated
harshly. But shall it be said, that Fear makes us
more gentle obligers than Love? —Forbid it, Honour!
forbid it, Gratitude! forbid it, Justice! that any
woman of sense should give occasion to have this said
of her! 
Did I think you would have any manner of doubt,
from the style or contents of this Letter, whose saucy
pen it is that has run on at this rate, I would write
my name at length; since it comes too much from
my heart to disavow it: But at present the initials
shall serve; and I will go on again directly. 
A. H. 