


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Lord L. came to town from Scotland within
two or three months of Sir Charles's arrival in
England. His first visit was to the young Baronet; 
who, on my Lord's avowing his passion for his sister,
and her acknowleging her esteem for him, introduced
him to her, and put their hands together, holding
them between both his: With pleasure, said he, I
join hands where hearts so worthy are united. Do
me, my Lord, the honour, from this moment, to look
upon me as your brother. My father, I find, was a
little embarrassed in his affairs. He loved his daughters,
and perhaps was loth that they should too early
claim another protection: But had he lived to make
himself easy, I have no doubt, but he would have
made them happy. He has left that duty upon me— 
And I will perform it. 
His sister was unable to speak for joy. My Lord's
tears were ready to start. 
My father, proceeded Sir Charles, in one of his
letters to me, acquainted me with the state of your
Lordship's affairs. Reckon upon my best services:
Promise, engage, undertake. The brother, my Lord,
hopes to make you easy: The sister, will make you
happy. 
Miss Charlotte was affected with this scene; and
she pray'd, with her hands and eyes lifted up, that
God would make his power as large as his heart:
The whole world would then, she said, be benefited
either by his bounty, or his example. 
Do you wonder now, my dear Mr. Reeves, that
Miss Grandison, Lady L. and Lord L. know not
how to contain their gratitude, when this beneficent-minded
brother is spoken of? 

And has not my Charlotte, said he, turning towards
her, and looking at Miss Caroline, some happy
man, that she can distinguish by her love? You are
equally dear to me, my sisters. Make me your confident,
Charlotte. Your inclinations shall be my
choice. 
Dear Miss Grandison, why did you mislead me by
your boasts of unreservedness? What room was
there for reserves to such a brother? —And yet it is
plain, you have not let him know all your heart; and
he seems to think so too. And now you are uneasy
at an hint he has thrown out of that nature. 
Two months before the marriage, Sir Charles put
into his sister's hands a paper sealed up. Receive
these, my Caroline, said he, as from your father's
bounty, in compliance with what your mother would
have wish'd, had we been bless'd with her life. When
you oblige Lord L. with one hand, make him, with
the other, this present: And intitle yourself to all the
gratitude, with which I know his worthy heart will
overflow, on both occasions. I have done but my
duty. I have performed only an article of the will,
which I have made in my mind for my father, as
time was not lent him to make one for himself. 
He saluted her, and withdrew, before she broke the
seal: And when she did, she found in it bank notes
for 10,000l. 
She threw herself into a chair, and was unable for
some time to stir; but recovering herself, hurried out
to find her brother. She was told, he was in her
sister's apartment. She found him not there, but
Charlotte in tears. Sir Charles had just left her. 
What ails my Charlotte? 
O this brother, my Caroline! —There is no bearing
his generous goodness. See that deed. See that
paper that lies upon it. She took it up; and these
were the contents of the paper: 


“I have just now paid my sister Caroline the sum
that I think she would have been intitled to expect
from my father's bounty, and the family circumstances,
had life been lent him to settle his
affairs, and make a will. I have an entire confidence
in the discretion of my Charlotte: And have,
by the inclosed deed, establish'd for her, beyond
the power of revocation, that independency as to
fortune, to which, from my father's death, I think
her intitled. And for this, having acted but as an
executor, I claim no merit, but that of having
fulfilled the supposed will of either of our parents,
as either had survived the other. Cherish, therefore,
in your grateful heart, their memory. Remember,
that when you marry, you change the
name of Grandison. Yet, with all my pride,
what is Name? —Let the man be worthy of you:
And be he who he will that you intitle to your
vows, I will embrace him, as the brother of 
“Your affectionate
“Charles Grandison.” 

The deed was for the same sum, as he had given
her sister, and to carry interest. 
The two sisters congratulated, and wept over, each
other, as if distressed. —To be sure, they were distressed. 
Caroline found out her brother: But when she approached
him, could not utter one word of what she
had meditated to say: But, dropping down on one
knee, blessed him, as she owned, in heart, both for
Lord L. and herself; but could only express her gratitude
by her lifted-up hands and eyes. 
Just as he had raised and seated her, enter'd to
them the equally grateful Charlotte. He placed her
next her sister, and drawing a chair for himself, taking
an hand of each, he thus addressed himself to them: 

My dear sisters, you are too sensible of these but
due instances of my brotherly love. It has pleased
God to take from us our father and mother. We are
more than brothers and sisters; and must supply to
each other the wanting relations. Look upon me
only as an executor of a will, that ought to have been
made, and perhaps would, had time been given. 
My circumstances are greater than I expected; 
greater, I dare say, than my father thought they
would be. Less than I have done, could not be done,
by a brother who had power to do this. You don't
know how much you will oblige me, if you never
say one word more on this subject. You will act
with less dignity, than becomes my sisters, if you
look upon what I have done in any other light than
as your due. 
O my aunt! Be so good, as to let the servants
prepare my apartment at Selby-house. There is no
living within the blazing glory of this man! But,
for one's comfort, he seems to have one fault; and
he owns it—And yet does not acknowlegement annihilate
that fault? —O no! for he thinks not of correcting
it. This fault is pride. Do you mind what
a stress he lays now-and-then on the Family-name?
and, as above, Dignity, says he, that becomes my sisters! 
—Proud mortal! —O my Lucy! he is proud, too
proud, I doubt, as well as too considerable in his fortunes
—What would I say? —Yet, I know who would
study to make him the happiest of men—Spare me,
spare me here, my uncle; or rather, skip over this
passage, Lucy. 
Sir Charles, at the end of eight months from his
father's death, gave Caroline, with his own hand, to
Lord L. 
Charlotte has two humble servants, Lord G. and
Sir Walter Watkyns, as you have seen in my former
letters; but likes not either of them. 
Lord L. carried his Lady down to Scotland, where 

she was greatly admired and caressed by all his relations. 
How happy for your Harriet was their critically-proposed
return, which carried down Sir Charles
and Miss Charlotte to prepare every-thing at Colne-brooke
for their reception! 
Sir Charles accompanied my Lord and Lady L. as
far on their way to Scotland as York; where he made
a visit to Mrs. Eleanor Grandison, his father's maiden-sister,
who resides there. She, having heard of his
goodness to his sisters, and to every-body else with
whom he had concerns, longed to see him; and on
this occasion rejoiced in the opportunity he gave her to
congratulate, to bless, and applaud, her nephew. 
What multitudes of things have I farther to tell
you, relating to this strange man! Let me call him
names. 
I enquired after the history of the good Dr. Bartlett:
But the ladies said, As they knew not the whole of it,
they would refer me to the Doctor himself. They
knew however enough, they said, to reverence him
as one of the most worthy and most pious of men. 
They believed, that he knew all the secrets of their
brother's heart. 
Strange, methinks, that these secrets lie so deep! 
Yet there does not seem any thing so very forbidding,
either in Sir Charles or the Doctor, but that one might
ask them a few innocent questions. And yet I did
not use to be so very curious neither. Why should I
be more so than his sisters? —Yet persons coming
strangers into a family of extraordinary merit, are
apt, I believe, to be more inquisitive about the affairs
and particularities of that family, than those who
make a part of it: And when they have no other
motive for their curiosity, than a desire to applaud
and imitate, I see not any great harm in it. 
I was also very anxious to know, what, at so early
an age (for Sir Charles was not then eighteen) were
the faults he found with the governor appointed for 

him. It seems, the man was not only profligate
himself, but, in order to keep himself in countenance,
laid snares for the young gentleman's virtue; which,
however, he had the happiness to escape; tho' at an
age in which youth is generally unguarded. This man
was also contentious, quarrelsome, and a drinker; and
yet (as Sir Charles at the time acknowleged to his
sisters) it had so very indifferent an appearance, for a
young man to find fault with his governor, that, as
well for the appearance-sake, as for the man's, he
was very loth to complain, till he became insupportable. 
It was mentioned, as it ought, greatly to the
honour of the young gentleman's frankness and magnanimity,
that when, at last, he found himself obliged
to complain of this wicked man to his father, he gave
him a copy of the letter he wrote, as soon as he sent
it away. You may make, Sir, said he, what use you
please of the step I have taken. You see my charge. 
I have not aggravated it. Only, let me caution you,
that, as I have not given you by my own misconduct
any advantage over me, you do not make a still worse
figure in my reply, if you give me occasion to justify
my charge. My father loves his son. I must be his
son. An altercation cannot end in your favour. 
But, on enquiry into the behaviour of this bad man
(who might have tainted the morals of one of the
finest youths on earth), which the son besought the
father to make before he paid any regard to his complaints,
Sir Thomas dismissed him, and made a compliment
to his son, that he should have no other governor,
for the future, than his own discretion. 
Miss Jervois's history is briefly this: 
She had one of the best of fathers: Her mother is
one of the worst of women. A termagant, a swearer,
a drinker, unchaste—Poor Mr. Jervois! —I have told
you, that he (a meek man) was obliged to abandon
his country, to avoid her. Yet she wants to have her 

daughter under her own tuition—Terrible! —Sir
Charles has had trouble with her. He expects to have
more—Poor Miss Jervois! 
Miss Emily's fortune is very great. The ladies say,
Not less than 50,000l. Her father was an Italian and
Turky merchant; and Sir Charles, by his management,
has augmented it to that sum, by the recovery
of some thousands of pounds, which Mr. Jervois had
thought desperate. 
* *
And thus have I brought down, as briefly as I was
able, tho' writing almost night and day (and greatly
indulged in the latter by the ladies, who saw my heart
was in the task,) the history of this family, to the
time when I had the happiness (by means, however,
most shockingly undesirable) to be first acquainted
with it. 
And now a word or two to present situations. 
Sir Charles is not yet come down, Lucy. And
this is Monday! —Very well! —He has made excuses
by his cousin Grandison, who came down with my
cousin Reeves on Sunday morning; and both went
up together yesterday—Vastly busy, no doubt! —He
will be here to-morrow, I think, he says. His excuses
were to his sisters and Lord L. I am glad he did
not give himself the importance with your Harriet, to
make any to her on his absence. 
Miss Grandison complains, that I open not my
heart to her. She wants, she says, to open hers to
me; but as she has intricacies that I cannot have, I
must begin. She knows not how, she pretends. 
What her secrets may be, I presume not to guess:
But surely I cannot tell a sister, who, with her sister,
favours another woman, that I have a regard for her
brother; and that before I can be sure he has any
for me. 
She will play me a trick, she just now told me, if
I will not let her know who the happy man in Northamptonshire 

is, whom I prefer to all others. That
there is such a one somewhere, she says, she has no
doubt: And if she find it out, before I tell her, she
will give me no quarter, speaking in the military
phrase; which sometimes she is apt to do. Lady L.
smiles, and eyes me with great attention, when her
sister is raillying me, as if she, also, wanted to find
out some reason for my refusing Lord D. I told them
an hour ago, that I am beset with their eyes, and
Lord L.'s; for Lady L. keeps no one secret of her
heart, nor, I believe, any body's else that she is
mistress of, from her Lord. Him, I think, of all
the men I know (my uncle not excepted) I could
soonest intrust with a secret. But, have I, Lucy,
any to reveal? It is, I hope, a secret to myself, that
never will be unfolded, even to myself, that I love a
man, who has not made professions of Love to me. 
As to Sir Charles Grandison—But have done, Harriet! 
Thou hast named a name, that will lead thee— 
Whither will it lead me? —More than I am at present
my own, I am, and will be ever, my dear Lucy, 
Your affectionate Harriet Byron. 

