



My dearest Miss Darnford,
I Was afraid I ended my last Letter in a gloomy
way; and I am obliged to you for the kind and 

friendly Notice you take of it. It was owing to a
Train of Thinking which sometimes I get into, of
late; I hope, only symptomatically, as you say, and
that the Cause and Effect will soon vanish together. 
But what a Task, my dear Miss, I'll warrant, you
think you have set me! I thought, in the Progress
of my Journal, and in my Letters, I had given so
many Instances of Mr. B's polite Tenderness to me,
that no new ones would be requir'd at my Hands; 
and when I said he was always most complaisant before
Company, I little expected, that such an Inference
would be drawn from my Words, as would
tend to question the Uniformity of his Behaviour to
me, when there were no Witnesses to it. But I am
glad you give me an Opportunity to clear up all
your Doubts on this Subject. To begin then, 
You first desire an Instance, Where Mr. B. has
borne with some Infirmity of mine: 
Next, That in Complaisance to my Will, he has
receded from his own: 
And, lastly, Whether he breaks not into my Retirements
unceremoniously, and without Apology or
Concern, making no Difference between the Field
or the Stud, and my Chamber or Closet. 
I know not, my dear Miss, what the Distance is,
at which the polite Ladies, and those of Rank, think
it proper to endeavour to keep their Husbands: 
But I will give you, by and by, the Subject of one
Conversation only, which will answer all you mean,
as I apprehend, and at the same time acquaint you
with the Notions and Behaviour of us both, with
respect to this Distance, and my Retirements; and
then leave you to judge as you think fit. 
As to the first, his bearing with my Infirmities, he
is daily giving Instances of his Goodness to me on
this Head; and I am asham'd to say, that of late I
give him so much Occasion for them as I do: But 

he sees my Apprehensiveness, at times, tho' I endeavour
to conceal it; and no Husband was ever so
soothing and so indulgent as Mr. B. He gives me
the best Advice, as to my Malady, if I may call it
one: Treats me with redoubled Tenderness; talks
to me upon the Subjects I most delight to dwell
upon; as of my worthy Parents; what they are
doing at this time, and at that; of our intended
Journey to London; of the Diversions of the Town; 
of Miss Darnford's Company; and when he goes
abroad, sends up my good Mrs. Jervis to me, because
I should not be alone. At other times, takes
me abroad with him; brings this Neighbour and
that Neighbour to visit me; and carries me to visit
them: Talks of our Journey to Kent, and into Lincolnshire,
and to my Lady Davers's to Bath, to
Tunbridge, and I can't tell whither, when the apprehended
Time shall be over. —In fine, my dear
Miss Darnford, you cannot imagine one half of his
tender Goodness and Politeness to me! Indeed you
cannot! —Then, as to what you call respectful,
he watches every Motion of my Eye, every Turn
of my Countenance; seldom gives his Opinion upon
Subjects that he kindly imagines within my Capacity,
till he has heard mine; and I have the less
Fear of falling into mean Compliances, because his
Generosity is my Guardian, and nover fails to exalt
me, more than I can debase myself, or than it is
possible I can deserve. Then he hardly ever goes
out to any Distance, but he brings me some pretty
Present, that he thinks will be grateful to me: When
at home, is seldom out of my Company; delights
to teach me French and Italian, and reads me Pieces
of manuscript Poetry, in several of the modern
Tongues: (for he speaks them all); explains to me
every thing I understand not; delights to answer
all my Questions, and to incourage my Inquisitiveness 

and Curiosity; tries to give me a Notion of
Pictures and Medals, and reads me Lectures upon
them, for he has a fine Collection of both; and
every now and then will have it, that he has been
improved by my Questions and Observations. 
What say you to these things, my dear Miss? Do
they come up to your first Question? or do they
not? Or is not what I have said, a full Answer, were
I to say no more, to all your Inquiries? Can there
be any such thing as undue Compliances to such an
Husband, on my Side, think you? And when I have
charm'd to sleep, by my grateful Duty, that watchful
Dragon Prerogative, as Lady Davers, in one of
her Letters, calls it; and am resolved not to awake
it, if I can help it, by the least disobliging or wilfully
perverse Act, what have I to apprehend from
it? 
O my dear Miss, I am thoroughly convinc'd, that
half the Misunderstandings among marry'd People,
are owing to Trifles, to petty Distinctions, to mere
Words, and little captious Follies, to Over-weenings,
or unguarded Petulances: And who would forego
the solid Satisfactions of Life, for the sake of triumphing
in such poor Contentions, if one could triumph? 
Are such Foibles as these to be dignify'd by the
Name of Inclinations, and Humours, which, to be
given up, would be making such a Sacrifice, as shall
render the married Life little desirable to free and
generous Minds?— 
But say not, my dear Miss, to free and generous
Minds: For every high Spirit deserves not those Epithets: 
Nor think what I say, a Partiality in behalf
of my own Conduct, and an Argument for Tameness
of Spirit, and such an one as would lick the Dust; 
for, let me tell you, my dear Friend, that dearly as
I love and honour my Mr. B. if he were to require 

of me any thing that I thought it was my Duty not
to comply with, I should be the unhappiest Creature
in the World; because I am sure I should withstand
his Will, and desire him to excuse my Compliance. 
But then I would reserve my Strength for these
greater Points, and would never dispute with him
the smaller, altho' they were not intirely to my Likeing: 
And this would give both Force and Merit to
the Opposition, when I found it necessary: But to
contest every little Point, where nothing but one's
stubborn Will was in the Question, what an inexcusable
Perverseness would that be! How ready to
enter the Lists against an Husband, would it make
one appear to him? And where, besides, is the Merit
of Obliging, were we only to yield to what will
oblige ourselves? 
But you next require of me an Instance, where,
in Complaisance to my Will, he has receded from
his own? I don't know, Miss, what to say to this. 
When Mt. B. is all Tenderness and Indulgence, as I
have said, and requires of me nothing, that I can
have a material Objection to; ought I not to oblige
him? Can I have a Will, that is not his? Or would
it be excusable, if I had? All little Matters, as I have
said, I chearfully give up: Great ones have not yet
occurr'd between us, and I hope never will. One
Point, indeed, I have some Apprehension may happen; 
and that, to be plain with you, is, We have
had a Debate or two on the Subject (which I maintain)
of a Mother's Duty to nurse her own Child; 
and, I am sorry to say it, he seems more determin'd
than I wish he were, against it. 
I hope it will not proceed so far, as to awaken
the sleeping Dragon I mention'd, Prerogative by
Name; but I doubt I cannot give up this Point
very contentedly. But as to lesser Points, had I been 

a Duchess born, I think I would not have contested
them with my Husband. 
Upon the Whole of this Question then, I have
really had no Will of my own to contend for, so
generous is Mr. B. and so observant and so grateful
have I thought it my Duty to be; yet I could give
you many respectful Instances, too, of his receding,
when he has desir'd to see what I have been writing,
and I have told him to whom, and begg'd to be excus'd. 
One such nstance I can give since I began
this Letter. This is it. 
I put it in my Bosom, when he came up: He saw
me do so. 
Are you writing, my Dear, what I must not see? 
I am writing to Miss Darnford. Sir; and she
begg'd, you might not, at present. 
This augments my Curiosity, Pamela. What can
two such Ladies write, that I may not see? 
If you won't be displeased, Sir, I had rather you
would not, because Miss desires you may not see her
Letter, nor this my Answer, till the latter is in her
Hands. 
Then I will not, return'd Mr. B. 
Will this Instance, my dear Miss, come up to
your Demand for one, where he recedes from his
own Will, in Complaisance, to mine? 
But now, as to what both our Notions and our
Practice are on the Article of my Retirements, and
whether he breaks in upon them unceremoniously,
and without Apology, let the Conversation I promised,
inform you, which began on the following
Occasion: 
Mr. B. rode out early one Morning, within a few
Days past, and did not return till the Afternoon, an
Absence I had not been used to of late; and breakfasting
and dining without him being also a new thing
to me, I had such an Impatiency to see him, having 

expected him at Dinner, that I was forced to retire
to my Closet, to try to divert it off, by writing; 
and the gloomy Conclusion of my last, was then the
Subject. He return'd about Four o'Clock, and indeed
did not tarry to change his Riding-dress, as
your Politeness, my dear Friend, would perhaps have
expected, but came directly up to me, with an Impatiency
to see me, equal to my own, when he was
told, upon Inquiry, that I was in my Closet. 
I heard his welcome Step, as he came up-stairs; 
which generally, after a longer Absence than I
expect, has such an Effect upon my fond Heart,
that it gives a responsive Throb for every Step he
takes towards me, and beats quicker and faster, as
he comes nearer and nearer, till, tapping my Breast,
I say to it sometimes, Lie still, busy Fool as thou
art! Canst thou not forbear letting thy discerning
Lord see thy nonsensical Emotions? I love to indulge
thee, in them, myself, 'tis true; but then let
nobody else observe them; for, generous as thy
Master is, thou mayst not perhaps meet with such
favourable Interpretations as thou deservest, when
thou art always fluttering thus, as he approaches,
and playest off all thy little joyful Frolicks into the
glowing Cheek, and brighten'd Eye, of thy Mistress; 
which makes her look, as if she were conscious of
some Misdemeanour; when all the time, it is nothing
in the world but grateful Joy, and a Love so innocent,
that the purest Mind might own it. 
This little Flutter and Chiding of the busy Simpleton,
made me meet him but at the Closet-door,
instead of the Entrance of my Chamber, as sometimes
I do. —So, my dear Love, how do you?
folding his kind Arms about me, and saluting me
with Ardour. Whenever I have been but a few
Hours from you, my Impatience to see my Beloved,
will not permit me to stand upon the Formality of a 

Message to know how you are ingag'd; but I break
in upon you, even in my Riding-dress, as you see. 
Dear Sir, you are very obliging. But I have no
Notion of mere Formalities of this kind (How unpolite
this, my dear Miss, in your Friend!) in a married
State; since 'tis impossible a virtuous Wife can be
imploy'd about any thing, that her Husband may
not know; and so need not fear Surprizes. 
I am glad to hear you say this, my Pamela; for I
have always thought the extraordinary Clvilities and
Distances of this kind, which I have observed among
several Persons of Rank, altogether unaccountable. 
For, if they are exacted by the Lady, I should suspect
she had Reserves, which she herself believ'd I
could not approve of. If not exacted, but practised
of Choice by the Gentleman, it carries with it, in
my Opinion, a false Air of Politeness, little less than
affrontive to the Lady, and dishonourable to himself; 
for does it not look, as if he supposed, and
allowed, that; probably, she might be so imployed,
that it was necessary to apprise her of his Visit, lest
he should make Discoveries not to her Credit, or his
own? 
One would not, Sir, (for I thought his Conclusion
too severe) make such a harsh Supposition as
this, neither: For there are little Delicacies and
Moments of Retirement, no doubt, in which a
modest Lady would be glad to be indulged by the
tenderest Husband. 
It may be so, in an early Matrimony, before the
Lady's Confidence in the Honour and Discretion of
the Man she has chosen, has disingag'd her from her
Bridal Reserves. 
Bridal Reserves! dear Sir; permit me to give it, as
my humble Opinion, That a Wife's Behaviour ought
to be as pure and as circumspect, in Degree, as that
of a Bride, or even of a maiden Lady, be her Confidence 

in her Husband's Honour and Discretion, ever
so great. For, indeed, I think, a gross or a careless
Demeanour little becomes that Modesty, which is
the peculiar Excellency and Distinction of our Sex. 
You account very well, my Dear, by what you
now say, for your own over-nice Behaviour, as I
have sometimes thought it. But are we not all apt
to argue for a Practice we make our own, because
we do make it our own, rather than from the Reason
of the Thing? 
I hope, Sir, that is not the present Case with me; 
for, permit me to say, That an over-free or negligent
Behaviour in a Lady in the marry'd State, must
be a Mark of Disrespect to her Consort; and would
shew, as if she was very little solicitous about what
Appearance she made in his Eye. And must not
this beget in him, a slight Opinion of her, and her
Sex too, as if, supposing the Gentleman had been a
free Liver, she would convince him, there was no
other Difference in the Sex, but as they were within
or without the Pale; licens'd by the Law, or acting
in Defiance of it? 
I understand the Force of your Argument, Pamela. 
But you was going to say something more. 
Only, Sir, permit me to add, That when, in my
particular Case, you injoin me to appear before you
always*  dress'd, even in the early Part of the Day,
it would be wrong, if I was less regardful of my Behaviour
and Actions, than of my Appearance. 
I believe you are right, my Dear, if a precise or
unnecessary Scrupulousness be avoided, and where
all is unaffected, easy, and natural, as in my Pamela. 
For I have seen marry'd Ladies, both in England
and France, who have kept a Husband at greater
Distance, than they have exacted from some of his 

Sex, who have been more intitled to his Resentment,
than to his Wife's Intimacies. 
But to wave a Subject, in which, as I can with
Pleasure say, neither of us have much Concern,
tell me, my Dearest, how you were imploy'd before
I came up? Here are Pen and Ink: Here too is
Paper; but it is as spotless as your Mind: To whom
was you directing your Favours now? May I not
know your Subject? 
Mr. H's Letter was a Part of it; and so I had put
it by, at his Approach; and not chusing he should
see that; I am writing, reply'd I, to Miss Darnford: 
But I think you must not ask me to see what I have
written this time. I put it aside, that you should
not, when I heard your welcome Step. The Subject
is our parting with our noble Guests; and a
little of my Apprehensiveness, on an Occation upon
which our Sex may write to one another; but, for
some of the Reasons we have been mentioning,
Gentlemen should not desire to see. 
Then I will not, my dearest Love (So here,
Miss, is another Instance–––I could give you an hundred
such,–––of his receding from his own Will, in
Complaisance to mine): Only, continued he, let
me warn you against too much Apprehensiveness,
for your own sake, as well as mine; for such a Mind,
as my Pamela's, I cannot permit to be habitually overclouded. 
And yet there now hangs upon your Brow
an Over-thoughtfulness, which you must not indulge. 
Indeed, Sir, I was a little too thoughtful, from
my Subject, before you came; but your Presence,
like the Sun, has dissipated the Mists that hung upon
my Mind. See you not, and I press'd his Hand with
my Lips, they are all gone already? smiling upon
him, with a Delight unfeigned. 

Not quite, my obliging Charmer; and therefore,
if you have no Objection, I will change my Dress,
and attend you in the Chariot for an Hour or two,
whither you please, that not one Shadow may remain
visible in this dear Face. And then he saluted me
with Ardour. 
Whither you please, Sir. A little Airing with you,
will be highly agreeable to me. 
The dear Obliger went and chang'd his Dress in
an Instant; and he led me to the Chariot, with his
usual tender Politeness, and we had a charming Airing
of several Miles; returning quite happy, chearful,
and delighted with each other's Conversation,
without calling in upon any of our good Neighbours: 
For what need of that, my dear Miss, when
we could be the best Company in the World to
each other? 
Now, Miss, do these Instances come up to your
Questions? Do they, or do they not? —If you
think not, I could give you our Conversation in the
Chariot; for I wrote it down, at my first Leisure,
so highly was I delighted with it: For the Subject
was my dearest Parents; a Subject started by himself,
because he knew it would oblige me. But being
tir'd with writing, I may reserve it, till I have the
Pleasure of seeing you, if you think it worth asking
for. And so I will hasten to a Conclusion of this
long Letter. 
You will perceive, my dear Miss, by what I have
written, in what Sense it may be justly said, That
Mr. B. is most complaisant to me before Company,
perhaps, politically, as you say, to do Credit to his
own generous Choice: —But that he is more tender,
yea, respectfully tender, (for that's the Word with
you) and not less polite to me, in our retired Hours,
you will have no Doubt, from what I have related; 
and could further relate if it was necessary: For 

every Day produces Instances equal to what I have
given you. 
Then, my dear Miss, let me say to you, what I
could not so freely say to any other young Lady; 
That I never could have hoped I should be so happy
as I am, in other Particulars, from a Gentleman who
has given himself the Liberties Mr. B. has done: 
For I never hear from him, in Company, or when
alone, the least shocking Expression, or such frothy
Jests, as tend to convey impure Ideas to the most
apprehensive Mind. There is indeed the less Wonder
in this, and that we can glory in a true conjugal
Chastity, as I have the Vanity to think, his Love,
as well as my own, is the Love of the Mind, rather
than that of Person; and our tenderest and most
affecting Moments, are those which lift us up above
Sense, and all that Sense can imagine. But this is a
Subject too delicate to be dwelt upon, even to you: 
And you'll better comprehend all I mean, when
your pure Mind meets with a Gentleman of exalted
Sense, like Mr. B. whom, if you find not so good
as you wish, your Example will make so. 
Permit me to add, for the sake of you, my dear
Parents, as well as for those of my much-respected
Friends, who have join'd in the kind Caution you
give me, my dear Miss, against getting into too
thoughtful and gloomy a way, that there is no great
Fear, that I should continue long in it, when I have
so kind and so generous a Comforter as Mr. B. 
For, at his Presence, all my fearful Apprehensions
are dissipated, and vanish like a Morning Dream. 
And depend upon it, that so sure as the Day succeeds
to the Night, so sure will my Mind, while
capable of the least Sense of Gratitude, be illuminated
the Moment he shines out upon me, let it be
ever so over-cast in his Absence, thro' imaginary
Doubts and apprehended Evils. 

I have only further to add, for my Comfort, that
next Thursday Sev'nnight, if nothing hinders, we are
to set out for London. And why do you think I
say for my Comfort? Only that I shall then soon have
the Opportunity, to assure you personally, as you
give me Hope, how much I am, my dear Miss
Darnford, 
Your truly affectionate
P. B. 

I will shew you, when I see you, the Conversation
you require about the young Ladies. 
