



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

I went up to my new-taken apartment, and fell to
writing in character, as usual. I thought I had
made good my quarters. But the cruel creature, understanding
that I intended to take up my lodgings
there, declared with so much violence against it, that
I was obliged to submit, and to accept of another
lodging, about twelve doors off, which Mrs. Moore
recommended. And all the advantage I could obtain, 

was, that Will. unknown to my Spouse, and for fear
of a freak, should lie in the house. 
Mrs. Moore, indeed, was unwilling to disoblige
either of us. But Miss Rawlins was of opinion, that
nothing more ought to be allowed me: And yet Mrs.
Moore owned, that the refusal was a strange piece of
tyranny to an Husband, if I were an Husband. 
I had a good mind to make Miss Rawlins smart for
it. Come and see Miss Rawlins, Jack—If thou likest
her, I'll get her for thee with a wet finger, as the saying
is! 
The Widow Bevis indeed stickled hard for me
[An innocent or injured man will have friends everywhere]. 
She said, That to bear much with some wives,
was to be obliged to bear more: And I reflected,
with a sigh, that tame spirits must always be imposed
upon. And then, in my heart, I renewed my vows
of Revenge upon this haughty and perverse Beauty. 
The second fellow came back from town about nine
o'clock, with Miss Howe's Letter of Wednesday last. 
‘Collins, it seems, when he left it, had desired, that
it might be safely and speedily delivered into Miss
Lætitia Beaumont's own hands. But Wilson, understanding,
that neither she nor I were in town [He
could not know of our difference, thou must think] resolved
to take care of it till our return, in order to
give it into one of our own hands; and now delivered
it to her messenger.’ 
This was told her. Wilson, I doubt not, is in her
favour upon it. 
She took the Letter with great eagerness; opened it
in a hurry [I am glad she did: Yet, I believe, all
was right] before Mrs. Moore and Mrs. Bevis [Miss
Rawlins was gone home]; and said, She would not
for the world, that I should have had that Letter, for
the sake of her dear friend the writer; who had written
to her very uneasily about it. 
Her dear friend! repeated Mrs. Bevis, when she 

told me this: —Such mischief-makers are always
deemed dear friends till they are found out! 
The widow says, that I am the finest gentleman she
ever beheld. 
I have found a warm kiss now-and-then very kindly
taken. 
I might be a very wicked fellow, Jack, if I were
to do all the mischief in my power. But I am evermore
for quitting a too easy prey to reptile Rakes. 
What but difficulty (tho' the Lady is an Angel) engages
me to so much perseverance here? And here,
Conquer or die, is now the determination! 
* *
I have just now parted with this honest widow. 
She called upon me at my new lodgings. I told her,
that I saw I must be further obliged to her in the course
of this difficult affair. She must allow me to make her
a handsome present when all was happily over. But I
desired, that she would take no notice of what should
pass between us, not even to her Aunt; for that she, as
I saw, was in the power of Miss Rawlins: And Miss
Rawlins being a maiden gentlewoman, knew not the
right and the fit in matrimonial matters, as she, my
dear widow, did. 
Very true: How should she? said Mrs. Bevis, proud
of knowing—nothing! But, for her part, she desired
no present. It was enough if she could contribute to
reconcile Man and Wife, and disappoint mischief-makers. 
She doubted not, that such an envious creature
as Miss Howe was glad that Mrs. Lovelace had
eloped—Jealousy and Love was Old Nick! 
See, Belford, how charmingly things work between
me and my new acquaintance the widow! —Who
knows, but that she may, after a little farther intimacy
(tho' I am banished the house on nights) contrive
a midnight visit for me to my Spouse, when all is
still and fast asleep? 

Where can a woman be safe, who has once entered
the Lists with a contriving and intrepid Lover? 
But as to this Letter, methinks thou sayest, of Miss
Howe? 
I knew thou wouldest be uneasy for me: But did
not I tell thee, that I had provided for every-thing? 
That I always took care to keep Seals entire, and
to preserve Covers (a) ? Was it not easy then, thinkest
thou, to contrive a shorter Letter out of a longer; 
and to copy the very words? 
I can tell thee, it was so well ordered, that, not
being suspected to have been in my hands, it was not
easy to find me out. Had it been my Beloved's hand,
there would have been no imitating it, for such a
length. Her delicate and even mind is seen in the
very cut of her Letters. Miss Howe's hand is no bad
one; but is not so equal and regular. That little
devil's natural impatience hurrying on her fingers,
gave, I suppose, from the beginning, her hand-writing,
as well as the rest of her, its fits and starts, and those
peculiarities, which, like strong muscular lines in a
face, neither the pen, nor the pencil, can miss. 
Hast thou a mind to see what it was I permitted
Miss Howe to write to her lovely friend? Why then
read it here, as extracted from hers of Wednesday
last, with a few additions of my own. The additions
underscored. 

My dearest Friend,
You will perhaps think, that I have been too long
silent. But I had begun two Letters at different
times since my last, and written a great deal each time; 
and with spirit enough, I assure you; incensed as I was
against the abominable wretch you are with, particularly
on reading yours of the 21st of the past month. 
The FIRST I intended to keep open till I could
give you some account of my proceedings with Mrs. 

Townsend. It was some days before I saw her: And
this intervenient space giving me time to reperuse
what I had written, I thought it proper to lay that
aside, and to write in a style a little less fervent; for
you would have blamed me, I knew, for the freedom
of some of my expressions [Execrations if you please.] 
And when I had gone a good way in the SECOND,
the change in your prospects, on his communicating
to you Miss Montague's Letter, and his better behaviour,
occasioning a change in your mind, I laid that
aside also: And in this uncertainty thought I would
wait to see the issue of affairs between you before I
wrote again; believing that all would soon be decided
one way or other.— 
* *
Here I was forced to break off. I am too little my
own mistress—My Mother (b)  is always up and
down; and watching as if I were writing to a Fellow. 
What need I [she asks me] lock myself in (c) , if I
am only reading past correspondencies? For that is
my pretence, when she comes poking in with her face
sharpened to an edge, as I may say, by a curiosity,
that gives her more pain than pleasure—The Lord
forgive me; but I believe I shall huff her next time
she comes in. 
* *
Do you forgive me too, my dear. My Mother
ought; because she says, I am my Father's girl; and
because I am sure I am hers. 
Upon my life, my dear, I am sometimes of opinion, that
this vile man was capable of meaning you dishonour. 
When I look back upon his past conduct, I cannot help
thinking so: What a villain, if so! —But now I hope,
and verily believe, that he has laid aside such thoughts. 
My reasons for both opinions I will give you. 
For the first; to wit, that he had it once in his head
to take you at advantage if he could, I consider (d) , that 

Pride, Revenge, and a delight to tread in unbeaten
paths, are principal ingredients in the character of this
finished Libertine. He hates all your family, yourself
excepted—Yet is a Savage in Love. His Pride, and
the credit which a few plausible qualities sprinkled
among his odious ones, have given him, have secured
him too good a reception from our eye-judging, our
undistinguishing, our self-flattering, our too-confiding
Sex, to make assiduity and obsequiousness, and a conquest
of his unruly passions, any part of his study. 
He has some reason for his animosity to all the men,
and to one woman, of your family. He has always
shewn you and his own family too, that he prefers his
Pride to his Interest. He is a declared Marriage-hater; 
a notorious Intriguer; full of his inventions,
and glorying in them. As his vanity had made him
imagine, that no woman could be proof against his
Love, no wonder that he struggled like a Lion held
in toils (e) , against a passion that he thought not returned
(f) . Hence, perhaps, it is not difficult to
believe, that it became possible for such a wretch as
this to give way to his old prejudice sagainst Marriage; 
and to that Revenge which had always been a
first passion with him (g) . 
And hence may we account for his delays; his teazing
ways; his bringing you to bear with his lodging in
the same house; his making you pass to the people of
it as his Wife; his bringing you into the company of
his Libertine companions; the attempt of imposing
upon you that Miss Partington for a bedfellow, &c. 
My reasons for the contrary opinion; to wit, that he
is now resolved to do you all the justice in his power to
do you; are these: That he sees that all his own family
(h)  have warmly engaged themselves in your
cause: That the horrid wretch loves you; with such
a Love, however, as Herod loved his Mariamne: That,
on enquiry, I find it to be true, that Counsellor Williams 

(whom Mr. Hickman knows to be a man of
eminence in his profession) has actually as good as
finished the Settlements: That two draughts of them
have been made; one avowedly to be sent to this very
Captain Tomlinson: And I find, that a Licence has
actually been more than once endeavoured to be obtained,
and that difficulties have hitherto been made
equally to Lovelace's vexation and disappointment. 
My Mother's Proctor, who is very intimate with the
Proctor applied to by the wretch, has come at this
information, in confidence; and hints, that as Mr.
Lovelace is a man of high fortunes, these difficulties
will probably be got over. 
I had once resolved to make strict enquiry about Tomlinson; 
and still, if you will, your Uncle's favourite
Housekeeper may be sounded, at distance. 
I know that the matter is so laid (i) , that Mrs.
Hodges is supposed to know nothing of the treaty set
on foot by means of Capt. Tomlinson. But your
Uncle is an old man (k) ; and old men imagine themselves
to be under obligation to their paramours, if
younger than themselves, and seldom keep any-thing
from their knowlege. —Yet, methinks, there can be
no need; since Tomlinson, as you describe him, is so
good a man, and so much of a gentleman; the end
to be answered by his being an impostor so much more
than necessary, if Lovelace has villainy in his head. — 
And thus what he communicated to you of Mr. Hickman's
application to your Uncle, and of Mrs. Norton's
to your Mother (some of which particulars I am
satisfied his vile agent Joseph Leman could not reveal
to his viler employer); his pushing on the Marriage-day,
in the name of your Uncle; which it could not
answer any wicked purpose for him to do; and what
he writes of your Uncle's proposal, to have it thought
that you were married from the time that you had
lived in one house together; and that to be made to 

agree with the time of Mr. Hickman's visit to your
Uncle; the insisting on a trusty person's being present
at the Ceremony, at that Uncle's nomination—These
things make me assured that he now at last means honourably. 
But if any unexpected delays should happen on his side,
acquaint me, my dear, with the very Street where Mrs.
Sinclair lives; and where Mrs. Fretchville's house is
situated (which I cannot find that you have ever mentioned
in your former Letters—which is a little odd); 
and I will make strict enquiries of them, and of Tomlinson
too; and I will (if your heart will let you take
my advice) soon procure you a refuge from him with
Mrs. Townsend. 
But why do I now, when you seem to be in so good a
train, puzzle and perplex you with my retrospections? 
And yet they may be of use to you, if any delay happen
on his part. 
But that I think cannot well be. What you have
therefore now to do, is, so to behave to this proud-spirited
wretch, as may banish from his mind all remembrance
of past disobligations (l) , and to receive his
addresses, as those of a betrothed Lover. You will
incur the censure of Prudery and Affectation, if you
keep him at that distance, which you have hitherto
kept him at. His sudden (and as suddenly recovered)
illness has given him an opportunity to find out that
you love him [Alas! my dear, I knew you loved
him!] He has seemed to change his nature, and is all
love and gentleness. And no more quarrels now, I
beseech you. 
I am very angry with him, nevertheless, for the freedoms
which he took with your person (m) ; and I think
some guard is necessary, as he is certainly an encroacher. 
But indeed all men are so; and you are such a charming
creature, and have kept him at such a distance! — 
But no more of this subject. Only, my dear, be not 

over-nice, now you are so near the State. You see what
difficulties you laid yourself under, when Tomlinson's
Letter called you again into the wretch's company. 
If you meet with no impediments, no new causes
of doubt (n) , your Reputation in the eye of the world
is concerned, that you should be his, and, as your Uncle
rightly judges, be thought to have been his, before now. 
And yet, let me tell you, I can hardly bear to think,
that these Libertines should be rewarded for their villainy
with the best of the Sex, when the worst of it
are too good for them. 
I shall send this long Letter by Collins (o) , who
changes his day to oblige me. As none of our Letters
by Wilson's conveyance have miscarried, when
you have been in more apparently disagreeable situations
than you are in at present, I have no doubt that
This will go safe. 
Miss Lardner (p)  (whom you have seen at her cousin
Biddulph's) saw you at St. James's Church on
Sunday was fortnight. She kept you in her eye during
the whole time; but could not once obtain the
notice of yours, tho' she courtesied to you twice. 
She thought to pay her compliments to you when the
Service was over; for she doubted not but you were
married—and for an odd reason—Because you came
to church by yourself. —Every eye, as usual where-ever
you are, she said, was upon you: And this seeming
to give you hurry, and you being nearer the door
than she, you slid out before she could go to you. 
But she ordered her servant to follow you till you were
housed. This servant saw you step into a chair which
waited for you; and you ordered the men to carry
you to the place where they took you up. She describes
the house as a very genteel house, and fit to receive
people of fashion: And what makes me mention
this, is, that perhaps you will have a visit from her; 
or message, at least. 

So that you have Mr. Doleman's testimony to the credit
of the house and people you are with; and he is a
man of fortune, and some reputation; formerly a Rake
indeed; but married to a woman of family; and having
had a palsy-blow, one would think, a penitent (q) . 
You have also Mr. Mennell's at least passive testimony; 
Mr. Tomlinson's; and now, lastly, Miss Lardner's; 
so that there will be the less need for enquiry: But you
know my busy and inquisitive temper, as well as my
affection for you, and my concern for your honour. But
all doubt will soon be lost in certainty. 
Nevertheless I must add, that I would have you command
me up, if I can be of the least service or pleasure
to you (r) . I value not Fame; I value not Censure; 
nor even Life itself, I verily think, as I do your
Honour, and your Friendship. —For is not your Honour
my Honour? And is not your Friendship the
Pride of my Life? 
May Heaven preserve you, my dearest creature, in
Honour and Safety, is the prayer, the hourly prayer,
of 
Your ever-faithful and affectionate
Anna Howe. 
Thursday Morn. 5. 
I have written all night. Excuse indifferent writeing. 
My crow-quills are worn to the stumps, and
I must get a new supply. 
These Ladies always write with crow-quills, Jack. 
If thou art capable of taking in all my providences,
in this Letter, thou wilt admire my sagacity and contrivance
almost as much as I do myself. Thou seest,
that Miss Lardner, Mrs. Sinclair, Tomlinson, Mrs.
Fretchville, Mennell, are all mentioned in it. My
first liberties with her person also [Modesty, modesty,
Belford, I doubt, is more confined to Time,
Place, and Occasion, even by the most delicate minds,
than those minds would have it believed to be]. And 

why all these taken notice of by me from the genuine
Letter, but for fear some future Letter from the Vixen
should escape my hands, in which she might refer to
these names? And if none of them were to have been
found in this that is to pass for hers, I might be routed
horse and foot, as Lord M. would phrase it in a like
case. 
Devilish hard (and yet I may thank myself) to be
put to all this plague and trouble! —And for what,
dost thou ask? —O Jack, for a triumph of more value
to me beforehand than an Imperial Crown! —Don't
ask me the value of it a month hence. But what indeed
is an Imperial Crown itself, when a man is used
to it? 
Miss Howe might well be anxious about the Letter
she wrote. Her sweet friend, from what I have let
pass of hers, has reason to rejoice in the thought, that
it fell not into my hands. 
And now must all my contrivances be set at work,
to intercept the expected Letter from Miss Howe; 
which is, as I suppose, to direct her to a place of
safety, and out of my knowlege. Mrs. Townsend
is, no doubt, in this case, to smuggle her off. I hope
the villain, as I am so frequently called between these
two girls, will be able to manage this point. 
But what, perhaps, thou askest, if the Lady should
take it into her head, by the connivance of Miss Rawlins,
to quit this house privately in the night? 
I have thought of this, Jack. Does not Will. lie
in the house? And is not the Widow Bevis my fast
friend? 