


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


Sat. June 16. 
I gave you, my dear grandmamma, in my two
last Letters (a) , an account of our delightful engagements,
among ourselves principally, and now-and-then
at public places. What a rich portion of time
has passed! And we have still the promise of a week
to come. And now let me take a survey of our
present happy situation. 

Every thing that can be adjusted, is. The Count
of Belvedere, as by Letters to Signor Jeronymo, is
on his way to Italy, and not unhappy: Lady Clementina
is mistress of every question, and the more
studious, for that reason, of obliging all her friends. 
How joyfully do we all, in prospect, see a durable
tranquillity taking possession of her noble heart! 
The Marquis and Marchioness have not one care
written on their heretofore visibly anxious brows. 
Clementina sees, as every one does, their amended
health in their fine countenances; wonders at the
power she had over them, and regrets that she made
not, what she calls, a more grateful and dutiful use
of it. 
Father Marescotti, the Bishop, Signor Juliano,
compliment the English air, as if that had contributed
to the alteration; and promise wonders from that and
its salubrious baths for Jeronymo. 
The highest merit is given to the conduct of Sir
Charles, and to the advice he gave not to precipitate
the noble Clementina. 
Lord and Lady L. Lord and Lady G. when we are
by ourselves, felicitate me more than any body else
on these joyful changes; for they rightly say, that I
could not but look upon the happiness of Lady Clementina,
as essential to my own. 
But your congratulations, my dearest grandmamma,
I most particularly expect, that in this
whole critical event, which brought to England a
Lady so deserving of every one's Love, not one
shadow of doubt has arisen of the tender, inviolable
affection of the best of men to his grateful Harriet. 
So peculiarly circumstanced as he was, how unaffectedly
noble has been his behaviour to his Wife,
and to his Friend, in the presence of both! How
often, tho' causelesly (because of the nobleness of the
Lady's heart) have I silently wished him to abate of
his outward tenderness to me, before her, tho' such as 

became the purest mind. –––Nothing but the conscious
integrity of his own heart, above disguises or concealments,
as his ever was, could thus gloriously
have carried him thro' situations so delicate. 
He had, from the first, avowed his friendly, his
compassionating Love, as well as Admiration, of this
noble Lady: That generous avowal prepared his
Harriet to expect, that he should behave with tenderness
to her, even had not her transcendent worthiness
done honour to every one who paid her honour. 
To her he applauded, he exalted his Harriet:
She was prepared to expect that he would recognize,
in the face of the sun, obligations that he had entered
into at the altar: And both knew, that he
was a good man; and that a good man cannot allow
himself either to palliate or temporize with a duty,
whether it regarded friendship, or a still closer and
more sacred union. How many difficulties will the
character and intervention of a man of undoubted
virtue obviate! What cannot he effect? What force
has his example! Sir Charles Grandison's Love is a
Love to be gloried in. Magnanimity and tenderness
are united in his noble heart. Littleness of any kind
has no place in it: All that know him are studious
to commend themselves to his favourable opinion; 
solicitous about what he will think of them; and,
suppressing common foibles before him, find their
hearts expand, nor know how to be mean. 
O my God! do thou make me thankful for such
a Friend, Protector, Director, Husband! Increase,
with my gratitude to Thee, my merits to him, and
my power of obliging him. For his sake, spare
to him [This, my grandmamma, he bids be my prayer
–––I know it is yours] in the awful hour approaching,
his Harriet; whose life and welfare, he assures
her, are the dearest part of his own. 

