


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Miss Grandison desired me to return to the
company. I did. She soon followed me; took
her seat; and, with an air of mingled dignity and
concern, deliver'd herself after this manner. 
If it be not too late, after a perseverance in error so
obstinate, to reinstate myself in my brother's good
opinion, dearer to me than that of the whole world
besides, my ingenuousness shall make atonement for
that error. 
Sir Ch. I would spare my sister the— 
Miss Gr. I will not be spared, Sir—Pray hear me— 
I would not, in order to extenuate my own faults (I
hope I have not many) seek to throw blame upon the
absent; much less upon the everlastingly absent: And
yet my brother's piety must not be offended, if I am
obliged to say something that may seem to cast a shade
on a memory—Be not hurt, Sir—I will be favourable
to that memory, and just to my own fault. You, Harriet, 

would no more excuse me, than my brother, if
I failed in either. 
I bowed, and blushed. Sir Charles look'd at me
with a benign aspect. 
My father, proceeded she, thought fit to be, or to
seem to be, displeased with something that passed between
him and Lord L. on the application made by
my Lord to him for my sister. 
Sir Ch. He was not willing, perhaps, that a treaty
of marriage should be begun but at his own first motion,
however unexceptionable the man, or the
proposal. 
Miss Gr. Every one knows that my father had
great abilities; and they were adorned with a vivacity
and spirit, that, where-ever pointed, there was no
resisting. He took his two daughters to task upon this
occasion; and, being desirous to discourage in them,
at that time, any thoughts of marriage, he exerted,
besides his authority, on this occasion (which I can
truly say, had due weight with us both) that vein of
humour and raillery for which he was noted; insomuch
that his poor girls were confounded, and unable
to hold up their heads. My sister, in particular, was
made to be ashamed of a passion, that surely no young
woman, the object so worthy, ought to be ashamed
of. My father also thought fit (perhaps for wise reasons)
to acquaint us, that he designed for us but small
fortunes: And this depreciated me with myself. My
sister had a stronger mind, and had better prospects. I
could not but apprehend from what my sister suffer'd,
what must be my sufferings in turn; and I thought I
could be induced to take any step, however rash,
where virtue was not to be wounded, rather than undergo
what she underwent from the raillery of a man
so lively, and so humorous, and who stood in so venerable
a degree of relation to me. While these impressions
were strong in my mind, Captain Anderson,
who was quarter'd near us, had an opportunity to fall 

into my company at an assembly. He is a sprightly
man, and was well received by every-body; and particularly
a favourite of three young ladies, who could
hardly be civil to each other, on his account: And
this, I own, when he made assiduous court to me, in
preference to them, and to every other woman, gave
him some consequence with me: And then, being the
principal officer in that part of the country, he was
caressed, as if he were a general. A daughter of Sir
Thomas Grandison was deemed a prize worthy of his
ambition, by every-body, as well as by himself:
While this poor daughter, dreading the difficulties
that her sister had met with, and being led to think,
by what her father declared to both sisters, that two
or three thousand pounds would be the height of her
fortune, had only to apprehend, that a captain either
of horse or foot, who had been perhaps for years a
frequenter of public places, both in town and country,
in hopes of raising his fortune, would think himself
but poorly paid for his pains (were she even to
obtain her father's pardon) should she engage without
waiting for his consent; as she was urged to do, by
letters, which he found ways unsuspectedly to send
her. —I hope, Sir, I hope, my Lord, and you, my
two sisters, that you will now, from what I have said,
acquit me of insincerity, tho' you cannot of past indiscretion. 
Nevertheless, my pride at times was piqued:
Sometimes I declared off; at other times was prevailed
upon by arts which men are masters of, to go
on again; till I found myself entangled, and at a loss
to know how to go either backward or forward. The
gentleman was indeed of a genteel family: But the object
of my sister's regard had so much to be said for
him; stood so well with my brother; and even with
my father; was so much the man of quality, in every
respect, that a rash step in me would be look'd upon
as the more disgraceful, on that account: And I could 

not but apprehend, that if I married Captain Anderson,
I must be pitied, rejected, scorned, for one while,
if not for ever. 
And what title, often thought I, when I permitted
myself seriously to think, have I to give my father a
son, my brother, my sister, my Lord L. (should he
and my sister marry) a brother, whom they would not
have chosen, nor will probably own? —Have they not
a right to reject him, as their relation? And shall
Charlotte Grandison, the daughter of the most prudent
of mothers, take a step that shall make her be
looked upon as the disgrace of her family? Shall
she be obliged to follow a soldier's fortune into different
quarters, and perhaps to distant regions? 
Such as these were, at times, my reasonings; and
perhaps they would have had the less force with me,
had I, in giving myself an husband, had none of these
relations living, on whom to obtrude a new one, to
their dislike, by my marriage. 
Hence I could not bear to reveal the matter to my
sister, who, in her choice, had so much advantage over
me. I thought within these few weeks past, I could
reveal it to my new-found sister; and it was one of
my motives to come hither, at your invitation, Lord
and Lady L. when you told me she was so obliging as
to accompany you down: But she was everlastingly
writing; and I was shy of forcing an opportunity, as
none agreeably offer'd. 
Sir Ch. I would not interrupt you, Charlotte. — 
But may I ask, If this whole affair was carried on by
letter? Did you not sometimes see each other? 
Miss Gr. We did. But our meetings were not
frequent, because he was at one time quarter'd in
Scotland; at another, was sent to Ireland; where he
staid six or seven months; at others, in distant parts
of the kingdom. 
Sir Ch. In what part of the king's dominions is the
Captain now? 

Miss Gr. Dear Sir, could not the person who acquainted
you with the affair, inform you of that? 
Sir Ch. (smiling) The person could, madam; and
did. He is in London. 
Miss Gr. I hope, my brother, after the freedom
of my confession, and an ingenuousness that is not
often found in such cases as this, will not be so unkind
as to imagine, that I ought to have traps laid for
me, as if I were not now at last frank and unreserved. 
Sir Ch. Exceedingly just, Charlotte! exceedingly
just! —I beg your pardon. I said, we had all something
to be forgiven for. I am not however questioning
you, with intent to cast a stone; but to lend you
a hand. 
Miss Gr. O that we had had liberty granted to us,
having such a brother, to correspond with him! — 
Happy shall I be, if I can atone— 
There she stopt. 
Sir Ch. Proceed with your story, my dear Charlotte. 
—Greatly does the atonement overbalance the
fault! 
Miss Gr. (bowing to her brother) Captain Anderson
is in town. I have seen him twice. I was to
have seen him at the play, had I not come down to
Colnebrooke. Not a tittle of the truth will I hide
from you. Now I have recover'd the right path,
not one wry step will I ever again wilfully take. I have
suffer'd enough by those I had taken, tho' I endeavour'd
to carry it off as well as I could (even sometimes
by a spirit of bravery) when it lay heavy here— 
putting her hand to her heart. 
Sir Charles rose from his seat; and taking one of
his sister's hands between both his, Worthy sister! 
Amiable Charlotte! After this noble frankness, I
must not permit you to accuse yourself. An error
gracefully acknowleged, is a victory won. If you
think Captain Anderson worthy of your heart, he 

shall have a place in mine; and I will use my interest
with Lord and Lady L. to allow of his relation to
them. Miss Byron and Dr. Bartlett will look upon
him as their friend. 
He sat down again; his countenance shining with
brotherly love. 
Miss Gr. O Sir, what shall I say? You add to my
difficulties by your goodness. I have told you how I
had entangled myself. Captain Anderson's address
began with hopes of a great fortune, which he imagined
a daughter of Sir Thomas Grandison could not
fail, first or last, to have. That this was his principal
motive, has been, on many occasions (on too many
for his advantage) visible to me. My allowance of
his address, as I have hinted, was owing to my apprehensions,
that I should not be a fortune worthy of
a more generous man. At that time, our life was a
confined one; and I girlishly wished for Liberty— 
Matrimony and Liberty—Girlish connexion!
as I have since thought. 
We could none of us help smiling at this lively
sally: But she went on more seriously. 
I thought at first, that I could break with him when
I would: But he holds me to it; and the more, since
he has heard of your goodness to me; and builds great
hopes of future preferment on the alliance. 
Sir Ch. But do you not love Captain Anderson,
my sister? 
Miss Gr. I believe I love him as well as he loves
me. His principal view, as I have said, has come
out, avowedly, to be to my fortune. If I regulate
my esteem for him by his for me, I ought not, for
the very reason that he likes me, to approve of him. 
Sir Ch. I do not wonder that the Captain is desirous
to hold you to it, to use your words: But, my dear
Charlotte, answer me, Have you had less liking to
Captain Anderson since your fortune is ascertained, and
absolutely in your own power, than you had before? 

Miss Gr. Not on that account, if I know my heart:
But he has been a much more earnest suiter since your
goodness to me was generally known, than before. 
When public report had made me absolutely dependent
on my brother; and diminished (beyond the
truth, as it has proved) the circumstances of the family; 
and when my sister and I were unhappy between
our fears and our hopes; I then heard but little
from Captain Anderson; and that little was so prudent,
and so cold—But I had found out the man
before. 
Lord and Lady L. with warmth of voice, called
him unworthy man. I thought him so; and so, by
his looks, did Dr. Bartlett. 
Sir Ch. Poor man! —He seems to have been too
prudent, to trust even to Providence. But what, my
sister, are now your difficulties? 
Miss Gr. They proceed from my folly. Captain
Anderson appeared to me at first, a man of sense, as
well as an agreeable man in his person and air. He
had a lively and easy elocution. He spoke without
doubt; and I had therefore the less doubt of his understanding. 
The man who knows how to say agreeable
things to a woman, in an agreeable manner, has
her vanity on his side; since, to doubt his veracity,
would be to question her own merit. When he came
to write, my judgment was even still more engaged in
his favour than before. But when he thought himself
on a safe footing with me, he then lost his hand-writing,
and his stile, and even his orthography. 
I blush to say it; and I then blush'd to see it. 
Sir Ch. Men will be men. It is natural for us,
when we find out our imperfections, to endeavour to
supply them, or to gloss them over to those, whose
good opinion of us we wish to engage. I have
known men, who are not so ready as the Captain
seems to have been, to find out their own defects. 
Captain Anderson, perhaps, lost his letter-writer, by 

the shifting of quarters. But it is strange that a man
of family, as the Captain is, should be so very
illiterate. 
Miss Gr. His early wildnesses, as I afterwards
heard, made him run from school, before he had acquired
common school-learning. His friends bought
him a pair of colours. That was all they would ever
do for him: And his father marrying a second wife,
by whom he had children, consider'd not him as one. 
This came out to be his story. But he displayed himself
to me in very different lights. He pretended to
have a pretty estate, which, tho' not large, was well-condition'd,
and capable of improvement; besides
very considerable expectations. A mind that would
not impose on another, must least bear to be imposed
upon itself: But I could not help despising him, when
I found myself so grosly imposed upon, by the letters
he had procured to be written for him; and that he
was not either the man of sense, or learning, that
he would have had me think him. 
Sir Ch. But what was the safe footing, my sister,
that he thought he was upon with you? 
Miss Gr. O Sir! while all these good appearances
held in his favour, he had teazed me into a promise. 
And when he had gained that point, then it was, or
soon after, that he wrote to me with his own hand. 
And yet, tho' he convinced me by doing so, that he
had before employed another, it was a point agreed
upon, that our intercourse was to be an absolute secret; 
and I trembled to find myself exposed to his
scribe, a man I knew not; and who must certainly
despise the lover whom he helped to all his agreeable
flourishes, and, in despising him, must probably despise
me. Yet I will say, that my letters were such as I can
submit to the severest eye. It was indeed giving him
encouragement enough, that I answer'd him by pen
and ink; and he presumed enough upon it, or he 

had never dared to teaze me, for a promise, as he did
for months before I made him one. 
Sir Ch. Women should never be drawn-in to fetter
themselves by promises. On the contrary, they ought
always to despise, and directly to break with the man,
who offers to exact a promise from them. To what
end is a promise of this kind endeavour'd to be obtained,
if the urger suspects not the fitness of his addresses
in the eyes of those who have a right to be consulted; 
and if he did not doubt either his own merit,
or the lady's honour and discretion? —Therefore
wanted to put it out of her own power to be dutiful; 
or (if she had begun to swerve, by listening to a
clandestine address) to recover herself? Your father,
my dear (but you might not know that) could have
absolved you from this promise (a).  You have not
now, however, any-body to controul you: You are
absolutely your own mistress: And I see not but a
promise—But, pray, of what nature was this promise? 
Miss Gr. O my folly! —I declared, that I never
would marry any other man without his consent, while
he was single. By this means (to my confusion) I
own, that I made him my father, my guardian, my
brother; at least, I made the influences over me,
of such of them as had been living, of no avail, in
the most material article of my life; teazed, as I
told you, into it; and against my judgment. 
Soon after, he let me know, as I said, in his own
hand-writing, what an illiterate, what a mere superficial
man I had enter'd into treaty with. And ever
since I have been endeavouring by pen, as well as in
person, to get him to absolve me from my rash promise:
And this was my view and endeavour before I
had entitle to the independence, in which, Sir, you
was so good as to establish me. 
I once thought, proceeded she, that he would 

easily have complied, and have look'd out elsewhere
for a wife; for I sought not to fetter him, as you
justly call it: He was not of so much consequence
with me; and this renders me, perhaps, the less excuseable:
—But you held me not long enough in suspense,
as to the great things you intended to do for
me, to enable me to obtain that release from Captain
Anderson, which I was meditating to procure, before
he knew what those were. 
All this time I kept my own secret. I had not
confidence enough in the steps I had so rashly taken
(indeed had not humility enough) to make any living
creature acquainted with my situation: And this was
the reason, I suppose, that I never was guessed at, or
found out. The proverb says, Two can keep a secret,
when one is away: But my Harriet knows [I bowed]
that I very early, in my knowlege of her, dropt hints
of an entanglement, as I ludicrously called it; for I
could not, with justice, say Love. 
Sir Ch. Charming frankness! How do your virtues
shine thro' your very mistakes! —But there are many
women who have suffer'd themselves to be worse entangled,
even beyond recovery, when they have not
had to plead the apprehensions which you had at entering
into this affair. 
Miss Gr. You are Sir Charles Grandison, Sir: I
need not say more. We often dread, in rash encounters,
to make those communications, which only can
be a means to extricate us from the difficulties into
which we have plunged ourselves. Had I, for the last
six or seven years of my life, known my brother as I
now know him; had I been indulged in a correspondence
with him in his absence; not a step would I
have taken, but with his approbation. 
Sir Ch. Perhaps I was too implicit on this occasion:
But I always thought it more safe, in a disputable case, to
check, than to give way, to an inclination. My father
knew the world. He was not an ill-natured man. He 

loved his daughters. I had not the vanity to imagine,
that my sisters, the youngest near as old as myself, would
want my advice, in material articles: And to break
thro' a father's commands, for the sake merely of gratifying
myself—I don't know how—But I could not do it:
And as a considerate person, when he has lost a dear
friend, and more particularly a parent, is apt to recollect
with pleasure those instances in which he has given
joy to the departed, and with pain the contrary; methinks
I am the more satisfied with myself, for having
obeyed a command, that however, at the time, I
knew not how to account for. 
Miss Gr. You are happy, brother, in this recollection. 
I should be more unhappy than I am (on
your principles) had I vexed my father in this affair. 
Thank God, he knew nothing of it. But now, Sir,
I have told you the whole truth. I have not aggravated
the failings of Captain Anderson; nor wish to
do so; for the man that once I had but the shadow of
a thought to make one day my nearest relation, is intitled,
I think, to my good wishes, tho' he prove not
quite so worthy, as I once believed him. 
Permit me, however, to add, that Captain Anderson
is passionate, overbearing: I have never
of late met him, but with great reluctance: Had
I not come to Colnebrooke, I should have seen him,
as I confessed; but it was with the resolution that
I had for a considerable time past avowed to him,
Never to be his; and to be a single woman all my
life, if he would not disengage me of my rash, my
foolish promise. And now be pleased (looking round
her to every one present) to advise me what to do. 
Lord L. I think the man utterly unworthy of you,
sister Charlotte. I think you are right to resolve never
to have him. 
Lady L. Without waiting for my brother's opinion,
I must say, That he acts most ungenerously and
unworthily, to hold you to an unequal promise: A promise, 

the like of which you offer'd not to bind him
by. I cannot, Charlotte, think you bound by such
a promise: And the poor trick of getting another person
to write his letters for him, and exposing my sister
to a stranger, and against stipulation—How I should
hate him! —What say you, sister Harriet? 
Harriet. I should be unworthy of this kind confidence,
if, thus called upon, I did not say something,
tho' it came out to be next to nothing—There
seems not to have been any strong affection, any sympathy
of soul, if I may so express myself, at any time,
Miss Grandison, between you and Captain Anderson,
I think? 
Sir Ch. A very proper question. 
Miss Gr. There was not, on either side, I believe. 
I have hinted at my motives, and at his. In every letter
of his he gave me cause to confirm what I have
said of his self-interestedness: And now his principal
plea to hold me to my promise, is, his interest. I
would not to him, I never did, plead mine; tho' his
example would excuse me, if I did. 
Lord L. Was the promise given in writing, sister? 
Miss Gr. Indeed it was. She look'd down. 
Harriet. May I be pardon'd, madam? —The substance
of your promise was, That you would never
marry any other man without his consent, while he
remained unmarried—Did you promise, that, if ever
you did marry at all, it should be to him? 
Miss Gr. No. He wanted me to promise that; but
I refused. And now, my Harriet, what is your
advice? 
Harriet. I beg to hear Dr. Bartlett's opinion, and
yours, Sir (to Sir Charles) before I presume to give
mine. 
Sir Charles looked at the Doctor. The Doctor referred
himself to him. 
Sir Ch. Then, Doctor, you must set me right, if
I am wrong. You are a Casuist. 

As to what Lord L. has said, I think with his Lordship,
that Captain Anderson appears not, in any of his
conduct, to be worthy of Miss Grandison: And in
truth, I don't know many who are. If I am partial,
excuse the brother. 
She bowed. Every one was pleased, that Miss
Grandison was enabled to hold up her head, as she did,
on this compliment from her brother. 
Sir Ch. I think also, if my sister esteems him not,
she is in the right to resolve never to be his. But what
shall we say, as to her promise, Never to be the wife
of any other man without his consent, while he remains
unmarried? It was made, I apprehend, while
her father was living; who might, I believe, Doctor,
you will allow, have absolved her from it: But
then, her very treating with him since to dispense
with it, shews, that in her own conscience she thinks
herself bound by it. 
Every one being silent, he proceeded. 
Lady L. is of opinion, that he acts ungenerously
and unworthily, to endeavour to hold her to an unequal
promise. But what man, except a very generous
one indeed, having obtained an advantage over
such a woman as Charlotte [She redden'd] would
not try to hold it? Must he not, by giving up this
advantage, vote against himself? Women should be
sure of the men in whom they place a confidence
that concerns them highly. Can you think, that the
man who engages a woman to make a promise, does
not intend to hold her to it? When he teazes her to
make it, he as good as tells her he does, let what will
happen to make her wish she had not. 
Miss Gr. O my brother! The repetition of that
word teazes! —Are you not raillying me? —Indeed I
deserve it. 
Sir Ch. Men gain all their advantages by teazing,
by promises, by importunities—Be not concern'd, my
Charlotte, that I use your word. 

Miss Gr. O my brother, what shall I do, if you
railly me on my folly? 
Sir Ch. I mean not to railly you. But I know
something of my own sex; and must have been very
negligent of my opportunities, if I know not something
of the world [I thought, Lucy, he would here have
used the word other instead of the word world]. We
have heard her reason for not binding the Captain by a
like promise; which was, That she did not value him
enough to exact it: And was not that his misfortune? 
She is apprehensive of blame on this head: But her
situation will be consider'd: I must not repeat the circumstances. 
I was grieved to hear that my sisters
had been in such circumstances! What pity, that
those who believe they best know the Sex, think themselves
intitled to treat it with least respect! [How we
women looked upon one another!] I should hope in
charity [In charity, Lucy!] and for the true value I
bear it, as I think a good woman one of the greatest
glories of the creation, that the fault is not generally
in the Sex. 
As to the Captain's artifice to obtain a footing by
letters of another man's writing; that was enough indeed
to make a woman, who herself writes finely,
despise him when she knew it. But to what will not
persons stoop to gain a point, on which their hearts
are fixed? —This is no new method. One signal instance
I will mention. Madam Maintenon, it is reported,
was employed in this way, by a favourite
mistress of Louis XIV. And this was said to be the
means of introducing her to the monarch's favour, on
the ruins of her employer. Let me repeat, that women
should be sure of their men, before they embark
with them in the voyage of Love. Hate the man,
says Lady L. for exposing her to the letter-writer! —Exposing! 
—Let me say, That women, who would not
be exposed, should not put themselves out of their 

own power. O Miss Byron! (turning, to my confusion,
to me, who was too ready to apply the first part
of the caution) be so good as to tell my Emily, that she
never love a man, of whose Love she is not well
assured: That she never permit a man to know his
consequence with her, 'till she is sure he is grateful,
just, and generous: And that she despise him as a
mean and interested man, the first moment he seeks
to engage her in a promise. Forgive me, Charlotte:
You so generously blame yourself, that you will not
scruple to have your experience pleaded for an example
to a young creature, who may not be able, if entangled,
to behave with your magnanimity. 
Seasonably did he say this last part, so immediately
after his reference to me; for I made Miss Grandison's
confusion a half-cover for my own; and I fear but a
half-cover. 
I find I must not allow myself to be long from you,
my dear friends; at least, in this company. Miss
Cantillon, Miss Barnevelt, and half a dozen more
Misses and Masters, with whose characters and descriptions
I first paraded; Where are you? Where
can I find you? My heart, when I saw you at Lady
Betty Williams's, was easy and unapprehensive: I
could then throw my little squibs about me at pleasure; 
and not fear, by their return upon me, the
singeing of my own cloaths! 

