



Miss Montague, To Miss Clar. Harlowe. 

Tuesday, Aug. 1. 
Dearest Madam,
All our family is deeply sensible of the injuries you
have received at the hands of one of it, whom You
only can render in any manner worthy of the relation he
stands in to us all: And if, as an act of mercy and charity,
the greatest your pious heart can shew, you will be pleased
to look over his past wickedness and ingratitude, and suffer
yourself to be our kinswoman, you will make us the happiest
family in the world: And I can engage, that Lord
M. And Lady Sarah Sadleir, and Lady Betty Lawrance,
and my Sister, who are all admirers of your virtues, and
of your nobleness of mind, will for ever love and reverence
you, and do every-thing in all our powers to make
you amends for what you have suffered from Mr. Lovelace. 

This, Madam, we should not, however, dare to
petition for, were we not assured, that he is most sincerely
sorry for his past vileness to you; and that he will, on his
knees, beg your pardon, and vow eternal love and honour
to you. 
Wherefore, my dearest cousin (How you will charm us
all, if this agreeable style may be permitted!) for all our
sakes, for his soul's sake (You must, I am sure, be so good
a lady, as to wish to save a soul!), and allow me to say,
for your own fame's sake, condescend to our joint requests: 
And if, by way of encouragement, you will but say, you
will be glad to see, and to be as much known personally,
as you are by fame, to Charlotte Montague, I will, in two
days time from the receipt of your permission, wait upon
you, with or without my sister, and receive your further
commands. 
Let me, our dearest cousin (we cannot deny ourselves the
pleasure of calling you so), let me intreat you to give me
your permission for my journey to London; and put it in
the power of Lord M. and of the Ladies of the family, to
make you what reparation they can make you, for the
injuries which a person of the greatest merit in the world
has received from one of the most audacious men in it; 
and you will infinitely oblige us all; and particularly her,
who repeatedly presumes to style herself, 
Your affectionate cousin, and obliged Servant,
Charlotte Montague. 