



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

I have many new particulars to acquaint you with
that shew a great change in the behaviour of my
friends to me. I did not think we had so much Art
among us, as I find we have. I will give these particulars
to you as they offered. 
All the family was at church in the morning. They
brought good Dr. Lewen with them, in pursuance of
a previous invitation. And the doctor sent up to desire
my permission to attend me in my own apartment. 
You may believe it was easily granted. 
So the doctor came up. 
We had a conversation of near an hour before dinner: 
But, to my surprize, he waved every-thing that
would have led to the subject I supposed he wanted to
talk about. At last, I asked him, If it were not
thought strange I should be so long absent from church? 
He made me some handsome compliments upon it: 
But said, for his part, he had ever made it a rule, to
avoid interfering in the private concerns of families,
unless desired to do so. 
I was prodigiously disappointed: But supposing that
he was thought too just a man to be made a judge of
in this cause; I led no more to it: Nor, when he
was called down to dinner, did he take the least notice
of leaving me behind him there. 
But this was not the first time since my confinement 

that I thought it a hardship not to dine below. And when
I parted with him on the stairs, a tear would burst its
way; and he hurried down; his own good-natured
eyes glistening; for he saw it. —Nor trusted he his
voice, lest the accent I suppose should have discovered
his concern; departing in silence; tho' with his usual
graceful obligingness. 
I hear, that he praised me, and my part in the conversation
that passed between us. —To shew them, I
suppose, that it was not upon the interesting subjects
which I make no doubt he was desired not to enter
upon. 
He left me so dissatisfied, yet so perplexed with this
new way of treatment, that I never found myself so
much disconcerted, and out of my train. 
But I was to be more so. This was to be a day of
puzzle to me. Pregnant puzzle, if I may so say: 
For there must great meaning lie behind it. 
In the afternoon, all but my Brother and Sister went
to church with the good doctor; who left his compliments
for me. I took a walk in the garden: My
Brother and Sister walked in it too, and kept me in
their eye a good while, on purpose, as I thought, that
I might see how gay and good-humoured they were
together. At last they came down the walk that I
was coming up, hand-in-hand, Lover-like. 
Your servant, Miss—Your servant, Sir—passed between
my Brother and me. 
Is it not cold-ish, Sister Clary? in a kinder voice
than usual, said my Sister, and stopped. —I stopped,
and courtesied low to her half-courtesy. —I think not,
Sister, said I. 
She went on. I courtesied without return; and
proceeded; turning to my poultry-yard. 
By a shorter turn, arm-in-arm, they were there
before me. 
I think, Clary, said my Brother, you must present
me with some of this breed, for Scotland. 

If you please, Brother. 
I'll chuse for you, said my Sister. 
And while I fed them, they pointed to half a dozen: 
Yet intending nothing by it, I believe, but to shew a
deal of love and good-humour to each other before me. 
My Uncles next (at their return from church) were
to do me the honour of their notice. They bid Betty
tell me, they would drink Tea with me in my own
apartment. Now, thought I, shall I have the subject
of next Tuesday enforced upon me. 
But they contradicted the Order for Tea, and only
my Uncle Harlowe came up to me. 
Half-distant, half-affectionate, at his entering my
chamber, was the air he put on to his Daughter-Niece,
as he used to call me; and I threw myself at his feet,
and besought his favour. 
None of these discomposures, child. None of
these apprehensions. You will now have every-body's
favour. All is coming about, my dear. I was impatient
to see you. I could no longer deny myself this
satisfaction. He then raised me, and kissed me, and
called me, Charming creature! 
But he waved entering into any interesting subject. 
All will be well now. All will be right. —No more
complainings! Every-body loves you! —I only came
to make my earliest court to you! [were his condescending
words] and to sit and talk of twenty and
twenty fond things, as I used to do. —And let every
past disagreeable thing be forgotten; as if nothing had
happened. 
He understood me as beginning to hint at the disgrace
of my confinement—No disgrace, my dear,
can fall to your lot: Your reputation is too well established. 
—I longed to see you, repeated he—I have
seen no-body half so amiable since I saw you last. 
And again he kissed my cheek, my glowing cheek; 
for I was impatient, I was vexed, to be thus, as I
thought, played upon: And how could I be thankful 

for a visit, that (it now was evident) was only a too
humble artifice, to draw me in against the next Tuesday,
or to leave me inexcuseable to them all? 
O my cunning Brother! —This is his contrivance. 
And then my anger made me recollect the triumph
in his and my Sister's fondness for each other, as practised
before me; and the mingled indignation flashing
from their eyes, as arm in arm they spoke to me,
and the forced condescension playing upon their lips,
when they called me Clary, and Sister. 
Do you think I could, with these reflections, look
upon my Uncle Harlowe's visit as the favour he seemed
desirous I should think it to be? —Indeed I could not; 
and seeing him so studiously avoid all recrimination,
as I may call it, I gave into the affectation; and followed
him in his talk of indifferent things: While he
seemed to admire This thing and That, as if he had
never seen them before; and now-and-then condescendingly
kissed the hand that wrought some of the
things he fixed his eyes upon; not so much to admire
them, as to find subjects to divert what was most in his
head, and in my heart. 
At his going away—How can I leave you here by
yourself, my dear? You, whose company used to enliven
us all. You are not expected down indeed: But
I protest I had a good mind to surprise your Father
and Mother! —If I thought nothing would arise that
would be disagreeable—My dear, my love! [O the
dear artful gentleman! How could my Uncle Harlowe
so dissemble?] What say you? Will you give me
your hand? Will you see your Father? Can you stand
his displeasure, on first seeing the dear creature who
has given him and all of us so much disturbance? Can
you promise future— 
He saw me rising in my temper—Nay, my dear,
interrupting himself, if you cannot be all resignation,
I would not have you think of it. 
My heart, struggling between duty and warmth of 

temper, was full. You know, my dear, I never could
bear to be dealt meanly with! —How—how can you,
Sir! You, my Papa-Uncle—How can you, Sir! — 
The poor girl! —For I could not speak with connexion. 
Nay, my dear, if you cannot be all duty, all resignation
—better stay where you are. —But after the
Instance you have given— 
Instance I have given! —What Instance, Sir? 
Well, well, child, better stay where you are, if
your past confinement hangs so heavy upon you—But
now there will be a sudden end to it. —Adieu, my
dear! —Three words only—Let your compliance be
sincere! —And love me, as you used to love me— 
Your Grandfather did not do so much for you, as I
will do for you. 
Without suffering me to reply, he hurried away,
as I thought, like one who had been employed to act
a part against his will, and was glad it was over. 
Don't you see, my dear Miss Howe, how they are
all determined? —Have I not reason to dread next
Tuesday? 
Up presently after came my Sister: —To observe,
I suppose, the way I was in. 
She found me in tears. 
Have you not a Thomas à Kempis, Sister? with a
stiff air. 
I have, Madam. 
Madam! How long are we to be at this distance,
Clary? 
No longer, my dear Bella, if you allow me to call
you Sister. And I took her hand. 
No fawning neither, girl! 
I withdrew my hand as hastily, as you may believe
I should have done, had I, in feeling for one of your
parcels under the wood, been bitten by a Viper. 
I beg pardon, said I—Too-too ready to make advances,
I am always subjecting myself to contempts. 

People who know not how to keep a middle behaviour,
said she, must ever-more do so. 
I will fetch you the Kempis, Sister. I did. Here
it is. You will find excellent things, Bella, in that
little book. 
I wish, retorted she, you had profited by them. 
I wish you may, said I. Example from a Sister
older than one's self is a fine thing. 
Older! Saucy little fool! —And away she flung. 
What a captious old woman will my Sister make,
if she live to be one!—demanding the reverence, perhaps,
yet not aiming at the merit; and ashamed of the
years that can only entitle her to the reverence. 
It is plain from what I have related, that they think
they have got me at some advantage by obtaining my
consent to this Interview: But if it were not, Betty's
impertinence just now would make it evident. She
has been complimenting me upon it; and upon the
visit of my Uncle Harlowe. She says, The difficulty
now is more than half over with me. She is sure I
would not see Mr. Solmes, but to have him. Now
shall she be soon better employed than of late she has
been. All hands will be at work. She loves dearly to
have weddings go forward! —Who knows, whose
turn will be next? 
I found in the afternoon a Reply to my Answer to
Mr. Lovelace's Letter. It is full of promises, full of
vows of gratitude, of eternal gratitude, is his word,
among others still more hyperbolic. Yet Mr. Lovelace,
the least of any man whose Letters I have seen,
runs into those elevated absurdities. I should be apt to
despise him for it, if he did. Such language looks always
to me, as if the flatterer thought to find a woman
a fool, or hoped to make her one. 
‘He regrets my indifference to him; which puts all
the hope he has in my favour upon the shocking usage
I receive from my friends. 
‘As to my charge upon him of unpoliteness and uncontroulableness— 

What [he asks] can he say? 
Since being unable absolutely to vindicate himself,
he has too much ingenuousness to attempt to do so: 
Yet is struck dumb by my harsh construction, that his
acknowleging temper is owing more to his carelessness
to defend himself, than to his inclination to
amend. He had never before met with the objections
against his morals which I had raised, justly
raised: And he was resolved to obviate them. What
is it, he asks, that he has promised. but reformation
by my example? And what occasion for the promise,
if he had not faults, and those very great ones,
to reform? He hopes, acknowlegement of an error
is no bad sign; altho' my severe virtue has interpreted
it into one. 
‘He believes, I may be right (severely right, he
calls it) in my judgment against making reprisals in
the case of the intelligence he receives from my family: 
He cannot charge himself to be of a temper
that leads him to be inquisitive into any-body's private
affairs; but hopes, that the circumstances of
the case, and the strange conduct of my friends, will
excuse him; especially, when so much depends upon
his knowing the movements of a family so violently
bent, by measures right or wrong, to carry their
point against me, in malice to him. People he says,
who act like Angels, ought to have Angels to deal
with. For his part, he has not yet learned the difficult
lesson of returning good for evil: And shall
think himself the less encouraged to learn it by the
treatment I have met with from the very persons,
who would trample upon him, as they do upon me,
were he to lay himself under their feet. 
‘He excuses himself for the liberties he owns he has
heretofore taken in ridiculing the Marriage-state. It
is a subject, he says, that he has not of late treated
so lightly. He owns it to be so trite, so beaten a
topic with all Libertines and Witlings; so frothy, 

so empty, so nothing-meaning, so worn-out a theme,
that he is heartily ashamed of himself, ever to have
made it his. He condemns it as a stupid reflection
upon the Laws and Good Order of Society, and
upon a man's own Ancestors: And in himself, who
has some reason to value himself upon his descent
and alliances, more censurable, than in those who
have not the same advantage to boast of. He promises
to be more circumspect than ever, both in his words
and actions, that he may be more and more worthy
of my approbation; and that he may give an assurance
before-hand, that a foundation is laid in his
mind for my example to work upon with equal reputation
and effect to us both;—If he may be so
happy as to call me his. 
‘He gives me up, as absolutely lost, if I go to my
Uncle Antony's: The close confinement; The
Moated-house; The Chapel; The implacableness
of my Brother and Sister, and their power over the
rest of my family, he sets forth in strong lights; and
plainly says, that he must have a struggle to prevent
my being carried thither.’ 
Your kind, your generous endeavours to interest
your Mother in my behalf, will, I hope, prevent
those harsher extremities to which I might be otherwise
driven. And to you I will fly, if permitted, and
keep all my promises, of not corresponding with anybody,
not seeing any body, but by your Mother's
direction and yours. 
I will close and deposit at This place. It is not necessary
to say, How much I am 
Your ever affectionate and obliged
Cl. Harlowe. 