


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Wedn. Sept. 23.
Excellent Mrs. Shirley! Incomparable woman! 
How I love her! If I were such an excellent ancient,
I would no more wish to be young, than she
has so often told us, she does. What my brother
once said, and you once wrote to your Lucy, is true
(in her case, at least); that the matronly and advanced
time of life, in a woman, is far from being the least
eligible part of it; especially, I may add, when health
and a good conscience accompany it. What a spirit
does she, at her time of Life, write with! —But her
heart is in her subject—I hope I may say that, Harriet,
without offending you. 
Not a word did my brother speak of his intention,
till he received that Letter; and then he invited Lady
L. and me, and our two honest men, to afternoon tea
with him—[O but I have not reckoned with you for
your saucy rebukes in your last of the 7th; I owe you
a spite for it; and, Harriet, depend on payment— 
What was I writing? —I have it—] And when tea
was over, he, without a blush, without looking down,
as a girl would do in this situation—[But why so, Harriet? 
Is a woman, on these occasions, to act a part as
if she supposed herself to be the greatest gainer by 

matrimony; and therefore was ashamed of consenting
to accept of an honourable offer? As if, in other
words, she was to be the self-denying receiver rather
than conferrer of an obligation? —Lord, how we rambling-headed
creatures break in upon ourselves!] with
a good grace he told us of his intention to marry; of
his apparition to Mrs. Shirley; of his sudden vanishing; 
and all that—And then he produced Mrs. Shirley's
Letter, but just received. 
And do you think we were not overjoyed? —Indeed
we were. We congratulated him: We congratulated
each other: Lord L. looked as he did when Caroline
gave him his happy day: Lord G. could not keep his
seat: He was tipsy, poor man, with his joy: Aunt
Nell prank'd herself, stroked her ribbands of pink and
yellow, and chuckled and mumped for joy, that her
nephew at last would not go out of Old England for
a wife. She was mightily pleased too with Mrs. Shirley's
Letter. It was just such a one as she herself
would have written upon the occasion. 
I posted afterwards to Mrs. Reeves, to shew her,
as you requested, your Letter: And when we had
read it, there was, Dear Madam, and, Dear Sir; and
now this, and now that; and Thank God—three times
in a breath; and we were cousins, and cousins, and
cousins: And, O blessed! And, O be joyful! —And
Hail the day! —And, God grant it to be a short one! — 
And, How will Harriet answer to the question? Will
not her frankness be try'd? He despises affectation:
So he thinks does she! —Good Sirs! and, O dears! — 
How things are brought about! —O my Harriet! you
never heard or saw such congratulations between three
gossips, as were between our two cousin Reeves's and
me: And not a little did the good woman pride herself
in her prognostics; for she explained that matter
to me. 
Dr. Bartlett is at Grandison-hall, with our unhappy
cousin. How will the good man rejoice! 

Now you will ask, What became of Emily?— 
By the way, do you know that Mrs. O-Hara is
turned Methodist? True as you are alive. And she
labours hard to convert her husband. Thank God
she is any-thing that is serious! Those people have
really great merit with me, in her conversion. —I am
sorry that our own Clergy are not as zealously in
earnest as they. They have really, my dear, if we
may believe aunt Eleanor, given a face of religion to
subterranean colliers, tinners, and the most profligate
of men, who hardly ever before heard either of the
word, or thing. But I am not turning Methodist,
Harriet. No! you will not suspect me. 
Now Emily, who is at present my visiter, had
asked leave before my brother's invitation (and was
gone, my Jenny attending her) to visit her mother,
who is not well. My brother was engaged to sup
abroad, with some of the Danby's, I believe: I therefore
made Lord and Lady L. cousin Reeves and cousin
Reeves, and my aunt Grandison, sup with me. 
Emily was at home before me—Ah the poor
Emily! —I'll tell you how it was between us— 
My lovely girl, my dear Emily, said I, I have good
news to tell you, about Miss Byron— 
O thank God! —And is she well? Pray, madam,
tell me, tell me; I long to hear good news of my dear
Miss Byron. 
Why, she will shortly be married, Emily!— 
Married, madam!— 
Yes, my love! —And to your guardian, child!— 
To my guardian, madam! —Well, but I hope
so— 
I then gave her a few particulars. 
The dear girl tried to be joyful, and burst into
tears! 
Why weeps my girl? —O fie! Are you sorry that
Miss Byron will have your guardian? I thought you
loved Miss Byron. 

So I do, madam, as my own self, and more than
myself, if possible—But the surprize, madam—Indeed
I am glad! What makes me such a fool? —Indeed
I am glad! —What ails me, to cry, I wonder! 
It is what I wished, what I prayed for, night and day. 
Dear madam, don't tell any-body. I am ashamed of
myself. 
The sweet April-faced girl then smiled through her
tears. 
I was charmed with her innocent sensibility; and if
you are not, I shall think less of you than ever I did
yet. 
Dear madam, said she, permit me to withdraw for
a few minutes: I must have my cry out—And I shall
then be all joy and gladness. 
She tript away; and in half an hour came down to
me with quite another face. 
Lady L. was then with me. I had told her of the
girl's emotion. We are equally lovers of you, my
dear, said I; you need not be afraid of Lady L. 
And have you told, madam? —Well, but I am not
a hypocrite. What a strange thing! I who have always
been so much afraid of another Lady, for Miss
Byron's sake, to be so oddly affected, as if I were
sorry! —Indeed I rejoice. —But if you tell Miss Byron,
she won't love me: She won't let me live with her
and my guardian, when she is happy, and has made
him so. And what shall I do then? for I have set my
heart upon it. 
Miss Byron, my dear, loves you so well, that she
will not be able to deny you any-thing your heart is
set upon, that is in her power to grant. 
God bless Miss Byron as I love her, and she will be
the happiest of women! —But what was the matter
with me? —Yet I believe I know—My poor mother
had been crying sadly to me, for her past unhappy
life. She kissed me, as she said, for my Father's 

sake: She had been the worst of wives to the best of
husbands. 
Again the good girl wept at her mother's remembered
remorse—My guar—my guardian's goodness,
my mother said, had awakened her to a sense of her
wickedness. My poor mother did not spare herself:
And I was all sorrow; for what could I say to her on
such a subject? —And all the way that I came home in
the coach, I did nothing but cry. I had but just dried
my eyes, and tried to look chearful, when you came
in. And then, when you told me the good news,
something struck me all at once, struck my very heart; 
I cannot account for it: I know not what to liken it
to—And had I not burst into tears, I believe it would
have been worse for me. But now I am myself; and
if my poor mother could pacify her conscience, I
should be a happy creature—because of Miss Byron's
happiness. You look at each other, Ladies: But if
you think I should not, bid me begone from your presence
for a false girl, and never see you more. 
Now, Harriet, this emotion of Emily appears to
me as a sort of phænomenon. Do you account for it
as you will; but I am sure Emily is no hypocrite:
She has no art: She believes what she says, that her
sudden burst of tears was owing to her heart being affected
by her mother's contrition: And I am also sure
that she loves you above all the women in the world. 
Yet it is possible, that the subtle thief, ycleped Love,
had got very near her heart; and just at the moment
threw a dart into one angle of it, which was the something
that struck her, all at once, as she phrased it,
and made her find tears a relief. This I know, my
dear, that we may be very differently affected by the
same event, when judged of at a distance, and near. 
If you don't already, or if you soon will not, experience
the truth of this observation in the great event
before you, I am much mistaken. 

But you see, Harriet, what joy this happy declaration
of my brother, and the kind reception it has
met with from Northamptonshire, has given us all. 
We will keep your secret, never fear, till all is over; 
and, when it is, you shall let my brother know, from
the Letters we have had the favour of seeing, as much
as we do. Till he does, excellent as he thinks you,
he will not know one half of your excellencies, nor
the merit which your Love and your Suspenses have made
you with him. 
But, with you, I long for the arrival of the next
Letters from Italy. God grant that Lady Clementina
hold her resolution, now that she sees it is almost
impossible for her to avoid marrying. If she should
relent, what would be the consequence, to my brother,
to herself, to you! And how shall all we, his
friends and yours, be affected! You think the Lady
is obliged, in duty to her parents, to marry. Lady L.
and I are determined to be wife, and not give our opinions
till the events which are yet in the bosom of
Fate, disclosing themselves, shall not leave us a possibility
of being much mistaken. And yet, as to what
the filial duty requires of her, we think she ought to
marry. Mean time, I repeat, ‘God grant that Lady
Clementina now hold her mind!’ 
* *
Lady L. sends up her name. Formality in her,
surely. I will chide her. But here she comes. —I
love, Harriet, to write to the moment; that's a knack
I had from you and my brother: And be sure continue
it, on every occasion: No pathetic without it! 
Your servant, Lady L. 
And your servant, Lady G. —Writing? To whom? 
To our Harriet— 
I will read your Letter—Shall I? 
Take it; but read it out, that I may know what I
have written. 

Now give it me again. I'll write down what you
say to it, Lady L. 
Lady L. I say you are a whimsical creature. But I
don't like what you have last written. 
Charlotte. Last written—'Tis down. —But why so,
Lady L.? 
Lady L. How can you thus teaze our beloved Byron,
with your conjectural evils? 
Ch. Have I supposed an impossibility? —But 'tis
down—Conjectural evils. 
Lady L. If you are so whimsical, write—‘My dear
Miss Byron’— 
Ch. My dear Miss Byron—'Tis down. 
Lady L. (Looking over me) ‘Do not let what
this strange Charlotte has written, grieve you:’— 
Ch. Very well, Caroline! —grieve you.— 
Lady L. ‘Sufficient to the day is the evil thereof.’ 
Ch. Well observed. —Words of Scripture, I believe. 
—Well—evil thereof.— 
Lady L. Never, surely, was there such a creature
as you, Charlotte— 
Ch. That's down, too.— 
Lady L. Is that down? laughing—That should
not have been down—Yet 'tis true. 
Ch. Yet 'tis true—What's next? 
Lady L. Pish— 
Ch. Pish.— 
Lady L. Well, now to Harriet—‘Clementina
cannot alter her resolution; her objection still subsisting. 
Her Love for my brother’— 
Ch. Hold, Lady L. Too much, at one time— 
Her Love for my brother— 
Lady L. ‘On which her apprehensions that she
shall not be able, if she be his wife’— 
Ch. Not so much at once, I tell you: It is too
much for my giddy head to remember—if she be his
wife— 

Lady L.—‘to adhere to her own religion, are
founded’— 
Ch. —founded. 
Lady L. ‘Is a security for her adherence to a
resolution so glorious to herself.’ 
Ch. Well said, Lady L. —May it be so, say, and
pray, I. —Any more, Lady L.? 
Lady L. ‘Therefore’— 
Ch. Therefore— 
Lady L. ‘Regard not the perplexing Charlotte’— 
Ch. I thank you, Caroline—perplexing Charlotte— 
Lady L. ‘Is the advice of your ever-affectionate
Sister, Friend, and Servant,’— 
Ch. So! —Friend and Servant— 
Lady L. Give me the pen.— 
Ch. Take another. —She did—and subscribed her
name, ‘C. L.’ 
With all my heart, Harriet. And here, after I
have repeated my hearty wishes, that nothing of this
that I have so sagely apprehended may happen (for I
desire not to be dubbed a witch so much at my own,
as well as at your, expence), I will also subscribe
that of 
Your no less affectionate Sister,
Friend, and Servant,
Charlotte G. 
My brother says, he has sent you a Letter, and your
grandmamma another—Full of grateful sensibilities,
both, I make no question. —But no Flight,
or Coddess-making absurdity, I dare say. You
will give us copies, if you are as obliging as you
used to be. 

