



Mr. Lovelace; In Continuation. 

And do I not see that I shall need nothing but
patience, in order to have all power with me? 
For what shall we say, if all these complaints of a
character wounded; these declarations of increasing
regrets for meeting me; of resentments never to be
got over for my seducing her away: These angry commands
to leave her: —What shall we say, If all were
to mean nothing but Matrimony? —And what if 

my forbearing to enter upon that subject come out to
be the true cause of her petulance and uneasiness? 
I had once before play'd about the skirts of the
irrevocable obligation; but thought myself obliged
to speak in clouds, and to run away from the subject,
as soon as she took my meaning, lest she should imagine
it to be ungenerously urged, now she was in
some sort in my power, as she had forbid me, beforehand,
to touch upon it, till I were in a state of
visible reformation, and till a reconciliation with her
friends were probable. But now, out-argued, out-talented,
and pushed so vehemently to leave one,
whom I had no good pretence to hold, if she would go; 
and who could so easily, if I had given her cause to
doubt, have thrown herself into other protection, or
have return'd to Harlowe-Place and Solmes; I spoke
out upon the subject, and offer'd reasons, altho' with
infinite doubt and hesitation [lest she should be offended
at me, Belford!] why she should assent to the legal
tie, and make me the happiest of men. And O how
the mantled cheek, the downcast eye, the silent, yet
trembling lip, and the heaving bosom, a sweet collection
of heighten'd beauties, gave evidence, that the
tender was not mortally offensive! 
Charming creature, thought I [But I charge thee,
that thou let not any of the sex know my exultation]
Is it so soon come to this? —Am I already lord of the
destiny of a Clarissa Harlowe! —Am I already the
reformed man thou resolvedst I should be, before I had
the least encouragement given me? Is it thus, that
the more thou knowest me, the less thou seest reason to
approve of me? —And can art and design enter into
a breast so celestial; To banish me from thee, to
insist so rigorously upon my absence, in order to bring
me closer to thee, and make the blessing dear? —Well
do thy arts justify mine; and encourage me to let loose
my plotting genius upon thee. 

But let me tell thee, charming maid, if thy wishes
are at all to be answer'd, that thou hast yet to account
to me for thy reluctance to go off with me, at a crisis
when thy going off was necessary to avoid being
forced into the nuptial setters with a wretch, that
were he not thy aversion, thou wert no more honest
to thy own merit, than to me. 
I am accustomed to be preferr'd, let me tell thee,
by thy equals in rank too, tho' thy inferiors in merit; 
but who is not so! And shall I marry a woman,
who has given me reason to doubt the preference she
has for me? 
No, my dearest love,—I have too sacred a regard
for thy injunctions, to let them be broke thro', even
by thyself. Nor will I take-in thy full meaning, by
blushing silence only. Nor shalt thou give me room to
doubt, whether it be necessity or love, that inspires
this condescending impulse. 
Upon these principles, what had I to do, but to
construe her silence into contemptuous displeasure? 
And I begg'd her pardon, for making a motion, which,
I had so much reason to fear, would offend her: For
the future I would pay a sacred regard to her previous
injunctions, and prove to her, by all my conduct, the
truth of that observation, That true love is always
fearful of offending!— 
And what could the Lady say to this? methinks
thou askest. 
Say! —Why she look'd vex'd, disconcerted, teaz'd; 
was at a loss, as I thought, whether to be more angry
with herself, or me. She turn'd about, however, as
if to hide a starting tear; and drew a sigh into two or
three but just audible quavers, trying to suppress it; 
and withdrew, leaving me master of the field. 
Tell me not of politeness: Tell me not of generosity: 
Tell me not of compassion: —Is she not a match
for me? More than a match? Does she not out-do
me at every fair weapon? Has she not made me 

doubt her love? Has she not taken officious pains to
declare, that she was not averse to Solmes for any
respect she had to me? and her sorrow for putting
herself out of his reach; that is to say, for meeting
me? 
Then what a triumph would it be to the Harlowe
pride, were I now to marry this Lady? —A family beneath
my own! —No one in it worthy of an alliance
with, but her! —My own estate not contemptible! — 
Living within the bounds of it, to avoid dependence
upon their betters, and obliged to no man living! —My
expectations still so much more considerable—My person,
my talents—not to be despised, surely—Yet rejected
by them with scorn: —Obliged to carry on an underhand
address to their daughter, when two of the most
considerable families in the kingdom have made overtures,
which I have declined, partly for her sake, and
partly because I never will marry, if she be not the
person: To be forced to steal her away; not only
from them, but from herself: —And must I be brought
to implore forgiveness and reconciliation from the
Harlowes? —Beg to be acknowleged as the son of a
gloomy tyrant, whose only boast is his riches? As a
brother to a wretch, who has conceived immortal
hatred to me; and to a sister who was beneath my
attempts, or I would have had her in my own way,
[and that with a tenth part of the trouble and pains,
that her sister, whom she has so barbarously insulted,
has cost me, yet not a step advanced with her?] And,
finally, as a nephew to uncles, who valuing themselves
upon their acquired fortunes, would insult me, as
creeping to them on that account? —Forbid it the blood
of the Lovelaces, that your last, and, let me say, not
the meanest of your stock, should thus creep, thus
fawn, thus lick the dust, for a Wife!— 
Proceed anon. 