


He embarks for France; is overtaken by a storm; 
is surprised with the appearance of Pipes; lands
at Calais, and has an affair with the officers of
the custom-house. 
Scarce had the vessel proceeded two
leagues on the passage, when the wind
shifting, blew directly in their teeth; so
that they were obliged to haul upon a wind, and
alter their course; and the sea running pretty
high at the same time, our hero, who was below
in his cabbin, began to be squeamish, and in consequence
of the skipper's advice, went upon deck
for the comfort of his stomach; while the governor,
experienced in these disasters, slipt into 

bed, where he lay at his ease, amusing himself
with a treatise on the Cycloid, with algebraical
demonstrations, which never failed to engage
his imagination in the most agreeable manner. 
In the mean time, the wind increased to a very
hard gale, the vessel pitched with great violence,
the sea washed over the decks, the master was
alarmed, the crew were confounded, the passengers
were overwhelmed with sickness and fear,
and universal distraction ensued. In the midst of
this uproar, Peregrine holding fast by the taffril,
and looking ruefully ahead, the countenance of
Pipes presented itself to his astonished view, rising
as it were from the hold of the ship. At first he
imagined it was a fear-formed shadow of his own
brain; though he did not long remain in this error,
but plainly perceived that it was no other
than the real person of Thomas, who jumping
on the quarter-deck, took charge of the helm,
and dictated to the sailors with as much authority
as if he had been commander of the ship. 
The skipper looked upon him as an angel sent to
his assistance, and the crew soon discovering him
to be a thorough-bred seaman, notwithstanding
his livery-frock, obeyed his orders with such alacrity
that in a little time the confusion vanished,
and every necessary step taken to weather the
gale. 
Our young gentleman immediately conceived
the meaning of Tom's appearance on board, and
when the tumult was a little subsided, went up
and encouraged him to exert himself for the preservation
of the ship, promising to take him again
into his service, from which he should never be
dismissed, except by his own desire. This assurance
had a surprising effect upon Pipes, who, 

though he made no manner of reply, thrust the
helm into the master's hand, saying, “Here,
you old bum-boat woman, take hold of the tiller,
and keep her thus, boy, thus;” and skipped
about the vessel, trimming the sails, and managing
the ropes with such agility and skill, that
every body on deck stood amazed at his dexterity. 
Mr. Jolter was far from being unconcerned at
the uncommon motion of the vessel, the singing
of the wind, and the uproar which he heard
above him; he looked towards the cabbin-door
with the most wishful expectation, in hope of
seeing some person who could give some account
of the weather, and what was doing upon deck; 
but not a soul appeared, and he was too well acquainted
with the disposition of his own bowels
to alter his own attitude in the least. When he
had lain a good while in all the agony of suspence,
the boy tumbled headlong into his apartment
with such noisy ruin, that he believed the
mast had gone by the board, and starting upright
in his bed, asked with all the symptoms of horror,
what was the cause of that disturbance? 
The boy, half stunned by his fall, answered in a
dolorous tone, “I'm come to put up the dead-lights.” 
At the mention of dead-lights, the
meaning of which he did not understand, the
poor governor's heart died within him; he shivered
with despair, and his recollection forsaking
him, he fell upon his knees in the bed, and fixing
his eyes upon the book which was in his hand, began
to pronounce aloud, with great fervor,
“The time of a compleat oscillation in the cycloid,
is to the time in which a body would fall
through the axis of the cycloid DV, as the circumference 

of a circle to its diameter—” He
would in all likelihood have proceeded with the
demonstration of this proposition, had he not
been seized with such a qualm as compelled him
to drop the book, and accommodate himself to
the emergency of his distemper; he therefore
stretched himself at full length, and putting up
ejaculations to heaven, began to prepare himself
for his latter end, when all of a sudden the noise
above was intermitted; and as he could not conceive
the cause of this tremendous silence, he
imagined that either the men were washed overboard,
or that despairing of safety, they had
ceased to oppose the tempest. While he was
harrowed by this miserable incertainty, which,
however, was not altogether unenlightened by
some scattered rays of hope, the master entered
the cabbin, and he asked with a voice half extinguished
by fear, how matters went upon deck? 
The skipper, with a large bottle of brandy applied
to his mouth, answered in a hollow tone,
“All's over now, master.” Upon which Mr.
Jolter, giving himself over for lost, exclaimed
with the utmost horror, “Lord have mercy upon
us! Christ have mercy upon us!” and repeated
this supplication as it were mechanically,
until the master undeceived him, by explaining the
meaning of what he had said, and assuring him
that the squall was over. 
Such a sudden transition from fear to joy, occasioned
a violent agitation both in his mind and
body; and it was a full quarter of an hour before
he recovered the right use of his organs. By
this time the weather cleared up, the wind began
to blow again from the right corner, and the
spires of Calais appeared at the distance of five 

leagues; so that the countenances of all on board
were lighted up with joyous expectation; and
Peregrine venturing to go down into the cabbin,
comforted his governor with an account of the
happy turn of their affairs. 
Jolter, transported with the thought of a speedy
landing, began to launch out in praise of that
country for which they were bound. He observed,
that France was the land of politeness
and hospitality, which were conspicuous in the
behaviour of all ranks and degrees, from the peer
to the peasant; that a gentleman and a foreigner,
far from being insulted and imposed upon by the
lower class of people, as in England, was treated
with the utmost reverence, candour and respect; 
that their fields were fertile, their climate pure
and healthy, their farmers rich and industrious,
and the subjects in general the happiest of men. 
He would have prosecuted this favourite theme
still farther, had not his pupil been obliged to run
upon deck, in consequence of certain warnings
he received from his stomach. 
The skipper seeing his condition, very honestly
reminded him of the cold ham and fowls, with a
basket of wine, which he had ordered to be sent
on board, and asked if he would have the cloth
laid below. He could not have chosen a more
seasonable opportunity of manifesting his own disinterestedness. 
Peregrine made wry faces at the
mention of food, bidding him, for Christ's sake,
talk no more on that subject. He then descended
into the cabbin, and put the same question to
Mr. Jolter, who, he knew, entertained the same
abhorrence for his proposal; and meeting with
the like reception from him, went between decks,
and repeated his courteous proffer to the valet de 

chambre and lacquey, who lay sprawling in all
the pangs of a double evacuation, and rejected
his civility with the most horrible loathing. Thus
baffled in all his kind endeavours, he ordered his
boy to secure the provision in one of his own
lockers, according to the custom of the ship; 
and he would have enjoyed a pretty comfortable
booty, had not Pipes interposed, and divided the
store among the sailors, who, he thought, were
most deserving of such indulgence; so that the
skipper had the mortification of seeing his plan
miscarry by his own precipitate conduct; for,
had he held his tongue, no body would have
dreamt of asking for the provision, and he would
have possessed his prize in peace. 
It being low water when they arrived on the
French coast, the vessel could not enter the harbour,
and they were obliged to bring to, and
wait for a boat, which in less than half an hour
came along-side from the shore. Mr. Jolter
now came upon deck, and snuffing up the French
air with symptoms of infinite satisfaction, asked
of the boatmen, with the friendly appellation of
Mes enfans, what they must have for transporting
them and their baggage to the pier. But how
was he disconcerted, when those polite, candid,
reasonable watermen, demanded a Louis d'or for
that service! Peregrine, with a sarcastic sneer,
observed, that he already began to perceive the
justice of his encomiums on the French; and the
disappointed governor could say nothing in his
own vindication, but that they were debauched
by their intercourse with the inhabitants of Dover. 
His pupil, however, was so much offended at
their extortion, that he absolutely refused to employ
them, even when they abated one half in 

their demand, and swore he would stay on board
till the packet should be able to enter the harbour,
rather than encourage such imposition. 
The master, who in all probability had some
sort of fellow-feeling with the boatmen, in vain
represented, that he could not with safety lie to,
or anchor upon a lee-shore; our hero having consulted
Pipes, answered, that he had hired his vessel
to transport him to Calais, and that he would
oblige him to perform what he had undertaken. 
The skipper, very much mortified at this peremptory
reply, which was not over and above
agreeable to Mr. Jolter, dismissed the boat, notwithstanding
the sollicitations and condescension
of the watermen, who promised to submit to the
generosity of their employer; and running a little
farther in-shore, came to an anchor, and waited
till there was water enough to float them over
the bar. Then they stood in to the harbour, and
our gentleman, with his attendants and baggage,
were landed on the pier by the sailors, whom he
liberally rewarded for their trouble. 
He was immediately plied by a great number
of porters, who, like so many hungry wolves,
laid hold on his luggage, and began to carry it
off piece-meal, without his order or direction. 
Incensed at this officious insolence, he commanded
them to desist, with many oaths and opprobrious
terms that his anger suggested; and perceiving
that one of them did not seem to pay any regard
to what he said, but marched off with his burthen,
he snatched a cudgel out of his lacquey's
hand, and overtaking the fellow in a twinkling,
brought him to the ground with one blow. He
was instantly surrounded by the whole congregration
of this canaille, who resented the injury 

which their brother had sustained, and would
have taken immediate satisfaction of the aggressor,
had not Pipes, seeing his master involved, brought
the whole crew to his assistance, and exerted
himself so manfully, that the enemy were obliged
to retreat with many marks of defeat, and menaces
of interesting the commandant in their quarrel. 
Jolter, who knew and dreaded the power
of the French governor, began to shake with apprehension,
when he heard their repeated threats; 
but they durst not apply to this magistrate, who,
upon a fair representation of the case, would
have punished them severely for their rapacious
and insolent behaviour; and Peregrine, without
farther molestation, availed himself of his own
attendants, who shouldered his baggage, and followed
him to the gate, where they were stopt by
the centinels, until their names should be registered. 
Mr. Jolter, who had undergone this examination
before, resolved to profit by his experience,
and cunningly represented his pupil as a young
English lord. This intimation, supported by the
appearance of his equipage, was no sooner communicated
to the officer, than he turned out the
guard, and ordered his soldiers to rest upon their
arms, while his lordship passed in great state to
the Lion d' Argent, where he took up his lodging
for the night, resolving to set out for Paris next
morning in a post-chaise. 
The governor triumphed greatly in this piece
of complaisance and respect with which they had
been honoured, and resumed his beloved topic
of discourse, in applauding the method and subordination
of the French government, which
was better calculated for maintaining order, and 

protecting the people, than any constitution upon
earth; and of their courteous attention to
strangers, there needed no other proof than the
compliment which had been paid to them, together
with the governor's connivance at Peregrine's
employing his own servants in carrying the
baggage to the inn, contrary to the privilege of
the inhabitants. 
While he expatiated with a remarkable degree
of self-indulgence on this subject, the valet de
chambre coming into the room, interrupted his
harangue, by telling his master, that their trunks
and portmanteaus must be carried to the custom-house,
in order to be searched, and sealed with
lead, which must remain untouched until their
arrival at Paris. 
Peregrine made no objection to this practice,
which was in itself reasonable enough; but when
he understood that the gate was besieged by another
multitude of porters, who insisted upon
their right of carrying the goods, and also of
fixing their own price, he absolutely refused to
comply with their demand; and chastising some
of the most clamorous among them with his foot,
told them, that if their custom-house officers had
a mind to examine his baggage, they might come
to the inn for that purpose. The valet de chambre
was abashed at this boldness of his master's
behaviour, which the lacquey, shrugging up his
shoulders, observed was bien a l'Angloise; while
the governor represented it as an indignity to
the whole nation, and endeavoured to persuade
his pupil to comply with the custom of the place. 
But Peregrine's natural haughtiness of disposition
hindered him from giving ear to Jolter's wholesome
advice; and in less than half an hour they 

perceived a file of musqueteers marching up to
the gate. At sight of this detachment the tutor
trembled, the valet grew pale, and the lacquey
crossed himself; but our hero, without exhibiting
any other symptoms than those of indignation,
met them on the threshold, and with a ferocious
air demanded their business. The corporal who
commanded the file answered with great deliberation,
that he had orders to convey his baggage
to the custom-house; and seeing the trunks
standing in the entry, placed his men between
them and the owner, while the porters that followed,
took them up, and proceeded to the
Douane without opposition. 
Pickle was not mad enough to dispute the
authority of this message; but, in order to gall,
and specify his contempt for those who brought
it, he called aloud to his valet, desiring him, in
French, to accompany his things, and see that
none of his linen and effects should be stolen by
the searchers. The corporal, mortified at this
satirical insinuation, darted a look of resentment
at the author, as if he had been interested for
the glory of his nation; and told him, that
he could perceive he was a stranger in France,
or else he would have saved himself the trouble
of such a needless precaution. Indeed this expression
had no sooner escaped our young gentleman,
than he was ashamed of his own petulance; 
for nothing was farther from his principles
than the least encouragement of ungenerous
suspicion. 