


Nor is the physician sacred from his ridicule. They
reach Arras, where our adventurer engages in
play with two French officers, who next morning
give the landlord an interesting proof of their
importance. 
Though Pickle enjoyed their disaster,
he was resolved to practise some invention
upon the doctor, that he might not triumph in
his revenge with impunity; and thus determined,
when Pallet had overcome the malady of his own
imagination, he imparted to him a plan of reprizal,
which agreeably flattered his resentment,
and was executed in this manner: as the painter
and physician lay in separate beds in the same
chamber, the former watched, till by the other's
snoring he was certified of his being fast asleep; 
then moving softly to the door, where Pipes
stood ready furnished for the purpose, took a
tea-kettle full of warm water, and cautiously
conveying the spout under the cloaths of the doctor's
bed, poured in the liquor, imperceptibly,
to the quantity of half a gallon, and then retired
to rest. 
Peregrine having undertaken to rouze his fellow-travellers
in the morning, entered the doctor's
apartment with the dawn, and waked them
both with the same hollow. The painter immediately
sprung out of bed; but the physician,
finding himself drenched from head to foot, was
equally astonished and ashamed, never doubting
that he had unfortunately bedewed himself in his
sleep. This mistake he thought so inconsistent 

with the dignity of his character, that he durst
not venture to disclose his condition, especially
as he well knew how eagerly the company would
seize such an occasion of making merry at his
expence; and it would be impracticable to conceal
it from their knowledge, if he should be obliged
to get up in their presence: he therefore
lay still in the utmost perplexity and tribulation,
while his two companions, guessing his thoughts,
and rejoicing at his anxiety, sat down by his bedside,
and exhorted him to rise. He told them,
that having sweated profusely all night, he could
not, with any regard to his health, get up, until
he should be shifted, and the pores of his skin
regularly closed; and in the mean time, desired
they would take the trouble of seeing the horses
put to the chaises, and the reckoning adjusted; 
assuring them, he should be ready to attend them
before their business could be dispatched. Our
young gentleman gave him to understand, that
Mr. Jolter had charged himself with the payment
of the bill, and the servants were now employed
about the carriages, so that he had not a moment
to lose; he therefore rung the bell for his footman,
and bade him bring a clean shirt for his
master with all possible speed. 
Ere the fellow returned, it was broad day; 
and a message came from the governor, importing
that the horses were yoked. The doctor's
confusion increased, he was tortured by the looks,
and baited by the importunities of his company; 
and moreover, suffered the uncomfortable situation
of being steeped, as he imagined, in his own
brine. At length Peregrine, impatient of his
delay, took the privilege of a comrade, and accusing
the republican of sloth, pulled off the bed-cloaths 

at one snatch, and displayed him at full
length, in this opprobrious condition. 
The painter seeing him thus exposed, lifted up
his hands, and in affected astonishment, “Lord
watch over us! (cried he) the doctor is a dead
man; sure the whole sap of his body is run out,
or have you spilt a whole dish of sillykickaby in
the bed? for it smells cursedly strong of sal armoniac.” 
Peregrine, in order to compleat the
physician's overthrow, shut up his nostrils with
his finger and thumb, and asked in a snuffling
tone, if he was subject to that infirmity. 
Unspeakable were the shame and vexation of
the modern Pindar on this occasion; he was at
the same time tormented with all the pangs which
mortified vanity can feel, and agitated by all the
furies of resentment against the persons who had
detected his disgrace, and who having thus insulted
him in his distress, quitted the room with a
loud laugh, leaving him to the thorny reflections
of his own pride. Nor could the painter, who
was not at all to be praised for his moderation,
abstain from certain ill-natured allusions to his
calamity, which by these means reached the ears
of the governor, from whom (of all men) he
desired to keep it concealed; so that he remained
sullen and dejected during the whole journey:
not but that he attempted to recover his importance,
by haranguing upon the Roman highways,
when Mr. Jolter desired the company to take notice
of the fine pavement upon which they travelled
from Paris into Flanders; but Pallet, who
thought he had now gained the ascendency over
the physician, exerted himself in maintaining the
superiority he had acquired, by venting various
sarcasms upon his self-conceit and affectation of 

learning, and even uttering puns and conundrums
upon the remarks which the republican retailed. 
When he talked of the Flaminian Way, the
painter questioned if it was a better pavement
than the Fleminian way on which they travelled:
and the doctor having observed, that this road
was made for the convenience of drawing the
French artillery into Flanders, which was often
the seat of war; his competitor in wit replied
with infinite vivacity, “There are more great
guns than the French king knows of drawn along
this causeway, doctor.” 
Encouraged by the success of these efforts,
which tickled the imagination of Jolter, and
drew smiles (as he imagined) of approbation from
our hero, he sported in many other æquivoques
of the same nature; and at dinner told the physician,
that he was like the root of the tongue,
as being cursedly down in the mouth. 
By this time, such was the animosity subsisting
between these quondam friends, that they
never conversed together, except with a view of
exposing each other to the ridicule or contempt
of their fellow-travellers. The doctor was at
great pains to point out the folly and ignorance
of Pallet in private to Peregrine, who was often
conjured in the same manner by the painter, to
take notice of the physician's want of manners
and taste. Pickle pretended to acquiesce in the
truth of their mutual severity, which indeed was
extremely just, and by malicious insinuations
blew up their contention, with a view of bringing
it to open hostility. But, both seemed so averse
to deeds of mortal purpose, that for a long time
his arts were baffled, and he could not spirit them 

up to any pitch of resentment higher than scurrilous
repartee. 
Before they reached Arras, the city-gates were
shut, so that they were obliged to take up their
lodging at an indifferent house in the suburbs,
where they found a couple of French officers,
who had also rode post from Paris, so far on their
way to Lisle. These gentlemen were about the
age of thirty, and their deportment distinguished
by such an air of insolence, as disgusted our hero,
who, nevertheless, accosted them politely in the
yard, and proposed that they should sup together. 
They thanked him for the honour of his invitation,
which, however, they declined, upon pretence
of having ordered something for themselves; 
but promised to wait upon him and his company
immediately after their repast. 
This they accordingly performed; and after
having drank a few glasses of Burgundy, one of
them asked, if the young gentleman would, for
pastime, take an hand at quadrille. Peregrine
easily divined the meaning of this proposal, which
was made with no other view than that of fleecing
him and his fellow-travellers; for he well knew
to what shifts a subaltern in the French service is
reduced, in order to maintain the appearance of a
gentleman, and had reason to believe that most of
them were sharpers from their youth: but, as he
depended a good deal upon his own penetration
and address, he gratified the stranger's desire; 
and a party was instantly formed of the painter,
the physician, the proposer and himself, the other
officer having professed himself utterly ignorant
of the game; yet, in the course of the play, he
took his station at the back of Pickle's chair,
which was opposite to his friend, on pretence of 

himself with seeing his manner of conducting
the cards. The youth was not such a novice
but that he perceived the design of this palpable
piece of behaviour, which, notwithstanding, he
overlook'd for the present, with a view of flattering
their hopes in the beginning, that they
might be the more effectually punished, by their
disappointment in the end. 
The game was scarce begun, when by the reflection
of a glass he discerned the officer at his
back, making signs to his companion, who, by these
pre-concerted gestures, was perfectly informed
of the contents of Peregrine's hand, and of consequence
fortunate in the course of play. 
Thus they were allowed to enjoy the fruits of
their dexterity, until their money amounted to
some Loui's; when our young gentleman, thinking
it high time to do himself justice, signified in
very polite terms to the gentleman who stood behind
him, that he could never play with ease
and deliberation when he was overlooked by any
by-stander, and begg'd that he would have the
goodness to be seated. 
As this was a remonstrance which the stranger
could not with any shew of breeding resist, he
asked pardon, and retired to the chair of the
physician, who frankly told him, that it was not
the fashion of his country for one to submit his
hand to the perusal of a spectator; and when, in
consequence of this rebuff, he wanted to quarter
himself upon the painter, he was refused by a
wave of the hand, and a shake of the head, with
an exclamation of, Pardonnez moi! which was
repeated with such emphasis, as discomposed his
effrontery, and he found himself obliged to sit
down in a state of mortification. 

The odds being thus removed, fortune proceeded
in her usual channel; and though the
Frenchman, deprived of his ally, endeavoured
to practise divers strokes of finesse, the rest of
the company observed him with such vigilance
and caution, as baffled all his attempts, and in a
very little time he was compelled to part with
his winning: but having engaged in the match
with an intention of taking all advantages, whether
fair or unfair, that his superior skill should
give him over the Englishmen, the money was
not refunded without a thousand disputes, in the
course of which he essayed to intimidate his antagonist
with high words, which were retorted
by our hero with such interest, as convinced him
that he had mistaken his man, and persuaded him
to make his retreat in quiet. Indeed, it was not
without cause that they repined at the bad success
of their enterprize; because, in all likelihood,
they had nothing to depend upon for the
present but their own industry, and knew not
how to defray their expences on the road, except
by some acquisition of this kind. 
Next morning they rose at day-break, and resolving
to anticipate their fellow-lodgers, bespoke
post-horses as soon as they could be admitted into
the city; so that when our company appeared,
their beasts were ready in the yard; and they
only waited to discuss the bill, which they had
ordered to be made out. The landlord of the
inn presented his carte with fear and trembling to
one of those ferocious cavaliers, who no sooner
cast his eye upon the sum total, than he discharged
a volley of dreadful oaths, and asked if the king's
officers were to be treated in that manner. The
poor publican protested with great humility, that 

he had the utmost respect for his majesty, and
every thing that belonged to him; and that, far
from consulting his own interest, all that he desired
was, to be barely indemnified for the expence
of their lodging. 
This condescension seemed to have no other
effect than that of encouraging their arrogance. 
They swore his extortion should be explained to
the commandant of the town, who would, by
making him a public example, teach other inn-keepers
how to behave towards men of honour; 
and threatened with such confidence of indignation,
that the wretched landlord, dreading the
consequence of their wrath, implored pardon in
the most abject manner, begging with many supplications,
that he might have the pleasure of
lodging them at his own charge. This was a
favour which he with great difficulty obtained; 
they chid him severely for his imposition, exhorted
him to have more regard for his own conscience,
as well as for the convenience of his
guests; and cautioning him in particular touching
his behaviour to the gentlemen of the army,
mounted their horses, and rode off in great state,
leaving him very thankful for having so successfully
appeased the choler of two officers, who
wanted either inclination or ability to pay their
bill: for experience had taught him to be apprehensive
of all such travellers, who commonly
lay the landlord under contribution, by way of
atonement for the extravagance of his demands,
even after he has professed his willingness to entertain
them on their own terms. 