


He makes a fruitless attempt in gallantry; departs
for Boulogne, where he spends the evening with
certain English exiles. 
Having thus yielded to the hand of power,
he inquired if there was any other English
company in the house; and understanding that a
gentleman and lady lodged in the next apartment,
and had bespoke a post-chaise for Paris,
he ordered Pipes to ingratiate himself with their
footman, and, if possible, learn their names and
condition, while he and Mr. Jolter, attended by
the lacquey, took a turn round the ramparts, and
viewed the particulars of the fortification. 
Tom was so very successful in his inquiry, that
when his master returned, he was able to give
him a very satisfactory account of his fellow-lodgers,
in consequence of having treated his
brother with a bottle of wine. The people in
question were a gentleman and his lady, lately
arrived from England, in their way to Paris. 
The husband was a man of good fortune, who
had been a libertine in his youth, and a professed
declaimer against matrimony. He neither wanted
sense nor experience, and piqued himself in particular
upon his art in avoiding the snares of the
female sex, in which he pretended to be deeply
versed. But, notwithstanding all his caution and
skill, he had lately fallen a sacrifice to the attractions
of an oyster-wench, who had found means
to decoy him into the bands of wedlock; and,
in order to evade the compliments and congratulations
of his friends and acquaintance, he had 

come so far on a tour to Paris, where he intended
to initiate his spouse in the beau-monde; though
in the mean time he chose to live upon the reserve,
because her natural talents had as yet received
but little cultivation; and he had not the
most implicit confidence in her virtue and discretion,
which, it seems, had like to have yielded
to the addresses of an officer at Canterbury, who
had made shift to insinuate himself into her acquaintance
and favour. 
Peregrine's curiosity being inflamed by this
information, he lounged about the yard, in hopes
of seeing the Dulcinea who had captivated the
old batchelor, and at length observing her at a
window, took the liberty of bowing to her with
great respect. She returned the compliment with
a curt'sie, and appeared so decent in her dress and
manner, that unless he had been previously informed
of her former life and conversation, he
never would have dreamt that her education was
different from that of other ladies of fashion; so
easy it is to acquire that external deportment on
which people of condition value themselves so
much. Not but that Mr. Pickle pretended to
distinguish a certain vulgar audacity in her countenance,
which in a lady of birth and fortune
would have passed for an agreeable vivacity that
enlivens the aspect, and gives a poignancy to
every feature: but, as she possessed a pair of fine
eyes and a clear complexion, overspread with the
glow of health, which never fails of recommending
the owner, he could not help gazing at
her with desire, and forming the design of making
a conquest of her heart. With this view, he
sent his compliments to her husband, whose
name was Hornbeck, with an intimation, that 

he proposed to set out next day for Paris, and as
he understood that he was resolved upon the same
journey, he should be extremely glad of his company
on the road, if he was not better engaged. 
Hornbeck, who in all probability did not chuse
to accommodate his wife with a squire of our hero's
appearance, sent a civil answer to his message,
professing infinite mortification at his being unable
to embrace the favour of his kind offer, by reason
of the indisposition of his wife, who, he was
afraid, would not be in a condition for some days
to bear the fatigue of travelling. This rebuff,
which Peregrine ascribed to the husband's jealousy,
stifled his project in embrio; he ordered
his French servant to take a place for himself in
the Diligence, where all his luggage was stowed,
except a small trunk with some linen and other
necessaries that was fixed upon the post-chaise
which they hired of the landlord; and early next
morning he and Mr. Jolter departed from Calais,
attended by his valet de chambre and Pipes
on horseback. They proceeded without any accident
as far as Boulogne, where they breakfasted
and visited old father Graham, a Scottish gentleman
of the governor's acquaintance, who had
lived as a capuchin in that place for the space of
threescore years, and during that period conformed
to all the austerities of the order, with the most
rigorous exactness; being equally remarkable for
the frankness of his conversation, the humanity
of his disposition, and the simplicity of his manners. 
From Boulogne they took their departure about
noon, and as they proposed to sleep that night
at Abbe Ville, commanded the postilion to drive
with extraordinary speed; and perhaps it was well
for his cattle that the axle-tree gave way, and the 

chaise of course overturned before they had travelled
one third part of the stage. 
This accident compelled them to return to the
place from whence they had set out, and as they
could not procure another convenience, they found
themselves under the necessity of staying till their
chaise could be refitted. Understanding that this
operation would detain them a whole day, our
young gentleman had recourse to his patience,
and demanded to know what they could have for
dinner; the garçon, or waiter thus questioned,
vanished in a moment, and immediately they
were surprized with the appearance of a strange
figure, which from the extravagance of its dress
and gesticulation, Peregrine mistook for a madman
of the growth of France. This phantome
(which by the bye, happened to be no other than
the cook) was a tall, long-legged, meagre, swarthy
fellow, that stooped very much; his cheekbones
were remarkably raised, his nose bent into
the shape and size of a powder-horn, and the
sockets of his eyes as raw round the edges, as if
the skin had been pared off; on his head he wore
an handkerchief which had once been white, and
now served to cover the upper part of a black
periwig, to which was attached a bag, at least a
foot square, with a solitaire and rose that stuck
up on each side to his ear; so that he looked like a
criminal in the pillory; his back was accommodated
with a linnen waistcoat, his hands adorned
with long ruffles of the same piece, his middle
was girded by an apron tucked up, that it might
not conceal his white silk stockings rolled; and at
his entrance he brandished a bloody weapon full
three feet in length. Peregrine, when he first saw
him approach in this menacing attitude, put himself 

upon his guard, but being informed of his quality,
perused his list, and having bespoke three or
four things for dinner, walked out with Mr. Jolter
to view both towns, which they had not leisure
to consider minutely before. In their return
from the harbour they met with four or five gentlemen,
all of whom seemed to look with an air
of dejection, and perceiving our hero and his governor
to be English by their dress, bowed with
great respect as they passed. Pickle, who was
naturally compassionate, felt an emotion of sympathy; 
and seeing a person, who by his habit he
judged to be one of their servants, accosted him
in English, and asked who the gentlemen were. 
The lacquey gave him to understand that they were
his own countrymen, exiled from their native
homes, in consequence of their adherence to an
unfortunate and ruined cause; and that they were
gone to the sea-side, according to their daily
practice, in order to indulge their longing eyes,
with a prospect of the white cliffs of Albion, which
they must never more approach. 
Though our young gentleman differed widely
from them in point of political principles, he was
not one of those enthusiasts who look upon every
schism from the established articles of faith, as
damnable, and exclude the sceptick from every
benefit of humanity and christian forgiveness: he
could easily comprehend how a man of the most
unblemished morals might, by the prejudice of
education, or indispensible attachments, be ingaged
in such a blame-worthy and pernicious undertaking; 
and thought that they had already suffered
severely for their imprudence. He was affected
with the account of their diurnal pilgrimage to
the sea-side, which he considered as a pathetic 

proof of their affliction, and invested Mr. Jolter
with the agreeable office of going to them with a
compliment in his name, and begging the honour
of drinking a glass with them in the evening. 
They accepted the proposal with great satisfaction
and respectful acknowledgement, and in the afternoon
waited upon the kind inviter, who treated
them with coffee, and would have detained them
to supper; but they intreated the favour of his
company at the house which they frequented, so
earnestly, that he yielded to their solicitations,
and with his governor was conducted by them to
the place, where they had provided an elegant repast,
and regaled them with some of the best claret
in France. 
It was easy for them to perceive that their
principal guest was no favourer of their state
maxims, and therefore they industriously avoided
every subject of conversation which could give
the least offence; not but that they lamented
their own situation, which cut them off from all
their dearest connexions, and doomed them to
perpetual banishment from their families and
friends: but they did not even by the most distant
hint, impeach the justice of that sentence by
which they were condemned; although one
among them, who seemed to be about the age of
thirty, wept bitterly over his misfortune, which
had involved a beloved wife and three children in
misery and distress; and in the impatience of his
grief, cursed his own fate with frantic imprecations. 
His companions, with a view of beguiling
his sorrow, and manifesting their own hospitality
at the same time, changed the topic of discourse,
and circulated the bumpers with great assiduity; 
so that all their cares were overwhelmed and forgotten, 

several drinking French catches were
sung, and mirth and good fellowship prevailed. 
In the midst of this elevation, which commonly
unlocks the most hidden sentiment, and dispels
every consideration of caution and constraint, one
of the entertainers being more intoxicated than
his fellows, proposed a toast, to which Peregrine
with some warmth excepted, as an unmannerly
insult. The other maintained his proposition with
indecent heat, and the dispute beginning to grow
very serious, the company interposed, and gave
judgment against their friend, who was so keenly
reproached and rebuked for his impolite behaviour,
by the gentleman whose sensibility hath been
mentioned, that he retired in high dudgeon,
threatening to relinquish their society, and branding
them with the appellation of apostates from
the common cause. Mortified at the behaviour
of their companion, those that remained were
earnest in their apologies to their guests, whom
they besought to forgive his intemperance; assuring
them with great confidence, that he would
upon the recovery of his reflection, wait upon
them in person, and ask pardon for the umbrage
he had given. Pickle was satisfied with their remonstrances,
resumed his good humour, and the
night being pretty far advanced, resisted all their
importunities with which he was intreated to see
another bottle go round, and was escorted to his
own lodgings, more than half seas over. Next
morning about eight o'clock, he was waked by
his valet de chambre, who told him that two of
the gentlemen with whom he had spent the evening
were in the house, and desired the favour of
being admitted into his chamber. He could not
conceive the meaning of this extraordinary visit, 

and ordering his man to shew them into his apartment,
beheld the person who had affronted him
enter with the gentleman who had reprehended
his rudeness. 
He who had given the offence, after having
made an apology for disturbing Mr. Pickle, told
him that his friend there present had been with
him early that morning, and proposed the alternative
of either fighting with him immediately,
or coming to beg pardon for his unmannerly deportment
over night; that though he had courage
enough to face any man in the field in a righteous
cause, he was not so brutal as to disobey the dictates
of his own duty and reflection, in consequence
of which, and not out of any regard to
the other's menaces, which he despised, he had
now taken the liberty of interrupting his repose,
that he might as soon us possible, atone for the
injury he had done him, which he protested was
the effect of intoxication alone, and begged his
forgiveness accordingly. Our hero accepted of
this acknowledgment very graciously, thanked
the other gentleman for the gallant part he had
acted in his behalf; and perceiving that his companion
was a little irritated at his officious interposition,
effected a reconciliation, by convincing
him that what he had done was for the honour of
the company. He then kept them to breakfast,
expressed a desire of seeing their situation altered
for the better, and the chaise being repaired, took
his leave of his entertainers, who came to wish
him a good journey, and with his attendants left. 
Boulogne for the second time. 