


The triumvirate turn the stream of their wit upon
the commodore, who by their means is embroiled
with an attorney, and terrified with an apparition. 
The shafts of their wit were now directed
against the commander himself, whom
they teized and terrified almost out of his senses. 
One day while he was at dinner, Pipes came and
told him that there was a person below that
wanted to speak with him immediately about an
affair of the greatest importance, that would admit
of no delay; upon which he ordered the stranger
to be told that he was engaged, and that he must
send up his name and business. To this demand
he received for answer a message, importing that
the person's name was unknown to him, and his
business of such a nature, that it could not be disclosed
to any one but the commodore himself,
whom he earnestly desired to see without loss of
time. 
Trunnion, surprised at this importunity, got
up with great reluctance in the middle of his
meal, and descending to a parlour where the
stranger was, asked in a surly tone what he wanted
with him in such a damned hurry, that he could
not wait till he had made an end of his mess. 
The other, not at all disconcerted at this rough
address, advanced close up to him on his tiptoes,
and with a look of confidence and conceit, laying
his mouth to one side of the commodore's head,
whispered softly in his ear, “Sir, I am the attorney
whom you wanted to converse with in private.” 

“The attorney!” cried Trunnion, staring
and half choaked with choler. “Yes, Sir,
at your service, replied this retainer to the law,
and if you please, the sooner we dispatch the affair
the better; for 'tis an old observation, that delay
breeds danger.” “Truly, brother, said the commodore,
who could no longer contain himself,
I do confess that I am very much of your way of
thinking, d'ye see; and therefore you shall be
dispatched in a trice;” so saying, he lifted up his
walking staff, which was something between a
crutch and a cudgel, and discharged it with such
energy on the seat of the attorney's understanding,
that if there had been any thing but solid
bone, the contents of his skull must have been
evacuated. 
Fortified as he was by nature against all such
assaults, he could not withstand the momentum
of the blow, which in an instant laid him flat on
the floor, deprived of all sense and motion; and
Trunnion hopped up stairs to dinner, applauding
himself in ejaculations all the way for the vengeance
he had taken on such an impudent petti-fogging
miscreant. 
The attorney no sooner awaked from this
trance, into which he had been so unexpectedly
lulled, than he cast his eyes around in quest of
evidence, by which he might be enabled the more
easily to prove the injury he had sustained; but
not a soul appearing, he made shift to get upon
his legs again, and with the blood trickling over
his nose, followed one of the servants into the
dining-room, resolved to come to an explanation
with the assailant, and either extort money from
him by way of satisfaction, or provoke him to a
second application before witnesses. With this 

view he entered the room in a peal of clamour,
to the amazement of all present, and the terror of
Mrs. Trunnion, who shrieked at the appearance
of such a spectacle; and addressing himself to the
commodore, “I'll tell you what, Sir, said he,
if there be law in England, I'll make you smart
for this here assault; you think you have screened
yourself from a prosecution, by sending all your
servants out of the way, but that circumstance
will appear upon trial to be a plain proof of the
malice propense with which the fact was committed; 
especially when corroborated by the evidence
of this here letter, under your own hand,
whereby I am desired to come to your own house
to transact an affair of consequence;” so saying,
he produced the writing, and read the contents in
these words. 

Mr. Roger Ravine.
Sir,
Being in a manner prisoner in my own
house, I desire you will give me a call precisely
at three o'clock in the afternoon, and insist
upon seeing myself, as I have an affair of great
consequence, in which your particular advice is
wanted by your humble servant 
Hawser Trunnion. 
The one-eyed commander who had been satisfied
with the chastisement he had already bestowed
upon the plaintiff, hearing him read this
audacious piece of forgery, which he considered
as the effect of his own villany, started up from
table, and seizing a huge turkey that lay in a dish 

before him, would have applied it sauce and all by
way of poultice to his wound, had he not been
restrained by Hatchway, who laid fast hold on
both his arms, and fixed him to his chair again,
advising the attorney to sheer off with what he
had got. Far from following this salutary counsel,
he redoubled his threats, and set Trunnion at defiance,
telling him he was not a man of true
courage, although he had commanded a ship of
war, or else he would not have attacked any
person in such a cowardly and clandestine manner. 
This provocation would have answered his
purpose effectually, had not his adversary's indignation
been repressed by the suggestions of the
lieutenant who desired his friend in a whisper to
be easy, for he would take care to have the attorney
tossed in a blanket for his presumption. This
proposal, which he received with great approbation,
pacified him in a moment; he wiped the
sweat from his forehead, and his features relaxed
into a grim smile. 
Hatchway disappeared, and Ravine proceeded
with great fluency of abuse, until he was interrupted
by the arrival of Pipes, who, without any expostulation,
led him out by the hand, and conducted
him to the yard, where he was put into a carpet,
and in a twinkling sent into the air by the strength
and dexterity of five stout operators, whom the
lieutenant had selected from the number of domesticks
for that singular spell of duty. 
In vain did the astonished vaulter beg for the
love of God and passion of Christ, that they would
take pity upon him, and put an end to his involuntary
gambols; they were deaf to his prayers
and protestations, even when he swore in the
most solemn manner, that if they would cease tormenting 

him, he would forget and forgive what
was passed, and depart in peace to his own habitation; 
and continued the game till they were
fatigued with the exercise. 
Ravine being dismissed in a most melancholy
plight, brought an action of assault and battery
against the commodore, and subpœna'd all the
servants as evidences in the cause; but as none of
them had seen what happened, he did not find his
account in the prosecution, though he himself
examined all the witnesses, and among other
questions, asked whether they had not seen him
come in like another man? and whether they had
ever seen any other man in such a condition as
that in which he had crawled off? But this last
interrogation they were not obliged to answer,
because it had reference to the second discipline he
had undergone, in which they, and they only
were concerned; and no person is bound to give
testimony against himself. 
In short, the attorney was nonsuited, to the
satisfaction of all who knew him, and found himself
under the necessity of proving that he had received
in course of post, the letter which was declared
in court a scandalous forgery, in order to
prevent an indictment with which he was threatened
by the commodore, who little dreamt that
the whole affair had been planned and executed
by Peregrine and his associates. 
The next enterprize in which this triumvirate
engaged, was a scheme to frighten Trunnion
with an apparition, which they prepared and exhibited
in this manner. To the hide of a large
ox Pipes fitted a leathern vizor of a most terrible
appearance, stretched on the jaws of a shark
which he had brought from sea, and accommodated 

with a couple of broad glasses instead of eyes. 
On the inside of these he placed two rush lights,
and with a composition of sulphur and salt-petre,
made a pretty large fuse, which he fixed between
two rows of the teeth. This equipage being finished,
he, one dark night chosen for the purpose, put it
on, and following the commodore into a long
passage in which he was preceded by Perry with
a light in his hand, kindled his fire-work with a
match, and began to bellow like a bull. The boy,
as it was concerted, looking behind him, screamed
aloud, and dropped the light, which was extinguished
in the fall: when Trunnion alarmed at
his nephew's consternation, exclaimed, “Zounds!
what's the matter?” And turning about to see
the cause of his dismay, beheld a hideous phantom
vomiting blue flame, which aggravated the
horrors of its aspect. He was instantly seized with
an agony of fear, which divested him of his reason; 
nevertheless, he, as it were mechanically,
raised his trusty supporter in his own defence, and
the apparition advancing towards him, aimed it
at this dreadful annoyance with such a convulsive
exertion of strength, that had not the blow
chanced to light upon one of the horns, Mr. Pipes
would have had no cause to value himself upon
his invention. Misapplied as it was, he did not
fail to stagger at the shock, and dreading another
such salutation, closed with the commodore, and
having tripped up his heels, retreated with great
expedition. 
It was then that Peregrine, pretending to recollect
himself a little, ran with all the marks
of disturbance and affright, and called up the
servants to the assistance of their master, whom
they found in a cold sweat upon the floor, his 

features betokening horror and confusion. Hatchway
raised him up, and having comforted him
with a cup of Nantz, began to inquire into the
cause of his disorder: but he could not extract
one word of answer from his friend, who, after
a considerable pause, during which he seemed to
be wrapped up in profound contemplation, pronounced
aloud, “By the Lord! Jack, you
may say what you wool; but I'll be damned if
it was not Davy Jones himself: I know him by
his saucer-eyes, his three rows of teeth, his horns
and tail, and the blue smoak that came out of
his nostrils. What does the black-guard, hell's
baby want with me? I'm sure I never committed
murder, nor wronged any man whatsomever,
since I first went to sea.” This same Davy
Jones, according to the mythology of sailors, is
the fiend that presides over all the evil spirits of
the deep, and is often seen in various shapes,
perching among the rigging on the eve of hurricanes,
shipwrecks, and other disasters, to which
a sea-faring life is exposed; warning the devoted
wretch of death and woe. No wonder then that
Trunnion was disturbed by a supposed visit of
this dæmon, which, in his opinion, foreboded
some dreadful calamity. 