


In which our Knight is tantalized with
a transient glimpse of felicity. 
The success of our adventurer,
which we have particularized
in the last chapter, could not fail of
inhancing his character, not only
among those who knew him, but
also among the people of the town to
whom he was an utter stranger. The
populace surrounded the house, and
testified their approbation in loud 

huzzas. Captain Crowe was more
than ever inspired with veneration for
his admired patron, and more than
ever determined to pursue his footsteps
in the road of chivalry. Fillet,
and his friend the lawyer, could not
help conceiving an affection, and
even a profound esteem, for the exalted
virtue, the person, and the accomplishments
of the knight, dashed
as they were with a mixture of extravagance
and insanity. Even Sir
Launcelot himself was elevated to an
extraordinary degree of self-complacency
on the fortunate issue of his adventure,
and became more and more
persuaded that a knight-errant's profession
might be exercised, even in
England, to the advantage of the
community. The only person of the
company who seemed unanimated
with the general satisfaction was Mr.
Thomas Clarke. He had, not without
good reason, laid it down as a
maxim, that knight-errantry and
madness were synonimous terms:
and that madness, though exhibited 

in the most advantageous and agreeable
light, could not change its nature,
but must continue a perversion
of sense to the end of the chapter. 
He perceived the additional impression
which the brain of his uncle had
sustained, from the happy manner in
which the benevolence of Sir Launcelot
had so lately operated; and began
to fear it would be, in a little
time, quite necessary to have recourse
to a commission of lunacy, which
might not only disgrace the family of
the Crowes, but also tend to invalidate
the settlement which the captain had
already made in favour of our young
lawyer. 
Perplexed with these cogitations,
Mr. Clarke appealed to our adventurer's
own reflection. He expatiated
upon the bad consequences that would
attend his uncle's perseverance in the
execution of a scheme so foreign to
his faculties; and intreated him, for
the love of God, to divert him from
his purpose, either by arguments or
authority; as, of all mankind, the 

knight alone had gained such an ascendency
over his spirit, that he would
listen to his exhortations with respect
and submission. Our adventurer was
not so mad, but that he saw and
owned the rationality of these remarks. 
He readily undertook to employ all
his influence with Crowe to dissuade
him from his extravagant design; and
seized the first opportunity of being
alone with the captain, to signify his
sentiments on this subject. “Captain
Crowe (said he), you are then
determined to proceed in the course
of knight-errantry?” “I am, (replied
the seaman) with God's help,
d'ye see, and the assistance of wind
and weather—” “What, do'st thou
talk of wind and weather! (cried the
knight, in an elevated tone of affected
transport:) without the help of
Heaven, indeed, we are all vanity,
imbecility, weakness, and wretchedness; 
but if thou art resolved to embrace
the life of an errant, let me not
hear thee so much as whisper a doubt,
a wish, an hope, or sentiment, with 

respect to any other obstacle, which
wind or weather, fire or water, sword
or famine, danger or disappointment,
may throw in the way of thy career. 
—When the duty of thy profession
calls, thou must singly rush upon innumerable
hosts of armed men: thou
must storm the breach in the mouth
of batteries loaded with death and destruction,
while, every step thou movest,
thou art exposed to the horrible explosion
of subterranean mines, which,
being sprung, will whirl thee aloft in
air, a mangled corse, to feed the fowls
of heaven. Thou must leap into the
abyss of dismal caves and caverns, replete
with poisonous toads and hissing
serpents. Thou must plunge into
seas of burning sulphur: thou must
launch upon the ocean in a crazy bark,
when the foaming billows roll mountain
high, when the lightning flashes,
the thunder roars, and the howling
tempest blows, as if it would commix
the jarring elements of air and water,
earth and fire, and reduce all nature
to the original anarchy of chaos. Thus 

involved, thou must turn thy prow
full against the fury of the storm, and
stem the boisterous surge to thy destined
port, though at the distance of
a thousand leagues—thou must”— 
“Avast, avast, brother, (exclaimed
the impatient Crowe) you've
got into the high latitudes, d'ye see:
—if so be as you spank it away at that
rate, adad, I can't continue in tow— 
we must cast off the rope, or 'ware
timbers. —As for your 'osts and
breeches, and hurling aloft, d'ye see,
your caves and caverns, whistling
tuoads and serpents, burning brimstone
and foaming billows, we must
take our hap; I value 'em not a rotten
ratline:—but, as for sailing in the
wind's eye, brother, you must give
me leave—no offence, I hope—I
pretend to be a thorough-bred seaman,
d'ye see—and I'll be damned if you,
or e'er an arrant that broke biscuit ever
sailed in a three-mast vessel within
five points of the wind, allowing for
variation and lee-way. —No, no,
brother, none of your tricks upon 

travellers—I a'n't now to learn my
compass.” “Tricks! (cried the
knight, starting up, and laying his
hand on the pummel of his sword)
what! suspect my honour!” 
Crowe, supposing him to be really
incensed, interrupted him with great
earnestness, saying, “Nay, don't— 
what a-pize!—adds-buntlines! —I
did'n't go to give you the lie, brother,
smite my limbs: I only said as how
to sail in the wind's eye was impossible.” 
“And I say unto thee, (resumed
the knight) nothing is impossible
to a true knight-errant, inspired
and animated by love.” “And I say
unto thee, (hollowed Crowe) if so
be as how love pretends to turn his
hawse-holes to the wind, he's no seaman
d'ye see, but a snotty-nose lubberly
boy, that knows not a cat from
a capstan—a-don't.” “He that
does not believe that love is an infallible
pilot, must not embark upon the
voyage of chivalry; for, next to the
protection of Heaven, it is from love
that the knight derives all his prowess 

and glory. The bare name of his
mistress invigorates his arm: the remembrance
of her beauty infuses in
his breast the most heroic sentiments
of courage, while the idea of her
chastity hedges him round like a
charm, and renders him invulnerable
to the sword of his antagonist. A
knight without a mistress is a mere
non-entity, or at least a monster in
nature, a pilot without compass, a
ship without rudder, and must be driven
to and fro upon the waves of discomfiture
and disgrace.” “An that
be all, (replied the sailor) I told you
before as how I've got a sweet-heart,
as true a hearted girl as ever swung
in canvas. —What tho'f she may have
started a hoop in rolling—that signifies
nothing—I'll warrant her tight as a
nut-shell.” “She must, in your
opinion, be a paragon either of beauty
or virtue. Now, as you have given
up the last, you must uphold her
charms unequalled, and her person
without a parallel.” “I do, I
do uphold she will sail upon a 

parallel as well as e'er a frigate
that was rigged to the northward
of fifty.” “At that rate she must
rival the attractions of her whom
I adore, but that, I say, is impossible:
the perfections of my Aurelia
are altogether supernatural; and as
two suns cannot shine together in the
same sphere with equal splendor, so
I affirm, and will prove with my
body, that your mistress, in comparison
with mine, is as a glow-worm
to the meridian sun, a rush-light to
the full moon, or a stale mackerel's
eye to a pearl of orient.” “Harkye,
brother, you might give good words,
however: an we once fall a-jawing,
d'ye see, I can heave out as much
bilge-water as another; and since you
besmear my sweetheart Besselia, I can
as well bedaub your mistress Aurelia,
whom I value no more than old junk,
pork-slush, or stinking stockfish.” 
“Enough, enough—such blasphemy
shall not pass unchastised. In consideration
of our having fed from the
same table, and maintained together
a friendly, tho' short intercourse, I 

will not demand the combat before
you are duly prepared. Proceed to
the first great town, where you can
be furnished with horse and harnessing,
with arms offensive and defensive:
provide a trusty squire, assume a motto
and device—declare yourself a son
of chivalry; and proclaim the excellence
of her who rules your heart. 
I shall fetch a compass,; and wheresoever
we may chance to meet, let us
engage with equal arms in mortal
combat, that shall decide and determine
this dispute.” 
So saying, our adventurer stalked
with great solemnity into another
apartment; while Crowe, being sufficiently
irritated, snapped his fingers
in token of defiance. Honest Crowe
thought himself scurvily used by a
man whom he had cultivated with
such humility of veneration; and,
after an incoherent ejaculation of sea-oaths,
went in quest of his nephew,
in order to make him acquainted with
this unlucky transaction. 
In the mean time Sir Launcelot,
having ordered supper, retired into 

his own chamber, and gave a loose
to the most tender emotions of his
heart. He recollected all the fond
ideas which had been excited in the
course of his correspondence with
the charming Aurelia. He remembered,
with horror, the cruel letter
he had received from that young lady,
containing a formal renunciation
of his attachment, so unsuitable to the
whole tenour of her character and
conduct. He revolved the late adventure
of the coach, and the declaration
of Mr. Clarke, with equal
eagerness and astonishment; and was
seized with the most ardent desire of
unravelling a mystery so interesting to
the predominant passion of his heart. 
—All these mingled considerations
produced a kind of ferment in the
œconomy of his mind, which subsided
into a profound reverie, compounded
of hope and perplexity. 
From this trance he was waked
by the arrival of his squire, who entered
the room with the blood trickling
over his nose, and stood before 

him without speaking. When the
knight asked whose livery was that he
wore, he replied, “'Tis your honour's
own livery:—I received it on
your account, and hope as you will
quit the score.” Then he proceeded
to inform his master, that two officers
of the army having come into the
kitchen, insisted upon having for their
supper the victuals which Sir Launcelot
had bespoke; and that he, the
squire, objecting to the proposal, one
of them had seized the poker, and
basted him with his own blood; that
when he told them he belonged to a
knight-errant, and threatened them
with the vengeance of his master,
they cursed and abused him, calling
him Sancho Panza, and such dogs
names; and bade him tell his master
Don Quicksot, that, if he made any
noise, they would confine him to his
cage, and lie with his mistress Dulcinea. 
“To be sure, Sir, (said he)
they thought you as great a nincompoop
as your squire—trim tram, like
master, like man;—but I hope as 

how you will give them a Rowland
for their Oliver.” 
“Miscreant! (cried the knight)
you have provoked the gentlemen
with your impertinence, and they
have chastised you as you deserve. 
I tell thee, Crabshaw, they have
saved me the trouble of punishing
thee with my own hands; and well
it is for thee, sinner as thou art, that
they themselves have performed the
office: for, had they complained to
me of thy insolence and rusticity, by
Heaven! I would have made thee an
example to all the impudent squires
upon the face of the earth. Hence
then, avaunt, caitif. —Let his majesty's
officers, who are perhaps fatigued
with hard duty in the service
of their country, comfort themselves
with the supper which was intended
for me, and leave me undisturbed to
my own meditations.” 
Timothy did not require a repetition
of this command, which he
forthwith obeyed, growling within
himself, that thence-forward he 

should let every cuckold wear his own
horns; but he could not help entertaining
some doubts with respect to
the courage of his master, who, he
supposed, was one of those Hectors
who have their fighting days, but are
not at all times equally prepared for
the combat. 
The knight, having taken a slight
repast, retired to his repose; and had
for some time enjoyed a very agreeable
slumber, when he was startled
by a knocking at his chamber-door. 
“I beg your honour's pardon,
(said the landlady) but there are two
uncivil persons in the kitchen, who
have well nigh turned my whole
house topsy-turvy. Not contented
with laying violent hands on your
honour's supper, they want to be
rude to two young ladies who are just
arrived, and have called for a post-chaise
to go on. They are afraid to
open their chamber-door to get out— 
and the young lawyer is like to be
murdered for taking the ladies part.” 

Sir Launcelot, though he refused
to take notice of the insult which had
been offered to himself, no sooner
heard of the distress of the ladies
than he started up, huddled on his
cloaths, and, girding his sword to his
loins, advanced with a deliberate pace
to the kitchen, where he perceived
Thomas Clarke warmly engaged in
altercation with a couple of young
men dressed in regimentals, who, with
a peculiar air of arrogance and ferocity,
treated him with great insolence
and contempt. Tom was endeavouring
to persuade them, that, in the
constitution of England, the military
was always subservient to the civil
power; and that their behaviour to a
couple of helpless young women was
not only unbecoming gentlemen, but
expressly contrary to the law, inasmuch
as they might be sued for an assault on
an action of damages. 
To this remonstrance the two heroes
in red replied by a volley of dreadful
oaths, intermingled with threats,
which put the lawyer in some pain 

for his ears. While one thus endeavoured
to intimidate honest Tom
Clarke, the other thundered at the
door of the apartment to which the
ladies had retired, demanding admittance,
but received no other answer
than a loud shriek. Our adventurer
advancing to this uncivil champion,
accosted him thus in a grave and solemn
tone: “Assuredly I could not
have believed, except upon the evidence
of my own senses, that persons
who have the appearance of gentlemen,
and bear his majesty's honourable
commission in the army,
could behave so wide of the decorum
due to society, of a proper respect to
the laws, of that humanity which we
owe to our fellow-creatures, and that
delicate regard for the fair-sex, which
ought to prevail in the breast of every
gentleman, and which in particular
dignifies the character of a soldier. 
To whom shall that weaker tho' more
amiable part of the creation, fly for
protection, if they are insulted and
outraged by those whose more immediate 

duty is it to afford them security
and defence from injury and violence? 
What right have you, or any
man upon earth, to excite riot in a
public inn, which may be deemed a
temple sacred to hospitality, to disturb
the quiet of your fellow-guests, some
of them perhaps exhausted by fatigue,
some of them invaded by distemper,
to interrupt the king's lieges in their
course of journeying upon their lawful
occasions? Above all, what motive
but wanton barbarity, could
prompt you to violate the apartment,
and terrify the tender hearts of two
helpless young ladies travelling no doubt
upon some cruel emergency, which
compels them unattended to encounter
in the night the dangers of the
highway.” 
“Heark ye, Don Bethlem, (said
the captain, strutting up and cocking
his hat in the face of our adventurer)
you may be as mad as e'er a straw-crowned
monarch in Moorfields, for
aught I care; but damme! don't you
be saucy, otherwise I shall dub your 

worship with a good stick across your
shoulders.” “How! petulant boy
(cried the knight) since you are so ignorant
of unbanity, I will give you a
lesson that you shall not easily forget.” 
So saying, he unsheathed his sword,
and called upon the soldier to draw
in his defence. 
The reader may have seen the
physiognomy of a stockholder at Jonathan's
when the rebels were at
Derby, or the features of a bard when
accosted by a bailiff, or the countenance
of an alderman when his banker
stops payment; if he has seen either
of these phænomena, he may
conceive the appearance that was now
exhibited by the visage of the ferocious
captain, when the naked sword
of Sir Launcelot glanced before his
eyes: far from attempting to produce
his own, which was of unconscionable
length, he stood motianless
as a statue, staring with the
most ghastly look of terror and
astonishment. His companion, who
partook of his panic, seeing matters 

brought to a very serious crisis, interposed
with a crest fallen countenance,
assuring Sir Launcelot they
had no intention to quarrel, and what
they done was intirely for the sake of
the frolick. 
“By such frolicks (cried the knight)
you become nuisances to society, bring
yourselves into contempt, and disgrace
the corps to which you belong. I
now perceive the truth of the observation,
that cruelty always resides with
cowardice. My contempt is changed
into compassion; and as you are probably
of good families, I must insist
upon this young man's drawing his
sword, and acquitting himself in such
a manner as may screen him from
the most infamous censure which an
officer can undergo.” “Lack a day,
Sir (said the other) we are no officers,
but 'prentices to two London haberdashers,
travellers for orders. Captain
is a good travelling name, and
we have dressed ourselves like officers
to procure more respect upon the
road.” 

The knight said he was very glad,
for the honour of the service, to find
they were impostors; tho' they deserved
to be chastised for arrogating to
themselves an honourable character,
which they had not spirit to sustain. 
These words were scarce pronounced,
when Mr. Clarke approaching
one of the bravadoes, who had
threatened to crop his ears, bestowed
such a benediction on his jaw, as he
could not receive without immediate
humiliation; while Timothy Crabshaw,
smarting from his broken-head
and his want of supper, saluted the
other with a Yorkshire hug, that
layed him across the body of his companion. 
In a word, the two pseudo-officers
were very roughly handled
for their presumption in pretending
to act characters for which they were
so ill qualified. 
While Clarke and Crabshaw were
thus laudably employed, the two
young ladies passed through the
kitchen so suddenly, that the knight
had only a transient glimpse of their 

backs, and they disappeared before
he could possibly make a tender of
his services. The truth is, they dreaded
nothing so much as their being discovered,
and took the first opportunity
of gliding into the chaise, which
had been for some time waiting in the
passage. 
Mr. Clarke was much more disconcerted
than our adventurer, by
their sudden escape. He ran with
great eagerness to the door, and, perceiving
they were flown, returned to
Sir Launcelot, saying, “Lord bless my
soul, Sir, didn't you see who it was?” 
“Hah! how! (exclaimed the knight,
reddening with alarm) who was it?” 
“One of them (replied the lawyer)
was Dolly, our old landlady's daughter
at the Black Lyon. —I knew her
when first she lighted, notwithstanding
her being neatly dressed in a green
joseph, which, I'll assure you, Sir,
becomes her remarkably well. —I'd
never desire to see a prettier creature. 
As for the other, she's a very genteel
woman; but whether old or young, 

ugly or handsome, I can't pretend to
say; for she was masqued. —I had just
time to salute Dolly, and ask a few
questions;—but all she could tell me
was, that the masqued lady's name
was Miss Meadows; and that she,
Dolly, was hired as her waiting-woman.” 
When the name of Meadows was
mentioned, Sir Launcelot, whose
spirits had been in violent commotion,
became suddenly calm and serene,
and he began to communicate
to Clarke the dialogue which had
passed between him and captain
Crowe, when the hostess, addressing
herself to our errant, “Well, (said
she) I have had the honour to accommodate
many ladies of the first
fashion at the White Hart, both young
and old, proud and lowly, ordinary
and handsome; but such a miracle as
Miss Meadows I never yet did see. 
Lord, let me never thrive but I think
she is of something more than a human
creature. —O, had your honour
but set eyes on her, you would have 

said it was a vision from Heaven, a
cherubim of beauty:—for my part,
I can hardly think it was any thing
but a dream:—then so meek, so mild,
so good-natured and generous! I say,
blessed is the young woman who tends
upon such a heavenly creature:—and
poor dear young lady! she seems to
be under grief and affliction; for the
tears stole down her lovely cheeks, and
looked for all the world like orient
pearl.” 
Sir Launcelot listened attentively to
the description, which reminded him
of his dear Aurelia, and, sighing bitterly,
withdrew to his own apartment. 