


DEAR DICK,
ABOUT a fornight is now elapsed since we
left the capital of Scotland, directing our course towards
Stirling, where we lay —The castle of this
place is such another as that of Edinburgh, and affords
a surprising prospect of the windings of the river
Forth, which are so extraordinary, that the
distance from hence to Alloa, by land, is but four
miles, and by water it is twenty-four. Alloa is a
neat thriving town, that depends in a great measure
on the commerce of Glasgow, the merchants of
which send hither tobacco and other articles, to be
deposited in warehouses for exportation from the
Frith of Forth. In our way hither we visited a
flourishing iron-work, where, instead of burning
wood, they use coal, which they have the art of
clearing in such a manner as frees it from the sulphur,
that would otherwise, render the metal too
brittle for working. Excellent coal is found in almost
every part of Scotland. 
The soil of this district produces scarce any other
grain but oats and barley; perhaps because it is
poorly cultivated, and almost altogether uninclosed. 
The few inclosures they have consist of paultry
walls of loose stones gathered from the fields, which
indeed they cover, as if they had been scattered on
purpose. When I expressed my surprize that the
peasants did not discumber their grounds of these
stones; a gentleman, well acquainted with the theory
as well as practice of farming, assured me that
the stones, far from being prejudicial, were serviceable
to the crop. This philosoper had ordered a
field of his own to be cleared, manured and sown
with barley, and the produce was more scanty than
before. He caused the stones to be replaced, and
next year the crop was as good as ever. The
stones were removed a second time, and the harvest 

failed; they were again brought back, and the
ground retrieved its fertility. The same experiment
has been tried in different parts of Scotland with the
same success —Astonished at this information, I
desired to know in what manner he accounted for
this strange phenomenon; and he said there were
three ways in which the stons might be serviceable. 
They might possibly restrain an excess in the
perspiration of the earth, analogous to colliquative
sweats, by which the human body is sometimes
wasted and consumed. They might act as so many
sences to protect the tender blade from the piercing
winds of the spring; or, by multiplying the reflexion
of the sun, they might increase the warmth
so as to mitigate the natural chilness of the soil and
climate —But, surely, this excessive perspiration
might be more effectually checked by different kinds
of manure, such as ashes, lime, chalk, or marl, of
which last it seems there are many pits in this kingdom:
as for the warmth, it would be much more; 
equally obtained by inclosures; one half of the
ground which is now covered, would be retrieved; 
the cultivation would require less labour; and the
ploughs, harrows, and horses, would not suffer
half the damage which they now sustain. 
These north-western parts are by no means fertile
in corn. The ground is naturally barren and
moorish. The peasants are poorly lodged, meagre
in their looks, mean in their apparel, and remarkably
dirty. This last reproach they might easily
wash off by means of those lakes, rivers, and rivulets
of pure water, with which they are so liberally
supplied by nature. Agriculture cannot be
expected to flourish where the farms are small, the
leases short, and the husbandman begins upon a
rack rent, without a sufficient stock to answer the
purposes of improvement. The granaries of Scotland
are the banks of the Tweed, the counties of
East and Mid-Lothian, the Carse of Gowrie, in 

Perthshire, equal in fertility to any part of England,
and some tracts in Aberdeenshire and Murray,
where I am told the harvest is more early than
in Northumberland, although they lie above two
degrees farther north. I have a strong curiosity to
visit many places beyond the Forth and the Tay,
such as Perth, Dundee, Montrose, and Aberdeen,
which are towns equally elegant and thriving; but
the season is too far advanced, to admit of this addition
to my original plan. 
I am so far happy as to have seen Glasgow,
which, to the best of my recollection and judgment,
is one of the prettiest towns in Europe; and,
without all doubt, it is one of the most flourishing
in Great Britain. In short, it is a perfect bee-hive
in point of industry. It stands partly on a gentle
declivity; but the greatest part of it is in a plain,
watered by the river Clyde. The streets are
straight, open, airy, and well paved; and the
houses lofty and well built of hewn stone. At the
upper end of the town, there is venerable cathedral,
that may be compared with York-minster or
Westminster; and, about the middle of the descent
from this to the Cross, is the college, a respectable
pile of building, with all manner of accommodation
for the professors and students, including
an elegant library, and an observatory well
provided with astronomical instruments. The
number of inhabitants is said to amount to thirty
thousand; and marks of opulence and independency
appear in every quarter of this commercial city,
which, however, is not without its inconveniences
and detects: The water of their public pumps is
generally hard and brackish, an imperfection the
less excusable, as the river Clyde runs by their
doors, in the lower part of the town, and there
are rivulets and springs above the cathedral, sufficient
to fill a large reservoir with excellent water,
which might be thence distributed to all the different 

parts of the city. It is of more consequence
to consult the health of the inhabitants in this article,
than to employ so much attention in beautifying
their town with new streets, squares, and
churches. Another defect, not so easily remedied,
is the shallowness of the river, which will not float
vessels of any burden within ten or twelve miles of
the city; so that the merchants are obliged to load
and unload their ships at Greenock and Port-Glasgow,
situated about fourteen miles nearer the mouth
of the Firth, where it is about two miles broad. 
The people of Glasgow have a noble spirit of
enterprise —Mr Moore, a surgeon, to whom I
was recommended from Edinburgh, introuduced me
to all the principal merchants of the place. Here I
became acquainted with Mr. Cochran, who may
be stiled one of the sages of this kingdom. He
was first magistrate at the time of the last rebellion. 
I sat as member when he was examined in the house
of commons; upon which occasion Mr. P&wblank; observed
he had never heard such a sensible evidence
given at that bar —I was also introduced to Dr.
John Gordon, a patriot of a truly Roman spirit,
who is the father of the linen manufacture in this
place, and was the great promoter of the city work-house,
infirmary, and other works of public utility. 
Had he lived in ancient Rome, he would have been
honoured with a statue at the public expence. I
moreover conversed with one Mr. G&wblank;ssf&wblank;d, whom
I take to be one of the greatest merchants in Europe. 
In the last war, he is said to have had at one
time five and twenty ships, with their cargoes, his
own property, and to have traded for above half a
million sterling a year. The last war was a fortunate
period for the commerce of Glasgow —The
merchants, considering that their ships bound for
America, launching out at once into the Atlantic
by the north of Ireland, pursued a track very little
frequented by privateers, resolved to insure one another 

and saved a very considerable sum by this resolution,
as few or none of their ships were taken 
—You must know I have a sort of national attachment
to this part of Scotland —The great church
dedicated to St. Mongah, the river Clyde, and other
particulars that smack of our Welch language and
customs, contribute to flatter me with the notion,
that these people are the descendants of the Britons,
who once possessed this country. Without all
question, this was a Cumbrian kingdom: its capital
was Dumbarton (a corruption of Dunbritton)
which still exists as a royal borough, at the influx
of the Clyde and Leven, ten miles below Glasgow. 
The same neighbourhood gave birth to St. Patrick,
the apostle of Ireland, at a place where there is
still a church and village, which retain his name. 
Hard by are some vestiges of the famous Roman
wall, built in the reign of Antonine, from the
Clyde to the Forth, and fortified with castles, to
restrain the incursions of the Scots or Caledonians,
who inhabited the west-Highlands. In a line parallel
to this wall, the merchants of Gsasgow have
determined to make a navigable canal betwixt the
two Friths, which will be of incredible advantage
to their commerce, in transporting merchandize
from one side of the island to the other. 
From Glasgow we travelled along the Clyde,
which is a delightful stream, adorned on both sides
with villas, towns, and, villages. Here is no want
of groves, and meadows, and corn-fields interspersed; 
but on this side of Glasgow, there is little
other grain than oats and barley; the first are much
better, the last much worse, than those of the same
species in England. I wonder there is so little
rye, which is a grain that will thrive in almost any
soil, and it is still more surprising, that the cultivation
of potatoes should be so much neglected
in the Highlands, where the poor people have
not meal enough to supply them with bread 

through the winter. On the other side of the river
are the towns of Paisley and Rensrew. The
first, from an inconsiderable village, is become
one of the most flourishing places of the kingdom,
enriched by the linen, cambrick, flowered lawn,
and silk manufactures. It was formerly noted for
a rich monastery of the monks of Clugney, who
wrote the famous Scoti-Chronicon called The Black
Book of Paisley. The old abbey still remains, converted
into a dwelling-house, belonging to the carl
of Dundonald. Renfrew is a pretty town, on the
banks of the Clyde, capital of the shire, which was
heretofore the patrimony of the Stuart family, and
gave the title of baron to the king's eldest son,
which is still assumed by the prince of Wales. 
The Clyde we left a little on our left-hand at
Dumbritton, where it widens into an æstuary or
frith, being augmented by the influx of the Leven. 
On this spot stands the castle formerly called Alcluyd,
washed by these two rivers on all sides, except
a narrow isthmus, which at every spring-tide
is overflowed. The whole is a great curiosity,
from the quality and form of the rock, as well as
from the nature of its situation. —We now crossed
the water of Leven, which, though nothing
near so considerable as the Clyde, is much more
transparent, pastoral, and delightful. This charming
stream is the outlet of Lough-Lomond, and
through a tract of four miles pursues its winding
course, murmuring over a bed of pebbles, till it
joins the Frith at Dumbritton. A very little above
its source, on the lake, stands the house of Cameron,
belonging to Mr. Smollett, so embosomed in
an oak wood, that we did not see it till we were
within fifty yards of the door. I have seen the
Lago di Garda, Albano, De Vico, Bolsena, and
Geneva, and, upon my honour, I prefer Lough-Lomond
to them all; a preference which is certainly 

owing to the verdant islands that seem to
float upon its surface, affording the most inchanting
objects of repose to the excursive view. Nor
are the banks destitute of beauties, which even partake
of the sublime. On this side they display a
sweet variety of woodland, corn-field, and pasture,
with several agreeable villas emerging as it were
out of the lake, till, at some distance, the prospect
terminates in huge mountains covered with
heath, which being in the bloom, affords a very
rich covering of purple. Every thing here is romantic
beyond imagination. This country is
justly stiled the Arcadia of Scotland; and I don't
doubt but it may vie with Arcadia in every thing
but climate. —I am sure it excels it in verdure,
wood, and water. —What say you to a natural bason
of pure water, near thirty miles long, and in
some places seven miles broad, and in many above
a hundred fathom deep, having four and twenty
habitable islands, some of them stocked with deer,
and all of them covered with wood; containing
immense quantities of delicious fish, salmon, pike,
trout, perch, flounders, eels, and powans, the last
a delicate kind of fresh-water herring peculiar to
this lake; and finally, communicating with the sea,
by sending off the Leven, through which all those
species (except the powan) make their exit and entrance
occasionally? 
Inclosed I send you the copy of a little ode to
this river, by Dr. Smollett, who was born on the
banks of it, within two miles of the place where I
am now writing. —It is at least picturesque and
accurately descriptive, if it has no other merit. — 
There is an idea of truth in an agreeable landscape
taken from nature, which pleases me more than
the gayest fiction which the most luxuriant fancy
can display. 

I have other remarks to make; but as my paper
is full, I must reserve them till the next occasion. 
I shall only observe at present, that I am determined
to penetrate at least forty miles into the
Highlands, which now appear like a vast fantastic
vision in the clouds, inviting the approach of 
Yours always,
Matt. Bramble. 
Cameron, Aug. 28. 

ODE to Leven-Water.
ON Leven's banks, while free to rove,
And tune the rural pipe to love;
I envied not the happiest swain
That ever trod th' Arcadian plain.
Pure stream! in whose transparent wave
My youthful limbs I wont to leave;
No torrents stain thy limpid source;
No rocks impede thy dimpling course,
That sweetly warbles o'er its bed,
With white, round, polish'd pebbles spread
While, lightly pois'd, the scaly brood
In myriads cleave thy crystal flood;
The springing trout in spekled pride;
The salmon, monarch of the tide;
The ruthless pike intent on war;
The silver cel, and mottled par * .
Devolving from thy parent lake,
A charming maze thy waters make,
By bow'rs of birch, and groves of pine,
And hedges flow'r'd with eglantine.
Still on thy banks so gayly green,
May num'rous herds and flocks be seen,
And lasses chanting o'er the pall,
And shepherd's piping in the dale,

And ancient faith that knows no guile,
And industry imbrown'd with toil,
And hearts resolv'd, and hands prepar'd,
The blessings they enjoy to guard.