


We proceed on our journey—are overtaken by
an highwayman who fires at Strap, is
prevented from shooting me by a company
of horsemen, who ride in pursuit of
him—Strap is put to bed at an inn. — 
Adventures at that inn. 
After having paid our score, and taken
leave of our hostess, who embraced me
tenderly at parting, we proceeded on our journey,
blessing our selves that we had come off so well. 
We had not walked above five miles, when we
observed a man on horse-back galloping after us,
whom we in a short time recognized to be no
other than this formidable hero who had already
given us so much vexation. —He stopped hard by
me, and asked if I knew who he was? —My astonishment
had disconcerted me so much, that I
did not hear his question, which he repeated
with a volley of oaths and threats; but I remained
as mute as before. —Strap seeing my discomposure,
fell upon his knees in the mud, uttering
with a lamentable voice, these words: “For
Ch&wblank;st's sake, have mercy upon us, Mr.
Rifle, we know you very well.” —“O ho!
cried the thief, you do!—but by G&sblank;d, you
never shall be evidence against me in this
world, you dog!” —So saying, he drew a 

pistol, and fired it at the unfortunate shaver, who
fell flat upon the ground without speaking one
word. —My comrade's fate, and my own situation,
rivetted me to the place where I stood, deprived
of all sense and reflection; so that I did not
make the least attempt either to run away, or deprecate
the wrath of this barbarian, who snapped a
second pistol at me; but before he had time to
prime again, perceived a company of horse-men
coming up; whereupon he rode off, and left me
standing motionless as a statue, in which posture
I was found by those whose appearance had saved
my life. —This company, which consisted of three
men in livery, well armed, was headed by an officer,
who (as I afterwards learned) was the person
from whom Rifle had taken the pocket pistols
the day before; and who, making known his
misfortune to a nobleman he met on the road,
assuring him, his non-resistance was altogether
owing to his consideration for the ladies in the
coach, procured the assistance of his Lordship's
servants to go in quest of the plunderer. —This
holiday captain scampered up to me with great
address, and asked who fired the pistol which he
had heard. —As I had not yet recovered my reason,
he, before I could answer, observed a body lying
on the ground: at which sight, his colour vanished,
and he pronounced with a faultering
tongue, “Gentlemen, here's murder committed! 
Let us alight.” —“No, no, said one of his
followers, let us rather pursue the murderer. 
—Which way went he, young man?” —By
this time, I had recollected myself so far as to
tell them he could not be a quarter of a mile before
them; and beg one of them to assist me in
conveying the corps of my friend to the next 

house, in order to its being interred. —The captain
foreseeing that in case he pursued, he must soon
come to action, began to curb his horse, and give
him the spur at the same time, which made the creature
rear up and snort in such a manner, that he
called out, his horse was frightened and would not
proceed; at the same time wheeling him round
and round, stroaking his neck, whistling and
wheedling him with “Sirrah, sirrah—gently,
gently, &c.”—“Z&wblank;ds! (cries one of the
servants) sure my Lord's Sorrel is not resty!” 
—With these words, he bestowed a lash on his
buttocks, and Sorrel disdaining the rein, sprung
forward with the captain at a pace that would
have soon brought him up with the robber, had
not the girth (happily for him) given way, by
which means he landed in the dirt; and two of
his attendants continued their pursuit, without
minding his situation in the least. —Mean while
one of the three who remained at my desire,
turning the Body of Strap to one side, in order
to see the wound which had killed him, found
him still warm and breathing; whereupon I immediately
let him blood, and saw him, with inexpressible
joy, recover; having received no other
wound than what his fear inflicted. — 
Having got him upon his legs, we walked together
to an inn, about half a mile from the place,
where Strap being not quite recovered, went to
bed; and in a little time after, the third servant
returned with the captain's horse and furniture,
leaving himself to crawl after as well as he could. 
This Gentleman of the sword upon his arrival,
complained grievously of the bruise occasioned by
his fall; and on the recommendation of the servant, 

who warranted my ability, I was employed
to bleed him, for which he rewarded me
with half a crown. 
The time between this and dinner, I passed in
observing a game at cards, between two farmers,
an exciseman, and a young fellow in a rusty gown
and cassock, who, as I afterwards understood,
was curate of a neighbouring parish. —It was
easy to perceive that the match was not equal; 
the two farmers being partners, having to do with
a couple of sharpers, who stript them of all their
cash in a very short time. —But what surprised me
very much, was to hear this clergyman reply to
one of the countrymen who seemed to suspect
foul play, in these words: “D&wblank;n me, friend,
d'ye question my honour?” —I did not at all
wonder to find a cheat in canonicals, this being
an animal frequent in my own country; but I
was scandalized at the indecency of his behaviour,
which appeared in the oaths he swore, and
the baudy songs which he sung. —At last, to
make amends, in some sort, for the damage he
had done the unwary boors, he pulled out a
fiddle from the lining of his gown, and promising
to treat them with a dinner, began to play most
melodiously, singing all the while in concert. —This
good humour of the parson inspired the company
with so much glee, that the farmers soon forgot their
losses, and all hands went to dancing in the yard. 
While we were agreeably amused in this manner,
our musician spying a horseman riding towards
the inn, stopt all of a sudden, crying out, “Gad
so! gentlemen, I beg your pardon, there's our
dog of a doctor coming into the inn.” —And
immediately concealed his instrument, and ran
towards the gate, where he took hold of the 

vicar's bridle, and helped him off, enquiring very
cordially into the state of his health. 
This rosy
son of the church (who might be about the age
of fifty) having alighted, and entrusted the curate
with his horse, stalked with great solemnity into
the kitchen, where, sitting down by the fire, he
called for a bottle of ale and a pipe; scarce deigning
an answer to the submissive questions of some
present who knew him, about the welfare of his
family. —While he indulged himself in this state,
amidst a profound silence, the curate approaching
him with great reverence, asked if he would not
be pleased to honour us with his company at dinner? 
To which he answered in the negative,
saying, he had been to visit 'squire Bumpkin, who
had drank himself into a high fever at the last
affizes; and that he had, on leaving his own
house, told Betty he should dine at home. —Accordingly,
when he had made an end of his bottle
and pipe, he got up and moved towards the
door with the same dignity as when he entered; 
where his journeyman stood ready with his nag. 
—He had no sooner mounted, than this facetious
person, coming into the kitchen, began in this
manner: “There the old rascal goes, and the
D&wblank;l go with him. —You see how the world
wags, gentlemen. —By G&sblank;d, this rogue of
a vicar does not deserve to live;—and yet he
has two livings worth 400l. per annum, while
poor I am fain to do all his drudgery, and
ride twenty miles every Sunday to preach, for
what? why truly, for 20l. a year. —I scorn to
boast of my own qualifications, but—comparisons,
you know, are odious. —I should be glad to
know how this swag-bellied doctor deserves to
be more at ease than me. —He can loll in his 

elbow chair at home, indulge himself in the
best of victuals and wine, and enjoy the conversation
of Betty his house-keeper. —You
understand me, gentlemen. —Betty is the doctor's
poor kinswoman, and a pretty girl she
is;—but no matter for that;—ay, and a dutiful
girl to her parents, whom she goes to see regularly
every year, though I must own I could
never learn in what county they live. —My
service t'ye gentlemen.” —By this time dinner
being ready, I waked my companion, and
we eat all together with great chearfulness and satisfaction. 
When our meal was ended, and every
man's share of the reckoning adjusted, the curate
went out on pretence of some necessary occasion,
and mounting his horse, left the two farmers
to satisfy the host in the best manner they
could. —We were no sooner informed of this
piece of finesse, then the exciseman who had been
silent hitherto, began with a malicious grin, “Ay, ay,
this is an old trick of Shufle,—I could not help
smiling, when he talked of treating. —You
must know, this is a very curious fellow. — 
He picked up some scraps of learning while he
served young lord Trifle at the university. — 
But what he most excells in, is pimping. —No
man knows his talents better than I, for I was
valet de chambre to 'squire Tattle, an intimate
companion of Shuffle's lord. —He got
himself into a scrape, by pawning some of his
lordship's cloaths, on which account he was
turned away; but as he was acquainted with
some particular circumstances of my lord's conduct,
he did not care to exasperate him too much,
and so made interest for his receiving orders, and
afterwards recommended him to the curacy 

which he now enjoys. —However, the fellow
cannot be too much admired for his dexterity
in making a comfortable livelihood, in spite of
such a small allowance. —You hear he
plays a good stick, and is really diverting company
—this makes him agreeable wherever he
goes;—and as for playing at cards, there
is not a man within three counties a match for
him;—the truth is, he is a damnable cheat,
and can shift a card with such address, that it
is impossible to discover him.” —At this he was
interrupted by one of the farmers, who asked him,
why he had not justice enough to acquaint them
with these particulars before they engaged in
play? —The exciseman replied without any hesitation,
that it was none of his business to intermeddle
between man and man; besides, he did
not know they were ignorant of Shuffle's character,
which was notorious to the whole country. — 
This did not satisfy the other, who taxed him
with abetting and assisting the curate's knavery,
and insisted on having his share of the winning
returned; which the exciseman as positively refused,
affirming, that whatever slights Shuffle
might practise on other occasions, he was
very certain, that he had play'd on the square
with them, and would answer it before any bench
in christendom; so saying, he got up, and having
paid his reckoning, sneaked off. The landlord
thrusting his neck into the passage, to see,
if he was gone, shook his head, saying, “Ah!
Lord help us! if every sinner was to have his
deserts. —Well, we victuallers must not disoblige
the excisemen. —But, I know what,— 
if parson Shuffle and he were weighed together,
a straw thrown into either scale would make 

the ballance kick the beam. —But, masters, this
is under the rose, continued Boniface with a
whisper.” 