


DEAR DOCTOR,
CONSIDERING the tax we pay for turnpikes,
the roads of this country constitute a most intolerable
grievance. Between Newark and Weatherby,
I have suffered more from jolting and swinging,
than ever I felt in the whole course of my life,
although the carriage is remarkably commodious
and well hung, and the postillions were very careful
in driving. I am now safely housed at the New
Inn at Harrigate, whither I came to satisfy my curiosity,
rather than with any view of advantage to
my health; and truly, after having considered all
the parts and particulars of the place I cannot account
for the concourse of people one finds here,
upon any other principle but that of caprice, which
seems to be the character of our nation. 
Harrigate is a wild common, bare and bleak
without tree or shrub, or the least signs of cultivation; 
and the people who come to drink the water,
are crowded together in paltry inns, where the
few tolerable rooms are monopolized by the friends
and favourites of the house, and all the rest of the
lodgers are obliged to put up with dirty holes, 

where there is neither space, air, nor convenience. 
My apartment is about ten feet square; and when
the folding bed is down, there is just room sufficient
to pass between it and the fire. One might
expect, indeed, that there would be no occasion
for a fire at midsummer; but here the climate is
so backward, that an ash tree, which our landlord
has planted before my window, is just beginning
to put forth its leaves; and I am fain to have my
bed warmed every night. 
As for the water, which is said to have effected
so many surprising cures, I have drank it once, and
the first draught has cured me of all desire to repeat
the medicine. —Some people say it smells of
rotten eggs, and other's compare it to the scourings
of a foul gun. —It is generally supposed to be
strongly impregnated with sulphur; and Dr. Shaw,
in his book upon mineral waters, says, he has seen
flakes of sulphur floating in the well—Pace tanti viri; 
I, for my part, have never observed any thing
like sulphur, either in or or about the well, neither
do I find that any brimstone has ever been extracted
from the water. As for the smell, if I
may be allowed to judge from my own organs, it
is exactly that of bilge-water; and the saline taste
of it seems to declare, that it is nothing else than
salt water putrified in the bowels of the earth. I
was obliged to hold my nose with one hand, while
I advanced the glass to my mouth with the other; 
and after I had made shift to swallow it, my stomach
could hardly retain what it had received. — 
The only effects it produced were sickness, griping,
and insurmountable disgust—I can hardly mention
it without puking. —The world is strangely misled
by the affectation of singularity. I cannot help
suspecting, that this water owes its reputation in a
great measure to its being so strikingly offensive. — 
On the same kind of analogy, a German doctor 

has introduced hemlock and other poisons, as specifics,
into the materia medica. —I am persuaded,
that all the cures ascribed to the Harrigate water,
would have been as efficaciously, and infinitely
more agreeably performed by the internal and external
use of sea-water. Sure I am, this last is
much less nauseous to the taste and smell, and
much more gentle in its operation as a purge, as
well as more extensive in its medical qualities. 
Two days ago, we went across the country to
visit 'squire Burdock, who married a first cousin
of my father, an heiress, who brought him an
estate of a thousand a year. This gentleman is a
declared opponent of the ministry in parliament; 
and, having an opulent fortune, piques himself
upon living in the country, and maintaining old
English hospitality. —By the bye, this is a phrase
very much used by the English themselves, both in
words and writing; but I never heard of it out of
the island, except by way of irony and sarcasm. 
What the hospitality of our forefathers has been,
I should be glad to see recorded, rather in the
memoirs of strangers who have visited our country,
and were the proper objects and judges of
such hospitality, than in the discourse and lucubrations
of the modern English, who seem to describe
it from theory and conjecture. Certain it is, we
are generally looked upon by foreigners, as a people
totally destitute of this virtue; and I never was in
any country abroad, where I did not meet with
persons of distinction who complained of having
been inhospitably used in Great Britain. A gentleman
of France, Italy, or Germany, who has entertained
and lodged an Englishman at his house, when
he afterwards meets with his guest at London, is
asked to dinner at the Saracen's head, the Turk's-head
the Boar's-head, or the Bear, eats raw beef and 

butter, drinks execrable port, and is allowed to
pay his share of the reckoning. 
But to return from this digression, which my
feeling for the honour of my country obliged me
to make—our Yorkshire cousin has been a
mighty fox-hunter before the Lord; but now he is
too fat and unweildy to leap ditches and five bar-gates; 
nevertheless he still keeps a pack of hounds,
which are well exercised; and his huntsman every
night entertains him with the adventures of the
day's chace, which he recites in a tone and terms
that are extremely curious and significant. In the
mean time, his broad brawn is scratched by one
of his grooms. —This fellow, it seems, having
no inclination to curry any beast out of the stable,
was at great pains to scollop his nails in such
a manner that the blood followed at every stroke. 
—He was in hopes that he would be dissmissed
from this disagreable office, but the event turned
out contrary to his expectation. —His master declared
he was the best scratcher in the family; and
now he will not suffer any other servant to draw a
nail upon his carcase. 
The 'squire's lady is very proud, without being
stiff or inaccessible. —She receives even her inferiors
in point of fortune with a kind of arrogant
civility; but then she thinks she has a right to
treat them with the most ungracious freedoms of
speech, and never fails to let them know she is
sensible of her own superior affluence. —In a word,
she speaks well of no living soul, and has not one
single friend in the world. Her husband hates her
mortally; but, although the brute is sometimes
so very powerful in him that he will have his own
way, he generally truckles to her dominion, and
dreads like a school-boy, the lash of her tongue. 
On the other hand, she is afraid of provoking him
too far, lest he should make some desperate effort 

to shake of her yoke. —She, therefore, acquiesces
in the proofs he daily gives of his attachment to
the liberty of an English freeholder, by saying and
doing, at his own table, whatever gratifies the
brutality of his disposition, or contributes to the
case of his person. The house, tho' large, is
neither elegant nor comfortable—It looks like a
great inn, crowded with travellers, who dine at
the landlord's ordinary, where there is a great profusion
of victuals and drink, but mine host seems
to be misplaced; and I would rather dine upon filberts
with a hermit, than feed upon venison with
a hog. The footmen might be aptly compared to
the waiters of a tavern, if they were more serviceable
and less rapacious; but they are generally insolent
and inattentive, and so greedy, that, I think,
I can dine better, and for less expence, at the Star
and Garter in Pall-mall, than at our cousin's castle
in Yorkshire. The 'squire is also blessed with
an only son, about two and twenty, just returned
from Italy, a complete fidler and dillettante; and
he slips no opportunity of manifesting the most
perfect contempt for his own father. 
When we arrived, there was a family of foreigners
at the house, on a visit to this virtuoso,
with whom they had been acquainted at the Spa; 
it was the count de Melville, with his lady, on
their way to Scotland. Mr. Burdock had met
with an accident, in consequence of which both
the count and I would have retired but the young
gentleman and his mother insisted upon our staying
dinner; and their serenity seemed to be so little
ruffled by what had happened, that we complied
with their invitation. The 'squire had been
brought home over night in his postchaise, so
terribly belaboured about the pate, that he seemed 

to be in a state of stupesaction, and had ever since
remained speechless. A country apothecary, called
Grieve, who lived in a neighbouring village, having
been called to his assistance, had let him blood,
and applied a poultice to his head, declaring, that
he had no fever, nor any other bad symptom but
the loss of speech, if he really had lost that faculty. 
But the young 'squire said this practitioner
was an ignorantaccio, that there was a fracture in
the cranium, and that there was a necessity for having
him trepanned without loss of time. His mother
espousing this opinion, had sent an express to
York for a surgeon to perform the operation, and
he was already come with his 'prentice and instruments. 
Having examined the patient's head, he
began to prepare his dressings; though Grieve still
retained his first opinion that there was no fracture,
and was the more confirmed in it as the 'squire had
passed the night in profound sleep, uninterrupted
by any catching or convulsion. The York surgeon
said he could not tell whether there was a
fracture, until he should take of the scalp, but, at
any rate, the operation might be of service, in
giving vent to any blood that might be extravasated,
either above or below the dura mater. The
lady and her son were clear for trying the experiment; 
and Grieve was dismissed with some marks
of contempt; which, perhaps, he owed to the
plainness of his appearance. He seemed to be
about the middle age, wore his own black hair
without any sort of dressing; by his garb, one
would have taken him for a quaker, but he had
none of the stiffness of that sect, on the contrary,
he was very submissive, respectful, and remarkably
taciturn. 
Leaving the ladies in an apartment by themselves,
we adjourned to the patient's chamber,
where the dressings and instruments were displayed 

in order upon a pewter dish. The operator, laying
aside his coat and periwig, equipped himself
with a night-cap, apron, and sleeves, while his
'prentice and footman, seizing the 'squire's head,
began to place it in a proper posture. —But
mark what followed. —The patient, bolting upright
in the bed, collared each of these assistants
with the grasp of Hercules, exclaiming, in a bellowing
tone, “I ha'n't lived so long in Yorkshire
to be trepanned by such vermin as you;” and
leaping on the floor, put on his breeches quietly,
to the astonishment of us all. The surgeon still
insisted upon the operation, alledging it was now
plain that the brain was injured, and desiring the
servants to put him into bed again; but no body
would venture to execute his orders, or even to
interpose: when the 'squire turned him and his
assistants out of doors, and threw his apparatus
out at the window. Having thus asserted his prerogative,
and put on his cloaths with the help of
a valet, the count, with my nephew and me, were
introduced by his son, and received with his usual
stile of rustic civility; then turning to signor
Macaroni, with a sarcastic grin, “I tell thee
what, Dick, (said he) a man's scull is not to
be bored every time his head is broken; and I'll
convince thee and thy mother, that I know
as many tricks as e'er an old fox in the West
Riding.” 
We afterwards understood he had quarrelled at
a public house with an exciseman, whom he challenged
to a bout at single stick, in which he had
been worsted; and that the shame of this defeat
had tied up his tongue. As for madam, she had
shewn no concern for his disaster, and now heard
of his recovery without emotion. —She had taken
some little notice of my sister and niece, though
rather with a view to indulge her own petulance, 

than out of any sentiment of regard to our family. 
—She said Liddy was a fright, and ordered her
woman to adjust her head before dinner; but she
would not meddle with Tabby, whose spirit, she
soon perceived, was not to be irritated with impunity. 
At table, she acknowledged me so far as
to say she had heard of my father; though she
hinted, that he had disobliged her family by making
a poor match in Wales. She was disagreeably
familiar in her inquiries about our circumstances; 
and asked, if I intended to bring up my nephew
to the law. I told her, that, as he had an independent
fortune, he should follow no profession
but that of a country gentleman; and that I was
not without hopes of procuring for him a seat in
parliament.—“pray, cousin, (said she) what
may his fortune be?” When I answered, that
with what I should be able to give him, he would
have better than two thousand a year, she replied,
with a disdainful toss of her head, that it would be
impossible for him to preserve his independence on
such a paltry provision. 
Not a little nettled at this arrogant remark, I
told her, I had the honour to sit in parliament
with her father, when he had little more than
half that income; and I believed there was not a
more independent and incorruptible member in
the house. “Ay; but times are changed, (cried
the 'squire)—Country gentlemen now-a-days,
live after another fashion. —My table alone
stands me in a cool thousand a quarter, though
I raise my own stock, import my own liquors,
and have every thing at the first hand. —True
it is, I keep open house, and receive all comers,
for the honour of Old England.” “If that
be the case, (said I) 'tis a wonder you can maintain
it at so small an expence; but every private
gentleman is not expected to keep a caravansera 

for the accommodation of travellers: indeed,
if every individual lived in the same stile, you
would not have such a number of guests at your
table, of consequence your hospitality would
not shine so bright for the glory of the West
Riding.” The young 'squire, tickled by this
ironical observation, exclaimed, “O che burla:” 
—his mother eyed me in silence with a supercilious
air: and the father of the feast, taking a bumper
of October, “My service to you, cousin Bramble,
(said he) I have always heard there was
something keen and biting in the air of the
Welsh mountains.” 
I was much pleased with the count de Melville,
who is sensible, easy, and polite; and the countess
is the most amiable woman I ever beheld. In the
afternoon they took leave of their entertainers, and
the young gentleman, mounting his horse, undertook
to conduct their coach through the park,
while one of their servants rode round to give
notice to the rest, whom they had left at a public
house on the road. The moment their backs were
turned, the censorious dæmon took possession of
our Yorkshire landlady and our sister Tabitha. — 
The former observed, that the countess was a
good sort of a body, but totally ignorant of good
breeding, consequently aukward in her address. 
The 'squire said he did not pretend to the breeding
of any thing but colts; but that the jade would
be very handsome, if she was a litle more in flesh. 
“Handsome! (cried Tabby) she has indeed a pair
of black eyes without any meaning; but then
there is not a good features in her face.” “I
know not what you call good features in Wales; 
(replied our landlord) but the'll pass in Yorkshire.” 
Then turning to Liddy, he added,
“What say you, my pretty Redstreak?—what
is your opinion of the countess?” “I think, 

(cried Liddy with great emotion) she's an angel.” 
Tabby chid her for talking with such
freedom in company; and the lady of the house
said, in a contemptuous tone, she supposed miss
had been brought up at some country boarding-school. 
Our conversation was suddenly interrupted by
the young gentleman, who galloped into the yard
all aghast, exclaiming, that the coach was attacked
by a great number of highwaymen. My nephew
and I rushing out, found his own and his
servant's horse ready saddled in the stable, with
pistols in the caps. —We mounted instantly, ordering
Clinker and Dutton to follow with all possible
expedition; but notwithstanding all the speed
we could make, the action was over before we
arrived, and the count with his lady safely lodged
at the house of Grieve, who signalized himself
in a very remarkable manner on this occasion. 
At the turning of a lane, that led to the village
where the count's servants remained, a couple of
robbers a-horseback suddenly appeared, with their
pistols advanced: one kept the coachman in awe,
and the other demanded the count's money, while
the young 'squire went off at full speed without
ever casting a look behind. The count desiring
the thief to withdraw his pistol, as the lady was
in great terror, delivered his purse without making
the least resistance: but not satisfied with this,
booty; which was pretty considerable, the rascal
nsisted upon rifling her of her ear-rings and necklace,
and the countess screamed with affright. Her
husband, exasperated at the violence with which
she was threatened, wrested the pistol out of the
fellow's hand, and turning it upon him, snapped
it in his face; but the robber knowing there was
no charge in it, drew another from his bosom, and
in all probability would have killed him on the 

spot, had not his life been saved by a wonderful interposition. 
Grieve, the apothecary, chancing to
pass that very instant, ran up to the coach, and
with a crab stick, which was all the weapon he
had, brought the fellow to the ground with the
first blow; then seizing his pistol, presented it to
his colleague, who fired his piece at random, and
fled without further opposition. The other was
secured by the assistance of the count and the coachman; 
and his legs being tied under the belly of his
own horse, Grieve conducted him to the village,
whither also the carriage proceeded. It was with
great difficulty the countess could be kept from
swooning; but at last she was happily conveyed to
the house of the apothecary, who went into the
shop to prepare some drops for her, while his wife
and daughter administered to her in another apartment. 
I found the count standing in the kitchen with
the parson of the parish, and expressing much impatience
to see his protector, whom as yet he had
scarce found time to thank for the essential service
he had done him and the countess—The daughter
passing at the same time with a glass of water,
monsieur de Melville could not help taking notice
of her figure which was strikingly engaging. — 
“Ay, (said the parson) she is the prettiest girl,
and the best girl in all my parish; if I could
give my son an estate of ten thousand a year, he
should have my consent to lay it at her feet. 
If Mr. Grieve had been as solicitous about getting
money, as he has been in performing all
the duties of a primitive Christian, Fy would
not have hung so long upon his hands.” “What
is her name?” said I. “Sixteen years ago
(answered the vicar) I christened her by the
names of Seraphina Melvilia.” “Ha! what!
how! (cried the count eagerly) sure you said 

Seraphina Melvilia.” “I did; (said he) Mr.
Grieve told me those were the names of two
noble persons abroad, to whom he had been
obliged for more than life.” 
The count, without speaking another syllable,
rushed into the parlour, crying, “This is your
“god-daughter, my dear.” Mrs. Grieve, then
seizing the countess by the hand, exclaimed with
great agitation, “O madam!—O sir!—I am—I
am your poor Eleanor. —This is my Seraphina
Melvilia. —O child! these are the count and
countess of Melville, the generous—the glorious
benefactors of thy once unhappy parents.” 
The countess rising from her seat, threw her
arms about the neck of the amiable Seraphina, and
clapsed her to her breast with great tenderness,
while she herself was embraced by the weeping
mother. This moving scene was completed by
the entrance of Grieve himself, who falling on his
knees before the count, Behold (said he) a penitent,
who at length can look upon his patron
without shrinking.” Ah, Ferdinand! (cried
he, raising and folding him in his arms) the
play fellow of my infancy—the companion of
my youth! —Is it to you then I am indebted
for my life?” “Heaven has heard my prayer,
(said the other) and given me an opportunity to
prove myself not altogether unworthy of your
clemency and protection.” He then kissed the
hand of the countess, while monsieur de Melville
saluted his wife and lovely daughter, and all of us
were greatly affected by this pathetic recognition. 
In a word, Grieve was no other than Ferdinand
count Fathom, whose adventures were printed many
years ago. Being a sincere convert to virtue,
he had changed his name, that he might elude the
inquiries of the count, whose generous allowance 

he determined to forego, that he might have no
dependence but upon his own industry and moderation. 
He had accordingly settled in this village as
a practitioner in surgery and physic, and for some
years wrestled with all the miseries of indigence,
which, however, he and his wife had borne with
the most exemplary resignation. At length, by
dint of unwearied attention to the duties of his
profession, which he exercised with equal humanity
and success, he had acquired a tolerable share of
business among the farmers and common people,
which enabled him to live in a decent manner. 
He had been scarce even seen to smile; was unaffectedly
pious; and all the time he could spare
from the avocations of his employment he spent in
educating his daughter, and in studying for his own
improvement. —In short, the adventurer Fathom
was, under the name of Grieve, universally respected
among the commonalty of this district, as
a prodigy of learning and virtue. These particulars
I learned from the vicar, when we quitted the
room, that they might be under no restraint in
their mutual effusions. I make no doubt that
Grieve will be pressed to leave off business, and
re-unite himself to the count's family; and as the
countess seemed extremely fond of his daughter,
she will in all probability insist upon Seraphina's
accompanying her to Scotland. 
Having paid our compliments to these noble
persons, we returned to the 'squires, where we
expected an invitation to pass the night, which
was wet and raw; but it seems 'squire Burdock's
hospitality reached not so far for the honour of
Yorkshire: we departed in the evening, and lay at
an inn, where I caught cold. 

In hope of riding it down before it could take
fast hold on my constitution, I resolved to visit another
relation, one Mr. Pimpernel, who lived about
a dozen miles from the place where we lodged. 
Pimpernel, being the youngest of four sons, was
bred an attorney at Furnival's-inn; but all his elder
brothers dying, he got himself called to the
bar for the honour of his family, and soon after this
preferment, succeeded to his father's estate, which
was very considerable. He carried home with
him all the knavish chicanery of the lowest pettifogger,
together with a wife whom he had purchased
of a drayman for twenty pounds; and he
soon found means to obtain a Dedimus as an acting
justice of peace. He is not only a sordid miser in
his disposition, but his avarice is mingled with a
spirit of despotism, which is truly diabolical. —He
is a brutal husband, an unnatural parent, a harsh
master, an oppressive landlord, a litigious neighbour,
and a partial magistrate. —Friends he has
none; and in point of hospitality and good breeding,
our cousin Burdock is a prince in comparison
of this ungracious miscreant, whose house is the
lively representation of a goal. Our reception was
suitable to the character I have sketched. Had it
depended upon the wife, we should have been
kindly treated. —She is really a good sort of a woman,
in spite of her low original, and well respected
in the country; but she has not interest enough
in her own house to command a draught of table-beer,
far less to bestow any kind of education on
her children, who run about, like ragged colts, in
a state of nature. —Pox on him! he is such a dirty
fellow, that I have not patience to prosecute the
subject. 
By the time we reached Harrigate, I began to
be visited by certain rheumatic symptoms. The 

Scoth lawyer, Mr. Micklewhimmen, recommended
a hot bath of these waters so earnestly that I
was over-persuaded to try the experiment. —He
had used it often with success, and always stayed an
hour in the bath, which was a tub filled with Harrigate
water, heated for the purpose. If I could
hardly bear the smell of a single tumbler when
cold, you may guess how my nose was regaled by
the steams arising from a hot bath of the same fluid. 
At night, I was conducted into a dark hole on the
ground floor, where the tub smoaked and stunk
like the pot of Acheron, in one corner, and in another
stood a dirty bed provided with thick blankets,
in which I was to sweat after coming out of
the bath. My heart seemed to die within me
when I entered this dismal bagnio, and sound my
brain assaulted by such insufferable effluvia. —I
cursed Micklewhimmen for not considering that
my organs were formed on this side of the Tweed; 
but being ashamed to recoil upon the treshold, I
submitted to the process. 
After having endured all but real suffocation for
above a quarter of an hour in the tub, I was moved
to the bed and wrapped in blankets—There I
lay a full hour panting with intollerable heat; but
not the least moisture appearing on my skin, I was
carried to my chamber, and passed the night without
closing an eye, in such a flutter of spirits as
rendered me the most miserable wretch in being. 
I should certainly have run distracted, if the rarefaction
of my blood, occasioned by that Stygian
bath, had not burst the vessels, and produced a
violent hæmorage, which, though dreadful and
alarming, removed the horrible disquiet. —I lost
two pounds of blood, and more, on this occasion; 
and find myself still weak and languid; but, I believe,
a little exercise will forward my recovery; 

and therefore I am resolved to set out to-morrow
for York, in my way to Scarborough, where I
propose to brace up my fibres by a sea-bathing,
which, I know, is one of your favourite specifics. 
There is however, one disease, for which you
have found as yet no specific, and that is old age,
of which this tedious unconnected epistle is an infallible
symptom:—what, therefore, cannot be
cured, must be endured, by you, as well as by 
Yours,
Matt. Bramble. 
Harrigate, June 26. 