

When my father had danced his
white bear backwards and forwards
through half a dozen pages, he closed
the book for good an' all,—and in a
kind of triumph redelivered it into Trim's
hand, with a nod to lay it upon the 'scrutoire
where he found it. —Tristram,
said he, shall be made to conjugate every
word in the dictionary, backwards and
forwards the same way;—every word,
Yorick, by this means, you see, is converted
into a thesis or an hypothesis;— 
every thesis and hypothesis have an offspring 

of propositions;—and each proposition
has its own consequences and
conclusions; every one of which leads
the mind on again, into fresh tracks of
enquiries and doubtings. —The force
of this engine, added my father, is incredible,
in opening a child's head. — 
'Tis enough, brother Shandy, cried my
uncle Toby, to burst it into a thousand
splinters.— 
I presume, said Yorick, smiling,—it
must be owing to this,—(for let logicians
say what they will, it is not to be
accounted for sufficiently from the bare
use of the ten predicaments)—That
the famous Vincent Quirino, amongst the
many other astonishing feats of his childhood,
of which the Cardinal Bembo has
given the world so exact a story,—should
be able to paste up in the publick schools 

at Rome, so early as in the eighth year of
his age, no less than four thousand, five
hundred, and sixty different theses, upon
the most abstruse points of the most abstruse
theology;—and to defend and
maintain them in such sort, as to cramp
and dumbfound his opponents. — 
What is that, cried my father, to what
is told us of Alphonsus Tostatus, who,
almost in his nurse's arms, learned all
the sciences and liberal arts without being
taught any one of them? —What
shall we say of the great Piereskius? — 
That's the very man, cried my uncle
Toby, I once told you of, brother Shandy,
who walked a matter of five hundred
miles, reckoning from Paris to Schevling,
and from Schevling back again, merely
to see Stevinus's flying chariot. —He
was a very great man! added my uncle
Toby; (meaning Stevinus)—He was so; 

brother Toby, said my father, (meaning
Piereskius)—and had multiplied his
ideas so fast, and increased his knowlege
to such a prodigious stock, that,
if we may give credit to an anecdote
concerning him, which we cannot withhold
here, without shaking the authority
of all anecdotes whatever—at seven years
of age, his father committed entirely to
his care the education of his younger brother,
a boy of five years old,—with the sole
management of all his concerns. —Was the
father as wise as the son? quoth my uncle
Toby: —I should think not, said Yorick: — 
But what are these, continued my father— 
(breaking out in a kind of enthusiasm)
—what are these, to those prodigies of
childhood in Grotius, Scioppius, Heinsius,
Politian, Pascal, Joseph Scaliger, Ferdinand
de Cordouè, and others—some of
which left off their substantial forms at 

nine years old, or sooner, and went on
reasoning without them;—others went
through their classics at seven;—wrote
tragedies at eight;—Ferdinand de Cordouè
was so wise at nine—'twas thought
the Devil was in him;—and at Venice
gave such proofs of his knowlege and
goodness, that the monks imagined he
was Antichrist, or nothing. —Others
were masters of fourteen languages at
ten,—finished the course of their rhetoric,
poetry, logic, and ethics, at eleven,
—put forth their commentaries upon
Servius and Martianus Capella at twelve,
—and at thirteen received their degrees
in philosophy, laws, and divinity: — 
But you forget the great Lipsius, quoth
Yorick, who composed a work *  the day 

he was born;—They should have
wiped it up, said my uncle Toby, and
said no more about it. 