




TRAVELS INTO SEVERAL Remote Nations OF THE WORLD.
PART I.
A Voyage to LILLIPUT.
LONDON:
Printed in the Year
MDCCXXVI.





Chap. I.
The Author gives some Account
of himself and Family: His first
Inducements to travel. He is shipwreck'd,
and swims for his Life: 
Gets safe on Shoar in the Country of
Lilliput: Is made a Prisoner, and carry'd
up the Country. Page 1.
Chap. II.
The Emperor of Lilliput, attended by
several of the Nobility, come to see
the Author in his Confinement. The
Emperor's Person and Habit describ'd. 
Learned Men appointed to teach the
Author their Language. He gains
Favour by his mild Disposition. His 

Pockets are search'd, and his Sword
and Pistols taken from him. p. 25.
Chap. III.
The Author diverts the Emperor and his
Nobility of both Sexes, in a very uncommon
Manner. The Diversions of
the Court of Lilliput describ'd. The
Author hath his Liberty granted him,
upon certain Conditions. p. 47.
Chap. IV.
Mildendo the Metropolis of Lilliput describ'd,
together with the Emperor's
Palace. A Conversation between the
Author and a principal Secretary,
concerning the Affairs of that Empire. 
The Author's Offers to serve the Emperor
in his Wars. p. 65.
Chap. V.
The Author by an extraordinary Stratagem,
prevents an Invasion. A high 

Title of Honour is conferr'd upon him. 
Embassadors arrive from the Emperor
of Blefuscu and sue for Peace. The
Empress's Apartment on fire by an
Accident. The Author instrumental in
saving the rest of the Palace. p. 77.
Chap. VI.
Of the Inhabitants of Lilliput, their
Learning, Laws and Customs, the
Manner of educating their Children. 
The Author's way of living in that
Country. His Vindication of a great
Lady. p. 92.
Chap. VII.
The Author being inform'd of a Design
to accuse him of High-Treason, makes
his Escape to Blefuscu. His Reception
there. p. 115.
Chap. VIII.
The Author by a lucky Accident, finds
Means to leave Blefuscu, and after
some Difficulties returns safe to his
native Country. p. 134.



TRAVELS. PART I. A Voyage to Lilliput.




The Author gives some Account of himself
and Family, his first Inducements
to travel. He is shipwrecked, and
swims for his Life, gets safe on shoar
in the Country of Lilliput, is made a
Prisoner, and carryed up the Country. 
My Father had a small Estate
in Nottinghamshire; I was
the Third of Five Sons. He
sent me to Emanuel College
in Cambridge, at Fourteen Years old, where
I resided three Years, and applyed my self 

close to my Studies; But the Charge of
maintaining me (although I had a very
scanty Allowance) being too great for a
narrow Fortune, I was bound Apprentice
to Mr. James Bates, an eminent Surgeon
in London, with whom I continued four
Years; and my Father now and then sending
me small Sums of Money, I laid them
out in learning Navigation, and other
Parts of the Mathematicks, useful to
those who intend to travel, as I always
believed it would be some time or other
my fortune to do. When I left Mr. Bates,
I went down to my Father; where by
the Assistance of Him and my Uncle John,
and some other Relations, I got Forty
Pounds, and a Promise of Thirty Pounds
a Year to maintain me at Leyden: There
I studied Physick two Years and seven
Months, knowing it would be useful in
long Voyages. 
Soon after my Return from Leyden,
I was recommended by my good Master
Mr. Bates, to be Surgeon to the Swallow, 

Captain Abraham Pannell Commander; 
with whom I continued three
Years and a half, making a Voyage or two
into the Levant, and some other Parts. 
When I came back, I resolved to settle in
London, to which Mr. Bates, my Master,
encouraged me, and by him I was recommended
to several Patients. I took Part
of a small House in the Old Jury; and
being advised to alter my Condition, I
married Mrs. Mary Burton, second Daughter
to Mr. Edmond Burton Hosier in
Newgate-Street, with whom I received
four Hundred Pounds for a Portion. 
But, my good Master Bates dying in
two Years after, and I having few Friends,
my Business began to fail; for my Conscience
would not suffer me to imitate
the bad Practice of two many among my
Brethren. Having therefore consulted
with my Wife, and some of my Acquaintance,
I determined to go again to Sea. 
I was Surgeon successively in two Ships,
and made several Voyages, for six Years, 

to the East and West-Indies, by which I
got some Addition to my Fortune. My
Hours of Leisure I spent in reading the
best Authors antient and modern, being
always provided with a good Number of
Books; and when I was ashore, in observing
the Manners and Dispositions of
the People, as well as learning their Language,
wherein I had a great Facility by
the Strength of my Memory. 
The last of these Voyages not proving
very fortunate, I grew weary of the
Sea, and intended to stay at home with
my Wife and Family. I removed from
the Old Jury to Fetter-Lane, and from
thence to Wapping, hoping to get Business
among the Sailors; but it would not
turn to account. After three Years Expectation
that things would mend, I accepted
an advantageous Offer from Captain
William Prichard, Master of the
Antelope, who was making a Voyage to
the South-Sea. We set sail from Bristol
May 4th, 1699, and our Voyage at first
was very prosperous. 

It would not be proper, for some Reasons,
to trouble the Reader with the
Particulars of our Adventures in those
Seas: Let it suffice to inform him, that
in our Passage from thence to the East-Indies,
we were driven by a violent
Storm to the Northwest of Van Diemen's
Land. By an Observation, we found ourselves
in the Latitude of 30 Degrees 2 Minutes
South. Twelve of our Crew were
dead by immoderate Labour, and ill Food,
the rest were in a very weak Condition. 
On the fifth of November, which was
the Beginning of Summer in those Parts,
the Weather being very hazy, the Seamen
spied a Rock, within half a Cable's
Length of the Ship; but the Wind was
so strong, that we were driven directly
upon it, and immediately split. Six of the
Crew, of whom I was one, having let down
the Boat into the Sea, made a shift to
get clear of the Ship, and the Rock. We
rowed by my Computation about three
Leagues, till we were able to work no 

longer, being already spent with Labour
while we were in the Ship. We therefore
trusted ourselves to the Mercy of
the Waves, and in about half an Hour
the Boat was overset by a sudden Flurry
from the North. What became of my
Companions in the Boat, as well as of
those who escaped on the Rock, or were
left in the Vessel, I cannot tell; but conclude
they were all lost. For my own
part, I swam as Fortune directed me, and
was pushed forward by Wind and Tide. 
I often let my Legs drop, and could feel
no Bottom: But when I was almost gone,
and able to struggle no longer, I found
myself within my Depth; and by this
time the Storm was much abated. The
Declivity was so small, that I walked near
a Mile before I got to the Shore, which I
conjectur'd was about eight a-clock in
the Evening. I then advanced forward
near half a Mile, but could not discover
any sign of Houses or Inhabitants; at
least I was in so weak a Condition, that
I did not observe them. I was extreamly 

tired, and with that, and the Heat of the
Weather, and about half a Pint of Brandy
that I drank as I left the Ship, I found
myself much inclined to sleep. I lay
down on the Grass, which was very short
and soft, where I slept sounder than ever
I remember to have done in my Life,
and as I reckoned, above nine Hours; for
when I awaked, it was just Day-light. 
I attempted to rise, but was not able to
stir: For as I happen'd to lye on my
Back, I found my Arms and Legs were
strongly fastened on each side to the
Ground; and my Hair, which was long
and thick, tied down in the same manner. 
I likewise felt several slender Ligatures
across my Body, from my Armpits
to my Thighs. I could only look
upwards, the Sun began to grow hot, and
the Light offended mine Eyes. I heard
a confused Noise about me, but in the
Posture I lay, could see nothing except
the Sky. In a little Time I felt something
alive moving on my left Leg, which advancing
gently forward over my Breast, 

came almost up to my Chin; when bending
mine Eyes downwards as much as I
could, I perceived it to be a human Creature
not six Inches high, with a Bow and
Arrow in his Hands, and a Quiver at his
Back. In the mean time, I felt at least
forty more of the same kind (as I conjectured)
following the first. I was in
the utmost Astonishment, and roared so
loud, that they all ran back in a Fright; 
and some of them, as I was afterwards
told, were hurt with the Falls they got
by leaping from my Sides upon the Ground. 
However, they soon returned, and one
of them, who ventured so far as to get a
full sight of my Face, lifting up his Hands
and Eyes by Way of Admiration, cryed
out in a shrill, but distinct Voice, Hekinah
Degul: The others repeated the same
Words several times, but I then knew not
what they meant. I lay all this while,
as the Reader may believe, in great Uneasiness:
at length, struggling to get loose,
I had the fortune to break the Strings,
and wrench out the Pegs that fastened my 

left Arm to the Ground; for, by lifting
it up to my Face, I discover'd the Methods
they had taken to bind me, and,
at the same Time, with a violent Pull,
which gave me excessive Pain, I a little
loosened the Strings that tied down my
Hair on the left Side, so that I was just
able to turn my Head about two Inches. 
But the Creatures ran off a second time,
before I could seize them; whereupon
there was a great Shout in a very shrill
Accent, and after it ceased, I heard one
of them cry aloud, Tolgo Phonac; when
in an instant I felt above an hundred
Arrows discharged on my left Hand,
which pricked me like so many Needles; 
and besides they shot another Flight into
the Air, as we do Bombs in Europe,
whereof many, I suppose, fell on my Body,
(though I felt them not) and some
on my Face, which I immediately covered
with my left Hand. When this Shower
of Arrows was over, I fell a groaning
with Grief and Pain, and then striving
again to get loose, they discharged another 

Volly larger than the first, and
some of them attempted with Spears to
stick me in the Sides; but, by good luck,
I had on me a Buff Jerkin, which they
could not pierce. I thought it the most
prudent Method to lie still, and my design
was to continue so till Night, when
my left Hand being already loose, I could
easily free myself: And as for the Inhabitants,
I had reason to believe I might
be a match for the greatest Armies they
could bring against me, if they were all
of the same Size with him that I saw. 
But Fortune disposed otherwise of me. 
When the People observed I was quiet,
they discharged no more Arrows: But
by the Noise I heard, I knew their Numbers
encreased; and about four Yards
from me, over-against my right Ear, I
heard a knocking for above an Hour,
like that of People at work; when turning
my Head that Way as well as the
Pegs and Strings would permit me, I
saw a Stage erected about a foot and a
half from the Ground, capable of holding 

four of the Inhabitants, with two
or three Ladders to mount it: From
whence one of them, who seemed to be
a Person of Quality, made me a long
Speech, whereof I understood not one
Syllable. But I should have mentioned,
that before the principal Person began his
Oration, he cryed out three times Langro
Dehul san: (these Words and the former
were afterwards repeated and explained to
me.) Whereupon immediately about fifty
of the Inhabitants, came and cut the Strings
that fastened the left Side of my Head,
which gave me the Liberty of turning it
to the right, and of observing the Person
and Gesture of him that was to speak. 
He appeared to be of a middle Age, and
taller than any of the other three who
attended him, whereof one was a Page
that held up his Train, and seemed to be
somewhat longer than my middle Finger; 
the other two stood one on each
side to support him. He acted every
part of an Orator, and I could observe
many Periods of Threatnings, 

and others of Promises, Pity and Kindness. 
I answered in a few Words, but
in the most submissive Manner, lifting
up my Left Hand and both mine Eyes
to the Sun, as calling him for a Witness; 
and being almost famished with Hunger,
having not eaten a Morsel for some Hours
before I left the Ship, I found the Demands
of Nature so strong upon me, that
I could not forbear shewing my Impatience
(perhaps against the strict Rules of
Decency) by putting my Finger frequently
on my Mouth, to signify that I wanted
Food. The Hurgo (for so they call a
great Lord, as I afterwards learnt) understood
me very well. He descended from
the Stage, and commanded that several
Ladders should be applyed to my Sides,
on which above an hundred of the Inhabitants
mounted, and walked towards my
Mouth, laden with Baskets full of Meat,
which had been provided, and sent thither
by the King's Orders upon the first Intelligence
he received of me. I observed
there was the Flesh of several Animals, 

but could not distinguish them by the
Taste. There were Shoulders, Legs and
Loins shaped like those of Mutton, and
very well dressed, but smaller than the
Wings of a Lark. I eat them by two or
three at a mouthful, and took three
Loaves at a time, about the Bigness of
Musket Bullets. They supplyed me as
they could, shewing a thousand Marks of
wonder and astonishment at my Bulk and
Appetite. I then made another Sign that
I wanted Drink. They found by my
eating that a small Quantity would not
suffice me, and being a most ingenious
People, they slung up with great Dexterity
one of their largest Hogsheads, then rolled
it towards my Hand, and beat out the
Top; I drank it off at a Draught, which
I might well do, for it did not hold half
a Pint, and tasted like a small Wine of Burgundy,
but much more delicious. They
brought me a second Hogshead, which I
drank in the same manner, and made
Signs for more, but they had none to
give me. When I had performed these 

Wonders, they shouted for Joy, and
danced upon my Breast, repeating several
times as they did at first, Hekinah Degul. 
They made me a Sign that I should throw
down the two Hogsheads, but first warning
the People below to stand out of the
way, crying aloud, Borach Mivola, and
when they saw the Vessels in the Air,
there was an universal shout of Hekinah
Degul. I confess I was often tempted,
while they were passing backwards and
forwards on my Body, to seize Forty or
Fifty of the first that came in my reach,
and dash them against the Ground. But
the Remembrance of what I had felt,
which probably might not be the worst
they could do, and the Promise of Honour
I made them, for so I interpreted
my submissive Behavour, soon drove out
these Imaginations. Besides, I now consider'd
my self as bound by the Laws of
Hospitality to a People who had treated
me with so much Expence and Magnificence. 
However, in my Thoughts I
could not sufficiently wonder at the Intrepidity 

of these diminutive Mortals,
who durst venture to mount and walk
upon my Body, while one of my Hands
was at liberty, without trembling at the
very sight of so prodigious a Creature as
I must appear to them. After some time,
when they observ'd that I made no more
Demands for Meat, there appeared before
me a Person of high Rank from his Imperial
Majesty. His excellency having
mounted on the small of my right Leg,
advanced forwards up to my Face, with
about a Dozen of his Retinue. And producing
his Credentials under the Signet
Royal, which he applyed close to mine
Eyes, spoke about ten Minutes, without
any Signs of Anger, but with a kind of
determinate Resolution; often pointing
forwards, which as I afterwards found,
was towards the Capital City, about half
a Mile distant, whither it was agreed by
his Majesty in Council that I must be conveyed. 
I answered in few words, but to
no purpose, and made a Sign with my
Hand that was loose, putting it to the 

other (but over his Excellency's Head, for
fear of hurting him or his Train) and then
to my own Head and Body, to signify
that I desired my Liberty. It appeared
that he understook me well enough, for
he shook his Head by way of Disapprobation,
and held his Hand in a Posture to
shew that I must be carried as a Prisoner. 
However, he made other Signs to let me
understand that I should have Meat and
Drink enough, and very good Treatment. 
Whereupon I once more thought of attempting
to break my Bonds, but again,
when I felt the Smart of their Arrows,
upon my Face and Hands, which were all
in Blisters, and many of the Darts still
sticking in them, and observing likewise
that the Number of my Enemies encreased,
I gave Tokens to let them know
that they might do with me what they
pleased. Upon this the Hurgo and his
Train withdrew with much Civility and
chearful Countenances. Soon after I
heard a general Shout, with frequent repetitions
of the Words, Peplom Selan, and 

I felt great Numbers of the People on
my Left Side relaxing the Cords to such a
degree, that I was able to turn upon my
Right, and to ease myself with making
Water; which I very plentifully did, to the
great Astonishment of the People, who
conjecturing by my Motions what I was
going to do, immediately opened to the
right and left on that side to avoid the
Torrent which fell with such noise and violence
from me. But before this, they had
dawbed my Face and both my Hands with
a sort of Ointment very pleasant to the
Smell, which in a few Minutes removed
all the Smart of their Arrows. These
Circumstances added to the Refreshment
I had received by their Victuals and Drink,
which were very nourishing, disposed me
to sleep. I slept about eight Hours, as I
was afterwards assured; and it was no
wonder, for the Physicians, by the Emperor's
Order, had mingled a sleepy Potion
in the Hogsheads of Wine. 

It seems that upon the first Moment I
was discovered sleeping on the Ground after
my Landing, the Emperor had early
Notice of it by an Express, and determined
in Council that I should be tyed in
the Manner I have related (which was
done in the Night while I slept) that Plenty
of Meat and Drink should be sent to me,
and a Machine prepared to carry me to the
Capital City. 
This Resolution perhaps may appear
very bold and dangerous, and I am confident
would not be immitated by any Prince
in Europe on the like Occasion; however,
in my Opinion it was extreamly Prudent
as well as generous. For supposing
these People had endeavour'd to kill me
with their Spears and Arrows while I was
asleep, I should certainly have awaked
with the first sense of Smart, which might
so far have rouzed my Rage and Strength,
as to have enabled me to break the Strings
wherewith I was tied; after which, as 

they were not able to make Resistance, so
they could expect no Mercy. 
These People are most excellent Mathematicians,
and arriv'd to a great Perfection
in Mechanicks by the Countenance and
Encouragement of the Emperor, who is
a renowned Patron of Learning. This
Prince hath several Machines fixed on
Wheels for the Carriage of Trees and
other great Weights. He often builds
his largest Men of War, whereof some
are nine Foot long, in the Woods where
the Timber grows, and has them carried
on these Engines three or four hundred
Yards to the Sea. Five Hundred Carpenters
and Engineers were immediately set
at work to prepare the greatest Engine
they had. It was a Frame of Wood
raised three Inches from the Ground,
about seven Foot long and four wide,
moving upon twenty two Wheels. The
Shout I heard was upon the Arrival of
this Engine, which it seems set out in four
Hours after my Landing. It was brought 

parallel to me as I lay. But the principal
Difficulty was to raise and place me in this
Vehicle. Eighty Poles, each of one
Foot high, were erected for this purpose,
and very strong Cords of the bigness of
Packthread were fastned by Hooks to many
Bandages, which the Workmen had
girt round my Neck, my Hands, my Body,
and my Legs. Nine hundred of the
strongest Men were employed to draw up
these Cords by many Pulleys fastned on
the Poles, and thus in less than three
Hours, I was raised and slung into the Engine,
and there tyed fast. All this I was
told, for while the whole Operation was
performing, I lay in a profound sleep, by
the force of that soporiferous Medicine
infused into my Liquor. Fifteen Hundred
of the Emperor's largest Horses, each
about four Inches and an half high, were
employed to draw me towards the Metropolis,
which, as I said, was half a Mile
distant. 

About four Hours after we began
our Journey, I awaked by a very ridiculous
Accident; for the Carriage being
stopt a while to adjust something that was
out of order, two or three of the young
Natives had the Curiosity to see how I
looked when I was asleep; they climbed
up into the Engine, and advancing very
softly to my Face, one of them, an Officer
in the Guards, put the sharp end of
his Half-pike a good way up into my left
Nostril, which tickled my Nose like a
Straw, and made me sneeze violently:
whereupon they stole off unperceived,
and it was three Weeks before I knew
the cause of my awaking so suddenly. 
We made a long March the remaining
part of that Day, and rested at Night
with five hundred Guards on each side of
me, half with Torches, and half with
Bows and Arrows, ready to shoot me if
I should offer to stir. The next Morning
at Sun-rise we continued our March, and
arrived within two hundred Yards of the 

City-Gates about Noon. The Emperor,
and all his Court came out to meet us, but
his gerat Officers would by no means suffer
his Majesty to endanger his Person by
mounting on my Body. 
At the Place where the Carriage stopt,
there stood an antient Temple, esteemed
to be the largest in the whole Kingdom,
which having been polluted some Years
before by an unnatural Murder, was, according
to the Zeal of those People,
looked on as Prophane, and therefore had
been applied to common Use, and all the
Ornaments and Furniture carried away.
In this Edifice it was determined I should
lodge. The great Gate fronting to the
North, was about four Foot high, and almost
two Foot wide, through which I
could easily creep. On each Side of the
Gate was a small Window not above six
Inches from the Ground into that on the
Left Side, the King's Smiths conveyed
fourscore and eleven Chains, like those
that hang to a Lady's Watch in Europe, 

and almost as large, which were locked to
my left Leg with six and thirty Padlocks. 
Over against this Temple, on t'other side of
the great Highway, at twenty Foot distance,
there was a Turret at least five Foot high. 
Here the Emperor ascended with many
principal Lords of his Court, to have an
opportunity of viewing me, as I was
told, for I could not see them. It was
reckoned that above an hundred thousand
Inhabitants came out of the Town
upon the same Errand; and in spight of
my Guards, I believe there could not be
fewer than ten thousand, at several
times, who mounted upon my Body by
the help of Ladders. But a Proclamation
was soon issued to forbid it upon pain of
Death. When the Workmen found it
was impossible for me to break loose,
they cut all the Strings that bound me; 
whereupon I rose up with as melancholy
a Disposition as ever I had in my Life. 
But the noise and astonishment of the People
at seeing me rise and walk are not to
be expressed. The Chains that held my 

left Leg were about two Yards long, and
gave me not only the Liberty of walking
backwards and forwards in a Semicircle; 
but being fixed within four Inches of the
Gate, allowed me to creep in, and lie at
my full length in the Temple. 





The Emperor of Lilliput, attended by
several of the Nobility, come to see
the Author in his Confinement. The
Emperor's Person and Habit describ'd. 
Learned Men appointed to teach the
Author their Language. He gains
Favour by his mild Disposition. His
Pockets are searched, and his Sword
and Pistols taken from him. 
When I found myself on my
Feet, I looked about me, and
must confess I never beheld a
more entertaining Prospect. The Country
round appeared like a continued
Garden, and the inclosed Fields, which
were generally forty Foot square, resembled
so many Beds of Flowers. 
These Fields were intermingled with 

Woods of half a Stang, and the tallest
Trees, as I could judge, appeared to be
seven Foot high. I viewed the Town on
my left hand, which looked like the
painted Scene of a City in a Theatre. 
I had been for some Hours extremely
pressed by the Necessities of Nature; 
which was no wonder, it being almost
two Days since I had last disburthened
myself. I was under great Difficulties
between Urgency and Shame. The best
Expedient I could think on, was to creep
into my House, which I accordingly did; 
and shutting the Gate after me, I went as far
as the length of my Chain would suffer,
and discharged my Body of that uneasy
Load. But this was the only time I was
ever guilty of so uncleanly an Action; 
for which I cannot but hope the candid
Reader will give some Allowance, after
he hath maturely and inpartially considered
my Case, and the Distress I was
in. From this time my constant Practice
was, as soon as I rose, to perform that 

Business in open Air, at the full Extent
of my Chain, and due Care was taken
every Morning before Company came,
that the offensive Matter should be carried
off in Wheel-barrows by two Servants
appointed for that Purpose. I would
not have dwelt so long upon a Circumstance,
that perhaps at first sight may appear
not very momentuous, if I had not
thought it necessary to justify my Character
in point of Cleanliness to the
World; which I am told some of my
Maligners have been pleased, upon this
and other Occasions, to call in question. 
When this Adventure was at an end,
I came back out of my House, having occasion
for fresh Air. The Emperor was
already descended from the Tower, and
advancing on Horse-back towards me,
which had like to have cost him dear; 
for the Beast, though very well trained,
yet wholly unused to such a Sight, which
appeared as if a Mountain moved before
him, reared up on his hinder Feet: But 

that Prince, who is an excellent Horse-Man,
kept his Seat, till his Attendants
ran in, and held the Bridle, while his Majesty
had time to dismount. When he
alighted, he surveyed me round with
great Admiration, but kept without the
length of my Chain. He ordered his
Cooks and Butlers, who were already
prepared to give me Victuals and Drink,
which they pushed forward in a sort of
Vehicles upon Wheels till I could reach
them. I took these Vehicles, and soon
emptied them all; twenty of them were
filled with Meat, and ten with Liquor, each
of the former afforded me two or three
good Mouthfuls, and I emptied the Liquor
of ten Vessels, which was contained
in earthen Vials, into one Vehicle, drinking
it off at a Draught, and so I did
with the rest. The Empress, and young
Princes of the Blood, of both Sexes, attended
by many Ladies, sat at some
distance in their Chairs, but upon the
Accident that happened to the Emperor's
Horse, they alighted, and came near his 

Person, which I am now going to describe. 
He is taller by almost the breadth
of my Nail, than any of his Court, which
alone is enough to strike an Awe into
the Beholders. His Features are strong
and masculine, with an Austrian Lip and
arched Nose, his Complexion olive, his
Countenance erect, his Body and Limbs
well proportioned, all his Motions graceful,
and his Deportment majestick. He
was then past his Prime, being twenty-eight
Years and three Quarters old, of
which he had reigned about seven, in
great Felicity, and generally victorious. 
For the better convenience of beholding
him, I lay on my Side, so that my Face
was parallel to his, and he stood but three
Yards off: However, I have had him since
many times in my Hand, and therefore
cannot be deceived in the Description. 
His Dress was very plain and simple, and
the Fashion of it between the Asiatick
and the European: but he had on his
Head a light Helmet of Gold, adorned
with Jewels, and a Plume on the Crest. 

He held his Sword drawn in his Hand, to
defend himself, if I should happen to break
loose; it was almost three Inches long,
the Hilt and Scabbard were Gold enriched
with Diamonds. His Voice was shrill,
but very clear and articulate, and I could
distinctly hear it when I stood up. The
Ladies and Courtiers were all most magnificently
clad, so that the Spot they stood
upon seemed to resemble a Petticoat spread
on the Ground, embroidered with Figures
of Gold and Silver. His Imperial Majesty
spoke often to me, and I returned Answers,
but neither of us could understand
a Syllable. There were several of his
Priests and Lawyers present (as I conjectured
by their Habits) who were commanded
to address themselves to me, and
I spoke to them in as many Languages as
I had the least smattering of, which were
High and Low Dutch, Latin, French,
Spanish, Italian, and Lingua Franca; 
but all to no purpose. After about two
Hours the Court retired, and I was left
with a strong Guard, to prevent the Impertinence, 

and probably the Malice of
the Rabble, who were very impatient to
croud about me as near as they durst,
and some of them had the Impudence to
shoot their Arrows at me as I sate on the
Ground by the Door of my House,
whereof one very narrowly missed my left
Eye. But the Colonel ordered six of the
Ring-leaders to be seized, and thought no
Punishment so proper as to deliver them
bound into my Hands, which some of
his Soldiers accordingly did, pushing them
forwards with the But-Ends of their Pikes
into my reach; I took them all in my
right Hand, put five of them into my
Coat-Pocket, and as to the sixth, I made
a Countenance as if I would eat him
alive. The poor Man squalled terribly
and the Colonel and his Officers were in
much Pain, especially when they saw me
take out my Penknife: But I soon put
them out of fear; for, looking mildly
and immediately cutting the Strings he
was bound with, I set him gently on the
Ground, and away he ran; I treated the 

rest in the same manner, taking them one
by one out of my Pocket, and I observed
both the Soldiers and People were highly
obliged at this Mark of my Clemency,
which was represented very much to my
Advantage at Court. 
Towards Night I got with some difficulty
into my House, where I lay on the
Ground, and continued to do so about
a Fortnight; during which time the Emperor
gave Orders to have a Bed prepared
for me. Six hundred Beds of the common
Measure, were brought in Carriages
and worked up in my House, an hundred
and fifty of their Beds sown together
made up the Breadth and Length,
and these were four double, which however
kept me but very indifferently from
the Hardness of the Floor, that was of
smooth Stone. By the same Computation
they provided me with Sheets, Blankets,
and Coverlets, tolerable enough for
one who had been so long enured to
Hardships as I. 

As the News of my Arrival spread
through the Kingdom, it brought prodigious
Numbers of rich, idle, and curious
People to see me; so that the Villages
were almost emptied, and great Neglect
of Tillage and Houshold Affairs must
have ensued, if his Imperial Majesty had
not provided by several Proclamations
and Orders of State against this Inconveniency. 
He directed that those, who had
already beheld me, should return Home,
and not presume to come within fifty
Yards of my House, without Licence from
Court; whereby the Secretarys of State
got considerable Fees. 
In the mean time, the Emperor held
frequent Councils to debate what Course
should be taken with me; and I was afterwards
assured by a particular Friend, a
Person of great Quality, who was looked
upon to be as much in the Secret as
any, that the Court was under many
Difficulties concerning me. They apprehended 

my breaking loose, that my
Diet would be very expensive, and might
cause a Famme. Sometimes they determined
to starve me, or at least to shoot
me in the Face and Hands with poisoned
Arrows, which would soon dispatch me: 
But again they consider'd, that the Stench
of so large a Carcase might produce a
Plague in the Metropolis, and probably
spread through the whole Kingdom. In
the midst of these Consultations, several
Officers of the Army went to the Door
of the great Council Chamber; and two
of them being admitted, gave an account
of my Behaviour to the six Criminals above-mentioned,
which made so favourable
an Impression in the Breast of his
Majesty and the whole Board in my behalf,
that an Imperial Commission was
issued out, obliging all the Villages nine
hundred Yards round the City, to deliver
in every Morning six Beeves, forty Sheep,
and other Victuals for my Sustenance; together
with a proportionable Quantity of
Bread, and Wine, and other Liquors: 

for the due Payment of which, his Majesty
gave Assignments upon his Treasury. 
For this Prince lives chiefly upon
his own Demesnes, seldom except upon
great Occasions raising any Subsidues upon
his Subjects, who are bound to attend
him in his Wars at their own Expence. 
An Establishment was also made of six
hundred Persons to be my Domesticks,
who had Board-Wages allowed for their
Maintenance, and Tents built for them
very conveniently on each side of my
Door. It was likewise ordered, that three
hundred Taylors should make me a Suit
of Cloaths after the Fashion of the Country: 
That six of his Majesty's greatest
Scholars should be employ'd to instruct
me in their Language: And, lastly,
that the Emperor's Horses, and those
of the Nobility, and Troops of Guards,
should be frequently exercised in my sight,
to accustom themselves to me. All these
Orders were duly put in Execution, and
in about three Weeks I made a great Progress
in learning their Language; during 

which time, the Emperor frequently honoured
me with his Visits, and was pleased
to assist my Masters in teaching me. 
We began already to converse together
in some sort; and the first Words I learnt
were to express my Desire that he would
please to give me my Liberty, which I
every day repeated on my Knees. His
Answer, as I could apprehend it, was,
that this must be a Work of Time, not
to be thought on without the Advice of
Council, and that first I must Lumos
Kelmin pesso desmar lon Emposo; that
is, swear a Peace with him and his Kingdom. 
However, that I should be used with
all Kindness, and he advised me to acquire
by my Patience, and discreet Behaviour,
the good Opinion of himself
and his Subjects. He desired I would
not take it ill if he gave Orders to certain
proper Officers to search me; for
probably I might carry about me several
Weapons, which must needs be dangerous
things, if they answered the Bulk of
so prodigious a Person. I said, his Majesty 

should be satisfied, for I was ready to
strip myself, and turn up my Pockets before
him. This I delivered part in Words,
and part in Signs. He replied, that by
the Laws of the Kingdom I must be
searched by two of his Officers; that he
knew this could not be done without
my Consent and Assistance; that he had
so good an Opinion of my Generosity
and Justice, as to trust their Persons in
my Hands: That whatever they took
from me should be returned when I left
the Country, or paid for at the Rate
which I would set upon them. I took
up the two Officers in my Hands, put
them first into my Coat-Pockets, and
then into every other Pocket about me,
except my two Fobs, and another secret
Pocket I had no mind should be
searched, wherein I had some little Necessaries
that were of no consequence to
any but myself. In one of my Fobs
there was a silver Watch, and in the other
a small Quantity of Gold in a Purse. 
These Gentlemen, having Pen Ink and 

Paper about them, made an exact Inventory
of every thing they saw; and when
they had done, desired I would set them
down, that they might deliver it to the
Emperor. This Inventory I afterwards
translated into English, and is word for
word as follows. 
Imprimis, In the right Coat-Pocket
of the Great Man Mountain (for so I
interpret the Words Quinbus Flestrin)
after the strictest search, we found only
one great Piece of coarse Cloath, large
enough to be a Foot-Cloth for your Majesty's
chief Room of State. In the left
Pocket, we saw a huge Silver Chest, with
a Cover of the same Metal, which we
the Searchers were not able to lift. We
desired it should be opened, and one of
us stepping into it, found himself up to
the mid Leg in a sort of Dust, some part
whereof flying up to our Faces, set us
both a sneezing for several times together. 
In his right Waistcoat-Pocket, we
found a prodigious Bundle of white thin 

Substances, folded one over another, about
the Bigness of three Men, tied with a
strong Cable, and marked with black Figures; 
which we humbly conceive to be
Writings, every Letter almost half as
large as the Palm of our Hands. In the
left there was a sort of Engine, from
the Back of which were extended twenty
long Poles, resembling the Pallisado's before
your Majesty's Court; wherewith we
conjecture the Man Mountain combs his
Head, for we did not always trouble him
with Questions, because we found it a
great Difficulty to make him understand
us. In the large Pocket on the right
side of his middle Cover, (so I translate
the Word Ranfu-Lo, by which they
meant my Breeches) we saw a hollow
Pillar of Iron, about the length of a
Man, fastened to a strong piece of Timber,
larger than the Pillar; and upon one
side of the Pillar were huge Pieces of
Iron sticking out, cut into strange Figures,
which we know not what to make
of. In the left Pocket, another Engine 

of the same kind. In the smaller Pocket
on the right side, were several round flat
Pieces of white and red Metal, of different
Bulk; some of the white, which
seemed to be Silver, were so large and
heavy, that my Comrade and I could
hardly lift them. In the left Pocket were
two black Pillars irregularly shaped: we
could not, without Difficulty reach the
Top of them as we stood at the Bottom
of his Pocket. One of them was covered,
and seemed all of a Piece: But at
the upper End of the other, there appeared
a white round Substance, about
twice the bigness of our Heads. Within
each of these was inclosed a prodigious
Plate of Steel; which, by our Orders,
we obliged him to shew us, because we
apprehended they might be dangerous
Engines. He took them out of their
Cases, and told us, that in his own Country
his Practice was to shave his Beard
with one of these, and to cut his Meat
with the other. There were two Pockets
which we could not enter: These he 

called his Fobs; they were two large
Slits cut into the top of his middle Cover,
but squeez'd close by the pressure
of his Belly. Out of the right Fob
hung a great silver Chain, with a wonderful
kind of Engine at the bottom. 
We directed him to draw out whatever
was fastened to that Chain; which appeared
to be a Globe, half Silver, and
half of some transparent Metal: For on
the transparent side we saw certain strange
Figures circularly drawn, and thought we
could touch them, till we found our Fingers
stopped by that lucid Substance. He
put this Engine to our Ears, which made
an incessant Noise like that of a Water-Mill. 
And we conjecture it is either some
unknown Animal, or the God that he
worships: But we are more inclined to
the latter Opinion, because he assured us,
(if we understood him right, for he expressed
himself very imperfectly) that he
seldom did any thing without consulting
it. He called it his Oracle, and said it
pointed out the Time for every Action 

of his Life. From the left Fob he
took out a Net almost large enough for
a Fisherman, but contrived to open and
shut like a Purse, and served him for the
same use: We found therein several
massy Pieces of yellow Metal, which if
they be real Gold, must be of immense
Value. 
Having thus, in obedience to your
Majesty's Commands, diligently searched
all his Pockets, we observed a Girdle
about his Waist made of the Hide of
some prodigious Animal; from which, on
the left Side, hung a Sword of the length
of five Men; and on the right, a Bag or
Pouch divided into two Cells, each Cell
capable of holding three of your Majesty's
Subjects. In one of these Cells were several
Globes or Balls of a most ponderous
Metal, about the bigness of our Heads,
and required a strong Hand to lift them: 
The other Cell contained a Heap of certain
black Grains, but of no great Bulk 

or Weight, for we could hold above fifty
of them in the Palms of our Hands. 
This is an exact Inventory of what
we found about the Body of the Man-Mountain,
who used us with great Civility,
and due Respect to your Majesty's
Commission. Signed and Sealed on the
fourth Day of the eighty ninth Moon of
your Majesty's auspicious Reign. 
Clefren Frelock, Marsi Frelock. 
When this Inventory was read over
to the Emperor, he directed me, although
in very gentle Terms, to deliver
up the several Particulars. He first called
for my Scymiter, which I took out, Scabbard
and all. In the mean time he ordered
three thousand of his choicest
Troops (who then attended him) to surround
me at a distance, with their Bows
and Arrows just ready to discharge: but
I did not observe it, for mine Eyes were
wholly fixed upon his Majesty. He then
desired me to draw my Scymiter, which, 

although it had got some Rust by the Sea-Water,
was in most parts exceeding
bright. I did so, and immediately all the
Troops gave a Shout between Terror and
Surprize; for the Sun shone clear, and
the Reflexion dazled their Eyes as I waved
the Scymiter two and fro in my Hand. 
His Majesty, who is a most magnanimous
Prince, was less danted than I could expect; 
he ordered me to return it into the
Scabbard, and cast in on the Ground as
gently as I could, about six Foot from the
end of my Chain. The next thing he
demanded, was one of the hollow Iron
Pillars, by which he meant my Pocket-Pistols. 
I drew it out, and at his desire,
as well as I could, expressed to him the
Use of it; and charging it only with
Powder, which by the closeness of my
Pouch happened to escape wetting in the
Sea, (an Inconvenience against which all
prudent Mariners take special care to provide)
I first cautioned the Emperor not to
be afraid, and then I let it off in the Air. 
The Astonishment here was much greater 

than at the sight of my Scymiter. Hundreds
fell down as if they had been struck dead; 
and even the Emperor, although he stood
his Ground, could not recover himself in
some time. I delivered up both my Pistols
in the same Manner, as I had done
my Scymiter, and then my Pouch of
Powder and Bullets; begging him that the
former might be kept from the Fire, for
it would kindle with the smallest Spark,
and blow up his Imperial Palace into the
Air. I likewise delivered up my Watch,
which the Emperor was very curious to
see, and commanded two of his tallest
Yeomen of the Guards to bear it on a
Pole upon their shoulders, as Dray-Men
in England do a Barrel of Ale. He was
amazed at the continual Noise it made,
and the Motion of the Minute-Hand,
which he could easily discern; for their
Sight is much more acute than ours:
and asked the Opinions of his learned
Men about him, which were various and
remote, as the Reader may well imagine
without my repeating; although indeed 

I could not very perfectly understand them. 
I then gave up my Silver and Copper
Money, my Purse with nine large Pieces
of Gold, and some smaller ones; my
Knife and Razor, my Comb and Silver
Snuff-Box, my Handkerchief and Journal
Book. My Scymiter, Pistols, and
Pouch, were conveyed in Carriages to
his Majesty's Stores; but the rest of my
Goods were returned me. 
I had, as I before observed, one private
Pocket which escaped their Search,
wherein there was a pair of Spectacles
(which I sometimes use for the Weakness
of mine Eyes) a Pocket Perspective, and
several other little Conveniences; which
being of no consequence to the Emperor,
I did not think my self bound in
Honour to discover, and I apprehended
they might be lost or spoiled if I ventured
them out of my Possession. 





The Author diverts the Emperor and
his Nobility of both Sexes in a very
uncommon Manner. The Diversions
of the Court of Lilliput described. 
The Author has his Liberty granted
him upon certain Conditions. 
My Gentleness and good Behaviour
had gained so far on the
Emperor and his Court, and indeed
upon the Army and People
in general, that I began to conceive
Hopes of getting my Liberty in a short
time. I took all possible Methods to cultivate
this favourable Disposition. The
Natives came by degrees to be less apprehensive
of any Danger from me. I
would sometimes lie down, and let five or 

six of them dance on my Hand. And at
last the Boys and Girls would venture to
come and play at Hide and Seek in my
Hair. I had now made a good Progress
in understanding and speaking their Language. 
The Emperor had a mind one
day to entertain me with several of the
Country Shows, wherein they exceed all
Nations I have known, both for Dexterity
and Magnificence. I was diverted
with none so much as that of the Rope-Dancers,
performed upon a slender white
Thread, extended about two Foot, and
twelve Inches from the Ground. Upon
which I shall desire liberty, with the Reader's
Patience, to enlarge a little. 
This Diversion is only practised by
those Persons who are Candidates for
great Employments, and high Favour, at
Court. They are trained in this Art
from their Youth, and are not always of
noble Birth, or liberal Education. When
a great Office is vacant either by Death
or Disgrace (which often happens) five 

or six of those Candidates petition the
Emperor to entertain his Majesty and the
Court with a Dance on the Rope, and
whoever jumps the highest without falling,
succeeds in the Office. Very often
the Chief Ministers themselves are commanded
to shew their Skill, and to convince
the Emperor that they have not lost
their Faculty. Flimnap, the Treasurer, is
allowed to cut a Caper on the strait Rope,
at least an Inch higher than any other Lord
in the whole Empire. I have seen him
do the Summerset several times together
upon a Trencher fixed on the Rope,
which is no thicker than a common Pack-thread
in England. My Friend Reldresal,
principal Secretary for private Affairs,
is, in my Opinion, if I am not partial,
the second after the Treasurer; the rest of
the great Officers are much upon a Par. 
These Diversions are often attended
with fatal Accidents, whereof great Numbers
are on Record. I my self have seen
two or three Candidates break a Limb. 

But the Danger is much greater when the
Ministers themselves are commanded to
shew their Dexterity; for by contending
to excel themselves and their Fellows,
they strain so far, that there is hardly one
of them who hath not received a Fall,
and some of them two or three. I was
assured that a Year or two before my Arrival,
Flimnap would have infallibly broke
his Neck, if one of the King's Cushions,
that accidentally lay on the Ground, had
not weakened the Force of his Fall. 
There is likewise another Diversion
which is only shewn before the Emperor
and Empress, and first Minister, upon
particular Occasions. The Emperor lays
on a Table three fine silken Threads of
six Inches long. One is Purple, the
other Yellow, and the third White. 
These Threads are proposed as Prizes for
those Persons whom the Emperor hath a
mind to distinguish by a peculiar Mark of
his Favour. The Ceremony is performed
in his Majesty's great Chamber of State, 

where the Candidates are to undergo a
Tryal of Dexterity very different from
the former, and such as I have not observed
the least Resemblance of in any other
Country of the old or the new World. 
The Emperor holds a Stick in his Hands,
both ends parallel to the Horizon, while
the Candidates advancing one by one,
sometimes leap over the Stick, sometimes
creep under it backwards and forwards several
times, according as the Stick is advanced
or depressed. Sometimes the Emperor
holds one end of the Stick, and his
first Minister the other; sometimes the
Minister has it entirely to himself. Whoever
performs his Part with most Agility,
and holds out the longest in leaping and
creeping, is rewarded with the Purple
coloured Silk; the Yellow is given to the
next, and the White to the third, which
they all were girt twice round about the
middle; and you see few great Persons
about this Court, who are not adorned
with one of these Girdles. 

The Horses of the Army, and those
of the royal Stables, having been daily
led before me, where no longer shy, but
would come up to my very Feet without
starting. The Riders would leap them
over my Hand as I held it on the Ground,
and one of the Emperor's Huntsmen, upon
a large Courser, took my Foot,
Shoe and all; which was indeed a prodigious
Leap. I had the good fortune to
divert the Emperor one Day after a very
extraordinary manner. I desired he would
order several Sticks of two Foot high,
and the thickness of an ordinary Cane, to
be brought me; whereupon his Majesty
commanded the Master of his Woods to
give Directions accordingly, and the next
Morning six Wood-men arrived with as
many Carriages, drawn by eight Horses
to each. I took nine of these Sticks,
and fixing them firmly in the Ground in a
Quadrangular Figure, two foot and a half
Square. I took four other Sticks, and
tied them parallel at each Corner, about 

two foot from the Ground; then I
fastned my Handkerchief to the nine
Sticks that stood erect, and extended it
on all sides till it was as tight as the top of
a Drum; and the four parallel Sticks rising
about five Inches higher than the
Handkerchief, served as Ledges on each
side. When I had finished my Work, I
desired the Emperor to let a Troop of
his best Horse, twenty four in number,
come and exercise upon this Plain. His
Majesty approved of the Proposal, and I
took them up one by one in my hands,
ready mounted and armed, with the proper
Officers to exercise them. As soon as
they got into order, they divided into
two Parties, performed mock Skirmishes,
discharged blunt Arrows, drew their
Swords, fled and pursued, attacked and
retired, and in short discovered the best
Military Discipline I ever beheld. The
parallel Sticks secured them and their
Horses from falling over the Stage; and
the Emperor was so much delighted, that
he ordered this Entertainment to be repeated 

several days, and once was pleased
to be lifted up, and give the word of
Command; and, with great difficulty,
persuaded even the Empress her self to let
me hold her in her close Chair within two
Yards of the Stage, from whence she was
able to take a full View of the whole
Performance. It was my good fortune
that no ill Accident happened in these
Entertainments, only once a fiery Horse
that belonged to one of the Captains
pawing with his Hoof struck a Hole in
my Handkerchief, and his Foot slipping,
he overthrew his Rider and himself; but
I immediately relieved them both, and
covering the Hole with one Hand, I set
down the Troop with the other, in the
same manner as I took them up. The
Horse that fell was strained in the left
Shoulder, but the Rider got no hurt, and
I repaired my Handkerchief as well as I
could; however, I would not trust to the
Strength of it any more in such dangerous
Enterprizes. 

About two or three days before I
was set at liberty, as I was entertaining
the Court with these kind of Feats, there
arrived an Express to inform his Majesty,
that some of his Subjects riding near the
Place where I was first taken up, had seen
a great black Substance lying on the
Ground very oddly shaped, extending its
Edges round as wide as his Majesty Bedchamber,
and rising up in the middle as
high as a Man; that it was no living
Creature, as they at first apprehended, for
it lay on the Grass without Motion, and
some of them had walked round it several
times: That by mounting upon each
other's Shoulders, they had got to the top,
which was flat and even, and stamping
upon it they found it was hollow within; 
that they humbly conceived it might
be something belonging to the Man-Mountain,
and if his Majesty pleased,
they would undertake to bring it with
only five Horses. I presently knew what
they meant, and was glad at heart to receive 

this Intelligence. It seems upon
my first reaching the Shore after our Shipwreck,
I was in such confusion, that before
I came to the Place where I went to
sleep, my Hat which I had fastned with a
String to my Head while I was rowing,
and had stuck on all the time I was swimming,
fell off after I came to Land; the
String, as I conjecture, breaking by some
Accident which I never observed, but
thought my Hat had been lost at Sea. I
intreated his Imperial Majesty to give Orders
it might be brought to me as soon as
possible, describing to him the Use and
the Nature of it: And the next Day the
Waggoners arrived with it, but not in a
very good condition; they had bored two
Holes in the Brim, within an Inch and
half of the Edge, and fastned two Hooks
in the Holes; these Hooks were tyed by a
long Cord to the Harness, and thus my
Hat was dragged along for above half an
English Mile: but the Ground in that
Country being extremely smooth and level,
it receiv'd less Damage than I expected. 

Two Days after this Adventure, the
Emperor having ordered that Part of his
Army which quarters in and about his
Metropolis to be in a readiness, took a
fancy of diverting himself in a very singular
manner. He desired I would stand
like a Colossus, with my Legs as far asunder
as I conveniently could. He then
commanded his General, (who was an old
experienced Leader, and a great Patron
of mine) to draw up the Troops in close
Order, and march them under me, the
Foot by Twenty-four in a Breast, and
the Horse by Sixteen, with Drums beating,
Colours flying, and Pikes advanced. 
This body consisted of three thousand
Foot, and a thousand Horse. His Majesty
gave Orders, upon pain of Death,
that every Soldier in his March should observe
the strictest Decency, with regard to
my Person; which, however, could not
prevent some of the younger Officers
from turning up their Eyes as they passed
under me. And, to confess the Truth, 

my Breeches were at that time in so ill a
Condition, that they afforded some Opportunities
for Laughter and Admiration. 
I had sent so many Memorials and Petitions
for my Liberty, that his Majesty
at length mentioned the Matter first in
the Cabinet, and then in a full Council; 
where it was opposed by none, except
Skyresh Bolgolam, who was pleased, without
any Provocation, to be my mortal
Enemy. But it was carried against him
by the whole Board, and confirmed by
the Emperor. That Minister was Galbet,
or Admiral of the Realm, very much in
his Master's Confidence, and a Person
well versed in Affairs, but of a morose
and sour Complection. However, he
was at length persuaded to comply; but
prevailed that the Articles and Conditions
upon which I should be set free,
and to which I must swear, should be
drawn up by himself. These Articles
were brought to me by Skyresh Bolgolam
in Person, attended by two Under-Secretarys, 

and several Persons of Distinction. 
After they were read, I was demanded to
swear to the Performance of them; first
in the manner of my own Country, and
afterwards in the method prescribed by
their Laws: which was to hold my right
Foot in my left Hand, to place the middle
Finger of my right Hand on the
Crown of my Head, and my Thumb on
the Tip of my right Ear. But because
the Reader may perhaps be curious to
have some Idea of the Style and Manner
of Expression peculiar to that People, as
well as to know the Articles upon which
I recovered my Liberty, I have made a
Translation of the whole Instrument word
for word, as near as I was able, which I
here offer to the Publick. 
Golbasto Momaren Evlame Gurdilo
Shefin Mully Ully Gue, most
Mighty Emperor of Lilliput, Delight and
Terror of the Universe, whose Dominions
extend five thousand Blustrugs, (about
twelve Miles in Circumference) to 

the Extremitys of the Globe; Monarch
of all Monarchs, taller than the Sons of
Men; whose Feet press down to the Center,
and whose Head strikes against the
Sun: At whose Nod the Princes of the
Earth shake their Knees; pleasant as the
Spring, comfortable as the Summer, fruitful
as Autumn, dreadful as Winter. His
most sublime Majesty proposeth to the
Man-Mountain, lately arrived to our Celestial
Dominions, the following Articles,
which by a solemn Oath he shall be obliged
to perform. 
First, The Man-Mountain shall not
depart from our Dominions, without our
Licence under our Great Seal. 
2d, He shall not presume to come into
our Metropolis, without our express
Order; at which time the Inhabitants
shall have two hours warning to keep
within their doors. 

3d, The said Man-Mountain shall confine
his Walks to our principal High
Roads, and not offer to walk or lie down
in a Meadow or Field of Corn. 
4th, As he walks the said Roads, he
shall take the utmost care not to trample
upon the Bodies of any of our loving
Subjects, their Horses, or Carriages, nor
take any of our said Subjects into his
hands, without their own Consent. 
5th, If an Express requires extraordinary
Dispatch, the Man-Mountain shall
be obliged to carry in his Pocket the Messenger
and Horse a Six Days Journey once
in every Moon, and return the said Messenger
back (if so required) safe to our
Imperial Presence. 
6th, He shall be our Ally against our
Enemies in the Island of Blefuscu, and
do his utmost to destroy their Fleet, which
is now preparing to invade Us. 

7th, That the said Man-Mountain
shall, at his times of leisure, be aiding
and assisting to our Workmen, in helping
to raise certain great Stones, towards
covering the Wall of the principal Park,
and other our Royal Buildings. 
8th, That the said Man-Mountain
shall, in two Moons time, deliver in an
exact Survey of the Circumference of
our Dominions by a Computation of his
own Paces round the Coast. 
Lastly, That upon his solemn Oath
to observe all the above Articles, the
said Man-Mountain shall have a daily
Allowance of Meat and Drink sufficient
for the Support of 1724 of our Subjects,
with free Access to our Royal Person,
and other Marks of our Favour. Given
at our Palace at Belfaborac the twelfth
Day of the Ninety-first Moon of our
Reign. 

I swore and subscribed to these Arties
with great Chearfulness and Content,
although some of them were not
so honourable as I could have wished; 
which proceeded wholly from the Malice
of Skyresh Bolgolam the High Admiral:
whereupon my Chains were immediately
unlocked, and I was at full liberty; 
the Emperor himself in Person
did me the Honour to be by at the whole
Ceremony. I made my Acknowledgments
by prostrating myself at his Majesty's
Feet: But he commanded me to
rise; and after many gracious Expressions,
which, to avoid the Censure of Vanity,
I shall not repeat, he added, that he
hoped I should prove a useful Servant,
and well deserve all the Favours he had
already conferred upon me, or might do
for the future. 
The Reader may please to observe,
that in the last Article for the Recovery
of my Liberty, the Emperor stipulates 

to allow me a Quantity of Meat and
Drink sufficient for the Support of 1724
Lilliputians. Some time after, asking a
Friend at Court how they came to fix on
that determinate Number; he told me,
that his Majesty's Mathematicians, having
taken the Height of my Body by the
help of a Quadrant, and finding it to exceed
theirs in the Proportion of Twelve
to One, they concluded from the Similarity
of their Bodies, that mine must contain
at least 1724 of theirs, and consequently
would require as much Food as
was necessary to support that number of
Lilliputians. By which, the Reader may
conceive an Idea of the Ingenuity of that
People, as well as the prudent and exact
Oeconomy of so great a Prince. 





Mildendo, the Metropolis of Lilliput,
described, together with the Emperor's
Palace. A Conversation between the
Author and a Principal Secretary,
concerning the Affairs of that Empire: 
The Author's Offers to serve the Emperor
in his Wars. 
The first Request I made after I had
obtained my Liberty, was, that
I might have licence to see Mildendo,
the Metropolis; which the Emperor
easily granted me, but with a special
Charge to do no hurt, either to the
Inhabitants, or their Houses. The People
had notice by Proclamation of my design
to visit the Town. The Wall which encompassed
it, is two foot and an half 

high, and at least eleven Inches broad, so
that a Coach and Horses may be driven
very safely round it; and it is flanked
with strong Towers at ten foot distance. 
I stept over the great Western Gate, and
passed very gently, and sideling through
the two principal Streets, only in my
short Waistcoat, for fear of damaging the
Roofs and Eves of the Houses with the
Skirts of my Coat. I walked with the
utmost Circumspection, to avoid treading
on any Stragglers, that might remain
in the Streets, although the Orders were
very strict, that all People should keep in
their Houses, at their own peril. The
Garret-windows and Tops of Houses were
so crowded with Spectators, that I thought
in all my Travels I had not seen a more
populous Place. The City is an exact
Square, each side of the Wall being five
hundred foot long. The two great Streets
which run cross and divide it into four
Quarters, are five foot wide. The Lanes
and Alleys which I could not enter, but
only viewed them as I passed, are from 

twelve to eighteen Inches. The Town
is capable of holding five hundred thousand
Souls. The Houses are from three
to five Stories. The Shops and Markets
well provided. 
The Emperor's Palace is in the Center
of the City, where the two great
Streets meet. It is inclosed by a Wall
of two foot high, and twenty foot distant
from the Buildings. I had his Majesty's
Permission to step over this Wall; 
and the Space being so wide between
that and the Palace, I could easily view
it on every side. The outward Court
is a Square of forty foot, and includes
two other Courts: In the inmost are the
Royal Apartments, which I was very desirous
to see, but found it extremely difficult; 
for the great Gates, from one
Square into another, were but eighteen
Inches high, and seven Inches wide. Now
the Buildidgs of the outer Court were
at least five foot high, and it was impossible
for me to stride over them, without 

infinite Damage to the Pile, though
the Walls were strongly built of hewn
Stone, and four Inches thick. At the
same time the Emperor had a great desire
that I should see the Magnificence of
his Palace; but this I was not able to
do till three Days after, which I spent in
cutting down with my Knife some of
the largest Trees in the Royal Park, about
an hundred Yards distant from the
City. Of these Trees I made two Stools,
each about three foot high, and strong
enough to bear my Weight. The People
having received notice a second time,
I went again through the City to the Palace,
with my two Stools in my Hands. 
When I came to the side of the outer
Court, I stood upon one Stool, and took
the other in my hand: This I lifted over
the Roof, and gently set it down on the
Space between the first and second Court,
which was eight foot wide. I then stept
over the Buildings very conveniently
from one Stool to the other, and drew
up the first after me with a hooked Stick. 

By this Contrivance I got into the inmost
Court; and lying down upon my Side, I
applied my Face to the Windows of the
middle Stories, which were left open on
purpose, and discovered the most splendid
Apartments that can be imagined. 
There I saw the Empress, and the young
Princes in their several Lodgings, with
their chief Attendants about them. Her
Imperial Majesty was pleased to smile
very graciously upon me, and gave me
out of the Window her Hand to kiss. 
But I shall not anticipate the Reader
with farther Descriptions of this kind,
because I reserve them for a greater Work,
which is now almost ready for the Press,
containing a general Description of this
Empire, from its first Erection, through
a long Series of Princes, with a particular
Account of their Wars and Politicks,
Laws, Learning, and Religion: their
Plants and Animals, their peculiar Manners
and Customs, with other Matters
very curious and useful; my chief design 

at present being only to relate such Events
and Transactions as happened to
the Publick, or to myself, during a Residence
of about nine Months in that Empire. 
One Morning, about a Fortnight after
I had obtain'd my Liberty, Keldresal,
Principal Secretary (as they style him)
of private Affairs, came to my House,
attended only by one Servant. He ordered
his Coach to wait at a distance, and
desired I would give him an Hour's Audience; 
which I readily consented to, on
account of his Quality, and Personal Merits,
as well as the many good Offices he
had done me during my Sollicitations at
Court. I offered to lie down, that he
might the more conveniently reach my
Ear; but he chose rather to let me hold
him in my hand during our Conversation. 
He began with Compliments on
my Liberty, said he might pretend to
some Merit in it: but, however, added,
that if it had not been for the present 

Situation of things at Court, perhaps I
might not have obtained it so soon. For,
said he, as flourishing a Condition as we
may appear to be in to Foreigners, we
labour under two mighty Evils; a violent
Faction at home, and the Danger of
an Invasion by a most potent Enemy from
abroad. As to the first, you are to understand,
that for above seventy Moons
past, there have been two struggling Parties
in this Empire, under the Names of
Tramecksan, and Slamecksan, from the
high and low Heels on their Shoes, by
which they distinguish themselves. It is
alledged indeed, that the high Heels are
most agreeable to our ancient Constitution: 
But however this be, his Majesty
hath determined to make use of only
low Heels in the Administration of the
Government, and all Offices in the Gift
of the Crown, as you cannot but observe; 
and particularly, that his Majesty's
Imperial Heels are lower at least by a
Drurr than any of his Court; (Drurr
is a Measure about the fourteenth Part 

of an Inch.) The Animositys between
these two Partys run so high, that they
will neither eat nor drink, nor talk with
each other. We compute the Tramecksan,
or High-Heels, to exceed us in number; 
but the Power is wholly on our
side. We apprehend his Imperial Highness,
the Heir to the Crown, to have
some Tendency towards the High-Heels; 
at least, we can plainly discover one of
his Heels higher than the other, which
gives him a Hobble in his Gait. Now,
in the midst of these intestine Disquiets,
we are threatned with an Invasion from
the Island of Blefuscu, which is the other
great Empire of the Universe, almost
as large and powerful as this of his
Majesty. For as to what we have heard
you affirm, that there are other Kingdoms
and States in the World, inhabited
by human Creatures as large as yourself,
our Philosophers are in much doubt, and
would rather conjecture that you dropt
from the Moon, or one of the Stars; 
because it is certain, that an hundred Mortals 

of your Bulk would, in a short time,
destroy all the Fruits and Cattle of his
Majesty's Dominions. Besides, our Historys
of six thousand Moons make no
mention of any other Regions, than the
two great Empires of Lilliput and Blefuscu. 
Which two mighty Powers have,
as I was going to tell you, been engaged
in a most obstinate War for six and thirty
Moons past. It began upon the following
Occasion. It is allowed on all hands,
that the primitive way of breaking Eggs
before we eat them, was upon the larger
End: But his present Majesty's Grandfather,
while he was a Boy, going to eat
an Egg, and breaking it according to the
ancient Practice, happened to cut one of
his Fingers. Whereupon the Emperor
his Father published an Edict, commanding
all his Subjects, upon great Penaltys,
to break the smaller End of their Eggs. 
The People so highly resented this Law,
that our Historys tell us there have been
six Rebellions raised on that account; 
wherein one Emperor lost his Life, and 

another his Crown. These civil Commotions
were constantly fomented by the
Monarchs of Blefuscu; and when they
were quelled, the Exiles always fled for
Refuge to that Empire. It is computed,
that eleven thousand Persons have, at
several times, suffered Death, rather than
submit to break their Eggs at the smaller
End. Many hundred large Volumes have
been published upon this Controversy: 
But the Books of the Big-Endians have
been long forbidden, and the whole Party
rendred incapable by Law of holding
Employments. During the Course
of these Troubles, the Emperors of Blefuscu
did frequently expostulate by their
Embassadors, accusing us of making a
Schism in Religion, by offending against
a fundamental Doctrine of our great Prophet
Lustrog, in the fifty-fourth Chapter
of the Blundecral, (which is their Alcoran.) 
This, however, is thought to be
a meer Strain upon the Text: For the
Words are these; That all true Believers
shall break their Eggs at the convenient 

End: and which is the convenient End,
seems, in my humble Opinion, to be left
to every Man's Conscience, or at least in
the power of the Chief Magistrate to determine. 
Now, the Big-Endian Exiles
have found so much Credit in the Emperor
of Blefuscu's Court, and so much private
Assistance and Encouragement from their
Party here at home, that a bloody War
hath been carried on between the two
Empires for six and thirty Moons with
various Success; during which time we
have lost forty Capital Ships, and a much
greater number of smaller Vessels, together
with thirty thousand of our best Seamen
and Soldiers; and the Damage received
by the Enemy is reckon'd to be
somewhat greater than Ours. However,
they have now equipped a numerous
Fleet, and are just preparing to make a
Descent upon us; and his Imperial Majesty
placing great Confidence in your
Valour and Strength, hath commanded
Me to lay this Account of his Affairs
before You. 

I desired the Secretary to present my
humble Duty to the Emperor, and to
let him know, that I thought it would
not become Me, who was a Foreigner, to
interfere with Parties; but I was ready,
with the hazard of my Life, to defend his
Person and State against all Invaders. 





The Author by an extraordinary Stratagem
prevents an Invasion. A high
Title of Honour is conferred upon him. 
Embassadors arrive from the Emperor
of Blefuscu, and sue for Peace. The
Empress's Apartment on fire by an Accident; 
the Author instrumental in
saving the rest of the Palace. 
The Empire of Blefuscu is an
Island, situated to the North
North-East side of Lilliput,
from whence it is parted only by a Channel
of eight hundred Yards wide. I had
not yet seen it, and upon this Notice of an
intended Invasion, I avoided appearing on
that side of the Coast, for fear of being
discovered by some of the Enemy's Ships, 

who had received no Intelligence of me,
all Intercourse between the two Empires
having been strictly forbidden during
the War, upon pain of Death, and an
Embargo laid by our Emperor upon all
Vessels whatsoever. I communicated to
his Majesty a Project I had formed of
seizing the Enemy's whole Fleet: which,
as our Scouts assured us, lay at Anchor in
the Harbour ready to sail with the first
fair Wind. I consulted the most experienced
Seamen, upon the Depth of the
Channel, which they had often plummed,
who told me, that in the middle at Highwater
it was seventy Glumgluffs deep,
which is about six Foot of European Measure; 
and the rest of it fifty Glumgluff's at
most. I walked towards the North-East
Coast over against Blefuscu; and lying
down behind a Hillock, took out my
small Pocket Perspective-Glass, and
viewed the Enemy's Fleet at Anchor, consisting
of about fifty Men of War, and a
great Number of Transports: I then
came back to my House, and gave Order 

(for which I had a Warrant) for a great
Quantity of the strongest Cable and Bars
of Iron. The Cable was about as thick
as Packthread, and the Bars of the length
and size of a Knitting-Needle. I trebled
the Cable to make it stronger, and for
the same reason I twisted three of the
Iron Bars together, binding the Extremitys
into a Hook. Having thus fixed fifty
Hooks to as many Cables, I went back
to the North-East Coast, and putting off
my Coat, Shooes, and Stockins, walked
into the Sea in my Leathern Jerkin, about
half an hour before high Water. I waded
with what haste I could, and swam in
the middle about thirty Yards till I felt
ground; I arrived to the Fleet in less than
half an hour. The Enemy was so frighted
when they saw me, that they leaped
out of their Ships, and swam to shore,
where there could not be fewer than
thirty thousand Souls. I then took my
Tackling, and fastning a Hook to the hole
at the Prow of each, I tyed all the Cords
together at the End. While I was thus 

employed, the Enemy discharged several
thousand Arrows, many of which stuck in
my Hands and Face; and besides the excessive
smart, gave me much disturbance in
my Work. My greatest Apprehension was
for mine Eyes, which I should have infallibly
lost, if I had not suddenly thought
of an Expedient. I kept among other
little Necessarys a pair of Spectacles in a
private Pocket, which, as I observed before,
had scaped the Emperor's Searchers. 
These I took out and fastned as strongly as
I could upon my Nose, and thus armed
went on boldly with my Work in spight
of the Enemy's Arrows, many of which
struck against the Glasses of my Spectacles,
but without any other Effect, further
than a little to discompose them. I had
now fastned all the Hooks, and taking
the Knot in my hand, began to pull; but
not a Ship would stir, for they were all
too fast held by their Anchors, so that the
bold part of my Enterprize remained. I
therefore let go the Cord, and leaving
the Hooks fixed to the Ships, I resolutely 

cut with my Knife the Cables that fastned
the Anchors, receiving above two
hundred Shots in my Face and Hands; 
then I took up the knotted End of the Cables
to which my Hooks were tyed, and
with great ease drew fifty of the Enemy's
largest Men of War after me. 
The Blefuscudians, who had not the
least Imagination of what I intended, were
at first confounded with Astonishment. 
They had seen me cut the Cables, and
thought my Design was only to let the
Ships run a-drift, or fall foul on each
other: but when they perceived the
whole Fleet moving in Order, and saw
me pulling at the End, they set up such a
scream of Grief and Despair, that it is
almost impossible to describe or conceive. 
When I had got out of danger, I stopt a
while to pick out the Arrows that stuck in
my Hands and Face, and rubbed on some
of the same Ointment that was given me
at my first arrival, as I have formerly
mentioned. I then took off my Spectacles, 

and waiting about an hour till the
Tide was a little fallen, I waded through
the middle with my Cargo, and arrived
safe at the Royal Port of Lilliput. 
The Emperor and his whole Court
stood on the Shore expecting the Issue of
this great Adventure. They saw the
Ships move forward in a large Half-Moon,
but could not discern me, who was up
to my Breast in Water. When I advanced
to the middle of the Channel,
they were yet more in pain because I
was under Water to my Neck. The Emperor
concluded me to be drowned, and
that the Enemy's Fleet was approaching in
a hostile manner: But he was soon eased
of his Fears, for the Channel growing
shallower every step I made, I came in a
short time within hearing, and holding
up the end of the Cable by which the
Fleet was fastned, I cryed in a loud Voice,
Long live the most puissant Emperor of
Lilliput! This great Prince received me
at my Landing with all possible Encomiums, 

and created me a Nardac upon
the spot, which is the highest Title of
Honour among them. 
His Majesty desired I would take
some other Opportunity of bringing all
the rest of his Enemy's Ships into his
Ports. And so unmeasurable is the Ambition
of Princes, that he seemed to think
of nothing less than reducing the whole
Empire of Blefuscu into a Province, and
governing it by a Vice-Roy; of destroying
the Big-Endian Exiles, and compelling
that People to break the smaller end of
their Eggs, by which he would remain
the sole Monarch of the whole World. 
But I endeavour'd to divert him from this
Design, by many Arguments drawn from
the Topicks of Policy as well as Justice: 
And I plainly protested, that I would never
be an Instrument of bringing a Free and
Brave People into Slavery. And when
the Matter was debated in Council, the
wisest part of the Ministry were of my
Opinion. 

This open bold Declaration of mine,
was so opposite to the Schemes and Politicks
of his Imperial Majesty, that he
could never forgive it; he mentioned it
in a very artful manner at Council, where
I was told that some of the wisest appeared,
at least, by their Silence, to be of my
Opinion; but others, who were my secret
Enemies, could not forbear some Expressions,
which by a side-wind reflected
on me. And from this time began an
Intrigue between his Majesty, and a Junto
of Ministers maliciously bent against
me, which broke out in less than two
Months, and had like to have ended in
my utter Destruction. Of so little weight
are the greatest Services to Princes, when
put into the Ballance with a Refusal to
gratify their Passions. 
About three Weeks after this Exploit,
there arrived a solemn Embassy from
Blefuscu, with humble Offers of a Peace; 
which was soon concluded upon Conditions 

very advantageous to our Emperor,
wherewith I shall not trouble the Reader. 
There were six Ambassadors, with a Train
of about five hundred Persons, and their
Entry was very magnificent, suitable to
the Grandeur of their Master, and the Importance
of their Business. When their
Treaty was finished, wherein I did them several
good Offices by the Credit I now had,
or at least appeared to have at Court, their
Excellencies, who were privately told how
much I had been their Friend, made me a
Visit in Form. They began with many
Compliments upon my Valour and Generosity,
invited me to that Kingdom in
the Emperor their Master's Name, and
desired me to shew them some Proofs of
my prodigious Strength, of which they
had heard so many Wonders; wherein I
readily obliged them, but shall not trouble
the Reader with the Particulars. 
When I had for some time entertained
their Excellencies to their infinite
Satisfaction and Surprize, I desired they 

would do me the Honour to present my
most humble Respects to the Emperor
their Master, the Renown of whose Virtues
had so justly filled the whole World
with Admiration, and whose Royal Person
I resolved to attend before I returned
to my own Country: accordingly, the
next time I had the honour to see our
Emperor, I desired his general Licence to
wait on the Blefuscudian Monarch, which
he was pleas'd to grant me, as I could plainly
perceive, in a very cold manner; but
could not guess the Reason, till I had a
Whisper from a certain Person, that
Flimnap and Bolgolam had represented
my Intercourse with those Ambassadors as
a mark of Disaffection, from which I am
sure my Heart was wholly free. And this
was the first time I began to conceive some
imperfect Idea of Courts and Ministers. 
It is to be observed, that these Ambassadors
spoke to me by an Interpreter,
the Languages of both Empires differing
as much from each other as any two in 

Europe, and each Nation priding itself
upon the Antiquity, Beauty, and Energy
of their own Tongues, with an avowed
Contempt for that of their Neighbour; 
yet our Emperor standing upon the advantage
he had got by the seisure of their
Fleet, obliged them to deliver their Credentials,
and make their Speech in the
Lilliputian Tongue. And it must be
confessed, that from the great Intercourse
of Trade and Commerce between both
Realms, from the continual Reception of
Exiles, which is mutual among them, and
from the Custom in each Empire to send
their young Nobility and richer Gentry to
the other, in order to polish themselves
by seeing the World, and understanding
Men and Manners; there are few Persons
of Distinction, or Merchants, or Seamen,
who dwell in the Maritime Parts, but
what can hold Conversation in both
Tongues; as I found some Weeks after,
when I went to pay my respects to the
Emperor of Blefuscu, which in the midst
of great Misfortunes, through the Malice of 

my Enemies, proved a very happy Adventure
to me, as I shall relate in its proper
place. 
The Reader may remember, that when
I signed those Articles upon which I recovered
my Liberty, there were some which
I disliked upon account of their being
too servile, neither could any thing but an
extreme Necessity have forced me to submit. 
But being now a Nardac, of the
highest Rank in that Empire, such Offices
were looked upon as below my Dignity,
and the Emperor (to do him Justice)
never once mentioned them to me. However,
it was not long before I had an Opportunity
of doing his Majesty, at least,
as I then thought, a most signal Service. 
I was alarmed at Midnight with the Cries
of many hundred People at my Door; 
by which being suddenly awaked, I was
in some kind of Terror. I heard the
word Burglum repeated incessantly: several
of the Emperor's Court making
their Way through the Croud, intreated 

me to come immediately to the Palace,
where her Imperial Majesty's Apartment
was on fire, by the carelessness of a Maid
of Honour, who fell asleep while she
was reading a Romance. I got up in an
instant; and Orders being given to clear
the way before me, and it being likewise
a Moon-shine Night, I made a
shift to get to the Palace without trampling
on any of the People. I found
they had already applied Ladders to
the Walls of the Apartment, and were
well provided with Buckets, but the Water
was at some distance. These Buckets
were about the size of a large Thimble,
and the poor People supplied me with
them as fast as they could; but the Flame
was so violent, that they did little good. 
I might easily have stifled it with my Coat,
which I unfortunately left behind me for
haste, and came away only in my Leathern
Jerkin. The Case seemed wholly desperate
and deplorable, and this magnificent
Palace would have infallibly been burnt
down to the ground, if, by a Presence 

of Mind, unusual to me, I had not suddenly
thought of an Expedient. I had
the Evening before drank plentifully
of a most delicious Wine, called Glimigrim,
(the Blefuscudians call it Flunec,
but ours is esteemed the better sort) which
is very diuretick. By the luckiest Chance
in the World, I had not discharged myself
of any part of it. The Heat I had
contracted by coming very near the Flames,
and by my labouring to quench them,
made the Wine begin to operate by
Urine; which I voided in such a Quantity,
and applied so well to the proper
Places, that in three Minutes the Fire
was wholly extinguished, and the rest of
that noble Pile, which had cost so many
Ages in erecting, preserved from Destruction. 
It was now Day-light, and I returned
to my House, without waiting to congratulate
with the Emperor; because, although
I had done a very eminent piece of Service,
yet I could not tell how his Majesty 

might resent the manner by which
I had performed it: For, by the fundamental
Laws of the Realm, it is Capital
in any Person, of what Quality soever,
to make water within the Precincts of
the Palace. But I was a little comforted
by a Message from his Majesty, that he
would give Orders to the Grand Justiciary
for passing my Pardon in form; which,
however, I could not obtain. And I was
privately assured, the Empress conceiving
the greatest Abhorrence of what I had
done, removed to the most distant side
of the Court, firmly resolved that those
Buildings should never be repaired for
her Use; and, in the presence of her
chief Confidents, could not forbear vowing
Revenge. 





Of the Inhabitants of Lilliput; their
Learning, Laws, and Customs, the
Manner of Educating their Children. 
The Author's way of living in that
Country. His Vindication of a great
Lady. 
Although I intend to leave the
Description of this Empire to a
particular Treatise, yet in the
mean time I am content to gratify
the curious Reader with some general
Ideas. As the common Size of the
Natives is somewhat under six Inches
high, so there is an exact Proportion in
all other Animals, as well as Plants and
Trees: For instance, the tallest Horses
and Oxen are between four and five Inches 

in height, the Sheep an Inch and a
half, more or less; their Geese about the
bigness of a Sparrow, and so the several
Gradations downwards, till you come to
the smallest, which, to my sight, were
almost invisible; but Nature hath adapted
the Eyes of the Lilliputians to all
Objects proper for their view: They see
with great exactness, but at no great distance. 
And to show the sharpness of their
Sight toward Objects that are near, I have
been much pleased observing a Cook pulling
a Lark, which was not so large as a
common Fly; and a young Girl threading
an invisible Needle with invisible Silk. 
Their tallest Trees are about seven foot
high: I mean some of those in the great
Royal Park, the Tops whereof I could but
just reach with my Fist clenched. The
other Vegetables are in the same Proportion; 
but this I leave to the Reader's Imagination. 
I shall say but little at present of their
Learning, which for many Ages hath 

flourished in all its Branches among them: 
But their manner of Writing is very peculiar,
being neither from the Left to the
Right, like the Europeans; nor from the
Right to the Left, like the Arabians; nor
from up to down, like the Chinese; nor
from down to up, like the Cascagians; 
but aslant from one Corner of the Paper
to the other, like Ladies in England. 
They bury their Dead with their
Heads directly downwards, because they
hold an Opinion, that in eleven thousand
Moons they are all to rise again,
in which Period the Earth (which they
conceive to be flat) will turn upside
down, and by this means they shall, at
their Resurrection, be found ready standing
on their Feet. The Learned among
them confess the Absurdity of this Doctrine,
but the Practice still continues, in
compliance to the Vulgar. 
There are some Laws and Customs
in this Empire very peculiar; and if they 

were not so directly contrary to those
of my own dear Country, I should be
tempted to say a little in their justification. 
It is only to be wished, that they were as
well executed. The first I shall mention,
relates to Informers. All Crimes against
the State are punished here with the utmost
severity; but if the Person accused
maketh his Innocence plainly to appear
upon his Tryal, the Accuser is immediately
put to an ignominious Death; and out
of his Goods or Lands, the innocent Person
is quadruply recompensed for the Loss
of his Time, for the Danger he underwent,
for the Hardship of his Imprisonment,
and for all the Charges he hath
been at in making his Defence. Or, if
that Fund be deficient, it is largely supplyed
by the Crown. The Emperor does
also confer on him some publick Mark of
his Favour, and Proclamation is made of
his Innocence through the whole City. 
They look upon Fraud as a greater
Crime than Theft, and therefore seldom 

fail to punish it with Death; for they
alledge, that Care and Vigilance, with a very
common Understanding, may preserve
a Man's Goods from Thieves, but Honesty
has no fence against superior Cunning:
and since it is necessary that there should
be a perpetual Intercourse of Buying and
Selling, and dealing upon Credit, where
Fraud is permitted or connived at, or hath
no Law to punish it, the honest Dealer is
always undone, and the Knave gets the advantage. 
I remember when I was once interceeding
with the King for a Criminal
who had wronged his Master of a great
Sum of Money, which he had received
by Order, and ran away with; and happening
to tell his Majesty, by way of Extenuation,
that it was only a Breach of
Trust; the Emperor thought it monstrous
in me to offer, as a Defence, the greatest
Aggravation of the Crime: and truly I
had little to say in return, farther than the
common Answer, that different Nations
had different Customs; for, I confess, I
was heartily ashamed. 

Although we usually call Reward
and Punishment the two Hinges upon
which all Government turns, yet I could
never observe this Maxim to be put in
practice by any Nation except that of
Lilliput. Whoever can there bring sufficient
Proof that he hath strictly observed
the Laws of his Country for seventy
three Moons, hath a claim to certain Privileges,
according to his Quality and Condition
of Life, with a proportionable
Sum of Money out of a Fund appropriated
for that Use: He likewise acquires
the Title of Snilpall, or Legal, which is
added to his Name, but does not descend
to his Posterity. And these People thought
it a prodigious Defect of Policy among
us, when I told them that our Laws
were enforced only by Penalties without
any mention of Reward. It is upon this
account that the Image of Justice, in their
Courts of Judicature, is formed with six
Eyes, two before, as many behind, and
on each side one, to signify Circumspection; 

with a Bag of Gold open in her
Right Hand, and a Sword sheathed in her
Left, to shew she is more disposed to Reward
than to Punish. 
In chusing Persons for all Employments,
they have more regard to good
Morals than to great Abilities; for, since
Government is necessary to Mankind,
they believe that the common Size of Human
Understandings, is fitted to some
Station or other, and that Providence never
intended to make the Management of
publick Affairs a Mystery, to be comprehended
only by a few Persons of sublime
Genius, of which there seldom are three
born in an Age: but they suppose Truth,
Justice, Temperance, and the like, to be
in every Man's power; the Practice of
which Virtues, assisted by Experience and
a good Intention, would qualify any
Man for the service of his Country, except
where a Course of Study is required. 
But they thought the want of Moral Virtues
was so far from being supplyed by superior 

Endowments of the Mind, that
Employments could never be put into
such dangerous Hands as those of Persons
so qualify'd; and at least, that the Mistakes
committed by Ignorance in a virtuous
Disposition, would never be of such
fatal Consequence to the Publick Weal,
as the Practices of a Man whose Inclinations
led him to be corrupt, and had
great Abilities to manage and multiply,
and defend his Corruptions. 
In like manner, the Disbelief of a
Divine Providence renders a Man uncapable
of holding any Publick Station; for
since Kings avow themselves to be the Deputies
of Providence, the Lilliputians
think nothing can be more absurd than
for a Prince to employ such Men as disown
the Authority under which he acts. 
In relating these and the following
Laws, I would only be understood to
mean the original Institutions, and not
the most scandalous Corruptions into 

which these People are fallen by the degenerate
Nature of Man. For as to
that infamous Practice of acquiring great
Employments by dancing on the Ropes,
or Badges of Favour and Distinction by
leaping over Sticks, and creeping under
them, the Reader is to observe, that they
were first introduced by the Grand-father
of the Emperor now reigning, and grew
to the present height, by the gradual increase
of Party and Faction. 
Ingratitude is among them a
capital Crime, as we read it to have been
in some other Countries; for they reason
thus, that whoever makes ill Returns to
his Benefactor, must needs be a common
Enemy to the rest of Mankind, from
whom he hath received no Obligation,
and therefore such a Man is not fit to live. 
Their Notions relating to the Duties
of Parents and Children differ extremely
from ours. For, since the Conjunction
of Male and Female is founded 

upon the great Law of Nature, in order
to propagate and continue the Species, the
Lilliputians will needs have it, that Men
and Women are joined together like
other Animals, by the Motives of Concupiscence; 
and that their Tenderness towards
their Young proceeds from the like
natural Principle: for which reason they
will never allow, that a Child is under
any Obligation to his Father for begetting
him, or his Mother for bringing him into
the World; which, considering the Miseries
of human Life, was neither a Benefit
in it self, or intended so by his Parents,
whose Thoughts in their Love-Encounters
were otherwise employ'd. Upon
these, and the like Reasonings, their
Opinion is, that Parents are the last of
all others to be trusted with the Education
of their own Children: and therefore
they have in every Town-publick
Nurseries, where all Parents, except Cottagers
and Labourers, are obliged to send
their Infants of both Sexes to be reared
and educated when they come to the Age of 

twenty Moons, at which time, they are
supposed to have some Rudiments of Docility. 
These Schools are of several
kinds, suited to different Qualities, and
to both Sexes. They have certain Professors
well skilled in preparing Children
for such a condition of Life as befits the
Rank of their Parents, and their own
Capacities as well as Inclinations. I
shall first say something of the Male Nurseries,
and then of the Female. 
The Nurseries for Males of Noble or
Eminent Birth, are provided with Grave
and Learned Professors, and their several
Deputies. The Clothes and Food of the
Children are plain and simple. They are
bred up in the Principles of Honour,
Justice, Courage, Modesty, Clemency,
Religion, and Love of their Country; 
they are always employed in some Business,
except in the times of Eating and
Sleeping, which are very short, and two
Hours for Diversions, consisting of bodily
Exercises. They are dressed by Men 

till four Years of Age, and then are
obliged to dress themselves, although
their Quality be ever so great; and the
Women Attendants, who are aged proportionably
to ours at fifty, perform only
the most menial Offices. They are
never suffered to converse with Servants,
but go together in small or greater numbers
to take their Diversions, and always
in the presence of a Professor, or one of
his Deputies; whereby they avoid those
early bad Impressions of Folly and Vice
to which our Children are subject. 
Their Parents are suffered to see them
only twice a Year; the Visit is to last but
an hour. 
They are allowed to kiss the
Child at Meeting and Parting; but a Professor,
who always stands by on those occasions,
will not suffer them to whisper,
or use any fondling Expressions, or bring
any Presents of Toys, Sweet-meats, and
the like. 
The Pension from each Family for
the Education and Entertainment of a 

Child, upon failure of due payment, is
levyed by the Emperor's Officers. 
The Nurseries for Children of ordinary
Gentlemen, Merchants, Traders,
and Handicrafts, are managed proportionably
after the same manner; only those
designed for Trades, are put out Apprentices
at Eleven years old, whereas
those of Persons of Quality continue in
their Nurseries till Fifteen, which answers
to One and Twenty with us: but the
Confinement is gradually lessened for the
last three Years. 
In the Female Nurseries, the young
Girls of Quality are educated much like
the Males, only they are dressed by orderly
Servants of their own Sex, but always
in the presence of a Professor or
Deputy, till they come to dress themselves,
which is at five Years old. And if
it be found that these Nurses ever presume
to entertain the Girls with frightful
or foolish Stories, or the common Follies 

practised by Chamber-Maids among us,
they are publickly whipped thrice about
the City, imprisoned for a Year, and
banished for Life to the most desolate
Part of the Country. Thus the
young Ladies there are as much ashamed
of being Cowards and Fools, as the Men,
and despise all personal Ornaments beyond
Decency and Cleanliness: Neither
did I perceive any Difference in their Education,
made by their Difference of Sex,
only that the Exercises of the Females
were not altogether so robust; and that
some Rules were given them relating to
domestick Life, and a smaller Compass
of Learning was enjoined them: For the
Maxim is, that among People of Quality,
a Wife should be always a reasonable
and agreeable Companion; because
she cannot always be young. When the
Girls are twelve Years old, which among
them is the marriageable Age, their Parents
or Guardians take them home, with
great Expressions of Gratitude to the
Professors, and seldom without Tears 

of the young Lady and her Companions. 
In the Nurseries of Females of the
meaner sort, the Children are instructed
in all kinds of Works proper for their
Sex, and their several degrees: Those intended
for Apprentices, are dismissed at
nine Years old, the rest are kept to thirteen. 
The meaner Families, who have Children
at these Nurseries, are obliged, besides
their annual Pension, which is
as low as possible, to return to the
Steward of the Nursery a small monthly
Share of their Gettings, to be a Portion
for the Child; and therefore all Parents
are limited in their Expences by
the Law. For the Lilliputians think
nothing can be more unjust, than for
People, in subservience to their own Appetites,
to bring Children into the World,
and leave the Burthen of supporting them
on the Publick. As to Persons of Quality,
they give Security to appropriate a 

certain Sum for each Child, suitable to
their Condition; and these Funds are always
managed with good Husbandry, and
the most exact Justice. 
The Cottagers and Labourers keep
their Children at home, their Business being
only to till and cultivate the Earth,
and therefore their Education is of little
consequence to the Publick; but the
Old and Diseased among them are supported
by Hospitals: for Begging is a
Trade unknown in this Kingdom. 
And here it may perhaps divert the
curious Reader, to give some account of
my Domestick, and my manner of living
in this Country, during a Residence of
nine Months and thirteen Days. Having
a Head mechanically turned, and being
likewise forced by necessity, I had
made for myself a Table and Chair convenient
enough, out of the largest Trees
in the Royal Park. Two hundred Sempstresses
were employed to make me Shirts, 

and Linnen for my Bed and Table, all of
the strongest and coarsest kind they could
get; which, however, they were forced
to quilt together in several Folds, for the
thickest was some degrees finer than
Lawn. Their Linnen is usually three Inches
wide, and three Foot make a Piece. 
The Sempstresses took my Measure as I
lay on the ground, one standing at my
Neck, and another at my Mid-Leg, with
a strong Cord extended, that each held
by the end, while the third measured the
length of the Cord with a Rule of an
Inch long. Then they measured my right
Thumb, and desired no more; for by a
mathematical Computation, that twice
round the Thumb is once round the
Wrist, and so on to the Neck and the
Waist, and by the help of my old Shirt,
which I displayed on the Ground before
them for a Pattern, they fitted me exactly. 
Three hundred Taylors were employed
in the same manner to make me
Clothes; but they had another Contrivance
for taking my Measure. I kneeled 

down, and they raised a Ladder from the
Ground to my Neck; upon this Ladder
one of them mounted, and let fall a Plum-Line
from my Collar to the Floor, which
just answered the length of my Coat; 
but my Waist and Arms I measured myself. 
When my Clothes were finished,
which was done in my House, (for the
largest of theirs would not be able to
hold them) they looked like the Patch-Work
made by the Ladies in England,
only that mine were all of a Colour. 
I had three hundred Cooks to dress
my Victuals, in little convenient Huts
built about my House, where they and
their Families lived, and prepared me two
Dishes a-piece. I took up twenty Waiters
in my Hand, and placed them on the
Table, an hundred more attended below
on the Ground, some with Dishes of
Meat, and some with Barrels of Wine,
and other Liquors, slung on their Shoulders; 
all which the Waiters above drew
up as I wanted, in a very ingenious manner, 

by certain Cords, as we draw the
Bucket up a Well in Europe. A Dish
of their Meat was a good Mouthful, and
a Barrel of their Liquor a reasonable
Draught. Their Mutton yields to ours,
but their Beef is excellent. I have had
a Sirloin so large, that I have been forced
to make three Bits of it; but this is
rare. My Servants were astonished to see
me eat it Bones and all, as in our Country
we do the Leg of a Lark. Their
Geese and Turkeys I usually eat at a
Mouthful, and I must confess they far
exceed ours. Of their smaller Fowl I
could take up twenty or thirty at the
end of my Knife. 
One day his Imperial Majesty being
informed of my way of living, desired
that himself, and his Royal Consort, with
the young Princes of the Blood of both
Sexes, might have the Happiness (as he
was pleased to call it) of dining with me. 
They came accordingly, and I placed 'em
upon Chairs of State on my Table, just 

over-against me, with their Guards about
them. Flimnap the Lord High Treasurer
attended there likewise, with his white
Staff; and I observed he often looked on
me with a sour Countenance, which I
would not seem to regard, but eat more
than usual, in honour to my dear Country,
as well as to fill the Court with
Admiration. I have some private Reasons
to believe, that this Visit from his
Majesty gave Flimnap an opportunity of
doing me ill Offices to his Master. That
Minister had always been my secret Enemy,
though he outwardly caressed me
more than was usual to the Moroseness
of his Nature. He represented to the
Emperor the low Condition of his Treasury; 
that he was forced to take up Money
at great Discount; that Exchequer
Bills would not circulate under nine per
Cent. below Par; that in short I had cost his
Majesty above a Million and a half of
Sprugs, (their greatest Gold Coin, about
the bigness of a Spangle;) and upon the
whole, that it would be adviseable in the 

Emperor to take the first fair Occasion
of dismissing me. 
I am here obliged to vindicate the Reputation
of an excellent Lady, who was
an innocent Sufferer upon my account. 
The Treasurer took a fancy to be jealous
of his Wife, from the Malice of
some Evil Tongues, who informed him
that her Grace had taken a violent Affection
for my Person, and the Court-Scandal
ran for some time, that she once
came privately to my Lodging. This I
solemnly declare to be a most infamous
Falshood, without any Grounds, farther
than that her Grace was pleased to treat
me with all innocent Marks of Freedom
and Friendship. I own she came often to
my House, but always publickly, nor
ever without three more in the Coach,
who were usually her Sister and young
Daughter, and some particular Acquaintance; 
but this was common to many
other Ladies of the Court. And I still
appeal to my Servants round, whether 

they at any time saw a Coach at my
Door without knowing what Persons
were in it. On those Occasions, when
a Servant had given me notice, my Custom
was to go immediately to the Door:
and, after paying my Respects, to take
up the Coach and two Horses very carefully
in my Hands, (for if there were six
Horses, the Postillion always unharnessed
four) and place them on a Table, where
I had fixed a moveable Rim quite round,
of five Inches high, to prevent Accidents. 
And I have often had four Coaches and
Horses at once on my Table full of Company,
while I sate in my Chair, leaning
my Face towards them; and when I was
engaged with one Sett, the Coachmen
would gently drive the others round my
Table. I have passed many an Afternoon
very agreeably in these Conversations. 
But I defy the Treasurer, or his two Informers,
(I will name them, and let 'em
make their best of it) Clustril and Drunlo,
to prove that any Person ever came to
me incognito, except the Secretary Reldresal, 

who was sent by express Command
of his Imperial Majesty, as I have
before related. I should not have dwelt
so long upon this Particular, if it had not
been a Point wherein the Reputation of
a great Lady is so nearly concerned, to
say nothing of my own; though I had
then the Honour to be a Nardac, which
the Treasurer himself is not; for all the
World knows he is only a Glumglum, a
Title inferiour by one Degree, as that of
a Marquiss is to a Duke in England, although
I allow he preceded me in right
of his Post. These false Informations,
which I afterwards came to the knowledge
of, by an Accident not proper to
mention, made Flimnap, the Treasurer,
shew his Lady for some time an ill Countenance,
and me a worse; and although
he were at last undeceived and reconciled
to her, yet I lost all Credit with him, and
found my Interest decline very fast with
the Emperor himself, who was indeed too
much governed by that Favourite. 





The Author being informed of a Design
to accuse him of High-Treason,
makes his Escape to Blefuscu. His
Reception there. 
Before I proceed to give an
account of my leaving this Kingdom,
it may be proper to inform
the Reader of a private Intrigue
which had been for two Months forming
against me. 
I had been hitherto all my Life a
Stranger to Courts, for which I was unqualified
by the Meanness of my Condition. 
I had indeed heard and read enough
of the Dispositions of great Princes
and Ministers; but never expected to 

have found such terrible Effects of them
in so remote a Country, governed, as I
thought, by very different Maxims from
those in Europe. 
When I was just preparing to pay
my Attendance on the Emperor of Blefuscu,
a considerable Person at Court (to
whom I had been very serviceable at a
time when he lay under the highest Displeasure
of his Imperial Majesty) came to
my House very privately at Night in a
close Chair, and, without sending his
Name, desired admittance: The Chair-Men
were dismissed; I put the Chair,
with his Lordship in it, into my Coat-Pocket; 
and giving Orders to a trusty Servant
to say I was indisposed and gone to
sleep, I fastened the Door of my House,
placed the Chair on the Table, according
to my usual Custom, and sate down by
it. After the common Salutations were
over, observing his Lordship's Countenance
full of Concern; and enquiring
into the reason, he desired I would hear 

him with patience in a Matter that highly
concerned my Honour and my Life. His
Speech was to the following effect, for I
took Notes of it as soon as he left me. 
You are to know, said he, that several
Committees of Council have been
lately called in the most private manner
on your account: And it is but two days
since his Majesty came to a full Resolution. 
You are very sensible that Skyris Bolgolam
(Galbet, or High Admiral) hath
been your mortal Enemy almost ever since
your Arrival: His original Reasons I
know not; but his Hatred is much encreased
since your great Success against
Blefuscu, by which his Glory, as Admiral,
is obscur'd. This Lord, in conjunction
with Flimnap the High Treasurer, whose
Enmity against you is notorious on account
of his Lady, Limtoc the General,
Lalcon the Chamberlain, and Balmuff
the grand Justiciary, have prepared Articles 

of Impeachment against you, for
Treason, and other capital Crimes. 
This Preface made me so impatient,
being conscious of my own Merits and
Innocence, that I was going to interrupt; 
when he entreated me to be silent, and
thus proceeded. 
Out of Gratitude for the Favours
you have done me, I procured Information
of the whole Proceedings, and a
Copy of the Articles, wherein I venture
my Head for your Service. 
Articles of Impeachment against Quinbus Flestrin (the Man-Mountain.)
ARTICLE I.
Whereas, by a Statute made in
the Reign of his Imperial Majesty
Calin Deffar Plune, it is enacted, That
whoever shall make water within the
Precincts of the Royal Palace, shall be
liable to the Pains and Penalties of High 

Treason: Notwithstanding the said Quinbus
Flestrin, in open breach of the said
Law, under colour of extinguishing the
Fire kindled in the Apartment of his
Majesty's dear Imperial Consort, did maliciously,
traitorously, and devilishly, by
discharge of his Urine, put out the said
Fire kindled in the said Apartment, lying
and being within the Precincts of the
said Royal Palace, against the Statute in
that case provided, &c. against the Duty,
&c. 
ARTICLE II.
That the said Quinbus Flestrin having
brought the Imperial Fleet of Blefuscu
into the Royal Port, and being afterwards
commanded by his Imperial Majesty
to seize all the other Ships of the
said Empire of Blefuscu, and reduce that
Empire to a Province, to be governed by
a Vice-Roy from hence, and to destroy
and put to death not only all the Big-Endian
Exiles, but likewise all the People
of that Empire; who would immediately 

forsake the Big-Endian Heresy: 
He the said Flestrin, like a false Traitor
against his most Auspicious, Serene, Imperial
Majesty, did petition to be excused
from the said Service upon pretence of
unwillingness to force the Consciences,
or destroy the Liberties and Lives of an
innocent People. 
ARTICLE III.
That, whereas certain Embassadors
arrived from the Court of Blefuscu, to
sue for Peace in his Majesty's Court: 
He the said Flestrin did, like a false Traitor,
aid, abet, comfort, and divert the said
Embassadors, although he knew them to
be Servants to a Prince who was lately
an open Enemy to his Imperial Majesty,
and in open War against his said Majesty. 
ARTICLE IV.
That the said Quinbus Flestrin, contrary
to the Duty of a faithful Subject,
is now preparing to make a Voyage to the
Court and Empire of Blefuscu, for which 

he hath received only verbal Licence from
his Imperial Majesty; and under colour
of the said Licence doth falsly and traitorously
intend to take the said Voyage,
and thereby to aid, comfort, and abet the
Emperor of Blefuscu, so late an Enemy,
and in open War with his Imperial Majesty aforesaid. 
There are some other Articles, but
these are the most important, of which I
have read you an Abstract. 
In the several Debates upon this Impeachment,
it must be confessed that his
Majesty gave many marks of his great Lenity,
often urging the Services you had
done him, and endeavouring to extenuate
your Crimes. The Treasurer and Admiral
insisted that you should be put to the
most painful and ignominious Death, by
setting fire on your House at Night, and
the General was to attend with twenty
thousand Men armed with poisoned Arrows
to shoot you on the Face and Hands. 

Some of your Servants were to have private
Orders to strew a poisonous Juice on
your Shirts, which would soon make you
tear your own Flesh, and die in the utmost
Torture. The General came into
the same Opinion; so that for a long
time there was a Majority against you: 
But his Majesty resolving, if possible, to
spare your Life, at last brought off the
Chamberlain. 
Upon this Incident, Reldresal, Principal
Secretary for private Affairs, who
always approved himself your true Friend,
was commanded by the Emperor to deliver
his Opinion, which he accordingly
did: and therein justify'd the good
Thoughts you have of him. He allowed
your Crimes to be great, but that still
there was room for Mercy, the most commendable
Virtue in a Prince, and for
which his Majesty was so justly celebrated. 
He said, the Friendship between you and
him was so well known to the World,
that perhaps the most honourable Board 

might think him partial: However, in
obedience to the Command he had received,
he would freely offer his Sentiments. 
That if his Majesty, in consideration
of your Services, and pursuant to
his own merciful Disposition, would
please to spare your Life, and only give
order to put out both your Eyes, he humbly
conceived, that by this Expedient,
Justice might in some measure be satisfied,
and all the World would applaud
the Lenity of the Emperor, as well as the
fair and generous Proceedings of those
who have the Honour to be his Counsellors. 
That the loss of your Eyes
would be no Impediment to your bodily
Strength, by which you might still be useful
to his Majesty. That Blindness is an
addition to Courage, by concealing Dangers
from us; that the Fear you had for
your Eyes, was the greatest Difficulty in
bringing over the Enemy's Fleet, and it
would be sufficient for you to see by the
Eyes of the Ministers, since the greatest
Princes do no more. 

This Proposal was received with the
utmost Disapprobation by the whole
Board. Bolgolam, the Admiral, could
not preserve his Temper; but rising up in
Fury, said, he wondered how the Secretary
durst presume to give his Opinion for
preserving the Life of a Traytor: That
the Services you had performed, were, by
all true Reasons of State, the great Aggravation
of your Crimes; that you, who
were able to extinguish the Fire, by discharge
of Urine in her Majesty's Apartment
(which he mentioned with horror)
might, at another time, raise an Inundation
by the same means, to drown the
whole Palace; and the same Strength
which enabled you to bring over the Enemy's
Fleet, might serve, upon the first
Discontent to carry it back: That he had
good Reasons to think you were a Big-Endian
in your Heart; and as Treason
begins in the Heart before it appears in
Overt-Acts, so he accused you as a Traytor
on that account, and therefore insisted you
should be put to death. 

The Treasurer was of the same Opinion; 
he shewed to what streights his Majesty's
Revenue was reduced by the charge
of maintaining you, which would soon
grow insupportable: That the Secretary's
Expedient of putting out your Eyes was
so far from being a Remedy against this
Evil, it would probably increase it, as it
is manifest from the common practice of
blinding some kind of Fowl, after which
they fed the faster, and grew sooner fat: 
That his sacred Majesty, and the Council,
who are your Judges, were in their own
Consciences fully convinced of your
Guilt, which was a sufficient Argument
to condemn you to Death, without the
formal Proofs required by the strict Letter
of the Law. 
But his Imperial Majesty fully determined
against capital Punishment, was
graciously pleased to say, that since the
Council thought the loss of your Eyes
too easy a Censure, some other may be 

inflicted hereafter. And your Friend the
Secretary humbly desiring to be heard
again, in answer to what the Treasurer
had objected concerning the great Charge
his Majesty was at in maintaining you,
said, that his Excellency, who had the sole
disposal of the Emperor's Revenue, might
easily provide against that Evil, by gradually
lessening your Establishment; by which,
for want of sufficient Food, you would
grow weak and faint, and lose your Appetite,
and consequently decay and consume
in a few Months; neither would the
Stench of your Carcass be then so dangerous,
when it should become more
than half diminished; and immediately
upon your Death, five or six Thousand
of his Majesty's Subjects might, in two
or three days, cut your Flesh from your
Bones, take it away by Cart-loads, and
bury it in distant parts to prevent Infection,
leaving the Skeleton as a Monument
of Admiration to Posterity. 

Thus by the great Friendship of the
Secretary, the whole Affair was compromised. 
It was strictly enjoin'd, that the
Project of starving you by degrees should
be kept a Secret, but the Sentence of putting
out your Eyes was entered on the
Books; none dissenting except Bolgolam
the Admiral, who being a Creature of
the Empress, was perpetually instigated
by her Majesty to insist upon your Death,
she having born perpetual Malice against
you, on account of that infamous and
illegal Method you took to extinguish
the Fire in her Apartment. 
In three days your Friend the Secretary
will be directed to come to your
House, and read before you the Articles
of Impeachment; and then to signify the
great Lenity and Favour of his Majesty
and Council, whereby you are only condemned
to the loss of your Eyes, which
his Majesty doth not question you will
gratefully and humbly submit to; and 

twenty of his Majesty's Surgeons will attend,
in order to see the Operation well
performed, by discharging very sharp-pointed
Arrows into the Balls of your
Eyes, as you lie on the Ground. 
I leave to your Prudence what Measures
you will take; and to avoid Suspicion,
I must immediately return in as private
a manner as I came. 
His Lordship did so, and I remained
alone, under many Doubts and Perplexities
of Mind. 
It was a Custom introduced by this
Prince and his Ministry, (very different,
as I have been assured, from the Practices
of former Times) that after the Court had
decreed any cruel Execution, either to
gratify the Monarch's Resentment, or the
Malice of a Favourite, the Emperor made
a Speech to his whole Council, expressing
his great Lenity and Tenderness, as Qualities
known and confessed by all the 

World. This Speech was immediately
published through the Kingdom; nor
did any thing terrify the People so much
as those Encomiums on his Majesty's
Mercy; because it was observed, that the
more these Praises were enlarged and insisted
on, the more inhuman was the Punishment,
and the Sufferer more innocent. 
And as to myself, I must confess,
having never been designed for a Courtier
either by my Birth or Education, I was so
ill a Judge of Things, that I could not
discover the Lenity and Favour of this
Sentence, but conceived it (perhaps erroneously)
rather to be rigorous than gentle. 
I sometimes thought of standing my
Tryal, for although I could not deny the
Facts alledged in the several Articles, yet
I hoped they would admit of some Extenuations. 
But having in my Life perused
many State-Tryals, which I ever observed
to terminate as the Judges thought fit to
direct, I durst not rely on so dangerous
a Decision, in so critical a Juncture, and
against such powerful Enemies. Once I 

was strongly bent upon Resistance, for
while I had Liberty, the whole Strength
of that Empire could hardly subdue me,
and I might easily with Stones pelt the Metropolis
to pieces; but I soon rejected that
Project with Horror, by remembring the
Oath I had made to the Emperor, the Favours
I received from him, and the high
Title of Nardac he conferred upon me. 
Neither had I so soon learned the Gratitude
of Courtiers, to persuade myself
that his Majesty's present Severities acquitted
me of all past Obligations. 
At last I fixed upon a Resolution, for
which it is probable I may incur some
Censure, and not unjustly; for I confess
I owe the preserving mine Eyes, and consequently
my Liberty, to my own great
Rashness and want of Experience: because
if I had then known the Nature of
Princes and Ministers, which I have since
observed in many other Courts, and their
Methods of treating Criminals less obnoxious
than myself, I should with great 

alacrity and readiness have submitted to so
easy a Punishment. But hurry'd on by
the Precipitancy of Youth, and having
his Imperial Majesty's Licence to pay my
Attendance upon the Emperor of Blefuscu,
I took this Opportunity, before the
three Days were elapsed, to send a Letter
to my Friend the Secretary, signifying my
Resolution of setting out that Morning
for Blefuscu pursuant to the leave I had
got; and without waiting for an Answer,
I went to that side of the Island where
our Fleet lay. I seized a large Man of
War, ty'd a Cable to the Prow, and lifting
up the Anchors, I stript myself, put
my Cloaths (together with my Coverlet,
which I brought under my Arm) into the
Vessel, and drawing it after me between
wading and swimming, arrived at the
Royal Port of Blefuscu, where the People
had long expected me; they lent me two
Guides to direct me to the Capital City,
which is of the same Name. I held them
in my Hands till I came within two hundred
Yards of the Gate, and desired them to 

signify my Arrival to one of the Secretarys,
and let him know, I there waited
his Majesty's Command. I had an Answer
in about an Hour, that his Majesty,
attended by the Royal Family, and great
Officers of the Court, was coming out to
receive me. I advanced a Hundred Yards. 
The Emperor, and his Train, alighted
from their Horses, the Empress and Ladies
from their Coaches, and I did not perceive
they were in any Fright or Concern. 
I lay on the Ground to kiss his Majesty's
and the Empress's Hand. I told his Majesty
that I was come according to my Promise,
and with the Licence of the Emperor
my Master, to have the Honour of
seeing so Mighty a Monarch, and to offer
him any Service in my power, consistent
with my Duty to my own Prince; not
mentioning a Word of my Disgrace, because
I had hitherto no regular Information
of it, and might suppose myself
wholly ignorant of any such Design; 
neither could I reasonably conceive that
the Emperor would discover the Secret 

while I was out of his power: wherein,
however, it soon appeared I was deceived. 
I shall not trouble the Reader with the
particular Account of my Reception at
this Court, which was suitable to the
Generosity of so great a Prince; nor of
the Difficulties I was in for want of a
House and Bed, being forced to lie on the
Ground, wrapt up in my Coverlet. 





The Author, by a lucky Accident, finds
means to leave Blefuscu; and, after
some Difficulties, returns safe to his
Native Country. 
Three Days after my Arrival,
walking out of Curiosity to the
North-East Coast of the Island, I
observed, about half a League off, in the
Sea, somewhat that looked like a Boat
overturned. I pulled off my Shoes and
Stockings, and wading two or three Hundred
Yards, I found the Object to approach
nearer by force of the Tide; and then
plainly saw it to be a real Boat, which I
supposed might, by some Tempest, have
been driven from a Ship: whereupon I returned
immediately towards the City, and 

desired his Imperial Majesty to lend me
twenty of the tallest Vessels he had left after
the Loss of his Fleet, and three thousand
Seamen under the Command of the
Vice-Admiral. This Fleet sailed round,
while I went back the shortest way to the
Coast where I first discovered the Boat; I
found the Tide had driven it still nearer. 
The Seamen were all provided with Cordage,
which I had beforehand twisted to a
sufficient strength. When the Ships came
up, I stript my self, and waded till I came
within an hundred Yards of the Boat, after
which I was forced to swim till I got
up to it. The Seamen threw me the end
of the Cord, which I fastned to a Hole in
the fore-part of the Boat, and the other
end to a Man of War: But I found all my
Labour to little purpose; for being out of
my depth, I was not able to work. In
this Necessity, I was forced to swim behind,
and push the Boat forwards as often as I
could, with one of my Hands; and the
Tide favouring me, I advanced so far, that
I could just hold up my Chin and feel the 

Ground. I rested two or three Minutes,
and then gave the Boat another Shove,
and so on till the Sea was no higher than
my Arm-pits; and now the most laborious
part being over, I took out my other Cables
which were stowed in one of the
Ships, and fastening them first to the Boat,
and then to nine of the Vessels which attended
me; the Wind being favourable
the Sea-men towed, and I shoved till we
arrived within forty Yards of the Shore,
and waiting till the Tide was out, I got
dry to the Boat, and by the assistance of
two thousand Men, with Ropes and Engines,
I made a shift to turn it on its
Bottom, and found it was but little damaged. 
I shall not trouble the Reader with the
Difficulties I was under by the help of
certain Paddles, which cost me ten days
making, to get my Boat to the Royal
Port of Blefuscu, where a mighty concourse
of People appeared upon my arrival,
full of Wonder at the sight of so 

prodigious a Vessel. I told the Emperor
that my good Fortune had thrown this
Boat in my way, to carry me to some
place from whence I might return into
my native Country, and begged his Majesty's
Orders for getting Materials to fit it
up, together with his Licence to depart,
which, after some kind Expostulations,
he was pleased to grant. 
I did very much wonder, in all this
time, not to have heard of any Express
relating to me from our Emperor to the
Court of Blefuscu. But I was afterwards
given privately to understand, that
his Imperial Majesty, never imagining I
had the least notice of his Designs, believed
I was only gone to Blefuscu in
performance of my Promise, according
to the Licence he had given me, which
was well known at our Court, and would
return in a few days when that Ceremony
was ended. But he was at last in pain at
my long absence; and, after consulting
with the Treasurer, and the rest of that 

Cabal, a Person of Quality was dispatched
with the Copy of the Articles against me. 
This Envoy had Instructions to represent
to the Monarch of Blefuscu, the great
Lenity of his Master, who was content
to punish me no further than with the loss
of mine Eyes; that I had fled from Justice,
and if I did not return in two Hours, I
should be deprived of my Title of Nardac,
and declared a Traitor. The Envoy
further added, that in order to maintain
the Peace and Amity between both Empires,
his Master expected, that his Brother
of Blefuscu would give Orders to have
me sent back to Lilliput, bound Hand
and Foot, to be punished as a Traitor. 
The Emperor of Blefuscu having taken
three Days to consult, returned an
Answer, consisting of many Civilities and
Excuses. He said, that as for sending
me bound, his Brother knew it was impossible; 
that although I had deprived
him of his Fleet, yet he owed great Obligations
to me for many good Offices I 

had done him in making the Peace. That
however both their Majesties would soon
be made easy; for I had found a prodigious
Vessel on the Shore, able to carry me
on the Sea, which he had given order to
fit up with my own Assistance and Direction; 
and he hoped in a few Weeks
both Empires would be freed from so insupportable
an Incumbrance. 
With this Answer the Envoy returned
to Lilliput, and the Monarch of
Blefuscu related to me all that had past; 
offering me at the same time (but under
the strictest Confidence) his gracious
Protection, if I would continue in his
Service; wherein although I believed him
sincere, yet I resolved never more to put
any Confidence in Princes or Ministers,
where I could possibly avoid it; and
therefore, with all due Acknowledgments
for his favourable Intentions, I humbly
begged to be excused. I told him, that
since Fortune, whether good or evil, had
thrown a Vessel in my way, I was resolved 

to venture myself in the Ocean,
rather than be an occasion of Difference
between two such mighty Monarchs. 
Neither did I find the Emperor at all
displeased; and I discover'd by a certain
Accident, that he was very glad of my
Resolution, and so were most of his Ministers. 
These Considerations moved me to
hasten my Departure somewhat sooner
than I intended; to which the Court, impatient
to have me gone, very readily
contributed. Five Hundred Workmen
were employed to make two Sails to
my Boat, according to my Directions, by
quilting thirteen fold of their strongest
Linnen together. I was at the pains of
making Ropes and Cables, by twisting
ten, twenty or thirty of the thickest and
strongest of theirs. A great Stone that
I happen'd to find, after a long Search by
the Sea-shore, served me for an Anchor. 
I had the Tallow of three hundred Cows
for greasing my Boat, and other Uses. 

I was at incredible pains in cutting down
some of the largest Timber-Trees for Oars
and Masts, wherein I was, however, much
assisted by his Majesty's Ship-Carpenters,
who helped me in smoothing them, after
I had done the rough Work. 
In about a Month, when all was prepared,
I sent to receive his Majesty's Commands,
and to take my leave. The Emperor
and Royal Family came out of the
Palace; I lay down on my Face to kiss
his Hand, which he very graciously gave
me; so did the Empress, and young
Princes of the Blood. His Majesty presented
me with fifty Purses of two hundred
Sprugs a-piece, together with his
Picture at full length, which I put immediately
into one of my Gloves, to keep it
from being hurt. The Ceremonies at my
Departure were too many to trouble the
Reader with at this time. 
I stored the Boat with the Carcasses of
an hundred Oxen, and three hundred 

Sheep, with Bread and Drink proportionable,
and as much Meat ready dressed
as four hundred Cooks could provide. 
I took with me six Cows and two
Bulls alive, with as many Ewes and Rams,
intending to carry them into my own
Country, and propagate the Breed. And
to feed them on board, I had a good Bundle
of Hay, and a Bag of Corn. I would
gladly have taken a Dozen of the Natives,
but this was a thing the Emperor would
by no means permit; and besides a diligent
Search into my Pockets, his Majesty
engaged my Honour not to carry away
any of his Subjects, although with their
own Consent and Desire. 
Having thus prepared all things as
well as I was able, I set sail on the twenty-fourth
Day of September 1701, at six
in the Morning; and when I had gone
about four Leagues to the Northward, the
Wind being at South-East, at six in the
Evening, I descryed a small Island about
half a League to the North-West. I advanced 

forward, and cast Anchor on the
Lee-side of the Island, which seemed to
be uninhabited. I then took some Refreshment,
and went to my rest. I slept well,
and I conjecture at least six Hours, for I
found the Day broke in two Hours after I
awaked. It was a clear Night. I eat my
Breakfast before the Sun was up; and
heaving Anchor, the Wind being favourable,
I steered the same Course that I had
done the Day before, wherein I was directed
by my Pocket-Compass. My Intention
was to reach, if possible, one of
those Islands, which I had reason to believe
lay to the North-East of Van Diemen's
Land. I discovered nothing all that
Day; but upon the next, about three in
the Afternoon, when I had by my Computation
made twenty-four Leagues from
Blefuscu, I descryed a Sail steering to the
South-East; my Course was due East. I
hailed her, but could get no Answer; yet
I found I gained upon her, for the Wind
slackned. I made all the sail I could,
and in half an hour she spyed me, then 

hung out her Antient, and discharged a
Gun. It is not easy to express the Joy I
was in upon the unexpected hope of once
more seeing my beloved Country, and
the dear Pledges I left in it. The Ship
slackned her Sails, and I came up with
her between five and six in the Evening,
September 26; but my Heart leapt within
me to see her English Colours. I
put my Cows and Sheep into my Coat-Pockets,
and got on board with all my
little Cargo of Provisions. The Vessel
was an English Merchant-Man, returning
from Japan by the North and South-Seas; 
the Captain, Mr. John Biddel of
Deptford, a very civil Man, and an excellent
Sailor. We were now in the
Latitude of 30 Degrees South, there were
about fifty Men in the Ship; and here I
met an old Comrade of mine, one Peter
Williams, who gave me a good Character
to the Captain. This Gentleman
treated me with Kindness, and desired I
would let him know what place I came
from last, and whither I was bound; 

which I did in few Words, but he thought
I was raving, and that the Dangers I underwent
had disturbed my Head; whereupon
I took my black Cattle and Sheep
out of my Pocket, which, after great
Astonishment, clearly convinced him of
my Veracity. I then shewed him the
Gold given me by the Emperor of Lilliput,
together with his Majesty's Picture
at full length, and some other Rarities
of that Country. I gave him two Purses
of two hundred Sprugs each, and promised,
when we arrived in England, to
make him a Present of a Cow and a
Sheep big with Young. 
I shall not trouble the Reader with a
particular Account of this Voyage, which
was very prosperous for the most part. 
We arrived in the Downs on the 13th
of April 1702. I had only one Misfortune,
that the Rats on board carried away
one of my Sheep; I found her
Bones in a Hole, picked clean from the 

Flesh. The rest of my Cattle I got safe
on shore, and set them a grazing in a
Bowling-Green at Greenwich, where the
Fineness of the Grass made them feed
very heartily, though I had always feared
the contrary: neither could I possibly
have preserved them in so long a Voyage,
if the Captain had not allowed me some
of his best Bisket, which rubbed to Powder,
and mingled with Water, was their
constant Food. The short time I continued
in England, I made a considerable
Profit by shewing my Cattle to
many Persons of Quality, and others:
and before I began my second Voyage,
I sold them for six hundred Pounds. 
Since my last return, I find the Breed
is considerably increased, especially the
Sheep; which I hope will prove much
to the Advantage of the Woollen Manufacture,
by the Fineness of the Fleeces. 

I stayed but two Months with my
Wife and Family; for my insatiable Desire
of seeing foreign Countries would
suffer me to continue no longer. I left
fifteen hundred Pounds with my Wife,
and fixed her in a good House at Redriff. 
My remaining Stock I carried
with me, part in Money, and part in
Goods, in hopes to improve my Fortunes. 
My eldest Uncle John had left
me an Estate in Land, near Epping, of
about Thirty Pounds a Year; and I had
a long Lease of the Black-Bull in Fetter-Lane,
which yielded me as much
more: so that I was not in any danger
of leaving my Family upon the Parish. 
My Son Johnny, named so after his
Uncle, was at the Grammar School, and
a towardly Child. My Daughter Betty
(who is now well married, and has Children)
was then at her Needle-Work. 
I took leave of my Wife, and Boy and
Girl, with Tears on both sides, and went 

on board the Adventure, a Merchant-Ship
of three hundred Tons, bound for
Surat, Captain John Nicholas of Leverpool
Commander. But my Account
of this Voyage must be referred to the
Second Part of my Travels. 
The End of the First Part.