



The Author relateth several Particulars of the Yahoos. The great Virtues of the Houyhnhnms. The Education and Exercise of their Youth. Their general Assembly. 

As I ought to have understood human
Nature much better than I supposed
it possible for my Master to do, so it
was easy to apply the Character he
gave of the Yahoos to myself and my
Countrymen; and I believed I could yet make farther
Discoveries from my own Observation. I
therefore often begged his Honour to let me go
among the Herds of Yahoos in the Neighbourhood; 
to which he always very graciously consented, being
perfectly convinced that the Hatred I bore those
Brutes would never suffer me to be corrupted by
them; and his Honour ordered one of his Servants,
a strong Sorrel Nag, very honest and good-natured,
to be my Guard; without whose Protection I durst 

not undertake such Adventures. For I have already
told the Reader how much I was pestered by those
odious Animals upon my first Arrival. I afterwards
failed very narrowly three or four times of
falling into their Clutches, when I happened to
stray at any Distance without my Hanger. And I
have Reason to believe, they had some Imagination
that I was of their own Species, which I often
assisted myself, by stripping up my Sleeves, and
shewing my naked Arms and Breast in their Sight,
when my Protector was with me: At which times
they would approach as near as they durst, and
imitate my Actions after the Manner of Monkeys,
but ever with great Signs of Hatred; as a tame
Jack Daw with Cap and Stockings, is always persecuted
by the wild ones, when he happens to be got
among them. 
They are prodigiously nimble from their Infancy; 
however, I once caught a young Male of three
Years old, and endeavoured by all Marks of Tenderness
to make it quiet; but the little Imp fell a
squalling, and scratching, and biting with such
Violence, that I was forced to let it go; and it was
high time, for a whole Troop of old ones came
about us at the Noise; but finding the Cub was
safe, (for away it ran) and my Sorrel Nag being
by, they durst not venture near us. I observed the
young Animal's Flesh to smell very rank, and the
Stink was somewhat between a Weasel and a Fox,
but much more disagreeable. I forgot another Circumstance,
(and perhaps I might have the Reader's
Pardon, if it were wholly omitted) that while I
held the odious Vermin in my Hands, it voided its
filthy Excrements of a yellow liquid Substance, all 

over my Cloaths; but by good Fortune there was a
small Brook hard by, where I washed myself as
clean as I could; although I durst not come into
my Master's Presence, until I were sufficiently
aired. 
By what I could discover, the Yahoos appear to
be the most unteachable of all Animals, their Capacities
never reaching higher than to draw or carry
Burthens. Yet I am of Opinion, this Defect
ariseth chiefly from a perverse, restive Disposition. 
For they are cunning, malicious, treacherous and
revengeful. They are strong and hardy, but of a
cowardly Spirit, and by Consequence insolent, abject,
and cruel. It is observed, that the Red-haired
of both Sexes are more libidinous and mischievous
than the rest, whom yet they much exceed in
Strength and Activity. 
The Houyhnhnms keep the Yahoos for present
Use in Huts not far from the House; but the rest
are sent abroad to certain Fields, where they dig up
Roots, eat several Kinds of Herbs, and search about
for Carrion, or sometimes catch Weasels and Luhimuhs
(a Sort of wild Rat) which they greedily
devour. Nature hath taught them to dig deep
Holes with their Nails on the Side of a rising
Ground, wherein they lie by themselves; only the
Kennels of the Females are larger, sufficient to
hold two or three Cubs. 
They swim from their Infancy like Frogs, and
are able to continue long under Water, where they
often take Fish, which the Females carry home to
their Young. And upon this Occasion, I hope the
the Reader will pardon my relating an odd Adventure. 

Being one Day abroad with my Protector the
Sorrel Nag, and the Weather exceeding hot, I entreated
him to let me bathe in a River that was
near. He consented, and I immediately stripped
myself stark naked, and went down softly into the
Stream. It happened that a young Female Yahoo
standing behind a Bank, saw the whole Proceeding; 
and inflamed by Desire, as the Nag and I conjectured,
came running with all Speed, and leaped
into the Water within five Yards of the Place where
I bathed. I was never in my Life so terribly frighted; 
the Nag was grazing at some Distance, not
suspecting any Harm: She embraced me after a
most fulsome Manner; I roared as loud as I could,
and the Nag came galloping towards me, whereupon
she quitted her Grasp, with the utmost Reluctancy,
and leaped upon the opposite Bank,
where she stood gazing and howling all the time I
was putting on my Cloaths. 
This was Matter of Diversion to my Master
and his Family, as well as of Mortification to my
self. For now I could no longer deny, that I was
a real Yahoo, in every Limb and Feature, since the
Females had a natural Propensity to me as one of
their own Species: Neither was the Hair of this
Brute of a Red Colour, (which might have been
some Excuse for an Appetite a little irregular) but
black as a Sloe, and her Countenance did not make
an Appearance altogether so hideous as the rest of
the Kind; for, I think, she could not be above
Eleven Years old. 
Having already lived three Years in this Country,
the Reader I suppose will expect, that I should, 

like other Travellers, give him some Account of
the Manners and Customs of its Inhabitants,
which it was indeed my principal Study to learn. 
As these noble Houyhnhnms are endowed by
Nature with a general Disposition to all Virtues,
and have no Conceptions or Ideas of what is evil
in a rational Creature; so their grand Maxim is, to
cultivate Reason, and to be wholly governed by
it. Neither is Reason among them a Point problematical
as with us, where Men can argue with
Plausibility on both Sides of a Question; but strikes
you with immediate Conviction; as it must needs
do where it is not mingled, obscured, or discoloured
by Passion and Interest. I remember it was with
extreme Difficulty that I could bring my Master to
understand the Meaning of the Word Opinion, or
how a Point could be disputable; because Reason
taught us to affirm or deny only where we are certain; 
and beyond our Knowledge we cannot do
either. So that Controversies, Wranglings, Disputes,
and Positiveness in false or dubious Propositions,
are Evils unknown among the Houyhnhnms. 
In the like Manner when I used to explain to him
our several Systems of Natural Philosophy, he
would laugh that a Creature pretending to Reason,
should value itself upon the Knowledge of other
Peoples Conjectures, and in Things, where that
Knowledge, if it were certain, could be of no Use. 
Wherein he agreed entirely with the Sentiments
of Socrates, as Plato delivers them; which I mention
as the highest Honour I can do that Prince of
Philosophers. I have often since reflected what
Destruction such a Doctrine would make in the
Libraries of Europe; and how many Paths to 

Fame would be then shut up in the Learned
World. 
Friendship and Benevolence are the two principal
Virtues among the Houyhnhnms; and these not
confined to particular Objects, but universal to the
whole Race. For, a Stranger from the remotest
Part, is equally treated with the nearest Neighbour,
and where-ever he goes, looks upon himself as at
home. They preserve Decency and Civility in the
highest Degrees, but are altogether ignorant of Ceremony. 
They have no Fondness for their Colts or
Foles; but the Care they take in educating them
proceedeth entirely from the Dictates of Reason. 
And, I observed my Master to shew the same Affection
to his Neighbour's Issue that he had for his
own. They will have it that Nature teaches them
to love the whole Species, and it is Reason only
that maketh a Distinction of Persons, where there
is a superior Degree of Virtue. 
When the Matron Houyhnhnms have produced
one of each Sex, they no longer accompany with
their Consorts, except they lose one of their Issue
by some Casualty, which very seldom happens:
But in such a Case they meet again; or when the
like Accident befalls a Person, whose Wife is past
bearing, some other Couple bestows on him one
of their own Colts, and then go together a second
Time, until the Mother be pregnant. This Caution
is necessary to prevent the Country from being
overburthened with Numbers. But the Race of
inferior Houyhnhnms bred up to be Servants is not
so strictly limited upon this Article; these are allowed
to produce three of each Sex, to be Domemesticks
in the Noble Families. 

In their Marriages they are exactly careful to
chuse such Colours as will not make any disagreeable
Mixture in the Breed. Strength is chiefly
valued in the Male, and Comeliness in the Female; 
not upon the Account of Love, but to preserve
the Race from degenerating: For, where a
Female happens to excel in Strength, a Consort is
chosen with regard to Comeliness. Courtship, Love,
Presents, Joyntures, Settlements, have no Place in
their Thoughts; or Terms whereby to express them
in their Language. The young Couple meet and
are joined, merely because it is the Determination
of their Parents and Friends: It is what they see
done every Day; and they look upon it as one of
the necessary Actions in a reasonable Being. But
the Violation of Marriage, or any other Unchastity,
was never heard of: And the married Pair pass
their Lives with the same Friendship, and mutual
Benevolence that they bear to all others of the same
Species, who come in their Way; without Jealousy,
Fondness, Quarrelling, or Discontent. 
In educating the Youth of both Sexes, their Method
is admirable, and highly deserveth our Imitation. 
These are not suffered to taste a Grain of Oats, except
upon certain Days, till Eighteen Years old; 
nor Milk, but very rarely; and in Summer they
graze two Hours in the Morning, and as many in
the Evening, which their Parents likewise observe; 
but the Servants are not allowed above half that
Time; and a great Part of the Grass is brought home,
which they eat at the most convenient Hours, when
they can be best spared from Work. 
Temperance, Industry, Exercise and Cleanliness,
are the Lessons equally enjoyned to the young ones 

of both Sexes: And my Master thought it monstrous
in us to give the Females a different Kind of
Education from the Males, except in some Articles
of Domestick Management; whereby, as he truly
observed, one Half of our Natives were good for
nothing but bringing Children into the World:
And to trust the Care of their Children to such useless
Animals, he said was yet a greater Instance of
Brutality. 
But the Houyhnhnms train up their Youth to
Strength, Speed, and Hardiness, by exercising them
in running Races up and down steep Hills, or
over hard stony Grounds; and when they are all in
a Sweat, they are ordered to leap over Head and
Ears into a Pond or a River. Four times a Year the
Youth of certain Districts meet to shew the Proficiency
in Running, and Leaping, and other Feats
of Strength or Agility; where the Victor is rewarded
with a Song made in his or her Praise. 
On this Festival the Servants drive a Herd of
Yahoos into the Field, laden with Hay, and
Oats, and Milk for a Repast to the Houyhnhnms;
after which, these Brutes are immediately driven
back again, for fear of being noisome to the Assembly. 
Every fourth Year, at the Vernal Equinox, there
is a Representative Council of the whole Nation,
which meets in a Plain about twenty Miles from our
House, and continueth about five or six Days. 
Here they inquire into the State and Condition of the
several Districts; whether they abound or be deficient
in Hay or Oats, or Cows or Yahoos? And
where-ever there is any Want (which is but seldom) 

it is immediately supplied by unanimous Consent
and Contribution. Here likewise the Regulation of
Children is settled: As for instance, if a Houyhnhnm
hath two Males, he changeth one of them with
another who hath two Females: And when a Child
hath been lost by any Casualty, where the Mother
is past Breeding, it is determined what Family shall
breed another to supply the Loss. 
