
Courteous Companions, sometime
since, to tell you my
Dream that I had of Christian
the Pilgrim, and of his
dangerous Journey toward
the Celestial Countrey; was pleasant to
me, and profitable to you. I told you
then also what I saw concerning his Wife
and Children, and how unwilling they
were to go with him on Pilgrimage: Insomuch
that he was forced to go on
his Progress without them, for he durst
not run the danger of that destruction
which he feared would come by staying
with them, in the City of Destruction:
Wherefore as I then shewed you, he left
them and departed.
Now it hath so happened, thorough
the Multiplicity of Business, that I have
been much hindred, and kept back

from my wonted Travels into those
Parts whence he went, and so could
not till now obtain an opportunity to
make further enquiry after whom he
left behind, that I might give you an
account of them. But having had some
concerns that way of late, I went down
again thitherward. Now having taken
up my Lodgings in a Wood about a mile
off the place, as I slept I dreamed
again.
And as I was in my Dream, behold,
an aged Gentleman came by where I
lay; and because he was to go some
part of the way that I was travelling,
me thought I got up and went with
him. So as we walked, and as Travellers
usually to do, I was as if we fell into
discourse, and our talk happened to be
about Christian and his Travels: For
thus I began with the Old-man.
Sir, said I, what Town is that there
below, that lieth on the left hand of our
way?
Then said Mr. Segasity, for that was
his name, It is the City of Destruction,
a populous place, but possessed with a
very ill conditioned, and idle sort of
People.
I thought that was that City, quoth I
I went once my self through that Town, and
therefore know that this report you give of it,
is true.
Sag. Too true, I wish I could speak
truth in speaking better of them that
dwell therein.

Well Sir, quoth I, Then I perceive you
to be a well meaning man: and so one that
takes pleasure to hear and tell of that which
is good; pray did you never hear what happened
to a man sometime ago in this Town
(whose name was Christian) that went on
Pilgrimage up towards the higher Regions?
Sag. Hear of him! Ay, and I also
heard of the Molestations, Troubles,
Wars, Captivities, Cries, Groans,
Frights and Fears that he met with,
and had in his Journey. Besides, I must
tell you, all our Countrey rings of him,
there are but few Houses that have
heard of him and his doings, but have
sought after and got the Records of his
Pilgrimage; yea, I think I may say,
that that his hazzardous Journey,Christians are well spoken of when gone: tho' called Fools while they are here. has
got a many wel-wishers to his ways:
For though when he was here, he was
Fool in every mans mouth, yet now he
is gon, he is highly commended of all.
For 'tis said he lives bravely where he
is: Yea many of them that are resolved
never to run his hazzards, yet have
their mouths water at his gains.
They may, quoth I well think, if they think
any thing that is true, that he liveth well
where he is, for he now lives at and in the
Fountain of Life, and has what he has
without labour and sorrow, for there is no
grief mixed therewith.
Sag. Talk!  The People talk strangely
about him. Some say that he now
walks in White, that he has a Chain of

Gold about his Neck, that he has a
Crown of Gold, beset with Pearls upon
his head: Others say that the shining
ones that sometimes shewed themselves
to him in his Journey, are become
his Companions, and that he is as familiar
with them in the place where
he is, as here one Neighbour is with
another. Besides, 'tis confidently affirmed
concerning him,  that the King of
the place where he is, has bestowed upon
him already, a very rich and pleasant
Dwelling at Court,  and that he
every day eateth and drinketh, and
walketh, and talketh with him, and receiveth
of the smiles and favours of him
that is Judg of all there. Moreover, it
is expected of some that his Prince, the
Lord of that Countrey, will shortly
come into these parts, and will know
the reason,  if they can give any, why
his Neighbours set so little by him, and
had him so much in derision when
they perceived that he would be a Pilgrim.
For they say, that now he is
so in the affections of his Prince, and
that his Soveraign is so much concerned
with the Indignities that was cast upon
Christian when he became a Pilgrim,
that he will look upon all as if done unto
himself; and no marvel, for 'twas for
the love that he had to his Prince,  that
he ventured as he did.

I dare say, quoth I, I am glad on't. I
am glad for the poor mans sake,  for that now
he has rest from his labour, and for that he
now reapeth the benefit of his Tears with
joy:  and for that he is got beyond the Gunshot
of his Enemies, and is out of the reach
of them that hate him. I also am glad for
that a Rumour of these things is noised abroad
in this Countrey: Who can tell but that it
may work some good effect on some that are
left behind? But, pray Sir, while it is fresh
in my mind, do you hear anything of his Wife
and Children? poor beasts, I wonder in
my mind what they do.
Sag. Who! Christiana, and her Sons!
They are like to do as well as did Christian
himself, for though they all plaid
the Fool at the first, and would by no
means be perswaded by either the tears
or entreaties of Christian, yet second
thoughts have wrought wonderfully with
them, so they have packt up and are also
gone after him.
Better, and better, quoth I. But what!
Wife and Children and all?
Sag. 'Tis true, I can give you an account
of the matter, for I was upon the
spot at the instant, and was throughly acquainted
with the whole affair.
Then, said I, a man it seems may report it
for a truth?
Sag. You need not fear to affirm it,
I mean that they are all gon on Pilgrimage,
both the good Woman and her
four Boys. And being we are, as I
perceive, going some considerable way

together, I will give you an account of
the whole of the matter.
This Christiana (for that was her
name from the day that she with her
Children betook themselves to a Pilgrims
Life,) after her Husband was
gone over the River,  and she could hear
of him no more, her thoughts began to
work in her mind; First, for that she
had lost her Husband, and for that the
loving bond of that Relation was utterly
broken betwixt them. For you
know, said he to me, nature can do no
less but entertain the living with many
a heavy Cogitation in the remembrance
of the loss of loving Relations. This
therefore of her Husband did cost her
many a Tear. But this was not all,
for Christiana did also begin to consider
with her self,Mark this you that are Churles to your godly Relations. whether her unbecoming
behaviour towards her Husband, was
not one cause that she saw him no more,
and that in such sort he was taken
a way from her. And upon this, came
into her mind by swarms, all her unkind,
unnatural, and ungodly Carriages
to her dear Friend: Which also clogged
her Conscience, and did load her
with guilt. She was moreover much
broken with recalling to remembrance
the restless Groans, brinish Tears and
self-bemoanings of her Husband, and
how she did harden her heart against all
his entreaties, and loving perswasions
(of her and her Sons) to go with him,
yea, there was not any thing that Christian

either said to her, or did before
her, all the while that his burden did
hang on his back, but it returned upon
her like a flash of lightning, and rent the
Caul of her Heart in sunder.  Specially
that bitter out-cry of his, What shall I
do to be saved, did ring in her ears most
dolefully.
Then said she to her Children, Sons,
we are all undone. I have sinned away
your Father, and he is gone; he
would have had us with him; but I
would not go my self, I also have
hindred you of Life. With that the
Boys fell all into Tears, and cryed out
to go after their Father. Oh! Said
Christiana, that it had been but our lot
to go with him, then had it fared
well with us beyond what 'tis like to
do now, For tho' I formerly foolishly
imagin'd concerning the Troubles of
your Father, that they proceeded of a
foolish fancy that he had, or for that
he was over run with Melancholy Humours;
yet now 'twill not out of my
mind, but that they sprang from another
cause, to wit, for that the Light
of Light was given him,  by the help
of which, as I perceive, he has escaped
the Snares of Death. Then they all
wept again, and cryed out: Oh, Wo,
worth the day.
The next night Christiana had a
Dream,Christiana's Dream. and behold she saw as if a
broad Parchment was opened before her
in which were recorded the sum of her

ways, and the times, as she thought,
look't very black upon her.  Then she
cryed out aloud in her sleep, Lord have
mercy upon me a Sinner, and the little
Children heard her.
After this she thought she saw two
very ill favoured ones standing by her
Bed-side, and saying, What shall we do
with this Woman? For she cryes out for
Mercy waking and sleeping: If she be
suffered to go on as she begins, we shall
lose her as we have lost her Husband.
Wherefore we must by one way or
other, seek to take her off from the
thoughts of what shall be hereafter:
else all the World cannot help it, but she
will become a Pilgrim.
Now she awoke in a great Sweat,
also a trembling was upon her, but after
a while she fell to sleeping again. And
then she thought she saw Christian her
Husband in a place of Bliss among many
Immortals, with an Harp in his Hand,
Standing and playing upon it before one
that sate on a Throne with a Rainbow
about his Head. She saw also as if he
bowed his Head with his Face to the
Pav'd-work that was under the Princes
Feet, saying, I heartily thank my Lord
and King for bringing of me into this Place.
Then shooted a company of them that
stood round about,  and harped with their
Harps: but no man living could tell
what they said, but Christian and his
Companions.

Next Morning when she was up, had
prayed to God, and talked with her
Children a while, one knocked hard
at the door; to whom she spake out
saying, If thou comest in Gods name, come
in. So he said Amen, and opened the
Door, and saluted her with Peace be to
this House. The which when he had
done, he said, Christiana, knowest thou
wherefore I am come? Then she
blush't and trembled, also her Heart
began to wax warm with desires to
know whence he came, and what was
his Errand to her. So he said unto
her; my name is Secret, I dwell with
those that are high. It is talked of
where I dwell, as if thou had'st a desire
to go thither: also there is a report
that thou art aware of the evil
thou hast formerly done to thy Husband
in hardening of thy Heart against his
way, and in keeping of these thy Babes
in their Ignorance. Christiana, the
merciful one has sent me to tell thee
that he is a God ready to forgive, and
that he taketh delight to multiply to
pardon offences. He also would have
thee know that he inviteth thee to
come into his presence, to his Table,
and that he will feed thee with the
Fat of his House, and with the Heritage
of Jacob thy Father.

There is Christian thy Husband, that
was, with Legions more his Companions,
ever beholding that face that doth
minister Life to beholders: and they
will all be glad when they shall hear
the sound of thy feet step over thy Fathers
Threshold.
Christiana at this was greatly abashed
in her self, and bowing her head to
the ground, this Visitor proceeded and
said, Christiana! Here is also a Letter
for thee which I have brought from thy
Husbands King. So she took it and
opened it, but it smelt after the manner
of the best Perfume,  also it was
Written in Letters of Gold. The Contents
of the Letter was, That the King
would have her do as did Christian her
Husband; For that was the way to come
to his City, and to dwell in his Presence
with Joy, forever. At this the good Woman
was quite overcome: So she cryed out
to her Visitor. Sir, will you carry me and
my Children with you, that we also may go
and Worship this King?
Then said the Visitor, Christiana!
The bitter is before the sweet: Thou must
through Troubles, as did he that went
before thee, enter this Celestial City.
Wherefore I advise thee; to do as did
Christian thy Husband: go to the Wicket
Gate yonder, over the Plain, for
that stands in the head of the way up
which thou must go, and I wish thee
all good speed. Also I advise that thou
put this Letter in thy Bosome. That

thou read therein to thy self and to thy
Children, until you have got it by
root-of-Heart. For it is one of the
Songs that thou must Sing while thou
art in this House of thy Pilgrimage.
Also this thou must deliver in at the
further Gate. 
Now I saw in my Dream that this
Old Gentleman, as he told me this
Story, did himself seem to be greatly
affected therewith. He moreover proceeded
and said, So Christiana called
her Sons together, and began thus to
Address her self unto them. My Sons,
I have as you may perceive, been of
late under much exercise in my Soul
about the Death of your Father; not
for that I doubt at all of his Happiness:
For I am satisfied now that he is well.
I have also been much affected with the
thoughts of mine own State and yours,
which I verily believe is by nature miserable:
My Carriages also to your Father
in his distress, is a great load to
my Conscience. For, I hardened both
mine own heart and yours against him,
and refused to go with him on Pilgrimage.
The thoughts of these things would
now kill me out-right; but that for a
Dream which I had last night, and but
that for the incouragement that this
Stranger has given me this Morning.
Come my Children, let us pack up,
and be gon to the Gate that leads to the
Celestial Countrey, that we may see

your Father, and be with him, and his
Companions in Peace according to the
Laws of tha Land.
Then did her Children burst out into
Tears for Joy that the Heart of their
Mother was so inclined: So their Visitor
bid them farewel: and they began
to prepare to set out for their Journey.
But while they were thus about to
be gon, two of the Women that were
Christianas Neighbours, came up to her
House and knocked at her Dore. To
whom she said as before, If you come
in Gods name, come in. At this the
Women were stun'd, for this kind of
Language, they used not to hear, or to
perceive to drop from the Lips of Christiana.
Yet they came in; but behold
they found the good Woman a preparing
to be gon from her House.
So they began and said, Neighbour,
pray what is your meaning by this.
Christiana answered and said to the
eldest of them whose name was Mrs.
Timorous, I am preparing for a Journey
(This Timorous was daughter to
him that met Christian upon the Hill
Difficulty:  and would a had him gone
back for fear of the Lyons.)
Timorous. For what Journey I pray
you?
Chris. Even to go after my good Husband,
and with that she fell aweeping.

Timo. I hope not so, good Neighbour,
pray for your poor Childrens sakes, do
not so unwomanly cast away yourTimorous comes to visit Christiana with Mercie one of her Neighbours.
self.
Chris. Nay, my Children, shall go with
me; not one of them is willing to stay behind.
Timo. I wonder in my very heart,
what, or who has brought you into this
mind.
Chris. Oh, Neighbour, knew you
but as much as I do, I doubt not but
that you would go with me.
Timo. Prethee what new knowledg
hast thou got that so worketh off thy mind
from thy Friends, and that tempteth thee to
go no body knows where?
Chris. Then Christiana reply'd, I
have been sorely afflicted since my Husbands
departure from me; but specially
since he went over the River.Death But
that which troubleth me most, is my
churlish Carriages to him when he was
under his distress. Besides, I am now,
as he was then; nothing will serve me
but going on Pilgrimage. I was a
dreaming last night that I saw him.
O that my Soul was with him. He
dwelleth in the presence of the King of
the Countrey, he sits and eats with him
at his Table, he is become a Companion
of Immortals, and has a House now
given him to dwell in, to which, the
best Palaces on Earth,  if compared,
seems to me to be but as a Dunghil. The
Prince of the Place has also sent for me

with promise of entertainment if I shall
come to him; his messenger was here
even now, and has brought me a Letter,
which invites me to come. And with
that she pluck'd out her Letter, and
read it, and said to them, what now will
you say to this?
Timo. Oh the madness that has possessed
thee and thy Husband, to run your
selves upon such difficulties! You have
heard, I am sure, what your Husband did
meet with, even in a manner at the first
step, that he took on his way, as our
Neighbour Obstinate yet can testifie; for he
went along with him, yea and plyable too
until they like wise men,  were afraid to
go any further. We also heard over and
above, how he met with the Lyons, Appollion,
the shadow of death, and many
other things: Nor is the danger he met
with at Vanity fair to be forgotten by thee.
For if he, tho' a man, was so hard put to
it, what canst thou being but a poor Woman
do? Consider also that these four
sweet Babes are thy Children, thy Flesh
and thy Bones. Wherefore, though thou
shouldest be so rash as to cast away thy
self: Yet for the sake of the Fruit of thy
Body, keep thou at home.
But Christiana said unto her, tempt
me not, my Neighbour: I have now
a price put into mine hand to get gain,
and I should be a Fool of the greatest
size, if I should have no heart to strike
in with the opportunity. And for that
you tell me of all these Troubles that

I am like to meet with in the way,
they are so far off from being to me
a discouragement, that they shew I am
in the right. The bitter must come before
the sweet, and that also will make the
sweet the sweeter. Wherefore since
you came not to my House, in Gods
name, as I said, I pray you to be gon
and not to disquiet me further.
Then Timorous all to revil'd her, and said
to her Fellow, come Neighbour Mercie,
lets leave her in her own hands, since
she scorns our Counsel and Company.
But Mercie was at a stand,Mercies Bowels yearn over Christiana. and could
not so readily comply with her Neighbour:
and that for a two-fold reason.
First, her Bowels yearned over Christiana:
so she said with in her self, If my
Neighbour will needs be gon, I will
go a little way with her, and help her.
Secondly, her Bowels yearned over her
own Soul, (for what Christiana had
said, had taken some hold upon her,
mind.) Wherefore she said within
her self again, I will yet have more
talk with this Christiana, and if I find
Truth and Life in what she shall say,
my self with my Heart shall also go
with her. Wherefore Mercy began thus
to reply to her Neighbour Timorous.
Mercie. Neighbour,Timorous forsakes her; but Mercy cleaves to her. I did indeed come
with you, to see Christiana this Morning,
and since she is, as you see, a taking of
her last farewel of her Country, I think
to walk this Sun-shine Morning, a little

way with her to help her on the way.
But she told her not of her second
Reason, but kept that to her self.
Timo. Well, I see you have a mind
to go a fooling too: but take heed in
time, and be wise: while we are out
of danger we are out; but when we
are in, we are in. So Mrs. Timorous
returned to her House, and Christiana
betook herself to her Journey. But
when Timorous was got home to her
House,Timorous acquaints her Friends what the good Christian intends to do. she sends for some of her Neighbours,
to wit, Mrs. Bats-eyes, Mrs. Inconsiderate,
Mrs. Light-mind, and Mrs.
Know-nothing. So when they were come
to her House, she falls to telling of the
story of Christiana, and of her intended
Journey. And thus she began her
Tale.
Timo. Neighbours, having had little
to do this morning, I went to give
Christiana a visit, and when I came at
the Door, I knocked, as you know 'tis
our Custom. And she answered, If you
come in Gods name, come in. So in I
went, thinking all was well: But when
I came in, I found her preparing her
self to depart the Town, she and also
her Children. So I asked her what
was her meaning by that, and she told
me in short, that she was now of a mind
to go on Pilgrimage, as did her Husband.
She told me also of a Dream
that she had, and how the King of the
Country where her Husband was, had
sent her an inviting Letter to come thither.

Then said Mrs. Know-nothing.Mrs. Knownothing. And
what do you think she will go?
Timo. Ay, go she will, what ever
come on't; and methinks I know it by
this, for that which was my great Argument
to perswade her to stay at home,
(to wit, the Troubles she was like to
meet with in the way) is one great
Argument with her to put her forward
on her Journey. For she told me in so
many words, The bitter goes before the
sweet. Yea, and for as much as it so
doth, it makes the sweet the sweeter.
Mrs. Bats-eyes,Mrs. Bats-eys. Oh this blind and foolish
Woman, said she, will she not
take warning by her Husbands Affilictions?
For my part, I see if he was here
again he would rest him content in a
whole Skin, and never run so many
hazards for nothing.
Mrs Inconsiderate, also replyed, saying,Mrs. Inconsiderate.
away with such Fantastical Fools
from the Town, a good riddance, for
my parr, I say, of her. Should she
stay where she dwels, and retain this
her mind, who could live quietly by
her? for she will either be dumpish or
unneighbourly, or talk of such matters
as no wise body can abide: Wherefore
for my part I shall never be sorry for
her departure, let her go and let better
come in her room; 'twas never a good
World since these whimsical Fools
dwelt in it.

Then Mrs. Light-mind added as followeth.Mrs. Lightmind.
Come put this kind of Talk
away. I was Yesterday at Madam
Wantons, where we were as merry as the
Maids.Madam Wanton she that had like to a bin too hard for Faithful in time past. For who do you think should
be there, but I, and Mrs. Love-the-flesh,
and three or four more with Mr.
Lechery, Mrs. Filth, and some others:
So there we had Musick and dancing,
and what else was meet to fill up the
pleasure. And I dare say my Lady her
self is an admirably well bred Gentlewoman,
and Mr. Lechery is as pretty a
Fellow.
By this time Christiana was got on
her way,  and Mercie went along with
her. So as they went, her Children
being there also, Christiana began to
discourse.discourse betwixt Mercie and good Christiana. And, Mercie, said Christiana,
I take this as an unexpected favour,
that thou shouldest set foot out of Doors
with me to accompany me a little in
my way.
Mercie. Then said young Mercie (for
she was but young,) If I thought it would
be to purpose to go with you, I would never
go near the Town any more.
Chris. Well Mercie, said Christiana,
cast in thy Lot with me. I well know
what will be the end of our Pilgrimage,Mercie inclines to go.
my Husband is where he would
not but be, for all the Gold in the Spanish
Mines. Nor shalt thou be rejected,
tho thou goest but upon my Invitation.
The King who hath sent for me and my
Children, is one that delighteth in

Mercie. Besides, if thou wilt, I will
hire thee, and thou shalt go along with
me as my servant. Yet we will have
all things in Common betwixt thee
and me, only go along with me.
Mercie. But how shall I be ascertained
that I also shall be entertained?Mercy doubts of accptance. Had
I this hope, but from one that can tell,
I would make no stick at all, but would
go being helped by him that can help, tho'
the way was never so tedious.
Christiana. Well, loving Mercie,Christana alures her to the Gate which is Christ and promiseth there to enquire for her. I
will tell thee what thou shalt do, go
with me to the Wicket Gate, and there
I will further enquire for thee, and if
there thou shalt not meet with incouragement,
I will be content that thou
shalt return to thy place. I also will
pay thee for thy Kindness which thou
shewest to me and my Children in thy
accompanying of us in our way as thou
doest.
Mercie. Then will I go thither, and
will take what shall follow, and the Lord
grant that my Lot may there fall even as
the King of Heaven shall have his heart
upon me.
Christiana, then was glad at her
heart, not only that she had a Companion,
but also for that she had prevailed
with this poor Maid to fall in love
with her own Salvation. So they went
on together, and Mercie began to weep.
Then said Christiana, wherefore weepeth
my Sister so?

Mer. Alas! said she, who can but lament
that shall but rightly consider what a
State and Condition my poor Relations are in,
that yet remain in our sinful Town: and
that which makes my grief the more heavy,
is because they have no Instructor, nor any
to tell them what is to come.
Chris. Bowls becometh Pilgrims. And
thou dost for thy Friends, as my good
Christian did for me when he left me;
he mourned for that I would not heed
nor regard him, but his Lord and ours
did gather up his Tears and put them
into his Bottle, and now both I, and
thou, and these my sweet Babes, are
reaping the Fruit and benefit of them.
I hope, Mercie, these Tears of thine
will not be lost, for the truth hath said;
That they that sow in Tears shall reap in
Joy, in singing. And he that goeth forth
and weepeth bearing precious seed, shall
doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing
his Sheaves with him. 
Then said Mercie,

 Let the most blessed be my guide,
If't be his blessed Will,
Unto his Gate, into his fould,
Up to his Holy Hill.
 And let him never suffer me,
To swarve, or turn aside
From his free grace, and Holy ways,
What ere shall me betide.
 And let him gather them of mine,
That I have left behind.
Lord make them pray they may be thine,
With all their heart and mind.

Now my old Friend proceeded and 
said, But when Christiana came up to
the Slow of Despond, she began to be at
a stand: For, said she, This is the place
in which my dear Husband had like to
a been smuthered with Mud.Their own Carnal Conclusions, instead of the word of life. She perceived
also, that notwithstanding the
Command of the King to make this
place for Pilgrims, good: yet it was
rather worse than formerly. So I asked
if that was true? Yes, said the Old Gentle-man,
too true. For that many
there be that pretend to be the King's
Labourers; and that say they are for
mending the Kings High-way, that bring
Dirt, and Dung instead of Stones, and so
marr, instead of mending. Here Christiana
therefore with her Boys did
make a stand: but said Mercie, come
let us venture, only let us be wary.
Then they looked well to the Steps,
and made a shift to get staggeringly over.
Yet Christiana had like to a been in, and
that not once nor twice. Now they
had no sooner got over, but they thought
they heard words that said unto them,
Blessed is she that believeth, for there shall
be a performance of the things that have
been told her from the Lord. 
Then they went on again; and said
Mercie to Christiana, Had I as good
ground to hope for a loving reception
at the Wicket-Gate, as you, I think no
Slow of Despond would discourage
me.

Well, said the other, you know your
sore, and I know mine; and, good
friend, we shall all have have enough evil
before we come at our Journeys
end.
For can it be imagined, that the people
that design to attain such excellent
Glories as we do, and that are so envied
that Happiness as we are; but that
we shall meet with what Fears and Scares,
with what Troubles and Afflictions they
can possibly assault us with, that hate
us?
And now Mr. Sagaciety left me to Dream
out my Dream by my self. Wherefore
me-thought I saw Christiana, and Mercie
and the Boys go all of them up to
the Gate. To which when they were
come, they betook themselves to a
short debate about how they must manage
their calling at the Gate,Prayer should be made with Consideration, and Fear: As well as in Faith and Hope. and what
should be said to him that did open to
them. So it was concluded, since Christiana
was the eldest, that she should
knock for entrance, and that she should
speak to him that did open, for the
rest. So Christiana began to knock,
and as her poor Husband did, she knocked
and knocked again. But instead of
any that answered,  they all thought
that they heard, as if a Dog came
barking upon them. A Dog and a
great one too,The Dog, the Devil an Enemy to Prayer. and this made the Woman
and Children afraid. Nor durst
they for a while dare to knock any
more, for fear the Mastiff should fly

upon them. Now therefore they were
greatly tumbled up and down in their
minds, and knew not what to do. Knock
they durst not, for fear of the Dog:
go back they durst not for fear that
the Keeper of that Gate should espy
them, as they so went, and should be
offended with them. At last they
thought of knocking again, and knocked
more vehemently then they did at
the first. Then said the Keeper of the
Gate, who is there? So the Dog left
off to bark, and he opened unto
them.
Then Christiana made low obeysance,
and said, Let not our Lord be offended
with his Handmaidens for that we have
knocked at his Princely Gate. Then
said the Keeper, Whence come ye, and
what is that you would have?
Christiana answered, We are come
from whence Christian did come, and
upon the same Errand as he; to wit,
to be, if it shall please you, graciously
admitted by this Gate, into the way
that leads to the Celestial City.
And I answer, my Lord in the next
place, that I am Christiana once the
Wife of Christian, that now is gotten
above?
With that the Keeper of the Gate
did marvel, saying, What is she become
now a Pilgrim, that but a while ago abhorred
that Life? Then she bowed her
Head, and said, yes; and so are these
my sweet Babes also.

Then he took her by the hand, and
led her in and said also, Suffer the little
Children to come unto me, and with
that he shut up the Gate. This don,
he called to a Trumpeter that was above
over the Gate,  to entertain Christiana
with shouting and sound of Trumpet
for joy. So he obeyed and sounded,
and filled the Air with his Melodious
Notes.
Now all this while, poor Mercie did
stand without, trembling and crying for
fear that she was rejected. But when
Christiana had gotten admittance for her
self and her Boys: Then she began to
make Intercession for Mercy.
Chris. And she said, my Lord, I have a
Companion of mine that stands yet without,
that is come hither upon the same account
as my self. One that is much dejected in
her mind, for that she comes, as she thinks,
without sending for, whereas I was sent to by
my Husbands King to come.
Now Mercie began to be very impatient,
The delays makee the hungering Soul the fervant.for each Minute was as long to her
as an hour, wherefore she prevented
Christiana from a fuller interceding for
her, by knocking at the Gate her self.
And she knocked then so loud, that
she made Christiana to start. Then said
the Keeper of the Gate who is there?
And said Christiana it, is my Friend.

So he opened the Gate, and looked
out; but Mercie was fallen down without
in a Swoon, for she fainted and was
afraid; that no Gate should be opened
to her.
Then he took her by the hand, and
said, Damsel, I bid thee arise.
O Sir, said she, I am faint, there is
scarce Life left in me. But he answered,
That one once said,  When my Soul
fainted within me, I remembred the Lord,
and my prayer came in unto thee, into thy
Holy Temple. Fear not, but stand upon
thy Feet, and tell me wherefore thou
art come.
Mer. I am come, for that, unto which
I was never invited, as my Friend Christiana
was. Hers was from the King,
and mine was but from her: Wherefore
I fear I presume.
Did she desire thee to come with her to
this Place?
Mer. Yes. And as my Lord sees, I
am come. And if there is any Grace
and forgiveness of Sins to spare, I beseech
that I thy poor Handmaid may
be partaker thereof.
Then he took her again by the Hand,
and led her gently in, and said: I pray
for all them that believe on me, by what
means soever they come unto me. Then
said he to those that stood by: Fetch
something, and give it Mercie to smell
on, thereby to stay her fainting. So they
fetcht her a Bundle of Myrrh, and
a while after she was revived.

And now was Christiana, and her
Boys and Mercie received of the Lord at
the head of the way, and spoke kindly
unto by him.
Then said they yet further unto him,
We are sorry for our Sins, and beg of
our Lord his Pardon, and further information,
what we must do.
I grant Pardon, said he, by word,
and deed; by word in the promise of
forgiveness: by deed in the way I obtained
it.  Take the first from my Lips
with a kiss, and the other, as it shall be
revealed.
Now I saw in my Dream that he
spake many good words unto them,
whereby they were greatly gladed.
He also had them up to the top of the
Gate and shewed them by what deed
they were saved, and told them withall,
that that sight they would have again
as they went along in the way,Christ Crucified seen afar off. to their
comfort.
So he left them a while in a Summer-Parler
below, where they entred into
talk by themselves. And thus Christiana
began, O Lord! How glad am I, that
we are got in hither?
Mer. So you well may; but I, of all, have
cause to leap for joy.
Chris. I thought, one time, as I stood
at the Gate (because I had knocked and
none did answer) that all our Labour had
been lost: Specially when that ugly Curr
made such a heavy barking against us.

Mer. But my vvorst Fears vvas after I
saw that you was taken in to his favour,
and that I was left behind: Now thought
I,  'tis fulfiled which is Written. Two
Women shall be Grinding together, the one
shall be taken, and the other left. I had
much ado to forbear crying out, Undone,
undone.
And afraid I was to knock any more;
but when I looked up, to what was
Written over the Gate, I took Courage. 
I also thought that I must either
knock again or dye. So I knocked;
but I cannot tell how, for my spirit now
struggled betwixt life and death.
Chris. Can you not tell how you knocked?
I am sure your knocks were so earnest,Christiana thinks her Companion prays better then she.
that the very sound of them made me start.
I thought I never heard such knocking in all
my Life. I thought you would a come in
by violent hands, or a took the Kingdom by
storm.
Mer. Alas,  to be in my Case, who
that so was, could but a done so? You
saw that the Door was shut upon me,
and that there was a most cruel Dog there
about. Who, I say, that was so faint
hearted as I, that would not a knocked
with all their might? But pray what
said my Lord to my rudeness, was he not
angry with me?
Chris. When he heard your lumbring
noise, he gave a wonderful Innocent smile.
I believe what you did pleas'd him well
enough. For he shewed no sign to the contrary.
But I marvel in my heart why he

keeps such a Dog;If the Soul at first did know all it should meet with in its Journey to Heaven it would hardly ever set out. had I known that afore,
I fear I should not have had heart enough to
a ventured my self in this manner. But
now we are in, we are in, and I am glad
with all my heart.
Mer. I will ask if you please next time
he comes down, why he keeps such a
filthy Cur in his Yard. I hope he will
not take it amiss.
Ay do, said the Children, and perswade
him to hang him, for we are afraid that he
will bite us when we go hence.
So at last he came down to them again,
and Mercie fell to the Ground on
her Face before him and worshipped,
and said, Let my Lord accept of the Sacrifice
of praise which I now offer
unto him, with the calves of my
Lips.
So he said to her, peace be to thee,
stand up.
But she continued upon her Face and
said,  Righteous art thou O Lord when I
plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee
of thy Judgments: Wherefore dost thou keep
so cruel a Dog in thy Yard, at the sight of
which, such Women and Children as we, are
ready to fly from thy Gate for fear?
He answered, and said; That Dog
has another Owner, he also is kept
close in an other man's ground; only my
Pilgrims hear his barking. He belongs
to the Castle which you see there at a
distance:  but can come up to the Walls
of this place. He has frighted many
an honest Pilgrim from worse to better,

by the great voice of his roaring. Indeed
he that oweth him, doth not
keep him of any good will to me or
mine; but with intent to keep the Pilgrims
from coming to me, and that
they may be afraid to knock at this
Gate for entrance. Sometimes also he
has broken out and has worried some
that I love; but I take all at present
patiently, I also give my Pilgrims timely
help: So they are not delivered up
to his power to do to them what his
Dogish nature would prompt him to.
But what! My purchased one, I tro,
hadst thou known never so much before
hand, thou wouldst not a bin afraid
of a Dog.
The Beggers that go from Door to Door,
will, rather then they will lose a supposed
Alms, run the hazzard of the bauling,
barking, and biting too of a Dog: and
shall a Dog, a Dog in an other Mans-Yard:
a Dog whose barking I turn to
the profit of Pilgrims, keep any from
coming to me? I deliver them from the
Lions, their Darling from the power of
the Dog.
Mer. Then said Mercie, I confess my
Ignorance: I spake what I understood not:
I acknowledg thou doest all things
well.
Chris. Then Christiana began to talk
of their Journey, and to enquire after
the way. So he fed them, and
washed their feet, and set them in
the way of his Steps, according as

 he had dealt with her Husband before
So I saw in my Dream, that they
walkt on in their way, and had the weather
very comfortable to them.
Then Christiana began to sing,
saying.

 Bless't be the Day that I began,
A Pilgrim for to be.
And blessed also be that man,
That thereto moved me.
 'Tis true, 'twas long ere I began,
To seek to live for ever:
But now I run fast as I can,
'Tis better late then never. 
 Our Tears to joy, our fears to Faith
Are turned, as we see:
Thus our beginning, (as one saith,)
Shews, what our end will be.
Now there was, on the other side
of the Wall that fenced in the way up
which Christiana and her Companions
was to go, a Garden; and that Garden
belonged to him whose was that Barking
Dog of whom mention was made
before. And some of the Fruit-Trees
that grew in that Garden shot their
Branches over the Wall, and being
mellow,The Children eat of the Enemies Fruit. they that found them did gather
them up and oft eat of them to
their hurt. So Christiana's Boys, as
Boys are apt to do, being pleas'd with
the Trees, and with the Fruit that did
hang thereon, did Plash them, and began

to eat. Their Mother did also
chide them for so doing; but still the
Boys went on.
Well, said she, my Sons, you Transgress,
for that Fruit is none of ours:
but she did not know that they did belong
to the Enemy; Ile warrant you if
she had, she would a been ready to die
for fear. But that passed, and they
went on their way. Now by that they
were gon about two Bows-shot from the
place that let them into the way:Two ill favoured ones. they
espyed two very ill-favoured ones coming
down a pace to meet them. With that
Christiana, and Mercie her Friend covered
themselves with their Vails, and so
kept on their Journey: The Children
also went on before, so at last they met
together. Then they that came down
to meet them, came just up to the Women,
as if they would imbrace them;
but Christiana said, Stand back, or go
peacebly by as you should.They assault Christiana. Yet these
two, as men that are deaf, regarded not
Christiana's words; but began to lay
hands upon them; at that Christiana
waxing very wroth, spurned at them
with her feet. Mercie also, as well as she
could, did what she could to shift them.
Christiana again, said to them, Stand
back and be gon, for we have no Money
to loose being Pilgrims as ye see, and
such too as live upon the Charity of our
Friends.

Ill-fa. Then said one of the two of
the Men, we make no assault upon you
for Money; but are come out to tell
you, that if you will but grant one small
request which we shall ask, we will
make Women of you forever.
Christ. Now Christiana imagining
what they should mean, made answer again,
We will neither hear nor regard,
nor yield to what you shall ask. We are
in haste, cannot stay, our Business is a
Business of Life and Death. So again she
and her Companions made a fresh assay
to go past them. But they letted them
in their way.
Ill-fa. And they said, we intend no
hurt to your lives, 'tis an other thing we
would have.
Christ. Ay, quoth Christiana, you
would have us Body and Soul, for I
know 'tis for that you are come;She cryes out. but
we will die rather upon the spot, then
suffer our selves to be brought into such
Snares as shall hazzard our well being
hereafter. And with that they both
Shrieked out, and cryed Murder, Murder:
and so put themselves under those
Laws that are provided for the Protection
of Women.  But the men still
made their approach upon them, with
design to prevail against them: They
therefore cryed out again.
Now they being, as I said, not far
from the Gate in at which they came,
their voice was heard from where they
was, thither: Wherefore some of the

House came out, and knowing that it
was Christiana's Tongue: they made
haste to her relief. But by that they
was got within sight of them, the Woman
was in a very great scuffle, the
Children also stood crying by.The Reliever comes. Then
did he that came in for their relief,
call out to the Ruffins saying, What is
that thing that you do? Would you
make my Lords People to transgress?
He also atempted to take them;The Ill-ones fly. but
they did make their escape over the
Wall into the Garden of the Man, to
whom the great Dog belonged, so
the Dog became their Protector. This
Reliever then came up to the Women,
and asked them how they did. So
they answered, we thank thy Prince,
pretty well, only we have been somewhat
affrighted, we thank thee also
for that thou camest in to our help,
for otherwise we had been overcome.
Reliever. So after a few more words,The Reliever talks to the Women.
this Reliever said as followeth: I marvelled
much when you was entertained at
the Gate above, being ye knew that ye
were but weak Women, that you petitioned
not the Lord there for a Conductor: Then
might you have avoided these Troubles, and
Dangers: For he would have granted you
one.
Christ. Alas said Christiana, we were
so taken with our present blessing,
that Dangers to come were forgotten
by us; besides, who could have thought

that so near the King's Palace there
should have lurked such naughty ones:
Indeed it had been well for us had we
asked our Lord for one; but since
our Lord knew 'twould be for our profit,
I wonder he sent not one along
with us.
Relie.We lose for want of asking for. It is not always necessary to
grant things not asked for, lest by so doing
they become of little esteem; but when the
want of a thing is felt, it then comes,
under, in the Eyes of him that feels it,
that estimate, that properly is its due, and
so consequently will be thereafter used. Had
my Lord granted you a Conductor, you would
not neither, so have bewailed that oversight
of yours in not asking for one, as now you
have occasion to do. So all things work
for good, and tend to make you more
wary.
Christ. Shall we go back again to
my Lord, and confess our folly and ask
one?
Relie. Your Confession of your folly, I
will present him with: To go back again,
you need not. For in all places where you
shall come, you will find no want at all,
for in every of my Lord's Lodgings which
he has prepared for the reception of his Pilgrims,
there is sufficient to furnish them against
all attempts whatsoever. But, as
I said, he will be enquired of by them to do
it for them: and 'tis a poor thing that is not
worth asking for.  When he had thus said, he
went back to his place, and the Pilgrims
went on their way.

Mer. Then said Mercie,The mistake of Mercie. what a
sudden blank is here? I made account
we had now been past all danger,
and that we should never see sorrow
more.
Christ. Thy Innocency, my Sister,
said Christiana to Mercie, may excuse
thee much; but as for me,Christiana's Guilt. my fault is
so much the greater, for that I saw
this danger before I came out of the
Doors, and yet did not provide for it,
where provision might a been had. I
am therefore much to be blamed.
Mer. Then said Mercie, how knew
you this before you came from home? pray
open to me this Riddle.
Christ. Why, I will tell you. Before
I set Foot out of Doors, one Night,
as I lay in my Bed, I had a Dream about
this. For methought I saw two
men, as like these as ever the World
they could look, stand at my Beds-feet,
Plotting how they might prevent my Salvation.
I will tell you their very words.
They said, ('twas when I was in my
Troubles,) What shall we do with this
Woman?Christiana's Dream repeated. For she cries out waking and
sleeping for forgvieness, If she be suffered to
go on as she begins, we shall lose her as
we have lost her Husband. This you know
might a made me take heed, and have
provided when Provision might a been
had.

Mer. Well said Mercie, as by this
neglect, we have an occasion ministred unto
us, to behold our own imperfections: So
our Lord has taken occasion thereby, to
make manifest the Riches of his Grace.
For he, as we see, has followed us with
un-asked kindness, and has delivered us
from their hands that were stronger then
we, of his meer good pleasure.
Thus now when they had talked
away a little more time, they drew
nigh to an House which stood in the
way,  which House was built for the relief
of Pilgrims: As you will find more
fully related in the first part of these Records
of the Pilgrims Progre&esset;. So they
drew on towards the House (the House
of the Interpreter) and when they
came to the Door they heard a great
talk in the House, they then gave ear,
and heard, as they thought, Christiana
mentioned by name. For you must
know that there went along, even
before her, a talk of her and her Childrens
going on Pilgrimage. And this
thing was the more pleasing to them,
because they had heard that she was
Christian's Wife; that Woman who
was sometime ago, so unwilling to hear
of going on Pilgrimage. Thus therefore
they stood still and heard the good
people within commending her, who
they little thought stood at the Door.
At last Christiana knocked as she had
done at the Gate before. Now when
she had knocked, there came to the

Door a young Damsel, and opened the
Door and looked, and behold two Women
was there.
Dams. Then said the Damsel to them,
With whom would you speak in this
Place?
Christ. Christiana answered, we understand
that this is a priviledged place
for those that are become Pilgrims,
and we now at this Door are such:
Wherefore we pray that we may be
partakers of that for which we at this
time are come; for the day, as thou
seest, is very far spent, and we are
loth to night to go any further.
Dams. Pray what may I call your
name, that I may tell it to my Lord
within?
Christ. My name is Christiana, I was
the Wife of that Pilgrim that some
years ago did Travel this way, and
these be his four Children. This Maiden
also is my Companion, and is going
on Pilgrimage too.
Innocent. Then ran Innocent in (for
that was her name) and said to those
within, Can you think who is at the
Door! There is Christiana and her Children,
and her Companion, all waiting
for entertainment here. Then they
leaped for Joy, and went and told their
Master. So he came to the Door, and
looking upon her, he said. Art thou
that Christiana, whom Christian, the
Good-man, left behind him, when he betook
himself to a Pilgrims Life?

Christ. I am that Woman that was so
hard-hearted as to slight my Husbands
Troubles, and that left him to go on in
his Journey alone, and these are his
four Children; but now I also am
come, for I am convinced that no way
is right but this.
Inter. Then is fulfilled that which also
is Written of the Man that said to his
Son, go work to day in my Vineyard, and
he said to his Father,  I will not; but afterwards
repented and went.
Christ. Then said Christiana, So be it,
Amen. God make it a true saying upon
me, and grant that I may be found
at the last, of him in peace without
spot and blameless.
Inter. But why standest thou thus at
the Door, come in thou Daughter of Abraham,
we was talking of thee but now:
For tidings have come to us before, how
thou art become a Pilgrim. Come Children,
come in; come Maiden, come in;
so he had them all in to the House.
So when they were within, they
were bidden sit down and rest them,
the which when they had done, those
that attended upon the Pilgrims in the
House, came into the Room to see them.
And one smiled,Old Saints glad to see the young ones walk in Gods ways. and another smiled,
and they all smiled for Joy that Christiana
was become a Pilgrim. They also
looked upon the Boys, they stroaked
them over the Faces with the Hand,
in token of their kind reception of
them: they also carried it lovingly to

Mercie, and bid them all welcome into
their Masters House.
After a while, because Supper was
not ready, the Interpreter took them
into his Significant Rooms, and shewed
them what Christian, Christiana's Husband
had seen sometime before. Here
therefore they saw the Man in the
Cage, the man and his Dream, the man
that cut his way thorough his Enemies,
and the Picture of the biggest of them
all: together with the rest of those
things that were then so profitable to
Christian.
This done, and after these things
had been somewhat digested by Christiana,
and her Company: the Interpreter
takes them apart again: and has
them first into a Room, where was a
man that could look no way but downwards,The man with the Muckrake expounded.
with a Muckrake in his hand. There stood
also one over his head with a Celestial
Crown in his Hand, and proffered to give
him that Crown, for his Muck-rake; but
the man did neither look up, nor regard;
but raked to himself the Straws, the small
Sticks, and Dust of the Floar.
Then said Christiana, I perswade my
self that I knew somewhat the meaning of
this: For this is a Figure of a man of this
World: Is it not, good Sir?
Inter. Thou hast said the right,
said he, and his Muck-rake doth show
his Carnal mind. And whereas thou
seest him rather give heed to rake up
Straws and Sticks, and the Dust of the

Floar, then to what he says that calls to
him from above with the Celestial
Crown in his Hand; it is to show, That
Heaven is but as a Fable to some, and
that things here are counted the only
things substantial. Now whereas it was
also shewed thee, that the man could
look no way but downwards: It is to
let thee know that earthly things when
they are with Power upon Mens minds,
quite carry their hearts away from
God.
Chris. Then said Christiana, O! deliver
me from this Muck-rake.
Inter. That Prayer, said the Interpreter,
has lain by till 'tis almost rusty:
Give me not Riches, Is scarce the Prayer
of one of ten thousand.  Straws, and
Sticks, and Dust, with most, are the
great things now looked after.
With that Mercie, and Christiana
wept, and said, It is alass! too
true.
When the Interpreter had shewed
them this, he has them into the very
best Room in the House, (a very brave
Room it was) so he bid them look
round about, and see if they could find
any thing profitable there. Then they
looked round and round: For there was
nothing there to be seen but a very
great Spider on the Wall: and that they
overlook't.
Mer. Then said Mercie, Sir, I see nothing;
but Christiana held her peace.

Inter. But said the Interpreter, look
again: she therefore lookt again and
said, Here is not any thing, but an
ugly Spider,Of the Spider. who hangs by her Hands upon
the Wall. Then said he, Is there
but one Spider in all this spacious
Room? Then the water stood in Christiana's
Eyes, for she was a Woman
quick of apprehension: and she said,
Yes Lord, there is here more then one.
Yea, and Spiders whose Venom is far
more destructive then that which is in
her. The Interpreter then looked pleasantly
upon her, and said, Thou hast
said the Truth. This made Mercie
blush, and the Boys to cover their Faces:
For they all began now to understand
the Riddle.
Then said the Interpreter again,  The
Spider taketh hold with her hands as you
see, and is in Kings Pallaces. And wherefore
is this recorded; but to show you,
that how full of the Venome of Sin soever
you be, yet you may by the hand of
Faith lay hold of, and dwell in the
best Room that belongs to the Kings
House above?
Chris. I thought, said Christiana, of
something of this; but I could not imagin
it all. I thought that we were like
Spiders, and that we looked like ugly
Creatures, in what fine Room soever
we were: But that by this Spider,
this venomous and ill favoured Creature,
we were to learn how to act Faith, that
came not into my mind. And yet she

has taken hold with her hands as I
see, and dwells in the best Room in
the House. God has made nothing in
vain.
Then they seemed all to be glad;
but the water stood in their Eyes:
Yet they looked one upon another,
and also bowed before the Interpreter.
He had them then into another
Room where was a Hen and Chickens,
and bid them observe a while.Of the Hen and Chickens. So one
of the Chickens went to the Trough to
drink, and every time she drank she
lift up her head and her eyes towards
Heaven. See, said he, what this little
Chick doth, and learn of her to acknowledg
whence your Mercies come,
by receiving them with looking up.
Yet again, said he, observe and look: So
they gave heed, and perceived that
the Hen did walk in a fourfold Method
towards her Chickens. 1. She had a
common call, and that she hath all day
long. 2. She had a speciall call, and
that she had but sometimes. 3. She had
a brooding note, and 4. she had an out-cry.
Now, said he, compare this Hen to
your King, and these Chickens to his
Obedient ones. For answerable to her,
himself has his Methods,  which he
walketh in towards his People. By his
common call, he gives nothing, by his
special call, he always has something to
give, he has also a brooding voice, for

them that are under his Wing, and he
has an out-cry to give the Alarm
when he seeth the Enemy come. I chose,
my Darlings, to lead you into the
Room where such things are, because
you are Women, and they are easie for
you.
Chris. And Sir, said Christiana, pray
let us see some more: So he had
them into the Slaughter-house, where
was a Butcher a kiliing of a Sheep: And
behold the Sheep was quiet,Of the Butcher and the Sheep. and took
her Death patiently. Then said the Interpreter:
You must learn of this Sheep,
to suffer: And to put up wrongs without
murmurings and complaints. Behold
how quietly she takes her Death,
and without objecting she suffereth her
Skin to be pulled over her Ears. Your
King doth call you his Sheep.
After this, he led them into his Garden,
where was great variety of Flowers:
and he said, do you see all these?Of the Garden.
So Christiana said, yes. Then said he
again, Behold the Flowers are divers
in Stature, in Quality, and Colour, and
Smell, and Virtue, and some are better
then some: Also where the Gardiner
has set them, there they stand, and
quarrel not one with another.
Again, he had them into his Field,Of the Field.
which he had sowed with Wheat,
and Corn: but when they beheld, the
tops of all was cut off, only the Straw
remained. He said again, this Ground
was Dunged, and Plowed, and sowed;

but what shall we do with the Crop?
Then said Christiana, burn some and
make muck of the rest. Then said the
Interpreter again, Fruit you see is that
thing you look for, and for want of
that you condemn it to the Fire, and
to be trodden under foot of men: Beware
that in this you condemn not your
selves.
Then, as they were coming in from
abroad, they espied a little Robbin with
a great Spider in his mouth. So the
Interpreter said, look here. So they
looked,Of the Robbin and the Spider. and Mercie wondred; but Christiana
said, what a disparagement is it
to such a little pretty Bird as the Robbin-red-breast
is, he being also a Bird
above many, that loveth to maintain a
kind of Sociableness with man? I had
thought they had lived upon crums of
Bread, or upon other such harmless
matter. I like him worse then I
did.
The Interpreter then replied, This
Robbin is an Emblem very apt to set
forth some Professors by; for to sight they
are as this Robbin, pretty of Note, Colour
and Carriage,s they seem also to have a
very great Love for Professors that are
sincere; and above all other to desire
to sosciate with, and to be in their
Company, as if they could live upon the
good Mans Crums. They Pretend also
that therefore it is, that they frequent
the House of the Godly, and the appointments
of the Lord: but when they

are by themselves, as the Robbin, they
can catch and gobble up Spiders, they
can change their Diet, drink Iniquity,
and swallow down Sin like Water.
So when they were come again into the
House,Pray and you will get at that which yet lies unrevealed. because Supper as yet was not
ready, Christiana again desired that the
Interpreter would either show or tell of
some other things that are Profitable.
Then the Interpreter began and said,
The fatter the Sow is, the more she desires
the Mire; the fatter the Ox is, the more
gamesomly he goes to the Slaughter; and
the more healthy the lusty man is, the more
prone he is unto Evil.
There is a desire in Women, to go neat
and fine, and it is a comely thing to be adorned
with that, that in Gods sight is of
great price.
'Tts easier watching a night or two, then
to sit up a whole year together: So 'tis easier
for one to begin to profess well, then to
hold out as he should to the end.
Every Ship-Master, when in a Storm,
will willingly cast that over Board that is
of the smallest valve in the Vessel; but who
will throw the best out first? none but he that
feareth not God.
One leak will sink a Ship, and one Sin
will destroy a Sinner.
He that forgets his Friend, is ungrateful
unto him; but he that forgets his Saviour
is unmerciful to himself.

He that lives in Sin, and looks for Happiness
hereafter, is like him that soweth
Cockle, and thinks to fill his Barn with
Wheat, or Barley.
If a man would live well, let him fetch
his last day to him, and make it always his
company-Keeper.
Whispering and change of thoughts,
proves that Sin is in the World.
If the World, which God sets light by,
is counted a thing of that worth with
men: what is Heaven which God commendeth?
If the Life that is attended with so many
troubles, is so loth to be let go by us,
What is the Life above?
Every Body will cry up the goodness of
Men; but who is there that is, as he
should, affected with the Goodness of
God?
We seldom sit down to Meat; but we
eat, and leave: So there is in Jesus Christ
more Merit and Righteousness then the whole
World has need of.
When the Interpreter had done, he
takes them out into his Garden again,
and had them to a Tree whose inside
was all Rotten, and gone, and yet it
grew and had Leaves.Of the Tree that is rotten at heart. Then said Mercie,
what means this? This Tree, said
he, whose out-side is fair, and whose inside
is Rotten; is it to which many may
be compared that are in the Garden of
God: Who with their mouths speak
high in behalf of God; but indeed will
do nothing for him: Whose Leaves are

fair; but their heart Good for nothing,
but to be Tinder for the Devils Tinderbox.
Now Supper was ready, the Table
spread, and all things set on the Board;
so they sate down and did eat when
one had given thanks. And,They are at Supper. the Interpreter
did usually entertain those that
lodged with him, with Musick at Meals,
so the Ministrels played. There was
also one that did Sing. And a very
fine voice he had.
His Song was this.

 The Lord is only my support,
And he that doth me feed:
How can I then want any thing,
Whereof I stand in need?
When the Song and Musick was
ended, the Interpreter asked Christiana,
What it was that at first did move her
to betake her self to a Pilgrims
Life?
Christiana answered. First,Talk at Supper. the loss
of my Husband came into my mind, at
which I was heartily grieved: but all
that was but natural Affection.A Repetition of Christiana's Experience. Then
after that, came the Troubles, and Pilgrimage
of my Husbands into my mind,
and also how like a Churl I had carried
it to him as to that. So guilt took
hold of my mind, and would have drawn
me into the Pond; but that opportunely
I had a Dream of the well-being
of my Husband, and a Letter sent me

by the King of that Country where my
Husband dwells, to come to him. The
Dream and the Letter together so
wrought upon my mind, that they forced
me to this way.
Inter. But met you with no opposition afore
you set out of Doors?
Chris. Yes, a Neighbour of mine one
Mrs. Timerous, (She was a kin to him
that would have perswaded my Husband
to go back for fear of the Lions.) She
all-tobe-fooled me; for, as she called it,
my intended desperate adventure; she
also urged what she could, to dishearten
me to it, the hardships and Troubles
that my Husband met with in the
way; but all this I got over pretty
well. But a Dream that I had, of two
ill-lookt ones, that I thought did Plot
how to make me miscarry in my Journey,
that hath troubled me much:
Yea, it still runs in my mind, and
makes me afraid of every one that I
meet, lest they should meet me to do
me a mischief, and to turn me out of
the way. Yea, I may tell my Lord,
tho' I would not have every body know
it, that between this and the Gate by
which we got into the way, we were
both so sorely assaulted, that we were
made to cry out Murder, and the
two that made this assault upon us,
were like the two that I saw in my
Dream.

Then said the Interpreter, Thy beginning
is good,A question put to Mercie. thy latter end shall
greatly increase. So he addressed himself
to Mercie: and said unto her, And
what moved thee to come hither sweetheart?
Mercie. Then Mercie blushed and
trembled, and for a while continued
silent.
Interpreter. Then said he, be not afraid,
only believe, and speak thy
mind.
Mer. So she began and said. Truly
Sir, my want of Experience, is that
that makes me covet to be in silence,
and that also that fills me with fears of
coming short at last. I cannot tell of
Visions, and Dreams as my friend Christiana
can; nor know I what it is to
mourn for my refusing of the Counsel
of those that were good Relations.
Interpreter. What was it then, dear-heart,
that hath prevailed with thee to do
as thou hast done?
Mer. Why, when our friend here,
was packing up to be gone from our
Town, I and another went accidentally
to see her. So we knocked at the
Door and went in. When we were within,
and seeing what she was doing, we
asked what was her meaning. She
said she was sent for to go to her Husband,
and then she up and told us,
how she had seen him in a Dream,
dwelling in a curious place among Immortals
wearing a Crown, playing upon

a Harp, eating and drinking at his
Princes Table, and singing Praises to
him for bringing him thither, &c.
Now methought, while she was telling
these things unto us, my heart burned
within me. And I said in my Heart, if
this be true, I will leave my Father
and my Mother, and the Land of my
Nativity, and will, if I may go along
with Christiana.
So I asked her further of the truth
of these things, and if she would let
me go with her? For I saw now that
there was no dwelling, but with the
danger of ruin, any longer in our Town.
But yet I came away with a heavy heart,
not for that I was unwilling to come
away; but for that so many of my Relations
were left behind. And I am
come with all the desire of my heart,
and will go if I may with Christiana unto
her Husband and his King.
Inter. Thy setting out is good, for
thou hast given credit to the truth.
Thou art a Ruth,  who did for the love
that she bore to Naomi, and to the Lord
her God, leave Father and Mother,
and the land of her Nativity to come
out, and go with a People that she knew
not heretofore. The Lord recompence thy
work, and a full reward be given thee of
the Lord God of Israel, under whose Wings
thou art come to trust.
Now Supper was ended, and Preparations
was made for Bed, the Women
were laid singly alone, and the

Boys by themselves. Now when Mercie
was in Bed, she could not sleep for
joy, for that now her doubts of missing
at last, were removed further from her
then ever they were before. So she
lay blessing and Praising God who had
had such favour for her.
In the Morning they arose with the
Sun, and prepared themselves for their
departure: But the Interpretor would
have them tarry a while, for, said he,
you must orderly go from hence. Then
said he to the Damsel that at first opened
unto them, Take them and have
them into the Garden, to the Bath,The Bath Sanctification. and
there wash them, and make them clean
from the soil which they have gathered
by travelling. Then Innocent the Damsel
took them and had them into the
Garden, and brought them to the Bath,
so she told them that there they must
wash and be clean, for so her Master
would have the Women to do that
called at his House as they were going
on Pilgrimage. They then went in and
washed, yea they and the Boys and all,
and they came out of that Bath not only
sweet, and clean; but also much enlivened
and strengthened in their Joynts:
So when they came in they looked fairer
a deal, then when they went out to
the washing.
When they were returned out of the
Garden from the Bath, the Interpreter
took them and looked upon them and
said unto them, fair as the Moon. Then

he called for the Seal wherewith they
They are sealed.used to be Sealed that were vvashed in
his Bath. So the Seal vvas brought, and
he set his Mark upon them, that they
might be knovvn in the Places vvhither
they vvere yet to go: Novv the
seal vvas the contents and sum of the
Passover which the Children of Israel did
eat when they came out from the
Land of Egypt: and the mark was set
betvveen their Eyes. This seal greatly
added to their Beauty, for it vvas an
Ornament to their Faces. It also added
to their gravity and made their
Coutenances more like them of Angels.
Then said the Interpreter again to the
Damsel that vvaited upon these Women,
Go into the Vestry and fetch out Garments
for these People: So she vvent
and fetched out vvhite Rayment, and
laid it dovvn before him, so he commanded
them to put it on. It was
fine Linnen,They are clothed. white and clean. When the
Women vvere thus adorned they seemed
to be a Terror one to the other.
For that they could not see that glory
each one on her self, vvhich they could
see in each other.True humility. Novv therefore they
began to esteem each other better then
themselves. For you are fairer then I
am, said one, and you are more comely
then I am, said another. The Children
also stood amazed to see into vvhat fashion
they vvere brought.



Behold here how the Slothfull are a Signe;
Hung up, cause holy ways they did decline.
See here too how the Child doth play &thorne; man
And weak grow strong, when Great heart leads the Van.

The Interpreter then called for a
Man-servant of his, and bid him take
Sword, and Helmet, and Shield, and
take these my Daughters, said he, and
conduct them to the House called Beautiful,
at vvhich place they vvill rest next.
So he took his Weapons, and vvent before
them, and the Interpreter said, God
speed. Those also that belonged to the
Family sent them avvay vvith many a
good vvish. So they vvent on their vvay,
and Sung,

 This place has been our second Stage,
Here we have heard and seen
Those good things that from Age to Age,
To others hid have been.
 The Dunghil-raker, Spider, Hen,
The Chicken too to me
Hath taught a Lesson, let me then
Conformed to it be.
 The Butcher, Garden, and the Field,
The Robbin, and his bait,
Also the Rotten-tree doth yield
Me Argument of weight
 To move me for to watch and pray,
To strive to be sincere,
To take my Cross up day by day,
And serve the Lord with fear.
Now I saw in my Dream that they
went on and Greatheart went before them,
so they went and came to the place
where Christians Burthen fell off his Back,
and tumbled into a Sepulchre.  Here
then they made a pause, and here also

they blessed God. Now said Christiana,
it comes to my mind what was said to
us at the Gate, to wit, that we should
have Pardon, by Word and Deed; by
word, that is, by the promise; by Deed,
to wit, in the way it was obtained.
What the promise is, of that I know
something: But what is it to have Pardon
by deed, or in the way that it
was obtained, Mr. Great-heart, I suppose
you know; wherefore if you
please let us hear you discourse thereof.
Great-heart. Pardon by the deed
done,A comment upon what was said at the Gate, or a discourse of our being justified by Christ. is Pardon obtained by some one,
for another that hath need thereof:
Not by the Person pardoned, but in
the way, saith another, in which I have
obtained it. So then, to speak to the
question more large, The pardon that
you and Mercie and these Boys have
attained, was obtained by another, to
wit, by him that let you in at the
Gate: And he hath obtain'd it in this
double way. He has performed
Righteousness to cover you, and spilt
blood to wash you in.
Chris. But if he parts with his Righteousness
to us: What will he have for himself?
Great-heart. He has more Righteousness
then you have need of, or then
he needeth himself.
Chris. Pray make that appear.

Great-heart. With all my heart, but
first I must premise that he of whom
we are now about to speak, is one that
has not his Fellow. He has two Natures
in one Person, plain to be distinguished,
impossible to be divided. Unto
each of these Natures a Righteousness
belongeth, and each Righteousness is
essential to that Nature. So that one
may as easily cause the Nature to be
extinct, as to seperate its Justice or Righteousness
from it. Of these Righteousnesses
therefore, we are not made partakers
so, as that they, any of them,
should be put upon us that we might be
made just, and live thereby. Besides
these there is a Righteousness which this
Person has, as these two Natures are
joyned in one. And this is not the
Righteousness of the God-head, as distinguished
from the Manhood; nor the
Righteousness of the Manhood, as distinguished
from the God-head; but a
Righteousness which standeth in the
Union of both Natures: and may properly
be called, the Righteousness that
is essential to his being prepared of God
to the capacity of the Mediatory Office
which he was to be intrusted with.
If he parts with his first Righteousness,
he parts with his God-head; if he parts
with his second Righteousness, he parts
with the purity of his Manhood; if he
parts with this third, he parts with
that perfection that capacitates him to
the Office of Mediation. He has therefore

another Righteousness which standeth
in performance, or obedience to a
revealed Will: And that is it that he
puts upon Sinners, and that by which
their Sins are covered. Wherefore he
saith, as by one mans disobedience many
were made Sinners:  So by the obedience
of one shall many be made Righteous.
Chris. But are the other Righteousnesses
of no use to us?
Great-heart. Yes, for though they
are essential to his Natures and Office,
and so cannot be communicated unto
another, yet it is by Virtue of them,
that the Righteousness that justifies, is
for that purpose efficacious. The Righteousness
of his God-head gives Virtue to
his Obedience; the Righteousness of his
Man-hood giveth capability to his obedience
to justifie, and the Righteousness
that standeth in the Union of
these two Natures to his Office, giveth
Authority to that Righteousness to
do the work or which it is ordained.
So then, here is a Righteousness that
Christ, as God, has no need of, for he
is God without it: here is a Righteousness
that Christ, as Man, has no need
of to make him so, for he is perfect
Man without it. Again, here is a Righteousness
that Christ as God-man has
no need of, for he is perfectly so without
it. Here then is a Righteousness
that Christ, as God, as Man, as God-man
has no need of, with Reference to himself,

and therefore he can spare it, a
justifying Righteousness, that he for
himself wanteth not, and therefore he
giveth it away. Hence 'tis called the
gift of Righteousness. This Righteousness,
since Christ Jesus the Lord, has made
himself under the Law,  must be given
away: For the Law doth, not only
bind him that is under it, to do justly;
but to use Charity: Wherefore he must,
he ought by the Law, if he hath two
Coats, to give one to him that has
none. Now our Lord hath indeed two
Coats, one for himself, and one to spare:
Wherefore he freely bestows one upon
those that have none. And thus
Christiana, and Mercy, and the rest of
you that are here, doth your Pardon
come by deed, or by the work of another
man? Your Lord Christ is he
that has worked, and given away what he
wrought for to the next poor Begger he
meets.
But again, in order to Pardon by
deed, there must something be paid to
God as a price, as well as something
prepared to cover us withal. Sin has
delivered us up to the just Curse of a
Righteous Law: Now from this Curse
we must be justified by way of Redemption,
a price being paid for the harms
we have done, and this is by the Blood
of your Lord: Who came and stood in
your place, and stead, and died your
Death for your Transgressions. Thus
has he ransomed you from your Transgressions 

by Blood, and covered your
poluted and deformed Souls with Righteousness:
For the sake of which,
God passeth by you,  and will not hurt
you, when he comes to Judge the
World.
Chris.Christiana affected with this way of Redemption. This is brave. Now I see that
there was something to be learnt by our being
pardoned by word and deed. Good Mercie,
let us labour to keep this in mind,
and my Children do you remember it also.
But, Sir, was not this it that made my good
Christians Burden fall from off his Shoulder,
and that made him give three leaps
for Joy?
Great-heart. Yes, 'twas the belief
of this, that cut those Strings that could
not be cut by other means, and 'twas
to give him a proof of the Virtue of
this, that he was suffered to carry his
Burden to the Cross.
Chris. I thought so, for tho' my heart
was lightful and joyous before, yet it is ten
times more lightsome and joyous now. And
I am perswaded by what I have felt, tho' I
have felt but little as yet, that if the most
burdened Man in the World was here, and
did see and believe, as I now do, 'twould
make his heart the more merry and
blithe.
Great-heart. There is not only comfort,
and the ease of a Burden brought
to us, by the sight and Consideration of
these; but an indeared Affection begot
in us by it: For who can, if he doth
but once think that Pardon comes,

not only by promise, but thus; but be
affected with the way and means of his
Redemption, and so with the man that
hath wrought it for him?
Chris. True, methinks it makes my
Heart bleed to think that he should bleed
for me. Oh! thou loving one, Oh!  thou
Blessed one. Thou deservest to have me,
thou hast bought me: Thou deservest to have
me all, thou hast paid for me ten thousand
times more than I am worth. No
marvel that this made the Water stand
in my Husbands Eyes, and that it made
him trudg so nimbly on. I am perswaded
he wished me with him; but vile wretch,
that I was, I let him come all alone. O
Mercy, that thy Father and Mother were
here, yea, and Mrs. Timorous also. Nay,
I wish now with all my Heart, that here
was Madam Wanton too. Surely, surely,
their Hearts would be affected, nor
could the fear of the one, nor the powerful
Lusts of the other, prevail with them to go
home again, and to refuse to become good
Pilgrims.
Great-heart. You speak now in the
warmth of your Affections, will it,
think you, be always thus with you?
Besides, this is not communicated to
every one, not to every one that did
see your Jesus bleed. There was that
stood by, and that saw the Blood run
from his Heart to the Ground, and yet
was so far off this, that instead of lamenting,
they laughed at him, and instead of
becoming his Disciples, did harden

their Hearts against him. So that all
that you have, my Daughters, you
have by a peculiar impression made by
a Divine contemplating upon what I
have spoken to you. Remember that
'twas told you, that the Hen by her
common call, gives no meat to her
Chickens. This you have therefore by a
special Grace.
Now I saw still in my Dream, that
they went on until they were come to
the place that Simple,Simple and Sloth and Presumption hanged, and why. and Sloth, and
Presumption lay and stept in, when Christian
went by on Pilgrimage. And behold
they were hanged up in Irons a little
way off on the other-side.
Mercy. Then said Mercy to him that
was their Guide, and Conductor, What are
those three men? and for what are they hanged
there?
Great-heart. These three men, were
Men of very bad Qualities, they had no
mind to be Pilgrims themselves, and
whosoever they could they hindred;
they were for sloth and folly themselves,
and whoever they could perswade
with, they made so too, and
withal taught them to presume that they
should do well at last. They were asleep
when Christian went by, and now
you go by they are hanged.
Mercy. But could they perswade any to
be of their Opinion?
Great-heart. Yes, they turned several
out of the way.Their Crimes. There was Slow-pace
that they perswaded to do as they.

They also prevailed with one Short-wind,
with one No-heart, with one Linger-after-lust,
and with one Sleepy-head, and
with a young Woman her name was
Dull, to turn out of the way and become
as they. Besides, they brought
up an ill-report of your Lord, perswading
others that he was a task-Master.
They also brought up an evil reporr of
the good Land, saying, 'twas not half
so good as some pretend it was: They
also began to villifie his Servants, and
to count the very best of them meddlesome,
troublesome busie-Bodies:
Further, they would call the Bread of
God Husks; the Comforts of his Childrens
Fancies, the Travel and Labour
of Pilgrims, things to no purpose.
Chris. Nay, said Christiana, if they
were such, they shall never be bewailed by
me, they have but what they deserve, and
I think it is well that they hang so near
the High-way that others may see and take
warning. But had it not been well if
their Crimes had been ingraven in some
Plate of Iron or Bra&esset;, and left here, even
where they did their Mischiefs, for a caution
to other bad Men.
Great-heart. So it is, as you well may
perceive if you will go a little to the
Wall.
Mercie. No, no, let them hang, and
their Names Rot, and their Crimes live
for ever against them; I think it a high favour
that they were hanged afore we came

hither, who knows else what they might
a done to such poor Women as we are? Then
she turned it into a Song, saying,

 Now then, you three, hang there and be a Sign
To all that shall against the Truth combine:
And let him that comes after, fear this end,
If unto Pilgrims he is not a Friend.
 And thou my Soul of all such men beware,
That unto Holiness Opposers are.
 Thus they went on till they came at
the foot of the Hill Difficulty. Where
again their good Friend, Mr. Great-heart,
 took an occasion to tell them of
what happened there when Christian
himself went by. So he had them first
to the Spring.'Tis difficult getting of good Doctrine in erroneous Times. Lo, saith he, This is the
Spring that Christian drank of, before
he went up this Hill, and then 'twas
clear, and good; but now 'tis Dirty
with the feet of some that are not desirous
that Pilgrims here should quench
their Thirst: Thereat Mercy said, And
why so envious tro? But said their Guide,
It will do, if taken up, and put into a
Vessel that is sweet and good; for then
the Dirt will sink to the bottom, and
the Water come out by it self more
clear. Thus therefore Christiana and
her Companions were compelled to do.
They took it up, and put it into an
Earthen-pot, and so let it stand till the
Dirt was gone to the bottom, and then
they drank thereof.

Next he shewed them the two by-ways
that were at the foot of the Hill,
where Formality and Hypocrisie, lost themselves.
And, said he, these are dangerous
Paths: Two were here cast away
when Christian came by. And although, 
as you see, these ways are since stopt
up with Chains, Posts and a Ditch: Yet
there are that will chuse to adventure
here, rather then take the pains to go
up this Hill.
Christiana.  The way of Transgressors
is hard. 'Tis a wonder that they can get into
those ways, without danger of breaking
their Necks.
Greatheart. They will venture, yea,
if at any time any of the Kings Servants
doth happen to see them, and doth call
unto them, and tell them that they are
in the wrong ways, and do bid them beware
the danger: Then they will railingly
return them answer and say, 
As for the Word that thou hast spoken unto
us in the name of the King, we will not
hearken unto thee; but we will certainly
do whatsoever thing goeth out of our own
Mouths, &c. Nay if you look a little
farther, you shall see that these ways,
are made cautionary enough, not only
by these Posts and Ditch and Chain;
but also by being hedged up. Yet
they will chuse to go there.
Christiana. They are Idle, they love not
to take Pains, up-hill-way is unpleasant to
them. So it is fulfilled unto them as it
is Written.  The way of the slothful man

is a Hedg of Thorns. Yea, they will rather
chuse to walk upon a Snare, then to
go up this Hill, and the rest of this way to the
City.
Then they set forward, and began to
go up the Hill, and up the Hill they
went; but before they got to the top,
Christiana began to Pant,The Hill puts the Pilgrims to it. and said, I
dare say this is a breathing Hill, no
marvel if they that love their ease more
than their Souls, chuse to themselves a
smoother way. Then said Mercie, I
must sit down, also the least of the
Children began to cry.They sit in the Arbour. Come, come,
said Great-heart, sit not down here, for
a little above is the Princes Arbour. Then
took he the little Boy by the Hand, and
led him up thereto.
When they were come to the Arbour, 
they were very willing to sit down, for
they were all in a pelting heat. Then
said Mercy, How sweet is rest to
them that Labour?  And how good is the
Prince of Pilgrims, to provide such
resting places for them? Of this Arbour
I have heard much; but I never saw
it before. But here let us beware of
sleeping: For as I have heard, for that
it cost poor Christian dear.
Then said Mr. Great-heart to the little
ones,The little Boys answer to the guide, and also to Mercy. Come my pretty Boys, how do you
do? what think you now of going on
Pilgrimage? Sir, said the least, I was
almost beat out of heart; but I thank
you for lending me a hand at my need.
And I remember now what my Mother

has told me, namely, That the
way to Heaven is as up a Ladder, and
the way to Hell is as down a Hill. But
I had rather go up the Ladder to Life,
then down the Hill to Death.
Then said Mercie, But the Proverb
says, To go down the Hill, is easie: But
James said (for that was his Name)
The day is coming when in my Opinion,
going down Hill will be the hardest of all.
'Tis a good Boy, said his Master, thou
hast given her a right answer. Then
Mercy smiled, but the little Boy did
blush.
Chris. Come, said Christiana,They refresh themselves. will you
eat a bit, a little to sweeten your
Mouths, while you sit here to rest your
Legs? For I have here a piece of
Pomgranate which Mr. Interpreter put in
my Hand, just when I came out of his
Doors; he gave me also a piece of
an Honey-comb, and a little Bottle of
Spirits. I thought he gave you something,
said Mercy, because he called you
a to-side. Yes, so he did, said the other.
But Mercy, It shall still be as I
said it should, when at first we came
from home: Thou shalt be a sharer in
all the good that I have, because thou
so willingly didst become my Companion.
Then she gave to them, and they
did eat, both Mercy, and the Boys.
And said Christiana to Mr. Great-heart,
Sir will you do as we? But he answered,
You are going on Pilgrimage, and presently
I shall return; much good may

what you have, do to you. At home
I eat the same every day. Now when
they had eaten and drank, and had
chatted a little longer, their guide
said to them, The day wears away,
if you think good, let us prepare to
be going. So they got up to go, and
the little Boys went before; but Christiana
forgat to take her Bottle of Spirits
with her, so she sent her little
Boy back to fetch it. Then said Mercy,
I think this is a losing Place. Here
Christian lost his Role, and here Christiana
left her Bottle behind her: Sir,
what is the cause of this? so their guide
made answer and said, The cause is
sleep, or forgetfulness; some sleep, when
they should keep awake; and some forget,
when they should remember; and
this is the very cause, why often at the
resting places, some Pilgrims in some
things come off losers. Pilgrims should
watch and remember what they have
Mark this.already received under their greatest
enjoyments: But for want of doing so,
oft times their rejoicing ends in
Tears, and their Sun-shine in a Cloud:
 Witness the story of Christian at this
place.
When they were come to the place
where Mistrust and Timorous met Christian
to perswade him to go back for fear
of the Lions, they perceived as it were
a Stage, and before it towards the
Road, a broad plate with a Copy of
Verses Written thereon, and underneath,

the reason of the raising up of
that Stage in that place, rendered. The
Verses were these.

 Let him that sees this Stage take heed,
Unto his Heart and Tongue:
Lest if he do not, here he speed
As some have long agone.
The words underneath the Verses
were. This Stage was built to punish
such upon, who through Timorousness, or
Mistrust, shall be afraid to go farther on
Pilgrimage. Also on this Stage both Mistrust,
and Timorous were burned thorough
the Tongue with an hot Iron, for endeavouring
to hinder Christian in his
Journey.
Then said Mercy. This is much like
to the saying of the beloved,  What shall
be given unto thee? or what shall be done
unto thee thou false Tongue? sharp Arrows
of the mighty, with Coals of Juniper.
So they went on,  till they came
within sight of the Lions. Now Mr.
Great-heart was a strong man, so he was
not afraid of a Lion.An Emblem of those that go on bravely, when there is no danger; but shrink when troubles come. But yet when
they were come up to the place where
the Lions were, the Boys that went
before, were now glad to cringe behind,
for they were afraid of the Lions, so
they stept back and went behind. At
this their guide smiled, and said, How
now my Boys, do you love to go
before when no danger doth approach,

and love to come behind so soon as the
Lions appear?
Now as they went up, Mr. Great-heart
drew his Sword with intent to
make a way for the Pilgrims in spite of
the Lions. Then there appeared one,
that it seems, had taken upon him to
back the Lions.Of Grim the Giant, and of his backing the Lions. And he said to the Pilgrims
guide, What is the cause of your
coming hither? Now the name of
that man was Bloody-man, because of his
slaying of Pilgrims, and he was of the
race of the Gyants.
Great-heart. Then said the Pilgrims guide,
these Women and Children, are going
on Pilgrimage, and this is the way they
must go, and go it they shall in spite of
thee and the Lions.
Grim. This is not their way, neither
shall they go therein. I am come forth
to withstand them, and to that end will
back the Lions.
Now to say truth, by reason of the
fierceness of the Lions, and of the Grim-Carriage
of him that did back them,
this way had of late lain much un-occupied,
and was almost all grown over
with Grass.
Christiana. Then said Christiana, Tho'
he High-ways have been un-occupied
heretofore, and tho' the Travellers have
been made in time past, to walk thorough
by-Paths, it must not be so now I
am risen,  Now I am Risen a Mother in Israel.

Grim. Then he swore by the Lions, but
it should; and therefore bid them turn
aside, for they should not have passage
there.
Great-heart. But their guide made first
his Approach unto Grim, and laid so
heavily at him with his Sword, that he
forced him to a retreat.
Grim. Then said he (that attempted
to back the Lions) will you slay me upon
mine own Ground?
Great-heart. 'Tis the Kings High-way
that we are in, and in his way it is
that thou hast placed thy Lions; but
these Women and these Children, tho'
weak, shall hold on their way in spite of
thy Lions. And with that he gave him
again, a down-right blow, and brought
him upon his Knees. With this blow
he also broke his Helmet, and with the
next he cut off an Arm. Then did the
Giant Roar so hideously, that his Voice
frighted the Women, and yet they were
glad to see him lie sprawling upon the
Ground. Now the Lions were chained,
and so of themselves could do nothing.
Wherefore when old Grim that intended
to back them was dead, Mr.
Great-heart said to the Pilgrims, Come
now and follow me, and no hurt shall
happen to you from the Lions. They
therefore went on; but the Women
trembled as they passed by them, the
Boys also look't as if they would die;
but they all got by without further hurt.

Now then they were within sight of
the Porters Lodg, and they soon came
up unto it; but they made the more
haste after this to go thither, because
'tis dangerous travelling there in the
Night. So when they were come to
the Gate, the guide knocked, and the
Porter cried, who is there; but as soon
as the Guide had said, it is I, he knew
his Voice and came down. (For the
Guide had oft before that, came thither
as a Conductor of Pilgrims) when
he was come down, he opened the Gate,
and seeing the Guide standing just before
it (for he saw not the Women,
for they were behind him) he said unto
him, How now, Mr. Great-heart, what
is your business here so late to Night?
I have brought, said he, some Pilgrims
hither, where by my Lords Commandment
they must Lodg. I had been
here some time ago, had I not been opposed
by the Giant that did use to back
the Lyons. But I after a long and
tedious combate with him, have cut him
off, and have brought the Pilgrims hither
in safety.
Porter. Will you not go in, and stay till
Morning?
Great-heart. No, I will return to my
Lord to night.
Christiana. Oh Sir, I know not how
to be willing you should leave us in our
Pilgrimage, you have been so faithful,
and so loving to us, you have fought so
stoutly for us, you have been so hearty

in counselling of us, that I shall never
forget your favour towards us.
Mercie. Then said Mercie, O that we
might have thy Company to our Journeys
end! How can such poor Women
as we, hold out in a way so full of Troubles
as this way is, without a Friend, and
Defender?
James. Then said James, the youngest
of the Boys, Pray Sir be perswaded
to go with us, and help us, because we
are so weak, and the way so dangerous
as it is.
Great-heart. I am at my Lords Commandment.
If he shall allot me to be
your Guide quite thorough, I will
willingly wait upon you; but here you
failed at first;Help lost for want of asking for. for when he bid me
come thus far with you, then you should
have begged me of him to have gon
quite thorough with you, and he
would have granted your request. However,
at present I must withdraw, and
so good Christiana, Mercy, and my
brave Children, Adieu.
Then the Porter, Mr. Watchfull, asked
Christiana of her Country,1 Part pag. 70. and of
her Kindred, and she said, I came
from the City of Destruction, I am a Widdow
Woman, and my Husband is dead,
his Name was Christian the Pilgrim. How,
said the Porter, was he your Husband?
Yes, said she, and these are his Children;
and this, pointing to Mercy, is
one of my Towns-Women. Then the
Porter rang his Bell, as at such times

he is wont, and there came to the
Door one of the Damsels, whose Name
was humble-mind. And to her the Porter
said, Go tell it within that Christiana
the Wife of Christian and her Children
are come hither on Pilgrimage. She
went in therefore and told it. But Oh
what a Noise for gladness was there
within, when the Damsel did but drop
that word out of her Mouth?
So they came with haste to the Porter,
for Christiana stood still at the
Door; then some of the most grave, said
unto her, Come in Christiana, come in
thou Wife of that Good Man, come in thou
Blessed Woman, come in with all that are
with thee. So she went in, and they
followed her that were her Children,
and her Companions. Now when they
were gone in, they were had into a
very large Room, where they were
bidden to sit down: So they sat down,
Christians love is kindled at the sight of one another.and the chief of the House was called to
see, and welcome the Guests. Then
they came in, and, understanding who
they were, did Salute each one with a
kiss, and said, Welcome ye Vessels
of the Grace of God, welcome to us your
Friends.
Now because it was somewhat late,
and because the Pilgrims were weary
with their Journey, and also made
faint with the sight of the Fight, and
of the terrible Lyons: Therefore they
desired as soon as might be, to prepare

to go to Rest.  Nay, said those of
the Family, refresh your selves first
with a morsel of Meat. For they had
prepared for them a Lamb,  with the accustomed
Sauce belonging thereto. For
the Porter had heard before of their
coming, and had told it to them within.
So when they had Supped, and ended
their Prayer with a Psalm, they desired
they might go to rest. But let us,  said
Christiana, if we may be so bold as to
chuse, be in that Chamber that was my
Husbands, when he was here. So they
had them up thither, and they lay all
in a Room. When they were at Rest,
Christiana and Mercy entred into discourse
about things that were convenient.
Chris. Little did I think once,Christs Bosome is for all Pilgrims. that when
my Husband went on Pilgrimage I should
ever a followed.
Mercy. And you as little thought of lying
in his Bed, and in his Chamber to
Rest, as you do now.
Chris. And much le&esset; did I ever think of
seeing his Face with Comfort, and of Worshipping
the Lord the King with him, and
yet now I believe I shall.
Mercy. Hark, don't you hear a
Noise?
Christiana. Yes, 'tis as I believe,
a Noise of Musick, for Joy that we are
here.
Mer. Wonderful!Musick. Musick in the House,
Musick in the Heart, and Musick also in
Heaven, for joy that we are here.

Thus they talked a while, and then
betook themselves to sleep; so in the
Morning, when they were awake Christiana
said to Mercy.
Chris. What was the matter that you
did laugh in your sleep to Night? I suppose you
was in a Dream?
Mercy. So I was, and a sweet Dream
it was; but are you sure I laughed?
Christiana. Yes, you laughed heartily;
But prethee Mercy tell me thy Dream?
Mercy.Mercy's Dream. I was a Dreamed that I sat all
alone in a solitary place, and was bemoaning
of the hardness of my Heart.
Now I had not sat there long, but
methought many were gathered about
me, to see me, and to hear what it
was that I said. So they harkened, and
I went on bemoaning the hardness of
my Heart. At this, some of them
laughed at me, some called me Fool,
and some began to thrust me about.
With that, methought I looked up, and
saw one coming with Wings towards
me. So he came directly to me, and
said, Mercy, what aileth thee? Now
when he had heard me make my complaint;
he said,  Peace be to thee: he also
wiped mine Eyes with his Hankerchief,
and clad me in Silver and Gold;
he put a Chain about my Neck, and
Ear-rings in mine Ears, and a beautiful
Crown upon my Head. Then he
took me by my Hand, and said, Mercy,
come after me. So he went up, and I
followed, till we came at a Golden

Gate. Then he knocked, and when
they within had opened, the man
went in and I followed him up to a
Throne, upon which one sat, and he
said to me, welcome Daughter. The place
looked bright, and twinkling like the
Stars, or rather like the Sun, and I
thought that I saw your Husband there,
so I awoke from my Dream. But did I
laugh?
Christiana. Laugh! Ay, and well you
might to see your self so well. For you must
give me leave to tell you, that I believe it
was a good Dream, and that as you have
begun to find the first part true, so you shall
find the second at last. God speaks once,
yea twice,  yet Man perceiveth it not.
in a Dream, in a Vision of the Night,
when deep sleep falleth upon men, in
slumbring upon the Bed. We need not,
when a-Bed, lie awake to talk with God;
He can visit us while we sleep, and cause
us then to hear his Voice. Our Heart oft
times wakes when we sleep, and God can
speak to that, either by Words, by Proverbs,
by Signs, and Similitudes, as well as if one
was awake.
Mercy. Well, I am glad of my Dream,
for I hope ere long to see it fulfilled,
to the making of me laugh again.
Christiana. I think it is now time to rise,
and to know what we must do?
Mercy. Pray, if they invite us to stay
awhile, let us willingly accept of the
proffer. I am the willinger to stay awhile
here, to grow better acquainted

with these Maids; methinks Prudence,
Piety and Charity, have very comly and
sober Countenances.
Chris. We shall see what they will do.
So when they were up and ready, they
came down. And they asked one another
of their rest, and if it was Comfortable,
or not?
Mer. Very good, said Mercy. It was one
of the best Nights Lodging that ever I had
in my Life.
Then said Prudence,They stay here some time. and Piety, If you
will be perswaded to stay here awhile,
you shall have what the House will afford.
Charity. Ay, and that with a very good
will, said Charity. So they consented,
and stayed there about a Month or above:
And became very Profitable one
to another. And because Prudence
would see how Christiana had brought
up her Children, she asked leave of her
to Catechise them? So she gave her
free consent. Then she began at the
youngest whose Name was James.
Pru. And she said, Come James, canst
thou tell who made thee?
Jam.James Catechised. God the Father, God the Son
and God the Holy-Ghost.
Pru. Good Boy. And canst thou tell who
saves thee?
Jam. God the Father, God the Son
and God the Holy Ghost.
Pru. Good Boy still. But how doth God
the Father save thee?
Jam. By his Grace.

Pru. How doth God the Son save
thee?
Jam. By his Righteousness, Death,
and Blood, and Life.
Pru. And how doth God the Holy Ghost
save thee?
Jam. By his Illumination, by his Renovation,
and by his Preservation.
Then said Prudence to Christiana, You
are to be commended for thus bringing
up your Children. I suppose I need not
ask the rest these Questions, since the
youngest of them can answer them so
well. I will therefore now apply my
self to the Youngest next.
Prudence. Then she said, Come Joseph,
(for his Name was Joseph) will you
let me Catechise you?
Joseph.Joseph Catechised. with all my Heart.
Pru. What is Man?
Joseph. A Reasonable Creature, so
made by God, as my Brother said.
Pru. What is supposed by this Word, saved?
Joseph. That man by Sin has brought
himself into a State of Captivity and Misery.
Pru. What is supposed by his being saved
by the Trinity?
Joseph. That Sin is so great and mighty
a Tyrant, that none can pull us out of
its clutches but God, and that God is so
good and loving to man, as to pull him
indeed out of this Miserable State.
Pru. What is Gods design in saving of
poor Men?

Joseph. The glorifying of his Name,
of his Grace, and Justice, &c. And
the everlasting Happiness of his Creature.
Pru. Who are they that must be saved?
Joseph. Those that accept of his Salvation.
Good Boy Joseph, thy Mother has
taught thee well, and thou hast
harkened to what she has said unto
thee.
Then said Prudence to Samuel, who
was the eldest but one.
Prudence. Come Samuel are you
willing that I should Catechise you
also?
Sam.Samuel Catechised. Yes, forsooth, if you please.
Pru. What is Heaven?
Sam. A palce, and State most blessed,
because God dwelleth there.
Pru. What is Hell?
Sam. A Place and State most woful,
because it is the dwelling place of Sin,
the Devil, and Death.
Prudence. Why wouldest thou go to Heaven?
Sam. That I may see God, and serve
him without weariness; that I may see
Christ, and love him everlastingly; that
I may have that fulness of the Holy
Spirit in me, that I can by no means here
Joy.
Pru. A very good Boy also, and one that
has learned well.

Then she addressed her self to the
eldest, whose Name was Mathew, and
she said to him, Come Mathew shall I also
Catechise you?
Mat.Mathew Catechised. With a very good will.
Pru. I ask then, if there was ever any
thing that had a being, Antecedent to, or before
God?
Mat. No, for God is Eternal, nor is
there any thing excepting himself, that
had a being until the beginning of the
first day. For in six days the Lord made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that in
them is.
Pru. What do you think of the Bible?
Mat. It is the Holy Word of God.
Pru. Is there nothing Written therein, but
what you understand?
Mat. Yes, a great deal.
Pru. What do you do when you meet with
such places therein, that you do not understand?
Mat. I think God is wiser then I.
I pray also that he will please to let me
know all therein that he knows will be
for my good.
Pru. How believe you as touching the Resurrection
of the Dead?
Mat. I believe they shall rise, the same
that was buried: The same in Nature,
tho' not in Corruption. And I believe
this upon a double account. First because
God has promised it. Secondly,
because he is able to perform
it.

Then said Prudence to the Boys, You
must still harken to your Mother, for
she can learn you more. You must also
diligently give ear to what good talk you
shall hear from others, for for your sakes
do they speak good things. Observe also
and that with carefulness, what the
Heavens and the Earth do teach you;
but especially be much in the Meditation
of that Book that was the cause
of your Fathers becoming a Pilgrim.
I for my part, my Children, will teach
you what I can while you are here,
and shall be glad if you will ask me
Questions that tend to Godly edifying.
Now by that these Pilgrims had been
at this place a week,Mercy has a sweet heart. Mercy had a Visitor
that pretended some good Will unto
her, and his name was Mr. Brisk. A
man of some breeding, and that pretended
to Religion; but a man thut
stuck very closs to the World. So he
came once or twice, or more to Mercy,
and offered love unto her. Now Mercy
was of a fair Countenance, and therefore
the more alluring.
Her mind also was, to be always busying
of her self in doing, for when she
had nothing to do for her self, she
would be making of Hose and Garments
for others, and would bestow them upon
them that had need. And Mr. Brisk
not knowing where or how she disposed
of what she made, seemed to be
greatly taken, for that he found her

never Idle. I will warrant her a
good Huswife, quoth he to himself.
Mercy then revealed the business to
the Maidens that were of the House,
and enquired of them concerning him:
for they did know him better then she.
So they told her that he was a very
busie Young-Man, and one that pretended
to Religion; but was as they
feared, a stranger to the Power of that
which was good.
Nay then, said Mercy, I will look no more
on him, for I purpose never to have a clog to my
Soul.
Prudence then replied, That there needed
no great matter of discouragement
to be given to him, her continuing so
as she had began to do for the Poor,
would quickly cool his Courage.
So the next time he comes, he finds
her at her old work, a making of things
for the Poor. Then said he, What, always
at it? Yes, said she, either for my
self, or for others. And what canst thee
earn a day, quoth he? I do these things,
said she,  That I may be Rich in good
Works, laying up in store a good Foundation
against the time to come, that I may
lay hold on Eternal Life: Why prethee
what dost thou with them? said he.
Cloath the naked, said she. With that
his Countenance fell. So he forbore to
come at her again.He forsakes her, and why. And when he was
asked the reason why, he said, That
Mercy was a pretty la&esset;; but troubled

with ill Conditions.
When he had left her, Prudence said,
Mercy in the Practise of Mercy rejected; While Mercy in the Name of Mercy is liked.Did I not tell thee that Mr. Brisk would
soon forsake thee? yea he will raise up
an ill report of thee: For notwithstanding
his pretence to Religion, and his
seeming love to Mercy: Yet Mercy and
he are of tempers so different, that I
believe they will never come together.
Mercy. I might a had Husbands afore
now, tho' I spake not of it to any; but
they were such as did not like my Conditions,
tho' never did any of them find fault
with my Person: So they and I could not
agree.
Prudence. Mercy in our days is little set
by, any further then as to its Name:
the Practice, which is set forth by thy
Conditions, there are but few that can
abide.
Mercy. Well, said Mercy, if no body
will have me, I will dye a Maid, or my
Conditions shall be to me as a Husband.
For I cannot change my Nature, and to have
one that lies cro&esset; to me in this, that I purpose
never to admit of, as long as I live. I
had a Sister named Bountiful that was
married to one of these Churles; but he
and she could never agree; but because my
Sister was resolved to do as she had began,
that is, to show Kindne&esset; to the Poor, therefore
her Husband first cried her down at
the Cro&esset;, and then turned her out of his
Doors.

Pru. And yet he was a Professor, I
warrant you?
Mer. Yes, such a one as he was, and of
such as he, the World is now full; but I am for
none of them all.
Now Mathew the eldest Son of Christiana
fell Sick, and his Sickness was
sore upon him, for he was much pained
in his Bowels, so that he was with it,
at times, pulled as 'twere both ends together.
There dwelt also not far from
thence, one Mr. Skill, an Antient, and
well approved Physician. So Christiana
desired it, and they sent for him, and
he came. When he was entred the
Room, and had a little observed the
Boy, he concluded that he was sick of
the Gripes.Gripes of Conscience. Then he said to his Mother,
What Diet has Mathew of late fed
upon? Diet, said Christiana, nothing but
that which is wholsome. The Physician
answered, This Boy has been tampering
with something which lies in his Maw undigested,
and that will not away without
means. And I tell you he must be purged,
or else he will dye.
Samuel. Then said Samuel. Mother,
Mother, what was that which my Brother
did gather up and eat, so soon as we were
come from the Gate, that is at the head of
this way? You know that there was an Orchard
on the left hand, on the otherside of
the Wall, and some of the Trees hung over
the Wall, and my Brother did plash and did
eat.

Christiana. True my Child, said Christiana,
he did take thereof and did eat;
naughty Boy as he was, I did chide
him, and yet he would eat thereof.
Skill. I knew he had eaten something
that was not wholsome Food. And that
Food, to wit, that Fruit, is even the most
hurtful of all. It is the Fruit of Belzebubs
Orchard. I do marvel that none
did warn you of it; many have died
thereof.
Christiana. Then Christiana began to
cry, and she said, O naughty Boy, and O
careless Mother what shall I do for my
Son?
Skill. Come, do not be too much Dejected;
the Boy may do well again; but he
must purge and Vomit.
Christiana. Pray Sir try the utmost
of your Skill with him whatever it
costs?
Skill. Nay, I hope I shall be reasonable:
So he made him a Purge; but it was too
weak. 'Twas said, it was made of the
Blood of a Goat,  the Ashes of an Heiffer,
and with some of the Juice of Hyssop,
&c. When Mr. Skill had seen
that that Purge was too weak,  he made
him one to the purpose, 'Twas made
ex Carne & Sanguine Christi . (You
know Physicians give strange Medicines
to their Patients)  and it was made up
into Pills with a Promise or two, and
a proportionable quantity of Salt. Now
he was to take them three at a time

fasting in half a quarter of a Pint of
the Tears of Repentance. When this
potion was prepared,  and brought to
the Boy, he was loth to take it, tho'
torn with the Gripes, as if he should be
pulled in pieces. Come, come, said the
Physician, you must take it. It goes against
my Stomach, said the Boy. I must have
you take it, said his Mother.  I shall Vomit
it up again, said the Boy. Pray Sir, said
Christiana to Mr. Skill, how does it
taste? It has no ill taste, said the Doctor,
and with that she touched one of
the pills with the tip of her Tongue. Oh
Mathew, said she, this potion is sweeter
then Hony. If thou lovest thy Mother,
if thou lovest thy Brothers, if thou
lovest Mercy, if thou lovest thy Life,
take it. So with much ado, after a
short Prayer for the blessing of God upon
it, he took it; and it wrought
kindly with him. It caused him to
Purge, it caused him to sleep, and rest
quietly, it put him into a fine heat and
breathing sweat, and did quite rid him
of his Gripes.
So in little time he got up, and walked
about with a Staff,A word of God in the hand of his Faith. and would go
from Room to Room, and talk with Prudence,
Piety, and Charity of his Distemper,
and how he was healed.
So when the Boy was healed, Christiana
asked Mr. Skill, saying, Sir, what
will content you for your pains and 
care to and of my Child? And he said,
you must pay the Master of the Colledge

of Physicians, according to rules made, in
that case, and provided.
Chris. But Sir, said she, what is this Pill
good for else?
Skill. It is an universal Pill, 'tis good
against all the Diseases that Pilgrims are
incident to,This Pill an Universal Remedy. and when it is well prepared
it will keep good, time out of
mind.
Christiana. Pray Sir, make me up
twelve Boxes of them: For if I can
get these, I will never take other Physick.
Skill. These Pills are good to prevent
Diseases, as well as to cure when one is
Sick. Yea, I dare say it, and stand to
it, that if a man will but use this Physick
as he should,  it will make him live
forever. But, good Christiana, thou must
give these Pills, no other way; but as I
have prescribed:In a Gla&esset; of the Tears of Repentance. For if you do, they
will do no good. So he gave unto Christiana
Physick for her self, and her Boys,
and for Mercy: and bid Mathew take
heed how he eat any more Green
Plums, and kist them and went his
way.
It was told you before, That Prudence
bid the Boys, that if at any time they
would, they should ask her some Questions,
that might be profitable, and she
would say something to them.
Mat. Then Mathew who had been
sick,Of Physick. asked her, Why for the most part Physick
should be bitter to our Palats?

Pru.Of the Effects of Physick. To shew how unwelcome the
word of God, and the Effects thereof are
to a Carnal Heart.
Mathew. Why does Physick, if it
does good, Purge, and cause that we Vomit?
Prudence. To shew that the Word
when it works effectually, cleanseth the
Heart and Mind. For look what the
one doth to the Body, the other doth to
the Soul.
Mathew.Of Fire and of the Sun. What should we learn by seeing
the Flame of our Fire go upwards? and by
seeing the Beams, and sweet Influences of the
Sun strike downwards?
Prudence. By the going up of the Fire,
we are taught to ascend to Heaven, by
fervent and hot desires. And by the
Sun his sending his Heat, Beams, and
sweet Influences downwards, we are
taught, that the Saviour of the World,
tho' high, reaches down with his Grace
and Love to us below.
Mathew.Of the Clouds. Where have the Clouds their
Water?
Pru. Out of the Sea.
Mathew. What may we learn from
that?
Pru. That Ministers should fetch their
Doctrine from God.
Mat. Why do they empty themselves upon
the Earth?
Prudence. To shew that Ministers
should give out what they know of God
to the World.

Mat.Of the Rain-bow. Why is the Rainbow caused by the
Sun?
Prudence. To shew that the Covenant
of Gods Grace is confirmed to us in
Christ.
Mathew. Why do the Springs come
from the Sea to us, thorough the Earth?
Prudence. To shew that the Grace of
God comes to us thorough the Body of
Christ.
Mathew.Of the Springs. Why do some of the Springs rise
out of the tops of high Hills?
Prudence. To shew that the Spirit of
Grace shall spring up in some that are
Great, and Mighty, as well as in many
that are Poor and low.
Mat.Of the Candle. Why doth the Fire fasten upon the
Candle-wick?
Prudence. To shew that unless Grace
doth kindle upon the Heart, there will
be no true Light of Life in us.
Mathew. Why is the Wick and Tallow
and all, spent to maintain the light of the
Candle?
Prudence. To shew that Body and
Soul and all, should be at the Service
of, and spend themselves to maintain
in good Condition that Grace of God
that is in us.
Mathew.Of the Pelican. Why doth the Pelican pierce her
own Brest with her Bill?
Prudence. To nourish her Young ones
with her Blood, and thereby to shew
that Christ the blessed, so loveth his
Young, his People, as to save them from
Death by his Blood.

Mat.Of the Cock. What may one learn by hearing the
Cock to Crow?
Prudence. Learn to remember Peter's
Sin, and Peter's Repentance. The Cocks
crowing, shews also that day is coming
on, let then the crowing of the Cock
put thee in mind of that last and terrible
Day of Judgment.
Now about this time their month was
out, wherefore they signified to those of
the House that 'twas convenient for them
to up and be going.The weak may sometimes call the strong to Prayers. Then said Joseph
to his Mother, It is convenient that
you forget not to send to the House of
Mr. Interpreter, to pray him to grant
that Mr. Great-heart should be sent unto
us, that he may be our Conductor
the rest of our way. Good Boy, said she,
I had almost forgot. So she drew up a
Petition, and prayed Mr. Watchful the
Porter to send it by some fit man to her
good Friend Mr. Interpreter; who when
it was come, and he had seen the contents
of the Petitions, said to the
Messenger, Go tell them that I will
send him.
When the Family where Christiana
was, saw that they had a purpose to
go forward, they called the whole House
together to give thanks to their King,
for sending of them such profitable
Guests as these. Which done they said
to Christiana, And shall we not shew
thee something, according as our Custom
is to do to Pilgrims, on which thou
mayest meditate when thou art upon

the way? So they took Christiana, her
Children and Mercy into the Closet, and
shewed them one of the Apples that Eve
did eat of, and that she also did give
to her Husband, and that for the eating
of which they both were turned out of
Paradice,A sight of Sin is amazing. and asked her what she
thought that was? Then Christiana said,
'Tis Food, or Poyson, I know not which;
so they opened the matter to her,  and
she held up her hands and wondered? 
Then they had her to a Place, and
shewed her Jacob's Ladder. Now at
that time there were some Angels ascending
upon it. So Christiana looked
and looked, to see the Angels go up,
and so did the rest of the Company.
Then they were going into another place
to shew them something else: But James
said to his Mother,A sight of Christ is taking. Pray bid them stay
here a little longer, for this is a curious
sight. So they turned again, and stood
feeding their Eyes with this so pleasant
a Prospect.  After this they had them
into a Place where did hang up a Golden
Anchor, so they bid Christiana take
it down;  for, said they, you shall have it
with you, for 'tis of absolute necessity
that you should, that you may lay hold
of that within the vail,  and stand stedfast,
in case you should meet with turbulent
weather: So they were glad
thereof. Then they took them, and
had them to the mount upon which
Abraham our Father,  had offered up

Isaac his Son, and shewed them the Altar,
the Wood, the Fire, and the Knife, for
they remain to be seen to this very Day.
When they had seen it, they held up
their hands and blest themselves, and
said, Oh! What a man, for love to his
Master, and for denial to himself, was
Abraham? After they had shewed them
all these things, Prudence took them into
the Dining-Room, where stood a
pair of Excellent Virginals, so she played
upon them, and turned what she had
shewed them into this excellent Song,
saying,

 Eve's Apple we have shewed you,
Of that be you aware:
You have seen Jacob's Ladder too,
Upon which Angels are.
 An Anchor you received have;
But let not these suffice,
Until with Abra'm you have gave,
Your best, a Sacrifice.
Now about this time one knocked
at the Door, So the Porter opened, and
behold Mr. Great-heart was there;Mr. Great-heart come again. but
when he was come in, what Joy was
there? For it came now fresh again into
their minds, how but a while ago he had
slain old Grim Bloody-man, the Giant,
and had delivered them from the Lions.

Then said Mr Greatheart to Christiana,
and to Mercy, My Lord has
sent each of you a Bottle of Wine,
and also some parched Corn, together
with a couple of Pomgranates.
He has also sent the Boys some Figs,
and Raisins to refresh you in your
way.
Then they addressed themselves to
their Journey, and Prudence, and
Piety went along with them. When
they came at the Gate, Christiana asked
the Porter, if any of late went
by. He said, No, only one some time
since: who also told me that of late
there had been a great Robbery committed
on the Kings High-way, as
you go: But he saith, the Thieves
are taken, and will shortly be Tryed
for their Lives. Then Christiana,
and Mercy was afraid; but Mathew
said, Mother fear nothing, as long
as Mr. Great-heart is to go with us, and to
be our Conductor.
Then said Christiana to the Porter,
Sir, I am much obliged to you
for all the Kindnesses that you have
shewed me since I came hither, and
also for that you have been so loving
and kind to my Children. I know
not how to gratifie your Kindness:
Wherefore pray as a token of my respects
to you, accept of this small
mite: So she put a Gold Angel in

his Hand, and he made her low
obeysance, and said, Let thy Garments
be always White, and let
thy Head want no Ointment. Let
Mercy live and not die, and let not
her Works be few. And to the Boys
he said, Do you fly Youthful lusts,
and follow after Godliness with them
that are Grave, and Wise, so shall
you put Gladness into your Mothers
Heart, and obtain Praise of all that
are sober minded. So they thanked
the Porter and departed.
Now I saw in my Dream, that they
went forward until they were come to
the Brow of the Hill, where Piety bethinking
her self cryed out, Ala&esset;!
I have forgot what I intended to bestow
upon Christiana, and her Companions.
I will go back and fetch it.
So she ran, and fetched it. While
she was gone, Christiana thought she
heard in a Grove a little way off, on
the Right-hand, a most curious Melodious
Note, with Words much like
these,

 Through all my Life thy Favour is
So frankly shew'd to me.
That in thy House for evermore
My dwelling place shall be.

And listning still she thought she heard
another answer it, saying,

 For why, the Lord our God is good,
His Mercy is forever sure:
His Truth at all times firmly stood:
And shall from Age to Age endure.
So Christiana asked Prudence, what
'twas that made those curious Notes?
They are,  said she, our Countrey Birds:
They sing these Notes but seldom,
except it be at the Spring, when
the Flowers appear, and the Sun shines
warm, and then you may hear them
all day long. I often, said she, go
out to hear them, we also oft times
keep them tame in our House. They
are very fine Company for us when
we are Melancholy, also they make the
Woods, and Groves, and Solitary places,
places desirous to be in.
By this time Piety was come again,
So she said to Christiana, Look
here, I have brought thee a Scheme
of all those things that thou hast
seen at our House: Upon which
thou mayest look when thou findest
thy self forgetful, and call those things
again to remembrance for thy Edification,
and comfort.

Now they began to go down the 
Hill into the Valley of Humiliation.
It was a steep Hill, and the way was
slippery; but they were very careful,
so they got down pretty well. When
they were down in the Valley, Piety
said to Christiana, This is the place
where Christian your Husband met
with the foul Fiend, Apollion, and
where they had that dreadful fight
that they had. I know you cannot
but have heard thereof. But be of
good Courage, as long as you have
here Mr. Great-heart to be your Guide
and Conductor, we hope you will fare
the better. So when these two had committed
the Pilgrims unto the Conduct
of their Guide, he went forward and
they went after.
Great-heart. Then said Mr. Great-heart,
We need not be so afraid of this
Valley: For here is nothing to hurt us,
unless we procure it to our selves.
'Tis true, Christian did here meet with
Apollion, with whom he also had a sore
Combate; but that frey, was the fruit
of those slips that he got in his going
down the Hill. For they that get slips
there, must look for Combats here. And
hence it is that this Valley has got 
so hard a name. For the common People
when they hear that some frightful
thing has befallen such an one in such
a place, are of an Opinion that that
place is haunted with some foul Fiend,

or evil Spirit; when alass it is for the
fruit of their doing, that such things do
befal them there.
This Valley of Humiliation is of it
self as fruitful a place, as any the Crow
flies over; and I am perswaded if we
could hit upon it, we might find
somewhere here abouts something
that might give us an account why
Christian was so hardly beset in this
place.
Then James said to his Mother,
Lo, yonder stands a Pillar, and it looks
as if something was Written thereon:
let us go and see what it is. So they
went, and found there Written, Let
Christian's slips before he came hither,A Pillar with an Inscription on it. and
the Battels that he met with in this place,
be a warning to those that come after. Lo,
said their Guide, did not I tell you,
that there was something here abouts
that would give Intimation of the reason
why Christian was so heard beset
in this place? Then turning himself
to Christiana, he said: No disparagement
to Christian more than to many
others, whose Hap and Lot his was.
For 'tis easier going up, then down this
Hill; and that can be said but of few
Hills in all these part of the World.
But we will leave the good Man, he
is at rest, he also had a brave Victory
over his Enemy; let him grant that
dwelleth above, that we fare no

worse when we come to be tryed
then he.
But we will come again to this Valley
of Humiliation. It is the best, and
most fruitful piece of Ground in all
those parts. It is fat Ground, and
as you see, consisteth much in Meddows:
and if a man was to come here
in the Summer-time as we do now,
if he knew not any thing before, thereof;
and if he also delighted himself
in the sight of his Eyes, he might see
that that would be delightful to him.
Behold, how green this Valley is, also
how beautified with Lillies.  I have
also known many labouring Men that
have got good Estates in this Valley 
of Humiliation.  (For God resisteth
the Proud; but gives more, more Grace to
the Humble)Men thrive in the Valley of Humiliation. for indeed it is a very
fruitful Soil, and doth bring forth by
handfuls. Some also have wished that
the next way to their Fathers House
were here, that they might be troubled
no more with either Hills or
Mountains to go over; but the way
is the way, and there's an end.
Now as they were going along and
talking, they espied a Boy feeding
his Fathers Sheep. The Boy was in
very mean Cloaths, but of a very
fresh and welfavoured Countenance,
and as he sate by himself he Sung.
Hark, said Mr. Great-heart, to what the

Shepherds Boy saith. So they hearkened,
and he said,

 He that is down, needs fear no fall,
He that is low, no Pride:
He that is humble,  ever shall
Have God to be his Guide.
 I am content with what I have,
Little be it, or much:
And, Lord, contentment still I crave,
Because thou savest such.
  Fulness to such a burden is
That go on Pilgrimage:
Here little, and hereafter Bliss,
Is best from Age to Age.
Then said their Guide, do you hear
him? I will dare to say, that this
Boy lives a merrier Life, and wears
more of that Herb called Hearts-ease in
his Bosom, then he that is clad in Silk,
and Velvet; but we will proceed in our
Discourse.
In this Valley,Christ when in the Flesh had his Countrey-House in the Valley of Humiliation. our Lord formerly
had his Countrey-House, he loved much
to be here. He loved also to walk these
Medows, for he found the Air was
pleasant. Besides here a man shall be free
from the Noise, and from the hurryings
of this Life, all States are full of
Noise and Confusion, only the Valley of
Humiliation, is that empty and Solitary

Place. Here a man shall not be so
let, and hindred in his Contemplation,
as in other places he is apt to be.
This is a Valley that no body walks in,
but those that love a Pilgrims Life.
And tho' Christian had the hard hap
to meet here with Apollion, and to enter
with him a brisk encounter: Yet I
must tell you, that in former times men
have met with Angels here,  have found
Pearls here, and have in this place
found the words of Life.
Did I say, our Lord had here in
former Days his Countrey-house, and
that he loved here to walk? I will
add, in this Place, and to the People
that live, and trace these Grounds he
has left a yearly revenue to be faithfully
payed them at certain Seasons,  for their
maintenance by the way, and for their
further incouragement to go on in their
Pilgrimage.
Simon. Now as they went on, Simon
said to Mr. Great-heart. Sir, I perceive
that in this Valley, my Father and Apollyon
had their Battel; but whereabout
was the Fight, for I perceive this Valley is
large?
Great-heart. Your Father had that
Battel with Apollyon at a place yonder,
before us, in a narrow Passage just beyond
Forgetful-Green.Forgetful-Green. And indeed that
place is the most dangerous place in

all these Parts. For if at any
time the Pilgrims meet with any
brunt, it is when they forget
what Favours they have received,
and how unworthy they are
of them. This was the Place
also where others have been hard
put to it. But more of the place
when we are come to it; for I
perswade my self, that to this
day there remains either some
sign of the Battel, or some Monument
to testifie that such a Battle
there was fought.
Mercy. Then said Mercy. I think
I am as well in this Valley, as
I have been any where else in
all our Journey: The place methinks
suits with my Spirit.Humility a sweet Grace. I
love to be in such places where
there is no ratling with Coaches,
nor rumbling with Wheels. Methinks
here one may without
much Molestation, be thinking
what he is, whence he came,
what he has done, and lo what
the King has called him. Here
one may think,  and break at Heart,

and melt in ones Spirit until ones
Eyes become like the Fish Pools of
Heshbon. They that go rightly
thorow this Valley of Baca make 
it a Well, the Rain that God
sends down from Heaven upon
them that are here also filleth the
Pools. This Valley is that from
whence also the King will give
to his their Vineyards,  and they
that go through it, shall sing, (as
Christian did, for all he met with
Apollyon.)
Great-heart. 'Tis true, said their
Guide,An Experiment of it. I have gon thorough this
Valley many a time, and never
was better then when here.
I have also been a Conduct to
several Pilgrims, and they have
confessed the same, To this man
will I look, saith the King, even to
him that is Poor, and of a contrite
Spirit, and that trembles at my
Word.
Now they were come to the
place where the afore mentioned
Battel was fought. Then said

the Guide to Christiana, her Children,
and Mercy: This is the
place, on this Ground Christian
stood, and up there came Apollyon
against him.The place where Christian and the Fiend did fight, some signs of the Battel remains. And look, did not
I tell you, hear is some of your
Husbands Blood upon these Stones
to this day: Behold also how
here, and there, are yet to be
seen upon the place, some of the
Shivers of Apollyon's broken Darts.
See also how they did beat the
Ground with their Feet, as they
fought to make good their Places
against each other, how also
with their by-blows, they did
split the very Stones in pieces.
Verily Christian did here play
the Man, and shewed himself as
stout, as could, had he been here,
even Hercules himself. When Apollyon
was beat, he made his retreat
to the next Valley, that is called
the Valley of the shadow of
Death, unto which we shall come
anon.
Lo yonder also stands a Monument
on which is Engraven this

Battle, and Christians Victory to
his Fame throughout all Ages.
So because it stood just on the
way-side before them, they stept
to it and read the Writing;
Which word for word was this,

 Hard by, here was a Battle fought,
Most strange, and yet most true.
Christian and Apollyon sought
Each other to subdue.
 The Man so bravely play'd the Man,A Monument of Christians Victory.
He made the Fiend to fly:
Of which a Monument I stand,
The same to testifie.
When they had passed by
this place, they came upon
the Borders of the shadow of
Death,  and this Valley was
longer then the other, a place
also most strangely haunted with
Evil things, as many are able to
testifie. But these Women and
Children went the better thorough
it, because they had daylight,
and because Mr. Great-heart
was their Conductor.

When they were entred upon
this Valley, they thought that
they heard a groaning as of dead
men: A very great groaning.
Groanings heard.They thought also they did hear
Words of Lamentation spoken,
as of some in extream Torment.
These things made the Boys to
quake; the Women also looked
pale and wan; but their
Guide bid them be of good Comfort.
So they went on a little further,
and they thought that
The Ground shakes.they felt the Ground begin to
shake under them, as if some
hollow place was there; they
heard also a kind of a hissing
as of Serpents; but nothing as
yet appeared. Then said the
Boys, Are we not yet at the end
of this Doleful place? But the
Guide also bid them be of good
Courage, and look well to their
Feet, lest haply, said he, you
be taken, in some Snare.

Now James began to be Sick;James sick with Fear.
but I think the cause thereof
was Fear, so his Mother gave
him some of that Glass of Spirits
that she had given her at
the Interpreters House, and three
of the Pills, and the Boy began
to revive. Thus they went on
till they came to about the middle
of the Valley, and then Christiana
said, Methinks I see something
yonder upon the Road
before us, a thing of a shape
such as I have not seen.The Fiend appears. Then
said Joseph, Mother, what is it?
An ugly thing, Child; an ugly
thing, said she. But Mother,
what is it like, said he? 'Tis
like I cannot tell what, said she.
And now it was but a little
way off. Then said she, it is
nigh.
Well, well, said Mr. Great-heart,
let them that are most afraid
keep close to me. So the
Fiend came on, and the Conductor
met it; but when it
was just come to him, it vanished

to all their sights. Then
remembred they what had been
said sometime ago. Resist the Devil,
and he will fly from you.
They went therefore on, as
being a little refreshed; but they
had not gone far, before Mercy
looking behind her, saw, as she
thought,A Lion. something, most like a
Lion, and it came a great padding
pace after; and it had a hollow
Voice of Roaring, and at every
Roar that it gave, it made all
the Valley Eccho, and their Hearts
to ake, save the Heart of him
that was their Guide. So it
came up, and Mr. Great-heart
went behind, and put the Pilgrims
all before him. The Lion
also came on a pace, and
Mr. Great-heart addressed himself
to give him Battel. But
when he saw that it was determined
 that resistance should be
made, he also drew back and came
no further.
