

Then they went on again, and their
Conductor did go before them, till they
came at a place where was cast up a
pit, the whole breadth of the way, and
before they could be prepared to go overA pit and darkness.
that, a great mist and a darkness
fell upon them, so that they could not
see. Then said the Pilgrims, alass! now
what shall we do? But their Guide
made answer; fear not, stand still and
see what an end will he put to this
also; so they stayed there because their
Path was marr'd. They then also thought
that they did hear more apparently the
noise and rushing of the Enemies,
the fire also and the smoke of the pit
was much easier to be discerned. Then
said Christiana to Mercy,Christiana now knows what her Husband felt. now I see what
my poor Husband went through. I
have heard much of this place, but I
never was here afore now; poor man,
he went here all alone in the night; he
had night almost quite through the
way, also these Fiends were busie about
him, as if they would have torn him
in pieces. Many have spoke of it, but
none can tell what the Valley of the
shaddow of death should mean, until
they come in it themselves. The heart
knows its own bitterness, and a stranger
intermeddleth not with its Joy. To
be here is a fearful thing.
Greath. This is like doing business in
great Waters, or like going down
into the deep; this is like being in the
heart of the Sea, and like going down

to the Bottoms of the Mountains.
Now it seems as if the Earth with its
bars were about us for ever. But let
them that walk in darkness and have no
light, trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon their God. For my part, as I have
told you already, I have gone often
through this Valley, and have been
much harder put to it, than now I am,
and yet you see I am alive. I would
not boast, for that I am not mine own
Saviour. But I trust we shall have a
good deliverance. Come let us pray
for light to him that can lighten our
darkness, and that can rebuke, not only
these, but all the Satans in Hell.
So they cried and prayed,They pray. and God
sent light and deliverance, for there was
now no lett in their way, no not there,
where but now they were stopt with a
pit.
Yet they were not got through the
Valley; so they went on still, and behold
great stinks and loathsome smells,
to the great annoyance of them. Then
said Mercy to Christiana, there is not such
pleasant being here, as at the Gate, or at
the Interpreters, or at the House where
we lay last.
O but, said one of the Boys, it is not so
bad to go through here, as it is to abide
here always, and for ought I know, one reason
why we must go this way to the House
prepared for us, is, that our home might be
made the sweeter to us.
Well said, Samuel, quoth the Guide,

thou hast now spoke like a man. Why,
if ever I get out here again, said the
Boy, I think I shall prise light, and good
way better than ever I did in all my
life. Then said the Guide, we shall be
out by and by.
So on they went, and Joseph said,
Cannot we see to the end of this Valley as
yet? Then said the Guide, Look to your
feet, for you shall presently be among
the Snares. So they looked to their
feet and went on; but they were troubled
much with the Snares. Now when
they were come among the Snares, they
espied a man cast into the Ditch on the
left hand, with his flesh all rent and
torn. Then said the Guide, That is one
Heedless,Heedless is slain, and Takeheed preserved. that was agoing this way; he
has lain there a great while. There was
on Takeheed with him, when he was
taken, and slain, but he escaped their
hands. You cannot imagine, how many
are killed here about, and yet men
are so foolishly venturous, as to set out
lightly on Pilgrimage, and to come
without a Guide. Poor Christian, it
was a wonder that he here escaped, but
he was beloved of his God, also he had
a good heart of his own, or else he
could never a-done it. Now they drew
towards the end of the way, and just
there, whree Christian had seen the Cave
when he went by,  out thence came
forth Maull a Gyant.Maull a Gyant. This Maull did
use to spoyl young Pilgrims with Sophistry,
and he called Great-heart by his

name, and said unto him, how many
times have you been forbidden to do
these things? Then said Mr. Great-heart,
what things? What things, quoth the
Gyant, you know what things; but I
will put an end to your trade. But
pray, said Mr. Great-heart, before we fall
to it, let us understand wherefore we
must fight (now the Women and Children
stood trembling, and knew not
what to do) quoth the Gyant, you rob
the Countrey, and rob it with the worst
of Thefts. These are but Generals,
said Mr. Great-heart, come to particulars,
man:
Then said the Giant, thou practises
the craft of a Kidnapper,God's Ministers counted as Kidnappers. thou gatherest
up Women, and Children, and carriest
them into a strange Countrey, to the
weakning of my Masters Kingdom. But
now Great-heart replied, I am a Servant
of the God of Heaven, my business is
to perswade sinners to Repentance, I
am commanded to do my endeavour to
turn Men, Women, and Children, from
darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan to God, and if this be indeed
the ground of thy quarrel,The Gyant and Mr. Great-heart must fight. let us fall to
it assoon as thou wilt.
Then the Giant, came up, and
Mr. Great-heart went to meet him,
and as he went he drew his Sword;
but the Giant had a Club. So without
more ado they fell to it, and
at the first blow the Giant stroke
Mr. Great-heart down upon one of his

knees; with that the Women, and
Children cried out.Weak folks prayers do sometimes help strong folks cries. So Mr. Great-heart
recovering himself, laid about him in
full lusty manner, and gave the Giant a
wound in his arm; thus he fought for
the space of an hour to that height of
heat, that the breath came out of the
Giants nostrils, as the heat doth out of
a boiling Caldron.
Then they sat down to rest them, but
Mr. Great-heart betook him to prayer,
also the Women and Children did nothing
but sigh and cry all the time that
the Battle did last.
When they had rested them, and
taken breath, they both fell to it again,
and Mr. Great-heart with a full blow
fetch't the Giant down to the ground.The Gyant struck down.
Nay hold, and let me recover, quoth he.
So Mr. Great-heart fairly let him get up;
so to it they went again; and the Giant
mist but little of all-to-breaking Mr.
Great-heart's Scull with his Club.
Mr. Great-heart seeing that, runs to
him in the full heat of his Spirit, and
pierceth him under the fifth rib; with
that the Giant began to faint, and could
hold up his Club no longer. Then Mr.
Great-heart seconded his blow, and smit
the head of the Giant from his shoulders.
Then the Women and Children
rejoyced, and Mr. Great-heart also praised
God, for the deliverance he had
wrought.
When this was done, they amongst
them erected a Pillar, and fastned the

Gyant's head thereon,He is slain, and his head disposed of. and wrote underneath
in Letters that Passingers might
read.

He that did wear this head, was one
That Pilgrims did misuse;
He stopt their way, he spared none,
But did them all abuse;
Until that I, Great-heart, arose,
The Pilgrims Guide to be;
Until that I did him oppose,
That was their Enemy.
Now I saw,  that they went to the Ascent
that was a little way off cast up to
be a Prospect for Pilgrims. (That was
the place from whence Christian had the
first sight of Faithful his Brother.)
Wherefore here they sat down, and rested,
they also here did eat and drink,
and make merry; for that they had
gotten deliverance from this so dangerous
an Enemy. As they sat thus and
did eat, Christiana asked the Guide, if
he had caught no hurt in the battle. Then
said Mr. Great-heart, no, save a little on
my flesh; yet that also shall be so far
from being to my determent, that it is
at present a proof of my love to my
Master, and you, and shall be a means
by Grace to encrease my reward at last. 
But was you not afraid, good Sir, when
you see him come with his Club?Discourse of the fights.
It is my Duty, said he, to distrust
mine own ability, that I may have reliance
on him that is stronger then all.

But what did you think when he fetched you
down to the ground at the first blow? Why
I thought, quoth he, that so my Master
himself was served, and yet he it was
that conquered at the last.Mat. here admires Goodness. Matt. When
you all have thought what you please, I
think God has been wonderful good unto
us, both in bringing us out of this Valley,
and in delivering us out of the hand of this
Enemy; for my part I see no reason why
we should distrust our God any more, since
he has now, and in such a place as this,
given us such testimony of his love as this.
Then they got up and went forward,Old Honest asleep under an Oak.
now a little before them stood an Oak,
and under it when they came to it, they
found an old Pilgrim fast asleep, they
knew that he was a Pilgrim by his Cloths,
and his Staff, and his Girdle.
So the Guide Mr. Great-heart awaked
him, and the old Gentleman, as he lift
up his eyes, cried out; What's the matter?
who are you? and what is your
business here?
Great. Come man be not so hot, here is
none but Friends; yet the old man gets
up and stands upon his guard, and will
know of them what they were. Then
said the Guide, my name is Great-heart,
I am the guide of these Pilgrims which
are going to the Celestial Countrey.
Honest. Then said Mr. Honest,One Saint sometimes takes another for his Enemy. I cry
you mercy; I fear'd that you had been
of the Company of those that some
time ago did rob Little faith of his money;
but now I look better about me,

I perceive you are honester People.
Greath. Why what would, or could
you adone, to a helped your self, if we indeed
had been of that Company?
Hon. Done! Why, I would a fought
as long as Breath had been in me; and
had I so done, I am sure you could never
have given me the worst on't, for
a Christian can never be overcome, unless
he shall yield of himself.
Greath. Well said, Father Honest,
quoth the Guide, for by this I know thou
art a Cock of the right kind, for thou hast
said the Truth.
Hon. And by this also I know that
thou knowest what true Pilgrimage is;
for all others do think that we are the
soonest overcome of any.
Greath.Whence Mr. Honest came. Well now we are so happily met,
pray let me crave your Name, and the name
of the Place you came from?
Hon. My Name I cannot, but I came
from the Town of Stupidity; it lieth about
four Degrees beyond the City of
Destruction.
Greath. Oh! Are you that Countryman
then? I deem I have half a guess of you,
your Name is old Honesty, is it not? So
the old Gentleman blushed, and said,
Not Honesty in the Abstract, but Honest
is my Name, and I wish that my Nature
shall agree to what I am called.
Hon. But Sir, said the old Gentleman,
how could you guess that I am such a
Man, since I came from such a place?
Greath. I had heard of you before, by

my Master,Stupified ones are worse then those meerly Carnal. for he knows all things that
are done on the Earth: But I have often
wondered that any should come from your
place; for your Town is worse then is the
City of Destruction it self.
Hon. Yes, we lie more off from the
Sun, and so are more Cold and Sensless;
but was a Man in a Mountain of Ice, yet
if the Sun of Righteousness will arise
upon him, his frozen Heart shall feel a
Thaw; and thus it hath been with me.
Greath. I believe it, Father Honest, I
believe it, for I know the thing is true.
Then the old Gentleman saluted all
the Pilgrims with a holy Kiss of Charity,
and asked them of their Names, and
how they had faired since they set out
on their Pilgrimage.
Christ. Then said Christiana, my Name
I suppose you have heard of, good
Christian was my Husband, and these four
were his Children. But can you think
how the old Gentleman was taken, when
she told them who she was! He skip'd,
he smiled, and blessed them with a
thousand good Wishes, saying,
Hon. I have heard much of your Husband,
and of his Travels and Wars which he underwent
in his days. Be it spoken to your
Comfort, the Name of your Husband rings
all over these parts of the World. His Faith,
his Courage, his Enduring, and his Sincerity
under all, has made his Name Famous.
Then he turned him to the
Boys, and asked them of their Names,
which they told him: And then said he

unto them,Old Mr. Honest's Blessing on them. Matthew, be thou like Matthew
the Publican, not in Vice, but
Virtue. Samuel, said he, be thou like
Samuel the Prophet, a Man of Faith and
Prayer.  Joseph, said he, be thou like
Joseph in Potiphar's House,  Chast, and
one that flies from Temptation.  And,
James.  be thou like James the Just, and
like James the Brother of our Lord.
Then they told him of Mercy, and how
she had left her Town and her Kindred
to come along with Christiana, and with
her Sons. At that the old Honest Man
said, Mercy, is thy Name? by Mercy shalt
thou be sustained, and carried thorough
all those Difficulties that shall assault
thee in thy way; till thou shalt come
thither where thou shalt look the Fountain
of Mercy in the Face with Comfort.
All this while the Guide Mr. Great-heart,
was very much pleased, and smiled
upon his Companion.
Now as they walked along together,Talk of one Mr. Fearing.
the Guide asked the old Gentleman, if
he did not know one Mr. Fearing that came
on Pilgrimage out of his Parts.
Hon. Yes, very well, said he; he was
a Man that had the Root of the Matter
in him, but he was one of the most
troublesom Pilgrims that ever I met with
in all my days.
Greath. I perceive you knew him, for
you have given a very right Character of
him.
Hon. Knew him! I was a great Companion

of his, I was with him most an
end; when he first began to think of
what would come upon us hereafter, I
was with him.
Greath. I was his Guide from my Master's
House, to the Gates of the Celestial
City.
Hon. Then you knew him to be a
troublesom one?
Greath. I did so, but I could very well
bear it: for Men of my Calling, are oftentimes
intrusted with the Conduct of such as
he was.
Hon. Well then, pray let us hear a
little of him, and how he managed himself
under your Conduct?
Greath. Why he was always afraid
that he should come short of whither
he had a desire to go.Mr. Fearing's troublesom Pilgrimage. Every thing
frightned him that he heard any body
speak of, that had but the least appearance
of Opposition in it. I heard that
he lay roaring at the Slow of Dispond,His behaviour at the Slow of Dispond.
for above a Month together, nor durst he,
for all he saw several go over before him,
venture, tho they, many of them, offered
to lend him their Hand. He would
not go back again neither. The Celestial
City, he said he should die if he
came not to it, and yet was dejected at
every Difficulty, and stumbled at every
Straw that any body cast in his way.
Well, after he had layn at the Slow of
Dispond a great while, as I have told
you; one sunshine Morning, I do not
know how, he ventured, and so got over.

But when he was over, he would
scarce believe it. He had, I think, a
Slow of Dispond in his Mind, a Slow that
he carried every where with him, or
else he could never have been as he was.
So he came up to the Gate, you know
what I mean, that stands at the head of
this way, and there also he stood a good
while before he would adventure to
knock.His behavior at the Gate. When the Gate was opened he
would give back, and give place to others,
and say that he was not worthy.
For, for all he gat before some to the
Gate, yet many of them went in before
him. There the poor Man would stand
shaking and shrinking; I dare say it
would have pitied ones Heart to have
seen him: Nor would he go back again.
At last he took the Hammer that hanged
on the Gate in his hand, and gave
a small Rapp or two; then one opened
to him, but he shrunk back as before.
He that opened stept out after him, and
said, Thou trembling one, what wantest
thou? with that he fell to the Ground.
He that spoke to him wondered to see
him so faint. So he said to him, Peace
be to thee; up, for I have set open the
Door to thee; come in, for thou art
blest. With that he gat up, and went
in trembling, and when he was in, he was
ashamed to show his Face. Well, after
he had been entertained there a while,His behavior at the Interpretors Dore.
as you know how the manner is, he was
bid go on his way, and also told the
way he should take. So he came till he

came to our House, but as he behaved
himself at the Gate, so he did at my
Master the Interpreters Door. He lay
thereabout in the Cold a good while, before
he would adventure to call; Yet
he would not go back. And the Nights
were long and cold then. Nay he had a
Note of Necessity in his Bosom to my
Master, to receive him, and grant him
the Comfort of his House, and also to
allow him a stout and valiant Conduct,
because he was himself so Chickin-hearted
a Man; and yet for all that he was afraid
to call at the Door. So he lay up and
down there abouts till, poor man, he
was almost starved; yea so great was
his Dejection, that tho he saw several
others for knocking got in, yet he was
afraid to venture. At last, I think I
looked out of the Window, and perceiving
a man to be up and down about
the Door, I went out to him, and asked
what he was; but, poor man, the water
stood in his Eyes. So I perceived what
he wanted. I went therefore in, and
told it in the House, and we shewed the
thing to our Lord; So he sent me out
again, to entreat him to come in, but I
dare say I had hard work to do it. At
last he came in, and I will say that for
my Lord, he carried it wonderful lovingly
to him.How he was entertained there. There were but a few
good bits at the Table, but some of it
was laid upon his Trencher. Then he
presented the Note, and my Lord looked
thereon and said, His Desire should be

granted. So when he had bin there a
good while, he seemed to get some
Heart, and to be a little more Comfortable.
For my Master, you must know,
is one of very tender Bowels, specially
to them that are afraid, wherefore he
carried it so towards him, as might tend
most to his Incouragement. Well, when
he had had a sight of the things of the
place, and was ready to take his Journy
to go to the City, my Lord, as he
did to Christian before, gave him a Bottle
of Spirits, and some comfortable
things to eat. Thus we set forward, and
I went before him; but the man was
but of few Words, only he would sigh
aloud.
When we were come to where the
three Fellows were hanged,He was greatly afraid when he saw the Gibbit, Cheary when he saw the Cross. he said,
that he doubted that that would be his
end also. Only he seemed glad when
he saw the Cross and the Sepulcher.
There I confess he desired to stay a little
to look; and he seemed for a while
after to be a little Cheary. When we
came at the Hill Difficulty, he made no
stick at that, nor did he much fear the
Lyons: For you must know that his
Trouble was not about such things as
those, his Fear was about his Acceptance
at last.
I got him in at the House Beautiful, I
think before he was willing;Dumpish the House Beautiful. also when
he was in, I brought him acquainted
with the Damsels that were of the Place,
but he was ashamed to make himself

much for Company, he desired much
to be alone, yet he always loved good
talk, and often would get behind the
Screen to hear it; he also loved much to
see antient Things, and to be pondering
them in his Mind. He told me afterwards,
that he loved to be in those two
Houses from which he came last, to
wit, at the Gate, and that of the Interpreters,
but that he durst not be so bold
to ask.
When we went also from the House
Beautiful, down the Hill, into the Valley
of Humiliation, he went down as
well as ever I saw man in my Life, for
he cared not how mean he was, so he
might be happy at last. Yea, I think
there was a kind of a Sympathy betwixtPleasant in the Valley of Humiliat.
that Valley and him. For I never saw
him better in all his Pilgrimage, then
when he was in that Valley.
Here he would lie down,  imbrace the
Ground, and kiss the very Flowers that
grew in this Valley. He would now be
up every Morning by break of Day,
tracing, and walking to and fro in this
Valley.
But when he was come to the entrance
of the Valley of the Shadow ofMuch perplexed in the Valley of the Shadow of Death.
Death, I thought I should have lost my
Man; not for that he had any Inclination
to go back, that he always abhorred,
but he was ready to dy for Fear.
O, the Hobgoblins will have me, the Hobgoblins
will have me, cried he; and I
could not beat him out on't. He made

such a noyse, and such an outcry here,
that, had they but heard him, 'twas enough
to encourage them to come and
fall upon us.
But this I took very great notice of,
that this Valley was as quiet while he
went thorow it, as ever I knew it before
or since. I suppose, those Enemies here,
had now a special Check from our Lord,
and a Command not to meddle until Mr.
Fearing was past over it.
It would be too tedious to tell you of
all; we will therefore mention a Passage
or two more. When he was come
at Vanity Fair, I thought he would have
fought with all the men in the Fair, I
feared there we should both have been
knock'd o'th Head, so hot was he against
their Fooleries; upon the inchanted
Ground, he also was very wakeful.
But when he was come at the River
where was no Bridg, there again he
was in a heavy Case; now, now he said
he should be drowned for ever, and so
never see that Face with Comfort, that
he had come so many miles to behold.
And here also I took notice of what
was very Remarkable, the Water of that
River was lower at this time, than ever
I saw it in all my Life; so he went over
at last, not much above wet-shod.
When he was going up to the Gate, Mr.
Greatheart began to take his Leave of
him, and to wish him a good Reception
above; So he said, I shall, I shall.
Then parted we asunder, and I saw
him no more.

Honest. Then it seems he was well at
last?
Greath. Yes, yes, I never had doubt
about him, he was a man of a choyce
Spirit, only he was always kept very
low,  and that made his Life so burthensom
to himself, and so troublesom to others.
He was above many, tender of
Sin;  he was so affraid of doing Injuries
to others, that he often would deny
himself of that which was lawful,  because
he would not offend.
Hon. But what should be the reason that
such a good Man should be all his days so
much in the dark?
Greath. There are two sorts of Reasons
for it; one is, The wise God will
have it so. Some must Pipe, and some
must Weep:  Now Mr. Fearing was one
that played upon this Base. He and his
Fellows sound the Sackbut, whose Notes
are more doleful, than the Notes of other
Musick are. Tho indeed some say,
the Base is the Ground of Musick. And
for my part I care not at all for that Profession,
that begins not in heaviness of
Mind. The first string that the Musitian
usually touches, is the Base, when he
intends to put all in tune; God also
plays upon this string first, when he sets
the Soul in tune for himself. Only here
was the imperfection of Mr. Fearing, he
could play upon no other Musick but
this, till towards his latter end.
I make bold to talk thus Metaphorically,
for the ripening of the Wits of

young Readers,  and because in the Book
of the Revelations,  the Saved are compared
to a company of Musicians that
play upon their Trumpets and Harps, and
sing their Songs before the Throne.
Hon. He was a very zealous man, as
one may see by what Relation you have given
of him. Difficulties, Lyons, or Vanity
Fair, he feared not at all: 'Twas only
Sin, Death, and Hell, that was to him a
Terror; because he had some Doubts about
his Interest in that Celestial Country.
Greath. You say right. Those were the
things that were his Troublers, and they,
as you have well observed, arose from
the weakness of his Mind there about,
not from weakness of Spirit as to the
practical part of a Pilgrims Life. I dare
believe that as the Proverb is, he could
have bitt a Fire-brand, had it stood
in his way: But the things with which
he was oppressed, no man ever yet could
shake off with ease.
Christiana. Then said Christiana, This
Relation of Mr. Fearing has done me good.
I thought no body had been like me, but I
see there was some Semblance 'twixt this
good man and I, only we differed in two
things. His Troubles were so great they
brake out, but mine I kept within. His
also lay so hard upon him, they made him
that he could not knock at the Houses provided
for Entertainment; but my Trouble
was always such, as made me knock the
lowder.

Mer. If I might also speak my Heart,
I must say that something of him has
also dwelt in me. For I have ever been
more afraid of the Lake and the loss of
a place in Paradice, then I have been of
the loss of other things. Oh, thought
I, may I have the Happiness to have a
Habitation there, 'tis enough, though I
part with all the World to win it.
Matt. Then said Matthew, Fear was
one thing that made me think that I was
far from having that within me that accompanies
Salvation, but if it was so with
such a good man as he, why may it not also
go well with me?
Jam. No fears, no Grace, said Jam. Tho
there is not always Grace where there is
the fear of Hell; yet to be sure there
is no Grace where there is no fear of
God.
Greath. Well, said James, Thou hast hit
the Mark, for the fear of God is the beginning
of Wisdom; and to be sure they that
want the beginning, have neither middle,
nor end. But we will here conclude our
Discourse of Mr. Fearing after we have sent
after him this Farewel.

Well, Master Fearing, thou didst fear
Thy God: And wast afraid
Of doing any thing, while here,
That would have thee betray'd.
And didst thou fear the Lake and Pit?
Would others did so too:
For, as for them that want thy Wit,
They do themselves undo.

Now I saw, that they still went on in
their Talk. For after Mr. Greatheart
had made an end with Mr. Fearing, Mr.
Honest began to tell them of another,Of Mr. Selfwill. but
his Name was Mr. Selfwil. He pretended
himself to be a Pilgrim, said Mr.
Honest; But I perswade my self, he never
came in at the Gate that stands at
the head of the way.
Greath. Had you ever any talk with
him about it?
Hon. Yes, more then once or twice,
but he would always be like himself, self-willed.
He neither cared for man, nor
Argument, nor yet Example; what his
Mind prompted him to, that he would
do, and nothing else could he be got
to.
Greath. Pray what Principles did he
hold, for I suppose you can tell?
Hon. He held that a man might follow
the Vices,Selfwill's Opinions. as well as the Virtues of
the Pilgrims, and that if he did both, he
should be certainly saved.
Greath. How? If he had said, 'tis posible
for the best to be guilty of the Vices, as
well as to partake of the Virtues of Pilgrims,
he could not much a been blamed. For
indeed we are exempted from no Vice absolutely,
but on condition that we Watch
and Strive. But this I perceive is not the
thing: But if I understand you right, your
meaning is, that he was of that Opinion,
that it was allowable so to be?
Hon. Ai, ai, so I mean, and so he believed
and practised.

Greath. But what Ground had he for
his so saying?
Hon. Why, he said he had the Scripture
for his Warrant.
Greath. Prethee Mr. Honest present us
with a few Particulars.
Hon. So I will, He said to have to do
with other mens Wives, had been
practised by David, God's Beloved, and
therefore he could do it. He said to
have more Women then one, was a thing
that Solomon practised, and therefore he
could do it. He said that Sarah, and
the godly Midwives of Egypt lied, and
so did saved Rahab, and therefore he
could do it. He said that the Deciples
went at the biding of their Master, and
took away the Owners Ass, and therefore
he could do so too. He said that
Jacob got the Inheritance of his Father
in a way of Guile, and Dissimulation,
and therefore he could do so too.
Greath. High base! indeed, and you
are sure he was of this Opinion?
Hon. I have heard him plead for it,
bring Scripture for it, bring Argument
for it, &c.
Greath. An Opinion that is not fit to
be, with any Allowance, in the World.
Hon. You must understand me rightly.
He did not say that any man might
do this; but, that those that had the
Virtues of those that did such things,
might also do the same.
Greath. But what more false then such
a Conclusion? For this is as much as to

say, that because good men heretofore have
sinned of Infirmity, therefore he had allowance
to do it of a presumptuous Mind. Or
if because a Child, by the blast of the Wind,
or for that it stumbled at a stone, fell down
and so defiled it self in Myre, therefore he
might wilfully ly down and wallow like a
Bore therein. Who could a thought that
any one could so far a bin blinded by the
power of Lust? But what is written must be
true. They stumble at the Word, being disobedient, 
whereunto also they were appointed.
His supposing that such may have the
godly Man's Virtues, who addict themselves
to their Vices, is also a Delusion as strong
as the other. 'Tis just as if the Dog should
say, I have, or may have the Qualities of
the Child, because I lick up its stinking
Excrements.  To eat up the Sin of God's
People, is no sign of one that is possessed with
their Virtues. Nor can I believe that one
that is of this Opinion, can at present have
Faith or Love in him. But I know you
have made strong Objections against him,
prethee what can he say for himself?
Hon. Why, he says, To do this by
way of Opinion, seems abundance more
honest, then to do it, and yet hold contrary
to it in Opinion.
Greath. A very wicked Answer, for
tho to let loose the Bridle to Lusts, while
our Opinions are against such things, is
bad; yet to sin and plead a Toleration so to
do, is worse; the one stumbles Beholders accidentally,
the other pleads them into the
Snare.

Hon. There are many of this mans
mind, that have not this mans mouth,
and that makes going on Pilgrimage of
so little esteem as it is.
Greath You have said the Truth, and
it is to be lamented. But he that feareth
the King of Paradice shall come out of them
all.
Christiana. There are strange Opinions
in the World. I know one that
said, 'twas time enough to repent when
they came to die.
Greath. Such are not over Wise. That
man would a bin loth, might he have had
a week to run twenty mile in for his Life,
to have deferred that Journey to the last
hour of that Week.
Hon. You say right, and yet the generality
of them that count themselves
Pilgrims, do indeed do thus. I am, as
you see, an old Man, and have bin a
Traveller in this Rode many a day; and
I have taken notice of many things.
I have seen some that have set out as
if they would drive all the World afore
them: Who yet have in few days, died
as they in the Wilderness, and so never
gat sight of the promised Land.
I have seen some that have promised
nothing at first setting out to be Pilgrims,
and that one would a thought
could not have lived a day, that have
yet proved very good Pilgrims.
I have seen some, that have run hastily
forward, that again have after a little
time, run as fast just back again.

I have seen some who have spoke very
well of a Pilgrims Life at first, that
after a while, have spoken as much against
it.
I have heard some, when they first
set out for Paradice, say positively, there
is such a place, who when they have
been almost there, have come back again,
and said there is none.
I have heard some vaunt what they
would do in case they should be opposed,
that have even at a false Alarm fled
Faith, the Pilgrims way, and all.
Now as they were thus in their way,
there came one runing to meet them,
and said, Gentlemen, and you of the
weaker sort, if you love Life, shift for
your selves, for the Robbers are before
you.
Greath. Then said Mr. Greatheart,  They
be the three that set upon Littlefaith
heretofore. Well, said he, we are ready
for them; So they went on their
way. Now they looked at every Turning
when they should a met with the
Villains. But whether they heard of Mr.
Greatheart, or whether they had some
other Game, they came not up to the
Pilgrims.
Chris. Christiana then wished for an
Inn for her self and her Children; because
they were weary. Then said Mr.
Honest,  there is one a little before us,
where a very honorable Disciple, one
Gaius, dwells. So they all concluded to
turn in thither; and the rather, because

the old Gentleman gave him so good a
Report. So when they came to the
Door, they went in, not knocking, for
Folks use not to knock at the Door of
an Inn. Then they called for the Master
of the House, and he came to them.
So they asked if they might lie there that
Night?
Gaius. Yes Gentlemen, if you be true
Men, for my House is for none but Pilgrims.
Then was Christiana, Mercy, and
the Boys, the more glad, for that the
Inn keeper was a lover of Pilgrims. So
they called for Rooms; and he shewed
them one for Christiana and her Children
and Mercy, and an other for Mr.
Great-heart and the old Gentleman.
Greath. Then said Mr. Great-heart,
Good Gaius, what hast thou for Supper? for
these Pilgrims have come far to day and
are weary.
Gaius. It is late, said Gaius; so we
cannot conveniently go out to seek
Food; but such as we have you shall be
welcome to, if that will content.
Greath. We will be content with what
thou hast in the House, for as much as I
have proved thee; thou art never destitute
of that which is convenient.
Then he went down, and spoke to the
Cook, whose Name was Taste-that-which-is-good,
to get ready Supper for so many
Pilgrims. This done, he comes up
again, saying, come my good Friends,
you are welcome to me, and I am glad
that I have an House to entertain you;

and while Supper is making ready, if
you please, let us entertain one another
with some good Discourse. So they all
said, content.
Gaius. Then said Gaius, Whose Wife is
this aged Matron, and whose Daughter is
this young Damsel?
Greath. The Woman is the Wife of
one Christian, a Pilgrim of former times,
and these are his four Children. The
Maid is one of her Acquaintance; one
that she hath perswaded to come with
her on Pilgrimage. The Boys take all
after their Father, and covet to tread in
his Steps. Yea, if they do but see any
place where the old Pilgrim hath lain,
or any print of his Foot, it ministreth
Joy to their Hearts, and they covet to
lie or tread in the same.
Gaius. Then said Gaius, Is this Christian's
Wife,  and are these Christian's
Children? I knew your Husband's Father,
yea, also, his Father's Father.
Many have been good of this stock, their
Ancestors dwelt first at Antioch. Christian's
Progenitors (I suppose you have
heard your Husband talk of them) were
very worthy men. They have above
any that I know, shewed themselves men
of great Virtue and Courage, for the
Lord of the Pilgrims, his ways, and
them that loved him. I have heard of
  many of your Husbands Relations that
have stood all Tryals for the sake of the
Truth. Stephen that was one of the first
of the Family from whence your Husband

sprang, was knocked o'th' Head
with Stones. James,  an other of this
Generation, was slain with the edge of
the Sword. To say nothing of Paul
and Peter, men antiently of the Family
from whence your Husband came. There
was Ignatius, who was cast to the Lyons.
Romanus, whose Flesh was cut by
pieces from his Bones; and Policarp,
that played the man in the Fire. There
was he that was hanged up in a Basket
in the Sun, for the Wasps to eat; and
he who they put into a Sack and cast him
into the Sea, to be drowned. 'Twould
be impossible, utterly to count up all of
that Family that have suffered Injuries
and Death, for the love of a Pilgrims
Life. Nor can I, but be glad, to see
that thy Husband has left behind him
four such Boys as these. I hope they
will hear up their Fathers Name, and
tread in their Fathers Steps, and come
to their Fathers End.
Greath. Indeed Sir they are likely Lads,
they seem to abuse heartily their Fathers
Ways.
Gaius. That is it that I said, wherefore
Christians Family is like still to
spread abroad upon the face of the
Ground, and yet to be numerous upon
the face of the Earth. Wherefore let
Christiana look out some Damsels for
her Sons, to whom they may be Betroathed,
&c. that the Name of their
Father, and the House of his Progenitors
may never be forgotten in the
World.

Hon. 'Tis pity this Family should fall,
and be extinct.
Gaius, Fall it cannot, but be diminished
it may; but let Christiana take
my Advice, and that's the way to uphold
it.
And Christiana, Said This Inkeeper,
I am glad to see thee and thy Friend
Mercy together here, a lovely Couple.
And may I advise, take Mercy into a
nearer Relation to thee. If she will, let
her be given to Matthew thy eldest Son.
'Tis the way to preserve you a Posterity
in the Earth. So this Match was
concluded, and in process of time they
were married. But more of that hereafter.
Gaius also proceeded, and said, I will
now speak on the behalf of Women, to
take away their Reproach. For as
Death and the Curse came into the
World by a Woman, so also did Life
and Health;  God sent forth his Son, made
of a Woman.  Yea, to shew how much
those that came after, did abhor the
Act of their Mother.Why Women of old so much desired Children. This Sex, in the
old Testament, coveted Children, if
happily this or that Woman might be
the Mother of the Saviour of the World.
I will say again, that when the Saviour
was come,  Women rejoyced in him,
before either Man or Angel. I read not
that ever any man did give unto Christ
so much as one Gorat,  but the Women
followed him, and ministred to him of
their Substance. 'Twas a Woman that

washed his Feet with Tears,  and a Woman
that anointed his Body to the Burial.
They were Women that wept, 
when he was going to the Cross;  And
Women that followed him from the 
Cross, and that sat by his Sepulcher
when he was buried.  They were Women
that was first with him at his Resurrection
morn,  and Women that
brought Tiding first to his Disciples
that he was risen from the Dead. Women
therefore are highly favoured, and
shew by these things that they are sharers
with us in the Grace of Life.
Now the Cook sent up to signifie
that Supper was almost ready, and sent
one to lay the Cloath, the Trenshers, and
to set the Salt and Bread in order.
Then said Matthew, The sight of this
Cloath, and of this Forerunner of a Supper,
begetteth in me a greater Appetite to my
Food then I had before.
Gaius So let all ministring DoctrinesWhat to be gathered from laying of the Board with the Cloath and Trenshers.
to thee in this Life, beget in thee a
greater desire to sit at the Supper of
the great King in his Kingdom; for all
Preaching, Books, and Ordinances here,
are but as the laying of the Trenshers,
and as setting of Salt upon the Board,
when compared with the Feast that our
Lord will make for us when we come
to his House.
So Supper came up,  and first a Heave-shoulder,
and a wave-Breast was set on
the Table before them.  To shew that
they must begin their Meal with Prayer

and Praise to God. The heave-shoulder
David lifted his Heart up to God with, 
and with the wave-Breast,  when his Heart
lays with that he used to lean upon his
Harp when he played. These two Dishes
were very fresh and good, and they all
eat heartily-well thereof.
The next they brought up, was a Bottle
of Wine, red as Blood. So Gaius
said to them,  Drink freely, this is the
Juice of the true Vine,  that makes glad
the Heart of God and Man.  So they
drank and were merry.
The next was a Dish of Milk well
crumbed.  But Gaius said,A Dish of Milk. Of Hony and Butter. Let the Boys
have that, that they may grow thereby.
Then they brought up in course a
dish of Butter and Hony. Then said Gaius,
Eat freely of this, for this is good to
chear up, and strengthen your Judgments
and Understandings. This was
our Lords Dish when he was a Child.
Butter and Hony shall he eat,  that he may
know to refuse the Evil, and chuse the
Good.
Then they brought them up a dish of
Apples,A dish of Apples. and they were very good tasted
Fruit. Then said Matthew, May we eat
Apples, since they were such, by, and
with which, the Serpent beguiled our
first Mother?
Then said Gaius,

Appl. were they with which we were beguil'd,
Yet Sin, not Apples hath our Souls defil'd.

Apples forbid, if eat, corrupts the Blood.
To eat such, when commanded, does us good.
Drink of his Flagons then, thou, Church, his Dove,
And eat his Apples, who art sick of Love.
Then said Matthew, I made the Scruple,
because I a while since, was sick with
eating of Fruit.
Gaius. Forbidden Fruit will make
you sick, but not what our Lord has
tolerated.
While they were thus talking,  they
were presented with an other Dish;A dish of Nuts. and
'twas a dish of Nuts. Then said some at
the Table, Nuts spoyl tender Teeth;
specially the Teeth of Children. Which
when Gaius heard, he said.

Hard Texts are Nuts (I will not call them Cheaters,)
Whose Shells do keep their Kirnels from the Eaters:
Opt then the Shells, and you shall have the Meat,
They here are brought, for you to crack and eat.
Then were they very Merry, and sat
at the Table a long time, talking of many
things. Then said the old Gentleman,
My good Landlord, while we are
cracking your Nuts, if you please, do
you open this Riddle.A Riddle.


A man there was, tho some did count him mad,
The more he cast away, the more he had.
Then they all gave good heed, wondring
what good Gaius would say, so
he sat still a while, and then thus replyed:

He that bestows his Goods upon the Poor,
Shall have as much again, and ten times more.
Then said Joseph, I dare say Sir, I did
not think you could a found it cut.
Oh! Said Gaius, I have bin trained
up in this way a great while. Nothing
teaches like Experience; I have learned
of my Lord to be kind, & have found by
experience that I have gained thereby.
There is that scattereth,  yet increaseth, and
there is that witholdeth more then is meet,
but it tendeth to Poverty.  There is that
maketh himself Rich, yet hath nothing,
There is that maketh himself poor, yet hath
great Riches.
Then Simon whispered to Christiana
his Mother, and said, Mother, this is
a very good mans House, let us stay
here a good while, and let my Brother
Matthew be married here to Mercy, before
we go any further.
The which, Gaius the Host overhearing,
said, with a very good Will my
Child.
So they stayed there more then a

Month, and Mercy was given to Matthew
to Wife.
While they stayed here, Mercy as her
Custom was, would be making Coats
and Garments to give to the Poor, by
which she brought up a very good Report
upon the Pilgrims.
But to return again to our Story. After
Supper, the Lads desired a Bed, for
that they were weary with Travelling.
Then Gaius called to shew them their
Chamber, but said Mercy, I will have
them to Bed. So she had them to Bed,
and they slept well, but the rest sat up
all Night. For Gaius and they were
such sutable Company, that they could
not tell how to part. Then after much
talk of their Lord, themselves, and
their Journey: Old Mr. Honest, he that
put forth the Riddle to Gaius, began
to nod. Then said Great-heart, What
Sir, you begin to be drouzy, come, rub
up, now here's a Riddle for you. Then
said Mr. Honest, let's hear it.A Riddle.
Then said Mr. Great-heart,

He that will kill, must first be overcome:
Who live abroad would, first must die at home.
Hah, said Mr. Honest, it is a hard
one, hard to expound, and harder to
practise. But come Landlord, said he,
I will if you please, leave my part to
you, do you expound it, and I will
hear what you say.

No said Gaius, 'twas put to you, and
'tis expected that you should answer
it.
Then said the Old Gentleman,

He first by Grace must conquer'd be,
That Sin would mortifie.
And who, that lives, would convince me,
Unto himself must die.
It is right, said Gaius; good Doctrine
and Experience teaches this. For
first, until Grace displays it self, and overcomes
the Soul with its Glory, it is
altogether without Heart to oppose Sin.
Besides, if Sin is Satan's Cords, by which
the Soul lies bound, how should it make
Resistance, before it is loosed from that
Infirmity?
Secondly, Nor will any that knows
either Reason or Grace, believe that
such a man can be a living Monument
of Grace, that is a Slave to his own
Corruptions.
And now it comes in my mind, I
will tell you a Story, worth the hearing.
There were two Men that went on
Pilgrimage, the one began when he was
young, the other when he was old. The
young Man had strong Corruptions
to grapple with, the old mans were decayed
with the decays of Nature. The
young man trod his steps as even as did
the old one, and was every way as light
as he; who now, or which of them, had
their Graces shining clearest, since
both seemed to be alike?

Honest.A Comparison. The young mans doubtless. For
that which heads it against the greatest Opposition,
gives best demonstration that it is
strongest. Specially when it also holdeth
pace with that that meets not with half so
much: as to be sure old Age does not.
Besides, I have observed that old
men, have blessed themselves with this
mistake; Namely, taking the decays
of Nature, for a gracious Conquest over
Corruptions, and so have been apt to
beguile themselves. Indeed old men
that are gracious, are best able to give
Advice to them that are young, because
they have seen most of the emptiness of
things. But yet, for an old and a
young to set out both together, the
young one has the advantage of the
fairest discovery of a work of Grace
within him, tho the old mans Corruptions
are naturally the weakest.
Thus they sat talking till break of
Day. Now when the Family was up,
Christiana bid her Son James that he
should read a Chapter; so he read the
53 of Isaiah. When he had done, Mr.
Honest asked why it was said, That the
Savior is said to come out of a dry ground,
and also that he had no Form nor Comliness
in him?
Greath. Then said Mr. Great-heart, To
the first I answer, because, The Church
of the Jews, of which Christ came, had
then lost almost, all the Sap and Spirit
of Religion. To the second I say, The
Words are spoken in the Person of the

Unbelievers, who because they want
that Eye, that can see into our Princes
Heart, therefore they judg of him by
the meanness of his Outside.
Just like those that know not that
precious Stones are covered over with a
homely Crust; who when they have found
one, because they know not what they
have found, cast it again away as men
do a common Stone.
Well, said Gaius, Now you are
here, and since, as I know, Mr. Great-heart
is good at his Weapons, if you
please, after we have refreshed ourselves,
we will walk into the Fields,Gyant Slaygood assaulted and slain. to see if
we can do any good. About a mile
from hence, there is one Slaygood, a
Gyant, that doth much annoy the Kings
Highway in these parts. And I know
whereabout his Haunt is, he is Master
of a number of Thieves; 'Twould be
well if we could clear these Parts of
him.
So they consented and went, Mr.
Great-heart with his Sword, Helmet, and
Shield; and the rest with Spears and
Staves.
When they came to the place where
he was, they found him with one Feeble-mind
in his Hands, whom his Servants
had brought unto him, having taken
him in the Way; now the Gyant was
rifling of him, with a purpose after that
to pick his Bones. For he was of the
nature of Flesh-eaters.
Well, so soon as he saw Mr. Great-heart,

and his Friends, at the Mouth of
his Cave with their Weapons, he demanded
what they wanted?
Greath. We want thee; for we are
come to revenge the Quarrel of the many
that thou hast slain of the Pilgrims,
when thou hast dragged them out of the
Kings High-way; wherefore come out
of thy Cave. So he armed himself and
came out, and to a Battel they went,
and fought for above an Hour, and then
stood still to take Wind.
Slaygood. Then said the Gyant, why
are you here on my Ground?
Greath. To revenge the Blood of Pilgrims,
as I also told thee before; so
they went to it again, and the Gyant
made Mr. Great-heart give back, but he
came up again, and in the greatness of
his Mind, he let fly with such stoutness
at the Gyants Head and Sides, that he
made him let his Weapon fall out of his
Hand. So he smote him and slew him,
and cut off his Head,One Feeble-mind rescued from the Gyant. and brought it away
to the Inn. He also took Feeble-mind
the Pilgrim, and brought him with
him to his Lodgings. When they were
come home, they shewed his Head to
the Family, and then set it up as they
had done others before, for a Terror to
those that should attempt to do as he,
hereafter.
Then they asked Mr. Feeble-mind how
he fell into his hands?How Feeble-mind came to be a Pilgrim.
Feblem. Then said the poor man, I
am a sickly man, as you see, and because

Death did usually once a day, knock
at my Door, I thought I should never be
well at home. So I betook my self to a
Pilgrims Life; and have travelled hither
from the Town of uncertain, where
I and my Father were born. I am a
man of no strength at all, of Body, nor
yet of Mind, but would, if I could, tho
I can but craul, spend my Life in the
Pilgrims way. When I came at the
Gate that is at the head of the Way, the
Lord of that place did entertain me freely.
Neither objected he against my
weakly Looks, nor against my feeble
Mind; but gave me such things that
were necessary for my Journey, and bid
me hope to the end. When I came to
the House of the Interpreter, I received
much Kindness there, and because the
Hill Difficulty was judged too hard for
me, I was carried up that by one of his
Servants. Indeed I have found much
Relief from Pilgrims, tho none was
willing to go so softly as I am forced to
do. Yet still as they came on, they bid
me be of good Chear, and said, that it
was the will of their Lord, that Comfort
should be given to the feeble minded, and
so went on their own pace.  When I
was come up to assault-Lane, then this
Gyant met with me, and bid me prepare
for an Incounter; but alas, feeble one
that I was, I had more need of a Cordial.
So he came up and took me, I conceited
he should not kill me; also when
he had got me into his Den, since I

went not with him willingly, I believed
I should come out alive again. For I
have heard, that not any Pilgrim that
is taken Captive by violent Hands, if he
keeps Heart-whole towards his Master,
is by the Laws of Providence to die by
the Hand of the Enemy. Robbed, I looked
to be, and Robbed to be sure I am;
but I am as you see escaped with Life,
for the which I thank my King as Author,
and you, as the Means. Other
Brunts I also look for, but this I have
resolved on, to wit, to run when I can,
to go when I cannot run, and to creep
when I cannot go. As to the main, I
thank him that loves me, I am fixed;
my way is before me, my Mind is beyond
the River that has no Bridg, tho I
am, as you see, but of a feeble Mind.
Hon. Then said old Mr. Honest, Have not
you some time ago, been acquainted with
one Mr. Fearing, a Pilgrim?
Feeble. Acquainted with him; Yes.
He came from the Town of Stupidity,
which lieth four Degrees to the Northward
of the City of Destruction, and as
many off, of where I was born;Mr. Fearing Mr. Feeble-mind's Uncle. Yet
we were well acquainted, for indeed he
was mine Uncle, my Fathers Brother;
he and I have been much of a Temper,
he was a little shorter then I, but yet
we were much of a Complexion.Feeble. has some of Mr. Fearing's Features.
Hon. I perceive you knew him, and I
am apt to believe also that you were related
one to an other; for you have his whitely
Look, a Cast like his with your Eye, and

your Speech is much alike.
Feebl. Most have said so, that have
known us both, and besides, what I
have read in him, I have for the most
part, found in my self.
Gaius.Gaius Comforts him. Come Sir, said good Gaius, be
of good Chear, you are welcome to me, and
to my House; and what thou hast a mind
to, call for freely; and what thou would'st
have my Servants do for thee, they will do
it with a ready Mind.
Feebl. Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, This
is unexpected Favor, and as the Sun,
shining out of a very dark Cloud.Notice to be taken of Providence. Did
Gyant Slay-good intend me this Favor
when he stop'd me, and resolved to let
me go no further? Did he intend that
after he had rifled my Pockets, I should
go to Gaius mine Host! Yet so it is.
Now, just as Mr. Feeble-mind, and
Gaius was thus in talk; there comes
one running and called at the Door,Tidings how one Not right was slain with a Thunder-bolt, and Mr. Feeble-mind's Comment upon it. and
told, That about a Mile and an half off,
there was one Mr. Not-right a Pilgrim,
struck dead upon the place where he
was, with a Thunder-bolt.
Feebl. Alas! said Mr. Feeble-mind, is
he slain, he overtook me some days before
I came so far as hither, and would
be my Company-keeper. He also was
with me when Slay-good the Gyant took
me, but he was nimble of his Heels, and
escaped. But it seems, he escaped to
die, and I was took to live.


What, one would think, doth seek to slay outright,
Ofttimes, delivers from the saddest Plight.
That very Providence, whose Face is Death,
Doth oft times, to the lowly, Life bequeath.
I taken was, he did escape and flee,
Hands Crost, gives Death to him, and Life to me.
Now about this time Matthew and
Mercy was Married;The Pilgrims prepare to go forward. also Gaius gave his
Daughter Phebe to James, Matthew's Brother,
to Wife; after which time, they
yet stayed above ten days, at Gaius's
House, spending their time, and the
Seasons, like as Pilgrims use to do.
When they were to depart, Gaius
made them a Feast, and they did eat
and drink, and were merry. Now the
Hour was come that they must be gon,
wherefore Mr. Great-heart called for a
Reckoning. But Gaius told him that
at his House, it was not the Custom
for Pilgrims to pay for their Entertainment. 
He boarded them by the year,
but looked for his Pay from the good
Samaritane,How they greet one another at parting. who had promised him at
his return, whatsoever Charge he was at
with them, faithfully to repay him.
Then said Mr. Great-heart to him. 
Greath. Beloved, thou dost faithfully,
whatsoever thou dost, to the Brethren and
to Strangers, which have born Witness of
thy Charity before the Church. Whom if
thou (yet) bring forward on their Journey

after a Godly sort, thou shalt do well.
Then Gaius took his Leave of them
all and of his Children,Gaius his last kindness to Feeble-mind. and particularly
of Mr. Feeble-mind. He also gave him
something to drink by the way.
Now Mr. Feeble-mind, when they
were going out of the Door, made as if
he intended to linger. The which,
when Mr. Great-heart espied, he said,
Come Mr. Feeble. Pray do you go along
with us. I will be your Conductor, and
you shall fair as the rest.
Feebl. Alas, I want a sutable Companion,
you are all lusty and strong, but I, as
you see, am weak; I chuse therefore rather
to come behind, lest, by reason of my many
Infirmities, I should be both a Burthen to
my self, and to you. I am, as I said, a
man of a weak and feeble Mind, and shall
be offended and made weak at that which
others can bear. I shall like no Laughing;
I shall like no gay Attire, I shall like no
unprofitable Questions. Nay, I am so weak
a Man, as to be offended with that which
others have a liberty to do. I do not yet
know all the Truth; I am a very ignorant
Christian-man; sometimes if I hear some
rejoyce in the Lord, it troubles me because I
cannot do so too. It is with me as it is with
a weak Man among the strong, or as with
a sick Man among the healthy, or as a
Lamp despised.  (He that is ready to slip
with his Feet, is as a Lamp despised in the
Thought of him that is at ease.) So that
I know not what to do.
Greath. But Brother, said Mr. Great-heart.

I have it in Commission,  to
comfort the feeble minded, and to support
the weak.  You must needs go along
with us;  we will wait for you, we
will lend you our help, we will deny our
selves of some things, both Opinionative
and Practical, for your sake;  we will
not enter into doubtful Disputations before
you, we will be made all things to
you rather then you shall be left behind.
Now, all this while they were at Gaius's
Door; and behold as they were
thus in the heat of their Discourse, Mr.
Ready-to-hault came by,  with his Crutches
in his hand,Promises. and he also was going on
Pilgrimage.
Feebl. Then said Mr. Feeblemind to
him, Man! How camest thou hither? I
was but just now complaining that I had
not a sutable Companion, but thou art according
to my Wish. Welcome, welcome,
good Mr. Ready-to-hault, I hope thee and
I may be some help.
Readyto. I shall be glad of thy Company,
said the other; and good Mr. Feeble-mind,
rather then we will part, since
we are thus happily met, I will lend
thee one of my Crutches.
Feebl. Nay, said he, tho I thank thee
for thy good will, I am not inclined to hault
afore I am Lame. How be it, I think when
occasion is, it may help me against a Dog.
Readyto. If either my self, or my
Crutches, can do thee a pleasure, we are
both at thy Command, good Mr. Feeble-mind.

Thus therefore they went on, Mr.
Greatheart, and Mr. Honest went before,
Christiana and her Children went next,
and Mr Feeble-mind, and Mr. Ready-to-hault
came behind with his Crutches.
Then said Mr. Honest,
Hon. Pray Sir, now we are upon the
Road, tell us some profitable things of some
that have gon on Pilgrimage before us.
Greath. With a good Will. I suppose
you have heard how Christian of
old, did meet with Apollyon in the Valley
of Humiliation, and also what hard
work he had to go thorow the Valley of
the Shadow of Death. Also I think
you cannot but have heard how Faithful
was put to it with Madam Wanton, 
with Adam the first, with one Discontent,
and Shame; four as deceitful Villains, as
a man can meet with upon the Road.
Hon. Yes, I have heard of all this; but
indeed, good Faithful, was hardest put to
it with shame, he was an unwearied one.
Greath. Ai, for as the Pilgrim well
said, He of all men had the wrong
Name.
Hon. But pray Sir where was it that
Christian and Faithful met Talkative?
that same was also a notable one.
Greath. He was a confident Fool, yet
many follow his wayes.
Hon. He had like to beguiled Faithful? 
Greath. Ai, But Christian put him into
a way quickly to find him out.  Thus
 they went on till they came at the place

where Evangelist met with Christian and
Faithful, and prophecyed to them of
what should befal them at Vanity-Fair.
Greath. Then said their Guide, hereabouts
did Christian and Faithful meet
with Evangelist, who prophecyed to
them of what Troubles they should meet
with at Vanity-Fair.
Hon. Say you so! I dare say it was a
hard Chapter that then he did read unto
them?
Greath. 'Twas so, but he gave them
Incouragement withall. But what do
we talk of them,  they were a couple
of Lyon-like Men; they had set their
Faces like Flint. Don't you remember
how undaunted they were when they
stood before the Judg?
Hon. Well Faithful bravely Suffered?
Greath. So he did, and as brave things
came on't: For Hopeful and some others,
as the Story relates it, were Converted
by his Death.
Greath. Well, but pray go on; for you
are well acquainted with things.
Greath. Above all that Christian met
with after he had past throw Vanity-Fair,
one By-ends was the arch one. 
Hon. By-ends; What was he?
Greath. A very arch Fellow, a downright
Hypocrite; one that would be
Religious, which way ever the World
went, but so cunning, that he would be
sure neither to lose, nor suffer for it.
He had his Mode of Religion for every
fresh Occasion, and his Wife was

as good at it as he. He would turn and
change from Opinion to Opinion; yea,
and plead for so doing too. But so far as
I could learn, he came to an ill End with
his By-ends, nor did I ever hear that any
of his Children was ever of any Esteem
with any that truly feared God.
Now by this time, they were come
within sight of the Town of Vanity,
where Vanity-Fair is kept.They are come within sight of Vanity. So when
they saw that they were so near the
Town, they consulted with one another
how they should pass thorow the
Town,  and some said one thing, and
some an other. At last Mr. Great-heart,
said, I have, as you may understand,
often been a Conductor of Pilgrims thorow
this Town;They enter into one Mr. Mnasons to Lodg. Now I am acquainted
with one Mr. Mnason, a Cyprusian by Nation,
an old Disciple, at whose House
we may Lodg. If you think good, said
he, we will turn in there?
Content, said old Honest; Content,
said Christiana; Content, said Mr. Feeble
mind; and so they said all. Now
you must think it was Even-tide, by that
they got to the outside of the Town,
but Mr. Great-heart knew the way to the
Old Man's House. So thither they
came; and he called at the Door, and
the old Man within knew his Tongue so
soon as ever he heard it; so he opened,
and they all came in. Then said Mnason
their Host, How far have ye come to day?
so they said, from the House of Gaius
our Friend. I promise you, said he,

you have gone a good stitch, you may
well be a weary; sit down. So they sat
down.
Greath. Then said their Guide,They are glad of entertainment. Come
what Chear Sirs, I dare say you are welcome
to my Friend.
Mna. I also, said Mr. Mnason, do bid
you Welcome; and what ever you want,
do but say, and we will do what we
can to get it for you.
Hon. Our great Want, a while since, was
Harbor, and good Company, and now I hope
we have both.
Mna. For Harbor, you see what it is,
but for good Company, that will appear
in the Tryal.
Greath. Well, said Mr. Great-heart,
will you have the Pilgrims up into their
Lodging.
Mna. I will, said Mr. Mnason. So he
had them to their respective Places; and
also shewed them a very fair Dining-Room
where they might be and sup together,
until time was come to go to
Rest.
Now when they were set in their
places, and were a little cheary after
their Journey, Mr. Honest asked his
Landlord if there were any store of
good People in the Town?
Mna. We have a few, for indeed they
are but a few, when compared with
them on the other side.They desire to see some of the good People in the Town.
Hon. But how shall we do to see some of
them? for the sight of good Men to them that
are going on Pilgrimage, is like to the

appearing of the Moon and the Stars to them
that are sailing upon the Seas.
Mna. Then Mr. Mnason stamped
with his Foot, and his Daughter Grace
came up; so he said unto her, Grace go
you, tell my Friends, Mr. Contrite, Mr.
Holy-man,Some sent for. Mr. Love-saint, Mr. Dare-not-ly,
and Mr. Penitent; That I have a
Friend or two at my House, that have a
mind this Evening to see them:
So Grace went to call them, and they
came, and after Salutation made, they
sat down together at the Table.
Then said Mr. Mnason their Landlord,
My Neighbours, I have, as you see, a
company of Strangers come to my House,
they are Pilgrims: They come from a
far, and are going to Mount Sion. But
who, quoth he, do you think this is?
pointing with his Finger to Christiana.
It is Christiana, the Wife of Christian,
that famous Pilgrim, who with Faithful
his Brother were so shamefully handled
in our Town. At that they stood amazed,
saying, we little thought to see
Christiana, when Grace came to call us,
wherefore this is a very comfortable Surprize.
Then they asked her of her wellfare,
and if these young Men were her
Husbands Sons. And when she had told
them they were; they said, The King
whom you love,Some Talk betwixt Mr. Honest and Contrite. and serve, make you
as your Father, and bring you where he
is in Peace.
Hon. Then Mr. Honest (when they
were all sat down) asked Mr. Contrite and

the rest, in what posture their Town was
at present?
Cont. You may be sure we are full of
Hurry, in Fair time. 'Tis hard keeping
our Hearts and Spirits in any good
Order, when we are in a cumbred Condition.
He that lives in such a place as
this is, and that has to do with such as
we have, has need of an Itum to caution
him to take heed, every Moment of
the Day.
Hon. But how are your Neighbors for
quietness?
Cont. They are much more moderate
now then formerly.Persecution not so hot at Vanity Fair as formerly. You know how
Christian and Faithful were used at our
Town; but of late, I say, they have
been far more moderate. I think the
Blood of Faithful lieth with load upon
them till now; for since they burned
him, they have been ashamed to burn
any more: In those Days we were afraid
to walk the Streets, but now we can
shew our Heads. Then the Name of a
Professor was odious, now specially in
some parts of our Town (for you know
our Town is large) Religion is counted
Honourable.
Then said Mr. Contrite to them, Pray
how faireth it with you in your Pilgrimage,
how stands the Country affected towards
you?
Hon. It happens to us, as it happeneth
to Way-fairing men; sometimes
our way is clean, sometimes foul; sometimes
up-hill, sometimes down-hill;

We are seldom at a Certainty. The
Wind is not always on our Backs, nor
is every one a Friend that we meet
with in the Way. We have met with
some notable Rubs already; and what
are yet behind we know not, but for
the most part we find it true, that has
been talked of of old, A good Man
must suffer Trouble.
Contrit. You talk of Rubs, what Rubs
have you met withal?
Hon. Nay, ask Mr. Great-heart our
Guide, for he can give the best Account
of that.
Greath. We have been beset three or
four times already: First Christiana and
her Children were beset with two Ruffians,
that they feared would a took away
their Lives; We was beset with
Gyant Bloody-man, Gyant Maul, and Gyant
Slay-good. Indeed we did rather
beset the last, then were beset of him:
And thus it was: After we had been
sometime at the House of Gaius, mine
Host and of the whole Church. We were
minded upon a time to take our Weapons
with us, and go see if we could
light upon any of those that were Enemies
to Pilgrims; (for we heard that
there was a notable one thereabouts.)
Now Gaius knew his Haunt better then
I, because he dwelt thereabout, so we
looked and looked, till at last we discerned
the Mouth of his Cave; then we
were glad and pluck'd up our Spirits.
So we approached up to his Den, and

lo when we came there, he had dragged
by meer force into his Net, this poor
man, Mr. Feeble-mind, and was about to
bring him to his End. But when he
saw us, supposing, as we thought, he
had had an other Prey, he left the poor
man in his Hole, and came out. So we
fell to it full sore, and he lustily laid about
him; but in conclusion, he was
brought down to the Ground, and his
Head cut off, and set up by the Way
side for a Terror to such as should after
practise such Ungodliness. That I tell
you the Truth, here is the man himself
to affirm it, who was as a Lamb, taken
out of the Mouth of the Lyon.
Feebl. Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, I
found this true to my Cost, and Comfort;
to my Cost, when he threatned to pick my
Bones every Moment, and to my Comfort,
when I saw Mr. Great-heart & his Friends
with their Weapons approach so neer for my
Deliverance.
Holym. Then said Mr. Holy-man,Mr. Holyman's Speech. There
are two things that they have need to be
possessed with that go on Pilgrimage,
Courage and an unspotted Life. If they
have not Courage, they can never hold
on their way; and if their Lives be
Loose, they will make the very Name of
a Pilgrim stink.
Loves. Then said Mr. Love-saint;Mr. Love-saint's Speech. I
hope this Caution is not needful amongst
you. But truly there are many
that go upon the Road, that rather declare
themselves Strangers, to Pilgrimage,

then Strangers and Pilgrims in
the Earth.
Dareno.Mr. Dare-not-ly his Speech. Then said Mr. Dare not-ly,
'Tis true; they neither have the Pilgrims
Weed, nor the Pilgrims Courage; they go
not uprightly, but all awrie with their
Feet, one Shoo goes inward, an other outward,
and their Hosen out behind; there
a Rag, and there a Rent, to the Disparagement
of their Lord.
Penit. These things said Mr. Penitent,Mr. Penitent his Speech.
they ought to be troubled for, nor are
the Pilgrims like to have that Grace put
upon them and their pilgrims Progress,
as they desire, until the way is cleared
of such Spots and Blemishes.
Thus they sat talking and spending
the time, until Supper was set upon the
Table. Unto which they went and refreshed
their weary Bodys, so they went
to Rest. Now they stayed in this Fair a
great while, at the House of this Mr.
Mnason, who in process of time, gave
his Daughter Grace unto Simon, Christiana's
Son, to Wife, and his Daughter
Martha to Joseph.
The time as I said, that they lay here,
was long (for it was not now as in former
times.) Wherefore the Pilgrims
grew acquainted with many of the good
People of the Town, and did them
what Service they could. Mercy, as she
was wont, laboured much for the Poor,
wherefore their Bellys and Backs blessed
her, and she was there an Ornament to
her Profession. And to say the truth,

for Grace, Phebe, and Martha, they were
all of a very good Nature, and did much
good in their place. They were all also
of them very Fruitful, so that
Christian's Name, as was said before,
was like to live in the World.
While they lay here,A Monster. there came a
Monster out of the Woods, and slew
many of the People of the Town. It
would also carry away their Children,
and teach them to suck its Whelps. Now
no Man in the Town durst so much as
face this Monster; but all Men fled when
they heard of the noise of his coming.
The Monster was like unto no one 
Beast upon the Earth. Its Body was
like a Dragon,His Shape. His Nature. and it had seven Heads
and ten Horns. It made great havock of
Children, and yet it was governed by a
Woman. This Monster propounded Conditions
to men; and such men as loved
their Lives more then their Souls, accepted
of those Conditions. So they
came under.
Now this Mr. Great-heart, together
with these that came to visit the Pilgrims
at Mr. Mnason's House, entered
into a Covenant to go and ingage this
Beast, if perhaps they might deliver the
People of this Town, from the Paw,
and Mouths of this so devouring a Serpent.
Then did Mr. Great-heart, Mr. Contrite,
Mr. Holy-man, Mr. Dare-not-ly, and
Mr. Penitent, with their Weapons go

forth to meet him.How he is ingaged. Now the Monster at
first was very Rampant, and looked upon
these Enemies with great Disdain,
but they so belabored him, being sturdy
men at Arms, that they made him
make a Retreat; so they came home to
Mr. Mnason's House again.
The Monster, you must know had his
certain Seasons to come out in, and to
make his Attempts upon the Children of
the People of the Town; also these Seasons
did these valiant Worthies watch
him in, and did still continually assault
him; in so much, that in process of
time, he became not only wounded,
but lame; also he has not made that
havock of the Towns mens Children,
as formerly he has done. And it is verily
believed by some, that this Beast
will die of his Wounds.
This therefore made Mr. Great-heart
and his Fellows, of great Fame in this
Town, so that many of the People that
wanted their tast of things, yet had a
reverend Esteem and Respect for them.
Upon this account therefore it was that
these Pilgrims got not much hurt here.
True, there were some of the baser sort
that could see no more then a Mole, nor
understand more then a Beast, these
had no reverence for these men, nor
took they notice of their Valour or
Adventures.
Well, the time drew on that the Pilgrims
must go on their way, wherefore
they prepared for their Journey. They

sent for their Friends, they conferred
with them, they had some time set apart;
therein to commit each other to
the protection of their Prince. There
was again, that brought them of such
things as they had, that was fit for the
weak, and the strong, for the Women, 
and the men; and so laded them with
such things as was necessary.
Then they set forwards on their way,
and their Friends accompaning them
so far as was convenient; they again
committed each other to the Protection
of their King, and parted.
They therefore that were of the Pilgrims
Company went on, and Mr. Great-heart
went before them; now the Women
and Children being weakly, they
was forced to go as they could bear, by
this means Mr. Ready-to-hault, and Mr.
Feeble-mind, had more to sympathize
with their Condition.
When they were gone from the
Towns-men, and when their Friends
had bid them farewel, they quickly
came to the place where Faithful was put
to Death. There therefore they made
a stand, and thanked him that had enabled
him to bear his Cross so well, and
the rather, because they now found that
they had a benefit by such a manly Suffering
as his was.
They went on therefore after this, a
good way further, talking of Christian
and Faithful, and how Hopeful joyned
himself to Christian after that Faithful
was dead.

 Now they were come up with the Hill
Lucre, where the Silver-mine was, which
took Demas off from his Pilgrimage, and
into which, as some think, By-ends fell
and perished; wherefore they considered
that. But when they were come to
the old Monument that stood over against
the Hill Lucre, to wit, to the Piller
of Salt that stood also within view
of Sodom, and its stinking Lake; they
marvelled, as did Christian before, that
men of that Knowledg and ripeness of
Wit as they was, should be so blinded
as to turn aside here. Only they considered
again, that Nature is not affected
with the Harms that others have
met with, specially if that thing upon
which they look, has an attracting Virtue
upon the foolish Eye.
 I saw now that they went on till they
came at the River that was on this side
of the delectable Mountains. To the
River where the fine Trees grow on
both sides, and whose Leaves, if taken
inwardly, are good against Surfits;
Where the Medows are green all the
year long, and where they might lie
down safely. 
By this River side in the medow,
there were Cotes and Folds for Sheep,
an House built for the nourishing, and
bringing up of those Lambs, the Babes
of those Women that go on Pilgrimage.
Also there was here one that was intrusted
with them,  who could have compassion, 
and that could gather these

Lambs with his Arm, and carry them
in his Bosom, and that could gently
lead those that were with young. Now
to the Care of this Man, Christiana admonished
her four Daughters to commit
their little ones; that by these Waters
they might be housed, harbored,
suckered, and nourished, and that none
of them might be lacking in time to come. 
This man, if any of them go astray, or
be lost,  he will bring them again, he
will also bind up that which was broken,
and will strengthen them that are
sick. Here they will never want Meat
and Drink and Cloathing, here they
will be kept from Thieves and Robbers,
for this man will die before one of those
committed to his Trust, shall be lost.
Besides,  here they shall besure to have
good Nurture and Admonition, and
shall be taught to walk in right Paths, and
that you know is a Favour of no small
account. Also here, as you see, are
delicate Waters, pleasant Medows, dainty
Flowers, variety of Trees, and such as
bear wholesom Fruit. Fruit, not like
that that Matthew eat of, that fell over
the Wall out of Belzebubs Garden, but
Fruit that procureth Health where there
is none, and that continueth and increaseth
it, where it is.
So they were content to commit their
little Ones to him; and that which was
also an Incouragement to them so to do,
was, for that all this was to be at the
Charge of the King, and so was as an

Hospital to young Children, and Orphans.
Now they went on:They being come to By-path Stile, have a mind to have apluck with Gyant-Dispair. And when they
were come, to By-path Medow, to the
Stile over which Christian went with his
Fellow Hopeful, when they were taken
by Gyant-dispair, and put into doubting-Castle:
They sat down and consulted
what was best to be done, to wit, now
they were so strong, and had got such
a man as Mr. Great-heart for their Conductor;  whether they had not best to
make an Attempt upon the Gyant, demolish
his Castle, and if there were any
Pilgrims in it, to set them at liberty before
they went any further. So one
said one thing, and an other said the
contrary. One questioned if it was
lawful to go upon Unconsecrated Ground,
an other said they might, provided their
end was good; but Mr. Great-heart said,
Though that Assertion offered last, cannot
be universally true, yet I have a Commandment
to resist Sin, to overcome
Evil, to fight the good Fight of Faith.
And I pray, with whom should I fight
this good Fight, if not with Gyant-dispair?
I will therefore attempt the taking
away of his Life and the demolishing
of Doubting-Castle. Then said
he, who will go with me? Then said
old Honest,  I will, And so will we too,
said Christian's four Sons, Matthew, Simon,
James, and Joseph, for they were
young men and strong.
So they left the Women in the Road,

and with them Mr. Feeble-mind, and Mr.
Ready-to-halt, with his Crutches, to be
their Guard, until they came back, for
in that place tho Gyant-Dispair dwelt so
near, they keeping in the Road,  A little
Child might lead them.
So Mr. Great-heart, old Honest, and
the four young men, went to go up to
Doubting-Castle, to look for Gyant-Dispair.
When they came at the Castle Gate
they knocked for Entrance with an unusual
Noyse. At that the old Gyant
comes to the Gate, and Diffidence his
Wife follows, Then said he, Who, and
what is he, that is so hardy, as after this
manner to molest the Gyant-Dispair? Mr.
Great-heart replyed, It is I, Great-heart,
one of the King of the Celestial Countries
Conductors of Pilgrims to their
Place. And I demand of thee that
thou open thy Gates for my Entrance,
prepare thy self also to Fight, for I am
come to take away thy Head, and to
demolish Doubting Castle.
Now Gyant-Dispair, because he was a
Gyant,Dispair has overcome Angels. thought no man could overcome
him, and again, thought he, since heretofore
I have made a Conquest of Angels,
shall Great-heart make me afraid?
So he harnessed himself and went out.
He had a Cap of Steel upon his Head, a
Brestplate of Fire girded to him, and
he came out in Iron Shoos, with a great
Club in his Hand. Then these six men
made up to him, and beset him behind
and before; also when Diffidence, the

Gyantess, came up to help him, old Mr.
Honest cut her down at one Blow. Then
they fought for their Lives, and Gyant-Dispair
was brought down to the
Ground,Dispair is loth to die. but was very loth to die. He
strugled hard, and had, as they say, as
many Lives as a Cat, but Great-heart was
his death, for he left him not till he had
severed his Head from his shoulders.
Then they fell to demolishing Doubting
Castle, and that you know might
with ease be done,Doubting-Castle demolished. since Gyant-Dispair
was dead. They was seven Days in
destroying of that; and in it of Pilgrims,
they found one Mr. Dispondencie, almost
starved to Death, and one Much-afraid
his Daughter; these two they saved alive.
But it would a made you a wondered
to have seen the dead Bodies that
lay here and there in the Castle Yard,
and how full of dead mens Bones the
Dungeon was.
When Mr. Great-heart and his Companions
had performed this Exploit,
they took Mr. Dispondencie, and his
Daughter Much-afraid, into their Protection,
for they were honest People,
tho they were Prisoners in Doubting-Castle,
to that Tyrant Gyant-Dispair. They
therefore I say, took with them the
Head of the Gyant (for his Body they
had buried under a heap of Stones) and
down to the Road and to their Companions
they came, and shewed them
what they had done. Now when Feeble-mind,
and Ready-to-halt saw that it

was the Head of Gyant-Dispair indeed,
they were very jocond and merry. Now
Christiana, if need was, could play upon
the Vial, and her Daughter Mercy upon
the Lute: So, since they were so merry
disposed, she plaid them a Lesson, and
Ready-to-halt would Dance.They have musick and dancing for Joy. So he took
Dispondencie's Daughter, named Much-afraid,
by the Hand, and to dancing
they went in the Road. True he could
not dance without one Crutch in his
Hand, but I promise you, he footed it
well; also the Girl was to be commended,
for she answered the Musick hansomely.
As for Mr. Dispondencie, the Musick
was not much to him, he was for feeding
rather then dancing, for that he
was almost starved. So Christiana gave
him some of her bottle of Spirits for
present Relief, and then prepared him
something to eat; and in little time the
old Gentleman came to himself, and began
to be finely revived.
Now I saw in my Dream, when all
these things were finished, Mr. Great-heart
took the Head. of Gyant-Dispair,
and set it upon a Pole by the Highway
side, right over against the Piller that
Christian erected for a Caution to Pilgrims
that came after, to take heed of
entering into his Grounds.
Then he writ under it upon a Marble
stone, these Verses following.


This is the Head of him, Whose Name only
In former times,A Monument of Deliverance. did Pilgrims terrify.
His Castle's down, and Diffidence his Wife,
Brave Master Great-heart has bereft of Life.
Dispondencie, his Daughter, Much-afraid;
Great-heart, for them, also the Man has plaid.
Who hereof doubts, if he'l but cast his Eye,
Up hither, may his Scruples satisfy.
This Head, also when doubting Cripples dance,
Doth shew from Fears they have Deliverance.
When these men had thus bravely
shewed themselves against Doubting-Castle,
and had slain Gyant-Dispair, they
went forward, and went on till they
came to the Delectable Mountains, where
Christian and Hopeful refreshed themselves
with the Varieties of the Place.
They also acquainted themselves with
the Shepherds there, who welcomed
them as they had done Christian before,
unto the delectable Mountains.
Now the Shepherds seeing so great
a train follow Mr. Great-heart (for with
him they were well acquainted;) they
said unto him, Good Sir, you have got
a goodly Company here; pray where
did you find all these?
Then Mr. Great-heart replyed,

First here's Christiana and her train,The Guides Speech to the Shepherds.
Her Sons, and her Sons Wives, who like the Wain,



The doubting Castle be demolished,
And the Gyant dispair hath lost his head:
Sin can rebuild the Castle, make't remaine;
And make despair the Gyant live againe.

Keep by the Pole, and do by Compass stere,
From Sin to Grace, else they had not been here.
Next here's old Honest come on Pilgrimage,
Ready-to-halt too, who I dare ingage,
True hearted is, and so is Feeble-mind,
Who willing was, not to be left behind.
Dispondencie, good-man, is coming after,
And so also is Much-afraid, his Daughter.
May we have Entertainment here, or must
We further go? let's know whereon to trust.
Then said the Shepherds;Their entertainment. This is a
comfortable Company, you are welcome
to us, for we have for the Feeble, as
for the Strong;  our Prince has an Eye
to what is done to the least of these.
Therefore Infirmity must not be a block
to our Entertainment. So they had
them to the Palace Door, and then said
unto them, Come in Mr. Feeble-mind,
come in Mr. Ready-to-halt, come in
Mr. Dispondencie, and Mrs. Much-afraid
his Daughter. These Mr. Great-heart,
said the Shepherds to the Guide, we call
in by name, for that they are most subject
to draw back; but as for you, and
the rest that are strong, we leave you to
your wonted Liberty. Then said Mr.
Great-heart, This day I see that Grace
doth shine in your Faces,A Description of false Shepherds: and that you
are my Lords Shepherds indeed; for
that you have not pushed these Diseased
neither with Side nor Shoulder,  but
have rather strewed their way into the
Palace with Flowers, as you should.

So the Feeble and weak went in, and
Mr. Great-heart, and the rest did follow.
When they were also set down, the
Shepherds said to those of the weakest
sort, what is it that you would have?
For said they, all things must be managed
here, to the supporting of the weak,
as well as to the warning of the Unruly:
So they made them a Feast of things,
easy of Digestion, and that were pleasant
to the Palate, and nourishing; the
which when they had received, they
went to their rest, each one respectively
unto his proper place. When Morning
was come, because the mountains
were high, and the day clear; and because
it was the Custom of the Shepherds
to shew to the Pilgrims, before
their Departure, some Rarities; therefore
after they were ready, and had refreshed
themselves, the Shepherds took
them out into the Fields, and shewed
them first, what they had shewed to
Christian before.
Then they had them to some new
places. The first was to Mount-Marvel,
where they looked, and behold a man
at a Distance, that tumbled the Hills about
with Words.Mount-Marvel. Then they asked the
Shepherds what that should mean? So
they told him,  that that man was the
Son of one Great-grace, of whom you
read in the first part of the Records of
the Pilgrims Progress. And he is set there
to teach Pilgrims how to believe down,

or to tumble out of their ways,  what
Difficulties they shall meet with, by faith.
Then said Mr. Great-heart, I know him,
he is a man above many.
Then they had them to another place,Mount-Innocent.
called Mount-Innocent. And there they
saw a man cloathed all in White; and
two men, Prejudice, and Ill-will, continually
casting Dirt upon him. Now
behold the Dirt, whatsoever they cast
at him, would in little time fall off again,
and his Garment would look as
clear as if no Dirt had been cast thereat.
Then said the Pilgrims what means
this? The Shepherds answered, This
man is named Godly-man, and this Garment
is to shew the Innocency of his
Life. Now those that throw Dirt at
him, are such as hate his Well-doing, but
as you see the Dirt will not stick upon
his Clothes, so it shall be with him that
liveth truly Innocently in the World.
Whoever they be that would make such
men dirty, they labor all in vain; for
God, by that a little time is spent, will
cause that their Innocence shall break
forth as the Light, and their Righteousness
as the Noon day.
Then they took them, and had them
to Mount-Charity,Mount-Charity. where they shewed
them a man that had a bundle of Cloth
lying before him, out of which he cut
Coats and Garments, for the Poor that
stood about him; yet his Bundle or
Role of Cloth was never the less.

Then said they, what should this be?
This is, said the Shepherds, to shew
you, That he that has a Heart to give of
his Labor to the Poor, shall never want
wherewithal. He that watereth shall be
watered himself. And the Cake that
the Widdow gave to the Prophet, did
not cause that she had ever the less in her
Barrel.
They had them also to a place where
they saw one Fool, and one Want-Wit,
washing of an Ethiopian with intention
to make him white, but the more they
washed him, the blacker he was. They
then asked the Shepherds what that
should mean. So they told them, saying,
Thus shall it be with the vile Person;
all means used to get such an one
a good Name, shall in conclusion tend
but to make him more abominable.
Thus it was with the Pharises, and so
shall be with all Hypocrites.
 Then said Mercy the Wife of Matthew
to Christiana her Mother, Mother,
I would, if it might be, see the hole in
the Hill; or that, commonly called, the
By-way to Hell. So her Mother brake
her mind to the Shepherds. Then they
went to the Door; it was in the side
of an Hill, and they opened it, and bid
Mercy harken awhile.Mercyhas a mind to see the hole in the Hill. So she harkened,
and heard one saying, Cursed be my Father
for holding of my Feet back from the way
of Peace and Life; and an other said, O
that I had been torn in pieces before I had,
to save my Life, lost my Soul; and an other

said, If I were to live again, how
would I deny my self rather then come to this
place. Then there was as if the very
Earth had groaned, and quaked under
the Feet of this young Woman for fear;
so she looked white, and came trembling
away, saying, Blessed be he and she
that is delivered from this Place.
Now when the Shepherds had shewed
them all these things, then they had
them back to the Palace, and entertained
them with what the House would
afford; But Mercy being a young, and
breeding Woman, Longed for something
which she saw there, but was ashamed
to ask. Her Mother-in-law then
asked her what she ailed, for she looked
as one not well. Then said Mercy, There
is a Looking-glass hangs up in the Dining-room,Mercy longeth and for what.
off of which I cannot take my
mind; if therefore I have it not, I think
I shall Miscarry. Then said her Mother,
I will mention thy Wants to the
Shepherds, and they will not deny it
thee. But she said, I am ashamed that
these men should know that I longed.
Nay my Daughter, said she, it is no
Shame, but a Virtue, to long for such
a thing as that; so Mercy said, Then Mother,
if you please; ask the Shepherds
if they are willing to sell it:
Now the Glass was one of a thousand.It was the Word of God.
It would present a man, one way,
with his own Feature exactly, and turn
it but an other way, and it would shew
one the very Face and Similitude of

the Prince of Pilgrims himself.  Yea I
have talked with them that can tell, and
they have said, that they have seen the
very Crown of Thorns upon his Head, 
by looking in that Glass, they have therein
also seen the holes in his Hands, in
his Feet,  and his Side. Yea such an excellency
is there in that Glass, that it
will shew him to one where they have
a mind to see him; whether living or
dead, whether in Earth or Heaven,
whether in a State of Humiliation, or in
his Exaltation, whether coming to
Suffer, or coming to Reign.
  Christiana therefore went to the Shepherds
apart. (Now the Names of the
Shepherds are Knowledge, Experience,
Watchful, and Sincere) and said unto
them, There is one of my Daughters a
breeding Woman, that, I think doth
long for something that she hath seen
in this House, and she thinks she shall
miscarry if she should by you be denyed.
Experience.She doth not lose her Longing. Call her, call her, She
shall assuredly have what we can help
her to. So they called her, and said
to her, Mercy, what is that thing thou
wouldest have? Then she blushed and
said, The great Glass that hangs up in
the Dining-room, so Sincere ran and
fetched it, and with a joyful Consent
it was given her. Then she bowed her
Head and gave Thanks, and said, by
this I know that I have obtained Favor
in your Eyes.

They also gave to the other young
Women such things as they desired, and
to their Husbands great Commendations
for that they joyned with Mr. Great-heart
to the slaying of Gyant-Dispair, and
the demolishing of Doubting-Castle.
About Christiana's Neck, the Shepherds
put a Brascelet, and so they did about
the Necks of her four Daughters,
also they put Ear-rings in their Ears,
and Jewels on their Fore-heads.
When they were minded to go hence.
They let them go in Peace, but gave
not to them those certain Cautions
which before was given to Christian and
his Companion. The Reason was,  for
that these had Great-heart to be their
Guide, who was one that was well acquainted
with things, and so could
give them their Cautions more seasonably,
to wit, even then when the Danger
was nigh the approaching.
What Cautions Christian and his Companions
had received of the Shepherds,
they had also lost;  by that the time was
come that they had need to put them
in practise. Wherefore here was the
Advantage that this Company had over
the other.
From hence they went on Singing,
and they said,

Behold, how fitly are the Stages set!
For their Relief, that Pilgrims are become;
And how they us receive without one let,
That make the other Life, our Mark and Home.

What Novelties they have, to us they give,
That we, tho Pilgrims joyful Lives may Live,
They do upon us too such things bestow,
That shew we Pilgrims are, where ere we go.
When they were gone from the Shepherds,
they quickly came to the place
where Christian met with one Turn-a-way,
that dwelt in the Town of Apostacy.
Wherefore of him Mr. Great-heart
their Guide did now put them in mind; 
saying, This is the place where Christian
met with one Turn-a-way, who carried
with him, the Character of his Rebellion
at his Back. And this I have to say
concerning this man,How one Turn-a-way managed his Apostacy. He would harken
to no Counsel, but once afalling, perswasion
could not stop him. When he
came to the place where the Cross and
the Sepulcher was, he did meet with
one that did bid him look there, but he
gnashed with his Teeth,  and stamped,
and said, he was resolved to go back to
his own Town. Before he came to the
Gate, he met with Evangelist, who offered
to lay Hands on him, to turn him
into the way again. But this Turn-a-way
resisted him, and having done much despite
unto him, he got away over the
Wall, and so escaped his Hand.
Then they went on, and just at the
place where Little-faith formerly was
Robbed, there stood a man with his
Sword drawn, and his Face all bloody.
Then said Mr. Great-heart, What art

thou? The man made Answer, saying,
I am one whose Name is Valiant-for-Truth,
I am a Pilgrim, and am going to
the Celestial City. Now as I was in my
way, there was three men did beset me,
and propounded unto me these three
things, 1 Whether I would become one
of them? Or go back from whence I
came? Or die upon the Place? To the
first I answered,  I had been a true Man
a long Season, and therefore, it could
not be expected that I now should cast
in my Lot with Thieves. Then they
demanded what I would say to the Second.
So I told them that the Place
from whence I came, had I not found
Incommodity there, I had not forsaken it
at all, but finding it altogether unsutable
to me, and very unprofitable for me,
I forsook it for this Way. Then they
asked me what I said to the third. And
I told them, my Life cost more dear
far, then that I should lightly give it away.
Besides, you have nothing to do
thus to put things to my Choice; wherefore
at your Peril be it, if you meddle.
Then these three, to wit, Wild-head, Inconsiderate,
and Pragmatick, drew upon
me, and I also drew upon them.
So we fell to it, one against three,
for the space of above three Hours. They
have left upon me, as you see, some of
the Marks of their Valour, and have also
carried away with them some of
mine. They are but just now gone. I
suppose they might, as the saying is,

hear your Horse dash, and so they betook
them to flight.
Greath. But here was great Odds, three
against one.
Valiant. 'Tis true, but little and
more, are nothing to him that has the
Truth on his side.  Though an Host should
encamp against me, said one, My Heart
shall not fear. Tho War should rise against
me, in this will I be Confident, &c. Besides,
said he, I have read in some Records,
that one man has sought an Army;
and how many did Sampson slay
with the Jaw Bone of an Ass.
Greath. Then said the Guide, Why did
you not cry out, that some might a came in
for your Succour?
Valiant. So I did, to my King, who
I knew could hear, and afford invisible
Help, and that was sufficient for me.
Greath. Then said Great-heart to Mr.
Valiant-for-truth, Thou hast worthily behaved
thy self; Let me see thy Sword, so
he shewed it him.
When he had taken it in his Hand,
and looked thereon a while,  he said,
Ha! It is a right Jerusalem Blade.
Valiant. It is so. Let a man have
one of these Blades, with a Hand to wield
it, ond skill to use it, and he may venture
upon an Angel with it.  He need
not fear its holding, if he can but tell
how to lay on. Its Edges will never
blunt.  It will cut Flesh, and Bones, and
Soul, and Spirit, and all.
Greath. But you fought a great while,

I wonder you was not weary?
Valiant.  I fought till my Sword did
cleave to my Hand, and when they
were joyned together,The Word. The Faith. Blood. as if a Sword
grew out of my Arm, and when the
Blood run thorow my Fingers, then I
fought with most Courage.
Greath. Thou hast done well, thou hast
resisted unto Blood, striving against Sin.
Thou shalt abide by us, come in, and go
out with us; for we are thy Companions.
Then they took him and washed his
Wounds, and gave him of what they
had, to refresh him, and so they went on
together. Now as they went on, because
Mr. Great-heart was delighted in him
(for he loved one greatly that he found
to be a man of his Hands) and because
there was with his Company, them that
was feeble and weak; Therefore he
questioned with him about many things;
as first, What Country-man he was?
Valiant I am of Dark-land, for there I
was born, and there my Father and
Mother are still.
Greath. Dark-land, said the Guide,
Doth not that ly upon the same Coast with
the City of Destruction?
Valiant. Yes it doth. Now that which
caused me to come on Pilgrimage,How Mr. Valiant come to go on Pilgrimage. was
this, We had one Mr. Tell-true came into
our parts, and he told it about, what
Christian had done, that went from the
City of Destruction. Namely, how he
had forsaken his Wife and Children, and
had betaken himself to a Pilgrim's Life.

It was also confidently reported how he
had killed a Serpent that did come out to
resist him in his Journey, and how he
got thorow to whither he intended. It
was also told what Welcome he had at
all his Lords Lodgings; specially when
he came to the Gates of the Celestial
City. For there, said the man, He was
received with sound of Trumpet, by a
company of shining ones. He told it
also, how all the Bells in the City did
ring for Joy at his Reception, and what
Golden Garments he was cloathed with,
with many other things that now I shall
forbear to relate. In a word, that man
so told the Story of Christian and his
Travels, that my Heart fell into a burning
hast to be gone after him, nor could
Father or Mother stay me, so I got
from them, and am come thus far on
my Way.
Greath. You came in at the Gate, did
you not?
Valiant.He begins right. Yes, yes. For the same man
also told us, that all would be nothing
if we did not begin to enter this way at
the Gate.
Greath.Christian's Name famous. Look you, said the Guide to
Christiana, The Pilgrimage of your Husband,
and what he has gotten thereby, is
spread abroad far and near.
Valiant. Why, is this Christian's
Wife?
Greath. Yes. That it is, and these are
also her four Sons.

Valiant. What! and going on Pilgrimage
too?
Greath. Yes verily, they are following
after.
Valiant. It glads me at the Heart!He is much rejoyced to see Christian's Wife.
Good man! How Joyful will he be,
then he shall see them that would not
go with him, yet to enter after him, in
at the Gates into the City?
Greath. Without doubt it will be a
comfort to him; For next to the Joy of seeing
himself there, it will be a Joy to meet
there his Wife and his Children.
Valiant. But now you are upon that,
pray let me see your Opinion about it.
Some make a Question whether we
shall know one another when we are
there?
Greath. Do they think they shall know
themselves then? Or that they shall rejoyce
to see themselves in that Bliss? And if they
think they shall know and do these; Why
not know others, and rejoyce in their Welfare
also?
Again, Since Relations are our second
Self, tho that State will be dissolved there,
yet why may it not be rationally concluded
that we shall be more glad to see them there,
then to see they are wanting?
Valiant. Well, I perceive whereabouts
you are as to this. Have you any
more things to ask me about my beginning
to come on Pilgrimage?
Greath. Yes, Was your Father and Mother
willing that you should become a Pilgrim?

Valiant. Oh, no. They used all means
imaginable to perswade me to stay at
Home.
Greath. Why, what could they say against
it?
Valiant.The great stumbling-Blocks that by his Friends were laid in his way. They said it was an idle Life
and if I my self were not inclined to
Sloath and Laziness, I would never
countenance a Pilgrim's Condition.
Greath. And what did they say else?
Valiant. Why, They told me, That
it was a dangerous Way, yea the most
dangerous Way in the World, said they
is that which the Pilgrims go.
Greath. Did they shew wherein the
Way is so dangerous?
Valiant. Yes. And that in many
Particulars.
Greath. Name some of them.
Valiant. They told me of the Slow
of Dispond,The first Stumbling-Block. where Christian was well nigh
Smuthered. They told me that there
were Archers standing ready in Belzebub-Castle,
to shoot them that should
knock at the Wicket Gate for Entrance.
They told me also of the Wood, and
dark Mountains, of the Hill Difficulty, of
the Lyons, and also of the three Gyants,
Bloodyman, Maul, and Slay-good.
They said moreover, That there was
foul Fiend haunted the Valley of Humiliation,
and that Christian was, by him
almost bereft of Life. Besides, said
they, You must go over the Valley of
the Shadow of Death, where the Hobgoblins
are, where the Light is Darkness

where the Way is full of Snares, Pits,
Traps, and Ginns. They told me also
of Gyant-Dispair, of Doubting-Castle, and
of the Ruins that the Pilgrims met with
there. Further, They said, I must go
over the enchanted Ground, which
was dangerous. And that after all this,
I should find a River, over which I
should find no Bridg, and that that
River did lie betwixt me and the Celestial
Country.
Greath. And was this all?
Valiant. No, They also told me that
this way was full of Deceivers,The Second. and of
Persons that laid await there, to turn
good men out of the Path.
Greath. But how did they make that
out?
Valiant. They told me that Mr. Worldly-wise-man
did there lie in wait to deceive.The Second.
They also said that there was
Formality and Hypocrisie, continually on
the Road. They said also that By-ends,
Talkative, or Demas, would go near to
gather me up; that the Flatterer would
catch me in his Net, or that with green-headed
Ignorance I would presume to go
on to the Gate, from whence he always
was sent back to the Hole that was in
the side of the Hill, and made to go
the By-way to Hell.
Greath. I promise you, This was enough
to discourage. But did they make an end
here?
Valiant. No, stay. They told me also
of many that had tryed that way ofThe Third.

old, and that had gone a great way
therein, to see if they could find something
of the Glory there, that so many
had so much talked of from time to
time; and how they came back again,
and befooled themselves for setting a
Foot out of Doors in that Path, to the
Satisfaction of all the Country. And
they named several that did so, as Obstinate,
and Plyable, Mistrust, and Timerous,
Turn-a-way, and old Atheist, with
several more; who, they said, had, some
of them, gone far to see if they could
find, but not one of them found so much
Advantage by going, as amounted to the
weight of a Fether.
Great. Said they any thing more to
discourage you?
Valiant. Yes, They told me of one
Mr. Fearing,The Fourth. who was a Pilgrim, and
how he found this way so Solitary, that
he never had comfortable Hour therein,
also that Mr. Dispondency had like to
been starved therein; Yea, and also,
which I had almost forgot, that Christian
himself, about whom there has been
such a Noise, after all his Ventures for
a Celestial Crown, was certainly drowned
in the black River, and never went
foot further, how ever it was smuthered
up.
Greath. And did none of these things
discourage you?
Valiant. No. They seemed but as so
many Nothings to me.
Greath. How came that about?

Valiant. Why,How he got over these stumbling-Blocks. I still believed what
Mr. Tell-true had said, and that carried
me beyond them all.
Greath. Then this Was your Victory, even
your Faith?
Valiant. It was so, I believed and
therefore came out, got into the Way,
fought all that set themselves against
me, and by believing am come to this
Place.

 Who would true Valour see,
Let him come hither;
One here will Constant be,
Come Wind, come Weather.
There's no Discouragement,
Shall make him once Relent,
His first avow'd Intent,
To be a Pilgrim.
 Who so beset him round,
With dismal Storys,
Do but themselves Confound;
His Strength the more is.
No Lyon can him fright,
He'l with a Gyant Fight,
But he will have a right,
To be a Pilgrim.
 Hobgoblin, nor foul Fiend,
Can daunt his Spirit:
He knows, he at the end,
Shall Life Inherit.
Then Fancies fly away,
He'l fear not what men say,
He'l labor Night and Day,
To be a Pilgrim.

 By this time they were got to the
enchanted Ground, where the Air naturally
tended to make one Drowzy. And
that place was all grown over with Bryers
and Thorns; excepting here and
there, where was an inchanted Arbor, upon
which, if a Man sits, or in which
if a man sleeps, 'tis a question, say some,
whether ever they shall rise or wake again
in this World. Over this Forrest
therefore they went, both one with an
other, and Mr. Great-heart went before,
for that he was the Guide, and Mr. Valiant-for-truth,
he came behind, being
there a Guard, for fear lest paradventure
some Fiend, or Dragon, or Gyant, or
Thief, should fall upon their Rere, and
so do Mischief. They went on here each
man with his Sword drawn in his Hand;
for they knew it was a dangerous place.
Also they cheared up one another as
well as they could. Feeble-mind, Mr.
Great-heart commanded should come up
after him, and Mr. Dispondency was under
the Eye of Mr. Valiant.
Now they had not gone far, but a
great Mist and a Darkness fell upon
them all; so that they could scarse, for
a great while, see the one the other.
Wherefore they were forced for some
time, to feel for one another, by Words;
for they walked not by Sight.
But any one must think, that here
was but sorry going for the best of them
all, but how much worse for the Women
and Children, who both of Feet

and Heart were but tender. Yet so it
was, that, thorow the incouraging
Words of he that led in the Front, and
of him that brought them up behind,
they made a pretty good shift to wagg
along.
The Way also was here very wearysom,
thorow Dirt and Slabbiness. Nor
was there on all this Ground, so much
as one Inn, or Victualling-House, therein
to refresh the feebler sort. Here
therefore was grunting, and puffing, and
sighing: While one tumbleth over a
Bush, another sticks fast in the Dirt, and
the Children, some of them, lost their
Shoos in the Mire. While one crys out,
I am down, and another, Ho, Where
are you? and a third, The Bushes have
got such fast hold on me, I think I
cannot get away from them.
Then they came at an Arbor, warm,An Arbor on the inchanting Ground.
and promising much Refreshing to the
Pilgrims; for it was finely wrought above-head,
beautified with Greens, furnished
with Benches, and Settles. It also
had in it a soft Couch whereon the weary
might lean. This, you must think,
all things considered, was tempting;
for the Pilgrims already began to be
soyled with the badness of the way; but
there was not one of them that made so
much as a motion to stop there. Yea,
for ought I could perceive, they continually
gave so good heed to the Advice
of their Guide, and he did so faithfully
tell them of Dangers, and of the

Nature of Dangers when they were at
them, that usually when they were nearest
to them, they did most pluck up
their Spirits, and hearten one another
to deny the Flesh.The Name of the Arbor. This Arbor was called
The sloathfuls Friend, on purpose to
allure, if it might be, some of the Pilgrims
there, to take up their Rest when
weary.
I saw then in my Dream, that they
went on in this their solitary Ground,
till they came to a place at which a man
is apt to lose his Way.The way dificult to find. Now, tho when
it was light, their Guide could well enough
tell how to miss those ways that
led wrong, yet in the dark he was put
to a stand:The Guide has a Map of all ways leading to or from the City. But he had in his Pocket a
Map of all ways leading to, or from the
Celestial City; wherefore he strook a
Light (for he never goes also without
his Tinder-box) and takes a view of
his Book or Map; which bids him be
careful in that place to turn to the right-hand-way.
And had he not here been
careful to look in his Map, they had all,
in probability, been smuthered in the
Mud, for just a little before them, and
that at the end of the cleanest Way too,
was a Pit, none knows how deep, full
of nothing but Mud; there made on
purpose to destroy the Pilgrims in.
Then thought I with my self, who,
that goeth on Pilgrimage, but would
have one of these Maps about him,God's Book. that
he may look when he is at a stand, which
is the way he must take?

They went on then in this inchanted
Ground, till they came to where was an
other Arbor,An Arbor and two asleep therein. and it was built by the
High-way-side. And in that Arbor there
lay two men whose Names were Heedless
and Too-bold. These two went thus
far on Pilgrimage, but here being wearied
with their Journy, they sat down
to rest themselves, and so fell fast asleep.
When the Pilgrims saw them, they stood
still and shook their Heads; for they
knew that the Sleepers were in a pitiful
Case. Then they consulted what to do;
whether to go on and leave them in
their Sleep, or to step to them and try
to awake them. So they concluded to
go to them and wake them; that is,The Pilgrims try to wake them. if
they could; but with this Caution,
namely, to take heed that themselves
did not sit down nor imbrace the offered
Benefit of that Arbor.
So they went in and spake to the
men, and called each by his Name, (for
the Guide, it seems, did know them)
but there was no Voice nor Answer.
Then the Guide did shake them, and do
what he could to disturb them. Then
said one of them, I will pay you when
I take my Mony; At which the Guide
shook his Head. I will fight so long as
I can hold my Sword in my Hand, said the
other.Their Endeavour is fruitless. At that, one of the Children
laughed.
Then said Christiana, what is the
meaning of this? The Guide said,  They
talk in their Sleep. If you strike them,

beat them, or what ever else you do to
them, they will answer you after this
fashion; or as one of them said in old
time, when the Waves of the Sea did
beat upon him, and he slept as one upon
the Mast of a Ship, When I awake I will
seek it again. You know when men talk
in their Sleeps, they say any thing; but
their Words are not governed, either
by Faith or Reason. There is an Incoherencie
in their Words now, as there was
before betwixt their going on Pilgrimage,
and sitting down here. This
then is the Mischief on't, when heedless
ones go on Pilgrimage, 'tis twenty to
one, but they are served thus. For this
inchanted Ground is one of the last Refuges
that the Enemy to Pilgrims has;
wherefore it is as you see, placed almost
at the end of the Way, and so it standeth
against us with the more Advantage.
For when, thinks the Enemy, will these
Fools be so desirous to sit down, as when
they are weary; and when so like to be
weary, as when almost at their Journys
end? Therefore it is, I say, that the
inchanted Ground is placed so nigh to
the Land Beulah, and so neer the end
of their Race. Wherefore let Pilgrims
look to themselves, lest, it happen to
them as it has done to these, that, as
you see, are fallen asleep, and none can
wake them.
Then the Pilgrims desired with trembling
to go forward, only they prayed
their Guide to strike a Light, that they

might go the rest of their way by the
help of the light of a Lanthorn. So he
strook a light,The light of the Word. and they went by the
help of that thorow the rest of this way, 
tho the Darkness was very great.
But the Children began to be sorely
weary,The Children cry for weariness. and they cryed out unto him
that loveth Pilgrims, to make their
way more Comfortable. So by that
they had gone a little further, a Wind
arose that drove away the Fog, so the
Air became more clear.
Yet they were not off (by much)
of the inchanted Ground; only now
they could see one an other better, and
the way wherein they should walk.
Now when they were almost at the
end of this Ground, they perceived
that a little before them, was a solemn
Noise, as of one that was much concerned.
So they went on and looked before
them, and behold, they saw, as
they thought, a Man upon his Knees,
with Hands and Eyes lift up, and speaking,
as they thought, earnestly to one
that was above. They drew nigh, but
could not tell what he said; so they
went softly till he had done. When he
had done, he got up and began to run
towards the Celestial City. Then Mr.
Great-heart called after him, saying, so-ho,
Friend, let us have your Company
if you go, as I suppose you do, to the
Celestial City. So the man stoped, and
they came up to him. But so soon as
Mr. Honest saw him, he said, I know

this man. Then said Mr. Valiant-for-truth,
Prethee who is it? 'Tis one, said
he,The Story of Standfast. that comes from whereabouts I dwelt,
his Name is Stand-fast, he is certainly a
right good Pilgrim.
So they came up one to another and
presently Stand-fast said to old Honest,
Ho, Father Honest, are you there? Ai,
said he, that I am, as sure as you are
there. Right glad am I, said Mr. Stand-fast,
that I have found you on this Road.
And as glad am I, said the other, that I
espied you upon your Knees. Then Mr.
Stand-fast blushed, and said, But why,
did you see me? Yes, that I did, quoth
the other,Talk betwixt him and Mr. Honest. and with my Heart was glad
at the Sight. Why, what did you think,
said Stand-fast? Think, said old Honest,
what should I think? I thought we had
an honest Man upon the Road, and therefore
should have his Company by and
by. If you thought not amiss, how happy
am I? But if I be not as I should, I
alone must bear it. That is true, said
the other; But your fear doth further
confirm me that things are right betwixt
the Prince of Pilgrims and your Soul.
For he saith, Blessed is the Man that feareth
always.
Valiant. Well, But Brother, I pray
They found him at prayer.thee tell us what was it that was the
cause of thy being upon thy Knees, even
now? Was it for that some special Mercy
laid Obligations upon thee, or how?
Stand. Why we are as you see, upon
the inchanted Ground, and as I was coming

along, I was musing with my self of
what a dangerous Road, the Road in
this place was,What it was that fetched him upon his Knees. and how many that had
come even thus far on Pilgrimage, had
here been stopt, and been destroyed. I
thought also of the manner of the Death
with which this place destroyeth Men.
Those that die here, die of no violent
Distemper; the Death which such die,
is not grievous to them. For he that
goeth away in a Sleep, begins that Journey
with Desire and Pleasure. Yea such
acquiesce in the Will of that Disease.
Hon. Then Mr. Honest Interrupting of
him said, did you see the two Men asleep
in the Arbor?
Stand. Ai, ai, I saw Heedless, and Too-bold
there; and for ought I know, there
they will ly till they Rot.  But let me
go on in my Tale? As I was thus Musing,
as I said, there was one in very
pleasant Attire, but old, that presented
herself unto me, and offered me three
things, to wit, her Body, her Purse, and
her Bed. Now the Truth is, I was both
aweary, and sleepy, I am also as poor as
a Howlet, and that, perhaps, the Witch
knew. Well, I repulsed her once and
twice, but she put by my Repulses, and
smiled. Then I began to be angry, but
she mattered that nothing at all. Then
she made Offers again, and said, If I
would be ruled by her, she would make
me great and happy. For, said she, I
am the Mistriss of the World, and men
are made happy by me. Then I asked

her Name, and she told me it was Madam
Bubble.Madam Buble, or this vain World: This set me further from
her; but she still followed me with Inticements.
Then I betook me, as you
see, to my Knees, and with Hands lift
up, and crys, I pray'd to him that had
said, he would help. So just as you
came up, the Gentlewoman went her
way. Then I continued to give thanks
for this my great Deliverance; for I verily
believe she intended no good, but
rather sought to make stop of me in my
Journey.
Hon. Without doubt her Designs were
bad. But stay, now you talk of her, methinks
I either have seen her, or have read
some story of her?
Standf. Perhaps you have done both.
Hon. Madam Buble! Is she not a tall
comely Dame, something of a swarthy Complexion?
Standf Right, you hit it, she is just
such an one.
Hon. Doth she not speak very smoothly,
and give you a Smile at the end of a Sentence?
Standf. You fall right upon it again,
for these are her very Actions.
Hon. Doth she not wear a great Purse
by her Side, and is not her Hand often in it,
fingering her Mony, as if that was her
Hearts delight?
Standf. 'Tis just so. Had she stood by
all this while, you could not more amply
have set her forth before me, nor have
better described her Features.

Hon. Then he that drew her Picture
was a good Limner, and he that wrote
of her, said true.
Greath. This Woman is a Witch,The World. and
it is by Virtue of her Sorceries that this
Ground is enchanted; whoever doth lay
their Head down in her Lap, had as good
lay it down upon that Block over which
the Ax doth hang; and whoever lay
their Eyes upon her Beauty, are counted
the Enemies of God.  This is she that
maintaineth in their Splendor,  all those
that are the Enemies of Pilgrims. Yea,
This is she that has bought off many a
man from a Pilgrims Life. She is a
great Gossiper, she is always, both she
and her Daughters, at one Pilgrim's
Heels or other, now Commending, and
then preferring the excellencies of this
Life. She is a bold and impudent Slut;
She will talk with any Man. She always
laugheth poor Pilgrims to scorn, but
highly commends the Rich. If there be
one cunning to get Mony in a Place, she
will speak well of him, from House to
House. She loveth Banqueting, and
Feasting, mainly well; she is always at
one full Table or another. She has given
it out in some places, that she is a Goddess,
and therefore some do Worship
her. She has her times and open places
of Cheating, and she will say and avow
it, that none can shew a Good comparable
to hers. She promiseth to dwell
with Childrens Children, if they will but
love and make much of her. She will

cast out of her Purse, Gold like Dust, in
some places, and to some Persons. She
loves to be sought after, spoken well of,
and to ly in the Bosoms of Men. She is
never weary of commending of her Commodities,
and she loves them most that
think best of her. She will promise to
some Crowns, and Kingdoms, if they
will but take her Advice, yet many has
she brought to the Halter, and ten thousand
times more to Hell.
Standf. O! Said Stand-fast, What a
Mercy is it that I did resist her; for whither
might she a drawn me?
Greath. Whither! Nay, none but
God knows whither. But in general to
be sure, she would a drawn thee into
many foolish and hurtful Lusts,  which
drown men in Destruction and Perdition.
'Twas she that set Absolom against his
Father, and Jeroboam against his Master.
'Twas she that perswaded Judas to sell
his Lord, and that prevailed with Demas
to forsake the godly Pilgrims Life; none
can tell of the Mischief that she doth.
She makes Variance betwixt Rulers and
Subjects, betwixt Parents and Children,
'twixt Neighbor and Neighbor, 'twixt
a Man and his Wife, 'twixt a Man and
himself, 'twixt the Flesh and the Heart.
Wherefore good Master Stand-fast, be
as your Name is, and when you have
done all stand.
At this Discourse there was among
the Pilgrims a mixture of Joy and Trembling,
but at length they brake out and
Sang.


What Danger is the Pilgrim in?
How many are his Foes?
How many ways there are to Sin?
No living Mortal knows.
Some of the Ditch, shy are, yet can
Lie tumbling in the Myre.
Some tho they shun the Frying-pan,
Do leap into the Fire.
After this I beheld, until they were
come into the Land of Beulah,  where
the Sun shineth Night and Day. Here,
because they was weary, they betook
themselves a while to Rest. And because
this Country was common for Pilgrims,
and because the Orchards and
Vinyards that were here, belonged to
the King of the Celestial Country;
therefore they were licensed to make
bold with any of his things.
But a little while soon refreshed them
here, for the Bells did so ring, and
the Trumpets continually sound so Melodiously,
that they could not sleep,
and yet they received as much refreshing,
as if they had slept their Sleep
never so soundly. Here also all the noise
of them that walked the Streets, was,
More Pilgrims are come to Town. And
an other would answer, saying, And
so many went over the Water, and were
let in at the Golden Gates to Day. They
would cry again, There is now a Legion
of Shining ones, just come to Town;
by which we know that there are more

Pilgrims upon the Road, for here they
come to wait for them and to comfort
them after all their Sorrow. Then the
Pilgrims got up and walked to and fro:
But how were their Ears now filled with
heavenly Noises, and their Eyes delighted
with Celestial Visions? In this
Land, they heard nothing, saw nothing,
felt nothing, smelt nothing, tasted nothing,
that was offensive to their Stomach
or Mind; only when they tasted
of the Water of the River,Death bitter to the Flesh, but sweet to the Soul. over which
they were to go, they thought that tasted
a little Bitterish to the Palat, but it
proved sweeter when 'twas down.
In this place there was a Record
kept of the Names of them that had
been Pilgrims of old, and a History of
all the famous Acts that they had done:
It was here also much discoursed how
the River to some had had its flowings,Death has its Ebbings and Flowings like the Tide.
and what ebbings it has had while others
have gone over. It has been in a manner
dry for some, while it has overflowed
its Banks for others.
In this place, the Children of the
Town would go into the Kings Gardens
and gather Nose-gaies for the Pilgrims,
and bring them to them with much affection.
Here also grew Camphire
with Spicknard, and Saffron, Calamus,
and Cinamon, with all its Trees of
Frankincense, Myrrhe, and Aloes, with all
chief Spices. With these the Pilgrims
Chambers were perfumed, while they
stayed here; and with these were their

Bodys anointed to prepare them to go
over the River when the time appointed
was come.
Now, while they lay here, and waited
for the good Hour;A Messenger of Death sent to Christiana. there was a
Noyse in the Town, that there was a
Post come from the Celestial City, with
Matter of great Importance, to one
Christiana, the Wife of Christian the
Pilgrim. So Enquiry was made for her,
and the House was found out where she
was, so the Post presented her with a
Letter; the Contents whereof was, Hail,
Good Woman,His Message. I bring thee Tidings that
the Master calleth for thee, and expecteth
that thou shouldest stand in his Presence, in
Cloaths of Immortality, within this ten
Days.
When he had read this Letter to her,How welcome is Death to them that have nothing to do but to dy.
he gave her therewith a sure Token
that he was a true Messenger, and was
come to bid her make hast to be gone.
The Token was, An Arrow with a Point
sharpened with Love, let easily into her
Heart, which by degrees wrought so effectually
with her, that at the time appointed she
must be gone.
When Christiana saw that her time
was come, and that she was the first of
this Company that was to go over: She
called for Mr. Great-heart her Guide, and
told him how Matters were. So he told
her he was heartily glad of the News,Her Speech to her Guide.
and could a been glad had the Post came
for him. Then she bid that he should
give Advice, how all things should be
prepared for her Journey.

So he told her, saying, Thus and
thus it must be, and we that Survive
will accompany you to the River-side.
Then she called for her Children,
and gave them her Blessing;To her Children. and told
them that she yet read with Comfort
the Mark that was set in their Foreheads,
and was glad to see them with
her there, and that they had kept their
Garments so white. Lastly, She bequeathed
to the Poor that little she had,
and commanded her Sons and her
Daughters to be ready against the Messenger
should come for them.
When she had spoken these Words
to her Guide and to her Children, she
called for Mr. Valiant-for-truth, and said
unto him,To Mr. Valiant. Sir, You have in all places
shewed your self true-hearted, be Faithful
unto Death, and my King will give
you a Crown of Life. I would also intreat
you to have an Eye to my Children,
and if at any time you see them
faint, speak comfortably to them. For
my Daughters, my Sons Wives, they
have been Faithful, and a fulfilling of
the Promise upon them,To Mr. Stand-fast. will be their
end. But she gave Mr. Stand-fast a
Ring.
Then she called for old Mr. Honest,To old Honest.
and said of him, Behold an Israelite indeed,
in whom is no Guile. Then said
he, I wish you a fair Day when you set
out for Mount Sion, and shall be glad to
see that you go over the River dry-shod.
But she answered, Come Wet, come

Dry, I long to be gone; for however the
Weather is in my Journey, I shall have
time enough when I come there to sit
down and rest me, and dry me.
Then came in that good Man Mr:Mr. Ready-to-halt.
Ready-to-halt to see her. So she said to
him, Thy Travel hither has been with
Dificulty, But that will make thy Rest
the sweeter. But watch, and be ready,
for at an Hour when you think not, the
Messenger may come.
After him, came in Mr. Dispondencie,
and his Daughter Much-a-fraid.To Dispondencie and his Daughter. To whom
she said, You ought with Thankfulness
for ever, to remember your Deliverance
from the Hands of Gyant Dispair, and
out of Doubting-Castle. The effect of that
Mercy is, that you are brought with
Safety hither. Be ye watchful, and cast
away Fear; be sober, and hope to the
End.
Then she said to Mr. Feeble-Mind,To Feeble-mind.
Thou was delivered from the Mouth of
Gyant Slay-good, that thou mightest live
in the Light of the Living for ever, and
see thy King with Comfort. Only I
advise thee to repent thee of thy aptness
to fear and doubt of his Goodness
before he sends for thee, lest thou shouldest
when he comes, be forced to stand
before him for that Fault with Blushing.
Now the Day drew on that ChristianaHer last Day, and manner of Departure. must be gone. So the Road was full of
People to see her take her Journey. But
behold all the Banks beyond the River

were full of Horses and Chariots, which
were come down from above to accompany
het to the City-Gate. So she came
forth and entered the River with a Beck'n
of Fare well, to those that followed
her to the River side. The last word
she was heard to say here was, I come
Lord, to be with thee and bless thee.
So her Children and Friends returned
to their Place, for that those that
waited for Christiana, had carried her
out of their Sight. So she went, and
called, and entered in at the Gate with
all the Ceremonies of Joy that her Husband
Christian had done before her.
At her Departure her Children wept,
but Mr. Great-heart, and Mr. Valiant,
played upon the well tuned Cymbal and
Harp for Joy. So all departed to their
respective Places.
In process of time there came a Post
to the Town again, and his Business was
with Mr. Ready-to-halt.Ready-to-halt Summoned. So he enquired
him out, and said to him, I am come
to thee in the Name of him whom thou
hast Loved and Followed, tho upon
Crutches. And my Message is to tell thee,
that he expects thee at his Table to Sup
with him in his Kingdom the next Day
after Easter. Wherefore prepare thy self
for this Journey.
Then he also gave him a Token that
he was a true Messenger,  saying, I have
broken thy golden Bowl, and loosed thy
silver Cord.
After this, Mr. Ready-to-halt called for

his Fellow Pilgrims, and told them, saying,
I am sent for, and God shall surely
visit you also. So he desired Mr. Valiant
to make his Will. And because he
had nothing to bequeath to them that
should Survive him, but his Crutches, and
his good Wishes, therefore thus he said.Promises. His Will.
These Crutches, I bequeath to my Son that
shall tread in my Steps, with an hundred
warm Wishes that he may prove better then I
have done.
Then he thanked Mr. Great-heart, for
his Conduct, and Kindness, and so addressed
himself to his Journey. When
he came at the brink of the River, he
said, Now I shall have no more need of
these Crutches, since yonder are Chariots
and Horses for me to ride on.His last Words. The
last Words he was heard to say, was,
Welcome Life. So he went his Way.
After this,Feeble-Mind Summoned. Mr. Feeble-mind had Tidings
brought him, that the Post sounded
his Horn at his Chamber Door. Then
he came in and told him, saying, I am
come to tell thee that the Master has
need of thee, and that in very little
time thou must behold his Face in
Brightness. And take this as a Token
of the Truth of my Message.  Those that
look out at the Windows shall be darkned.
Then Mr. Feeble-mind called for his
Friends, and told them what Errand
had been brought unto him, and what
Token he had received of the truth of
the Message. Then he said, Since I have

nothing to bequeath to any,He makes no Will. to what
purpose should I make a Will? As for
my feeble Mind, that I will leave behind
me, for that I shall have no need of that
in the place whither I go; nor is it
worth bestowing upon the poorest Pilgrim:
Wherefore when I am gon, I desire,
that you, Mr. Valiant, would bury
it in a Dunghil. This done, and the
Day being come, in which he was to
depart; he entered the River as the rest.
His last Words were,His last Words. Hold out Faith and
Patience. So he went over to the other
Side.
When Days,Mr. Dispondencie's Summons. had many of them passed
away; Mr. Dispondencie was sent for.
For a Post was come and brought this
Message to him. Trembling Man, These are
to summon thee to be ready with thy King,
by the next Lords Day, to shout for Joy for
thy Deliverance from all thy Doubtings.
And said the Messenger, That my
Message is true, take this for a Proof. So
he gave him The Grashopper to be a Burthen
unto him:  Now Mr. Dispondencie's Daughter, whose Name was Much-a-fraid,His Daughter goes too. said,
when she heard what was done, that she
would go with her Father. Then Mr.
Dispondencie said to his Friends; My
self, and my Daughter, you know what
we have been, and how troublesomly we
have behaved our selves in every Company.
My Will and my Daughters is,His Will.
that our Disponds, and slavish Fears, be
by no man ever received, from the day
of our Departure, for ever; For I know

that after my Death they will offer themselves
to others. For, to be plain with
you, they are Ghosts, the which we entertained
when we first began to be Pilgrims,
and could never shake them off
after. And they will walk about and
seek Entertainment of the Pilgrims, but
for our Sakes, shut ye the Doors upon
them.
When the time was come for them toHis last Words.
depart, they went to the Brink of the
River. The last Words of Mr. Dispondencie,
were, Farewel Night, welcome Day. His
Daughter went thorow the River singing,
but none could understand what
she said.
Then it came to pass, a while after,
that there was a Post in the Town thatMr. Honest. Summoned.
enquired for Mr. Honest. So he came to
the House where he was, and delivered
to his Hand these Lines. Thou art Commanded
to be ready against this Day seven
Night, to present thy self before thy Lord,
at his Fathers House. And for a Token
that my Message is true, All thy Daughters
of Musick shall be brought low.  Then
Mr. Honest called for his Friends, and
said unto them, I Die, but shall make
no Will. As for my Honesty,He makes no will. it shall
go with me; let him that comes after
be told of this. When the Day that
he was to be gone, was come, he addressed
himself to go over the River.
Now the River at that time overflowed
the Banks in some places. But Mr. Honest
in his Life time had spoken to one Good-conscience

to meet him there,Good-conscience helps Mr. Honest over the River. the which
he also did, and lent him his Hand, and
so helped him over. The last Words
of Mr. Honest were, Grace Reigns. So he
left the World.
After this, It was noised abroad that
Mr. Valiant Summoned.Mr. Valiant for-truth was taken with a
Summons, by the same Post as the other;
and had this for a Token that the Summons
was true,  That his Pitcher was
broken at the Fountain. When he understood
it, he called for his Friends, and
told them of it. Then said he, I am
going to my Fathers, and tho with great
Difficulty I am got hither, yet now I do
not repent me of all the Trouble I have
been at to arrive where I am.His Will. My Sword,
I give to him that shall succeed me in
my Pilgrimage, and my Courage and Skill,
to him that can get it. My Marks and
Scarrs I carry with me, to be a Witness
for me, that I have fought his Battels,
who now will be my Rewarder. When
the Day that he must go hence, was
come, many accompanied him to the
River side, into which, as he went, he
said, Death, where is thy Sting? And as
he went down deeper, he said, Grave,
where is thy Victory?His last Words. So he passed over,
and the Trumpets sounded for him on
the other side.
Then there came forth a Summons
for Mr. Stand-fast,Mr. Stand-fast is Summoned. (This Mr. Stand-fast,
was he that the rest of the Pilgrims
found upon his Knees in the inchanted
Ground.) For the Post brought it him

open in his Hands. The Contents whereof
were, That he must prepare for a change
of Life, for his Master was not willing that
he should be so far from him any longer. At
this Mr. Stand-fast was put into a Muse;
Nay, said the Messenger, you need not
doubt of the truth of my Message; for
here is a Token of the Truth thereof, Thy
Wheel is broken at the Cistern Then he
called to him Mr. Great-heart,.  who was
their Guide, and said unto him, Sir,He calls for Mr. Great-Heart.
Altho it was not my hap to be much in
your good Company in the Days of my
Pilgrimage, yet since the time I knew
you, you have been profitable to me.
When I came from home,His Speech to him. I left behind
me a Wife, and five small Children.
Let me entreat you, at your Return
(for I know that you will go, and return
to your Masters House, in Hopes
that you may yet be a Conductor to
more of the Holy Pilgrims,) that you
send to my Family, and let them be acquainted
with all that hath, and shall
happen unto me. Tell them moreover,
of my happy Arrival to this Place, and
of the present late blessed Condition
that I am in. Tell them also of Christian,
and of Christiana his Wife,His Errand to his Family. and how
She and her Children came after her
Husband. Tell them also of what a
happy End she made, and whither she
is gone. I have little or nothing to send
to my Family, except it be Praiers, and
Tears for them; of which it will suffice,
if thou acquaint them, if paradventure

they may prevail. When Mr. Stand-fast
had thus set things in order, and
the time being come for him to hast
him away; he also went down to the
River. Now there was a great Calm
at that time in the River, wherefore Mr.
Stand-fast, when he was about half way
in, he stood a while and talked to his
Companions that had waited upon him
thither. And he said,
This River has been a Terror to many,
His last Words.yea the thoughts of it also have often
frighted me. But now methinks I stand
easie,  my Foot is fixed upon that, upon
which the Feet of the Priests that
bare the Ark of the Covenant, stood
while Israel went over this Jordan. The
Waters indeed are to the Palate bitter,
and to the Stomack cold; yet the
thoughts of what I am going to, and of
the Conduct that waits for me on the other
side, doth lie as a glowing Coal at
my Heart.
I see my self now at the end of my
Journey, my toilesom Days are ended.
I am going now to see that Head that
was Crowned with Thorns, and that
Face that was spit upon, for me.
I have formerly lived by Hear-say,
and Faith, but now I go where I shall
live by sight, and shall be with him, in
whose Company I delight my self.
I have loved to hear my Lord spoken
of, and wherever I have seen the
print of his Shooe in the Earth, there I
have coveted to set my Foot too.

His Name has been to me as a Civit-Box,
yea, sweeter then all Perfumes. His
Voice to me has been most sweet, and
his Countenance, I have more desired
then they that have most desired the
Light of the Sun. His Word I did use
to gather for my Food, and for Antidotes
against my Faintings. He has held
me, and I have kept me from mine
Iniquities: Yea, my Steps hath he
strengthened in his Way.
Now while he was thus in Discourse,
his Countenance changed, his strongman
bowed under him, and after he
had said, Take me, for I come unto thee,
he ceased to be seen of them.
But glorious it was, to see how the
open Region was filled with Horses and
Chariots, with Trumpeters and Pipers,
with Singers, and Players on stringed
Instruments, to welcome the Pilgrims
as they went up, and followed one another
in at the beautiful Gate of the
City.
As for Christian's Children, the four
Boys that Christiana brought with her,
with their Wives and Children, I did
not stay where I was, till they were
gone over. Also since I came away,
I heard one say, that they were yet alive,
and so would be for the Increase
of the Church in that Place where they
were for a time.

Shall it be my Lot to go that way
again, I may give those that desire it,
an Account of what I here am silent
about; mean time I bid my Reader
Adieu.