

Scipiana had scarce finish'd
her Discourse, when
one of her Women enter'd her
Chamber, all surpriz'd, telling
her, that according to her Ladyship's
Commands, she had been to visit
the poor Youth Almon, to see that he had
all Things necessary for a Person indispos'd
with Sickness: But coming into his
Chamber, (said she) I found him sleeping,
and the Cloaths fallen a little from his Stomach; 
by which Means I discover'd the 
perfect Beauties of a Virgin Breast. This
surprizing Information made the two Ladies
run to assure themselves of the Truth
of this Adventure. The Lights, and Noise
of their coming, awak'd the poor Almon; 
who, all blushing, half dy'd with Confusion. 
It is in vain, Almon, said Scipiana, to
endeavour to hide from us your being a
Woman; nor be afflicted or affrighted at
our Knowledge of it, but assure yourself
of all the Service we can render you in that
State; therefore, if it be not inconvenient
to you, or too great a Fatigue to your
weak Spirits, acquaint us with the Cause
of this your Transformation. Wherefore
Almon, with much Respect and Modesty,
related as follows: 
The History of Almon, or
Cordiala.
Be not surpriz'd, Ladies, (said Almon)
when I tell you, that under this Disguise
is hid the unfortunate Cordiala, formerly
the suppos'd Daughter of Flavia,
Widow to Camillus, with whom I liv'd all
the Days of my Childhood, and knew no
other but that I was her proper Daughter. 
And is it possible, said Clelia, (interrupting 
her) that I cou'd behold those lovely Features,
and not immediately remember the
fair Charmer, that captivated the Hearts of
all our Roman Gallants. I now perfectly
call to Mind those Beauties, with which I
had the Happiness to be acquainted at
Rome; so, embracing her most tenderly,
begg'd her to proceed. 
Having attain'd to the Age of Fifteen,
(said Cordiala) Flavia, my suppos'd Mother,
with much Prudence, propos'd a Marriage
between me and her Nephew Clodius; 
but great was my Aversion to the loose,
or rather lewd Life of Clodius, that I could
not possibly comply with her Commands,
or his Desires, tho' he made his Addresses
to me with all the Gallantry and Assiduity
proper on such an Occasion. I know not
whether my ill Genius inspir'd me, or my
hard Fate commanded me, but I cou'd not
in the least gain upon my Inclinations in
Favour of Clodius. This displeas'd Flavia,
my pretended Mother, that she not only
absolutely commanded, but threaten'd to
discard me, if I did not make my Will
comply with hers, in marrying Clodius. 
In Conclusion, my Resistance caus'd her to
drive me from her Presence, forbidding
me ever to see her more, without a Resolution
to obey her in this her just and honourable
Command, the Marrying her Nephew. 
This Treatment, instead of softening 
me towards Clodius, increas'd my Disgust,
and what was before only a Disesteem
of his loose Character, became now
an absolute and thorough Aversion. Thus
my unlucky Constellations and ill Genius
conspir d to engage my Disobedience to
make an indiscreet Resolution, or, rather,
a rash Vow, never to marry Clodius, he
being the Author of my Mother's great
Anger; tho', at the same Time, I was ignorant
what to do, and destitute of all
Consolation, but what I receiv'd from solitary
Sighs and Tears. 
Whilst my Thoughts were thus in Agitation,
Flavia's Woman came to me, and
told me, I should be for ever miserable, if
I persisted to resist her Lady's Will: For,
said she, I will tell you a Thing which is
an absolute Secret to all but my Lady and
myself. Then be pleas'd to know, Madam,
(continu'd she) that you are not Daughter
to Flavia and Camillus, as the World
believes you to be; for soon after the
Death of Camillus, your suppos'd Father,
his little Daughter Cordiala dy'd also. And,
Camillus and his Daughter being dead, and
his Brother Catullus banish'd, his Estate of
course would have fall'n into the Hands
of the Senate. Now, Madam, (continu'd
she) take it not ill that I do tell you this
secret Truth, You are Daughter to that
Woman who nurs'd my Lady's Daughter, 
Foster-Sister to her Cordiala, whom my Lady
finding very pretty, and (as she fancy'd) a
little like her own Child, brib'd the Nurse
to say it was her Child that dy'd; so my
Lady took you as her proper Daughter,
and always tender'd you accordingly; and
now would make you happy, in marrying
you to her Nephew, who is her lawful
Heir. So that, if you refuse this Marriage,
she is oblig'd in Conscience to declare the
Truth of your Original, rather than defraud
her Nephew of what belongs to him
by Right of Inheritance. And now, Madam,
since you know the Case, I hope Gratitude
and your own Interest will oblige
you to a ready Compliance with my Lady's Commands. 
Whatever Gratitude and Interest may
excite me to, (said I) I know not; but I am
sure Justice and Generosity teaches me to
refuse what belongs not to me; wherefore,
the Knowledge I have of my low Birth
obliges me to refuse Clodius, as being altogether
unworthy of that Honour. So that
if I cannot keep my Lady's Favour, but
by unworthy and indirect Means, I must
submit to whatsoever hard Fortune the
Gods have allotted me. In short, Flavia
wholly discarded me; by which Means
I was reduc'd to the Necessity of seeking a
Livelihood. 
Now it was that Asbella had taken her
Resolution to leave Rome, and retire to her
Estate in Sicily; and wanting a Woman to
go along with her, I offer'd myself, being
desirous to quit Rome, where I had liv'd
in so much Splendour; and she retiring with
a Pretence of leading a vertuous recollected
Life, I thought I could not propose to my
self a happier Way of Subsistance. 
Thus we took our Voyage for Sicily,
where I enjoy'd as much Happiness as I
could hope for in that Rank or Station of
Life, 'till Valerius (Asbella's Son) came, and
with him Clarinthia, whom they kept there
secretly in Restraint. I will not digress
so, as to tell your Ladyships her Story, (extraordinary
as it is) at least, not at this
Time, but go on with my own: I was appointed
to wait on Clarinthia, whose sweet
Humour made it a very agreeable Employment,
excepting the Pain I had for fear
she should know me; but she having been
some Time in the Country, and I very
young when she left Rome, I was grown
out of her Remembrance. Nevertheless,
she was pleas'd to confide in me, so far as
to relate to me all the Cause and Circumstances
of her Sufferings; which made me
add Pity to that Esteem which her Merits
had grafted in my Soul, and wish'd with
all my Heart I could have been serviceable
to her in helping her to make her Escape; 
but that lay not in my Power. However,
so it was, she got away, by what Means I
know not; but Asbella believing me to be
the Author, or, at least, Coadjutor of her
Flight, in a violent Rage turn'd me out of
Doors, without the least Consideration to
what Misery she expos'd me, a poor unfortunate
Stranger, who knew not the Language
of the Country, nor which Way to
direct my Steps: Moreover, it was Evening
when her Anger oblig'd her to this Act
of Severity. I got into an adjacent Wood,
where I soon wander'd myself weary, and
out of my Knowledge, without Hopes of
Town or House, wherein to shelter or repose
myself, so that I was forc'd to lodge under
an aged Oak, making its mossy Root my
Pillow, and its Boughs my Canopy. Thus
was I, poor Maid, expos'd to the Weather
and wild Beasts, or perhaps my Youth a
Prey to lewd Out-laws, who inhabit those
Woods in great Number. It pleas'd the
Gods to send the former of these Sorts of
Enemies, which, in Part, I may suppose,
secur'd me from the latter more dangerous
Assailants; for it thunder'd, lighten'd, and
rain'd so violently, that no living Creature
that had a Den or Hole to creep into,
would be abroad that stormy Night; nevertheless,
I, poor Creature, remain'd all
the Night, trembling and frighted at every
Clap of Thunder, ready to sink, and 
wish'd myself in my Grave, at every Flash
of Lightning. At last, I saw just before
me a great Oak rent in a thousand Pieces,
and burnt with the Lightning, which
dreadful Spectacle, with the Noise that accompany'd
it, cast me to the Ground, quite
bereav'd of Sense, where I lay 'till Morning,
and then, a little recovering, I found myself
so numb'd and loaded with my wet Cloaths,
that I had much ado to go along. I came
to that Side of the Wood which runs along
the Sea Coast, where I had not gone many
Paces, but I found a Suit of Man's Apparel,
which lay so well cover'd under a
great Cloak, that the Cloaths were not at
all wet. In these Cloaths I array'd my
self, without considering the Decency or
Indecency of the Place or Action, my present
Distress making me postpone all such
little Difficulties, and entertain no Considerations
but such as were favourable to
my Necessities. 
Thus being eas'd of my wet Habit, I
walk'd indifferently well along the Sea-Coast, 
'till I came to a Port where many
Ships lay in Harbour. Here I submitted
myself to be hir'd for a Marmer, where
I used my utmost Endeavours to perform
my Duty; but, alas! my Weakness, as well
as Ignorance, made them soon weary of
my Service; so that after much Cursing and
Swearing, they set me on Shore in Sardinia. 
Here I was reduc'd to the last Degree
of Necessity, not knowing which Way to
direct my Steps, nor to whom to address. 
A little Way distant from the Port where
I was set on Shore, is a Temple of Apollo; 
a very stately Fabrick, with an adjacent
House of Holy Priests, Votaries to that
God. Here I went, in Order to make my
Devotion, and to obtain some Assistance,
or, at least, Advice, from those pious Recluses. 
It happen'd to be a very solemn
Festival among them, it being the Day on
which they commemorated that God's being
taken up into Heaven, after his long
Servitude, of having been Herdsman to
King Admetus. Here I got into the Musick-Lost, 
or Tribune, where being many Instruments
as well as Voices, wherewith to
celebrate that Day's Sacrifice, amongst
these I took one, and assisted so tolerably
well, that the Priests took me into their
House, and treated me very kindly, making
me sing, and discourse of the Science
of Musick, in which I pleas'd 'em so well,
(the Priests of Apollo being all great Musicians)
that they were willing to take me
in as a Probationer, in order to become one
of their holy Fraternity. I was almost
non-plus'd what Answer to make; but present
Necessity being the imperious Mistress
that will be first serv'd, oblig'd me to accept
of their kind Offer, and so resolv'd to 
stay with them, at least for some Time,
'till I cou'd study or turn myself some other
Way, more suitable to my Sex and
Education. Here I improv'd that little
Talent I had of Singing and Musick,
learn'd all the Ways and Rules of those
holy Votaries; and found so much Happiness
and Tranquility in that Kind of Life,
that if it had been compatible with my
Sex, I should have preferr'd it before all
others, and have supplicated most earnestly
to have been admitted into their holy Society. 
Here I pass'd many Months, 'till the
Time began to approach, in which I must
initiate myself a Member of these holy
Recluses, or leave the House totally; one
was hard, and the other impossible. Sometimes
I thought to cast myself at the Feet
of the High-Priest, and discover my Grief
and Necessity to him; but then again, I
knew the Crime I had committed, in living
thus in Disguise amongst them, would be
thought very enormous, if not unpardonable; 
so whether out of Cowardice or
Modesty, I know not, but I could not furnish
myself with Assurance enough to
declare these my hard Circumstances. 
An Accident, which is a little particular,
I cannot omit. There was near this holy
Confraternity, a certain House, wherein
liv'd their Steward, or chief Servant, who 
took Care of all their external Concerns,
a very discreet Man, who had gather'd
much Riches, and had Possessions of Pastures,
Corn, and Cattle. This good Man
had only one fair Daughter, Heiress of his
Substance: She was sought after by all
the rich Swains of those Parts; but the
unfortunate Maid took an Affection to me. 
This made her refuse their Addresses, and
those her Father made on their Behalf. I
will not repeat the several Advances and
innocent Efforts she made; for I being a
Person not engag'd in their Rule of Living,
was sent abroad on divers Occasions, so I
was very often at this House, with this
pretty Maid, whose Vertue engag'd me to
a particular Love and Esteem for her; she
and her Mother always treating me extream
kindly with their rural Cates,
Creams, Tarts, Sweet-meats, and the like:
She frequently took Occasion to hint her
Affection to me, which I endeavour'd to
avoid, or not understand; 'till one Day, being
set with her in a pleasant Arbour, she
was rallying and talking against Love and
Marriage, which was often the Theme of
her Discourse; I suppose, partly to justify
her refusing those Offers of Marriage, so
proper and fitting, that no Exception could
be made; and partly to introduce that Entertainment
in a modest Manner, the innocent
Affection she had for me, rendering 
that Discourse pleasing to her. Tho' thereby
she shew'd her Want of Education, and
Ignorance of the World; for our Roman
Gallants take it for a certain Mark of
Love, when a young Lady rallies or banters
a young Gentleman on that Subject; 
and count it an Invitation to Courtship, or
a transparent Mask, thro' which they see
she has a Mind to be marry'd. But this
pretty Innocence knew none of these Sophisms,
and therefore pursu'd the Dictates
of her own Fancy; and, like Heaven,
which often treats with Rigour its greatest
Favourites, thereby to prove them; so she
seem'd to condemn Love and Marriage, to
try how far I would stand in its Defence. 
Wherefore, I would not baulk her Fancy,
but let her catch the Discourse for which
she laid a Trap, and oppos'd all the little
Harangues she made against Cupid and
Hymen; and with due Respect and Veneration
asserted the Greatness of their Power,
the Happiness of their Votaries, the Inevitableness
of falling under their Jurisdiction; 
therefore, perswaded her to make Vertue
comply with Necessity, and submit her
Inclinations to her Father's wise Election,
and take for an Husband one of those her
rich and honest Lovers recommended by
her Father. Alas! Almon, (reply'd she,
with a Look over-charg'd with Tenderness)
had Heaven made you one of those! 
And so fainted away, her Spirits being
overcome with Shame and Confusion; for
she was perfectly vertuous and modest. After
some little Endeavours, she came to
herself, and I led her in, where she betook
herself to her Bed, I suppose, partly out
of Indisposition, and partly out of Confusion,
for having so far discover'd her Weakness. 
Whatever was the Cause, the Effect
was an Affliction to me, and a sensible
Augmentation of my Misfortunes, by reason
that I truly lov'd her; for her Vertue
had gain'd my Esteem, and her Kindness
engag'd my Gratitude. In fine, I found
myself in a Labyrinth, thro' which I knew
not how to direct my Steps. To reveal
my Sex I was asham'd, nor indeed knew I
to whom; for to this vertuous Maid it
was in vain, she not being able to help
me; to the High-Priest it was dangerous,
fearing to be immur'd for having prophan'd
that holy Place, by living so long there in
Disguise; and to live there longer, was but
to augment my Crime. How to discover
myself, I knew not; to steal away, I durst
not, or if I did, was ignorant which Way
to dispose of this wretched Creature. 
Thus I was very knowing in what could
not be done, but what could or ought to
to be done supass'd my Capacity. Great
were my Griefs, and tumultuous were my
Thoughts; I reflected on my past Life, 
but found nothing wherein I had so grossly
offended the Gods, as to render me thus
the Object of their Anger. I call'd to Mind
my Disobedience to Flavia, as the worst of
my Life's Actions; but even in that I
found a Mixture of Vertue; for before I
knew my own Meanness, I refus'd Clodius
out of a Principle of Morality, he being a
very loose irregular Liver; and my Refusal
afterwards proceeded from Justice, as
knowing myself unworthy of his Quality. 
This made me think, that in disobeying
Flavia, I comply'd with the Will of the
Gods, and accordingly hoped for their Protection. 
But finding so great Severity, I
began to grow prophane in my Thoughts,
and almost concluded with the Atheists,
that there were no such Beings, but that
our Fears and Necessities had created the
Deities, and not they us. That our Weakness
gave them Power, and our Want of
Ability to avenge ourselves, caus'd us to
set up those immortal Tribunals, to affright
those with a future Punishment, which our
impotent Anger could not make them feel
at present. That all those Lectures taught
by Philosophers and Divines, of Patience,
Humility, and Resignation, and the Rewards
belonging to them, were but Words
to bubble the Minds of the Poor, that they
might let the Rich enjoy their Ease and
Plenty without Opposition. They decry'd 
Self-Assassination, thereby to oblige the
Poor to live, in spite of all their Wants,
that the Rich might have some to serve
their Sloth. 
These and a thousand desperate Thoughts
roll'd in my Breast, by which I found Poverty
to be a greater Enemy to Vertue,
than Riches: For if the Rich, in the Fulness
of Riot, forget the Givers of those
good Things; the Poor, in their Murmurs
and Despair, affront their very Beings, as
well as tax their Justice in the Distribution
of their Blessings. All this I experienc'd
in the Midst of my Afflictions, in a solitary
Grove at the Bottom of our Garden, where
I was walking alone, without Friend to
consolate, or Patron to assist me: But propitious
Heaven directed my Steps to a Chapel
of Diana's: Here I humbled myself at
the Feet of this Virgin-Goddess, endeavour'd
to purge my Breast of those Murmurings
tending to Despair, which my
Misfortunes had there planted, and offer'd
my Afflictions, Youth, and Innocence, to
her Protection; and, with devout Aspirations,
begg'd her to pity my Weakness,
and support mine Innocence. As I thus
lay in a most humble Posture before her, I
know not whether Sleep overtook me, and
with my flowing Tears seal'd my corporeal
Eyes, or what else, I am ignorant, but I
saw strange glorious Pageants of Victories, 
Triumphs, Countries won and lost, mighty
Heroes, and heroic Actions; and after
all, I thought I saw a lovely Youth stand
by me, and sing these Words: 


 Cease, gentle Maid, cease, cease to grieve,
Thy Goddess does thy Pray'rs receive,
And Providence will thee relieve.


 Those, who on Providence depend,
And patiently its Will attend,
Shall be rewarded in the End,


 By Ways and Means least thought upon,
That Mortals may be forc'd to own
Their Help comes from the Gods alone.


 Griefs to Heav'n's Favourites are sent,
To purify the Penitent,
And justify the Innocent.


 These Ways of Heav'n are always good,
Tho' opposite to Flesh and Blood,
And are but seldom understood.


 Then dry thy Eyes, and clear thy Brow;
All Africa to thee shall bow,
'Tis thy Good Genius tells thee so.


This I should have taken for a mere
Dream, but that the Words were most
perfectly recorded in my Memory, which 
must have been by some immortal Power; 
moreover, one of the holy Priests walking
in the Grove, heard the Singing, and came
to the Chapel, where finding me, he concluded
it to have been my Voice: All
which made me suppose it something extraordinary:
But the latter Words carrying,
with them so much Impossibility, that one
must suppose them to proceed from some
false, or at least flattering Demon, rather
than a God, or one's Good Genius. 
Excuse me, (reply'd Scipiana) such good
Lectures cannot proceed from an infernal
Teacher; I can very well believe it to be
thy good Genius, which brought with him
such Consolation and vertuous Instructions; 
nor is there an Impossibility in what
he sung touching Africa: Your Beauty
and Vertues are certainly made to shine
in some splendid Sphere; for the all-wise
Gods making nothing in vain, consequently
such Merits are not to be bury'd in Obscurity,
but to be instructive and exemplary
to the World; and I doubt not but those
Divine Powers have sent thee hither, as a
Means to accomplish their eternal Will,
and have given into our Hands the Power
to agitate for thee, which shall be in this
Manner: My Cousin Clelia and L will recommend
thee to our Kinswoman and
Friend Fabiel, who is a great Princess in Egypt,
where I doubt not but your Merits 
may (at least in Part) help you to accomplish
this extraordinary Prediction. In all
which a little Time shall instruct us; but
at present proceed in your Story. 
I must needs own (said Cordiala) that I
found an inward Tranquility of Mind,
tho' I saw no Prospect of any good Event,
or Means to extricate myself from these
Difficulties in which I was entangled. But
propitious Heaven had Pity on me, and
sent a Deliverance least expected. 
Fabius, your noble Brother, (bowing to
Clelia) came into Sardinia, in Search of Scipiana; 
and having lost himself in the
Night, by Chance arriv'd at this Place,
where he was kindly entertain'd by these
holy Priests. Here he was complaining
for want of a Servant, being, by some
Means or Accident, depriv'd of those he
brought with him from Rome, and was
now destitute. These holy Priests, finding
my Time of Probation almost expir'd, and
that I made no Application to be receiv'd
into their Fraternity, recommended me to
this noble Person, as one faithful and
diligent in anything suitable to my Years
and Capacity. 
Behold, Ladies, how my hard Fortune
toss'd me, from a Lady to a Waiting-Gentlewoman,
thence to a miserable Vagabond,
afterwards to a Mariner, then to a
wretched Beggar, and after that, to a 
Choirister, lastly, to a Serving-Man. In
this State I travell'd with my Master, the
noble Fabius, till we came in Sight of a
great and magnificent Castle, standing in a
large Park, enclos'd with a high Wall. Here
my Master had a great Curiosity to enter,
and going on, he found a Breach in the
Wall, over which he pass'd without much
Difficulty, leaving me on the other Side
with the Horses. 
As Cordiala was about to go on with her
Story, they heard a Noise of People coming
up Stairs; and looking up, they saw
Asiaticus enter the Chamber; but so fully
were they possess'd with the Belief of his
being dead, that they could not credit
their Senses, till Time and several Demonstrations
convinc'd them that it was really
he himself. But then the Joy which took
Possession of their Souls is not to be express'd,
nor the interchangeable Caresses
between him and his dear Sister not to
be number'd, which continu'd till the Consideration
of making their Father Partaker
of this vast Felicity, made 'em descend to
his Apartment, where their mutual Satisfactions
were such, as no Hand can delineate,
therefore I leave the Reader to
imagine. 