

Marcellus being pretty well recover'd
of his Illness, walk'd out to
take the Air; but not daring to approach
those Walks which Clelia frequented, (by
Means of her late Prohibition) he took the
Way of the great Forest, which extends its
Confines to the Sea-Coast, and being debilitated
by his Sickness, betook himself to a 
Seat, where he heard the Voices of some
distress'd Persons, complaining one to another
of their past and present Misfortunes. 
Marcellus, according to his natural Goodness,
address'd his Steps towards the Place,
and there found two Men and a Woman,
set upon a mossy Bank, under a Cluster of
Bushes, which they design'd that Night for
their Lodging. Marcellus, with great Courtesy,
invited them to his House, which Favour
they gladly accepted, and being come
thither, he desir'd them, if it might consist
with their Conveniency, to inform him
what hard Fortune had reduc'd them to
these Necessities, from which, by their
Mein, they ought to have a perfect Immunity. 
To this the Strangers readily accorded,
and whilst Supper and Beds were
preparing, the Lady, at the Desire of the
others, began as follows: 
The History of Clarinthia.
My Name, said she, is Clarinthia, Daughter
to Turpius, and the sole lawful
Heiress of all his great Riches: But the
Irregularity of his Life makes me almost
asham'd to own him for my Father; his
large Possessions not being able to cover,
nor the Weight of his Riches to poize, the
Infamy of his Actions; which filial Respect
and Prudence wou'd oblige me to conceal, 
were they not too much known to all the
World already. Besides, when such Benefactors
as you all are, call for a Recital, it
is Heaven that speaks, and commands a
true and undisguis'd Relation. 
In my Childhood I was very intimate
with Scipiana, Daughter to Publius Scipio,
as also her elder Brother Scipio, who since,
by his great Actions in the Conquest of
Asia, has obtain'd the Name of Asiaticus, as
I have heard, for I have not seen him since
he was dignify'd with that Title, and
therefore in my Discourse know him by no
other Name than that of Scipio; who, tho'
young as he was, appear'd sensible of that
Passion which at one Time or other charms
all Hearts; these his tender Sentiments he
express'd to me in little innocent Efforts,
suitable to his Years and my Simplicity. 
Being ready to go for Athens, to compleat
his Studies, he endeavour'd to make me
promise him not to accept of the Addresses
of any Lover during his Absence, to which
I answer'd according to the Dictates of my
childish Innocence, which merits not your
Attention. 
A little after his Departure, his noble
Mother dy'd, his little Brother Scipio was
lost, and Catullus, the particular and intimate
Friend of his Father, was banish'd; 
all which happening in a little Space of
Time, made Publius Scipio leave Rome, and 
in extreme Grief retire to his Country-House,
taking with him Scipiana, his Daughter,
resolving for ever to absent himself
from that fatal Place, that Theatre of Horror,
on which had been acted these his
great Misfortunes. 
After the Departure of Scipiana, my dear
Play-fellow, I took very little Pleasure or
Satisfaction in any Company, or Diversion
that Rome could present, only apply'd my
self to my Devoirs, according to the Will
of my virtuous Mother: But the Gods left
me not long in this happy State; for it was
but little after, that the Death of this virtuous
and honourable Parent put a Period
to my Felicity; for then my Father resolv'd
to marry me to his Bastard Son Valerius,
which was such a Piece of Incest,
that I could not shew the least Complacency,
much less Obedience to the Proposal. 
My Father not believing this Refusal to
arise from any Principle of Virtue, but
rather from some Pre-engagement of my
Thoughts to some other of our young Romans,
remov'd himself and me into the
Country, where he thought he should not
fail to discover, and consequently to disappoint
any such conceal'd Intrigue. But I
too well knew my Duty to him and Heaven,
as also what I ow'd to mine own Honour,
to entertain any Correspondence of
that Kind, though never so innocent and 
honourably meant; for the very Being and
essential Part of an honourable Amour is
perverted, and becomes unworthy, if not
criminal, when entertain'd by a young Lady
without the Consent of her Parents. 
These were my Maxims, to which I resolv'd
to adhear, and of which I gave my
Father all the Assurance possible; withal
begging him, that as I had taken the Rule
of Virtue to guide both my Actions and
Inclinations, he would not interrupt my
Progress therein by any opposite Command. 
But all was to no Purpose, I was
perpetually persecuted with the Courtship
of Valerius, and the Persuasions of my Father. 
Now it was that Asbella, Mother to Valerius,
(a Lady really of Quality and Fortune)
retir'd herself to her Estate in Sicily,
pretending to spend the rest of her Days
in the Practice of Virtue; but the World
believ'd rather it was the Effect of her Discontent,
because my Father did not marry
her when at Liberty by the Death of my
Mother; thereby to repair, in some Degree,
her ruin'd Honour. What was the
Subject of her Retreat, I had not the Curiosity
to examine, but willingly accorded
my Belief to that Key to which she tuned
her own Discourse, and so concluded Virtue
to be the principal End of her Retirement. 
In the mean Time, my Father finding
his Perswasions, and Valerius's Courtship,
fruitless, began to treat me with Importunities
and Menaces, and at last grew angry
to that Degree, that he vow'd I should never
see the Sun more, 'till I made my Will
comply with his, in marrying Valerius; 
treating me with much Rigour, or rather
Tyranny, still believing, I suppose, that I
must have some secret Passion elsewhere. 
Valerius being gone to Rome about some Business
for my Father, I was in Hopes his
Absence would have afforded me some
little Respite, at least from the Fatigue of
amorous Pursuits; but behold a new, and
I think unheard of, Calamity befel me! for
contrary to all Morality, and the Laws of
Heaven, my wretched Father became enamour'd
of me, and express'd his Flame
with as much Assurance as if it had been
no Way criminal; and when I urg'd the
Illegallity of this heinous Passion, and that
it would cause the Vengeance of the Gods
to descend on him, and render him at once
miserable and infamous. He made Answer,
That the Notion of Deities was a
Chimera infused into my Fancy by my
Mother, and a customary Education; and
that all the World were misled into such
Opinions by Priests and Potentates, whose
Interest it was to ingage their Inferiors into
a Belief of some invisible Powers, thereby 
to keep them in Subjection. If there be
no Gods, reply'd I, how came we and all
the World made at first? Sure we did not
make our selves! for if we had, methinks
we might have preserv'd the Knowledge
of this Creative Power in all Ages, and
then we might have made our selves a
Kingdom or a World when we pleased, and
this would save our Romans much Pains
and toil, which they continually are at
in their Conquests. But besides this Creative
Power, methinks the Preservative no
less evinces the Belief of some Omnipotent
Beings; for how comes it to pass, that the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, do not fall upon us? 
Besides, this perfect Order and Harmony of
all Things both Celestial and Terrestrial,
as also our own little Microcosme, and interiour
Cogitations, assert this great Truth, in
which our rational Faculty must needs acquiesce. 
But, said my Father, admit all
this your little Prattle true, is not Mercy
one of the chief Attributes of these your
Divinities? Then why do you not imitate
them, and have Pity on your unhappy
Father, or rather wretched Lover, who
dies for you? With these and the like Discourses,
together with all the fond Actions
and Grimaces of a passionate Lover, he
continually entertain'd me, that I heartily
wish'd for Valerius again, whose Love (incestuous
as it was) was yet much more 
supportable than this other. Moreover, I
concluded his Love and Courage would
secure my Honour from any Attempts of
my Father's Brutality, of which I was
dreadfully afraid, knowing him to be a
Man that would stick at nothing to satisfy
his Sensuality. 
The Return of Valerius prov'd sooner
than was expected, which, tho' it gave me
some little Consolation, yet Sighs and
Tears were my continual Entertainment. 
Being one Day set in my Chamber in a
very melancholy Posture, there rush'd into
the Room three disguis'd Men, by a secret
Door behind the Hangings, who, without
speaking a Word, took me away, in spite
of all the Cries and Resistance of me and
my Women. They carry'd me down many
Steps, and thro' divers Turnings under
Ground; at last ascending, I found myself
without the Castle, where Horses waited,
on one of which I was set, and convey'd
with Speed for the Space of an Hour or
more, 'till we came to a certain great Forest. 
Here it was that the Chief of these
rapacious Wretches essay'd to violate my
Honour; but the just Gods, propitious to
mine Innocence, by Means of my Cries,
brought a Person of Virtue and Courage to
my Rescue, which he accomplish'd by the
Death of the Ravisher; the other two,
who were at a Distance, perceiving what 
happen'd, came running to assist their Master,
where one of them immediately met
his Fate, and was sent by the Stranger's
Sword to serve his Master in the other World,
which his Companion seeing, he made his
Escape with all Expedition. The Stranger
taking off the Vizards that disguis'd these
Miscreants, in order to give Air, if any Life
yet remain'd; whose Faces I no sooner saw,
but I knew 'em to be my wretched Father,
and one of his Servants. O ye Gods! what
Surprize and Confusion then seiz'd me!
which I express'd in bitter Cries and Lamentations; 
in the mean Time, the unknown
Person did all he could to restore
him to Life, but he expir'd with these
Words, Forgive me, Clarinthia. The Stranger
courteously ask'd me wherein he could
be farther serviceable? to whom I answer'd,
that I was a Wretch incapable to receive
Service or Succour; a Monster unfit for human
Conversation; therefore desir'd him to
leave me to wander in these Woods, among
the Wolves, and other Salvage Beasts, as
the most fit Cohabitants for such a wretched
Creature as I was made by my Misfortunes:
But he endeavour'd, by discreet
Arguments, to soften this my Fury, and
perswaded me to mount behind him, to
seek some Place of Retreat. I had much
Difficulty to consent to this Proposal, not
only in Consideration of his being an absolute 
Stranger, but his Hands still wreeking
with my Father's Blood; for, wicked
as he was, he was still my Father; but Night
coming on, together with the Wildness of
the Place, oblig'd me to accept of his Offer; 
so he covering the Body of my Father with
his upper Garment, we mounted on Horseback,
and follow'd a little Foot-Path, which
we hop'd would have brought us out of the
Forest; but it only led us to the Abode
of a certain holy Hermit, situated in a
thick and obscure Part of the Wood, which
the Approach of Night, and the Horrors
I carry'd with me, made appear dreadful; 
but the kind Reception we found a little
mitigated my first Apprehensions. And if
I had been capable of reflecting on any
Thing that had the Face of Content, I might
here have found a happy Employment for
my Thoughts, in beholding the tranquil
State of this good Man, and all such who
thus betake themselves to a holy Retreat,
where they are free from those false Alarms
of the World, which beguile us with
foolish Hopes, or as foolish Fears; for to
these Votaries the Smiles and Frowns of
Fortune are equal; for they court not the
one, nor apprehend the other. They dance
not the Measures play'd by Ambition's
Pipe, nor wander after the Ignis-fatuus of
Vain-glory. Their Poverty secures them
from Envy, and its being voluntary, places 
them above the Reach of Contempt; in renouncing
the World they are Masters of it,
and by subduing their Passions, they become
distinguish'd and admir'd by the rest of
Mankind, to whom their Words are Lectures,
and their Actions Sermons. They
find Plenty in the Contempt of Riches, and
great Honour in virtuous Actions. Their
Contemplations are to them all Company,
and their devout Exercises great Diversion. 
Their Food is savoury, and their Sleep
sound; the one is not disturbed with Cares,
nor the other made unpalatable by Intemperance. 
Their abstemious Way of living
preserves their Health, to which is ordinarily
annex'd long Life, and they fear not
Death whose Lives have been so perfect. 
In fine; they are in fact what Socrates and
his Adherents pretend to teach by long
Study, and elaborate Speculation. The
Consideration of all which, made us without
Difficulty commit to this holy Anchorite
the whole of what had befallen us, and
prevail'd with him to go see if he could
find the Body of my Father; but his Pains
prov'd ineffectual: for at his Return he
told us that he had found the tragick Place
of that Rencounter, but the Body was
gone, which was an Augmentation to our
Disquiet. The Stranger having receiv'd a
Wound in the Combat, was over-perswaded
by us to accept of the Hermit's Bed, 
where having taken some Refreshment by
the good Man's Charity, I entreated him
to compose himself to Rest, in Consideration
of the Wound: To which he replied,
That he must never more pretend to Rest
nor Repose, since he had been so unfortunate
to render me fatherless, and consequently
the Object of my Anger, if not
Aversion, which depriv'd him of all Hopes
of Happiness; therefore Death was what
he courted; dispair having render'd it
both his Interest and Inclination. He was
about to have proceeded in this kind of
Discourse, but that I interrupted him under
Pretence of leaving him to his Repose; for
I perceiv'd to what his Words tended, and
was loth to hear him profess himself my Lover,
who had just depriv'd me of my Father. 
The Obligation I had to him in preserving
my Honour, at the Hazard of his
Life, was too great to use him ill, and the
unhappy Circumstances which accompanied
this Obligation were such that I could
not use him well. These Considerations
made me take Leave of him; and as I
turned to go out, I found a Picture
fallen out of his Pocket, which I intended
to restore to him next Morning; but instead
of the Beauties of some fair Lady,
which I expected, it prov'd to be his own
Portraiture, which I have ever since preserv'd
with great Veneration. 
Imagine, Gentlemen, in what Anxiety
of Mind I pass'd this Night, in Consideration
how the Senate, and all the World,
would construe my being as it were in the
Hands of a Stranger, and one who had so
lately kill'd my Father. O Clarinthia! Clarinthia!
said I to my self, what difficult
Paths has Fortune mark'd out for thy Virtue
to trace? How can I ever declare to
the Senate what detestable Crime caused
my Father's Death? Or if I do, perhaps I
shall not be believ'd: If I do not, I expose
my self, and this noble Stranger, to the
Fury of the Laws, and his Honour to everlasting
Infamy. I am in a Labyrinth so
intricate, that even the Line of Reason is
not able to conduct me through its wild
Mazes. On every Hand I see nothing but
Danger and Distress, such as confound
my Resolution, and non-plus my Courage. 
On this Side a rapid Stream of persecuting
Laws, on that, a Precipice of perpetual
Shame; one to ingulph, the other to dash
my Honour in a thousand Pieces. Ah,
Clarinthia! Unfortunate Maid! To what
serves thy Riches and Noble Brith, (the
two most excellent Ingredients towards a
happy Life) but to augment thy Misfortunes,
by rendering thee the more conspicuous
Object of Contempt? Nay, even
Virtue it self, that constant Companion of
my Life, conspires against me, and betrays 
my Youth to these Dilemma's: I say, even
Virtue and Innocence (which inrich the
Poor, comfort the Disconsolate, and lessen
the Terrors of Death) are my Persecutors; 
for it is thro' their Means that I am reduc'd
to these Exigencies; that whether
the Senate condemn or acquit me, give me
Life or Death, Imprisonment or Liberty,
all is Shame, Horror, and Infamy. Nor
was my Concern less in Behalf of the Stranger,
which I then thought was out of a Principle
of Gratitude or Generosity; but I
have found since, that it was Love which
subtily enter'd my Soul in that Disguise. 
In these Disquiets and a thousand others, I
wore away the Night, my Eyes without
Sleep, and my Heart without Repose. 
Early in the Morning I went into the Wood
a few Steps, thinking to find certain Herbs
to apply to the Stranger's Wound. Here I
met three or four armed Men, who immediately
took me away, and carry'd me with
great Speed through the Forest. Long it
was not, e'er I knew them to be Valerius and
his Servants, who reproached me with
much Bitterness, as being a Shame to my
Sex, and a Dishonour to my noble Race for
running away, and abiding in secret with
a Stranger; and not only so, but impious
beyond parallel, in causing my Father's
Death rather than return to him and my
Obedience, when he endeavour'd to take 
me out of the Hands of this my wicked
Co-partner. By all this Discourse, I found
Valerius was misinform'd, and had a wrong
Notion of what had pass'd. This gave me
Occasion to reflect how subject we are to
be deceiv'd by Appearances, and what
great Precaution we ought to use before we
believe, censure, or condemn Things, by
the exterior or first Sight; whereas the other
Side of the Curtain often shews a quite
different Scene. I am sure this Transaction
shall ever be a Warning to me, how I condemn
any Body's Actions with Precipitation; 
for, to speak impartially, this Passage
had so much the Face of what they
represented it to be, that I wonder not that
Valerius was wholly possess'd with a Belief
that this Stranger was the Person my Father
had long suspected to have Possession
of my tenderest Thoughts, and oblig'd me
to oppose his Commands touching the Marriage
of Valerius; and that now being fled
away with him, chose rather to see my
Father die by his Hands, than to return to
his Jurisdiction, and my filial Obedience. 
In vain I strove to disabuse him, he being
so wholly pre-possess'd, that all I could say
seem'd to come from a Mouth false and
biass'd by Crimes, or at least unworthy
Intrigues. He told me, if he had not had
a Passion for me, that carry'd him beyond
the usual Pitch of Lovers, so as to make 
him sacrifice all Interest to his Affection,
he would not have hazarded his Honour,
by thus engaging himself in my Protection,
but have left me to the Rigour of the
Laws, and in the mean Time have secur'd
himself of my Estate, by the Interest he
could have made in the Senate. But the
perfect Love I have for your Person, (continued
he) which belongs to me by Right
of your Father's Donation, makes me overlook
all Advantage on my own Part, and
regard only your Security, which I shall
provide for with my Mother in her Castle
in Sicily. This was a hard Stroke of Fortune; 
to be oblig'd to, and under the Dominion
of, that Woman, whose leud Life
with my Father had made me to detest,
and withal to be in the Power of Valerius,
whose Love I dreaded more than the Danger
of the Laws, or the Anger of the Senate. 
Thus I was conveigh'd to the Sea-Coast,
where we immediately embark'd, and in
few Hours arriv'd in Sicily, at the aforesaid
Castle, where I was confin'd to an Apartment
very richly furnish'd, and pleasantly
situated, yet still it was a Prison, and that
Thought render'd all Things disagreeable. 
They pretended to me, this Restraint proceeded
from Kindness, that none of the
Family might discover me, but that I might
remain conceal'd 'till Time and Industry
could accommodate my Affairs with the 
Senate; all which had the Appearance of
Friendship; but whether it was a real Face,
or only a Mask, I could not tell. Here
I remain'd without the Sight of any Body,
but Valerius, Asbella his Mother, and Cordiala,
who was a young Maid that waited
on Asbella. Pardon me, Gentlemen, if
I enlarge a little on this young Creature's
Character; for she is one of the most accomplish'd
Pieces of Nature's Handy-work,
not only in her outward Form, but her
Mind is so replenish'd with Virtue and Wisdom,
as shews the exterior to be only the
well-made Case of a precious Jewel. Her
Looks and Words were equally engaging,
close-knit Sense in fine-turn'd Language,
which pleas'd not only the outward Senses,
but the most inward Part of the Mind, and
made the Understanding dance to the Musick
of such a charming Consert; that her
Conversation often supplanted my Griefs,
and made them give Way to some Sort of
Satisfaction; especially when she represented
the great Honour that attended patient
suffering for the Sake of Virtue. She was so
eloquent on that Subject, as made me sometimes
almost in Love with Misfortunes, and
find a secret Satisfaction in being cast into
such a Field of Disasters, where so plentiful
an Harvest of Glory was to be reap'd,
by humble and Patient Submission to the
Will of Heaven. These Morals coming 
from a Mouth so very young, and so properly
adapted to my Circumstances, made
me ready to perswade my self, that the
Gods had sent my Good Genius in that
Figure, to beguile my Sufferings, and support
my Virtue. Nor was the low State in
which the Gods had placed this excellent
Creature, less instructive; for it excited me
in this my Solitude, to admire the inscrutable
Providence of the Powers Divine,
who distribute their Benefits diversly; to
some the Gifts of Nature, to others those of
Fortune; to this Body Riches, to that Honours; 
here Wisdom, and there Virtue; by
which Means Hunan-kind becomes united,
that every one having some Quality esteemable,
recommends him to the Assistance of
others; for none being perfect, none can
remain independant; but the mutual necessities
we have of each other's Assistance,
causes reciprocal Obligations, which tyes
fast the Knot of human Society. But alas!
how came I to launch into this Ocean of
Reflections, distant from the Coast of my
Relation, for which I beg your Pardon. 
I cannot but own (continued Clarinthia)
they treated me with as much Civility
and Respect as I cou'd hope for, in these
my hard Circumstances; only Valerius
continually persecuted me with his Courtship
and Presents; all which I refus'd with
equal Aversion, as being inconsistent with 
Virtue, by Reason of our Consanguinity; 
otherwise his Addresses were honourable,
and his Person agreeable. Nor wanted he
Reasons to alledge, nor Examples to produce,
that might justify the Legality of his
Pretensions; as indeed, there are but too
many Examples of that Kind amongst the
Gods and Heroes. Even the present King
and Queen of Egypt live in that State which
our Laws call Incest. How the Men of
the Robe disguise, alter, and transform,
what they say is the Law of the Gods, I
know not; but we often find they make
Vice and Virtue to differ according to
Time, Place, and Person; and make that a
Crime in one Person, which is none in another; 
and that a Virtue in one Place, which
is a Vice in another. These serve to distract
the Ignorant, amuse the Curious and
Speculative, and is an inexhaustible Source
of everlasting Disputes. Wherefore I avoided
these Casuistical By-ways, and kept
to the open common Road of Virtue, taught
me by my Mother, which oblig'd me to
oppose the Love of Valerius as incestuous,
and contrary to the present known Laws
of our Country. But Valerius gave another
Interpretation to this my Reluctance, and
believed my Aversion proceeded from a
pre-existing Passion for that Stranger I had
left at the Hermitage; and once, upon occasion
of some earnest Words which pass'd 
between us, he indiscreetly let fall some
dubious Sayings, as if he thought the
Stranger had possess'd my Person as well as
my Affections. This gave me so great a
Shock, and so irritated my Anger and Indignation
against him, that after severe
Words on that Subject, I begg'd him, for the
Love he pretended to me as his Mistress,
for the Friendship he ought to have for me
as his Sister, for the Respect he ow'd me as
the Daughter of Turpius, that he would
leave me, and never see me more. This I
utter'd with much Passion and Vehemency,
together with so many Tears, that Valerius
cou'd not refrain from weeping also, and
without saying much, left me to my Chagrine. 
After this, Valerius fell into a Melancholy,
which impair'd his Health, for
which I was truly sorry, but knew no Remedy. 
The fraternal Love I bore him,
made the Diminution of his Health an
Augmentation to my Misfortunes; and
the Weight of my Sufferings were made
heavier by the Part I took in his. In fine,
I was absorp'd in Sorrow, and loaden with
Afflictions, without Prospect of Alleviation,
except what I receiv'd from the poor
Cordiala, whose discreet Words often calm'd
my Passion; they were as Balm to a Mind
enflam'd with Sorrow, and when those salutary
Remedies fail'd, she try'd to charm
me with the Musick of her Voice or Instrument, 
for in both these she was perfect,
even to Admiration. Divers Times Valerius
let me know by her the Greatness of
his Griefs, in being depriv'd of my Presence,
alledging, that as this Deprivation
lost him the Heaven of his Happiness, so
the Regret he had for having been himself
the Cause, was to him a Hell of Misery. 
He testify'd a real Sorrow for those his
rash Words, and sued for Pardon with unfeigned
Submission; all which serv'd but
to encrease my Burthen, already too
weighty for my weak Constitution; it
being inconsistent with Virtue to make
him happy, yet fraternal Love made me
a Sharer in his Misfortunes. But beside
these Considerations, I must own (with
Blushes) that my tender Thoughts were too
far engag'd with the noble Stranger, the
generous Defender of my Honour, to think
of any other Object of Affection; not but
that I endeavour'd to stifle and suppress
these foolish Fancies, as Rebels to my Reason,
and Enemies to my Repose. I placed
him in the Tribunal of my Judgment, as
the Author of my Father's Death, which
render'd him unfit ever to be my Husband,
almost to an impossibility, if his Quality,
Inclinations, and all other Circumstances
were correspondent, of which I was wholly
ignorant, except those few dubious Words
of Gallantry at the Hermit's Cell, which 
ought to pass in Oblivion, as common
Words of course; and wou'd have done so
with me, if fantastick Folly had not kept
them alive in my Memory. I was in
perpetual Fear of his being taken and
prosecuted by the Agents of Valerius, as
my Father's Murtherer, and my Ravisher. 
Thus was my Person confin'd, but my
Griefs enlarg'd; I had lost my Father, and
was believ'd to be his Murtherer; I had
follow'd Virtue on all Occasions, and was
suppos'd to be a great Criminal; I was
born an Heiress of a noble Family, and
inherited nothing but a Prison. In these,
and the like sorrowful Reflections, I pass'd
my Days without Repose, and my Nights
without Slumbers. Being one Night in
these doleful Thoughts, I saw, by the Light
of the Moon, a Person enter my Chamber,
at whose Approach I knew to be Cordiala,
who, after having apologized for coming
at an Hour so unexpected, she told me the
Occasion; which was to inform me of what
had been projected against mine Innocence
and Quiet, and was to be executed that
coming Day. She had overheard her Lady
and Valerius discoursing that Evening
about me; Asbella blam'd her Son for suffering
any Disquiet in his Mind for a Person
he had in his Power. Your Softness
(said she) makes me almost asham'd to own
you for my Son; rouze up your Resolution, 
and act as becomes your Sex and Quality,
and not languish under the Effects of I
know not what Fears and Fancies of a rigorous
Beauty. Shake off, I say, this unpardonable
Cowardice, and be a happy Conqueror
over this your fair Enemy. But
Valerius seem'd to abominate any Thing of
Force, and told his Mother, he was no less
a Votary to my Virtue than my Beauty,
both to him were sacred. I perceive, said
Asbella, that Love is not only blind, but
void of all Manner of Sense, otherwise,
you cou'd not speak of her as a Person of
Virtue, who is a Criminal of so deep a
Dye. One, not only disobedient to her
Father, but his Murtherer; an ungrateful
Sorceress, who bewitches you with her
Beauty, and then abandons you to Despair
by her Scorn and Ingratitude. She neither
considers you as her Brother, Lover, nor
Benefactor; the latter of which you have
sufficiently prov'd your self to be, in undertaking
her Protection, when her Crimes
had reduced her to a perfect Exigence; but
she, transported with an irregular Affection,
is not capable to consider her own Interest,
which is bound up in your Kindness, and
Constancy. Now, since Passion has so far
the Regency of her Intellect, that she is
uncapable of judging what is good for her,
you must be so much her Friend, as to make
her happy against her Will, for there is no 
 medium for her, between becoming your
Wife, and falling into Shame, Punishment,
and Misery of all Kinds; therefore, out of
Compassion to her, (the Thing you so much
dote upon) you must espouse her, without
considering whether she be willing or unwilling,
pleas'd or displeas'd; for your
Life and her Honour both depend upon
this Enterprize. Fear not, for I will find
a Priest shall be subservient to my Request; 
therefore resolve to make to Morrow a happy
Day to your self and this your cruel
Fair, by espousing her lawfully, according
as her Father design'd. Valerius, though a
little Opposite at first, yet, upon his Mother's
pressing, and repeating how far my
Happiness was the Object, if not the whole
End of the Undertaking, he at last consented,
and this my forced Marriage was
resolv'd on that coming Day. Thus was
Valerius perswaded to this real Wickedness,
under the Pretext of an imaginary Good; 
and thus, indeed, it fares too often with the
most Part of Mankind; for when Interest
and Inclination stand Candidates for Preference,
we then trick with Virtue, and put
the Cheat upon Honour; we impose upon
our Understandings, and force our Judgments; 
nay more, we depose even Reason
itself, and give Passions the Regency; 
and when our Minds are thus untun'd, our
Actions soon joyn in the same Discord; 
we post-pone the Laws of the Gods, and
make those of our Country ineffectual,
of all which Valerius now became an Example; 
for he was not wicked in his Nature,
but misled by the Ignis-fatuus of his
Passion and Interest. But to return, Cordiala
having inform'd me of this their Design,
I thank'd, and hasten'd her away to prevent
Suspicion. She being gone, I arose,
and walk'd about my Chamber quite distracted
with the Apprehension of what was
to succeed; sometimes I threw myself on
the Bed, sometimes on the Floor; being
tir'd of all Postures; at last I went out
on the Balcony which appertain'd to my
Lodging, and jetted, as it were, over the
Sea. Here I walk'd many Turns in the
greatest Perplexity a Soul cou'd suffer. I
fancy I resembled Queen Dido (as History
describes her) at the Departure of her Æneas,
and was as much embarras'd and distracted
how to avoid my amorous Persecutor,
as she cou'd be how to follow or overtake
her beloved Fugitive. Thus, different
Causes often produce the same Effect, as
Glass, which is equally made by the Extremities
of Heat and Cold. How happy did
I esteem those Nymphs of Old, who, by
the Pity of the Gods, were transform'd into
Plants or Animals, by which they avoided
the Embraces of their hated Lovers. And,
indeed, Valerius was now become such to 
me, this Contrivance having raz'd out all
those Characters of Friendship and fraternal
Love, which his virtuous and generous
Behaviour had engraven in my Heart before; 
and I now detested and abhorr'd him
as the worst of Criminals. Sometimes I
resolv'd to cast my self into the Deep, and
so become a Sacrifice to Neptune, rather
than a Victim to his incestuous Love; sometimes
to force my self upon those iron Spikes
on the Banisters, with a Thousand other
extravagant Thoughts, which Reason, or
want of Courage, render'd abortive; till,
befriended by Cynthia's bright Beams, I saw
in a Cleft of the Wall an old rusty Key,
with which (as Fortune, or my good Genius
would have it) I open'd the Iron-Gate,
thro' which one descends by Steps to the
Sea. At the Bottom of these Stairs there
was an old Boat slightly fasten'd, into which
I enter'd, and committed my self to the
Mercy of that rude Element. 
The Wind being favourable, I was soon
driven far enough from the Coast of Sicily,
with how little Appearance of Safety I leave
you to imagine; but I trusted in that Divine
Prouidence which had deliver'd me so
far, and this bore up my Hopes against
those swelling Surges, and the gaping Deep,
which every Moment threaten'd to devour
me; being well assur'd of the Mercy of
those Gods I had serv'd to receive my immortal 
Part, if my Body perish'd. And here
it was that I experienc'd the Doctrine of
those Philosophers who affirm, that a Person
truly Virtuous can never be throughly
unfortunate, because he places not his Happiness
on external Things, as not being always
in his Power. In these Thoughts I
was toss'd all that Night; when the Morning
appear'd, I saw a Ship sailing that Way,
to which I call d and becken'd, intreating
them to take me in, which they did with
much readiness, and put me into a Cabin
to repose my self. Whilst I was there, I
heard a complaining Voice, which said,
O Divine Beauty! Where have the Gods
dispos'd thee! Must I for ever wander in a
gloomy Despair, without being enlightend
by the Rays of thy bright Perfections? 
Ah me! what signifies all those Honours
with which I have been adorn'd, since hard
Fortune forces me from all I love; with
many other Words of this Kind; by which
I knew there were Persons of Quality in
the World unfortunate as well as the unhappy
Clarinthia. After a convenient Time
of Rest, I was call'd for, to go before the
Commander of the Vessel; for his Servants
had inform'd him of their Adventure in
finding me that Morning; wherefore he
desir'd to speak with me, to know wherein
he cou'd be farther serviceable to me. I
being willing to inform my self into whose 
Hands I was fallen, ask'd the Name and
Country of their Master; to which they
answer'd, that he was a Roman, and his
Name Lysander; of the former I was glad,
but ignorant of the latter. When I enter'd
into his Cabin, good Gods! with what Astonishment
did I behold in him the Person
of the noble Stranger I left wounded at the
Hermit's Cell, at which my Transports
were so great, that I sunk down with the
pressure of so great a surprize. They presently
apply'd their Assistance, which soon
prov'd effectual to the Recovery of my
Senses. The first Object that presented it
self to my opening Eyes, was Lysander's
Face all bath'd in Tears, making me such
extravagant Protestations of his Joy and
Love, as is impossible to repeat. Then kissing
my Hands a thousand Times, on his Knees
begg'd me to pronounce his Doom, forasmuch
as it was evidence by my swooning
at the Sight of him, that he was not indifferent
to me; but whether he was the
Object of my Inclination or Aversion was
doubtful; but he fear'd the latter, having
been so unfortunate as to render me fatherless. 
This plain Declaration put me to so
great a Confusion, that I scarce knew what
to reply, for I knew I ought not to receive
favourably such a Declaration from a Man
that had bereav'd me of my Father; and,
on the other Side, Gratitude as well as Inclination 
forbad me to treat him harshly,
who had defended my Honour, and now
sav'd my Life. Alas, (said I to him) Fortune
has been so unkind to me, that I can
neither refuse, nor grant what you require,
one being inconsistent with Gratitude, the
other with Honour. Hard Fate in the Death
of my Father, having put such a Bar as can
never be remov'd, so as for me to become
your Wife; otherwise, I would pronounce,
that I neither do, or ever will love any but
the brave and vertuous Lysander. Nevertheless,
he was quite transported at this Assurance,
and made me a thousand Protestations
of his everlasting Love, in which was
contain'd more Extasy and Rapture than I
am able to repeat. His Looks declar'd his
Thoughts, and his Words explain'd his
Looks, and all together agreed in the Testimony
of a sincere and virtuous Passion. 
Virtuous was his Mein, Words, and Actions,
which was to me a greater Assurance
of his Love than many Years Service, replenish'd
with numerous and large Declarations,
rich Presents, publick Acts of Galantry,
in Honour of my Beauty, and a
thousand other Arts used by the Sex to engage
ours. This little Cabin in which we
were, was to us the whole World. Dancing,
Feasting, Theatres, Triumphs, were
all here compriz'd. Our Persons were to
each other all Objects agreeable to the 
Sight, and our Words all that cou'd charm
the Hearing; our Hearts danc'd to the
Musick of repeated Vows, whilst faithful
Sighs sung the Chorus to every Period. 
What shall I say? 'Twas here we built in
a few Moments the Fabrick of an everlasting
Love, on the Foundation of perfect
Virtue. But alas! how short is all human
Happiness, especially all that appertains to
me; for whilst we were in this Entertainment,
his Servants came in, telling him,
they apprehended a Storm was coming
upon us, and desir'd his Orders. By this
Time we were a good Way over the Mediterranean
Sea, towards the Coast of Africa,
whether he was going in search of me,
concluding me escap'd thither, there to remain
amongst some Friends I had at Carthage,
'till the Business of my Father's Death
cou'd be accommodated with the Senate; 
nor had he thought to consult or command
the turning of the Vessel when he found
me, by reason of the 'foresaid surprizing
Entertainment, which had taken up the
greatest Part of the Day; and now Night
coming on, and the Storm increasing, we
were in great Danger, notwithstanding all
the Pains and Care of the Mariners. The
Storm continued all Night, and in the
Morning we felt what before we fear'd, for
we were forceably driven upon a Rock on
the Coast of Africa; at the second Blow 
our Vessel began to shatter, at the third, I
saw (to my everlasting Grief) the brave
and virtuous Lysander (who was assisting the
Mariners) toss'd off into the Sea, where he
was immediately overwhelmed with the
Waves. The Wind never ceas'd, beating
our Vessel against the Rock, 'till it was split
in a thousand Pieces. I was by the Care
of Lysander's Gentleman fasten'd to a Plank,
on which I was driven by the force of the
Winds on the Coast of Africa, where I was
taken up by Amilcar, and Hannibal his Son. 
All which this young Gentleman (addressing
her Speech to one of the Strangers)
knows better than my self, therefore to
him I recommend the Continuation of my
History. 
The HISTORY of Ismenus, in
which is contain'd the Remainder of
Clarinthia's Story.
My Name, said he, is call'd Ismenus,
but of what Country or Family I
know not; I suppose a Roman, though I
never knew any other Being, or State of
Life, but that of Slave to Hannibal. Here
I enjoy'd as much Happiness by the Favour
of Hannibal, and his Father, as cou'd be
hop'd for in Servitude, for I was on the
same footing with his Pages, which were 
Free men, and with them learn'd all Sorts
of Exercises and Accomplishments, in
which I made so good a Proficiency, that
Amilcar and Hannibal wou'd sometimes
say, there appear'd in me a true Roman Genius,
which was saying, in one Word, all
that cou'd be said on that Subject, the Romans
bearing the Prize of Renown from the
whole Universe; not but that the Africans
are endeavouring, and do daily improve in
Arts and Arms, especially their Chiefs,
amongst whom Hannibal (young as he is)
wears the Character of a complete Person; 
he is in his Nature Courteous and Civil,
and in all his Actions Just and Generous; 
which, indeed, are the Bases on which a
great Man ought to build his Glory. Whensoever
Hannibal has occasion to Reward or
Punish, he does it in such a Manner, as
shews the one to proceed from Inclination,
the other from Necessity. The latter he
does with such apparent Regret, that even
the Criminal himself may see that his
Design is to punish the Crime, and not the
Person, if they were separable. And, on
the other Side, he rewards with such Alacrity,
or rather Eagerness, as if he desir'd
to recompence both the Virtue and the
Person, if they were distinct; by one he
avoids making any Body his Enemy, and
by the other he makes every Body his
Friend; that he is one of the most popular 
and best belov'd of all the Carthagenian Nobility. 
As his Birth has plac'd him in an
exalted Sphere, so his personal Worth shines
there with such Lustre, as from thence they
calculate coming Glories to their Country:
But it is not my Business to dwell upon his
Character, therefore return. 
In the Summer he was with his Father
Amilcar, retir'd from the Noise and Hurry
of Business. which fills the great and populous
City of Carthage, into the Country,
to divert themselves with Rural Recreations; 
where, walking out one Morning by
the Sea-Coast, they found there this beautious
Person Clarinthia, fasten'd on a Plank,
(as she told you) and driven to the Shoar,
almost dead, but by their Industry was recover'd
to Life, and in due Time to perfect
Health. Amilcar finding her beautiful, and
a Person of Address, gave her to his Daughter Emelia. Here she behav'd herself with
such a graceful Affability, that she soon
gain'd the Love and Esteem of every Body. 
I dare not enlarge on her Character, lest I
offend her Modesty, and encroach on your
Judgments, who now behold her before
you. But as she was agreeable to all, so in
particular to Emelia, her Mistress, who had
so much Consideration for her, that she
treated her more like a Friend than a Servant; 
in which she gratify'd not only her
compassionate Inclination, but gave herself 
a sensible Pleasure in the Sweetness of
Clarinthia's Conversation. This Treatment
from Emelia, and the Death of her much
lamented Lysander, join'd with her fatal
Circumstances in Italy, made her resolve to
pass her Days in that unknown Condition,
without ever thinking on a Return into
her native Country, and for that Reason
conceal'd her Name and Quality; of all
which she was pleas'd to make me the only
Confident, and so I became acquainted
with her past and present Afflictions; amongst
which nothing was so touching as
the Lamentations she made for her Lysander; 
and for his sake made firm Resolutions
of perpetual Virginity. Now altho' she
was thus incircled with Griefs and Misfortunes,
her Beauties were not thereby
obscur'd but, like the Sun behind a transparent
Cloud, was more conspicuous to the
Beholders, especially to the View of Hannibal,
whose young Heart having never yet
been touch'd with any amorous Inclination,
soon became sensible of Clarinthia's
Charms; and accordingly made his Addresses
to her with that Sincerity and Respect,
which her Beauty and graceful Mein
always commanded, notwithstanding her
Misfortunes, which generally humble and
abase a noble Behaviour. But she retain'd
still such an Air of Greatness, tho mix'd
with her 'foresaid Courtesy, as render'd all 
Access of that Kind very difficult, and denoted
in her something extraordinary. 
Nevertheless, this Coldness serv'd only to
fan Hannibal's Flame, and by Way of Antepiristasis
(as the Philosophers term it) increas'd
the Ardour of that Fire already inextinguishable. 
Now tho' Clarinthia carefully
avoided all Occasions of his Courtship,
yet her Devoirs engaging her continually
to Emilia's Apartment, (where, as a
Brother, he had free Access) subjected Clarinthia
to divers little amorous Rencounters,
which no Care or Foresight could
prevent. 
This Proceeding began to break her
Measures, and check her Resolution of remaining
there, and made her divers Times
cast in her Thoughts how to compass an
Escape. Sometimes she resolv'd to send to
the Senate to purchase her Freedom; but
then again, considering the great Possessions
they enjoy'd by her Captivity, she too
well knew their avaricious Inclinations to
hope for their Assistance. Another while,
she resolv'd to discover herself to Emelia; 
and so obtain Amilcar's Counsel and
Protection; but then again she concluded,
the making her Quality known, would open
an Inlet to Hanibal's Love, and by his
Father's Consent bring upon herself a Marriage
contrary to her firm Resolution taken
to consecrate her Affections, and, indeed, 

her whole Life, to the Memory of Lysander. 
These Considerations gave her much
Inquietude, which she communicated to
me, when any favourable Moment furnish'd
us with Opportunity. 
Whilst Clarinthia was thus embarass'd
with the Love of Hannibal, I was happy in
that of Emelia, the several Circumstances
of which would be too arrogant for me to
repeat; nor, indeed, would it be necessary,
all the World knowing the Africans Inclinations
towards the Europeans; for they not
only prefer our Complections, but also our
Features, Shape, Mein, and Humour, as
being naturally more soft, easy and genteel
than those of that Country. Whatever
it was I know not, but had the good
Fortune to be lik'd by Emelia, and we
lov'd, tho' at the Hazard of our Lives; so
I need not tell you with what Care we kept
this Affection secret, no Mortal having the
least Thought or Knowledge of it, except
Clarinthia, whom Emelia made her Confident. 
Long we did not remain in this State; 
for the cold Reception Clarinthia gave to
Hannibal's Address, made him begin to
think her frequent Correspondence with
me had some other Original than that of
Friendship, not knowing how far his Sister's
Affections gave Occasion to such Intercourse. 
Nor do I believe Emelia was 
quite free from Suspicion, though we gave
no real Cause to either. But such are the
Effects of this unhappy Passion, Jealousy; 
it supplants Reason, and sows in our Minds
a thousand Follies; by it we demean the
Person we love through unworthy Suspicions,
and honour our hated Rival in supposing
him preferable to our selves; and, in
so doing, often do Injustice to our own
Merit, which, perhaps, deserves the Preheminence. 
The jealous Man may be
compar'd to those we read of condemn'd to
certain Punishments in Hell; he labours at
Ixion's Wheel, by turning from Fancy to
Fancy, from Suspicion to Suspicion, and
his own Thoughts are mere Vultures to devour
the Heart of his Happiness; in fine,
this Passion is the Green Sickness of the
Mind, making us swallow Notions pernicious
to our Quiet: Some say, it is the
Child of Love, if so, it is a cruel Offspring,
which commonly devours its Parent
in the End, and then becomes it self
transform'd into Rage or Regret. Yet ridiculous
and extravagant as it is, the Noble
Hannibal could not defend himself from its
Incroachments; but, as aforesaid, was jealous
of me his poor Vassal, whom he might
have crush'd with a Look, and with a Word
reduc'd to nothing. 
Whilst Things were on this footing, a
certain Nobleman of Carthage, Gundibund 
by Name, made his Addresses to Amilcar,
in order to marry his Daughter Emelia. 
His Riches and Honours were too considerable
to be refus'd by Amilcar, tho' his
Years render'd him disagreeable to Emelia's
Youth. However, being order'd by her
Father to receive his Love, and dispose her
self for a speedy Marriage, she durst not
disobey. The Truth is, I flatter'd my self
that the Command was the more displeasing
to her, in Consideration of those kind
Thoughts she had conceiv'd towards me. 
I am sure, it was to me the greatest of Afflictions; 
tho' in Reality, the whole Affair
of our Love was a meer Chimera, a
Machine of Folly, wherein to weave our
own Ruin. For what could we ever hope
for but Death and Destruction, if it ever
came to be known? And Love is too violent
a Flame to remain long conceal'd. In
vain it was for me to count upon a Right to
her Person, because she had given me her
Affections; for in my low Station I could
not assert this Right without exposing her
Life to her Father's Anger, and her Honour
to everlasting Infamy. But Heaven
deliver'd me out of these Difficulties, by a
Means least expected. Emilia having her
Thoughts much incumber'd, as well as my
self, order'd me to come to her Apartment
one Evening late, where I had ready Access,
as being her Brother's Page. Here I 
found her alone with Tapers burning by
her, which gave a Lustre to all the bright
Ornaments of the Room; but her own
Beauties were such as quite dazl'd the Eyes
and Senses of me the fond Spectator. Then
kneeling, and kissing her Hands with excessive
Transport, I told her, if her Courage
would support her to accomplish what her
Goodness had begun, and by a secret
Flight with me into Europe, make me for
ever happy, eternal Blessings would attend
the Enterprize. 
What you propose, said Emelia, is impossible
to accomplish; you know how Great
a Prince my Father is, and what absolute
Authority our Laws give such over Children
and Servants, that the least Attempt
of that Kind would cost us both our Lives; 
yet what is it I would not do for my lovely
Boy? Even now I risque what ought to
be more dear to me than Life, mine Honour; 
yet a Goddess would do the same
for such an European Youth as is my dear
Ismenus. Then be not surpriz'd that I tell
you, tho' I am to be marry'd to Gundibund,
Ismenus shall be my Husband in effect; 
then you shall be as happy as Love can
make you. These Words were so amazing,
and so contradictory to that Virtue I so
much value in the Sex, that they quite
chang'd the Bias of my Thoughts; and all
the Affliction I had before, in Consideration 
of loosing her I lov'd, now vanish'd; 
and she whom before I ador'd I now disesteem'd; 
nay, my Soul was seiz'd with
such a secret Disgust, that all her Charms
had not the Power to fix one tender
Thought in me towards her, so as to make
her grateful to my Senses. In short, I told
her, that since I could not hope to enjoy
her wholly and for ever, I must despair of
being made happy by Love, and so I left
her Apartment. How she resented this my
Indifference, or rather Scorn, I know not,
but I suppose with great indignation. 
Next Morning early she walk'd into the
Garden, and entering an Arbour she found
Clarinthia, with the Picture of Lysander in
her Hand, which she kiss'd and bedew'd
with her Tears so passionately, that she
did not see Emelia when she came into the
Arbour. The Sight of this Picture blew
up the Fire of Jealousy in Emelia; for she
believ'd it to be my Portraiture, and, indeed,
every Body that saw it said it resembled
me: This, with my cold Behaviour to
her over Night, put her into a perfect Fury,
which she demonstrated by all the opprobrious
Speeches her Anger could suggest,
unbefitting her Sex and Quality. 
I being thoughtful of what had pass'd the
preceding Night, concluded that Emelia's
Displeasure and Hannibal's Jealousy would
not permit me to live there long in Security, 
much less in Repose; wherefore I went
into the Garden where Clarinthia frequented,
with Intent to advise with her about
making our Escape, if possible. It was my
Fate to enter the Arbour just as Emelia was
in her Fury; and in few Moments Hannibal
came also, whether excited by Love, as
knowing that to be the Place where Clarinthia
frequently retir'd; or by Jealousy,
as knowing me to be gone thither, is not
certain; but so it was, just as Emelia was
in the Heat of her Choler, Hannibal entered,
and was soon made to understand the
Cause of his Sister's Anger, and seeing the
Picture concluded it to be mine; wherefore
drawing his Sword, said Insolent
Slave, since Clarinthia honours thee with
her Love, thou shalt have the Honour to
die by my Hand. If, said I, Clarinthia honours
me with her Love, I am bound for
her sake to defend my Life; so drawing
my Sword, we made several Passes at each
other, 'till both fell wounded, Hannibal in
the Body, and I in the Arm. The Cries
of Emelia and Clarinthia brought many of
the Family thither, who finding us in this
Posture, took us away, Hannibal to his Bed,
and me to Prison. Here Care was taken
for the Cure of my Wound, to make me
suffer the more condign Punishment, and
be made a publick Example; as, indeed, I
think I partly deserv'd, in forgetting my 
Duty so far as to lift up my Hand against
my Master and Benefactor: However, the
Suddenness of the Occasion, join'd with the
Law of Nature, which commands Self-Defence,
I hope will plead my Excuse, in
some Degree, in the Minds of moderate
and judicious Persons. 
As soon as my Arm was well, Amilcar
condemn'd me to be devour'd by wild
Beasts, as the proper Punishment of a Crime
so brutal; though, as I have heard, Hannibal
interceded for me earnestly, but could
not obtain my Pardon. The Day of my
Execution being come, I had a Sword given
me to defend my Life as long as I
could, the better to divert the Spectators,
which I used so well, that I quickly dispatch'd
one of my salvage Combatants. 
The other that had been more used to those
Kind of Attacks came not upon me with
open Jaws, as did the other, but with many
subtle Turnings, endeavour'd to catch
hold of my Sword with his Paws, and so to
wrest it out of my Hands; but I proving
too nimble for him in his Turnings, leap'd
on his Back, caught hold on his Beard, and
so forc'd my Sword through his Throat. 
Thus was I deliver'd from both my fierce
Enemies. But this serv'd only to enrage
Amilcar against me; wherefore he again
return'd me to Prison, where I lay some
Days, expecting my Doom. In the mean 
Time Hannibal and Emelia interceded with
their Father on my behalf, nor was Gundebund
silent on this Occasion; but Amilcar
could not be mov'd, it being counted a
Crime so enormous, that to Pardon it was
to affront Justice, and shock the Fundamental
Laws of the Country; wherefore
all the Favour they could obtain for me was,
that my Death should not be quite so brutal,
tho' altogether as cruel, that is, by the
Hands of Men, to wit, Gladiators; (for
they have that bloody Diversion among
them) so I was to make a Part in those
Spectacles, which were to divert the World
at Emelia's Marriage, which was to succeed
very soon. But Emelia being truly
concern'd for me, came one Night into the
Prison, with a Number of her Servants; 
whether she had Leave from her Father, or
had gain'd the Keeper with Bribes, I
know not; but she brought with her a Disguise,
in which I dress'd my self, and so
went out with her as one of her Maids. She
bade me escape for my Life, and never
think on her more. The Moon shining
bright, I got to the great Forest which runs
so many Leagues along the Sea-Coast. As
I here wander'd, endeavouring to direct
my Steps towards the Sea, I found the
Mouth of a Cave, which, without much
Difficulty, I open'd, and entering in, I
found a pretty large Cavity, enlighten'd 
by a Lamp, which made me conclude it to
be the Habitation of some human Creature,
but ignorant whether of some lewd Outlaw,
or some holy Anchorite, or Priest of
Pan or Diana, who, renouncing the World,
and all human Happiness, live in such Retreats,
in Contemplation of that Divinity to
which they are devoted. But which soever of
them it might be, I could propose no great
Hopes of Assistance from either; therefore
was doubtful to make any farther Progress
in that unfrequented Recess. Yet the
Danger of the wild Beasts abroad made me
willing to remain there 'till Morning, at
which Time they are ordinarily retir'd to
their Dens. In fine, I pray'd my good
Genius to direct me, and humbly supplicated
the Goddess Diana (by whose bright
Beams my Steps had been directed thither)
to inspire me. I begg'd her Protection who
was the Patroness of Chastity, which Virtue
had been the original Cause of my Sufferings. 
After having thus recommended
my self to the Powers Divine, I resolv'd
to proceed: But going on, I found the
Cavity grow narrow and dark, that I moved
my Steps with Horror as well as Care. 
At last the Cave turning, I saw at a Distance
another Lamp, which gave a small
dim Light; yet by it I perceiv'd, at the
farthest End of the Cave, a Person lying
upon a Bed of Moss, Rushes, and such like 
Materials, but I could not possibly get near
him; for there was a Trench or Ditch
cross the Cave, too large to be stepp'd or
leap'd over: I saw on the other Side a sort
of Bridge, which I presum'd he plac'd to
pass and repass at his Pleasure; but I could
no Ways attain to have it for my Use. This
Person seem'd to lie in a profound Sleep,
such as they enjoy who have Innocence
for their Bed, and a good Conscience for
their Pillow. His Countenance seem'd amiable,
and vanquish'd from my Breast all
Terror and Apprehension, and brought into
their Place Content, and a Desire of corresponding
with him, but could not find
in my Heart to make any Noise whereby
to awake him: But viewing him, and his
disconsolate Apartment, I perceiv'd the
Walls garnish'd in an odd Manner, with
divers Sorts of Cyphers, Emblems, and
Devices; some made of different Shells, others
of Moss, Bark of Trees, Seeds, and
the like; but all of them, of whatsoever
they were made, had one certain Name over
or under, or round about them; which
I concluded was the Name of the Goddess
he ador'd, or the Mistress he lov'd. The
Name was Scipiana, writ in Roman Characters. 
In some Places there was a flaming
Heart crown'd with that Name, here
a broken Heart, there a chain'd Heart; in
this Place Knots and Devices, in that the 
Emblems of Death and Despair; but all of
what Kind soever, was still Scipiana,
which was, for the most Part, made of
Clay, roll'd into a certain Bigness, fit to
make large Letters, plain to be read at that
Distance. Casting my Eyes directly above
his Head, I saw these Words: 

When I but dream of her I love,
I envy not the Bless'd above,
Nor wish to be the mighty Jove.


Then, O! ye Gods, her Vision show,
Since that is all you can bestow,
And all that Hope has left me now.


Ey these Verses, Emblems, and Mottoes, I
began to conclude, the Inhabitant I there
saw, to be some desparate unfortunate Lover,
and therefore a fit Companion of my
Misfortunes. As I stood looking on him
with no small Astonishment, I perceiv'd his
Lips mov'd, with a pleas'd Countenance,
as if he were dreaming on the Object of
his Tenderness, as in reality he was: For
he thought he saw his Scipiana on the other
Side of the Trench, endeavouring to come
over to him; at which he striving to help
her, awak'd; and seeing me on the other
Side, in my female Habit, believ'd me, at
first Sight, to be this Object of his Adoration; 
or, if not Scipiana her self, at least her 
Spirit; whereupon he made me a thousand
extravagant Complements, and coming
over his Bridge, cast himself at my
Feet, crying, Scipiana, Scipiana, divine
Beauty, incomparable Goodness, is it you
in Person, or is it thy Angelick Spirit, or
some other airy Apparition that comes to
visit and comfort me in this my disconsolate
Solitude? whatever thou art, I am sure I
find my self happy in the Vision. Thus he
went on, with a thousand other the like
Expressions, all the while kissing my Feet
and embracing my Knees with the utmost
Transport; insomuch, that I had much Difficulty
to undeceive him, by telling him
who I was, and what Disguise I wore; beseeching
him to convert his Transports into
Charity, and receive me into this his solitary
Retreat, and instruct me in those
Rudiments of Humility and Self-Denyal
which he there practis'd in Perfection. At
last, by divers Turns of Discourse he came
out of his amorous Delirium, and receiv'd
me into his Cell, with all the Courtesy
and Kindness which was possible for one
distress'd Person to shew to another in such
an Adventure, and treated me with such
Cates as that savage Being afforded. Next
Day, towards Evening, we heard a prodigious
Shout of People, which oblig'd our
Curiosity to go towards the Out-side of the
Forest, thereby to inform our selves of the 
Cause of that great Noise, where we were
soon made to understand the Affair, by the
Sight of a Funeral Pile, on which they said
Clarinthia was to be burnt; for since the
guilty Ismenus was escap'd, the innocent
Clarinthia was to sustain the whole Shock of
Amilcar's Anger, supposing her to be an
Assistant, or at least conscious of his Escape. 
At this Information I was so concern'd,
that I was running to offer my self
to the Tyrant, thereby to save her; but
my Companion stopp'd me, saying, We
might exercise our Courage another Way,
more useful to her, or at least part with
our Lives more honourably. I was very
ready to take his Instructions, and so resolv'd
to act as he should advise, he being
a Person of greater Experience than my
self. Whilst he was giving me his Documents,
the beauteous Prisoner came bound,
led by the Hands of Amilcar's Servants, and
a great Rabble of Spectators following. 
Then it was we rush'd in amongst 'em,
crying, A Pardon, A Pardon; by which
Means the People made Way for us, till
we got to those who handed this fair Victim. 
The first my noble Companion dispatch'd,
whose Sword I took, and therewith
assisted my Friend with such Success,
that we soon kill'd, or put to Flight, those
who had the Charge of her Execution,
who were only some of Amilcar's Servants, 
the rest of this head-less Mob dispers'd
themselves of Course, some running one
Way, some another; few of those Barbarians
knowing what we meant or would be
at. For the vulgar Part of the Africans are
extreamly unthoughtful and unpolish'd,
without Reflection or Fore-sight, but, like
Mules, follow the common Track mark'd
out by their Leaders, who are the Nobility,
and command their respective Districts
with an absolute Authority; his Will
being the Law by which he governs, having
scarce any other Rule to guide either
his own or others Actions by, tho' now they
begin to improve; the Nobles industriously
applying themselves to learn the
Laws and Customs of the Romans and Egyptians,
according to their respective Proximity. 
But not to entertain you with their
Customs, which merit not your Hearing:
In short, we deliver'd the beauteous Prisoner,
and brought her along with us to the
Forest, where we went no more to the
Cave, but forc'd our selves into the thickest
and most unfrequented Parts of the
Wood; Night befriending us, we accomplish'd
our Escape. Next Morning our generous
and valiant Friend brought us to a
certain Place on the Sea-shoar, where he
knew the Carcass of an old Vessel lay, in a
Creek between two Rocks, which was the
same that had brought him thither, for he 
was not a Native of that Country. Into
this miserable Instrument of Escape we descended,
not without great Difficulty, the
Rocks being stupendous and craggy. By
the Help of some Poles we had provided for
that Purpose, we got the Boat out of the
Creek; and, having a prosperous Gale,
were soon driven out into the midst of the
Mediterranean. The Gods having been thus
far propitious, we could not Despair, tho'
otherwise there was scarce any Shadow of
Safety, we being in an old Shell of a Vessel,
without either Sails, Oars, or any manner
of Tackling, or Food to supply our
Necessities. But Clarinthia's pious Intention
gave us some Encouragement, believing
the Gods would not abandon so bright a
Votary; for she all along told us, that having
lost her Lysander, she now resolv'd to
become a Vestal Nun, if, by the Favour of
the Gods, she arriv'd safe into her own
Country. The Gods hearing the Prayers
and Vows of so much Beauty and Innocence,
sent to our Assistance an Italian Ship,
who charitably took us in, and, at my
Request, furnish'd me with a Suit of Man's
Apparel, I leaving with them my Female
Accoutrements. 
Thus we were brought to this Coast. 
Clarinthia being very much indispos'd with
the Sea-Voyage, and the preceding Fatigue,
desir'd to be set on Shoar the first 
Opportunity, which was on this Strand,
where we found our selves deliver'd from
violent Death, and maritime Dangers, but
expos'd to the Misery of wanting every
Thing; from which, by your Charity, we
are at present deliver'd (addressing himself
to Marrcellus) and now you see, Sir,
(continued he) what unfortunate People are
the Objects of your Bounty, even destitute
of all Means to testify our Gratitude,
but a sincere Acknowledgment. And having
found you thus far our Benefactor, we
have Reason to believe you to be one of
those Noble Souls, who find a Satisfaction
in exhibiting Benefits; therefore we may
reasonably apply our selves to your Prudence
and Goodness, to counsel and assist
this unfortunate Lady in accomplishing
her Business with the Senate, that she may
speedily be establish'd in that holy Retreat
her Soul longs after, amongst the Vestal
Virgins. I shall always (reply'd Marcellus)
be ready to assist the Distress'd, especially
Persons of your Merit; but methinks the
Beauty of Clarinthia ought not to be hid in
those obscure Cells, but placed in such a
Sphere, where it may irradiate, and enliven
the Hearts of all admiring Beholders. 
Ah! Sir, reply'd Clarinthia, had my Lysander
liv'd, I should have thought on no
such Retreat; but since his Death, I ought
to count those Beauties with which I am 
complemented, but as Comets, whose Aspects
are horrible, and their Influence destructive
to my Quiet; wherefore it behoves
me to endeavour their Fall and Dissolution; 
for, besides the Death of the incomparable
Lysander, my other Misfortunes
render me unfit for human Society,
so ought to be lopp'd off as an useless and
combersom Member of the Body Politick; 
and since Death's kind Hand refuses me
that Favour, my self shall do it, by a voluntary
dying Life among those sacred
Recluses. Since your Resolution is fix'd
(said Marcellus) on a Design so agreeable to
the Gods, it were impiety to oppose it; 
therefore, to fortify your Interest with the
Senate, I will wait on you to my Lord
Publius Scipio, whose House is near. I know
the Love he has for your Ladyship, as also
for the Memory of your virtuous Mother,
will engage him in your Concerns, both by
his Advice, and Interest in the Senate; 
but at present, Rest being the most necessary
Accommodation, after so many
great and dangerous Fatigues, we will conduct
you to your Apartment. 