

The Reader may please to remember
in the third Book, that the two Ladies,
Scipiana and Clelia, were interrupted
in their Discourse by the Arrival of a certain
Youth, Servant to Fabius; from whom
he brought Letters to my Lord Publius Scipio. 
Now these Letters were to inform Publius,
that his Nephew Fabius, as also Jemella, the
fair Daughter of Lucullus, were detain'd
Prisoners by Clodius, in his Castle at Sardinia; 
from thence the same Messenger was
to have gone to Rome, to advertize the two
Noble Lords, Lucullus and Fabius, Fathers
of the two Prisoners. But the poor Youth,
Almon, falling sick, Publius was oblig'd to
send an Express to Rome, to inform the said
Lords, that they might take their Measures
with the Senate for their Enlargement,
whilst the poor Youth was constrain'd to
attend his Recovery. 
Night approaching, and the two Ladies,
Scipiana and Clelia, being retir'd into their
Apartment, Clelia begg'd Scipiana to finish
her Story, and let her know what became
of Exilius after put in Prison, and by what
Means she had made her Escape out of Egypt; 
of which two material Circumstances
she was still ignorant, they having been
divers Times interrupted in the Sequel of
their Discourse. 
The Continuation of the HISTORY of Scipiana.
Exilius being put in Prison (said Scipiana)
as I have already told you, I ceased
not to implore the King continually
on his behalf; but his Majesty was deaf to 
all my Petitions. He told me, if Exilius
had conspir'd against his Crown or Life,
the least Word from me should procure his
Pardon; but being the Rival of his Love, it
was not in the Power of Mercy to forgive. 
One Day in particular being at the King's
Feet, with Tears in my Eyes, and earnest
Importunities, I besought him to pity the
poor Exilius, whose Youth and Constancy
was all his Crime. Alas! my Royal Lord,
(said I) blame not him for loving one who
is his Equal, and one whom Fortune has
render'd Copartner in all his Sufferings, it
is a Weakness incident to all human Beings; 
then pity this poor Miserable, for her sake
who now kneels before you; without him
I neither can nor ought to live; our Hearts
have been inseparably united since the Moment
of our first Interview. At which the
King assay'd to go away, but I caught hold
of his Robe, beseeching him to hear me out. 
I will hear you in all Things, said the King,
but when you ask the Life of Exilius, for
that I neither can nor will grant, it being
incompatible with my Affection. 
At these Words, I was like one Thunder-struck,
and sunk down quite bereav'd
of Sense. When I came to my self I found
the King still with me, and, kissing my
Hands, said, He was sorry to see me so passionate
for one who deserv'd it not. I am
sure (continued he) Exilius would make no 
Difficulty to desert you, if thereby he might
purchase his Life or Liberty. Be advis'd,
then, and consider wherein your Happiness
consists. Weigh the Difference between a
Monarch who offers you his Crown, together
with his Love, and a poor abandon'd
Creature, dependant on my Bounty; that
if you had Kindness to your self or him, or
Gratitude towards me, you would act suitable
to your Advantage and my Satisfaction,
you would consider with what Respect
I have treated you, it being in my Power
to oblige your Compliance, nevertheless I
left you Mistress of my Love and Empire; 
therefore, if you have any Sense of Generosity,
or of the Honour I profer you, conform
your Will to a speedy Consent to my
just Desires, I might say, Commands: And
though the Wretch Exilius has deserv'd
Death beyond all Degrees of Mercy, yet
I make you Arbitrator of his Lot: If he dies,
it is by your Tyranny. Adieu, I leave you
to consider on the Event, so make your
own Election. 
The King being gone, I reflected on his
Words, and consider'd with what Goodness
and Generosity he had treated me: I
could scarce forbear accusing my self of Ingratitude; 
but then again the Consideration
of my Faith given to Exilius, render'd me
uncapable of gratifying the King's Desires. 
One while I represented to my self the 
Death of my unhappy Lover, the most
faithful and passionate of all Men, dying
by my Means, in whose Power it was to
save his Life; that noble Life, so useful to
the World; that dear Life, that had not
only twice saved mine, but that of my Brother
the renowned Asiaticus, and in him
the Roman Glory; that vertuous Life, that
had subdued Rebels, redeem'd Royal and
Nobles Captives, and fix'd the falling Crown
of a mighty Monarch. O Scipiana, Scipiana,
(did I say to my self) how canst thou
consent to, much less pronounce, the Death
of this thy Friend, Lover, and Benefactor,
or rather this God-like Hero, the Benefactor
of all Mankind! O! no, it is impossible: 
For I should be the cruelest of Creatures,
abhorr'd of all Mankind, and the
Odium of future Ages. And then again,
considering the Means of saving his Life,
which was more cruel than Death, I was
in a perfect Exigence and Non plus what
to do; both was cruel to Extremity, neither
admitting any Degree of Comparison
of which was worst. Sometimes I resolv'd
to discover my Quality to the King, and
get him to send to my Father and the Senate,
thereby to protract Time; but then
I look'd on that as giving my tacit Consent. 
I was in this Labyrinth of Thoughts
when one brought me a Letter from Exiilus. 

MADAM,
I Flatter my self that my Sincerity is so well
known to you, that I need use no previous
Arguments to convince you, that I prefer your
Happiness before all Things in this World, much
before my own Life, which I hope will plead
my Excuse, when I not only counsel but beg you
to accept of those glorious Offers made you by our
Royal Benefactor. 
Madam, when Advantage courts and Miseries
threaten, we must not suffer our Passions
to argue in Opposition, unless we renounce our
Reason, the Mark of our Humanity. Nay more,
we abandon even the Sense of Animals, if we
avoid not a Precipice where we see another fall. 
Then give me Leave, Madam, to conjure
you to let my Fall be your Security, which will in
some Degree make happy, or at least abate the
Miseries of, 
MADAM,
Your Ladyship's most humble and
unfortunate Servant,
EXILIUS. 

Having read this Letter, I was more
confounded than ever. I saw in it such a 
Mixture of Kindness and Inconstancy as I
knew not how to separate or distinguish. 
Here Friendship, there Interest; here
Kindness, there Inconstancy; in this Part
Love, in that Reason; but all was so tangled
one with another, that I knew not
where to fix or begin to unravel his
real Thoughts. Sometimes I made tender
Reflections on his Kindness, and then my
Love increas'd, in Consideration of what
he suffer'd for me and presently I disdain'd
him as the falsest of Men, and hated my
self for having ever lov'd him. My Scorn
would shoot up with such Violence, so as
to eradicate all those tender Thoughts his
Services had planted in my Soul, and the
Eyes of my Understanding seem'd open to
distinguish between him, a miserable Vagabond,
and a Sovereign Monarch, who offer'd
me his Crown together with his Love,
who had courted me most honourably, and
been indulgent to my Humour and capricious
Freaks. Thus I rais'd my Thoughts
to the highest Pitch of Vanity, and then
branch'd them forth, by enumerating the
Honours and Antiquities of my Family, the
Noble House of the Scipio's. Then look'd
down with Scorn into the Abyss of his Obscurity,
wondering what Power of Darkness,
or ill Genius, had level'd this Inequality. 
A thousand Things I thought,
and as many bitter Things I utter'd against 
this unworthy perfidious Exilius. All which
were reported to the King by those Women
about me, who endeavour'd to make
their Court by their officious Intelligence; 
and his Majesty would not lose so favourable
an Occasion, but order'd all Things to
be prepar'd for the speedy Celebration of
our Marriage. 
But, oh! how inscruitable are the mysterious
Turnings of human Cogitations,
and how inevitable the Vicissitudes of exteriour
Events! Both compose Labyrinths
for Reason to lose her Way, unless conducted
by the Line of Vertue: This I experienc'd,
when the King sent me his Commands
to dispose my self for a speedy Marriage. 
Then did all those Resentments I
had conceiv'd against Exilius vanish, and
his Worth appear'd more bright than ever. 
All his Services and vertuous Affection,
his modest long conceal'd Passion, his
tender Declaration, seem'd now to enlarge
themselves as Shadows at the Sun's declining. 
Methought his Sufferings drew that
Knot strait which our mutual Vows had
ty'd; and that seeming Willingness (in his
Letter) to loosen it, serv'd only to tie it faster,
and render it impossible to be undone,
till cut together with the Thread of our
Lives. His Dungeon was much more charming
to my Thoughts than that Dignity
which courted me. I hated my self, the 
King, and all that conduc'd to this my glorious
Undoing. I accus'd the Gods that
had made me fair, my Parents and European
Education that had render'd me agreeable. 
Unhappy Maid, (said I to myself)
that cannot be in Love with Riches, dote
upon Honour, and idolize Grandeur, which
carry with them such Charms as inchant
and intoxicate the greatest Part of Mankind,
and chiefly our Sex, who are said to
be their most exact Votaries. Why was I
born? Or, why was I born a Female? Or,
why did I not die in my Infancy? Or, why
did not some foul Disease seize my Youth,
to disfigure this unhappy Form, that it
might have been Love's Antidote to all
Beholders? Or why, O ye immortal Powers!
did you not give me a Soul unjust,
treacherous, or unfaithful, thereby to render
me the Odium of all vertuous People? 
But why, oh! why have you given me an
Interior, bearing so great a Resemblance to
your own divine Purities, and not given me
the Power to act accordingly; but have fix'd
me in such a State, that my Actions must
combat my Conscience, and my Conscience
oppose my Reason, and all make a civil
War in my Affections. Happiness courts
me, Misery flies me: I, like a Creature quite
irrational, avoid the former, and pursue
the latter, which I am bound to do by Inclination
and Religion, and forbid by Reason 
and Necessity. Vertue and Wisdom,
which are generally Friends and Allies, in
me are utter Enemies; I cannot adhere to
the one, nor dare not incline to the other. 
I am made up of Antipathies and Contradictions,
which compose a Chaos of Madness,
Misery, and Despair. O ye divine
Powers, assist me! O Vertue, be my Guide
thro' this Wilderness, into which my cruel
Stars have misled me! O all ye immortal
Beings, that contributed to raise the Scipio's
to their Grandeur, and each good Genius of
my Ancestors, suffer not a Daughter of this
noble House, which has been your peculiar
Care so many Ages, to fall into Dishonour! 
Whilst I was thus confusedly entertaining
my distracted Thoughts, the King came to
make me a Visit. He treated me with a
chearful Discourse of Things indifferent,
which I receiv'd with all the agreeable
Complaisance I could, thereby to screw him
up to a good Humour, the better to repeat
my Request to him touching Exilius. But
before any happy Moment gave me Occasion
to speak, the Captain of the Guard
came in, telling the King, he was come according
to his Majesty's Command, to know
his Orders about Exilius. At which, his
Majesty turning towards me, said, Madam,
I suppose you have by this Time fix'd your
Resolution touching Exilius. You know
the Conditions of his Life and Death, therefore 
be pleas'd to give your Sentence. To
which I reply'd, all transported with Grief
and Anger, saying, Let him die rather than
live, to upbraid me with Falshood and Inconstancy. 
Since 'tis your Will (said the King)
it shall be so: Then, turning to the Captain,
gave Order for his Execution that very
Night. This very Night! (reply'd I, all
distracted) Can nothing purchase his Life
one Night? Yes, (said the King) give me
your Hand, and you shall have his Life
to Night. Alas! (said I) I will give my
Hand, my Life, or anything, to purchase
his Life but for a Moment. So giving my
Hand, begg'd that Exilius might live; to
which the King accorded, and forthwith
dispatch'd the Captain. Now, you must
know, that, in that Country, a Woman
never gives her Hand on any Occasion, but
gives withal the Assurance of her Person. 
This I did not well know then, but thought
it was as with us, that it might be done on
divers Occasions, without Consequence. 
I having thus ignorantly given this Assurance
to the King, his Majesty express'd
greater Transport than is needful to repeat: 
But I being all Grief and Distraction,
begg'd him to leave me; which according
he did, vowing he would not defer his
Happiness. 
Next Morning I heard that Exilius was
sent away in the most miserable Condition 
in the World, in an old Boat, without Sails,
Oars, or any Manner of Provision; which
was indeed giving him Life, but accompany'd
with such Circumstances, as render'd
it worse than Death. This cruel, or rather
tyrannical Treatment to him, whom I
lov'd above all terrestrial Beings, rais'd in
me such Anger, as turn'd to Hatred and
Aversion to the King, which, 'till then, had
never touch'd my Thoughts: For his Majesty
had demean'd himself with so much
Goodness and Generosity towards me, that
it was impossible for a grateful Soul not to
love him as the best of Friends, Masters,
and Benefactors. To which add his Person
truly handsom and graceful, his Humour
agreeable and gallant, all his Actions
moderate and merciful, (this being the only
cruel Action of his Life) that it was impossible
for the proudest Beauty, or severest
Vertue, not to be touch'd where he
address'd. But I, miserable Creature, was
dead to all but Exilius; his unparalel'd
Services had taken my Heart, and fortify'd
it against all amorous Attacks whatsoever:
and now this severe Treatment, he had
found, redoubled all its Guards, rendering
it more impregnable than ever. Nevertheless,
when Word was brought me from
the King, that in three Days I must dispose
myself for his Espousals, I cannot tell you
in what a Consternation of Mind I pass'd 
my Hours; 'tis certain, that in two Days I
neither eat nor slept, and resolv'd never
more to gratify or assist Nature in that
Kind, but leave her to be vanquish'd and
overcome by Death, her everlasting Enemy: 
In which I pleas'd myself, to think I should
be reveng'd on the King; and, for that Reason,
spitefully wish'd the Augmentation of
his Love, that his Affliction might be the
more insupportable. This Despair chang'd
my Desires, and I saw, in the dark Recess
of Death, that Glimmering of Satisfaction,
which the dazzl'd Eyes of my Understanding
were not capable to behold elsewhere; 
but like Wolves, and other wild Beasts of
Prey, who see best in the Night, this black
Despair, which benighted my Reason, made
me see Happiness in Malice, Rancour, and
Revenge. 
The Evening before the Day appointed
for our Marriage, the Captain of the Guard,
our Roman Friend, sent one to let me know,
that he was mortally wounded in a Rencounter,
and desir'd to speak with me speedily. 
At my Arrival, he told me, that he
could not die in Quiet, nor hope for Mercy
from the Gods, 'till he had reveal'd and
ask'd Pardon for his Treason committed
against me and Exilius. It was I, Madam,
(continu'd he) who being perfect in the
Roman Language, and knew your Character,
counterfeited that Letter from Exilius 
to you, and likewise one from you to
him. Your Stile, as well as Character, on
both Sides, were so well represented, that I
think neither of you mistrusted, or thought
of any Deceit; for as your Letter to him
was full of Devotion and Submission to the
Will of the Gods, so his to you was grounded
on Reason, and the Necessity of obeying
its Rudiments. These were the Topicks on
which I founded my perswasive Arguments
to you both, as knowing these two, to wit,
Religion in you, and Reason in him, to be
the Regents of your vertuous Souls; which
reign'd with an Authority never to be control'd. 
It was I, Madam, this wretched
repenting Creature, who brought him secretly
into your Closet, where he saw you
give your Hand to the King; which in this
Country is never done, but on the Account
of Marriage. It was I that contriv'd that
cunning Placing of our Words, and tuning
our Voice so, that he believ'd you begg'd
his speedy Death of the King, as being loth
to have a living Witness of your Inconstancy; 
so that he believes you not only false
and marry'd to the King, but also pleas'd
and fond of this your glorious Perjury. 
Thus is this most excellent and faithful of
all Lovers the most wrong'd and abused
of all Men. 
At the Knowledge hereof, Good Gods!
how violent was the Passion that seiz'd me! 
I told him, that nothing but the Destruction
of Egypt should satisfy my Revenge, unless
he could invent some Means to prevent or
escape this Marriage: I will (said I) declare
before the Altar of Hymen, that I am
Daughter to Publius Scipio, a Roman Senator,
and therefore ought not to be marry'd
without the Consent of the Senate; so, in
the Presence of the Gods and all the People,
refuse my Consent, and swear never to
be at Rest 'till Egypt be by Rome destroy'd. 
The Captain was surpriz'd at the Knowledge
of my Quality; but soon recollected
himself, and told me, that I spake like a
true noble Roman, and Daughter of that
honourable Family: But (said he) it is
much easier to avoid, than revenge the
Blow. If your Roman Courage will support
you to undertake the Enterprize which
I shall consel, I doubt not but you may
accomplish your Escape. And therewithal
he told me he would send a Suit of Cloaths
of his Livery, in which, befriended by
the Night, I might escape without Suspicion. 
This Proposal pleas'd me beyond
Expression; I thank'd, forgave, and pray'd
for him, then return'd to my Lodging,
where I attended the Performance of his
Promise, which was not long, for in few
Hours he sent me the Disguise; but before
I left my Apartment, I wrote these few
Words to the King. 

Royal Sir,
Since the poor Exilia is escap'd, as not being
worthy those Honours offer'd by your Majesty,
she humbly begs you will cast your Eyes on
Fabiel, who in her Retreat sighs for you, and
is, no Doubt, that Roman design'd by the Gods
for your Majesty; her Birth and Beauty in some
Degree qualify her for it; her vertuous Inclination
lay Claim to it; her being a Roman. entitles
her to the Divine Prediction: Then, Royal
Sir, oppose not Heaven and your own Happiness,
in thinking on the unfortunate 
Exilia. 

Having left this little Billet, I made my
Escape without Difficulty or Opposition and
got safe to the Port of Alexandria, where I
found a Vessel bound for Italy, ready to go
off; in which Fortune favour'd me so well,
that I got hither safe; where, for an Augmentation
of my Happiness, I found you,
my dear Cousin, in the Grove, and forgetting
the Disguise I wore, embraced you
with much Joy and Transport. 