


Julian recounts what happened to
him while he was a Poet. 
‘Rome was now the Seat of my Nativity,
where I was born of a Family
more remarkable for Honour than
Riches. I was intended for the Church,
and had a pretty good Education: but my
Father dying while I was young, and leaving
me nothing, for he had wasted his whole
Patrimony, I was forced to enter my self in
the Order of Mendicants. 
‘When I was at School, I had a knack
of rhiming, which I unhappily mistook for
Genius, and indulged to my Cost: for my
Verses drew on me only Ridicule, and I was
in Contempt called The Poet. 

‘This Humour pursued me through my
Life. My first Composition after I left
School, was a Panegyric on Pope Alexander
IV. who then pretended a Project of
dethroning the King of Sicily. On this
Subject, I composed a Poem of about fifteen
Thousand Lines, which with much
difficulty I got to be presented to his Holiness,
of whom I expected great Preferment
as my Reward, but I was cruelly disappointed:
for when I had waited a Year without
hearing any of the Commendations I
had flattered my self with receiving, and being
now able to contain no longer, I applied
to a Jesuit who was my Relation, and had
the Pope's Ear, to know what his Holiness's
Opinion was of my Work; he coldly answered
me, that he was at that time busied
in Concerns of too much Importance,
to attend the reading of Poems. 
‘However dissatisfied I might be, and
really was, with this Reception; and however
angry I was with the Pope for whose Understanding
I entertained an immoderate
Contempt, I was not yet discouraged from a 

second Attempt. Accordingly, I soon after
produced another Work, entituled, The
Trojan Horse. This was an allegorical
Work, in which the Church was introduced
into the World, in the same manner
as that Machine had been into Troy. The
Priests were the Soldiers in its Belly, and
the Heathen Superstition the City to be
destroyed by them. This Poem was written
in Latin. I remember some of the
Lines: 

‘Mundanos scandit fatalis Machina Muros,
‘Farta Sacerdotum Turmis: exinde per Alvum
‘Visi exire omnes, magno cum Murmure olentes.
‘Non aliter quam cum Humanis furibundus ab Antris
‘It Sonus, & Nares simul Aura invadit hiantes.
‘Mille scatent et mille alii; trepidare Timore
‘Ethnica Gens cœpit: falsi per inane volantes
‘Effugere Dei—Desertaque Templa relinquunt.
‘Jam magnum crepitavit Equus, mox Orbis & alti
‘Ingemuere Poli: tunc tu Pater, ultimus Omnium

‘Maxime Alexander, ventrem maturus Equinum
‘Deseris, heu Proles meliori digne Parente.’
‘I believe Julian, had I not stopt him, would
have gone through the whole Poem; (for,
as I observed, in most of the Characters he related,
the Affections he had enjoyed while
he personated them on Earth, still made some
Impression on him) but I begged him to omit
the Sequel of the Poem, and proceed with
his History. He then recollected himself,
and smiling at the Observation which by Intuition
he perceived I had made, continued
his Narration as follows: 
‘I Confess to you, says he, that the Delight
in repeating our own Works is so predominant
in a Poet, that I find nothing can
totally root it out of the Soul. Happy would
it be for those Persons, if their Hearers could
be delighted in the same manner: but alas!
hence that ingens Solitudo complained of by
Horace: for the Vanity of Mankind is so
much greedier and more general than their
Avarice, that no Beggar is so ill received by
them as he who solicits their Praise. 

‘This I sufficiently experienced in the
Character of a Poet: for my Company was
shunned (I believe on this account chiefly) by
my whole House; nay, there were few who
would submit to hearing me read my Poetry,
even at the price of sharing in my Provisions. 
The only Person who gave me Audience
was a Brother Poet; he indeed fed
me with Commendation very liberally: but
as I was forced to hear and commend in my
turn, I perhaps bought his Attention dear
enough. 
‘Well, Sir, if my Expectations of the
Reward I hoped from my first Poem had
baulked me, I had now still greater Reason
to complain: for instead of being preferred
or commended for the second, I was enjoined
a very severe Penance by my Superiour,
for ludicrously comparing the Pope
to a Fart. My Poetry was now the Jest of
every Company, except some few, who
spoke of it with detestation; and I found,
that instead of recommending me to Preferment,
it had effectually barred me from
all Probability of attaining it. 

‘These Discouragements had now induced
me to lay down my Pen, and write
no more. But, as Juvenal says, 

‘—Si discedas, Laqueo tenet ambitiosi
‘Consuetudo Mali.
‘I was an Example of the Truth of this
Assertion: for I soon betook my self again
to my Muse. Indeed, a Poet hath the same
Happiness with a Man who is doatingly fond
of an ugly Woman. The one enjoys his
Muse, and the other his Mistress, with a
Pleasure very little abated by the Esteem of
the World, and only undervalues their Taste
for not corresponding with his own. 
‘It is unnecessary to mention any more
of my Poems; they had all the same Fate; 
and tho' in reality some of my latter Pieces
deserved (I may now speak it without the
Imputation of Vanity) a better Success, as I
had the Character of a bad Writer, I found
it impossible ever to obtain the Reputation
of a good one. Had I possessed the Merit
of Homer, I could have hoped for no Applause; 

since it must have been a profound
Secret: for no one would now read a Syllable
of my Writings. 
‘The Poets of my Age were, as I believe
you know, not very famous. However,
there was one in some Credit at that time,
tho' I have the Consolation to know his
Works are all perished long ago. The Malice,
Envy, and Hatred I bore this Man are
inconceivable to any but an Author, and
an unsuccessful one; I never could bear to
hear him well spoken of, and writ anonymous
Satires against him, tho' I had received
Obligations from him; indeed I believe
it would have been an absolute Impossibility
for him at any rate to have made
me sincerely his Friend. 
‘I Have heard an Observation which
was made by some one of later Days, that
there are no worse Men than bad Authors. 
A Remark of the same kind hath been made
on ugly Women, and the Truth of both
stands on one and the same Reason, viz.
that they are both tainted with that cursed
and detestable Vice of Envy; which, as it is 

the greatest Torment to the Mind it inhabits,
so is it capable of introducing into it a total
Corruption, and of inspiring it to the Commission
of the most horrid Crimes imaginable. 
‘My Life was but short; for I soon
pined my self to death with the Vice I
just now mentioned. Minos told me, I
was infinitely too bad for Elysium; and as
for the other Place, the Devil had sworn, he
would never entertain a Poet for Orpheus's
sake: so I was forced to return again to
the Place from whence I came.’ 