


Containing about Six Days. 



A Farewel to the Reader. 
We are now, Reader, arrived at
the last Stage of our long Journey. 
As we have therefore travelled
together through so many Pages, let
us behave to one another like Fellow-Traveller 

in a Stage-Coach, who have passed
several Days in the Company of each other; 
and who, notwithstanding any Bickerings
or little Animosities which may have occurred
on the Road, generally make all up
at last, and mount, for the last Time, into
their Vehicle with Chearfulness and Good-Humour; 
since, after this one Stage, it
may possibly happen to us, as it commonly
happens to them, never to meet more. 
As I have here taken up this Simile,
give me Leave to carry it a little farther. 
I intend then in this last Book to imitate the
good Company I have mentioned in their
last Journey. Now it is well known, that
all Jokes and Raillery are at this Time
laid aside; whatever Characters any of the
Passengers have for the Jest-sake personated
on the Road, are now thrown off, and the
Conversation is usually plain and serious. 
In the same Manner, if I have now and
then, in the Course of this Work, indulged
any Pleasantry for thy Entertainment, I
shall here lay it down. The Variety of
Matter, indeed, which I shall be obliged to
cram into this Book, will afford no Room
for any of those ludicrous Observations
which I have elsewhere made, and which 

may sometimes, perhaps, have prevented
thee from taking a Nap when it was beginning
to steal upon thee. In this last Book
thou wilt find nothing (or at most very little)
of that Nature. All will be plain Narrative
only; and, indeed, when thou hast perused
the many great Events which this
Book will produce, thou wilt think the
Number of Pages contained in it, scarce
sufficient to tell the Story. 
And now, my Friend, I take this Opportunity
(as I shall have no other) of
heartily wishing thee well. If I have been
an entertaining Companion to thee, I promise
thee it is what I have desired. If in
any Thing I have offended, it was really
without any Intention. Some Things perhaps
here said, may have hit thee or thy
Friends; but I do most solemnly declare
they were not pointed at them. I question
not but thou hast been told, among other
Stories of me, that thou wast to travel with
a very scurrilous Fellow: But whoever told
thee so, did me an Injury. No Man detests
and despises Scurrility more than myself; 
nor hath any Man more Reason; for
none has ever been treated with more: 
And what is a very severe Fate, I have had
some of the abusive Writings of those very 

Men fathered upon me, who in other of
their Works have abused me themselves
with the utmost Virulence. 
All these Works, however, I am well
convinced, will be dead long before this
Page shall offer itself to thy Perusal: For
however short the Period may be of my
own Performances, they will most probably
outlive their own infirm Author, and
the weakly Productions of his abusive Cotemporaries. 



Containing a very tragical Incident. 
While Jones was employed in these
unpleasant Meditations, with which
we left him tormenting himself, Partridge
came stumbling into the Room with his
Face paler than Ashes, his Eyes fixed in
his Head, his Hair standing an End, and
every Limb trembling. In short, he looked
as he would have done had he seen a
Spectre, or had he indeed been a Spectre
himself. 
Jones, who was little subject to Fear,
could not avoid being somewhat shocked at 

this sudden Appearance. He did indeed
himself change Colour, and his Voice a little
faultered, while he asked him what was
the Matter. 
‘I hope, Sir,’ said Partridge, ‘you will
not be angry with me. Indeed I did not
listen, but I was obliged to stay in the
outward Room. I am sure I wish I had
been a hundred Miles off, rather than
have heard what I have heard.’ ‘Why
what is the Matter?’ said Jones. ‘The
Matter, Sir? O good Heaven!’ answered
Partridge, ‘was that Woman who is
just gone out, the Woman who was with
you at Upton?’ ‘She was, Partridge,’ cries
Jones. ‘And did you really, Sir, go to
Bed with that Woman?’ said he trembling. 
—‘I am afraid what past between
us is no Secret,’ said Jones. —‘Nay,
but pray, Sir, for Heaven's Sake, Sir, answer
me,’ cries Partridge. ‘You know I
did,’ cries Jones. —‘Why then the Lord
have Mercy upon your Soul, and forgive
you,’ cries Partridge; ‘but as sure as I
stand here alive, you have been a-Bed
with your own Mother.’ 
Upon these Words, Jones became in
a Moment a greater Picture of Horror than 

Partridge himself. He was indeed, for
some Time, struck dumb with Amazement,
and both stood staring wildly at each other. 
At last his Words found Way, and in an
interrupted Voice he said—‘How! how! 
What's this you tell me?’ ‘Nay, Sir,’ 
cries Partridge, ‘I have not Breath enough
left to tell you now—but what I have said
is most certainly true—That Woman
who now went out is your own Mother. 
How unlucky was it for you, Sir, that
I did not happen to see her at that Time,
to have prevented it? Sure the Devil
himself must have contrived to bring about
this Wickedness.’ 
‘Sure,’ cries Jones, ‘Fortune will never
have done with me, 'till she hath
driven me to Distraction. But why do I
blame Fortune? I am myself the Cause
of all my Misery. All the dreadful Mischiefs
which have befallen me, are the
Consequences only of my own Folly and
Vice. What thou hast told me, Partridge,
hath almost deprived me of my
Senses. And was Mrs. Waters then— 
—But why do I ask? for thou must certainly
know her. —If thou hast any
Affection for me; nay, if thou hast any
Pity, let me beseech thee to fetch this 

miserable Woman back again to me. 
O good Heavens! Incest—with a Mother! 
To what am I reserved?’ He then fell into
the most violent and frantic Agonies of
Grief and Despair, in which Partridge declared
he would not leave him: But at
last having vented the first Torrent of
Passion, he came a little to himself; and
then having acquainted Partridge that he
would find this wretched Woman in the
same House where the wounded Gentleman
was lodged, he dispatched him in quest of
her. 
If the Reader will please to refresh his
Memory, by turning to the Scene at Upton
in the Ninth Book, he will be apt to admire
the many strange Accidents which unfortunately
prevented any Interview between
Partridge and Mrs. Waters, when
she spent a whole Day there with Mr.
Jones. Instances of this Kind we may frequently
observe in Life, where the greatest
Events are produced by a nice Train of little
Circumstances; and more than one
Example of this may be discovered by the
accurate Eye, in this our History. 
After a fruitless Search of two or three
Hours, Partridge returned back to his Master, 

without having seen Mrs. Waters. Jones,
who was in a State of Desperation at his
Delay, was almost raving mad when he
brought him this Account. He was not
long however in this Condition before he
received the following Letter. 

‘Sir,
Since I left you, I have seen a Gentleman,
from whom I have learnt something
concerning you which greatly surprizes
and affects me; but as I have not
at present Leisure to communicate a Matter
of such high Importance, you must
suspend your Curiosity 'till our next Meeting,
which shall be the first Moment I
am able to see you. O Mr. Jones, little
did I think, when I past that happy Day
at Upton, the Reflection upon which is
like to embitter all my future Life, who
it was to whom I owed such perfect Happiness. 
Believe me to be ever sincerely
your unfortunate. 
‘J. Waters.’ 
P. S. ‘I would have you comfort yourself
as much as possible, for Mr. Fitzpatrick
is in no Manner of Danger; so that
whatever other grievous Crimes you may
have to repent of, the Guilt of Blood is
not among the Number.’ 

Jones having received the Letter, let it
drop (for he was unable to hold it, and
indeed had scarce the Use of any one of
his Faculties). Partridge took it up, and
having received Consent by Silence, read
it likewise; nor had it upon him a less sensible
Effect. The Pencil, and not the Pen,
should describe the Horrors which appeared
in both their Countenances. While they
both remained speechless, the Turnkey entered
the Room, and without taking any
Notice of what sufficiently discovered itself
in the Faces of them both, acquainted
Jones that a Man without desired to speak
with him. This Person was presently introduced,
and was no other than Black
George. 
As Sights of Horror were not so usual
to George as they were to the Turnkey, he
instantly saw the great Disorder which appeared
in the Face of Jones. This he imputed
to the Accident that had happened,
which was reported in the very worst Light
in Mr. Western's Family; he concluded
therefore that the Gentleman was dead, and
that Mr. Jones was in a fair Way of coming
to a shameful End. A Thought which
gave him much Uneasiness; for George was 

of a compassionate Disposition, and notwithstanding
a small Breach of Friendship
which he had been over-tempted to commit,
was, in the main, not insensible of the
Obligations he had formerly received from
Mr. Jones. 
The poor Fellow therefore scarce refrained
from a Tear at the present Sight. He
told Jones he was heartily sorry for his Misfortunes,
and begged him to consider if he
could be of any Manner of Service. ‘Perhaps,
Sir, said he, you may want a little
Matter of Money upon this Occasion; 
if you do, Sir, what little I have is
heartily at your Service.’ 
Jones shook him very heartily by the
Hand, and gave him many Thanks for
the kind Offer he had made; but answered,
‘He had not the least Want
of that Kind.’ Upon which George began
to press his Services more eagerly than
before. Jones again thanked him, with
Assurances that he wanted nothing which
was in the Power of any Man living to
give. ‘Come, come, my good Master,
answered George, do not take the Matter
so much to Heart. Things may end
better than you imagine; to be sure you 

ant the first Gentleman who hath killed a
Man, and yet come off.’ ‘You are
wide of the Matter, George, said Partridge,
the Gentleman is not dead, nor
like to die. Don't disturb my Master,
at present, for he is troubled about a
Matter in which it is not in your Power
to do him any good.’ ‘You don't know
what I may be able to do, Mr. Partridge,
answered George; if his Concern
is about my young Lady, I have some
News to tell my Master.’ —‘What
do you say, Mr. George?’ cry'd Jones,
‘Hath any thing lately happened in
which my Sophia is concerned? My
Sophia! How dares such a Wretch
as I mention her so prophanely.’ —‘I
hope she will be yours yet, ‘answered
George.’ —‘Why, yes, Sir, I have
something to tell you about her. Madam
Western hath just brought Madam Sophia
home, and there hath been a terrible to
do. I could not possibly learn the very
Right of it; but my Master he hath been
in a vast big Passion, and so was Madam
Western, and I heard her say as she went
out of Doors into her Chair, that she
would never set her Foot in Master's
House again. I don't know what's the
Matter, not I, but every thing was very 

quiet when I came out; but Robin, who
waited at Supper, said he had never seen
the Squire for a long while in such good
Humour with young Madam; that he
kiss'd her several Times, and swore she
should be her own Mistress, and he never
would think of confining her any more. 
I thought this News would please you,
and so I slipp'd out, though it was so
late, to inform you of it.’ Mr. Jones
assured George that it did greatly please
him; for though he should never more
presume to lift his Eyes towards that incomparable
Creature, nothing could so
much relieve his Misery as the Satisfaction
he should always have in hearing of her
Welfare. 
The rest of the Conversation which passed
at the Visit is not important enough to
be here related. The Reader will therefore
forgive us this abrupt breaking off,
and be pleased to hear how this great good
Will of the Squire towards his Daughter
was brought about. 
Mrs. Western, on her first Arrival at her
Brother's Lodging, began to set forth the
great Honours and Advantages which would
accrue to the Family by the Match with 

Lord Fellamar, which her Niece had absolutely
refused; in which Refusal, when the
Squire took the Part of his Daughter, she
fell immediately into the most violent Passion,
and so irritated and provoked the
Squire, that neither his Patience nor his
Prudence could bear any longer; upon
which there ensued between them both so
warm a Bout at Altercation, that perhaps
the Regions of Billingsgate never equalled
it. In the Heat of this Scolding Mrs.
Western departed, and had consequently no
Leisure to acquaint the Brother with the
Letter which Sophia received, which might
have possibly produced ill Effects; but to
say Truth I believe it never once occurred
to her Memory at this Time. 
When Mrs. Western was gone, Sophia,
who had been hitherto silent, as well indeed
from Necessity as Inclination, began
to return the Compliment which her Father
had made her, in taking her Part against
her Aunt, by taking his likewise against
the Lady. This was the first Time of her
so doing, and it was in the highest Degree
acceptable to the Squire. Again he remembred
that Mr. Allworthy had insisted
on an entire Relinquishment of all violent
Means; and indeed as he made no doubt 

but that Jones would be hanged, he did
not in the least question succeeding with his
Daughter by fair Means; he now therefore
once more gave a Loose to his natural
Fondness for her, which had such an Effect
on the dutiful, grateful, tender and affectionate
Heart of Sophia, that had her
Honour given to Jones, and something else
perhaps in which he was concerned, been
removed, I much doubt whether she
would not have sacrificed herself to a Man
she did not like, to have obliged her Father. 
She promised him she would make
it the whole Business of her Life to oblige
him, and would never marry any Man against
his Consent; which brought the old
Man so near to his highest Happiness, that he
was resolved to take the other Step, and
went to Bed completely drunk. 




Allworthy visits old Nightingale; with a
strange Discovery that he made on that Occasion. 
The Morning after these Things had
happened, Mr. Allworthy went according
to his Promise to visit old Nightingale,
with whom his Authority was so great,
that after having sat with him three Hours,
he at last prevailed with him to consent to
see his Son. 
Here an Accident happened of a very
extraordinary Kind; one indeed of those
strange Chances, whence very good and
grave Men have concluded that Providence
often interposes in the Discovery of the most
secret Villany, in order to caution Men from
quitting the Paths of Honesty, however
warily they tread in those of Vice. 
Mr. Allworthy, at his Entrance into Mr.
Nightingale's, saw Black George; he took no
Notice of him, nor did Black George imagine
he had perceived him. However,
when their Conversation on the principal 

Point was over, Allworthy asked Nightingale
whether he knew one George Seagrim,
and upon what Business he came to his
House. ‘Yes, answered Nightingale, I
know him very well, and a most extraordinary
Fellow he is, who, in these
Days, hath been able to hoard up 500l.
from renting a very small Estate of 30l.
a Year.’ ‘And is this the Story which
he hath told you? cries Allworthy.’ ‘Nay,
it is true, I promise you, said Nightingale,
for I have the Money now in my
own Hands, in five Bank Bills, which I
am to lay out either in a Mortgage,
or in some Purchase in the North of
England.’ The Bank Bills were no sooner
produced at Allworthy's Desire, than he
blessed himself at the Strangeness of the
Discovery. He presently told Nightingale,
that these Bank Bills were formerly his, and
then acquainted him with the whole Affair. 
As there are no Men who complain more
of the Frauds of Business than Highwaymen,
Gamesters, and other Thieves of
that Kind; so there are none who so bitterly
exclaim against the Frauds of Gamesters,
&c. as Usurers, Brokers, and other
Thieves of this Kind; whether it be that
the one Way of cheating is a Discountenance
or Reflection upon the other, or that 

Money, which is the common Mistress
of all Cheats, makes them regard each other
in the Light of Rivals; but Nightingale
no sooner heard the Story, than he
exclaimed against the Fellow in Terms
much severer than the Justice and Honesty
of Allworthy had bestowed on him. 
Allworthy desired Nightingale to retain
both the Money and the Secret till he
should hear farther from him; and if he
should in the mean Time see the Fellow,
that he would not take the least Notice to
him of the Discovery which he had made. 
He then returned to his Lodgings, where
he found Mrs. Miller in a very dejected
Condition, on Account of the Information
she had received from her Son-in-law. Mr.
Allworthy, with great Chearfulness, told
her that he had much good News to communicate; 
and with little further Preface,
acquainted her, that he had brought Mr.
Nightingale to consent to see his Son, and
did not in the least doubt to effect a perfect
Reconciliation between them; though he
found the Father more sowered by another
Accident of the same Kind, which had happened
in his Family. He then mentioned
the running away of the Uncle's Daughter,
which he had been told by the old 

Gentleman, and which Mrs. Miller, and
her Son-in-law, did not yet know. 
The Reader may suppose Mrs. Miller
received this Account with great Thankfulness
and no less Pleasure; but so uncommon
was her Friendship to Jones, that I am
not certain whether the Uneasiness she suffered
for his Sake, did not over-ballance
her Satisfaction at hearing a Piece of News
tending so much to the Happiness of her
own Family; nor whether even this very
News, as it reminded her of the Obligations
she had to Jones, did not hurt as well as
please her; when her grateful Heart said to
her, ‘While my own Family is happy, how
miserable is the poor Creature, to whose
Generosity we owe the Beginning of all
this Happiness.’ 
Allworthy having left her a little while to
chew the Cud (if I may use that Expression)
on these first Tidings, told her, he had still
something more to impart, which he believed
would give her Pleasure. ‘I think,
said he,’ ‘I have discovered a pretty considerable
Treasure belonging to the young
Gentleman, your Friend; but perhaps
indeed, his present Situation may be such,
that it will be of no Service to him.’ The 

latter Part of the Speech gave Mrs. Miller
to understand who was meant, and she answered
with a Sigh, ‘I hope not, Sir.’ 
‘I hope so too, cries Allworthy, with all
my Heart, but my Nephew told me this
Morning, he had heard a very bad Account
of the Affair.’ —‘Good Heaven! 
Sir, said she—Well, I must not speak,
and yet it is certainly very hard to be obliged
to hold one's Tongue when one
hears’—‘Madam, said Allworthy, you
may say whatever you please, you know
me too well to think I have a Prejudice
against any one; and as for that young
Man, I assure you I should be heartily
pleased to find he could acquit himself of
every thing, and particularly of this sad
Affair. You can testify the Affection I have
formerly borne him. The World, I know,
censured me for loving him so much. I did
not withdraw that Affection from him
without thinking I had the justest Cause. 
Believe me, Mrs. Miller, I should be glad
to find I have been mistaken.’ Mrs.
Miller was going eagerly to reply, when a
Servant acquainted her, that a Gentleman
without desired to speak with her immediately. 
‘Allworthy then enquired for his Nephew,
and was old, that he had been for
some Time in his Room with the Gentleman 

who used to come to him, and whom
Mr. Allworthy, guessing rightly to be Mr.
Dowling, he desired presently to speak with
him. 
When Dowling attended, Allworthy put
the Case of the Bank-Notes to him, without
mentioning any Name, and asked in
what manner such a Person might be
punished. To which Dowling answered,
he thought he might be indicted on the
Black Act; but said, as it was a Matter of
some Nicety, it would be proper to go to
Council. He said he was to attend Council
presently upon an Affair of Mr. Western's,
and if Mr. Allworthy pleased he would lay
the Case before them. This was agreed
to; and then Mrs. Miller opening the Door,
cry'd, ‘I ask pardon, I did not know you
had Company;’ but Allworthy desired her
to come in, saying, he had finished his Business. 
Upon which Mr. Dowling withdrew,
and Mrs. Miller introduced Mr. Nightingale
the younger, to return thanks for the
great Kindness done him by Allworthy; but
she had scarce Patience to let the young
Gentleman finish his Speech before she interrupted
him, saying, ‘O Sir, Mr. Nightingale,
brings great News about poor Mr. Jones,
he hath been to see the wounded Gentleman, 

who, is out of all Danger of Death,
and what is more, declares he fell upon
poor Mr. Jones himself, and beat him. 
I am sure, Sir, you would not have Mr.
Jones be a Coward. If I was a Man
myself, I am sure if any Man was to
strike me, I should draw my Sword. Do
pray, my Dear, tell Mr. Allworthy, tell
him all yourself.’ Nightingale then confirmed
what Mrs. Miller had said; and
concluded with many handsome Things
of Jones, who was, he said, one of the
best-natured Fellows in the World, and
not in the least inclined to be quarrelsome. 
Here Nightingale was going to cease, when
Mrs. Miller again begged him to relate all
the many dutiful Expressions he had heard
him make use of towards Mr. Allworthy. 
‘To say the utmost Good of Mr. Allworthy,
cries Nightingale, is doing no more
than strict Justice, and can have no Merit
in it; but indeed I must say, no Man
can be more sensible of the Obligations
he hath to so good a Man, than is
poor Jones. Indeed, Sir, I am convinced
the Weight of your Displeasure is the
heaviest Burthen he lies under. He hath
often lamented it to me, and hath as often
protested in the most solemn Manner
he had never been intentionally guilty of 

any Offence towards you; nay, he hath
sworn he would rather die a Thousand Deaths
than he would have his Conscience upbraid
him with one disrespectful, ungrateful,
or undutiful Thought towards you. But
I ask pardon, Sir, I am afraid I presume
to intermeddle too far in so tender a Point.’ 
‘You have spoke no more than what a
Christian ought, cries Mrs. Miller.’ ‘Indeed,
Mr. Nightingale, answered Allworthy,
I applaud your generous Friendship,
and I wish he may merit it of you. I
confess I am glad to hear the Report you
bring from this unfortunate Gentleman; 
and if that Matter should turn out to be
as you represent it (and indeed I doubt
nothing of what you say) I may perhaps,
in Time, be brought to think better than
lately I have of this young Man: For
this good Gentlewoman here, nay all who
know me, can witness that I loved him
as dearly as if he had been my own Son. 
Indeed I have considered him as a Child
sent by Fortune to my Care. I still remember
the innocent, the helpless Situation
in which I found him. I feel the
tender Pressure of his little Hands at this
Moment. —He was my Darling, indeed
he was.’ At which Words he ceased,
and the Tears stood in his Eyes. 

As the Answer which Mrs. Miller made
may lead us into fresh Matters, we will
here stop to account for the visible Alteration
in Mr. Allworthy's Mind, and the Abatement
of his Anger to Jones. Revolutions
of this Kind, it is true, do frequently occur
in Histories and dramatic Writers, for no other
Reason than because the History or Play
draws to a Conclusion, and are justified by
Authority of Authors; yet though we insist
upon as much Authority as any Author
whatever, we shall use this Power very
sparingly, and never but when we are driven
to it by Necessity, which we do not
at present foresee will happen in this Work. 
This Alteration then in the Mind of Mr.
Allworthy, was occasioned by a Letter he
had just received from Mr. Square, and
which we shall give the Reader in the Beginning
of the next Chapter. 



Containing two Letters in very different Stiles. 

“My worthy Friend,
I informed you in my last, that I was
forbidden the Use of the Waters, as 

they were found by Experience rather to
encrease than lessen the Symptoms of my
Distemper. I must now acquaint you
with a Piece of News, which, I believe,
will afflict my Friends more than it hath
afflicted me. Dr. Harrington and Dr.
Brewster, have informed me, that there
is no Hopes of my Recovery. 
“I have somewhere read, that the great
Use of Philosophy is to learn to die. I
will not therefore so far disgrace mine, as
to shew any Surprize at receiving a Lesson
which I must be thought to have so
long studied. Yet, to say the Truth,
one Page of the Gospel teaches this Lesson
better than all the Volumes of antient
or modern Philosophers. The Assurance
it gives us of another Life is a
much stronger Support to a good
Mind, than all the Consolations that
are drawn from the Necessity of Nature,
the Emptiness or Satiety of our
Enjoyments here, or any other Topic
of those Declamations which are
sometimes capable of arming our Minds
with a stubborn Patience in bearing the
Thoughts of Death; but never of raising
them to a real Contempt of it, and much
less of making us think it a real Good. I 

would not here be understood to throw
the horrid Censure of Atheism, or even the
absolute Denial of Immortality, on all
who are called Philosophers. Many of that
Sect, as well antient as modern, have,
from the Light of Reason, discovered
from Hopes of a future State; but,
in Reality, that Light was so faint
and glimmering, and the Hopes were
so incertain and precarious, that it may
be justly doubted on which Side their
Belief turned. Plato himself concludes
his Phædon, with declaring that his best
Arguments amount only to raise a Probability,
and Cicero himself seems rather to
profess an Inclination to believe, than any
actual Belief in the Doctrines of Immortality. 
As to myself, to be very sincere
with you, I never was much in earnest in
this Faith, till I was in earnest a Christian. 
“You will perhaps wonder at the latter
Expression; but I assure you it hath not
been till very lately, that I could, with
Truth, call myself so. The Pride of
Philosophy had intoxicated my Reason,
and the sublimest of all Wisdom appeared
to me, as it did to the Greeks of old,
to be Foolishness. God hath however
been so gracious to shew me my Error 

in Time, and to bring me into the Way
of Truth, before I sunk into utter Darkness
for ever. 
“I find myself beginning to grow weak,
I shall therefore hasten to the main Purpose
of this Letter. 
“When I reflect on the Actions of my
past Life, I know of nothing which sits
heavier upon my Conscience, than the Injustice
I have been guilty of to that poor
Wretch, your adopted Son. I have
not indeed only connived at the Villany
of others, but been myself active
in Injustice towards him. Believe me,
my dear Friend, when I tell you on the
Word of a dying Man, he hath been
basely injured. As to the principal Fact,
upon the Misrepresentation of which you
discarded him, I solemnly assure you he
is innocent. When you lay upon your
supposed Death-bed, he was the only
Person in the House who testified any
real Concern; and what happened afterwards
arose from the Wildness of his
Joy on your Recovery; and, I am sorry
to say it, from the Baseness of another
Person (but it is my Desire to justify the
Innocent, and to accuse none). Believe 

me, my Friend, this young Man hath
the noblest Generosity of Heart, the
most perfect Capacity for Friendship,
the highest Integrity, and indeed every
Virtue which can enoble a Man. He
hath some Faults, but among them is
not to be numbred the least want of
Duty or Gratitude towards you. On
the contrary, I am satisfied when you
dismissed him from your House, his Heart
bled for you more than for himself. 
“Worldly Motives were the wicked and
base Reasons of my concealing this from
you so long; to reveal it now I can have
no Inducement but the Desire of serving
the Cause of Truth, of doing Right to the
Innocent, and of making all the Amends
in my Power for a past Offence. I hope
this Declaration therefore will have the
Effect desired, and will restore this deserving
young Man to your Favour; the
hearing of which, while I am yet alive,
will afford the utmost Consolation to, 
“Sir,
Your most obliged,
Obedient humble Servant,
Thomas Square.” 

The Reader will, after this, scarce wonder
at the Revolution so visibly appearing
in Mr. Allworthy, notwithstanding he
received from Thwackum, by the same
Post, another Letter of a very different
Kind, which we shall here add, as it may
possibly be the last Time we shall have Occasion
to mention the Name of that Gentleman. 

‘Sir,
I am not at all surprized at hearing from
your worthy Nephew a fresh Instance of
the Villany of Mr. Square the Atheist's
young Pupil. I shall not wonder at any
Murders he may commit; and I heartily
pray that your own Blood may not seal
up his final Commitment to the Place of
Wailing and gnashing of Teeth. 
‘Though you cannot want sufficient
Calls to Repentance for the many unwarrantable
Weaknesses exemplified in
your Behaviour to this Wretch, so much
to the Prejudice of your own lawful Family,
and of your Character. I say, tho'
these may sufficiently be supposed to
prick and goad your Conscience at this
Season; I should yet be wanting to my 

Duty, if I spared to give you some Admonition
in order to bring you to a due Sense
of your Errors. I therefore pray you seriously
to consider the Judgment which is
likely to overtake this wicked Villain; 
and let it serve at least as a Warning to
you, that you may not for the future despise
the Advice of one who is so indefatigable
in his Prayers for your Welfare. 
‘Had not my Hand been withheld from
due Correction, I had scourged much of
this diabolical Spirit out of a Boy, of
whom from his Infancy I discovered the
Devil had taken such entire Possession; 
but Reflections of this Kind now come
too late. 
‘I am sorry you have given away the
Living of Westerton so hastily. I should
have applied on that Occasion earlier, had
I thought you would not have acquainted
me previous to the Disposition. — 
Your Objection to Pluralities is being
righteous over-much. If there were any
Crime in the Practice, so many godly
Men would not agree to it. If the Vicar
of Aldergrove should die (as we hear
he is in a declining Way) I hope you will 

think of me, since I am certain you must
be convinced of my most sincere Attachment
to your highest Welfare. A Welfare
to which all worthy Considerations
are as trifling as the small Tithes mentioned
in Scripture are, when compared to
the weighty Matters of the Law. 
‘I am, Sir,
Your faithful humble Servant,
Roger Thwackum.’ 
This was the first Time Thwackum ever
wrote in this authoritative Stile to Allworthy,
and of this he had afterwards sufficient
Reason to repent, as in the Case of those
who mistake the highest Degree of Goodness
for the lowest Degree of Weakness. 
Allworthy had indeed never liked this Man. 
He knew him to be proud and ill-natured; 
he also knew that his Divinity itself was tinctured
with his Temper, and such as in many
Respects he himself did by no means approve: 
But he was at the same Time an excellent
Scholar, and most indefatigable in teaching
the two Lads. Add to this the strict Severity
of his Life and Manners, an unimpeached
Honesty, and a most devout Attachment
to Religion. So that upon the whole,
though Allworthy did not esteem nor love
the Man, yet he could never bring himself
to part with a Tutor to the Boys, who was 

both by Learning and Industry, extremely
well qualified for his Office; and he hoped,
that as they were bred up in his own House,
and under his own Eye, he should be able
to correct whatever was wrong in Thwackum's
Instructions. 



In which the History is continued. 
Mr. Allworthy, in his last Speech,
had recollected some tender Ideas
concerning Jones, which had brought Tears
into the good Man's Eyes. This Mrs.
Miller observing, said, ‘Yes, yes, Sir,
your Goodness to this poor young Man
is known, notwithstanding all your Care to
conceal it; but there is not a single Syllable
of Truth in what those Villains said. 
Mr. Nightingale hath now discovered the
whole Matter. It seems these Fellows
were employed by a Lord, who is a Rival
of poor Mr. Jones, to have pressed
him on board a Ship. —I assure them
I don't know who they will press
next. Mr. Nightingale here hath
seen the Officer himself, who is a very
pretty Gentleman, and hath told him all,
and is very sorry for what he undertook,
which he would never have done had he 

known Mr. Jones to have been a Gentleman; 
but he was told that he was a
common strolling Vagabond.’ 
Allworthy stared at all this, and declared
he was a Stranger to every Word she said. 
‘Yes, Sir,’ answered she, ‘I believe you are. 
—It is a very different Story, I believe,
from what those Fellows told the Lawyer.’ 
‘What Lawyer, Madam? what is it
you mean?’ said Allworthy. ‘Nay, nay,’ 
said she, ‘this is so like you to deny your
own Goodness; but Mr. Nightingale here
saw him.’ ‘Saw whom, Madam?’ answered
he. ‘Why your Lawyer, Sir,’ said
she, ‘that you so kindly sent to enquire into
the Affair.’ ‘I am still in the Dark,
upon my Honour,’ said Allworthy. ‘Why
then do you tell him, my dear Sir,’ cries
she. ‘Indeed, Sir,’ said Nightingale, ‘I
did see that very Lawyer who went from
you when I came into the Room, at an
Alehouse in Aldersgate, in Company with
two of the Fellows who were employed
by Lord Fellamar to press Mr. Jones, and
who were by that Means present at the
unhappy Rencounter between him and
Mr. Fitzpatrick.’ ‘I own, Sir,’ said Mrs.
Miller, ‘when I saw this Gentleman come
into the Room to you, I told Mr. Nightingale 

that I apprehended you had sent
him thither to enquire into the Affair.’ 
Allworthy shewed Marks of Astonishment
in his Countenance at this News, and was
indeed for two or three Minutes struck
dumb by it. At last, addressing himself to
Mr. Nightingale, he said, ‘I must confess
myself, Sir, more surprized at what you
tell me, than I have ever been before at
any Thing in my whole Life. Are you
certain this was the Gentleman?’ ‘I am
most certain,’ answered ‘Nightingale.’ ‘At
Aldersgate?’ cries Allworthy. ‘And was
you in Company with this Lawyer and
the two Fellows?’ —‘I was, Sir,’ said
the other, ‘very near half an Hour.’ — 
‘Well, Sir,’ said Allworthy, ‘and in what
Manner did the Lawyer behave? Did
you hear all that past between him and
the Fellows?’ ‘No, Sir,’ answered Nightingale,
‘they had been together before I
came—In my Presence the Lawyer said
little; but after I had several Times
examined the Fellows, who persisted in
a Story directly contrary to what I had
heard from Mr. Jones, and what I find
by Mr. Fitzpatrick was a rank Falshood,
the Lawyer then desired the Fellows to
say nothing but what was the Truth, and
seemed to speak so much in Favour of Mr. 

Jones, that when I saw the same Person
with you, I concluded your Goodness
had prompted you to send him thither. — 
—And did you not send him thither?’ 
says Mrs. Miller. —‘Indeed I did not,’ 
answered Allworthy; ‘nor did I know he
had gone on such an Errand 'till this
Moment.’ —‘I see it all!’ said Mrs.
Miller: ‘Upon my Soul, I see it all! No
Wonder they have been closetted so close
lately. Son Nightingale, let me beg you
run for these Fellows immediately—find
them out if they are above Ground. I
will go myself.’ —‘Dear Madam,’ said
Allworthy, ‘be patient, and do me the Favour
to send a Servant up Stairs to call
Mr. Dowling hither, if he be in the
House, or if not, Mr. Blifil.’ Mrs. Miller
went out muttering something to herself,
and presently returned with an Answer,
‘That Mr. Dowling was gone; but
that the t'other, as she called him, was
coming.’ 
Allworthy was of a cooler Disposition
than the good Woman, whose Spirits were
all up in Arms in the Cause of her Friend. 
He was not however without some Suspicions
which were near a-kin to hers. When
Blifil came into the Room, he asked him 

with a very serious Countenance, and with
a less friendly Look than he had ever before
given him, ‘Whether he knew any
Thing of Mr. Dowling's having seen any
of the Persons who were present at the
Duel between Jones and another Gentleman?’ 
There is nothing so dangerous as a Question
which comes by Surprize on a Man,
whose Business it is to conceal Truth, or
to defend Falshood. For which Reason
those worthy Personages, whose noble Office
it is to save the Lives of their Fellow-Creatures
at the Old-Bailey, take the utmost Care,
by frequent previous Examination, to divine
every Question which may be asked their
Clients on the Day of Trial, that they may
be supply'd with proper and ready Answers,
which the most fertile Invention cannot supply
in an Instant. Besides, the sudden and
violent Impulse on the Blood, occasioned by
these Surprizes, occasions frequently such an
Alteration in the Countenance, that the
Man is obliged to give Evidence against
himself. And such indeed were the Alterations
which the Countenance of Blifil underwent
from this sudden Question, that we
can scarce blame the Eagerness of Mrs.
Miller, who immediately cry'd out, ‘Guilty, 

upon my Honour! Guilty, upon my
Soul!’ 
Mr. Allworthy sharply rebuked her for
this Impetuosity; and then turning to Blifil,
who seemed sinking into the Earth, he
said, ‘Why do you hesitate, Sir, at giving
me an Answer? You certainly must have
employed him, for he would not, of his
own Accord, I believe, have undertaken
such an Errand, and especially without
acquainting me.’ 
Blifil then answered, ‘I own, Sir, I
have been guilty of an Offence, yet may
I hope your Pardon?’ —‘My Pardon?’ 
said Allworthy very angrily. —‘Nay, Sir,’ 
answered Blifil, ‘I knew you would be offended; 
yet surely my dear Uncle will
forgive the Effects of the most amiable
of Human Weaknesses. Compassion for
those who do not deserve it, I own, is a
Crime; and yet it is a Crime from which
you yourself are not entirely free. I
know I have been guilty of it in more
than one Instance to this very Person; 
and I will own I did send Mr. Dowling,
not on a vain and fruitless Enquiry, but
to discover the Witnesses, and to endeavour
to soften their Evidence. This, 

Sir, is the Truth; which though I intended
to conceal from you, I will not
deny.’ 
‘I confess,’ said Nightingale, ‘this is
the Light in which it appeared to me
from the Gentleman's Behaviour.’ 
‘Now, Madam,’ said Allworthy, ‘I
believe you will once in your Life own
you have entertained a wrong Suspicion,
and are not so angry with my Nephew
as you was.’ 
Mrs. Miller was silent; for though she
could not so hastily be pleased with Blifil,
whom she looked upon to have been the
Ruin of Jones, yet in this particular Instance
he had imposed upon her as well as
the rest; so entirely had the Devil stood
his Friend. And, indeed, I look upon the
vulgar Observation, That the Devil often
deserts his Friends, and leaves them in
the Lurch, to be a great Abuse on that
Gentleman's Character. Perhaps he may
sometimes desert those who are only his
Cup Acquaintance; or who, at most, are
but half his; but he generally stands by
those who are thoroughly his Servants, and 

helps them off in all Extremities 'till their
Bargain expires. 
As a conquered Rebellion strengthens a
Government, or as Health is more perfectly
established by Recovery from some
Diseases; so Anger, when removed, often
gives new Life to Affection. This was the
Case of Mr. Allworthy; for Blifil having
wiped off the greater Suspicion, the lesser,
which had been raised by Square's Letter,
sunk of Course, and was forgotten; and
Thwackum, with whom he was greatly offended,
bore alone all the Reflections which
Square had cast on the Enemies of Jones. 
As for that young Man, the Resentment
of Mr. Allworthy began more and more to
abate towards him. He told Blifil, ‘he did
not only forgive the extraordinary Efforts
of his Good-Nature, but would give him
the Pleasure of following his Example.’ 
Then turning to Mrs. Miller, with a Smile
which would have become an Angel, he
cry'd, ‘What say you, Madam; shall we
take a Hackney-Coach, and all of us together
pay a Visit to your Friend? I promise
you it is not the first Visit I have
made in a Prison.’ 

Every Reader, I believe, will be able to
answer for the worthy Woman; but they
must have a great deal of Good-Nature,
and be well acquainted with Friendship, who
can feel what she felt on this Occasion. 
Few, I hope, are capable of feeling what
now past in the Mind of Blifil; but those
who are, will acknowledge, that it was impossible
for him to raise any Objection to
this Visit. Fortune, however, or the Gentleman
lately mentioned above, stood his
Friend, and prevented his undergoing so
great a Shock: For at the very Instant when
the Coach was sent for, Partridge arrived,
and having called Mrs. Miller from the
Company, acquainted her with the dreadful
Accident lately come to Light; and hearing
Mr. Allworthy's Intention, begged her
to find some Means of stopping him; ‘for,’ 
says he, ‘the Matter must at all Hazards
be kept a Secret from him; and if
he should now go, he will find Mr. Jones
and his Mother, who arrived just as I
left him, lamenting over one another the
horrid Crime they have ignorantly committed.’ 
The poor Woman, who was almost deprived
of her Senses at this dreadful News, 

was never less capable of Invention than at
present. However, as Women are much
readier at this than Men, she bethought herself
of an Excuse, and returning to All-worthy
said, ‘I am sure, Sir, you will be
surprized at hearing any Objection from
me to the kind Proposal you just now
made; and yet I am afraid of the Consequence
of it, if carried immediately into
Execution. You must imagine, Sir, that
all the Calamities which have lately befallen
this poor young Fellow, must have
thrown him into the lowest Dejection of
Spirits: And now, Sir, should we all on
a sudden fling him into such a violent Fit
of Joy, as I know your Presence will occasion,
it may, I am afraid, produce some
fatal Mischief, especially as his Servant,
who is without, tells me he is very far
from being well.’ 
‘Is his Servant without?’ cries Allworthy; 
‘pray call him hitler. I will ask
him some Questions concerning his Master.’ 
Partridge was at first afraid to appear
before Mr. Allworthy; but was at length
persuaded, after Mrs. Miller, who had 

often heard his whole Story from his own
Mouth, had promised to introduce him. 
Allworthy recollected Partridge the Moment
he came into the Room, though many
Years had passed since he had seen him. 
Mrs. Miller therefore might have spared
here a formal Oration, in which indeed she
was somewhat prolix: For the Reader, I
believe, may have observed already that the
good Woman, among other Things, had
a Tongue always ready for the Service of
her Friends. 
‘And are you,’ said Allworthy to Partridge,
‘the Servant of Mr. Jones?’ ‘I
can't say, Sir,’ answered he, ‘that I am
regularly a Servant, but I live with him,
an't please your Honour, at present. Non
sum qualis eram, as your Honour very
well knows. 
Mr. Allworthy then asked him many
Questions concerning Jones, as to his
Health, and other Matters; to all which
Partridge answered, without having the
least Regard to what was, but considered
only what he would have Things appear; 
for a strict Adherence to Truth was not among 

the Articles of this honest Fellow's
Morality, or his Religion. 
During this Dialogue Mr. Nightingale
took his Leave, and presently after Mrs.
Miller left the Room, when Allworthy likewise
dispatched Blifil; for he imagined that
Partridge, when alone with him, would be
more explicit than before Company. They
were no sooner left in private together,
than Allworthy began as in the following
Chapter. 



In which the History is farther continued. 
‘Sure, Friend,’ said the good Man,
‘you are the strangest of all Human
Beings. Not only to have suffered as
you have formerly, for obstinately persisting
in a Falshood; but to persist
in it thus to the last, and to pass thus
upon the World for the Servant of your
own Son? What Interest can you have
in all this? What can be your Motive?’ 
‘I see, Sir,’ said Partridge, falling
down upon his Knees, ‘that your Honour
is prepossessed against me, and resolved
not to believe any Thing I say, and 

therefore what signifies my Protestations; 
but yet there is one above who knows
that I am not the Father of this young
Man.’ 
‘How!’ said Allworthy, ‘Will you yet
deny what you was formerly convicted of
upon such unanswerable, such manifest
Evidence? Nay, what a Confirmation is
your being now found with this very
Man, of all which twenty Years ago appeared
against you. I thought you had
left the Country; nay, I thought you had
been long since dead. —In what Manner
did you know any Thing of this
young Man? Where did you meet with
him, unless you had kept some Correspondence
together. Do not deny this; 
for I promise you it will greatly raise your
Son in my Opinion, to find that he hath
such a Sense of filial Duty, as privately to
support his Father for so many Years.’ 
‘If your Honour will have Patience to
hear me,’ said Partridge, ‘I will tell you
all.’ —Being bid go on, he proceeded
thus: ‘When your Honour conceived that
Displeasure against me, it ended in my
Ruin soon after; for I lost my little 

School; and the Minister, thinking I suppose
it would be agreeable to your Honour,
turned me out from the Office of
Clerk; so that I had nothing to trust to
but the Barber's Shop, which, in a Country
Place like that, is a poor Livelihood; 
and when my Wife died, (for 'till that
Time I received a Pension of 12l. a
Year from an unknown Hand, which indeed
I believe was your Honour's own,
for no Body that ever I heard of doth
these Things besides) but as I was saying,
when she died, this Pension forsook
me; so that now as I owed two or three
small Debts, which began to be troublesome
to me, (particularly one *  which an
Attorney brought up by Law-charges
from 15s. to near 30l.) and as I found
all my usual Means of living had forsook
me, I packed up my little All as well as
I could, and went off. 

‘The first Place I came to was Salisbury,
where I got into the Service of a Gentleman
belonging to the Law, and one of
the best Gentlemen that ever I knew; 
for he was not only good to me, but I
I know a thousand good and charitable
Acts which he did while I staid with him; 
and I have known him often refuse Business
because it was paultry and oppressive.’ 
‘—You need not be so particular,’ said
Allworthy; ‘I know this Gentleman, and
a very worthy Man he is, and an Honour
to his Profession.’ —‘Well, Sir,’ continued
Partridge, ‘from hence I removed to
Lymmington, where I was above three Years
in the Service of another Lawyer, who was
likewise a very good Sort of a Man, and to
be sure one of the merriest Gentlemen in
England. Well, Sir, at the End of the
three Years I set up a little School, and
was likely to do well again, had it not
been for a most unlucky Accident. Here
I kept a Pig; and one Day, as ill Fortune
would have it, this Pig broke out,
and did a Trespass I think they call it,
in a Garden belonging to one of my
Neighbours, who was a proud, revengeful
Man, and employed a Lawyer, one— 
one—I can't think of his Name; but 

he sent for a Writ against me, and had me
to Size. When I came there, Lord have
Mercy upon me—to hear what the Counsellor
said. There was one that told my
Lord a Parcel of the confoundedst Lies
about me; he said, that I used to drive
my Hogs into other Folks Gardens, and
a great deal more; and at last he said,
He hoped I had at last brought my Hogs
to a fair Market. To be sure, one wou'd
have thought, that instead of being Owner
only of one poor, little Pig, I had been
the greatest Hog-Merchant in England. 
Well’—‘Pray,’ said Allworthy, do not
be so particular. I have heard nothing of
your Son yet.’ ‘O it was a great many
Years,’ answered Partridge, ‘before I
saw my Son, as you are pleased to call
him—I went over to Ireland after this,
and taught School at Cork, (for that one
Suit ruined me again, and I lay seven
Years in Winchester Goal.)’ —‘Well,’ 
said Allworthy, ‘pass that over till your Return
to England.’ —‘Then, Sir,’ said
he, ‘it was about half a Year ago that I
landed at Bristol, where I stayed some
Time, and not finding it do there, and
hearing of a Place between that and
Gloucester, where the Barber was just
dead, I went thither, and there I had 

been about two Months, when Mr. Jones
came thither.’ He then gave Allworthy
a very particular Account of their first
Meeting, and of every Thing as well as
he could remember, which had happened
from that Day to this, frequently interlarding
his Story with Panegyricks on Jones,
and not forgetting to insinuate the great
Love and Respect which he had for Allworthy. 
He concluded with saying, ‘Now,
Sir, I have told your Honour the whole
Truth:’ And then repeated a most solemn
Protestation, ‘That he was no more the
Father of Jones than of the Pope of
Rome;’ and imprecated the most bitter
Curses on his Head if he did not speak
Truth. 
‘What am I to think of this Matter?’ 
cries Allworthy. ‘For what Purpose should
you so strongly deny a Fact, which I
think it would be rather your Interest to
own?’ —‘Nay, Sir,’ answered Partridge,
(for he could hold no longer) ‘if
your Honour will not believe me, you
are like soon to have Satisfaction enough. 
I wish you had mistaken the Mother of
this young Man, as well as you have his
Father.’ —And now being asked what 

he meant, with all the Symptoms of Horror
both in his Voice and Countenance,
he told Allworthy the whole Story, which
he had a little before expressed such Desire
to Mrs. Miller to conceal from him. 
Allworthy was almost as much shocked
at this Discovery as Partridge himself had
been while he related it. ‘Good Heavens!’ 
says he, ‘in what miserable Distresses do
Vice and Imprudence involve Men! How
much beyond our Designs are the Effects
of Wickedness sometimes carried!’ He had
scarce uttered these Words, when Mrs. Waters
came hastily and abruptly into the Room. 
Partridge no sooner saw her, than he cry'd,
‘Here, Sir, here is the very Woman herself. 
This is the unfortunate Mother of
Mr. Jones; I am sure she will acquit me
before your Honour.’ —Pray, Madam— 
Mrs. Waters, without paying any Regard
to what Partridge said, and almost
without taking any Notice of him, advanced
to Mr. Allworthy. ‘I believe, Sir, it
is so long since I had the Honour of seeing
you, that you do not recollect me.’ — 
‘Indeed,’ answered Allworthy, ‘you are so
very much altered, on many Accounts, 

that had not this Man already acquainted
me who you are, I should not have immediately
called you to my Remembrance. 
Have you, Madam, any particular Business
which brings you to me?’ —Allworthy
spoke this with great Reserve; for
the Reader may easily believe he was not
well pleased with the Conduct of this Lady; 
neither with what he had formerly heard,
nor with what Partridge had now delivered. 
Mrs. Waters answered,—‘Indeed, Sir,
I have very particular Business with you; 
and it is such as I can only impart to
yourself. —I must desire therefore the Favour
of a Word with you alone; for I
assure you what I have to tell you is of
the utmost Importance.’ 
Partridge was then ordered to withdraw,
but before he went, he begged the Lady to
satisfy Mr. Allworthy that he was perfectly
innocent. To which she answered—‘You
need be under no Apprehension, Sir, I
shall satisfy Mr. Allworthy very perfectly
of that Master.’ 

Then Partridge withdrew, and that past
between Mr. Allworthy and Mrs. Waters
which is written in the next Chapter. 



Continuation of the History. 
Mrs. Waters remaining a few Moments
silent, Mr. Allworthy could
not refrain from saying, ‘I am sorry,
Madam, to perceive by what i have since
heard, that you have made so very ill a
Use—’ ‘Mr. Allworthy,’ says she, interrupting
him, ‘I know I have Faults, but Ingratitude
to you is not one of them. I
never can nor shall forget your Goodness,
which I own I have very little deserved; 
but be pleased to wave all Upbraiding me
at present, as I have so important an
Affair to communicate to you concerning
this young Man, to whom you have given
my Maiden Name of Jones.’ ‘Have I
then,’ said Allworthy, ‘ignorantly punished
an innocent Man in the Person of him
who hath just left us? was he not the
Father of the Child?’ —‘Indeed he was
not,’ said Mrs. Waters. ‘You may be 

pleased to remember, Sir, I formerly
told you, you should one Day know; and
I acknowledge myself to have been guilty
of a cruel Neglect, in not having discovered
it to you before. —Indeed I little knew how
necessary it was.’ —‘Well, Madam,’ 
said Allworthy, ‘be pleased to proceed.’ ‘You
must remember, Sir,’ said she, ‘a young
Fellow, whose Name was Summer.’ ‘Very
well,’ cries Allworthy, ‘he was the Son
of a Clergyman of great Learning and Virtue,
for whom I had the highest Friendship.’ 
‘So it appeared, Sir,’ answered
she; ‘for I believe you bred the young
Man up, and maintained him at the University; 
where, I think, he had finished
his Studies, when he came to reside
at your House; a finer Man, I must say,
the Sun never shone upon; for, besides
the handsomest Person I ever saw, he was
so genteel, and had so much Wit and good
Breeding.’ ‘Poor Gentleman,’ said Allworthy,
‘he was indeed untimely snatch'd away; 
and little did I think he had any Sins of
this kind to answer for; for I plainly perceive,
you are going to tell me he was the
Father of your Child.’ ‘Indeed, Sir,’ 
answered she, ‘he was not.’ ‘How?’ said
Allworthy, ‘to what then tends all this Preface?’ 
‘To a Story, Sir,’ said she, ‘which 

I am concerned it falls to my Lot
to unfold to you. —O, Sir, prepare
to hear something which will surprize
you, will grieve you.’ ‘Speak,’ said
Allworthy, ‘I am conscious of no Crime,
and cannot be afraid to hear.’ — 
‘Sir,’ said she, ‘that Mr. Summer, the Son
of your Friend, educated at your Expence,
who, after living a Year in the
House as if he had been your own Son,
died there of the small Pox, was tenderly
lamented by you, and buried as if he had
been your own; that Summer, Sir, was
the Father of this Child.’ —‘How!’ said
Allworthy, ‘you contradict yourself.’ — 
‘That I do not,’ answered she, ‘he was
indeed the Father of this Child, but not
by me.’ ‘Take care, Madam,’ said
Allworthy, ‘do not to shun the Imputation
of any Crime be guilty of Falsehood. 
Remember there is one from whom
you can conceal nothing, and before whose
Tribunal Falsehood will only aggravate
your Guilt.’ ‘Indeed, Sir,’ says she,
I am not his Mother; nor would I now
think myself so for the World.’ ‘I know
your Reason,’ said Allworthy, ‘and shall
rejoice as much as you to find it otherwise,
yet you must remember, you yourself 

confessed it before me.’ —‘So far what I
confest,’ said she, ‘was true, that these
Hands conveyed the Infant to your Bed,
conveyed it thither at the Command of
its Mother; at her Commands I afterwards
owned it, and thought myself by
her Generosity nobly rewarded, both for
my Secrecy and my Shame,’ ‘Who
could this Woman be?’ said Allworthy. — 
‘Indeed I tremble to name her,’ answered
Mrs. Waters. ‘By all this Preparation
I am to guess that she was a Relation of
mine,’ cried he. ‘Indeed she was a near one.’ At which Words Allworthy started,
and she continued. —‘You had a Sister,
Sir.’ —‘A Sister!’ repeated he, looking
aghast. —‘As there is Truth in
Heaven,’ cries she, ‘your Sister was
the Mother of that Child you found between
your Sheets.’ ‘Can it be possible,’ 
cries he, ‘good Heavens!’ ‘Have Patience,
Sir,’ said Mrs. Waters, ‘and I
will unfold to you the whole Story. Just
after your Departure for London, Miss
Bridget came one Day to the House of
my Mother. She was pleased to say she
had heard an extraordinary Character of
me for my Learning and superior Understanding
to all the young Women
there, so she was pleased to say. She 

then bid me come to her to the great
House; where when I attended, she employed
me to read to her. She expressed
great Satisfaction in my reading, shewed
great Kindness to me, and made me many
Presents. At last she began to catechise
me on the Subject of Secrecy, to which I
gave her such satisfactory Answers, that
at last having locked the Door of her
Room, she took me into her Closet, and
then locking that Door likewise, she said,
she should convince me of the vast Reliance
she had on my Integrity, by communicating
a Secret in which her Honour
and consequently her Life was concerned. 
She then stopt, and after a Silence of a
Minute, during which she often wiped her
Eyes, she enquired of me, if I thought
my Mother might safely be confided in. 
I answered, I would stake my Life on
her Fidelity. She then imparted to me
the great Secret which laboured in her
Breast, and which, I believe, was delivered
with more Pains than she afterwards
suffered in Child-birth. It was then contrived,
that my Mother and myself only
should attend at the Time, and that Mrs.
Wilkins should be sent out of the way,
as she accordingly was to the very furthest
Part of Dorsetshire to enquire the Character 

of a Servant; for the Lady had
turned away her own Maid near three
Months before, during all which Time
I officiated about her Person, upon Trial
as she said, tho', as she afterwards declared,
I was not sufficiently handy for the Place. 
This and many other such Things which
she used to say of me, were all thrown
out to prevent any Suspicion which Wilkins
might hereafter have when I was to
own the Child; for she thought it could
never be believed she would venture to
hurt a young Woman with whom she had
intrusted such a Secret. You may be assured,
Sir, I was well paid for all these
Affronts, which, together with being informed
of the Occasion of them, very
well contented me. Indeed the Lady had
a greater Suspicion of Mrs. Wilkins than
of any other Person; not that she had the
least Aversion to the Gentlewoman, but
she thought her incapable of keeping a
Secret, especially from you, Sir: For I
have often heard Miss Bridget say, that, if
Mrs. Wilkins had committed a Murder,
she believed she would acquaint you with
it. At last the expected Day came, and
Mrs. Wilkins, who had been kept a
Week in Readiness, and put off from
Time to Time, upon some Pretence or
other, that she might not return too soon, 

was dispatched. Then the Child was born in
the Presence only of myself and my Mother,
and was by my Mother conveyed to her
own House, where it was privately kept
by her till the Evening of your Return,
when I, by the Command of Miss Bridget,
conveyed it into the Bed where you found
it.’ And all Suspicions were afterwards
‘laid asleep by the artful Conduct of your
Sister, in pretending Ill-will to the Boy,
and that any Regard she shew'd him was
out of meer Complaisance to you.’ Mrs.
Waters then made many Protestations of
the Truth of this Story, and concluded
by saying, ‘Thus, Sir, you have at last
discovered your Nephew, for so I am sure
you will hereafter think him, and I question
not but he will be both an Honour and a
Comfort to you under that Appellation.’ 
‘I need not, Madam,’ said Allworthy,
‘express my Astonishment at what you
have told me; and yet surely you would
not, and could not, have put together
so many Circumstances to evidence an
Untruth. I confess, I recollect some Passages
relating to that Summer, which formerly
gave me a Conceit that my Sister
had some Liking to him. I mentioned
it to her: For I had such a Regard to the
young Man, as well on his own account,
as on his Father's, that I should have 

willingly consented to a Match between
them; but she exprest the highest Disdain
of my unkind Suspicion, as she called it,
so that I never more spoke on the Subject. 
Good Heaven! well, the Lord disposeth
all Things. —Yet sure it was a most unjustifiable
Conduct in my Sister to carry
this Secret with her out of the World.’ 
‘I promise you, Sir,’ said Mrs. Waters,
‘she always profest a contrary Intention, and
frequently told me she intended one Day to
communicate it to you. She said indeed,
she was highly rejoiced that her Plot had
succeeded so well, and that you had of
your own accord taken such a Fancy to
the Child, that it was yet unnecessary to
make any express Declaration. Oh! Sir,
had that Lady lived to have seen this poor
young Man turned like a Vagabond from
your House; nay, Sir, could she have
lived to hear that you had yourself employed
a Lawyer to prosecute him for a
Murder of which he was not guilty— 
Forgive me, Mr.Allworthy, I must say
it was unkind. —Indeed you have been
abused, he never deserved it of you.’ 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ said Allworthy, ‘I
have been abused by the Person whoever
he was that told you so.’ ‘Nay,
Sir,’ said she, ‘I would not be mistaken,
I did not presume to say you were guilty 

of any wrong. The Gentleman who
came to me, proposed no such Matter: 
He only said, taking me for Mr. Fitzpatrick's
Wife, that if Mr. Jones had
murdered my Husband, I should be assisted
with any Money I wanted to carry
on the Prosecution, by a very worthy
Gentleman, who, he said, was well apprized
what a Villain I had to deal with. It
was by this Man I found out who Mr.
Jones was; and this Man, whose Name
is Dowling, Mr. Jones tells me, is your
Steward. I discovered his Name by a
very odd Accident, for he himself
refused to tell it me; but Partridge, who
met him at my Lodgings the second Time
he came, knew him formerly at Salisbury.’ 
‘And did this Mr. Dowling, says Allworthy,
with great Astonishment in his
Countenance, tell you that I would assist
in the Prosecution?’ —‘No, Sir, answered
she, I will not charge him wrongfully. 
He said, I should be assisted, but
he mentioned no Name. —Yet you must
pardon me, Sir, if from Circumstances I
thought it could be no other.’ —‘Indeed,
Madam, says Allworthy, from Circumstances
I am too well convinced it 

was another. —Good Heaven, by what
wonderful Means is the blackest and deepest
Villany sometimes discovered! —Shall
I beg you, Madam, to stay till the Person
you have mentioned comes, for I expect
him every Minute; nay, he may be
perhaps already in the House.’ Allworthy
then stept to the Door, in order to
call a Servant, when in came, not Mr.
Dowling, but the Gentleman who will be
seen in the next Chapter. 



Further Continuation. 
The Gentleman who now arrived was
no other than Mr. Western. He no
sooner saw Allworthy, than without considering
in the least the Presence of Mrs.
Waters, he began to vociferate in the following
Manner. ‘Fine Doings at my
House! A rare Kettle of Fish I have discovered
at last; who the Devil would be
plagued with a Daughter?’ ‘What's the
Matter, Neighbour, said Allworthy,’ 
‘Matter enough, answered Western, when
I thought she was a just coming to, nay, 

when she had in a Manner promised me
to do as I would ha her, and when I was
a hoped to have had nothing more to do
than to have a sent for the Lawyer and
finished all. What do you think I have
found out? that the little B&wblank; hath
bin playing Tricks with me all the while,
and carrying on a Correspondence with
that Bastard of yours. Sister Western,
whom I have a quarrelled with upon her
Account, sent me Word o't, and I ordered
her Pockets to be searched when
she was asleep, and here I have got unsigned
with the Son of a Whore's own
Name. I have not had Patience to read
half o't, for 'tis longer than one of Parson
Supple'sSermons; but I find plainly
it is all about Love, and indeed what
should it be else? I have packed her
up in Chamber again, and To-morrow
Morning down she goes into the Country,
unless she consents to be married directly,
and there she shall live in a Garret
upon Bread and Water all her Days; 
and the sooner such a B&wblank; breaks her
Heart the better, though d&wblank;n her, that I
believe is too tough. She will live long
enough to plague me.’ ‘Mr. Western,
answered Allworthy, you know I have always
protested against Force, and you 

yourself consented that none should be
used.’ ‘Ay, cries he, that was only
upon Condition that she would consent
without. What the Devil and Doctor
Faustus, shan't I do what I will with my
own Daughter, especially when I desire
nothing but her own Good?’ ‘Well,
Neighbour, answered Allworthy, if you
will give me Leave, I will undertake
once to argue with the young Lady.’ 
Will you, said Western, why that is kind
now and neighbourly, and mayhap
you will do more than I have been able
to do with her; for I promise you she
hath a very good Opinion of you.’ 
‘Well, Sir, said Allworthy, if you will go
Home and release the young Lady from
her Captivity, I will wait upon her within
this half Hour.’ —‘But suppose,
said Western, she should run away with
un in the mean Time? for Lawyer Dowling
tells me there is no Hopes of hanging
the Fellow at last, for that the Man
is alive, and like to do well, and that he
thinks Jones will be out of Prison again
presently.’ —‘How, said Allworthy,
what did you employ him then to enquire
or to do any Thing in that Matter?’ 
‘Not I, answered Western, he mentioned
it to me just now of his own Accord.’ — 

‘Just now! cries Allworthy, why where
did you see him then? I want much to
see Mr. Dowling.’ —‘Why you may see
un an you will presently at my Lodgings; 
for there is to be a Meeting of Lawyers
there this Morning, about a Mortgage. 
—Icod! I shall lose two or dree Thousand
Pounds, I believe, by that honest
Gentleman, Mr. Nightingale.’ —‘Well,
Sir, said Allworthy, I will be with you
within the half Hour.’ ‘And do for
once, cries the Squire, take a Fool's Advice; 
never think of dealing with her by
gentle Methods, take my Word for it,
those will never do. I have try'd um
long enough. She must be frightned into
it, there is no other Way. Tell her
I'm her Father, and of the horrid Sin of
Disobedience, and of the dreadful Punishment
of it in t'other World, and then
tell her about being lock'd up all her
Life in a Garret in this, and be kept only
upon Bread and Water.’ ‘I will do
all I can, said Allworthy, for I promise
you there is nothing I wish more than an
Alliance with this amiable Creature.’ 
‘Nay, the Girl is well enough for Matter
o' that, cries the Squire, a Man may
go farther and meet with worse Meat; 
that I may declare o' her, thof she be 

my own Daughter. And if she will but
be obedient to me, there is no'orow a Father
within a hundred Miles o' the Place
that loves a Daughter better than I do; 
but I see you are busy with the Lady
here, so I will go Huome and expect
you, and so your humble Servant.’ 
As soon as Mr. Western was gone, Mrs.
Waters said, ‘I see, Sir, the Squire hath not
the least Remembrance of my Face. I believe,
Mr. Allworthy, you would not have
known me neither. I am very considerably
altered since that Day when you so
kindly gave me that Advice, which I had
been happy had I followed.’ —‘Indeed,
Madam, cries Allworthy, it gave me great
Concern when I first heard the contrary.’ 
‘Indeed, Sir, says she, I was ruined by
a very deep Scheme of Villany, which if
you knew, though I pretend not to think
it would justify me in your Opinion, it
would at least mitigate my Offence, and
induce you to pity me; you are not now
at Leisure to hear my whole Story; but
this I assure you, I was betrayed by the
most solemn Promises of Marriage; nay
in the Eye of Heaven I was married to
him; for after much reading on the Subject,
I am convinced that particular Ceremonies 

are only requisite to give a legal
Sanction to Marriage, and have only
a worldly Use in giving a Woman the
Privileges of a Wife; but that she who
lives constant to one Man, after a solemn
private Affiance, whatever the World
may call her, hath little to charge on her
own Conscience.’ ‘I am sorry, Madam,
said Allworthy, you made so ill an Use of
your Learning. Indeed it would have
been well that you had been possessed of
much more, or had remained in a State
of Ignorance. And yet, Madam, I am
afraid you have more than this Sin to answer
for. ‘During his Life, answered
she, which was above a Dozen Years, I
most solemnly assure you, I had not. And
consider, Sir, on my Behalf, what is in
the Power of a Woman stript of her Reputation,
and left destitute, whether the
good-natured World will suffer such a
stray Sheep to return to the Road of
Virtue, even if she was never so desirous. 
I protest then I would have chose it had
it been in my Power; but Necessity drove
me into the Arms of Capt. Waters, with
whom, though still unmarried, I lived as
a Wife for many Years, and went by
his Name. I parted with this Gentleman
at Worcester, on his March against 

the Rebels, and it was then I accidentally
met with Mr. Jones, who rescued me
from the Hands of a Villain. Indeed he
is the worthiest of Men. No young
Gentleman of his Age is, I believe, freer
from Vice, and few have the twentieth
Part of his Virtues; nay, whatever Vices
he hath had, I am firmly persuaded he
hath now taken a Resolution to abandon
them.’ I hope he hath, cries Allworthy,
‘and I hope he will preserve that Resolution. 
I must say I have still the same
Hopes with Regard to yourself. The
World, I do agree, are apt to be too
unmerciful on these Occasions, yet Time
and Perseverance will get the better of
this their Disinclination, as I may call it,
to Pity, for though they are not, like
Heaven, ready to receive a penitent Sinner,
yet a continued Repentance will at
length obtain Mercy even with the World. 
This you may be assured of, Mrs. Waters,
that whenever I find you are sincere in such
good Intentions, you shall want no Assistance
in my Power to make them effectual.’ 
Mrs. Waters fell now upon her Knees before
him, and, in a Flood of Tears, made
him many most passionate Acknowledgments 

of his Goodness, which, as she truly
said, favoured more of the divine than
human Nature. 
Allworthy raised her up, and spoke in the
most tender Manner, making use of every
Expression which his Invention could suggest
to comfort her, when he was interrupted
by the Arrival of Mr. Dowling, who,
upon his first Entrance, seeing Mrs. Waters,
started, and appeared in some Confusion; 
from which he soon recovered himself as well
as he could, and then said, he was in the utmost
Haste to attend Council at Mr. Western's
Lodgings; but however thought it
his Duty to call and acquaint him with the
Opinion of Council upon the Case which he
had before told him, which was that the
Conversion of the Moneys in that Case
could not be questioned in a Criminal Cause,
but that an Action of Trover might be
brought, and if it appeared to the Jury
to be the Moneys of Plaintiff, that Plaintiff
would recover a Verdict for the Value. 
Allworthy, without making any Answer
to this, bolted the Door, and then advancing
with a stern Look to Dowling, he said,
‘Whatever be your Haste, Sir, I must first
receive an Answer to some Questions. 

Do you know this young Lady?’ — 
‘That Lady, Sir? answered Dowling with
great Hesitation.’ Allworthy then, with
the most solemn Voice, said, ‘Look you,
Mr. Dowling, as you value my Favour,
or your Continuance a Moment longer in
my Service, do not hesitate nor prevaricate; 
but answer faithfully and truly to
every Question I ask. —Do you know
this Lady?’ —‘Yes, Sir, said Dowling,
I have seen the Lady.’ ‘Where, Sir? 
At her own Lodgings.’ —‘Upon what
Business did you go thither, Sir, and who
sent you?’ ‘I went, Sir, to enquire, Sir,
about Mr. Jones.’ ‘And who sent you to
enquire about him?’ ‘Who, Sir, why, Sir,
Mr. Blifil sent me.’ ‘And what did you say
to the Lady concerning that Matter?’ 
‘Nay, Sir, it is impossible to recollect every
Word.’ ‘Will you please, Madam, to
assist the Gentleman's Memory?’ ‘He
told me, Sir, said Mrs. Waters, that if
Mr. Jones had murdered my Husband, I
should be assisted by any Money I wanted
to carry on the Prosecution, by a very
worthy Gentleman, who was well apprized
what a Villain I had to deal with.’ 
‘These I can safely swear were the very
Words he spoke.’ —‘Were these the
Words, Sir, said Allworthy?’ ‘I cannot 

charge my Memory exactly, cries Dowling,
but I believe I did speak to that
Purpose.’ —‘And did Mr. Blifil order you
to say so?’ ‘I am sure, Sir, I should not
have gone on my own Accord, nor have
willingly exceeded my Authority in Matters
of this Kind. If I said so, I must
have so understood Mr. Blifil's Instructions.’ 
‘Look you, Mr. Dowling, said Allworthy,
I promise you before this Lady,
that whatever you have done in this Affair
by Mr. Blifil's Order, I will forgive,
provided you now tell me strictly the
Truth; for I believe what you say, that
you would not have acted of your own
Accord, and without Authority, in this
Matter. —Mr. Blifil then likewise sent
you to examine the two Fellows at Aldersgate?’ 
—‘He did, Sir,’—‘Well,
and what Instructions did he then give
you? Recollect as well as you can, and
tell me, as near as possible, the very
Words he used.’ —‘Why, Sir, Mr.
Blifil sent me to find out the Persons who
were Eye-Witnesses of this Fight. He
said, he feared they might be tampered
with by Mr. Jones, or some of his Friends. 
He said, Blood required Blood; and that
not only all who concealed a Murderer,
but those who omitted any Thing in their 

Power to bring him to Justice, were Sharers
in his Guilt. He said, he found you was
very desirous of having the Villain brought
to Justice, though it was not proper you
should appear in it.’ —‘He did so? says
Allworthy.’ —‘Yes, Sir, cries Dowling,
I should not, I am sure, have proceeded
such Lengths for the Sake of any other
Person living but your Worship.’ — 
‘What Lengths, Sir, said Allworthy.’ — 
‘Nay, Sir, cries Dowling, I would not
have your Worship think I would, on any
Account, be guilty of Subordination
of Perjury; but there are two Ways of
delivering Evidence. I told them therefore
that if any Offers should be made them
on the other Side, they should refuse them,
and that they might be assured they should
lose nothing by being honest Men, and
telling the Truth. I said, we were told,
that Mr. Jones had assaulted the Gentleman
first, and that if that was the Truth,
they should declare it; and I did give
them some Hints that they should be no
Losers.’ —‘I think you went Lengths indeed,
cries Allworthy.’ —‘Nay, Sir, answered
Dowling, I am sure I did not desire
them to tell an Untruth,—nor
should I have said what I did, unless it
had been to oblige you.’ —‘You would 

not have thought, I believe, says Allworthy,
to have obliged me, had you known
that this Mr. Jones was my own Nephew.’ 
‘—I am sure, Sir, answered he, it did not
become me to take any Notice of what I
thought you desired to conceal.’ —‘How,
cries Allworthy, and did you know it
then?’ —‘Nay, Sir, answered Dowling,
if your Worship bids me speak the Truth,
I am sure I shall do it. —Indeed, Sir, I
did know it; for they were almost the
last Words which Madam Blifil ever
spoke, which she mentioned to me as I
stood alone by her Bedside, when she delivered
me the Letter I brought your
Worship from her.’ —‘What Letter,
cries Allworthy?’ —‘The Letter, Sir,
answered Dowling, which I brought from
Salisbury, and which I delivered into the
Hands of Mr. Blifil.’ —‘O Heavens!
cries Allworthy, well, and what were the
Words? What did my Sister say to you?’ 
‘—She took me by the Hand, answered
he, and as she delivered me the Letter,
said, I scarce know what I have written. 
Tell my Brother, Mr. Jones is his Nephew
—He is my Son—Bless him, says
she, and then fell backward, as if dying
away. I presently called in the People,
and she never spoke more to me, and 

dy'd within a few Minutes afterwards.’ 
—Allworthy stood a Minute silent, lifting
up his Eyes, and then turning to Dowling,
said,—‘How came you, Sir, not to deliver
me this Message?’ ‘Your Worship,
answered he, must remember that
you was at that Time ill in Bed; and being
in a violent Hurry, as indeed I always
am, I delivered the Letter and Message
to Mr. Blifil, who told me he would
carry them both to you, which he hath
since told me he did, and that your Worship,
partly out of Friendship to Mr. Jones,
and partly out of Regard to your Sister,
would never have it mentioned; and did
intend to conceal it from the World; 
and therefore, Sir, if you had not mentioned
it to me first, I am certain I should
never have thought it belonged to me to
say any Thing of the Matter, either to
your Worship, or any other Person.’ 
We have remarked somewhere already,
that it is possible for a Man to convey a Lie
in the Words of Truth; this was the Case
at present: For Blifil had in Fact told Dowling
what he now related; but had not imposed
upon him, nor indeed had imagined
that he was able so to do. In Reality; the
Promises which Blifil had made to Dowling,
were the Motives which had induced him 

to Secrecy; and as he very plainly saw he
should not be able to keep them, he thought
proper now to make this Confession, which
the Promises of Forgiveness, joined to the
Threats, the Voice, the Looks of Allworthy,
and the Discoveries he had made before,
extorted from him, who was besides
taken unawares, and had no Time to consider
of Evasions. 
Allworthy appeared well satisfied with this
Relation, and having enjoined strict Silence
as to what had past on Dowling, conducted
that Gentleman himself to the Door, lest
he should see Blifil, who was returned to
his Chamber, where he exulted in the
Thoughts of his last Deceit on his Uncle,
and little suspected what had since passed below
Stairs. 
As Allworthy was returning to his Room,
he met Mrs. Miller in the Entry, who with
a Face all pale and full of Terror, said to
him, ‘O! Sir, I find this wicked Woman
hath been with you, and you know all; 
yet do not on this Account abandon the
poor young Man. Consider, Sir, he was
ignorant it was his own Mother, and the
Discovery itself will most probably break
his Heart, without your Unkindness.’ 

‘Madam, says Allworthy, I am under such
an Astonishment at what I have heard,
that I am really unable to satisfy you; 
but come with me into my Room. Indeed,
Mrs. Miller, I have made surprising
Discoveries, and you shall soon know
them.’ 
The poor Woman followed him trembling; 
and now Allworthy going up to
Mrs. Waters, took her by the Hand, and
then turning to Mrs. Miller said, ‘What
Reward shall I bestow upon this Gentlewoman
for the Services she hath done
me? —O! Mrs. Miller, you have a Thousand
Times heard me call the young Man
to whom you are so faithful a Friend,
my Son. Little did I then think he was
indeed related to me at all. —Your
Friend, Madam, is my Nephew, he is
the Brother of that wicked Viper
which I have so long nourished in my
Bosom. —She will herself tell you the
whole Story, and how the Youth came
to pass for her Son. Indeed, Mrs. Miller,
I am convinced that he hath been wronged,
and that I have been abused, abused
by one whom you too justly suspected of
being a Villain. He is, in Truth, the worst
of Villains.’ 

The Joy which Mrs. Miller now felt,
bereft her of the Power of Speech, and
might perhaps have deprived her of her
Senses, if not of Life, had not a friendly
Shower of Tears come seasonably to her
Relief. At length recovering so far from
her Transport as to be able to speak, she
cry'd, ‘And is my dear Mr. Jones then
your Nephew, Sir? and not the Son of
this Lady? and are your Eyes opened
to him at last? and shall I live
to see him as happy as he deserves?’ ‘He
certainly is my Nephew, says Allworthy,
and I hope all the rest.’ —‘And is this the
dear, good Woman, the Person, cries
she, to whom all this Discovery is owing!’ 
‘—She is indeed, says Allworthy.’ —‘Why
then, cry'd Mrs. Miller, upon her Knees,
may Heaven shower down its choicest
Blessings upon her Head, and for this one
good Action, forgive her all her Sins be
they never so many.’ 
Mrs. Waters then informed them, that
she believed Jones would very shortly be
released; for that the Surgeon was gone, in
Company with a Nobleman, to the Justice
who committed him, in order to certify
that Mr. Fitzpatrick was out of all Manner 

of Danger, and to procure the Prisoner
his Liberty. 
Allworthy said, he should be glad to find
his Nephew there at his Return home; but
that he was then obliged to go on some
Business of Consequence. He then called
to a Servant to fetch him a Chair, and presently
left the two Ladies together. 
Mr. Blifil hearing the Chair ordered, came
down Stairs to attend upon his Uncle, for
he never was deficient in such Acts of Duty. 
He asked his Uncle if he was going
out, which is a civil Way of asking a Man
where he is going; to which the other making
no Answer, he again desired to know
when he would be pleased to return. — 
Allworthy made no Answer to this neither,
till he was just getting into his Chair, and
then turning about he said—‘Harkee,
Sir, do you find out, before my Return,
the Letter which your Mother sent me on
her Death-bed.’ Allworthy then departed,
and left Blifil in a Situation to be envied
only by a Man who is just going to
be hanged. 




A further Continuation. 
Allworthy took an Opportunity whilst
he was in the Chair of reading the
Letter from Jones to Sophia, which Western
delivered him; and there were some Expressions
in it concerning himself, which
drew Tears from his Eyes. At length he
arrived at Mr. Western's, and was introduced
to Sophia. 
When the first Ceremonies were past, and
the Gentleman and Lady had taken their
Chairs, a Silence of some Minutes ensued; 
during which, the latter, who had been
prepared for the Visit by her Father, sat
playing with her Fan, and had every Mark
of Confusion both in her Countenance and
Behaviour. At length Allworthy, who was
himself a little disconcerted, began thus; 
‘I am afraid, Miss Western, my Family
hath been the occasion of giving you
some Uneasiness; to which, I fear, I have
innocently become more instrumental than
I intended. Be assured, Madam, had I at
first known how disagreeable the Proposals 

had been, I should not have suffered you
to have been so long persecuted. I hope
therefore you will not think the Design of
this Visit is to trouble you with any further
Solicitations of that kind, but entirely to
relieve you from them.’ 
‘Sir,’ said Sophia, with a little modest
Hesitation, ‘this Behaviour is most kind
and generous, and such as I could expect
only from Mr. Allworthy: But as
you have been so kind to mention this
Matter, you will pardon me for saying,
it hath indeed given me great Uneasiness,
and hath been the occasion of my suffering
much cruel Treatment from a Father,
who was, 'till that unhappy Affair, the
tenderest and fondest of all Parents. I am
convinced, Sir, you are too good and
generous to resent my Refusal of your
Nephew. Our own Inclinations are not
in our Power; and whatever may be his
Merit, I cannot force them in his Favour.’ 
‘I assure you, most amiable
young Lady,’ said Allworthy, ‘I am capable
of no such Resentment, had the
Person been my own Son, and had I entertain'd
the highest Esteem for him. 
For you say truly, Madam, we cannot
force our own Inclinations, much less can
they be directed by another.’ ‘Oh! Sir,’ 

answered Sophia, ‘every Word you speak
proves you to deserve that good, that
great, that benevolent Character the whole
World allows you. I assure you, Sir,
nothing less than the certain Prospect of
future Misery could have made me resist
the Commands of my Father.’ ‘I sincerely
believe you, Madam,’ replied Allworthy,
‘and I heartily congratulate you on
your prudent Foresight, since by so justifiable
a Resistance you have avoided Misery
indeed.’ ‘You speak now, Mr.
Allworthy,’ cries she, ‘with a Delicacy
which few Men are capable of feeling; 
but surely in my Opinion, to lead our
Lives with one to whom we are indifferent,
must be a State of Wretchedness—Perhaps
that Wretchedness would be even increased
by a Sense of the Merits of an Object
to whom we cannot give our Affections. If
I had married Mr. Blifil—‘Pardon my
interrupting you, Madam,’ answered Allworthy,
‘but I cannot bear the Supposition. 
—Believe me, Miss Western, I rejoice
from my Heart, I rejoice in your
Escape. —I have discovered the Wretch,
for whom you have suffered all this cruel
Violence from your Father, to be a Villain.’ 
‘How, Sir!’ cries Sophia,—‘you must believe 

this surprises me.’ —‘It hath surprised
me, Madam,’ answered Allworthy,
‘and so it will the World. —But I have
acquainted you with the real Truth.’ 
‘Nothing but Truth,’ says Sophia, ‘can,
I am convinced, come from the Lips of
Mr. Allworthy. —Yet, Sir, such sudden,
such unexpected News—Discovered, you
say—may Villany be ever so.’ —‘You
will soon enough hear the Story,’ cries
Allworthy,—‘at present let us not mention
so detested a Name—I have another Matter
of a very serious Nature to propose. — 
O! Miss Western, I know your vast Worth,
nor can I so easily part with the Ambition
of being allied to it. —I have a near
Relation, Madam, a young Man whose
Character is, I am convinced, the very
opposite to that of this Wretch, and
whose Fortune I will make equal to what
his was to have been. —Could I, Madam,
hope you would admit a Visit from him?’ 
Sophia, after a Minute's Silence, answered,
‘I will deal with the utmost Sincerity with
Mr. Allworthy. His Character, and the
Obligation I have just received from him
demand it. I have determined at present
to listen to no such Proposals from any
Person. My only Desire is to be restor'd
to the Affection of my Father, and to 

be again the Mistress of his Family. This,
Sir, I hope to owe to your good Offices. 
Let me beseech you, let me conjure
you by all the Goodness which I, and
all who know you, have experienced; 
do not the very Moment when you have
released me from one Persecution, do not
engage me in another, as miserable and
as fruitless.’ ‘Indeed, Miss Western,’ 
replied Allworthy, ‘I am capable of no
such Conduct; and if this be your Resolution,
he must submit to the Disappointment,
whatever Torments he may
suffer under it.’ ‘I must smile now,
Mr. Allworthy,’ answered Sophia, ‘when
you mention the Torments of a Man
whom I do not know, and who can consequently
have so little Acquaintance with
me.’ ‘Pardon me, dear young Lady,’ 
cries Allworthy, ‘I begin now to be afraid
he hath had too much Acquaintance for
the Repose of his future Days; since, if
ever Man was capable of a sincere, violent
and noble Passion, such, I am convinced,
is my unhappy Nephew's for Miss
Western.’ ‘A Nephew of yours! Mr.
Allworthy,’ answered Sophia. It is surely
strange, I never heard of him before.’ 
‘Indeed! Madam,’ cries Allworthy, ‘it is
only the Circumstance of his being my Nephew 

to which you are a Stranger, and
which, 'till this Day, was a Secret to
me.’ —Mr. Jones, who has long loved
you, he! he is my Nephew.’ —‘Mr.
Jones your Nephew, Sir?’ cries Sophia,
‘Can it be possible?’ —‘He is indeed,
Madam, answered Allworthy: He is my
own Sister's Son—as such I shall always
own him; nor am I ashamed of
owning him. I am much more ashamed
of my past Behaviour to him; but I was
as ignorant of his Merit as of his Birth. 
Indeed, Miss Western, I have used him
cruelly—Indeed I have.’ —Here the
good Man wiped his Eyes, and after a short
Pause proceeded—‘I never shall be able
to reward him for his Sufferings without
your Assistance. —Believe me, most amiable
young Lady, I must have a great
Esteem of that Offering which I make
to your Worth. I know he hath been
guilty of Faults: but there is great Goodness
of Heart at the Bottom. Believe
me, Madam, there is.’ —Here he stopped,
seeming to expect an Answer, which
he presently received from Sophia, after
she had a little recovered herself from the
Hurry of Spirits into which so strange and
sudden Information had thrown her: ‘I
sincerely wish you Joy, Sir, of a Discovery
in which you seem to have 

such Satisfaction. I doubt not but
you will have all the Comfort you
can promise yourself from it. The
young Gentleman hath certainly a thousand
good Qualities, which makes it
impossible he should not behave well to
such an Uncle.’ —‘I hope, Madam,’ 
said Allworthy, ‘he hath those good Qualities
which must make him a good Husband. 
—He must, I am sure, be of all
Men the most abandoned, if a Lady of
your Merit should condescend’—‘You
must pardon me, Mr. Allworthy,’ answered
Sophia, ‘I cannot listen to a Proposal
of this Kind. Mr. Jones, I am convinced,
hath much Merit; but I shall
never receive Mr. Jones as one who is to
be my Husband—Upon my Honour I
never will.’ —‘Pardon me, Madam,’ 
cries Allworthy, ‘if I am a little surpized
after what I have heard from Mr. Western
—I hope the unhappy young Man
hath done nothing to forfeit your good
Opinion, if he had ever the Honour to
enjoy it. —Perhaps he may have been misrepresented
to you, as he was to me. The
same Villainy may have injured him every
where. —He is no Murderer, I assure you
as he hath been called.’ —Mr. Allworthy,
answered Sophia, ‘I have told you my Resolution. 

I wonder not at what my Father
hath told you; but whatever his Apprehensions
or Fears have been, if I know
my Heart, I have given no Occasion for
them; since it hath always been a fixed
Principle with me, never to have marry'd
without his Consent. This is, I think,
the Duty of a Child to a Parent; and
this, I hope, nothing could ever have
prevailed with me to swerve from. I do
not indeed conceive, that the Authority
of any Parent can oblige us to marry, in
direct Opposition to our Inclinations. To
avoid a Force of this Kind, which I had
Reason to suspect, I left my Father's
House, and sought Protection elsewhere. 
This is the Truth of my Story; and if
the World, or my Father, carry my
Intentions any farther, my own Conscience
will acquit me.’ ‘I hear you,
Miss Western,’ cries Allworthy with Admiration. 
‘I admire the Justness of your
Sentiments; but surely there is more in this. 
I am cautious of offending you, young
Lady; but am I to look on all which
I have hitherto heard or seen, as a Dream
only? And have you suffered so much
Cruelty from your Father on the Account
of a Man to whom you have been
always absolutely indifferent?’ ‘I beg, 

Mr. Allworthy,’ answered Sophia, ‘you
will not insist on my Reasons;—Yes,
I have suffered indeed: I will not, Mr.
Allworthy, conceal—I will be very sincere
with you—I own I had a great
Opinion of Mr. Jones—I believe— 
I know I have suffered for my Opinion— 
—I have been treated cruelly by my
Aunt, as well as by my Father; but
that is now past—I beg I may not be
farther press'd; for whatever hath been,
my Resolution is now fixed. Your Nephew,
Sir, hath many Virtues—he
hath great Virtues, Mr. Allworthy. I
question not but he will do you Honour
in the World, and make you happy.’ — 
‘I wish I could make him so, Madam,’ 
replied Allworthy; ‘but that I am convinced
is only in your Power. It is that
Conviction which hath made me so earnest
a Solicitor in his Favour.’ ‘You are deceived; 
indeed, Sir, you are deceived,’ 
said Sophia—‘I hope not by him—It
is sufficient to have deceived me. Mr.
Allworthy, I must insist on being prest
no farther on this Subject. —I should
be sorry—Nay, I will not injure him
in your Favour. I wish Mr. Jones very
well. I sincerely wish him well; and I
repeat again to you, whatever Demerit 

he may have to me, I am certain he hath
many good Qualities. I do not disown
my former Thoughts; but nothing can
ever recall them. At present there is not a
Man on Earth whom I would more resolutely
reject than Mr. Jones; nor would
the Addresses of Mr. Blifil himself be less
agreeable to me.’ 
Western had been long impatient for the
Event of this Conference, and was just now
arrived at the Door to listen; when having
heard the last Sentiments of his Daughter's
Heart, he lost all Temper, and bursting
open the Door in a Rage, cried out,—‘It
is a Lie. It is a d&wblank;n'd Lie. It is all
owing to that d&wblank;n'd Rascal Juones; and
if she could get at un, she'd ha un any
Hour of the Day.’ Here Allworthy interposed,
and addressing himself to the
Squire with some Anger in his Look, he
said, ‘Mr. Western, you have not kept your
Word with me. You promised to abstain
from all Violence.’ —‘Why so I did,’ 
cries Western, ‘as long as it was possible; 
but to hear a Wench telling such confounded
Lies. —Zounds! Doth she
think if she can make Vools of other
Volk, she can make one of me? —No,
no, I know her better than thee dost.’ 

‘I am sorry to tell you, Sir,’ answered
Allworthy, ‘it doth not appear by your
Behaviour to this young Lady, that you
know her at all. I ask Pardon for what
I say; but I think our Intimacy, your
own Desires, and the Occasion justify
me. She is your Daughter, Mr. Western,
and I think she doth Honour to your
Name. If I was capable of Envy, I
should sooner envy you on this Account,
than any other Man whatever.’ —‘Od-rabbit-it,’ 
cries the Squire, ‘I wish she
was thine with all my Heart—wouldst
soon be glad to be rid of the Trouble o'
her.’ —‘Indeed, my good Friend,’ answered
Allworthy, ‘you yourself are the
Cause of all the Trouble you complain of. 
Place that Confidence in the young Lady
which she so well deserves, and I am certain
you will be the happiest Father on
Earth.’ —‘I Confidence in her!’ cries
the Squire. —‘Sblood!’ what Confidence
can I place in her, when she won't do as
I wou'd ha her? Let her gi but her Consent
to marry as I would ha her, and
I'll place as much Confidence in her as
wouldst ha me.’ —‘You have no
Right, Neighbour,’ answered Allworthy,
‘to insist on any such Consent. A negative
Voice your Daughter allows you, and 

God and Nature have thought proper to
allow you no more.’ ‘A negative
Voice?’ cries the Squire,— ‘Ay! ay!
I'll shew you what a negative Voice I
ha. —Go along, go into your Chamber,
go, you Stubborn’—‘Indeed, Mr.
Western,’ said Allworthy,—‘Indeed,
you use her cruelly—I cannot bear to
see this—You shall, you must behave
to her in a kinder Manner. She deserves
the best of Treatment.’ ‘Yes, yes,’ said
the Squire, ‘I know what she deserves:’ 
‘Now she's gone, I'll shew you what she
deserves—See here, Sir, here is a Letter
from my Cousin, my Lady Bellaston,
in which she is so kind to gi me to understand,
that the Fellow is got out of
Prison again; and here she advises me to
take all the Care I can o' the Wench. 
Odzookers! Neighbour Allworthy, you
don't know what it is to govern a Daughter.’ 
The Squire ended his Speech with some
Compliments to his own Sagacity; and
then Allworthy, after a formal Preface, acquainted
him with the whole Discovery
which he had made concerning Jones, with
his anger to Blifil, and with every Particular 

which hath been disclosed to the
Reader in the preceding Chapters. 
Men over-violent in their Dispositions,
are, for the most Part, as changeable in
them. No sooner then was Western informed
of Mr. Allworthy's Intention to make
Jones his Heir, than he joined heartily with
the Uncle in every Commendation of the
Nephew, and became as eager for her Marriage
with Jones, as he had before been to
couple her to Blifil. 
Here Mr. Allworthy was again forced to
interpose, and to relate what had passed between
him and Sophia, at which he testified
great Surprize. 
The Squire was silent a Moment, and
looked wild with Astonishment at this Account
—At last he cried out, ‘Why
what can be the Meaning of this, Neighbour
Allworthy? Vond o un she was,
that I'll be sworn to. —Odzookers!
I have hit o't. As sure as a Gun I have
hit o the very right o't. It's all along
o Zister. The Girl hath got a Hankering
after this Son of a Whore of a Lord. 
I vound 'em together at my Cousin, my
Lady Bellaston's. He hath turned the 

Head o' her that's certain—but d&wblank;n
me if he shall ha her—I'll ha no Lords
nor Courtiers in my Vamily.’ 
Allworthy now made a long Speech, in
which he repeated his Resolution to avoid
all violent Measures, and very earnestly recommended
gentle Methods to Mr. Western,
as those by which he might be assured
of succeeding best with his Daughter. He
then took his Leave, and returned back to
Mrs. Miller, but was forced to comply with
the earnest Entreaties of the Squire, in promising
to bring Mr. Jones to visit him that
Afternoon, ‘that he might,’ as he said,
‘make all Matters up with the young Gentleman.’ 
At Mr. Allworthy's Departure,
Western promised to follow his Advice in his
Behaviour to Sophia, saying, ‘I don't know
how 'tis, but d&wblank;n me, Allworthy, if
you don't make me always do just as you
please, and yet I have as good an Esteate
as you, and am in the Commission of the
Peace as well as yourself.’ 



Wherein the History begins to draw towards
a Conclusion. 
When Allworthy returned to his
Lodgings, he heard Mr. Jones was
just arrived before him. He hurried therefore
instantly into an empty Chamber, whither
he ordered Mr. Jones, to be brought to
him alone. 
It is impossible to conceive a more tender
or moving Scene, than the Meeting between
the Uncle and Nephew, (for Mrs. Waters,
as the Reader may well suppose, had at
her last Visit discovered to him the Secret
of his Birth). The first Agonies of
Joy which were felt on both Sides, are indeed
beyond my Power to describe: I shall
not therefore attempt it. After Allworthy
had raised Jones from his Feet, where he had
prostrated himself, and received him into his
Arms, ‘O my Child,’ he cried, ‘how have
I been to blame! How have I injured you! 
What Amends can I ever make you for
those unkind, those unjust Suspicions which
I have entertained; and for all the Sufferings,
they have occasioned to you?’ ‘Am I not
now made Amends?’ cries Jones, ‘Would
not my Sufferings, if they had been ten
Times greater, have been now richly repaid? 

O my dear Uncle! this Goodness,
this Tenderness overpowers, unmans, destroys
me. I cannot bear the Transports
which flow so fast upon me. To be again
restored to your Presence, to your Favour; 
to be once more thus kindly received by
my great, my noble, my generous Benefactor’ 
—‘Indeed, Child,’ cries Allworthy,
‘I have used you cruelly.’ — 
He then explained to him all the Treachery
of Blifil, and again repeated Expressions of
the utmost Concern, for having been induced
by that Treachery to use him so ill. ‘O talk
not so,’ answered Jones; ‘Indeed, Sir,
you have used me nobly. The wisest
Man might be deceived as you were, and,
under such a Deception, the best must
have acted just as you did. Your
Goodness displayed itself in the Midst of
your Anger, just as it then seemed. I owe
every thing to that Goodness of which I
have been most unworthy. Do not put
me on Self-accusation, by carrying your
generous Sentiments too far. Alas, Sir,
I have not been punished more than I
have deserved; and it shall be the whole
Business of my future Life to deserve that
Happiness you now bestow on me; for
believe me, my dear Uncle, my Punishment
hath not been thrown away upon 

me : Though I have been a great, I am
not a hardened Sinner; I thank Heaven I
have had Time to reflect on my past
Life, where, though I cannot charge myself
with any gross Villainy, yet I can discern
Follies and Vices too sufficient to repent
and to be ashamed of; Follies which
have been attended with dreadful Consequences
to myself, and have brought me
to the Brink of Destruction.’ ‘I am rejoiced,
my dear Child,’ answered Allworthy,
‘to hear you talk thus sensibly; for as
I am convinced Hypocrisy (good Heaven
how have I been imposed on by it in
others!) was never among your Faults,
so I can readily believe all you say. You
now see, Tom, to what Dangers Imprudence
alone may subject Virtue (for Virtue,
I am now convinced, you love in a great
Degree). Prudence is indeed the Duty
which we owe to ourselves; and if we will
be so much our own Enemies as to neglect
it, we are not to wonder if the World is
deficient in discharging their Duty to us; 
for when a Man lays the Foundation of his
own Ruin, others will, I am afraid, be
too apt to build upon it. You say, however,
you have seen your Errors; and
will reform them. I firmly believe you,
my dear Child; and therefore, from this 

Moment, you shall never more be reminded
of them by me. Remember them only
yourself so far, as for the future to teach
you the better to avoid them; but still remember,
for your Comfort, that there is
this great Difference between those Faults
which Candour may construe into Imprudence,
and those which can be deduced
from Villainy only. The former, perhaps,
are even more liable to subject a Man to
Ruin; but if he reform, his Character
will, at length, be totally retrieved; the
World, though not immediately, will, in
Time, be reconciled to him; and he may
reflect, not without some Mixture of Pleasure,
on the Dangers he hath escaped: But
Villainy, my Boy, when once discovered,
is irretrievable; the Stains which this
leaves behind, no Time will wash away. 
The Censures of Mankind will pursue the
Wretch, their Scorn will abash him in
Public, and if Shame drives him into Retirement,
he will go to it with all those Terrors
with which a weary Child, who is
afraid of Hobgoblins, retreats from Company
to go to Bed alone. Here his murdered
Conscience will haunt him. Repose,
like a false Friend, will fly from him. 
Where-ever he turns his Eyes, Horror
presents itself; if he looks backward, unavailable 

Repentance treads on his Heels; 
if forward, incurable Despair stares him in
the Face; till, like a condemned Prisoner,
confined in a Dungeon, he detests his present
Condition, and yet dreads the Consequence
of that Hour which is to relieve
him from it. Comfort yourself, I say, my
Child, that this is not your Case; and rejoice,
with Thankfulness to him who hath
suffered you to see your Errors, before
they have brought on you that Destruction
to which a Persistance in even those Errors
must have led you. You have deserted
them, and the Prospect now before
you is such, that Happiness seems in your
own Power.’ —At these Words Jones
fetched a deep Sigh; upon which, when
Allworthy remonstrated, he said, ‘Sir, I will
conceal nothing from you: I fear there is
one Consequence of my Vices I shall never
be able to retrieve. O my dear Uncle, I
have lost a Treasure.’ —‘You need say
no more,’ answered Allworthy; I will be
explicit with you; I know what you lament; 
I have seen the young Lady, and
have discoursed with her concerning you. 
This I must insist on, as an Earnest of
your Sincerity in all you have said, and of
the Stedfastness of your Resolution, that
you obey me in one Instance. To abide 

intirely by the Determination of the young
Lady, whether it shall be in your Favour,
or no. She hath already suffered enough
from Sollicitations which I hate to think
of; she shall owe no further Constraint
to my Family: I know her Father will
be as ready to torment her now on your
Account, as he hath formerly been on another; 
but I am determined she shall suffer
no more Confinement, no more Violence,
no more uneasy Hours.’ —‘O my dear
Uncle, answered Jones, lay, I beseech you,
some Command on me, in which I shall
have some Merit in Obedience. Believe
me, Sir, the only Instance in which I could
disobey you, would be to give an uneasy
Moment to my Sophia. No, Sir, if I am
so miserable to have incurred her Displeasure
beyond all Hope of Forgiveness,
that alone, with the dreadful Reflection of
causing her Misery, will be sufficient to
overpower me. To call Sophia mine is
the greatest, and now the only additional
Blessing which Heaven can bestow; but it
is a Blessing which I must owe to her
alone.’ ‘I will not flatter you, Child,’ 
cries Allworthy; ‘I fear your Case is desperate: 
I never saw stronger Marks of an
unalterable Resolution in any Person, than
appeared in her vehement Declarations 

against receiving your Addresses; for
which, perhaps, you can account better
than myself.’ —‘Oh, Sir! I can account
too well,’ answered Jones; ‘I have sinned
against her beyond all Hope of Pardon; 
and, guilty as I am, my Guilt unfortunately
appears to her in ten Times blacker than
the real Colours. O my dear Uncle, I
find my Follies are irretrievable; and all
your Goodness cannot save me from Perdition.’ 
A Servant now acquainted them, that Mr.
Western was below Stairs; for his Eagerness
to see Jones could not wait till the Afternoon. 
Upon which Jones, whose Eyes were full of
Tears, begged his Uncle to entertain Western
a few Minutes, till he a little recovered himself: 
To which the good Man consented,
and having ordered Mr. Western to be shewn
into a Parlour, went down to him. 
Mrs. Miller no sooner heard, that Jones
was alone (for she had not yet seen him since
his Release from Prison,) than she came eagerly
into the Room, and, advancing towards
Jones, wished him heartily Joy of his
new-found Uncle, and his happy Reconciliation; 
adding, I wish I could give you Joy
on another Account, my dear Child; but 

any thing so inexorable I never saw. Jones,
with some Appearance of Surprize, asked her,
what she meant. ‘Why then,’ says she, ‘I
have been with your young Lady, and have
explained all Matters to her, as they were
told me by my Son Nightingale. She
can have no longer any Doubt about the
Letter, that I am certain; for I told her
my Son Nightingale was ready to take his
Oath, if she pleased, that it was all his
own Invention, and the Letter of his inditing. 
I told her the very Reason of
sending the Letter ought to recommend
you to her the more, as it was all upon her
Account, and a plain Proof, that you was
resolved to quit all your Profligacy for the
future; that you had never been guilty of
a single Instance of Infidelity to her since
your seeing her in Town. I am afraid I
went too far there; but Heaven forgive
me: I hope your future Behaviour will be
my Justification. I am sure I have said all
I can; but all to no Purpose. She remains
inflexible. She says, she had forgiven
many Faults on account of Youth; 
but expressed such Detestation of the Character
of a Libertine, that she absolutely
silenced me. I often attempted to excuse
you; but the Justness of her Accusation
flew in my Face. Upon my Honour she 

is a lovely Woman, and one of the sweetest
and most sensible Creatures I ever saw. I
could have almost kissed her for one Expression
she made use of. It was a Sentiment
worthy of Seneca, or of a Bishop.’ “I
once fancied, Madam,’ said she, “I had
discovered great Goodness of Heart in Mr.
Jones; and for that I own I had a sincere
Esteem; but an entire Profligacy of Manners
will corrupt the best Heart in the
World; and all which a good-natured
Libertine can expect is, that we should
mix some Grains of Pity with our Contempt
and Abhorrence.” ‘She is an angelic
Creature, that is the Truth on't.’ — 
O Mrs. Miller, answered Jones, can I bear
to think I have lost such an Angel.’ — 
‘Lost! No,’ cries Mrs. Miller;’ I hope
you have not lost her yet. Resolve to
leave such vicious Courses, and you may
yet have Hopes: Nay, if she should remain
inexorable, there is another young
Lady, a sweet pretty young Lady, and a
swinging Fortune, who is absolutely dying
for Love of you. I heard of it this very
Morning, and I told it to Miss Western; 
nay, I went a little beyond the Truth
again; for I told her you had refused her; 
but indeed I knew you would refuse her. 
—And here I must give you a little 

Comfort: When I mentioned the young
Lady's Name, who is no other than the
pretty Widow Hunt, I thought she turned
pale; but when I said you had refused
her, I will be sworn her Face was all over
Scarlet in an Instant; and these were her
very Words,’ “I will not deny but
that I believe he has some Affection for
me.” 
Here the Conversation was interrupted by
the Arrival of Western, who could no longer
be kept out of the Room even by the Authority
of Allworthy himself; though this,
as we have often seen, had a wonderful
Power over him. 
Western immediately went up to Jones,
crying out, ‘My old Friend Tom, I am glad
to see thee with all my Heart. All past
must be forgotten. I could not intend
any Affront to thee, because, as Allworthy
here knows, nay, dost know it thyself, I
took thee for another Person; and where a
Body means no Harm, what signifies a
hasty Word or two; one Christian must
forget and forgive another.’ ‘I hope,
Sir, said Jones, I shall never forget the
many Obligations I have had to you; but
as for any Offence towards me, I declare I 

am an utter Stranger.’ —‘A't,’ says
Western,’ then give me thy Fist, a't as
hearty an honest Cock as any in the Kingdom. 
Come along with me; I'll carry
thee to thy Mistress this Moment.’ Here
Allworthy interposed; and the Squire being
unable to prevail either with the Uncle or
Nephew, was, after some Litigation, obliged
to consent to delay introducing Jones to Sophia
till the Afternoon; at which Time Allworthy,
as well in Compassion to Jones, as
in Compliance with the eager Desires of
Western, was prevailed upon to promise to
attend at the Tea-table. 
The Conversation which now ensued was
pleasant enough; and with which, had it
happened earlier in our History, we would
have entertained our Reader; but as we
have now Leisure only to attend to what is
very material, it shall suffice to say, that
Matters being intirely adjusted as to the
Afternoon-visit, Mr. Western again returned
home. 




The History draws nearer to a Conclusion. 
When Mr. Western was departed,
Jones began to inform Mr. Allworthy
and Mrs. Miller, that his Liberty
had been procured by two noble Lords,
who, together with two Surgeons, and a
Friend of Mr. Nightingale's, had attended
the Magistrate by whom he had been committed,
and by whom, on the Surgeons
Oaths that the wounded Person was out of
all Manner of Danger from this Wound,
he was discharged. 
One only of these Lords, he said, he had
ever seen before, and that no more than
once; but the other had greatly surprized
him, by asking his Pardon for an Offence
he had been guilty of towards him, occasioned,
he said, entirely by his Ignorance
who he was. 
Now the Reality of the Case with which
Jones was not acquainted till afterwards,
was this. The Lieutenant whom Lord
Fellamar had employed, according to the
Advice of Lady Bellaston, to press Jones, 

as a Vagabond, into the Sea Service, when
he came to report the Event which we
have before seen to his Lordship, spoke very
favourably of the Behaviour of Mr.
Jones on all Accounts, and strongly assured
that Lord, that he must have mistaken
the Person, for that Jones was certainly
a Gentleman, insomuch that his Lordship,
who was strictly a Man of Honour,
and would by no Means have been guilty
of an Action which the World in general
would have condemned, began to be much
concerned for the Advice which he had
taken. 
Within a Day or two after this, Lord
Fellamar happened to dine with the Irish
Peer, who, in a Conversation upon the
Duel, acquainted his Company with the
Character of Fitzpatrick; to which indeed
he did not do strict Justice, especially in
what related to his Lady. He said, she was
the most innocent, and most injured Woman
alive, and that from Compassion alone he
had undertaken her Cause. He then declared
an Intention of going the next Morning
to Fitzpatrick's Lodgings, in order to
prevail with him, if possibly, to consent to
a Separation from his Wife, who, the Peer
said, was in Apprehensions for her Life, if 

she should ever return to be under the Power
of her Husband. Lord Fellamar agreed
to go with him, that he might satisfy himself
more concerning Jones, and the Circumstances
of the Duel; for he was by no
Means easy concerning the Part he had acted. 
The Moment his Lordship gave a
Hint of his Readiness to assist in the Delivery
of the Lady, it was eagerly embraced
by the other Nobleman, who depended
much on the Authority of Lord Fellamar,
as he thought it would greatly contribute to
awe Fitzpatrick into a Compliance; and
perhaps he was in the right; for the poor
Irishman no sooner saw these noble Peers
had undertaken the Cause of his Wife,
than he submitted, and Articles of Separation
were soon drawn up and signed between
the Parties. 
Fitzpatrick had been so well satisfied by
Mrs. Waters concerning the Innocence of
his Wife with Jones at Upton, or perhaps
from some other Reasons, was now become
so indifferent to that Matter, that he spoke
highly in Favour of Jones, to Lord Fellamar,
took all the Blame upon himself, and
said the other had behaved very much like
a Gentleman, and a Man of Honour; and
upon that Lord's further Enquiry concerning 

Mr. Jones, Fitzpatrick told him he was
Nephew to a Gentleman of very great
Fashion and Fortune, which was the Account
he had just received from Mrs. Waters,
after her Interview with Dowling. 
Lord Fellamar now thought it behoved
him to do every Thing in his Power to
make Satisfaction to a Gentleman whom he
had so grosly injured, and without any Consideration
of Rivalship, (for he had now
given over all Thoughts of Sophia) determined
to procure Mr. Jones's Liberty, being
satisfied as well from Fitzpatrick as
his Surgeon, that the Wound was not mortal. 
He therefore prevailed with the Irish
Peer to accompany him to the Place where
Jones was confined, to whom he behaved
as we have already related. 
When Allworthy returned to his Lodgings,
he immediately carried Jones into his
Room, and then acquainted him with the
whole Matter, as well what he had heard
from Mrs. Waters, as what he had discovered
from Mr. Dowling. 
Jones expressed great Astonishment, and
no less Concern at this Account; but without
making any Comment or Observation 

upon it. And now a Message was brought
from Mr. Blifil desiring to know if his
Uncle was at Leisure, and he might wait
upon him. Allworthy started and turned
pale, and then in a more passionate Tone
than, I believe, he had ever used before,
bid the Servant tell Blifil, he knew him
not. ‘Consider, dear Sir,—cries Jones in
a trembling Voice.’ —‘I have considered,
answered Allworthy, and you yourself
shall carry my Message to the Villain. — 
No one can carry him the Sentence of
his own Ruin so properly as the Man
whose Ruin he hath so villainously contrived.’ 
—‘Pardon me, dear Sir, said
Jones; a Moment's Reflection will, I
am sure, convince you of the contrary. 
What might be perhaps but Justice from
another Tongue, would from mine be
Insult; and to whom? —My own Brother,
and your Nephew. —Nor did he
use me so barbarously. —Indeed that would
have been more inexcuseable than any
Thing he hath done. Fortune may tempt
Men of no very bad Dispositions to Injustice; 
but Insults proceed only from
black and rancorous Minds, and have
no Temptations to excuse them. —Let
me beseech you, Sir, to do nothing by
him in the present Height of your Anger. 

Consider, my dear Uncle, I was
not myself condemned unheard.’ Allworthy
stood silent a Moment, and then
embracing Jones, he said, with Tears gushing
from his Eyes, ‘O my Child! to
what Goodness have I been so long
blind!’ 
Mrs. Miller entring the Room at that Moment,
after a gentle Rap, which was not
perceived, and seeing Jones in the Arms of
his Uncle, the poor Woman, in an Agony
of Joy, fell upon her Knees, and burst
forth into the most extatic Thanksgivings to
Heaven, for what had happened. —Then
running to Jones, she embraced him eagerly,
crying, ‘My dearest Friend, I wish
you Joy a Thousand and a Thousand
Times of this blest Day;’ and next Mr.
Allworthy himself received the same Congratulations. 
To which he answered, ‘Indeed,
indeed, Mrs. Miller, I am beyond
Expression happy.’ Some few more Raptures
having passed on all Sides, Mrs.
Miller desired them both to walk down
to Dinner in the Parlour, where she said
there were a very happy Set of People assembled; 
being indeed no other than Mr.
Nightingale and his Bride, and his Cousin
Harris with her Bridegroom. 

Allworthy excused himself from dining
with the Company, saying he had ordered
some little Thing for him and his Nephew
in his own Apartment; for that they had
much private Business to discourse of, but
would not resist promising the good Woman,
that both he and Jones would make
Part of her Society at Supper. 
Mrs. Miller then asked what was to be
done with Blifil; ‘for indeed, says she, I
cannot be easy while such a Villain is in
my House.’ —Allworthy answered, ‘He
was as uneasy as herself on the same Account.’ ‘O, cries she, if that be the
Case, leave the Matter to me; I'll soon
shew him the Outside of my Doors, I
warrant you. Here are two or three lusty
Fellows below Stairs.’ ‘There will
be no need of any Violence, cries Allworthy,
if you will carry him a Message from
me, he will, I am convinced, depart of
his own Accord.’ ‘Will I? said Mrs.
Miller, I never did any Thing in my
Life with a better Will.’ Here Jones interfered,
and said, ‘He had considered the
Matter better, and would, if Mr. Allworthy
pleased, be himself the Messenger.’ 

‘I know, says he, already enough
of your Pleasure, Sir, and I beg Leave
to acquaint him with it by my own Words. 
Let me beseech you, Sir, added he, to
reflect on the dreadful Consequences of
driving him to violent and sudden Despair. 
How unfit, alas! is this poor Man
to die in his present Situation.’ This
Suggestion had not the least Effect on
Mrs. Miller. She left the Room crying,
‘You are too good, Mr. Jones, infinitely
too good to live in this World.’ But it
made a deeper Impression on Allworthy. 
‘My good Child, said he, I am equally
astonished at the Goodness of your Heart,
and the Quickness of your Understanding. 
Heaven indeed forbid that this
Wretch should be deprived of any Means
or Time for Repentance. That would
be a shocking Consideration indeed. Go
to him therefore, and use your own Discretion; 
yet do not flatter him with any
Hopes of my Forgiveness; for I shall never
forgive Villainy farther than my Religion
obliges me, and that extends not either to
our Bounty or our Conversation.’ 
Jones went up to Blifil's Room, whom
he found in a Situation which moved his 

Pity, though it would have raised a less amiable
Passion in many Beholders. He had
cast himself on his Bed, where he lay abandoning
himself to Despair, and drowned
in Tears; not in such Tears as flow from
Contrition, and wash away Guilt from
Minds which have been seduced or surprised
into it unawares, against the Bent of their
natural Dispositions, as will sometimes happen
from human Frailty, even to the Good: 
No, these Tears were such as the frighted
Thief sheds in his Cart, and are indeed the
Effects of that concern which the most
savage Natures are seldom deficient in feeling
for themselves. 
It would be unpleasant and tedious to
paint this Scene in full Length. Let it suffice
to say, that the Behaviour of Jones was
kind to Excess. He omitted nothing which
his Invention could supply, to raise and comfort
the drooping Spirits of Blifil, before he
communicated to him the Resolution of his
Uncle, that he must quit the House that
Evening. He offered to furnish him with
any Money he wanted, assured him of his
hearty Forgiveness of all he had done
against him, that he would endeavour
to live with him hereafter as a Brother, 

and would leave nothing unattempted to
effectuate a Reconciliation with his Uncle. 
Blifil was at first sullen and silent, balancing
in his Mind whether he should yet
deny all: But finding at last the Evidence
too strong against him, he betook himself
at last to Confession. He then asked Pardon
of his Brother in the most vehement
Manner, prostrated himself on the Ground,
and kissed his Feet: In short, he was now
as remarkably mean, as he had been before
remarkably wicked. 
Jones could not so far check his Disdain,
but that it a little discovered itself in his
Countenance at this extreme Servility. He
raised his Brother the Moment he could
from the Ground, and advised him to bear
his Afflictions more like a Man; repeating,
at the same Time, his Promises, that
he would do all in his Power to lessen
them: For which Blifil making many Professions
of his Unworthiness, poured forth
a Profusion of Thanks: And then he having
declared he would immediately depart
to another Lodging, Jones returned to his
Uncle. 

Among other Matters, Allworthy now
acquainted Jones with the Discovery which
he made concerning the 500l. Bank-Notes. 
I have,’ said he, ‘already consulted a
Lawyer, who tells me, to my great
Astonishment, that there is no Punishment
for a Fraud of this Kind. Indeed,
when I consider the black Ingratitude of
this Fellow toward you, I think a Highwayman,
compared to him, is an innocent Person.’ 
‘Good Heaven!’ says Jones, ‘is it possible? 
—I am shocked beyond Measure
at this News. I thought there was not
an honester Fellow in the World. — 
The Temptation of such a Sum was too
great for him to withstand; for smaller
Matters have come safe to me through
his Hand. Indeed, my dear Uncle, you
must suffer me to call it Weakness rather
than Ingratitude; for I am convinced
the poor Fellow loves me, and hath done
me some Kindnesses, which I can never
forget; nay, I believe he hath repented
of this very Act: For it is not above a Day
or two ago, when my affairs seemed in
the most desperate Situation, that he visited
me in my Confinement, and offered 

me any Money I wanted. Consider, Sir,
what a Temptation to a Man who had
tasted such bitter Distress, it must be to
have a Sum in his Possession, which must
put him and his Family beyond any future
Possibility of suffering the like. 
‘Child,’ cries Allworthy, ‘you carry
this forgiving Temper too far. Such mistaken
Mercy is not only Weakness, but
borders on Injustice, and is very pernicious
to Society, as it encourages Vice. The Dishonesty of this Fellow I might
perhaps have pardoned, but never his Ingratitude. 
And give me Leave to say,
when we suffer any Temptation to attone
for Dishonesty itself, we are as candid and
merciful as we ought to be; and so far I
confess I have gone: for I have often pitied
the Fate of a Highwayman, when
I have been on the Grand Jury; and
have more than once applied to the Judge
on the Behalf of such as have had any mitigating
Circumstances in their Case; but
when Dishonesty is attended with any
blacker Crime, such as Cruelty, Murder,
Ingratitude, or the like, Compassion
and Forgiveness then become Faults. 
I am convinced the Fellow is a Villain, and 

he shall be punished; at least as far as I
can punish him. 
This was spoke with so stern a Voice, that
Jones did not think proper to make any Reply: 
Besides, the Hour appointed by Mr.
Western now drew so near, that he had barely
Time left to dress himself. Here therefore
ended the present Dialogue, and Jones retired
to another Room, where Partridge
attended, according to Order, with his
Cloaths. 
Partridge had scarce seen his Master since
the happy Discovery. The poor Fellow was
unable either to contain or express his Transports. 
He behaved like one frantic, and
made almost as many Mistakes while he
was dressing Jones, as I have seen made
by Harlequin in dressing himself on the
Stage. 
His Memory, however, was not in the
least deficient. He recollected now many
Omens and Presages of this happy Event,
some of which he had remarked at the
Time, but many more he now remembered; 
nor did he omit the Dreams he had dreamt
the Evening before his meeting with Jones; 

and concluded with saying, ‘I always told
your Honour something boded in my
Mind, that you would one Time or other
have it in your Power to make my Fortune.’ 
Jones assured him, that this Boding
should as certainly be verified with regard to
him, as all the other Omens had been to
himself; which did not a little add to all the
Raptures which the poor Fellow had already
conceived on account of his Master. 



Approaching still nearer to the End. 
Jones being now completely dressed, attended
his Uncle to Mr. Western's. He
was indeed one of the finest Figures ever
beheld, and his Person alone would have
charmed the greater Part of Womankind; 
but we hope it hath already appeared in this
History, that Nature, when she formed him,
did not totally rely, as she sometimes doth,
on this Merit only, to recommend her
Work. 
Sophia, who, angry as she was, was likewise
set forth to the best Advantage, for 

for which I leave my female Readers to
account, appeared so extremely beautiful,
that even Allworthy, when he saw her, could
not forbear whispering Western, that he believed
she was the finest Creature in the
World. To which Western answered, in
a Whisper overheard by all present, ‘So
much the better for Tom;—for d&wblank;n
me if he shan't ha the tousling her.’ Sophia
was all over Scarlet at these Words,
while Tom's Countenance was altogether as
pale, and he was almost ready to sink from
his Chair. 
The Tea-table was scarce removed, before
Western lugged Allworthy out of the
Room, telling him, ‘He had Business of
Consequence to impart, and must speak
to him that Instant in private before he
forgot it.’ 
The Lovers were now alone, and it will,
I question not, appear strange to many
Readers, that those who had so much to
say to one another when Danger and Difficulty
attended their Conversation, and who
seemed so eager to rush into each others
Arms when so many Bars lay in their Way,
now that with Safety they were at Liberty to
say or do whatever they pleased, should both 

remain for some Time silent and motionless; 
insomuch, that a Stranger of moderate
Sagacity might have well concluded
they were mutually indifferent: But so it
was, however strange it may seem; both
sat with their Eyes cast downwards on the
Ground, and for some Minutes continued
in perfect Silence. 
Mr. Jones, during this Interval, attempted
once or twice to speak, but was absolutely
incapable, muttering only, or rather
sighing out some broken Words; when
Sophia at length, partly out of Pity to him,
and partly to turn the Discourse from the
Subject which she knew well enough he was
endeavouring to open, said;— 
‘Sure, Sir, you are the most fortunate
Man in the World in this Discovery.’ 
‘And can you really, Madam,
think me so fortunate,’ said Jones, sighing,
‘while I have incurred your Displeasure? 
—‘Nay, Sir,’ says she, ‘as to
that, you best know whether you have deserved
it.’ ‘Indeed, Madam,’ answered
he, ‘you yourself are as well apprized of
all my Demerits. Mrs. Miller has
acquainted you with the whole Truth. 
O! my Sophia, am I never to hope for 

Forgiveness?’ —‘I think, Mr. Jones,
said she, ‘I may almost depend on your
own Justice, and leave it to yourself to
pass Sentence on your own Conduct.’— 
Alas! Madam,’ answered he, ‘it is
Mercy, and not Justice, which I implore
at your Hands. Justice I know must
condemn me—Yet not for the Letter I
sent to Lady Bellaston. Of that I most
solemnly declare, you have had a true
Account.’ He then insisted much on the
Security given him by Nightingale of a fair
Pretence for breaking off, if, contrary to
their Expectations, her Ladyship should have
accepted his Offer; but confest, that he had
been guilty of a great Indiscretion to put
such a Letter as that into her Power, ‘which,’ 
said he, ‘I have dearly paid for, in the Effect
it has upon you.’ ‘I do not, I cannot,’ 
says she, ‘believe otherwise of that
Letter than you would have me. My
Conduct, I think, shews you clearly I do
not believe there is much in that. And yet,
Mr. Jones, have I not enough to resent? 
After what past at Upton, so soon to engage
in a new Amour with another
Woman, while I fancied, and you pretended,
your Heart was bleeding for me! — 
Indeed you have acted strangely. Can I
believe the Passion you have profest to me 

to be sincere? Or if I can, what Happiness
can I assure myself of with a Man
capable of so much Inconstancy?’ ‘O!
my Sophia,’ cries he, ‘do not doubt the
Sincerity of the purest Passion that ever
inflamed a human Breast. Think, most
adorable Creature, of my unhappy Situation,
of my Despair. —Could I,
my Sophia, have flatter'd myself with
the most distant Hopes of being ever permitted
to throw myself at your Feet, in
the Manner I do now, it would not have
been in the Power of any other Woman
to have inspired a Thought which the
severest Chastity could have condemned. 
Inconstancy to you! O Sophia! if you
can have Goodness enough to pardon
what is past, do not let any cruel future
Apprehensions shut your Mercy against
me. —No Repentance was ever more
sincere. O! let it reconcile me to my
Heaven in this dear Bosom.’ ‘Sincere
Repentance, Mr. Jones,’ answered she,
will obtain the Pardon of a Sinner, but
it is from one who is a perfect Judge of
that Sincerity. A human Mind may be
imposed on; nor is there any infallible
Method to prevent it. You must expect 

however, that if I can be prevailed on by
your Repentance to pardon you, I will at
least insist on the strongest Proof of its
Sincerity.’ —‘O! name any Proof in my
Power,’ answered Jones eagerly. ‘Time,’ 
replied she; ‘Time, Mr. Jones, can alone
convince me that you are a true Penitent,
and have resolved to abandon these vicious
Courses, which I should detest you, if I
imagined you capable of persevering in.’ 
Do not imagine it,’ cries Jones. ‘On
my Knees I intreat, I implore your Confidence,
a Confidence which it shall be
the Business of my Life to deserve.’ ‘Let
it then,’ said she, ‘be the Business of
some Part of your Life to shew me you
deserve it. I think I have been explicit
enough in assuring you, that when I see
you merit my Confidence, you will obtain
it. After what is past, Sir, can you
expect I should take you upon your
Word?’ 
He replied, ‘Don't believe me upon my
Word; I have a better Security, a Pledge
for my Constancy, which it is impossible
to see and to doubt.’ ‘What is that?’ 
said Sophia, a little surprised. ‘I will show
you, my charming Angel,’ cried Jones, 

seizing her Hand, and carrying her to the
Glass. ‘There, behold it there, in that
lovely Figure, in that Face, that Shape,
those Eyes, that Mind which shines through
those Eyes: Can the Man who shall be
in Possession of these be inconstant? Impossible!
my Sophia. They would fix a
Dorimant, a Lord Rochester. You could
not doubt it, if you could see yourself
with any Eyes but your own.’ Sophia
blushed, and half smiled; but forcing again
her Brow into a Frown, ‘If I am to
judge,’ said she, ‘of the future by the
past, my Image will no more remain in
your Heart, when I am out of your
Sight, than it will in this Glass when I
am out of the Room.’ ‘By Heaven,
by all that is sacred,’ said Jones, ‘it never
was out of my Heart. The Delicacy
of your Sex cannot conceive the
Grossness of ours, nor how little one Sort
of Amour has to do with the Heart.’ 
‘I will never marry a Man,’ replied Sophia,
very gravely, ‘who shall not learn
Refinement enough to be as incapable as
I am myself of making such a Distinction.’ 
I will learn it,’ said Jones. ‘I have
learnt it already. The first Moment
of Hope that my Sophia might be my
Wife taught it me at once; and all the 

rest of her Sex from that Moment became
as little the Objects of Desire to
my Sense, as of Passion to my Heart.’ 
Well,’ said Sophia, ‘the Proof of this
must be from Time. Your Situation,
Mr. Jones, is now altered, and I assure
you I have great Satisfaction in the Alteration. 
You will now want no Opportunity
of being near me, and convincing me
that your Mind is altered too.’ ‘O!
my Angel,’ cries Jones, ‘how shall I thank
thy Goodness? And are you so good to
own, that you have a Satisfaction in my
Prosperity? —Believe me, believe me,
Madam, it is you alone have given a
Relish to that Prosperity, since I owe to
it the dear Hope—O! my Sophia, let
it not be a distant one. —I will be all
Obedience to your Commands. I will
not dare to press any thing further than
you permit me. Yet let me intreat you
to appoint a short Trial. O! tell me,
when I may expect you will be convinced
of what is most solemnly true.’ 
When I have gone voluntarily thus far,
Mr. Jones,' said she, ‘I expect not to be
pressed. Nay, I will not.’ —‘O don't
look unkindly thus, my Sophia,’ cries he. 
I do not, I dare not press you. —Yet 

permit me at least once more to beg you
would six the Period. O! consider the
Impatience of Love.’ —‘A Twelve-month
perhaps,’ said she.’ —‘O! my
Sophia,’ cries he, ‘you have named an
Eternity.’ —‘Perhaps it may be something
sooner,’ says she, ‘I will not be
teazed. If your Passion for me be what
I would have it, I think you may now be
easy.’ —‘Easy, Sophia, call not such
exulting Happiness as mine by so cold a
Name. —O! transporting Thought! am
I not assured that the blessed Day will
come, when I shall call you mine; when
Fears shall be no more; when I shall have
that dear, that vast, that exquisite, extatic
Delight of making my Sophia happy?’ 
—‘Indeed, Sir,’ said she, ‘that Day
is in your own Power.’ —‘O! my dear,
my divine Angel,’ cried he, ‘these Words
have made me mad with Joy. —But
I must, I will thank those dear Lips
which have so sweetly pronounced my
Bliss.’ He then caught her in his
Arms, and kissed her with an Ardour he
had never ventured before. 
At this Instant, Western, who had stood
some Time listening, burst into the Room,
and with his hunting Voice and Phrase, cry'd 

out, ‘To her Boy, to her, go to her. — 
That's it, little Honeys, O that's it. 
Well, what is it all over? Hath she appointed
the Day, Boy? What, shall it
be to-morrow or next Day? It shan't
be put off a Minute longer than next Day,
I am resolved.’ ‘Let me beseech you,
Sir,’ says Jones, ‘don't let me be the
Occasion— ‘Beseech mine A—,’ 
cries Western, ‘I thought thou had'st been a
Lad of higher Mettle, than to give way to
a Parcel of maidenish Tricks. —I tell
thee 'tis all Flimflam. Zoodikers! she'd
have the Wedding to-Night with all her
Heart. Would'st not, Sophy? Come
confess, and be an honest Girl for once. 
What, art dumb? Why do'st not speak?’ 
Why should I confess, Sir,’ says Sophia,
since it seems you are so well acquainted
with my Thoughts.’ —‘That's a good
Girl,’ cries he, ‘and do'st consent then?’ 
No indeed, Sir,’ says Sophia, ‘I have
given no such Consent.’ —‘And wunt nut
ha un then to-Morrow, nor next Day?’ 
says Western. —‘Indeed, Sir,’ says she,
I have no such Intention.’ ‘But I
can tell thee,’ replied he, ‘why hast
nut, only because thou dost love to
be disobedient, and to plague and
vex thy Father.’ —‘Pray, Sir,’ said Jones
interfering. —‘I tell thee, thou at a Puppy,’ 

cries he. ‘When I forbid her,
then it was all nothing but sighing and
whining, and languishing and writing; 
now I am vor thee, she is against thee. 
All the Spirit of contrary, that's all. She
is above being guided and governed by
her Father, that is the whole Truth on't. 
It is only to disoblige and contradict me.’ 
‘What would my Papa have me do?’ cries
Sophia. ‘What would I have thee do?’ 
says he, ‘why gi un thy Hand this Moment.’ 
‘Well, Sir,’ said Sophia, ‘I will
obey you. —There is my Hand, Mr.
Jones.’ ‘Well, and will you consent to
ha un to-morrow Morning?’ says Western. 
—‘I will be obedient to you, Sir,’
cries she. —‘Why then to-morrow Morning
be the Day,’ cries he. —‘Why
then to-morrow Morning shall be
the Day, Papa, since you will have it
so,’ says Sophia. Jones then fell upon his
Knees, and kissed her Hand in an Agony,
of Joy, while Western began to caper and
dance about the Room, presently crying
out,—‘Where the Devil is Allworthy? He
is without now a-talking with that d&wblank;d
Lawyer Dowling, when he should be minding
other Matters.’ He then sallied out in
quest of him, and very opportunity left
the Lovers to enjoy a few tender Minutes
alone. 

But he soon returned with Allworthy,
saying, ‘If you won't believe me, you may
ask her yourself. Hast nut gin thy
Consent, Sophy, to be married to-morrow?’ 
Such are your Commands, Sir,’ cries Sophia,
‘and I dare not be guilty of Disobedience.’ 
‘I hope, Madam,’ cries Allworthy,
my Nephew will merit so much Goodness,
and will be always as sensible as myself
of the great Honour you have done my
Family. An Alliance with so charming and
so excellent a young Lady, would indeed
be an Honour to the greatest in England. 
Yes,’ cries Western, ‘but if I had suffered
her to stand shill I shall I, dilly dally, you
might not have had that Honour yet awhile; 
I was forced to use a little fatherly
Authority to bring her to.’ ‘I hope
not, Sir,’ cries Allworthy. ‘I hope there
is not the least Constraint.’ ‘Why there,’ 
cries Western, ‘you may bid her unsay
all again, if you will. Do'st repent heartily
of thy Promise, do'st not Sophy?’ 
Indeed, Papa,’ cries she, ‘I do not repent,
nor do I believe I ever shall, of
any Promise in favour of Mr. Jones. 
Then, Nephew,’ cries Allworthy, ‘I
felicitate you most heartily; for I think 

you are the happiest of Men. And,
Madam, you will give me leave to congratulate
you on this joyful Occasion; 
indeed I am convinced you have bestowed
yourself on one who will be sensible of
your great Merit, and who will at least
use his best Endeavours to deserve it.’ 
His best Endeavours!’ cries Western, ‘that
he will I warrant un. —Harkee, Allworthy,
I'll bet thee five Pound to a Crown we
have a Boy to-morrow nine Months; but
prithee tell me what wut ha? wut ha Burgundy,
Champaigne, or what? for please
Jupiter, we'll make a Night on't.’ 
‘Indeed,
Sir, said Allworthy, you must excuse
me; both my Nephew and I were
engaged before I suspected this near Approach
of his Happiness.’ —‘Engaged!’ 
quoth the Squire, ‘never tell me. —I won't
part with thee to-night upon any Occasion. 
Shalt sup here, please the Lord
Harry’ ‘You must pardon me, my dear
Neighbour,’ answered Allworthy; ‘I have
given a solemn Promise, and that you
know I never break.’ ‘Why, prithee,
who art engaged to?’ cries the Squire. — 
Allworthy then informed him, as likewise of
the Company. —‘Odzookers!’ answered
the Squire, ‘I will go with thee, and so 

shall Sophy; for I won't part with thee
to-night; and it would be barbarous to
part Tom and the Girl.’ This Offer was
presently embraced by Allworthy; and Sophia
consented, having first obtained a private
Promise from her Father, that he
would not mention a Syllable concerning
her Marriage. 



In which the History is concluded. 
Young Nightingale had been that
Afternoon by Appointment to wait
on his Father who received him much more
kindly than he expected. There likewise
he met his Uncle, who was returned to
Town in quest of his new-married Daughter. 
This Marriage was the luckiest Incident
which could have happened to the young
Gentleman; for these Brothers lived in a
constant State of Contention about the Government
of their Children, both heartily
despising the Method which each other took. 
Each of them therefore now endeavoured
as much as he could to palliate the Offence 

which his own Child had committed, and
to aggravate the Match of the other. This
Desire of triumphing over his Brother, added
to the many Arguments which Allworthy
had used, so strongly operated on the old
Gentleman, that he met his Son with a
smiling Countenance, and actually agreed
to sup with him that Evening at Mrs. Miller's. 
As for the other, who really loved his
Daughter with the most immoderate Affection,
there was little Difficulty in inclining
him to a Reconciliation. He was no sooner
informed by his Nephew where his Daughter
and her Husband were, than he declared
he would instantly go to her. And when
he arrived there, he scarce suffered her to
fall upon her Knees, before he took her up,
and embraced her with a Tenderness which
affected all who saw him; and in less than
a Quarter of an Hour was as well reconciled
to both her and her Husband, as if
he had himself joined their Hands. 
In this Situation were Affairs when Mr.
Allworthy and his Company arrived to complete
the Happiness of Mrs. Miller, who
no sooner saw Sophia, than she guessed every
Thing that had happened; and so great 

was her Friendship to Jones, that it added
not a few Transports to those she felt on the
Happiness of her own Daughter. 
There have not, I believe, been many
Instances of a Number of People met together,
where every one was so perfectly
happy, as in this Company. Amongst
whom the Father of young Nightingale enjoyed
the least perfect Content; for notwithstanding
his Affection for his Son,
notwithstanding the Authority and the Arguments
of Allworthy, together with the
other Motive mentioned before, he could not
so entirely be satisfied with his Son's Choice; 
and perhaps the Presence of Sophia herself
tended a little to aggravate and heighten
his Concern, as a Thought now and then
suggested itself, that his Son might have
had that Lady, or some such other. Not
that any of the Charms which adorned either
the Person or Mind of Sophia, created
the Uneasiness: It was the Contents
of her Father's Coffers which set his Heart
a longing. These were the Charms which
he could not bear to think his Son had sacrificed
to the Daughter of Mrs. Miller. 
The Brides were both very pretty Women; 
but so totally were they eclipsed by 

the Beauty of Sophia, that had they not
been two of the best-tempered Girls in the
World, it would have raised some Envy in
their Breasts; for neither of their Husbands
could long keep his Eyes from Sophia,
who sat at the Table like a Queen receiving
Homage, or rather like a superiour Being
receiving Adoration from all around her. 
But it was an Adoration which they gave,
not which she exacted: For she was as much
distinguished by her Modesty and Affability,
as by all her other Perfections. 
The Evening was spent in much true
Mirth. All were happy, but those the most,
who had been most unhappy before. Their
former Sufferings and Fears gave such a
Relish to their Felicity, as even Love and
Fortune in their fullest Flow could not have
given without the Advantage of such a Comparison. 
Yet as great Joy, especially after
a sudden Change and Revolution of Circumstances,
is apt to be silent, and dwells
rather in the Heart than on the Tongue,
Jones and Sophia appeared the least merry of
the whole Company. Which Western observed
with great Impatience, often crying
out to them, ‘Why do'st not talk Boy! 
Why do'st look so grave! Hast lost thy
Tongue Girl! Drink another Glass of 

Wine, sha't drink another Glass?’ And
the more to enliven her, he would sometimes
sing a merry Song, which bore some
Relation to Matrimony, and the Loss of a
Maidenhead, Nay, he would have proceeded
so far on that Topic, as to have
driven her out of the Room, if Mr. Allworthy
had not checkt him sometimes by
Looks, and once or twice by a Fie! Mr.
Western. He began indeed once to debate
the Matter, and assert his Right to talk to
his own Daughter as he thought fit; but as
no Body seconded him, he was soon reduced
to Order. 
Notwithstanding this little Restraint,
he was so pleased with the Chearfulness
and Good-Humour of the Company,
that he insisted on their meeting the next Day
at his Lodgings. They all did so; and the
lovely Sophia, who was now in private become
a Bride too, officiated as the Mistress
of the Ceremonies, or, in the polite
Phrase, did the Honours of the Table. 
She had that Morning given her Hand
to Jones, in the Chapel at Doctors Commons,
where Mr. Allworthy, Mr. Western, and
Mrs. Miller were the only Persons present. 

Sophia had earnestly desired her Father,
that no others of the Company, who were
that Day to dine with him, should be acquainted
with her Marriage. The same
Secrecy was enjoined to Mrs. Miller, and
Jones undertook for Allworthy. This somewhat
reconciled the Delicacy of Sophia to
the public Entertainment, which, in Compliance
with her Father's Will, she was obliged
to go to, greatly against her own Inclinations. 
In Confidence of this Secrecy, she
went through the Day pretty well, till the
Squire, who was now advanced into the
second Bottle, could contain his Joy no
longer, but, filling out a Bumper, drank
a Health to the Bride. The Health was
immediately pledged by all present, to the
great Confusion of our poor blushing Sophia,
and the great Concern of Jones upon
her Account. To say Truth, there was not
a Person present made wiser by this Discovery; 
for Mrs. Miller had whispered it to
her Daughter, her Daughter to her Husband,
her Husband to his Sister, and she
to all the rest. 
Sophia now took the first Opportunity of
withdrawing with the Ladies, and the
Squire sat in to his Cups, in which he was, 

by Degrees, deserted by all the Company,
except the Uncle of young Nightingale,
who loved his Bottle as well as Western himself. 
These two therefore sat stoutly to it,
during the whole Evening, and long after
that happy Hour which had surrendered the
charming Sophia to the eager Arms of her
enraptured Jones. 
Thus, Reader, we have at length
brought our History to a Conclusion, in
which, to our great Pleasure, tho' contrary
perhaps to thy Expectation, Mr. Jones
appears to be the happiest of all human
Kind: For what Happiness this World affords
equal to the Possession of such a Woman
as Sophia, I sincerely own I have never
yet discovered. 
As to the other Persons who have made
any considerable Figure in this History, as
some may desire to know a little more concerning
them, we will proceed in as
few Words as possible, to satisfy their Curiosity. 
Allworthy hath never yet been prevailed
upon to see Blifil, but he hath yielded to
the Importunity of Jones, backed by Sophia,
to settle 200l. a Year upon him; 

to which Jones hath privately added a third. 
Upon this Income he lives in one of the
northern Counties, about 200 Miles distant
from London, and lays up 200l. a Year out
of it, in order to purchase a Seat in the next
Parliament from a neighbouring Borough,
which he has bargained for with an Attorney
there. He is also lately turned Methodist,
in hopes of marrying a very rich Widow
of that Sect, whose Estate lies in that Part
of the Kingdom. 
Square died soon after he writ the before-mentioned
Letter; and as to Thwackum, he
continues at his Vicarage. He hath made
many fruitless Attempts to regain the Confidence
of Allworthy, or to ingratiate himself
with Jones, both of whom he flatters
to their Faces, and abuses behind their
Packs. But in his stead, Mr. Allworthy
hath lately taken Mr. Abraham Adams into
his House, of whom Sophia is grown immoderately
fond, and declares he shall have the
Tuition of her Children. 
Mrs. Fitzpatrick is separated from her
Husband, and retains the little Remains of
her Fortune. She lives in Reputation at
the polite End of the Town, and is so good
an Œconomist, that she spends three Times 

the Income of her Fortune, without running
in Debt. She maintains a perfect Intimacy
with the Lady of the Irish Peer; 
and in Acts of Friendship to her repays all
the Obligations she owes to her Husband. 
Mrs. Western was soon reconciled to her
Niece Sophia, and hath spent two Months
together with her in the Country. Lady
Bellaston made the latter a formal Visit at
her Return to Town, where she behaved
to Jones, as to a perfect Stranger, and
with great Civility, wished him Joy on
his Marriage. 
Mr. Nightingale hath purchased an Estate
for his Son in the Neighbourhood of Jones,
where the young Gentleman, his Lady,
Mrs. Miller, and her little Daughter reside,
and the most agreeable Intercourse subsists
between the two Families. 
As to those of lower Account, Mrs.
Waters returned into the Country, had a
Pension of 60l. a Year settled upon her by
Mr. Allworthy, and is married to Parson
Supple, on whom, at the Instance of Sophia,
Western hath bestowed a considerable
Living. 

Black George hearing the Discovery that
had been made, run away, and was never
since heard of; and Jones bestowed the Money
on his Family, but not in equal Proportions,
for Molly had much the greatest
Share. 
As for Partridge, Jones hath settled 50l.
a Year on him; and he hath again set up
a School, in which he meets with much
better Encouragement than formerly; and
there is now a Treaty of Marriage on Foot,
between him and Miss Molly Seagrim, which
through the Mediation of Sophia, is likely
to take Effect. 
We now return to take Leave of Mr.
Jones and Sophia, who, within two Days
after their Marriage, attended Mr. Western
and Mr. Allworthy into the Country. Western
hath resigned his Family Seat, and the
greater Part of his Estate to his Son-in-law,
and hath retired to a lesser House of his,
in another Part of the Country, which
is better for Hunting. Indeed he is often
as a Visitant with Mr. Jones, who as
well as his Daughter, hath an infinite Delight
in doing every Thing in their Power
to please him. And this Desire of theirs is 

attended with such Success, that the old
Gentleman declares he was never happy in
his Life till now. He hath here a Parlour
and Anti-chamber to himself, where he gets
drunk with whom he pleases, and his Daughter
is still as ready as formerly to play to
him whenever he desires it; for Jones hath
assured her, that as next to pleasing her,
one of his highest Satisfactions is to contribute
to the Happiness of the old Man; 
so the great Duty which she expresses and
performs to her Father renders her almost
equally dear to him, with the Love which
she bestows on himself. 
Sophia hath already produced him two
fine Children, a Boy and a Girl, of
whom the old Gentleman is so fond, that
he spends much of his Time in the Nursery,
where he declares the tattling of his little
Grand-Daughter, who is above a Year and
half old, is sweeter Music than the finest Cry
of Dogs in England. 
Allworthy was likewise greatly liberal to
Jones on the Marriage, and hath omitted
no Instance of shewing his Affection to him
and his Lady, who love him as a Father. 
Whatever in the Nature of Jones had a
Tendency to Vice, has been corrected by 

continual Conversation with this good Man,
and by his Union with the lovely and virtuous
Sophia. He has also, by Reflexion
on his past Follies, acquired a Discretion
and Prudence very uncommon in one of his
lively Parts. 
To conclude, as there are not to be
found a worthier Man and Woman, than
this fond Couple, so neither can any be
imagined more happy. They preserve the
purest and tenderest Affection for each other,
an Affection daily encreased and confirmed
by mutual Endearments, and mutual
Esteem. Nor is their Conduct towards
their Relations and Friends less amiable,
than towards one another. And such
is their Condescension, their Indulgence, and
their Beneficence to those below them, that
there is not a Neighbour, a Tenant, or a Servant,
who doth not most gratefully bless
the Day when Mr. Jones was married to his
Sophia. 