


Containing the Time of a Year. 



Containing five Pages of Paper. 
As Truth distinguishes our Writings
from those idle Romances which are
filled with Monsters, the Productions, not
of Nature, but of distempered Brains; and
which have been therefore recommended by
an eminent Critic to the sole Use of the
Pastry-cook: So, on the other hand, we 

would avoid any Resemblance to that Kind
of History which a celebrated Poet seems to
think is no less calculated for the Emolument
of the Brewer, as the reading it should
be always attended with a Tankard of good
Ale. 
While—History with her Comrade Ale,
Sooths the sad Series of her serious Tale.
For as this is the Liquor of modern Historians,
nay, perhaps their Muse, if we
may believe the Opinion of Butler, who attributes
Inspiration to Ale, it ought likewise
to be the Potation of their Readers; 
since every Book ought to be read with the
same Spirit, and in the same Manner, as it
is writ. Thus the famous Author of Hurlothrumbo
told a learned Bishop, that the
Reason his Lordship could not taste the Excellence
of his Piece, was, that he did not
read it with a Fiddle in his Hand; which
Instrument he himself had always had in his
own, when he composed it. 
That our Work, therefore, might be in
no Danger of being likened to the Labours
of these Historians, we have taken every
Occasion of interspersing through the whole
sundry Similes, Descriptions, and other 

kind of poetical Embellishments. These
are, indeed, designed to supply the Place of
the said Ale, and to refresh the Mind,
whenever those Slumbers which in a long
Work are apt to invade the Reader as well
as the Writer, shall begin to creep upon
him. Without Interruptions of this Kind,
the best Narrative of plain Matter of
Fact must overpower every Reader; for
nothing but the everlasting Watchfulness,
which Homer hath ascribed to Jove himself,
can be Proof against a News Paper of many
Volumes. 
We shall leave to the Reader to determine
with what Judgment we have chosen
the several Occasions for inserting these ornamental
Parts of our Work. Surely it
will be allowed that none could be more
proper than the present; where we are
about to introduce a considerable Character
on the Scene; no less, indeed, than the
Heroine of this Heroic, Historical, Prosaic
Poem. Here, therefore, we have
thought proper to prepare the Mind of the
Reader for her Reception, by filling it with
every pleasing Image, which we can draw from
the Face of Nature. And for this Method
we plead many Precedents. First, this is
an Art well known to, and much practised 

by, our Tragic Poets; who seldom fail to
prepare their Audience for the Reception of
their principal Characters. 
Thus the Heroe is always introduced with
a Flourish of Drums and Trumpets, in order
to rouse a martial Spirit in the Audience,
and to accommodate their Ears to
Bombast and Fustian, which Mr. Lock's
blind Man would not have grossly erred in
likening to the Sound of a Trumpet. Again,
when Lovers are coming forth, soft
Music often conducts them on the Stage,
either to sooth the Audience with all the
Softness of the tender Passion, or to lull and
prepare them for that gentle Slumber in
which they will most probably be composed
by the ensuing Scene. 
And not only the Poets, but the Masters
of these Poets, the Managers of Playhouses,
seem to be in this Secret; for, besides the
aforesaid Kettle Drums, &c. which denote
the Heroe's Approach, he is generally ushered
on the Stage by a large Troop of half a
dozen Scene-shifters; and how necessary
these are imagined to his Appearance, may
be concluded from the following Theatrical
Story. 

King Pyrrhus was at Dinner at an Ale-house
bordering on the Theatre, when he
was summoned to go on the Stage. The
Heroe, being unwilling to quit his Shoulder
of Mutton, and as unwilling to draw on
himself the Indignation of Mr. Wilks, (his
Brother Manager) for making the Audience
wait, had bribed these his Harbingers
to be out of the Way. While Mr.
Wilks, therefore, was thundering out,
‘Where are the Carpenters to walk on
before King Pyrrhus,’ that Monarch very
quietly eat his Mutton, and the Audience,
however impatient, were obliged to entertain
themselves with Music in his Absence. 
To be plain, I much question whether
the Politician, who hath generally a good
Nose, hath not scented out somewhat of the
Utility of this Practice. I am convinced
that awful Magistrate my Lord Mayor contracts
a good deal of that Reverence which
attends him through the Year, by the
several Pageants which precede his Pomp. 
Nay, I must confess, that even I myself,
who am not remarkably liable to be captivated
with Show, have yielded not a little
to the Impressions of much preceding State. 
When I have seen a Man strutting in a Procession,
after others whose Business hath 

been only to walk before him, I have conceived
a higher Notion of his Dignity, than
I have felt on seeing him in a common Situation. 
But there is one Instance which
comes exactly up to my Purpose. This is
the Custom of sending on a Basket-woman,
who is to precede the Pomp at a Coronation,
and to strew the Stage with Flowers, before
the great Personages begin their Procession. 
The Antients would certainly have invoked
the Goddess Flora for this Purpose, and it
would have been no Difficulty for their
Priests or Politicians to have persuaded the
People of the real Presence of the Deity,
though a plain Mortal had personated her,
and performed her Office. But we have no
such Design of imposing on our Reader,
and therefore those who object to the Heathen
Theology, may, if they please, change
our Goddess into the above-mentioned Basket-woman. 
Our Intention, in short, is to
introduce our Heroine with the utmost Solemnity
in our Power, with an Elevation of
Stile, and all other Circumstances proper to
raise the Veneration of our Reader. Indeed
we would, for certain Causes, advise those
of our Male Readers who have any Hearts,
to read no farther, were we not well assured,
that how amiable soever the Picture of our
Heroine will appear, as it is really a Copy 

from Nature, many of our fair Countrywomen
will be found worthy to satisfy any
Passion, and to answer any Idea of Female
Perfection, which our Pencil will be able to
raise. 
And now, without any further Preface,
we proceed to our next Chapter. 



A short Hint of what we can do in the Sublime,
and a Description of Miss Sophia
Western. 
Hushed be every ruder Breath. May
the Heathen Ruler of the Winds confine
in iron Chains the boisterous Limbs of
noisy Boreas, and the sharp-pointed Nose
of bitter-biting Eurus. Do thou, sweet
Zephyrus, tiring from thy fragrant Bed,
mount the western Sky, and lead on those
delicious Gales, the Charms of which call
forth the lovely Flora from her Chamber,
perfumed with pearly Dews, when on the
first of June, her Birth-day, the blooming
Maid, in loose Attire, gently trips it over
the verdant Mead, where every Flower
rises to do her Homage, 'till the whole 

Field becomes enamelled, and Colours contend
with Sweets which shall ravish her
most. 
So charming may she now appear; and
you the feather'd Choristers of Nature,
whose sweetest Notes not even Handel can
excel, tune your melodious Throats, to
celebrate her Appearance. From Love
proceeds your Music, and to Love it returns. 
Awaken therefore that gentle Passion
in every Swain: for lo! adorned with
all the Charms in which Nature can array
her; bedecked with Beauty, Youth, Sprightliness,
Innocence, Modesty, and Tenderness,
breathing Sweetness from her rosy
Lips, and darting Brightness from her
sparkling Eyes, the lovely Sophia comes. 
Reader, perhaps thou hast seen the Statue
of the Venus de Medicis. Perhaps too, thou
hast seen the Gallery of Beauties at Hampton-Court. 
Thou may'st remember each
bright Churchill of the Gallaxy, and all the
Toasts of the Kit-Cat. Or if their Reign
was before thy Times, at least thou hast
seen their Daughters, the no less dazling
Beauties of the present Age; whose Names,
should we here insert, we apprehend they
would fill the whole Volume. 

Now if thou hast seen all these, be not
afraid of the rude Answer which Lord
Rochester once gave to a Man, who had
seen many Things. No. If thou hast seen
all these without knowing what Beauty is,
thou hast no Eyes; if without feeling its
Power, thou hast no Heart. 
Yet is possible, my Friend, that thou
mayest have seen all these without being
able to form an exact Idea of Sophia: for
she did not exactly resemble any of them. 
She was most like the Picture of Lady Ranelagh; 
and I have heard more still to the
famous Dutchess of Mazarine; but most of
all, she resembled one whose Image never
can depart from my Breast, and whom, if
thou dost remember, thou hast then, my
Friend, an adequate Idea of Sophia. 
But lest this should not have been thy
Fortune, we will endeavour with our utmost
Skill to describe this Paragon, though
we are sensible that our highest Abilities are
very inadequate to the Task. 

Sophia then, the only Daughter of Mr.
Western, was a middle-sized Woman; but
rather inclining to tall. Her Shape was not
only exact, but extremely delicate; and
the nice Proportion of her Arms promised
the truest Symmetry in her Limbs. Her
Hair, which was black, was so luxuriant,
that it reached her Middle, before she cut
it, to comply with the modern Fashion; and
it was now curled so gracefully in her Neck,
that few would believe it to be her own. 
If Envy could find any Part of her Face
which demanded less Commendation than
the rest, it might possibly think her Forehead
might have been higher without Prejudice
to her. Her Eye-brows were full,
even, and arched beyond the Power of
Art to imitate. Her black Eyes had a
Lustre in them, which all her Softness could
not extinguish. Her Nose was exactly regular,
and her Mouth, in which were two
Rows of Ivory, exactly answered Sir John
Suckling's Description in those Lines. 

Her Lips were red, and one was thin,
Compar'd to that was next her Chin.
Some Bee had stung it newly.
Her Cheeks, were of the oval Kind; and
in her right she had a Dimple which the 

least Smile discovered. Her Chin had certainly,
its Share in forming the Beauty of
her Face; but it was difficult to say it was
either large or small, tho' perhaps it was
rather of the former Kind. Her Complexion
had rather more of the Lilly than
of the Rose; but when Exercise, or Modesty,
encreased her natural Colour, no
Vermilion could equal it. Then one might
indeed cry out with the celebrated Dr.
Donne. 

—Her pure and eloquent Blood
Spoke in her Cheeks, and so distinctly wrought,
That one might almost say her Body thought.
Her Neck was long and finely turned; 
and here, if I was not afraid of offending
her Delicacy, I might justly say, the highest
Beauties of the famous Venus de Medicis
were outdone. Here was Whiteness which
no Lillies, Ivory, nor Alabaster could
match. The finest Cambric might indeed
be supposed from Envy to cover that Bosom,
which was much whiter than itself,— 
It was indeed, 

Nitor splendens Pario marmore purius.
“A Gloss shining beyond the purest Brightness
of Parian Marble.” 

Such was the Outside of Sophia; nor
was this beautiful Frame disgraced by an
Inhabitant unworthy of it. Her Mind was
every way equal to her Person; nay, the
latter borrowed some Charms from the former: 
For when she smiled, the Sweetness
of her Temper diffused that Glory over her
Countenance, which no Regularity of Features
can give. But as there are no Perfections
of the Mind which do not discover
themselves, in that perfect Intimacy, to
which we intend to introduce our Reader,
with this charming young Creature; so it
is needless to mention them here: Nay, it
is a Kind of tacit Affront to our Reader's
Understanding, and may also rob him
of that Pleasure which he will receive
in forming his own Judgment of her Character. 
It may however, be proper to say, that
whatever mental Accomplishments she had
derived from Nature, they were somewhat improved
and cultivated by Art: for she had
been educated under the Care of an Aunt,
who was a Lady of great Discretion, and
was thoroughly acquainted with the World,
having lived in her Youth about the Court,
whence she had retired some Years since into 

the Country. By her Conversation and
Instructions, Sophia was perfectly well-bred,
though perhaps she wanted a little of that
Ease in her Behaviour, which is to be acquired
only by Habit, and living within
what is called the polite Circle. But this,
to say the Truth, is often too dearly purchased; 
and though it hath Charms so inexpressible,
that the French, perhaps, among
other Qualities, mean to express this, when
they declare they know not what it is, yet
its Absence is well compensated by Innocence; 
nor can good Sense, and a natural
Gentility ever stand in need of it. 



Wherein the History goes back to commemorate
a trifling Incident that happened some
Years since; but which, trifling as it was,
had some future Consequences. 
The amiable Sophia was now in her
eighteenth Year, when she is introduced
into this History. Her Father, as
hath been said, was fonder of her than of
any other human Creature. To her, therefore,
Tom Jones applied, in order to engage 

her Interest on the Behalf of his Friend
the Game-keeper. 
But before we proceed to this Business,
a short Recapitulation of some previous
Matters may be necessary. 
Though the different Tempers of Mr.
Allworthy, and of Mr. Western did not admit
of a very intimate Correspondence,
yet they lived upon what is called a decent
Footing together; by which Means the
young People of both Families had been
acquainted from their Infancy; and as they
were all near of the same Age, had been
frequent Play-mates together. 
The Gaiety of Tom's Temper suited better
with Sophia, than the grave and sober Disposition
of Master Blifil. And the Preference
which she gave the former of these, would
often appear so plainly, that a Lad of a more
passionate Turn than Master Blifil was,
might have shewn some Displeasure at it. 
As he did not, however, outwardly express
any such Disgust, it would be an ill
Office in us to pay a Visit to the inmost
Recesses of his Mind, as some scandalous
People search into the most secret Affairs of 

their Friends, and often pry into their
Closets and Cupboards, only to discover
their Poverty and Meanness to the World. 
However, as Persons who suspect they
have given others Cause of Offence, are
apt to conclude they are offended; so Sophia
imputed an Action of Master Blifil, to
his Anger, which the superior Sagacity of
Thwackum and Square discerned to have
arisen from a much better Principle. 
Tom Jones, when very young, had presented
Sophia with a little Bird, which he
had taken from the Nest, had nursed up,
and taught to sing. 
Of this Bird, Sophia, then about thirteen
Years old, was so extremely fond, that her
chief Business was to feed and tend it, and
her chief Pleasure to play with it. By
these Means little Tommy, for so the Bird
was called, was become so tame, that it
would feed out of the Hand of its Mistress,
would perch upon her Finger, and lie contented
in her Bosom, where it seemed almost
sensible of its own Happiness; tho'
she always kept a small String about its
Leg, nor would ever trust it with the Liberty
of flying away. 

One Day, when Mr. Allworthy and his
whole Family, dined at Mr. Western's,
Master Blifil, being in the Garden with
little Sophia, and observing the extreme
Fondness that she shewed for her little
Bird, desired her to trust it for a Moment
in his Hands. Sophia presently complied
with the young Gentleman's Request, and
after some previous Caution, delivered him
her Bird; of which he was no sooner in Possession,
than he slipt the String from its Leg,
and tossed it into the Air. 
The foolish Animal no sooner perceived
itself at Liberty, than forgetting all the Favours
it had received from Sophia, it flew
directly from her, and perched on a Bough
at some Distance. 
Sophia, seeing her Bird gone, screamed
out so loud, that Tom Jones, who was at a
little Distance, immediately ran to her Assistance. 
He was no sooner informed of what had
happened, than he cursed Blifil for a pitiful,
malicious Rascal, and then immediately
stripping off his Coat, he applied himself to 

climbing the Tree to which the Bird escaped. 
Tom had almost recovered his little Namesake,
when the Branch, on which it was
perched, and that hung over a Canal, broke,
and the poor Lad plumped over Head and
Ears into the Warer. 
Sophia's Concern now changed its Object. 
And as she apprehended the Boy's Life
was in Danger, she screamed ten times
louder than before; and indeed Master Blifil
himself now seconded her with all the
Vociferation in his Power. 
The Company, who were sitting in a
Room next the Garden, were instantly alarmed,
and came all forth; but just as
they reached the Canal, Tom, (for the Water
was luckily pretty shallow in that Part)
arrived safely on shore. 
Thwackum fell violently on poor Tom,
who stood dropping and shivering before
him, when Mr. Allworthy desired him to
have Patience, and turning to Master Blifil,
said, Pray, Child, what is the Reason of
all this Disturbance? 

Master Blifil answered, ‘Indeed, Uncle,
I am very sorry for what I have done; 
I have been unhappily the Occasion of it
all. I had Miss Sophia's Bird in my
Hand, and thinking the poor Creature
languished for Liberty, I own, I could
not forbear giving it what it desired: for
I always thought there was something
very cruel in confining any Thing. It
seemed to me against the Law of Nature,
by which every Thing hath a Right to
Liberty; nay, it is even unchristian; for
it is not doing what we would be done by: 
But if I had imagined Miss Sophia would
have been so much concerned at it, I am
sure I would never have done it; nay, if
I had known what would have happened
to the Bird itself: for when Master Jones,
who climbed up that Tree afteer it, fell
into the Water, the Bird took a second
Flight, and presently a nasty Hawk carried
it away.’ 
Poor Sophia, who now first heard of her
little Tommy's Fate; for her Concern for
Jones had prevented her perceiving it when
it happened, shed a Shower of Tears. These
Mr. Allworthy endeavoured to assuage, promising 

her a much finer Bird; but she
declared she would never have another. 
Her Father chid her for crying so for a
foolish Bird; but could not help telling
young Blifil, if he was a Son of his, his
Backside should be well flea'd. 
Sophia now returned to her Chamber, the
two young Gentlemen were sent home, and
the rest of the Company returned to their
Bottle; where a Conversation ensued on the
Subject of the Bird, so curious, that we
think it deserves a Chapter by itself. 



Containing such very deep and grave Matters,
that some Readers, perhaps, may not relish
it. 
Square had no sooner lighted his
Pipe, than addressing himself to Allworthy,
he thus began: ‘Sir, I cannot
help congratulating you on your Nephew; 
who, at an Age when few Lads have any
Ideas but of sensible Objects, is arrived at
a Capacity of distinguishing Right from
Wrong. To confine any thing, seems to
me against the Law of Nature, by which 

every thing hath a Right to Liberty. 
These were his Words; and the Impression
they have made on me is never to be
eradicated. Can any Man have a higher
Notion of the Rule of Right, and the
Eternal Fitness of Things. I cannot help
promising myself from such a Dawn, that
the Meridian of this Youth will be equal
to that of either the elder or the younger
Brutus.’ 
Here Thwackum hastily interrupted, and
spilling some of his Wine, and swallowing
the rest with great Eagerness, answered,
‘From another Expression he made use of,
I hope he will resemble much better Men. 
The Law of Nature is a Jargon of
Words, which means nothing. I know
not of any such Law, nor of any Right
which can be derived from it. To do as
we would be done by, is indeed a Christian
Motive, as the Boy well expressed
himself, and I am glad to find my Instructions
have born so good Fruit.’ 
‘If Vanity was a thing fit (says Square)
I might indulge some on the same Occasion; 
for whence he can only have
learnt his Notions of Right or Wrong, I
think is pretty apparent. If there be no 

Law of Nature, there is no Right nor
Wrong.’ 
‘How! (says the Parson) do you then
banish Revelation? Am I talking with a
Deist or an Atheist?’ 
‘Drink about, (says Western) Pox of
your Laws of Nature. I don't know
what you mean either of you, by Right
and Wrong. To take away my Girl's
Bird was wrong in my Opinion; and my
Neighbour Allworthy may do as he pleases; 
but to encourage Boys in such Practices,
is to breed them up to the Gallows.’ 
Allworthy answered, ‘that he was sorry
for what his Nephew had done; but could
not consent to punish him, as he acted rather
from a generous than unworthy Motive.’ 
He said, ‘if the Boy had stolen the
Bird, none would have been more ready to
vote for a severe Chastisement than himself; 
but it was plain that was not his Design:’ 
And, indeed, it was as apparent to him, that
he could have no other View but what he had
himself confessed. (For as to that malicious
Purpose which Sophia suspected, it never
once entered into the Head of Mr. Allworthy). 
He, at length, concluded with again 

blaming the Action as inconsiderate, and
which, he said, was only pardonable in a
Child. 
Square had delivered his Opinion so
openly, that if he was now silent, he must
submit to have his Judgment censured. 
He said, therefore, with some Warmth,
‘that Mr. Allworthy had too much Respect
to the dirty Consideration of Property. 
That in passing our Judgments on great
and mighty Actions, all private Regards
should be laid aside; for by adhering to
those narrow Rules, the younger Brutus
had been condemned of Ingratitude, and
the elder of Parricide.’ 
‘And if they had been hanged too
for those Crimes,’ cried Thwackum, ‘they
would have had no more than their Deserts. 
A couple of heathenish Villains! 
Heaven be praised, we have no Brutus's
now-a-days. I wish, Mr. Square, you
would desist from filling the Minds of
my Pupils with such Antichristian Stuff: 
For the Consequence must be, while they
are under my Care, its being well
scourged out of them again. There is
your Disciple Tom almost spoiled already. 
I overheard him the other Day disputing 

with Master Blifil, that there was no
Merit in Faith without Works. I know
that is one of your Tenets, and I suppose
he had it from you.’ 
‘Don't accuse me of spoiling him,’ says
Square, ‘who taught him to laugh at whatever
is virtuous and decent, and fit and
right in the Nature of Things? He is
your own Scholar, and I disclaim him. 
No, no, Master Blifil is my Boy. Young
as he is, that Lad's Notions of moral
Rectitude I defy you ever to eradicate.’ 
Thwackum put on a contemptuous Sneer
at this, and replied, ‘Ay, ay, I will venture
him with you. He is too well
grounded for all your philosophical Cant
to hurt. No, no, I have taken Care to
instil such Principles into him.—’ 
‘And I have instilled Principles into
him too,’ cries Square. ‘What but the
sublime Idea of Virtue could inspire a human
Mind with the generous Thought of
giving Liberty. And I repeat to you
again, if it was a fit thing to be proud, I
might claim the Honour of having infused
that Idea—’ 

‘And if Pride was not forbidden,’ said
Thwackum, ‘I might boast of having taught
him that Duty which he himself assigned
as his Motive.’ 
‘So between you both,’ says the Squire,
‘the young Gentleman hath been taught
to rob my Daughter of her Bird. I find
I must take Care of my Partridge Mew. 
I shall have some virtuous, religious Man
or other set all my Partridges at Liberty.’ 
Then slapping a Gentleman of the Law,
who was present, on the Back. He cried
out, ‘What say you to this, Mr. Counsellor? 
Is not this against Law?’ 
The Lawyer, with great Gravity, delivered
himself as follows: 
‘If the Case be put of a Partridge, there
can be no Doubt but an Action would
lie: For though this be feræ Naturæ, yet
being reclaimed, Property vests; but
being the Case of a Singing Bird, though
reclaimed, as it is a Thing of base Nature,
it must be considered as nullius in
Bonis. In this Case, therefore, I conceive
the Plaintiff must be nonsuited; and 

I should disadvise the bringing any such
Action.’ 
‘Well, (says the Squire) if it be nullus
Bonus, let us drink about, and talk a little
of the State of the Nation, or some
such Discourse that we all understand; for
I am sure I don't understand a Word of
this. It may be Learning and Sense for
aught I know; but you shall never persuade
me into it. Pox! you have neither
of you mentioned a Word of that poor
Lad who deserves to be commended. To
venture breaking his Neck to oblige my
Girl, was a generous spirited Action; I
have Learning enough to see that. D&wblank;n
me, here's Tom's Health, I shall love the
Boy for it the longest Day I have to
live.’ 
Thus was this Debate interrupted; but
it would probably have been soon resumed,
had not Mr. Allworthy presently called for
his Coach, and carried off the two Combatants. 
Such was the Conclusion of this Adventure
of the Bird, and the Dialogue occasioned
by it, which we could not help recounting
to our Reader, though it happened 

some Years before that Stage, or Period of
Time, at which our History is now arrived. 



Containing Matter accommodated to every
Taste. 
Parva leves capiunt Animos, ‘Small
Things affect light Minds,’ was the
Sentiment of a great Master of the Passion
of Love. And certain it is, that from this
Day Sophia began to have some little Kindness
for Tom Jones, and no little Aversion
for his Companion. 
Many Accidents from time to time improved
both these Passions in her Breast; 
which, without our recounting, the Reader
may well conclude, from what we have before
hinted of the different Tempers of these
Lads, and how much the one suited with
her own Inclinations more than the other. 
To say the Truth, Sophia, when very
young, discerned that Tom, though an idle,
thoughtless, rattling Rascal, was no-body's
Enemy but his own; and that Master
Blifil, though a prudent, discreet, sober
young Gentleman, was at the same Time 

strongly attached to the Interest only of one
single Person; and who that single Person
was, the Reader will be able to divine without
any Assistance of ours. 
These two Characters are not always received
in the World with the different Regard
which seems severally due to either; and which
one would imagine Mankind, from Self-interest,
should shew towards them. But
perhaps there may be a political Reason for
it: In finding one of a truly benevolent
Disposition, Men may very reasonably suppose,
they have found a Treasure, and be
desirous of keeping it, like all other good
Things, to themselves. Hence they may
imagine, that to trumpet forth the Praises
of such a Person, would, in the vulgar
Phrase, be crying Roast-meat; and calling
in Partakers of what they intend to apply
solely to their own Use. If this Reason
doth not satisfy the Reader, I know no
other Means of accounting for the little
Respect which I have commonly seen paid
to a Character which really doth great Honour
to Human Nature, and is productive
of the highest Good to Society. But it was
otherwise with Sophia. She honoured Tom
Jones, and scorned Master Blifil, almost as 

soon as she knew the Meaning of those two
Words. 
Sophia had been absent upwards of three
Years with her Aunt; during all which
Time she had seldom seen either of these
young Gentlemen. She dined, however,
once together with her Aunt, at Mr. Allworthy's. 
This was a few Days after the
Adventure of the Partridge, before commemorated. 
Sophia heard the whole Story
at Table, where she said nothing; nor
indeed could her Aunt get many Words
from her, as she returned home; but her
Maid, when undressing her, happening to
say, ‘Well, Miss, I suppose you have seen
young Master Blifil to Day.’ She answered
with much Passion, ‘I hate the Name of
Master Blifil, as I do whatever is base and
treacherous; and I wonder Mr. Allworthy
would suffer that old barbarous Schoolmaster
to punish a poor Boy so cruelly for what
was only the Effect of his Good-nature.’ 
She then recounted the Story to her Maid,
and concluded with Saying—‘Don't you
think he is a Boy of a noble Spirit?’ 
This young Lady was now returned to
her Father; who gave her the Command
of his House, and placed her at the upper 

End of his Table, where Tom (who from
his great Love of Hunting was become a
great Favourite of the Squire) often dined. 
Young Men of open, generous Dispositions
are naturally inclined to Gallantry, which,
if they have good Understandings, as was
in reality Tom's Case, exerts itself in an
obliging, complaisant Behaviour to all Women
in general. This greatly distinguished
Tom from the boisterous Brutality of mere
Country Squires on the one hand; and
from the solemn, and somewhat sullen, Deportment
of Master Blifil on the other: 
And he began now, at Nineteen,  to have
the Name of a pretty Fellow among all the
Women in the Neighbourhood. 
Tom behaved to Sophia with no Particularity,
unless, perhaps, by shewing her a
higher Respect than he paid to any other. 
This Distinction her Beauty, Fortune, Sense,
and amiable Carriage, seemed to demand; 
but as to Design upon her Person he had
none; for which we shall at present suffer
the Reader to condemn him of Stupidity; 
but perhaps we shall be able indifferently
well to account for it hereafter. 
Sophia, with the highest Degree of Innocence
and Modesty, had a remarkable 

Sprightliness in her Temper. This was so
greatly encreased whenever she was in Company
with Tom, that, had he not been very
young and thoughtless, he must have observed
it; or had not Mr. Western's
Thoughts been generally either in the Field,
the Stable, or the Dog-kennel, it might
have, perhaps, created some Jealousy in
him; but so far was the good Gentleman
from entertaining any such Suspicions, that
he gave Tom every Opportunity with his
Daughter which any Lover could have
wished. And these Tom innocently improved
to better Advantage, by following
only the Dictates of his natural Gallantry
and Good-nature, than he might, perhaps,
have done, had he had the deepest Designs
on the young Lady. 
But, indeed, it can occasion little Wonder,
that this Matter escaped the Observation
of others, since poor Sophia herself
never remarked it, and her Heart was
irretrievably lost before she suspected it was
in Danger. 
Matters were in this Situation, when Tom
one Afternoon finding Sophia alone, began,
after a short Apology, with a very serious
Face, to acquaint her, that he had a 

Favour to ask of her, which he hoped her
Goodness would comply with. 
Though neither the young Man's Behaviour,
nor indeed his Manner of opening
this Business, were such as could give her any
just Cause of suspecting he intended to make
Love to her; yet, whether Nature whispered
something into her Ear, or from what Cause
it arose I will not determine, certain it is,
some Idea of that Kind must have intruded
itself; for her Colour forsook her Cheeks,
her Limbs trembled, and her Tongue would
have faultered, had Tom stopped for an Answer: 
But he soon relieved her from her
Perplexity, by proceeding to inform her of
his Request, which was to sollicit her Interest
on Behalf of the Game-keeper, whose own
Ruin, and that of a large Family, must be,
he said, the Consequence of Mr. Western's
pursuing his Action against him. 
Sophia presently recovered her Confusion,
and with a Smile full of Sweetness, said,
‘Is this the mighty Favour you asked
with so much Gravity. I will do it with
all my Heart. I really pity the poor Fellow,
and no longer ago than Yesterday
sent a small Matter to his Wife.’ This
small Matter was one of her Gowns, some 

Linnen, and ten Shillings in Money, of
which Tom had heard, and it had, in reality,
put this Solicitation into his Head. 
Our Youth, now emboldened with his
Success, resolved to push the Matter farther; 
and ventured even to beg her Recommendation
of him to her Father's Service; protesting
that he thought him one of the honestest
Fellows in the Country, and extremely
well qualified for the Place of a Game-keeper,
which luckily then happened to be vacant. 
Sophia answered; ‘Well, I will undertake
this too; but I cannot promise you
as much Success as in the former Part,
which I assure you I will not quit my Father
without obtaining. However, I will
do what I can for the poor Fellow, for I
sincerely look upon him and his Family
as Objects of great Compassion.’ —And
now, Mr. Jones, I must ask you a Favour.—’ 
‘A Favour, Madam, (cries Tom) if you
knew the Pleasure you have given me in
the Hopes of receiving a Command from
you, you would think by mentioning it you
must confer the greatest Favour on me; 

for by this dear Hand I would sacrifice
my Life to oblige you.’ 
He then snatched her Hand, and eagerly
kissed it, which was the first Time his Lips
had ever touched her. The Blood, which
before had forsaken her Cheeks, now made
her sufficient Amends, by rushing all over
her Face and Neck with such Violence, that
they became all of a scarlet Colour. She
now first felt a Sensation to which she had
been before a Stranger, and which, when
she had Leisure to reflect on it, began to
acquaint her with some Secrets, which
the Reader, if he doth not already guess
them, will know in due Time. 
Sophia, as soon as she could speak (which
was not instantly) informed him, that the
Favour she had to desire of him, was not to
lead her Father through so many Dangers
in Hunting; for that, from what she had
heard, she was terribly frightened every
Time they went out together, and expected
some Day or other to see her Father
brought Home with broken Limbs. She
therefore begged him, for her Sake, to be
more cautious; and, as he well knew Mr.
Western would follow him, not to ride so 

madly, nor to take those dangerous Leaps
for the future. 
Tom faithfully promised to obey her Commands; 
and after thanking her for her kind
Compliance with his Request, took his
Leave, and departed highly charmed with
his Success. 
Poor Sophia was charmed too; but in a
very different Way. Her Sensations; however,
the Reader's Heart (if he or she
have any) will better represent than I can,
if I had as many Mouths as ever Poet
wished for, to eat, I suppose, those many
Dainties with which he was so plentifully
provided. 
It was Mr. Western's Custom every Afternoon,
as soon as he was drunk, to hear
his Daughter play on the Harpsichord: for
he was a great Lover of Music, and perhaps,
had he lived in Town, might have
passed for a Connoisseur: for he always excepted
against the finest Compositions of
Mr. Handel. He never relished any Music
but what was light and airy; and indeed
his most favourite Tunes, were Old Sir
Simon the King, St. George he was for England,
Bobbing Joan, and some others. 

His Daughter, though she was a perfect
Mistress of Music, and would never willingly
have played any but Handel's, was
so devoted to her Father's Pleasure, that
she learnt all those Tunes to oblige him. 
However, she would now and then endeavour
to lead him into her own Taste, and
when he required the Repetition of his Ballads,
would answer with a ‘Nay, dear Sir,’ 
and would often beg him to suffer her to
play something else. 
This Evening, however, when the
Gentleman was retired from his Bottle, she
played all his Favourites three Times over,
without any Solicitation. This so pleased
the good Squire, that he started from his
Couch, gave his Daughter a Kiss, and
swore her Hand was greatly improved. She
took this Opportunity to execute her Promise
to Tom, in which she succeeded so well,
that the Squire declared, if she would give
him t'other Bout of old Sir Simon, he
would give the Game-keeper his Deputation
the next Morning. Sir Simon was played
again and again, till the Charms of the
Music soothed Mr. Western to sleep. In
the Morning Sophia did not fail to remind
him of his Engagement, and his Attorney 

was immediately sent for, ordered to stop
any further Proceedings in the Action, and
to make out the Deputation. 
Tom's Success in this Affair soon began
to ring over the Country, and various were
the Censures past upon it. Some greatly
applauding it as an Act of good Nature,
others sneering, and saying, ‘No Wonder
that one idle Fellow should love another.’ 
Young Blifil was greatly enraged at it. He
had long hated Black George in the same
Proportion as Jones delighted in him; not
from any Offence which he had ever received,
but from his great Love to Religion
and Virtue: For Black George had the
Reputation of a loose kind of a Fellow. 
Blifil therefore represented this as flying
in Mr. Allworthy's Face; and declared with
great Concern, that it was impossible to find
any other Motive for doing Good to such
a Wretch. 
Thwackum and Square likewise sung to the
same Tune: They were now (especially
the latter) become greatly jealous of young
Jones with the Widow: For he now approached
the Age of Twenty, was really
a fine young Fellow; and that Lady, by 

her Encouragements to him, seemed daily
more and more to think him so. 
Allworthy was not, however, moved with
their Malice. He declared himself very
well satisfied with what Jones had done. 
He said, the Perseverance and Integrity of
his Friendship was highly commendable, and
he wished he could see more frequent Instances
of that Virtue. 
But Fortune, who seldom greatly relishes
such Sparks as my Friend Tom, perhaps,
because they do not pay more ardent Addresses
to her, gave now a very different
Turn to all his Actions, and shewed
them to Mr. Allworthy in a Light far less
agreeable than that Gentleman's Goodness
had hitherto seen them in. 




An Apology for the Insensibility of Mr. Jones, to all the Charms of the lovely Sophia; 
in which possibly we may, in a considerable
Degree, lower his Character in the
Estimation of those Men of Wit and Gallantry,
who approve the Heroes in most
of our modern Comedies. 
There are two Sorts of People,
who I am afraid, have already conceived
some Contempt for my Heroe, on
Account of his Behaviour to Sophia. The
former of these will blame his Prudence in
neglecting an Opportunity to possess himself
of Mr. Western's Fortune; and the latter
will no less despise him for his Backwardness
to so fine a Girl, who seemed
ready to fly into his Arms, if he would
open them to receive her. 
Now, though I shall not perhaps be able
absolutely to acquit him of either of these
Charges; (for Want of Prudence admits of
no Excuse; and what I shall produce against
the latter Charge, will, I apprehend,
be scarce satisfactory;) yet as Evidence may 

sometimes be offered in Mitigation, I shall
set forth the plain Matter of Fact, and leave
the whole to the Reader's Determination. 
Mr. Jones had Somewhat about him,
which, though I think Writers are not thoroughly
agreed in its Name, doth certainly
inhabit some human Breasts; whose Use is
not so properly to distinguish Right from
Wrong, as to prompt and incite them to
the former, and to restrain and with-hold
them from the latter. 
This Somewhat may be indeed resembled
to the famous Trunk-maker in the Playhouse:
for whenever the Person who is
possessed of it doth what is right, no ravished
or friendly Spectator is so eager, or
so loud in his Applause; on the contrary,
when he doth wrong, no Critic is so apt to
hiss and explode him. 
To give a higher Idea of the Principle I
mean, as well as one more familiar to the
present Age; it may be considered as sitting
on its Throne in the Mind, like the Lord
High Chancellor of this Kingdom in his
Court; where it presides, governs, directs, judges,
acquits and condemns according to Merit
and Justice; with a Knowledge which nothing 

escapes, a Penetration which nothing can deceive,
and an Integrity which nothing can corrupt. 
This active Principle may perhaps be
said to constitute the most essential Barrier
between us, and our Neighbours the Brutes; 
for if there be some in the human Shape,
who are not under any such Dominion, I
chuse rather to consider them as Deserters
from us to our Neighbours; among whom
they will have the Fate of Deserters, and
not be placed in the first Rank. 
Our Heroe, whether he derived it from
Thwackum or Square I will not determine,
was very strongly under the Guidance of
this Principle: for though he did not always
act rightly, yet he never did otherwise
without feeling and suffering for it. 
It was this which taught him, that to repay
the Civilities and little Friendships of Hospitality
by robbing the House where you
have received them, is to be the basest and
meanest of Thieves. He did not think the
Baseness of this offence lessened by the
Height of the Injury committed; on the
contrary, if to steal another's Plate deserved
Death and Infamy, it seemed to him difficult
to assign a Punishment adequate to the 

robbing a Man of his whole Fortune, and
of his Child into the Bargain. 
This Principle therefore prevented him
from any Thought of making his Fortune by
such Means (for this, as I have said, is an
active Principle, and doth not content itself
with Knowledge or Belief only.) Had
he been greatly enamoured of Sophia, he
possibly might have thought otherwise; 
but give me Leave to say, there is great
Difference between running away with a
Man's Daughter from the Motive of Love,
and doing the same Thing from the Motive
of Theft. 
Now though this young Gentleman was
not insensible of the Charms of Sophia; tho'
he greatly liked her Beauty, and esteemed
all her other Qualifications, she had made,
however, no deep Impression on his Heart: 
For which, as it renders him liable to the
Charge of Stupidity, or at least of Want of
Taste, we shall now proceed to account. 
The Truth then is, his Heart was in the
Possession of another Woman. Here I
question not, but the Reader will be surprized
at our long Taciturnity as to this
Matter; and at no less Loss to divine who 

this Woman was; since we have hitherto
not dropt a Hint of any one likely to be a
Rival to Sophia: For as to Mrs. Blifil,
though we have been obliged to mention
some Suspicions of her Affection for Tom,
we have not hitherto given the least Latitude
for imagining that he had any for her; 
and, indeed, I am sorry to say it, but the
Youth of both Sexes are too apt to be deficient
in their Gratitude, for that Regard
with which Persons more advanced in Years
are sometimes so kind to honour them. 
That the Reader may be no longer in
Suspence, he will be pleased to remember,
that we have often mentioned the Family
of George Seagrim, commonly called Black
George, the Game-keeper, which consisted
at present of a Wife and five Children. 
The second of these Children was a
Daughter, whose Name was Molly, and
who was esteemed one of the handsomest
Girls in the whole Country. 
Congreve well says, There is in true
Beauty something which vulgar Souls cannot
admire; so can no Dirt or Rags hide this
Something from those Souls which are not
of the vulgar Stamp. 

The Beauty of this Girl made, however,
no Impression on Tom, till she grew towards
the Age of Sixteen, when Tom, who
was near three Years older, began first to
cast the Eyes of Affection upon her. And
this Affection he had fixed on the Girl
long before he could bring himself to attempt
the Possession of her Person: for tho'
his Constitution urged him greatly to this,
his Principles no less forcibly restrained him. 
To debauch a young Woman, however low
her Condition was, appeared to him a
very heinous Crime; and the Good-will he
bore the Father, with the Compassion he
had for his Family, very strongly corroborated
all such sober Reflections; so that
he once resolved to get the better of his
Inclinations, and he actually abstained three
whole Months without ever going to Seagrim's
House, or seeing his Daughter. 
Now though Molly was, as we have said,
generally thought a very fine Girl, and
in reality she was so, yet her Beauty was
not of the most amiable Kind. It had indeed
very little of Feminine in it, and
would at least have become a Man as well
as a Woman; for, to say the Truth, Youth 

and florid Health had a very considerable
Share in the Composition. 
Nor was her Mind more effeminate than
her Person. As this was tall and robust, so
was that bold and forward. So little had she
of Modesty, that Jones had more Regard for
her Virtue than she herself. And as most probably
she liked Tom as well as he liked her, so
when she perceived his Backwardness, she herself
grew proportionably forward; and when
she saw he had entirely deserted the House,
she found Means of throwing herself in his
Way, and behaved in such a Manner, that
the Youth must have had very much, or
very little of the Heroe, if her Endeavours
had proved unsuccessful. In a Word, she
soon triumphed over all the virtuous Resolutions
of Jones: For though she behaved
at last with all decent Reluctance, yet I
rather chuse to attribute the Triumph to
her, Since, in Fact, it was her Design
which succeeded. 
In the Conduct of this Matter, Molly so
well played her Part, that Jones attributed
the Conquest entirely to himself, and considered
the young Woman as one who had
yielded to the violent Attacks of his Passion. 
He likewise imputed her yielding, to the 

ungovernable Force of her Love towards
him; and this the Reader will allow to
have been a very natural and probable Supposition,
as we have more than once mentioned
the uncommon Comeliness of his
Person: And indeed he was one of the
handsomest young Fellows in the World. 
As there are some Minds whose Affections,
like Master Blifil's, are solely placed
on one single Person, whose Interest and indulgence alone
they consider on every Occasion; 
regarding the Good and Ill of all others
as merely indifferent, any farther than as
they contribute to the Pleasure or Advantage
of that Person: So there is a different
Temper of Mind which borrows a Degree
of Virtue even from Self-love; such can
never receive any kind of Satisfaction from
another, without loving the Creature to
whom that Satisfaction is owing, and without
making its Well-being in some sort necessary
to their own Ease. 
Of this latter Species was our Heroe. He
considered this poor Girl as one whose Happiness
or Misery he bad caused to be dependent
on himself. Her Beauty was still
the Object of Desire, though greater Beauty,
or a fresher Object, might have been more 

so; but the little Abatement which Fruition
had occasioned to this, was highly overballanced
by the Considerations of the Affection
which she visibly bore him, and of
the Situation into which he had brought
her. The former of these created Gratitude,
the latter Compassion; and both together
with his Desire for her Person, raised
in him a Passion, which might, without any
great Violence to the Word, be called Love; 
though, perhaps, it was at first not very
judiciously placed. 
This then was the Reason of that Insensibility
which he had shewn of the Charms
of Sophia, and of that Behaviour in her,
which might have been reasonably enough
interpreted as an Encouragement to his Addresses: 
For as he could not think of
abandoning his Molly, poor and destitute
as she was, so no more could he entertain
a Notion of betraying such a Creature as
Sophia. And surely, had he given the least
Encouragement to any Passion for that young
Lady, he must have been absolutely guilty of
one or other of those Crimes; either of which
would, in my Opinion, have very justly
subjected him to that Fate, which at his
first Introduction into this History, I mentioned
to have been generally predicted as
his certain Destiny. 



Being the shortest Chapter in this Book. 
Her Mother first perceived the Alteration
in the Shape of Molly, and
in order to hide it from her Neighbours,
she foolishly clothed her in that Sack which
Sophia had sent her. Though indeed that
young Lady had little Apprehension, that the
poor Woman would have been weak enough
to let any of her Daughters wear it in that
Form. 
Molly was charmed with the first Opportunity
she had ever had of shewing her
Beauty to Advantage; for though she could
very well bear to contemplate herself in the
Glass, even when drest in Rags; and
though she had in that Dress conquered
the Heart of Jones, and perhaps of some
others; yet she thought the Addition of
Finery would much improve her Charms,
and extend her Conquests. 
Molly, therefore, having dressed herself
out in this Sack, with a new laced Cap, and
some other Ornaments which Tom had given
her, repairs to Church with her Fan in her 

Hand the very next Sunday. The Great are
deceived, if they imagine they have appropriated
Ambition and Vanity to themselves. 
These noble Qualities flourish as notably in
a Country Church, and Church-yard, as in the
Drawing-Room, or in the Closet. Schemes
have indeed been laid in the Vestry, which
would hardly disgrace the Conclave. Here
is a Ministry, and here is an Opposition. 
Here are Plots and Circumventions, Parties
and Factions, equal to those which are
to be found in Courts. 
Nor are the Women here less practised in
the highest Feminine Arts than their fair
Superiors in Quality and Fortune. Here
are Prudes and Coquettes. Here are Dressing
and Ogling, Falshood, Envy, Malice,
Scandal; in short, every Thing which is
common to the most splendid Assembly,
or politest Circle. Let those of high Life,
therefore, no longer despise the Ignorance
of their Inferiors; nor the Vulgar any longer
rail at the Vices of their Betters. 
Molly had seated herself some time before she
was known by her Neighbours; and a Whisper
ran through the whole Congregation, ‘Who
is she?’ But when she was discovered, such
sneering, gigling, tittering, and laughing, 

ensued among the Women, that Mr. Allworthy
was obliged to exert his Authority
to preserve any Decency among them. 



A Battle sung by the Muse in the Homerican
Stile, and which none but the classical Reader
can taste. 
Mr. Western had an Estate in this Parish; 
and as his House stood at little
greater Distance from this Church than from
his own, he very often came to divine Service
here; and both he and the charming Sophia
happened to be present at this Time. 
Sophia was much pleased with the Beauty of
the Girl, whom she pitied for her Simplicity,
in having dressed herself in that Manner,
as she saw the Envy which it had
occasioned among her Equals. She no
sooner came home, than she sent for the
Game-keeper, and ordered him to bring his
Daughter to her; saying, She would provide
for her in the Family, and might possibly
place the Girl about her own Person,
when her own Maid, who was now going
away, had left her. 

Poor Seagrim was thunderstruck at this; 
for he was no Stranger to the Fault in the
Shape of his Daughter. He answered, in
a stammering Voice, ‘That he was afraid
Molly would be too aukward to wait on
her Ladyship, as she had never been at
Service.’ ‘No matter for that,’ says
Sophia, ‘she will soon improve. I am
pleased with the Girl, and am resolved to
try her.’ 
Black George now repaired to his Wife,
on whose prudent Council he depended to
extricate him out of this Dilemma; but
when he came thither, he found his House
in some Confusion. So great Envy had
this Sack occasioned, that when Mr. Allworthy
and the other Gentry were gone
from Church, the Rage, which had hitherto
been confined, burst into an Uproar, and, having
vented itself at first in opprobrious Words,
Laughs, Hisses, and Gestures, betook itself
at last to certain missile Weapons; 
which, though from their plastic Nature
they threatened neither the Loss of Life or
of Limb, were however sufficiently dreadful
to a well-dressed Lady. Molly had too
much Spirit to bear this Treatment tamely. 
Having therefore—But hold, as we 

are diffident of our own Abilities, let us here
invite a superior Power to our Assistance. 
Ye Muses then, whoever ye are, who
love to sing Battles, and principally thou,
who whileom didst recount the Slaughter
in those Fields where Hudibras and Trulla
fought, if thou wert not starved with thy
Friend Butler, assist me on this great Occasion. 
All things are not in the Power of
all. 
As a vast Herd of Cows in a rich Farmer's
Yard, if, while they are milked, they
hear their Calves at a Distance, lamenting
the Robbery which is then committing, roar
and bellow: So roared forth the Somersetshire
Mob an Hallaloo, made up of almost
as many Squawls, Screams, and other different
Sounds, as there were Persons, or
indeed Passions, among them: Some
were inspired by Rage, others alarmed
by Fear, and others had nothing in their
Heads but the Love of Fun; but chiefly
Envy, the Sister of Satan, and his constant
Companion, rushed among the Crowd,
and blew up the Fury of the Women; who
no sooner came up to Molly, than they
pelted her with Dirt and Rubbish. 

Molly, having endeavoured in vain to
make a handsome Retreat, faced about; 
and laying hold of ragged Bess, who advanced
in the Front of the Enemy, she at
one Blow felled her to the Ground. The
whole Army of the Enemy (though near a
hundred in Number) seeing the Fate of
their General, gave back many Paces, and
retired behind a new-dug Grave; for the
Church-yard was the Field of Battle, where
there was to be a Funeral that very Evening. 
Molly pursued her Victory, and catching
up a Skull which lay on the Side of the
Grave, discharged it with such Fury, that
having hit a Taylor on the Head, the two
Skulls sent equally forth a hollow Sound at
their Meeting, and the Taylor took presently
measure of his Length on the Ground,
where the Skulls lay side by side, and it was
doubtful which was the most valuable of the
two. Molly then taking a Thigh Bone
in her Hand, fell in among the flying
Ranks, and dealing her Blows with great
Liberality on either Side, overthrew the
Carcass of many a mighty Heroe and
Heroine. 
Recount, O Muse, the Names of those
who fell on this fatal Day. First Jemmy 

Tweedle felt on his hinder Head the direful
Bone. Him the pleasant Banks of sweetly
winding Stower had nourished, where he
first learnt the vocal Art, with which, wandring
up and down at Wakes and Fairs,
he cheered the rural Nymphs and Swains,
when upon the Green they interweave the
sprightly Dance; while he himself stood fidling
and jumping to his own Music. How
little now avails his Fiddle? He thumps
the verdant Floor with his Carcass. Next
old Echepole, the Sow-gelder, received a
Blow in his Forehead from our Amazonian
Heroine, and immediately fell to the
Ground. He was a swinging fat Fellow,
and fell with almost as much Noise as a
House. His Tobacco-box dropt at the
same Time from his Pocket, which Molly
took up as lawful Spoils. Then Kate of
the Mill tumbled unfortunately over a
Tombstone, which catching hold of her ungartered
Stocking, inverted the Order of
Nature, and gave her Heels the Superiority
to her Head. Betty Pippin, with young
Roger her Lover, fell both to the Ground. 
Where, O perverse Fate, she salutes the
Earth, and he the Sky. Tom Freckle, the
Smith's Son, was the next Victim to her
Rage. He was an ingenious Workman,
and made excellent Pattins; nay the very 

Pattin with which he was knocked down
was his own Workmanship. Had he been
at that Time singing Psalms in the Church,
he would have avoided a broken Head. 
Miss Crow, the Daughter of a Farmer; 
John Giddish, himself a Farmer; Nan
Slouch, Esther Codling, Will Spray, Tom
Bennet; the three Misses Potter, whose
Father keeps the Sign of the Red Lion.
Betty Chambermaid, Jack Ostler, and many
others of inferior Note, lay rolling among
the Graves. 
Not that the strenuous Arm of Molly
reached all these; for many of them in their
Flight overthrew each other. 
But now Fortune, fearing she had acted
out of Character, and had inclined too long to
the same Side, especially as it was the right
Side, hastily turned about: For now Goody
Brown, whom Zekiel Brown caresses in his
Arms; nor he alone, but half the Parish
besides; so famous was she in the Fields of
Venus, nor indeed less in those of Mars. 
The Trophies of both these, her Husband
always bore about on his Head and Face; 
for if ever human Head did by its Horns
display the amorous Glories of a Wife, 

Zekiel's did; nor did his well-scratched
Face less denote her Talents (or rather
Talons) of a different Kind. 
No longer bore this Amazon the shameful
Flight of her Party. She stopt short,
and calling aloud to all who fled, spoke as
follows: ‘Ye Somersetshire Men, or rather
ye Somersetshire Women, are ye not
ashamed, thus to fly from a single Woman; 
but if no other will oppose her, I
myself and Joan Top here will have the
Honour of the Victory.’ Having thus
said, she flew at Molly Seagrim, and easily
wrenched the Thigh Bone from her Hand,
at the same Time clawing off her Cap from
her Head. Then laying hold of the Hair of
Molly, with her Left Hand, she attacked her
so furiously in the Face with the Right,
that the Blood soon began to trickle from
her Nose. Molly was not idle this while. 
She soon removed the Clout from the Head
of Goody Brown, and then fastening on her
Hair with one Hand, with the other she
caused the same bloody Stream to issue forth
from the Nostrils of the Enemy. 
When each of the Combatants had bore
off sufficient Spoils of Hair from the Head
of her Antagonist, the next Rage was 

against their Garments. In this Attack they
exerted so much Violence, that in a very
few Minutes, they were both naked to the
middle. 
It is lucky for the Women, that the Seat
of Fistycuff-War is not the same with them
as among Men; but though they may seem
a little to deviate from their Sex, when they
go forth to Battle, yet I have observed they
never so far forget it, as to assail the Bosoms of
each other; where a few Blows would be fatal
to most of them. This, I know, some derive
from their being of a more bloody Inclination
than the Males. On which Account
they apply to the Nose, as to the Part
whence Blood may most easily be drawn; 
but this seems a far-fetched, as well as ill-natured
Supposition. 
Goody Brown had great Advantage of
Molly in this Particular; for the former had
indeed no Breasts, her Bosom (if it may be
so called) as well in Colour as in many
other Properties, exactly resembling an antient
Piece of Parchment, upon which any
one might have drummed a considerable
while, without doing her any great Damage. 

Molly, beside her present unhappy Condition,
was differently formed in those Parts,
and might, perhaps, have tempted the
Envy of Brown to give her a fatal Blow,
had not the lucky Arrival of Tom Jones at
this Instant put an immediate End to the
bloody Scene. 
This Accident was luckily owing to Mr.
Square; for he, Master Blifil, and Jones,
had mounted their Horses, after Church, to
take the Air, and had ridden about a Quarter
of a Mile, when Square, changing his
Mind, (not idly, but for a Reason which we
shall unfold as soon as we have Leisure) desired
the young Gentlemen to ride with him
another Way than they had at first purposed. 
This Motion being complied with, brought
them of Necessity back again to the Church-yard. 
Master Blifil, who rode first, seeing such
a Mob assembled, and two Women in the
Posture in which we left the Combatants,
stopt his Horse to enquire what was the
Matter. A Country Fellow, scratching his
Head, answered him; ‘I don't know
Measter un't I; an't please your Honour,
here hath been a Vight, I think, between 

Goody Brown and Mol Seagrim.’ ‘Who,
who, cries Tom?’ but without waiting
for an Answer, having discovered the Features
of his Molly through all the Discomposure
in which they now were, he hastily
alighted, turned his Horse loose, and leaping
over the Wall, ran to her. She now,
first bursting into Tears, told him how barbarously
she had been treated. Upon which,
forgetting the Sex of Goody Brown, or perhaps
not knowing it, in his Rage; for, in
reality, she had no feminine Appearance,
but a Petticoat, which he might not observe,
he gave her a Lash or two with his
Horsewhip; and then flying at the Mob,
who were all accused by Molly, he dealt
his Blows so profusely on all Sides, that unless
I would again invoke the Muse, (which
the good-natured Reader may think a little
too hard upon her, as she hath so lately
been violently sweated) it would be impossible
for me to recount the Horsewhipping
of that Day. 
Having scoured the whole Coast of the
Enemy, as well as any of Homer's Heroes
ever did, or as Don Quixotte, or any Knight
Errand in the World could have done, he
returned to Molly, whom he found in a
Condition, which must give both me and 

my Reader Pain, was it to be described here. 
Tom raved like a Madman, beat his Breast,
tore his Hair, stamped on the Ground, and
vowed the utmost Vengeance on all who had
been concerned. He then pulled off his
Coat, and buttoned it round her, put his
Hat upon her Head, wiped the Blood from
her Face as well as he could with his Handkerchief,
and called out to the Servant to
ride as fast as possible for a Side-saddle, or
a Pillion, that he might carry her safe
home. 
Master Blifil objected to the sending away
the Servant, as they had only one with
them; but as Square seconded the Order of
Jones, he was obliged to comply. 
The Servant returned in a very short
Time with the Pillion, and Molly, having
collected her Rags as well as she could, was
placed behind him. In which Manner she
was carried home, Square, Blifil, and Jones,
attending. 
Here Jones, having received his Coat, given
her a sly Kiss, and whispered her that
he would return in the Evening, quitted
his Molly, and rode on after his Companions. 




Containing Matters of no very peaceable
Colour. 
Molly had no sooner apparelled
herself in her accustomed Rags, than
her Sisters began to fall violently upon her; 
particularly her elder Sister, who told her
she was well enough served. ‘How had
she the Assurance to wear a Gown which
young Madam Western had given to
Mother! If one of us was to wear it, I
think,’ says she, ‘I myself have the best
Right; but I warrant you think it belongs
to your Beauty. I suppose you
think yourself more handsomer than any
of us.’ ‘Hand her down the Bit of Glass
from over the Cupboard,’ cries another,
‘I'd wash the Blood from my Face before
I tauked of my Beauty.’ ‘You'd better
have minded what the Parson says,’ cries
the eldest, ‘and not a harkened after Men
Voke.’ ‘Indeed, Child, and so she had,’ 
says the Mother sobbing, ‘she hath brought
a Disgrace upon us all. She's the vurst
of the Vamily that ever was a Whore.’ 
‘You need not upbraid me with that, Mother,’ 

cries Molly, ‘you yourself was
brought to-bed of Sister there within a
Week after you was married.’ ‘Yes,
Hussy,’ answered the enraged Mother, ‘so
I was, and what was the mighty Matter
of that? I was made an honest Woman
then; and if you was to be made an honest
Woman, I should not be angry; 
but you must have to doing with a Gentleman,
you nasty Slut, you will have a
Bastard, Hussy, you will; and that I
defy any one to say of me.’ 
In this Situation Black George found his
Family, when he came home for the Purpose
before mentioned. As his Wife and
three Daughters were all of them talking
together, and most of them crying, it was
some time before he could get an Opportunity
of being heard; but as soon as such
an Interval occurred, he acquainted the
Company with what Sophia had said to
him. 
Goody Seagrim then began to revile her
Daughter afresh. ‘Here,’ says she, ‘you
have brought us into a fine Quandary indeed. 
What will Madam say to that
big Belly? Oh that ever I should live to
see this Day.’ 

Molly answered with great Spirit, ‘And
what is this mighty Place which you have
got for me, Father?’ (for he had not
well understood the Phrase used by Sophia
of being about her Person) ‘I suppose
it is to be under the Cook; but I
shan't wash Dishes for any Body. My
Gentleman will provide better for me. 
See what he hath given me this Afternoon; 
he hath promised I shall never
want Money; and you shan't want Money
neither, Mother, if you will hold
your Tongue, and know when you are
well.’ And so saying, she pulled out several
Guineas, and gave her Mother one
of them. 
The good Woman no sooner felt the
Gold within her Palm, than her Temper
began (such is the Efficacy of that Panacea)
to be mollified. ‘Why Husband,’ says
she, ‘would any but such a Blockhead as
you not have enquired what Place this
was before he had accepted it! Perhaps,
as Molly says, it may be in the Kitchin,
and truly I don't care my Daughter
should be a Scullion Wench: For poor
as I am, I am a Gentlewoman. And
thof I was obliged, as my Father, who 

was a Clergyman died worse than nothing,
and so could not give me a Shilling
of Potion, to undervalue myself, by
marrying a poor Man, yet I would have
you to know, I have a Spirit above all
them Things. Marry come up, it would
better become Madam Western to look at
Home, and remember who her own
Grandfather was. Some of my Family,
for ought I know, might ride in their
Coaches, when the Grandfathers of some
Voke walked a-voot. I warrant she fancies
she did a mighty Matter, when she
sent us that old Gownd; some of my Family
would not have picked up such
Rags in the Street; but poor People are
always trampled upon.—The Parish need
not have been in such a Fluster with
Molly. —You might have told them,
Child, your Grandmother wore better
Things new out of the Shop.’ 
‘Well but, consider,’ cried George,
‘What Answer shall I make to Madam?’ 
‘I don't know what Answer,’ says she,
‘You are always bringing your Family
into one Quandary or other. Do you
remember when you shot the Partridge,
the Occasion of all our Misfortunes? Did,
not I advise you never to go into Squire 

Western's Manor? Did not I tell you
many a good Year ago what would come
of it? but you would have your own
headstrong Ways; yes, you would, you
Villain—’ 
Black George was, in the main, a peaceable
kind of Fellow, and nothing choleric,
nor rash, yet did he bear about him something
of what the Antients called the Irascible,
and which his Wife, if she had been
endowed with much Wisdom, would have
feared. He had long experienced, that
when the Storm grew very high Arguments
were but Wind, which served rather
to increase than to abate it. He was therefore
seldom unprovided with a small Switch,
a Remedy of wonderful Force, as he had
often essayed, and which the Word Villain
served as a Hint for his applying. 
No sooner, therefore, had this Symptom
appeared, than he had immediate Recourse
to the said Remedy, which though, as it
is usual in all very efficacious Medicines,
it at first seemed to heighten and inflame
the Disease, soon produced a total Calm,
and restored the Patient to perfect Ease and
Tranquility. 

This is, however, a kind of Horse-medicine,
which requires a very robust Constitution
to digest, and is therefore only
proper for the Vulgar, unless in one single
Instance, viz. where Superiority of Birth
breaks out; in which Case, we should not
think it very improperly applied by any
Husband whatever, if the Application
was not, in itself so base, that, like certain
Applications of the Physical Kind
which need not be mentioned, it so much
degrades and contaminates the Hand employed
in it, that no Gentleman should endure
the Thought of any Thing so low and
detestable. 
The whole Family were soon reduced
to a State of perfect Quiet: For the Virtue
of this Medicine, like that of Electricity, is
often communicated through one Person to
many others, who are not touched by the
Instrument. To say the Truth, as they
both operate by Friction, it may be doubted
whether there is not something analogous
between them, of which Mr. Freke
would do well to enquire before he publishes
the next Edition of his Book. 

A Council was now called, in which,
after many Debates, Molly still persisting
that she would not go to Service, it was
at length resolved, that Goody Seagrim
herself should wait on Miss Western, and
endeavour to procure the Place for her elder
Daughter, who declared great Readiness
to accept it; but Fortune, who seems
to have been an Enemy of this little Family,
afterwards put a Stop to her Promotion. 



A Story told by Mr. Supple, the Curate. 
The Penetration of Squire Western. His
great Love for his Daughter, and the Return
to it made by her. 
The next Morning Tom Jones hunted
with Mr. Western, and was at his
Return invited by that Gentleman to Dinner. 
The lovely Sophia shone forth that Day
with more Gaiety and Sprightliness than
usual. Her Battery was certainly levelled
at our Heroe; though, I believe, she herself
scarce yet knew her own Intention; 

but if she had any Design of charming him,
she now succeeded. 
Mr. Supple, the Curate of Mr. Allworthy's
Parish, made one of the Company. He was
a good-natured worthy Man; but chiefly
remarkable for his great Taciturnity at
Table, though his Mouth was never shut
at it. In short, he had one of the best Appetites
in the World. However, the Cloth
was no sooner taken away, than he always
made sufficient Amends for his Silence: 
For he was a very hearty Fellow; 
and his Conversation was often entertaining,
never offensive. 
At his first Arrival, which was immediately
before the Entrance of the Roast-beef,
he had given an Intimation that he had
brought some News with him, and was
beginning to tell, that he came that Moment
from Mr. Allworthy's, when the
Sight of the Roast-beef struck him dumb,
permitting him only to say Grace, and to
declare he must pay his Respect to the Baronet: 
For so he called the Sirloin. 
When Dinner was over, being reminded
by Sophia of his News, he began as
follows, ‘I believe, Lady, your Ladyship 

observed a young Woman at Church
yesterday at Even-song, who was drest in
one of your outlandish Garments; I think
I have seen your Ladyship in such a one. 
However, in the Country, such Dresses are 

Rara avis in Terris, nigroque simillima Cycno,
‘That is, Madam, as much as to say, 
‘A rare Bird upon the Earth, and very
like a black Swan. 
‘The Verse is in Juvenal: but to return
to what I was relating. I was saying
such Garments are rare Sights in the
Country, and perchance too, it was
thought the more rare, Respect being had
to the Person who wore it, who, they
tell me, is the Daughter of Black George,
your Worship's Game-keeper, whose
Sufferings I should have opined, might
have taught him more Wit than to dress
forth his Wenches in such gaudy Apparel. 
She created so much Confusion in
the Congregation, that if Squire Allworthy
had not silenced it, it would have
interrupted the Service: For I was once
about to stop in the Middle of the first 

Lesson. Howbeit, nevertheless, after
Prayer was over, and I was departed
home, this occasioned a Battle in the
Church-yard, where, amongst other Mischief,
the Head of a travelling Fidler
was very much braken. This Morning
the Fidler came to Squire Allworthy for
a Warrant, and the Wench was brought
before him. The Squire was inclined to
have compounded Matters; when, lo!
on a sudden, the Wench appeared (I ask
your Ladyship Pardon) to be, as it
were at the Eve of bringing forth a Bastard. 
The Squire demanded of her who
was the Father; but she pertinaciously
refused to make any Response. So that
he was about to make her Mittimus to
Bridewel, when I departed.’ 
‘And is a Wench having a Bastard all
your News, Doctor?’ cries Western. ‘I
thought it might have been some public
Matter, something about the Nation.’ 
‘I am afraid it is too common, indeed,’ 
answered the Parson, ‘but I thought the
whole Story all together deserved commemorating. 
As to National Matters,
your Worship knows them best. My 

Concerns extend no farther than my own Parish.’ 
‘Why ay,’ says the Squire,’ ‘I believe
I do know a little of that Matter, as
you say; but come, Tommy, drink about,
the Bottle stands with you.’ 
Tom begged to be excused, for that he
had particular Business; and getting up
from Table, escaped the Clutches of the
Squire who was rising to stop him, and
went off with very little Ceremony. 
The Squire gave him a good Curse at
his Departure; and then turning to the
Parson, he cried out, ‘I smoke it, I smoke
it. Tom is certainly the Father of this
Bastard.’ ‘Zooks, Parson, you remember
how he recommended the Veather
o'her to me—d&wblank;n uh, what a sly
B&wblank;ch 'tis. Ay, ay, as sure as Two-pence,
Tom is the Veather of the Bastard.’ 
‘I should be very sorry for that,’ says
the Parson. ‘Why sorry, cries the Squire,
Where is the mighty Matter o't? What,
I suppose, dost pretend that thee hast
never got a Bastard? Pox! more good
Luck's thine: for I warrant hast a done
therefore many's the good Time and often. 

Your Worship is pleased to be jocular,’ 
answered the Parson, ‘but I do not only
animadvert on the Sinfulness of the Action,
though that surely is to be greatly
deprecated; but I fear his Unrighteousness
may injure him with Mr. Allworthy. 
And truly I must say, though he hath
the Character of being a little wild, I
never saw any Harm in the young Man; 
nor can I say I have heard any, save
what your Worship now mentions. I
wish, indeed he was a little more regular
in his Responses at Church; but altogether
he seems 

‘Ingenui vultus puer ingenuiq; pudoris.
‘That is a classical Line, young
Lady, and being rendered into English,
is, A Lad of an ingenuous Countenance
and of an ingenuous Modesty: 
For this was a Virtue in great Repute
both among the Latins and Greeks. 
I must say the young Gentleman (for so
I think I may call him, notwithstanding
his Birth) appears to me a very modest,
civil Lad, and I should be sorry that he
should do himself any Injury in Squire
Allworthy's Opinion.’ 
‘Poogh!’ says the Squire, ‘Injury
with Allworthy! Why Allworthy loves a 

Wench himself. Doth not all the Country
know whose Son Tom is? You must
talk to another Person in that Manner. I
remember Allworthy at College.’ 
‘I thought,’ said the Parson, ‘he had
never been at the University.’ 
‘Yes, yes, he was,’ says the Squire,
‘and many a Wench have we two had
together. As errant a Whoremaster as
any within five Miles o'un. No, no. It
will do'n no Harm with he, assure your
self; nor with any Body else. Ask Sophy
there—You have not the worse Opinion
of a young Fellow for getting a
Bastard, have you, Girl? No, no, the
Women will like un the better for't.’ 
This was a cruel Question to poor Sophia. 
She had observed Tom's Colour change at
the Parson's Story; and that, with his
hasty and abrupt Departure, gave her sufficient
Reason to think her Father's Suspicion
not groundless. Her Heart now, at
once, discovered the great Secret to her,
which it had been so long disclosing by
little and little; and she found herself highly
interested in this Matter. In such a
Situation, her Father's malapert Question 

rushing suddenly upon her, produced some
Symptoms which might have alarmed a
suspicious Heart; but to do the Squire
Justice, that was not his Fault. When she
rose therefore from her Chair, and told
him, a Hint from him was always sufficient
to make her withdraw, he suffered her to
leave the Room; and then with great Gravity
of Countenance remarked, ‘that it was
better to see a Daughter over-modest, than
over-forward;’ a Sentiment which was highly
applauded by the Parson. 
There now ensued between the Squire
and the Parson, a most excellent political
Discourse, framed out of News-papers, and
political Pamphlets; in which they made
a Libation of four Bottles of Wine to the
Good of their Country; and then, the
Squire being fast asleep, the Parson lighted
his Pipe, mounted his Horse, and rode
home. 
When the Squire had finished his Half-hour's
Nap, he summoned his Daughter to
her Harpsichord; but she begged to be excused
that Evening, on Account of a violent
Head-ach. This Remission was presently
granted: For indeed she seldom had
Occasion to ask him twice, as he loved 

her with such ardent Affection, that by
gratifying her, he commonly conveyed the
highest Gratification to himself. She was
really what he frequently called her, his
little Darling; and she well deserved to be
so: For she returned all his Affection in
the most ample Manner. She had preserved
the most inviolable Duty to him in
all Things; and this her Love made not
only easy, but so delightful, that when one
of her Companions laughed at her for
placing so much Merit in such scrupulous
Obedience, as that young Lady called it,
Sophia answered, ‘You mistake me, Madam,
if you think I value myself upon
this Account: For besides that I am
barely discharging my Duty, I am likewise
pleasing myself. I can truly say, I
have no Delight equal to that of contributing
to my Father's Happiness; and if I
value myself, my Dear, it is on having
this Power, and not on executing it.’ 
This was a Satisfaction, however, which
poor Sophia was incapable of tasting this
Evening. She therefore not only desired
to be excused from her Attendance at the
Harpsichord, but likewise begged that he
would suffer her to absent herself from Supper. 
To this Request likewise the Squire 

agreed, though not without some Reluctance; 
for he scarce ever permitted her to
be out of his Sight, unless when he was engaged
with his Horses, Dogs, or Bottle. 
Nevertheless he yielded to the Desire of his
Daughter, though the poor Man was, at
the same Time, obliged to avoid his own
Company, (if I may so express myself) by
sending for a neighbouring Farmer to sit
with him. 



The narrow Escape of Molly Seagrim, with
some Observations for which we have been
forced to dive pretty deep into Nature. 
Tom Jones had ridden one of Mr.
Western's Horses that Morning in the
Chaise: so that having no Horse of his own
in the Squire's Stable, he was obliged to go
home on Foot. This he did so expeditiously,
that he ran upwards of three Miles within
the half Hour. 
Just as he arrived at Mr. Allworthy's outward
Gate, he met the Constable and Company,
with Molly in their Possession, whom
they were conducting to that House where 

the inferior Sort of People may learn one
good Lesson, viz. Respect and Deference
to their Superiors. Since it must shew them
the wide Distinction Fortune intends between
those Persons who are to be corrected
for their Faults, and those who are not; 
which Lesson, if they do not learn, I am
afraid, they very rarely learn any other
good Lesson, or improve their Morals, at
the House of Correction. 
A Lawyer may, perhaps, think Mr. Allworthy
exceeded his Authority a little in this
Instance. And, to fay the Truth, I
question, as here was no regular Information
before him, whether his Conduct was
strictly regular. However, as his Intention
was truly upright, he ought to be excused
in Foro Consientiæ, since so many arbitrary
Acts are daily committed by Magistrates,
who have not this Excuse to plead
for themselves. 
Tom was no sooner informed by the Constable,
whither they were proceeding, (indeed
he pretty well guessed it of himself)
than he caught Molly in his Arms, and embracing
her tenderly before them all, swore
he would murder the first Man who offered
to lay hold of her. He bid her dry her 

Eyes, and be comforted; for wherever she
went, he would accompany her. Then
turning to the Constable, who stood trembling
with his Hat off, he desired him, in a
very mild Voice, to return with him for a
Moment only to his Father, (so he now
called Allworthy) for he durst, he said, be
assured, that when he had alledged what he
had to say in her Favour, the Girl would be
discharged. 
The Constable, who, I make no Doubt,
would have surrendered his Prisoner, had
Tom demanded her, very readily consented
to this Request. So back they all went into
Mr. Allworthy's Hall; where Tom desired
them to stay till his Return, and then went
himself in Pursuit of the Good Man. As
soon as he was found, Tom threw himself at
his Feet, and having begged a patient Hearing,
confessed himself to be the Father of
the Child, of which Molly was then big. 
He entreated him to have Compassion on
the poor Girl, and to consider, if there
was any Guilt in the Case, it lay principally
at his Door. 
‘If there is any Guilt in the Case!’ answered
Allworthy warmly, ‘are you then
so profligate and abandoned a Libertine, 

to doubt whether the breaking the Laws
of God and Man, the corrupting and
ruining a poor Girl, be Guilt? I own,
indeed, it doth lie principally upon you,
and so heavy it is, that you ought to expect
it should crush you.’ 
‘Whatever may be my Fate, says Tom,
let me succeed in my Intercessions for the
poor Girl. I confess I have corrupted
her; but whether she shall be ruined depends
on you. For Heaven's Sake, Sir,
revoke your Warrant, and do not send
her to a Place which must unavoidably
prove her Destruction.’ 
Allworthy bid him immediately call a Servant. 
Tom answered, there was no Occasion; 
for he had luckily met them at the
Gate, and relying upon his Goodness, had
brought them all back into his Hall, where
they now waited his final Resolution, which,
upon his Knees, he besought him might be
in favour of the Girl; that she might be
permitted to go home to her Parents, and
not be exposed to a greater Degree of Shame
and Scorn than must necessarily fall upon
her. ‘I know, said he, that is too much. I know
I am the wicked Occasion of it. I will endeavour
to make Amends, if possible; and 

if you shall have hereafter the Goodness to
forgive me, I hope I shall deserve it.’ 
Allworthy hesitated some Time, and at
last said, ‘Well, I will discharge my Mittimus. 
—You may send the Constable to
me.’ He was instantly called, discharged,
and so was the Girl. 
It will be believed, that Mr. Allworthy
failed not to read Tom a very revere Lecture
on this Occasion; but it is unnecessary to
insert it here, as we have faithfully transcribed
what he said to Jenny Jones in the
first Book, most of which may be applied
to the Men, equally with the Women. So
sensible an Effect had these Reproofs on the
young Man, who was no hardened Sinner,
that he retired to his own Room, where he
passed the Evening alone in much melancholy
Contemplation. 
Allworthy was sufficiently offended by this
Transgression of Jones; for notwithstanding
the Assertions of Mr. Western, it is certain
this worthy Man had never indulged himself
in any loose Pleasures with Women,
and greatly condemned the Vice of Incontinence
in others. Indeed, there is much
Reason to imagine, that there was not the 

least Truth in what Mr. Western affirmed,
especially as he laid the Scene of those Impurities
at the University, where Mr. Allworthy
had never been. In fact, the good
Squire was a little too apt to indulge that
Kind of Pleasantry which is generally called
Rodomontade; but which may, with as much
Propriety, be expressed by a much shorter
Word; and, perhaps, we too often supply
the Use of this little Monosyllable by others; 
since very much of what frequently passes in the
World for Wit and Humour, should, in
the strictest Purity of Language, receive
that short Appellation, which, in Conformity
to the well-bred Laws of Custom, I
here suppress. 
But whatever Detestation Mr. Allworthy
had to this or to any other Vice, he was not
so blinded by it, but that he could discern
any Virtue in the guilty Person, as clearly,
indeed, as if there had been no Mixture of
Vice in the same Character. While he was
angry, therefore, with the Incontinence of
Jones, he was no less pleased with the Honour
and Honesty of his Self-accusation. 
He began now to form in his Mind the
same Opinion of this young Fellow which
we hope our Reader may have conceived. 
And in ballancing his Faults with his Perfections, 

the latter seemed rather to preponderate. 
It was to no Purpose, therefore, that
Thwackum, who was immediately charged
by Mr. Blifil with the Story, unbended all
his Rancour against poor Tom. Allworthy
gave a patient Hearing to these Invectives,
and then answered coldly; ‘That young
Men of Tom's Complexion were too generally
addicted to this Vice; but he believed
That Youth was sincerely affected
with what he had said to him on the Occasion,
and he hoped he would not transgress
again.’ So that, as the Days of
whipping were at an End, the Tutor had
no other Vent but his own Mouth for his
Gall, the usual poor Resource of impotent
Revenge. 
But Square, who was a less violent, was
a much more artful Man; and as he hated
Jones more, perhaps, than Thwackum himself,
so he contrived to do him more Mischief
in the Mind of Mr. Allworthy. 
The Reader must remember the several
little Incidents of the Partridge, the Horse,
and the Bible, which were recounted in the
second Book. By all which Jones had rather 

improved than injured the Affection
which Mr. Allworthy was inclined to entertain
for him. The same, I believe, must
have happened to him with every other
Person who hath any Idea of Friendship,
Generosity, and Greatness of Spirit; that is
to say, who hath any Traces of Goodness
in his Mind. 
Square himself was not unacquainted with
the true Impression which those several Instances
of Goodness had made on the excellent
Heart of Allworthy; for the Philosopher
very well knew what Virtue was,
though he was not always, perhaps, steady
in its Pursuit; but as for Thwackum, from
what Reason I will not determine, no such
Thoughts ever entered into his Head. He
saw Jones in a bad Light, and he imagined Allworthy
saw him in the same, but that he was
resolved, from Pride and Stubbornness of Spirit,
not to give up the Boy whom he had
once cherished, since, by so doing, he must
tacitly acknowledge that his former Opinion
of him had been wrong. 
Square therefore embraced this Opportunity
of injuring Jones in the tendereft Part,
by giving a very bad Turn to all there before-mentioned
Occurrences. ‘I am sorry, 

Sir,’ said he, ‘to own I have been deceived
as well as yourself. I could not,
I confess, help being pleased with what I
ascribed to the Motive of Friendship,
though it was carried to an Excess, and
all Excess is faulty, and vicious; but in
this I made Allowance for Youth. Little
did I suspect that the Sacrifice of
Truth, which we both imagined to have
been made to Friendship, was, in reality,
a Prostitution of it to a depraved and debauched
Appetite. You now plainly see
whence all the seeming Generosity of this
young Man to the Family of the Gamekeeper
proceeded. He supported the Father
in order to corrupt the Daughter, and
preserved the Family from starving, to
bring one of them to Shame and Ruin. 
This is Friendship! this is Generosity! 
As Sir Richard Steele says, Gluttons who
give high Prices for Delicacies, are very
worthy to be called generous. In short,
I am resolved, from this Instance, never
to give Way to the Weakness of Human
Nature more, nor to think any thing Virtue
which doth not exactly quadrate with
the unerring Rule of Right.’ 
The Goodness of Allworthy had prevented
those Considerations from occurring to himself; 

yet were they too plausible to be absolutely
and hastily rejected, when laid before
his Eyes by another. Indeed what Square
had said sunk very deeply into his Mind,
and the Uneasiness which it there created
was very visible to the other; though the
good Man would not acknowledge this,
but made a very slight Answer, and forcibly
drove off the Discourse to some other
Subject. It was well, perhaps, for poor
Tom, that no such Suggestions had been
made before he was pardoned; for they
certainly stamped in the Mind of Allworthy
the first bad Impression concerning Jones. 



Containing much clearer Matters; but which
flow from the same Fountain with those in
the preceding Chapter. 
The Reader will be pleased, I believe,
to return with me to Sophia. She passed
the Night, after we saw her last, in no
very agreeable Manner. Sleep befriended
her but little, and Dreams less. In the
Morning, when Mrs. Honour her Maid attended
her, at the usual Hour, she was
found already up and drest. 

Persons who live two or three Miles Distance
in the Country are considered as next
Door Neighbours, and Transactions at the one
House fly with incredible Celerity to the other. 
Mrs. Honour, therefore, had heard the
whole Story of Molly's Shame; which she,
being of a very communicative Temper, had
no sooner entered the Apartment of her
Mistress, than she began to relate in the
following Manner: 
‘La Ma'am, what doth your La'ship
think? the Girl that your La'ship saw at
Church on Sunday, whom you thought
so handsome; though you would not have
thought her so handsome neither, if you
had seen her nearer; but to be sure she
hath been carried before the Justice for
being big with Child. She seemed to me
to look like a confident Slut; and to be
sure she hath laid the Child to young
Mr. Jones. And all the Parish says Mr.
Allworthy is so angry with young Mr.
Jones, that he won't see him. To be
sure, one can't help pitying the poor
young Man, and yet he doth not deserve
much Pity neither, for demeaning himself
with such Kind of Trumpery. Yet
he is so pretty a Gentleman, I should be 

sorry to have him turned out of Doors. 
I dares to swear the Wench was as willing
as he; for she was always a forward
Kind of Body. And when Wenches are
so coming, young Men are not so much
to be blamed neither; for to be sure they
do no more than what is natural. Indeed
it is beneath them to meddle with such
dirty Draggle-tails, and whatever happens
to them, it is good enough for them. 
And yet to be sure the vile Baggages are
most in Fault. I wishes, with all my
Heart, they were well to be whipped 
the Cart's Tail; for it is Pity they should
be the Ruin of a pretty young Gentleman; 
and no body can deny but that
Mr. Jones is one of the most handsomest
young Men that ever—’ 
She was running on thus, when Sophia,
with a more peevish Voice than she had
ever spoken to her in before,cried, ‘Prithee
why do'st thou trouble me with all this
Stuff? What Concern have I in what
Mr. Jones doth? I suppose you are all
alike. And you seem to me to be angry
it was not your own Case.’ 
‘I, Ma'am!’ answered Mrs. Honour,
‘I am sorry your Ladyship should have 

such an Opinion of me. I am sure nobody
can say any such thing of me. All
the young Fellows in the World may go
to the Divil, for me. Because I said he
was a handsome Man! Every body says
it as well as I—To be sure, I never
thought as it was any Harm to say a
young Man was handsome; but to be
sure I shall never think him so any more
now; for handsome is that handsome
does. A Beggar Wench!—’ 
‘Stop thy Torrent of Impertinence,’ cries
Sophia, ‘and see whether my Father wants
me at Breakfast.’ 
Mrs. Honour then flung out of the Room,
muttering much to herself—of which— 
‘Marry come up, I assure you,’ was all that
could be plainly distinguished. 
Whether Mrs. Honour really deserved
that Suspicion, of which her Mistress gave
her a Hint, is a Matter which we cannot
indulge our Reader's Curiosity by resolving. 
We will however make him Amends, in
disclosing what passed in the Mind of
Sophia. 
The Reader will be pleased to recollect,
that a secret Affection for Mr. Jones had
insensibly stolen into the Bosom of this
young Lady. That it had there grown to
a pretty great Height before she herself had
discovered it. When she first began to
perceive its Symptoms, the Sensations were
so sweet and pleasing, that she had not
Resolution sufficient to check or repel
them; and thus she went on cherishing a
Passion of which she never once considered
the Consequences. 
This Incident relating to Molly, first
opened her Eyes. She now first perceived
the Weakness of which she had been guilty; 
and though it caused the utmost Perturbation
in her Mind, yet it had the Effect
of other nauseous Physic, and for the Time
expelled her Distemper. Its Operation indeed
was most wonderfully quick; and in
the short Interval, while her Maid was absent,
so entirely removed all Symptoms,
that when Mrs. Honour returned with a
Summons from her Father, she was become
perfectly easy, and had brought herself
to a thorough Indifference for Mr. Jones. 
The Diseases of the Mind do in almost
every Particular imitate those of the Body. 

For which Reason, we hope, That learned
Faculty, for whom we have so profound a
Respect, will pardon us the violent Hands
we have been necessitated to lay on several
Words and Phrases, which of Right belong
to them, and without which our Descriptions
must have been often unintelligible. 
Now there is no one Circumstance in
which the Distempers of the Mind bear a
more exact Analogy to those which are called
Bodily, than that Aptness which both have
to a Relapse. This is plain, in the violent
Diseases of Ambition and Avarice. I have
known Ambition, when cured at Court by
frequent Disappointments, (which are the
only Physic for it,) to break out again in
a Contest for Foreman of the Grand Jury
at an Assizes; and have heard of a Man
who had so far conquered Avarice, as to
give away many a Sixpence, that comforted
himself, at last, on his Death-bed, by
making a crafty and advantagious Bargain
concerning his ensuing Funeral, with an Undertaker
who had married his only Child. 
In the Affair of Love, which out of strict
Conformity with the Stoic Philosophy, we
shall here treat as a Disease, this Proneness
to relapse is no less conspicuous. Thus it 

happened to poor Sophia; upon whom, the
very next Time she saw young Jones, all
the former Symptoms returned, and from
that Time cold and hot Fits alternately
seized her Heart. 
The Situation of this young Lady was
now very different from what it had ever
been before. That Passion, which had formerly
been so exquisitely delicious, became
now a Scorpion in her Bosom. She resisted
it therefore with her utmost Force, and
summoned every Argument her Reason
(which was surprizingly strong for her Age)
could suggest, to subdue and expel it. In
this she so far succeeded, that she began
to hope from Time and Absence a perfect
Cure. She resolved therefore to avoid Tom
Jones, as much as possible; for which Purpose
she began to conceive a Design of visiting
her Aunt, to which she made no
Doubt of obtaining her Father's Consent. 
But Fortune, who had other Designs in
her Head, put an immediate Stop to any
such Proceeding, by introducing an Accident,
which will be related in the next Chapter. 




A dreadful Accident which befel Sophia. 
The gallant Behaviour of Jones, and the
more dreadful Consequence of that Behaviour
to the young Lady; with a short
Digression in Favour of the Female Sex. 
Mr. Western grew every Day fonder
and fonder of Sophia, insomuch that
his beloved Dogs themselves almost gave
Place to her in his Affections; but as he
could not prevail on himself to abandon
these, he contrived very cunningly to enjoy
their Company, together with that of his
Daughter, by insisting on her riding a hunting
with him. 
Sophia, to whom her Father's Word was
a Law, readily complied with his Desires,
though she had not the least Delight in
a Sport, which was of too rough and masculine
a Nature to suit with her Disposition. 
She had, however, another Motive, beside
her Obedience, to accompany the old Gentleman
in the Chace; for by her Presence
she hoped in some Measure to restrain his
Impetuosity, and to prevent him from so 

frequently exposing his Neck to the utmost
Hazard. 
The strongest Objection was that which
would have formerly been an Inducement
to her, namely, the frequent Meeting with
young Jones, whom she had determined
to avoid; but as the End of the hunting
Season now approached, she hoped, by a
short Absence with her Aunt, to reason
herself entirely out of her unfortunate Passion; 
and had not any Doubt of being able
to meet him in the Field the subsequent
Season without the least Danger. 
On the second Day of her Hunting, as she
was returning from the Chace, and was arrived
within a little Distance from Mr. Western's
House, her Horse, whose mettlesome
Spirit required a better Rider, fell suddenly to
prancing and capering, in such a Manner,
that she was in the most eminent Peril of
falling. Tom Jones, who was at a little
Distance behind, saw this, and immediately
galloped up to her Assistance. As soon as
he came up, he immediately leapt from
his own Horse, and caught hold of her's
by the Bridle. The unruly Beast presently
reared himself an End on his hind Legs, 

and threw his lovely Burthen from his Back,
and Jones caught her in his Arms. 
She was so affected with the Fright, that
she was not immediately able to satisfy
Jones, who was very sollicitous to know
whether she had received any Hurt. She
soon after, however, recovered her Spirits,
assured him she was safe, and thanked him
for the Care he had taken of her. Jones
answered, ‘If I have preserved you, Madam,
I am sufficiently repaid; for I promise
you, I would have secured you
from the least Harm, at the Expence of
a much greater Misfortune to myself,
than I have suffered on this Occasion.’ 
‘What Misfortune,’ replied Sophia,
eagerly, ‘I hope you have come to no
Mischief?’ 
‘Be not concerned, Madam,’ answered
Jones, ‘Heaven be praised, you have escaped
so well, considering the Danger
you was in. If I have broke my Arm,
I consider it as a Trifle, in Comparison
of what I feared upon your Account.’ 
Sophia then screamed out, ‘Broke your
Arm! Heaven forbid.’ 

‘I am afraid I have, Madam,’ says Jones,
‘but I beg you will suffer me first to take
Care of you. I have a Right-hand yet
at your Service, to help you into the
next Field, where we have but a very
little Walk to your Father's House.’ 
Sophia seeing his left Arm dangling by
his Side, while he was using the other to
lead her, no longer doubted of the Truth. 
She now grew much paler than her Fears
for herself had made her before. All her
Limbs were seized with a Trembling, insomuch
that Jones could scarce support her; 
and as her Thoughts were in no less Agitation,
she could not refrain from giving Jones
a Look so full of Tenderness, that it almost
argued a stronger Sensation in her
Mind, than even Gratitude and Pity united
can raise in the gentlest female Bosom,
without the Assistance of a third more
powerful Passion. 
Mr. Western, who was advanced at some
Distance when this Accident happened, was
now returned, as were the rest of the Horsemen. 
Sophia immediately acquainted them
with what had befallen Jones, and begged
them to take Care of him. Upon which, Western, 

who had been much alarmed by
meeting his Daughter's Horse without its
Rider, and was now overjoyed to find her
unhurt, cried out, ‘I am glad it is no
worse, if Tom hath broken his Arm, we
will get a Joiner to mend un again.’ 
The Squire alighted, from his Horse,
and proceeded to his House on foot, with
his Daughter and Jones. An impartial
Spectator, who had met them on the
Way, would, on viewing their several
Countenances, have concluded Sophia alone
to have been the Object of Compassion: 
For as to Jones, he exulted in having probably
saved the Life of the young Lady,
at the Price only of a broken Bone; and
Mr. Western, though he was not unconcerned
at the Accident which had befallen
Jones, was, however, delighted in a
much higher Degree with the fortunate Escape
of his Daughter. 
The Generosity of Sophia's Temper construed
this Behaviour of Jones into great Bravery; 
and it made a deep Impression on her Heart: 
For certain it is, that there is no one Quality
which so generally recommends Men
to Women as this; proceeding, if we believe
the common Opinion, from that natural 

Timidity of the Sex; which is, says
Mr. Osborne, so great, that a Woman is
‘the most cowardly of all the Creatures
God ever made.’ A Sentiment more remarkable
for its Bluntness, than for its
Truth. Aristotle, in his Politics, doth
them, I believe, more Justice, when he
says, ‘The Modesty and Fortitude of
Men differ from those Virtues in
Women; for the Fortitude which becomes
a Woman, would be Cowardice
in a Man; and the Modesty which becomes
a Man, would be Pertness in a
Woman.’ Nor is there, perhaps, more
of Truth in the Opinion of those who
derive the Partiality which Women are inclined
to shew to the Brave, from this Excess
of their Fear. Mr. Bayle (I think, in
his Article of Helen) imputes this, and with
greater Probability, to their violent Love of
Glory; for the Truth of which, we have the
Authority of him, who, of all others, saw
farthest into human Nature; and who introduces
the Heroine of his Odyssey, the
great Pattern of matrimonial Love and
Constancy, assigning the Glory of her
Husband as the only Source of her Affection
towards him. *  


However this be, certain it is that the
Accident operated very strongly on Sophia; 
and, indeed, after much Enquiry into the
Matter, I am inclined to believe, that at
this very Time, the charming Sophia made
no less Impression on the Heart of Jones; 
to say Truth, he had for some Time become
sensible of the irresistible Power of
her Charms. 



The Arrival of a Surgeon. His Operations,
and a long Dialogue between Sophia and her
Maid. 
When they arrived in Mr. Western's
Hall, Sophia, who had totter'd along
with much Difficulty, sunk down in a
Chair; but by the Assistance of Hartshorn
and Water, she was prevented from fainting
away, and had pretty well recovered
her Spirits, when the Surgeon, who was
sent for to Jones, appeared. Mr. Western,
who imputed these Symptoms in his
Daughter to her Fall, advised her to be
presently blooded by way of Prevention. 

In this Opinion he was seconded by the
Surgeon, who gave so many Reasons for
bleeding, and quoted so many Cases where
Persons had miscarried for want of it, that
the Squire became very importunate, and
indeed insisted peremptorily that his Daughter
should be blooded. 
Sophia soon yielded to the Commands of
her Father, though entirely contrary to
her own Inclinations: For she suspected,
I believe, less Danger from the Fright,
than either the Squire or the Surgeon. 
She then stretched out her beautiful Arm,
and the Operator began to prepare for his
Work. 
While the Servants were busied in providing
Materials; the Surgeon, who imputed
the Backwardness which had appeared
in Sophia to her Fears, began to
comfort her with Assurances that there was
not the least Danger; for no Accident, he said,
could ever happen in Bleeding, but from
the monstrous Ignorance of Pretenders to
Surgery, which he pretty plainly insinuated
was not at present to be apprehended. Sophia
declared she was not under the least Apprehension; 
adding, if you open an Artery, 

I promise you I'll forgive you; ‘Will
you,’ cries Western, ‘D&wblank;n me, if I
will; if he does thee the least Mischief,
d&wblank;n me, if I don't ha' the Heart's Blood
o'un out.’ The Surgeon assented to
bleed her upon these Conditions, and then
proceeded to his Operation, which he performed
with as much Dexterity as he had
promised; and with as much Quickness: 
For he took but little Blood from her, saying,
it was much safer to bleed again and
again, than to take away too much at once. 
Sophia, when her Arm was bound up,
retired: For she was not willing (nor was
it, perhaps, strictly decent) to be present
at the Operation on Jones. Indeed one
Objection which she had to Bleeding, (tho'
she did not make it) was the Delay which it
would occasion to dressing the broken Bone. 
For Western, when Sophia was concerned, had
no Consideration, but for her; and as for
Jones himself, he ‘sat like Patience on a
Monument smiling at Grief.’ To say the
Truth, when he saw the Blood springing
from the lovely Arm of Sophia, he scarce
thought of what had happened to himself. 

The Surgeon now ordered his Patient to
be stript to his Shirt, and then entirely
baring the Arm, he began to stretch and
examine it, in such a Manner, that the
Tortures he put him to, caused Jones to
make several wry Faces; which the Surgeon
observing, greatly wondered at, crying,
‘What is the Matter, Sir? I am sure it is
impossible I should hurt you.’ And then
holding forth the broken Arm, he began a
long and very learned Lecture of Anatomy,
in which simple and double Fractures
were most accurately considered, and the
several Ways in which Jones might have
broken his Arm were discussed, with proper
Annotations, shewing how many of
these would have been better, and how
many worse than the present Case. 
Having at length finish'd his laboured
Harangue, with which the Audience, tho'
it had greatly raised their Attention and
Admiration, were not much edified, as they
really understood not a single Syllable of
all he had said, he proceeded to Business,
which he was more expeditious in finishing,
than he had been in beginning. 
Jones was then ordered into a Bed,
which Mr. Western compelled him to accept 

at his own House, and Sentence of
Water-Gruel was passed upon him. 
Among the good Company which had
attended in the Hall during the Bone-setting,
Mrs. Honour was one; who being
summoned to her Mistress as soon as it was
over, and asked by her how the young Gentleman
did, presently launched into extravagant
Praises on the Magnimity, as she called
it, of his Behaviour, which, she said, ‘was so
charming in so pretty a Creature.’ She then
burst forth into much warmer Encomiums on
the Beauty of his Person; enumerating many
Particulars, and ending with the Whiteness
of his Skin. 
This Discourse had an Effect on Sophia's
Countenance, which would not perhaps
have escaped the Observance of the sagacious
Waiting-woman, had she once looked
her Mistress in the Face, all the Time she
was speaking; but as a Looking-glass,
which was most commodiously placed opposite
to her, gave her an Opportunity of
surveying those Features, in which, of all
others, she took most Delight, so she had
not once removed her Eyes from that
amiable Object during her whole Speech. 

Mrs. Honour was so entirely wrapped up
in the Subject on which she exercised her
Tongue, and the Object before her Eyes,
that she gave her Mistress Time to conquer
her Confusion; which having done, she
smiled on her Maid, and told her, ‘She
was certainly in Love with this young
Fellow.’ ‘I in Love,’ Madam! answers
she, ‘upon my Word, Ma'am, I assure
you, Ma'am, upon my Soul, Ma'am, I
am not.’ ‘Why if you was,’ cries her
Mistress, ‘I see no Reason that you
should be ashamed of it; for he is certainly
a pretty Fellow—Yes, Ma'am,
answered the other ‘That he is, the most
handsomest Man I ever saw in my Life. 
Yes, to be sure, that he is, and, as your
Ladyship says, I don't know why I
should be ashamed of loving him, though
he is my Betters. To be sure gentle
Folks are but Flesh and Blood no more
than us Servants. Besides, as for Mr.
Jones, thof Squire Allworthy hath made a
Gentleman of him, he was not so good
as myself by Birth: For thof I am a
poor Body, I am an honest Person's
Child, and my Father and Mother were
married, which is more than some People
can say, as high as they hold their Heads. 

Marry, come up! I assure you, my dirty
Cousin! thof his Skin be so white, and
to be sure, it is the most whitest that
ever was seen, I am a Christian as well as
he, and no-body can say that I am base
born, my grand-father was a Clergyman *  ,
and would have been very angry,
I believe, to have thought any of his Family
should have taken up with Molly
Seagrim's dirty Leavings.’ 
Perhaps Sophia might have suffered her
Maid to run on in this Manner, from wanting
sufficient Spirits to stop her Tongue, which
the Reader may probably conjecture was
no very easy Task: For, certainly
there were some Passages in her Speech,
which were far from being agreeable to the
Lady. However, she now checked the
Torrent, as there seemed no End of its
Flowing. ‘I wonder,’ says she, ‘at your
Assurance in daring to talk thus of one
of my Father's Friends. As to the
Wench, I order you never to mention 

her Name to me. And, with Regard
to the young Gentleman's Birth, those
who can say nothing more to his Disadvantage,
may as well be silent on that
Head, as I desire you will be for the future.’ 
‘I am sorry, I have offended your
Ladyship,’ answered Mrs. Honour, ‘I
am sure I hate Molly Seagrim as much as
your Ladyship can, and as for abusing
'Squire Jones, I can call all the Servants
in the House to witness, that whenever
any Talk hath been about Bastards,
I have always taken his Part: For which
of you,’ says I to the Footmen, ‘would
not be a Bastard, if he could, to be made
a Gentleman of? and,’ says I, ‘I am
sure he is a very fine Gentleman; and
he hath one of the whitest Hands in the
World: For to be sure so he hath;’ 
and’ says I, ‘one of the sweetest temperedest,
best naturedest Men in the World
he is,’ and says I, ‘all the Servants and
Neighbours all round the Country loves
him. And, to be sure, I could tell your
Ladyship something, but that I am afraid
it would offend you.’ —‘What could
you tell me, Honour,’ says Sophia. ‘Nay,
Ma'am, to be sure he meant nothing by 

it, therefore I would not have your
Ladyship be offended.’ —‘Prithee tell
me,’ says Sophia,—‘I will know it this
Instant.’ ‘Why, Ma'am,’ answered Mrs.
Honour, ‘he came into the Room, one
Day last Week when I was at Work,
and there lay your Ladyship's Muff on a
Chair, and to be sure he put his Hands
into it, that very Muff your Ladyship
gave me but yesterday; La,’ says I,
‘Mr. Jones, you will stretch my Lady's
Muff and spoil it; but he still kept his
Hands in it, and then he kissed it—to
be sure, I hardly ever saw such a Kiss in
my Life as he gave it.’ —‘I suppose he
did not know it was mine,’ reply'd Sophia. 
‘Your Ladyship shall hear, Ma'am. 
He kissed it again and again, and said it
was the prettiest Muff in the World.’ 
‘La! Sir,’ says I, ‘you have seen it a
hundred Times,’—‘Yes, Mrs. Honour,’ 
cry'd he; ‘but who can see any thing
beautiful in the Presence of your Lady
but herself: Nay, that's not all neither,
but I hope your Ladyship won't be offended,
for to be sure he meant nothing: One
Day as your Ladyship was playing on
the Harpsicord to my Master, Mr. Jones
was sitting in the next Room, and methought
he looked melancholy. La!’ 

says I, ‘Mr. Jones, what's the Matter? 
A Penny for your Thoughts,’ says I; 
‘Why, Hussy,’ says he, starting up from
a Dream, ‘what can I be thinking of
when that Angel your Mistress is playing?’ 
And then squeezing me by the
Hand—‘Oh! Mrs. Honour,’ says he,
‘how happy will that Man be!’—and
then he sighed; ‘upon my Troth, his
Breath is as sweet as a Nosegay—but
to be sure he meant no Harm by it. So
I hope your Ladyship will not mention a
Word: For he gave me a Crown never
to mention it, and made me swear upon
a Book, but I believe, indeed, it was
not the Bible.’ 
Till something of a more beautiful Red
than Vermilion be found out, I shall say
nothing of Sophia's Colour on this Occasion. 
‘Ho—nour,’ says she, ‘I—if you
will not mention this any more to me,— 
nor to any Body else, I will not betray
you—I mean I will not be angry; but
I am afraid of your Tongue. Why,
my Girl, will you give it such Liberties?’ 
‘Nay, Ma'am,’ answered she,
‘to be sure, I would sooner cut out my
Tongue than offend your Ladyship—to
be sure, I shall never mention a Word 

that your Ladyship would not have me.’ 
‘—Why I would not have you mention
this any more,’ said Sophia, ‘for it may
come to my Father's Ears, and he would
be angry with Mr. Jones, tho' I really
believe, as you say, he meant nothing. 
I should be very angry myself I imagined’ 
—‘Nay, Ma'am,’ says Honour,
‘I protest I believe he meant nothing. I
thought he talked as if he was out of his
Senses; nay, he said he believed he was
beside himself when he had spoken the
Words. Ay, Sir,’ says I, ‘I believe so
too.’ ‘Yes,’ says he, ‘Honour,—but I
ask your Ladyship's Pardon; I could tear
my Tongue out for offending you.’ ‘Go
on,’ says Sophia, ‘you may mention any
thing you have not told me before.’ 
‘Yes, Honour,’ says he, (this was some
time afterwards when he gave me the
Crown) ‘I am neither such a Coxcomb,
or such a Villain as to think of her, in
any other Delight, but as my Goddess; 
as such I will always worship and adore
her while I have Breath. This was all,
Ma'am, I will be sworn, to the best of
my Remembrance; I was in a Passion
with him, myself, till I found he meant
no Harm.’ ‘Indeed, Honour,’ says Sophia,
‘I believe you have a real Affection 

for me; I was provoked the other Day
when I gave you Warning; but if you
have a Desire to stay with me, you
shall.’ ‘To be sure, Ma'am,’ answered
Mrs. Honour, ‘I shall never desire to part
with your Ladyship. To be sure, I
almost cried my Eyes out when you gave
me Warning. It would be very ungrateful
in me, to desire to leave your Ladyship; 
because as why, I should never get
so good a Place again. I am sure I would
live and die with your Ladyship—for,
as poor Mr. Jones said, happy is the
Man—’ 
Here the Dinner-bell interrupted a Conversation
which had wrought such an Effect
on Sophia, that she was, perhaps, more
obliged to her bleeding in the Morning,
than she, at the time, had apprehended
she should be. As to the present Situation
of her Mind, I shall adhere to a Rule of
Horace, by not attempting to describe it,
from Despair of Success. Most of my
Readers will suggest it easily to themselves,
and the few who cannot, would not
understand the Picture, or at least would
deny it to be natural, if ever so well
drawn. 