

Is of still more importance than the former. 
Though Rodophil, as Sophia had told Jenny, was not possess'd of any real passion for this capricious lady, and had been instigated merely by the prospect of advantage to make his addresses to her, yet was he so much chagrin'd at being exposed, by her folly, to the ridicule of the neighbourhood, from the thought it could not be kept a secret, that he went directly to the house of an intimate friend, and would not be prevailed upon to return to his own for a considerable time. 
As for the two young ladies, the consternation they were in at what they had seen and heard, is not to be describ'd;—nothing but the conviction of their own senses, could have made either of them believe it possible, that a person, such as had just now left them, could have acted in the manner she had done. 
The discourse they had together, after she was gone, was suitable to the occasion. —‘I know,—said Sophia,—that there are some men who have so much vanity and assurance, that they will take no denial, nor quit their pretensions without some extraordinary method be taken to compel them to it; but I can assure you this was not the case with my brother;—I have very good reasons to believe she made him the first advances; and am certain, that if she did not, she at least highly encouraged his addresses. 
‘That you may not think,—continued she,—that I am excited to speak in this fashion through the natural affection to my brother, I will shew you a letter, which he happening to drop, I took up, and never return'd; because I was unwilling to let him know I had seen it.’ 
In speaking these words she took a paper out of her pocket, and put into Jenny's hands, which the young lady hastily opening found the contents as follow: 
To ******* Esq;
“I have had a thousand lovers, but never found one so easily repuls'd;—if you had lov'd me with half that violent passion you pretended, you would have remember'd what the poet makes Jupiter say of our sex, 
I gave them but one tongue to form denials,
And two fine eyes to yield a kind compliance.
“Mine must have been very unintelligible indeed, if they did not inform you that my heart was far from being displeased at the fine things you said to me;—Were you then to take it for granted, that I did not like you because I told you so, and gallop immediately out of town, as if absolutely despairing ever to obtain me? —Faint-hearted creature!—I pity your want of spirit;—a man of courage would have been more enflam'd by resistance, and never given over till he had gained his point. 
“I know this is going a great length, and may encourage you to boldnesses, which, perhaps, I should not be very ready to forgive; but I have said it, and do not think it worth while to spoil another piece of paper with writing to you in a different manner, so you must put what construction you please upon words: if you venture to town again upon the receipt of this, it is possible you will have no reason to repent your journey; but I promise nothing further, than that it depends entirely on yourself to continue in the good graces of 
**** 
“P. S. I have made an appointment with some ladies to go to Vaux-Hall the day after to-morrow;—they will have all their pretty fellows with them, and if you come time enough, I should chuse rather that you should squire me thither than any other man of my acquaintance.—Adieu. 

‘Upon this summons,—said Sophia,—my brother went directly to London, and you may suppose met with no unkind reception from the lady, by what you have been witness of.’ 
‘Yes, my dear,—cried Jenny,—I have, indeed, been witness of much more than I could ever have imagined in woman, much less in any one who pretends to the least share of honour or reputation.’ 
This adventure, it is certain, had made a very extraordinary impression on the mind of that young beauty,—she had a strong discernment, and an uncommon quickness of apprehension,—she had easily discover'd, that the lady they were speaking of, tho' vain and affected to an excess, wanted not wit, but judgment, and that the errors of her conduct, in regard to La Val and Rodophil, were not owing so much to her folly, as to the inconstancy of her nature. 
‘Who can be assur'd,—said she within herself, till experience convinces them, that they themselves may not be guilty of the same irregularity of humour, tho' their prudence, and the fears of censure may keep them from exposing the weakness of their resolution! —We all of us are liable to change in trifling matters, and frequently despise to-morrow what we lik'd to-day;—I see no reason, therefore, that we have to depend on our own hearts in things of the greatest importance.’ 
Jenny could not, in spite of the gaiety of her temper, forbear falling into little resveries of this nature, whenever she consider'd herself as entering into a state, from which there is no relief but the grave; or, what to a woman of any delicacy, is yet worse,—a divorcement. 
She could not keep herself from uttering some part of her thoughts on this subject to Sophia; ‘Inconstancy, replied she, is certainly a very great weakness; yet what security can be given by the wisest of us all, that we never shall be guilty of it?—it is an involuntary error; the effect of a sudden object, that when we least think of it, strikes upon the senses,—confounds the understanding, and leads the inclination astray, before people well know what they are doing. 
‘Since it is so,—said Jenny,—and may as well happen after marriage as before, I think it is best not to marry at all, as the consequences of such an accident would then be terrible indeed. Then you would chuse to avoid a certain good,—cried Sophia, laughing,—rather than run the risque of falling into an uncertain evil?—but I do not regard what you say on this head,—we may talk as we will, but when it comes to the point, we shall do just as nature prompts.’ 
Thus did the odd event of Rodophil's courtship furnish out both serious and pleasant matter of conversation for these two ladies while they continued together;—but Jenny, who had not intended her visit should be long, took her leave on the third day, and return'd to London,—where a second discovery fell in her way, which greatly corrobrated those sentiments which the first had begun to inspire her with. 
There are few milliners of more reputation in their way among the beau monde than mrs. Frill;—Jenny had been her customer ever since she had left her boarding-school, and happening now to go to her shop for some things she wanted, found her behind the counter very busy, and bustling among her shelves and band-boxes,—a thing very extraordinary with her, as she was pretty far advanced in years,—was infirm, and had always kept an extremely adroit shop-maid, who was used to take the trouble of the most part of the business off her hands. 
‘Bless me,—cried Jenny,—'tis a kind of prodigy to see you below stairs,—especially at this time in the morning;—pray where is mrs. Becky, that you are obliged to fatigue yourself in this manner? 
‘Ah, miss Jessamy,’—replyed she, puffing and blowing like a pair of bellows that has lost its wind,—‘Becky has play'd the fool with herself,—she has left me, and is gone into keeping. Into keeping,’—cried Jenny!—‘I should never have suspected it;—I thought mrs. Becky had been defended by the plainness of her person as well as by her virtue, from all attacks of that nature:—but pray who is the man? —I was of your opinion,—said mrs. Frill,—but sir J&wblank;*** has found charms in her, and she in him;—he has taken fine lodgings for her, and they are almost always together.’ 
She had no sooner mentioned the name of sir J&wblank;***, than Jenny burst into exclamations;—she knew very well that he had loved, to the most romantic height the lady who was now his wife;—that he had not been marry'd to her more months than it had cost him years of courtship to obtain her;—that she was a person whose beauty,—accomplishments,—virtue and good nature rendered her every way deserving of all the affection he had profess'd for her;—and now to hear he had so early falsify'd his vows, seem'd a thing so strange,—so incredible, that she could scarce believe her ears, or that mrs. Frill was not mistaken in what she said;—she asked over and over if she was sure the thing was true, and desir'd her to repeat all the particulars she knew concerning this surprising affair;—to which the other comply'd in these terms: 
‘You must know, madam, said she, that I had a very curious french capuchin,—never was there a greater beauty of its kind,—it was wrought by a nun of quality to be disposed of for the benefit of the poor; scarce a flower that grows but was represented in their proper colours, intermix'd with gold and silver;—I shew'd it to such of my customers as I thought most likely to be the purchasers,—they all admired it, but did not care to give the price, tho' nothing ever was so cheap; for I asked no more than fifty guineas;—but the truth is, most of them had lost a great deal of their money at play, and you know, madam, that makes ill for us trades-people. —I had kept it above a week, and fearing it would be blow'd upon, proposed a raffle, and got ten ladies to subscribe five guineas a-piece; but when the day came appointed to decide to whose lot the prize should fall, one of them sent me word she had changed her mind, and could not come. 
‘This a little vex'd me,—continued she;—but rather than lose all, was determined to make up the deficiency myself, when luckily this very sir J&wblank;*** stept in;—as he was a married man, I ventured to ask him if he would not try his fortune for a present to his lady;—he readily agreed, and in fine won it;—I offer'd to send it home, but he told me I need not give myself that trouble, for his man should call for it the next day, which Becky told me he did; but you will find by the sequel that he intended no such thing. 
‘About a week after, as near as I can remember, went she on,—this audacious young hussy pretended to go on a visit to a relation, but came not home the whole night; which very much surprised me, and as she never had been guilty of the like before, made me fear some accident had befallen her; but the next morning I received a letter from her, which I will read to you.’ 
In speaking these words, she took a paper out of her pocket, and read these lines: 
To Mrs. Frill.
“Madam,
I beg your pardon for quitting your service in so clandestine a manner; but I had an offer which I did not think proper to refuse;—I have a quarter's wages in your hands, and that, I hope, will make amends for my going without warning:—pray be so good to send my box by the bearer. —I am, 
“Madam,
your humble servant,
to command,
Rebecca Trip. 

‘I was very much amaz'd, as you may easily believe,—resumed she,—at the impertinence of the creature in writing to me in this manner; however, had presence of mind enough to ask the porter from whence he brought the letter, and he readily told me from one madam Trip, in South-Audley-Street;—on which I presently guess'd her situation, though not the person who had occasioned this change in it. 
‘But I continued not long in this suspence,—pursued she,—one of the ladies, who had been so unfortunate to lose her five pieces at the raffle, told me she had met her in the mall, dress'd in a very rich brocade short sack and petticoat, and that very capuchin sir J&wblank;*** had won; and I soon after heard, by one who is acquainted with the person at whose house she lodges, that she passes there for a relation of that gentleman's, and that he visits her every day.’ 
Mrs. Frill had just finish'd this little narrative when a lady came into her shop,—after the usual compliment,—‘I have been just giving,—said mrs. Frill to her,—this young lady an account of the change of Becky's circumstances; and I assure your ladyship have had much ado to make her believe the veracity of it. —I am sensible,—reply'd Jenny,—that things of this nature too frequently happen;—but I confess, that to find a man who loved to that degree sir J&wblank;*** has done, should act in such a manner is very astonishing to me. 
‘For my part,—said the lady,—I see nothing astonishing in it, except his want of taste,—for as to his keeping a mistress, it could not be expected to be otherwise; that woman is a fool who thinks to keep a pretty fellow to herself in a town like this;—'tis true his wife is a very fine woman,—but he has had her, and variety has its charms for us all. 
‘In some things it may, madam,—answer'd Jenny,—yet I cannot help thinking that inconstancy, either in man or woman, argues a very weak mind. —Lord, miss, you talk like one that knows nothing of the world,—cry'd the other,—I have been married these three years, and am wife by experience;—it is not in nature for two persons always to be pleasing to each other;—but if you will not take my word for it, I hope you will believe Cowley, who was certainly as great a judge of love as even Ovid himself. 
The world's a scene of changes, and to be
Constant in nature were inconstancy;
For 'twere to break the laws herself has made;
Our substances themselves do fleet and fade:
The most fix'd being still does move and fly,
Swift as the wings of time 'tis measur'd by:
To imagine then that love should never cease,
Love, which is but the ornament of these,
Were quite as senseless as to wonder why
Beauty and colour stay not when we die.
Not this authority, nor all the arguments the lady could bring, who possibly was herself a proof of what she urg'd, could make Jenny recede from her opinion, or give up the point, the dispute between them continued till other company coming in put an end to it. 
Though, by the whole deportment of Jenny, there seem'd to be but little share of earth in her composition, yet had she her serious moments;—what she had seen at the house of Rodophil, and been told of at mrs. Frill's, came often into her mind; and she began to fear, from these two instances, that inconstancy was a frailty to which human nature was but too liable, and the reflections she made upon it had no small influence on her future conduct towards Jemmy, to whom it is now high time we should return. 
