

Syrena was a Girl, who even in
her Cradle gave the promise of being
one of the compleatest Beauties of the
Age: As her Years encreas'd, and
her Features grew more settled, her Loveliness
encreased in Proportion; but what was most
to be admired in her was, that the Innocence
which is inseparable from Infancy, and which
is so charming, even in the plainest Children,
never forsook her Countenance; but continued
to dwell in every little Turn and Gesture long 

after she came to Maturity, and had been
guilty of Things, which one would think
should have given her the boldest and most audacious
Air. 
Her Mother, though in very mean Circumcumstances,
when she was born, flatter'd herself
with great Things, from the growing Beauties
of her sweet Babe; and tho' she had other
Children, this alone engross'd her whole Attention: 
I say her Mother, for her Father, at least
him, whom the Law would have obliged to
own her, died soon after she came into the
World; and was incapable of receiving any
share either in the Profits or Disgrace of our
little Syrena's future Conduct. 
Being therefore left entirely to the Care of
a Parent, who had been a Woman of Intrigue
in her Youth, was far from repenting what she
had done; and one of the most subtil Mistresses
in the Art of Decoying that ever was; the
Girl was not out of her Bib and Apron, before
she instructed her in Lessons, which she had
the wicked Satisfaction to find, her Pupil
knew not only how to observe, but also to improve. 
She had not reach'd her thirteenth Year,
before she excell'd the most experienc'd Actresses
on the Stage, in a lively assuming all the different
Passions that find Entrance in a Female
Mind. Her young Heart affected with imaginary
Accidents (such as her Mother, from time
to time, suggested to her might possibly happen) 

gave her whole Frame, Agitations adapted to
the Occasion, her Colour would come and
go, her Eyes sparkle, grow Languid, or overflow
with Tears, her Bosom heave, her Limbs
tremble; she would fall into Faintings, or
appear transported, and as it were out of herself; 
and all this so natural, that had the whole
College of Phycians been present, they could
not have imagin'd it otherwise than real. 
Thus was she train'd up to deceive and betray
all those whom her Beauty should allure; 
but she had not so soon as she wish'd an Opportunity
of discovering how well she should
behave, when what had yet only been Ideal,
should come to be real Matter of Fact; for
being very little of her Age, the Men took no
farther Notice of her, than to say she was an
exceeding pretty Miss—a very fine Girl— 
that she'd soon be a delicate Creature, and
such like Compliments, that were nothing to
the Purpose at present. 
About this Time several of her Mother's
Relations, as she had some that lived well, and
in good Repute; knowing the Indigence of
their Condition, and that they were obliged
frequently to have recouese to them, for even
the common Necessaries of Life; began to ask
what was intended to be done with Syrena,
for the other Children were all taken away by
the Friends of one side or the other; to which
finding no determinate Answer, they advised
the Mother, to put her to a Milliner or Mantua-maker,
tho' the latter they seem'd to think 

most proper; not only because there required
no Stock to set up, with, when her Apprenticeship
should be expired but because also
they thought that in that Business, having to
deal only with Persons of her own Sex, she
would be exempt from those Temptations, her
Youth and Beauty might expose her to in the
Millinary Way. One of these Gentlewomen
was so good, as to promise she would give
Fifteen or Twenty Pounds with her to a Mistress
she should approve. The Mother durst
not refuse so kind an Offer, and assured her
generous Kinswoman she would enquire about
it; but as this was not the manner in which
she desired to dispose of Syrena, she still found
excuses to evade the Matter, and pretended
she could not hear of any fit Place. 
As there seem'd no room to suspect the
Truth of what she said, or that a Parent
would not be glad her Child should be in a
way of getting a handsome Living; this truly
honest and worthy Friend, took upon herself
the trouble of looking out for a Mistress, and
in a short time was inform'd of one who had
very great Business, and was a Woman of a
sober and unblemish'd Character. The Mother
of Syrena had no Objections to make,
the Terms between them was soon agreed
upon, and the Girl was to go one Month upon
Trial; after which the Indenture was to be
made, and the Money paid by the good Gentlewoman,
who had taken all this Pains, out
of a conscientious regard for the Preservation
of a young Creature, who she thought deserv'd 

it; and who might otherwise be drawn
into those Snares, too often laid for Youth and
Innocence; especially where there is an Indigence
of Circumstances, and which a
much better Education than could be expected
the poor Syrena had been blest with, is not always
a sufficient Guard again. 
Syrena, who had always been sooth'd with
the hopes of living grand, either by Marriage,
or a Settlement from some Man of Condition,
could not endure the Apprehension of
sitting all Day to run Seams; nor was her
Mother better pleased at this putting her Girl
out of Fortune's way, as she call'd it; but as
she resolv'd it should not be for any Continuance,
she was the more easy, and made the
other so too. Care was to be taken however
not to disoblige their Benefactress, and they
both affected the highest Gratitude to her,
and Satisfaction in what, indeed, was most irksome
to them. 
Here one cannot forbear reflecting, how
shocking it is, when those who should point out
the Paths of Virtue, give a wrong Bent to the
young and unform'd Mind, and turn the pliant
Disposition to Desires unworthy of it; but
more especially so in Parents, who seem ordain'd
by Heaven and Nature, to instil the
first Principles for the future Happiness of those
to whom they have given Being; and tho'
we cannot suppose there are many, who like
the Mother of Syrena, breed their Children
up with no other Intent than to make them 

the Slaves of Vice, yet if we look into the
World, and consider the number of unfortunate
Women (as they justly call themselves) I believe
we shall find the Miseries these poor
Creatures undergo, and frequently involve
others in, less owing to their own Inclinations,
than to the too great Indulgence and false Tenderness
of their Parents; who flattering themselves
that by breeding them like Gentlewomen,
and setting them forth to the utmost of
their Abilities, and often beyond, they shall
be able to make their Fortune by Marriage; 
give them Ideas no way to their Advantage. 
What Compassion is due to a Mother, who
having no Portion to give her Daughter, shall
fill her Head with Notions of Quality; give
Half a Crown for the cutting her Hair, when
perhaps half the Money must serve the whole
Family for a Dinner; make her wear Gloves,
Night and Day, and scarce suffer her to wash
a Tea-Cup for fear of spoiling her Hands; 
when such one, I say, shall cry out Daughter
is undone, and exclaim against the cruel Man
that has robb'd her of her Child; who can avoid
accusing her as the first Seducer of the Girl's
Virtue, by flattering that Pride and Vanity in
her Nature, which without some extraordinary
Providence, indeed, must render her an easy
Prey to the first Temptation that offer'd itself. 
But as this is an Observation, that must occur
to every thinking Person, I ought to beg my
Reader's Pardon for the Digression, and return. 
The Day prefix'd for the Departure of Syrena,
the good-natur'd Kinswoman came and 

took her up in a Hackney-Coach with her
Mother, who it was thought proper should go
with her, and a Trunk with a few Cloaths
in it; which the other looking over, told
her, it should be better fill'd if she was a
good Girl, and behaved herself well. I hope
Madam, answer'd the young Dissembler, I
shall never do any thing to forfeit the Favour
of so kind, so generous a Relation; and
if I could be capable of any Pride, it would
be to carry myself so, that the Mistress I am
going to, should give you such a Character of
me, as would convince you I am not unworthy
of your Favours. This Speech, accompanied
with a thousand modest Graces, so
charm'd the Person it was address'd to, that
she took her in her Arms, and said, I have
not the least doubt about me, that you will
deserve much more Encouragement than is
in my power to give; but, added she, you
may be assur'd I will do all I can. Many
such like Expressions of Kindness on the one
side, and Gratitude on the other, pass'd between
them till they got to the end of their
little Journey, where they were very handsomely
receiv'd and entertained by Syrena's
intended Mistress; and our young Hypocrite
so well acted her Part, affecting to be highly
pleas'd with the Place and Person she was to
be with, and testifying no farther Regret at
parting from her Mother, than just so much
as served to shew her Duty and Affection, that
she was look'd upon as a Prodigy of Sweetness
and Prudence. 

Thus was she enter'd on a new Stage of
Life; but in what Manner she was used,
and her Behaviour in it, can be no way so
well represented, as by her own Letters to her
Mother; the first of which was wrote three
Days after their Separation. 

THURSDAY Afternoon.
Dear Mamma,
Tho' my Mistress has promised I shall
go to see you next Sunday, if the Weather
proves fair, I could not forbear writing
to let you know how I go on. I assure you
all here are very kind to me in their way. I
lie with my Mistress's Sister, and breakfast
and dine with them; for they say they see
something in me that deserves better Treatment
than any they have had before; but all
this don't make me easy. I could not live as
they do for the World; and I believe I shall
find it a hard Matter to stay my Month out,
they are such an old-fashion'd sanctify'd Family. 
—Ah, Mamma, what a difference
between this and home! we rise every Morning
at Eight o'Clock, have but one Hour allowed
for Breakfast, and then to Work— 
the same for Dinner, and then to Work
again—no Tea in the Afternoon, unless
Company comes—and then at Night, my
Master who has a Place in the Stamp-Office, 

comes home about Nine; he and my Mistress
and her Sister sit down to eat a bit; after
that, I and the Maid, and an old Woman
that has been a Nurse in the Family, are
called into Prayers, and so to Bed — 
This they call a sober regular Life—my
Stars! defend me from such formal Ways— 
I am quite sick of them already. I pretend,
however, to be mighty well pleas'd, and do
every thing they bid me with a great deal of
Chearfulness, but it goes so against the Grain,
that I know I can't do so long. Therefore,
dear Mamma, remember your Promise, and
contrive some Way to get me as soon as you
can out of this Bondage, who am, 
Your dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 
P. S. They don't know of my Writing,
so I have no Compliments to send you. 


MONDAY Morning.
Dear Mamma,
I Fretted myself almost sick that I could
not come to you Yesterday; but you
saw it rain'd incessantly—indeed I long to
see you; and the more, because an Adventure
has happened to me, which I don't know but
may come to something, if I manage right— 

I'll tell you exactly how it was, and then you
will be the better able to advise me. —You
must know, Mrs. Martin, my Mistress's
Sister, and I, lie in a dark Closet, within
the Dining-Room; so I go there as soon as I
am up, to comb my Head and put on my
Cap in the great Glass; but I am always in
such a Hurry to get my things on before my
Master and Mistress comes down, that I never
minded who observed me. —I was observed
however, and all my Motions watch'd,
from the first Day I came it seems, as you
shall hear —Last Friday some Silk being
wanting for our Business, and the Maid sent
out another Way, my Mistress bade me step
for it: I ask'd if she had any particular Place
where she bought. —Yes, said she, but that's
too far off: for I generally buy a large Quantity
together of a wholesale Dealer in the City,
so you may go to the Haberdashers at the Corner
of the Street, and get a Quarter of an
Ounce for the present, but be sure you
match the Colour; with these Words she
gave me a bit of the Damask, and I said
no more, but went on my Errand — 
The Shop was very full of People when I
came in, and among them a fine Gentleman
with a lac'd Hat and Cockade, looking
over some white Stockings—so I was oblig'd to
wait till most of them were dispatch'd;—all
the time I could see the Gentleman had his
Eye upon me, and when all were gone besides
ourselves and the Gentlewoman behind the
Counter; How do you do, my pretty Neighbour,
said he? Very well thank you, Sir, 

answered I, blushing and curtsying, as you
bid me when any Stranger spoke to me, but I
han't the Honour to know you—for that
Matter, cry'd he, the Honour would be
wholly on my side, if you had found any
thing in me to take Notice of; but I
assure you I lodge just over against you— 
I was at my Window when you came out of a
Hackney-Coach, accompanied by two grave
Gentlewomen, who I suppose were your Relations; 
I saw too much of you then, not to
wish to see more; and I can tell you the Pleasure
of looking on you, while you are setting
those pretty Locks of yours in Order, has
made me an early Riser. As he spoke
these Words, he took hold of my Hair as
it hung down on my Neck, on which I
frowned, and snatched away my Head—— 
I did not know that I had any Over-lookers,
said I, but since I have, shall be
more careful for the future; then I turned to
the Woman of the Shop, and desired she would
make haste to weigh me the Silk, for I could
not stay. Nay, my sweet Miss, said he, you
must not be angry,—I mean no Harm to
you,—I have only a small Favour to beg of
you, which you must not refuse me. All the
Favours I can grant, answered I, must be
small indeed. What I have to ask is such
said he, it is no more than to chuse a Pair of
Stockings; I am obliged to make a Present of
a Pair to a young Relation in the Country,
and would have your Fancy; —Pray let us
see some of your best Womens Silk Stockings,
added he, to the Woman; yes Sir, cry'd 

she, and immediately turn'd to reach a Parcel
down. I have no Judgment, upon my
Word, Sir, answered I, a little peevishly— 
so pray Madam let me have the Silk. No,
no, I bar that, cry'd he, first come, first
serv'd, you know Miss is the Rule; and as I
was here before you, I insist on having my
Stockings before you have your Silk. I said
nothing, but pretended to be mighty uneasy,
tho' in my Heart I was well enough pleas'd.— 
Well! the Stockings were brought, and he
would have me chuse; so I pick'd out a pair
of white with Pink Clocks, for there was
none with Silver. He made me a Compliment
on the Genteelness of my Fancy; and
having paid for them, and two pair of fine
Thread for himself, now, Miss, said he, you
must accept of what you have made Choice
of, and put them into my Hand with a Squeeze,
that made my Fingers ake for an Hour after; 
—I was very much surprised I confess, not expecting
any such thing, but I threw them
down on the Counter, and told him, I never
took any Presents from Gentlemen: He
attempted to force them upon me again and
again, but I would not take them all he could
do; and there was a great Scuffle between us. 
At last finding I was resolute, he put them
with the others into his Pocket, and went out
of the Shop very much out of Humour. After
he was gone, the Woman of the Shop began
to banter me, and told me, I had made
a Conquest; but I seemed to think nothing
of it, and went away as soon as I had got
my Silk. I prevented my Mistress from asking 

why I staid so long, by telling her, the
Shop was so full of Customers, that I could
not get served, at which she seemed not at all
surprised. When I began to consider on
what had pass'd; I thought I had been a
little too rough in the latter part of my Behaviour; 
for tho' I did not repent my having
refused the Stockings (tho' indeed they
were very pretty) yet I did, that I had not
done it with more Complaisance. —I verily
believed he loved me; but then, as it was a
Passion of so late a Date, it might want a
little Hope to give it Strength; and tho' it
was necessary I should seem coy, yet it should
have been such a Coyness, as might give him
room to fancy I might at last be won; and so
have drawn him in by Degrees, till it was
not in his power to go back. These Reflections
kept me awake all Night, and when
Morning came, I dress'd me at the usual
Place; but that I might not seem too forward,
I put the Window-Shutters a-jar, so that I
could see him through the Crack, without his
distinguishing me. —I was glad to find he was
at his Post, because it look'd as if he had
not given over all Thoughts of me;—I
wanted to shew myself to him too, but
could not tell how to do it, without making
him think I did it on Purpose. —At
last I bethought me of our Cutting-Room,
which is over the Dining-Room;—I ran up
there, and finding the Window open, stood
some time; but he not expecting me so
high, never lifted up his Eyes; so I took a
Bottle with some Mint growing in it, and 

threw it into the Street; the Clash made
him look up; he seem'd pleas'd to find there
what he had so long been looking for in another
Place, and kiss'd his Hand with a great
deal of Gallantry and Tenderness; I seem'd
confus'd, but made a Bow, and soon after
retir'd. —I saw him no more that Day,
but Yesterday and this Morning we have
exchanged Glances several times thro' the
Glass. —Dear Mamma, I am impatient
to know if I have behaved hitherto as I
should, and how I shall proceed for the future; 
for I am certain by all his Ways he
loves me, and that something may be made of
him, for he must be rich; he goes as fine
as any Lord, and has a Man that waits upon
him: So pray write your Mind with all Speed,
and send it by old Sarah; but don't let her
give it me before any of the Family, for fear
they should expect me to shew it them; but
she may come as with a Compliment from
you to them, and to know how I do:— 
So dear Mamma, no more at present, but
that I am 
Your most dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 



MONDAY Afternoon.
Dear Mamma,
As I was coming from putting my Letter
to you, into the Post-house; who should
I see in the middle of our Street, but my Lover,
(for I think I may venture to call him so
now) talking to another fine Gentleman— 
I found he saw me, and it presently came into
my Head to make tryal of his Love; so
instead of going home, I turn'd down a little
Court, I don't know the Name of it, but
it goes into Covent-Garden, and walk'd slow. 
I had not gone many paces before I heard
somebody come very fast behind me, I did not
doubt but it was my Gentleman; and so indeed
it proved; for having overtaken me, so
my little cruel Dear, said he, taking hold of
my Shoulder, have I caught you abroad once
more. —I pretended a great Fright and Confusion,
and desired him to take his Hand away; 
not without you'll tell me where you are going,
and permit me to accompany you said
he. Lord, Sir, cry'd I, trembling, I am only
going to—to—where my Dear, again
demanded He? Only to Covent-Garden, answered
I, for a little Fruit. Well, said he,
and where's the mighty Business if I go and
buy a little Fruit too—I beg'd he would
not—told him we should be taken notice
of—and said all I could, but he swore he 

would go with me, and go with me he
did. —When we came among the Stalls he
would needs fill my Pockets with the best the
Market afforded; I would have paid for them,
but he would not let me, and I thought it
would be carrying the thing too far, to make
a bustle in that publick Place; so I thank'd
him, and was going to take my leave— 
No, said he, since Opportunities of speaking
to you are so scarce, I am resolv'd you shan't
quit me now, till you have heard what I have
to say; and with these Words took hold of
my Hand, and attempted to pull me into the
Tavern, at the End of the Piazza. —I was
frighted now in good earnest; and snatching
my Hand away with more Strength than could
be expected from me; what do you mean,
Sir, said I, what do you take me for? For
every thing that's charming, answered he 
—By Heaven! I would rather die than offer any
thing should give you cause of Offence; therefore,
dear Angel, oblige me so far, as to go
in for one Quarter of an Hour only. Not
for a Minute, cried I, I would not set my
Foot in a nasty Tavern for the World. Fie,
fie, said he, I shall suspect you for a little
Prude if you talk at this rate, and look'd I
thought as if he took me to be silly. I don't
care what you suspect me for, answered I, and
turn'd away as if I was going home; but he
came after me, and beg'd that since I would
not go into a Tavern, I would take a little
walk with him in the Church-Yard, just to
let him tell me something. This I was not
averse to in my Mind, for I long'd to hear 

what he had to say, and so after some seeming
Reluctance I comply'd. —Dear Mamma,
'tis impossible for me to repeat the fine
Things he said to me, and much more to
express the Tenderness with which he spoke
them. He swore that his Intentions were perfectly
honourable, that his Heart told him the
first Moment he saw my Face, that I was the
Person that must make him happy or miserable
for ever—that he could not live without
me, and that if he had Millions he would
lay them at my Feet; and sigh'd at every word
as if his Heart were breaking—I reply'd
very little to all this, and seemed to think him
not in earnest; but then he swore a Thousand
Oaths, and offer'd to give me any proof
I ask'd, tho' 'twere his Life. —Indeed
Mamma, I never read more moving Things
in a Play, but I did not seem to believe him
for all that, and was for hurrying away; but
he would not let me go till I had promised to
meet him on Wednesday at the same Place —So pray let me have your Advice before then,
whither I shall keep my word or not, and
how I shall behave, for I am quite at a
loss—Let old Sarah come by all Means— 
I am, 
Dear Mamma,
Your most Dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 


The Answer to these two Letters came to
her on Wednesday Morning by old Sarah, as
she had desired, and contained as follows. 

WEDNESDAY Morning.
Dear Child,
I Received your Letters, and am very much
surprized to find you have gone so far in a
Love Intrigue, in so short a Time: I perceive
nothing, however, to condemn in your Behaviour
hitherto—your Refusal of the Stockings,
your giving him an Opportunity to speak
to you a second Time, and the Confusion you
affected were all perfectly right; but I am a
little angry that you so readily believe what he
says, and seem assured of his Affection— 
I doubt not, but he likes you, but my Girl
there is a wide Difference between Love and
Likeing; the chief aim of the one is to make
the beloved Object happy: That of the other,
only to gratify itself. —Now your Business
is by an artful Management to bring this Likeing
up to Love, and then it will be in your
power to do with him as you please. —But
after all, I am afraid he is not worth taking
much pains about—if he be only an Officer,
as I quess by his Cockade, 'tis not in his
Power to make you any Settlement as a Mistress
—and as a Wife; when Children come,
what is a Commission! —Or what a Pension
to the Widow, left perhaps in an advanced 

Age, when 'tis out of one's power to mend
one's Fortune any way. —No, Child! 'Tis
your Business to make Hay while the Sun
shines—for when Youth and Beauty are
no more—Farewel Hope—I could wish
notwithstanding you knew his Name, and what
Family he is of. He may be born to an
Estate, and if so, his Passion must be cultivated. 
—It won't therefore be improper to
give him the meeting to-night, but continue
your Shyness; yet so as to give him some little
Encouragement too, that you may the easier
get out of him what he is; for there is no
advising you how to proceed till we know
that. —Besure you write me a full Account
of what passes between you, on Thursday Morning; 
and if you come on Sunday, shall then
give you Instructions suitable to the Occasion. 
—I hope you do not stand in need of
any Caution against indulging a secret Inclination
for him; for if it once comes to that
you are ruin'd! —No Woman ever made
her Fortune by the Man she had a sincere
Value for. —Depend upon it in a little
time you will see finer Gentlemen than he,
be he as fine as he will—let your own Interest
be your only Aim—think of nothing,
but how to be fine yourself; and by keeping
in that Mind you will be happy, and also
make so, 
Your Affectionate Mother,
Ann Tricksy. 

P. S. I charge you not to be prevail'd upon
to go into any House with him—I don't
like his asking you to go into the Tavern. 

Syrena was rejoiced to find by this, that
her Mother approved of her keeping the
Assignation, and had before prepared an Excuse
to her Mistress for going out —Her
Lover had detain'd her so long on Monday,
that she was oblig'd to say when she came
home, that in stepping out to buy a few Apples,
she had met with a Relation who was
very glad to see her, and to hear she was so
well put out; and added, that she had bid her
come to see her on Wednesday in the Afternoon,
for she had something to make her a Present
of. Well, said Mrs. Martin, to whom all
this was spoke; I'll prevail on my Sister to
give you leave, for 'tis pity you should lose
any thing for not going for it. The good
Gentlewoman performed her Promise, little
suspecting the Truth, and Syrena put a handsome
Paris Cap in her Pocket, which at her
Return, she pretended had been given her by
her Cousin; but in what Manner she had in
reality been engaged, she gave her Mother a
faithful Account of, the next Morning, in
these Words. 


Thursday Morning.
Dear Mamma,
Having your Permission I went at the
appointed time, which was Four o'Clock,
to the Church-Yard. —My Gentleman
was there before me, and his Eyes sparkled
with Joy as soon as he saw me coming: He
ran to meet me; my dear Angel said he, the
Place we are in will not permit me to throw
myself at your Feet, as I ought to do, to
thank you for this Favour; but be assured,
my Heart is more your Slave than ever by this
Goodness. Sir, I have been taught, answer'd
I, that to be guilty of a breach of Promise,
is the worst thing almost that a Person can be
guilty of, so have always been careful to avoid
that Fault with every Body. But may I
not hope, returned he, that you make some
Distinction between me and others, and that
I owe this Blessing to something more than
meerly a Punctilio of Honour. —I wish,
Sir, said I, that I have not given you too
much Cause to think so; for as the Promise I
made you was upon a sort of Compulsion, I
might have dispensed with it. This I spoke,
Mamma, in a more tender Air than ever
I had done before; in Hopes by seeming
open and unguarded to him, he might in
reality be so to me; and indeed it answer'd
my Expectation, for on my representing the 

Hazard I run in my Reputation, for meeting
by Appointment with a Gentleman, who was
a perfect Stranger to me, he readily told me
his Name was Vardine, that he was of French
Extraction, and his Parents among those who
quitted their Estates and Country for the Sake
of Religion; and that they being dead, a Person
of Quality, but who he did not mention,
had been so good to procure him a Commission
in the Army: He concluded this Narrative of
himself with telling me, he expected to be
preferr'd, for at present he was only a Lieutenant; 
and that if I could once be brought
to love him, he would make me a happy
Woman. —I thought of you then, Mamma,
and how lucky it was for me, that I had not
set my Heart upon him. —I took no Notice
however of the Baulk it was to me, but
seem'd very civil and obliging. —He press'd me
again to go and take a Glass of Wine with
him, but I absolutely refused that; however,
being afraid somebody might happen to come
through the Church-yard that might know me,
we cross'd, at my Request, the Garden, and
struck down Southampton-street, and so into
the Savoy, where we walk'd about an Hour:
he all the time entertaining me with Praises
of my Beauty, and the Impression it had made
on him. Indeed I staid with him more to
accustom myself to hear fine things said to me,
and to practice an agreeable manner of receiving
them, than any thing else—for as
you say, Mamma, he is neither fit to make
either Husband or Gallant to one in my Circumstances; 
so I am resolv'd to think no 

more on him. —I am a little vex'd tho'
now, that I did not take the Stockings, for as
there is nothing to be done with him, 'twould
have been clear Gains; but I did not know
then, his fine Cloaths deceiv'd me; and methinks
I am sorry he has not an Estate, for he
has Wit at Will, and I am sure loves me to
Distraction; and so you would say, if you
heard him as I have done—but that's nothing
to the Purpose—let him love on—I
shall trouble my Head no more about him, but
wait with Patience 'till something offers more
to my Advantage. —He wou'd fain have
exacted another Promise to meet him again; 
but I told him it was not in my power, if even
I had an Inclination, I was much so confined; 
and if ever he had an Opportunity of speaking
to me again, it must be Chance that gave it
him. —He complain'd bitterly of my
Cruelty; but I was not to be persuaded, and
left him as much mortified as the Account he
had given me of himself had made me. 
—I shall see you on Sunday, and if any Thing
should happen before, then, shall not fail to let
you know it—till then I am, 
Dear Mamma,
Your Dutiful, but
Disappointed Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 


Hitherto Syrena had disguised nothing either
of her Behaviour or Sentiments from her Mother; 
but a very little Time made her alter
her Conduct in that Point, and practice on her
some of those Lessons of Deceit, she had so
well instructed her in. Friday in the Afternoon,
as she was sitting at Work, old Sarah
came in: She was surpris'd to see her, and
ask'd hastily if her Mamma was well. Yes,
Miss, said Sarah, very well; but hearing me
say, I was coming this way, she desired me to
call and give you her Blessing, with these three
Yards and a half of Dimitty; she says, if your
Mistress will be so good to cut it out, and give
you leave to run it up at a leisure Time, it
will serve you in a Morning to comb your
Head and wash in, and save your other
Cloaths; as she deliver'd this Message, she
gave her the Bundle, and at the same time
slipt a Letter into her Hand unperceiv'd by any
Body. The Mistress who was present, said
Mrs. Tricksy was a very good Mother; and
she might be sure, the Girl should find time
to make her Gown very soon. Sarah then
told her, they hoped to see her on Sunday,
which the other promised, and the old Emissary
went away. 
Syrena could not imagine the reason of her
Mother's writing again, when she expected to
see her so soon, and as she thought had no
farther Advice to give her, concerning the
Lieutenant; being full of Impatience to see
what it contain'd, she soon made a pretence for
going out of the Room, and read these Lines. 


FRIDAY Noon.
Dear Child,
Tho' I hope to see you on Sunday, I could
not refrain giving you some Remonstrance,
which every Hour's Delay of, may
render less effectual. —I have not slept all
Night for thinking on some Passages in
your Letter. Ah, Syrena! —Syrena! 
I am afraid you like this poor idle Fellow,
more than it may be you are yet sensible of
yourself—why else are you sorry he has not
an Estate? —If he has not an Estate others
have, that, perhaps, may find you as agreeable
as he has done. —You have a very
great Opinion too of his Wit, and of his Love;
suppose you are not mistaken, he is only the
more dangerous, and you ought the less to trust
yourself with him. —I charge you, therefore,
to shun him henceforward—be as
industrious to avoid all Opportunities of seeing
him, as 'tis probable he will be in seeking
them. —You already believe all the fine
Things (as you call them) that he says to you; 
and knowing by Experience, how susceptible
the Heart is at your Years, I tremble least all
the Counsel I have given you, should not be
sufficient to guard you from the Temptation. 
—Don't think Child, that I want to lay
you under any unreasonable Restraints. — 
No, if we were rich and above Censure, I
should be far from putting any curb to Nature; 
but as all our Hopes depend on your 

making your Fortue, either by Marriage or a
Settlement equal to it, you must be extremely
cautious of your Character till that Point is
gain'd, and when once it is, you may freely
indulge your Inclinations with this, or any
other Man. —You see, I do not like most
Parents, want to deprive you of the Pleasures
of Life; I would only have you first attain,
that which alone can give them a true Relish; 
for Love in Rags Syrena, is a most despicable
Thing. Therefore, I once more lay my
Commands upon you, to speak no more to
this paltry Vardine; and to endeavour with all
your Might, to conquer whatever Sentiments
you may be possest of in his Favour, which is
all that can restore Peace of Mind to her, who
is at present, 
Your most discontented Mother,
Ann Tricksy. 
P. S. Come as early as you can on Sunday. 

Syrena was not very well pleas'd at the Contents
of this Letter: She thought there was
no Occasion for this Caution; and that she had
said enough to convince her Mother, that she
had no regard for any Thing in Competition
with her Interest. —Why then, said she,
must I be debarr'd from speaking to a Man
that loves me? A little Conversation with him
sometimes would certainly instruct me better
how to behave to the Sex, than a thousand
Lessons—besides, I might get some small 

Presents from him—but she will needs
have it that I am in love, forsooth. —Not
I, indeed, I did not care if he was hang'd for
that Matter; but there is something pleasingly
amusing, in being address'd by a Man that
admires one, and can talk well—in the insipid
Life I lead here, 'tis necessary I should
have some Diversion to keep up my Spirits. 
—She owns my Conduct has been perfectly right
hitherto—why then should it not be so still?— 
why must I run away whenever I see him, as
if I were afraid he would devour me? Indeed,
I shan't make myself such a Fool— 
if Fortune or his own Endeavours throw him
in my way, I shall hear what he has to say,
and it may be manage, so as to get something
of him—poor as she thinks him. 
Thus did Vanity, Self-Conceit and Avarice,
tempt her to despise the Admonitions of her
crafty Mother, and make her resolve to act
henceforward of herself. 
When Sunday Morning came, as she stood
drawing on her Gloves at the Window, she saw
him at his ready drest; she presently imagin'd
he was ready so early, for no other Reason
than to watch her going abroad; but she had
not indulg'd herself with this Idea above three
Minutes, before it was entirely dash'd: He
took up his Hat and Cane and went out of
Doors, without so much as looking up. 
—Ha! cryed she in a Pet, is it so—you are
strangely alter'd methinks. —Mamma,
need not have been so fearful. The 

Coldness of my Behaviour last time, has certainly
made him resolve to give over all
Thoughts of me. 
So instead of thinking she had been too kind,
she was beginning to repent of not having been
kind enough; and in the room of avoiding her
Man, was fearful of nothing so much, as not
being pursued by him,—in this Ill-Humour
she went out of her Mistress's House; 
but was no sooner in the Street than she perceived
the Person who had occasion'd it, at
the Corner of that Court, where he had once
before overtaken her. —Her Heart bounded
with Joy at the Sight of him, not doubting
if he stood there for any other Purpose, than
to observe which way she went. She deceived
not herself in this; he soon came up with her,
and accosted her with more Gallantry than
ever. She pretended to be greatly alarm'd at
seeing him—entreated he would leave her,
and told him she had suffered enough already
by the little Acquaintance she had with him. 
—Some body, said she, saw us together in
the Church-yard, and told my Mamma, who
is so angry, that she vows she won't own me
as her Child, if ever I speak to you again. 
Your Mamma, answered he, is ignorant of
the Respect I have for you—besides all
old People have odd Notions in their Heads— 
But, my Charmer, continued he, this might
have been avoided if you had complied with
my Request, and gone into a Tavern. O!
that might have been worse, cried she. Much
better for us both, said he; at least if I am 

not the Object of your Aversion; for you would
have been convinced of the Sincerity of my
Passion, and I should have been happy in your
being so; but I'll warrant, added he, the same
scrupulous Modesty that made you refuse me
then, will not suffer you now to accept of a
Coach where you are going. Not for the
World, replied she hastily, I am going to my
Mamma, who expects me; and if she should
send any body to meet me (as 'tis likely she
may, for she is violently suspicious since she
heard that Story) I should be undone; so pray,
Sir, don't go any farther with me. He seem'd
to believe what she said; but swore that whatever
was the Consequence he would not quit
her, till she promised to meet him in the Afternoon. 
O dear! cried she, then we may
be seen again. No, said he, I'll be in the
Birdcage-Walk in St. James's Park, about
Four o'Clock, and if you'll come we'll
strike up into the Fields behind Buckingham-house,
where we may be private enough. Well,
said she, I like this better than going into a
Tavern, and if I can get away from Mamma,
I will do thus much to oblige you. He call'd
this but a half Assurance, nor would leave her
till she protested in the most solemn manner,
that she would be at the Place he mentioned. 
Had he known her Mind, he might have
spared himself the trouble of exacting a Vow
from her, for the fear of losing the first Lover
she ever had, render'd her in so complying a
Humour, that she was ready to grant almost
any Thing to secure him. 

The Reception she had from Mother, was
such as she expected from her Letter; but by
telling part of the Truth, she so cunningly conceal'd
the rest, that artful as the Person she had
to deal with, was, there remain'd not the least
Suspicion in her Breast. The foolish Fellow
watch'd me out, said she, but I gave him such
Looks, as I believe put half what he intended
to say to me, out of his Head; but yet he
would come with me, and talk his Stuff, so I
told him we had been seen together in the
Church-yard, and you had been made acquainted
with it, and were very angry; and for
my own Part I did not like to be followed about,
and did not know what he meant by it; but
whatever Designs he had upon me, he should find
himself disappointed; that I could neither like
him nor love him, nor desired to be lov'd by
him, and a great deal more to the same Purpose. 
And at last he said; he had been a Fool
to trouble himself about me, that I was a
proud, pert Minx, and so went strutting away
highly affronted. I dare say, Mamma, I am
quite rid of him now, and I hope you will be
so of all your Fears for me. Mrs. Tricksy was
perfectly well satisfied with this Account, and
after a little ridicule on the Folly of Women,
who suffer themselves to be seduced by fine
Speeches only, they fell into other Conversation,
such as the Affairs of the Family Syrena
was in, and the Methods that were to be taken
for her coming away at the Month's End; till
the young Gipsy remembring her Assignation,
said what a sad Thing it is to be confined, 

Mamma, now I have not seen you for almost
for a Fortnight, and must not stay
with you but a small Part of the Day. 
How so Child, cried the Mother? why said
the other, my Mistress dines abroad on an
Engagement made long ago, and poor Mrs.
Martin is almost dead with the Head-ach, so
she begg'd I would come home soon, for 'tis
our Maid's Sunday to go out, and she should be
alone. I thought you had an old Nurse in
the House, said Mrs. Tricksy; yes, answered
Syrena, but she has been these two Days with
her Grandson who has the Small-Pox. Well
then, returned the Mother, I would not have
you do any thing to disoblige Mrs. Martin, or
any of them, because they may give you a
bad Word to your Cousin—you shall go as
soon as Dinner is over. —When the time
grew near, Syrena played loth to depart to the
Life, and seemed ready to whimper, but her
Mother forced her away; and she departed
laughing in her Sleeve, and applauding her
own Ingenuity in outwitting so penetrating a
Judgment. 
Vardine was in the Park before the Hour
prefix'd, and Syrena scarce exceeded it; the
Afternoon being gloomy, there was but little
Company, especially on that side, so they
chose to entertain each other there, rather
than walk farther; but this was no sooner
agreed upon, than there fell so violent a
Shower, that had it continued, the Trees
under which they stood for Shelter, would
not have defended them from being wet: 

Happily however for them, and all that
were abroad, the Sky cleared up, yet not
enough to give any Prospect of a fair Evening,
so he could not desire her to stay, without
shewing he had little Regard of her
Health; they walked pretty fast till they came
to Spring-Garden, when it began to rain again:
He called a Coach, but there was none in
hearing, and they were oblig'd to stand up in
a Tavern Entry, tho' when she ran in, she
knew it not for such; and when she did,
would have quitted it, tho' all the Doors beside
being shut, she saw no other Refuge from
the Storm. Nothing could have happened
more lucky for Vardine's Designs: He had
now a very plausible Pretence for persuading
her to go into a Room. —It would be a
piece of strange Affectation, said he, to chuse
to stand in a Place where we are exposed to
the View of every body; (and you see how
many People pass) rather than go with a Man
who loves you, and whose every Action you
may command. With such like Arguments
she was at last prevail'd upon, and he order'd
some Wine to be made hot with Spice and
Sugar. After they had drank a Glass or
two, now, said he, where is the mighty Business
of going into a Tavern—is it not
better sitting here than strolling the Streets, as
if no House would receive us? —'Twould
be more comfortable indeed, answered she, if
it were not for the Scandal; there is no Scandal
in it, cry'd he; beside, who need know it,
unless we tell it ourselves, for the Drawers
here are as secret as Confessors. That may be, 

said she, in a sort of Childish Tone; but
methinks I am ashamed to know I am here
myself. That's for want of knowing the
World, my Dear, replied he; in such Weather
as this the veriest Puritan would have
made no Scruple. Did not Dido, tho' a
great Queen, run into a Cave with a wandring
Soldier to avoid a Storm. Great Folks
may do any thing, said she, but pray what is
that Story? I'll tell you anon, my Dear, answered
he, but first pray ease me of this Luggage; 
—I have had your Stockings in
my Pocket all Day, and now I desire you'll
take charge on them yourself;—with these
Words he laid them on the Table before her:— 
My Stockings, said she, indeed they are none
of mine;—and I won't have them;—but you
shall, and you must, reply'd he; you chose
them, and they are bought and paid for;— 
but may be you think they won't fit;—I
should know that, because they may be
changed;—I can tell in a Moment, by grasping
your pretty Leg: —Here he made an offer
of doing as he said, but she resisted with all
her Strength, crying out at the same time— 
hold! hold! I will have them—they will fit; 
and glad enough she was to take them, tho'
in reality a little frightend at the manner in
which he forced them upon her. He found
she trembled, and would not alarm her Modesty
too much at once, so drawing back his
Hand, don't be under any Apprehensions my
sweet Innocence, said he; upon my Soul I
mean no hurt to you, and did this only to
oblige you to accept my little Present.— 

Well, I'll believe you this time, answer'd she,
but pray don't offer such Freedoms any more,
for if you do, I'll never speak to you again. 
He then made her drink another Glass of
Wine in token of Forgiveness; and that being
followed by several others, her young Brain
unaccustomed to such an Encrease of Heat,
began to grow confused, and she lost all Memory
of the Place, or Danger she was in: 
He ply'd her all the time with Protestations
of Love, and sometimes by way of Parenthesis
gave her a Kiss, which he had the Satisfaction
to find she less and less resisted. 
How ought, therefore, the Fair-Sex to beware
of indulging even the very Temptation
of a Vice, which I am sorry to say is at present
too prevalent among them. I need not
say I mean that of Drinking, which indeed
opens the way to all others; the Example before
us of a Girl train'd up in Precepts directly
opposite, to giving Way to any tender Inclinations,
and taught that the only thing she
had to avoid, was the bestowing any Favours
but where Interest directed; now, by the meer
Force of Liquor, betray'd to yield to the Impulse
of Nature, and resign that Jewel, on
which all her Hopes of living great in the
World depended, to a Person from whom
she could have no Expectations, and for
whom what she felt could not justly be called
Love; this, I say, may be a Warning to all
of what Principles and Station whatever; since
there are Dangers arising from this pernicious 

Custom, as well in the Closet as in the Street,
tho' perhaps of a different Nature. 
The young Officer perceiving the Ground
he gain'd, did not fail pursuing the Attack,
and bombarded her so fast with Speeches out
of Plays, tender Pressures, Kisses, and the
more intoxicating Juice of the Grape, that at
length the Town was wholly his;—the
momentary Rapture over, the Power of Reflection
return'd to this unhappy ruin'd Girl; 
—she reproach'd him and herself;—she wept; 
—she exclaim'd;—but it was now too late. 
He said a good many fond things to her, but
he made a Jest of her Complaints; why, my
Dear, cry'd he, you desir'd to know the
Story of Dido and Æneas, and I have more
than told it to you, for I have acted it to the
Life. O wicked! wicked Man! cry'd she,
and sobb'd most bitterly: —He then endeavour'd
all he could to set her Mind at ease: 
He made a thousand Vows of everlasting Constancy,
and that when his Affairs were once
settled, he would make her his Wife; at last
she grew a little more composed; and it being
now dark, began to think what Excuse she
should make at home for being out so late; 
her ready Invention soon supplied her with
one, and a Coach being call'd, he set her down
at the end of the Street, after having made
her promise to meet him again the first Opportunity,
which she was to let him know by
a Sign from the Window. 

The good People at home were very much
frighted at her staying so late, for it was
near Nine, and as much rejoiced to see her
safe returned: She told them, that being just
coming away, the Rain obliged her to stay; 
and that afterwards a Person who happened to
dine that Day with a Lodger in the same
House, offer'd to set her down if she would
stay her Time; so Madam said she, I accepted
her Favour, as it was a bad Evening; and
hope you would not be offended; not in the
least, answered her Mistress, I am very glad
it happened so. 
As Syrena had a Share of Understanding uncommon
for her Years, she could not recollect
what had pass'd between her and Vardine, without
a great deal of Uneasiness; but her Vivacity
and Strength of Spirits soon threw it off; 
she consider'd that as it was past recall, to
hurt her Eyes and Complexion, by crying and
fretting, would encrease not diminish her Misfortune; 
and therefore resolved to be entirely
secret in the Matter, and get as much as she
could from him, in recompence for what he
had robb'd her of. How she should contrive
any future Meetings with him, was now the
chief Employment of her Thoughts; but tho'
she rack'd Invention to the utmost Pitch, she
could not hit on any thing that had not some
Danger of Discovery. She saw her Lover
the next Morning at his Window as usual,
but had no Sign to make but a melancholy
shaking her Head, accompanied with a Look 

that told him, it was not owing to her Inclinations,
that they had not a nearer Intercourse. 
The next Day it was the same, and probably
would have continued so till Sunday, had not
Fortune befriended her Endeavours. 
A Gown being in hand, Syrena was ordered
to go to the Lady's House for Silver Lace
to trim it;—what would she not have given
to have known this in the Morning,—but it
was now too late. —Vardine was abroad,
and she knew not where to send to him;— 
it came into her Head however as she was in
the Street, not to go, but to walk about a
little, and return home, pretending the Lady
had not bought the Trimming, and had bid
her come for it the next Day at three in the
Afternoon: This was feasible enough, and
passed current with People that had not the
least Suspicion of her Conduct. 
Possession had not so far abated the Fervour
of her Gallant's Affections, but that he attended
the Window as before—and she had
the Opportunity of making him know he
might see her in the Afternoon; which was
done by pointing to the Street, and holding up
three Fingers, in signification that Three
o'Clock was the time. He express'd his Satisfaction
by a thousand tender Gestures; but
she was oblig'd to leave him in the midst of
them, fancying she heard somebody coming
up Stairs. She had indeed more than ordinary
Reason now for being cautious, not only because
Guilt naturally makes People so, but 

also, because his standing so much at the
Window had been taken Notice of: The
Maid told her one Day as she was washing
her Hands in the Kitchen, that she was sure
she had got a Sweetheart since she came;— 
a Sweetheart, said Syrena! what do you
mean, Margaret? I mean as I say, answer'd
Margaret;—the Gentleman that lodges
over the Way is as surely in love with you,
as I am alive. —I never go to the Door
or into the Parlour in a Morning, but I see
him staring at our Windows, as if he'd lose
his Eyes; and it must be for you, for there's
no other young Body in the House;—why
not yourself, said Syrena, you are not old;— 
no, no, I am not so vain, cry'd Margaret;
but if I were, he takes care to undeceive me; 
for the Minute he sees me he pops his Head in. 
Syrena laugh'd, and the Maid being call'd,
there pass'd no more between them; but this
serv'd her as a good Warning to be circumspect; 
for she very well knew that if her Conversation
with him were once but so much as
suspected, it would break the Neck of her Designs
every way. 
When it grew near three Syrena reminded
her Mistress, that it was the time for her to
go; and received the Praise her supposed Dilligence
seem'd to deserve. —Vardine was at the
usual Corner, and having a Coach in waiting
at the end of the Street, they both slept into
it, and drove immediately to the same Tavern
they had been in before. 

The pains she took for this Interview may
very well be taken for the Effect of Love, as
indeed it was; but not of the Man, tho' something
belonging to him. She had seen a very
genteel Snuff-Box in his Hand of Pinchbeck's
Mettal, which she mistook for Gold: This
Box had run in her head ever since Sunday;
and she languished with Impatience for an Opportunity,
which she hoped would make her
Mistress of it. 
She was not deceiv'd in the Complaisance of
her Lover, tho' she was in the Value of the
thing she had set her Heart upon; for by
praising and looking earnestly on it, she so
artfully insinuated she had a mind to it, that
he soon made her a Present of it. They past
about an Hour together, in the manner Persons
usually do, who see each other on the
Terms they did; and parted with a Promise
of meeting at the same Place at four o'Clock,
as she came from her Mother's next Sunday. 
After which she went on the Business she was
sent, and was dispatch'd time enough not to
make her Mistress think she loiter'd; tho', to
excuse her stay, she pretended she had waited
a good while before the Lady could be spoke
with. 
She had now nothing to think on, but
what she should wheedle him out of next: 
He had no Ring on his Finger, no lac'd Ruffles,
or any thing fit for her to ask. —She
therefore contriv'd a Stratagem to get a small 

Sum of Money from him (for she did not
imagine he could spare a large one) and executed
it in this manner. 
When she came to the Tavern, where he
was ready to receive her, she put on so wild
confused a Countenance, as made him, when
about to take her in his Arms, start back and
ask if she were not well—Yes, said she,
I am well enough in Health—but the saddest
Accident—O that I had been sick,
or dead, or any thing, so that I had not come
out this Day! —Then she threw her self
into a Chair, and burst into Tears. He prest
her very endearingly to tell him the Occasion; 
but all the Answer she gave him was,
O! I must never look my Mamma in the
Face again—O! I am undone—I durst
not go home—I cannot tell what to say,
that will pacify my Mistress—Sure I am
the most unfortunate Creature in the World. 
—What, my Dear, said he, nothing concerning
me, I hope, is discovered? No, reply'd
she sobbing, but I'll tell you the whole
Business. You must know, continued she,
that my Mamma, borrow'd five Guineas of
my Mistress, upon a very great Exigence: 
She gave her a Note for it, and a time was prefix'd
for the Payment;—it became due Yesterday,
and my Mamma having the Money ready,
desired the Note might be sent by me, as
I was to come this Day. —O! unhappy
Day that it is to me, I'm sure. —Here she
feigned as if she could not speak again; but
then seeming to recover a little—In short, 

said she, I carry'd the Note—My Mamma
gave the Money to me, and I put it into my
Purse, where I had a few Pieces of Silver of
my own;—but they are all gone together 
—Either some Rogue has picked my Pocket,
or I have pull'd out the Purse with my
Handkerchief. —An ugly Accident indeed,
my Dear, reply'd he gravely, but might have
happen'd to any body —You must ev'n tell
the Truth—O! cry'd she, 'tis a sign you
don't know their Tempers; they would tear
me in Pieces —My Mistress would think it
a Trick between Mamma and me, because I
carry'd the Note; and Mamma beside would
be obliged to pay—O! what shall I do? 
I'll never go home again, unless I have the
Money —She run on in this manner for a
good while, without his offering to interrupt
her; which she had cunning enough to look
on as no good Omen of Success; and finding
she must speak more plain—O! if you
loved me half so well as I do you, said she,
you would not see me fret so—you'd give me or
lend me such a Trifle. I protest, Child, reply'd
he, I have not so much about me —Well, said
she, you may leave me at the Corner of our
Street while you fetch it —That I would
willingly do, return'd he, but if you must
know, I am not at present Master of so much. 
—But you can borrow it, cry'd she; nor
can I borrow it any where that I know of,
answer'd he; I never ask'd such a Favour of
any body but our Agent, and he happens to
be out of Town—so you had better own the
Truth. —I dare not, said she, and you only 

perswade me to run the risque of it, because
you don't care to part with your Money. — 
Upon my Soul, answered he, I have it not — 
See here, continued he, pulling out his Purse,
and throwing two Guineas on the Table; this
is my whole Stock, besides a little Silver in my
Pockets —But you have a gold Watch,
returned she, and any Body—the very
People of this House, I'll warrant you, would
lend you five Pounds upon it till your Agent
comes to Town —Excuse me, my Dear,
reply'd he somewhat haughtily, I never pawn,
—nor can I part with my Watch on any Consideration
—we in the Army are oblig'd to
observe time —Well, cry'd she, sobbing
again, I see that I am miserable—you
have ruin'd me, and now neither love nor
pity me. That's unkind, said he, I would
serve you if it were in my power, but this you
ask is not—if these two Pieces, added he,
would make your Mistress easy —Give
them to me, interrupted she, I'll tell her,
Mamma receiv'd but half what she expected,
and could send no more than two, but she
should have the other three some Day this
Week—but then you must be sure to get
them for me. He would fain have perswaded
her to have told the Accident —He said he
could not be assured of receiving Money so
soon, and would be loth to disappoint her— 

In fine, they had many Arguments, he to
keep, and she to get the two Guineas: —At
length he found himself forced in a manner to
recede, and she pocketed the two Pieces — 
Well, said she, I'll tell my Mistress, that I 

forgot to bring back the Note—but, my
dear, dear Vardine, don't fail to procure me
the other three by Tuesday —I can't promise
it so soon as then, reply'd he, you must
say Thursday or Friday —Ay, let it be Friday 
—Since she found she could do no better,
she urg'd it no farther, and began to grow
more chearful—but the young Officer
could not so readily dissipate his Gloom: He
was not quite satisfy'd with the Story she told
him, and began to fear his little Mistress would
become too expensive to him. He conceal'd
his Sentiments, however, as well as he was
able, and when the Close of Day reminded
them of parting, ordered a Coach, and set her
down at the same Place where he had taken
her up. —As she took her leave, remember
Friday, and the three Guineas, said she,
I shall look for you at the Corner of the
Court, about Ten in the Morning, and if
you fail, will never speak to you again — 
And if I do, Child, answer'd he, I'll never
venture to look thee in the Face again. 
Now did Syrena Glory in the Power of her
Beauty and Invention, she thought it impossible
for Mankind to refuse her any thing; and
tho' it was with Difficulty she had gain'd her
Point with Vardine, she imputed it only to the
Scantiness of his Fortune; and did not doubt
but to find Articles to get greater Sums of
him, tho' he even sold his Commission to raise
them for her: But her Triumph lasted not
long. —Friday Morning happening to come
into the Dinning-Room, before the Maid had 

quite finished putting it in order —O Miss!
cry'd she, you have lost your Admirer — 
I did not know I ever had any, answer'd Syrena;
but what do you mean, Margaret? — 
Why, said she, the Gentleman that I told
you of over the way, that used to stare up so. 
—Syrena's Heart flutter'd at these Words,
and in the present Confusion, she cry'd hastily,
well what of him? He has left our Neighbourhood,
reply'd Margaret; as I was washing
our Steps about an Hour ago, I saw a
Hackney Coach at the Door with a Portmanteau
and other Luggage before it, and presently
in stept the Beau, and cry'd, Drive
away Coachman. Pish! said Syrena, thou
art always troubling one with some Stuff or
other —What was the Fellow to us, I
wonder. She said no more, nor, indeed, was
she able, nor to stay any longer in the Room,
without discovering her Disorder. She ran up
Stairs, tho' she knew not why, she doubted
not the Truth of what the Maid had said — 
She saw the Window open, but no Lover appear 
—She sat down, pondering on this
Adventure, at last recollected herself —Well,
said she, a thousand Accidents may have obliged
him to quit his Lodging, but that does
not follow, that he must therefore quit me. 
—He will certainly be at the Place he
promised at the appointed time —I will
at least make my self easy till then. 
Soon as she heard the Clock strike ten she
ran out, pretending she had broke her
Lace, and must go to buy another; but no 

Vardine could she see. —She stay'd a few
Minutes walking about the Court, flattering
herself still with the Hope that he would come; 
but instead of him, a sort of ill-look'd Fellow
came up to her, and ask'd if her Name was
not Syrena Tricksy, and on her saying it was,
gave her a Letter, which she hastily opening,
found in it these few, and little pleasing Lines. 

Dear Girl,
Our Regiment is ordered to the West, and
thence, I believe, to Ireland: I was too
lately apprized of it to take my leave of
you—make yourself as easy as you can— 
when I come back I shall with pleasure renew
my Acquaintance with you, 
Yours, &c.
J. Vardine. 
P. S. I am sorry I could not comply with
your Request. 

Rage did not so far bereave her of her
Senses, but that she ask'd the Fellow a great
many Questions, but he either could not or
would not answer any thing to the purpose; 
and all she could get from him was, that
the Letter was given him by a Gentleman at
a Coffee-House, who ordered him to wait in
that Court till she came, and deliver it to
her. 

It must be confessed, this Action of Vardine's
was cruel and ungrateful—what must have
become of the undone and forsaken Syrena,
had she been possest of that Softness and Tenderness
which some are; but as she was capable
of loving in reality nothing but herself,
and carried on a Correspondence with him
merely on a mercenary View, she was not
much to be pitied. The Mortification of her
Pride and Avarice, however, gave her Agonies
which she before had no notion of; and made
her the more easily counterfeit an Indisposition,
which was the Pretence agreed on between
her and her Mother, for her going Home at
the Month's end—and it is certain, she
grew so thin and pale, that the Mistress herself
imagined that sitting so close to her Work had
prejudiced her Health. She had the Good-nature
to offer her the Advice of a Physician, but
could not help agreeing with every body who
were consulted about it, that it was most proper
she should be with her Mother, as best acquainted
with her Constitution. In fine,
home she was brought, nor could that Kinswoman
who had recommended her, take it
amiss, when she saw how ill she looked— 
a violent Pain in her Head and Stomach was
the Complaint; and it seemed reasonable to believe,
that stooping forward to her Work, had
occasioned it. There was again some talk of
putting her to a Milliner, which was indeed
what Mrs. Tricksy aimed at; but the Reasons
before alledged against that Business, being now
repeated, stopped her Mouth; and nothing 

seemed now so proper for her, as to wait upon
a Lady. All the Relations in general approved
of this, and promised to enquire among
their Acquaintance for a Place for her. 
In the mean time Syrena was so far from
recovering her former Colour and Vivacity,
that she look'd worse and worse; and had
sometimes such sick Fits, that her Mother began
to be afraid she had counterfeited a Disorder
so well, as to bring it upon her in good
earnest: But her Penetration did not permit
her to continue long in the dark as to the
Cause. She soon discover'd, that a too near
Conversation with a Man had made the Alteration; 
and not doubting but it was Vardine,
accused her in such plain and positive Terms,
that the Girl had not Courage to deny it. She
search'd her Trunk, and found the Stockings,
Snuff-Box, and two Guineas, with the Letter,
which not only let her into the whole
Mystery of her undoing, but her being forsaken
also. 
It would be tiresome to repeat the
Exclamations she made, or the Reproaches
poor Syrena was oblig'd to bear; 'tis sufficient
to say, that the first Fury of her Resentment
over Reason resumed its Place, and as what
was past could not be recall'd, all that could
be done, was to endeavour to alleviate the
Misfortune as much as possible: To that end,
she prepared a strong Potion, which the Girl
very willing drank, and being so timely given,
had the desired Effect, and caused an
Abortion, to the great Joy of both Mother
and Daughter. After all was over, and Syrena 

pretty well recovered, Mrs. Tricksy could not
forbear renewing her upbraidings; but the
other confessing herself to blame, and professing
her future Conduct should retrieve all, at
length mollify'd her Passion; and the more so,
because tho' she had suffered hersed to be beguiled
by that young Officer, yet her Management
of him afterwards shewed the Instructions
given her had not been thrown away; and
that she had both a Genius and Inclination to
make the most of her Men, and now an Opportunity
offered to prove her Abilities that
way. 
She was recommended to the Service of an
old Lady, who wanted one chiefly to attend
her in her Chamber, and read to her till she
fell asleep. Such an Employment would have
afforded little Hope of advancing Syrena
in the manner she had desired, had it not been
for the Family the old Gentlewoman was in; 
which consisted of her Daughter, who was
married to a Baronet, and their Son, a fine
young Gentleman of about twenty-two. This
last Article rendered the Place extremely acceptable,
and our young Deceiver being introduced
to the Ladies, her feigned Innocence
immediately gained their Favour; and she was
received into the House, with the promise of
being used very kindly. The second Day after
her coming, she wrote to her Mother as
full an Account of the Family, as she was able
to give in so short a Time. 


FRIDAY.
Dear Mamma,
How happy would some young Women
think themselves to be in my Place, I have
so little to do, and am so much respected by the
inferior Servants, that I can scarce think I am
a Servant myself—it is not required of me
to rise till nine or ten o'Clock, and then I go
into my Lady's Room, enquire after her Health,
and give her her Chocolate, which is ready
made and brought up by the upper House-maid: 
After this, I am my own Mistress till about
one, when she rises, and I help her on with
her Clothes, and see her no more till about
eleven, which is the time she generally goes
to Bed. I sit down and read to her till she
falls asleep, and this compleats the Work of
the Day —Her Daughter's Woman has ten
times more fatigue than I, tho' her Ladyship
is reckoned very good too; but I heard by the
by that she is horribly jealous of Sir Thomas;
and that makes her a little cross sometimes to
those about her; so I am glad I have nothing
to do with her: I lie with Mrs. Mary her
Chamber maid, who is a mighty good-natur'd
Creature, and likes me prodigiously; it was
she gave me the hint about Sir Thomas, and
bid me avoid him as much as I could; for
says she, if he should take any notice of you,
my Lady would never rest till you were out
of the House; and her Mother is so fond of 

her, that she would part from any body rather
than give her a Minute's uneasiness—and I
can tell you he loves a Girl in a corner— 
so I find, Mamma, I must take care of my
Behaviour —As for the young Gentleman,
I never saw him till this Morning as I was
coming up Stairs—I assure you he is not at all
handsome—you need not fear I shall lose
my Heart. —He did not speak a Word,
but stared at me when I stopped to let him
pass, and I made him a Curtesy—so how
things will happen I can't tell; but if any
thing material occurs, you may be sure of being
immediately acquainted with it, by 
Dear Mamma,
Your most Obedient Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 
P. S. Just as I had finish'd the above, my
Lady's Bell rung; so not having time to seal it
then, I have the opportunity to tell you, that
as I was crossing the passage, I saw the young
Gentleman again, coming out of his Father's
Closet; I made him another Curtesy, and
blush'd, and I thought he look'd a little red
too, but did not speak a Word—I hope
soon to have more to acquaint you with. 


MONDAY.
Dear Mamma,
I Long'd to see you Yesterday, but did not
think it would look well to ask to go out
the very first Sunday I came. So I write to
inform you, what has happen'd since my last. 
On Saturday Morning, as I was in a Room
joining to my Lady's Chamber, tacking a
Pair of three-double Ruffles on her Sleeves (for
she goes as fine and as gay as her Daughter,
tho' she is so very old) Mr. L&wblank; came thro'
to pay his Duty to his Grandmother, as it
seems he does every Morning, tho' I never
happen'd to be in the way before. He took
no notice of me as he went, but when he came
back, So my pretty Lass, said he, you wait
upon my Grandmother, I think? Yes, Sir,
replied I, rising and curtesying, I am so happy. 
I hope you'll have cause to think yourself so,
returned he, she is a very good Mistress, and
you look as if you would deserve her Favours. 
This was all that past, and he went directly
down stairs. —Now whether he had any
Meaning in what he said I can't tell, but I
could not help thinking it a lucky Omen, that
the first thing he said to me should be, that he
hoped I should have Cause to think myself happy. — 
I should think myself happy indeed, if I could
get a Husband with such an Estate as he will
have— O, what Splendor does my Lady
L&wblank; live in! —How every body worships
her—tho' I must not set my Heart 

too much upon it, for fear of a Disappointment
—but I have something more to tell
you still, Mamma—Yesterday in the Afternoon
my Lady, and Sir Thomas and his Lady,
and Mr. L&wblank; went all out a visiting— 
So it being an idle time Mrs. Brown Lady
L&wblank;'s Woman, and the Chambermaid and
I were got all together over a Pot of Coffee in
the Back-Parlour; and tho' I believe none of
us are silly enough to give any Credit to what
one may fancy is to be seen in throwing the
Grounds, yet to amuse ourselves we toss'd the
Cups, as they call it, and were telling one another
our Fortunes—when, to our great
Surprize, in comes Mr. L&wblank;: we were
so busy, that we never heard him, till he was
just upon us—it seems some of the Under-Maids
happen'd to be standing at the Door,
and he came in without knocking—He
found what we were at, and fell a laughing
most prodigiously; but the Confusion we were
all in is not to be express'd——Nay, nay, said
he, I won't disturb you; and since I have
caught you, am resolved to make one among
you—Come, which of you is the Artist? 
—I believe, Sir, replied Mrs. Brown, who
had the most Courage, our Skill is pretty equal; 
tho' I think Mary is rather the best at
Invention —Then Mary shall be my Conjurer,
said he; and with these Words turn'd down
a Cup. Poor Mrs. Mary was sadly asham'd,
and begg'd his Honour would excuse her; but
he would needs carry on the Jest, and forced
her to take the Cup —Well then, said she,
here is a great House, and a fine Lady at the 

Gate, that seems to expect a Visit from your
Honour; and a great deal more such Stuff she
run on with. He laugh'd again, and said, as
you observed Mrs. Brown I find Mary is a
great Visionary; but she has not happen'd to
hit upon my Humour —I don't regard fine
Ladies; Beauty and Innocence have more
Charms for me than Grandeur —He look'd
full at me as he spoke these last Words:— 
then, I thank you for my Fortune, however,
Mary, continued he; and I think I ought to
pay for it. With this he gave us every one a
Kiss, beginning with Mrs. Brown, and ending
with me. But indeed, Mamma, I am very
much mistaken, if there was not a great deal
of difference between his manner of saluting
them and me; he seem'd, I thought, only to
touch their Lips, but press'd mine so hard that
he made them smart. After this, Well, said
he, I won't stay to be a Restraint upon you— 
pray pursue your Diversion, and so went up
stairs. 
This Accident is very trifling, but every
thing must have a Beginning; and therefore I
thought fit to let you know it, as you shall
most faithfully all that happens to, my dear
Mamma, 
Your most Dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy.  


WEDNESDAY.
Dear Mamma,
I am not half so easy as when I wrote to
you last—I am afraid, I have made a
Conquest in the wrong Place. —I find what
Mrs. Mary told me is true. —Sir Thomas
can't be content with his own Lady, tho' she
is allow'd to be one of the finest Women in
the Kingdom, and is not old now; for they
say, she was a perfect Girl when Mr. L&wblank;
was born: Well, if I were a Woman of Fortune,
I'd marry none of them. —But I'll tell
you, Mamma; Lady L&wblank; went with some
Company to the Play on Monday; after she
was gone, Sir Thomas came up into my Lady's
Room, and staid about an Hour, and drank
Wine and eat some Jelly with her, which I
serv'd, as it being in her Chamber; when he
took his leave I was order'd to light him down; 
I did so, and when we came to the Door of his
Study, he took hold of my Hand and pull'd
me in: I was so confounded, not expecting any
such Thing from him, who had never before
seem'd to look at me, that I had not power
to make any Resistance. —Pretty Mrs.
Syrena, said he, I would not have given you
this Trouble; but for an Opportunity to tell
you how much I am charmed with your Person
and Behaviour—in speaking this he
clapped the Door, but did not lock it. I beg
your Honour would not talk so to me, answered
I, endeavouring to get from him; but 

he held me fast, and in spite of all I could do,
forced a hundred Kisses from me. —The
more I struggled, the closer he press'd me to
him; and I don't know how far the old Goat
might have proceeded, if I had not protested,
I would cry out and alarm the House: he then
desisted; but still held me with one Hand,
and with the other took five Guineas out of
his Pocket, and would have put them down
my Bosom; say nothing to any body, cried he,
and I'll be a Friend to you: Sir, said I, resolutely,
I desire no Friendship, but what I shall
endeavour to merit by my Honesty; and as I
am Madam S&wblank;'s Servant, shall take no
Presents from any of her Relations, without
acquainting her with it. You are young,
cried he, and don't know the World yet; nor
do I desire to be inform'd of it by such Means,
replied I; and giving a sudden Spring got loose,
and ran up Stairs. I thought that I had
thrown all the Pieces down, that he attempted
to put into my Bosom; but when I came
to unlace me, I found one Guinea had slipt in
unknown to me. —Indeed, I was a little
tempted to keep it, as believing he would not
miss it, in the hurry of Spirits he seemed to
have been; but then again I thought that
if he did, it would look like an Encouragement: 
So it came into my Head to make a
merit to the Ladies of restoring it, and at the
time shew him, that any future Attempts he
should think to make upon me would be in
vain. When I went into my Lady's Chamber
in the Morning; Madam, said I, after I
had read you to sleep last Night, I saw this 

Guinea lying on the Carpet, so I took it up,
fearing it might be lost, when the Carpet was
taken up to be shook, I suppose you happen'd
to drop it. No, answer'd she, I never carry
Money loose in my Pocket. —I believe,
my Son in pulling out some Papers, might let
it fall. I beg then, Madam, said I, you will
be so good to return it to him. No, replied
she, you shall do it yourself. When we go to
Dinner, I'll send for you into the Parlour: 
She did so, and having told Sir Thomas, what
I had said concerning the Guinea; I went to
him, and made him a low Curtesy, offering
it to him. No, Mrs. Syrena, said he, pray
keep it yourself, as a Reward for your Honesty. 
I humbly thank'd his Honour, and went
away; but as I went out of the Room, I heard
Lady L&wblank; say, Sir Thomas, I am glad
you have given it to her; and the Butler told
me afterwards, that they all were full of my
Praises. Sir Thomas himself, I find is not disobliged
at this Action, for as I went through
the Dining-Room this Morning, to ask how
Lady L&wblank; had slept, she being a little ill
with the Head-Ach last Night, he was sitting
at the Window, and as soon as he saw me, he
rose, and in a low Voice, said, I see you have
a Discretion above your Years. —I will
offer nothing that shall alarm you; but I
must have a Moment's Discourse with you
soon. I was vex'd he was there, and only
answer'd, I beg your Honour will not think
on't, and so left him. As to Mr. L&wblank;,
I have not seen him since Sunday, but at Table
when I carried in the Guinea, and once in 

my Lady's Chamber; so I can form no Judgment,
how far I am in his good Graces, any
farther than my last made mention of. —It is
very unlucky that his Father likes me; but I
shall shun him as much as I can, without being
taken Notice on by the Family. —I am
afraid I shan't be able to see you next Sunday
neither, for my Lady talks of taking Physick; 
but I am not certain yet, and shall write to
you again before then, for I have time
enough, if I have but an agreeable Subject. 
I am, 
Dear Mamma,
Your most dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 


THURSDAY Evening.
Dear Mamma,
Strange Adventures have happen'd
since yesterday Morning; but don't be
alarm'd for the Consequence of them, in all
Probability will turn out highly to Advantage,
one Way or another. But I will not keep
you in Suspence. As soon as Dinner was over,
the Coach was order'd, and my Lady and
Lady L&wblank;, and Mrs Brown went among
the Shops as they call it, that is to make all
the Tradesmen in their Way pull down their
Goods; tell them what Lady bought of such 

a Pattern, and what of such a one; in fine to
hear News, and buy Pennyworths if they
meet with any. But this is nothing to my
Purpose. —After they were gone, I went
up into my Lady's Room, to lay her Night-Things
ready, as I always did, against she
undrest, and was a humming a new Tune to
myself, little thinking any Body was behind
me, when turning about, I saw Sir Thomas
just coming into the Chamber; I was very
much startled, but had not time to speak, before
he said Mrs. Syrena, I have a Favour to
beg of you; in any Thing I can, and ought
to do, I shall obey your Honour, answer'd I; 
it is only to mend a Hole in my Stocking, that
is just now broke, return'd he; and then looking
round the Room, I see you are alone,
cried he: These Words frighted me very
much, and I would have given any Thing to
have been out of the Chamber, or that somebody
had come up; but he knew well enough
the Under-Servants were all at Dinner; and
he had left Mrs. Mary busy in her Lady's Room,
or else he would not have ventured to come
into me in that Manner. He saw I was uneasy,
and to dissipate my Fears. —Don't
be under Apprehensions, said he, I shall do
you no Hurt—you don't think I wou'd
ravish you sure. —I hope, Sir, answer'd I,
you would not harbour any Thoughts of ruining
a poor Girl, who has nothing but her
good Character to depend upon. No Child,
said he, your Character can run no risque with
a Man, who would not forfeit his own— 
and it is on this Head, I want to talk with 

you. —He then told me, that he liked and
loved me above any Woman he had ever seen; 
that if I would consent to be his, he would
put it out, even of his own power to use me
ill, by making me a handsome Settlement. — 
All which Offers I rejected with (I think, I
may say without Vanity) a well-affected vertuous
Pride. —I told him, I preferr'd my
Honesty in Rags, to all the Splendor in the
World, when it must be the Purchase of Vice
and Infamy; and desired he would desist making
me any such Offers; for as I looked upon
it, as a Crime even to listen to them, I must
be obliged to leave the House. —Well, said
he, I will endeavour to conquer myself, if I
am able. —But, how is it possible, continued
he, sighing, and looking full in my
Face, when I see those Eyes. —Then I
must hide them, cried I, turning away. — 
No resumed he, I must not, cannot loose the
Pleasure of seeing you—cruel Girl as
you are—but still I hope, you will one
Day be kinder. —Yes you will. — 
You must, continued he, catching hold of both
Hands, and pressing them between his— 
then perceiving I began to tremble again, why
are you so alarm'd, added he? tho' Opportunities
are so scarce, that perhaps, I was a little too
precipitate in seizing the first; yet you see I
now behave to you in a different Manner. 
Every thing that has a Tendency to corrupt
my Innocence, said I, is alike alarming; and I
against protest, I will not stay in a House
where I cannot be secure. —Well, Mrs.
Syrena, replied he, letting go my Hands, you 

judge my Intentions with too much Severity. 
—I assure you, that the short time you
have been in my Family, has made an Impression
on me, that would not suffer me to
injure you. —Only think on what I have
said, and command any thing in my power: 
With these Words he kiss'd me, and left the
Room. I presently lock'd the Door to prevent
his Return; and was sitting down to
consider how I should behave in this Affair,
when the Closet-Door behind me open'd, and
out came Mr. L&wblank;. Never was Surprize
equal to mine, of seeing him there: I had
not Presence enough of Mind to forbear
shrieking, which I am since heartily glad,
nobody heard. Hush! cried he, or you'll
bring my Father back again. For Heaven's
sake, Sir, said I, what brought you into
that Closet? Not Curiosity, upon my Word,
answer'd he, for I little expected the Scene
I have been witness of; but whatever Motive
induced me to conceal myself here,
you ought not to be dissatisfy'd, since by it
I have proved your Virtue and Prudence
equal to your Beauty. I beseech you, Sir, said
I, don't rally a poor silly Girl, who has nothing
to boast of, but the Resolution of keeping
herself honest. No, Mrs. Syrena, reply'd
he, I never was more serious in my Life than
I am this Moment—I was less so, I confess
when I went into that Closet, but my Father's
Behaviour has been such a Surprize upon
me that—He was going to say something,
but a sudden Thought made him break
off, and after a little Pause, But sure, resum'd 

he, you do not in earnest intend to quit my
Grandmother? I should think it the greatest
Blessing of Life, answer'd I, to continue in
the Service of so good a Lady; but the Persecutions
I am like to receive from Sir Thomas,
are of a Nature I neither can or ought to bear,
for any Consideration. I am sorry to say,
returned he, that amorous Addresses are not
very becoming in a Man of fifty to a Girl of
your Years; but if ever it should be discover'd,
'tis his own, not your Character, would suffer
by it —You may depend, that whatever
his Inclinations are, he has too much Honour
to make use of Force to gain you; and if you
should leave us, you can go into no Family,
but where those Eyes of yours will lay you
under the same Temptations you receive from
him. On this I hung down my Head, and
kept looking on the Ground to avoid seeing
how he look'd when he spoke. Don't be
asham'd, pursued he, taking me by the Hand,
I tell you nothing but Truth —So, pretty
Mrs. Syrena, you must not think of going out
of the House, at least yet a while. If I could
be safe, said I, nothing could give me greater
Pleasure than to continue here—but— 
You shall be safe, interrupted he, Come, dry
those lovely Eyes—(for I was just then
squeezing out some Tears) I had something to
say to you, but will take another Opportunity,
and leave you now to compose your self: He
concluded with giving me a Kiss, accompanied
with a most tender Pressure of my Hand, and
then went out of the Chamber; but had not
been gone above three Steps, before he return'd; 

I believe, said he, you are too discreet and
good-natur'd to expose my Father's Folly? I
should be very sorry, answer'd I, to do any
thing that might create Uneasiness in a Family,
for the greatest part of whom I have the
most perfect Love and Veneration. Those of
us who enjoy that are happy, cry'd he, and
methought his Eyes struck Fire as he spoke
these Words; but he went on, I have one
thing more to desire of you, and that is, that
you will let me know from time to time what
Sollicitations you receive from my Father — 
My Advice may be of some Service to you; 
and such a Mark of your Confidence highly
obliging to me. Sir, reply'd I, tho' such a
Confidence to a Person of a different Sex,
must cover me with the utmost Confusion; 
yet you seem too good, and too full of Pity to
me, for me to refuse. You cannot have too
great an Opinion of my Good-will towards
you, said he, and so you shall find. Here he
took me in his Arms, and gave me three or
four hearty Kisses, tho' with all the Modesty
in the World, and then ran down Stairs. 
Now, Mamma, what can I think of all
this, but that he conceal'd himself in the Closet
for no other purpose, than to attempt me
in the manner Sir Thomas has done; but that
my resolute Behaviour to the Father, made a
Convert of the Son; and turned the Inclinations
he felt for me, into others of a more respectful
Nature. —I would be loath to flatter
my self too far—but I think I am
right —Time will discover —This Morning, 

after he came down from Breakfast, as
he always does, with Sir Thomas and his Lady
in their Chamber, he tarry'd walking backwards
and forwards in the great Parlour, for,
I believe, three Hours; and every time I
pass'd him, as I was oblig'd to do very often,
there being no other way from my Lady's
Room, he gave me Looks which told me, he
had the kindest Thoughts of me; and once,
no Body being in Sight, came to me and kiss'd
me, with these Words, Dear Mrs. Syrena be
easy. He dined abroad to Day with Sir Thomas,
so I have seen neither of them since; but
I don't doubt now, but I shall have Matter
sufficient to employ my Pen to you very often. 
Dear Mamma, with good Success to, 
Your dutiful Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 


Friday Morning.
Dear Mamma,
I am now eased of the Suspence I was in
when I wrote to you Yesterday: Mr. L&wblank;
has broke his Mind to me——I'll tell you in
what manner—Thursday being what they
call my Lady's Visiting Day, there was a vast
deal of Company; but I had dothing to do
with them, for Mrs. Brown and the Chambermaid
attend in a little Room within the 

Drawing-Room, as the Groom of the Chambers
and Butler do in one without; so having
no Body to converse with, I sat in my own
Lady's Room, meditating on my Affairs — 
I think I mention'd in my former, that the
two Gentlemen dined abroad—Sir Thomas,
after he had quitted his Company, it seems,
went to the Play, but Mr. L&wblank; came
Home —He did not stay five Minutes in the
Drawing Room, but knowing how the Family
were engag'd, and expecting to find me where
he did, came directly up. I rose to pay my Respects
to him, but he made me sit down immediately,
and placing himself near me, I desire,
said he, that there may be no Distance
observ'd between us when we are alone, and
could wish our Circumstances would admit of
an Equality in publick —But Fortune is
not always just to Merit. I was about to make
him some Complement in return, but he prevented
me by going on —I have a great
deal to say to you Mrs. Syrena, pursued he,
but if you desire I should be a sincere Friend
to you, you must be sincere to me in answering
a few Questions I shall ask. I should be
altogether unworthy of the Honour you do
me, Sir, reply'd I, if I should make any Attempt
to impose on your Belief —I say an
Attempt, for being bred up in a perfect Abhorrence
of Lying, and all kind of Deceit, I
should go about the Practice of it in so aukward
a manner, that a very little Share of
Judgment would be sufficient to detect me. 
But, Sir, continued I, thank Heaven, I yet
am conscious of nothing I would wish to conceal 

from the Knowledge of any Body. (There,
I think, I followed your Instructions to a nicety,
Mamma.) I dare answer for you to my
self, said he, that you have been guilty of nothing
that can be call'd a Crime; but Love is
not so; and my sweet Syrena, have you never
yet seen the Man happy enough to make
an Impression on you? Never, indeed, Sir,
reply'd I, nor do I boast it as a Virtue; because
till the dreadful Declaration made by Sir
Thomas, I never heard the Sound of Love
from any Man in the World. Well, resumed
he, and was it owing, examine well your
Heart before you answer, to a Detestation of
his Offers, or a Dislike to his Person and
Years, that made you so resolutely repulse
him? To a Detestation of his Offers, said I,
for I consider'd nothing farther. Then, cry'd
he, you would equally hate any other should
address you on the same score? I think so,
answer'd I; but, Sir, I beseech you question
me no farther. —I know my Heart
at present, but know not what it may be
hereafter. —I have heard of Women,
that have an hundred Times my Understanding,
and yet made a false Step, as they call it. 
—'Tis Heaven alone must keep me, and
by depending on that only Guard, I hope to
be secure. Well, but there is no harm, said
he, in indulging a Tenderness, for a generous
faithful Lover. No, Sir, replied I, not when
his Designs are virtuous and honourable. The
World, cry'd he, is not well agreed about the
true Signification of those Words, Virtuous
and Honourable; but for my Part, I think that 

what tends to make the Happiness of the beloved
Object is both Virtuous and Honourable. 
—But, we'll leave the Definition to the Casuists: 
I have one Thing more, my charming
Syrena, to be inform'd of, and then I have
done. —Suppose, continued he, I loved
you, and loved you with a Passion, which it
was utterly impossible for me to subdue, must
I for that Reason, be the Object of your Aversion? 
—(I expected this, so had prepared
myself for it, as you will find Mamma.) 
Heaven forbid, cry'd I, that I should ever be
brought into so terrible Dilemma. ——I
know what I ought to do—but—(here
I seem'd to faulter in my Speech) but I beseech
you, Sir, do not talk in this Manner to a
a poor silly Creature, that knows not how to
answer you. Dear lovely Innocence! cry'd
he, pulling me to him, and kissing me an hundred
Times, I believe in spite of all my Struggling,
I do love you, pursued he; the very
first Minute I saw you, I loved you. — 
But your Wit, your Prudence, your unaffected
Modesty, has made me now almost adore you. 
Here, he began to kiss me again with more
Vehemence than before, and I could not get
leave to speak for a good while; at last bursting
from him, and pretending to weep,
Ah, Sir! said I, if you lov'd me, you would
not use me in this Manner. By Heaven,
I do, said he, and to prove it will—here
he stopped, and then, will do almost any
thing. I was going to reply, but heard somebody
coming up Stairs; it was the Groom of
the Chambers for a Sheet of gilt Paper out of 

my Lady's 'Scrutore, for one of the Company
to write a Song; he seem'd surpriz'd to
find Mr. L&wblank; with me, as was he at his
coming up; but to take off all Suspicion, I
came a begging too, said he, for a Stick of
Wax; I happening to be out, and I know my
Grandmother is a great Clerk, but Mrs. Syrena
tells me there is none, have you any in
your Charge, for I want to seal some Letters? 
I think I have, Sir, answer'd the other, where
shall I bring it your Honour? Into my Chamber,
said Mr. L&wblank;, and went with him
down Stairs. I have not seen him since, nor
indeed was there any Opportunity, for the
Company taking leave soon after, they went
to Supper; and he is not stirring yet;— 
a thousand to one but this Day will produce
something more; if it does, I'll write Tomorrow,
for my Lady persists in her Design
of taking Physick, and I can't come out on
Sunday. If you find any thing amiss in my
Management, let me know it by old Sarah,
for I would not have you trust the Penny Post; 
but if I have behaved according to your Mind,
defer writing till a more material Occasion, for
I would not have any Body come after me too
often. I am, dear Mamma, as ever, 
Your most obedient Daughter,
Syrena Tricksy. 
P. S. I had forgot to tell you that Mr.
Groves, the Groom of the Chambers, has been
vastly diligent to oblige me ever since I came 

into the House; and I am afraid guesses somewhat
by seeing Mr. L&wblank; in the Chamber
with me last Night, for this Morning he looks
very sullen, and did not speak to me as he used
to do. 

