

In the late War between the French
and the Confederate Armies, there
were two Brothers, who had
acquir'd a more than ordinary Reputation,
under the Command of
the great and intrepid Luxembourgh. 
But the Conclusion of the Peace taking
away any further Occasions of shewing their
Valour, the Eldest of 'em, whose Name was
Count D'elmont, return'd to Paris, from
whence he had been absent two Years, leaving
his Brother at St. Omers, 'till the Cure of some
slight Wounds were perfected. 
The Fame of the Count's brave Actions arriv'd
before him; and he had the Satisfaction of being receiv'd 

by the King and Court, after a Manner
that might gratify the Ambition of the proudest. 
The Beauty of his Person, the Gaiety of his Air,
and the unequal'd Charms of his Conversation,
made him the Admiration of both Sexes; and
whilst those of his own strove which should gain
the largest Share in his Friendship; the other vented
fruitless Wishes, and in secret curs'd that Custom
which forbids Women to make a Declaration of
their Thoughts. Amongst the Number of these,
was Alovisa, a Lady descended (by the Father's
Side) from the Noble Family of the D'la Tours,
formerly Lord of Beujey, and (by her Mother's)
from the equally Illustrious House of Montmorency. 
The late Death of her Parents had left
her Coheiress (with her Sister) of a vast Estate. 
If her Passion was not greater than the rest,
her Pride, and the good Opinion she had of
herself, made her the less able to support it; she
sigh'd, she burn'd, she rag'd, when she perceiv'd
the Charming D'elmont behav'd himself toward
her with no Mark of a distinguishing Affection. 
What (said she) have I beheld without Concern a
Thousand Lovers at my Feet, and shall the only
Man I ever endeavour'd, or wish'd to Charm, regard
me with Indifference? Wherefore has the agreeing
World join'd with my deceitful Glass to
flatter me into a vain Belief I had invincible Attractions? 
D'elmont sees 'em not; D'elmont
is insensible! Then would she fall into Ravings,
sometimes cursing her own Want of Power, sometimes
the Coldness of D'elmont. Many Days
she pass'd in these Inquietudes, and every time she
saw him (which was very frequently) either at
Court, at Church, or publick Meetings, she found
fresh Matter for her troubled Thoughts to work
upon: When on any Occasion he happen'd to
speak to her, it was with that Softness in his Eyes,
and that engaging Tenderness in his Voice, as 

would half persuade her, that the same God had
touch'd his Heart, which so powerfully had influenced
her's; but if a Glimmering of such a Hope gave
her a Pleasure inconceivable, how great were the
ensuing Torments, when she observ'd those Looks
and Accents were but the Effects of his natural
Complaisance, and that to whomsoever he address'd,
he carried an Equality in his Behaviour,
which sufficiently evinced, his Hour was not yet
come to feel those Pains he gave; and if the afflicted
Fair Ones found any Consolation, it was in
the Reflection, that no Triumphant Rival could
boast a Conquest, each now despair'd of gaining. 
But the impatient Alovisa disdaining to be
rank'd with those, whom her Vanity made her
consider as infinitely her Inferiors, suffer'd herself
to be agitated almost to Madness, between
the two Extremes of Love and Indignation; a
thousand Chimeras came into her Head, and
sometimes prompted her to discover the Sentiments
she had in his Favour: But these Resolutions
were rejected, almost as soon as form'd, and
she could not fix on any for a long time; 'till at
last, Love (ingenious in Invention) inspired her
with one, which probably might let her into the
Secrets of his Heart, without the Shame of revealing
her own, 
The Celebration of Madam the Dutchess of
Burgundy's Birth-day being to be solemnized
with great Magnificence, she writ this Billet to him
on the Night before. 


To Count D'elmont.
Resistless as you are in War, you are
much more so in Love: Here, you conquer without
making an Attack, and we Surrender before
you Summons; the Law of Arms obliges you to show
Mercy to an yielding Enemy, and sure the Court cannot
inspire less generous Sentiments than the Field. 
The little God lays down his Arrows at your Feet,
confesses your superior Power, and begs a friendly Treatment; 
he will appear to you to morrow Night at the
Ball, in the Eyes of the most passionate of all his Votresses; 
search therefore for him in Her, in whom (amongst
that bright Assembly) you would most desire to
find him; I am confident you have too much Penetration
to miss of him, if not byass'd by a former Inclination; 
and in that Hope, I shall (as patiently as
my Expectations will let me) support, 'till then, the
tedious Hours. 
Farewell. 

This she sent by a trusty Servant, and so disguis'd,
that it was impossible for him to be known,
with a strict Charge to deliver it to the Count's
own Hands, and come away before he had read
it. The Fellow perform'd her Orders exactly; and
when the Count, who was not a little surprised at
the first opening it, ask'd for the Messenger, and
commanded he should be stay'd; his Gentleman
(who then was waiting in his Chamber) told him
he ran down Stairs with all the speed imaginable,
immediately on his Lordship's receiving it. 

D'elmont having never experienced the Force
of Love, could not presently comprehend the
Truth of this Adventure; at first he imagin'd some
of his Companions had caus'd this Letter to be
wrote, either to sound his Inclinations, or upbraid
his little Disposition to Gallantry; but these Cogitations
soon gave Place to others; and tho' he
was not very vain, yet he found it no Difficulty
to persuade himself to an Opinion, that it was
possible for a Lady to distinguish him from other
Men. Nor did he find any thing so unpleasing in
that Thought as might make him endeavour to
repel it; the more he consider'd his own Perfections,
the more he was confirm'd in his Belief,
but who to fix it on, he was at a Loss as much as
ever; then he began to reflect on all the Discourse
and little Railleries that had pass'd between him
and the Ladies whom he had convers'd with since
his Arrival, but cou'd find nothing in any of 'em
of Consequence enough to make him guess at the
Person; He spent great part of the Night in
Thoughts very different from those he was accustom'd
to; the Joy which naturally rises from the
Knowledge 'tis in one's Power to bestow it, gave
him Notions which till then he was a Stranger to; 
he began to consider a Mistress as an agreeable as
well as fashionable Amusement, and resolv'd not
to be cruel. 
In the mean time poor Alovisa was in all
the Anxiety imaginable, she counted every Hour,
and thought 'em Ages, and at the first Dawn of
Day she rose, and calling up her Women, who
were amaz'd to find her so uneasy, she employ'd
'em in placing her Jewels on her Cloaths to the
best Advantage, while she consulted her Glass after
what Manner she should dress her Eyes, the gay,
the languishing, the sedate, the commanding, the
beseeching Air, were put on a thousand times,
and as often rejected; and she had scarce determin'd 

which to make use of, when her Page brought
her Word, some Ladies who were going to Court
desir'd her to accompany them; she was too impatient
not to be willing to be one of the first, so
went with them immediately, arm'd with all her
Lightnings, but full of unsettled Reflections. She
had not been long in the Drawing-Room, before
it grew very full of Company, but D'elmont
not being amongst 'em, she had her Eyes fixed towards
the Door, expecting every Moment to see
him enter; but how impossible is it to represent
her Confusion, when he appeared, leading the
young Amena, Daughter to Monsieur Sanseverin,
a Gentleman, who tho' he had a very small Estate
and many Children, had by a partial Indulgence,
too common among Parents, nelecting the rest,
maintain'd this Darling of his Heart in all the Pomp
of Quality. The Beauty and Sweetness of this
Lady was present Death to Alovisa's Hopes; 
she saw, or fancy'd she saw, an unusual Joy in her
Eyes, and dying Love in his; Disdain, Despair, and
Jealousie at once crowded into her Heart, and
swell'd her almost to bursting; and 'twas no wonder
that the Violence of such terrible Emotions
kept her from regarding the Discourses of those
who stood by her, or the Devoirs that D'elmont
made as he pass'd by, and at length threw her
into a Swoon; the Ladies ran to her Assistance,
and her charming Rival, being one of her particular
Acquaintance, shew'd an extraordinary Assiduity
in applying Means for her Relief; they made
what haste they cou'd to get her into another Room
and unfasten her Robe, but were a great while before
they could bring her to herself; and when
they did, the Shame of having been so disorder'd
in such an Assembly, and the Fears of their suspecting
the Occasion added to her former Agonies,
and rack'd her with most terrible Revulsions, every
one now despairing of her being able to assist at 

that Night's Entertainment, she was put into her
Chair, in order to be carry'd home: Amena who
little thought how unwelcome she was grown,
would needs have one call'd, and accompany'd her
thither, in spight of the Intreaties of D'elmont,
who had before engag'd her for his Partner in dancing; 
not that he was in Love with her, or at
that time believ'd he cou'd be touch'd with a Passion
which he esteem'd a Trifle in itself, and below
the Dignity of a Man of Sense; but Fortune
(to whom this Lady no less enamour'd than Alovisa)
had made a thousand Invocations, seem'd
to have allotted her the Glory of his first Addresses; 
she was getting out of her Chariot just as he alighted
from his, and offering her his Hand, he perceiv'd
hers trembled; which engaging him to look upon
her more earnestly than he was wont, he immediately
fancy'd he saw something of that Languishment
in her Eyes, which the obliging Mandate had
describ'd. Amena was too lovely to make that
Belief disagreeable, and he resolv'd on the Beginnings
of an Amour, without giving himself the
Trouble of considering the Consequences; the Evening
being extremely pleasant, he ask'd if she
wou'd not favour him so far as to take a Turn or
two with him in the Palace-Garden; she, who desir'd
nothing more than such a particular Conversation,
was not at all backward of complying; he talk'd to
her there for some time, in a manner as could
leave her no room to doubt he was entirelycharm'd,
and 'twas the Air such an Entertainment had left
on both their Faces, as produc'd those sad Effects
in the jealous Alovisa. She was no sooner led
to her Apartment, but she desir'd to be put to Bed,
and the good natur'd Amena, who really had
a very great Kindness for her, offer'd to quit
the Diversions of the Ball, and stay with her all
Night; but the unfortunate Alovisa was not in
a Condition to endure the Presence of any, especially 

her, so put her off as civilly as her Anxiety
would give her leave, chusing rather to suffer her
to return to the Ball, than retain so hateful an Object
(as she was now become) in her Sight; and
'tis likely the other was not much troubled at her
Refusal. But how (when left alone, and abandon'd
to the Whirlwinds of her Passion) the desperate
Alovisa behav'd, none but those who,
like her, have burn'd in hopeless Fires can guess,
the most lively Description wou'd come far short
of what she felt; she rav'd, she tore her Hair and
Face, and in the Extremity of her Anguish was
ready to lay violent Hands on her own Life. In
this Tempest of Mind, she continu'd for some time,
till at length Rage beginning to dissipate itself in
Tears, made way for cooler Considerations; and
her natural Vanity resuming its Empire in her Soul,
was of no little Service to her on this Occasion. 
Why am I thus disturb'd? Mean spirited as I am!
said she, D'elmont is ignorant of the Sentiments
I am possessed with in his Favour; and perhaps
'tis only want of Incouragement that has so long
depriv'd me of my Lover; my Letter bore no certain
Mark by which he might distinguish me, and
who knows what Arts that Creature might make
use of to allure him. I will therefore (pursu'd she,
with a more cheerful Countenance) direct his erring
Search. As she was in this Thought (happily
for her, who else might have relaps'd) her Women,
who were waiting in the next Room, came in to
know if she wanted any thing; yes, answer'd she,
with a Voice and Eyes wholly chang'd, I'll rise,
one of you help me on with my Cloaths, and let
the other send Charlo to me, I have instant
Business with him. 'Twas in vain for 'em to represent
to her the Prejudice it might be to her
Health to get out of her Bed at so unseasonable an
Hour, it being then just Midnight: They knew her
too absolute a Mistress not to be obeyed, and executed 

her Commands, without disputing the Reason. 
She was no sooner ready, than Charlo
was introduced, who being the same Person that
carry'd the Letter to D'elmont, guess'd what
Affair he was to be concerned in, and shut the
Door after him. I commend your Caution, said
his Lady, for what I am now going to trust you
with, is of more Concernment than my Life. The
Fellow bow'd, and made a thousand Protestations
of an eternal Fidelity. I doubt it not, resum'd she; 
go then immediately to the Court, 'tis not impossible
but in this hurry you may get into the Drawing
Room; but if not, make some Pretence to
stay as near as you can 'till the Ball be over; listen
carefully to all Discourses where you hear Count
D'elmont mentioned, enquire who he dances
with, and above all, watch what Company he comes
out with, and bring me an exact Account. Go,
continu'd she hastily, these are all the Orders I
have for you to Night, but to Morrow I shall employ
you farther. Then turning to her Escritore,
she sat down, and began to prepare a second Letter,
which she hop'd wou'd be more lucky than the
former. She was not long writing, Love and Wit
suggested a world of passionate and agreeable Expressions
to her in a Moment: But when she had
finish'd this so full a Discovery of her Heart, and
was about to sign her Name to it, not all that
Passion which had inspir'd her with a Resolution to
scruple nothing that might advance the compassing
her Wishes, nor the Vanity which assur'd her of
Success, were forcible enough to withstand the
Shock it gave her Pride: No, let me rather die!
said she (starting up and frighted at her own Designs)
than be guilty of a Meanness which wou'd
render me unworthy of Life: Oh Heavens! to offer
Love, and poorful sue for Pity! 'tis insupportable! 
What bewitch'd me to harbour such a
Thought, as even the vilest of my Sex would blush 

at? To Pieces then (added she, tearing the Paper)
with this shameful Witness of my Folly, my furious
Desires may be the Destruction of my Peace,
but never of my Honour, that shall still attend
my Name when Love and Life are fled. She continu'd
in this Temper (without being able to compose
herself to rest) till Day began to appear, and
and Charlo returned with News which confirm'd
her most dreaded Suspicions. He told her that he
had gain'd Admittance to the Drawing-Room several
Times, under Pretence of delivering Messages to
some of the Ladies; that the whole Talk among
'em was, that D'elmont was no longer insensible
of Beauty; that he observ'd that Gentleman
in very particular Conference with Amena,
and that he waited on her home in his Chariot, her
own not being in the way: I knew it, said Alovisa,
(walking about in a disorder'd Motion) I did
not doubt but that I was undone, and to my other
Miseries, have that of being aiding to my Rival's
Happiness: Whatever his Desires were, he carefully
conceal'd 'em till my cursed Letter prompted
a Discovery; tenacious as I was, and too, too
confident of this little Beauty! Here she stopp'd,
and wiping away some Tears, which in spight of
her ran down her Cheeks, gave Charlo leave
to ask if she had any more Commands for him. 
Yes (answer'd she) I will write once more to this
undiscerning Man, and let him know, 'tis not
Amena that is worthy of him; that I may do
without prejudicing my Fame, and 'twill be at least
some Easement to my Mind, to undeceive the Opinion
he may have conceiv'd of her Wit, for I am
almost confident she passes for the Authoress of
those Lines which have been so fatal to me: In
speaking this, without any further Thought, she
once more took her Pen, and wrote these Words. 


To Count D'elmont.
If Ambition be a Fault, 'tis only in those who have
not a sufficient Stock of Merit to support it; too
much Humility is a greater in you, whose Person
and Qualities are too admirable, not to render any
Attempt you shall make justifiable, as well as successful. 
Heaven when it distinguished you in so particular
a Manner from the Rest of Mankind, design'd you
not for vulgar Conquests; and you cannot without a
manifest Contradiction to its Will, and an irreparable
Injury to yourself, make a Present of that Heart to
Amena, when one of at least an equal Beauty, and
far superior in every other Consideration, would sacrifice
all to purchase the glorious Trophy; continue then
no longer in a wilful Ignorance, aim at a more exalted
Flight, and you will find it no Difficulty to discover
who she is that languishes, and almost dies for
an Opportunity of confessing (without too great a Breach
of Modesty) that her Soul, and all the Faculties of it,
are, and must be, 
Eternally Yours. 

This she gave to Charlo, to deliver with
the same Caution as the former; but he was
scarce got out of the House before a new Fear assaulted
her, and she repented her Uncircumspection. 
What have I done! cry'd she; Who knows but
D'elmont may shew these Letters to Amena,
she is perfectly acquainted with my Hand, and I
shall be the most expos'd and wretched Woman
in the World. Thus industrious was she in forming
Notions to torment herself; nor indeed was
there any thing of Improbability in this Conjecture. 

There are too many ungenerous enough
to boast such an Adventure; but D'elmont, tho'
he would have given good Part of his Estate to satisfy
his Curiosity, yet chose rather to remain in a
perpetual Ignorance, than make use of any means
that might be disadvantagious to the Lady's Reputation. 
He now perceiv'd his Mistake, and that
it was not Amena who had taken that Method to
engage him, and possibly was not disgusted to find
she had a Rival of such Merit, as the Letter intimated. 
However, he had said too many fine
Things to her to be lost, and thought it as inconsistent
with his Honour as his Inclination, to desist
a Pursuit in which he had all the Reason in the
World to assure himself of Victory; for the young
Amena (little vers'd in the Art of Dissimulation,
so necessary to her Sex) cou'd not conceal the Pleasure
she took in his Addresses, and without even
a seeming Reluctancy, had given him a Promise of
meeting him the next Day in the Tuilleries; nor
could all his unknown Mistress had writ, persuade
him to miss this Assignation, nor let that be succeeded
with another, and that by a third, and so
on, 'till by making a Shew of Tenderness, he began
to fancy himself really touch'd with a Passion
he only designed to represent. 'Tis certain this
way of Fooling rais'd Desires in him, little different
from what is commonly call'd Love; and
made him redouble his Attacks in such a Manner,
as Amena stood in need of all her Virtue to resist; 
but as much as she thought herself oblig'd to
resent such Attempts, yet he knew so well how to
excuse himself, and lay the Blame on the Violence
of his Passion, that he was still too charming and
dear to her, not to be forgiven. Thus was Amena
(by her too generous and open Temper) brought
to the very Brink of Ruin, and D'elmont was
possibly contriving Means to compleat it, when
her Page brought him this Letter. 


To Count D'elmont.
Some malicious Persons have endeavour'd to
make the little Conversation I have had with you,
appear as Criminal; therefore to put a Stop to all
such Aspersions, I must for the future deny myself the
Honour of your Visits, unless commanded to receive
'em by my Father, who only has the Power of disposing
of 
Amena. 

The Consternation he was in at the reading
these Lines, so very different from her former Behaviour,
is more easily imagin'd than express'd; 
'till casting his Eyes on the Ground, he saw a small
Note, which in the opening of this, had fallen
out of it, which he hastily took up, and found it
contain'd these Words. 

I guess the Surprize my lovely Friend is in, but
have not time now to unriddle the Mystery: I beg
you will be at your Lodgings towards the Evening,
and I will invent a Way to send to you. 

'Twas now that D'elmont began to find
there were Embarrassments in an Intrigue of this
Nature, which he had not foreseen, and stay'd at
Home all Day, impatiently expecting the clearing
of an Affair, which at present seem'd so ambiguous. 
When it grew a little duskish, his Gentleman
brought in a young Woman, whom he immediately
knew to be Anaret, an Attendant on
Amena; and when he had made her sit down, 

told her he hop'd she was come to make an Eclaircisment,
which would be very obliging to
him, and therefore desired she wou'd not defer
it. 
My Lord, said she, 'tis with an unspeakable
Trouble I discharge that Trust my Lady has repos'd
in me, in giving you a Relation of her Misfortunes; 
but not to keep you longer in suspence,
which I perceive is uneasy to you, I shall acquaint
you, that soon after you were gone, my Lady
came up into her Chamber, where, as I was preparing
to undress her, we heard Monsieur Sanseverin
in an angry Tone, ask where his
Daughter was, and being told she was above, we
immediately saw him enter, with a Countenance
so inflam'd, as put us both in a mortal Apprehension. 
An ill Use (said he to her) have you made
of my Indulgence, and the Liberty I have allow'd
you! Could neither the Considerations of the Honour
of your Family, your own Reputation, nor
my eternal Repose, deter you from such imprudent
Actions, as you cannot be ignorant must be
the inevitable Ruin of 'em all. My poor Lady
was too much surpriz'd at these cruel Words, to
be able to make any Answer to 'em, and stood
trembling, and almost fainting, while he went
on with his Discourse. Was it consistent with the
Niceties of your Sex, said he, or with the Duty
you owe me, to receive the Addresses of a Person
whose Pretensions I was a Stranger to? If the
Count D'elmont has any that are honourable,
wherefore are they concealed? The Count D'elmont!
(cry'd my Lady more frighted than before)
never made any Declarations to me worthy
of your Knowledge, nor did I ever entertain him
otherwise, than might become your Daughter. 
'Tis false (interrupted he furiously) I am but too
well inform'd of the contrary; nor has the most
private of your shameful Meetings escap'd my 

Ears! Judge, Sir, in what a Confusion my Lady
was in at this Discourse; 'twas in vain, she muster'd
all her Courage to persuade him from giving
Credit to an Intelligence so injurious to her; he
grew the more enrag'd, and after a thousand Reproaches,
flung out of the Room with all the Marks
of a most violent Indignation; but tho' your Lordship
is too well acquainted with the Mildness of
Amena's Disposition, not to believe she could
bear the Displeasure of a Father (who had always
most tenderly lov'd her) with Indifference; yet
'tis impossible for you to imagine in what an Excess
of Sorrow she was plung'd, she found every
Passage of her ill Conduct (as she was pleased to
call it) was betray'd, and did not doubt but whoever
had done her that ill Office to her Father,
wou'd take care the Discovery shou'd not be confin'd
to him alone. Grief, Fear, Remorse, and
Shame by turns assaulted her, and made her incapable
of Consolation; even the soft Pleas of Love
were silenced by their tumultuous Clamours, and
for a Time she consider'd your Lordship in no other
view than that of her Undoer. How! cry'd
D'elmont (interrupting her) cou'd my Amena,
who I thought all Sweetness, judge so harshly of
me. Oh! my Lord, resum'd Anaret, you
must forgive those first Emotions, which as violent
as they were, wanted but your Presence to
dissipate in a Moment; and if your Idea had not
presently that Power, it lost no Honour by having
Foes to struggle with, since at last it put 'em all to
flight, and gain'd so entire a Victory, that before
Morning, of all her Troubles, scarce any but the
Fears of losing you remain'd: And I must take the
Liberty to assure your Lordship, my Endeavours
were not wanting to establish a Resolution in her to
despise every thing for Love and You. But to be
as brief as I can in my Relation; the Night was
no sooner gone, than Monsieur her Father came 

into the Chamber, with a Countenance more compos'd
than that with which he left us, yet with such
an Air of Austerity, as made my timerous Lady lose
most of the Spirit she had assum'd for this Encounter. 
I come not now, Amena, said he, to upbraid or
punish your disobedience; if you are not wholly
abandon'd by your Reason, your own Reflections
will be sufficiently your Tormentors. But to put
you in a way (if not to clear your Fame, yet to
take away all Occasion of future Calumny) you
must write to Count D'elmont. 
I will have no Denials, continu'd he, (seeing
her about to speak) and leading her to her Escritore,
constrain'd her to write what he dictated, and you
receiv'd; just as she was going to seal it, a Servant
brought word that a Gentleman desir'd to
speak with Monsieur Sanseverin, he was oblig'd
to step into another Room, and that Absence
gave her an Opportunity of writing a Note,
which she dextrously slip'd into the Letter, unperceiv'd
by her Father at his Return, who little suspecting
what she had done, sent it away immediately. 
Now, said he, we shall be able to judge of
the Sincerity of the Count's Affections, but 'till
then I shall take care to prove myself a Person not
disinterested in the Honour of my Family. As he
spoke these Words, he took her by the Hand, and
conducting her, thro' his own, into a little Chamber
(which he had order'd to be made ready for
that purpose) shut her into it: I follow'd to the
Door, and seconded my Lady in her Desires, that
I might be permitted to attend her there; but all
in vain; he told me, he doubted not but that I had
been her Confident in this Affair, and ordered me
to quit his House in a few Days. As soon as he was
gone out, I went into the Garden, and saunter'd
up and down a good while, hoping to get an Opportunity
of speaking to my Lady through the Window,
for I knew there was one that look'd into it; 

but not seeing her, I be thought me of getting a
little Stick, with which I knock'd gently against
the Glass, and engag'd her to open it. As soon as
she perceiv'd me, a Beam of Joy brightned in
her Eyes, and glisten'd thro' her Tears. Dear
Anaret, said she, how kindly do I take this
Proof of thy Affection; 'tis only in thy Power to
alleviate my Misfortunes, and thou I know art
come to offer thy Assistance. Then after I had
assur'd her of my Willingness to serve her in any
Command, she desir'd me to wait on you with an
Account of all that had happen'd, and to give you
her Vows of an eternal Love. My Eyes, said she
weeping, perhaps may ne'er behold him more, but
Imagination shall supply that Want, and from my
Heart he never shall be absent. Oh! do not talk
thus, cry'd the Count, extremely touch'd at this
Discourse. I must, I will see her, nothing shall
hold her from me. You may, answer'd Anaret,
but then it must be with the Approbation of Monsieur
Sanseverin, he will be proud to receive
you in Quality of a Suitor to his Daughter, and
'tis only to oblige you to a publick Declaration that
he takes these Measures. D'elmont was not
perfectly pleas'd with these Words; he was too
quick-sighted not to perceive immediately what
Monsieur Sanseverin drove at, but as well
as he lik'd Amena, found no Inclination in himself
to marry her; and therefore was not desirous
of an Explanation of what he resolv'd not to seem
to understand. He walk'd two or three Turns about
the Room, endeavouring to conceal his Disgust,
and when he had so well overcome the Shockas
to banish all visible Tokens of it, I would willingly,
said he coldly, come into any proper Method
for the obtaining the Person of Amena, as
well as her Heart; but there are certain Reasons
for which I cannot make a Discovery of my Designs
to her Father, 'till I have first spoken with 

her. My Lord, reply'd the subtle Anaret (easily
guessing at his Meaning) I wish to Heaven there
were a Possibility of your Meeting; there is nothing
I would not risque to forward it, and if your Lordship
can think of any way in which I may be serviceable
to you, in this short time I am allow'd to
stay in the Family, I beg you would command
me. She spoke this with an Air, which made the
Count believe she really had it in her Power to
serve him in this Occasion, and presently hit on
the surest Means to bind her to his Interest. You
are very obliging, said he, and I doubt not but your
Ingenuity is equal to your good Nature, therefore
will leave the Contrivance of my Happiness entirely 
to you; and that you may not think your
Care bestow'd on an ungrateful Person, be pleas'd
(continu'd he, giving her a Purse of Louis-D'ors) to
accept this small Earnest of my future Friendship. 
Anaret, like most of her Function, was too
mercinary to resist such a Temptation, tho' it had
been given her to betray the Honour of her whole
Sex; and after a little pause, reply'd, your Lordship
is too generous to be refus'd, tho' in a Matter
of the greatest Difficulty, as indeed this is; for
in the strict Confinement my Lady is, I know no
way but one, and that extremely hazardous to her; 
however, I do not fear but my Persuasions, joyn'd
with her own Desires, will influence her to attempt
it. Your Lordship knows we have a little Door at
the farther End of the Garden, that opens into the
Tuilleries. I do, cry'd D'elmont interrupting
her, I have several times parted from my Charmet
there, when my Entreaties have prevail'd with her
to stay longer with me than she wou'd have the
Family to take notice of. I hope to order the Matter
so, resum'd Anaret, that it shall be the Scene
this Night of a most happy Meeting. My Lady, unknown
to her Father, has the Key of it, she can
throw it to me from her Window, and I can open 

it to you, who must be walking near it, about
twelve or one o' Clock, for by that time every
body will be in Bed. But what will that avail, cry'd
D'elmont hastily, since she lies in her Father's
Chamber, where 'tis impossible to pass without
alarming him? You Lovers are so impatient, rejoin'd
Anaret, smiling, I never design'd you
should have Entrance there, tho' the Window is
so low that a Person of your Lordship's Stature and
Agility might mount it with a Galliard Step; but I
suppose it will turn to as good an Account, if your
Mistress by my Assistance gets out of it. But can
she, interrupted he; will she, dost thou think? 
Fear not, my Lord, reply'd she, be but punctual
to the Hour, Amena shall be yours, if Love,
Wit and Opportunity have power to make her so. 
D'elmont was transported with this Promise,
and the Thoughts of what he expected to possess
by her Means, rais'd his Imagination to so high a
pitch, as he cou'd not forbear kissing and embracing
her with such Raptures, as might not have
been very pleasing to Amena, had she been
witness of 'em. But Anaret, who had other
things in her Head than Gallantry, disengag'd her
self from him as soon as she cou'd, taking more
Satisfaction in forwarding an Affair in which she
propos'd so much Advantage, than in the Caresses
of the most accomplish'd Gentleman in the
World. 
When she came Home, she found every thing
as she cou'd wish, Monsieur Abroad, and his
Daughter at the Window, impatiently watching her
return; she told her as much of the Discourse she
had with the Count as she thought proper, extolling
his Love and Constancy, and carefully concealing
all she thought might give an Umbrage to
her Virtue. But in spight of all the Artifice she
made use of, she found it no easie Matter to perswade
her to get out of the Window; the Fears she 

had of being discover'd, and more expos'd to her Father's
Indignation, and the Censure of the World,
damp'd her Inclinations, and made her deaf to the
eager Sollicitations of this unfaithful Woman. As
they were disputing, some of the Servants happ'ning
to come into the Garden, oblig'd 'em to break
off, and Anaret retir'd, not totally dispairing
of compassing her Designs, when the appointed
Hour should arrive, and Amena should know the
darling Object of her Wishes was so near. Nor
did her Hopes deceive her, the Resolutions of a
Lover, when made against the Interest of the Person
belov'd, are but of a short duration; and this
unhappy Fair was no sooner left alone, and had
leisure to contemplate on the Graces of the Charming
D'elmont, but Love play'd his part with
such Success, as made her repent she had chid
Anaret for her Proposal, and wish'd for nothing
more than an Opportunity to tell her so. 
She pass'd several Hours in Disquietudes she had
never known before, till at last she heard her Father
come into the next Room to go to Bed, and soon
after some Body knock'd softly at the Window,
she immediately open'd it, and perceiv'd by the
Light of the Moon, which then shone very bright,
that it was Anaret; she had not Patience to
listen to the long Speech the other had prepar'd to
perswade her, but putting her Head as far as she
could, to prevent being heard by her Father; Well
Anaret, said she, where is this Adventrous
Lover, what is it he requires of me? Oh! Madam,
Reply'd she, overjoy'd at the compliable Humour
she found her in, he is now at the Garden Door,
there's nothing wanting but your Key to give him
Entrance; what farther he requests, himself shall
tell you. Oh Heavens! cry'd Amena, searching
her Pockets, and finding she had it not; I am undone,
I have left it in my Cabinet in the Chamber
where I us'd to lie. These Words made Anaret 

at her Wits end, she knew there was no possibility
of fetching it, there being so many Rooms to go
thro', she ran to the Door, and endeavour'd to
push back the Lock, but had not Strength; she
then knew not what to do, she was sure D'elmont
was on the other side, and fear'd he would resent
this usage to the disappointment of all her
mercenary Hopes, and durst not call to acquaint
him with his Misfortune for fear of being heard. 
As for Amena, she was now more sensible than
ever of the violence of her Inclinations, by the
extream Vexation this Disappointment gave her:
Never did People pass a Night in greater Uneasiness
than these three; the Count, who was naturally
impatient, could not bear a Baulk of this
nature without the utmost Chagrin. Amena languish'd,
and Anaret fretted to Death, tho'
she resolv'd to leave no Stone unturn'd to set all
right again. Early in the Morning she went to his
Lodgings, and found him in a very ill Humour; 
but she easily pacify'd him, by representing with
a great deal of real Grief, the Accident that retarded
his Happiness, and assuring him there was
nothing cou'd hinder the fulfilling it the next Night. 
When she had gain'd this Point, she came Home
and got the Key into her possession, but could not
find an opportunity all Day of speaking to her Lady; 
Monsieur Sanseverin did not stir out of
Doors, and spent most of it with his Daughter:
In his Discourse to her, he set the Passion the
Count had for her in so true a light, that it
made a very great Alteration in her Sentiments; 
and she began to reflect on the Condescensions
she had given a Man, who had never so much as
mention'd Marriage to her, with so much shame,
as almost over whelm'd her Love, and she was now
determin'd never to see him, till he should declare 

himself to her Father in such a manner as would
be for her Honour. 
In the mean time Anaret waited with a
great deal of Impatience for the Family going to
Bed; and as soon as all was hush, ran to give the
Count Admittance; and leaving him in an
Alley on the farther side of the Garden, made
the accustom'd Sign at the Window. Amena
presently open'd it, but instead of staying to hear
what she would say, threw a Letter out; Carry
that, said she, to Count D'elmont, let him
know the Contents of it are wholly the result of
my own Reason. And as for your part, I charge
you trouble me no farther on this Subject; then
shutting the Casement hastily, left Anaret in
a strange Consternation at this sudden Change of
her Humour; however she made no delay, but
running to the Place where the Count waited
her return, deliver'd him the Letter, but advis'd
him (who was ready enough of himself) not to
obey any Commands might be given him to the
hindrance of his Designs. The Moon was then
at the full, and gave so clear a Light, that he easily
found it contain'd these Words. 

To Count D'elmont.
Too many Proofs have I given you of my Weakness,
not to make you think me incapable of forming
or keeping any Resolution to the Prejudice of
that Passion you have inspir'd me with: But know,
thou Undoer of my Quiet, tho' I have lov'd and still
do love you you with a Tenderness, which I fear will
be unvanquishable; yet I will rather suffer my Life,
than my Virtue to become its Prey. Press me then 

no more, I conjure you, to such dangerous Interviews,
in which I dare neither trust my Self, nor You; if
you believe me worthy your real Regard, the way thro'
Honour is open to receive You; Religion, Reason, Modesty,
and Obedience forbid the rest. 
Farewell. 

D'elmont knew the Power he had over her
too well, to be much discourag'd at what he read; 
and after a little consultation with Anaret, they
concluded he should go to speak to her, as being
the best Sollicitor in his own Cause. As he came
down the Walk, Amena saw him thro' the Glass,
and the sight of that beloved Object, bringing a
thousand past Endearments to her Memory, made
her incapable of retiring from the Window, and
she remain'd in a languishing and immoveable
Posture, leaning her Head against the Shutter, 'till
he drew near enough to discern she saw him. He
took this for no ill Omen, and instead of falling
on his Knees at an humble Distance, as some Romantick
Lovers would have done, redoubled his
Pace, and Love and Fortune, which on this Occasion
were resolv'd to befriend him, presented to
his View a large Rolling-Stone which the Gardiner
had accidentally left there; the Iron-work that
held it was very high, and strong enough to bear
a much greater Weight than his; so he made no
more to do, but getting on the top of it, was almost
to the Waste above the bottom of the Casement. 
This was a strange Trial, for had she been
less in Love, good Manners would have oblig'd
her to open it; however she retain'd so much of
her former Resolution, as to conjure him to be
gone, and not expose her to such Hazards; that
if her Father should come to know she held any
clandestine Correspondence with him, after the
Commands he had given her, she were utterly
undone, and that he never must expect any Condescensions 

from her, without being first allow'd
by him. D'elmont, tho' he was a little startled
to find her so much more Mistress of her Temper
then he believ'd she could be, yet resolv'd to
make all possible use of this Opportunity, which
probably might be the last he shou'd ever have,
look'd on her as she spoke, with Eyes so piercing,
so sparkling with Desire, accompany'd with so
bewitching softness, as might have thaw'd the most
frozen Reservedness, and on the melting Soul
stamp'd Love's Impression. 'Tis certain they were
too irresistable to be long withstood, and putting
an end to Amena's grave Remonstrances, gave
him leave to reply to 'em in this manner. Why
my Life, my Angel, said he, my everlasting Treasure
of my Soul, shou'd these Objections now
be rais'd? How can you say you have given me
your Heart? Nay, own you think me worthy
that inestimable Jewel, yet dare not trust your Person
with me a few Hours: What have you to
fear from your adoring Slave? I want but to
convince you how much I am so, by a thousand
yet uninvented Vows. They may be spar'd, cry'd
Amena, hastily interrupting him, one Declaration
to my Father, is all the Proof that he or I
demands of your Sincerity. Oh! Thou Inhuman
and Tyrannick Charmer, answer'd he, seizing
her Hand, and eagerly kissing it, I doubt not
but your faithful Anaret has told you that I
could not without the highest Imprudence, presently
discover the Passion I have for you to the World. 
I have, my Lord, said that cunning Wench who
stood near him, and that 'twas only to acquaint
her with the Reasons why, for some Time, you
would have it a Secret, that you much desir'd to
speak with her. Besides (rejoin'd the Count)
consider, my Angel, how much more hazardous
it is for you to hold Discourse with me here, than
at a farther distance from your Father; your denying 

to go with me, is the only way to make your
Fears prove true; his Jealousy of you may possibly
make him more watchful than ordinary, and
we are not sure but that this Minute he may tear
you from my Arms; whereas, if you suffer me to
bear you hence, if he should happen to come even
to your Door, and hear no noise, he will believe
you sleeping, and return to his Bed well satisfy'd. 
With these and the like Arguments she was at last
overcome; and with the Assistance of Anaret,
he easily lifted her down. But this rash Action, so
contrary to the Resolution she thought herself a few
Moments before so fix'd in, made such a Confusion
in her Mind, as render'd her insensible for some
Time of all he said to her. They made what
haste they could into the Tuilleries; and D'elmont
having plac'd her on one of the most pleasant Seats,
was resolv'd to lose no time; and having given
her some Reasons for his not addressing to her Father,
which, tho' weak in themselves, were easily
believ'd by a Heart so willing to be deceiv'd as
her's, he began to press for a greater Confirmation
of her Affection than Words; and 'twas now
this inconsiderate Lady found herself in the greatest
Strait she had ever yet been in; all Nature seem'd
to favour his Design, the Pleasantness of the Place,
the Silence of the Night, the Sweetness of the Air,
perfum'd with a thousand various Odours, wasted
by gentle Breezes from adjacent Gardens, compleated
the most delightful Scene that ever was, to
offer up a Sacrifice to Love; not a Breath but flew
wing'd with Desire, and sent soft thrilling Wishes
to the Soul; Cynthia herself, cold as she is reported,
assisted in the Inspiration, and sometimes
shone with all her Brightness, as it were to feast
their ravish'd Eyes with gazing on each other's
Beauty; then veil'd her Beams in Clouds, to give
the Lover Boldness, and hide the Virgin's Blushes. 
What now could poor Amena do, surrounded 

with so many Powers, attack'd by such a charming
Force without, betray'd by Tenderness within:
Virtue and Pride, the Guardians of her Honour,
fled from her Breast, and left her to her Foe, only
a modest Bashfulness remain'd, which for a time
made some Defence, but with such Weakness, as
a Lover, less impatient than D'elmont, would
have little regarded. The Heat of the Weather,
and her Confinement having hindered her from
dressing that Day, she had only a thin Silk Night-Gown
on, which flying open as he caught her in
his Arms, he found her panting Heart beat Measures
of Consent, her heaving Breast swell to be
press'd by his, and every Pulse confess a Wish to
yield; her Spirits all dissolv'd, sunk in a Lethargy
of Love; her snowy Arms, unknowing, grasp'd
his Neck, her Lips met his half way, and trembled
at the Touch; in fine, there was but a Moment
betwixt her and Ruin, when the Tread of somebody
coming hastily down the Walk, oblig'd the
half-bless'd Pair to put a stop to farther Endearments. 
It was Anaret, who having been left
Centinel in the Garden, in order to open the Door
when her Lady should return, had seen Lights in
every Room in the House, and heard great Confusion,
so ran immediately to give 'em notice of
this Misfortune. These dreadful Tidings soon
rouz'd Amena from her Dream of Happiness, she
accus'd the Influence of her amorous Stars, upbraided
Anaret, and blamed the Count in Terms
little differing from Distraction, and 'twas as
much as both of them could do, to perswade her
to be calm. However, 'twas concluded that Anaret
should go back to the House, and return
to 'em again, as soon as she had learn'd what Accident
had occasion'd this Disturbance. The Lovers
had now a second Opportunity, if either of 'em
had been inclin'd to make use of it; but their Sentiments
were entirely chang'd with this Alarm; 

Amena's Thoughts were wholly taken up with
her approaching Shame, and vow'd she wou'd rather
die than ever come into her Father's Presence,
if it were true that she was miss'd: The Count, who
wanted not good Nature, seriously reflecting on
the Misfortunes he was likely to bring on a young
Lady, who tenderly lov'd him, gave him a great
deal of real Remorse, and the Consideration
that he should be necessitated, either to own an
injurious Design, or come into Measures for the
clearing of it, which would in no way agree with
his Ambition, made him extremely pensive, and
wish Amena again in her Chamber more earnestly
than ever he had done to get her out of it; 
they both remain'd in a profound Silence, impatiently
waiting the Approach of Anaret; but
she not coming as they expected, and the Night
wearing away apace, very much encreas'd the
Trouble they were in; at length the Count, after
revolving a thousand Inventions in his Mind, advis'd
to walk toward the Garden, and see whether
the Door was yet open. 'Tis better for you, Madam,
said he, whatsoever has happen'd, to be
found in your own Garden, than in any Place
with me. Amena comply'd, and suffer'd herself
to be led thither, trembling, and ready to sink
with Fear and Grief at every Step; but when they
found all fast, and that there was no Hopes of
getting Entrance, she fell quite sensless, and without
any Signs of Life, at her Lover's Feet; he was
strangely at a Loss what to do with her, and made
a thousand Vows, if he got clear of this Adventure,
never to embark in another of this Nature: he
was little skill'd in proper Means to recover her,
and 'twas more to her Youth and the Goodness of
her Constitution that she ow'd the Return of her
Senses, than his aukward Endeavours. When she
reviv'd, the pitious Lamentations she made, and
the Perplexity he was in how to dispose of her, 

was very near reducing him to as bad a Condition
as she had been in; he never till now having had
occasion for a Confident, render'd him so unhappy,
as not to know any one Person at whose House he
cou'd, with any Convenience, trust her; and to
carry her to that where he had Lodgings, was the
way to be made the Talk of all Paris. He ask'd
her several times if she would not command him
to wait on her to some Place where she might remain
free from Censure, till she heard from her
Father, but cou'd get no Answer but Upbraidings
from her. So making a Virtue of a Necessity, he
was oblig'd to take her in his Arms, with a Design
to bring her (tho' much against his Inclinations)
to his own Apartment. As he was going
thro' a very fair Street which led to that in which
he liv'd, Amena cry'd out with a sort of Joy,
loose me, my Lord, I see a Light in yonder House,
the Lady of it is my dearest Friend, she has power
with my Father, and if I beg her Protection, I
doubt not but she will afford it me, and perhaps
find some way to mitigate my Misfortunes. The
Count was over-joy'd to be eas'd of his Fair Burthen; 
and setting her down at the Gate, was preparing
to take his Leave with an Indifference,
which was but too visible to the afflicted Lady. I
see, my Lord, said she, the Pleasure you take in getting
rid of me, exceeds the Trouble for the Ruin
you have brought upon me; but go, I hope I shall
resent this Usage as I ought; and that I may be
the better enabled to do so, I desire you to return
the Letter I writ this fatal Night; the Resolution
it contain'd will serve to remind me of my shameful
Breach of it. 
Madam (answer'd he coldly, but with great
Complaisance) you have said enough to make a
Lover less obedient, refuse; but because I am sensible
of the Accidents that happen to Letters, and
to shew that I can never be repugnant even to the 

most rigorous of your Commands, I shall make no
Scruple in fulfilling this, and trust to your Goodness
for the re-settling me in your Esteem, when
next you make me so happy as to see you. The
Formality of this Compliment touch'd her to the
Quick, and the Thought of what she was like to
suffer on his Account, fill'd her with so just an Anger,
that as soon as she got the Letter, she knock'd
hastily at the Gate, which being immediatly open'd,
broke off any further Discourse; she went in, and
he departed to his Lodging, ruminating on every
Circumstance of this Affair, and consulting with
himself how he shou'd proceed. Alovisa (for
it was her House which Amena by a whimsical
Effect of Chance had made choice of for her Sanctuary)
was no sooner told her Rival was come
to speak with her, but she fell into all the Raptures
that successful Malice cou'd inspire; she was already
inform'd of Part of this Night's Adventure; 
for the cunning Charlo who, by her Orders had
been a diligent Spy on Count D'elmont's Actions,
and as constant an Attendant on him as his
Shadow, had watch'd him to Monsieur Sanseverin's
Garden, seen him enter, and afterwards
come with Amena into the Tuilleries; where perceiving
'em seated, ran home, and brought his
Lady an Account; Rage, Jealousy, and Envy working
their usual Effects in her, at this News, made
her promise the Fellow infinite Rewards if he would
invent some Stratagem to separate 'em, which he
undertaking to do, occasion'd her being up so
late, impatiently waiting his Return; she went
down to receive her with great Civility, mix'd
with a feign'd Surprize to see her at such an Hour,
and in such a Dishabilee; wich the other answering
ingenuously, and freely letting her into the
whole Secret, not only of her Amour, but the
Coldness she observ'd in D'elmont's Behaviour
at parting, fill'd this cruel Woman with so exquisite 

a Joy, as she was hardly capable of dissembling; 
therefore to get liberty to indulge it, and to learn
the rest of the Particulars of Charlo, who she
heard was come in, she told Amena she would
have her go to bed, and endeavour to compose
herself, and that she would send for Monsieur
Sanseverin in the Morning, and endeavour
to reconcile him to her. I will also, added she,
with a deceitful Smile, see the Count D'elmont,
and talk to him in a manner as shall make him
truly sensible of his Happiness; nay, so far my
Friendship shall extend, that if there be any real
Cause for making your Amour a Secret, he shall
see you at my House, and pass for a Visitor of
mine; I have nobody to whom I need be accountable
for my Actions, and am above the Censures
of the World. Amena thank'd her in Terms full
of Gratitude, and went with the Maid whom Alovisa
had order'd to conduct her to a Chamber
prepar'd for her; as soon as she had got rid of her,
she call'd for Charlo, impatient to hear by what
Contrivance this lucky Chance had befallen her. 
Madam, said he, tho' I form'd a thousand Inventions,
I found not any so plausible, as to alarm
Monsieur Sanseverin's Family with an Outcry
of Fire: Therefore I rang the Bell at the Fore-Gate
of the House, and bellow'd in the most terrible
Accent I could possible turn my Voice to,
Fire! Fire! Rise! or you will all be burnt in your
Beds. I had not repeated this many times, before
I found the Effect I wish'd; the Noises I heard,
and the Lights I saw in the Rooms, assur'd me
there were no Sleepers left: then I ran to the Tuilleries,
designing to observe the Lovers Proceedings,
but I found they were appriz'd of the Danger
they were in of being discover'd, and were
coming to endeavour an Entrance into the Garden. 
I know the rest, interrupted Alovisa; the Event
has answer'd even beyond my Wishes, and thy 

Reward for this good Service, shall be greater than
thy Expectations. As she said these Words, she retir'd
to her Chamber, more satisfied than she had
been for many Months. Quite different did poor
Amena pass the Night; for besides the Grief of
having disoblig'd her Father, banish'd herself his
House, and expos'd her Reputation to the unavoidable
Censures of the unpitying World, for an ungrateful,
or at best, an indifferent Lover, she receiv'd
a vast Addition of Afflictions; when taking
out the Letter which D'elmont had given her
at parting, possibly to weep over it, and accuse
herself for so inconsiderately breaking the noble
Resolution she had form'd, when it was writ, she
found it was Alovisa's Hand; for the Count
by mistake had given her the second he receiv'd
from that Lady, instead of that she desir'd him to
return. Never was Surprize, Confusion, and Despair
at such a height, as in Amena's Soul at this
Discovery: she was now assur'd by what she read,
that she had fled for Protection to the very Person
she ought most to have avoided; that she had made
a Confident of her greatest Enemy, a Rival dangerous
to her Hopes in every Circumstance. She
consider'd the high Birth and vast Possessions that
Alovisa was Mistress of, in Opposition to her
Father's scanted Power of making her a Fortune; 
her Wit and Subtilty, against her Innocence and
Simplicity; her Pride and the Respect her Grandeur
commanded from the World, against her
own deplor'd and wretched State; and look'd upon
herself as wholly lost. The Violence of her Sorrow
is more easily imagin d than express'd; but
of all her melancholy Reflections, none rack'd her
equal to the Belief she had that D'elmont was
not unsensible by this time whom the Letter came
from, and had only made a Court to her to amuse
himself a while, and then suffer her to fall a Sacrifice
to his Ambition, and feed the Vanity of her 

Rival; a just Indignation now open'd the Eyes of
her Understanding; and considering all the Passages
of the Count's Behaviour, she saw a thousand Things
which told her, his Designs on her were far unworthy
of the Name of Love. None that were
ever touch'd with the least of those Passions which
agitated the Soul of Amena, can believe they
would permit Sleep to enter her Eyes: But if Grief
and Distraction kept her from Repose, Alovisa
had too much Business on her Hands to enjoy
much more; she had promis'd Amena to send
for her Father and the Count, and found there
were not too many Moments before Morning, to
contrive so many different Forms of Behaviour, as
should deceive 'em all three, compleat the Ruin of
her Rival, and engage the Adresses of her Lover. 
As soon as she thought it a proper Hour, she dispatch'd
a Messenger to Count D'elmont, and
another to Monsieur Sanseverin, who, full of
Sorrow as he was, immediately obey'd her Summons. 
She receiv'd him in her Dressing-Room,
and with a great deal of feign'd Trouble in her
Countenance, accosted him in this manner. How
hard is it, said she, to dissemble Grief, and in spite
of all the Care, which I doubt not you have taken
to conceal it, in Consideration of your own and
Daughter's Honour, I too plainly perceive it in
your Face, to imagine that my own is hid. How,
Madam, cry'd the impatient Father (giving a
loose to his Tears) are you acquainted then with
my Misfortune? Alas, answer'd she, I fear by the
Consequences, you have been the last to whom it
has been reveal'd. I hop'd that my Advice, and
the daily Proofs the Count gave your Daughter
of the little Regard he had for her, might have
fir'd her to a generous Disdain, and have a thousand
Pardons to ask of you for Breach of Friendship,
in concealing an Affair so requisite you should
have known. Oh! Madam, resum'd he, interrupting 

her, I conjure you make no Apologies for what
is past; I know too well the Greatness of your
Goodness, and the Favour you have always been
pleas'd to honour her with, not to be assur'd she
was happy in your Esteem; and only beg I may
no longer be kept in Ignorance of the fatal Secret. 
You shall be inform'd of all, said she; but then
you must promise me to act by my Advice; which
he having promis'd, she told him after what manner
Amena came to her House, the Coldness the
Count express'd to her, and the Violence of her
Passion for him. Now, said she, if you should suffer
your Rage to break out in any publick Manner
against the Count, it will only serve to make your
Daughter's Dishonour the Table-Talk of all Paris. 
He is too great at Court, and has too many Friends
to be compell'd to any Terms for your Satisfaction; 
besides, the least Noise might make him discover
by what Means he first became acquainted with
her, and her excessive, I will not say troublesome,
Fondess of him since; which should he do, the
Shame wou'd be wholly hers, for few wou'd condemn
him for accepting the offer'd Caresses of a
Lady so young and beautiful as Amena. But is
it possible, cry'd he (quite confounded at these
Words) that she should stoop so low to offer Love. 
Oh Heavens! is this the Effect of all my Prayers,
my Care, and my Indulgence. Doubt not, resum'd
Alovisa, of the Truth of what I say, I have it
from herself, and to convince you it is so, I shall
inform you of something I had forgot before. 
Then she told him of the Note she had slip'd into
the Letter he had forc'd her to write, and of sending
Anaret to his Lodgings, which she heightned
with all the aggravating Circumstances her Wit
and Malice cou'd suggest; till the old Man believing
all she said as an Oracle, was almost sensless between
Grief and Anger; but the latter growing rather
the most predominant, he vow'd to punish 

her in such a manner as should deter all Children
from Disobedience. Now, said Alovisa, it is
that I expect the Performance of your Promise; 
these Threats avail but little to the retrieving your
Daughter's Reputation, or your Quiet; be therefore
persuaded to make no Words of it, compose
your Countenance as much as possible to Serenity,
and think if you have no Friend in any Monastery
where you could send her till this Discourse and
her own foolish Folly be blown over. If you have
not, I can recommend you to one at St. Dennis,
where the Abbess is my near Relation, and on my
Letter will use her with all imaginable Tenderness. 
Monsieur was extremely pleas'd at this Proposal,
and gave her those Thanks the seeming Kindness
of her Offer deserv'd. I would not, resum'd she,
have you take her Home, or see her before she
goes; or if you do, not till all Things are ready
for her Departure, for I know she will be prodigal
of her Promises of Amendment, 'till she has prevail'd
with your Fatherly Indulgence to permit her
Stay at Paris, and know as well she will not have
the Power to keep 'em in the same Town with the
Count. She shall, if you please, remain conceal'd
in my House, 'till you have provided for her Journey; 
and it will be a great Means to put a Stop to
any farther Reflections the Malicious may make
on her, if you give out she is already gone to
some Relations in the Country. As she was speaking,
Charlo came to acquaint her, one was
come to visit her. She made no doubt but 'twas
D'elmont, therefore hastened away Monsieur
Sanseverin, after having fix'd him in a Resolution
to do every thing as she advis'd. It was
indeed Count D'elmont that was come, which
as soon as she was assur'd of, soon threw off her
dejected and mournful Air, and assum'd one all
Gaiety and good Humour, dimpled her Mouth 

with Smiles, and call'd the laughing Cupids to her
Eyes. 
My Lord, said she, you do well by this early Visit
to retrieve your Sexes drooping Fame of Constancy,
and prove the Nicety of Amena's Discernment,
in conferring Favours on a Person, who to his excellent
Qualifications, has that of Assiduity to deserve
them. As he was about to reply, the Rush
of somebody coming hastily down the Stairs, which
faced the Room they were in, oblig'd 'em to turn
that way. It was the unfortunate Amena, who
not being able to endure the Thoughts of staying
in her Rival's House, distracted with her Griefs,
and not regarding what should become of her, as
soon as she heard the Doors were open, was preparing
to fly from that detested Place. Alovisa
was vex'd to the Heart at the Sight of her, hoping
to have had some Discourse with the Count, before
they met; but she dissembled it, and catching
hold of her as she was endeavouring to pass,
ask'd where she was going, and what occasion'd
the Disorder she observ'd in her? I go (answer'd
Amena) from a false Lover and a falser Friend:
But why shou'd I upbraid you (continu'd she looking
wildly sometimes on the Count, and sometimes
on Alovisa) treacherous Pair, you know too
well each others Baseness, and my Wrongs; no
longer then detain a Wretch, whose Presence, had
you the least Sense of Honour, Gratitude, or even
common Humanity, wou'd fill your Consciences
with Remorse and Shame; and who has now no
other Wish than that of shunning you for ever. 
As she spoke this, she struggled to get loose from
Alovisa's Arms, who in spite of the Amazement
she was in, still held her. D'elmont was
no less confounded, and intirely ignorant of the
Meaning of what he heard, was at a loss how to
reply, 'till she resum'd her Reproaches in this manner:
Why, ye Monsters of Barbarity, said she, 

do you delight in beholding the Ruins you have
made? Is not the Knowledge of my Miseries, my
everlasting Miseries, sufficient to content you? 
And must I be debarr'd that only Remedy for Woes
like mine, Death? Oh! cruel Return for all my
Love, my Friendship, and the Confidence I repos'd
in you! Oh! to what am I reduced by my
too soft and easy Nature! hard Fate of Tenderness,
which healing others, only wounds itself. 
Just Heavens!here she stopp'd the
Violence of her Resentment, endeavouring to vent
itself in Sighs, rose in her Breast with such an Impetuosity
as choak'd the Passage of her Words, and
she fell into a Swoon. Tho' the Count and Alovisa
were both in the greatest Consternation imaginable,
yet neither of 'em were negligent in trying
to recover her; as they were busy'd about her,
that fatal Letter which had been the Cause of this
Disturbance, fell out of her Bosom, and both being
eager to take it up (believing it might make
some Discovery) had their Hands on it at the same
time; it was but slightly folded, and immediately
shew'd 'em from what Source Amena's Despair
proceeded. Her Upbraidings of Alovisa, and
the Blushes and Confusion which he observed in
that Lady's Face, as soon as ever she saw it open'd,
put an end to the Mystery, and one less quick of
Apprehension than D'elmont, wou'd have made
no Difficulty in finding his unknown Admirer in the
Person of Alovisa: She, to conceal the Disorder
she was in at this Adventure as much as possible,
call'd her Women, and order'd 'em to convey
Amena into another Chamber where there
was more Air; as she was preparing to follow,
turning a little towards the Count, but still extremely
confus'd, you'll pardon me, my Lord, said she,
if my Concern for my Friend obliges me to leave
you. Ah, Madam, reply'd he, forbear to make any
Apologies to me, rather summon all your Goodness 

to forgive a Wretch so blind to Happiness as
I have been: She either cou'd not, or wou'd not
make any Answer to these Words, but seeming as
tho' she heard 'em not, went hastily into the Room
where Amena was, leaving the Count full of various
and confus'd Reflections; the Sweetness of his
Disposition made him regret his being the Author
of Amena's Misfortunes; but how miserable is that
Woman's Condition, who by her Mismanagement
is reduc'd to so poor a Comfort as the Pity of her
Lover; that Sex is generally too gay to continue
long uneasy, and there was little Likelyhood he
cou'd be capable of lamenting Ills, which his small
Acquaintance with the Passion from which they
sprung, made him not comprehend. The Pleasure
the Discovery gave him of a Secret he had so long
desir'd to find out, kept him from being too much
concern'd at the Adventure that occasion'd it; but
he could not forbear accusing himself of intollerable
Stupidity, when he consider'd the Passages of
Alovisa's Behaviour, her Swooning at the Ball,
her constant Glances, her frequent Blushes when
he talk'd to her, and all his Cogitations, whether on
Alovisa or Amena, were mingled with a wonder
that Love should have such Power. The Diversity
of his Thoughts wou'd have entertain'd
him much longer, if they had not been interrupted
by his Page, who came in a great hurry, to acquaint
him, that his Brother, the young Chevalier
Brillian, was just come to Town, and waited
with Impatience for his coming Home: As much
a Stranger as D'elmont was to the Affairs of
Love, he was none to those of Friendship; and
making no doubt but that the former ought to yield
to the latter in every Respect, contented himself
with telling one of Alovisa's Servants, as he
went out, that he wou'd wait on her in the Evening,
and made what haste he cou'd to give his beloved
Brother the Welcome he expected after so 

long an Absence; and indeed the manner of their
Meeting, express'd a most entire and sincere Affection
on both Sides. The Chevalier was but a Year
younger than the Count; they had been bred together
from their Infancy, and there was such a Sympathy
in their Souls, and so great a Resemblance in their
Persons, as very much contributed to endear 'em
to each other with a Tenderness far beyond that
which is ordinarily found among Relations. After
the first Testimonies of it were over, D'elmont
began to question him how he had pass'd his Time
since their Separation, and to give him some little
Reproaches for not writing so often as he might
have expected. Alas! my dearest Brother, reply'd
the Chevalier, such various Adventures have happened
to me since we parted, as when I relate 'em,
will I hope excuse my seeming Negligence: these
Words were accompany'd with Sighs, and a melancholy
Air immediately over-spreading his Face,
and taking away great part of the Vivacity which
lately sparkled in his Eyes, rais'd an impatient Desire
in the Count to know the Reason of it, which
when he had express'd, the other (after having engag'd
him, that whatever Causes he might find to
ridicule his Folly, he wou'd suspend all Appearance
of it till the End of his Narration) began to satisfy
in this Manner. 



At St. Omers, where you left me, I happen'd
to make an Acquaintance with one Monsieur
Belpine, a Gentleman who was
there on some Business; we being both pretty much
Strangers in the Place, occasion'd an Intimacy between
us, which the Disparity of our Tempers
would have prevented our commencing at Paris;
but you know I was never a Lover of Solitude, and
for want of Company more agreeable, was willing
to encourage his. He was indeed so obliging
as to stay longer at St. Omers than his Affairs required,
purposely to engage me to make Amiens
in my way to Paris. He was very vain; and fancying
himself happy in the Esteem of the fair Sex,
was desirous I should be Witness of the Favours
they bestowed on him. Among the Number of
those he used to talk of, was Madamoiselle Ansellina
de la Tour, a Parisian Lady, and
Heiress of a great Estate, but had been some time
at Amiens with Madam the Baroness de Beronville,
her God-mother. The Wonders he told
me of this young Lady's Wit and Beauty, inclin'd 

me to a Desire of seeing her; and as soon as I was in
a Condition to travel, we took our Way towards Amiens;
he us'd me with all the Friendship he was capable
of expressing; and soon after we arriv'd, carry'd
me to the Baroness's: But, oh Heavens! how
great was my Astonishment, when I found Ansellina
as far beyond his faint Description, as the Sun-Beams
the Imitation of Art; besides the Regularity
of her Features, the Delicacy of her Complexion, and
the just Symmetry of her whole Composition, she
has an undescribable Sweetness that plays about her
Eyes and Mouth, and softens all her Air: But all
her Charms, dazzling as they are, would have lost
their captivating Force on me, if I had believ'd her
capable of that Weakness for Belpine, that his
Vanity would have me think. She is very young
and gay, and I easily perceiv'd she suffer'd his Addresses
more out of Diversion, than any real Regard
she had for him; he held a constant Correspondence
at Paris, and was continually furnish'd
with every thing that was novel, and by that means
introduc'd himself into many Companies, who else
would not have endur'd him; but when at any
time I was so happy as to entertain the lovely Ansellina
alone, and we had Opportunity for serious
Discourse, (which was impossible in his Company)
I found that she was Mistress of a Wit
poignant enough to be satirical, yet it was accompany'd
with a Discretion, as very much heighten'd
her Charms, and compleated the Conquest that her
Eyes begun. I will confess to you, Brother, that
I became so devoted to my Passion, that I had no
leisure for any other Sentiments. Fears, Hopes,
Anxieties, jealous Pains, uneasy Pleasures, all the
Artillery of Love, were garrison'd in my Heart,
and a thousand various half-form'd Resolutions
fill'd my Head. Ansellina's Insensibility among
a Crowd of Admirers, and the Disparity of
our Fortunes, would have given me just Causes of 

Despair, if the Generosity of her Temper had not
dissipated the one, and her Youth, and the Hope
her Hour was not yet come, the other. I was often
about letting her know the Power she had over
me; but something of an Awe, which none but
those who truly Love can guess at, still prevented
my being able to utter it; and I believe should
have languish'd 'till this Moment in an unavailing
Silence, if an Accident had not happen'd to embolden
me: I went one Day to visit my Adorable,
and being told she was in the Garden, went thither
in hopes to see her; but being deceiv'd in my
Expectation, believ'd the Servant who gave me
that Information was mistaken, and fancying she
might be retir'd to her Closet, as she very often did
in an Afternoon, and the Pleasantness of the Place
inducing me to stay there 'till she was willing to admit
me, I sat down at the Foot of a DIANA,
curiously carv'd in Marble, and full of melancholy
Reflections, without knowing what I did, took a
Black-Lead Pen out of my Pocket, and writ on the
Pedestal these two Lines: 

Hopeless, and silent, I must still adore:
Her Heart's more hard than stone, whom I'd implore.

I had scarce finish'd 'em, when I perceiv'd
Ansellina at a good Distance from me, coming
out of a little Arbor; the Respect I had for
her, made me fear she should know I was the
Author of 'em, and guess, what I found, I had not
gain'd Courage enough to tell her. I went out of
the Alley, as I imagin'd, unseen, and design'd to
come up another, and meet her, before she could
get into the House. But tho' I walk'd pretty fast,
she had left the Place before I cou'd attain it; and
in her stead (casting my Eyes toward the Statue,
with an Intention to rub out what I had writ) I
found this Addition to it. 


You wrong your Love, while you conceal your Pain;
Flints will dissolve with constant Drops of Rain.

But, my dear Brother, if you are yet insensible
of the wonderful Effects of Love, you will
not be able to imagine what I felt at this View; 
I was satisfy'd it could be writ by no body but
Ansellina, there being no other Person in
the Garden; and knew as well she could not design
that Encouragement for any other Man, because
on many occasions she had seen my Hand; 
and the Day before had written a Song for her,
which she desir'd to learn, with that very Pen I
now had made use of; and going hastily away at
the Sight of her, had forgot to take with me. I
gaz'd upon the dear obliging Characters, and kiss'd
the Marble, which contain'd 'em, a thousand times
before I could find in my Heart to efface 'em. As
I was in this agreeable Amazement, I heard Belpine's
Voice calling to me as he came up the
Walk, which oblig'd me to put an end to it, and
the Object which occasion'd it. He had been
told, as well as I, that Ansellina was in the
Garden; and expressing some wonder to see me
alone, ask'd where she was? I answer'd him, with
a great deal of real Truth, that I knew not, and
that I had been there some Time, but had not
been so happy as to entertain her. He seem'd
not to give Credit to what I said, and began to
use me after a Fashion as would have much more
astonish'd me from any other Person. I would
not have you, said he, be concern'd at what I am
about to say, because you are one of those for
whom I am willing to preserve a Friendship; and
to convince you of my Sincerity, give you leave
to address after what Manner you please, to any
of the Ladies with whom I have brought you acquainted,
excepting Ansellina. But I take
this Opportunity to let you know, I have already 

made choice of her, with a Design of Marriage; 
and from this time forward, shall look on any
Visits you shall make to her, as injurious to my
Pretensions. Tho' I was no Stranger to the Vanity
and Insolence of Belpine's Humour, yet not
being accustomed to such arbitrary kind of Treatment,
had certainly resented it (if we had been in
any other Place) in a very different Manner than I
did; but the Consideration, that to make a Noise
there, would be a Reflection, rather than a Vindication
on Ansellina's Fame; I contented
myself with telling him he might be perfectly easy,
that whatever Qualifications the Lady might have
that should encourage his Addresses, I should never
give her any Reason to boast a Conquest over
me. These Words might have born two Interpretations,
if the disdainful Air, with which I spoke
'em, and which I could not dissemble, and going
immediately away had not made him take 'em, as
they were really design'd, to affront him; he was
full of Indignation and Jealousy, (if it is possible
for a Person to be touch'd with that Passion, who
is not capable of the other, which generally occasions
it;) but, however, having taken it into his
Head to imagine I was better receiv'd by Ansellina
than he desir'd, Envy, and a sort of womanish
Spleen transported him so far as to go to
Ansellina's Apartment, and rail at me most
profusely (as I have since been told) and threaten
how much he'd be reveng'd if he heard I ever
should have the Assurance to visit there again. Ansellina
at first laugh'd at his Folly; but finding
he persisted, and began to assume more Liberty
than she ever meant to afford him, instead of listening
to his Entreaties, to forbid me the Privilege
I had enjoy'd of her Conversation, she pass'd
that very Sentence on him, and, when next I waited
on her, receiv'd me with more Respect than
ever; and when at last I took the Boldness to acquaint 

her with my Passion; I had the Satisfaction
to observe, from the Frankness of her Disposition,
that I was not indifferent to her; nor indeed
did she, even in Publick, affect any Reservedness
more than the Decencies of her Sex and
Quality requir'd; for after my Pretensions to her
were commonly talk'd of, and those who were
intimate with her, would rally her about me, she
pass'd it off with a Spirit of Gaiety and good Humour
peculiar to herself, and bated nothing of her
usual Freedom to me; she permitted me to read to
her, to walk and dance with her, and I had all the
Opportunities of endeavouring an Encrease of her
Esteem that I cou'd wish, which so ineens'd Belpine,
that he made no Scruple of reviling both
her and me in all Companies wherever he came; 
saying, I was a little worthless Fellow, who had
nothing but my Sword to depend upon; and that
Ansellina having no hopes of marrying him,
was glad to take up with the first that ask'd her. 
These scandalous Reports on my first hearing of
'em had assuredly been fatal to one of us, if Ansellina
had not commanded me, by all the
Passion I profess'd, and by the Friendship she freely
acknowledged to have for me, not to take any notice
of 'em. I set too high a Value on the Favours
she allow'd me, to be capable of Disobedience; 
and she was too nice a Judge of the Punctillio's of
our Sex's Honour, not to take this Sacrifice of so
just a Resentment, as a very great Proof how much
I submitted to her Will, and suffer'd not a Day to
pass without giving me some new Mark how nearly
she was touch'd with it. I was the most contented
and happy Person in the World, still hoping that
in a little time (she having no Relations that had
Power to contradict her Inclinations) I should be
able to obtain every thing from her that an honourable
Passion could require; 'till one Evening
coming home pretty late from her, my Servant 

gave me a Letter, which he told me was left for
me by one of Belpine's Servants: I presently
suspected the Contents, and found I was not mistaken; 
it was really a Challenge to meet him the
next Morning; and must confess, tho' I long'd
for an Opportunity to chastise his Insolence, was
a little troubled how to excuse myself to Ansellina;
but there was no possibility of evading it,
without rendering myself unworthy of her, and
hop'd that Circumstance wou'd be sufficient to clear
me to her. I will not trouble you, Brother, with
the Particulars of our Duel, since there was nothing
material, but that at the third Pass (I know
not whether I may call it the Effect of my good
or evil Fortune) he receiv'd my Sword a good
Depth in his Body, and fell with all the Symptoms
of a dying Man. I made all possible haste to send
a Surgeon to him. In my way, I met two Gentlemen,
who it seems he had made acquainted with
his Design (probably with an Intention to be prevented.) 
They ask'd me what Success, and when
I had inform'd them, advis'd me to be gone from
Amiens before the News should reach the Ears of
Belpine's Relations, who were not inconsiderable
in that Place. I made 'em those Retributions
their Civilities deserv'd; but how eminent
soever the Danger appear'd that threatned me,
could not think of leaving Amiens without having
first seen Ansellina. I went to the Baronesses,
and found my Charmer at her Toylet, and either
it was my Fancy, or else she really did look more
amiable in that Undress, than ever I had seen her,
tho' adorn'd with the utmost Illustrations: She
seem'd surpriz'd at seeing me so early, and with
her wonted good Humour, asking me the reason
of it, put me into a mortal Agony how to answer
her; for I must assure you, Brother, that the Fears
of her Displeasure were a thousand times more
dreadful to me, than any other Apprehensions; 

she repeated the Question three or four Times before
I had Courage to reply, and I believe she was
pretty near guessing the Truth by my Silence, and
the Disorder in my Countenance before I spoke
and when I did, she receiv'd the Account of the
whole Adventure with a vast deal of Trouble, but
no Anger; she knew too well what I ow'd to my
Reputation, and the Post his Majesty had honour'd
me with, to believe I cou'd or ought to dispense
with submitting to the Reflections which must have
fallen on me, had I acted otherwise than I did. 
Her Concern and Tears, which she had not Power
to contain at the Thoughts of my Departure, joyn'd
with her earnest Conjurations to me to be gone,
let me more than ever into the Secrets of her
Heart, and gave me a Pleasure as inconceiveable
as the Necessity of parting did the contrary. Nothing
could be more moving than our taking leave; 
and when she tore herself, half willing and half
unwilling from my Arms, had sent me away
inconsolable, if her Promises of coming to Paris,
as soon as she could without being taken notice
of and frequently writing to me in the mean time,
had not given me a Hope, tho' a distant one, of
Happiness. Thus, Brother, have I given you, in
as few Words as I cou'd, a Recital of every thing
that has happen'd to me of Consequence since our
Separation, in which I dare believe you will find
more to pity than condemn. The afflicted Chevalier
cou'd not conclude without letting fall some
Tears; which the Count perceiving, ran to him, and
tenderly embracing him, said all that cou'd be expected
from a most affectionate Friend to mitigate
his Sorrows, nor suffered him to remove from his
Arms 'till he had accomplish'd his Design; and then
believing the hearing of the Adventures of another
(especially one he was so deeply interested
in) would be the surest Means to give a Truce to
the more melancholy Reflections on his own, related 

every thing that had befallen him since his
coming to Paris. The Letters he receiv'd from
a Lady incognito, his little Gallantries with Amena,
and the Accident that presented to his View the
unknown Lady in the Person of one of the greatest
Fortunes in all France. Nothing cou'd be a
greater Cordial to the Chevalier, than to find his
Brother was beloved by the Sister of Ansellina;
he did not doubt but that by this there might be a
Possibility of seeing her sooner than else he cou'd
have hop'd, and the two Brothers began to enter
into a serious Consultation of this Affair, which
ended with a Resolution to fix their Fortunes there. 
The Count had never yet seen a Beauty formidable
enough to give him an Hour's Uneasiness (purely
for the Sake of Love) and would often say, Cupid's
Quiver never held an Arrow of force to reach his
Heart; those little Delicacies, those trembling
aking Transports, which every Sight of the belov'd
Object occasions, and so visibly distinguishes
a real Passion from a Counterfeit, he look'd on as
the Chimera's of an idle Brain, form'd to inspire
Notions of an imaginary Bliss, and make Fools
lose themselves in seeking; or if they had a Being,
it was only in weak Souls, a kind of a Disease with
which he assur'd himself he should never be infected. 
Ambition was certainly the reigning Passion in his
Soul, and Alovisa's Quality and vast Possessions,
promising a full Gratification of that, he ne'er so
much as wish'd to know a farther Happiness in
Marriage. 
But while the Count and Chevalier were thus
employ'd, the Rival Ladies past their Hours in a
very different Entertainment, the Despair and bitter
Lamentations that the unfortunate Amena
made, when she came out of her Swooning, were
such as mov'd even Alovisa to Compassion, and
if any thing, but resigning D'elmont, cou'd have
given her Consolation, she wou'd willingly have apply'd 

it. There was now no need of further Dissimulation,
and she confess'd to Amena, that she
had lov'd the charming Count with a Kind of Madness
from the first Moment she beheld him: That to
favour her Designs on him, she had made use of
every Stratagem she cou'd invent; that by her
means, the Amour was first discovered to Monsieur
Sanseverin, and his Family alarm'd the
Night before; and lastly, that by her Persuasions,
he had resolv'd to send her to a Monastery, to which
she must prepare herself to go in a few Days without
taking any leave even of her Father. Have you
(cry'd Amena, hastily interrupting her) have you
prevail'd with my Father to send me from this
hated Place without the Punishment of hearing his
Upbraidings? Which the other answering in the
Affirmative, I thank you, resum'd Amena, that
Favour has cancell'd all your Score of Cruelty; for
after the Follies I have been guilty of, nothing is
so dreadful as the Sight of him. And, who wou'd,
oh Heavens! (continu'd she, bursting into a Flood
of Tears) wish to stay in a World so full of Falshood! 
She was able to utter no more for some
Moments; but at last, raising herself on the Bed
where she was laid, and endeavouring to seem a
little more compos'd: I have two Favours, Madam,
yet to ask of you (rejoin'd she) neither of 'em
will, I believe, seem difficult to you to grant, that
you will make use of the Power you have with my
Father, to let my Departure be as sudden as possible,
and that while I am here, I may never see Count
D'elmont. It was not likely that Alovisa
shou'd deny Requests so suitable to her own Inclinations; 
and believing, with a great deal of Reason,
that her Presence was not very grateful, left
her to the Care of her Women, whom she order'd
to attend her with the same Diligence as herself. 
It was Evening before the Count came, and Alovisa
spent the Remainder of the Day in very uneasy 

Reflections; she knew not, as yet, whether
she had Cause to rejoice in, or blame her Fortune
in so unexpectedly discovering her Passion, and an
incessant Vicissitude of Hope and Fears, rack'd her
with most intollerable Inquietude, till the darling
Object of her Wishes appear'd; and tho' the first
Sight of him added to her other Passions that of
Shame, yet he manag'd his Address so well, and
so modestly and artfully hinted the Knowledge of
his Happiness, that every Sentiment gave place to
a new Admiration of the Wonders of his Wit; and
if before she lov'd, she now ador'd, and began to
think it a Kind of Merit in herself, to be sensible
of his. He soon put it in her Power to oblige him,
by giving her the History of his Brother's Passion
for her Sister, and she was not at all backward in
assuring him how much she approv'd of it, and that
she wou'd write to Ansellina by the first Post,
to engage her coming to Paris with all imaginable
Speed. In fine, there was nothing he cou'd ask,
refus'd, and indeed it would have been ridiculous
for her to affect Coyness, after the Testimonies
she had long since given him of one of the most
violent Passions that ever was: this Fore-knowledge
sav'd Abundance of Dissimulation on both Sides,
and she took care that if he should be wanting in
his kind Expressions after Marriage, he should not
have it in his Power to pretend (as some Husbands
have done) that his Stock was exhausted in
a tedious Courtship. Every thing was presently
agreed upon, and the Wedding. Day appointed,
which was to be as soon as every thing cou'd be
got ready to make it magnificent; tho' the Count's
good Nature made him desirous to learn something
of Amena, yet he durst not enquire, for
Fear of giving an Umbrage to his intended Bride; 
but she, imagining the Reason of his Silence, very
frankly told him, how she was to be dispos'd of:
This Knowledge made no small Addition to his 

Contentment, for had she stay'd in Paris, he could
expect nothing but continual Jealousies from Alovisa;
besides, as he really wish'd her happy,
tho' he could not make her so, he thought Absence
might banish a hopeless Passion from her
Heart, and Time and other Objects efface an Idea
which could not but be destructive to her Peace. 
He stay'd at Alovisa's House 'till it was pretty
late, and perhaps they had not parted in some
Hours longer, if his Impatience to inform his Brother
his Success, had not carried him away. The
young Chevalier was infinitely more transported at
the bare Hopes of being something nearer the
Aim of all his Hopes, than D'elmont was at
the Assurance of losing his in Possession, and could
not forbear rallying him for placing the Ultimate
of his Wishes on such a Toy, as he argu'd Woman
was; which the Chevalier endeavouring to confute,
there began a very warm Dispute, in which,
neither of 'em being able to convince the other,
Sleep at last interpos'd as a Moderator. The next
Day they went together to visit Alovisa, and
from that time were seldom asunder: But in Compassion
to Amena, they took what care they
could to conceal the Design they had in Hand
and that unhappy Lady was in a few Days, according
to her Rival's Contrivance, hurried away
without seeing any of her Friends. When she
was gone, and there was no farther need of keeping
it a Secret, the News of this great Wedding
was immediately spread over the whole Town, and
every one talk'd of it as their particular Interests
or Affections dictated. All D'elmont's Friends
were full of Joy, and he met no inconsiderable
Augmentation of it himself, when his Brother receiv'd
a Letter from Ansellina, with an Account,
that Belpine's Wound was found not
dangerous, and that he was in a very fair way of
Recovery: and it was concluded, that as soon as 

the Wedding was over, the Chevalier should to in
Person to Amiens, and fetch his belov'd Ansellina,
in order for a Second, and as much
desir'd Nuptial. There was no Gloom now left
to cloud the Gaiety of the happy Day, nothing
could be more grand than the Celebration of it,
and Alovisa now thought herself at the End of
all her Cares; but the Sequel of this glorious Beginning,
and what Effect the Despair and Imprecations
of Amena (when she heard of it) produc'd,
shall, with the Continuance of the Chevalier
Brillian's Adventures, be faithfully related in
the next Part. 

