

Gives the reader room to guess at what
is to ensue, tho' ten to one but he finds
himself deceived. 
It was always my opinion,
that fewer women were undone
by love, than vanity; 
and that those mistakes the
sex are sometimes guilty of,
proceed, for the most part,
rather from inadvertency, than a vicious inclination. 
The ladies, however, I am sorry
to observe, are apt to make too little allowances
to each other on this score, and 
seem better pleased with an occasion to condemn,
than to excuse; and it is not above
one, in a greater number than I will presume
to mention, who, while she passes the
severest censure on the conduct of her friend,
will be at the trouble of taking a retrospect
on her own. There are some who behold,
with indignation and contempt, those errors
in others, which, unhappily, they are
every day falling into themselves; and as
want of a due consideration occasions the
guilt, so the want of a due consideration also
occasions the scandal: and there would be
much less room either for the one or the
other, were some part of that time, which
is wasted at the toilet, in consulting what
dress is most becoming to the face, employed
in examining the heart, and what
actions are most becoming of the character. 
Betsy Thoughtless was the only daughter
of a gentleman of good family and fortune
in L&wblank;e, where he constantly resided,
scarce ever going to London, and
contented himself with such diversions as
the country afforded. On the death of his
wife, he sent this little favourite, then about
ten years old, to a boarding-school, the governess
of which had the reputation of a woman
of great good sense, fine breeding, and
every way qualified for the well forming of 
the minds of those young persons who were
entrusted to her care. 
The old gentleman was so well pleased
with having placed his daughter where she
was so likely to improve in all the accomplishments
befitting her sex, that he never
suffered her to come home, even at breaking-up
times, when most of the other young
ladies did so; but as the school was not
above seven or eight miles from his seat,
he seldom failed calling to see her once or
twice a week. 
Miss Betsy, who had a great deal of
good-nature, and somewhat extremely engaging
in her manner of behaviour, soon
gained the affection not only of the governess,
but of all the young ladies; but as
girls, as well as women, have their particular
favourites, to whom they may communicate
their little secrets, there was one,
who above all the others was distinguished
by her. Miss Forward, for so she was called,
was also very fond of miss Betsy. This intimacy
beginning but in trivial things, and
such as suited their age, continued as they
advanced nearer to maturity. Miss Forward,
however, had two years the advantage
of her friend, yet did not disdain to make
her the confidante of a kind of amorous
intrigue she had entered into with a young 
lad, called master Sparkish, the son of a
neighbouring gentleman: he had fallen in
love with her at church, and had taken all
opportunities to convince her of his passion:
—she, proud of being looked upon as a
woman, encouraged it. —Frequent letters
passed between them; for she never failed
to answer those she received from him, both
which were shewn to miss Betsy, and this
gave her an early light into the art and
mystery of courtship, and, consequently,
a relish for admiration. The young lover
calling his mistress angel and goddess, made
her long to be in her teens, that she might
have the same fine things said of her. 
This correspondence being, by some accident,
discovered, the governess found it
behoved her to keep a strict eye upon miss
Forward; all the servants were examined
concerning the conveying any letters, either
to or from her; but none of them knew
any thing of the matter: it was a secret to
all but miss Betsy, who kept it inviolably. 
It is fit, however, the reader should not
remain in ignorance. 
Master Sparkish had read the story of
Piramus and Thisbe;—he told his mistress
of it, and in imitation of those lovers of antiquity,
stuck his letters into a little crevice
he found in the garden wall, whence she 
pulled them out every day, and returned
her answers by the same friendly breach,
which he very gallantly told her in one of
his epistles, had been made by the god of
love himself, in order to favour his suit;— 
so that all the governess's circumspection
could not hinder this amour from going on
without interruption; and could they have
contented themselves with barely writing to
each other, they might, probably, have
done so till they both had been weary; but
tho' I will not pretend to say, that either of
them had any thing in their inclinations that
was not perfectly consistent with innocence,
yet, it is certain, they both languished for a
nearer conversation, which the fertile brain
of miss Forward at last brought about. 
She pretended on sunday, in the afternoon,
to have so violent a pain in her head,
that she could not go to church: miss
Betsy begged leave to stay and keep her
company, and told the governess she would
read a sermon, or some other good book,
to her; the good old gentlewoman, little
suspecting the plot concerted between them,
readily consented. 
No body being left in the house but
themselves, and one maid-servant, young
Sparkish, who had previous notice at what
hour to come, was let in at the garden 
door, the key being always in it. Miss
Betsy left the lovers in an arbour, and went
into the kitchen, telling the maid, she had
read miss Forward to sleep, and hoped she
would be better when she waked. She
amused the wench with one little chat or
other, till she thought divine service was
near over, then returned into the garden to
give her friends warning it was time to separate. 
They had after this many private interviews,
thro' the contrivance and assistance
of miss Betsy, who, quite charmed with
being made the confidante of a person elder
than herself, set all her wits to work, to
render herself worthy of the trust reposed
in her. Sometimes she made pretences of
going to the milliner, the mantua-maker,
or to buy something in town, and begged
leave, that miss Forward should accompany
her, saying, she wanted her choice
of what she was to purchase. Sparkish was
always made acquainted when they were to
go out, and never failed to give them the
meeting. 
Miss Forward had a great deal of the
coquette in her nature:—she knew how
to play at fast-and-loose with her lover; 
and, young as she was, took a pride in
mingling pain with the pleasure she bestowed. 
Miss Betsy was a witness of all
the airs the other gave herself on this occasion,
and the artifices she made use of,
in order to secure the continuance of his
addresses; so that thus early initiated into
the mystery of courtship, it is not to be wondered
at, that when she came to the practice,
she was so little at a loss. 
This intercourse, however, lasted but a
small time;—their meetings were too
frequent, and too little circumspection used
in them, not to be liable to discovery. 
The governess was informed, that in spite
of all her care, the young folks had been
too cunning for her; on which she went
to the father of Sparkish, acquainted him
with what she knew of the affair, and intreated
he would lay his commands on his
son to refrain all conversation with any of
the ladies under her tuition. The old gentleman
flew into a violent passion, at hearing
his son had already begun to think of
love;—he called for him, and after having
rated his youthful folly in the severest
manner, charged him to relate the whole
truth of what had passed between him and
the young lady mentioned by the governess. 
The poor lad was terrified beyond
measure at his father's anger, and confessed
every particular of his meetings with
miss Forward, and her companion; and 
thus miss Betsy's share of the contrivance
was brought to light, and drew on her a
reprimand equally severe with that miss
Forward had received. The careful governess
would not entirely depend on the
assurances the father of Sparkish had given
her, and resolved to trust neither of the
ladies out of her sight, while that young
gentleman remained so near them, which
she knew would be but a short time, he
having finished his school-learning, and
was soon to go to the university. To
prevent, also, any future stratagems being
laid between miss Betsy and miss Forward,
she took care to keep them from ever being
alone together, which was a very great
mortification to them; but a sudden turn
soon after happened in the affairs of miss
Betsy, which put all I have been relating
entirely out of her head. 