
Gives a very succinct account of the happy accomplishment of an affair, as yet quite unthought-of by the reader; and also of another which has been long ago expected, with other particulars of less consequence. 
Jenny was so much disconcerted at Belpine's visit, and the manner in which she had been entertain'd by him, that it was a considerable time before she was able to bring back her temper to its 
accustomed serenity; and when the emotions of anger and disdain were a little subsided, they yet left a certain heaviness upon her spirits, which made her fall into reflexions of the most serious nature. 
‘How greatly, said she, does the name of love suffer by the unworthiness of its pretended votaries? How is that passion, which in reality refines the mind, and fills it only with sublime ideas, made the veil to cover the most soul and most detestable designs, and also an excuse for the worst of villainies when perpetrated? 
‘That woman must certainly be very weak, continued she, who believes herself truly belov'd by a man who has recourse to dishonourable means for the accomplishment of his wishes:—if this wretch has in earnest been instigated to act as he has done by any inclination for me, they must be of such a sort as I should blush to inspire; and I am amazed that my sex should plume themselves, as I have seen some do, in addresses which either have no meaning at all, or such as are not consistent with their virtue or reputation to encourage.’ 
Her maid now coming in to ask some questions concerning the packing up of her things, she started from the resvery she had been in, and went into her dressing-room to give the necessary directions, where, busying herself in assisting in the execution of her own orders, the pleasing thoughts of her journey drove those of Belpine pretty much out of her head, tho' not so entirely but that the remembrance of his complicated impudence and hypocrisy would sometimes intervene. 
It would be superfluous to trouble the reader with a detail of those avocations in which she pass'd the remainder of that evening, as nothing happen'd of consequence enough to afford either much delight or improvement. 
Ten the next morning being the hour appointed to celebrate the nuptials of lord Huntley and miss Wingman, she arose pretty early,—dress'd herself in a rich riding habit, and went to lady Wingman's in a chair, leaving her maid, who was to attend her in this expedition, to follow with the luggage in a hackney coach. 
She found all the company already there, except the reverend divine, who also came in a few minutes after;—sir Thomas Welby presented the bride, and the ceremony was instantly perform'd; but the wedded pair had scarce time to receive the benediction of lady Wingman, and the congratulations of those friends who were present, before mr. Lovegrove took lady Speck by the hand and led her towards sir Thomas, saying,—‘Sir, I must intreat the favour of you to become a father a second time this morning, and bestow a blessing on me which my whole life shall thank you for.’ 
‘How is this!’ cried the old baronet very much astonish'd, as was every one in the room: —‘Is it possible! added the new-married lady Huntley; sister, are you in earnest,—really going to be married to mr. Lovegrove?’ 
‘Even so, indeed, my dear sister, reply'd lady Speck laughing, I have suffer'd him too long as a lover not to make a husband of him at last.’ 
—Then turning to lady Wingman,—‘I beg pardon, madam, continued she, for not consulting your ladyship in this affair; but you gave me away once, and now 
I thought myself at liberty to make my own choice.’ 
‘Indeed, daughter, said that lady, it is a choice which I should long ago have made for you myself, if, as you justly say, I had not lost my right of directing your inclinations, by your having been married before;—however, I must do you the justice to acknowledge, you exercise not the power you now have over your actions but in favour of a gentleman, who you were very certain would not only receive my approbation, but that of every one who has any acquaintance with his merit.’ 
It is not to be doubted but that mr. Lovegrove, who is one of the most polite men on earth, return'd this compliment from the mother of his mistress in terms full of submission and respect. 
Lord Huntley, his fair bride, and Jenny, were all this while got together, expressing to each other the most glad surprise at this event;—‘It affords me, said the former, a double potion of satisfaction, to see my friends happiness go hand in hand with mine;’—which mr. Lovegrove overhearing, just as he had done speaking to lady Wingman,— 
‘My dear lord, cried he, though yesterday I thought myself as far remov'd from the completion of my wishes as I now am near, I protest to your lordship that I found room in my heart to rejoice in your good fortune while despairing of my own.’ 
‘Aye,—aye,—we are all very well pleased, said sir Thomas Welby; but do not let us make the reverend gentleman wait any longer. —Come, my fair daughter elect, pursued he, taking lady Speck by the hand, put yourself under my jurisdiction for a minute or or two, that I may consign my shortliv'd authority to one whose every command, I dare answer, you will find a pleasure in obeying,’ 
Here the remembrance of some disagreeable passages in her former marriage made lady Speck shudder a little at the thoughts of venturing on a second;—but she had great experience of mr. Lovegrove's temper;—she had promised to be his, both in private and now before all this company,—so threw off all apprehensions, and advanced with her usual sprightliness towards the clergyman, who had his book ready open'd in order to begin the ceremony. 
Jenny, who till this morning had never happen'd to be present at these sacred rites, was fill'd with the most solemn meditations during the performance, especially on the repetition for this second couple;—she found something so binding in the contract,—so awful in the injunction laid on the married persons by the ordinance, that she was amaz'd to think there could be any one hardly enough to infringe it. 
She thought, nevertheless, that the obligation would make a greater impression, and have more weight with those who enter'd into it, if celebrated in a place consecrated to divine worship, than in one which was usually the scene of feasting,—dancing,—and all kinds of pleasantry, if no worse: —‘Marriage, said she within herself, is the great action of our lives;—the hinge on which our happiness or misery, while we have breath, depends;—the more respect we pay to the institution, the more we shall be careful to observe its rules; and I can see no justifiable reason for avoiding to solemnize it in the temple of him who first ordain'd, and who alone has power to render it a blessing.’ 
These reflections frequently recurr'd to her mind, but she had no opportunity at present to proceed in them;—mr. Lovegrove, now put in possession of the happiness he so long had sought, was already receiving the felicitations of his friends; and she, who sincerely rejoiced in his good fortune, would not be slow in testifying the sense she had of it. 
Lady Wingman, who was a great lover of old customs, had prepar'd a rich cake, which sir Thomas Welby immediately broke over the heads of the bridegrooms and their brides;—the servants were all call'd in to partake of this oblation to Ceres,—after which they went down to see if the equipage was ready for setting out. 
The leave this happy company took of lady Wingman and sir Thomas Welby was very short, as it was now past one o'clock, and they purposed to reach Sittingbourn that evening;—they went all together in a landeau, chusing to sit close rather than be separated;—their women attendants, which were also five in number, were cramm'd into lady Speck's old travelling coach, with such things as they knew their ladies would require for 
present use upon the road, and the more heavy baggage placed behind and before it. 
Notwithstanding the privacy with which these weddings had been conducted, a crowd of Mendicants having got a scent of what was doing, had gather'd about the house, and hung upon the doors and even wheels of the landeau; but lord Huntley and mr. Lovegrove throwing out handfuls of money for them to scramble for, the machine was soon freed from this incumbrance and drove away, escorted by nine servants on horseback, valets included. 
