

CHAP. I.
Shews the character of Jemmy in a light which will be thought worthy approbation by some readers, and equally ridiculed by others. 
p. I
CHAP. II.
Contains, besides other matters, some farther particulars relating to lady Hardy, which she did not think proper to make any mention of to Jemmy, in the detail she had given him of her adventures. 
12
CHAP. III.
If it cannot be said to deserve any encomium, it must at least be allowed to stand in no need of an apology. 
25
CHAP. IV.
Contains a brief recital of Jemmy's journey and return, with some other particulars, which if not very interesting will be found necessary, however, to be inserted. 
36
CHAP. V.
Displays love in colours very different from those in which that passion generally appears, and seems calculated chiefly for the entertainment of the young and fair; but will scarcely be displeasing 
to such as are not so, with this proviso, that they have no share of envy in their composition. 
45
CHAP. VI.
Will be found yet more affecting than the former, unless the reader is as dull as perhaps he may think the author. 
55
CHAP. VII.
Is very concise, and presents the reader only with some few passages, by way of a preparative for events, shortly to ensue, of an infinitely far greater consequence. 
63
CHAP. VIII.
Contains a most extraordinary, as well as unexpected turn in the lovers affairs, not fit to be read by those who have very tender hearts or watery eyes. 
71
CHAP. IX.
Is inserted for no other purpose than merely to gratify the curiosity of the reader. 
83
CHAP. X.
Treats of divers things, some of little, some of greater consequence; but none that will afford much matter of entertainment to those who read for no other end than merely to divert themselves. 
91
CHAP. XI.
Contains some occurrences deserving the attention of the reader. 
101
CHAP. XII.
Recites a passage which will certainly be extremely agreeable to all the ladies; it is much to be feared, however, that there are but very few of them who can, with any reason, flatter themselves with experiencing the like. 
110

CHAP. XIII.
Affords less matter either of instruction or entertainment than many of the former; though perhaps more of both than can be found in some other late histories of the same nature with this. 
121
CHAP. XIV.
Contains a very strange and detestable instance of perfidiousness and ingratitude, in a person of the most honourable vocation. 
130
CHAP. XV.
Is only a continuance of the same story. 
143
CHAP. XVI.
Contains the sequel of Sophia's story. 
156
CHAP. XVII.
In which the reader is not to expect any extraordinary matters. 
173
CHAP. XVIII.
Contains none of those beautiful digressions, those remarks, or reflections which a certain would-be critic pretends are so much distinguish'd in the writings of his two favourite authors; yet, it is to be hoped, will afford sufficient to please all those who are willing to be pleased. 
186
CHAP. XIX.
Which, the author thinks it highly proper to acquaint the public, is much of a piece with the foregoing; so that every one may be at liberty either to read or not, according to the satisfaction the other has afforded. 
196
CHAP. XX.
Makes a short pause in the history, in order to present the reader with the detail of a matrimonial contest on a pretty particular occasion. 
207

CHAP. XXI.
Is very proper to be read in an easy chair, either soon after dinner, or at night just going to rest. 
217
CHAP. XXII.
Contains, among sundry interesting and entertaining particulars, a certain proposal, agreement, and resolution,—sudden,—unexpected,—highly important to one of the parties concerned, and no less pleasing to the others. 
232
CHAP. XXIII.
Contains, among other particulars of less moment, an incident, which, to every reader of a distinguishing capacity, must certainly appear as extraordinary as it did to our fair heroine herself, or indeed any other in the whole history. 
247
CHAP. XXIV.
Gives a very succinct account of the happy accomplishment of an affair, as yet quite unthought-of by the reader; and also of another which has been long ago expected, with other particulars of less consequence. 
259
CHAP. XXV.
Contains a great deal of business in a very narrow compass. 
267
CHAP. XXVI.
Affords less than perhaps may be expected, yet enough to satisfy a reasonable reader. 
277
CHAP. XXVII.
Contains a very remarkable occurrence. 
286
CHAP. XXVIII.
Concludes this history, and all the author thinks fit, at present, to intrude upon the public. 
305

