
Is very concise, and presents the reader only with some few passages, by way of a preparative for events, shortly to ensue, of an infinitely far greater consequence. 
The good-natured reader must certainly be pleased to find, that all the base artifices of Belpine were so entirely frustrated;—that all his endeavours to dissolve the union between the lovers had only served to cement it the more firmly;—they were now in a fair way of being as happy as could be wish'd; and that the ungenerous contriver of the plots against them had the mortification to see all his labour had been thrown away. 
He could not, indeed, any longer flatter himself with the least hopes of success;—the last conversation he had with Jemmy before he went to Bath, and that he had with Jenny on her arrival from that place, convinced him that neither the one nor 
the other were to be wrought upon by any projects he could frame. 
Besides the disappointment of those vain hopes he had entertain'd of becoming one day the master of Jenny's person and fortune, it vexed him to the heart to have lost himself in the good graces of miss Chit; not that he had any regard for her, on her own account; but because, as has been already observed, he was solliciting for an employment at court, where he knew that young lady had a very great interest. 
He had never attempted to visit her since the concert, when, as the reader may remember, she had given him a rebuff which might well make him fearful of approaching her again, without some more plausible pretence than it was in his power to make, to cover the occasion he had given her of offence. 
It also fell out, very unluckily for him, that just at this time the post he was endeavouring to procure happened in the disposal of a certain great person, who, it was said, was too nearly allied to miss Chit to have refused any thing she ask'd;—well therefore might he be chagrin'd at having, by a foolish scheme, incurr'd 
the displeasure of one so able, and where he had reason to believe, would otherwise have been so ready to serve him. 
Miss Chit had, indeed, a great deal of good-nature, and an inclination to afford all the assistance in her power, to any one who she thought either wanted or deserved it;—she had been acquainted with Belpine for a considerable time, had look'd upon him as a very facetious tea table visiter, and he had not deceived himself in believing she would have exerted her whole interest in his favour. 
But all the good-will she once had for him was now justly converted into an adequate resentment;—she was gay and flighty, but wanted not understanding;—she plainly saw he had imposed upon her on mr. Jessamy's account, by the answer that gentleman had sent to her card of invitation; and as she was not able to conceive with what design he had made her the dupe, it gave her the more disquiet, and dwelt the longer on her mind. 
She likewise found he had told the same story he had done to herself to several of her friends, who were continually teazing her with one question or another concerning this imaginary lover; not could all 
her protestations that she knew nothing of the matter, pass with any of them for more than maiden bashfulness. 
All this while, however, she knew not how much she suffer'd in the opinion of some people, till a pretty extraordinary chance discover'd it to her. 
On account of some apprehensions of an inward decay, she had been advised to drink milk warm from the Cow with conserve of roses; and in compliance with this recipe, went every morning into the Park, and sat upon a bench while her maid prepared the dose she was to take. 
It happen'd that at one of these times two elderly gentlemen came and placed themselves on the same seat;—they took no other notice of her than the compliment of—‘By your leave, madam;’—nor did she much regard the near neighbourhood of them, as their age and gravity defended her from the fears of being treated by them with any of those impertinencies she might have had reason enough to expect from the more young and gay. 
They talked only of the weather,—the calamity of the times,—and such like common topics of conversation, till he, 
who appeared to be somewhat the oldest of the two, started up on a sudden and went hastily towards a footman who he saw passing along on the other side of the Mall. 
On his return,—‘If I am not mistaken, said his friend, the person you have been speaking to belongs to mr. Jessamy.’ —“Yes reply'd he, I did not know his master was in town, but it seems he came last night.” —‘Are you acquainted with him, pray.’ —“No otherwise, said he, than by seeing him at a coffee-house where I sometimes go; but I am told he is a very accomplish'd gentleman.” —‘As any in town, rejoin'd the old gentleman pretty eagerly;—and I can tell you, has as few of the vices of it.’ 
Before we proceed any farther, it is highly proper to inform the reader, that the person who spoke with so much friendly warmth was no other than that very mr. Morgan, mention'd in the nineteenth chapter of the second volume of this history, for the remarkable conference he had with Jemmy on account of his supposed infidelity to Jenny. 
This hearty well-wisher of Jemmy was about to add something farther in his praise, but was hinder'd from doing so at that time by the others saying, that he had heard some talk of the match between him and miss Jessamy was broke off, and that he made his addresses at present to a young lady call'd miss Chit. 
‘Nothing in it, upon my word, sir, reply'd mr. Morgan a little peevishly;—all an idle story, raised by the vain girl herself: —I heard it too, and I believe was the first that told him of it; but I never saw a man so much surprised and vexed. —She wanted to draw him in, I suppose;—she has a good voice, it seems, and plays on the Harpsichord;—he made her some few visits on that score, and she was so silly as either to believe him really in love with her, or to endeavour to make others believe so if she could;—that is all, upon my honour, sir.’ 
It is easy to conceive what miss Chit must feel on being witness of this discourse:—on hearing mr. Jessamy named, she had sat longer than else she would have done, out of mere curiosity of knowing what would be said of him, but little 
expected to hear such a character of herself;—she as yet, however, restrain'd the passion she was in, and mr. Morgan went on. 
‘Thank Heaven I have no daughters, resumed he; formerly a young maid was ready to blush to death at being told a man was in love with her; but now, forsooth, the girls are as proud of a new lover as they are of a new suit of cloaths, and want as much to shew it;—but, a-lack-a-day, miss Chit quite miss'd her mark in my friend Jessamy;—he loves music, 'tis true; but is not to be sung or play'd out of his senses.’ 
She could now hold out no longer;—“Do you know this miss Chit, sir, demanded she, whom you speak of in this contemptuous manner?” —‘No truly, madam, answer'd he; but if I did, should make no scruple to tell her my mind on this occasion.’ —“If you had the least acquaintance with her, return'd she, you would find she stood in no need of any lessons you could give. 
—I can assure you she despises the thoughts of drawing in any man;—she is above it;—and as for boasting of her lovers, has too many who are 
really such for her to be vain on any imaginary single one.” 
With these words she quitted the bench, and casting a disdainful look on mr. Morgan took hold of her maid's arm and tripp'd down the walk with the utmost precipitation. 
What the gentlemen said of her after she was gone, or whether mr. Morgan had any guess that she was the person he had been speaking of is not material, I shall only say that the affronted lady went home in the greatest agitations;—that she wept,—raved,—curst Belpine as the primary cause of all this, and at last took a resolution to do what will presently be shewn. 
