

Instead of the open, childish, affectionate
familiarity, with which Virginia
used to meet Clarence Hervey, she now
received him with reserved, timid embarrassment.
Struck by this change in her
manner, and alarmed by the dejection of
her spirits, which she vainly strove to conceal,
he eagerly inquired, from Mrs. Ormond,
into the cause of this alteration.
Mrs. Ormond's answers, and her account
of all that had passed during his
absence, increased his anxiety. His indignation
was roused, by the insult which
Virginia had been offered by the strangers
who had scaled the garden-wall. All his
endeavours, to discover who they were,
proved ineffectual; but, lest they should

venture to repeat their visit, he removed
her from Windsor, and took her directly to
Twickenham. Here he staid with her
and Mrs. Ormond some days, to determine,
by his own observation, how far the
representations, that had been made to
him, were just. Till this period he had
been persuaded, that Virginia's regard for
him was rather that of gratitude, than of
love; and with this opinion, he thought,
that he had no reason seriously to reproach
himself for the imprudence, with
which he had betrayed the partiality that
he felt for her, in the beginning of their
acquaintance. He flattered himself, that,
even should she have discerned his intentions,
her heart would not repine at any
alteration in his sentiments: and if her
happiness were uninjured, his reason told
him, that he was not in honour bound to
constancy. The case was now altered.— 
Unwilling as he was to believe, he could
no longer doubt.—Virginia could neither
meet his eyes, nor speak to him without a
degree of embarrassment, which she had

not sufficient art to conceal: she trembled
whenever he came near her, and if he
looked grave, or forbore to take notice of
her, she would burst into tears. At other
times, contrary to the natural indolence of
her character, she would exert herself to
please him, with surprising energy; she
learned every thing that he wished; her
capacity seemed suddenly to unfold. For
an instant, Clarence flattered himself, that
both her fits of melancholy and of exertion
might arise from a secret desire to
see something of that world, from which
she had been secluded. One day, he
touched upon this subject, to see what
effect it would produce; but, contrary to
his expectations, she seemed to have no
desire to quit her retirement: she did not
wish, she said, for amusements such as he
described; she did not wish to go into the
world.
It was during the time of his passion
for her, that Clarence had her picture
painted in the character of St. Pierre's
Virginia. It happened to be in the room

in which they were now conversing, and
when she spoke of loving a life of retirement,
Clarence accidentally cast his eyes
upon the picture, and then upon Virginia.
She turned away—sighed deeply; and
when, in a tone of kindness, he asked her,
if she were unhappy, she hid her face in
her hands, and made no answer.
Mr. Hervey could not be insensible to
her distress, or to her delicacy. He saw
her bloom fading daily, her spirits depressed,
her existence a burden to her,
and he feared, that his own imprudence
had been the cause of all this misery.
“I have taken her out of a situation,
in which she might have spent her life usefully
and happily; I have excited false
hopes in her mind, and now she is a
wretched and useless being; I have won
her affections; her happiness depends totally
upon me; and can I forsake her?
Mrs. Ormond says, that she is convinced,
Virginia would not survive the day of my
marriage with another. I am not disposed
to believe, that girls often die or destroy

themselves for love; nor am I coxcomb
enough to suppose, that love for me must
be extraordinarily desperate. But here's a
girl, who is of a melancholy temperament,
who has a great deal of natural sensibility,
whose affections have all been concentrated,
who has lived in solitude, whose
imagination has dwelled, for a length of
time, upon a certain set of ideas, who has
but one object of hope: in such a mind,
and in such circumstances, passion may
rise to a paroxysm of despair.”
Pity, generosity, and honour, made
him resolve not to abandon this unfortunate
girl; though he felt, that every time
he saw her, his love for Belinda increased.
It was this struggle in his mind, betwixt
love and honour, which produced all the
apparent inconsistency and irresolution,
that puzzled lady Delacour, and perplexed
Belinda. The lock! of beautiful hair,
which so unluckily fell at Belinda's feet,
was Virginia's; he wa going to take it to
the painter, who had made the hair in her
picture considerably too dark. How this

picture got into the exhibition must now
be explained.
Whilst Mr. Hervey's mind was in
that painful state of doubt, which has
just been described, a circumstance happened,
that promised him some relief from
his embarrassment. Mr. Moreton, the
clergyman who used to read prayers every
Sunday for Mrs. Ormond and Virginia,
did not come one Sunday at the usual
time: the next morning he called on Mr.
Hervey, with a face that showed he had
something of importance to communicate.
“I have hopes, my dear Clarence,” 
said he, “that I have found out your Virginia's
father. Yesterday, a musical friend
of mine persuaded me to go with him,
to hear the singing at the Asylum for
children, in St. George's Fields. There is
a girl there, who has, indeed, a charming
voice—but that's not to the present purpose.
After church was over, I happened
to be one of the last that staid; for I am
too old, to love bustling through a crowd.

Perhaps, as you are impatient, you think,
that's nothing to the purpose; and yet it
is, as you shall hear. When the congregation
had almost left the church, I observed,
that the children of the Asylum
remained in their places, by order of one
of the governors; and a middle aged gentleman
went round amongst the elder girls,
examined their countenances with care,
and inquired, with much anxiety, their
ages, and every particular relative to their
parents. The stranger held a miniature
picture in his hand, with which he compared
each face. I was not near enough
to him,” continued Mr. Moreton, “to
see the miniature distinctly; but, from the
glimpse I caught of it, I thought that it
was like your Virginia, though it seemed
to be the portrait of a child but four, or
five years old. I understand, that this
gentleman will be at the Asylum again
next Sunday; I heard him express a wish
to see some of the girls, who happened
last Sunday to be absent.”

“Do you know this gentleman's name,
or where he lives?” said Clarence.
“I know nothing of him,” replied Mr.
Moreton, “except, that he seems fond of
painting, for he told one of the directors,
who was looking at his miniature,
that it was remarkably well painted, and
that, in his happier days, he had been
something of a judge of the art.”
Impatient to see the stranger, who, he
did not doubt, was Virginia's father, Clarence
Hervey went the next Sunday to the
Asylum; but no such gentleman appeared,
and all that he could learn, respecting him,
was, that he had applied to one of the directors
of the institution, for leave to see
and question the girls, in hopes of finding
amongst them his lost daughter; that in
the course of the week, he had seen all
those who were not at church the last
Sunday. None of the directors knew any
thing more concerning him; but the porter
remarked, that he came in a very handsome
coach, and one of the girls of the
Asylum said, that he gave her half a

guinea, because she was a little like his
poor Rachel, who was dead; but that he
had added, with a sigh, “This cannot be
my daughter, for she is only thirteen, and
my girl, if she be now living, must be
nearly eighteen.”
The age, the name, every circumstance
confirmed Mr. Hervey in the belief, that
this stranger was the father of Virginia,
and he was disappointed and provoked
by having missed the opportunity of seeing
or speaking to him. It occurred to Clarence,
that the gentleman might probably
visit the Foundling Hospital, and thither
he immediately went, to make inquiries.
He was told that a person, such as he described,
had been there about a month
before, and had compared the faces of the
oldest girls with a little picture of a child:
that he gave money to several of the girls,
but that they did not know his name, or
any thing more about him.
Mr. Hervey now inserted proper advertisements
in all the papers, but without
producing any effect. At last, recollecting

what Mr. Moreton told him of the stranger's
love of pictures, he determined to put
his portriat of Virginia into the exhibition,
in hopes that the gentleman might go there
and ask some questions about it, which
might lead to a discovery. The young
artist, who had painted this picture, was
under particular obligations to Clarence,
and he promised that he would faithfully
comply with his request, to be at Somersethouse
regularly every morning, as soon as
the exhibition opened; that he would stay
there till it closed, and watch whether any
of the spectators were particularly struck
with the portrait of Virginia. If any person
should ask questions respecting the
picture, he was to let Mr. Hervey know
immediately, and to give the inquirer his
address.
Now it happened, that the very day,
when lady Delacour and Belinda were at
the exhibition, the painter called Clarence
aside, and informed him, that a gentleman
had just inquired from him very eagerly,
whether the picture of Virginia was a portrait.

This gentleman proved to be, not
the stranger who had been at the Asylum,
but an eminent jeweller, who told Mr.
Hervey, that his curiosity about the picture
arose merely from it's striking likeness
to a miniature, which had been lately
left at his house to be new set. It belonged
to a Mr. Hartley, a gentleman who had
made a considerable fortune in the West
Indies, but who was prevented from enjoying
his affluence by the loss of an only
daughter, of whom the miniature was a
portrait, taken when she was not more than
four or five years old. When Clarence
heard all this, he was extremely impatient
to know where Mr. Hartley was to be
found; but the jeweller could only tell
him, that the mimature had been called for
the preceding day by Mr. Hartley's servant,
who said his master was leaving town
in a great hurry to go to Portsmouth, to
join the West India fleet, which was to
sail with the first favourable wind.
Clarence determined immediately to
follow him to Portsmouth; he had not a

moment to spare, for the wind was actually
favourable, and his only chance of
seeing Mr. Hartley was by reaching Portsmouth
as soon as possible. This was the
cause of his taking leave of Belinda in such
an abrupt manner: painful indeed were
his feelings at that moment, and great the
difficulty he felt in parting with her, without
giving any explanation of his conduct, which
must have appeared to her capricious and
mysterious. He was aware, that he had
explicitly to lady Delacour avowed his
admiration of miss Portman, and that in
a thousand instances he had betrayed his
passion. Yet of her love he dared not
trust himself to think, whilst his affairs
were in this doubtful state. He had, it is
true, some faint hopes, that a change in
Virginia's situation might produce an alteration
in her sentiments, and he resolved
to decide his own conduct by the manner
in which she should behave, if her
father should be found, and she should
become heiress to a considerable fortune.
New views might then open to her imagination;

the world, the fashionable world
in all it's glory, would be before her; her
beauty and fortune would attract a variety
of admirers, and Clarence thought, that
perhaps her partiality for him might become
less exclusive, when she had more
opportunities of choice. If her love arose
merely from circumstances, with circumstances
it would change; if it were only a
disease of the imagination, induced by her
seclusion from society, it might be cured
by mixing with the world; and then he
would be at liberty to follow the dictates
of his own heart, and declare his attachment
to Belinda. But if he should find
that change of situation made no alteration
in Virginia's sentiments, if her happiness
should absolutely depend upon the realization
of those hopes, which he had imprudently
excited, he felt that he should be
bound to her by all the laws of justice
and honour; laws, which no passion could
tempt him to break. Full of these ideas,
he hurried to Portsmouth in pursuit of
Virginia's father. The first question he

asked, upon his arrival there, may easily be
guessed.
“Has the West India fleet sailed?”
“No: it sails to morrow at one o'clock,” 
was the answer.
He hastened instantly to make inquiries
for Mr. Hartley. No such person could
be found, no such gentleman was to be
heard of any where. Hartley, he was sure,
was the name which the jeweller mentioned
to him, but it was in vain that he repeated
it, no Mr. Hartley was to be heard of at
Portsmouth, except a pawnbroker. At
last, a steward of one of the West Indiamen,
recollected that a gentleman of that
name came over with him in the Effingham,
and that he talked of returning in
the same vessel to the West Indies, if he
should ever leave England again.
“But we have heard nothing of him
since, sir,” said the steward. “No passage
is taken for him with us.”
“And my life to a china orange,” cried
a sailor who was standing by, “he's gone
to kingdom come, or more likely to Bedlam

afore this, for he was plaguy crazy in
his timbers, and his head wanted righting
I take it, if it was he, Jack, who used to
walk the deck, you know, with a bit of
a picture, not so big as a dead man's eye,
in his hand, to which he seemed to be
mumbling his prayers from morning to
night. There's no use in sounding for
him, master, he's down in Davy's locker
long ago, or stowed into the tight waistcoat
before this time o'day.”
Notwithstanding this knowing sailor's
opinion, Clarence would not desist from
his sounding, because, having so lately
heard of him at different places, he could
not believe that he was gone either into
Davy's locker, or to Bedlam. He imagined,
that by some accident, Mr. Hartley had
been detained upon the road to Portsmouth; 
and in the expectation that he
would certainly arrive before the fleet
should sail, Clarence waited with tolerable
patience. He waited, however, in vain; 
he saw the Effingham and the whole fleet
sail—no Mr. Hartley arrived. As he hailed

one of the boats of the Effingham, which
was rowing out with some passengers, who
had been too late to get on board, his
friend, the sailor, answered:
“We've no crazyman here: I told you,
master, he'd never go out no more in the
Effingham. He's where I said, master,
you'll find, or no where.”
Mr. Hervey remained some days at
Portsmouth, after the fleet had sailed, in
hopes that he might yet obtain some
information; but none could be had: neither
could any farther tidings be obtained
from the jeweller, who had first mentioned
Mr. Hartley. Despairing of success in
the object of his journey, he however determined
to delay his return to town, for
some time, in hopes that absence might
efface the impression which had been made
on the heart of Virginia. He made a
tour along the picturesque coasts of Dorset
and Devonshire, and it was during this excursion,
that he wrote the letters to lady
Delacour, which have so often been mentioned.
He endeavoured to dissipate his

thoughts by new scenes and employments; 
but all his ideas involuntarily centred in
Belinda. If he saw new characters, he compared
them with hers, or considered how
far she would approve or condemn them.
The books that he read were perused with
a constant refernce to what she would
think or feel; and during his whole journey
he never beheld any beautiful prospect,
without wishing that it could at the same
instant be seen by Belinda. If her name
were mentioned but once in his letters, it
were because he dared not trust himself to
speak of her; she was for ever present to
his mind: but whilst he was writing to lady
Delacour, her idea pressed more strongly
upon his heart; he recollected, that it was
she who first gave him a just insight into
her ladyship's real character; he recollected,
that she had joined with him in the benevolent
design of reconciling her to lord
Delacour, and of creating in her mind a
taste for domestic happiness. This remembrance
operated powerfully to excite
him to fresh exertions, and the eloquence,

which touched lady Delacour so much in
these “edifying” letters as she called them,
was in fact inspired by Belinda.
Whenever he thought distinctly upon
his future plans, Virginia's attachment, and
the hopes which he had imprudently inspired,
appeared insuperable obstacles to
his union with miss Portman; but, in more
sanguine moments, he flattered himself
with a confused notion, that these difficulties
would vanish. Great were his surprise
and alarm, when he received that letter
of lady Delacour's, in which she announced
the probability of Belinda's marriage
with Mr. Vincent. By one of those
small unfortunate accidents, which sometimes
occur in the most important moments
of our lives, he did not receive this
letter, till nearly a fortnight after it should
have come to his hands. The instant he
received it, he set out on his way home,
he travelled with all that expedition, which
money can command in England: his first
thought, and first wish, when he arrived in
town, were to go to lady Delacour's, but

he checked his impatience, and proceeded
immediately to Twickenham, to have his
fate decided by Virginia. It was with the
utmost painful sensations, that he saw her
again. The accounts, which he received
from Mrs. Ormond, convinced him, that
absence had produced none of the effects,
which he expected on the mind of her pupil.
Mrs. Ormond was naturally both of
an affectionate disposition and a timid
temper; she had become excessively fond
of Virginia, and her anxiety was more
than in proportion to her love; it sometimes
balanced and even overbalanced her
regard and respect for Clarence Hervey
himself. When he spoke of his attachment
to Belinda, and of his doubts respecting
Virginia, she could no longer restrain her
emotion.
“O! indeed! Mr. Hervey,” said she,
“this is no time for reasoning and doubting.
No man in his senses—no man, who
is not wilfully blind, could doubt her being
distractedly fond of you.”
“I am sorry for it,” said Clarence.

“And why? O, why, Mr. Hervey?
Don't you recollect the time, when you
were all impatience to call her yours— 
when you thought her the most charming
creature in the whole world?”
“I had not seen Belinda Portman then.”
“And I wish to Heaven you never had
seen her; but O, surely, Mr. Hervey, you
will not desert my Virginia!—Must her
health, her happiness, her reputation, all
be the sacrifice?”
“Reputation, Mrs. Ormond!”
“Reputation, Mr. Hervey!—you do
not know in what light she is considered
here; nor did I till lately. But I tell you,
her reputation is injured, fatally injured.
It is whispered, and more than whispered
every where, that she is your mistress. A
woman came here the other day with
the bullfinch, and she looked at me, and
spoke in such an extraordinary way, that
I was shocked more than I can express.
I need not tell you all the particulars; it
is enough that I have made inquiries, and
am sure, too sure, of what I say, that nothing

but your marriage with Virginia
can save her reputation; or—”
Mrs. Ormond stopped short, for at this
instant Virginia entered the room, walking
in her slow manner, as if she were in a
deep reverie.
“Since my return,” said Clarence, in an
embarrassed voice, “I have scarcely heard
a syllable from miss St. Pierre's lips.”
“Miss St. Pierre!—He used to call me
Virginia,” said she, turning to Mrs. Ormond
—“he is angry with me—He used to
call me Virginia.”
“But you were a child then, you know,
my love,” said Mrs. Ormond.
“And I wish I was still a child,” said
Virginia—Then, after a long pause, she
approached Mr. Hervey with extreme
timidity, and opening a port folio, which
by on the table, she said to him:
“If you are at leisure—if I do not interrupt
you—would you look at these
drawings; though they are not worth your
seeing, except as proofs, that I can conquer
my natural indolence?”

The drawings were views, which she had
painted from memory, of scenes in the New
Forest, near her grandmother's cottage.
That cottage was drawn with an exactness,
that proved how fresh it was in her remembrance.
Many recollections rushed forcibly
into Clarence Hervey's mind, at the
sight of this cottage. The charming image
of Virginia, as it first struck his fancy; the
smile, the innocent affectionate smile, with
which she offered him the finest rose in her
basket; the stern voice, in which her grandmother
spoke to her; the prophetic fears
of her protectress; the figure of the dying
woman; the solemn promise he made to
her; all recurred, in rapid succession, to his
memory.
“You don't seem to like that,” said
Virginia; and then putting another drawing
into his hands, “perhaps this may please
you better.”
“They are beautiful; they are surprisingly
well done!” exclaimed he,
“I knew he would like them! I told

you so!” cried Mrs. Ormond, in a triumphant
tone.
“You see,” said Virginia, “that thought
you have heard scarcely a syllable from
miss St. Pierre's lips, since your return, yet
she has not been unmindful of your wishes
in your absence. You told her, some time
ago, that you wished she would try to improve
in drawing. She has done her best.
But do not trouble yourself to look at them
any longer,” said Virginia, taking one of her
drawings from his hand; “I merely wanted
to show you, that though I have no genius,
I have some—”
Her voice faultered so, that she could
not pronounce the word gratitude.
Mrs. Ormond pronounced it for her; and
added, “I can answer for it, that Virginia
is not ungrateful.”
“Ungrateful!” repeated Clarence; 
“Who ever thought her so!” Why did
you put these ideas into her mind?”
Virginia, resting her head on Mrs. Ormond's
shoulder, wept bitterly.
“You have worked upon her sensibility,

till you have made her miserable,” cried Clarence,
angrily. “Virginia, listen to me; look
at me,” said he, affectionately taking her
hand: but she pressed closer to Mrs. Ormond,
and would not raise her head. “Do
not consider me as your master—your tyrant
—do not imagine that I think you
ungrateful!”
“O, I am—I am—I am ungrateful to
you,” cried she, sobbing; “but Mrs. Ormond
never told me so: do not blame
her; she has never worked upon my sensibility.
Do you think,” said she, looking
up, while a transient expression of indignation
passed over her countenance—“do
you think I cannot feel without having
been taught?”
Clarence uttered a deep sigh.
“But if you feel too much, my dearest
Virginia—if you give way to your feelings,
in this manner,” said Mrs. Ormond, “you
will make both yourself and Mr. Hervey
unhappy.!”
“Heaven forbid! The first wish of
my soul is—” She paused—“I should be

the most ungrateful wretch in the world,
if I were to make him unhappy.”
“But if he sees you miserable, Virginia?”
“Then he shall not see it,” said she,
wiping the tears from her face.
“To imagine that you were unhappy,
and that you concealed it from us, would
be still worse,” said Clarence.
“But why should you imagine it?” replied
Virginia; “you are too good, too
kind: but do not fancy that I am not
happy; I am sure I ought to be happy.”
“Do you regret your cottage?” said
Clarence: “these drawings show how welf
you remember it.”
Virginia coloured; and with some hesitation
answered: “Is it my fault, if I cannot
forget?”
“You were happier then, Virginia,
than you are now, you will confess,” said
Mrs. Ormond, who was not a woman of
refined delicacy, and who thought, that the
best chance she had of working upon Mr.
Hervey's sense of honour, was, by making

it plain to him, how much her pupil's affections
were engaged.
Virginia made no answer to this question,
and her silence touched Clarence more
than any thing she could have said. When
Mrs. Ormond repeated her question, he
relieved the trembling girl, by saying:
“My dear Mrs. Ormond, confidence
must be won, not demanded.”
“I have no right to insist upon confessions,
I know,” said Mrs. Ormond
“but—”
“Confessions—I do not wish to conceal
any thing; but I think, sincerity is not
always, in our sex, consistent with—I
mean—I don't know what I mean—what I
say—or what I ought to say,” cried Virginia; 
and she sunk down on a sofa, in extreme
confusion.
“Why will you agitate her, Mrs. Ormond,
in this manner?” said Mr. Hervey,
with an expression of sudden anger. It
was succeeded by a look of such tender
compassion for Virginia, that Mrs. Ormond
rejoiced to have excited his anger: at any

price, she wished to serve her beloved
pupil.
“Do not be in the least apprehensive,
my dear Virginia, that we should take ungenerous
advantage of the openness and
simplicity of your character,” said Mr.
Hervey.
“O, no, no; I cannot, do not apprehend
any thing ungenerous from you— 
you are—you ever have been my best, my
most generous friend! But I fear that I
have not the simplicity of character, the
openness that you imagine: and yet I am
sure—I wish, from the bottom of my
heart—I wish to do right, if I knew how.
But there is not one, no not one person in
the whole world,” continued she, her eyes
moving from Mrs. Ormond to Mr. Hervey,
and from him to Mrs. Ormond again— 
“Not one person in the whole world I dare— 
I ought to lay my heart open to. I have,
perhaps, said more than is proper already.
But this I know,” added she in a firm tone,
rising, and addressing herself to Clarence:
“You shall never be made unhappy by me.

And do not think about my happiness so
much,” said she, forcing a smile. “I am,
I will be perfectly happy; only let me always
know your wishes, your sentiments,
your feelings, and by them I will, as I
ought, regulate mine.”
“Amiable, charming, generous girl!” 
cried Clarence.
“Take care,” said Mrs. Ormond; “take
care, Virginia, lest you promise more than
you can perform. Wishes, and feelings,
and sentiments, are not to be so easily regulated.”
“I did not, I believe, say it was easy; 
but I hope it is possible,” replied Virginia; 
“I promise nothing but what I am able to
perform.”
“I doubt it,” said Mrs. Ormond, shaking
her head; “you are—you will be perfectly
happy. O, Virginia, my love, do
not deceive yourself; do not deceive us so
terribly. I am sorry to put you to the
blush; but”—
“Not a word more, my dear madam, I
beg—I insist,” said Mr. Hervey, in a commanding

tone; but, for the first time in
her life, regardless of him, she persisted.
“I only ask you to call to mind, my
dearest Virginia,” said she, taking her hand,
“the morning that you screamed in your
sleep, the morning when you told me the
frightful dream—Were you perfectly happy
then?”
“It is easy to force my thoughts from
me,” said Virginia, withdrawing her hand
from Mrs. Ormond; “but it is cruel to
do so.” And with an air of offended dignity
she passed them, and quitted the
room.
“I wish to Heaven!” exclaimed Mrs.
Ormond, “that miss Portman was married,
and out of the way—I shall never forgive
myself! We have used this poor girl
cruelly amongst us: she loves you to distraction,
and I have encouraged her passion,
and I have betrayed her—O, fool that
I was! I told her, that she would certainly
be your wife.”
“You have told her so!—Did I not
charge you, Mrs. Ormond—”

“Yes; but I could not help it, when
I saw the sweet girl fading away—and,
besides, I am sure she thought it, from
your manner, long and long before I
told it to her. Do you forget, how fond
of her you were scarce one short year ago?
And do you forget, how plainly you let her
see your passion? O, how can you blame
her, if she loves you, and if she is unhappy?”
“I blame no one but myself,” cried
Clarence. “I must abide by the consequences
of my own folly.—Unhappy!— 
she shall not be unhappy; she does not
deserve to be so.”
He walked backward and forward,
with hasty steps, for some minutes; then
sat down, and wrote a letter to Virginia.
When he had finished it, he put it into
Mrs. Ormand's hands.
“Read it—seal it—give it to her—and
let her answer be sent to town to me, at
Dr. X.'s, in Clifford street.”
Mrs. Ormond clasped her hands, in an
ecstacy of joy, as she glanced her eye over

the letter, for it contained an offer of his
hand.
“This is like yourself; like what I always
knew you to be, dear Mr. Hervey!” 
she exclaimed.
But her exclamation was lost upon him.
When she looked up to repeat her praises,
she perceived he was gone. After the effort
which he had made, he wished for
time to tranquillize his mind, before he
should again see Virginia: what her answer
to this letter would be, he could not
doubt; his fate was now decided, and
he determined immediately to write to
lady Delacour, to explain his situation; 
he felt, that he had not sufficient fortitude
at this moment to make such an explanation
in person. With all the strength
of his mind, he endeavoured to exclude
Belinda from his thoughts, but curiosity— 
(for he would suffer himself to call it by
no other name)—curiosity to know whether
she were actually engaged to Mr. Vincent,
obtruded itself with such force, that it
could not be resisted.

From doctor X&wblank; he thought he
could obtain full information, and he
hastened immediately to town. When he
got to Clifford street, he found that the
doctor was not at home; his servant said,
he might probably be met with at Mrs.
Margaret Delacour's, as he usually finished
his morning rounds at her house. Thither
Mr. Hervey immediately went.
The first sound that he heard, as he
went up her stairs, was the screaming of a
macaw; and the first person he saw,
through the open door of the drawingroom,
was Helena Delacour. She was
standing with her back to him, learning
over the macaw's cage, and he heard her
say, in a joyful tone,
“Yes; though you do scream so frightfully,
my pretty macaw, I love you as
well as Marriott ever did. When my dear,
good miss Portman sent this macaw— 
My dear aunt! here's Mr. Hervey!—You
were just wishing to see him.”
“Mr. Hervey,” said the old lady, with
a benevolent smile, “your little friend

Helena tells you truth. We were just
wishing for you. I am sure it will give
you pleasure to hear, that I am at last a
convert to your opinion of lady Delacour.
She has given up all those that I used to
call her rantipole acquaintance. She has
reconciled herself to her husband, and to
his friends; and Helena is to go home to
live with her. Here is a charming note, I
have just received from her! Dine with
me on Thursday next, and you will meet
her ladyship, and see a happy family party.
You have had some share in the reformation,
I know, and that was the reason
I wished that you should be with us on
Thursday. You see, I am not an obsinate
old woman, though I was cross the first
day I saw you at lady Anne Percival's.— 
I found I was mistaken in your character,
and I am glad of it. But this note of
lady Delacour's seems to have struck you
dumb.”
There were, indeed, a few words in
this note, which deprived him, for some
moments, of all power of utterance.

“The report you have heard (unlike
most other reports) is perfectly well founded.
Belinda Portman is going to be married
to Mr. Vincent.—I will bring him
with us on Thursday.”
Mr. Hervey was relieved from the necessity
of accounting to Mrs. Delacour for
his sudden embarrassment, by the entrance
of Dr. X&wblank;and another gentleman, of
whom, in the confusion of his mind, he
did not at first take any notice. Dr. X&wblank;,
with his usual mixture of benevolence and
raillery, addressed himself to Clarence,
whilst the stranger took out of his pocket
some papers, and, in a low voice, entered
earnestly into conversation with Mrs. Delacour.
“Now tell me, if you can, Clarence,” 
said Dr. X&wblank;, “which of your three
mistresses you like best? I think I left
you some months ago in great doubt upon
this subject.—Are you still in that philosophic
state?”
“No;” said Clarence, “all doubts are
over—I am going to be married.”

“Brayo!—But you look as if you were
going to be hanged. May I, as it will
so soon be in the newspaper—may I ask
the name of the fair lady?”
“Virginia St. Pierre—You shall know
her history and mine when we are alone,” 
said Mr. Hervey, lowering his voice.
“You need not lower your voice,” said
Dr. X&wblank;, “for Mrs. Delacour is, as you
see, so much taken up with her own
affairs, that she has no curiosity for those
of her neighbours; and Mr. Hartley is as
busy as&wblank;”
“Mr. who? Mr. Hartley! did you
say,” interrupted Clarence, eagerly, turning
his eyes upon the stranger, who was a
middle-aged gentleman, exactly answering
the description of the person who
had been at the Asylum in search of his
daughter.—
“Mr. Hartley yes. What astonishes
you so much?” said Dr. X&wblank;, calmly.
“He is a West Indian. I met him in
Cambridgeshire last summer, at his friend
Mr. Horton's; he has been very generous

to the poor people, who suffered by the
fire, and he is now consulting with Mrs.
Delacour, who has an estate adjoining to
Mr. Horton's, about her tenants, whose
houses in the village were burnt. Now I
have, in as few words and parenthesises as
possible, told you all I know of Mr. Hartley's
history; but your curiosity still looks
voracious.”
“I want to know whether he has a
miniature?” said Clarence, hastily. “Introduce
me to him, for Heaven's sake,
directly!”
“Mr Hartley,” cried the doctor, raising
his voice, “give me leave to introduce
my friend Mr. Hervey to you, and to
your miniature picture, if you have one.”
Mr. Hartley sighed profoundly, as he
drew from his bosom a small portrait,
which he put into Hervey's hands, saying,
“Alas! sir, you cannot, I fear, give
me any tidings of the original; it is the
picture of a daughter, whom I have never
seen since she was an infant—whom I
never shall see again.”

Clarence instantly knew it to be Virginia; 
but as he was upon the point of
making some joyful exclamation, he felt
Dr. X&wblank;touch his shoulder, and looking
up at Mr. Hartley, he saw in his
countenance such strong workings of passion,
that he prudently repressed his own
emotion, and calmly said—“It would be
cruel, sir, to give you false hopes.”
“It would kill me, it would kill me,
sir!—or worse!—worse!—a thousand
times worse!” cried Mr. Hartley, putting
his hand to his forehead. “What,” continued
he, impatiently—“what was the
meaning of the look you gave, when you
first saw that picture? Speak, if you have
any humanity! Did you ever see any one
that resembles that picture?”
“I have seen, I think, a picture,” said
Clarence Hervey, “that has some resemblance
to it.”
“When? where?&wblank;”
“My good sir,” said Dr. X&wblank;, “let
me recommend it to you to consider, that
there is scarcely any possibility of judging

from the features of children, of what
their faces may be when they grow up.
Nothing can be more fallacious than these
accidental resemblances between the pictures
of children and of grown up people.”
Mr. Hartley's countenance fell.
“But,” added Clarence Hervey, “you
will perhaps, sir, think it worth your
while to see the picture of which I speak; 
you can see it at Mr. F&wblank;'s, the painter,
in Newman street; and I will
accompany you thither whenever you
please.”
“This moment, if you would have the
goodness! My carriage is at the door; 
and Mrs Delacour will be so kind to excuse&wblank;”
“O, make no apologies to me at such
a time as this,” said Mrs. Delacour—.
“Away with you, gentlemen, as soon as
you please; upon condition, that if you
have any good news to tell, some of you
will remember, in the midst of your joy,
that such an old woman as Mrs Margaret

Delacour exists, who loves to hear good
news of those who deserve it.”
It was so late in the day, when they got
to Newman street, that they were obliged
to light candles. Trembling with eagerness,
Mr. Hartley drew near, while Clarence
held the light to the picture.
“It is so like,” said he, looking at his
miniature, “that I dare not believe my
senses. Dr. X&wblank;, pray do you look.
My head is so dizzy, and my eyes so&wblank; 
What do you think, sir? What do you
say, doctor?”
“That the likeness is certainly striking
—but this seems to be a fancy piece.”
“A fancy piece!” repeated Mr. Hartley,
with terrour;—“Why then did you
bring me here?—A fancy piece!”
“No, sir; it is a portrait,” said Clarence; 
“and if you will be calm, I will
tell you more.—”
“I will be calm;—only—is she alive?”
“The lady, of whom this is the portrait,
is alive,” replied Clarence Hervey,
who was obliged to exert his utmost command

over himself, to maintain that composure,
which he saw was necessary; “the
lady, of whom this is the portrait, is alive,
and you shall see her to morrow.”
“O, why not now? Cannot I see her
now? I must see her to night: this intant,
sir!”
“It is impossible,” said Mr. Hervey,
“that you should see her this instant, for
she is some miles off, at Twickenham.”
“It is too late to go thither now; you
cannot think of it, Mr. Hartley,” continued
Dr. X&wblank;, in a tone of command,
to which he yielded more readily than to
reason.
Clarence had the presence of mind to
recollect, that it would be necessary to prepare
poor Virginia for this meeting, and he
sent a messenger immediately, to request
that Mrs. Ormond would communicate
the intelligence with all the caution in her
power.
The next morning, Mr. Hartley and Mr.
Hervey set off together for Twickenham.
In their way thither, Clarence gradually

confirmed Mr. Hartley in the belief, that
Virginia was his daughter, by relating all
the circumstances, that he had learned from
her grandmother, and from Mrs. Smith,
the farmer's wife, with whom she had
formerly been acquainted: the name, the
age, every particular, as it was disclosed,
heightened his security and his joy. There
was one slight mark, however, which, he
said, would identify his child more satisfactorily
to his own mind, than any collateral
proofs; he knew, that his daughter,
when she was an infant, had a little mole
just above her right temple.
“I looked for this,” added he, “in her
picture yesterday; but, probably, as the
painter might think it a defect, he would
have omitted it; and, besides, the hair
shaded the spot where it should have
been.”
For some time Mr. Hartley's mind was
so intent upon this mole, that he could
not listen to any thing, and Clarence could
not satisfy him on this point; but, at last,
he engaged his attention, and suspended

his anxiety, by giving him a history of his
own connexion with Virginia, from the
day of his first discovering her in the New
Forest, to the letter which he had just
written, to offer her his hand. The partiality,
which it was suspected Virginia felt
for him, was the only circumstance which
he suppressed, because, notwithstanding
all Mrs. Ormond had said, and all he had
himself heard and seen, his obstinate incredulity
required confirmation under her
own hand, or positively from her own lips.
He still fancied it was possible, that change
of situation might alter her views and sentiments; 
and he earnestly entreated, that
she might be left entirely to her own decision.
It was necessary to make this stipulation
with her father; for, in the excess
of his gratitude for the kindness, which
Clarence had shown to her, he protested,
that he should look upon her as a monster
if she did not love him; be added, that if
Mr. Hervey had not a farthing he should
prefer him to every man upon earth; he
however promised that he would conceal

his wishes, and that his daughter
should act entirely from the dictates of her
own mind. In the fullness of his heart,
he told Clarence all those circumstances
of his conduct towards Virginia's mother,
which had filled his soul with remorse.
She was scarcely sixteen, when he ran away
with her from a boarding-school; he was
at that time a gay officer, she a sentimental
girl, who had been spoiled by early
novel-reading. Her father had a small place
at court, lived beyond his fortune, educated
his daughter, to whom he could give
no portion, as if she were to be heiress to
a large estate; then died, and left his widow
absolutely in penury. This widow was
the old lady, who lived in the cottage in
the New Forest. It was just at the time of
her husband's death, and of her own distress,
that she heard of the elopement of
her daughter from school. Mr. Hartley's
parents were so much incensed by the
match, that he was prevailed upon to separate
from his wife, and to go abroad, to
push his fortune in the army. His marriage

had been secret, his own friends disavowed
it, notwithstanding the repeated, urgent
entreaties of his wife, and of her mother,
who was her only surviving relation. His
wife, on her deathbed, wrote, to urge him to
take charge of his daughter; and, to make
the appeal stronger to his feelings, she sent
him a picture of his little girl, who was
then about four years old. Mr. Hartley,
however, was intent upon forming a new
connexion with the rich widow of a planter
in Jamaica. He married the widow, took
possession of her fortune, and all his affections
soon were fixed upon a son, for
whom he formed, even from the moment
of his birth, various schemes of aggrandizement:
the boy lived till he was about
ten years old, when he caught a fever, which
at that time raged in Jamaica, and, after
a few days illness, died. His mother was
carried off by the same disease; and, Mr.
Hartley, left alone in the midst of his
wealth, felt how insufficient it was to happiness.
Remorse now seized him: in the
desertion of his daughter he could not

rest, but returned to England in search of
her. To this neglected child he now looked
forward, for the peace and happiness of
the remainder of his life. Disappointment
in all his inquiries for some months
preyed upon his spirits to such a degree,
that his intellects were at times disordered:
this derangement was the cause of his not
sooner recovering his child. He was in confinement,
during the time that Clarence
Hervey's advertisements were inserted in
the papers; and his illness was also the
cause of his not going to Portsmouth, and
sailing in the Effingham, as he had originally
intended. So that the sailor's conjecture,
after all, was right, or nearly so.
The history of his connexion with Mr.
Horton would be uninteresting to the
reader; it is enough to say, that he was
prevailed upon, by that gentleman, to
spend some time in the country with him,
for the recovery of his health. And it was
there, that he became acquainted with Dr.
X&wblank;, who introduced him, as we have
seen, to Mrs. Margaret Delacour, at whose

house he met Clarence Hervey. This is
the most succinct account, that we can
give of him and his affairs. His own account
was ten times as long; but we spare
the reader his incoherencies and reflections,
because, perhaps, they are in a hurry to
get to Twickenham, and to hear of his
meeting with Virginia.
Mrs. Ormond found it no easy task to
prepare Virginia for the sight of Mr.
Hartley. Virginia had scarcely over spoken
of her father; but the remembrance of
things, which she had heard of him from
her grandmother, was fresh in her mind; 
she had often pictured him in her fancy,
and she had secretly nourished the hope,
that she should not for ever be a deserted
child. Mrs. Ormond had observed, that
in those romances, of which Virginia was
so fond, every thing that related to children,
who were deserted by their parents,
or to their sudden discovery, affected her
strongly.
The belief in what the French call la
force du sang was suited to her affectionate

temper and ardent imagination; 
and it had taken full possession of her
mind. The eloquence of romance persuaded
her, that she should not only discover,
but love her father with intuitive
filial piety, and she longed to experience
those yearnings of affection, of which she
had read so much.
The first moment that Mrs. Ormond
began to speak of Mr. Clarence Hervey's
hopes of discovering her father, she was
transported with joy.
“My father!—How delightful that
word father sounds!—My father!—May
I say, my father?—And will he own me,
and will he love me, and will he give me
his blessing, and will he fold me in his
arms, and call me his daughter, his dear
daughter?—O, how I shall love him! I
will make it the whole business of my life
to please him!”
“The whole business?” said Mrs. Ormond,
smiling.
“Not the whole,” said Virginia; “I
hope my father will like Mr. Hervey. Did

not you say, that he is rich? I wish, that
my father may be very rich.”
“That is the last wish, that I should
have expected to hear from you, my Virginia”
“But do not you know why I wish it?
—That I may show my gratitude to Mr.
Hervey.”
“My dear child,” said Mrs. Ormond,
“these are most generous sentiments, and
worthy of you; but do not let your imagination
run away with you at this rate— 
Mr. Hervey is rich enough.”
“I wish he was poor,” said Virginia,
that I might make him rich.”
“Ho would not love you the better,
my dear,” said Mrs. Ormond, “if you
had the wealth of the Indies. Perhaps,
your father may not be rich; therefore, do
not set your heart upon this idea.”
Virginia sighed—fear succeeded to hope,
and her imagination immediately reversed
the bright picture, that it had drawn.
“But I am afraid,” said she, “that this

gentleman is not my father—how disappointed
I shall be! I wish you had never
told me all this, my dear Mrs. Ormond.”
“I would not have told it to you, if
Mr. Hervey had not desired that I should; 
and, you may be sure, he would not have
desired it, unless he had good reason to
believe, that you would not be disappointed.”
“But he is not sure—he does not say,
he is quite sure. And, even if I were
quite certain of his being my father, how
can I be certain, that he will not disown
me—he, who has deserted me so long?
My grandmother, I remember, often used
to say, that he had no natural affection.”
“Your grandmother was mistaken then,
for he has been searching for his child all
over England, Mr. Hervey says; and he
has almost lost his senses with grief, and
with remorse.”
“Remorse!”
“Yes; remorse—for, having so long deserted
you, he fears, that you will hate
him.”

“Hate him!—Is it possible to hate a
father” said Virginia.
“He dread, that you should never for
give him.”
“Forgive him!—I have read of parents
forgiving their children; but I never remember,
to have read of a daughter forgiving
her father.—Forgive! You should
not have used that word. I cannot forgive
my father; but I can love him, and
I will make him quite forget all his sorrows
—I mean, all his sorrows about me.”
After this conversation, Virginia spent
her time in imagining, what sort of person
her father would be; whether he was like
Mr. Hervey; what words he would say; 
where he would sit; whether he would sit
beside her; and, above all, whether he
would give her his blessing.
“I am afraid,” said she, “of liking my
father better than any body else.”
“No danger of that, my dear,” said
Mrs. Ormond, smiling.
“I am glad of it; for it would be very

wrong and ungrateful, to like any thing
in this world so well as Mr. Hervey.”
The carriage now came to the door:
Mrs. Ormond instantly ran to the window,
but Virginia had not power to move—her
heart beat violently.
“Is he come?” said she.
“Yes, he is getting out of the carriage
this moment!”
Virginia stood with her eyes eagerly
fixed upon the door—“Hark!” said she,
laying her hand upon Mrs. Ormond's arm
to prevent her from moving—“Hush!
that we may hear his voice.”
She was breathless—No voice was to be
heard—“They are not coming,” said she,
turning as pale as death. An instant afterward
her colour returned—She heard
the steps of two people coming up the
stairs.
“His step!—Do you hear it?—Is it
my father?”
Virginia's imagination was worked to
the highest pitch, she could scarcely sustain

herself: Mrs. Ormond supported her.
At this instant her father appeared.
“My child!—the image of her mother!” 
exclaimed he—stopping short— 
he sunk upon a chair.
“My father!” cried Virginia, springing
forward, and throwing herself at his
feet.
“The voice of her mother!” said Mr.
Hartley—“My daughter!—My long lost
child!”
He tried to raise her, but could not; 
her arms were clasped round his knee,
her face rested upon it, and when he
stooped to kiss her cheek, he found it cold.
—She had fainted.
When she came to her senses, and found
herself in her father's arms, she could
scarcely believe that it was not a dream.
He parted the ringlets of her fine hair,
and found the mole on her forehead. The
delighted father kissed it in a transport of
joy and tenderness.
“Your blessing!—give me your blessing,
and then I shall know that you are

indeed my father!” cried Virginia, kneeling
to him, and looking up with an enthusiastic
expression of filial piety in her countenance.
“God bless you, my sweet child!” said
he, laying his hand upon her—“and God
forgive your father!”
“My grandmother died without giving
me her blessing,” said Virginia, “but now
I have been blessed by my father!—Happy!
happy moment!—O that she could
look down from Heaven, and see us at this
instant!”
It is sometimes prudent to draw a veil
over the excess of joy, as well as of
grief. There are scenes, which may be
imagined, but which cannot be described.
Virginia was so much astonished and
overpowered by this sudden discovery of
a parent, and by the novelty of his first
caresses, that after the first violent effervescence
of her sensibility was over, she
might, to an indifferent spectator, have
appeared stupid and insensible. Mrs. Ormond,
though far from an indifferent spectator,

was by no means a penetrating judge
of the human heart; she seldom saw more
than the external symptoms of feeling, and
she was apt to be rather impatient with her
friends, if theirs did not accord with her
own.
“Virginia, my dear,” said she, in rather
a reproachful tone, “Mr. Hervey, you
see, has left the room, on purpose to leave
you at full liberty to talk to your father's
and I am going—but you are so silent?”
“I have so much to say, and my heart
is so full!”—said Virginia.
“Yes, I know you told me of a thousand
things, that you had to say to your
father, before you saw him.”
“But now I see him, I have forgotten
them all. I can think of nothing but of
him.”
“Of him and Mr. Hervey,” said Mrs.
Ormond.
“I was not thinking of Mr. Hervey at
that moment,” said Virginia, blushing.
“Well, my love, I will leave you to
think and talk of what you please,” said

Mrs. Ormond, smiling significantly as she
left the room.
Mr. Hartley folded his daughter in his
arms with the fondest expressions of parental
affection, and he was upon the point
of telling her how much he approved of
the choice of her heart; but he recollected
his promise, and he determined to sound
her inclinations farther, before he even
mentioned the name of Clarence Hervey.
He began, by representing to her all that
was in his power and his wish to bestow.
He painted the pleasures of the world,
that world, from which she had hitherto
been secluded.
She heard him with simple indifference:
not even her curiosity was excited.
He observed, that though she had no
curiosity to see, it was natural that she
must have some pleasure in the thoughts
of being seen.
“What pleasure?” said Virginia.
“The pleasure of being admired and
loved: beauty and grace such as yours, my

child, cannot be seen without commanding
admiration and love.”
“I do not want to be admired,” replied
Virginia, “and I want to be loved by
those only whom I love.”
“My dearest daughter, you shall be
intirely your own mistress, I will never
interfere, directly or indirectly, in the disposal
of your heart.”
At these last words, Virginia, who had
listened to all the rest unmoved, took her
father's hand, and kissed it repeatedly.
“Now that I have found you, my darling
child, let me at least make you happy,
if I can—It is the only atonement in my
power; it will be the only solace of my
declining years. All that wealth can bestow&wblank;”
“Wealth!” interrupted Virginia— 
“Then you have wealth?”
“Yes, my child—may it make you
happy! that is all the enjoyment I expect
from it.—It shall all be yours.”
“And may I do what I please with it?
—O then it will indeed make me happy.

I will give it all, all to Mr. Hervey. How
delightful to have something to give to
Mr. Hervey!”
“And had you never any thing to give
to Mr. Hervey till now?”
“Never! never! he has given me every
thing: now—O joyful day!—I can prove
to him that Virginia is not ungrateful!”
“Dear generous girl,” said her father,
wiping the tears from his eyes, “what a
daughter have I found! But tell me, my
child,” continued he, smiling; “do you
think Mr. Hervey will be content if you
give him only your fortune? Do you think
that he would accept the fortune without
the heart?—Nay, do not turn away that
dear blushing face from me: remember it
is your father who speaks to you.
“Mr. Hervey will not take your fortune
without yourself, I am afraid—What shall
we do? Must I refuse him your hand?”
“Refuse him! do you think that I
could refuse him any thing, who has given
me every thing?—I should be a monster
indeed! There is no sacrifice I would not

make, no exertion of which I am not capable,
for Mr. Hervey's sake. But my dear
father,” said she, changing her tone, “he
never asked for my hand, till yesterday.”
“But he had got your heart long ago,
I see,” thought her father.
“I have written an answer to his letter; 
will you look at it, and tell me if you approve
of it.”
“I do approve of it, my darling child:
—I will not read it—I know what it must
be—he has a right to the preference he
has so nobly earned.”
“O, he has! he has indeed,” cried:
Virginia, with an expression of strong feeling; 
“and now is the time to show him
that I am not ungrateful.”
“How I love you for this, my child!” 
cried her father, fondly embracing her.
“This is exactly what I wished, though I
did not dare to say so, till I was sure of
your sentiments. Mr. Hervey charged
me to leave you intirely to yourself; he
thought that your new situation might
perhaps produce some change in your

sentiments: I see he was mistaken, and I
am heartily glad of it—But you are
going to say something, my dear, do not
let me interrupt you.”
“I was only going to beg, that you
would give this letter, my dear father, to
Mr. Hervey. It is an answer to one, which
he wrote to me when I was poor”—and
deserted—she was near saying, but she
stopped herself.
“I wish,” continued she, “Mr. Hervey
should know, that my sentiments are
precisely the same now, that they have
always been. Tell him,” added she, proudly,
“that he did me injustice, by imagining
that my sentiments could alter with
my situation. He little knows Virginia.”
Clarence at this moment entered the
room, and Mr. Hartley eagerly led his
daughter to meet him.
“Take her hand,” cried he—“you
have her heart—you deserve it—and she
has just been very angry with me for
doubting.—But read her letter, that will

speak better for her, and more to your
satisfaction, no doubt, than I can.”
Virginia hastily put the letter into Mr.
Hervey's hand, and breaking from her
father, retired to her own apartment.
With all the trepidation of a person; 
who feels that the happiness of his life is
to be decided in a few moments, Clarence
tore open Virginia's letter, and conscious
that he was not able to command his emotion,
he withdrew from her father's inquiring
eyes. Mr. Hartley, however, saw
nothing in this agitation, but what he
thought natural to a lover, and he was delighted
to perceive, that his daughter had
inspired so strong a passion.
Virginia's letter contained but these
few lines.

“Most happy shall I be, if the whole
of my future life can prove to you how
deeply I feel your goodness.”
“Virginia St. Pierre.”

An acceptance so direct left Clarence
no alternative: his fate was decided. He
determined immediately to force himself
to see Belinda and Mr. Vincent, for he
fancied, that his mind would be more at
case, when he had convinced himself by
ocular demonstration, that she was absolutely
engaged to another; that consequently,
even if he were free, he could
have no chance of gaining her affections.
There are moments, when we desire the
conviction, which at another time would
overwhelm us with despair. It was in this
temper, that Mr. Hervey paid his visit to
lady Delacour; but we have seen, that he
was unable to support, for many minutes,
that philosophic composure, to which, at
his first entrance into the room, he had
worked up his mind. The tranquillity,
which he had expected would be the consequence
of this visit, he was farther than
ever from obtaining. The extravagant
joy, with which lady Delacour received
him, and an indescribable something in

her manner, when she looked from him
to Belinda, and from Belinda to Mr. Vincent,
persuaded him her ladyship wished
that he were in Mr. Vincent's place. The
idea was so delightful, that his soul was
entranced, and for a few minutes Virginia,
and every thing that related to her, vanished
from his remembrance. It was
whilst he was in this state, that lady Delacour
(as the reader may recollect) invited
him into her lord's dressing-room, to tell
her the contents of the packet, which had
not then reached her hands. The request
suddenly recalled him to his senses, but he
felt that he was not at this moment able
to trust himself to her ladyship's penetration; 
he therefore referred her to his
letter for that explanation, which he dreaded
to make in person, and he escaped from
Belinda's presence, resolving never more
to expose himself to such danger.
What effect this packet produced on
lady's Delacour's mind, and whether she
forgave Belinda for the steadiness of her

attachment to Mr. Vincent, we shall not
at present stop to inquire; but having
brought up Clarence Hervey's affairs to
the present day, we shall continue his
history.