

Crescent, Bath.
July—Wednesday.
MY DEAR BELINDA,
“I received safely the bank notes for
my two hundred guineas, enclosed in
your last. But you should never trust
unnecessairly in this manner to the post
—always, when you are obliged to send
bank notes by post, cut them in two,
and send half by one post and half by
another. This is what is done by all prudent
people. Prudence, whether in trifles
or in matters of consequence, can be
learned only by experience (which is
often too dearly bought)—or by listening,
which costs nothing, to the suggestions
of those who have a thorough knowledge
of the world.
“A report has just reached me concerning
you and a certain lord, which
gives me the most heartfelt concern. I

always knew, and told you, that you were
a great favourite with the person in question.
I depended on your prudence,
delicacy, and principles, to understand
this hint properly, and I trusted that you
would conduct yourself accordingly. It
is too plain (from the report alluded to)
that there has been some misconduct
or mismanagement somewhere. The
misconduct I cannot—the mismanagement
I must attribute to you, my dear.
For, let a man's admiration for any woman
be ever so great, unless she suffer
herself to be dazzled by vanity, or unless
she be naturally of an inconsiderate
temper, she can surely prevent his partiality
from becoming so glaring as to excite
envy. Envy is always to be dreaded
by handsome young women, as being,
sooner or later, infallibly followed by
scandal.—Of this I fear you have not
been sufficiently aware, and you see the
consequences—consequences which, to
a female of genuine delicacy or of real
good sense, must be extremely alarming.

—Men of contracted minds and cold
tempers, who are absolutely incapable
of feeling generous passion for our sex,
are often unaccountably ambitious to
gain the reputation of being well with
any woman whose beauty, accomplishments,
or connexions, may have brought
her into fashion. Whatever affection
may be pretended, this is frequently the
ultimate and sole object of these selfish
creatures. Whether or not the person
I have in my eye deserves to be included
in this class, I will not presume positively
to determine; but you, who have
personal opportunities of observation,
may decide this point (if you have any
curiosity on the subject) by observing
whether he most affects to pay his devoirs
to you in public or in private. If
the latter be the case, it is the most
dangerous: because a man even of the
most contracted understanding has always
sense, or instinct, enough to feel
that the slightest taint in the reputation
of the woman who is, or who is to be,

his wife, would affect his own private
peace, or his honour, in the eyes of the
world. A husband who has, in a first
marriage, been, as it is said, in constant
fear both of matrimonial subjugation
and disgrace, would, in his choice of a
second lady, be peculiarly nice, and
probably tardy. Any degree of favour
that might have been shown him, any
report that may have been raised, and,
above all, any restraint he might feel
himself under from implied engagement,
or from the discovery or reputation of
superiour understanding and talents in the
object beloved, would operate infallibly
against her, to the confusion of all
her plans, and the ruin at once of her
reputation, her peace of mind, and her
hopes of an establishment.—Nay, supposing
the best that could possibly happen—that,
after playing with the utmost
dexterity this desperate game, the pool
were absolutely your own; yet, if there
were any suspicions of unfair play buzzed
about amongst the by-standers, you

would not in the main be a gainer; for,
my dear, without character, what is even
wealth, or all that wealth can bestow?— 
I do not mean to trouble you with stale
wise sayings, which young people hate,
nor musty morality, which is seldom
fit for use in the world, or which smells
too much of books to be brought into
good company. This is not my way of
giving advice; but I only beg you to observe
what actually passes before your
eyes in the circle in which we live.— 
Ladies of the best families, with rank
and fortune, and beauty and fashion,
and every thing in their favour, cannot
(as yet in this country) dispense with
the strictest observance of the rules of
virtue and decorum. Some have fancied
themselves raised so high above
the vulgar, as to be in no danger from
the thunder and lightning of public
opinion: but these ladies in the clouds
have found themselves mistaken; they
have been blasted, and have fallen nobody
knows where!—What is become

of lady&wblank;, and the countess of&wblank;,
and others I could mention, who were
as high as envy could look?—I remember
seeing the countess of&wblank;, who
was then the most beautiful creature
my eyes ever beheld, and the most admired
that ever was heard of, come into
the Opera-house, and sit the whole night
in her box without any woman's speaking
or curtsying to her, or taking any
more notice of her than you would of a
post, or a beggar woman.—And there
was the ci-devant lady&wblank;; I danced
in the same set with her myself at Cheltenham
about fifteen years ago,—the
best dressed woman in the room she
was, sparkling as I well remember with
diamonds;—this same woman was seen
yesterday by a gentleman on whom I
can depend, at&wblank;races, in rags, absolute
rags! drinking brandy in a booth
with common soldiers!—I protest I
tremble when I think of these things,— 
and you do too, I am sure, my dear! Even
a coronet cannot protect a woman, you

see, from disgrace: if she falls, she and it
and all together are trampled under foot.
—But why should I address all this to
my dear niece? Whither have the terrour
and confusion I was thrown into by this
strange report about you and lord&wblank; 
led me?—And yet one cannot be too
cautious—‘Ce n'est que le premier mot
qui coute’—Scandal never stops after
the first word, unless she be instantly
gagged by a dexterous hand. Nothing shall be wanting on any part, but yet
alone are the person who can do any
thing effectual. Do not imagine that I
would have you quit lady&wblank;; that is
the first idea, I know, that will come into
your silly little head, but put it out directly.
If you were upon this attack to quit
the field of battle, you yield the victory
to your enemies. To leave lady&wblank;'s
house would be folly and madness.
As long as she is your friend, or appears
such, all is safe; but any coolness on
her part would, in the present circumstances,
be death to your reputation.

And even if you were to leave her on
the best terms possible, the malicious
world would say that you left her on
the worst, and would assign as a reason
the report alluded to. People who have
not yet believed it would then conclude
that it must be true; and thus, by your
cowardice, you would furnish an incontrovertible
argument against your innocence.
I therefore desire that you will
not upon any account think of coming
home to me at present. Indeed, I hope
your own good sense would prevent
you from wishing it, after the reasons
that I have given. Far from quitting
lady&wblank;from false delicacy, it is your
business, from consideration for her peace
as well as your own, to redouble your
attentions to her in private, and, above
all things, to appear as much as possible
with her in public. I am glad to
hear her health is so far reestablished
that she can appear again in public— 
her spirits, as you may hint, will be the
better for a little amusement. Luckily,

you have it completely in your power to
convince her and all the world of the
correctness of your mind. I believe I
certainly should have fainted, my dear,
when I first heard this shocking report,
if I had not just afterward received a
letter from sir Philip Baddeley which revived
me. His proposal at this crisis
for you, my dear, is a charming thing.
You have nothing to do but to encourage
his addresses immediately,—the report
dies away of itself,—and all is just
as your best friends wish. Such an establishment
for you, my dear, is indeed
beyond their most sanguine expectations.
Sir Philip hints in his letter, that
my influence might be wanting with you in
his favour—But this surely cannot be. As
I have told him, he has merely mistaken
becoming female reserve for a want of
sensibility on your part, which would
be equally unnatural and absurd. Do
you know, my dear, that sir Philip Baddeley
has an estate of fifteen thousand a
year in Wiltshire? and his uncle Barton's

estate in Norfolk will, in due time, pay
his debts. Then, as to family—look in
the list of baronets in your pocket book; 
and surely, my love, an old baronetage
in actual possession is worth something
more than the reversion of a new coronet— 
supposing that such a thing could
properly be thought of, which Heaven
forbid!—So I see no possible objection
to sir Philip, my dear Belinda! and I am
sure you have too much candour and
good sense to make any childish or romantic
difficulties. Sir Philip is not, I
know, a man of what you call genius. So
much the better, my dear!—Those men
of genius are dangerous husbands; they
have so many oddities and eccentricities
there is no managing them, though they
are mighty pleasant men in company
to enliven conversation. For example,
your favourite Clarence Hervey. As it is
well known he is not a marrying man,
you never can have thought of him.— 
You are not a girl, to expose yourself
to the ridicule, &c. of all your female

acquaintance by romance and nonsense.
I cannot conceive that a niece of mine
could degrade herself by a mean prepossession
for a man, who has never
made any declaration of his attachment
to her, and who, I am sure, feels no
such attachment. That you may not
deceive yourself, it is fit I should tell
you, what otherwise it might not be so
proper to mention to a young lady, that
he keeps, and has kept a mistress for
some years; and those who are most intimately
in his confidence have assured
me, that, if ever he marries any body,
he will marry this girl; which is not
impossible, considering that she is, they
say, the most beautiful young creature
that ever was seen, and he a man of
genius. If you have any sense or spirit,
I have said enough.—So adieu!—Let me
hear, by return of the post, that every
thing is going on as it should do. I am
impatient to write to your sister Tollemache
this good news. I always foretold,
that my Belinda would marry better

than her sister, or any of her cousins,
and take place of them all. Are not you
obliged to me for sending you this winter
to town to lady&wblank;? It was an admirable
hit. Pray tell lady Delacour,
with my best compliments, that our aloe
friend (her ladyship will understand me)
cheated a gentleman of my acquaintance
the other day, at casino, out of
seventy guineas. He hates the sight of
her odious red wig as much now as we
always did. I knew, and told lady
D&wblank;, as she will do me the justice to
remember, that Mrs.&wblank;cheated at
play.—What a contemptible character!
—Pray, my dear, do not forget to tell
lady Delacour, that I have a charming
anecdote for her, about another friend
of ours who has lately gone over to the
enemy. Has her ladyship seen a manuscript
that is handed about as a great
secret, and said to be by&wblank;, a parallel
between our friend and the chevalier
D'Eon? It is done with infinite wit
and humour, in the manner of Plutarch.

I would send a copy, but am afraid my
frank would be too heavy if I began
upon another sheet.—So once more,
adieu, my dear niece! Write to me
without fail, and mention sir Philip. I
have written to him my thanks, approbation, &c.
Yours sincerely,
Selina Stanhope.”,
“Mrs. Stanhope seems to have written
you a volume instead of a letter,
miss Portman!” cried lady Delacour as
Belinda turned over the sheets of her
aunt's long epistle. She did not attempt
to read it regularly through: some
passages here and there were sufficient
to astonish and shock her extremely.
“No bad news, I hope?”—said lady
Delacour, again looking up from her
writing at Belinda, who sat motionless,
leaning her head upon her hand as if
in deep thought—Mrs. Stanhope's unfolded
letter hanging from her hand.
In the midst of the variety of embarrassing,
painful, and alarming feelings

excited by this letter, she had sufficient
strength of mind to adhere to her resolution
of speaking the exact truth to
lady Delacour. When she was roused
by her ladyship's question, “No bad
news, I hope, miss Portman?” she instantly
answered, with all the firmness
she could command,
“Yes. My aunt has been alarmed by
a strange report which I heard myself
for the first time this morning from Mr.
Hervey. I am sure I am much obliged
to him for having the courage to speak
the truth to me.”
And here she repeated what Mr.
Hervey had said to her.
Lady Delacour never raised her eyes
whilst Belinda spoke, but went on
scratching out some words in what she
was writing. Through the mask of paint
which she wore, no change of colour
could be visible; and as Belinda did not
see the expression of her ladyship's
eyes, she could not in the least judge
of what was passing in her mind.

“Mr. Hervey has acted like a man of
honour and sense,” said lady Delacour; 
“but it is a pity, for your sake, he did
not speak sooner—before this report became
so public—before it reached Bath,
and your aunt.—Though it could not surprise
her much—she has such a perfect
knowledge of the world,—and—” 
Lady Delacour uttered these broken
sentences in a voice of suppressed anger; 
cleared her throat several times, and at
last, unable to speak, stopped short—and
then began with much precipitation to
put wafers into several notes that she
had been writing. So, it has reached
Bath?—thought she—The report is public!— 
I never till now heard a hint of
any such thing, except from sir Philip
Baddely; but it has doubtless been the
common talk of the town, and I am
laughed at as a dupe and an idiot, as I
am. And now, when the thing can be
concealed no longer, she comes to me
with that face of simplicity, and, knowing
my generous temper, throws herself

on my mercy, and trusts that her speaking
to me with this audacious plainness
will convince me of her innocence.
“You have acted in the most prudent
manner possible, miss Portman,” said
her ladyship, as she went on sealing her
notes, “by speaking at once to me of this
strange, scandalous, absurd report. Do
you act from your aunt Stanhope's advice,
or entirely from your own judgment
and knowledge of my character?”
“From my own judgment and knowledge
of your character, in which I hope
—I am not—I cannot be mistaken,” 
said Belinda, looking at her with a mixture
of doubt and astonishment.
“No—you calculated admirably— 
'twas the best, the only thing you
could do—Only,” said her ladyship, falling
back in her chair with an hysteric
laugh, “only the blunder of Champfort,
and the entrance of my lord Delacour,
and the hammercloth with the
orange and black fringe. Forgive me,
my dear! for the soul of me I can't help

laughing! it was rather unlucky; so
awkward, such a contre-temps! But
you,” added she, wiping her eyes, and
recovering from laughter, “you have such
admirable presence of mind, nothing
disconcerts you! You are equal to all
situations, and stand in no need of such
long letters of advice from your aunt
Stanhope,” pointing to the two folio
sheets which lay at Belinda's feet.
The rapid, unconnected manner in
which lady Delacour spoke, the hurry
of her motions, the quick, suspicious,
angry glances of her eye, her laugh, her
unintelligible words, all conspired at
this moment to give Belinda the idea
that her intellects were suddenly disordered.
She was so firmly persuaded
of her ladyship's utter indifference to
lord Delacour, that she never conceived
the possibility of her being actuated by
the passion of jealousy—by the jealousy
of power—a species of jealousy which
she had never felt, and could not comprehend.
But she had sometimes seen

lady Delacour in starts of passion that
seemed to border on insanity, and the
idea of her losing all command of her
reason now struck Belinda with irresistible
force. She felt the necessity for
preserving her own composure; and with
all the calmness that she could assume
she took up her aunt Stanhope's letter,
and looked for the passage in which
Mrs. Luttridge and Harriet Freke were
mentioned. If I can turn the course of
lady Delacour's mind, thought she, or
catch her attention, perhaps she will recover
herself. “Here is a message to
you, my dear lady Delacour!” cried she,
“from my aunt Stanhope, about—about
Mrs. Luttridge.”
Miss Portman's hands trembled as she
turned over the pages of the letter. “I
am all attention,” said lady D&wblank;with
a composed voice; “only take care don't
make a mistake: I am in no hurry, don't
read any thing Mrs. Stanhope might not
wish. It is dangerous to garble letters,
almost as dangerous as to snatch them

out of a friend's hand, as I once did, you
know—but you need not now be under
the least alarm.”
Conscious that this letter was not fit
for her ladyship to see, Belinda neither
offered to show it to her, nor attempted
any apology for her reserve and embarrassment,
but hastily began to read the
message relative to Mrs. Luttridge; her
voice gaining confidence as she went
on, as she observed that she had fixed
lady Delacour's attention, who now sat
listening to her, calm and motionless.
But when miss Portman came to the
words “Do not forget to tell lady
D&wblank;, that I have a charming anecdote
for her about another friend of hers, who
lately went over to the enemy,”—her
ladyship exclaimed with great vehemence,
“Friend!—Harriet Freke!—Yes— 
like all other friends—Harriet Freke!— 
What was she compared to?—'Tis too
much for me—too much.”—and she put
her hand to her head.

“Compose yourself, my dear friend!” 
said Belinda, in a calm gentle tone; and
she went towards her with an intention of
soothing her by caresses: but, at her
approach, lady Delacour pushed the table
on which she had been writing from
her with violence; started up, flung
back the veil which fell over her face as
she rose, and darted upon Belinda a look
which fixed her to the spot where she
stood. It said, “Come not a step
nearer, at your peril!” Belinda's blood ran
cold—she had no longer any doubt that
this was insanity. She shut the penknife
which lay upon the table, and put
it in her pocket.
“Cowardly creature!” cried lady
Delacour, and her countenance changed
to the expression of ineffable contempt— 
“what is it you fear?”
“That you should injure yourself.— 
Sit down—For Heaven's sake listen to
me, to your friend, to Belinda!”
“My friend! my Belinda!” cried
lady Delacour, and she turned from her,

and walked away some steps in silence; 
then suddenly clasping her hands, she
raised her eyes to Heaven with a fervent
but wild expression of devotion, and exclaimed— 
“Great God of Heaven! my punishment
is just. The death of Lawless is
avenged.—May the present agony of
my soul expiate my folly!—Of guilt— 
deliberate guilt—of hypocrisy—treachery
—I have not—O never may I have— 
to repent!”
She paused—her eyes involuntarily returned
upon Belinda. “Oh Belinda!— 
You! whom I have so loved! so
trusted!”
The tears rolled fast down her painted
cheeks; she wiped them hastily away,
and so roughly, that her face became a
strange and ghastly spectacle. Unconscious
of her disordered appearance, she
rushed past Belinda, who vainly attempted
to stop her, threw up the sash, and,
stretching herself far out of the window,
gasped for breath. Miss Portman drew

her back, and closed the window, saying,
“The rouge is all off your face, my dear
lady Delacour!—you are not fit to be
seen. Sit down upon this sofa, and I
will ring for Marriott, and get some
fresh rouge. Look at your face in this
glass—you see—”
“I see,” interrupted lady Delacour,
looking full at Belinda, “that she who I
thought had the noblest of souls has
the meanest!—I see that she is incapable
of feeling.—Rouge!—not fit to be
seen!—At such a time as this, to talk
to me in this manner!—O niece of Mrs.
Stanhope!—dupe!—dupe that I am!” 
She flung herself upon the sofa, and
struck her forehead with her hand violently
several times. Belinda catching
her arm, and holding it with all her
force, cried in a tone of authority— 
“Command yourself, lady Delacour!
I conjure you, or you will go out of your
senses; and if you do, your secret will be
discovered by the whole world.”
“Hold me not—you have no right,”

cried lady Delacour, struggling to free
her hand. “All powerful as you are in
this house, you have no longer any
power over me!—I am not going out
of my senses!—You cannot get me into
Bedlam, all powerful, all artful as you
are. You have done enough to drive me
me mad—but I am not mad.—No wonder
you cannot believe me—no wonder
you are astonished at the strong expression
of feelings that are foreign to your
nature—no wonder that you mistake the
writhings of the heart, the agony of a
generous soul, for madness! Look not
so terrified, I will do you no injury. Do
not you hear that I can lower my voice?
—do not you see that I can be calm?— 
Could Mrs. Stanhope herself—could you,
miss Portman, speak in a softer, milder,
more polite, more proper tone than I do
now?—Are you pleased, are you satisfied?”
“I am better satisfied—a little better
satisfied,” said Belinda.
“That's well,—but still you tremble.

There's not the least occasion for apprehension— 
You see I can command myself,
and smile upon you.”
“O, do not smile in that horrid
manner.”
“Why not?—Horrid!—Don't you love
deceit?”
“I detest it from my soul.”
“Indeed!” said lady Delacour, still
speaking in the same low, soft, unnatural
voice—“Then why do you practise it,
my love?”
“I never practised it for a moment—I
am incapable of deceit.—When you are
really calm, when you can really command
yourself, you will do me justice,
lady Delacour; but now it is my business,
if I can, to bear with you.”
“You are goodness itself, and gentleness,
and prudence personified.—You
know how perfectly to manage a friend,
whom you far you have driven just to
the verge of madness. But tell me, good,
gentle, prudent miss Portman, why need
you dread so much that I should go mad?

You know, if I went mad, nobody would
mind, nobody would believe whatever
I said—I should be no evidence against
you, and I should be out of your way
sufficiently, shouldn't I?—And you would
have all the power in your own hands,
would not you?—And would not this be
almost as well as if I were dead and
buried?—No. Your calculations are better
than mine. The poor mad wife would
still be in your way, would yet stand between
you and the fond object of your
secret soul—a coronet!”
As she pronounced the word coronet,
she pointed to a coronet set in diamonds
on her watch-case, which lay on the table.
Then suddenly seizing the watch, she
dashed it upon the marble hearth with
all her force—“Vile bauble!” cried she,
“must I lose my only friend for such a
thing as you? Oh, Belinda! do not you
see that a coronet cannot confer happiness?”
“I have seen it long:—I pity you from

the bottom of my soul,” said Belinda,
and she burst into tears.
“Pity me not. I cannot endure your
pity, treacherous woman!” cried lady
Delacour, and she stamped with a look
of rage—“most perfidious of women!”
“Yes, call me perfidious, treacherous,
—stamp at me—say, do what you will; 
I can and will bear it all—all patiently; 
for I am innocent, and you are mistaken
and unhappy,” said Belinda. “You will
love me when you return to your senses,
then how can I be angry with you!”
“Fondle me not,” said lady Delacour,
starting back from Belinda's caresses— 
“Do not degrade yourself to no purpose
—I never more can be your dupe—Your
protestations of innocence are wasted on
me—I am not so blind as you imagine— 
Dupe as you think me, I have seen much
in silence. The whole world, you find,
suspects you now.—To save your reputation,
you want my friendship—you
want—”

“I want nothing from you, lady Delacour,” 
said Belinda—“You have suspected
me long in silence—Then I have mistaken
your character, I can love you no
longer—Farewell for ever!—Find another— 
a better friend.”
She walked away from lady Delacour
with proud indignation; but, before she
reached the door, she recollected her
promise to remain with this unfortunate
woman.
Is a dying woman, in the paroxysm
of insane passion, a fit object of indignation?
thought Belinda, and she stopped
short.—“No, lady Delacour,” cried she,
“I will not yield to my humour—I will not
listen to my pride. A few words said in
the heat of passion shall not make me
forget myself or you. You have given
me your confidence, I am grateful for it.
I cannot—will not desert you—my promise
is sacred.”
“Your promise!” said lady Delacour
contemptuously, “I absolve you from
your promise. Unless you find it convenient

to yourself to remember it, pray
let it be forgotten; and if I must die—” 
At this instant, the door opened suddenly,
and little Helena came in singing— 
“Merrily, merrily shall we live now,
Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.”
“What comes next, miss Portman?”
Lady Delacour dragged her veil across
her face, and rushed out of the room.
“What is the matter?—Is mamma
ill?”
“Yes, my dear,” said Belinda. But
at this instant she heard the sound of
lord Delacour's voice upon the stairs, and
she broke from the little girl, and with
the greatest precipitation retreated to her
own room.
She had not been alone above half
an hour before Marriott knocked at the
door.
“Miss Portman, you don't know how
late it is. Lady Singleton and the miss
Singletons are come. But, merciful Heaven!”

exclaimed Marriott as she entered
the room, “what is all this packing up?
What is this trunk?”
“I am going to Oakly-park with lady
Anne Percival,” said Belinda calmly.
“I thought there was something
wrong, my mind misgave me all the time
I was dressing my lady, she was in such
a flutter, and never spoke to me—I'd lay
my life this is, some way or other, Mr.
Champfort's doings. But, good dear miss
Portman, can you leave my poor lady when
she wants you so much—and I'll take upon
me to say, ma'am, loves you so much at the
bottom of her heart?—Dear me, how your
face is flushed!—Pray let me pack up
these things, if it must be. But I do hope,
if it be possible, that you should stay.— 
However, I've no business to speak. I
beg pardon for being so impertinent; I
hope you won't take it ill, it is only from
regard to my poor lady I ventured to
speak.”
“Your regard to your lady deserves

the highest approbation, Marriott,” said
Belinda. “It is impossible that I should
stay with her any longer. When I am
gone, good Marriott, and when her health
and strength decline, your fidelity and
your services will be absolutely necessary
to your mistress; and from what I have
seen of the goodness of your heart, I am
convinced that the more she is in want
of you, the more respectful will be your
attention.”
Marriott answered only by her tears,
and went on packing up in a great hurry.
Nothing could equal lady Delacour's
astonishment, when she learnt from Marriott
that miss Portman was actually preparing
to leave the house. After a moment's
reflection, however, she persuaded
herself that this was only a new artifice
to work upon her affections; that Belinda
did not mean to leave her; but that she
would venture all lengths, in hopes of
being at the last moment pressed to stay.
Under this persuasion, lady Delacour
resolved to disappoint her expectations;

she determined to meet her with that
polite coldness, which would best become
her own dignity, and which, without infringing
the laws of hospitality, would
effectually point out to the world, that
lady Delacour was no dupe, and that
miss Portman was an unwelcome inmate
in her house.
The power of assuming gayety when
her heart was a prey to the most poignant
feelings, she had completely acquired
by long practice. With the promptitude
of an actress she could instantly appear
upon the stage, and support a character
totally foreign to her own. The loud
knocks at the door which announced the
arrival of company, were signals that
operated punctually upon her associations; 
and to this species of conventional
necessity her most violent passions submitted
with magical celerity. Fresh
rouged, and elegantly dressed, she was
performing her part to a brilliant audience
in her drawing-room, when Belinda entered.

Belinda beheld her with much
astonishment, but more pity.
“Miss Portman,” said her ladyship,
turning carelessly towards her, “where
do you buy your rouge? Lady Singleton,
would you rather at this moment be
mistress of the philosopher's stone, or
have a patent for rouge that will come
and go like miss Portman's?—A propos,
have you read St. Leon?” Her ladyship
was running on to a fresh train of ideas,
when a footman announced the arrival of
lady Anne Percival's carriage; and miss
Portman rose to depart.
“You dine with lady Anne, miss Portman,
I understand?—My compliments
to her ladyship, and my duty to Mrs.
Margaret Delacour, and her maccaw.— 
Au revoir! Though you talk of running
away from me to Oakly-park, I am sure
you will do no such cruel thing. I am,
with all due humility, so confident of the
irresistible attractions of this house, that
I defy Oakly-park and all its charms.—

So, miss Portman, instead of adieu, I shall
only say—Au revoir!”
“Adieu, lady Delacour!” said Belinda
with a look and tone which struck her
ladyship to the heart. All her supicions,
all her pride, all her affected gayety
vanished; her presence of mind forsook
her, and for some moments she stood motionless
and powerless. Then recollecting
herself, she flew after miss Portman
abruptly, stopped her at the head of the
stairs, and exclaimed,
“My dearest Belinda, are you gone?— 
My best, my only friend!—Say you are
not gone for ever!—Say you will return!”
“Adieu!” repeated Belinda. It was
all she could say; and she broke from
lady Delacour, and hurried out of the
house with the strongest feeling of compassion
for this unhappy woman, but with
an unaltered sense of the propriety and
necessity of her own firmness.