

In what words of polite circumlocution,
or of cautious diplomacy, shall we say,
or hint, that the deceased ambassador's
papers were found in shameful disorder.
His excellency's executor, sir James
Brooke, however, was indefatigable in
his researches. He and lord Colambre
spent two whole days in looking over
portfolios of letters and memorials, and
manifestoes and bundles of paper, of
the most heterogeneous sorts; some of
them without any docket or direction,
to lead to a knowlèdge of their contents; 
others written upon in such a
manner, as to give an erroneous notion
of their nature, so that it was necessary
to unite every paper separately.
At last, when they had opened, as they

thought, every paper; and, wearied and
in despair, were just on the point of
giving up the search; lord Colambre
spied a bundle of old newspapers at the
bottom of a trunk.
“They are only old Vienna Gazettes,
I looked at them,” said sir James.
Lord Colambre, upon this assurance,
was going to throw them into the trunk
again, but observing that the bundle
had not been untied, he opened it, and
within side of the newspapers he found
a rough copy of the ambassador's journal,
and with it the packet, directed to
Ralph Reynolds, sen., Esq., Old Court,
Suffolk, per favour of his excellency
earl&wblank;,—a note on the cover,
signed O'Halloran, stating when received
by him, and the date of the
day when delivered to the ambassador— 
seals unbroken. Our hero was in such
a transport of joy at the sight of this
packet, and his friend, sir James Brooke,
so full of his congratulations, that they
forgot to curse the ambassador's carelessness,

which had been the cause of
so much evil.
The next thing to be done was to
deliver the packet to Ralph Reynolds,
Old Court, Suffolk. But when lord
Colambre arrived at Old Court, Suffolk,
he found all the gates locked, and no
admittance to be had. At last an old
woman came out of the porter's lodge,
who said Mr. Reynolds was not there,
and she could not say where he was.
After our hero had opened her heart by
the present of half a guinea, she explained,
that she “could not justly say
where he was, because that he never
let any body of his own people know
where he was any day; he had several
different houses and places in different
parts and far off counties, and other
shires, as she heard, and by times he
was at one, and by times at another.” 
The names of two of the places, Toddrington
and Little Wrestham, she
knew, but there were others to which
she could give no direction. He had

houses in odd parts of London too, that
he let; and sometimes, when the
lodgers time was out, he would go, and
be never heard of for a month, may be
in one of them. In short, there was no
telling or saying where he was or
would be one day of the week, by
where he had been the last.”
When lord Colambre expressed some
surprise, that an old gentleman, as he
conceived Mr. Ralph Reynolds to be,
should change places so frequently: the
old woman answered, “That though
her master was a deal on the wrong side
of seventy, and though, to look at him,
you'd think he was glued to his chair,
and would fall to pieces if he should
stir out of it, yet was as alert, and
thought no more of going about, than if
he was as young as the gentleman who
was now speaking to her. It was old
Mr. Reynolds's delight to come down
and surprise his people at his different
places, and see that they were keeping
all tight.”

“What sort of a man is he?—Is he
a miser?” said lord Colambre.
“He is a miser, and he is not a
miser,” said the woman. “Now he'd
think as much of the waste of a penny
as another man would of a hundred
pounds, and yet he would give a hundred
pounds easier than another would
give a penny—when he's in the humour.
But his humour is very odd, and
there's no knowing where to have him; 
he's cross-grained, and more positiver-like
than a mule; and his deafness made
him worse in this, because he never
heard what nobody said, but would say
on his own way—he was very odd, but
not cracked—no, he was as clear-headed,
when he took a thing the right way,
as any man could be, and as clever,
and could talk as well as any member
of parliament—and good-natured, and
kind-hearted, where he would take a
fancy—but then, may be, it would be
to a dog (he was remarkable fond of
dogs), or a cat, or a rat even, that he

would take a fancy, and think more
of 'em than he would of a christian.— 
But, poor gentleman, there's great allowance,” 
said she, “to be made for
him, that lost his son and their—that
would have been heir to all, and a fine
youth, that he doated upon. But,” 
continued the old woman, in whose
mind the transitions from great to little,
from serious to trivial, were ludicrously
abrupt, “that was no reason why the
old gentleman should scold me last time
he was here, as he did, for as long as
ever he could stand over me, only because
I killed a mouse who was eating
my cheese; and, before night, he beat
a boy for stealing a piece of that same
cheese; and he would never, when
down here, let me set a mousetrap.”
“Well, my good woman,” interrupted
lord Colambre, who was little interested
in this affair of the mousetrap,
and nowise curious to learn more of
Mr. Reynold's domestic economy, “I'll
not trouble you any farther, if you can

be so good as to tell me the road to
Toddrington, or to Little Wickham, I
think you call it.”
“Little Wickham!” repeated the
woman, laughing, “bless you, sir,
where do you come from?—It's Little
Wrestham; surely every body knows,
near Lantry, and keep the pike till you
come to the turn at Rotherford, and
then you strike off into the by-road to
the left, and then again turn at the ford
to the right. But, if you are going to
Toddrington, you don't go the road to
market, which is at the first turn to the
left, and the cross country road, where
there's no quarter, and Toddrington lies
—but for Wrestham, you take the road
to market.”
It was some time before our hero
could persuade the old woman to stick
to Little Wrestham, or to Toddrington,
and not to mix the directions for the
different roads together—he took patience,
for his impatience only confused
his director the more. In process of

time he made out and wrote down the
various turns that he was to follow to
reach Little Wrestham; but no human
power could get her from Little Wrestham
to Toddrington, though she knew
the road perfectly well; but she had,
for the seventeen last years, been used
to go “the other road,” and all the
carriers went that way, and passed the
door, and that was all she could certify.
Little Wrestham, after turning to the
left and right, as often as his directory
required, our hero happily reached: but
unhappily, he found no Mr. Reynolds
there; only a steward, who gave nearly
the same account of his master as had
been given by the old woman, and
could not guess even where the gentleman
might now be. Toddrington was
as likely as any place—but he could not
say.
“Perseverance against fortune.”— 
To Toddrington our hero proceeded,
through cross country roads—such
roads!—very different from the Irish

roads. Waggon ruts, into which the
carriage wheels sunk nearly to the nave
—and from time to time “sloughs of
despond,” through which it seemed impossible
to drag, walk, wade, or swim,
and all the time with a sulky postillion
—“O,how unlike my Larry!” thought
lord Colambre.
At length, in a very narrow lane, going
up a hill, said to be two miles of
ascent, they overtook a heavy laden
waggon, and they were obliged to go
step by step behind it, whilst, enjoying
the gentleman's impatience much, and
the postillion's sulkiness more, the waggoner,
in his embroidered frock, walked
in state, with his long sceptre in his
hand.
The postillion muttered ‘curses not
loud, but deep.’ Deep or loud, no
purpose would they have answered; 
the waggoner's temper was proof against
curse in or out of the English language; 
and, from their snail's pace, neither
Dickens, nor devil, nor any postillion

in England, could make him put his
horses. Lord Colambre jumped out of
the chaise, and, walking beside him,
began to talk to him; and spoke of his
horses, their bells, their trappings; the
beauty and strength of the thill-horse
—the value of the whole team, which
his lordship happening to guess right
within ten pounds, and showing, moreover,
some skill about road-making and
waggon-wheels, and being fortunately
of the waggoner's own opinion in the
great question, about conical and cylindrical
rims, he was pleased with
the young chap of a gentleman; and,
in spite of the chuffiness of his appearance,
and churlishness of his speech,
this waggoner's bosom ‘being made of
penetrating stuff,’ he determined to let
the gentleman pass. Accordingly, when
half way up the hill, and the head of
the forehorse came near an open gate,
the waggoner, without saying one word
or turning his head, touched the horse
with his long whip—and the horse

turned in at the gate, and then
came,
“Dobbin!—Jeho!”—and strange
calls and sounds, which all the other
horses of the team obeyed; and the
waggon turned into the farm yard.
“Now, master! while I turn, you
may pass.”
The covering of the waggon caught
in the hedge as the waggon turned in; 
and, as the sacking was drawn back,
some of the packages were disturbed— 
a cheese was just rolling off on the side
next lord Colambre; he stopped it from
falling: the direction caught his quick
eye—“To Ralph Reynolds, Esq.”— 
“Toddrington” scratched out; “Red
Lion Square, London,” written in
another hand below.
“Now, I have found him! And
surely, I know that hand!” said lord
Colambre to himself, looking more
closely at the direction.
The original direction was certainly

in a handwriting well known to him; 
it was lady Dashfort's.
“That there cheese, that you're
looking at so cur'ously,” said the waggoner,
“has been a great traveller; for
it came all the way down from Lon'on,
and now it's going all the way up again
back, on account of not finding the
gentleman at home; and the man that
booked it told me as how, it came
from foreign parts.”
Lord Colambre took down the direction,
tossed the honest waggoner a
guinea, wished him good night, passed,
and went on. As soon as he could, he
turned into the London road—at the
first town, got a place in the mail— 
reached London—saw his father—went
directly to his friend, count O'Halloran,
who was delighted when he beheld
the packet. Lord Colambre was
extremely eager to go immediately to
old Reynolds, fatigued as he was; for
he had travelled night and day, and

had scarcely allowed himself, mind or
body, one moment's repose.
“Heroes must sleep, and lovers
too; or they soon will cease to be heroes
or lovers!” said the count. “Rest,
rest, perturbed spirit! this night: and
to morrow morning we'll finish the
adventure in Red Lion Square, or I will
accompany you when and where you
will; if necessary, to Earth's remotest
bounds.”
The next morning lord Colambre
went to breakfast with the count. The
count, who was not in love, was not up,
for our hero was half an hour earlier
than the time appointed. The old
servant Ulick, who had attended his
master to England, was very glad to
see lord Colambre again, and, showing
him into the breakfast parlour, could
not help saying, in defence of his
master's punctuality—
“Your clocks, I suppose, my lord,
are half an hour faster than ours: my
master will be ready to the moment.”

The count soon appeared—breakfast
was soon over, and the carriage at the
door; for the count sympathised in his
young friend's impatience. As they
were setting out, the count's large Irish
dog pushed out of the house door to
follow them; and his master would have
forbidden him, but lord Colambre begged
that he might be permitted to accompany
them; for his lordship recollected
the old woman's having mentioned,
that Mr. Reynolds was fond of
dogs.
They arrived in Red Lion Square,
found the house of Mr. Reynolds, and,
contrary to the count's prognostics,
found the old gentleman up, and they
saw him in his red night-cap, at his
parlour window. After some minutes'
running backwards and forwards of a
boy in the passage, and two or three
peeps taken over the blinds by the old
gentleman, they were admitted.
The boy could not master their
names; so they were obliged reciprocally

to announce themselves—“Count
O'Halloran, and lord Colambre.” The
names seemed to make no impression
on the old gentleman; but he deliberately
looked at the count and his
lordship, as if studying what, rather
than who they were. In spite of the
red night-cap and a flowered dressing
gown, Mr. Reynolds looked like a gentleman,
an odd gentleman—but still a
gentleman.
As count O'Halloran came into the
room, and as his large dog attempted to
follow, the count's voice expressed— 
“Say, shall I let him in, or shut the
door?”
“O, let him in, by all means, sir,
if you please! I am fond of dogs; and
a finer one I never saw: pray, gentlemen,
be seated,” said he—a portion
of the complacency, inspired by the
sight of the dog, diffusing itself over
his manner towards the master of so fine
an animal, and even extending to the
master's companion, though in an inferior

degree. Whilst Mr. Reynolds
stroaked the dog, the count told him,
that “the dog was of a curious breed,
now almost extinct—the Irish greyhound; 
of which only one nobleman
in Ireland, it is said, has now a few
of the species remaining in his possession
... Now, lie down, Hannibal,” 
said the count. “Mr. Reynolds,
we have taken the liberty, though
strangers, of waiting upon you—”
“I beg your pardon, sir,” interrupted
Mr. Reynolds; “but did I understand
you rightly, that a few of the same
species are still to be had from one nobleman
in Ireland? Pray, what is his
name?” said he, taking out his pencil.
The count wrote the name for him,
but observed, that “he had asserted
only, that a few of these dogs remained
in the possession of that nobleman; he
could not answer for it, that they were
to be had.”
“O, I have ways and means!” said
old Reynolds; and rapping his snuff

box, and talking, as it was his custom,
loud to himself—“Lady Dashfort
knows all those Irish lords: she shall
get one for me—Ay! ay!”
“Count O'Halloran replied, as if the
words had deen addressed to him—
“Lady Dashfort is in England.”
“I know it, sir: she is in London,” 
said Mr. Reynolds, hastily. “What
do you know of her?”
“I know, sir, that she is not likely
to return to Ireland, and that I am; and
so is my young friend here: and, if the
thing can be accomplished, we will get
it done for you.”
Lord Colambre joined in this promise,
and added, that, “if the dog could be
obtained, he would undertake to have
him safely sent over to England.”
“Sir—gentlemen! I'm much obliged; 
that is, when you have done the
thing, I shall be much obliged.—But,
may be, you are only making me civil
speeches!”
“Of that, sir, said the count,”

smiling with much temper, “your own
sagacity and knowledge of the world
must enable you to judge.”
“For my own part, I can only say,” 
cried lord Colambre, “that I am not
in the habit of being reproached with
saying one thing and meaning another.”
“Hot! I see,” said old Reynolds,
nodding, as he looked at lord Colambre.
“Cool!” added he, nodding at
the count.—“But a time for every thing:
I was hot once:—both answers good,
for their ages.”
This speech lord Colambre and the
count tacitly agreed to consider as another
apart, which they were not to hear,
or seem to hear. The count began
again on the business of their visit, as
he saw that lord Colambre was boiling
with impatience, and feared that he
should boil over and spoil all. The
count commenced with— 
“Mr. Reynolds, your name sounds
to me like the name of a friend; for I

had once a friend of that name: I had
once the pleasure (and a very great
pleasure it was to me) to be intimately
acquainted, abroad, on the continent,
with a very amiable and gallant youth— 
your son!”
“Take care, sir!” said the old man,
starting up from his chair, and instantly
sinking down again—“Take care!
don't mention him to me—unless you
would strike me dead on the spot!”
The convulsed motions of his fingers
and face worked for some moments; 
whilst the count and lord Colambre,
much shocked and alarmed, stood in
silence.
The convulsed motions ceased; and
the old man unbuttoned his waiscoat,
as if to relieve some sense of expression; 
uncovered his gray hairs; and, after a
leaning back to rest himself, with his
eyes fixed, and in reverie for a few moments,
he sat upright again in his chair,
and exclaimed, as he looked round— 
“Son! did not somebody say that

word? Who is so cruel to say that
word before me? Nobody has ever
spoken of him to me—but once, since
his death! Do you know, sir,” said
he fixing his eyes on count O'Halloran,
and laying his cold hand on him—“Do
you know where he was buried, I ask
you, sir? do you remember how he
died?”
“Too well! too well!” cried the
count, so much affected as to be
scarcely able to pronounce the words.
—“He died in my arms: I buried him
myself!”
“Impossible!” cried Mr. Reynolds.
“Why do you say so, sir?” said he,
studying the count's face with a sort of
bewildered earnestness.—“Impossible!
His body was sent over to me in
a lead coffin; and I saw it—and I was
asked. ... and I answered, ‘in the
family vault.’ But the shock is over,” 
said he: “and, gentlemen, if the business
of your visit relates to that subject,
I trust I am now sufficiently

composed to attend to you. Indeed, I
ought to be prepared; for I had reason
for years to expect the stroke: and yet,
when it came, it seemed sudden!—it
stunned me—put an end to all my
worldly prospects—left me childless,
without a single descendant, or relation,
near enough to be dear to me!
I am an insulated being!”
“No, sir, you are not an insulated
being,” said lord Colambre: “you have
a near relation, who will, who must be
dear to you; who will make you amends
for all you have lost, all you have suffered
—who will bring peace and joy
to your heart.—You have a granddaughter.”
“No, sir; I have no grand-daughter,” 
said old Reynolds, his face and
whole form becoming rigid with the expression
of obstinacy. “Rather have
no descendant, than be forced to acknowledge
an illegitimate child.”
“My lord, I entreat as a friend—I
command you to be patient,” said the

count, who saw lord Colambre's indignation
suddenly rise.
“So then, this is the purpose of your
visit,” continued old Reynolds: “and
you come from my enemies; from the
St. Omar's, and you are in a league
with them,” continued old Reynolds
—and all this time it is of my eldest
son you have been talking.”
“Yes, sir,” replied the count; “of
captain Reynolds, who fell in battle, in
the Austrian service, about nineteen
years ago—a more gallant and amiable
youth never lived.”
Pleasure revived through the dull
look of obstinacy in the father's eyes.
“He was, as you say, sir, a gallant,
an amiable youth once—and he was my
pride, and I loved him too once—but
did not you know I had another?”
“No, sir, we did not—we are, you
may perceive, totally ignorant of your
family, and of your affairs—we have no
connection whatever, or knowledge of
any of the St. Omar's.”

“I detest the sound of the name,” 
cried lord Colambre.
“O, good! good!—Well! well! I
beg your pardon, gentlemen, a thousand
times—I am a hasty, very hasty old
man; but I have been harrassed, persecuted,
hunted by wretches, who got
a scent of my gold; often in my rage I
longed to throw my treasure bags to my
pursuers, and bid them leave me to die
in peace. You have feelings, I see,
both of you, gentlemen; excuse me and
bear with my temper.”
“Bear with you! Much enforced, the
best tempers will emit a hasty spark,” 
said the count, looking at lord Colambre,
who was now cool again; and who,
with a countenance full of compassion,
sat with his eyes fixed upon the poor— 
no not the poor—but the unhappy old
man.
“Yes, I had another son,” continued
Mr. Reynolds, “and on him all my affections
concentrated when I lost my
eldest, and for him I desired to preserve

the estate which his mother brought into
my family. Since you know nothing
of my affairs let me explain to you— 
that estate was so settled that it would
have gone to the child, even the daughter,
of my eldest son, if there had been a
legitimate child. But I knew there was
no marriage, and I held out firm to my
opinion.—‘If there was a marriage,’ 
said I, ‘show me the marriage certificate,
and I will acknowledge the marriage,
and acknowledge the child:’ but they
could not, and I knew they could not; 
and I kept the estate for my darling
boy,” cried the old gentleman, with the
exultation of successful positiveness
again appearing strong in his physiognomy; 
but suddenly changing and relaxing,
his countenance fell, and he
added,
“But now I have no darling boy— 
what use all!—all must go to the heir
at law, or I must will it to a stranger
—a lady of quality, who has just found
out she is my relation—God knows

how, I'm no genealogist—and sends me
Irish cheese and Iceland moss for my
breakfast, and her waiting gentlewoman
to namby-pamby-me. O, I'm sick of it
all—see through it—wish I was blind
—wish I had a hiding place, where
flatterers could not find me—pursued,
chaced—must change my lodgings again
to morrow—will, will—I beg your pardon
gentlemen, again. You were going
to tell me, sir, something more of my
eldest son, and how I was led away
from the subject I don't know; but I
meant only to have assured you that
his memory was dear to me, till I was
so tormented about that unfortunate affair
of his pretended marriage, that at
length I hated to hear him named; 
but the heir at law at last will triumph
over me.”
“No, my good sir, not if you triumph
over yourself and do justice,” 
cried lord Colambre; “if you listen to
the truth which my friend will tell you,
and if you will read and believe the

confirmation of it under your son's own
hand in this packet.”
“His own hand indeed! His seal— 
unbroken—but how—when—where— 
why was it kept so long, and how came
it into your hands?”
Count O'Halloran told Mr. Reynolds
that the packet had been given to him
by captain Reynolds on his death bed; 
related the dying acknowledgment which
captain Reynolds had made of his marriage; 
and gave an account of the delivery
of the packet to the ambassador,
who had promised to transmit it faithfully.
Lord Colambre told the manner
in which it had been mislaid, and at last
recovered from among the deceased ambassador's
papers. The father still gazed
at the direction, and reexamined the
seals.
“My son's hand writing—my son's
seals! But where is the certificate of
the marriage?” repeated he; “if it is
within side of this packet I have done
great in—But I am convinced it never

was a marriage. Yet I wish now it
could be proved—Only, in that case, I
have for years done great—”
“Won't you open the packet, sir,” 
said lord Colambre. Mr. Reynolds
looked up at him with a look that said,
“I don't clearly know what interest
you have in all this. But unable to
speak, and his hands trembling so that
he could scarcely break the seals, he
tore off the cover, laid the papers before
him, sat down, and took breath. Lord
Colambre, however impatient, had now
too much humanity to hurry the old
gentleman: he only ran for the spectacles
which he espied on the chimney-piece,
rubbed them bright, and held
them ready. Mr. Reynolds stretched
his hand out for them, put them on, and
the first paper he opened was the certificate
of the marriage: he read it aloud,
and putting it down, said,
“Now I acknowledge the marriage.
I always said, if there is a marriage
there must be a certificate. And you

see now there is a certificate—I acknowledge
the marriage.”
“And now,” cried lord Colambre,
“I am happy, positively happy. Acknowledge
your grand-daughter, sir,— 
acknowledge miss Nugent.”
“Acknowledge who, sir?”
“Acknowledge miss Reynolds—your
grand-daughter; I ask no more—do
what yo will with your fortune.”
“O, now I understand—I begin to
understand this young gentleman is in
love—but where is my grand-daughter?
—how shall I know she is my granddaughter?
I have not heard of her since
she was an infant—I forgot her existence
—I have done her great injustice.”
“She knows nothing of it sir,” said
lord Colambre, who now entered into a
full explanation of miss Nugent's history,
and of her connexion with his family,
and of his own attachment to her; 
concluding the whole by assuring Mr.
Reynolds, that his grand-daughter had
every virtue under heaven. “And as

to your fortune, sir, I know that she
will, as I do, say—”
“No matter what she will say,” interrupted
old Reynolds; “where is
she? When I see her I shall hear what
she says. Tell me where she is—let me
see her. I long to see whether there is
any likeness to her poor father. Where
is she? Let me see her immediately.”
“She is one hundred and sixty miles
off, sir, at Buxton.”
“Well, my lord, and what is a hundred
and sixty miles? I suppose you
think I can't stir from my chair, but
you are mistaken. I think nothing of a
journey of a hundred and sixty miles— 
I'm ready to set off to morrow—this instant.”
Lord Colambre said, that he was sure
miss Reynolds would obey her grandfather's
slightest summons, as it was her
duty to do, and would be with him as
soon as possible, if this would be more
agreeable to him. “I will write to her

instantly,” said his lordship, “if you
will commission me.”
“No, my lord, I do not commission
—I will go—I think nothing, I say, of
a journey of a hundred and sixty miles
—I'll go—and set out to morrow
morning.”
Lord Colambre and the count, perfectly
satisfied with the result of their
visit, now thought it best to leave old
Reynolds at liberty to rest himself, after
so many strong and varied feelings.
They paid their parting compliments,
settled the time for the next day's journey; 
and were just going to quit the
room, when lord Colambre heard in the
passage a well known voice—the voice
of Mrs. Petito.
“O no, my compliments, and my
lady Dashrort's best compliments, and
I will call again—”
“No no,” cried old Reynolds, pulling
his bell; “I'll have no calling
again—I'll be hanged if I do—let her in

now and I'll see her—Jack, let in that
woman now or never.”
“The lady's gone, sir, out of the
street door.”
“After her, then—now or never,” 
tell her.
“Sir, she was in a hackney coach.”
Old Reynolds jumped up and went
to the window himself, and seeing the
hackney coachman just turning, beckoned
at the window, and Mrs. Petito
was set down again, and ushered in by
Jack, who anounced her as— 
“The lady, sir.” The only lady he
had seen in that house.
“My dear Mr. Reynolds, I'm so
obliged to you for letting me in,” cried
Mrs. Petito, adjusting her shawl in the
passage, and speaking in a voice and
manner well mimicked after her betters,
—“You are so very good and kind,
and I am so much obliged to you.”
“You are not obliged to me, and I
am neither good nor kind,” said old
Reynolds.
“You strange man,” said Mrs. Petito,

advancing graceful in shawl drapery; 
but she stopped short—
“My lord Colambre and count
O'Halloran, as I hope to be saved!”
“I did not know Mrs. Petito was an
acquaintance of your's, gentlemen,” said
Mr. Reynolds, smiling shrewdly.
Count O'Halloran was too polite to
deny his acquaintance with a lady who
challenged it by thus naming him, but
he had not the slightest recollection of
her, though it seems he had met her on
the stairs when he visited Lady Dashfort
at Killpatrickstown.—Lord Colambre
was “indeed undeniably an old
acquaintance: and as soon as she had
recovered from her first natural start
and vulgar exclamation, she with very
easy familiarity hoped,
My lady Conbrony, and my lord,
and miss Nugent, and all her friends in
the family were well; and said, she did
not know whether she was to congratulate
his lordship or not upon miss
Broadhurst, my lady Berryl's marriage,

but she should soon have to hope for
his lordship's congratulations for another
marriage in her present family— 
lady Isabel to colonel Heathcock, who
has come in for a large portion, and they
are buying the wedding clothes—sights
of clothes—and the di'monds this day,
—and lady Dashfort and my lady Isabel
sent me especially, sir, to you, Mr. Reynolds,
and to tell you, sir, before any
body else; and to hope the cheese come
safe up again at last: and to ask whether
the Iceland moss agrees with your
chocolate, and is palateable; it's the
most diluent thing upon the universal
earth, and the most tonic and fashionable
—the dutches of Forcaster takes it always
for breakfast, and lady St. James's
too is quite a convert, and I hear the
duke of V&wblank; takes it too—”
“And the devil may take it too, for
any thing that I care,” said old Reynolds.
“O, my dear! dear sir! you are so
refractory a patient.”

“I am no patient at all, ma'am, and
have no patience either;—I am as well
as you are, or my lady Dashfort either,
and hope, God willing, long to continue
so.”
Mrs Petito smiled aside at lord
Colambre, to mark her perception of
the man's strangeness.—Then, in a cajoling
voice, addressing herself to the
old gentleman,
“Long, long, I hope, to continue so,
if Heaven grants my daily and nightly
prayers, and my lady Dashfort's also.
So, Mr. Reynolds, if the ladies' prayers
are of any avail, you ought to be purely,
and I suppose ladies' prayers have the
precedency in efficacy.—But it was
not of prayers and deathbed affairs I
came commissioned to treat—not of
burials, which Heaven above forbid,
but of weddings my diplomacy was to
speak: and to premise my lady Dashfort
would have come herself in her
carriage, but is hurried out of her
senses, and my lasy Isabel could not in

proper modesty; so they sent me as
their double, to hope you, my dear Mr.
Reynolds, who is one of the family relations,
will honour the wedding with
your presence.”
“It would be no honour, and they
know that as well as I do,” said the
intractable Mr. Reynolds. “It will be
no advantage either, but that they do
not know as well as I do.—Mrs. Petito,
to save you and your lady all trouble
about me in future, please to let my
lady Dashfort know that I have just
received and read the certificate of my
son captain Reynold's marriage with
miss St. Omar. I have acknowledged
the marriage. Better late than never.
And to morrow morning, God willing,
shall set out with this young nobleman
for Buxton, where I hope to see and
intend publicly to acknowledge my
grand-daughter—provided she will acknowledge
me—”
“Crimini!” exclaimed Mrs. Petito; 
“what new turns are here? Well, sir,

I shall tell my lady of the metamorphoses
that have taken place, though by what
magic, (as I have not the honour to
deal in the black art) I can't guess.
But, since it seems annoying and inopportune,
I shall take my finale, and
shall thus have a verbal P. P. C.—as
you are leaving town, it seems, for
Buxton, so early in the morning.—My
lord Colambre, if I see rightly into a
mill stone, as I hope and believe I do
on the present occasion, I have to congratulate
your lordship (haven't I?)
upon something like a succession, or a
windfall, in this denewment. And I
beg you'll make my humble respects
acceptable to the ci-devant miss Grace
Nugent that was; and I won't derrogate
her by any other name in the interregnum,
as I am persuaded it will only be
a temporary name, scarce worth assuming,
except for the honour of the public
adoption; and that will, I'm confident,
be soon exchanged for a viscount's

title, or I have no sagacity nor sympathy.
I hope I don't (pray don't let me)
put you to the blush, my lord.”
Lord Colambre would not have let
her, if he could have helped it.
“Count O'Halloran, your most
obedient! I had the honour of meeting
you at Killpatrickstown,” said Mrs.
Petito, backing to the door, and twitching
her shawl. She stumbled, nearly
fell down, over the large dog—caught
by the door, and recovered herself
Hannibal rose, and shook his ears.
“Poor fellow! you are of my acquaintance
too.” She would have stroked
his head, but Hannibal walked off indignant,
and so did she.
Thus ended certain hopes: for Mrs.
Petito had conceived that her diplomacy
might be turned to account; that in
her character of an ambassadress, as
lady Dashfort's double, by the aid of
Iceland moss in chocolate, flattery properly
administered; that, by bearing
with all her dear Mr. Reynolds oddnesses

and roughnessess, she might, in
time—that is to say, before he made a
new will—become his dear Mrs. Petito; 
or, (for stranger things have happened,
and do happen every day) his dear Mrs.
Reynolds! Mrs. Petito, however, was
good at a retreat; and she flattered herself,
that, at least, nothing of this under
plot had appeared: and, at all events,
she secured, by her services in this
embassy, the long looked for object of
her ambition, Lady Dashfort's scarlet
velvet gown—“Not yet a thread the
worse for the wear!” One cordial look
at this comforted her for the loss of her
expected octogenaire; and she proceeded
to discomfit her lady, by repeating the
message with which strange, old Mr.
Reynolds had charged her. ... So
ended all lady Dashfort's hopes of his
fortune.
Since the death of his youngest son,
she had been indefatigable in her attentions,
and sanguine in her hopes: the
disappointment affected both her interest

and her pride, as an intrigante. It
was necessary, however, to keep her
feelings to herself; for if Heathcock
should hear any thing of the matter before
the articles were signed, he might
“be off!”—So she put him and lady
Isabel into her coach directly—drove
to Gray's, to make sure, at all events,
of the jewels.
In the mean time, count O'Halloran
and lord Colambre, delighted with the
result of their visit, took leave of Mr.
Reynolds, after having arranged the
journey, and appointed the hour for
setting off the next day. Lord Colambre
proposed to call upon Mr. Reynolds
in the evening, and introduce his father,
lord Clonbrony; but Mr. Reynolds
said,
“No, no! I'm not ceremonious. I
have given you proofs enough of that, I
think, in the short time we've been already
acquainted.—Time enough to introduce
your father to me when we are
in a carriage, going our journey: then

we can talk, and get acquainted; but
merely to come this evening, in a hurry,
and say, ‘Lord Clonbrony, Mr. Reynolds; 
—Mr. Reynolds, lord Clonbrony,’ 
—and then bob our two heads at
one another, and scrape one foot back,
and away!—where's the use of that
nonsense at my time of life, or at any
time of life? No, no! we have enough
to do without that, I dare say. ...
Good morning to you, count O'Halloran!
I thank you heartily. From the
first moment I saw you, I liked you:
lucky, too, that you brought your dog
with you! 'Twas Hannibal made me
first let you in; I saw him over the top
of the blind.—Hannibal, my good fellow!
I'm more obliged to you than you
can guess.”
“So are we all,” said lord Colambre.
Hannibal was well patted, and then
they parted. In returning home, they
met sir James Brooke.
“I told you,” said sir James, “I

should be in London almost as soon as
you.—Have you found old Reynolds?”
“Just come from him.”
“How does your business prosper?
I hope, as well as mine.”
A history of all that had passed, up
to the present moment, was given, and
hearty congratulations received.
“Where are you going now, sir
James?—cannot you come with us?” 
said lord Colambre and the count.
“Impossible,” replied sir James:
“but, perhaps, you can come with me
—I'm going to Gray's, to give some
old family diamonds, either to be new
set or exchanged. Count O'Halloran,
I know you are a judge of these
things; pray, come and give me your
opinion.”
“Better consult your bride elect!” 
said the count.
“No; she knows little of the matter
—and cares less,” replied sir James.
“Not so; this bride elect, or I mistake

her much,” said the count, as they
passed by the window and saw lady
Isabel, who, with lady Dashfort, had
been holding consultation deep with the
jeweller; and Heathcock, playing personnage
muet.
Lady Dashfort, who had always, as
old Reynolds expressed it, “her head
upon her shoulders,”—presence of mind,
where her interests were concerned,
ran to the door, before the count and
lord Colambre could enter, giving a
hand to each—as if they had all parted
the best friends in the world.
“How do? how do?—Give you
joy! give me joy!” and all that. “But
mind! not a word,” said she, laying
her finger upon her lips—“Not a word
before Heathcock, of old Reynolds, or
of the best part of the old fool—his
fortune!”
The gentlemen bowed, in sign of
submission to her ladyship's commands; 
and comprehended, that she feared
Heathcock might be off, if the best part

of his bride (her fortune, or her expectations)
were lowered in value, or in
prospect.
“How low is she reduced!” whispered
lord Colambre, “when such a
husband is thought a prize—and to be
secured by a manœuvre!” He sighed.
“Spare that generous sigh!” said
sir James Brooke: “it is wasted!”
Lady Isabel, as they approached,
turned from a mirror, at which she was
trying on a diamond crescent. Her face
clouded at sight of count O'Halloran
and lord Colambre, and grew dark as
hatred, when she saw sir James Brooke.
She walked away to the farther end of
the shop, and asked one of the shopmen
the price of a diamond necklace,
which lay upon the counter.
The man said, “he really did not
know; it belonged to lady Oranmore; 
it had just been new set for one of her
ladyship's daughters, who is going to
be married to sir James Brooke—one of

the gentlemen, my lady, who are just
come in.”
Then, calling to his master, he asked
him the price of the necklace: he named
the value, which was considerable.
“I really thought lady Oranmore
and her daughters were vastly too philosophical
to think of diamonds,” said
lady Isabel to her mother, with a sort
of sentimental sneer in her voice and
countenance. “But it is some comfort
to me to find, in these pattern-women,
philosophy and love do not so
wholly engross the heart, that they
‘feel every vanity in fondness lost.’”
“'Twould be difficult, in some
cases,” thought many present.
“'Pon honour! di'monds are cursed
expensive things, I know!” said
Heathcock. “But, be that as it may,” 
whispered he to the lady, though loud
enough to be heard by others, “I've
laid a damned round wager, that no
woman's diamonds married this winter,

under a countess, in Lon'on, shall
eclipse lady Isabel Heathcock's!—and
Mr. Gray here's to be judge.”
Lady Isabel paid for this promise one
of her sweetest smiles; with one of
those smiles, which she had formerly
bestowed upon lord Colambre, and
which he had once fancied expressed so
much sensibility—such discriminative
and delicate application.
Our hero felt so much contempt,
that he never wasted another sigh of
pity for her degradation. Lady Dashfort
came up to him as he was standing
alone; and whilst the count and
sir James were settling about the diamonds—
“My lord Colambre,” said she, in a
low voice, “I know your thoughts,
and I could moralize as well as you, if
I did not prefer laughing—you are right
enough; and so am I, and so is Isabel,
we are all right. For look here: women
have not always the liberty of choice,

and therefore they can't be expected to
have always the power of refusal.”
The mother, satisfied with her convenient
optimism, got into her carriage with
her daughter, her daughter's diamonds,
and her precious son-in-law, her daughter's
companion for life.
“The more I see,” said count O'Halloran,
to lord Colambre, as they left
the shop, “the more I find reason to
congratulate you upon your escape,
my dear lord.”
“I owe it not to my own wit or
wisdom,” said lord Colambre; “but
much to love, and much to friendship,” 
added he, turning to sir James Brooke; 
“here was the friend who early warned
me against the siren's voice—who, before
I knew the lady Isabel, told me
what I have since found to be true,
that,
“Two passions alternately govern her fate,—
“Her business is love, but her pleasure is hate.”

“That is dreadfully severe, sir James,” 
said count O'Halloran; “but I am
afraid it is just.”
“I am sure it is just, or I would not
have said it,” replied sir James Brooke.
“For the foibles of the sex, I hope, I
have as much indulgence as any man; 
and for the errors of passion as much pity; 
but I cannot repress the indignation,
the abhorrence I feel against women,
cold and vain, who use their wit and
their charms only to make others miserable.”
Lord Colambre recollected at this moment
lady Isabel's look and voice, when
she declared, that “she would let her
little finger be cut off to purchase the
pleasure of inflicting on lady de Cresey
for one hour the torture of jealousy.”
“Perhaps,” continued sir James
Brooke, “now that I am going to
marry into an Irish family, I may feel,
with peculiar energy, disapprobation of
this mother and daughter on another
account; but you, lord Colambre, will

do me the justice to recollect, that
before I had any personal interest in the
country, I expressed, as a general friend
to Ireland, antipathy to those who return
the hospitality they received from
a warm hearted people, by publicly setting
the example of elegant sentimental
hypocrisy, or daring disregard of decorum; 
by privately endeavouring to
destroy the domestic peace of families,
on which, at last, public as well as private
virtue and happiness depend. I do
rejoice, my dear lord Colambre, to hear
you say, that I had any share in saving
you from the siren. And now, I will
never speak of these ladies more.—I am
sorry you cannot stay in town to see— 
but why should I be sorry—we shall
meet again, I trust, and I shall introduce
you, and you, I hope, will introduce
me, to a very different charmer.
Farewel, you have my warm, good
wishes wherever you go.”
Sir James turned off quickly to the
street in which lady Oranmore lived,

and lord Colambre had not time to tell
him, that he knew and admired his intended
bride. Count O'Halloran promised
to do this for him. “And now,” 
said the good count, “I am to take
leave of you, and I assure you I do it
with so much reluctance, that nothing
less than positive engagements to stay
in town would prevent me from setting
off with you to morrow; but I shall
be soon, very soon at liberty to return
to Ireland, and Clonbrony castle, if you
will give me leave, I will see before I
see Halloran castle.”
Lord Colambre joyfully thanked his
friend for this promise.
“Nay, it is to indulge myself&wblank;I
long to see you happy—long to behold
the choice of such a heart as yours.
Pray do not steal a march upon me— 
let me know in time. I will leave every
thing, even the siege of&wblank;for your
wedding. But I trust I shall be in
time.”

“Assuredly you will, my dear count; 
if ever that wedding”—
“If,” repeated the count—
“If,” repeated lord Colambre—“obstacles
which, when we last parted, appeared
to me invincible, prevented my
having ever even attempted to make an
impression on the heart of the woman I
love; and if you knew her, count, as
well as I do, you would know that her
love could “not unsought be won.”
“Of that I cannot doubt, or she
would not be your choice—but when
her love is sought, we have every reason
to hope,” said the count, smiling, “that
it may, because it ought to be won by
tried honour and affection—I only require
to be left in hope.”
“Well, I leave you hope,” said lord
Colambre; “Miss Nugent—miss Reynolds
I should say, has been in the
habit of considering a union with me as
impossible—my mother early instilled
this idea into her mind.—Miss Nugent

thought that duty forbad her to think
of me; she told me so: I have seen it
in all her conduct and manners. The
barriers of habit, the ideas of duty, cannot,
ought not, to be thrown down or
suddenly changed in a well regulated
female mind. And you, I am sure,
know enough of the best female hearts
to be aware that time—”
“Well, well, let this dear good
charmer take her own time, provided
there's none given to affectation, or
prudery, or coquetry; and from all
these, of course, she must be free; and
of course I must be content. Adieu au
revoir.”