

White Connal and his father—we
name the son first, because his superior
wealth, inverting the order of nature,
gave him, in his own opinion, the precedency
on all occasions—White Connal
and his father arrived at Corny
Castle. King Corny rejoiced to see his
old friend, the elder Connal; but through
all the efforts that his majesty made to be
more than civil to the son, the degenerate
grazier, his future son-in-law, it was
plain that he was only keeping his promise,
and receiving such a guest as he
ought to be received.
Mademoiselle decided, that old Connal,
the father, was quite a gentleman,

for he handed her about, and in his way,
had some politeness towards the sex; 
but as for the son, her abhorrence must
have burst forth in plain English, if it
had not exhaled itself safely in French,
in every exclamation of contempt which
the language could afford. She called
him bête! and grand bête!—by turns,
butor! âne! and grand butor!—nigaud!
and grand nigaud!—pronounced him to
be, “Un homme qui ne dit rien—D'ailleurs
un homme qui n'a pas l'air comme
il faut—Un homme enfin qui n'est pas
presentable, meme en fait de mari.”
Dora looked unutterable things; but
this was not unusual with her. Her
equally scornful airs, her short answers,
were not more decidedly rude to White
Connal than to others; she was rather
more civil to him than to Ormond. In
short, there was nothing in her manner
of keeping Connal at a distance, beyond
what he who had not much practice of
skill in the language of female coquetry

might construe into maiden coyness to
the acknowledged husband lover.
It seemed as if she had some secret
hope or fear, or reason for not coming to
open war. In short, as usual, she was
odd, if not unintelligible. White Connal
did not disturb himself at all to
follow her doublings, his pleasure was
not in the chace—he was sure the game
was his own.
Be bold! but not too bold, White
Connal; be negligent, but not too negligent,
of the destined bride. 'Tis bad, as
you say, to be spoiling a wife before
marriage; but what if she should never
be your wife—thought some!
That was a contingency that never
had occurred to White Connal. Had
he not horses, and saddles, and bridles,
and bits, finer than had ever been seen
before in the Black Islands? And had
he not the finest pistols, and the most
famous fowling pieces? And had he not
thousands of sheep, and hundreds of oxen?

And had he not thousands in paper,
and thousands in gold; and if he lived,
would he not have tens of thousands
more? And had he not brought with
him a plan of Connal's Town, the name
by which he dignified a snug slated
lodge he had upon one of his farms—an
elevation of the house to be built, and of
the offices that had been built?
He had so.—But it happened one
day, when Connal was going to ride out
with Dora, that just as he mounted, her
veil fluttering before his horse's eyes,
startled the animal; and the awkward
rider, unable to manage him, king Corny
begged Harry Ormond to change horses
with him, that Mr. Connal might go
quietly beside Dora, “who was a bit of
a coward.”—Imprudent father! Harry
obeyed—and the difference between the
riders and the gentlemen was but too
apparent. For what avails it that you
have the finest horse, if another ride him
better? What avails it that you have

the finest saddle, if another become it
better? What use to you your Wogden
pistols, if another hit the mark you miss?
What avails the finest fowling-piece to
the worst sportsman? The thousands
upon thousands to him who says but
little, and says that little ill? What
avail that the offices at Connal's Town
be finished, dog-kennel and all; or what
boots it that the plan and elevation of
Connal's Town be unrolled, and submitted
to the fair one's inspection and remarks,
if the fair disdain to inspect, and if she
remark only, that a cottage and love are
more to her taste? White Connal put
none of these questions to himself, he
went on his own way.—Faint heart never
won fair lady.—Then no doubt he was
in a way to win, for his heart never
quailed, his colour never changed when he
saw his fair one's furtive smiles, or heard
her aunt's open praises of the youth, by
whom riding, dancing, shooting, speaking,
or silent, he was always eclipsed.

Connal of Connal's Town despised Harry
Ormond of no-town—viewed him with
scornful, but not with jealous eyes.—Idle
jealousies were far from Connal's thoughts.— 
He was intent upon the noble recreation
of cock-fighting. Cock-fighting had been
the taste of his boyish days, before he
became a money-making man; and at
every interval of business, at each intermitting
of the passion of avarice, when
he had leisure to think of amusement,
this his first idea of pleasure recurred.
Since he came to Corny Castle, he had
at sundry times expressed to his father
his “hope in heaven, that before they
would leave the Black Islands, they
should get some good fun cock-fighting,
for it was a poor case for a man that is
not used to it, to be tied to a female's
apron strings, twirling his thumbs all
mornings, for form's sake.”
There was a strolling kind of gentleman
in the Islands, a Mr. O'Tara, who
was a famous cock-fighter. O'Tara

came one day to dine at Corny Castle.
The kindred souls found each other out,
and an animated discourse across the
table commenced concerning cocks. After
dinner, as the bottle went round, the
rival cock-fighters warmed to enthusiasm
in praise of their birds. Each relating
wonders, they finished, by proposing
a match, laying bets, and dispatching
messengers and hampers for
their favourites. The cocks arrived, and
were put in separate houses, under the
care of separate feeders.
Moriarty Carroll, who was curious, and
something of a sportsman, had a mind
to have a peep at the cocks. Opening
the door of one of the buildings hastily,
he disturbed the cock, who taking
fright, flew about the barn with such
violence, as to tear off several of his feathers,
and very much to deface his appearance.
Unfortunately, at this instant
White Connal and Mr. O'Tara
came by, and finding what had happened,

abused Moriarty with all the vulgar
eloquence which anger could supply.
Ormond, who had been with Moriarty,
but who had no share in the disaster, endeavoured
to mitigate the fury of White
Connal, and apologized to Mr. O'Tara; 
O'Tara was satisfied—shook hands with
Ormond, and went off. But White Connal's
anger lasted longer—for many reasons
he disliked Ormond—and thinking
from Harry's gentleness, that he might
venture to insult him, returned to the
charge, and becoming high and brutal in
his tone, said, that “Mr. Ormond had
committed an ungentlemanlike action,
which it was easier to apologize for, than
to defend.” Harry took fire, and instantly
was much more ready than his
opponent wished, to give any other
satisfaction that Mr. Connal desired.
Well, “Name his hour—his place.” “Tomorrow
morning, six o'clock, in the east
meadow;—out of reach and sight of all—” 
Ormond said, “or he was ready that instant,

if Mr. Connal pleased: he hated,
he said, to bear malice—he could not
sleep upon it.”
Moriarty now stepping up privately
besought Mr. Connal's “honour, for heaven
and earth's sake, to recollect, if he
did not know it, what a desperate good
shot Mr. Harry notoriously was always.”
“What! you rascal! are you here
still?” cried White Connal, “hold your
peace;—how dare you speak between
gentlemen?”
Moriarty begged pardon and departed.
The hint he had given, however, operated
immediately upon White Connal.
“This scattered-brained young Ormond,” 
said he to himself, “desires nothing
better than to fight.—Very natural,
he has nothing to lose in the world but
his bare life.—Neither money, nor landed
property, as I have to quit, in leaving
the world—unequal odds.—Not worth
my while to stand his shot, for the feather
of a cock,” concluded Connal, a

he pulled to pieces one of the feathers,
which had been the original cause of all
the mischief.
Thus cooled, and suddenly become reasonable,
he lowered his tone, declaring
that he did not mean to say any thing
in short that could give offence, nothing
but what it was natural for any man in
the heat of passion to say, and it was
enough to put a man in a passion at
first sight to see his cock disfigured.— 
If he had said any thing too strong,
he hoped Mr. Ormond would excuse it.
Ormond knew what the heat of passion
was, and was willing to make all
proper allowances.—White Connal made
more than proper apologies; and Ormond
rejoiced that the business was
ended. But White Connal, conscious
that he had first bullied, then quailed,
and that if the story were repeated, it
would tell to his disadvantage, made
it his anxious request, that he would say
nothing to Cornelius O'Shane of what

had passed between them, lest it should
offend Cornelius, who he knew was so
fond of Mr. Ormond.—Harry eased the
gentleman's mind, by promising that he
would never say a word about the matter.
Mr. Connal was not content till
this promise was solemnly repeated. Even
this, though it seemed quite to satisfy
him at the time, did not afterwards relieve
Connal from the uneasy consciousness
he felt in Ormond's company. He could
bear it only the remainder of this day.
The next morning he left the Black
Islands, having received letters on business,
he said, which required his immediate
presence at Connal's Town.—Many
at Corny Castle seemed willing to dispense
with his further stay, but king
Corny, true to his word and his character,
took leave of him as his son-in-law, and
only as far as hospitality required was
ready to “speed the parting guest.” 
At parting White Connal drew his future
father-in-law aside, and gave him a

hint, that “he had better look sharp
after that youth he was fostering.”
“Harry Ormond, do you mean?” 
said O'Shane.
“I do,” said Connal, “but Mr.
O'Shane, don't go to mistake me, I am
not jealous of the man—not capable—of
such a fellow as that, a wild scatterbrains,
who is not worth a sixpence
scarce—I have too good an opinion of
Miss Dora. But if I was in your place,
her father, just for the look of the thing
in the whole country, I should not like it— 
not that I mind what people say a
potato skin, but still if I was her father,
I'd as soon have the devil an inmate
and intimate in my house, muzzling in
my daughter's ear behind backs.”
Cornelius O'Shane stoutly stood by his
young friend.
“He never saw Harry Ormond
muzzling—behind backs, especially— 
did not believe any such thing—all
Harry said and did was always above

board, and before faces, any way. In
short,” said Cornelius, “I will answer
for Harry Ormond's honour with my
own honour. After that 'twould be useless
to add with my life, if required,
that of course—and this ought to satisfy
any son-in-law, who was a gentleman— 
none such could glance or mean to reflect
on Dora.”
Connal, perceiving he had overshot
himself, made protestations of his innocence
of the remotest intention of glancing
at, or reflecting upon, or imagining
any thing but what was perfectly
angelic and proper in Miss Dora—Miss
O'Shane.
“Then that was all as it should be,” 
Mr. O'Shane said, “so far—but another
point, he would not concede to mortal
man, was he fifty times his son-in-law
promised, that was his own right to have
who he pleased and willed to have, at
his own castle, his inmate and his intimate.”

“No doubt—to be sure,” Connal said,
“he did not mean—he only meant— 
he could not mean—in short he meant
nothing at all, only just to put Mr.
O'Shane on his guard—that was all he
meant.”
“Phoo!” said Cornelius O'Shane, but
checking the expression of his contempt
for the man, he made an abrupt transition
to Connal's horse, which had just
come to the door.
“That's a handsome horse! certainly
you are well mounted, Mr. Connal.”
O'Shane's elision of contempt was
beyond Mr. Connal's understanding or
feeling.
“Well mounted!—certainly I am
that, and ever will be, while I can so
well afford it,” said Connal, mounting
his horse—and identifying himself with
the animal, he sat proudly, then bowing
to the ladies, who were standing at an
open window—
“Good day to ye—ladies—till October,
when I hope”—

But his horse, who did not seem quite
satisfied of his identity with the man,
would not permit him to say more, and
off he went—half his hopes dispersed in
empty air.
“I know I wish,” said Cornelius
O'Shane to himself, as he stood on the
steps, looking after the man and horse— 
“I wish that that unlucky bowl of
punch had remained for ever unmixed,
at the bottom of which I found this
son-in-law for my poor daughter, my
innocent Dora, then unborn—but she
must make the best of him for me and
herself, since the fates and my word, irrevocable
as the Styx, have bound me to
him, the purse-proud grazier and mean
man—not a remnant of a gentleman!
as the father was.—Oh my poor Dora!”
As king Corny heaved a heartfelt sigh,
very difficult to force from his anti-sentimental
bosom, Harry Ormond, with a
plate of meat in his hand, whistling to his
dog to follow him, ran down the steps.
“Leave feeding that dog, and come here

to me, Harry,” said O'Shane, “and
answer me truly, such questions as I shall
ask.”
“Truly—if I answer at all,” said
Harry.
“Answer you must—when I ask you— 
every man, every gentleman must
answer in all honour for what he does.”
“Certainly, answer for what he does,” 
said Harry.
“For!—Phoo!—come none of your
tricks upon prepositions to gain time—I
never knew you do the like—you'll give
me a worse opinion.—I'm no school
master, nor you a grammarian, I hope,
to be equivocating on monosyllables.”
“Equivocate! I never equivocated,
Sir,” said Harry.
“Don't begin now then,” said Cornelius,
“I've enough to put me out of
humour already—so answer straight, like
yourself. What's this you've done to
get the ill-will of White Connal, that's
just gone?”
Surprised and embarrassed—Ormond

answered, “I trust I have not his ill-will,
Sir.”
“You have, Sir,” said O'Shane.
“Is it possible?” cried Harry, “when
we shook hands—you must have misunderstood,
or have been misinformed.
How do you know, my dear Sir?”
“I know it from the man's own lips— 
see! I can give you a straight answer
at once.—Now answer me, was there any
quarrel between you, and what cause of
offence did you give?”
“Excuse me, Sir, those are questions
which I cannot answer.”
“Your blush, young man, answers me
enough, and too much.—Mark me, I
thought I could answer for your honour
with my own, and I did so.”
“Thank you, Sir, and you shall never
have reason—”
“Don't interrupt me, young man.— 
What reason can I have to judge of the
future, but from the past—I am not
an idiot to be bothered with fair words.”
“Oh, Sir, can you suspect?”

“I suspect nothing, Harry Ormond,
I am, I thank my God, above suspicion.— 
Listen to me—you know, whether I
ever told it you before or not, I can't
remember, but whether or not, you
know, as well as if you were withinside
of me, that in my heart's core there's
not a man alive I should have preferred
for my son-in-law, to the man I once
thought Harry Ormond, without a penny”— 
“Once thought!”
“Interrupt me again, and I'll lave
you, Sir. In confidence between ourselves,
thinking as once I did, that I
might depend on your friendship and
discretion, equally with your honour,
I confessed I repented a rash promise, and
let you see my regret deep enough—that
my son-in-law will never be what Dora
deserves—I said, or let you see as much,
no matter which, I am no equivocator,
nor do I now unsay or retract a word.— 
You have my secret, but remember when

first I had the folly to tell it you, same
time I warned you, I warned you, Harry,
like the moth from the candle—I warned
you in vain. In another tone I warn
you now, young man, for the last time— 
I tell you my promise to me is sacred— 
she is as good as married to White
Connal—fairly tied up neck and heels— 
and so am I, to all intents and purposes,
and if I thought it were possible you
could consider her, or make her, by any
means, consider herself in any other
light, I will tell you what I would do— 
I would shoot myself, for one of us
must fall, and I wouldn't chuse it
should be you, Harry.—That's all.”
“Oh hear me, Sir,” cried Harry,
seizing his arm as he turned away, “kill
me if you will, but hear me—I give you
my word you are from beginning to
end mistaken.—I cannot tell you the
whole—but this much believe, Dora was
not the cause of quarrel.”
“Then there was a quarrel.—Oh for

shame! for shame!—you are not used
to falsehood enough yet—you can't carry
it through—why did you attempt it with
me?”
“Sir, though I can't tell you the truth,
the foolish truth, I tell you no falsehood.— 
Dora's name, a thought of Dora, never
came in question between Mr. Connal
and me, upon my honour.”
“Your honour!” repeated Cornelius,
with a severe look, severe more in its
sorrow than its anger—“Oh Harry Ormond!— 
what signifies whether the name
was mentioned—you know she was the
thing—the cause of offence.—Stop, I
charge you—equivocate no more. If a
lie's beneath a gentleman, an equivocation
is doubly beneath a man.”