

In the silence of the night, when the
hurry of action was over, and the enthusiasm
of generosity began to subside, the
words, which had escaped from Mr. Vincent,
in theparoxysm of despair and rage— 
the words—“Belinda loves you”—recurred
to Clarence Hervey; and it required
all his power over himself, to banish the
sound from his ear, and the idea from his
mind. He endeavoured to persuade himself,
that these words were dictated merely
by sudden jealousy; and that there could
be no real foundation for the assertion:
perhaps this belief was a necessary support
to his integrity. He reflected, that, at
all events, his engagement with Virginia
could not be violated; his proffered services

to Mr. Vincent could not be withdrawn:
he was firm and consistent. Before
two o'clock the next day, Vincent
received from Clarence this short note:
“Enclosed is Mrs. Luttridge's acknowledgment,
that she has no claims upon
you, in consequence of what passed last
night. I said nothing about the money
she had previously won, as I understand
you have paid it.
“The lady fell into fits; but it would
not do. The husband attempted to bully
me. I told him, I should be at his service,
after he had made the whole affair
public, by calling you out.
“I would have seen you myself this
morning, but that I am engaged with
lawyers and marriage settlements.
“Yours sincerely,
“Clarence Hervey.”
Overjoyed at the sight of Mrs. Luttridge's
acknowledgment, Vincent repeated
his vow, never more to hazard

himself in her dangerous society. He
was impatient to see Belinda; and full of
generous and grateful sentiments, in this
first moment of joy, he determined to
conceal nothing from her; to make at
once the confession of his own imprudence
and the eulogium of Clarence
Hervey's generosity. He was just setting
out for Twickenham, when he was sent
for by his uncle, governor Montford,
who had business to settle with him, relative
to his West India estates. He spent
the remainder of the morning with his
uncle; and there he received a charming
letter from Belinda;—that letter, which
she had written and sent, whilst lady Delacour
was reading Clarence Hervey's
packet. It would have cured Vincent of
jealousy, even if he had not, in the interim,
seen Mr. Hervey, and learnt from
him the news of his approaching marriage.
Miss Portman, at the conclusion of her
letter, informed him, that lady Delacour
purposed being in Berkeley square the
next day; that they were to spend a week

in town, on account of Mrs. Margaret
Delacour, who had promised her ladyship
a visit: and to go to Twickenham would
be a formidable journey to an infirm old
lady, who seldom stirred out of her
house.
Whatever displeasure lady Delacour
felt towards her friend Belinda, on account
of her coldness to Mr. Hervey, and her
steadiness to Mr. Vincent, had by this
time subsided. Angry people, who express
their passion, as it has been justly
said, always speak worse than they think.
This was usually the case with her ladyship.
The morning after they arrived in town,
she came into Belinda's room, with an air
of more than usual sprightliness and satisfaction.—“Great
news!—Great news!
—Extraordinary news!—But it is very
imprudent to excite your expectations,
my dear Belinda. Pray, did you hear a
wonderful noise in the square a little
while ago?”

“Yes; I thought I heard a great
bustle; but Marriott appeased my curiosity,
by saying, that it was only a battle
between two dogs.”
“It is well, if this battle between two
dogs do not end in a duel between two
men,” said lady Deiacour.
“This prospect of mischief seems to
have put your ladyship in wonderfully
good spirits,” said Belinda, smiling. “But
what have you heard of Mr. Vincent?”
“That miss Annabella Luttridge is
dying for love of him—or of his fortune.
Knowing, as I do, the vanity of mankind,
I suppose, that your Mr. Vincent, all
perfect as he is, was flattered by the little
coquet; and perhaps he condescends to
repay her in the same coin. I take it for
granted—for I always fill up the gaps in a
story my own way—I take it for granted,
that Mr. Vincent got into some entanglement
with her; and that this has been
the cause of the quarrel with the aunt.
That there has been a quarrel, is certain:

for your friend Juba told Marriott so.
His massa swore, that he would never go
to Mrs. Luttridge's again; and this morning
he took the decisive measure of sending
to request, that his dog might be returned.
Juba went for his namesake.
Miss Annabella Luttridge was the person,
who delivered up the dog; and she destred
the black to tell his master, with her
compliments, that Juba's collar was rather
too tight; and she begged, that he would
not fail to take it off as soon as he could.
Perhaps, my dear, you are as simple as
the poor negro, and suspect no fiuesse in
this message. Miss Luttridge, aware that
the faithful fellow was too much in your
interests, to be either persuaded or bribed
to carry a billet-doux from any other lady
to his master, did not dare to trust him
upon this occasion; but she had the art
to make him carry her letter, without his
knowing it. Colin meillard, vulgarly
called blind max's buff, was, some time
ago, a favourite play amongst the Parisian
ladies: now, hide and seek will be

brought into fashion, I suppose, by
the fair Annabella. Judge of her talents
for the game by this instance:— 
She hid her billet-doux within the lining
of Juba's collar. The dog, unconscious
of his dignity as an ambassador, or rather
as a charge d'affaires, set out on his way
home. As he was crossing Berkeley square,
he was met by sir Philip Baddely and
his dog. The baronet's insolent favourite
bit the black's heels. Juba, the dog,
resented the injury immediately, and a
furious combat ensued. In the height of
the battle Juba's collar fell off. Sir Philip
Baddely espied the paper, that was sewed
to the lining, and seized upon it immediately:
the negro caught hold of it at the
same instant: the baronet swore; the black
struggled: the baronet knocked him down.
The great dog left his canine antagonist
that moment, flew at your baronet, and
would have eaten him up at three mouthfuls,
if sir Philip had not made good his retreat
to Dangerfield's circulating library. The
negro's head was terribly cut by the sharp
point of a stone, and his ancle was sprained;

but, as he has just told me, he did not
feel this till afterward. He started up,
and pursued his master's enemy. Sir
Philip was actually reading miss Luttridge's
billet-doux aloud, when the black
entered the library. He reclaimed his
master's property, with great intrepidity; 
and a gentleman, who was present, took
his part immediately.
“In the mean time, lord Delacour, who
had been looking at the battle from our
breakfast-room window, declared he would
go over to Dangerfield's, to see what was
the matter, and how all this would end.
He entered the library, just as the gentleman,
who had volunteered in favour of
poor Juba, was disputing with sir Philip.
The bleeding negro told my lord, in as plain
words as he could, the cause of the dispute; 
and lord Delacour, who, to do him
justice, is a man of honour, joined instantly
in his defence. The baronet thought
proper, at length, to submit; and he left
the field of battle, without having any
thing to say for himself, but—‘Damme!—

very extraordinary, damme!’—or words to
that effect.
“Now, lord Delacour, beside being a
man of honour, is also a man of humanity.
I know, that I cannot oblige you more,
my dear Belinda, than by seasoning my
discourse with a little conjugal flattery.
My lord was concerned to see the poor
black writhing in pain; and, with the assistance
of the gentleman, who had joined
in his defence, he brought Juba across the
square to our house. Guess for what:— 
to try upon the strained ancle an infallible
quack balsam recommended to him by the
dowager lady Boucher. I was in the hall,
when they brought the poor fellow in.
Marriott was called. ‘Mrs. Marriott,’ 
cried my lord, ‘pray let us have lady
Boucher's infallible balsam this instant!’ 
Had you but seen the eagerness of face,
or heard the emphasis, with which he
said, ‘infallible balsam’—you must let
me laugh at the recollection. One human
smile must pass, and be forgiven.”

“The smile may be the more readily
forgiven,” said Belinda, “since, I am
sure, you are conscious, that it reflected
almost as much upon yourself as upon
lord Delacour.”
“Why, yes: belief in a quack doctor
is full as bad as belief in a quack balsam,
I allow. Your observation is so malicious,
because so just, that, to punish you for
it, I will not tell you the remainder of
my story for a week to come; and I assure
you, that the best part of it I have left
untold. To return to our friend, Mr.
Vincent:—Could you but know, what reasons
I have, at this instant, for wishing
him in Jamaica, you would acknowledge,
that I am truly candid in confessing, that
I believe my suspicions about E O were
unfounded; and I am truly generous in
admitting, that you are right to treat him
with justice.”
This last enigmatical sentence Belinda
could not prevail upon lady Delacour to
explain.

In the evening Mr. Vincent made his
appearance. Lady Delacour immediately
attacked him with raillery, on the subject
of the fair Annabella. He was rejoiced
to perceive, that her suspicions took
this turn; and that nothing relative to
the transaction, in which Clarence Hervey
had been engaged, had transpired. Vincent
wavered in his resolution to confess
the truth to Belinda. Though he had determined
upon this in the first moment of
joyful enthusiasm, yet the delay of four-and-twenty
hours had made a material
change in his feelings: his dread of losing
Belinda by his sincerity increased, the more
time he had for reflection. Indeed, his
most virtuous resolves were always rather
the effect of sudden impulse, than of
steady principle. But when the tide of
passion had swept away the landmarks,
he had no method of ascertaining the
boundaries of right and wrong. Upon
the present occasion, his love for Belinda
confounded all his moral calculations:
one moment, his feelings as a man of

honour forbade him to condescend to that
meanness of dissimulation but the next
instant, his feelings as a lover prevaileds
and he satisfied his conscience, by the idea
that, as his vow must preclude all danger
of his return to the gaming-table in future,
it would be only creating an unnecessary
alarm in Belinda's mind, to speak to her
of his past imprudence. His generosity
at first revolted from the thought of sur
pressing those praises of Clarence Hervey,
which had been so well deserved; but his
jealousy returned, to combat his first vintuous
impulse. He considered, that his
own inferiority must by comparison appear
more striking to his mistress; and be
sophistically persuaded himself, that it
would be for her happiness to conceal the
merits of a rival, to whom she could
never be united. In this vacillating state
of mind he continued during the greatest
part of the evening. About half an hour
before he took his leave, lady Delacour
was called out of the room by Mrs. Marriott.
Left alone with Belinda, his embarrasment

increased, and the unsuspecting
kindness of her manner was to him
the most bitter reproach. He stood in a
silent agony, whilst in a playful tone she
smiled and said,
“Where are your thoughts? If I were
of a jealous temper, I should say with the
fair Annabella—”
“You would say wrong then,” replied
Mr. Vincent, in a constrained voice. He
was upon the point of telling the truth; 
but to gain a reprieve of a few minutes,
he entered into a defence of his conduct
toward miss Luttridge.
“I have not interrupted you,” said
Belinda, when he paused; “and I do not,
from false generosity or politeness, preclude
you from the opportunity of proving
your integrity, by assuring you, that
it was suspected, and that your defence
is totally unnecessary. I follow my own
maxims, you see: this was the justice that
I requested from you, when you treated
me so generously about the anonymous
letter. Believe me, I have not—I never

shall, forget your handsome conduct upon
that occasion.”
She held out her hand to him as she
spoke, with much sweetness in her countenance,
and an air of perfect sincerity.
He pressed it to his lips, and exclaimed,
“Could I deceive such confidence as you
repose in me?”
“Whether you could or could not, I
am sure you would not,” said Belinda; 
“and I trust myself with more pleasure
to those who have not the will, than to
those who have not the power, to deceive
me.”
But observing the excessive agitation of
his whole frame at this instant, her gayety
forsook her.
“Are you not well? What is the matter?
How long,” said Belinda, “will you
keep me in suspense? Have I no right
to share your uneasiness? You are in some
doubt, some difficulty, some distress! Do
not persist in this painful silence; speak
to me as to your friend, at least with all
your accustomed sincerity!”

“Sincerity!—O, Belinda!—but if this
sincerity should be fatal to me!—if it should
cost me the whole happiness of my life— 
if it should be one word deprive me of
your love—too well am I aware, that your
affection for me has not that enthusiasm,
which sustains the blast of adversity.”
“This is poetry—almost blank verse,” 
said Belinda, smiling.
“I am in earnest, believe me,” continued
Vincent; “I have something to
communicate; something to confess to
you.”
“To confess!” repeated Belinda, with
a look of sudden terrour.
“Yes, something to confess, which I
fear may deprive me of your affection.”
“Is it a misfortune, or is it a crime?”
“It is not a crime,” replied Vincent.
“Then how,” said Belinda, “can you
do me the injustice to fear that any misfortune
should deprive you of my affection?
Though I have never felt, or pretended
to feel for you, that species of enthusiasm
on which you set so high a

value, yet, perhaps, my conduct will, convince
you, that without being in love
like Clelia or Cleopatra, a woman may
deserve the affection of a man of sense and
honour.”
“You are an angel!” cried Vincent.
“I have heard that so often, that I
cannot help believing it,” said Belinda; 
“but now, without farther hesitation, communicate,
impart, or confess this dreadful
misfortune.”
“I suffer, at this instant, more than
the utmost stretch of your imagination
can conceive. Most I tell you, that the
day before yesterday I was deprived by
the fraud and villainy of one is when I
placed confidence, of almost my whole
fortune? Can you, who have been accustomed
to all the elegancies of affluence; 
you, who are formed to ships in the
highest circles of society, consent to live
with me in obscurity, in poverty?”
“I am not so romantic as to imagine,
that I could be happy with you or you
with me, if we were in absolute want of

the common comforts of life; but if your
word poverty be only a figure of speech; 
if between us there yet remain what prudence,
not what the cant of fashion and
affectation would allow to be, a competence,
I can easily part with useless luxuries,” 
said Belinda:—“to be more explicit,
I can live without an equipage, and in the
country. You know, that when your
splendid equipage was ready to carry us
to Oakly-park, I told you, that show could
add nothing to my happiness, and I told
you truly—Nor do I now feel, as Dr.
Johnson says, that ‘It is misery to want
what it is not happiness to have.”
Mr. Vincent burst into the most rapturous
expressions of admiration and gratitude.
“You rather offend, than gratify me,
by these praises,” said Belinda, “Are you
surprised, that I should act as you would
do in my place? You surely could not
imagine, that I would desert you in adversity?
You have lost your wealth by the
fraud and villainy of one, in whom you

had confidence; you shall not lose your
happiness by the inconstancy or meanness
of another, in whom you have placed
yet greater confidence,” said Belinda, with
more tenderness, than she had ever before
spoken to Mr. Vincent. “Compose yourself,
than,” continued she, “and let us
look into your affairs at our leisure, and
explain to me how all this has happened.”
“My generous, charming, adorable,
Belinda! My fortune is not lost. All
stratagems, you know, the poet says, are
allowable in love and war. This was only
a stratagem to excite your compassion.”
“You have not done wisely,” said Belinda,
rising with a look of such serious
displeasure as struck him speechless; 
“you have shown me, that I never stood
as high in your esteem as I believed, and
as I deserved.”
Mr. Vincent now thought that this
was not the happy moment for any farther
confessions. He had not the courage to
increase her displeasure.

The sudden entrance of lady Delacour
relieved him from his embarrassment, and
they conversed only on general subjects
during the remainder of the evening: and
he at last departed, secretly rejoicing that
he was, as he fancied, under the necessity
of postponing his explanation; he even
thought of suppressing the history of his
transactions with Mrs. Luttridge. His
former nice sense of honour had been considerably
deadened, at the gaming-table; 
and he could now stoop to that dissimulation,
at which he would have shuddered but
a few months before. He knew that his
secret was safe with Clarence Hervey:
Mrs. Luttridge would be silent, for her
own sake; and neither lady Delacour nor
Belinda had any connexion with her society.
The next day, miss Portman observed,
that Mr. Vincent looked extremely
ill; and softened by the sorrow, that he
expressed at having incurred her displeasure,
she blamed herself for the harshness,
with which she had spoken the preceding
day. She forgave an errour, which she

thought had been more than sufficiently
punished, and Mr. Vincent was reinstated
in her favour. He hurried forward the
preparations for their nuptials with indescribable
anxiety; still he postponed his
explanation from day to day. And now
he actually approached the completion of
his hopes:
The very morning before that, which was
fixed for their marriage, Mr. Vincent went
to Gray, the jeweller, for some trinkets,
which he had bespoke for Belinda. Lord
Delacour was there, speaking about the
diamond ring, which Gray had promised
to dispose of for him. Whilst his lordship
and Mr. Vincent were busy about
their own affairs, sir Philip Baddely and
Mr. Rochfort came into the shop. Sir
Philip and Mr. Vincent had never before
met. Lond Delacour, to prevent him
from getting into a quarrel about a lady,
who was so little worth fighting for as miss
Annabella Luttridge, had positively refused
to tell Mr. Vincent what he knew of the

affair, or to let him know the name of the
gentleman who was concerned in it.
The shopman addressed Mr. Vincent
by his name, and immediately sir Philip
whispered to Rochfort, that Mr. Vincent
was “the master of the black.” Vincent,
who unluckily overheard him, instantly
asked lord Delacour, if that was
the gentleman who had behaved so ill to
his servant? Lord Delacour told him,
that it was now of no consequence to inquire,
and that he hoped he was too prudent,
on the very eve of his marriage, to go
in quest of a quarrel. “If,” said his lordship,
“any of these gentlemen choose to accost
you, I shall think you do rightly to
retort; but for Heaven's sake do not begin
the attack!”
Vincent's impetuosity was not to be
restrained; he demanded from sir Philip,
whether he was the person who had beaten
his servant? Sir Philip readily obliged
him with an answer in the affirmative; 
and the consequence was, the loss of a
finger to the baronet, and a wound in the

side to Mr. Vincent, which, though it
did not endanger his life, yet confined
him to his room for several days. The
impatience of his mind increased his fever,
and retarded his recovery and his marriage.
Lady Delacour did not affect to conceal
her satisfaction at this delay, though
humanity made her wish, that it had been
caused by any other means. When Belinda's
first alarm for Mr. Vincent's safety,
was over, she anxiously questioned lord
Delacour as to the particulars of all that
had passed between Mr. Vincent and sir
Philip, that the might judge of the manner,
in which her lover had conducted himself.
Lord Delacour, who was a man of
strict truth, was compelled to confess,
that Mr. Vincent had shown more spirit
than temper, and more courage than prudence.
Lady Delacour rejoiced to perceive,
that this account made Belinda uncommonly
serious.
Mr. Vincent now thought himself sufficiently
recovered, to leave his room: his

physicians, indeed, would have kept him
prisoner a few days longer, but he was too
impatient of restraint, to listen to then
Counsels.
“Juba, tell the doctor, when the comes,
that you could not keep me at home; and
that is all that is necessary to be said.”
He had now summoned courage, to acknowledge
to Belinda all that had happened,
and was proceeding, without difficulty,
down stairs, when he was suddenly
struck by the sound of a voice, which he
little expected at this moment a voice he
had formerly been accustomed to hear with
pleasure, but now it smote him to the
heart:—it was the voice of Mr. Percival.
For the first time in his life, he wished to
deny himself to his friend. The recollection
of the E O table, of Mr. Luttridge,
of Mr. Percival as his guardian, and of all
the advice he had heard from him as his
friend, rushed upon his mind at this instant; 
conscious and ashamed, he shrunk
back, precipitately returned to his own
room, and threw, himself into a chair,

breathless with agitation. He listened; 
expecting to hear Mr. Percival coming up
stairs, and endeavoured to compose himself,
that he might not betray, by his own
agitation, all that he wished most anxiously
to ceal. After waiting for some
time, he rang the bell, to make inquiries.
The waiter told him, that a Mr. Perceived
had asked for him; but, having been told
by his black that he was just gone out?
the gentleman being, as he said, much
hurried, had left a note, for an answer to
which he would call at 8 o'clock in the
evening. Vincent was glad of this short
reprieve. “Alas!” thought he, “how
changed am I, when I fear to meet my best
friend! To what has this one fatal propensity
reduced me!”
He was little aware of the new difficulties
that awaited him.
Mr. Percival's note was as follows:

“My dear friend!
“Am not I a happy man, to find a
friend in my ci-devant-ward? But I have

no time for sentiment; nor does it become
the character, in which I am now writing
to you—that of a dun.—You are so rich,
and so prudent, that the word in capital
letters cannot frighten you. Lady Anne's
cousin, poor Mr. Carysfort, is dead. I
am guardian to his boys; they are but ill
provided for. I have fortunately obtained
a partnership in a good house for the second
son. Fifteen thousand pounds are
wanting to establish him—we cannot raise
the money amongst us, without dunning
poor Mr. Vincent, Enclosed is your bond
for the purchase money of the little estate
you bought from me last summer. I
know, that you have double the sum we
want in ready money—so I make no ceremony.
Let me have the ten thousand
this evening, if you can, as I wish to leave
town as soon as possible.
“Yours, most sincerely,
“Henry Percival.”
Now, Mr. Vincent, had lost, and had
actually paid to Mrs. Luttridge, the ready

money, which had been destined to discharge
his debt to Mr. Percival: he expected
fresh remittances from the West
Indies in the course of a few weeks; but,
in the mean time, he must raise this money
immediately: this he could only do by
having recourse to Jews—a desperate expedient.
The Jew, to whom he applied,
no sooner discovered, that Mr. Vincent
was under a necessity of having this sum
before eight o'clock in the evening, than
he became exorbitant in his demands; and
the more impatient this unfortunate young
man became, the more difficulties he raised.
At last, a bargain was concluded between
them, in which Vincent knew, that he
was grossly imposed upon; but to this he
submitted, for he had no alternative. The
Jew promised to bring him ten thousand
pounds at five o'clock in the evening, but
it was half after seven before he made his
appearance; and then, he was so dilatory
and circumspect, in reading over and signing
the bonds, and in completing the formalities
of the transaction, that before the

money was actually in Vincent's possession,
one of the waiters of the hotel
knocked at the door, to let him know that
Mr. Percival was coming up stairs. Vincent
hurried the Jew into an adjoining
apartment, and bid him wait there, till he
should come to finish the business.
Though totally unsuspicious, Mr. Percival
could not help being struck with the
perturbation, in which he found his young
friend. Vincent immediately began to
talk of the duel, which had delayed his
marriage, and his friend was led to conclude,
that his anxiety arose from this affair.
He endeavoured to put him at case,
by changing the conversation. He spoks
of the business, which brought him to
town, and of the young man, whom he was
going to place with a banker.
“I hope,” said he, observing that Vincent
grew more embarrassed, “that my
dunning you for this money is not really
inconvenient.”
“Not in the least—not in the least. I
have the money ready—in a few moments

—if you'll be so good as to wait here—I
have the money ready in the next room.”
At this instant a loud noise was heard— 
the raised voices of two people quarrelling.
It was Juba, the black, and Solomon, the
Jew. Mr. Vincent had sent Juba out of
the way, on some errand, whilst he had
been transacting his affairs with the Jew; 
but the black, having executed the commission
on which he had been sent, returned,
and went into his master's bed-chamber,
to read at his leisure a letter,
which he had just received from his wife.
He did not at first see the Jew, and he was
spelling out the words of his wife's letter.
“My dear Juba,
“I take this op-por-tu—”
—nity he would have said; but the Jew,
who had held his breath in, to avoid discovery,
till he could hold it no longer, now
drew it so loud, that Juba started, looked
round, and saw the feet of a man, which
appeared beneath the bottom of the window
curtain. Where fears of supernatural
appearances were out of the question, our

negro was a man of courage: he had no
doubt, that the man who was concealed
behind the curtain was a robber, but the
idea of a robber did not unnerve him like
that of an Obeah woman. With presence
of mind worthy of a greater danger, Juba
took down his master's pistols, which hung
over the chimneypiece, and marching deliberately
up to the enemy, he seized the
Jew by the throat, exclaiming—
“You rob my matsa?—You dead man,
if you rob my massa.”
Terrified at the sight of the pistol, the
jew instantly explained who he was, and
producing his large purse, assured Juba,
that he was come to lend money, and not
to take it from his master; but this appeared
highly improbable to Juba, who
believed his master to be the richest man
in the world; besides, the Jew's language
was scarcely intelligible to him, and he
saw secret terrour in Solomon's countehance.
Solomon had an antipathy to the sight of a
black, and he shrunk from the negro with
strong signs of aversion. Juba would not

relinquish his hold; each went on talking
in their own angry gibberish as loud as they
could, till at last the negro fairly dragged
the Jew into the presence of his master and
Mr. Percival.
It is impossible to describe Mr. Vincent's
confusion, or Mr. Percival's astonishment.
The Jew's explanation was perfectly intelligible
to him; he saw at once all the
truth. Vincent, overwhelmed with shame,
stood the picture of despair, incapable of
uttering a single syllable.
“There is no necessity to borrow this
money on my account,” said Mr. Percival
calmly; “and if there were, we could probably
have it on more reasonable terms
than this gentleman proproses.”
“I care not on what terms I have it—I
care not what becomes of me—I am undone!” 
cried Vincent.
Mr. Percival coolly dismissed the Jew,
made a sign to Juba to leave the room,
and then, addressing himself to Vincents
said—“I can borrow the money that I want
elsewhere—Fear no reproaches from me—I

foresaw all this—you have lost this sum at
play—It is well, that it was not your whole
fortune. I have only one question to ask
you, on which depends my esteem—Have
you informed miss Portman of this affair?”
“I have not yet told her, but I was actually
half down stairs in my way to tell her.”
“Then, Mr. Vincent, you are still my
friend. I know the difficulty of such an
avowal—but it is necessary.
“Cannot you, dear Mr. Percival, save
me the intolerable shame of confessing my
own folly?—Spare me this mortification— 
Be yourself the bearer of this intelligence,
and the mediator in my favour.”
“I will with pleasure,” said Mr. Percival— 
“I will go this instant—but I cannot
say, that I have any hope of persuading
Belinda, to believe in your being irrevocably
reclaimed from the charms of play.”
“Indeed, my excellent friend, she may
only upon me: I feel such horrour at the
past, such heartfelt resolution against all
future temptation, that you may pledge
yourself for my total reformation.”

Mr. Percival promised, that he would exert
all his influence, except by pledging his
own honour: to this he could not consent.
—“If I have any good news for you, I
will return as soon as possible—but I will
not be the bearer of any painful intelligence,” 
said he; and he departed, leaving
Mr. Vincent in a state of anxiety, which,
to his temper, was a punishment sufficient
for almost any imprudence he could have
committed.
Mr. Percival returned no more that
night. The next morning Mr. Vincent
received the following letter from Belinda.
—He guessed his fate—he had scarcely
power to read the words.

“You have frequently lamented, that
my affection for you was not of the enthusiastic
sort, which constitutes your idea of
the passion of love. Instead of lamenting,
we have now reason to rejoice at this, since
it will save us from much useless pain. It
spares me the difficulty of conquering a
passion, that might be fatal to my happiness;

and it will diminish the regret, which
you may feel at our separation.
“From a person of your honourable
character, I need not claim the terms of
the agreement, that left each of us at liberty
to recede, without reproach, whenever
we should think proper; I am now
obliged to say, that circumstances have
made me certain we could not add to
our felicity by that union, which, but a
few days ago, appeared to me so desirable.
The hopes of enjoying domestic happiness
with a person whose manners, temper, and
tastes, were suited to my own, induced
me to listen to your addresses. Your unfortunate
propensity to a dangerous amusement,
which is now, for the first time,
made known to me, puts an end to these
hopes for ever.
“For my own sake, as well as for yours,
I rejoice that your fortune has not been
materially injured; as this relieves me from
the fear, that my present conduct should
be imputed to interested motives. Indeed,
such is the generosity of your own

temper, that in any situation I should
scarcely have reason to apprehend from
you such a suspicion.
“The absolute impossibility of my forming
at present another connexion, will
prevent you from imagining, that I am
secretly influenced by sentiments different
from those which I avow: nor can any
weak doubts on this subject expose me to
my own reproaches.
“You perceive, sir, that I am not willing,
utterly to lose your esteem, even when I
renounce, in the most unequivocal manner,
all claim upon your affections. If any
thing should appear to you harsh in this
letter, I beg you to impute it to the real
cause—my desire to spare you all painful
suspense, by convincing you at once, that
my determination is irrevocable. I am
persuaded, that love cannot long exist
without hope. With sincere wishes for
your happiness, and gratitude for your part
attachment, I bid you farewell.
“Belinda Portman.”

A few hours after Mr. Vincent had read
this letter, he threw himself into a postchaise,
and set out for Germany. He saw
that all hopes of being united to Belinda
were over, and he hurried as far from her
as possible. Her letter rather soothed than
irritated his temper; her praises of his generosity
were highly gratifying, and they
had so powerful an effect upon his mind,
that he was determined to prove that they
were deserved. His conscience reproached
him with not having made sufficiently
honourable mention of Hervey's
conduct, on the night when he was on the
point of destroying himself. Before he left
London he wrote a full account of this
whole transaction, to be given to miss
Portman after his departure. It was delivered
to Belinda by poor Juba, who
would willingly have accompanied his unfortunate
master in his voluntary exile,
but Mr. Vincent would not permit him
to give this proof of attachment.
“Go,” said he, “to your wife, and to
your happy home.”

The poor fellow put his master's letter
into miss Portman's hand, without being
able to utter one syllable; the big tears
rolled down his black cheeks, when she
kindly said to him—
“I shall see you again, Juba, soon, at
your cottage.”
“But massa will not be there—massa
is gone!—When shall we see massa again?
—Never—never!”
He sobbed like an infant.
No torments, in the power of human
cruelty to inflict, could in all probability
have extorted from this region one of the
tears, which affection wrung from him so
plentifully.
Belinda was deeply touched by this
faithful creature's sensibility. He recalled
to her mind some of the most amiable
traits in his master's character, some
of the happy days that she had spent in
Mr. Vincent's company. His letter—his
farewell letter—she could not read without
great emotion. It was written with true
feeling, but in a manly style, without one

word of vain lamentation. His generosity,
in speaking of Clarence Hervey, was not
lost upon her.
“What a pity,” thought Belinda, “that
with so many good and great qualities, I
should be forced to bid him adieu for
ever!”
Though she strongly felt the pain of
this separation, yet she could not recede
from her decision: nothing could tempt
her to connect herself with a man, who
had the fatal taste for play. Even Mr.
Percival, much as he loved his ward, much
as he wished for his union with Belinda,
dared not pledge his honour for Mr. Vincent
on this point. Reason and prudence
then forbade her to trust the happiness of
her life to a vain promise. She trembled
at the thoughts of having been so near
forming an indissoluble connexion with
one, who had such a dangerous, and as she
firmly believed, incurable taste. Even her
sense of escape was attended with many
painful feelings: not that she had ever loved
him with passion, but she had been habituated

to think of him with much kindness,
esteem, and affection. Her thoughts
had now for some months been fixed upon
him, and she could not suddenly change
their course, or console herself for his loss.
She was soothed, however, by a most kind
and sensible letter from lady Anne Percival,
who expressed the highest approbation
of her conduct, the most friendly concern
for her disappointment, and the most polite
and sincere hopes, that Belinda would
still continue to think of her with affection
and esteem; though she had been so
rash in her advice, and though her friendship
had been apparently so selfish.
Belinda was conscious, that whatever
might be her present regret, she had acted
prudently in breaking off her connexion
with Mr. Vincent; she endeavoured to
tranquillize her mind, and she occupied
herself without ceasing, for she found employment
the best relief from painful recollection.