

Letter from Alfred Percy to his Mother.
“MY DEAR MOTHER,
I am shocked by your
story of Kate Robinson.—I agree with
you in rejoicing, that Caroline had sufficient
penetration to see the faults of
Buckhurst Falconer's character, and
steadiness enough, notwithstanding his
agreeable talents, never to give him any
encouragement. I agree with you also,
that it was fortunate that her last letter

to him was written and sent, before this
affair came to her knowledge. It was
much better that she should abide by
her objection to his general principles,
than to have had explanations and discussions
on a subject, into which she
could not enter with propriety.
“I will, as you desire, keep Buckhurst's
secret. Indeed, in a worldly point
of view, it behoves him that it should be
carefully kept, because Bishop Clay, the
prelate, who gave him his present living,
though he tolerates gormandizing to excess,
is extremely strict with his clergy
in other matters, and, as I once heard
Buckhurst say,

“Compounds for sins he is inclin'd to,
By damning those he has no mind to.”
Buckhurst had, I believe, hopes that
Caroline would have relented, in consequence
of his last overture; he was
thrown into despair by her answer, containing,
as he told me, such a calm and
civil repetition of her refusal—that he

swears he will never trouble her again.— 
For a fortnight after, he protests he was
ready to hang himself.—About that
time, I suppose, when he heard of Kate
Robinson's death, he shut himself up in
his room for several days—said he was
not well, and could not see any body.
When he came out again, he looked
wretchedly ill, and unhappy—I pitied
him—I felt the truth of what Rosamond
said, ‘that there is such a mixture of
good and bad in his character, as makes
one change one's opinion of him every
half hour.’
He has just done me an essential service.
—He learnt the other day from one
of his sisters the secret reason why Lord
Oldborough was displeased with Godfrey,
and, I suspect, though this was
not avowed, the true cause why Godfrey
was despatched to the West Indies.— 
Lord Oldborough had been told either
by Cunningham, or by one of the sisters,
that Godfrey made love to Miss Hauton,
and that when he came to town ostensibly

on some regimental business, and
was pleading for a brother-officer, his
concealed motive was to break off the
marriage of his Lordship's niece. Buckhurst
had been at the opera in the same
box with Miss Hauton and with my
brother Godfrey one night in particular,
when his conduct had been misrepresented,
and as soon as he found that
Lord Oldborough had been deceived,
Buckhurst was determined that he should
know the truth, or, at least, that he
should know that my brother was not
to blame. Godfrey never mentioned the
subject to me. But, from what I can
understand, the lady showed him distinguished
attention. How Buckhurst Falconer
managed to right my brother in
Lord Oldborough's opinion without involving
the young lady, I do not know.
—He said that he had fortunately had
an opportunity one evening at his father's,
when he was playing at chess
with Lord Oldborough, of speaking to
him on that subject, when none of his

family was watching him. He told me
that Lord Oldborough desires to see me,
and has appointed his hour to morrow
morning.—Now, Rosamond, my dear,
set your imagination to work; I must go
and draw a replication, which will keep
mine fast bound.
Yours truly,
Alfred Percy.”
At the appointed hour, Alfred waited
upon the minister, and was received graciously.
—Not one word of Godfrey, however,
or of any thing leading to that
subject. Lord Oldborough spoke to Alfred
as to the son of his old friend.—He
began by lamenting “the misfortunes,
which had deprived Mr. Percy of that
estate and station, to which he had done
honor.” His Lordship went on to say,
that “he was sorry that Mr. Percy's
love of retirement, or pride of independence,
precluded all idea of seeing him
in parliament; but he hoped that Mr.
Percy's sons were in this extravagant

notion of independence, and in this only,
unlike their father.”
With all due deference, Alfred took
the liberty of replying to the word extravagant,
and endeavored to explain, that
his father's ideas of independence did
not go beyond just bounds: Lord Oldborough,
contrary to his usual custom,
when he met with any thing like contradiction,
did not look displeased, on the
contrary, he complimented Alfred on his
being a good advocate.—Alfred was going
to fall into a commonplace, about a
good cause.—But from that he was happily
saved by Lord Oldborough's changing
the conversation.
He took up a pamphlet, which lay
upon his table. It was Cunningham
Falconer's, that is to say, the pamphlet
which was published in Cunningham's
name, and for which he was mean
enough to take the credit from the poor
starving genius in the garret. Lord
Oldborough turned over the leaves— 
“Here is a passage, that was quoted yesterday

at dinner, at Commissioner Falconer's,
but I don't think that any of
the company, or the Commissioner himself,
though he is, or was, a reading
man, could recollect to what author it
alludes.”
Lord Oldborough pointed to the passage:
“Thus the fane of heroes is at last
neglected by their worshippers, and left to
the care of the birds of Heaven, or abandoned
to the serpents of the earth.”
Alfred fortunately recollected, that this
alluded to a description in Arrian of the
Island of Achilles, the present Isle of
serpents, where there is that temple of
the hero, of which, as the historian says,
“the care is left to the birds alone, who,
every morning, repair to the sea, wet
their wings, and sprinkle the temple, afterwards
sweeping with their plumage
it's sacred pavement.”
Lord Oldborough smiled, and said,
“The author ... the reputed author of
this pamphlet, Sir, is obliged to you for

throwing light upon a passage, which he
could not himself elucidate.”
This speech of Lord Oldborough's alluded
to something that had passed at a
dinner at Lord Skreene's, the day before
Cunningham had set out on his embassy.
Cunningham had been posed by this passage,
for which Secretary Cope, who hated
him, had maliciously complimented him,
and besought him to explain it.—Secretary
Cope, who was a poet, made an
epigram on Cunningham, the diplomatist.
The lines we do not remember.
The points of it were, that Cunningham
was so complete a diplomatist, that he
would not commit himself by giving up
his authority, even for a quotation, and
that when he knew the author of an excellent
thing, he, with admirable good
faith, kept it to himself. This epigram
remained at the time a profound secret
to Lord Oldborough. Whilst Cunningham
was going with a prosperous gale,
it was not heard of; but it worked round
according to the manœuvres of courts,

just by the time the tide of favor to ebb.
Lord Oldborough, dissatisfied with one
of Cunningham's despatches, was heard
to say, as he folded it up—“A slovenly
performance!”
Then, at the happy moment stepped
in the rival Secretary Cope, and put into
his Lordship's hands the epigram and
the anecdote.—
All this the reader is to take as a note
explanatory upon Lord Oldborough's
last speech to Alfred, and now to go on
with the conversation—at the word elucidate.
“I suspect,”—continued his Lordship,
“that Mr. Alfred Percy knows
more of this pamphlet altogether, than
the reputed author ever did.”
Alfred felt himself change color, and
the genius in the garret rushed upon his
mind; at the same instant he recollected,
that he was not at liberty to name Mr.
Temple, and that he must not betray
Cunningham.—Alfred answered, “that

it was not surprising he should know the
pamphlet well, as he probably admired
it more, and had read it oftener, than
the author himself had ever done.”
“Very well parried, young gentleman.
—You will not allow, then, that you had
any hand in writing it.”
“No, my Lord,” said Alfred, “I had
none whatever; I never saw it till it was
published.”
“I have not a right, in politeness, to
press the question.—Permit me, however,
to say, that it is a performance of which
any man might be proud.”
“I should, my Lord, be proud ...
very proud, if I had written it; but I
am incapable of assuming a merit that
is not mine, and I trust the manner in
which I now disclaim it does not appear
like the affected modesty of an author,
who wishes to have that believed which
he denies. I hope I convince your Lordship
of the truth.”
“I cannot have any doubt of what

you assert in this serious manner, Sir.
May I ask if you can tell me the name
of the real author?”
“Excuse me, my Lord—I cannot. I
have answered your Lordship with perfect
openness, as far as I am concerned.”
“Sir,” said Lord Oldborough, “I
confess that I began this conversation
with the prepossession, that you were
equal to a performance, of which I
think highly, but you have succeeded
in convincing me that I was mistaken
—that you are not equal—but superior
to it.”
Upon this compliment, Alfred, as he
thought the force of politeness could no
farther go, rose, bowed, and prepared to
retire.
“Are you in a hurry to leave me,
Mr. Percy?”
“Quite the contrary, but I was afraid
of encroaching upon your Lordship's
goodness; I know that your time is most
valuable, and that your Lordship has so
much business of importance.”—

“Perhaps Mr. Alfred Percy may assist
me in saving time hereafter.”—
Alfred sat down again, as his Lordship's
eye desired it.—Lord Oldborough
remained for a few moments silent, leaning
upon his arm on the table, deep in
thought.
“Yes, Sir,” said he, “I certainly
have, as you say, much business upon
my hands.&wblank;But that is not the difficulty.— 
With hands and heads business
is easily arranged and expedited.— 
I have hands and heads enough at my
command.—Talents of all sorts can be
obtained for their price, but, that which
is above all price, integrity cannot— 
There's the difficulty—There is my difficulty.
I have not a single man about
me, whom I can trust—many who understand
my views, but none who feel
them— ‘Des ames de boue et de fange!’ 
—Wretches who care not if the throne
and the country perish, if their little interests.
... Young gentleman,” said
he, recollecting himself, and turning to

Alfred—“I feel as if I was speaking to
a part of your father, when I am speaking
to you.”
Alfred felt this compliment, and Lord
Oldborough saw that he felt it strongly.
“Then, my dear Sir,” said he,—“you
understand me—I see we understand,
and shall suit one another. I am in
want of a secretary, to supply the place
of Mr. Cunningham Falconer.—Mr.
Drakelow is going to Constantinople.— 
But he shall first initiate his successor in
the business of his office—a routine which
little minds would make great minds believe
is a mystery above ordinary comprehension.
—But, Sir, I have no doubt,
that you will be expert in a very short
time in the technical part,—in the routine
of office.—And, if it suits your
views, in one word, I should be happy
to have you for my private secretary.— 
Take time to consider, if you do not
wish to give an answer immediately; but
I beg that you will consult no one but
yourself—not even your father.—And as

soon as your mind is made up, let me
know your decision.”
After returning thanks to the minister,
who had, by this time, risen to a prodigious
height in Alfred's opinion, after having
reiterated his thanks with a warmth
which was not displeasing, he retired.— 
The account of his feelings on this occasion
are given with much truth in his
own letter, from which we extract the
passage:
“I believe I felt a little like Gil Blas
after his first visit at court. Vapors of
ambition certainly mounted into my
head, and made me a little giddy; that
night I did not sleep quite so well as
usual. The Bar and the Court, Lord
Oldborough and my special pleader, were
continually before my eyes balancing
in my imagination all the proes and cons.
—I fatigued myself, but could neither
rest nor decide—seven years of famine at
the bar—horrible!—but then independence
and liberty of conscience—and in
time, success—the certain reward of industry—

well-earned wealth—perhaps— 
honors—why not the highest professional
honors.—The life of a party-man and
a politician agreed by all who have tried
—even by this very Lord Oldborough
himself, agreed to be an unhappy life— 
obliged to live with people I despise— 
might be tempted, like others, to do
things for which I should despise myself
—subject to caprice—at best, my fortune
quite dependant on my patron's
continuance in power—power and favor
uncertain.
“It was long before I got my proes
and cons even into this rude preparation
for comparison, and longer still before
the logical process of giving to each
good and evil it's just value, and drawing
clear deductions from distinct premises,
could be accomplished. However,
in four and twenty hours I solved
the problem.
“I waited upon Lord Oldborough to
tell him my conclusion. With professions
of gratitude, respect, and attachment

more sincere, I fancy, than those
he usually hears, I began; and ended by
telling him in the best manner I could,
that I thought my trade was more honest
than his, and that, hard as a lawyer's
life was, I preferred it to a politician's.
—You don't suspect me of saying
all this—No, I was not quite so
brutal—but, perhaps, it was implied by
my declining the honor of the secretaryship,
and preferring to abide by my profession.
—Lord Oldborough looked ... or
my vanity fancied that he looked disappointed.
—After a pause of silent displeasure,
he said,
“Well, Sir, upon the whole I believe
you have decided wisely. I am sorry
that you cannot serve me, and that I
cannot serve you in the manner which I
had proposed. Yours is a profession in
which ministerial support can be of little
use, but in which, talents, perseverance,
and integrity, are secure, sooner or later,
of success.—I have, therefore, only to
wish you opportunity.—And, if any means

in my power should occur of accelerating
that opportunity, you may depend upon
it, Sir,’ said his Lordship, holding out
his hand to me, ‘I shall not forget you
—even if you were not the son of my
old friend, you have made an interest
for yourself in my mind.’
“Thus satisfactorily we parted—No— 
Just as I reached the door, his Lordship
added—
“Your brother Captain Percy. ...
Have you heard from him lately?’ ...
“Yes, my Lord, from Plymouth,
where they were driven back by contrary
winds.’
“Ha!—he was well I hope?’
“Very well, I thank your Lordship.’
“Thats well—He is a temperate
man, I think.—So he will stand the climate
of the West Indies—and, probably,
it will not be necessary for his Majesty's
service, that he should remain
there long.’
“I bowed—was again retiring, and
was again recalled.

“There was a Major in your brother's
regiment, about whom Captain
Percy spoke to me ... Major ...’
“Gascoigne, I believe, my Lord.’
“Gascoigne—true—Gascoigne.’— 
His Lordship wrote the name down in a
note-book.
“Bows for the last time,—not a word
more on either side.—
“And now that I have written all this
to you, my dear mother, I am almost
ashamed to send it—because it is so full
of egotism. But Rosamond, the excuser
general, will apologize for me, by pleading
that I was obliged to tell the truth,
and the whole truth.—My father too, I
know, can tolerate better honest vanity
than “pride that apes humility.” Whatever
you may think of the manner, you
will, I hope, approve the matter.—I
think I am safe, at least, in my father's
approbation, having kept clear of patronage,
and having asked no favor but
a government frank to convey this packet
to you.—If you have any letters for

Godfrey, send them to me before the
first Wednesday in the month, when the
West-India packet sails. I have executed
all your commissions—don't be afraid
of troubling me with more.—Alas! I am
not yet so busy as to find commissions
troublesome.
“Erasmus says he has written my
mother two folio sheets, and that I need
say nothing about him.—
“I am glad to hear you are all going
to Hungerford-Castle.—Whilst they were
in town, Mrs. Hungerford and Mrs.
Mortimer were very kind to Erasmus and
to me; more so, since we lost our fortune,
I think, than before.—Love to Caroline,
and thanks for her letter.—Love to Rosamond,
upon condition, that she will write
to me from Hungerford-Castle, and cheer
my solitude in London with news from
the country, and from home.—
Your affectionate son,
Alfred Percy.
“P. S. I hope you all like O'Brien.”

O'Brien, we hope the reader recollects,
was the poor Irishman, whose leg the
surgeon had condemned to be cut off,
but which was saved by Erasmus.—A
considerable time afterwards, one morning,
when Erasmus was just getting up,
he heard a loud knock at his door, and in
one and the same instant pushing past
his servant into his bed-chamber, and to
the foot of his bed, rushed O'Brien,
breathless, and with a face perspiring
joy—
“I axe your Honor's pardon, master,
but it's what you're wanting down street
in all haste—Here's an elegant case for ye,
Doctor dear!—That painter-jantleman
down in the square there beyond that is
not expected.”—
“Not expected!”—said Erasmus.
“Ay, not expected, so put on ye
with the speed of light—Where's his
waistcoat?” continued he, turning to
Dr. Percy's astonished servant—“and
coat?—the top coat—and the wig—has

he one?—Well! boots or shoes give him
any way.”—
“But I don't clearly understand. ...
Pray did this gentleman send for me?”— 
said Dr. Percy.
“Send for your Honor! Troth, he never
thought of it—No nor couldn't— 
how could he? and he in the way he
was and is—But God bless ye! and never
mind shaving, or another might get it
afore we'd be back. Though there was
none in it but myself when I left it—but
still keep on buttoning for the life.”—
Erasmus dressed as quickly as he could,
not understanding, however, above one
word in ten that had been said to him.
His servant, who did not comprehend
even one word, endeavored in vain to obtain
an explanation; but O'Brien, paying
no regard to his solemn face of curiosity,
put him aside with his hand, and
continuing to address Dr. Percy, followed
him about the room.
“Master! you mind my mintioning to
you last time I seen your Honor, that my

leg was weak by times, no fault though to
the doctor that cured it, so I could not
be after carrying the weighty loads I
used up and down the ladders at every
call, so I quit sarving the masons, and
sought for lighter work, and found an employ
that shuted me with a jantleman
painter, grinding of his colours, and that
was what I was at this morning, so I was,
and standing as close to him as I am this
minute to your Honor, thinking of nothing
at all just now, please your Honor,
forenent him—asy grinding, whin he took
some sort or kind of a fit.”
“A fit! Why did you not tell me that
sooner?”
“Sure I tould you he was not expicted,
—that is, if you don't know in England,
not expicted to live—and—sure
I tould your Honor so from the first,” 
said O'Brien. “But then the jantleman
was as well as I am this minute,
that minute afore—and the nixt fell his
length on the floor entirely. Well! I set
him up again, and for want of better

filled out a thimble-full say, of the spirits
of wine as they call it, which he got by
good luck for the varnish, and made him
take it down, and he come to, and I axed
him how was he after it?—Better, says
he—That's well, says I, and who will I
send for to ye, Sir? says I—But afore he
could make answer, I bethought me of
your own Honor, and for fear he would
say another, I never troubled him, putting
the question to him again, but just
set the spirits nigh-hand him, and away
with me here; I come off without letting
on a word to nobody, good or bad, in
dread your Honor would miss the job.”
“Job!”—said Dr. Percy's servant— 
“do you think my master wants a job?”
“Oh! Lord, love ye, and just give his
hat. Would you have us be standing on
ceremony now in a case of life and
death?”—
Dr. Percy was, as far as he understood
it, of the Irishman's way of thinking. He
followed as fast as he could to the painter's
—found that he had had a slight paralytic

stroke;—from which he recovered.— 
We need not detail the particulars.—Nature
and Dr. Percy brought him through.— 
He was satisfied with his physician; for
Erasmus would not take any fee, because
he went unsent for by the patient. The
painter, after his recovery, was one day
complimenting Dr. Percy on the inestimable
service he had done the arts in restoring
him to his pencil, in proof of
which the artist showed many masterpieces,
that wanted only the finishing
touch, in particular a huge long-limbed,
fantastic, allegorical piece of his own design,
which he assured Dr. Percy was
the finest example of the beau idéal
ancient or modern, that human genius
had ever produced upon canvass.— 
“And what do you think, doctor,” said
the painter, “tell me what you can
think of a connoisseur, a patron, Sir, who
could stop my hand, and force me from
that immortal work to a portrait, a portrait!—Barbarian!
he fit to encourage
genius!—he set up to be a Mecænas!

mere vanity!—gives pensions to four signpost
daubers, not fit to grind my colors!
knows no more of the art than that fellow,” 
pointing to the Irishman, who was
at that instant grinding the colors—asy
as he described himself.
“And lets me languish here in obscurity!” 
continued the enraged painter— 
“Now I'll never put another stroke to
his Dutch beauty's portrait if I starve— 
if I not for it in a jail—he a Mecænas!”
The changes upon this abuse were rung
repeatedly by this irritated genius, his
voice and palsied hand trembling with
rage while he spoke, till he was interrupted
by a carriage stopping at the door.—
“Here's the patron!”—cried the Irishman,
with an arch look—“Ay, it's the
patron sure enough!”
Dr. Percy was going away, but
O'Brien got between him and the door,
menacing his coat with his pallet knife
covered with oil—Erasmus stopped.
“I axe your pardon, but don't go,”

whispered he, “I wouldn't for the best
coat nor waistcoat ever I seen you went
this minute, Dear!”—
Mr. Gresham was announced—a gentleman
of a most respectable, benevolent,
prepossessing appearance, whom Erasmus
had some recollection of having seen
before. Mr. Gresham recognised him instantly.
—Mr. Gresham was the merchant,
whom Erasmus had met at Sir Amyas
Courtney's the morning when he went to
solicit Sir Amyas's vote at the hospital
election.—After having spoken a few
words to the painter about the portrait,
Mr. Gresham turned to Dr. Percy, and
said, “I am afraid, Sir, that you lost
your election at the hospital by your sincerity
about a shell.”—
Before Erasmus could answer—in less
time than he could have thought it possible
to take off a stocking, a great bare
leg—O'Brien's leg, came between Mr.
Gresham and Dr. Percy.
“There's what lost him the election!

saving that leg lost him the election—so
it did, God for ever bless him! and reward
him for it!”
Then with eloquence, emphasis, and
action, which came from the heart, and
went to the heart, the poor fellow told
how his leg had been saved, and spoke of
what Dr. Percy had done for him, in terms
which Erasmus would have been ashamed
to hear, but that he really was so much
affected with O'Brien's gratitude, and
thought it did so much honor to human
nature, that he could not stop him.—Mr.
Gresham was touched also; and upon
observing this, Erasmus's friend, with his
odd mixture of comedy and pathos, ended
with this exhortation.
“And God bless you, Sir, you're a
great man, and have many to my knowledge
under a compliment to you, and if
you've any friends that are lying, or sick,
if you'd recommend them to send for him
in preference to any other of the doctors,
it would be a charity to themselves and to
me—for I will never have peace else

thinking how I have been a hinderance to
him—And a charity it would be to themselves,
for what does the sick want but
to be cured? and there's the man will do
that for them, as two witnesses here present
can prove,—that jantleman if he
would spake, and myself.”
Erasmus now peremptorily stopped this
scene, for he began to feel for himself,
and to be ashamed of the ridicule, which
his puffing friend, in his zeal, was throwing
upon him; Erasmus was afraid that
Mr. Gresham might think him mean. So
strongly was our young physician occupied
by these ideas, that he did not hear
one word of what the painter said. Mr.
Gresham, however, at once relieved his
wounded pride, and dispelled all fears
and anxiety, by the manner in which he
spoke and looked. He concluded by inviting
Dr. Percy to his house, expressing
with much cordiality a wish “to be more
intimately acquainted with a young gentleman,
of whose character he had twice
accidentally learned more good than his

modesty seemed willing to allow should be
known.”
O'Brien's eyes sparkled; he rubbed
his hands, but restrained himself lest Dr.
Percy should be displeased.—When Erasmus
went away, O'Brien followed him
down stairs, “begging his Honor's pardon
—if he had said any thing wrong or
unbecoming, it was through ignorance.”
It was impossible to be angry with
him.—
We extract from Erasmus's letter to his
mother, the following account of his first
visit to Mr. Gresham.
“When I went to see Mr. Gresham, I
was directed to an unfashionable part of
the town, to one of the dark old streets of
the city, and from all appearance I
thought I was going to grope my way
into some strange dismal den, like many
of the ancient houses in that quarter of
the town.—But to my surprise, after passing
through a court, and up an unpromising
staircase, I found myself in a spacious
apartment.—The darkness changed

to light, the smoke and din of the city,
to retirement and fresh air—A near view
of the Thames appeared through large
windows down to the floor, balconies filled
with flowers and sweet shrubs!—It was an
Arabian scene in London—Rosamond!
how you would have been delighted!
But I have not yet told you, that there
was a young and beautiful lady sitting
near the balcony, and her name is Constance.
—That is all I shall tell you about
the young lady at present.—I must go on
with Mr. Gresham, who was in his picture
gallery—Yes, picture gallery—and
a very fine one it is—Mr. Gresham, whose
fortune is one of those of which only English
merchants can form any adequate
idea, makes use of it in a manner, which
does honor to his profession and to his
country. He has patronised the arts with
a munificence not unworthy of the Medici.
“My complaining genius, the painter
who had abused his patron so much, was
there with his portrait, which, notwithstanding

his vow never to touch it again,
he had finished, and brought home, and
with it the sprawling Venus: he was now
extremely angry with Mr. Gresham for
declining to purchase this chef d'œuvre.— 
With the painter was a poet equally vain
and dissatisfied.
“I admired the mildness, with which
Mr. Gresham bore with their ill-humor
and vanity.—After the painter and poet
to my satisfaction had departed, I said
something expressive of my pity for patrons,
who had to deal with the irritable
race. He mildly replied, that he thought
that a man, surrounded as he was with
all the comforts and luxuries of life,
should have compassion, and should make
allowance for genius struggling with poverty,
disease, and disappointment.—He
acknowledged, that he had met with much
ingratitude and had been plagued by the
pretensions, expectations, and quarrels
of his tribe of poets and painters.— ‘For
a man's own happiness,’ said he, ‘the

trade of a patron is the most dreadful
trade he can follow—gathering samphire
were nothing to it.’
“Pray tell my father this, because it
opens a new view, and new confirmation
of his opinions—I never spent a more
agreeable day than this with Mr. Gresham.
He converses well, and has a variety
of information which he pours forth
liberally, and yet without the slightest
ostentation; his only wish seems to be to
entertain and inform those to whom he
speaks; he has no desire to shine.—In a
few hours we went over a world of literature.
—I was proud to follow him, and he
seemed pleased that I could sometimes
anticipate—I happened to know as well
as he did the history of the two Flamels,
and several particulars of the jesuits in
Paraguay.
“My father often told us when we
were boys, that there is no knowledge,
however distant it seems from our profession,
that may not, sometime or other,
be useful; and Mr. Gresham, after he

had conversed sufficiently with me both
on literature and science, to discover that
I was not an ignorant pretender, grew
warm in his desire to serve me. But he
had the politeness to refrain from saying
any thing directly about medicine; he
expressed only an increased desire to cultivate
my acquaintance, and begged that
I would call upon him at any hour, and
give him the pleasure of my conversation,
whenever I had time.
“The next morning he called upon me
and told me, that he was desired to ask my
advice for a sick partner of his, to whom,
if I would accompany him, he would immediately
introduce me.—Who and what
this partner is, and of what disease he is
dying, if you have any curiosity to know,
you shall hear in my next, this frank will
hold no more—accept love—light as air— 
to all at home. When shall I ever see
home again.
“Dear Mother, affectionately yours,
E. Percy.”