



Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Friday, March 3. 
I have both your letters at once. It is very unhappy,
my dear, since your friends will have you
marry, that such a merit as yours should be addressed
by a succession of worthless creatures, who have nothing
but their presumption for their excuse. 
That these presumers appear not in this very unworthy
light to some of your friends, is, because their
defects are not so striking to them, as to others. —And
why? Shall I venture to tell you? —Because they are
nearer their own standard. —Modesty, after all, perhaps
has a concern in it; for how should they think, 

that a niece or a sister of theirs (I will not go higher,
for fear of incurring your displeasure) should be an
angel? —But where indeed is the man to be found,
who has the least share of due diffidence, that dares
to look up to Miss Clarissa Harlowe with hope, or
with any thing but wishes? Thus the bold and forward,
not being sensible of their defects, aspire; while
the modesty of the really worthy fills them with too
much reverence to permit them to explain themselves. 
Hence your Symmes's, your Byron's, your Mullins's,
your Wyerley's (the best of the herd), and your
Solmes's, in turn invade you—Wretches that, looking
upon the rest of your family, need not despair of
succeeding in an alliance with it: —But to you, what
an inexcusable presumption! 
Yet I am afraid all opposition will be in vain. You
must, you will, I doubt, be sacrificed to this odious
man! —I know your family! —There will be no resisting
such baits as he has thrown out. —O, my dear,
my beloved friend! and are such charming qualities,
is such exalted merit, to be sunk in such a marriage! 
—You must not, your uncle tells my mamma, dispute
their authority. Authority! what a full
word is that in the mouth of a narrow-minded person,
who happen'd to be born thirty years before one! — 
Of your uncles I speak; for as to the parental authority,
That ought to be sacred. —But should not parents
have reason for what they do? 
Wonder not, however, at your Bell's unsisterly
behaviour in this affair: I have a particular to add to
the inducements your insolent brother is govern'd by,
which will account for all her driving. Her outward
eye, as you have own'd, was from the first struck
with the figure and address of the man whom she
pretends to despise, and who 'tis certain thoroughly
despises her: But you have not told us, that still she
loves him of all men. Bell has a meanness in her very
pride; and no one is so proud as Bell. She has own'd 

her love, her uneasy days, and sleepless nights, and
her revenge grafted upon it, to her favourite Betty
Barnes. —To, lay herself in the power of a servant's
tongue! —Poor creature! —But LIKE little souls will
find one another out, and mingle, as well as LIKE
great ones. This, however, she told the wench in
strict confidence: And thus, by way of the female
round-about, as Lovelace had the sauciness on such
another occasion, in ridicule of our sex, to call it,
Betty (pleased to be thought worthy of a secret,
and to have an opportunity of inveighing against Lovelace's
perfidy, as she would have it to be) told it to
one of her confidants: That confidant, with like
injunctions of secrecy, to Miss Lloyd's Harriot—Harriot
to Miss Lloyd—Miss Lloyd to me—I to you— 
with leave to make what you please of it. —And
now you will not wonder to find in Miss Bell an implacable
rivaless, rather than an affectionate sister; 
and will be able to account for the words witchcraft,
syren, and such-like, thrown out against you; and
for her driving on for a fixed day for sacrificing you
to Solmes: In short, for her rudeness and violence of
every kind. —What a sweet revenge will she take, as
well upon Lovelace, as upon you, if she can procure
her rival and all-excelling sister to be married to the
man that sister hates; and so prevent her having the
man whom she herself loves (whether she have hope
of him, or not), and whom she suspects her sister
loves! Poisons and poniards have often been set to
work by minds inflam'd by disappointed love and revenge; 
will you wonder then, that the ties of relationship
in such a case have no force, and that a sister
forgets to be a sister? 
This her secret motive (the more resistless, because
her pride is concern'd to make her disavow it), join'd
with her former envy, and with the general and
avowed inducements particularized by you, now it is
known, fills me with apprehensions for you: Join'd 

also by a brother, who has such an ascendant over
the whole family; and whose interest, slave to it
as he always was, and whose revenge, his other darling
passion, are engaged to ruin you with everyone: 
Both having the ears of all your family, and
continually misrepresenting all you say, all you do,
to them: Their subject the rencounter, and Lovelace's
want of morals, to expatiate upon. O, my
dear! how will you be able to withstand all this? — 
I am sure (—alas! I am too sure) that they will subdue
such a fine spirit as yours, unused to opposition; 
and, Tell it not in Gath, you must be Mrs. Solmes! 
Mean time, it is now easy, as you will observe, to
guess from what quarter the report I mention'd to
you in one of my former came, That the younger
sister has robb'd the elder of her lover: For Betty
whisper'd it, at the time she whisper'd the rest, that
neither Lovelace nor you had done honourably by her
young mistress. —How cruel, my dear, in you, to
job the poor Bella of the only lover she ever had! — 
At the instant too that she was priding herself, that
now, at last, she should have it in her power not only
to gratify her own susceptibilities, but to give an example
to the flirts of her sex (my worship's self the
principal, I suppose, with her) how to govern their
man with a silken rein, and without a kerb-bridle! 
Upon the whole, I have now no doubt of their
persevering in favour of the despicable Solmes; and of
their dependence upon the gentleness of your temper,
and the regard you have for their favour, and for your
own reputation. And now I am more than ever convinced
of the propriety of the advice I formerly gave
you, to keep in your own hands the estate bequeathed
to you by your grandfather. —Had you done so, it
would have procured you at least an outward respect
from your brother and sister; which would have made
them conceal the envy and ill-will that now is bursting
upon you from hearts so narrow. 

I must harp a little more upon this string—Don't
you observe, how much your brother's influence has
over-topp'd yours, since he has got into fortunes so
considerable; and since you have given some of them an
appetite to continue in themselves the possession of your
estate, unless you comply with their terms? 
I know your dutiful, your laudable motives; and
one would have thought, that you might have trusted
to a father who so dearly loved you. But had you
been actually in possession of that estate, and living
up to it, and upon it (your youth protected from
blighting tongues by the company of your prudent
Norton, as you had purposed), do you think that
your brother, grudging it to you at the time, as he
did, and looking upon it as his right, as an only son,
would have been practising about it, and aiming at
it? —I told you some time ago, that I thought your
trials but proportion'd to your prudence: —But you
will be more than woman, if you can extricate yourself
with honour, having such violent spirits and sordid
minds, as in some, and such tyrannical and despotic
wills, as in others, to deal with. —Indeed, all may be
done, and the world be taught further to admire you,
for your blind duty and will-less resignation, if you
can persuade yourself to be Mrs. Solmes! 
I am pleased with the instances you give me of Mr.
Lovelace's benevolence to his own tenants, and with
his little gift to your uncle's. Mrs. Fortescue allows
him to be the best of landlords: I might have told you. 
That, had I thought it necessary to put you in some
little conceit of him. He has qualities, in short, that may
make him a tolerable creature on the other side of
fifty: But God help the poor woman to whose lot he
shall fall till then! Women, I should say perhaps; since
he may break half a dozen hearts before that time. — 
But to the point I was upon—Shall we not have reason
to commend the tenant's grateful honesty, if we are
told, that with joy the poor man call'd out your uncle 

and on the spot paid him in part of his debt those two
guineas? —But what shall we say of that landlord,
who, tho' he knew the poor man to be quite destitute,
could take it; and, saying nothing while Mr. Lovelace
staid, as soon as he was gone, tell of it, praising
the poor fellow's honesty? —Were this so, and were
not that landlord related to my dearest friend, how
should I despise such a wretch! —But perhaps the
story is aggravated. Covetous people have everyone's
ill word: And so indeed they ought; because
they are only sollicitous to keep that which they prefer
to every-one's good one. —Covetous indeed would
they be, who deserved neither, yet expected both! 
I long for your next letter. Continue to be as particular
as possible. I can think of no other subject but
that relates to you, and to your affairs: For I am,
and ever will be, most affectionately, 
All your own
Anna Howe. 