



From Miss Darnford, in Answer to the
preceding. 


My dear Mrs. B.
I have been several times (in Company with
Mr. Peters) to see Mrs. Jewkes. The poor
Woman is very bad, and cannot live many Days. 

We comfort her all we can; but she often accuses
herself of her past Behaviour to so excellent a Lady; 
and with Blessings upon Blessings, heaped upon
you, and her Master, and your charming little Boy,
she is continually declaring how much your Goodness
to her aggravates her former Faults to her own
Conscience. 
She has her Sister-in-law and her Niece with
her, and has settled all her Affairs, and thinks she
is not long for this World. 
Her Distemper is an inward Decay, all at once,
as it were from a Constitution that seem'd like
one of Iron; and she is a mere Skeleton: You
would not know her, I dare say. 
I will see her every Day; and she has given me
up all her Keys, and Accompts, to give to Mr. Longman;
who is daily expected, and I hope will be
here soon; for her Sister-in-law, she says herself, is
a Woman of this World, as she has been. 
Mr. Peters calling upon me to go with him to
visit her, I will break off here. 
Mrs. Jewkes is much as she was; but your faithful
Steward is come. I am glad of it—and so is
she. —Nevertheless I will go every Day, and do
all the Good I can for the poor Woman, according
to your charitable Desires. 
I thank you, Madam, for your Communication
of Lady Davers's Letter. I am much obliged to
my Lord, and her Ladyship; and should have been
proud of an Alliance with that noble Family: But
with all Mr. H.'s good Qualities, as my Lady paints
them out, and his other Advantages, I could not,
for the World, make him my Husband. 

I'll tell you One of my Objections, in Confidence,
however (for you are only to sound me, you
know); and I would not have it mention'd, that I
have taken any Thought about the Matter, because
a stronger Reason may be given, such a one as my
Lord and Lady will both allow; which I will communicate
to you by-and-by. 
My Objection arises even from what you intimate
of Mr. H.'s Good-humour, and his Persuadableness,
if I may so call it. Now, Madam, were I of a
boisterous Temper, and high Spirit, such a one as
requir'd great Patience in a Husband, to bear with
me, then Mr. H.'s Good-humour might have been
a Consideration with me. But when I have (I pride
myself in the Thought) a Temper not wholly unlike
your own, and such a one as would not want
to contend for Superiority with a Husband, it is no
Recommendation to me, that Mr. H. is a good-humour'd
Gentleman, and will bear with Faults I
design not to be guilty of. 
But, my dear Mrs. B. my Husband must be a
Man of Sense, and must give me Reason to think,
he has a superior Judgment to my own, or I shall
be unhappy. He will otherwise do wrong-headed
Things: I shall be forced to oppose him in them:
He will be tenacious and obstinate, and will be
taught to talk of Prerogative, and to call himself a
Man, without knowing how to behave as one, and
I to despise him of course; and so be deemed a bad
Wife, when, I hope, I have Qualities that would
make me a tolerable good one, with a Man of
Sense for my Husband. You know who says, 


For Fools (pardon me this harsh Word, 'tis in my Author)
For Fools are stubborn in their Way,
As Coins are harden'd by th Allay;
And Obstinacy's ne'er so stiff,
As when 'tis in a wrong Belief.

Now you must not think I would dispense with
real Good-humour in a Man. No, I make it one
of my Indispensables in a Husband. A good-natur'd
Man will put the best Constructions on what happens:
But he must have Sense to distinguish the best. 
He will be kind to little, unwilful, undesigned Failings:
But he must have Judgment to distinguish
what are or are not so. 
But Mr. H.'s Good-humour is Softness, as I may
call it; and my Husband must be such a one, in
short, as I need not be ashamed to be seen with in
Company; one, who being my Head, must not be
beneath all the Gentlemen he may happen to fall in
with; and who, every time he is adjusting his
Mouth for Speech, will give me Pain at my Heart,
and Blushes in my Face, even before he speaks. 
I could not bear, therefore, that every Gentleman,
and every Lady, we encounter'd, should be prepar'd,
whenever he offer'd to open his Lips, by their
contemptuous Smiles, to expect some weak and
silly. Things from him; and when he had spoken,
that he should, with a booby Grin, seem pleased
that he had not disappointed them. 
The only recommendatory Point in Mr. H. is,
that he dresses exceedingly smart, and is no contemptible
Figure of a Man, as you have observed in
a former Letter* . But, dear Madam, you know, 

that's so much the worse, when the Man's Talent is
not Taciturnity, except before his Aunt, or before
Mr. B. or you; when he is not conscious of internal
Defect, and values himself upon outward Appearance. 
As to his Attempt upon your Polly, tho' I don't
like him the better for it, yet it is a Fault so wickedly
common among Gentlemen, that when a Lady
resolves never to marry, till a quite virtuous Man
addresses her, it is, in other Words, resolving to die
single: So that I make not this the chief Objection; 
and yet, I must tell you, I would abate in my Expectations
of half a dozen other good Qualities,
rather than that One of Virtue in a Husband. 
But when I reflect upon the Figure Mr. H. made
in that Affair, I cannot bear him; and if I may
judge of other Coxcombs by him, what Wretches
are these smart, well-dressing Querpo fellows, many
of which you and I have seen admiring themselves
at the Plays and Operas! 
This is one of my infallible Rules, and I know
it is yours too; That he who is taken up with the
Admiration of his own sweet Person, will never admire
a Wife's. His Delights are centred in himself; 
and he will not wish to get out of that narrow, that
exceeding narrow Circle; and, in my Opinion,
should keep no Company, but that of Tailors, Wigpuffers,
and Milaners. 
But I will run on no further upon this Subject; 
but will tell you a Reason, which you may give to
Lady Davers, why her kind Intentions to me cannot
be answer'd; and which she'll take better than
what I have said, were she to know it, as I hope
you won't let her: And this is, My Papa has had 

a Proposal made to him, from a Gentleman you
have seen, and have thought polite* . It is from
Sir W. G. of this County, who is one of your great
Admirers, and Mr. B.'s too; and that, you must
suppose, makes me have never the worse Opinion
of him, or of his Understanding; altho' it requires
no great Sagacity or Penetration to see how much
you adorn our Sex, and human Nature too. 
Every thing was adjusted between my Papa
and Mamma, and Sir William, on Condition we
approv'd of each other, before I came down; which
I knew not, till I had seen him here Four times; 
and then my Papa surpris'd me into a half Approbation
of him: And this, it seems, was one of
the Reasons why I was so hurried down from you. 
I can't say, but I like the Gentleman as well as
most I have seen: He is a Man of Sense and Sobriety,
to give him his Due, and is in very easy
Circumstances, and much respected by all who know
him; and that's no bad Earnest, you are sensible,
in a Marriage Prospect. 
But, hitherto, he seems to like me better than
I do him. I don't know how it is; but I have
often observ'd, that when any thing is in our own
Power, we are not half so much taken with it, as
we should be, perhaps, if we were kept in Suspense! 
Why should this be? 
But this I am convinc'd of. There is no Comparison
between Sir William and Mr. Murray. 
Now I have nam'd this Brother-in-law of mine,
what do you think? 
Why, that good Couple have had their House
on Fire Three times already, and that very dangerously 

too. Once it was put out by Mr Murray's
Mother, who lives near them; and twice Sir Simon
has been forced to carry Water to extinguish it; 
for, truly, Mrs. Murray would go home again to
her Papa: She would not live with such a surly
Wretch: And it was, With all his Heart! A fair
Riddance! for there was no bearing the House with
such an ill-natur'd Wife:—Her Sister Polly was
worth a thousand of her! 
I am sorry, heartily sorry, for their Unhappiness! 
But could she think that every body must bear with
her, and her fretful Ways? 
They'll jangle on, I reckon, till they are better
us'd to one another; and when he sees she can't
help it, why he'll bear with her, as Husbands generally
do with ill-temper'd Wives; that is to say,
he'll try to make himself happy abroad, and leave
her to quarrel with her Maids, instead of him; for
she must have somebody to vent her Spleen upon:
poor Nancy! 
I am glad to hear of Mr. Williams's good Fortune. 
As Mr. Adams knows not Polly's Fault, and it
was prevented in time, they may be happy cnough. 
She is a sly Girl. I always thought her so: Something
so innocent, and yet so artful, in her very
Looks! She is an odd Compound of a Girl. But
these worthy and piously turn'd young Gentlemen,
who have but just quitted the College, are mere
Novices, as to the World: Indeed, they are above
it, while in it; they therefore give themselves little
Trouble to study it, and so, depending on the
Goodness of their own Hearts, are more liable to
be imposed upon, than People of half their Understanding. 

I think, since he seems to love her, you do
right not to hinder the Girl's Fortune. But I
wish she may take your Advice, in her Behaviour to
him, at least; for as to her Carriage to her Neighbours,
I doubt she'll be one of the Heads of the
Parish, presently, in her own Estimation. 
'Tis pity, methinks, any worthy Gentleman of
the Cloth should have a Wife, who, by a bad Example,
should pull down, as fast as he, by a good
one, can build up. 
This is not the Case of Mrs. Peters, however; 
whose Example I wish was more generally follow'd
by Gentlewomen, who are made so by marrying
good Clergymen, if they were not so before. 
Don't be surpris'd, if you should hear, that poor
Jewkes is given over! —She made a very exemplary—Full
of Blessings—And more easy and
resign'd, than I apprehended she would be. 
I know you'll shed a Tear for the poor Woman—I
can't help it myself. But you will be
pleas'd, that she had so much Time given her, and
made so good Use of it. 
Mr. Peters has been every thing that one would
wish one of his Function to be, in his Attendances
and Advice to the poor Woman. Mr. Longman
will take proper Care of every thing. 
So, I will only add, That I am, with the sincerest
Respects, in hopes to see you soon, (for I
have a Multitude of things to talk to you about)
Dear Mrs. B. 
Your ever-faithful and affectionate
Polly Darnford. 

