


I have removed my Papers from under the Rosebush; 
for I saw the Gardener begin to dig near
that Spot; and I was afraid he would find them. 
Mrs. Jewkes and I were looking yesterday through
the Iron Gate that fronted the Elms, and a Gypsey-like
Body made up to us, and said; If, Madam,
you will give me some broken Victuals, I will tell
you both your Fortunes. I said, Let us hear our
Fortunes, Mrs. Jewkes; but she said, I don't like
these fort of People; but we will hear what she'll
say to us. I than't fetch you any Victuals; but I
will give you some Pence, said she. But Nan
coming out, she said, Fetch some Bread, and some
of the cold Meat, and you shall have your Fortune
told, Nan. 
This, you'll think, like some of my other Matters,
a very trifling thing to write about. But mark the
Discovery of a dreadful Plot, which I have made by
it. O bless me! what can I think of this naughty, 
this very naughty Gentleman! —Now will I hate
him most heartily. Thus it was: 
Mrs. Jewkes had no Suspicion of the Woman, the
Iron Gate being lock'd, and she of the Outside, and
we on the Inside; and so put her Hand thro'. She
said, muttering over a Parcel of cramp Words:
Why, Madam, you will marry soon, I can tell you. 
At that she seem'd pleas'd, and said, I am glad to
hear that, and shook her fat Sides with laughing. 
The Woman look'd most earnestly at me all the
Time, and as if she had Meaning. Then it came
into my Head, from my Master's Caution, that possibly
this Woman might be employ'd to try to get
a Letter into my Hands; and I was resolved to
watch all her Motions. So Mrs. Jewkes said, What
sort of a Man shall I have, pray? —Why, said she,
a Man younger than yourself; and a very good
Husband he'll prove. —I am glad of that, said she,
and laugh'd again. Come, Madam, let us hear your
Fortune. 
The Woman came to me, and took my Hand, O!
said she, I cannot tell your Fortune; your Hand is
so white and fine, that I cannot see the Lines: But,
said she, and stoop'd, and pulled up a little Tuft of
Grass, I have a Way for that; and so rubb'd my
Hand with the Mould-part of the Tuft: Now, said
she, I can see the Lines. 
Mrs. Jewkes was very watchful of all her Ways,
and took the Tuft, and look'd upon it, lest any
thing should be in that. And then the Woman said,
Here is the Line of Jupiter crossing the Line of
Life; and Mars—Odd, my pretty Mistress, said she,
you had best take care of yourself: For you are
hard beset, I'll assure you. You will never be marry'd,
I can see; and will die of your first Child. 
Out upon thee, Woman! said I, better thou hadst
never come here. 
Said Mrs. Jewkes, whispering, I don't like this. 
It looks like a Cheat: Pray, Mrs. Pamela, go in this
Moment. So I will, said I; for I have enough of
Fortune-telling. And in I went. 
The Woman wanted sadly to tell me more; 
which made Mrs. Jewkes threaten her, suspecting
still the more: And away the Woman went, having
told Nan her Fortune, that she would be
drown'd. 
This thing ran strongly in my Head; and we went
an Hour after, to see if the was lurking about, and
Mr. Colbrand for our Guard; and looking thro' the
Iron Gate, he spy'd a Man sauntring about the middle
of the Walk; which filled Mrs. Jewkes with still
more Suspicions. But she said, Mr. Colbrand, you
and I will walk towards this Fellow, and see what
he saunters there for: And, Nan, do you and Madam
stay at the Gate. 
So they open'd the Iron Gate, and walked down
towards the Man; and, guessing the Woman, if employ'd,
must mean something by the Tuft of Grass,
I cast my Eye that way, whence she pull'd it, and
saw more Grass seemingly pull'd up: then I doubted
not something was there for me; so I walked to it,
and standing over it, said to Nan, That's a pretty
Sort of a wild Flower that grows yonder, near that
Elm, the fifth from us on the Left; pray pull it
for me. Said she, It is a common Weed. Well,
said I, but pull it for me; there are sometimes beautiful
Colours in a Weed. 
While she went on, I stoop'd, and pull'd up a
good Handful of the Grass, and in it a Bit of Paper,
which I put instantly in my Bosom, and dropt
the Grass; and my Heart went pit-a-pat at the odd 
Adventure. Said I, Let us go in, Mrs. Ann. No,
said she, we must stay till Mrs. Jewkes comes. 
I was all Impatience to read this Paper. And
when Colbrand and she return'd, I went in. Said
she, Certainly there is some Reason for my Master's
Caution; I can make nothing of this sauntring Fellow; 
but, to be sure, there was some Roguery in
the Gypsey. Well, said I, if there was, she lost her
Aim, you see! Ay, very true, said she; but that
was owing to my Watchfulness; and you was very
good to go away when I spoke to you. 
I went up Stairs, and, hasting to my Closet, found
the Billet to contain, in a Hand that seem'd disguised,
and bad Spelling, the following Words: 

‘Twenty Contrivances have been thought of to
let you know your Danger; but all have
prov'd in vain. Your Friends hope it is not yet
too late to give you this Caution, if it reaches
your Hands. The 'Squire is absolutely determin'd
to ruin you. And because he despairs of any other
way, he will pretend great Love and Kindness to
you, and that he will marry you. You may expect
a Parson for this Purpose, in a few Days; 
but it is a sly artful Fellow of a broken Attorney,
that he has hir'd to personate a Minister. The
Man has a broad Face, pitted much with the
Small-pox, and is a very good Companion. So take
care of yourself. Doubt not this Advice. Perhaps
you'll have but too much Reason already to
confirm you in the Truth of it. From your zealous
Well-wisher, 
‘Somebody.’ 

Now, my dear Father and Mother, what shall
we say of this truly diabolical Master! O how shall 
I find Words to paint my Griefs, and his Deceit! 
I have as good as confessed I love him; but indeed
it was on supposing him good. —This, however,
has given him too much Advantage. But now I
will break this wicked forward Heart of mine, if it
will not be taught to hate him! O what a black,
dismal Heart must he have! So here is a Plot to
ruin me, and by my own Consent too! ––– No wonder
he did not improve his wicked Opportunities,
(which I thought owing to Remorse for his Sin, and
Compassion for me) when he had such a Project as
this in Reserve! —Here should I have been deluded
with the Hopes of a Happiness that my highest Ambition
could not have aspired to! ––– But how
dreadful must have been my Lot, when I had found 
myself an undone Creature, and a guilty Harlot, instead
of a lawful Wife? Oh! this is indeed too
much, too much for your poor Pamela to support! 
This is the worse, as I hop'd all the Worst was over; 
and that I had the Pleasure of beholding a reclaimed
Gentleman, and not an abandon'd Libertine. 
What now must your poor Daughter do! Now all
her Hopes are dash'd! And if this fails him, then
comes, to be sure, my forcible Disgrace! for this
shews he will never leave till he has ruin'd me! — 
O the wretched, wretched Pamela! 