



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To the Rev. Dr. Lewen. 

Sat. Aug. 19. 
Reverend and Dear Sir,
I thought, till I received your affectionate and welcome
Letter, that I had neither Father, Uncle,
Brother left; nor hardly a friend among my former
favourers of your Sex. Yet, knowing you so well,
and having no reason to upbraid myself with a faulty
will, I was to blame (even although I had doubted the
continuance of your good opinion) to decline the trial
whether I had forfeited it or not; and if I had, whether
I could not, honourably, reinstate myself in it. 
But, Sir, it was owing to different causes that I did
not; partly to shame, to think how high, in my happier
days, I stood in your esteem, and how much I 

must be sunk in it, since those so much nearer in relation
to me gave me up; partly to deep distress,
which makes the humbled heart diffident; and made
mine afraid to claim the kindred mind in yours, which
would have supplied to me in some measure all the
dear and lost relations I have named. 
Then, So loth, as I sometimes was, to be thought
to want to make a party against those whom both
duty and inclination bid me reverence: So long
trailed on between hope and doubt: So little my own
mistress at one time; so fearful of making or causing
mischief, at another; and not being encouraged to
hope, by your kind notice, that my application to you
would be acceptable;—apprehending, that my relations
had engaged your silence at least (a) — 
These—But why these unavailing retrospections
now? —I was to be unhappy—In order to be happy; 
that is my hope! —Resigning therefore to That hope,
I will, without any further preamble, write a few
lines (if writing to you, I can write but a few) in answer
to the subject of your kind Letter. 
Permit me, then, to say, That I believe your arguments
would have been unanswerable in almost
every other case of This nature, but in That of the
unhappy Clarissa Harlowe. 
It is certain, that creatures who cannot stand the
shock of public shame, should be doubly careful how
they expose themselves to the danger of incurring
private guilt, which may possibly bring them to it. 
But as to myself, suppose there were no objections
from the declining way I am in as to my health; and
supposing I could have prevailed upon myself to appear
against This man; were there not room to apprehend,
that the end so much wished for by my friends (to
wit, his condign punishment) would not have been 

obtained, when it came to be seen, that I had consented
to give him a clandestine meeting; and, in
consequence of that, had been weakly tricked out
of myself; and further still, had not been able to
avoid living under one roof with him for several
weeks; which I did (not only without complaint,
but) without cause of complaint? 
Little advantage in a Court (perhaps, bandied
about, and jested profligately with) would some of
those pleas in my favour have been, which out of
Court, and to a private and serious audience, would
have carried the greatest weight against him—Such,
particularly, as the infamous methods to which he
had recourse.— 
It would, no doubt, have been a ready retort
from every mouth, that I ought not to have thrown
myself into the power of such a man, and that I
ought to take for my pains what had befallen me. 
But had the Prosecution been carried on to effect,
and had he even been sentenced to death, can it be
supposed, that his family would not have had interest
enough to obtain his pardon, for a crime thought too
lightly of, though one of the greatest that can be
committed against a creature valuing her honour
above her life? —While I had been censured as pursuing
with sanguinary views a man who offered me early
all the reparation in his power to make? 
And had he been pardoned, would he not then have
been at liberty to do as much mischief as ever? 
I dare say, Sir, such is the assurance of the man
upon whom my unhappy destiny threw me; and
such his inveteracy to my family (which would then
have appeared to be justified by their known inveteracy
to him, and by their earnest endeavours to take
away his life); that he would not have been sorry to
have had an opportunity to confront Me, and my Father,
Uncles, and Brother, at the Bar of a Court
of justice, on such an occasion. In which case, 

would not (on his acquittal, or pardon) resentments
have been reciprocally heightened? And then would
my Brother, or my Cousin Morden, have been more
secure than now? 
How do these considerations aggravate my fault!
My motives, at first, were not indeed blameable: 
But I had forgotten the excellent caution, which yet
I was not ignorant of, That we ought not to do evil
that good may come of it. 
In full conviction of the purity of my heart, and
of the firmness of my principles [Why may I not,
thus called upon, say what I am conscious of, and
yet without the imputation of faulty pride; since all
is but a Duty, and I should be utterly inexcuseable,
could I not justly say what I do? —In this full conviction]
he has offered me Marriage. He has avowed
his penitence: A sincere penitence I have reason to
think it, tho' perhaps not a Christian one. And his
noble relations (kinder to the poor Sufferer than her
own) on the same conviction, and his own not ungenerous
acknowledgements, have joined to intercede
with me to forgive and accept of him. Altho' I cannot
comply with the latter part of their intercession,
have not you, Sir, from the best Rules, and from
the divinest Example, taught me to forgive injuries? 
The injury I have received from him is indeed of
the highest nature, and it was attended with circumstances
of unmanly baseness, and premeditation; yet,
I bless God, it has not tainted my mind; it has not
hurt my morals. No thanks indeed to the wicked
man that it has not. No vile courses have followed
it. My will is unviolated. The evil (respecting myself,
and not my friends) is merely personal. No
credulity, no weakness, no want of vigilance, have
I to reproach myself with. I have, thro' Grace,
triumphed over the deepest machinations. I have
escaped from him. I have renounced him. The
man whom once I could have loved, I have been 

enabled to despise: And shall not Charity complete
my triumph? And shall I not enjoy it? —And where
would be my triumph, if he deserved my forgiveness? 
—Poor man! He has had a loss in losing me! I have
the pride to think so, because I think I know my
own heart. I have had none in losing him! 
But I have another plea to make, which alone
would have been enough (as I presume) to answer
the contents of your very kind and friendly Letter. 
I know, my dear and reverend friend, the spiritual
guide and director of my happier days! I know, that
you will allow of my endeavour to bring myself to
this charitable disposition, when I tell you how near
I think myself to that great and awful moment, in
which, and even in the ardent preparation to which,
every sense of indignity or injury that concerns not
the immortal Soul, ought to be absorbed in higher
and more important contemplations. 
Thus much for myself. 
And for the satisfaction of my friends and favourers,
Miss Howe is solicitous to have all those Letters
and Materials preserved, which will set my whole
story in a true light. The good Dr. Lewen is one of
the principal of those friends and favourers. 
The warning that may be given from those papers
to all such young creatures as may have known or
heard of me, may be of more efficacy to the end
wished for, as I humbly presume to think, than my
appearance could have been in a Court of Justice,
pursuing a doubtful event, under the disadvantages
I have mentioned. And if, my dear and good Sir,
you are now, on considering every-thing, of this
opinion, and I could know it, I should consider it as
a particular felicity; being as solicitous as ever to be
justified in what I may in your eyes. 
I am sorry, Sir, that your indisposition has reduced
you to the necessity of writing upon your pillow. 
But how much am I obliged to that kind and generous 

concern for me, which has impelled you, as I may
say, to write a Letter, containing so many paternal
lines, with such inconvenience to yourself! 
May the Almighty bless you, dear and reverend
Sir, for all your goodness to me of long time past,
as well as for that which engages my present gratitude! 
Continue to esteem me to the last, as I do
and will venerate you! And let me bespeak your
prayers; the continuance, I should say, of your
prayers; for I doubt not, that I have always had
them: And to them, perhaps, has in part been owing
(as well as to your pious precepts instilled thro'
my earlier youth) that I have been able to make the
Stand I have made; altho' every-thing that you
prayed for has not been granted to me by that Divine
Wisdom, which knows what is best for its poor
creatures. 
My prayers for you are, That it will please God
to restore you to your affectionate flock; and after
as many years of life as shall be for His service, and
to your own comfort, give us a happy meeting in
those regions of blessedness, which you have taught
me, as well by Example, as by Precept, to aspire to! 
Clarissa Harlowe. 