


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Monday, Mar. 13. 
I Will now tell you, who the Lady is, to whom
the two sisters have given their interest. 
It is Lady Anne S. the only daughter of the Earl of S.
A vast fortune, it seems, independent of her father; 
and yet certain of a very great one from him. She is
to be here this very afternoon, on a visit to the two
Ladies. With all my heart. I hope she is a very
agreeable Lady. I hope she has a capacious mind. I 

hope—I don't know what to hope—And why? 
Because I find myself out to be a selfish wretch, and
don't wish her to be so fine and so good a woman,
as I say I do. Is Love, if I must own Love, a narrower
of the heart? —I don't know whether, while it
is in suspense, and is only on one side, it be not the parent
of jealousy, envy, dissimulation; making the person
pretend generosity, disinterestedness, and I cannot
tell what; but secretly wishing, that her rival may not
be so worthy, so lovely, as she pretends to wish her to
be. —Ah! Lucy, were one sure, one could afford to
be generous: One might then look down with pity
upon a rival, instead of being mortified with apprehensions
of being looked down upon. 
But I will be just to the education given me, and the
examples set me. Whatever I shall be able to do,
or to wish, while I am in suspense; when any happy
woman becomes the wife of Sir Charles Grandison, I
will revere her; and wish her, for his sake as well as
her own, all the felicities that this world can afford; 
and if I cannot do this from my heart, I will disown
that heart. 
The two Ladies set upon Mr. Grandison on Sunday,
to get out of him the business that carried Sir Charles
so often of late to Canterbury. But tho' he owned,
that he was not injoined secrecy, he affected to amuse
them, and strangely to romance; hinting to them a
story of a fine woman in love with him, and he with
her; yet neither of them thinking of marriage:
Mr. Grandison valued not truth, nor scrupled solemn
words, tho' ludicrously utter'd, to make the most improbable
stuff perplexing and teazing; and then the
wretch laughed immoderately at the suspense he supposed
he had caused. 
What witless creatures, what mere nothings, are
these beaux, fine fellows, and laughers, of men! — 
How silly must they think us women! —And how 

silly indeed are such of us, as can keep in countenance,
at our own expence, their folly! 
He was left alone with me for half an hour last
night; and, in a very serious manner, besought me to
receive his addresses. I was greatly displeased with the
two sisters; for I thought they intended to give him
this opportunity, by their manner of withdrawing. 
Surely, thought I, I am not sunk so low in the eyes
of the Ladies of such a family as this, as to be thought
by them a fit wife to the only worthless person in it,
because I have not the fortune of Lady Anne S. I
will hear, thought I, what Miss Grandison says to
this; and, altho' I had made excuses to my cousin
Reeves's, at their request, for staying here longer than
I had intended, I will get away to town as fast as I
can. Proud as they are of the name of Grandison,
thought I, the name only won't do with Harriet Byron. 
I am as proud as they. 
I said nothing of my resentment: But told both Ladies,
the moment I saw them, of Mr. Grandison's
declaration. They expressed themselves highly displeased
with him for it; and said, they would talk to
him. Miss Grandison said, She wondered at his presumption. 
His fortune was indeed very considerable, she
said, notwithstanding the extravagance of his youth:
But it was an high degree of confidence, in a man of
such free principles, to think himself intitled to countenance
from—in short, from such a Lady, as
your Harriet, Lucy; whatever you may think of her
in these days of her humiliation. 
She added the goodness of my heart to her compliment. 
I hope it is not a bad one. Then it was
that I told them of my thoughts of going to town on
the occasion: And the two Ladies instantly went to
their cousin, and talk'd to him in such a manner, that
he promised, if no more notice were taken of the
matter, never again to give occasion for them to reprimand
him on this subject. He had indeed, he 

owned, no very strong aspirations after matrimony; 
and had balanced about it a good while, before he
could allow himself to declare his passion so seriously:
But only, as it was probable, that he might at one time
or other enter the pale, he thought he never in his life
saw a woman with whom he could be so happy, as
with me. 
But you see, Lucy, by this address of Mr. Grandison,
that nothing is thought of in the family of another
nature. What makes me a little more affected
than otherwise I believe I should be, is, That all you,
my dear friends, are so much in love with this really
great, because good, man. It is a very happy circumstance
for a young woman, to look forward to a
change of condition with a man, of whom every
one of her relations highly approves. But what can't
be, can't. I shall see what merit Lady Anne has by-and-by. 
But if fortune—Indeed, my dear, were I
the first princess on earth, I would have no other man,
if I might have him. And so I say, that am but poor
Harriet Byron. By this time Lady D. will have taken
such measures, I hope, as will not disturb me in my
resolution. It is fixed, my dear. I cannot help it. 
I must not, I ought not, I therefore will not, give
my hand, whatever has passed between that Lady and
my aunt, to any man living, and leave a preference in
my heart against that man. Gratitude, Justice,
Virtue, Decency, all forbid it. 
And yet, as I see no hope, nor trace for hope, I
have begun to attempt the conquest of my hopeless— 
What shall I call it? —Passion? —Well, if I must
call it so, I must. A child in love-matters, if I did
not, would find me out, you know. Nor will I, however
hopeless, be ashamed of owning it, if I can help
it. Is not reason, is not purity, is not delicacy, with
me? Is it person that I am in love with, if I am in
love? No: It is virtue, it is goodness, it is generosity,
it is true politeness, that I am captivated by; all 

centred in this one good man. What then have I to
be ashamed of? —And yet I am a little ashamed now-and-then,
for all that. 
After all, that Love, which is founded on fancy, or
exterior advantages, is a Love, I should think, that
may, and oftentimes ought to be overcome: But that
which is founded on interior worth; that blazes out
when charity, beneficence, piety, fortitude, are signally
exerted by the object beloved; how can such a
Love as that be restrained, damped, suppress'd? How
can it, without damping every spark of generous
goodness, in what my partial grandmamma calls a
fellow-heart, admiring and longing to promote and
share in such glorious philanthropy? 
Philanthropy! —Yes, my uncle: Why should women,
in compliance with the petulance of narrowminded
men, forbear to use words that some seem
to think above them, when no other single word will
equally express their sense? It will be said, They need
not write. Well then, don't let them read: And
carry it a little further, and they may be forbidden
to speak. And every lordly man will then be a Grand
Signor, and have his mute attendant. 
But won't you think my heart a little at ease, that
I can thus trifle? I would fain have it be at ease; and
that makes me give way to any chearful idea that
rises to my mind. 
The Ladies here have made me read to them several
passages out of my Letters to you before I send them. 
They are more generous than I think I wish them to
be, in allowing me to skip and pass over sentences and
paragraphs as I please: For is not this allowing that
I have something to write, or have written something,
that they think I ought to keep from their knowlege; 
and which they do not desire to know? With all my
heart. I will not be mean, Lucy. 
* *
Well, Lucy, Lady Anne has been here, and is 

gone. She is an agreeable woman. I can't say but she
is very agreeable. And were she actually Lady Grandison,
I think I could respect her. I think I could— 
But O, my dear friends, what an happy creature was
I, before I came to London! 
There was a good deal of discourse about Sir
Charles. She owned, that she thought him the
handsomest man she ever saw in her life. She was in
love with his great character, she said. She could go
no-where, but he was the subject. She had heard of
the affair between him and Sir Hargrave; and made
me an hundred compliments on the occasion; and
said, That her having heard, that I was at Colne-brooke,
was one inducement to her, to make this
visit. 
It seems, she told Miss Grandison, That she
thought me the prettiest creature she ever beheld. — 
Creature was her word—We are all creatures, 'tis
true: But I think I never was more displeased with
the sound of the word Creature, than I was from
Lady Anne. 
* *
My aunt's Letter relating to what passed between
her and Lady D. is just brought me. 
And so Lady D. was greatly chagrined! —I am
sorry for it. But, my dear aunt, you say, that she is
not displeased with me in the main, and commends
my sincerity. That, I hope, is but doing me justice. 
I am very glad to find, that she knew not how to get
over my prepossession in favour of another man. It
was worthy of herself, and of my Lord D.'s character. 
I shall always respect her. I hope this affair is quite
over. 
My grandmamma regrets the uncertainty I am in:
But did she not say herself, that Sir Charles Grandison
was too considerable in his fortune; in his merit? 
That we were but as the private, he the public, in
this particular? What room is there then for regret? 

Why is the word uncertainty used? We may be
certain—And there's an end of it. His sisters can
railly me; “Some happy man in Northamptonshire!” 
—As much as to say, “You must not think
of our brother.” “Lady Anne S. has a vast fortune.” 
Is not that saying, “What hope can you
have, Harriet Byron?” —Well, I don't care: This
life is but a passage, a short passage, to a better: And
let one jostle, and another elbow; another push me,
because they know the weakest must give way; yet I
will endeavour steadily to pursue my course, till I get
thro' it, and into broad and open day. 
One word only more on this subject—There is but
one man in the world, whom I can honestly marry,
my mind continuing what it is. His I cannot expect
to be: I must then of necessity be a single woman as
long as I live. Well! And where is the great evil of
that? Shall I not have less cares, less anxieties? —I
shall. And let me beg of my dear friends, that none
of you will ever again mention marriage to 
Your Harriet Byron. 

