



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To her Mother. 

Sat. Aug. 5. 
Honoured Madam,
No self-convicted criminal ever approached her
angry and just judge with greater awe, nor
with a truer contrition, than I do you by these lines. 

Indeed I must say, that if the matter of my humble
prayer had not respected my future welfare, I had
not dared to take this liberty. But my heart is set
upon it, as upon a thing next to God Almighty's
forgiveness necessary for me. 
Had my happy Sister known my distresses, she
would not have wrung my heart, as she has done, by
a Severity, which I must needs think unkind and unsisterly. 
But complaint of any unkindness from her belongs
not to me: Yet, as she is pleased to write, that it
must be seen that my penitence is less owing to disappointment,
than to true conviction, permit me,
Madam, to insist upon it, that, if such a plea can be
allowed me, I am actually entitled to the Blessing I
sue for; since my humble prayer is founded upon a
true and unfeigned repentance: And this you will the
readier believe, if the creature who never, to the
best of her remembrance, told her Mamma a wilful
falshood, may be credited, when she declares, as she
does, in the most solemn manner, that she met the
Seducer, with a determination not to go off with
him: That the rash step was owing more to compulsion
than to infatuation: And that her heart was so
little in it, that she repented and grieved from the
moment she found herself in his power; and for every
moment after, for several weeks before she had any
cause from him to apprehend the usage she met with. 
Wherefore, on my knees, my ever-honoured
Mamma, (for on my knees I write this Letter) I do
most humbly beg your Blessing: Say but, in so many
words (I ask you not, Madam, to call me your
Daughter)—Lost, unhappy wretch, I forgive you! and
may God bless you! —This is all! Let me, on a blessed
scrap of paper, but see one sentence to this effect,
under your dear hand, that I may hold it to my
heart in my most trying struggles, and I shall think it
a passport to Heaven. And, if I do not too much 

presume, and it were We iustead of I, and both your
honoured names subjoined to it, I should then have
nothing more to wish. Then would I say, “Great
and merciful God! thou seest here in this paper
thy poor unworthy creature absolved by her justly
offended Parents: O join, for my Redeemer's
sake, thy all-gracious Fiat, and receive a repentant
sinner to the arms of thy mercy!” 
I can conjure you, Madam, by no subject of motherly
tenderness, that will not, in the opinion of my
severe censurers (before whom this humble address
must appear) add to my reproach: Let me therefore,
for God's sake, prevail upon you to pronounce me
blest and forgiven, since you will thereby sprinkle
comfort thro' the last hours of 
Your Clarissa Harlowe. 