



To Miss Clarissa Harlowe;
To be left at Mr. Osgood's, near Soho-Square. 

Friday, April 21. 
It was expected you would send again to me, or
to my aunt Hervey. The inclosed has lain ready
for you therefore by direction. You will have no answer
from any-body, write to whom you will, and as
often as you will, and what you will. 
It was designed to bring you back by proper authority,
or to send you whither the disgraces you
have brought upon us all, should be in the likeliest
way, after a while, to be forgotten. But I believe
that design is over: So you may range securely: Nobody
will think it worth while to give themselves any
trouble about you. Yet my mamma has obtained
leave to send you your cloaths, of all sorts: But your
cloaths only. This is a favour you'll see by the within
letter not design'd you: And now not granted for your
sake, but because my poor mother cannot bear in
her sight any thing you used to wear. Read the inclosed,
and tremble. 
Arabella Harlowe. 


To the most ungrateful and undutiful of daughters.
Harlowe-Place, Sat. April 15. 
Sister that was,
For I know not what name you are permitted, or
choose to go by. 
You have filled us all with distraction. My father,
in the first agitations of his mind, on discovering your
wicked, your shameful elopement, imprecated, on
his knees, a fearful curse upon yon. Tremble at the
recital of it! —No less, than ‘that you may meet
your punishment, both here and hereafter, by means
of the very wretch, in whom you have chosen to
place your wicked confidence.” 
Your cloaths will not be sent you. You seem, by
leaving them behind you, to have been secure of them,
whenever you demanded them. But perhaps you
could think of nothing but meeting your fellow: — 
Nothing but how to get off your forward self! —For
every-thing seems to have been forgot, but what was
to contribute to your wicked flight. —Yet, you judged
right, perhaps, that you would have been detected,
had you endeavour'd to get off your cloaths! —Cunning
creature! not to make one step that we could
guess at you by! —Cunning to effect your own ruin,
and the disgrace of all the family! 
But does the wretch put you upon writing for
your things, for fear you should be too expensive to
him? —That's it, I suppose. 
Was there ever a giddier creature? —Yet this is
the celebrated, the blazing Clarissa—Clarissa, what? 
—Harlowe, no doubt! —And Harlowe it will be,
to the disgrace of us all!— 
Your drawings and your pieces are all taken down; 
as is also your own whole-length picture, in the Vandyke
taste, from your late parlour: They are taken
down, and thrown into your closet, which will be 

nailed up, as if it were not a part of the house; there
to perish together: For who can bear to see them? 
Yet, how did they use to be shewn to every-body; 
the former, for the magnifying of your dainty finger-works; 
the latter, for the imputed dignity [dignity
now in the dust!] of your boasted figure (a) ; and
this by those fond parents whom you have run away
from with so much, yet with so little contrivance! 
My brother vows revenge upon your libertine— 
For the family's sake he vows it—Not for yours! — 
For he will treat you, he declares, like a common
creature, if ever he sees you: And doubts not, that
this will be your fate. 
My uncle Harlowe renounces you for ever. 
So does my uncle Antony. 
So does my aunt Hervey. 
So do I, base unworthy creature! —The disgrace
of a good family, and the property of an infamous
rake, as questionless you will soon find yourself, if
you are not already! 
Your books, since they have not taught you what
belongs to your family, to your sex, and to your
education, will not be sent you. Your money neither. 
Nor yet the jewels so undeservedly made yours! For
it is wished you may be seen a beggar along London
streets! 
If all this is heavy, lay your hand to your heart,
and ask yourself, why you have deserved it? 
Every gentleman, whom your pride taught you to
reject with scorn (Mr. Solmes excepted, who, however,
has reason to rejoice that he missed you), triumphs
in your shameful elopement; and now knows
how to account for his being refused. 
Your worthy Norton is ashamed of you, and
mingles her tears with your mamma's; both reproaching 

themselves for their shares in you, and in so fruitless
an education. 
Every-body, in short, is ashamed of you: But
none more than 
Arabella Harlowe. 