



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Jan. 15. 
Such, my dear, was the situation Mr. Lovelace
and I were in when my Brother arrived from
Scotland. 
The moment Mr. Lovelace's visits were mentioned
to him, he, without either hesitation or apology, expressed
his disapprobation of them. He found great
flaws in his character; and took the liberty to say in
so many words, That he wondered how it came into
the heads of his Uncles to encourage such a man for
either of his Sisters: At the same time returning his
thanks to my Father for declining his consent till he
arrived, in such a manner, I thought, as a Superior
would do, when he commended an Inferior for having
well performed his duty in his absence. 
He justified his avowed inveteracy by common 

fame, and by what he had known of him at College; 
declaring, That he had ever hated him; ever should
hate him; and would never own him for a Brother,
or me for a Sister, if I married him. 
That early antipathy I have heard accounted for in
this manner: 
Mr. Lovelace was always noted for his vivacity and
courage; and no less, it seems, for the swift and surprising
progress he made in all parts of literature: 
For diligence in his studies in the hours of study, he
had hardly his equal. This it seems was his general
character at the University; and it gained him many
friends among the more learned; while those who did
not love him, feared him, by reason of the offence his
vivacity made him too ready to give, and of the
courage he shewed in supporting the offence when
given; which procured him as many followers as he
pleased among the mischievous sort. —No very amiable
character, you'll say, upon the whole. 
But my Brother's temper was not more happy. His
native haughtiness could not bear a superiority so visible; 
and whom we fear more than love, we are not
far from hating: And having less command of his
passions than the other, he was evermore the subject
of his perhaps indecent ridicule: So that they never
met without quarrelling: And every-body, either
from love or fear, siding with his antagonist, he had
a most uneasy time of it while both continued in the
same College. —It was the less wonder therefore that
a young man who is not noted for the gentleness of his
temper, should resume an antipathy early begun, and
so deeply rooted. 
He found my Sister, who waited but for the occasion,
ready to join him in his resentments against the
man he hated. She utterly disclaimed all manner
of regard for him: ‘Never liked him at all: — 
His Estate was certainly much incumbered: It was
impossible it should be otherwise; so entirely devoted 

as he was to his pleasures. He kept no house; 
had no equipage: Nobody pretended that he wanted
pride: The reason therefore was easy to be
guessed at.’ And then did she boast of, and my
Brother praise her for, refusing him: And both joined
on all occasions to depreciate him, and not seldom
made the occasions; their displeasure against him causing
every subject to run into this, if it began not
with it. 
I was not solicitous to vindicate him when I was
not joined in their reflections. I told them, I did not
value him enough to make a difference in the family
on his account: And as he was supposed to have given
too much cause for their ill opinion of him, I thought
he ought to take the consequence of his own faults. 
Now-and-then indeed, when I observed that their
vehemence carried them beyond all bounds of probability
in their charges against him, I thought it but
justice to put in a word for him. But this only subjected
me to reproach, as having a prepossession in his
favour which I would not own. —So that when I
could not change the subject, I used to retire either to
my music, or to my closet. 
Their behaviour to him when they could not help
seeing him, was very cold and disobliging; but as yet
not directly affrontive. For they were in hopes of
prevailing upon my Father to forbid his visits. But,
as there was nothing in his behaviour, that might warrant
such a treatment of a man of his birth and fortune,
they succeeded not: And then they were very
earnest with me to forbid them. I asked, What authority
I had to take such a step in my Father's house; 
and when my behaviour to him was so distant, that
he seemed to be as much the guest of any other person
of the family, themselves excepted, as mine? — 
In revenge, they told me, That it was cunning management
between us; and that we both understood
one another better than we pretended to do. And 

at last they gave such a loose to their passions, all of
a sudden (a) , as I may say, that instead of withdrawing,
as they used to do when he came, they threw
themselves in his way purposely to affront him. 
Mr. Lovelace, you may believe, very ill brooked
this: But nevertheless contented himself to complain
of it to me: In high terms however, telling me, that
but for my sake my Brother's treatment of him was
not to be borne. 
I was sorry for the merit this gave him in his own
opinion with me: And the more, as some of the affronts
he received were too flagrant to be excused: 
But I told him, That I was determined not to fall
out with my Brother, if I could help it, whatever
faults he had: And, since they could not see one
another with temper, should be glad that he would
not throw himself in my Brother's way; and I was
sure my Brother would not seek him. 
He was very much nettled at this answer: But said,
He must bear his affronts if I would have it so. He
had been accused himself of violence in his temper; 
but he hoped to shew on this occasion that he had a
command of his passions which few young men, so
highly provoked, would be able to shew; and doubted
not but it would be attributed to a proper motive
by a person of my generosity and penetration. 
My Brother had just before, with the approbation
of my Uncles, employed a person related to a discharged
Bailiff or Steward of Lord M. who had had the management
of some part of Mr. Lovelace's affairs
(from which he was also dismissed by him) to enquire
into his debts, after his companions, into his amours,
and the like. 
My Aunt Hervey, in confidence, gave me the following
particulars of what the man said of him. 
‘That he was a generous Landlord: That he 

spared nothing for solid and lasting improvements
upon his Estate; and that he looked into his own
affairs, and understood them: That he had been
very expensive when abroad; and contracted a large
debt (for he made no secret of his affairs); yet chose
to limit himself to an annual sum, and to decline
equipage, in order to avoid being obliged to his Uncle
and Aunts; from whom he might have what
money he pleased; but that he was very jealous of
their controul; had often quarrels with them; and
treated them so freely, that they were all afraid of
him. However, that his Estate was never mortgaged,
as my Brother had heard it was; his credit
was always high; and the man believed, he was by
this time near upon, if not quite, clear of the world. 
‘He was a sad gentleman, he said, as to women: — 
If his tenants had pretty daughters, they chose to
keep them out of his sight. He believed he kept
no particular mistress; for he had heard newelty,
that was the man's word, was every-thing with
him. But for his Uncle's and Aunt's teazings, the
man fansied he would not think of marriage: He
was never known to be disguised with liquor; but
was a great plotter, and a great writer: That he
lived a wild life in town, by what he had heard: 
Had Six or Seven companions as bad as himself; 
whom now-and-then he brought down with him; 
and the country was always glad when they went
up again. He would have it, that altho' passionate,
he was good-humour'd; lov'd as well to take a jest
as to give one; and would railly himself upon occasion
the freest of any man he ever knew.’ 
This was his character from an enemy; for, as my
Aunt observed, every-thing the man said commendably
of him came grudgingly, with a Must needs say— 
To do him justice, &c. while the contrary was delivered
with a free good-will. And this character, as a
worse was expected, tho' This was bad enough, not 

answering the end of enquiring after it, my Brother
and Sister were more apprehensive than before, that
his address would be encouraged, since the worst part
of it was known, or supposed, when he was first introduced
to my Sister. 
But, with regard to myself, I must observe in his
disfavour, that notwithstanding the merit he wanted to
make with me for his patience upon my Brother's ill-treatment
of him, I owed him no compliments for trying
to conciliate with him. Not that I believe it would
have signified any-thing if he had made ever such
court either to him or to my Sister: Yet one might
have expected from a man of his politeness, and from
his pretensions, you know, that he would have been
willing to try. Instead of which, he shewed such a
contempt both of my Brother and Sister, especially of
my Brother, as was construed into a defiance of them. 
And for me to have hinted at an alteration in his behaviour
to my Brother, was an advantage I knew he
would have been proud of; and which therefore I had
no mind to give him. But I doubted not that having
so very little encouragement from any-body, his pride
would soon take fire, and he would of himself discontinue
his visits, or go to town; where, till he
came acquainted with our family, he used chiefly to
reside: And in this latter case he had no reason to
expect, that I would receive, much less answer, his
Letters; the occasion which had led me to receive
any of his being by this time over. 
But my Brother's antipathy would not permit him
to wait for such an event; and after several excesses,
which Mr. Lovelace still returned with contempt, and
a haughtiness too much like that of the aggressor, my
Brother took upon himself to fill up the door-way
once when he came, as if to oppose his entrance: 
And, upon his asking for me, demanded, What his
business was with his Sister? 
The other, with a challenging air, as my Brother 

says, told him, He would answer a Gentleman any
question; but he wished that Mr. James Harlowe,
who had of late given himself high airs, would remember
that he was not now at College. 
Just then the good Dr. Lewen, who frequently
honours me with a visit of Conversation, as he is
pleased to call it, and had parted with me in my own
parlour, came to the door; and hearing the words,
interposed; both having their hands upon their swords: 
And telling Mr. Lovelace where I was, he burst by
my Brother, to come to me; leaving him chafing, he
said, like a hunted boar at bay. 
This alarmed us all. My Father was pleased to
hint to Mr. Lovelace, that he wished he would discontinue
his visits, for the peace-sake of the family: 
And I, by his command, spoke a great deal plainer. 
But Mr. Lovelace is a man not easily brought to
give up his purpose, especially in a point wherein he
pretends his heart is so much engaged: And no absolute
prohibition having been given, things went on
for a little while as before: For I saw plainly, that to
have denied myself to his visits (which however I declined
receiving as often as I could) was to bring forward
some desperate issue between the two; since the
offence so readily given on one side was brooked by
the other only out of consideration to me. 
And thus did my Brother's rashness lay me under
an obligation where I would least have owed it. 
The intermediate proposals of Mr. Symmes and
Mr. Mullins, both (in turn) encouraged by my Brother,
induced him to be more patient for a while, as
nobody thought me over-forward in Mr. Lovelace's
favour; for he hoped that he should engage my Father
and Uncles to approve of the one or the other in opposition
to the man he hated. But when he found that
I had interest enough to disengage myself from the addresses
of those gentlemen, as I had (before he went
to Scotland, and before Mr. Lovelace visited here) of 

Mr. Wyerley's, he then kept no measures: And first
set himself to upbraid me for a supposed prepossession,
which he treated as if it were criminal; and then to
insult Mr. Lovelace in person, at Mr. Edward
Symmes's, the Brother of the other Symmes, two
miles off; and no good Dr. Lewen being there to interpose,
the unhappy Rencounter followed. My Brother
was disarmed, as you have heard; and on being
brought home, and giving us ground to suppose he
was much worse hurt than he really was, and a fever
ensuing, every one flamed out; and all was laid at
my door. 
Mr. Lovelace for three days together sent twice
each day to enquire after my Brother's health; and
altho' he received rude and even shocking returns, he
thought fit on the fourth day to make in person the
same enquiries; and received still greater incivilities
from my two Uncles, who happened to be both there. 
My Father also was held by force from going to him
with his sword in his hand, altho' he had the gout
upon him. 
I fainted away with terror, seeing every one so violent,
and hearing Mr. Lovelace swear that he would
not depart till he had made my Uncles ask his pardon
for the indignities he had received at their hands; a
door being held fast locked between him and them. 
My Mother all the time was praying and struggling
to with-hold my Father in the Great Parlour. Mean
while my Sister, who had treated Mr. Lovelace with
virulence, came in to me, and insulted me as fast as I
recovered. But when Mr. Lovelace was told how ill
I was, he departed; nevertheless vowing revenge. 
He was ever a favourite with our domestics. His
bounty to them, and having always something facetious
to say to each, had made them all of his party: 
And on this occasion they privately blamed every-body
else, and reported his calm and gentlemanly behaviour
(till the provocations given him ran very high) in such 

favourable terms, that those reports, and my apprehensions
of the consequence of this treatment, induced
me to read a Letter he sent me that night; and, it being
written in the most respectful terms (offering to
submit the whole to my decision, and to govern himself
entirely by my will) to answer it some days after. 
To this unhappy necessity was owing our renewed
correspondence, as I may call it: Yet I did not write
till I had informed myself from Mr. Symmes's Brother,
that he was really insulted into the act of drawing
his sword by my Brother's repeatedly threatening
(upon his excusing himself out of regard to me) to
brand him if he did not; and, by all the enquiry I
could make, that he was again the sufferer from my
Uncles in a more violent manner than I have related. 
The same circumstances were related to my Father
and other relations by Mr. Symmes; but they had
gone too far in making themselves parties to the quarrel
either to retract or forgive; and I was forbidden to
correspond with him, or to be seen a moment in his
company. 
One thing however I can say, but that in confidence,
because my Mother commanded me not to
mention it: —That, expressing her apprehension of
the consequences of the indignities offered to Mr.
Lovelace, she told me, She would leave it to my prudence
to do all I could to prevent the impending mischief
on one side. 
I am obliged to break off. But I believe I have
written enough to answer very fully all that you have
required of me. It is not for a child to seek to clear
her own character, or to justify her actions, at the
expence of the most revered ones: Yet, as I know
that the account of all those further proceedings by
which I may be affected, will be interesting to so dear
a friend (who will communicate to others no more
than what is fitting) I will continue to write, as I have
opportunity, as minutely as we are used to write to 

each other. Indeed I have no delight, as I have often
told you, equal to that which I take in conversing
with you—By Letter, when I cannot in Person. 
Mean time, I cannot help saying, that I am exceedingly
concerned to find, that I am become so much
the public talk as you tell me I am. Your kind, your
precautionary regard for my fame, and the opportunity
you have given me to tell my own Story previous
to any new accident (which Heaven avert!) is so like
the warm friend I have ever found in my dear Miss
Howe, that, with redoubled obligation, you bind me
to be 
Your ever-grateful and affectionate,
Clarissa Harlowe. 
Copy of the requested Preamble to the clauses in her
Grandfather's Will: Inclosed in the preceding Letter. 
As the particular Estate I have mentioned and described
above, is principally of my own raising: 
As my three Sons have been uncommonly prosperous; 
and are very rich: The eldest by means of the unexpected
benefits he reaps from his new-found mines: 
The second, by what has, as unexpectedly, fallen in
to him on the deaths of several relations of his present
wife, the worthy daughter by both sides of very honourable
families; over and above the very large portion
which he received with her in marriage: My Son
Antony by his East-India traffick, and successful voyages: 
As furthermore my Grandson James will be
sufficiently provided for by his Grandmother Lovell's
kindness to him; who, having no near relations, hath
assured me, that she hath, as well by Deed of Gift as
by Will, left him both her Scotish and English Estates: 
For never was there a family more prosperous in all
its branches, blessed be God therefore: And as my
said Son James will very probably make it up to my
Grand-daughter Arabella; to whom I intend no disrespect; 
nor have reason; for she is a very hopeful 

and dutiful child: And as my Sons John and Antony
seem not inclined to a married life; so that my Son
James is the only one who has children, or is likely
to have any: —For all these reasons; and because my
dearest and beloved Grand-daughter Clarissa hath been
from her infancy a matchless young creature in her
duty to me, and admired by all who knew her, as a
very extraordinary child; I must therefore take the
pleasure of considering her as my own peculiar child; 
and this without intending offence; and I hope it will
not be taken as any, since my Son James can bestow
his favours accordingly, and in greater proportion,
upon his Son James, and upon his Daughter Arabella. 
—These, I say, are the reasons which move me to dispose
of the above described Estate in the precious
child's favour; who is the delight of my Old age: 
And, I verily think, has contributed, by her amiable
duty and kind and tender regards, to prolong my life. 
Wherefore it is my express Will and Commandment,
and I enjoin my said three Sons John, James,
and Antony, and my Grandson James, and my
Grand-daughter Arabella, as they value my Blessing,
and will regard my Memory, and would wish their
own last Wills and Desires to be fulfilled by their Survivors,
that they will not impugn or contest the following
bequests and devises in favour of my said
Grand-daughter Clarissa, altho' they should not be
strictly conformable to Law or to the forms thereof; 
nor suffer them to be controverted or disputed on any
pretence whatsoever. 
And in this confidence, &c. &c. &c. 