


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Receive, my Lucy, the doctor's sixth Letter. The
fifth has almost broken the hearts of us all. 


Dr. Bartlett's sixth Letter.
A scene of another nature took place of this, proceeds
Mr. Grandison. 
Camilla stept in, and said, The General was come; 
and was at that moment lamenting with the Marchioness
the disordered state of mind of his beloved
sister; who had again fainted away; but was quiet
when Camilla came in. 
The General will be here presently, said Jeronymo. 
Do you choose to see him? 
As, perhaps, he has been told I am here, it would
look too particular to depart instantly. If he comes
not in soon, I will take my leave of you. 
I had hardly done speaking, when the General entered,
drying his eyes. 
Your servant, Mr. Grandison, said he. Brother, 

How do you? Not the better, I dare say, for the present
affliction. Who the devil would have thought
the girl had been so deeply affected? —Well, Sir, you
have a glorious triumph! —Clementina's heart is not
a vulgar one. Her family— 
My Lord, I hope I do not deserve this address! — 
Triumph, my Lord! —Not a heart in this family can
be more distressed than mine. 
And is religion, is conscience, really of such force,
Chevalier? 
Let me ask that question, my Lord, of your own
heart: Let me ask it of your brother the Bishop; of
the other principals of your noble family: And the
answer given will be an answer for me. 
He seemed displeased. Explain yourself, Chevalier. 
If, my Lord, said I, you think there is so great, so
essential, a difference in the two religions, that you
cannot consent that I should keep my own; What
must I be, who think as highly of my own as you can
of yours, to give it up, tho' on the highest temporal
consideration? Make the case your own, my Lord. 
I can. And were I in your situation, such a woman
as my sister; such a family as ours; such a
splendid fortune as she will have; I believe, I should
not make the scruples you do. My brother the Bishop
indeed might not have given the same answer:
He might be more tenacious. 
The Bishop cannot be better satisfied with his religion
then I am with mine. But I hope, my Lord,
from what you have said, that I may claim the honour
of your friendship in this great article. It is proposed
to me, that I renounce my religion: I make no such
proposal to your family: On the contrary, I consent
that Lady Clementina should keep hers; and I am
ready to allow a very handsome provision for a discreet
man, her confessor, to attend her, in order to secure
her in it. As to residence; I will consent to reside 

one year in Italy, one in England; and even, if she
choose not to go to England at all, I will acquiesce; and
visit England myself but for three months in every year. 
As to the children, Mr. Grandison? said Signor Jeronymo; 
desirous of promoting the compromise. 
I will consent that daughters shall be the mother's
care; the education of sons must be left to me. 
What will the poor daughters have done, Chevalier,
sneeringly spoke the General, that they should be
left to perdition? 
Your Lordship, without my entering into the opinion
of the professors of both religions on this subject,
will consider my proposal as a compromise. I would
not have begun an address upon these terms with a
princess. I do assure you, that mere fortune has no
bias with me. Prescribe not to me in the article of
religion, and I will, with all my soul, give up every
ducat of your sister's fortune. 
Then what will you have to support— 
My Lord, leave that to your sister and me. I will
deal honourably with her. If she renounce me on
that article, you will have reason to congratulate
yourselves. 
Your fortune, Sir, by marriage, will be much more
considerable than it can be by patrimony, if Clementina
be yours: Why then should you not look forward
to your posterity as Italians? And in that case— 
He stopt there. —It was easy to guess at his inference. 
I would no more renounce my Country than my
Religion: I would leave posterity free; but would not
deprive them of an attachment that I value myself
upon: Nor yet my country, of a family that never
gave it cause to be ashamed of it. 
The General took snuff, and looked on me, and off
me, with an air too supercilious. I could not but be
sensible of it. 
I have no small difficulty, my Lord, said I, to bear 

the hardships of my situation, added to the distress
which that situation gives me, to be looked upon in
this family as a delinquent, without having done anything
to reproach myself with, either in thought,
word, or deed—My Lord, it is extremely hard. 
It is, my Lord, said Signor Jeronymo. The great
misfortune in the case before us, is, that the Chevalier
Grandison has merit superior to that of most men; 
and that our sister, who was not to be attached by
common merit, could not be insensible to his. 
Whatever were my sister's attachments, Signor Jeronymo,
we know yours; and generous ones they
are: But we all know how handsome men may attach
young Ladies, without needing to say a single
word. The poison once taken in at the eye, it will
soon diffuse itself through the whole mass. 
My honour, yet, my Lord, was never called in
question, either by man or woman. 
Your character is well known, Chevalier—Had it
not been unexceptionable, we should not have entered
into treaty with you on this subject, I do assure you; 
and it piques us not a little to have a daughter of our
house refused. You don't know the consequence, I
can tell you, of such an indignity offered in this
country. 
Refused! my Lord! —To endeavour to obviate this
charge, would be to put an affront upon your Lordship's
justice, as well as an indignity offered to your
truly noble house. 
He arose in anger, and swore that he would not be
treated with contempt. 
I stood up too; And if I am, my Lord, with indignity,
it is not what I have been used to bear. 
Signor Jeronymo was disturbed. He said, He was
against our seeing each other. He knew his brother's
warmth; and I, he said, from the scenes that had
before passed, ought perhaps to have shewn more pity
than resentment. 

It was owing to my regard for the delicacy of your
sister, Signor Jeronymo, said I (for whom I have the
tenderest sentiments), as well as to do justice to my
own conduct towards her, that I could not help shewing
myself affected by the word refused. 
Affected by the word refused! Sir, said the General
—Yes, you have soft words for hard meanings. 
But I, who have not your choice of words, make use
of those that are explained by actions. 
I was in hopes, my Lord, that I might rather have
been favoured with your weight in the proposed compromise,
than to have met with your displeasure. 
Consider, Chevalier, coolly consider this matter:
How shall we answer it to our country? (We are public
people, Sir); to the church, to which we stand related; 
to our own character; to marry a daughter of
our house to a Protestant? You say you are concerned
for her honour: What must we, what can we
say in her behalf, when she is reflected upon as a
Love-sick girl, who, tho' stedfast in her religion,
could refuse men of the first consideration, all of her
own religion and country, and let a foreigner, an
Englishman, carry her off?— 
Preserving nevertheless by stipulation, you will remember,
my Lord, her religion. —If you shall have
so much to answer for to the world with such a stipulation
in the Lady's favour, What shall I be thought
of, who, tho' I am not, nor wish to be, a public man,
am not of a low or inconsiderable family, if I, against
my conscience, renounce my religion and my country,
for a consideration, that, tho' the highest in private life,
is a partial and selfish consideration? 
No more, no more, Sir—If you can despise worldly
grandeur; if you can set light by Riches, Honours,
Love; my sister has this to be said in her praise, that
she is the first woman, that ever I heard of, who fell
in love with a philosopher: And she must, I think,
take the consequence of such a peculiarity. Her example
will not have many followers. 

Yes, my Lord, it will, said Jeronymo, if Mr.
Grandison be the philosopher. If women were to be
regimented, he would carry an army into the field
without beat of drum. 
I was vexed to find an affair that had penetrated my
heart, go off so lightly; but the levity shewn by the
General was followed by Jeronymo, in order to make
the past warmth between us forgotten. 
I left the brothers together. As I passed through
the salon, I had the pleasure of hearing, by a whisper
from Camilla, that her young Lady was somewhat
more composed for the operation she had yielded to. 
In the afternoon, the General made me a visit at
my lodgings. He told me, he had taken amiss some
things that had fallen from my mouth. 
I owned that I was at one time warm; but excused
myself by his example. 
I urged him to promote my interest as to the proposed
compromise. He gave me no encouragement; 
but took down my proposals in writing. 
He asked me, If my father were as tenacious in the
article of religion as I was? 
I told him, That I had forborn to write any-thing of
the affair to my father. 
That, he said, was surprising. He had always apprehended,
that a man who pretended to be strict in
religion, be it what religion it would, should be uniform. 
He who could dispense with one duty, might
with another. 
I answered, That having no view to address Lady
Clementina, I had only given my father general accounts
of the favour I had met with from a family so
considerable: That it was but very lately that I had
entertained any hopes at all, as he must know: That
those hopes were allayed by my fears that the articles
of religion and residence would be an insuperable obstacle:
But that it was my resolution, in the same
hour that I could have any prospect of succeeding, to 

lay all before him; and I was sure of his approbation
and consent to an alliance so answerable to the magnificence
of his own spirit. 
The General, at parting, with an haughty air said,
I take my leave, Chevalier: I suppose you will not be
in haste to leave Bologna. I am extremely sensible of
the indignity you have cast upon us all. I am, and
swore—We shall not disgrace our sister and ourselves,
by courting your acceptance of her. I understand,
that Olivia is in Love with you too. These contentions
for you may give you consequence with yourself. 
But Olivia is not a Clementina. You are in a country
jealous of family-honour. Ours is a first family in it. 
You know not what you have done, Sir 
What you have said, my Lord, I have not deserved
of you. It can-not be answered, at least by me. I
shall not leave Bologna till I apprize you of it, and
till I have the misfortune to be assured, that I cannot
have any hope of the honour once designed me. I
will only add, That my principles were well known
before I was written to at Vienna. 
And do you reproach us with that step? It was a
base one: It had not my concurrence. He went from
me in a passion. 
I had enough at my heart, Dr. Bartlett, had I been
spared this insult from a brother of Clementina. It
went very hard with me to be threatened. But I
thank God, I do not deserve the treatment. 

