



My dearest Mr. B.
I will continue my Subject, altho' I have not
had an Opportunity to know whether you approve
of my Notions or not, by reason of the Excursions
you have been pleased to allow me to make
in your beloved Company, to the Sea-ports of this
Kingdom, and to the more noted inland Towns of
Essex, Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, and Dorsetshire,
which have given me infinite Delight and Pleasure,
and inlarged my Notions of the Wealth and Power 

of the Kingdom, in which God's Goodness has
given you so considerable a Stake. 
My next Topick will be upon a Home Education,
which Mr. Locke prefers, for several weighty
Reasons, to a School one, provided such a Tutor
can be procur'd, as he makes next to an Impossibility
to procure. The Gentleman has set forth the
Inconveniencies of both, and was himself so discourag'd,
on a Review of them, that he was ready, as
he says, to throw up his Pen. My chief Cares, dear
Sir, on this Head, are Three: 1st, The Difficulty,
which, as I said, Mr. Locke makes almost insuperable,
to find a qualify'd Tutor. 2dly, The Necessity
there is, according to Mr. Locke, of keeping
the Youth out of the Company of the meaner Servants,
who may set him bad Examples. And,
3dly, Those still greater Difficulties, which will
arise from the Examples of his Parents, if they are
not very discreet and circumspect. 
As to the Qualifications of the Tutor, Mr. Locke
supposes, that he is to be so learned, so discreet, so
wise, in short, so perfect a Man, that, I doubt, and
so does Mr. Locke, such a one is hardly possible to
be met with, for this humble and slavish Imployment. 
I presume, Sir, to call it so, because of the
too little Regard that is generally paid to these useful
Men, in the Families of the Great, where they
are frequently put upon a Foot with the uppermost
Servants, and the rather, if they happen to be Men
of Modesty. 
’I would, says this Gentleman, from Childrens
first beginning to talk, have some discreet, sober,
nay, wise Person about them, whose Care it should
be to fashion them right, and to keep them from 

all Ill; especially the Infection of bad Company. 
I think, continues he, this Province requires great
Sobriety, Temperance, Tenderness, Diligence,
and Discretion; Qualities hardly to be found
united in Persons that are to be had for ordinary
Salaries, nor easily to be found any-where.’ 
If this, Sir, be the Case, does not this excellent
Author recommend a Scheme, that is render'd in a
manner impracticable from this Difficulty? 
As to these Qualities being more rarely to be met
with in Persons that are to be had for ordinary Salaries,
I cannot help being of Opinion, (altho', with
Mr. Locke, I think, no Expence should be spared,
if that would do) that there is as good a Chance for
finding a proper Person among the needy Scholars,
(if not of a low and sordid Turn of Mind) as among
the more Affluent: Because the narrow Circumstances
of the former (which probably became a
Spur to his own Improvement) will, it is likely,
at first setting out in the World, make him be glad
to embrace an Offer of this kind, in a Family which
has Interest enough to prefer him, and will quicken
his Diligence to make him deserve Preferment:
And if such a one wanted any thing of that requisite
Politeness, which some would naturally expect from
Scholars of better Fortune, might not that be supply'd
to the Youth by the Conversation of Parents,
Relations, and Visitors, in Conjunction with those
other Helps which young Gentlemen of Family and
large Expectations constantly have, and which few
learned Tutors can give him? 
I say not this, dear Sir, to countenance the
wretched Niggardliness (which this Gentleman
justly censures) of those who grudge a handsome 

Consideration to so necessary and painful a Labour
as that of a Tutor, which, where a deserving Man
can be met with, cannot be too genteelly rewarded,
nor himself too respectfully treated. I only take
the Liberty to deliver my Opinion, that a low Condition
is as likely, as any other, with a Mind not
ungenerous, as I said, to produce a Gentleman who
has these good Qualities, as well for the Reasons I
have hinted at, as for others, which might be mentioned. 
To which, to name no more, the Merit
of Mr. Williams and Mr. Adams will bear Witness. 
But Mr. Locke proceeds with his Difficulties in
this Particular: ‘To form a young Gentleman as he
should be, says he, 'tis fit his Governor should be
well-bred, understand the Ways of Carriage, and
Measures of Civility, in all the Variety of Persons,
Times, and Places; and keep his Pupil, as
far as his Age requires, constantly to the Observation
of them. This is an Art, continues he, not
to be learnt or taught by Books. Nothing can
give it, but good Company, and Observation,
join'd together.’ 
And in another Place, ‘Besides being well-bred,
the Tutor should know the World well; the Ways,
the Humours, the Follies, the Cheats, the Faults
of the Age he is fallen into, and particularly of
the Country he lives in: These he should be able
to shew to his Pupil, as he finds him capable; 
teach him Skill in Men and their Manners; pull
off the Mask, which their several Callings and
Pretences cover them with; and make his Pupil
discern what lies at the Bottom, under such Appearances,
that he may not, as unexperienc'd 

young Men are apt to do, if they are unwarn'd,
take one thing for another, judge by the Outsides,
and give himself up to Shew, and the Insinuation
of a fair Carriage, or an obliging Application:
Teach him to guess at, and beware of, the Designs
of Men he hath to do with, neither with too
much Suspicion, nor too much Confidence.’ 
This, dear Sir, is excellently said: 'Tis noble
Theory. And if the Tutor be a Man void of Resentment
and Caprice, and will not be govern'd by
partial Considerations in his own Judgment of Persons
and Things, all will be well: But if otherwise,
may he not take Advantage of the Confidence
placed in him, to the Injury of some worthy Person,
and by degrees monopolize the young Gentleman
to himself, and govern his Passions as absolutely,
as I have heard some First Ministers have done those
of their Prince, equally to his own personal Disreputation,
and to the Disadvantage of his People? 
But, 
All this, and much more, according to Mr. Locke,
is the Duty of a Tutor; and on the finding out such
a one, depends his Scheme of a Home Education. 
No Wonder then, that he himself says, ‘When I
consider the Scruples and Cautions I here lay in
your Way, methinks it looks as if I advised you to
something which I would have offer'd at, but in
Effect not done,’ &c. Permit me, dear Sir, in
this Place, to express my Fear, that it is hardly possible
for any one, of Talents inferior to those of
Mr. Locke himself, to come up to the Rules he has
laid down upon this Subject; and 'tis to be question'd,
whether even he, with all that vast Stock of
natural Reason, and solid Sense, for which, as you 

tell me, Sir, he was so famous, had attain'd to
these Perfections, at his first setting out into Life. 
Now, therefore, dear Sir, you can't imagine,
how these Difficulties perplex me, as to my knowing
how to judge which is best, a Home or a School
Education. —For hear what this excellent Author
justly observes on the latter, among other things no
less to the Purpose: ‘I am sure, he who is able to
be at the Charge of a Tutor at home, may there
give his Son a more genteel Carriage, more manly
Thoughts, and a Sense of what is worthy and becoming,
with a greater Proficiency in Learning
into the Bargain, and ripen him up sooner into a
Man, than any at School can do. Not that I blame
the School-master, in this, says he, or think it to
be laid to his Charge. The Difference is great
between Two or Three Pupils in the same House,
and three or fourscore Boys lodg'd up and down:
For, let the Master's Industry and Skill be never
so great, it is impossible he should have Fifty or a
Hundred Scholars under his Eye, any longer than
they are in the School together.’ But then, Sir,
if there be such a Difficulty, as Mr. Locke says, to
meet with a proper Tutor, for the Home Education
which he thus prefers, what a perplexing thing
is this! 
But still, according to this Gentleman, another
Difficulty attends a Home Education; and that is,
what I hinted at before, in my second Article, The
Necessity of keeping the Youth out of the Company
of the meaner Servants, who may set him bad Examples. 
For thus he says: ‘Here is another great
Inconvenience, which Children receive from the
ill Examples, which they meet with from the 

meaner Servants. They are wholly, if possible, to
be kept from such Conversation: For the Contagion
of these ill Precedents, both in Civility and
Virtue, horribly infects Children, as often as they
come within Reach of it. They frequently learn
from unbred or debauched Servants, such Language,
untowardly Tricks, and Vices, as otherwise
they would be ignorant of, all their Lives. 'Tis
a hard Matter wholly to prevent this Mischief,
continues he; you will have very good Luck, if
you never have a clownish or vicious Servant,
and if from them your Children never get any
Infection.’ 
Then, Sir, my third Point (which I mention'd
in the Beginning of this Letter) makes a still stronger
Objection, as it may happen, against a Home Education; 
to wit, The Example of the Parents themselves,
if they be not very circumspect and discreet. 
All these Difficulties being put together, let me,
dear Sir, humbly propose it, as a Matter for your
Consideration and Determination, Whether there
be not a middle Way to be found out in a School
Education, that may remedy some of these Inconveniencies? 
For, suppose you cannot get a Tutor
so qualified, as Mr. Locke thinks he ought to be,
for your Billy, as he grows up. Suppose there is
Danger from your meaner Servants; and suppose
we his Parents should not be able to lay ourselves
under the requisite Restraints, in order to form his
Mind by our own Examples, which, I hope, by
God's Grace, however, will not be the Case— 
Cannot some Master be found out, who shall be
so well rewarded for his Care of a few young Gentlemen,
as shall make it worth his while to be contented 

with those few? suppose Five, Six, Seven,
or Eight at most; whose Morals and Breeding he
may attend to, as well as to their Learning? The farther
this Master lives from the young Gentlemens
Friends, the better it may be. We will hope, that
he is a Man of a mild Disposition, but strict in his
Discipline, and who shall make it a Rule not to
give Correction for small Faults, or till every other
Method has been try'd; who carries such a just
Dignity in his Manner, without the Appearance of
Tyranny, that his Looks may be of greater Force,
than the Words of some, and his Words than the
Blows of others; and who will rather endeavour to
shame, than terrify, a Youth out of his Faults. Then,
Sir, suppose this Gentleman was to allot a particular
Portion of Time for the more learned Studies; and
before the Youth was tir'd with them, suppose another
Portion was alloted for the Writing and Arithmetick
Parts; and then, to relieve his Mind from
both, suppose the Dancing-master should take his
Part; and innocent Exercises of mere Diversion, to
fill up the rest, at his own Choice; in which, diverted
by such a Rotation of Imployments, (all
thus render'd delightful by their successive Variety)
he would hardly wish to pass much Time. For the
Dancing of itself will answer both Parts, that of
good Breeding, and that of Exercise: And thus different
Studies, at one time, may be master'd. 
Moreover the Emulation, which will be inspir'd,
where there are several young Gentlemen,
will be of inconceivable Use both to Tutor and
Pupil, in lessening the Trouble of the one, and advancing
the Learning of the other, which cannot
be expected, where there is but a single Youth to be
taken care of. 

Such a Master will know it to be his Interest, sa
well as his Duty, to have a watchful Eye over the
Conduct and Behaviour of his Servants. His Assistants,
in the different Branches of Science and
Education, will be Persons of approved Prudence,
for whom he will think himself answerable, since
his own Reputation, as well as his Livelihood, will
depend upon their Behaviour. The young Gentlemen
will have young Gentlemen for their Companions,
all under the Influence of the same Precepts
and Directions; and if some chosen Period were
fixed, once a Week, as a Reward for some Excellence,
where, at a little Desk, rais'd a Step or two
above the other Seats, the excelling Youth should
be set to read, under the Master's Direction, a little
Portion from the best Translations of the Greek
and Roman Historians, and even from the best
English Authors; this might, in a very engaging
manner, initiate them into the Knowlege of the
History of past Times, and of their own Country,
and give them a Curiosity to pass some of their
vacant Hours in the same laudable Pursuit: For,
dear Sir, I must still insist, that Rewards, and innocent
Gratifications, as also little Honours and Distinctions,
must needs be very attractive to the
Minds of Youth. 
For don't you think, dear Sir, that the pretty
Ride, and Dairy-house Breakfasting* , by which
Miss Goodwin's Governess distinguishes the little
Ladies, who excel in their allotted Tasks, is a fine
Encouragement to their ductile Minds? —Yes, it
is, to be sure! —And I have often thought of it 

with Pleasure, and have, in a manner, partaken of
the Delight, with which I have supposed their pretty
Hearts must be fill'd, on that Occasion. And why
may not such little Triumphs be, in Proportion, as
incentive to Children, to make them endeavour to
master laudable Tasks, as the Roman Triumphs, of
different Kinds, and their Mural and Civick Crowns,
all which I have heard you speak of, were to their
Heroes and Warriors of old? For Mr. Dryden well
observes, That 

Men are but Children of a larger Growth.
Our Appetites are apt to change, as theirs,
And full as craving too, and full as vain.

Permit me, Sir, to transcribe Four or Five
Lines more, for the Beauty of the Thought: 

And yet the Soul, shut up in her dark Room,
Viewing so clear abroad, at home sees nothing:
But, like a Mole in Earth, busy and blind,
Works all her Folly up, and casts it outward
To the World's open View—

Improving the Thought, methinks, I can see
the dear little Miss, who has, in some eminent
Task, borne away the Palm, make her publick Entry,
as I may call it, after her Dairy Breakfast, and
pretty Airing, into her Governess's Court-yard, thro'
a Row of her School-fellows, drawn out on each
Side, to admire her; her Governess and Assistants
receiving her at the Porch, their little Capitol, and
lifting her out with Applauses and Encomiums,
with a Thus shall it be done to the Miss, whom her 

Governess delighteth to honour! I see not, my
Mr. B. why the dear Miss, in this Case, as she
moves thro' her admiring School-fellows, may not
have her little Heart beat with as much Delight, be
as gloriously elated, proportionably, as that of the
greatest Hero, in his Triumphal Car, who has return'd
from Exploits, perhaps, much less laudable. 
But how I ramble! —Yet, surely, Sir, you
don't expect Method or Connexion from your Girl. 
The Education of our Sex will not permit that,
where it is best. We are forced to struggle for
Knowlege, like the poor feeble Infant in the Month,
who, as I describ'd in my first Letter on this Subject,
is pinn'd and fetter'd down upon the Nurse's Lap; 
and who, if its little Arms happen, by Chance, to
escape its Nurse's Observation, and offer but to expand
themselves, are immediately taken into Custody,
and pinn'd down to their passive Behaviour. 
So, when a poor Girl, in spite of her narrow Education,
breaks into Notice, her Genius is immediately
tamed by trifling Imployments, lest, perhaps,
she should become the Envy of one Sex, and the
Equal of the other. But you, Sir, act more nobly
with your Pamela; for you throw in her Way all
the Opportunities of Improvement that can offer; 
and she has only to regret, that she cannot make a
better Use of them, and, of consequence, render
herself more worthy of your generous Indulgence. 
I know not how, Sir, to recover my Thread; 
and so must break off with that Delight, which I
always take, when I come near the Bottom of my
Letters to your dear Self; because then I can boast
of the Honour which I have in being 
Your ever-dutiful
P. B. 

