


I Rose up early in the Morning; but found my
Father was up before me, and was gone to walk
in the Garden. I went to him: And with what
Delight, with what Thankfulness, did we go over
every Scene of it, that had before been so dreadful
to me! The Fish-Pond, the Back-door, and every
Place: O what Reason had we for Thankfulness and
Gratitude! 
About Seven o'Clock, my good Master join'd us,
in his Morning-gown and Slippers; and looking a
little heavy, I said, Sir, I fear you had not good Rest
last Night. That is your Fault, Pamela, said he: 
After I went from you, I must needs look into your
Papers, and could not leave them till I had read
them thro'; and so 'twas Three o'Clock before I
went to sleep. I wish, Sir, said I, you had had better
Entertainment. The worst Part of it, said he,
was what I had brought upon myself; and you have
not spar'd me. Sir, said I—He interrupting me, said,
Well, I forgive you. You had too much Reason
for it. But I find, plain enough, that if you had got
away, you would soon have been Williams's Wife: 
And I can't see how it could well have been otherwise. 
Indeed, Sir, said I, I had no Notion of it,
or of being any body's. I believe so, said he; but
it must have come on as a Thing of Course; and I
see your Father was for it. Sir, said he, I little 
thought of the Honour your Goodness would confer
upon her; and I thought that would be a Match
above what we could do for her, a great deal. But
when I found she was not for it, I resolved not to
urge her; but leave all to God's Grace, and her
own Prudence. 
I see, said he, all was sincere, honest, and open; 
and I speak of it, if it had been done, as a thing
that could hardly well be avoided; and I am quite
satisfied. But, said he, I must observe, as I have
an hundred times, with Admiration, what a prodigious
Memory, and easy and happy Manner of
Narration this excellent Girl has! And tho' she is
full of her pretty Tricks and Artifices, to escape the
Snares I had laid for her, yet all is innocent, lovely,
and uniformly beautiful. You are exceedingly happy
in a Daughter; and, I hope, I shall be so in a Wife.
–––;Or, said my Father, may she not have that Honour! 
—I fear it not, said he; and hope I shall deserve
it of her. 
But, Pamela, said my Master, I am sorry to find, in
some Parts of your Journal, that Mrs. Jewkes carry'd
her Orders a little too far. And I the more take
Notice of it, because you have not complain'd to
me of her Behaviour, as she might have expected
for some Parts of it. Tho' a good deal was occasion'd
by my strict Orders. —But she had the Insolence
to strike my Girl! I find. Sir, said I, I was
a little provoking, I believe; but as we forgave
one another, I was the less intitled to complain of
her. 
Well, said he, you are very good; but if you have
any particular Resentment, I will indulge it so far,
as that she shall hereafter have nothing to do where
you are. Sir, said I, you are so kind, that I ought
to forgive every body; and when I see that God
has brought about my Happiness by the very Means 
that I thought then my great Grievance; I ought to
bless those Means, and forgive all that was disagreeable
to me at the time, for the great Good that
has issued from it. —That, said he, and kissed me,
is sweetly consider'd! and it shall be my Part to
make you Amends for what you have suffer'd, that
you may still think lighter of the one, and have
Cause to rejoice in the other. 
My dear Father's Heart was full; and he said,
with his Hands folded, and lifted up, Pray, Sir, let
me go,—let me go,—to my dear Wife! and tell her
all these blessed things, while my Heart holds! for it
is ready to burst with Joy! Good Man! said my
Master,—I love to hear this honest Heart of yours
speaking at your Lips. I injoin you, Pamela, to
continue your Relation, as you have Opportunity; 
and tho' your Father be here, write to your Mother,
that this wondrous Story be perfect, and we, your
Friends, may read and admire you more and more. 
Ay, pray, pray do, my dear Child, said my Father. 
And this is the Reason that I write on, my dear
Mother, when I thought not to do it, because my
Father could tell you all that passed while he was
here. 
My Master took notice of my Psalm, and was pleas'd
to commend it; and said, That I had very charitably
turn'd the last Verses, which, in the Original,
was full of heavy Curses, to a Wish, that shew'd I
was not of an implacable Disposition; tho my then
Usage might have excused it, if I had. But, said
he, I think you shall sing it to me to-morrow. 
After we have breakfasted, added he, if you have
no Objection, Pamela, we'll take an Airing together; 
and it shall be in the Coach, because we'll have your
Father's Company. He would have excus'd himself; 
but my Master would have it so. But he was
much ashamed, because he was not in a Dress for my
Master's Company. 
My Master would make us both breakfast with
him, on Chocolate; and he said, I would have you,
Pamela, begin to dress as you used to do; for now,
at least, you may call your two other Bundles your
own; and if you want any thing against the approaching
Occasion, private, as I design it, I'll send
to Lincoln for it, by a special Messenger. I said,
My good Lady's Bounty, and his own, had set me
much above my Degree, and I had very good things
of all Sorts; and I did not desire any other, because
I would not excite the Censure of the Ladies. That
would be a different thing, he was pleased to say,
when he publickly own'd his Nuptials, after we came
to the other House. But at present, if I was satisfied,
he would not make Words with me. 
I hope, Mr. Andrews, said he to my Father,
you'll not leave us till you see the Affair over, and
then you'll be sure I mean honourably; and besides,
Pamela will be induced to set the Day sooner. O
Sir, said he, I bless God, I have no Reason to doubt
your meaning honourably; and I hope you'll excuse
me, if I set out on Monday Morning, very
early, to my dear Wife, and make her as happy as
I am. 
Why, Pamela, said my good Master, may it not
be perform'd on Tuesday, and then your Father,
may-be, will stay? —I should have been glad to
have had it to-morrow, added he; but I have sent
Monsieur Colbrand for a Licence, that you may
have no Scruple unanswer'd; and he can't very well
be back before to-morrow Night, or Monday Morning. 
This was most agreeable News. I said, Sir, I
know my dear Father will want to be at home. And
as you was so good to give me a Fortnight from
last Thursday, I should be glad you'll be pleased to
indulge me with some Day in the second Seven. 
Well, said he, I will not be too urgent; but the
sooner you fix, the better. Mr. Andrews, we must
leave something to these Jephtha's Daughters, in
these Cases, he was pleased to say: I suppose the
little bashful Folly, which, in the happiest Circumstances,
may give a kind of Regret to quit the Maiden
State, and an Aukwardness at the Entrance of
a new one, is a Reason with Pamela; and so she
shall name her Day. Sir, said he, you are all Goodness. 
I went up soon after, and new dress'd myself,
taking Possession, in a happy Moment, I hope, of
my two Bundles, as my good Master was pleased to
call them, (alluding to my former Division of those
good things my Lady and himself bestow'd upon
me) and so put on fine Linen, silk Shoes, and fine
white Cotton Stockens, a fine quilted Coat, a delicate
green mantua silk Gown and Coat; a French
Necklace, and a lac'd Head, and Handkerchief, and
clean Gloves; and taking my Fan in my Hand, I,
like a little proud Hussy, looked in the Glass, and
thought myself a Gentlewoman once more; but I
forgot not to thank God, for being able to put on
this Dress with so much Comfort. 
Mrs. Jewkes would help to dress me, and complimented
me highly, saying, among other things,
that now I looked like her Lady indeed! And as,
she said, the little Chapel was ready, and Divine
Service would be read in it to-morrow, she wished
the happy Knot might then be ty'd. Said she, Have
you not seen the Chapel, Madam, since it has been
cleaned out? —No, said I; but are we to have
Service in it to-morrow, do you say? —I am glad
of that; for I have been a sad Heathen lately, sore
against my Will! —But who is to officiate? —Somebody,
reply'd she, Mr. Peters will send. You tell
me very good News, said I, Mrs. Jewkes. I hope it 
will never be a Lumber-room again. —Ay, said she,
I can tell you more good News; for the two Miss
Darnfords, and Lady Jones, are to be here at the
Opening of it; and will stay and dine with you. 
My Master, said I, has not told me that. You must
alter your Stile, Madam, said she. It must not be
Master, now, sure! —O, return'd I, that is a Language
I shall never forget. He shall always be my Master; 
and I shall think myself more and more his
Servant. 
My poor Father did not know I went up to dress
myself; and he said, his Heart misgave him, when
he saw me first, for fear I was made a Fool of, and
that here was some fine Lady that was to be my
Master's true Wife. And he stood in Admiration,
and said, O, my dear Child, how well will you become
your happy Condition! Why you look like a
Lady already! —I hope, my dear Father, said I,
and boldly kissed him, I shall always be your dutiful
Daughter, whatever my Condition be. 
My Master sent me word he was ready; and
when he saw me, said, Dress as you will, Pamela,
you're a charming Girl; and so handed me to the
Coach, and would make my Father and me sit both
on the Fore-side; and sat backwards, over-against
me; and bid the Coachman drive to the Meadow; 
that is, where he once met Mr. Williams. 
The Conversation was most agreeable to me, and
to my dear Father, as we went; and he more and
more exceeded in Goodness and Generosity; and,
while I was gone up to dress, he had presented my
Father with twenty Guineas; desiring him to buy
himself and my Mother such Apparel, as they should
think proper; and lay it all out: But I knew not this
till after that we came home; my Father having no
Opportunity to tell me of it. 
He was pleased to tell me of the Chapel being
got in tolerable Order; and said, it look'd very well; 
and against he came down next, it should be all
new white-wash'd, and painted, and lin'd; and a
new Pulpit-cloth, Cushion, Desk, &c. and that it
should always be kept in order for the future. He
told me, the two Miss Darnford's, and Lady Jones,
would dine with him on Sunday; And with their
Servants and mine, said he, we shall make a tolerable
little Congregation. And, added he, have I not
well contriv'd, to shew you, that the Chapel is really
a little House of God, and has been consecrated,
before we solemnize our Nuptials in it? —O, Sir,
reply'd I, your Goodness to me is inexpressible! Mr.
Peters, said he, offer'd to come and officiate in it; 
but would not stay to dine with me, because he has
Company at his own House; and so I intend that
Divine Service shall be perform'd in it, by one to
whom I shall make some yearly Allowance, as a sort
of Chaplain. —You look serious, Pamela, added he; 
I know you think of your Friend Williams. Indeed,
Sir, said I, if you won't be angry, I did. Poor
Man! I am sorry I have been the Cause of his disobliging
you. 
When we came to the Meadow, where the Gentry
have their Walk sometimes, the Coach stopt,
and my Master alighted, and led me to the Brookside; 
and it is a very pretty Summer Walk. He
asked my Father, if he chose to walk out, or go on
in the Coach, to the further End. He, poor Man,
chose to go in the Coach, for fear, he said, any
Gentry should be walking there; and he told me,
he was most of the way upon his Knees, in the
Coach, thanking God for his gracious Mercies and
Goodness; and begging a Blessing upon my good
Master and me. 
I was quite astonish'd, when we came into the
shady Walk, to see Mr. Williams there. See there,
said my Master, there's poor Williams, taking his
solitary Walk again, with his Book. And it seems,
it was so contriv'd; for Mr. Peters had been, as I
since find, desir'd to tell him, to be in that Walk at
such an Hour in the Morning. 
So, old Acquaintance, said my Master, again have
I met you in this Place? What Book are you now
reading? He said, It was Boileau's Lutrin. Said
my Master, You see I have brought with me my
little Fugitive, that would have been: While you
are perfecting yourself in French, I am trying to
learn English; and hope soon to be Master of it. 
Mine, Sir, said he, is a very beautiful Piece of
French: But your English has no Equal. 
You are very polite, Mr. Williams, said my Master. 
And he that does not think as you do, deserves
no Share in her. Why, Pamela, added he, very
generously, why so strange, where you have once
been so familiar? I do assure you both, that I mean
not, by this Interview, to insult Mr. Williams, or
confuse you. Then I said, Mr. Williams, I am very
glad to see you well; and tho' the generous Favour
of my good Master has happily changed the Scene,
since you and I last saw one another, I am nevertheless
very glad of an Opportunity to acknowledge,
with Gratitude, your good Intentions, not so much
to serve me, as me, but as a Person that then had
great Reason to believe herself in Distress. And, I
hope, Sir, added I, to my Master, your Goodness
will permit me to say this. 
You, Pamela, said he, may make what Acknowledgments
you please to Mr. Williams's good Intentions; 
and I would have you speak as you think; 
but I do not apprehend myself to be quite so much
oblig'd to those Intentions. 
Sir, said Mr. Williams, I beg leave to say, I knew
well, that, by Education, you was no Libertine; 
nor had I Reason to think you so by Inclination; 
and when you came to reflect, I hoped you would
not be displeased with me. And this was no small
Motive to me, at first, to do as I did. 
Ay, but, Mr. Williams, said my Master, could you
think, that I should have had Reason to thank you,
if, above all her Sex, I loved one Person, and you
had robbed me of her, and marry'd her yourself? 
––– And then, said he, you are to consider, that she
was of long Acquaintance with me, and a quite
new one to you; that I had sent her down to my
own House, for better securing her; and that you,
who had Access to my House, could not effect your
Purpose, without being guilty, in some sort, of a
Breach of the Laws of Hospitality and Friendship. 
As to my Designs upon her, I own they had not
the best Appearance; but still I was not answerable
to Mr. Williams on that Score; much less could
you be excus'd, to invade a Property so very dear
to me, and to endeavour to gain an Interest in her
Affections, tho' you could not be certain, that Matters
would not turn out as they have actually done. 
I own, said he, that some Parts of my Conduct
seem exceptionable, as you state it. But, Sir, I am
but a young Man. I meant no Harm. I had no
Interest, I am sure, to incur your Displeasure; and
when you think of every thing, and the inimitable
Graces of Person, and Perfections of Mind, that
adorn this excellent Lady, (so he called me) you
will, perhaps, find your Generosity allow something
as an Extenuation of a Fault, which your Anger
would not permit as an Excuse. 
I have done, said my Master; nor did I meet you
here to be angry with you. Pamela knew not that
she should see you; and now you are both present, 
I would ask you, Mr. Williams, If, now you know
my honourable Designs towards this good Girl, you
can really be almost, I will not say quite, as well
pleased with the Friendship of my Wife, as you
could be with the Favour of Mrs. Andrews? 
Sir, said he, I will answer you truly. I think I
could have preferr'd, with her, any Condition that
could have befallen me, had I consider'd only myself. 
But, Sir, I was very far from having any Encouragement
to expect her Favour; and I had
much more Reason to believe, that if she could
have hoped for your Goodness, her Heart was too
much pre-engaged, to think of any body else. And
give me Leave further to say, Sir, That tho' I tell
you sincerely my Thoughts, were I only to consider
myself; yet when I consider her Good, and her Merit,
I should be highly ungenerous, were it put to my
Choice, if I could not wish her in a Condition so
much superior to what I could do for her, and so
very answerable to her Merit. 
Pamela, said my Master, you are obliged to Mr.
Williams, and ought to thank him: He has distinguished
well. But as for me, who had like to have
lost you by his means, I am glad the Matter was not
left to his Choice. Mr. Williams, said he, I give you
Pamela's Hand, because I know it will be pleasing
to her, in Token of her Friendship and Esteem for
you; and I give you mine, that I will not be your
Enemy. But yet I must say, that I think I owe
this proper Manner of your Thinking more to your
Disappointment, than to the Generosity you talk of. 
Mr. Williams kissed my Hand, as my Master gave
it him; and my Master said, Sir, you will go home
and dine with me, and I'll shew you my little Chapel; 
and do you, Pamela, look upon yourself at
Liberty to number Mr. Williams in the List of your
Friends. 
How generous, how noble was this! Mr. Williams
(and so had I) had Tears of Pleasure in his Eyes. I
was silent; but Mr. Williams said, Sir, I shall be
taught, by your Generosity, to think myself inexcusably
wrong, in every Step I took, that could
give you Offence; and my future Life shall shew
my respectful Gratitude. 
We walked on till we came to the Coach, where
was my dear Father. Pamela, said my Master, tell
Mr. Williams who that good Man is. O, Mr. Williams!
said I, it is my dear Father; And, my Master
was pleased to say, one of the honestest Men in
England. Pamela owes every thing that she is to
be, as well as her Being, to him; for, I think, she
would not have brought me to this, nor made so
great Resistance, but for the good Lessons, and religious
Education she imbib'd from him. 
Mr. Williams said, taking my Father's Hand, You
see, good Mr. Andrews, with inexpressible Pleasure,
the Fruits of your pious Care; and now are in a
way, with your beloved Daughter, to reap the happy
Effects of it. —I am overcome, said my dear Father,
with his Honour's Goodness. But I can only say,
I bless God, and bless him. 
Mr. Williams and I being nearer the Coach than
my Master; and he offering to draw back, to give
way to him, he kindly said, Pray, Mr. Williams,
oblige Pamela with your Hand; and step in yourself. 
He bow'd, and took my Hand, and my Master
made him step in, and sit next me, all that ever
he could do, and sat himself over-against him, next
my Father, who sat against me. 
And he said, Mr. Andrews, I told you Yesterday,
that the Divine you saw, was not Mr. Williams; I
now tell you, this Gentleman is: And tho' I have
been telling him, I think not myself obliged to his
Intentions; yet I will own, that Pamela and you 
are; and tho' I won't promise to love him, I would
have you. 
Sir, said Mr. Williams, you have a way of overcoming,
that hardly all my Reading affords an Instance
of the like; and it is the more noble, as it is
on this Side, as I presume, the happy Ceremony; 
which, great as your Fortune is, will lay you under
an Obligation to so much Virtue and Beauty, when
she becomes yours; for you will then have a Treasure
that Princes might envy. 
Said my generous Master, (God bless him!) Mr.
Williams, it is impossible that you and I should long
live at Variance, when our Sentiments agree so well
together, on Subjects the most material. 
I was quite confused; and my Master seeing it,
took my Hand, and said, Look up, my good Girl!
and collect yourself. —Don't injure Mr. Williams
and me so much, as to think we are capping Compliments,
as we used to do Verses, at School. I
dare answer for us both, that we say not a Syllable
we don't think. 
O, Sir, said I, how unequal am I to all this Goodness! 
Every Moment that passes, adds to the Weight
of the Obligations you oppress me with. 
Think not too much of that, said he, most generously. 
Mr. Williams's Compliments to you have
great Advantage of mine: For, tho' equally sincere,
I have a great deal to say, and to do, to compensate
the Sufferings I have made you undergo; and,
at last, must sit down dissatisfied, because those will
never be aton'd by all I can do for you. 
He saw my dear Father quite unable to support
these affecting Instances of his Goodness; and he let
go my Hand, and took his, and said, seeing his
Tears, I wonder not, my dear Pamela's Father, that
your honest Heart springs thus to your Eyes, to see
all her Trials at an End. I will not pretend to say, 
that I had formerly either Power or Will to act
thus. But since I began to resolve on the Change
you see, I have reap'd so much Pleasure in it, that
my own Interest will keep me steady. For, till
within these few Days, I knew not what it was to be
happy. 
Poor Mr. Williams, with Tears of Joy in his Eyes,
said; How happily, Sir, have you been touched by
the Divine Grace, before you have been hurried
into the Commission of Sins, that the deepest Penitence
could hardly have aton'd for! —God has enabled
you to stop short of the Evil; and you have
nothing to do, but to rejoice in the Good, which
now will be doubly so, because you can receive it
without the least inward Reproach. 
You do well, said he, to remind me, that I owe
all this to the Grace of God. I bless Him for it; 
and I thank this good Man for his excellent Lessons. 
I thank his dear Daughter for following them: And,
I hope, from her good Example, and your Friendship,
Mr. Williams, in time, to be half as good as
my Tutoress. And that, said he, I believe you'll
own, will make me, without Disparagement to any
Gentleman, the best Fox-hunter in England. —Mr.
Williams was going to speak: And he said, You put
on so grave a Look, Mr. Williams, that, I believe,
what I have said, with you practical good Folks, is
liable to Exception: But I see we were become
quite grave; and we must not be too serious neither. 
What a happy Creature, my dear Mother, is your
Pamela! —O may my thankful Heart, and the good
Use I may be enabled to make of the Blessings before
me, be a Means to continue this delightful Prospect
to a long Date, for the sake of the dear good
Gentleman, who thus becomes the happy Instrument,
in the Hands of Providence, to bless all he smiles 
upon! To be sure, I shall never enough acknowledge
the Value he is pleased to express for my Unworthiness,
in that he has prevented my Wishes,
and, unask'd, sought the Occasion of being reconciled
to a good Man, who, for my sake, had incurred
his Displeasure; and whose Name he could not,
a few Days before, permit to pass thro' my Lips:
But see the wonderful Ways of Providence! The
very things that I most dreaded his seeing or knowing,
the Contents of my Papers, have, as I hope,
satisfy'd all his Scruples, and been a Means to promote
my Happiness. 
Henceforth let not us poor short-sighted Mortals
pretend to rely on our own Wisdom; or vainly
think, that we are absolutely to direct for ourselves. 
I have abundant Reason, I am sure, to say, that
when I was most disappointed, I was nearer my
Happiness. For, had I made my Escape, which was
so often my chief Point of View, and what I had
placed my Heart upon, I had escaped the Blessings
now before me, and fallen, perhaps headlong, into
the Miseries I would have avoided! And yet, after
all, it was necessary I should take the Steps I did,
to bring on this wonderful Turn! O the unsearchable
Wisdom of God! —And how much ought I
to adore the Divine Goodness, and humble myself,
who am made a poor Instrument, as, I hope, not
only to magnify his Graciousness to this fine Gentleman
and myself; but to dispense Benefits to others? 
Which God of his Mercy grant! 
In the agreeable manner I have mentioned, did
we pass the Time in our second happy Tour; and
I thought Mrs. Jewkes would have sunk into the
Ground, when she saw Mr. Williams brought in the
Coach with us, and treated so kindly. We dined
together in a most pleasant, and easy, and frank 
manner; and I found I needed not, from my Master's
Generosity, to be under any Restraint, as to
my Conduct to this good Clergyman; for he, so
often as he fansy'd I was reserv'd, mov'd me to be
free with him, and to him; and several times called
upon me to help my Father and Mr. Williams; and
seem'd to take great Delight in seeing me carve
and help round, as indeed he does in every thing
I do. 
After Dinner we went and looked into the Chapel; 
which is a very pretty one, and very decent; and
when finish'd, as he designs it, against his next coming
down, will be a very pretty Place. 
My Heart, my dear Mother, when I first sat my
Foot in it, throbb'd a good deal, with awful Joy,
at the Thoughts of the Solemnity, which, I hope,
will be, in a few Days, performed here. And when
I came up towards the little pretty Altar-piece, while
they were looking at a Communion-picture, and
saying it was prettily done, I gently stept into a Corner,
out of Sight, and poured out my Soul to God,
on my Knees, in Thankfulness and Supplication,
that, after having been so long absent from Divine
Service, the first time that I enter'd into a House
dedicated to His Honour, should be with such blessed
Prospects before me; and begging of God to
continue me humble, and to make me not unworthy
of his Mercies; and that he would be pleased
to bless the next Author of it, my good Master. 
I heard my Master say, Where's Pamela? And so I
broke off sooner than I would, and went up to him. 
He said, Mr. Williams, I hope I have not so offended
you, by my Conduct past, (for really it is
what I ought to be ashamed of) as that you will
refuse to officiate, and to give us your Instructions
here to-morrow. Mr. Peters was so kind, for the
first time, to offer it; but I know it would be inconvenient 
for him; and besides, I was willing to make
this Request to you an Introduction to our Reconciliation. 
Sir, said he, most willingly, and most gratefully
will I obey you. Tho', if you expect a Discourse,
I am wholly unprepar'd for the Occasion. I would
not have it, reply'd he, pointed to any particular Occasion; 
but if you have one upon the Text,––– There
is more Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repenteth,
than over Ninety-nine just Persons that need not Repentance; 
and if it makes me not such a sad Fellow
as to be pointed at by mine and the Ladies Servants
we shall have here, I shall be well content. 'Tis a
general Subject, added he, makes me speak of that; 
but any one you please will do; for you cannot
make a bad Choice, I am sure. 
Sir, said he, I have one upon that Text; but I
am ready to think, that a Thanksgiving one, which
I made on a great Mercy to myself, if I may be
permitted to make my own Acknowledgments of
your Favour the Subject of a Discourse, will be
suitable to my grateful Sentiments. It is on the
Text,––– Now lettest thou thy Servant depart in
Peace; for my Eyes have seen thy Salvation. 
That Text, said I, will be a very suitable one for
me. Not so, Pamela, said my Master; because I
don't let you depart in Peace; but I hope you will
stay here with Content. 
O but, Sir, said I, I have seen God's Salvation! ––– I
am sure, added I, if any body ever had Reason, I
have, to say, with the blessed Virgin, My Soul doth
magnify the Lord; for he hath regarded the low
Estate of his Handmaiden,––– and exalted one of low
Degree. 
Said my good Father, I am sure, if there were
Time for it, the Book of Ruth would afford a fine
Subject for the Honour done my dear Child. 
Why, good Mr. Andrews, said my Master, should
you say so? ––– I know that Story, and Mr. Williams
will confirm what I say, that my good Girl here
will confer at least as much Honour as she will
receive. 
Sir, said I, you are inexpressibly generous; but
I shall never think so. Why, my Pamela, said he,
that's another thing: It will be best for me to think
you will; and it will be kind in you to think you
shan't; and then we shall have always an excellent
Rule to regulate our Conduct by to one another. 
Was not this finely, nobly, wisely said, my dear
Mother? –––– O what a blessed thing it is to be
match'd to a Man of Sense and Generosity! ––– How
edifying! —How! —But what shall I say! —I am
at a Loss for Words. 
Mr. Williams said, When we came out of the
little Chapel, he would go home, and look over his
Discourses, for one for the next Day. My Master
said, I have one thing to say, before you go. —When
my Jealousy, on Account of this good Girl, put me
upon such a vindictive Conduct to you, you know
I took a Bond for the Money I had caused you to
be troubled for: I really am ashamed of the Matter; 
because I never intended, when I presented it
to you, to have it again, you may be sure: But I
knew not what might happen between you and her,
nor how far Matters might have gone between you; 
and so I was willing to have that in Awe over you. 
And, I think, it is no extraordinary Present, therefore,
to give you up your Bond again, cancell'd. 
And so he took it from his Pocket, and gave it
him. I think, added he, all the Charges attending it,
and the Trouble you had, were defray'd by my Attorney:
I order'd that they should. They were,
Sir, said he; and Ten thousand Thanks to you for
this Goodness, and the kind manner in which you 
do it! —If you will go, Mr. Williams, said he, shall
my Chariot carry you home? No, Sir, answer'd he,
I thank you. My Time will be so well employ'd all
the way in thinking of your Favours, that I chuse to
meditate upon them, as I walk home. 
My dear Father was very uneasy about his Habit,
for appearing at Chapel next Day, because of Miss
Darnfords, and the Servants, for fear, poor Man,
he should disgrace my Master; and he told me,
when he was mentioning this, my Master's kind Present
of Twenty Guineas for Cloaths, for you both; 
which made my Heart truly joyful. But Oh! to be
sure, I never can deserve the hundredth Part of his
Goodness! —It is almost a hard thing to lie under
the Weight of such deep Obligations on one side; 
and such a Sense of one's own Unworthiness of the
other! —O! what a Godlike Power is that of doing
Good! —I envy the Rich and the Great for nothing
else! 
My Master coming to us just then, I said, Oh! 
Sir, will your Bounty know no Limits! My dear
Father has told me what you have given him! ––– A
Trifle, Pamela, said he; a little Earnest only of my
Kindness. —Say no more of it. But did I not hear
the good Man expressing some sort of Concern for
somewhat? Hide nothing from me, Pamela. Only,
Sir, said I, he knew not how to absent himself from
Divine Service, and yet is afraid of disgracing you
by appearing. 
Fie, Mr. Andrews, said he, I thought you knew that
the outward Appearance was nothing. I wish I had
as good a Habit inwardly, as you have. But I'll tell
you, Pamela, your Father is not much thinner than
I am, nor much shorter; he and I will walk up together
to my Wardrobe; tho' it is not so well stor'd
here, as in Bedfordshire. 
And so, said he, pleasantly, Don't you pretend to
come near us, till I call you; for you must not yet
see how Men dress and undress themselves. O, Sir,
said my Father, I beg to be excused. I am sorry
you are told. So am not I, said my Master: Pray
come along with me. 
He carry'd him up Stairs, and shew'd him several
Suits; and would have had him take his Choice. 
My poor Father was quite confounded: For my
Master saw not any he thought too good, and my
Father none that he thought bad enough. And my
good Master, at last, (he fixing his Eye upon a fine
Drab, which he thought looked the plainest) would
help him to try the Coat and Waistcoat on himself; 
and indeed, one would not have thought it, because
my Master is taller, and rather plumper, as I thought; 
but, as I saw afterwards, they fitted him very well:
And being plain, and lined with the same Colour,
and made for travelling in a Coach, pleased my poor
Father much. He gave him the whole Suit, and
calling up Mrs. Jewkes, said, Let these Cloaths be
well aired against to-morrow Morning. Mr. Andrews
brought only with him his common Apparel,
not thinking to stay Sunday with us. And pray see
for some of my Stockens; and whether none of
my Shoes will fit him; and see also for some of
my Linen; for we have put the good Man quite out
of his Course, by keeping him Sunday over. He
was then pleased to give him the silver Buckles out
of his own Shoes. So, my good Mother, you must
expect to see my dear Father a great Beau. Wig,
said my Master, he wants none; for his own venerable
white Locks are better than all the Perukes in
England. —But I am sure I have Hars enow somewhere. 
I'll take care of every thing, Sir, said Mrs.
Jewkes. —And my poor Father, when he came to
me, could not refrain Tears. I know not how, 
said he, to comfort myself under these great Favours
O my Child, it is all owing to God's Goodness, and
your Virtue. 