


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Sat. April 1. 
Dr. Bartlett is one of the kindest as well as best of
men. I believe he loves me as if I were his own
child: But good men must be affectionate men. He
received but this morning a letter from Sir Charles,
and hastened to communicate some of its contents to
me, tho' I could pretend to no other motive but curiosity
for wishing to be acquainted with the proceedings
of his patron. 
Sir Charles dined, as he had intended, with Sir
Hargrave and his friends. He complains in his letter
of a riotous day: “Yet I think, adds he, it has led me
into some useful reflexions. It is not indeed agreeable to
be the spectator of riot; but how easy to shun being a
partaker in it! How easy to avoid the too freely circling
glass, if a man is known to have established a rule
to himself, from which he will not depart; and if it
be not refused sullenly; but mirth and good humour 

the more studiously kept up, by the person; who would
else indeed be looked upon as a spy on unguarded folly! 
I heartily pitied a young man, who, I dare say, has
a good heart, but from false shame durst not affert the
freedom that every Englishman would claim a right to,
in almost every other instance! He had once put by
the glass, and excused himself on account of his health; 
but on being laughed at for a sober dog, as they phrased
it, and asked, if his spouse had not lectured him before
he came out, he gave way to the wretched raillery:
Nor could I interfere at such a noisy moment
with effect: They had laughed him out of his caution
before I could be heard; and I left him there at
nine o'clock trying with Bagenhall which should drink
the deepest. 
I wish, my good Dr. Bartlett, you would throw
together some serious considerations on this subject. 
You could touch it delicately, and such a discourse
would not be unuseful to some sew of our neighbours
even at Grandison-hall. What is it, that, in this
single article, men sacrifice to false shame and false
glory! Reason, health, fortune, personal elegance,
the peace and order of their families; and all the
comfort and honour of their after-years. How peevish,
how wretched, is the decline of a man worn out with
intemperance! In a cool hour, resolutions might be
formed, that should stand the attack of a boisterous
jest.” 
I obtained leave from Dr. Bartlett, to transcribe
this part of the letter. I thought my uncle would
be pleased with it. 
It was near ten at night, before Sir Charles got to
Lord W's, tho' but three miles from Sir Hargrave's. 
My Lord rejoiced to see him; and, after first compliments,
asked him, if he had thought of what he
had undertaken for him. Sir Charles told him, that
he was the more desirous of seeing him in his way to 

the Hall, because he wanted to know if his Lordship
held his mind as to marriage. He assured him he did,
and would sign and seal to whatever he should stipulate
for him. 
I wished for a copy of this part of Sir Charles's
letter, for the sake of my aunt, whose delicacy would,
I thought, be charmed with it. He has been so good
as to say, he would transcribe it for me. I will inclose
it, Lucy; and you will read it here: 

“I cannot, my Lord, said Sir Charles, engage,
that the Lady will comply with the proposal I shall
take the liberty to make to her mother and her. She
is not more than three or four and thirty: She is handsome:
She has a fine understanding: She is brought
up an oeconomist: She is a woman of good family:
She has not, however, tho' born to happier prospects,
a fortune worthy of your Lordship's acceptance. 
Whatever that is, your Lordship will perhaps
choose to give it to her family. 
With all my heart and soul, nephew: But do you
say, she is handsome? Do you say, she is of family? 
And has she so many good qualities? —Ah, nephew! 
She won't have me, I doubt. —And is she not too
young, Sir Charles, to think of such a poor decrepit
soul as I am? 
All I can say to this, my Lord, is, that the proposals
on your part must be the more generous— 
I will leave all those matters to you, kinsman— 
This, my Lord, I will take upon me to answer for,
That she is a woman of principle: She will not give
your Lordship her hand, if she thinks she cannot
make you a wife worthy of your utmost kindness:
And now, my Lord, I will tell you who she is, that
you may make what other enquiries you think proper. 
And then I named her to him, and gave him pretty
near the account of the family, and the circumstances 

and affairs of it, that I shall by-and-by give you; 
tho' you are not quite a stranger to the unhappy case. 
My Lord was in raptures: He knew something, he
said, of the Lady's father, and enough of the family,
by hearsay, to confirm all I had said of them; and
besought me to do my utmost to bring the affair to a
speedy conclusion. 
Sir Thomas Mansfield was a very good man; and
much respected in his neighbourhood. He was once
possessed of a large estate; but his father left him involved
in a law-suit to support his title to more than
one half of it. 
After it had been depending several years, it was at
last, to the deep regret of all who knew him, by the
chicanery of the lawyers of the opposite side, and
the remissness of his own, carried against him; and
his expences having been very great in supporting for
years his possession, he found himself reduced from an
estate of near three thousand pounds a year, to little
more than five hundred. He had six children: Four
sons, and two daughters. His eldest son died of grief
in two months after the loss of the cause. The second,
now the eldest, is a melancholy man. The
third is a cornet of horse. The fourth is unprovided
for; but all three are men of worthy minds, and deserve
better fortune. 
The daughters are remarkable for their piety, patience,
good oeconomy, and prudence. They are
the most dutiful of children, and most affectionate of
sisters. They were for three years the support of their
father's spirits, and have always been the consolation
of their mother. They lost their father about four
years ago: And it is even edifying to observe, how
elegantly they support the family reputation in their
fine old mansion-house by the prudent management
of their little income; for the mother leaves every
houshold care to them; and they make it a rule to
conclude the year with discharging every demand that 

can be made upon them, and to commence the new
year absolutely clear of the world, and with some cash
in hand; yet were brought up in affluence, and to the
expectation of handsome fortunes; for, besides that
they could have no thought of losing their cause, they
had very great and reasonable prospects from Mr. Calvert,
an uncle by their mother's side; who was rich
in money, and had besides an estate in land of 1500l.
a year. He always declared, that for the sake of his
sister's children he would continue a single man; and
kept his word till he was upwards of seventy; when,
being very infirm in health, and defective even to
dotage in his understanding, Bolton his steward, who
had always stood in the way of his inclination to have
his eldest niece for his companion and manager, at
last contrived to get him married to a young creature
under twenty, one of the servants in the house; who
brought him a child in seven months; and was with
child again at the old man's death, which happened
in eighteen months after his marriage: And then a will
was provided, in which he gave all he had to his wife
and her children born, and to be born, within a year
after his demise. This steward and woman now live
together as man and wife. 
A worthy clergyman, who hoped it might be in my
power to procure them redress, either in the one
case or in the other, gave me the above particulars; 
and upon enquiry, finding every-thing to be as represented,
I made myself acquainted with the widow
Lady and her sons: And it was impossible to see them
at their own house, and not respect the daughters for
their amiable qualities. 
I desired them, when I was last down, to put into
my hands their titles, deeds, and papers; which they
have done; and they have been laid before counsel,
who give a very hopeful account of them. 
Being fully authoriz'd by my Lord, I took leave of him
over-night, and set out early in the morning, directly 

for Mansfield-house. I arrived there soon after their
breakfast was over, and was received by Lady Mansfield,
her sons (who happened to be all at home) and her
two daughters, with politeness. 
After some general conversation, I took Lady Mansfield
aside; and, making an apology for my freedom,
asked her, If Miss Mansfield were, to her knowlege,
engaged in her affections? 
She answered, she was sure she was not: Ah, Sir,
said she, a man of your observation must know, that
the daughters of a decayed family of some note in the
world, do not easily get husbands. Men of great fortunes
look higher: Men of small must look out for
wives to enlarge them; and men of genteel businesses
are afraid of young women better born than portioned. 
Every-body knows not that my girls can bend to their
condition; and they must be contented to live single
all their lives; and so they will choose to do, rather
than not marry creditably, and with some prospect. 
I then opened my mind fully to her. She was
agreeably surprised: But who, Sir, said she, would
expect such a proposal from the next heir to Lord
W.? 
I made known to her how much in earnest I was
in this proposal, as well for my Lord's sake, as for the
young Lady's. I will take care, madam, said I, that
Miss Mansfield, if she will consent to make Lord W.
happy, shall have very handsome settlements, and such
an allowance for pin-money, as shall enable her to
gratify every moderate, every reasonable, wish of her
heart. 
Was it possible, she asked, for such an affair to be
brought about? Would my Lord—There she stopt. 
I said, I would be answerable for him: And desired
her to break the matter to her daughter directly. 
I left Lady Mansfield, and joined the brothers, who
were with their two sisters; and soon after Miss Mansfield
was sent for by her mother. 

After they had been a little while together, my Lady
Mansfield sent to speak with me. They were both
silent when I came in. The mother was at a loss
what to say: The daughter was in still greater confusion. 
I addressed myself to the mother. You have, I
perceive, madam, acquainted Miss Mansfield with the
proposal I made to you. I am fully authorized to
make it. Propitious be your silence! There never
was, proceeded I, a treaty of marriage set on foot,
that had not its conveniencies and inconveniencies. 
My Lord is greatly afflicted with the gout: There is
too great a disparity in years. These are the inconveniencies
which are to be considered of for the lady. 
On the other hand, if Miss Mansfield can give into
the proposal, she will be received by my Lord as a
blessing; as one whose acceptance of him will lay
him under an obligation to her. If this proposal could
not have been made with dignity and honour to the
lady, it had not come from me. 
The conveniencies to yourselves will more properly
fall under the consideration of yourselves and family. 
One thing only I will suggest, that an alliance with so
rich a man as Lord W. will make perhaps some people
tremble, who now think themselves secure. 
But, madam, to the still silent daughter, let not
a regard for me byass you: Your family may be sure
of my best services, whether my proposal be received
or rejected. 
My Lord (I must deal sincerely with you) has lived a
life of error. He thinks so himself. I am earnest
to have him see the difference, and to have an opportunity
to rejoice with him upon it. 
I stopt: But both being still silent, the mother looking
on the daughter, the daughter glancing now-and-then
her conscious eye on the mother, If, madam,
said I, you can give your hand to Lord W. I will take
care, that settlements shall exceed your expectation. 

What I have observed as well as heard of Miss Mansfield's
temper and goodness, is the principal motive
of my application to her, in preference to all the women
I know. 
But permit me to say, that were your affections
engaged to the lowest honest man on earth, I would
not wish for your favour to my Lord W. And farther,
if, madam, you think you should have but the shadow
of a hope, to induce your compliance, that my Lord's
death would be more agreeable to you than his life,
then would I not, for your morality's sake, wish you
to engage. In a word, I address myself to you, Miss
Mansfield, as to a woman of honour and conscience:
If your conscience bids you doubt, reject the proposal; 
and this not only for my Lord's sake, but for your
own. 
Consider, if, without too great a force upon your
inclinations, you can behave with that condescension
and indulgence to a man who has hastened advanc'd
age upon himself, which I have thought from your
temper I might hope. 
I have said a great deal, because you, ladies, were
silent; and because explicitness in every case becomes
the proposer. Give me leave to withdraw for a few
moments. 
I withdrew, accordingly, to the brothers and sister. 
I did not think I ought to mention to them the proposal
I had made: It might perhaps have engaged
them all in its favour, as it was of such evident advantage
to the whole family; and that might have
imposed a difficulty on the Lady, that neither for her
own sake, nor my Lord's, it would have been just to
lay upon her. 
Lady Mansfield came out to me, and said, I presume,
Sir, as we are a family which misfortune as
well as love, has closely bound together, you will allow
it to be mentioned— 
To the whole family, madam? —By all means. 

I wanted only first to know, whether Miss Mansfield's
affections were disengaged: And new you shall give
me leave to attend Miss Mansfield. I am a party for
my Lord W.: Miss Mansfield is a party: Your debates
will be the more free in our absence. If I find
her averse, believe me, madam, I will not endeavour
to persuade her. On the contrary, if she declare
against accepting the proposal, I will be her advocate,
tho' every one else should vote in its favour. 
The brothers and sister looked upon one another:
I left the mother to propose it to them; and stept into
the inner parlour to Miss Mansfield. 
She was sitting with her back to the door, in a meditating
posture. She started at my entrance. 
I talked of indifferent subjects, in order to divert
her from the important one, that had taken up her
whole attention. 
It would have been a degree of oppression to her to
have entered with her upon a subject of so much consequence
to her while we were alone; and when her
not having given a negative, was to be taken as a
modest affirmative. 
Lady Mansfield soon joined us—My dear daughter,
said she, we are all unanimous. We have agreed to
leave every-thing to Sir Charles Grandison: And we
hope you will. 
She was silent. I will only ask you, madam, said
I, to her, If you have any wish to take time to consider
of the matter? Do you think you shall be easier
in your mind, if you take time? —She was silent. 
I will not at this time, my good Miss Mansfield,
urge you farther. I will make my report to Lord W.
and you shall be sure of his joyful approbation of the
steps I have taken, before your final consent shall be
asked for. But that I may not be employed in a doubtful
cause, let me be commissioned to tell my Lord,
that you are disengaged; and that you wholly resign
yourself to your mother's advice. 

She bowed her head. 
And that you, madam, to Lady Mansfield, are
not averse to enter into treaty upon this important
subject. 
Averse, Sir! said the mother, bowing, and gratefully
smiling. 
I will write the particulars of our conversation to
Lord W. and my opinion of settlements, and advise
him (if I am not forbid) to make a visit at Mansfieldhouse
[I stopt: they were both silent]. If possible, I
will attend my Lord in his first visit. I hope, madam,
to Miss Mansfield, you will not dislike him: I am sure
he will be charmed with you: He is far from being
disagreeable in his person: His temper is not bad. 
Your goodness will make him good. I dare say that
he will engage your gratitude; and I defy a good mind
to separate love from gratitude. 
We returned to company. I had all their blessings
pronounced at once, as from one mouth. The melancholy
brother was enlivened: Who knows but the
consequence of this alliance may illuminate his mind? 
I could see by the pleasure they all had, in beholding
him capable of joy on the occasion, that they hoped
it would. The unhappy situation of the family affairs,
as it broke the heart of the eldest brother, fixed a
gloom on the temper of this gentleman. 
I was prevailed upon to dine with them. In the
conversation we had at and after dinner, their minds
opened, and their characters rose upon me. Lord W.
will be charmed with Miss Mansfield. I am delighted
to think, that my mother's brother will be happy, in
the latter part of his life, with a wife of so much prudence
and goodness, as I am sure this Lady will make
him. On one instance of her very obliging behaviour
to me, I whispered her sister, Pray, Miss Fanny, tell
Miss Mansfield, but not till I am gone, that she knows
not the inconveniencies she is bringing upon herself: I
may, perhaps, hereafter, have the boldness, to look for 

the same favour from my aunt, that I meet with from
Miss Mansfield. 
If my sister, returned she, should ever misbehave
to her benefactor, I will deny my relation to her. 
I promised to write to Lady Mansfield as soon as I
heard from my Lord; and parted with them, followed
by the blessings of them all. 
You will soon have another letter from me, with
an account of the success of my visit to Sir Harry
Beauchamp and his Lady. We must have our Beauchamp
among us, my dear friend: I should rather say,
you must among you; for I shall not be long in England. 
He will supply to you, my dear Dr. Bartlett,
the absence (it will not, I hope, be a long one) of 
Your Charles Grandison.” 

Sir Charles, I remember, as the doctor read, mentions
getting leave for his Beauchamp to come over,
who, he says, will supply his absence to him—But,
ah! Lucy! Who, let me have the boldness to ask,
shall supply it to your Harriet? Time, my dear, will
do nothing for me, except I could hear something very
much amiss of this man. 
I have a great suspicion, that the first part of the
letter inclosed was about me. The doctor looked so
earnestly at me, when he skipt two sides of it; and,
as I thought, with so much compassion! —To be sure,
it was about me. What would I give to know as
much of his mind as Dr. Bartlett knows! If I thought
he pitied the poor Harriet—I should scorn myself. I
am, I will be, above his pity, Lucy. In this believe 
Your Harriet Byron. 

