



Mr. Lovelace. In Continuation. 

It is much better, Jack, to tell your own Story,
when it must be known, than to have an adversary
tell it for you. Conscious of this, I gave them a particular 

account how urgent I had been with her to fix
upon the Thursday after I left her (it being her Uncle
Harlowe's anniversary Birth-day, and named to oblige
her) for the private Celebration; having some days
before actually procured a Licence, which still remained
with her. 
That, not being able to prevail upon her to promise
any-thing, while under a supposed restraint; I
offered to leave her at full liberty, if she would give
me the least hope for that day. But neither did this
offer avail me. 
That this inflexibleness making me desperate, I resolved
to add to my former fault, by giving directions,
that she should not either go or correspond out
of the house, till I returned from M. Hall; well
knowing, that if she were at full liberty, I must for
ever lose her. 
That this constraint had so much incensed her,
that altho' I wrote no less than four different Letters,
I could not procure a single word in answer; tho' I
pressed her but for four words to signify the Day and
the Church. 
I referred to my two Cousins to vouch for me the
extraordinary methods I took to send messengers to
town, tho' they knew not the occasion: Which now
I told them, was this. 
I acquainted them, that I even had wrote to you,
Jack, and to another gentleman of whom I thought
she had a good opinion, to attend her, in order to
press for her compliance; holding myself in readiness
the last day, at Salt-hill, to meet the messenger they
should send, and proceed to London, if his message
were favourable: But that, before they could attend
her, she had found means to fly away once more: 
And is now, said I, perched perhaps somewhere under
Lady Betty's window at Glenham-Hall; and
there, like the sweet Philomela, a thorn in her breast, 

warbles forth her melancholy complaints against her
barbarous Tereus. 
Lady Betty declared, That she was not with her; 
nor did she know where she was. She should be, she
added, the most welcome guest to her, that she ever
received. 
In truth I had a suspicion, that she was already in
their knowlege, and taken into their protection; for
Lady Sarah I imagined incapable of being roused to
this spirit by a Letter only from Miss Harlowe, and
that not directed to herself; she being a very indolent
and melancholy woman. But her Sister, I find, had
wrought her up to it: For Lady Betty is as officious and
managing a woman as Mrs. Howe; but of a much more
generous and noble disposition—She is my Aunt, Jack. 
I supposed, I said, that her Ladyship might have a
private Direction where to send to her. I spoke as I
wished: I would have given the world, to have heard
that she was inclined to cultivate the interest of any of
my family. 
Lady Betty answered, that she had no Direction but
what was in the Letter; which she had scratched out,
and which, it was probable, was only a temporary
one, in order to avoid me: Otherwise she would
hardly have directed an Answer to be left at an Inn. 
And she was of opinion, that to apply to Miss Howe
would be the only certain way to succeed in any application
for forgiveness, would I enable that young
Lady to interest herself in procuring it. 
Miss Charlotte. Permit me to make a proposal. — 
Since we are all of one mind in relation to the justice
due to Miss Harlowe, if Mr. Lovelace will oblige
himself to marry her, I will make Miss Howe a visit,
little as I am acquainted with her; and endeavour to
engage her interest to forward the desired Reconciliation. 
And if this can be done, I make no question but
all may be happily accommodated; for every-body
knows the Love there is between Miss Harlowe and
Miss Howe. 

MARRIAGE, with these Women, thou seest, Jack,
is an Atonement for all we can do to them. A true
Dramatic Recompence! 
This motion was highly approved of; and I gave
my honour, as desired, in the fullest manner they
could wish. 
Lady Sarah. Well then, Cousin Charlotte, begin
your Treaty with Miss Howe, out of hand. 
Lady Betty. Pray do. And let Miss Harlowe be
told, that I am ready to receive her as the most welcome
of guests: And I will not have her out of my
sight till the knot is tied. 
Lady Sarah. Tell her from me, That she shall be
my Daughter! —Instead of my poor Betsey! —And
shed a tear in remembrance of her lost Daughter. 
Lord M. What say you, Sir, to this? 
Lovel. Content, my Lord, I speak in the language
of your House. 
Lord M. We are not to be fooled, Nephew. No
quibbling. We will have no slur put upon us. 
Lovel. You shall not. And yet, I did not intend
to marry, if she exceeded the appointed Thursday. 
But, I think (according to her own notions) that I have
injured her beyond reparation, altho' I were to make
her the best of Husbands; as I am resolved to be, if
she will condescend, as I will call it, to have me. And
be this, Cousin Charlotte, my part of your commission
to say. 
This pleased them all. 
Lord M. Give me thy hand, Bob! —Thou talkest
like a man of honour at last. I hope we may depend
upon what thou sayest? 
The Ladies eyes put the same question to me. 
Lovel. You may, my Lord. You may, Ladies. 
Absolutely you may. 
Then was the personal character of the Lady, as
well as her more extraordinary talents and endowments,
again expatiated upon: And Miss Patty, who had 

once seen her, launched out more than all the rest in
her praise. These were followed by such Enquiries
as are never forgotten to be made in Marriage-treaties,
and which generally are the principal motives with the
Sages of a family, tho' the least to be mentioned by the
Parties themselves, and yet even by them, perhaps,
the first thought of: That is to say, inquisition into
the Lady's fortune; into the particulars of the Grandfather's
Estate; and what her Father, and her single-souled
Uncles, will probably do for her, if a Reconciliation
be effected; as, by their means, they make
no doubt but it will, between both Families, if it be
not my fault. The two Venerables [No longer Tabbies
with me now] hinted at rich presents on their
own parts; and my Lord declared, that he would
make such overtures in my behalf, as should render
my Marriage with Miss Harlowe the best Day's Work
I ever made; and what, he doubted not, would be
as agreeable to that family, as to myself. 
Thus, at present, by a single Hair, hangs over my
head the Matrimonial Sword. And thus ended my
Tryal. And thus are we all friends; and Cousin
and Cousin, and Nephew and Nephew, at every
word. 
Did ever Comedy end more happily, than this long
Tryal? 