



From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. 


My dearest Lady,
My first Letter, and my first Devoirs, after
those of Thankfulness to that gracious God,
who has so happily conducted me thro' two such
beavy Trials, as my Child's and my own Illness,
must be directed to your Ladyship, with all due
Acknowlegement of your generous and affectionate
Concern for me. 
We are now preparing for our Journey to Bedfordshire;
and there, to my great Satisfaction, I
am to be favour'd with the Care of Miss Goodwin. 
After we have tarry'd about a Month there,
Mr. B. will make a Tour with me thro' several
Counties, (taking the Hall in the Way, for about
a Fortnight) and shew me what is remarkable everywhere
as we pass; for this, he is pleased to think,
will better contribute to my Health, than any other
Method; for the Distemper has left upon me a
kind of Weariness and Listlessness: And he proposes
to be out with me till the Bath Season begins; and
by the Aid of those healing and balsamick Waters,
he hopes, I shall be quite establish'd. Afterwards
he purposes to return to Bedfordshire for a little
while; then to London; then to Kent; and, if
nothing hinders, has a great mind to carry me over
to Paris. 
Thus most kindly does he amuse and divert me
with his agreeable Schemes and Proposals. But I
have made one Amendment to them; and that is,
that I must not be deny'd to pay my Respects to 

your Ladyship, at your Seat, and to my good Lady
Countess; and this will be far from being the least
of my Pleasures. 
I have had Congratulations without Number, on
my Recovery; but one, among the rest, I did not
expect; from the Countess Dowager: Could you
think it, Madam? Who sent me, by her Gentleman,
the following Letter, from Tunbridge. 

“Dear Mrs. B.
I Hope, among the Congratulations of your
numerous Admirers, on your happy Recovery,
my very sincere ones, will not be unacceptable. 
I have no other Motive for making
you my Compliments on this Occasion, on so
slender an Acquaintance, than the Pleasure it
gives me, that the Publick, as well as your private
Friends, have not been deprived of a Lady
whose Example, in every Duty of Life, is of so
much Concern to both. May you, Madam,
long rejoice in an uninterrupted State of Happiness,
answerable to your Merits, and to your
own Wishes, are those of 
“Your most obedient humble Servant.” 

To this kind Letter I return'd the following: 

“My good Lady,
I am under the highest Obligation to your
generous Favour, in your kind Compliments
of Congratulation on my Recovery. There is
something so noble and so condescending in the
Honour you have done me, on so slender an
Acquaintance, that it bespeaks the exalted Mind
and Character of a Lady, who, in the Principles 

of Generosity, and in true Nobleness of Nature,
has no Example. May God Almighty bless
you, my dear Lady, with all the Good you
wish me, and with Increase of Honour and
Glory, both here and hereafter, prays, and will
always pray, 
“Your Ladyship's
Most obliged and obedient Servant,
P. B.” 

This leads me to mention to your Ladyship, what
my Illness would not permit me to do before, that
Mr. B. met with such a Reception and Audience
from the Countess, when he attended her, in all he
had to offer and propose to her, and in her patient
Hearing of what he thought fit to read her from
your Ladyship's Letters and mine, that he said,
Don't be jealous, my dear Pamela; but I must
admire her, as long as I live. 
He gave me the Particulars, so much to her Ladyship's
Honour, that I told him, he should not only
be welcome to admire her Ladyship, but that I
would admire her too. 
They parted very good Friends, and with great
Professions of Esteem for each other–––And as Mr. B.
had undertaken to inspect into some exceptionable
Accounts and Managements of her Ladyship's Bailiff,
one of her Servants brought a Letter for him
on Monday last, wholly written on that Subject. 
But her Ladyship was so kindly considerate, as to
send it unsealed, in a Cover directed to me. When
I open'd it, I was frighted, to see it begin, to
Mr. B. and I hastened to find him, in the Walk
up to the new-rais'd Mount. –––Dear Sir–––Here's
some Mistake–––You see the Direction is to Mrs. B. 

–––'Tis very plain–––But upon my Word, I have
not read it. 
Don't be uneasy, my Love! –––I know what the
Subject must be; but I dare swear there is nothing,
nor will there ever be, but what you or any body
may see. 
He read it, and giving it to me to peruse, said,
Answer yourself the Postscript, my Dear–––That
was–––“If, Sir, the Trouble I give you, is likely
to subject you or your Lady to Uneasiness or
Apprehensions, I beg you will not interfere in it. 
I will then set about the Matter myself; for my
Uncle I will not trouble: Yet, Women enter
into these Particulars with as little Advantage to
themselves, as Inclination.” 
I told him, I was intirely easy and unapprehensive; 
and, after all his Goodness to me, should be
so, if he saw the Countess every Day. That's
kindly said, my Dear, return'd he; but I will not
trust myself to see her every Day, or at all, for the
present: I'll assure you, I will not. –––But I shall
be obliged to correspond with her for a Month or
so, on this Occasion: Unless you prohibit it; and
it shall be in your Power to do so. 
I said, With my whole Heart, he might; and I
should be quite easy in both their Honours. 
Yet will I not, Pamela, said he, unless you see
our Letters; for I know she will always, now she
has begun, send in a Cover to you, what she will
write to me, unseal'd; and whether I am at home
or abroad, I shall take it unkindly, if you do not
read them. 
He went in with me, and wrote an Answer,
which he sent by the Messenger; but would make
me, whether I would or not, read it, and seal it
up with his Seal. But all this needed not to me 

now, who think so much better of the Lady than
I did before; and am so well satisfy'd in his own
Honour and generous Affection for me; for you
saw, Madam, in what I wrote before, that he always
loved me, tho' he was angry, at times, at my Change
of Temper, as he apprehended it, not knowing, that
I was apprised of what passed between him and the
Countess. 
I really am better pleas'd with this Correspondence
than I should have been, had it not been carry'd on; 
because the Servants, on both Sides, will see, by my
Deportment on the Occasion, (and I will officiously,
with a smiling Countenance, throw myself in their
Observation) that it is quite innocent; and this may
help to silence the Mouths of those who have so freely
censur'd their Conduct. 
Indeed, Madam, I think I have received no small
Good myself by that Affair, which once lay so heavy
upon me: For I don't believe I shall ever be jealous
again; indeed, I don't think I shall. And won't that
be an ugly Foible overcome? I see what may be
done, in Cases not favourable to our Wishes, by
the Aid of proper Reflection; and that the Bee is
not the only Creature that may make Honey out of
the bitter Flowers, as well as the sweet. 
My best and most grateful Respects and Thanks
to my good Lord Davers; to the Earl, and his
excellent Countess; and, most particularly, to Lady
Betty, with whose kind Compliments your Ladyship
acquaints me; and to Mr. H. for all your united Congratulations
on my Recovery. What Obligations do I
lie under to such noble and generous Well-wishers! ––– 
I can make no Return, but by my Prayers, that God,
by his Goodness, will supply all my Defects. And these
will always attend you, from, my dearest Lady, 
Your ever obliged Sister, and humble Servant,
P. B. 

Mr. H. is just arriv'd. He says, He comes a
special Messenger, to make a Report how my
Face has come off. He makes me many
Compliments upon it. How kind your Ladyship
is, to enter so favourably into the minutest
Concerns, which you think may any way affect
my future Happiness in your dear Brother's
Wishes! –––I want to pour out all my Joy and
my Thankfulness to God, before your Ladyship,
and my good Lady Countess of C&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;! 
For I am a happy, yea, a blessed Creature! ––– 
Mr. B.'s Boy, your Ladyship's Boy, and my
Boy, is charmingly well; quite strong, and
very forward, for his Months; and his Papa is
delighted with him more and more. 

