


Lady Grandison. In Continuation. 


Tuesday, Jan. 9. 
I have been obliged, by the just demands made upon
us by the equally-solemn and joyful season,
to be silent for many days. You madam, and you
Ladies L. and G. have, I doubt not, been engaged
in consequence of the same demand;—so will excuse
me; especially as Lucy and my aunt have both written,
and that very minutely, in the interim. 
Mr. Deane, to our great joy, has signified to us
his intention to live near us; and to present his house
at Peterborough to one of his two nephews. 
Sir Charles has besought him to consider Grandison-hall
as his own house. He promises that he will. 
I hope, by my care of him, to be an humble means
of prolonging his life, at least of making his latter
days chearful. 
What a happy season has this been to scores of
people in our neighbourhood! but most to ourselves,
as the giver is more blessed than the receiver! Such
admirable management! Such good order! —But I
told you, that all was left to Dr. Bartlett's direction:
What a blessing is he to us, and all around him! 
Sir Charles has a Letter from Mr. Lowther, who
is on his return from Bologna. By the date it should
have arrived a fortnight ago: So that he may be every
day expected. 

Mr. Lowther lets him know, that the family at
Bologna are all in spirits, on the prospect they have
of carrying their point with Lady Clementina; who,
however, for the present, declines the visits of the
Count of Belvedere; and they humour her in that
particular. 
Mr. Lowther is afraid, he says, that all is not quite
right as to her mind. Poor Lady! He judges so,
from the very great earnestness she continues to express
to make a visit to England. 
She received, he says, with great intrepidity, the
news of Sir Charles's marriage. She besought a blessing
upon him and his bride: But since has been
thoughtful, reserved, and sometimes is found in tears. 
When challenged, she ascribed, once, her grief to her
apprehensions that her malady may possibly return. 
The physicians have absolutely given their opinion,
that she should marry. 
The General is expected from Naples to urge the
solemnity; and vows, that he will not return till she
is actually Countess of Belvedere. 
She begs, that she may be allowed again to pass
the Apennines, and visit Mrs. Beaumont at Florence,
in order to settle her mind. 
She dreads to see the General. 
How I am grieved for her! —Sir Charles must be
afflicted too. Why, why, will they not leave to time,
the pacifier of every woe, the issue of the event upon
which they have set their hearts? 
Mr. Lowther writes, that Signor Jeronymo is in a
fine way. 
Mr. Lowther in his Letter acquits Sir Charles of
all obligation to himself. He returns him bills for
the sum he had advanced; and declares, that he never
will enter into his presence, if he refuses to accept
of his acquittance. The family, he tells him, have
nobly rewarded him. 
Dr. Bartlett applauds Mr. Lowther's spirit on this 

occasion. As Sir Charles, he says, is not an ostentatious
man, but judges of every-thing, according to
the rules of right and prudence, he has no doubt (tho'
he might not expect this handsome treatment) but he
will acquiesce with it. This, however, lessens not
the comparative merit of Mr. Lowther. There are
men, I believe, who having succeeded so well, would
have accepted of a reward from both parties. Yet,
on recollection, Sir Charles stipulated with Mr. Lowther,
that he should receive no fee, but from himself:
And his present to the worthy man was the
ampler on that account. 
I have two charming Letters from the Countess of
D. By her permission, I have shewn to Sir Charles
the correspondence between that good Lady and me. 
He greatly admires her. She desires, that he will be
acquainted with her son; and declares, she will always
look upon me as her daughter, and call me so. Sir
Charles bids me tells her, that he cannot consent to
her calling me so, unless she will look upon him as
her son, and unless my Lord will allow him to call
him brother. He bid me express his wishes of a
friendship with both, answerable to that desirable relation. 
My uncle says, he knows not such a place as Selby-house. 
Shirley-manor indeed he loves for the
sake of the dear mistress of it: But, as long as he
has with him his Dame, his Harriet, Mr. Deane, and
Sir Charles, he is happy. Yet my aunt now-and-then
gets upon a rising ground in the park, and asks,
pointing, Does not Northamptonshire lie off there? 
Emily is very good in the main. Dear girl! I do
pity her. Her young heart, so early to be tried and
tormented by the stings of hopeless Love! —Her eyes
just now were fixed for several minutes, so much
Love in them! on the face of her guardian, that his
modest eye fell under them. 
I will give you, on this occasion, the particulars 

of a conversation, that passed between us; which, at
the conclusion, let in a little dawn of hope, that the
dear girl may be happy in time. 
I had more than once been apprehensive, that her
eyes would betray her to her guardian; who at present
imputes all her reverence for him to gratitude; 
and as soon as he was withdrawn, with a true sisterly
tenderness, Come hither, my Love, said I. I was
busy with my needle—She came. 
My dearest Emily, if you were to look with so
much earnestness in the face of any other man, as you
sometimes do, and just now did, in that of your
guardian, and the man a single man, he would have
hope of a wife. 
High-ho! sighed she. Did my guardian mind me? — 
I hope he did not so much, madam, as you do. 
So much as I do, my Love! 
Yes, madam. When my guardian is present, you
do look very hard at me: But I hope, I am not a
confident girl. 
You are serious, my Emily! 
And so is my dear Lady Grandison! 
I was a little surprised. The child abashed me. 
Her Love, thought I, will make her hardy, without
intending to be so. 
She was too innocent even for consciousness of
having disconcerted me. She looked upon my work,
What would I give, madam, to be so fine a workwoman
as you? —But why that sigh, madam? 
The poor Lady Clementina! said I: I was really
thinking of her. 
Do you sigh for every-body, madam, that loves
my guardian? 
There are different sorts of Love, Emily. 
Why so I think. Nobody loves my guardian better
than I myself do: But it is not the Love that Lady
Clementina bears him. I love his goodness. 
And does not Clementina? 

Yes, yes, but still the Love is different. 
Explain, my dear, your kind of Love. 
Impossible! 
Why, now, sighs my Emily? You asked me why
I sighed. I have answered it was from pity. 
Why, madam, I can pity Lady Clementina, and I
do: But I sigh not for her; because she might have
had my guardian, and would not. 
I sigh for her the more, for that very reason, Emily; 
her motive so great! 
Pho, pho, her motive! When he would have allowed
her to be of her own religion! 
Then you sigh not now for Clementina, Emily? 
I believe not. 
For whom then? 
I don't know. You must not ask. A habit, and
nothing else. 
Again sighs my Emily? 
You must not mind me, madam. A habit, I tell
you. But, believe me, Lady Grandison (hiding her
blushing face in my bosom, her arms about my neck)
I believe, if the truth were known— 
She stopt, but continued there her glowing cheek— 
What, my dear, if the truth were known? 
I dare not tell you. You will be angry at me. 
Indeed, my Love, I will not. 
O yes, but you will. 
I thought we had been sisters, my dear. I thought
we were to have no secrets. Tell me, what, if the
truth were known? 
Why, madam, for a trial of your forgiveingness,
tell me, Are you not apt to be a little jealous? 
Jealous, my Emily! You surprise me! Why, of
whom, of what, jealous? Jealousy is doubt; of whom
should I doubt? 
People have not always cause, I suppose, madam. 
Explain yourself, my dear. 
Are you not angry with me, madam? 

I am not. But why do you think me jealous? 
You need not, indeed! My guardian adores you. 
You deserve to be adored. —But you should allow a
poor girl to look upon her guardian now-and-then,
with eyes of gratitude. Your charming eye is so
ready to take mine to task! —I am, if I know myself,
a poor innocent girl. I do love my guardian, that's
certain: So I ever did, you know, madam: And let
me say, before he knew there was such a Lady in the
world as yourself, madam. 
I threw aside my work, and clasping my arms about
her, And love him still, my Emily. You cannot
love him so well as he deserves. You are indeed a
dear innocent, but not a poor, girl. You are rich in
the return of his Love. I will ever, ever, be a promoter
of an affection so innocent, so pure on both
sides. But jealousy, my dear! do you charge me with
jealousy? Impossible I should deserve it! My only
concern is, lest, as the heart is guessed at by the eyes
(the hearts of young creatures especially, whose good
minds are incapable of art or design) you should give
room for the censorious, who know not as I do, that
your Love is reverence next to filial, to attribute it
to a beginning of the other sort of Love; which yet
in you, were it kindled, would be as bright and as
pure a flame as ever warmed a virgin heart. 
O madam! how you express yourself! What
words you have! They go to my heart! —I don't
know how it is: But every day I reverence more
and more my guardian: Reverence! Yes, that is the
proper word! I thank you for it! Filial reverence! 
Just the thing! And let me say, that I never reverenced
him so much as now, that I see what a polite,
what a kind, what an affectionate husband he
makes my dear Lady Grandison. Yet, let me tell
you truth, madam, I should, I am afraid, be such
a little-minded poor creature, that if I were married,
and had not a husband that was very like him, I
should envy you. I should be at least unhappy. 

If you could be envious, my dear, you would be
unhappy: But you must never encourage the addresses
of a man, who you think loves you not better than
any other woman: Who is not a good man upon
principle: Who is not a man of sense; and that has
seen something of the world. 
And where, madam, can such a man be found? 
Leave it to your guardian, my dear. He, if anybody,
will find you a man that you may be happy
with, if your eye be not aforehand with your judgment. 
That, madam, I hope it will not be: First, because
the reverence I have for my guardian, and his
great qualities, will make all other men look little in
my eye; and next, as I have such a confidence in his
judgment, that if he points his finger, and says,
That's the man, Emily! I will endeavour to like
him. But I believe I never now shall like any man
on earth. 
It is early days, my Love; but is there not some
one man, that, were you of age to marry, you would
think better of than of any other? 
I don't know what to say to that. It is early
days, as you say. I am but a girl. But girls have
thoughts. I will tell you, madam, that the man who
has passed some years in the company of Sir Charles
Grandison; who is beloved by him on proof, on experience
(as I may say) of his good heart—She stopt. 
Beauchamp, my dear? 
Why yes Him, I mean: He is the most to be
liked of any man but my guardian: But he now is
a great man; and I suppose may have seen the woman
he could love. 
I fansy not, my dear. 
Why do you fansy not, madam? 
Because, if I must speak as freely to you, as I
would have you do always to me, I think he shews
great and uncommon respect to you, tho' you are so
young a creature. 

That's for my guardian's sake: But be that as it
will; let me be secure of my guardian's Love and
yours, and I shall have nothing to wish for. 
Her guardian, my guardian, my friend, my Lover,
my Husband, every sweet word is one, coming in,
put an end to the subject. I leave this conversation
to your own reflexions, my dear grandmamma, Lady
L. Lady G. But I have hopes from it. 

