


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Wednesday Night, Nov. 8.
Sir Charles broke away, and came hither by our
tea-time. I was in my closet, writing. They
all crouded about him. He avoided particulars: Only
said, that all was friendship between Mr. Greville and
himself; and that Mr. Greville came with him part of
the way; full of his resumed scheme, of appearing
to be upon a good understanding with him, and a friend
to the alliance between him and us. 
Sir Charles looked about him, as if for somebody
he saw not. My aunt came up to me: My dear, do
you know who is come? She then told me the above
particulars. We had a summons to tea. Down we
hastened. He met us both at the parlour-door. O
madam, said he, what precious hours have I lost! — 
I have been patience itself! 
I congratulated him on what my aunt had told me. 
I found he intended, as he says in his Billet, that the
particulars he gave in it should answer our curiosity; 
and to have done with the subject. What a charming
possession of himself, that he could be in such a
brangle, as I may call it, and which might have had
fatal consequences; yet to be so wholly, and so soon,
divested of the subject; and so infinitely agreeable
upon half a score others, as they offered from one or
other as we sat at tea! 
Tea was no sooner over, but he singled me out— 
May I, madam, beg the favour of a half-hour's audience? 
Sir, Sir! hesitated the simpleton, and was going to
betray my expectation, by expressing some little reluctance; 
but, recollecting myself, I suffered him to
lead me into the Cedar-parlour. When there, seating 

me—Now, madam, let me again thank you, a thousand
and a thousand times, for the honour of your last
condescending Letter. 
He but just touched my hand, and appeared so encouragingly
respectful! —I must have loved him then,
if I had not before. 
You have, my dearest Miss Byron, a man before
you, that never can be ungrateful. Believe me, my
dearest Life, tho' I have urged you as I have, you are
absolutely your own mistress of the day, and of every
day of my life, as far as it shall be in my power to
make you so. You part with power, my lovely Miss
Byron, but to find it with an increase. Only let me
beseech you, now I have given it you back again, not
to permit your heart to be swayed by mere motives of
punctilio. 
A charming glow had overspread his cheek; and he
looked as when I beheld him in his sister's dressingroom,
after he had rescued me from the hands of the
then cruel, now mortified, Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. 
Punctilio, mere punctilio, Sir, shall not weigh with
me. What I wrote to you, I intended to comply with. 
My heart, Sir, is—Yours! —I would have said—Why
would not my tongue speak it? —My, my, I stammered
—Why did I stammer? —Had I not owned it
before to be so? —My grandmamma, Sir, and aunt— 
I could not at that instant, for my life, say another
word. 
Sweet confusion! I urge you no more on this topic,
just now: I joyfully take your reference. Then
drawing a chair next me, he kissed his own hand,
and held it out, as it were, courting mine. I yielded
it to him, as by an involuntary motion—yet my heart
was forwarder than my hand. He tenderly grasped it
—retaining it—and instead of urging the approaching
day, talked to me as if it were past. 
I have a request to make to your grandmother, your
uncle and aunt, your Lucy, and our Mr. Deane; it 

is a very bold one: That when I have been blessed
with your hand, they will be so good as to accompany
their beloved Harriet, then no more Byron, but Grandison,
to my family-seat, and see the beloved of every
heart happily fixed, and in possession of it. The
house is venerable (I will not call it old); but large
and convenient. Compassion for your neighbouring
admirers, will induce you to support me in this request. 
You cannot bear, I imagine, without a lessening of
your own joy (if I prove the just, the grateful man to
you, that, if I know myself, I shall be) either to see
at church, or in your visits, those men who preferred
you to all women; or, if they forbear the one or the
other, to account with a gentle sigh for their forbearance. 
Other women might triumph secretly on such
occasions; but I, even I, the successful, the distinguished
man, shall not forbear some inward pity for
them. Now, madam, an excursion of a month or
two, if no more, made by those dear friends, who
otherwise will be loth, so soon as I wish, to part with
you; will wean, as I may say, these unhappy men
from you. Mr. Orme, Mr. Greville, will not then
be obliged to quit their own houses, and this neighbourhood. 
I shall not, whenever I step into company,
see dejected men, whose dejection is owing, as
they will think, to my happiness: All your new relations
will attend you, in turn, in the house that I always
loved, and wished to settle in; your own relations
with you, and witnesses of our mutual happiness
—Support me, generously support me, in this proposal,
when I shall be intitled, by your goodness, to
make it. —Silent, my dearest Love! —If I have been
too early in thus opening my heart to you, do me the
justice to suppose that it is owing to my wishes to pass
over another interesting subject which must take place
before my proposal can; and which, however, engages
my whole heart. 
I might well be silent: I could not find utterance 

for the emotions of my heart. I withdrew my hand
to take my handkerchief (You have often told me,
Lady G. that I was born in an April morning); but
putting it into my other hand, I gratefully (I hope not
too fondly) laid it in his way to take it again. He did,
with an air that had both veneration and gratitude in
it—My dearest Life, tenderly grasping it—how amiable
this goodness! —You are not, I see, displeased. 
Displeased! —O, Sir Charles! —But, alas! while I
am too-too happy, the exalted Lady abroad! —She,
she, only! Your friend Jeronymo's last Letter— 
Thus brokenly did I express (what my heart was full
of) her worthiness, my inferiority. 
Exalted creature! —Angelic goodness! You are
Clementina and Harriet, both in one: One mind certainly
informs you both. 
Just then came in my aunt Selby. I have, madam,
said he to her, been making a request to your beloved
niece: I am exceedingly earnest in it. She will be so
good as to break it to you; and I hope— 
O Sir! interrupted my too eager aunt, supposing it
had been for the Day, Mrs. Shirley has the power— 
My dear aunt Selby! said I. 
What have I said, Love?— 
He caught eagerly at it—Happy mistake! said he. 
My dear Mrs. Selby, I thank you! 
He bowed, kissed my hand, and left me, to go to
my grandmamma, to inform himself of what he had
to hope for, as to the Day, from her. 
I told my aunt what the request was, and what a
conversation we had had: And what, madam, said I,
have you done! 
My aunt approved of his proposal. It will be the
pride of your uncle's heart and mine, to see you settled
in Grandison-hall. 
What short work did my grandmamma make of it! 
In less than a quarter of an hour Sir Charles returned,
overjoyed, with an open Billet in his hand, from the venerable
parent. This is it: 


‘To me, my Harriet, you have referred the most
important Day of your life. May the Almighty
shower down his blessings on it! Thursday, next
week, is the Day, that, God willing, shall crown
the happiness of us all. Make no objections, my
dearest child. Hasten to me, and say you acquiesce
chearfully in the determination of 
‘Your ever-affectionate
Henrietta Shirley.’ 

Had you seen, my dear Charlotte, with what tender
respect your brother approached me, and with
what an inimitable grace he offered me the open Billet,
how would you have been charmed with him! The
excellent Mrs. Shirley, said he, would not permit me
to bring this inestimable paper folded. I have contemplated
the propitious lines all the way. On my
knee let me thank you, my dear Miss Byron, for your
acquiescence with her determination. He kissed my
hand on one knee. 
He saw me disturbed [Could I help it? There is
something awful in the fixing of the very Day, Lady
G. but I tried to recover myself. I would fain avoid
appearing guilty of affectation in his eyes]. I will
not add a word more, my Angel, said he, on the joyful
subject. Only tell me, Shall we hasten to attend
the condescending parent? 
My duty to her, Sir, said I (but with more hesitation
than I wished) shall be an earnest of that which
I am so soon, so very soon, to vow to you: And I
gave him my hand. 
There is no describing to you, my dear Lady G.
the looks, the manner, with which it was received, by
the most ardent, and yet most respectful, of Lovers. 
I had scarce approached my grandmamma, and begun
to utter something of the much my heart was filled
with, when my Uncle and Mr. Deane (by mistake, I
believe) were admitted. 

Well, let us know every-thing about it, said my
uncle—I hope Sir Charles is pleased. I hope— 
The Day was named to him. 
Well, well, thank God! And he spoke in an accent
that expressed his joy. 
Your niece has pleased you now, I hope, Mr. Selby,
said my grandmamma. 
Pretty well! pretty well! God grant that we meet
with no Put-offs! I hardly longed so much for my
own Day with my Dame Selby there, as I have done,
and do, to see my Harriet Lady Grandison—God,
God, bless you, my dearest love! and kissed my cheek
—You have been very, very good, in the main—And,
but for Dame Selby, would have been better, as far as
I know. 
You don't do me justice, my dear, replied my
aunt. 
Don't I? —Nor did I ever—taking kindly her hand
—It was impossible, my dear Sir Charles Grandison,
for such a man as I to do justice to this excellent woman. 
You never, Sir, will be so froppish as I have
been: It was in my nature: I could not help it: But
I was always sorry for it afterwards. —But if Harriet
make you no worse a wife than my Dame Selby has
made me, you will not be unhappy—And yet I was
led a tedious dance after her, before I knew what she
would be at—I had like to have forgot that. But one
thing I have to request, proceeded my uncle—Mr.
Deane and I have been talking of it—God bless your
dear souls, all of you, oblige me—It is, That we may
have a joyful Day of it; and that all our neighbours
and tenants may rejoice with us. I must make the
village smoke. No hugger-mugger doings—Let private
weddings be for doubtful happiness— 
O my uncle! said I— 
And O my niece, too! I must have it so. Sir
Charles, what say you? Are you for chamber-marriages? 
—I say, that such are neither decent, nor godly. 

But you would not allow Lady G. to come off so— 
And in your own case— 
Am for doing as in Lady G's. I must hope to pay
my vows at the Altar to this excellent Lady. What
says my Miss Byron? 
I, Sir, hope to return mine in the same sacred place
(my face, as I felt, in a glow); but yet I shall wish
to have it as private as possible. 
Why, oy, to be sure—When a woman is to do anything
she is ashamed of—I think she is right to be private,
for example-sake. Shall you be ashamed, Sir
Charles? 
Sir Charles has given it under his hand, this very
day, said Lucy, interrupting him, as he was going to
speak, that he shall glory in receiving my cousin's hand
before ten thousand witnesses. 
Make but my dearest Miss Byron easy on this head,
said Sir Charles (That task, Ladies, be yours); and,
so the Church be the place, I shall be happy in the
manner. 
The ceremony, said my grandmamma, cannot be
a private one with us: Every-body's eyes are upon us. 
It would be an affectation in us, that would rather
raise, than allay, curiosity. 
And I have as good as promised the two pretty
Nedhams, said my uncle—and Miss Watson and her
cousin are in expectation— 
O my uncle! 
Dear Harriet, forgive me! These are your companions
from childhood! You can treat them but once
in your life in this way. They would be glad at heart
to return the favour. 
I withdrew: Lucy followed me—You, Lucy, I see,
said I, are for these public doings—But you would not,
if it were your own case. 
Your case is my case, Harriet. I should hardly bear
being made a shew of with any other man: But with
such a man as yours, if I did not hold up my head, I 

should give leer for stare, to see how envy sat upon
the womens faces. You may leer at the men, for the
same reason. It will be a wicked day, after all, Harriet; 
for a general envy will possess the hearts of all
beholders. 
Lucy, you know, my dear Lady G. is a whimsical
girl. 
So, my dear, the solemn Day is fixed. If you
could favour me with your supporting presence—I
know, if you come, you will be very good, now I
have not, as I hope you will think, been guilty of
much, no not of any, parade. —Lucy will write Letters
for me to Lady D. to my cousin Reeves's, and
will undertake all matters of ceremony for her Harriet. 
May I but have the happiness to know that
Lady Clementina—What can I wish for Lady Clementina? 
—But should she be unhappy—that would
be an abatement of my felicity indeed! 
There is no such thing as thinking of the dear
Emily. What a happiness, could I have seen Lady
L. here! —But that cannot be! May the Day that will
in its anniversary be the happiest of my life, give to
Lord and Lady L. their most earnest wishes! 
Sir Charles dispatches Frederick to-morrow to town
with Letters: He will bring you mine. I would not
go to rest till I had finished it. 
What have I more to say? —I seem to have a great
deal. My head and my heart are full: Yet it is time
to draw to a conclusion. 
Let me, my dearest Lady G. know, if I am to
have any hopes of your presence? Will you be so
good as to manage with Emily? 
My aunt bids me suppose to you, that since we are
to have all the world of our acquaintance, you should
bring down your aunt Grandison with you. —We have
at both houses a great deal of room. 
Sir Charles just now asked my grandmamma, Whether
Dr. Curtis would be satisfied with a handsome 

present, if every one's dear Dr. Bartlett were to perform
the ceremony? My grandmamma answered,
That Dr. Curtis was one of my admiring friends. He
had for years, even from my girlhood, prided himself
with the hopes of joining my hand in marriage, especially
if the office were performed in Northamptonshire. 
She was afraid he would think himself slighted; 
and he was a very worthy man. 
Sir Charles acquiesced. But, greatly as I respect Dr.
Curtis, I should have preferred the venerable Dr. Bartlett
to any man in the world. A solemn, solemn subject,
tho' a joyful one! 
Adieu, adieu, my dear Lady G. Be sure continue
to love me. I will, if possible, deserve your
Love. 
Witness Harriet Byron. 

