



From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. 


My dearest Lady,
Mr. B. with great Goodness came back from
Bedfordshire to his Time. Every thing being
in Readiness, we set out, my Baby, and his Nurse,
and Polly, and Rachel, in the Coach. Mr. B.
and myself in the Chariot. The other Maids are to
go down with Mrs. Jervis, when every thing in
London is settled by her Direction, to Bedfordshire;
and all the Men-servants too, except Mr. Jonathan,
and Abraham and John, who went down with us
on Horseback; as also did Mr. Colbrand. 
We were met by my Father and Mother in a
Chaise and Pair, that your dear Brother had, unknown
to me, presented to them, that they might
often take the Air together, and go to Church in it,
(which is at some Distance from them) on Sundays. 
The Driver is cloathed in a good brown Cloth Suit,
but no Livery; for that my Parents could not have
borne, as Mr. B.'s Goodness made him consider. 
Your Ladyship must needs think, how much we
were all overjoy'd at this Meeting: For my own
Part, I cannot express how much I was transported
when we arrived at the Farm-house, to see all I delighted
in, upon one happy Spot together! 
Mr. B. is much pleased with the Alterations made
here *  , and it is a sweet, rural, and convenient
Place. 

We were at Church together on Sunday, and
welcom'd into these Parts by the Bells, and by the
Minister, and the People of most Note. 
Mr. B. is to set out on Tuesday for Tunbridge,
with my Papers. A happy Issue attend that Affair,
I pray God! He has given me the following Particulars
of it, to the Time of my Trial, beginning at
the Masquerade. 
He says, That at the Masquerade, when, pleased
with the fair Nun's Shape, Air, and Voice, he had
followed her to a Corner most unobserved, she said,
in Italian, Why are my Retirements invaded, audacious
Spaniard? 
Because, reply'd he, my dear Nun, I hope you
would have it so. 
I can no otherwise, return'd she, strike dead they
bold Presumption, than to shew thee my Scorn and
Anger thus–––And unmasking, she surpris'd me,
said Mr. B. with a Face as beautiful, but not so
soft, as my Pamela's! –––And I, said Mr. B. to
shew I can defy your Resentment, will shew you a
Countenance as intrepid, as yours is lovely. And so
he drew aside his Mask too. 
He says, he observed his fair Nun followed, where-ever
she went, by a Mask habited like Testimony in
Sir Courtly Nice, whose Attention was fixed upon
them; and he doubted not, that it was Mr. Turner. 
So he and the fair Nun, took different Ways, and
he joined me and Miss Darnford, and found me ingag'd
in the manner I related to your Ladyship; and
his Nun at his Elbow, unexpected. 
That afterwards, as he was ingag'd in French
with a Lady who had the Dress of an Indian Princess,
and the Mask of an Ethiopian, his fair Nun 

said, in broken Spanish, Art thou at all Complections? 
–––By St. Ignatius, I believe thou'rt a Rover! 
I am trying, reply'd he, in Italian, whether I
can meet with any Lady comparable to my lovely
Nun. 
And what is the Result? 
Not one; no, not one. 
I wish you could not help being in Earnest, said
she; and slid from him. 
He ingag'd her next at the Side-board, drinking
under her Veil a Glass of Champaign. You know,
Pamela, said he, there never was a sweeter Mouth
in the World, than the Countess's, except your
own. She drew away the Glass, as if, unobserved
by any body, to shew me the lower Part of her
Face. 
I cannot say, continued he, but I was struck with
her charming Manner, and an Unreservedness of Air
and Behaviour, that I had not before seen so becoming. 
–––The Place, and the Freedom of Conversation
and Deportment allowed there, gave her Manner
great Advantages, in my Eye, altho' her Habit requir'd,
as I thought, continued he, a little more
Gravity and Circumspection: And I could not tell
how to resist a secret Pride and Vanity, which is but
too natural to both Sexes, when they are taken notice
of by Persons so worthy of Regard. 
Naturally fond of any thing that carry'd the Face
of an Intrigue, I long'd to know, proceeded he,
who this charming Nun was. –––And next Time I ingag'd
her, My good Sister, said I, how happy should
I be, if I might be admitted to a Conversation with
you at your Grate? 
Answer me, thou bold Spaniard, (for that was a
Name she seem'd fond to call me by, said he, which 

gave me to imagine, that Boldness was a Qualification
with which she was not displeased: 'Tis not
unusual with our vain Sex, observed he, to construe
even Reproaches to our Advantage) Is the Lady
here, whose Shackles thou wearest? 
Do I look like a Man shackled, my fairest Nun? 
N–––No! not much like such an one. But I fansy
thy Wife is either a Widow, or a Quaker? 
Neither, reply'd I, taking, by Equivocation, her
Question literally. 
And art thou not a marry'd Wretch? Answer
me quickly! –––We are observ'd. 
No–––said I. 
Swear to me, thou art not.— 
By St. Ignatius then: For, my Dear, I was no
Wretch, you know. 
Enough! said she–––and slid away; and the Fanatick
would fain have ingag'd her, but she avoided
him as industriously. 
Before I was aware, continued Mr. B. she was
at my Elbow, and, in Italian, said, That fair
Quaker yonder is the Wit of the Assemblée: Her
Eyes seem always directed to thy Motions: And her
Person shews some Intimacies have passed with somebody! 
Is it with thee? 
It would be my Glory if it was, said I, were her
Face answerable to her Person. 
Is it not? 
I long to know, reply'd Mr. B. 
I am glad thou dost not. 
I am glad to hear my fair Nun say that. 
Dost thou, said she, hate Shackles? Or is it,
that thy Hour is not come? 
I wish! reply'd he, this be not the Hour, the
very Hour–––pretending (naughty Gentleman! ––– 
What Ways these Men have!–––) to sigh. 

She went again to the Side-board, put her Hand
kerchief upon it. Mr. B. followed her, and observed
all her Motions. She drank a Glass of Lemonade,
as he of Burgundy; and a Person in a
Domine, who was supposed to be the King, taking
every one's Attention, and Mr. B. eying her Handkerchief,
which he doubted not she laid on purpose to
forget taking up, she left it there; and slipping by
him, he, unobserv'd, as he believes, took it, and
put it in his Pocket, and at one Corner found the
Cover of a Letter, To the Right Honourable the
Countess Dowager of &sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;. 
That after this, the fair Nun was so shy, so reserv'd,
and seem'd so studiously to avoid him, that
he had no Opportunity to return her Handkerchief; 
and the Fanatick observing how she shunned him,
said, in Erench, What, Monsieur, have you done
to your Nun? 
Found her to be a very Coquet; and told her so
–––and she is offended. 
How could you affront a Lady, reply'd he, with
such a charming Face? 
By that, I had Reason to think, said Mr. B.
that he had seen her unmask; and I said–––It becomes
not any Character, but that you wear, to
pry into the Secrets of others, in order to make ill-natur'd
Remarks, and perhaps to take ungentlemanly
Advantages. 
No Man would make that Observation, return'd
he, whose Views would bear prying into. 
I was nettled, said Mr. B. at this warm Retort,
and drew aside my Mask: Nor would any Man,
who wore not a Mask, tell me so! 
He took not the Challenge, and slid from me,
and I saw him no more that Night. 

So, thinks I, another Instance this might have
been of the glorious Consequences of Masquerading,
–––O my Lady, these Masquerades are abominable
Things!— 
The King, they said, met with a free Speaker that
Night: In Truth, I was not very sorry for it; for
if Monarchs will lay aside their sovereign Distinctions,
and mingle thus in Masquerade with the
worst as well as the highest (I cannot say best) of
their Subjects, let 'em take the Consequence. –––Perhaps
they might have a Chance to hear more Truth
here than in their Palaces–––the only Good that possibly
can accrue from them–––that is to say–––If they
made a good Use of it when they heard it. For,
you see, my Monarch, tho' told the Truth, as it
happened, received the Hint with more Resentment
than Thankfulness! –––So, 'tis too likely, did the
Monarch of us both! 
And now, my Lady, you need not doubt, that
so polite a Gentleman would find an Opportunity
to return the Nun her Handkerchief! –––To be sure
he would: For what Man of Honour would rob a
Lady of any Part of her Apparel? And should he
that wanted to steal a Heart, content himself with a
Handkerchief? –––No, no, that was not to be expected. 
–––So what does he do, but, the very next
Day, after Dinner, the soonest Opportunity he
could well take, because of the late Hours the Night
before, resolve to pursue this Affair! Accordingly,
the poor Quaker little thinking of the Matter, away
goes her naughty Spaniard, to find out his Nun at
her Grate, or in her Parlour rather. 
He asks for the Countess. Is admitted into the
outward Parlour—Her Woman comes down; requires
his Name, and Business. His Name he mentioned
not. His Business was, to restore into her 

Lady's own Hands, something she had dropt the
Night before.––– Was desir'd to wait. 
I should have told your Ladyship, that he was
dress'd very richly–––having no Design at all, to make
Conquests; no, not he! –––O this wicked Love of
Intrigue! –––A kind of Olive-colour'd Velvet, and
fine brocaded Waistcoat. I said, when he took
Leave of me, You're a charming Mr. B.—and saluted
him, more pressingly than he return'd it; but
little did I think, when I plaited so smooth his rich-lac'd
Ruffles, and Bosom, where he was going, or
what he had in his plotting Heart. –––He went in his
own Chariot, that he did: So that he had no Design
to conceal who he was–––But Intrigue, a new Conquest,
Vanity, Pride! –––O these Men! –––They had
need talk of Ladies! –––But it is half our own Fault; 
indeed it is, to incourage their Vanity! 
Well, Madam, he waited till his Stateliness was
moved to send up again, That he would wait on her
Ladyship some other Time. –––So down she came,
dress'd most richly, Jewels in her Breast, and in her
Hair, and Ears–––But with a very reserved and
stately Air—He approached her–––Me thinks I see
him, dear saucy Gentleman. You know, Madam,
what a noble manner of Address he has! 
He took the Handkerchief, from his Bosom, with
an Air; and kissing it, presented it to her, saying,
This happy Estray, thus restor'd, begs Leave, by me,
to acknowlege its lovely Owner! 
What mean you, Sir? –––Who be you, Sir? ––– 
What mean you? 
Your Ladyship will excuse me: But I am incapable
of meaning any thing but what is honourable. 
–––(No to be sure!)–––This, Madam, you left last
Night, when the Domine took up every one's Attention 

but mine, which was much better ingag'd; 
and I take the Liberty to restore it to you. 
She turn'd to the Mark; a Coronet, at one Corner. 
'Tis true, Sir, I see now it is one of mine: 
But such a Trifle was not worthy of being brought
by such a Gentleman as you seem to be; nor of my
Trouble to receive it in Person. Your Servant, Sir,
might have delivered the Bagatelle to mine. 
Nothing should be called so, that belongs to the
Countess of&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; 
She was no Countess, Sir, that dropt that Hand-kerchief; 
and a Gentleman would not attempt to
penetrate unbecomingly, thro' the Disguises that a
Lady thinks proper to assume, especially at such a
Place, where every Inquiry should begin and end. 
This, Madam, from a Lady, who had unmasked
–––because she would not be known! –––Very pretty,
indeed! –––Oh! these slight Cobweb Airs of Modesty!
so easily seen thro'–––Hence such Advantages against
us are taken by the Men. 
She had looked out of her Window, and seen no
Arms quartered with his own; for you know, my
Lady, I would never permit any to be procured for
me: So, she doubted not, it seems, but he was an
unmarried Gentleman, as he had intimated to her
the Night before. 
He told her, it was impossible, after having had
the Opportunity of seeing the finest Lady in the
World, not to wish to see her again; and that he
hop'd, he did not, unbecomingly, break thro' her
Ladyship's Reserves: Nor had he made any Inquiries
either on the Spot, or off of it; having had a
much better Direction by Accident. 
As how, Sir? said she, as he told me, with so
bewitching an Air, between Attentive and Pleasant,
that, bold Gentleman, forgetting all manner of Distance, 

so early too! he clasped his Arms round her
Waist, and saluted her, struggling with Anger and
Indignation, he says: But I think little of that!––– 
Whence this Insolence? –––How-now, Sir! –––Begone!
were her Words, and she rung the Bell; but
he set his Back against the Door–––(I never heard
such Boldness in my Life, Madam!)–––till she would
forgive him. –––And it is plain, she was not so angry
as she pretended; for her Woman coming, she was
calmer: Nelthorpe, said she, fetch my Snuff-box,
with the Lavender in it. 
Her Woman went; and then she said, You told
me, Sir, last Night, of your Intrepidness: I think
you are the boldest Man I ever met with: But, Sir,
surely you ought to know, that you are not now in
the Hay-market. 
I think, truly, Madam, the Lady might have
sav'd herself that Speech; for, upon my Word, they
neither of 'em wore Masks–––Tho' they ought both
to have put on one of Blushes. –––I am sure I do for
'em, while I am writing. 
Her irresistible Loveliness served for an Excuse,
that she could not disapprove from a Man she disliked
not; and his irresistible–––may I say, Assurance,
Madam? –––found too ready an Excuse. 
Well, but, Sir, said I, pray, when her Ladyship
was made acquainted, that you were a marry'd Gentleman,
how then? –––I long to hear, how then! 
–––Pray, did she find it out, or did you tell her? 
Patience, my Dear! 
Well, pray, Sir, go on. –––What was next? 
Why, next, I put on a more respectful and tender
Air: I would have taken her Hand indeed, but
she would not permit it; and when she saw I would
not go, till her Lavender Snuff came down, (for so I
told her, and her Woman was not in Haste) she 

seated herself, and I took my Place by her, and began
upon a Subject of a charming Lady I saw the
Night before, after I had parted with her Ladyship,
but not equal by any means to her: And I was confident
this would ingage her Attention; for I never
knew the Lady, who thought herself handsome, that
was not taken by this Topick. Flattery and Admiration,
Pamela, are the two principal Engines by
which our Sex make their first Approaches to yours; 
and if you listen to us, we are sure, either by the
Sap or the Mine, to succeed, and blow you up,
whenever we please, if we do but take care to suit
ourselves to your particular Foibles; or, to carry on
the Metaphor, point our Batteries to your weak
Side: For the strongest Fortresses, my Dear, are
weaker in one Place than another! –––A fine thing,
Sir, said I, to be so learned a Gentleman! –––I wish
tho' you had always come honestly by your Knowlege,
thought I. 
When the Lavender Snuff came down, continued
he, we were ingaged in an agreeable Disputation,
that I had raised on purpose to excite her Opposition,
she having all the Advantage in it; and in
order to give it up, when she was intent upon it, as
a Mark of my Consideration for her. 
I the less wonder, Sir, said I, at your Boldness
(pardon the Word!) with such a Lady, in your
first Visit, because of her Freedoms, when mask'd; 
her Unmasking, and her Handkerchief, and Letter-cover. 
To be sure the Lady, when she saw next
Day, such a fine Gentleman, and such an handsome
Equipage, had little Reason, after her other Freedoms,
to be so very nice with you, as to decline an
insnaring Conversation, calculated on purpose to ingage
her Attention, and to lengthen out your Visit. 
But did she not ask you, who you were? 

Her Servants did of mine. –––And her Woman
(for I knew all afterwards, when we were better acquainted)
came, and whispered her Lady, that I was
Mr. B. of Bedfordshire; and had an immense
Estate, to which they were so kind as to add two or
three thousand Pounds a Year, out of pure Good-will
to me: I thank them. 
But pray, dear Sir, what had you in View in all
this? Did you intend to carry this Matter at first,
as far as ever you could? 
I had, at first, my Dear, no View, but such as
Pride and Vanity suggested to me. I was carried
away by Inconsideration, and the Love of Intrigue,
without so much as giving myself any Thought about
the Consequences. The Lady, I observed, had
abundance of fine Qualities. I thought I could converse
with her, on a very agreeable Foot; and her
Honour, I knew, at any Time, would preserve me
mine, if ever I should find it in Danger: And, in
my Soul, I preferr'd my Pamela to all the Ladies
on Earth, and questioned not, but that, and your
Virtue, would be another Barrier to my Fidelity. 
As to the Notion of Polygamy, I never, but in
the Levity of Speech, and the Wantonness of Argument,
like other lively young Fellows, who think
they have Wit to shew, when they advance something
out of the common way, had it in my Head. 
I thought myself doubly bound by the Laws of my
Country, to discourage that way of Thinking, as I
was a Five hundredth Part of one of the Branches of
the Legislature; and inconsiderable as that is, yet it
makes one too considerable, in my Opinion, to
break those Laws, one should rather join all one's
Interest to inforce. 
In a Word, therefore, Pride, Vanity, Thoughtlessness,
were my Misguiders, as I said. The Countess's 

Honour and Character, and your Virtue and
Merit, my Dear, and my Obligations to you, were
my Defences: But I find one should avoid the first
Appearances of Evil. One knows not one's own
Strength. 'Tis presumptuous to depend upon it,
where Wit and Beauty are in the Way on one Side,
and Youth and strong Passions on the other. 
You certainly, Sir, say right. But be pleased to
tell me, what her Ladyship said, when she knew
you were marry'd? 
The Countess's Woman was in my Interest, and
let me into some of her Lady's Secrets, having a
great Share in her Confidence; and particularly acquainted
me, how loth her Lady was to believe I
was marry'd. I had paid her three Visits in Town,
and attended her once to her Seat upon the Forest,
before she heard that I was. But when she was
assured of it, and directed her Nelthorpe to ask me
about it, and I readily own'd it, she was greatly incensed,
tho' nothing but general Civilities, and Intimacies
not inconsistent with honourable Friendship,
had passed between us. The Consequence was, she
forbid me ever seeing her again, and set out with
her Sister, and the Viscount, for Tunbridge, where
she stay'd about three Weeks. 
I thought I had already gone too far, and blamed
myself for permitting her Ladyship so long to believe
me a single Man; and here the Matter had dropp'd,
in all Probability, had not a Ball, given by Lord&wblank;,
to which, unknown to each other, we were both,
as also the Viscountess, invited, brought us again
into one another's Company. The Lady withdrew,
after a while, with her Sister, to another Apartment; 
and being resolved upon personal Recrimination,
(which is what a Lady, who is resolved to break with
a favoured Object, should never trust herself with) 

sent for me, and reproached me on my Conduct, in
which her Sister join'd. 
I own'd frankly, that it was rather Gaiety than
Design, that made me give Cause, at the Masquerade,
for her Ladyship to think I was not marry'd; 
for that I had a Wife, who had a thousand Excellencies,
and was my Pride, and my Boast: That I
held it very possible for a Gentleman and Lady to
carry on an innocent and honourable Friendship, in
a Family way; and I was sure, when she and her
Sister saw my Spouse, they would not be displeased
with her Acquaintance; and all that I had to reproach
myself with, was, that after having, at the
Masquerade, given Reason to think I was not marry'd,
I had been loth, officiously, to say I was,
altho' it never was my Intention to conceal it. 
In short, I acquitted myself so well to both Ladies,
that a Family Intimacy was consented to. 
I renew'd my Visits, and we accounted to one
another's Honour, by entering upon a kind of Platonick
System, in which Sex was to have no manner
of Concern. 
But, my dear Pamela, I must own myself extremely
blameable, because I knew the World, and
human Nature, I will say, better than the Lady,
who never before had been trusted into it upon her
own Feet; and who, notwithstanding that Wit and
Vivacity which every one admires in her, gave herself
little Time for Consideration, as she had met
with a Man whose Person and Conversation she did
not dislike, and whose Circumstances and Spirit set
him above sordid or mercenary Views: And besides,
I made myself useful to her in some of her Affairs,
wherein she had been grosly abused; which brought
us into more intimate and frequent. Conversations,
than otherwise we should have had Opportunities for. 

I ought therefore to have more carefully guarded
against Inconveniencies, that I knew were so likely
to arise from such Intimacies; and the rather, as I
hinted, because the Lady had no Apprehension at all
of any: So that, my Dear, if I have no Excuse
from human Frailty, from Youth, and the Charms
of the Object, I am intirely destitute of any. 
I see, dear Sir, said I, there is a great deal to be
said for the Lady. I wish I could say there was for
the Gentleman. But such a fine Lady had been
safe, with all her Inconsideration, and so, forgive
me, Sir, would the Gentleman, with all his intriguing
Spirit, had it not been for these vile Masquerades. 
Never, dear Sir, think of going to another. 
Why, my Dear, he was pleased to say, those
are least of all to be trusted at those Diversions, who
are most desirous to go to them. —Of this I am now
fully convinced. 
Well, dear Sir, I long to hear the further Particulars
of this Story: For this generous Openness,
now the Affair is over, cannot but be grateful to
me, as it shews me you have no Reserves; and as
it tends to convince me, that the Lady was less
blameable than I apprehended she was: For dearly
do I love, for the Honour of my Sex, to find Ladies
of Birth and Quality innocent; who have so many
Opportunities of knowing and practising their Duties,
above what meaner Persons can have—Else, what
one fails in thro' Surprize and Ignorance, it will look
as if the others did from Inclination: And what a
Disgrace is that upon the Sex in general? And what
a Triumph to the wicked ones of yours? 
Well observed, my Dear: This is like your generous
and deep way of Thinking. 
Well, but dear Sir, proceed, if you please. — 
Your Reconciliation is now effected: A Friendship 

Quadrupartite is commenced. And the Viscountess
and myself are to find Cement for the erecting of
an Edifice, that is to be devoted to Platonick Love. 
What, may I ask, came next? And what did you
design should come of it? 
The Oxford Journey, my Dear, followed next; 
and it was my Fault, that you made not a Party in
it: For both Ladies were very desirous of your Company: 
But it being about the Time you were going
abroad, after your Lying-in, I excused you to them. 
Yet they both long'd to see you; especially, as by
this Time, you may believe, they knew all your
Story: And besides, whenever you were mentioned,
I always did Justice, as well to your Mind, as your
Person; and this, not only for the Sake of Justice,
but, to say Truth, because it gave the two Sisters,
and the Viscount, (whose softly Character, and his
Lady's prudent and respectful Conduct to him, notwithstanding
that, are both so well known) less
Cause of Suspicion, that I had any dishonourable
Designs upon the Dowager Lady. 
Miss Darnford will have it, permit me, my dear
Lady, to observe, that I have some Merit, with Regard
to the rest of my Sex, if I am inabled to reform
such a dangerous Spirit of Intrigue, as your dear
Brother possessed: And the History of this Affair
from his own Mouth, made me begin to pride myself
on this Head: For was he not, think you, my
Lady, in this Case, a sad Gentleman! —And how
deeply was he able to lay his Mischiefs! And how
much had this fine Lady been to be pity'd, had she
fallen by his Arts, who was the only Man, almost,
that from the Gracefulness of his Person, the Nobleness
of his Mind, his Generosity, Courage, ample
Fortunes, and Wit, could have made her unhappy! 
—God be praised, that it was stopt in Time, tho', 

as it seems, but just in Time, as well for the poor
Lady's sake, as for Mr. B.'s, and my own! 
Excuse me, Madam, for this Digression. But
yet, for what I am going to repeat, I shall still
want further Excuse; for I cannot resist a little
rising Vanity, upon a Comparison (tho' only as to
Features) drawn, by your dear Brother, between
the Countess and me; which, however the Preference
he gives me in it, may be undeserved, yet it
cannot but be very agreeable, in this particular Case
of a Rivalry, to one who takes so much Pride in his
good Opinion, and who makes it her chief Study,
by all honest and laudable Means, to preserve it; 
but who, else, I hope, is far from considering such
a transitory Advantage, (had I it in as great a Degree
as his kind Fancy imputes to me) but as it deserves. 
I will give it, as near as I can, in his own
Words: 
It may not be altogether amiss, my Dear, now I
have mentioned the Justice I always did your Character
and Merit, to give you a brief Account of a
Comparison, which once the Countess's Curiosity
drew from me, between your Features and hers. 
She and I were alone in the Bow-window of her
Library, which commands a fine View over Windsor
Forest, but which View we could not enjoy; for
it rain'd, and blew a Hurricane almost, which, tho'
ready dress'd to go abroad, detain'd us within. 
I began a Subject, which never fails to make the
worst of Weather agreeable to a fine Lady; that of
praising her Beauty, and the Symmetry of her Features,
telling her, how much I thought every graceful
one in her Face adorn'd the rest, as if they were
all form'd to give and receive Advantage from each
other. I added, approaching her, as if the more
attentively to peruse her fine Face, that I believ'd it 

possible, from the transparent Whiteness of her Skin,
and the clear Blueness of her Veins, to discover the
Circulation, without a Microscope. 
Keep your Distance, Mr. B. said she. Does
your magnifying thus egregiously the Graces you impute
to my outward Form, agree with your Platonick
Scheme? Your Eye, penetrating as you imagine
it, pierces not deep enough for a Platonick,
if you cannot look farther than the White and the
Blue, and discover the Circulation of the Spirit; for
our Friendship is all Mind, you know. 
True, Madam; but if the Face is the Index of
the Mind, when I contemplate yours, I see and revere
the Beauties of both in one. And what Platonick
Laws forbid us to do Justice to the one, when
we admire the other? 
Well, sit you down, bold Mr. B. sit you down,
and answer me a Question or two on this Subject,
since you will be always raising my Vanity upon it. 
I did, saluting her Hand only (That was his
Word, which I took notice of in the dear Platonick,
tho' I said nothing). 
Tell me now of a Truth, with all the Charms
your too agreeable Flattery gives me, Which is the
most lovely, your Pamela, or myself? 
I told her, you were both inimitable, in a different
Way. 
Well, said she, I give up the Person and Air in
general, because I have heard, that she is slenderer,
and better shap'd, than most Ladies; but for a few
Particulars, as to Face, (invidious as the Comparison
may be, and concern'd as you are to justify your
Choice) I'll begin with the Hair, Mr. B. Whose
Hair is of most Advantage to her Complection? — 
Come, I fansy, I shall, at least, divide Perfections
with your Pamela. 

Your Ladyship's delicate light Brown is extremely
beautiful, and infinitely better becomes your Complection
and Features, than would that lovely shining
Auburn, which suits best with my Girl's. 
You must know, Pamela, I always called you
my Girl, to her, as I do frequently to yourself and
others. 
So she excels me there, I find! 
I don't say so. 
Well, but as to the Forehead, Mr. B.? 
Indeed, Madam, my Girl has some Advantage,
I presume to think, in her Forehead: She has a noble
Openness and Freedom there, that bespeaks her
Mind, and every body's Favour, the Moment she
appears: Not but that your Ladyship's, next to hers,
is the finest I ever saw. 
So! –––Next to hers! rubbing her Forehead—Well,
Brows, Mr. B.? 
Your Ladyship's fine Arch-Brow is a Beauty in
your fair Face, that a Pencil cannot imitate; but
then your fairer Hair shews it not to that Advantage,
I must needs say, that her darker Hair gives
her; for, as to Complection, you are both so
charmingly fair, that I cannot, for my Life, give a
Preference to either. 
Well, well, foolish Man, said she, peevishly,
thou art strangely taken with thy Girl! –––I wish
thou wouldst go about thy Business! –––What signifies
a little bad Weather to Men? –––But if her Complection
is as good as mine, it must look better, because
of her dark Hair. –––I shall come poorly off, I
find! –––Let's have the Eyes, however. 
For black Eyes in my Girl, and blue in your Ladyship,
they are both the loveliest I ever beheld. ––– 
And, Pamela, I was wicked enough to say, That
it would be the sweetest Travelling in the World, 

to have you both placed at Fifty Miles Distance
from each other, and to pass the Prime of one's Life
from Black to Blue, and from Blue to Black; and
it would be impossible to know which to prefer, but
the present. 
Ah! naughty Mr. B. said I, were you not worse
than the Countess a great deal? 
The Countess is not bad, my Dear. I was all in
Fault. 
But what, Sir, did she say to you? 
Say! why, the saucy Lady did what very few
Ladies have ever done: She made the Powder fly out
of my Wig, by a smart Cuff, with her nimble
Fingers. 
And how, Sir, did you take that? 
How, my Dear! —Why I kiss'd her in Revenge. 
Fine Doings between two Platonicks! thought I. 
But I will own to you, Madam, that my Vanity
in this Comparison, was too much soothed, not to
wish to hear how it was carried on. 
Well, Sir, did you proceed further in your Comparison? 
I knew, my Dear, you would not let me finish
at half your Picture. —O Pamela—Who says, you
are absolutely perfect? Who says, there is no Sex
in your Mind? and tapp'd my Neck. 
All is owing, Sir, to the Pride I take in your
Opinion. I care not how indifferent I appear in
the Eyes of all the World besides. 
The Cheek came next, proceeded Mr. B. I
allow'd her Ladyship to have a livelier Carmine in
hers; and that it was somewhat rounder, her Ladyship
being a little plumper than my Girl; but that
your Face, my Dear, being rather smaller featur'd
of the two, there was an inimitably finer Turn in
your Cheek, than I had ever seen in my Life. 

Her Ladyship stroked her Cheek-bones, which,
however, Madam, I think, are far from being high,
(tho', to be sure, she is a little larger featur'd; in
excellent Proportion, for all that, as she is of a
taller and a larger Make than me) and said, Very
well, Sir; you are determined to mortify me. But,
added her Ladyship, (which shewed, Madam, she
little depended upon Platonicism in him) if you have
a View in this, you will be greatly mistaken, I'll
assure you: For, let me tell you, Sir, the Lady
who can think meanly of herself, is any Man's Purchace. 
The Nose I left in doubt, said Mr. B. but allow'd,
that each were exquisitely beautiful on its
own proper Face. 
Her Ladyship was sure of a Preference in her
Mouth. I allow'd, that her Lips were somewhat
plumper—and, saluting her by Surprize, (for which
I had much ado to preserve my Wig from another
Disorder—) a little softer, of Consequence; but
not quite so red—for, said I, I never saw a Lip of
so rich and balmy a Red in my Life, as my Girl's. 
But your Smiles, Madam, are more bewitchingly
free and attractive; for my Girl is a little too
grave. 
And, my Lady, charming as your Teeth are,
I think hers not a whit inferior in Whiteness and
Regularity. 
Her Chin, my Lady, is a sweet Addition to her
Face, by that easy soft half Round, that looks as
if Nature had begun at Top, and gave that as her
finishing Stroke to the rest: While, my dear Lady,
yours is a little, little too strong featur'd; but such
as so infinitely becomes your Face, that my Girl's
Chin would not have half the Beauty upon your
Face. 

Her Ears, my Lady, are just such as your own: 
—Must they not be beautiful then? Her Neck,
tho' it must not presume—let me see, Madam,
approaching her—(Keep your Distance, Sir. I was
forced to do so)—tho' it must not pretend to excel
yours for Whiteness, yet, except yours, did I never
see any Neck so beautiful. But your Ladyship, it
must be confess'd, being a little plumper in Person,
has the Advantage here. 
I had a smart Rap on my Knuckles with her Fan. 
And she would hear no more. But was resolv'd she
would see you, she said. 
And, my Dear, I am the more particular in repeating
this comparative Description of the two
charming'st Persons in England, because you will
see the Reason, (and that it was not to insult you,
as you rightly judg'd in your Letter to my Sister *  , but to your Advantage) that I gave way to the Importunity
of the Countess to see you; for I little
thought you were so well acquainted with our Intimacy; 
much less, that we had been made more
intimate, to you, than ever, in Truth, we were,
or, perhaps, might have been: And when I asked
you, Why you were not richer dress'd, and had not
your Jewels, you may believe, (as I had no Reason
to doubt, that the Countess would come in all her
Ornaments) I was not willing my Girl should give
way to the noble Emulatress in any thing; being
concern'd for your own Honour, as well as mine,
in the Superiority of Beauty I had so justly given
you. 
Well, Sir, to be sure, this was kind, very kind; 
and little was I disposed (knowing what I knew) to
pass so favourable a Construction on your Generosity
to me. 

My Question to her Ladyship, continued Mr. B. at
going away, Whether you was not the charming'st
Girl in the World, which, seeing you together at
one View, rich as she was drest, and plain as you,
gave me the double Pleasure (a Pleasure she said
afterwards I exulted in) of deciding in your Favour; 
my Readiness to explain to you what we
both said, and her not ungenerous Answer, I
thought would have intitled me to a better Return
than a Flood of Tears; which confirm'd me, that
your past Uneasiness was a Jealousy, I was not
willing to allow in you; tho' I should have been
more indulgent to it, had I known the Grounds
you thought you had for it: And this was the Reason
of my leaving you so abruptly as I did. 
Here, Madam, Mr. B. broke off, referring to
another time the Conclusion of his Narrative. And,
having written a great deal, I will here also close this
Letter (tho' possibly I may not send it, till I send
the Conclusion of this Story in my next) with the
Assurance, that I am 
Your Ladyship's obliged Sister and Servant,
P. B. 

