



My dear Lady G.
I Received your last Letter at Paris, as we were
disposing every thing for our Return to England,
after an Absence of near Two Years; in which, as
I have inform'd you, from time to time, I have
been a great Traveller, into Holland, the Netherlands,
through the most considerable Provinces of France,
into Italy; and, in our Return to Paris again, (the
principal Place of our Residence) through several
Parts of Germany. 
I told you of the Favours and Civilities we receiv'd
at Florence, from the then Countess Dowager
of &sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; who, with her Humble Servant Lord C.&sblank;&sblank;&sblank; 
(that had so assiduously attended her for so many
Months in Italy) accompany'd us from Florence to
Inspruck. 
Her Ladyship made that worthy Lord happy in
about a Month after she parted from us; and the
noble Pair gave us an Opportunity at Paris, in their
Way to England, to return some of the Civilities,
which we receiv'd from them in Italy: And they
are now arriv'd at her Ladyship's Seat on the Forest. 
Her Lord is exceedingly fond of her, as he well
may; for she is one of the most charming Ladies
in England; and behaves to him with so much Prudence
and Respect, that they are as happy in each
other, as can be wish'd. And let me just add,
That both in Italy and at Paris, Mr. B.'s Demeanour
and her Ladyship's to one another, was so nobly
open, and unaffectedly polite, as well as highly discreet,
that neither Lord C. who had once been
jealous of Mr. B. nor the other Party, who had 

had a Tincture of the same Yellow Evil, as you
know, because of the Countess, had so much as a
Shadow of Uneasiness remaining on that Occasion. 
Lord Davers has had his Health (which had begun
to decline in England) so well, that there was
no persuading Lady Davers to return before now; 
altho' I begg'd and pray'd I might not have another
little Frenchman, for fear they should, as they grew
up, forget, as I pleasantly used to say, the Obligations
which their Parentage lays them under to
dearer England. 
And now, my dearest Friend, I have shut up my
Rambles for my whole Life; for Three little English
Folks, and One little Frenchman, (but a charming
Baby, as well as the rest, Charley by Name) and
a near Prospect of a further Increase, you will
say, are Family enough to employ all my Cares at
home. 
I have told you, from time to time, altho' I could
not write to you so often as I would, because of
our being so constantly in Motion, what was most
worthy of your Knowlege relating to our Particular,
and how happy we have all been in one another. 
And I have the Pleasure to confirm to you what I
have several times written, that Mr. B. and my Lord
and Lady Davers are all that I could wish and hope
for, with regard to their first Duties. Indeed, indeed,
we are an happy Family, united by the best
and most solid Motives! 
Miss Goodwin is a charming young Lady!–––– I
cannot express how much I love her. She is a perfect
Mistress of the French Language, and speaks
Italian very prettily: And, as to myself, I have improved
so well under my dear Tutor's Lessons, together
with the Opportunity of conversing with the
politest and most learned Gentry of different Nations,
that I will hold a Conversation with you in 

two or three Languages, if you please, when I have
the Happiness to see you. There's a learned Boaster
for you, my dear Friend! (if the Knowlege of different
Languages makes one learned). But I shall
bring you an Heart as intirely English as ever, for
all that! 
We landed on Thursday last at Dover, and directed
our Course to the dear Farm-house; and
you can better imagine, than I express, what a Meeting
we had with my dear Father and Mother, and
my beloved Davers and Pamela, who are charming
Babies–––––But is not this the Language of every
fond Mamma? 
Miss Goodwin is highly delighted now with my sweet
little Pamela, and says, She shall be her Sister indeed! 
For, Madam, said she, Miss is a Beauty!––– And we
see no French Beauties like Master Davers and Miss. 
Beauty! my dear Miss Goodwin, said I; what is
Beauty, if she be not a good Girl?––– Beauty is but
a specious, and, as it may happen, a dangerous Recommendation,
a mere skin-deep Perfection; and if,
as she grows up, she is not as good as my Miss Goodwin,
she shall be none of my Girl. 
What adds to my Pleasure, my dear Friend, is to
see them both so well got over the Small pox. It
has been as happy for them, as it was for their
Mamma and her Billy, that they had it under so
skilful and kind a Manager in that Distemper, as my
dear Mother. I wish, if it please God, it was as
happily over with my little pretty Frenchman. 
Every body is surpris'd to see what the past two
Years have done for Miss Goodwin, and my Billy. ––– 
O my dear Friend, they are both of them almost–––nay,
quite, I think, for their Years, all that I wish them to be. 
In order to make them keep their French, which
Miss so well speaks, and Billy so prettily prattles, I
make them, when they talk to one another, and 

are in the Nursery, speak nothing else: But at Table,
except on particular Occasions, when French may be
spoken, they are to speak in English; that is to say,
when they do speak: For I tell them, that little
Masters must do nothing but ask Questions for Information,
and say Yes, or No, till their Papa's or
Mamma's give them Leave to speak; nor little
Ladies neither, till they are Sixteen: for, my dear
Loves, cry I, You would not speak before you
know how: And Knowlege is obtain'd by Hearing,
and not by Speaking: And setting my Billy on my
Lap, in Miss's Presence, Here, said I, taking an Ear
in the Fingers of each Hand, are two Ears, my Billy;
and, then pointing to his Mouth, but one Tongue,
my Love: So you must be sure to mind, that you
bear twice as much as you speak, even when you
grow a bigger Master than you are now. 
You have so many pretty Ways to learn one,
Madam, says Miss, now-and-then, it is impossible
we should not regard what you say to us! 
Several French Tutors, when we were abroad,
were recommended to Mr. B. But there is one
English Gentleman, now on his Travels with young
Mr. R. with whom Mr. B. has agreed; and in the
mean time, my best Friend is pleas'd to compliment
me, that the Children will not suffer for want of a
Tutor, while I can take the Pains I do: Which he
will have to be too much for me; especially, that
now, on our Return, my Davers and my Pamela are
added to my Cares. But what Mother can take
too much Pains to cultivate the Minds of her
Children?––– If, my dear Lady G. it were not for these
frequent Lyings-in!––– But this is the Time of Life––– 
Tho' little did I think, so early, I should have so
many careful Blessings! 
I have as great Credit as Pleasure from my little
Family. All our Neighbours here in Bedfordshire 

admire us more and more. You'll excuse my seeming
(for it is but seeming) Vanity; I hope I know
better than to have it real–––Never, says Mrs. Towers,
who is still a single Lady, did I see, before, a Lady
so much advantag'd by her Residence in that fantastick
Nation, (for she loves not the French) and
who brought home with her nothing of their Affectations!––– 
She will have it, that the French Politeness,
and the English Frankness and Plainness of
Heart, appear happily blended in all we say and do. 
And she makes me a thousand Compliments upon
Lord and Lady Davers's Account, who, she would
fain persuade me, owe a great deal of Improvement,
(my Lord in his Conversation, and my Lady in her
Temper) to living in the same House with us. 
Indeed my Lady Davers is exceeding kind and
good to me, is always magnifying me to every body,
and says, she knows not how to live from me; and
that I have been a Means of saving half an hundred
Souls, as well as her dear Brother's. On an Indisposition
of my Lord's at Montpelier, which made
her Ladyship very apprehensive, she declar'd, that
were she to be depriv'd of his Lordship, she would
not let us rest, till we had consented to permit her
to live with us; saying, that we had Room enough
in Lincolnshire, and she would inlarge the Bedfordshire
Seat at her own Expence. 
Mr. H. is Mr. H. still; and that's the best I can
say of him: For, I verily think, he is more an Ape
than ever. His whole Head is now French. 'Twas
half so before. We had great Difficulties with him
abroad: His Aunt and I endeavouring to give him a
serious and religious Turn, we had like to have turn'd
him into a Roman Catholick. For he was pleased
much with the shewy Part of that Religion, and the
fine Pictures and Decorations in the Churches of
Italy; and having got into Company with a Dominican 

at Padua, a Franciscan at Milan, and a Jesuit
at Paris, they lay so hard at him, in their Turns, that
we had like to have lost him to each Assailant; so
were forced to let him take his own Course; for,
his Aunt would have it, that he had no other Defence
from the Attacks of Persons to make him
embrace a faulty Religion, than to permit him to
continue as he was; that is to say, to have none at
all. So she suspended attempting to proselyte the
thoughtless Creature, till he came to England. I
wish her Ladyship Success here; but, I doubt, he
will not be a Credit to any Religion, for a great
while. And as he is very desirous to go to London,
as he has always been, it will be found, when there,
that any fluttering Coxcomb will do more to make
him one of that Class, in an Hour, than his Aunt's
Lessons, to make him a good Man, in a Twelvemonth. 
Where much is given, much is required. 
The contrary of this, I doubt, is all poor Mr. H.
has to trust to. 
Just now we have a Messenger to tell us, that
his Father, who has been long ill, is dead. So, now,
he is a Lord indeed! He flutters and struts about
most strangely, I warrant, and is wholly imploy'd
in giving Directions relating to his Mourning Equipage
–––And now there will be no holding of him
in, I doubt; except his new Title has so much Virtue
in it, as to make him a wiser and a better Man. 
He will now have a Seat in the House of Peers
of Great Britain; but I hope, for the Nation's sake,
he will not meet with many more like himself there! 
–––For, to me, that is one of the most venerable
Assemblies in the World; and it appears the more
so, since I have been abroad; for an English Gentleman
is respected, if he be any thing of a Man,
above a foreign Nobleman; and an English Nobleman,
above some petty Sovereigns. 

If our travelling Gentry duly consider'd this Distinction
in their Favour, they would, for the Honour
of their Country, as well as for their own Credit,
behave in a better manner, in their foreign Tours,
than, I am sorry to say it, some of them do. But
what can one expect, from the unlick'd Cubs, pardon
the Term, sent abroad with only Stature, to
make them look like Men, and Equipage to attract
Respect, without one other Qualification to inforce it? 
Here let me close this, with a few Tears, to the
Memory of my dear Mrs. Jervis, my other Mother,
my Friend, my Adviser, my Protectress, in my
single State, and my faithful Second and Partaker in
the Comforts of my higher Life, and better Fortunes! 
What would I have given to have been present,
as, it seems, she so earnestly wished, to close her
dying Eyes! I should have done it, with the Piety
and the Concern of a truly affectionate Daughter. 
But that melancholy Happiness was deny'd to us
both; for, as I told you in the Letter on the Occasion,
the dear good Woman (who now is in the
Possession of her blessed Reward, and is rejoicing
in God's Mercies) was no more, when the News
reached me, so far off, as at Heidelburgh, of her
last Illness and Wishes. 
I cannot forbear, every time I enter her Parlour,
(where I used to see, with so much Delight, the
good Woman sitting, always imploy'd in some useful
or pious Work) shedding a Tear to her Memory: 
And in my Sabbath Duties, missing her, I miss half
a dozen Friends, methinks; and I sigh in Remembrance
of her; and can only recover that chearful
Frame, which the Performance of those Duties
always gave me, by reflecting, that she now is
reaping the Reward of that sincere Piety, which
us'd to edify and encourage us all. 

The Servants we brought home with us, and those
we left behind us, met in Tears at the Name of
Mrs. Jervis. Mr. Longman lamented too, in the
most moving Strain, her Loss: And all I can do
now, in Honour of her Memory and her Merit, is
to be a Friend to those she lov'd most, as I have
already begun to be; and none of them shall suffer
in those Concerns that can be answer'd, now she is
gone. For the Loss of so excellent a Friend and
Relation, is Loss enough to all that knew her, and
claim'd Kindred with her. 
Poor worthy Jonathan too, ('tis almost a Misery
to have so soft, so susceptible an Heart as I have,
or to have such good Servants and Friends as one
cannot lose without such Emotions as I feel for
their Loss!) his Silver Hairs, which I have beheld
with so much Delight, and thought I had a Father
in Presence, when I saw them adorning so honest
and comely a Face, how are they now laid low! ––– 
Forgive me, my dear Lady G. Jonathan was not a
common Servant; neither are any of ours so: But
Jonathan excell'd all that excell'd in his Class!––– I
am told, That these two worthy Folks dy'd within
two Days of one another; a Circumstance you
mention'd not in your Letter to me; on which
Occasion I could not help saying to myself, in the
Words of David over Saul and his Son Jonathan,
the Namesake of our worthy Butler, They were lovely
and pleasant in their Lives, and in their Deaths they
were not divided. 
I might have continu'd on in the Words of the
Royal Lamenter; for, surely, never did one Fellow-servant
love another in my Maiden State, nor Servant
love a Mistress in my exalted Condition, better
than Jonathan lov'd me! I could see in his Eyes a
glistening Pleasure, whenever I pass'd by him: If at
such times I spoke to him, as I seldom fail'd to do, 

with a God bless you too! in Answer to his repeated
Blessings, he had a kind of Re-juvenescence (may I
say?) visibly running thro' his whole Frame: And,
now-and-then, if I laid my Hand upon his folded
ones, as I pass'd him on a Sunday Morning or Evening,
praying for me, with a How do you, my worthy
old Acquaintance? his Heart would spring to his
Lips in a kind of Rapture, and his Eyes would run
over. 
O my beloved Friend! how the Loss of these
two Worthies of my Family oppresses me at times! 
Mr. B. likewise shew'd a generous Concern on
the Occasion: And when all the Servants welcom'd
us in a Body, on our Return, Methinks, my Dear,
said the good Gentleman, I miss your Mrs. Jervis,
and honest Jonathan. A starting Tear, and, They
are happy, dear honest Souls! and a Sigh, were the
Tribute I paid to their Memories, on their beloved
Master's so kindly repeating their Names. 
Who knows, had I been here––– But, away, too
painful Reflection! They liv'd to a good old Age,
and fell like Fruit fully ripe: They died the Death
of the Righteous; I must follow them in time, God
knows how soon: And Oh! that my latter End
may be like theirs! 
Once more, forgive me, my dear Friend, this
small Tribute to their Memories: And believe, that
I am not so ungrateful for God's Mercies, as to let
the Loss of these dear good Folks lessen with me
the Joy, and the Delight, I have still (more than any
other happy Creature) left me, in the Health, and the
Love, of the best of good Husbands, and good Men; 
in the Children, charming as ever Mother boasted!
charming, I mean principally, in the dawning Beauties
of their Minds, and in the Pleasure their Towardliness
of Nature gives me; including, as I always do,
and have Reason to do, from her dutiful Love, as 

I may call it, for me, and Observation of all I say
to her, my dear Miss Goodwin; in the Preservation
to me of the best and worthiest of Parents, hearty,
tho' aged, as they are; in the Love and Friendship
of good Lord and Lady Davers; and my excellent
Friend Lady G. God preserve all these to me,
(not forgetting the worthy Mr. Longman) as I am
truly thankful for His Mercies!––– And then, notwithstanding
my affecting Losses, as above, who
will be so happy as I? 
That you, my dear Lady G. may long continue
so, likewise, in the Love of a worthy Husband, and
the Delights of an increasing hopeful Family, which
will make you some Amends for the heavy Losses
you also have sustain'd, in the two last Years, of an
affectionate Father, and a most worthy Mother; 
and, in Mrs. Jones, of a good Neighbour; prays 
Your ever affectionate Friend and Servant,
P. B. 

