


To the Honourable Sir Charles Grandison, Bart. 


Saturday, Feb. 18. 
In what an odious light must that wretch appear before
the worthiest of men, who cannot but abhor
himself! 

I am the unhappy man who was hired into the service
of the best of young ladies: Whom I was the
means of betraying into the power of Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen, from the Ball in the Hay-market on Thursday
night last. 
Your honour has made yourself an interest in Miss
Byron's fate, as I may say, by your powerful protection. 
Pardon me if I give you some account of myself,
and of transactions which perhaps will otherwise
never be known: And this in justice to all round. 
My parentage was honest: My education was above
my parentage. I set out with good principles: But I
fell into a bad service. I was young, and of a good
natural disposition; but had not virtue enough to resist
a temptation: I could not say No, to an unlawful
thing, when my principals commanded my assent. 
I was, at first setting out, by favour of friends,
taken as clerk to a merchant. In process of time I
transacted his business at the Custom-house. He
taught me to make light of oaths of office; and this
by degrees made me think light of all moral obligations,
and laid the foundation of my ruin. 
My master's name was Bagenhall. He died; and I
was to seek. His brother succeeded to his fortune,
which was very large: He was brought up to no business:
He was a gentleman: His seat is near Reading. 
I was recommended by him to the service of a
gentleman who was nominated to go abroad on a foreign
embassy. I will name his name, lest your honour
should imagine I have any design to evade the
strictest truth; Sir Christopher Lucas; I was to be this
gentleman's master of the horse abroad. 
The first service my new master employed me in,
was to try to get for him the pretty daughter of an
honest farmer. 
I had been out of place for a twelvemonth. Had I
had twenty shillings aforehand in the world, I would,
I think, have said No. Nevertheless I consulted, in 

confidence, my late master's brother upon it. The
advice he gave me, was, not to boggle at it: But if,
he said, I could manage the matter so, as to cheat Sir
Christopher, and get the girl for him, and keep the
secret, he would give me 50l. I abhorred the double
treachery of young Mr. Bagenhall: But undertook to
serve Sir Christopher; and carried on a treaty with the
farmer for his daughter; as if she were to be the wife
of Sir Christopher; but not to be owned till he return'd
from abroad; no not even if she should prove
with child. 
I found, in the course of my visits at the farmer's, so
much honesty both in father and mother, and so much
innocence in the daughter, that my heart relented; 
and I took an opportunity to reveal Sir Christopher's
base design to them; for the girl was design'd to be
ruin'd the very first moment that Sir Christopher could
be alone with her. Your honour may believe, that I
enjoined all three strict secrecy. 
Nevertheless this contriving devil of a master found
a way to get the young woman by other means; and,
in amorous dalliance, she told him to whom he was
obliged for not succeeding before. 
In rage he turned me out of his service, in the most
disgraceful manner; but without giving any other
reasons, than that he knew me to be a villain; and
that I knew myself to be one: Nor would he give me
a character: So I was quite reduced; and but for the
kindness of a sister, who keeps an inn in Smithfield,
I should have starved, or been obliged to do worse. 
I should have told your honour, that the poor farmer
and his wife both died of grief in half a year. An honest
young man, who dearly loved the young woman,
was found drowned soon after: It is feared he was his
own executioner. Sir Christopher went not on his
embassy. His preparations for it, and his expensive
way of life, before and after, reduced him: And he
has been long a beggar, as I may say. The poor 

young woman is now, if living, on the town. I saw
her about half a year ago in St. Martin's Round-house,
taken up as a common prostitute, and charged with
picking a pocket. She was a pretty creature, and had
a very pious turn, when I knew her first. Her father
had gone beyond himself in her education: And this
was the fruit. What has such a man as Sir Christopher
to answer for! —But it is come home to him. I
rejoice that this wickedness was not added to my score. 
But heavy scenes I had enough afterwards. Being
utterly destitute, except what my sister did for me,
and not enduring to be a burden to her, I threw myself
on my master Bagenhall. He employed me in
mean offices, till his pander died (he is a very profligate
man, Sir!); and then he promoted me to a still
meaner. 
In this way, I grew a shameless contriver. He introduced
me to Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, and to Mr.
Merceda, a Portuguese Jew. In the service of these
three masters, good heaven forgive me! what villainies
was I not the means of perpetrating! Yet I never was
so harden'd, but I had temporary remorses. But these
three gentlemen would never let me rest from wickedness:
Yet they kept me poor and necessitous; as the
only means to keep me what they called honest; for
they had often reason to think, that had I had any other
means of subsistence, I would have been really honest. 
I was now Mr. Bagenhall's constant servant. Sir
Hargrave and Mr. Merceda used to borrow me: But
I must say Sir Hargrave is an innocent man to the
other two. They caressed me, I speak it to my shame,
as a man fit for their turn. I had contrivance, temper; 
I knew something of every-body. But my sister
knows my frequent compunctions; and that I hated
the vile course I was in. She used to lecture me
enough. She is a good woman. 
Will your honour have patience with me a little
longer? 

Sir Hargrave on the seventh of this month came to
my master Bagenhall at Reading, with whom he had
double business: One was to take a bond and judgment
of him (Sir Hargrave is no better than an usurer):
Mr. Bagenhall has lived a most extravagant life: The
other was to borrow me. Mr. Merceda had a scheme
on foot at the same time, which he was earnest to
engage me in; but it was too shocking; and Mr. Bagenhall
came into Sir Hargrave's. 
Sir Hargrave told them, he designed nothing more
than a violation, if he could get my assistance, of the
most beautiful woman in the world. And, Sir, to
see the villainy of the other two, they both, unknown
to each other, made proposals to me, to trick Sir
Hargrave, and to get the lady, each for himself. 
But to me, Sir Hargrave swore, that he was fully
resolved to leave this wicked course of life. Bagenhall
and Merceda, he said, were devils; and he would
marry, and have no more to say to them. All that
was in his view was honest marriage. He said he had
never been in the lady's company but once, and that
was the day before at Lady Betty Williams's. He said
he went thither, knowing she was to be there; for
having for some time had it in his head to marry, this
was the lady he had pitch'd upon in his mind, from
the character he had of her from every mouth at the
Northampton races. 
Now, said he, I shall have some difficulty to obtain
her, notwithstanding my fortune is so great; for
every one who sees her is in love with her; and he
named several gentlemen who laid close siege to her. 
She brought a servant up with her, said he, who hones
after the country, and is actually gone, or soon will. 
Her cousin enquires of every one after a proper servant
for her. You, Wilson, said he, are handsome
and genteel: He was pleased to say so. You have a
modest humble look: You know all the duties of a
servant: Get yourself entertain'd, and your fortune is 

made for life, if by your means I obtain the lady. I
have already tender'd myself, said he. Perhaps she
will have me in a sew days. I don't expect to be denied,
if she be disengaged, as it is said she is. If you
can get into her service, you will find out every thing. 
This is all that is to be done: But you must never
mention my name, nor ever know any-thing of me,
as I go and come. 
Sir Hargrave declared, that his heart was burnt up
with the love of the lady: And if he succeeded (as he
had little doubt even without my help, had I been actually
in Merceda's service) you will, said he, as my
lady's servant, be mine of course; you shall never
wear a livery; and you shall be my gentleman, till I
can get a place for you in the customs. This, may
it please your honour, he knew I had long aimed at,
and it had been often promised by himself, and my
other two masters; and was their first promise when
they wanted to engage me in any of their schemes; 
tho' they never thought more of it when the service
was over. If I got but myself engaged, I was, on
the day I entered into my lady's service, to have as an
earnest ten guineas. 
Encouraged by such promises, and by a prospect
more honest than ever Sir Hargrave, or either of the
other two, had sought to engage me in, I offered my
service to my lady; and, on Mr. Bagenhall's writing
a good character of me, was accepted. 
I could have been happy in the service of this lady,
for all the days of my life. She is all goodness: All
the servants, every-body, gentle and simple, adored
her: But she, unexpectedly, refusing to have Sir Hargrave,
and he being afraid that one of her three or
four lovers would cut him out, he resolved to take
more violent measures than he had at first intended. 
If any man was ever mad in love, it was Sir Hargrave. 
But then he was as mad with anger to be refused. Sir
Hargrave was ever thought to be one of the proudest 

men in England: And he complained that my lady
used him worse than she did any-body else. But it
was not her way to use any-body ill, I saw that. 
Nevertheless he was resolved to strike a bold stroke
for a wife, as were his words from the title of a play:
And between us we settled the matter in one night:
For I had found means to get out unknown to the family. 
It will be trespassing too much upon your honour's
patience, to be very particular in our contrivances. I
will be as brief as possible. 
My lady was to go to a Masquerade. I got into
the knowlege of every thing how and about it. The
maids were as full of the matter as their master and
mistresses. 
It was agreed to make the chairmen fuddled. Two
of Mr. Merceda's footmen were to undertake the task. 
Brandy was put into their liquor to hasten them. 
They were soon overcome. The weather was cold,
They drank briskly, and were laid up safe. I then
hired two chance chairmen, and gave them orders as
had been contrived. 
I had twenty guineas given me in hand for my encouragement; 
in which were included the promised
ten. 
I had, when I was my first master Bagenhall's clerk,
made acquaintance with several clerks of the Customhouse,
particularly with one Awberry, a sober modest
man; who has two sisters, to one of whom I am contracted,
and always for two years past, intended to
make my wife, as soon as I should be in any way to
maintain her. The mother is a widow. All of them
are very honest people. 
Mr. Awberry the brother being assured by me (and
I was well assured of it myself, and had no doubt
about it) that marriage was intended; and knowing
Sir Hargrave's great estate (and having indeed seen Sir
Hargrave on the account, and received his protestations 

of honour) engaged his mother and sisters in it; 
and the result, as to them and me, was, that I was
to receive, as soon as the knot was tied, an hundred
guineas besides the twenty; and moreover an absolute
promise of a place; and twenty pounds a year till I
got it; and then my marriage with young Mrs. Awberry
was to follow. 
The widow has an annuity of thirty pounds, which,
with her son's salary, keeps them above want. 
She lives at Paddington. There is a back-door and
garden, as it happens, convenient to bring any-body
in, or carry any-body out, secretly; and hither it was
resolved, if possible, that the lady should be brought,
and a Fleet parson and his clerk ready station'd, to perform
the ceremony; and then all that the bridegroom
wish'd was to follow of course. 
Sir Hargrave doubted not (tho' he was fruitful in
contrivances, and put many others in practice) but he
should be detected if he carried the lady to his own
house. And as he was afraid that the chairmen (not-withstanding
several other artful contrivances) would
be able to find out the place they carried her to, he
had ordered his chariot-and-six to be at the widow
Awberry's by six in the morning, with three servants
on horseback, armed, and a horse and pistols besides. 
After marriage and consummation he was resolved to
go to his house on the forest, but not to stay there; 
but to go to Mr. Merceda's house near Newberry,
where he doubted not but he should be secret till he
thought fit to produce the lady, as Lady Pollexfen:
And often, very often, did he triumph on the victory
he should obtain over her other lovers, and over her
own proud heart, as he would have it to be. 
The parson, Sir, came: The clerk was there:
But what with sits, prayers, tears, and one thing or
other, at one time the lady being thought irrecoverable
(having receiv'd some unintended hurt in her
struggling to get out of a door, as I heard it was) Sir 

Hargrave in terror dismissed the parson; and resolved
to carry the lady, who by that time was recovered,
in the chariot to his seat at Windsor; and then, staying
there only to marry, go to Newberry: And from
thence break out by degrees, as the matter should be
taken. 
My lady screamed, resisted, and did all that woman
could do, to get free: And more than once, people
who heard her cry out for help were put on a wrong
scent: And had we not met with your honour (who
would see with your own eyes, and hear with your
own ears) the affair had been all over in the way Sir
Hargrave wished, and was at so much pains and expence
to effect. For, Sir, the chariot generally drove
so fast, that before passengers could have resolved whether
to interfere or not, we should have been out of
sight or reach, 
Sir Hargrave is in the greatest rage with us all, because
we stood not better by him. He refuses any favour
to me, and threatens to pistol me the moment he
sees me. That's to be my reward. 
We were four at setting out from Paddington; but
one of the servants was dispatch'd to prepossess an old
servant of Sir Hargrave's mother, at Colnebrooke,
who keeps there a kind of haberdashery shop; and
where he proposed to get some refreshment for the
lady, if he could make her take any. For my part I
wonder how she kept out of fits on the road. She had
enow of them at Paddington. 
The two servants who staid about Sir Hargrave, are
discharged with all the marks of indignation that a
master incensed by such a disappointment could express; 
and, as I said before, he is resolved to pistol
me the moment he sees me. Yet I too well served
him for the peace of my conscience. 
A coach-and-four was ordered to carry the widow
and her two daughters to Reading, to the New Inn
there, where they were to reside for a week or so, till 

all was blown over; and that they might be out of
the way of answering questions: And my brother
Awberry, as I call him, and hope to make him (for
he is a very honest man) was to go to them there. 
And there in all probability, had Sir Hargrave succeeded,
and been as good as his word, should I have
been the husband of as tender-hearted a young woman
as any in the parish she lives in. 
Here is a very long letter, may it please you, Sir. I
have shortened it however as much as I could: But in
hatred to myself, and the vile ways I have, by excess of
good-nature, and by meeting with wicked masters,
been drawn into—For the clearing of my sister's character,
who lives in credit among her neighbours,
and of every other person who might otherwise have
been suspected—In justice to Mrs. Awberry's, and her
two daughters, and her son's characters—And in justice
so far to Sir Hargrave's, as that he intended marriage
(and had he not, he would have found no friends in
his designs at Paddington) and so far as to clear him
of having not offered the least incivility to my lady— 
[had he intended, or been provoked so to do, he was
too well watch'd by the widow, and her daughters,
to have been permitted; and that by my own request,
which was, that they should be ready to run in
whenever they heard her cry out, and that they would
not leave Sir Hargrave alone with my lady for six minutes,
till their hands were joined in wedlock]—In
justice I say to all these persons, I thought proper
thus to give you, Sir, all that I knew relating to this
wicked transaction. And if, may it please your honour,
I were to be taken up, I could say no more before
a magistrate; except this, which I had like to
have forgot; which is, that had it not been for me,
some mischief might have been done, between Sir
Hargrave's servants and yours, if not to your honour's
person. 
All that I most humbly beg, is, the pardon of so 

sweet a lady. I have chosen, ever-to-be-honoured Sir,
to write to you, whose goodness is so generally talk'd
of, and who have so nobly redeemed and protected
her. Mr. Reeves, I know, has suffered too much in
his mind to forgive me. He is a worthy gentleman. 
I am sorry for the disturbance I have given him. I
have hopes given me, that I shall get employment on
the Keys, or as a tide-waiter extraordinary. 
Please the Lord, I will never, never more, be the
tool of wicked masters. All I wish for is, to be able
to do justice to the love of an honest young woman; 
and I am resolved, whether so enabled or not, to
starve, rather than to go any more, no, not for a
single hour, into the service of the iniquitous gentlemen
I have so often named in this long letter. 
If I might be assured, that I may pursue unmolested,
any honest calling, so as that I may not be tempted
or driven into unhappy courses, my heart would be
at rest. 
There might have been murder in this affair: That
shocks me to think of. O Sir, good, excellent, brave,
and the most worthy of gentlemen, you have given
to me as great a deliverance, as you have to the lady:
Yea, greater; for mine may be a deliverance, if I
make a proper use of it, of soul as well as body. 
Which God grant, as also your honour's health and
prosperity, to the prayers of 
Your Honour's ever-devoted
Humble Servant,
William Wilson. 
I thought I had something else to say: Something it
is of high importance: Your life is threatened,
Sir: God preserve your precious life. Amen! 

