


Sir Charles Grandison, To Lady Clementina. 


Florence, Aug. 23. N. S.
My dear correspondent asks, If I am convinced by
her reasonings—I repeat, That I resign to your
will every hope, every wish, respecting myself. In
a case where conscience can be pleaded, no other reasonings
are necessary. 
But what can I say, most excellent of women, to
the request you make, that I will support you in your
solicitude to take the veil? I hope you only propose
this to me, by way of asking my advice—“Let me, say
you, advise with my tutor, my friend, my brother”— 
I have given the highest instance that man could give,
of my disinterestedness; and I will now, as you require,
suppose myself a Catholic in the humble advice
I shall offer to my sisterly friend; and this will the
rather appear as I should, as a Protestant, argue against
any one's binding him or herself, by vows of perpetual
celibacy. 
“Need I, asks my dear correspondent, suggest a
plea for you to make, the force of which must be
allowed, if ever you fervently loved Clementina?” 
At what plea does the excellent Clementina hint? Is
it not at an Herodian one* ? Why, if ever she honoured
her Grandison with her esteem, does she not enforce
the same plea with regard to him? Can she, avowing
that esteem, be so generous as to wish him to enter
into the married state, and even to insist upon it, as a 

step that would contribute to her future peace of mind,
yet hope to prevail upon him to make it his request,
that she may be secluded from a possibility of ever enjoying
the same liberty? Were I married, and capable
of wishing to fetter and restrain thus my wife, in case
of her surviving me, I should think she ought to despise
me for the narrowness of my heart. What then is
the plea that a young Lady, in the bloom of beauty,
would put me upon making? —And to whom? —To
her own relations, who all languish, as she expresses
herself, for opportunities to oblige him; and who are
extremely earnest to dissuade her from entering upon
the measure she wishes him to promote? Can he, madam,
to use your own words in the solemn paper you
gave me, think of taking such advantage of their generosity
to him? 
But can Clementina della Porretta, who is blest
with the tenderest and most indulgent of parents, and
who has always gloried in her duty to them; whose
brothers love her with a disinterestedness that hardly
any brothers before them have been able to shew; 
can she, in opposition to the will of her grandfathers,
wish to enter into a measure, that must frustrate all
their hopes from her for ever? —Dear Lady! consider. 
You, my beloved correspondent, who hold marriage
as a sacrament, surely cannot doubt but you may
serve God in it with much greater efficacy, than were
you to sequester yourself from a world that wants such
an example as you are able to give it. But, madam,
your parents propose not marriage to you: They,
only, at present, beseech, not command you (they
know the generosity of your heart) not to take a step
that must entirely frustrate all their hopes, and put an
option out of your own power, should you change your
mind. Let me advise you, madam, disclaiming all
interested views, and from motives of a Love merely
fraternal (for such is your expectation from the man 

you honour with your correspondence) to set the hearts
of relations, so justly dear to you, at ease; and to leave
to Providence the issue. They never, madam, will
compel you. And give me leave to say, that piety
requires this of you. Does not the Almighty, everywhere
in his word, sanctify the reasonable commands of
parents? Does he not interest himself, if I may so
express myself, in the performance of the filial duty? 
May it not be justly said, that to obey your parents, is
to serve God? Would the generous, the noble-minded
Clementina della Porretta, narrow, as I may say, her
piety, by limiting it (I speak now as if I were a Catholic,
and as if I thought there were some merit in
secluding one's self from the world) when she could,
at least, equally serve God, and benefit her own soul,
by obeying her parents, by fulfilling the will of her
deceased grandfathers, and by obliging all her other
near and dear relations? Lady Clementina cannot resolve
all the world into herself. Shall I say, there is
often cowardice, there is selfishness, and perhaps, in
the world's eye, a too strong confession of disappointment,
in such seclusions? 
There are about you persons who can give this
argument its full force—I cannot do it. O my Clementina,
my sister, my friend, I cannot be so great,
so undivested, in this instance, as you can be! —But
I can be just: I presume to say, I cannot be ungenerous. 
I tell you not what I hope to be enabled by
your noble example, in time, to do, because of the
present tenderness of your health. But you must not,
madam, expect from me a conduct, that you think
it would become you to disavow. Delicate as the female
mind is, and as is most particularly my dear
correspondent's, that of the man, on such an occasion
as this, should shew at least an equal delicacy: For
has he not her honour, as a woman, to protect, as
well as his own, as a man, to regard? 
Distress me not, my dear Clementina; add not, I 

should rather say, to my distress, by the declaration
of yours. I repeat, that your parents will not compel
you. Put it not out of your power to be prevailed upon
to do an act of duty. God requires not that you
should be dead to your friends, in order to live to Him. 
Their hope is laudable. Will Lady Clementina della
Porretta put it out even of the Almighty's power, to
bless their hope? Will she think herself unhappy, if
she cannot punish them, instead of rewarding them,
for all their tender and indulgent goodness to her? 
—It cannot be. God Almighty perfect his own work,
so happily begun, in the full restoration of your health! 
This blessing, I have no doubt, will attend your filial
obedience. But can you, my dear correspondent,
expect it, if you make yourself uneasy, and keep your
mind in suspense, as to your duty, and indulge yourself
in supposing, that the will of God, and the will of
your parents, are opposite, when theirs is solely designed
for your good, spiritual and temporal? A great
deal now depends upon yourself. O, madam, will
you not in a smaller instance, were your heart ever
so much engaged to the cloistered life, practise that
self-denial, which in the highest you enforce upon me? 
All your temporal duties, against you; and your spiritual
not favouring, much less impelling, you? 
But once more, I quit a subject, that may, and,
no doubt, will, be enforced in a much stronger manner,
than I can enforce it. I will soon, very soon,
pay my duty to you, and all yours. You own your
wishes to see me, because you are fortified by your
invincible adherence to your resolution. I will acknowlege
anguish of heart. I cannot, as I told you
above, be so great as you. But if you will permit your
sisterly Love to have its full operation, and if you
wish me peace of mind, and a cordial resignation to
your will, let me see you, madam, on the next visit
I shall have the honour to make you, chearful, serene,
and determined to resign your will to the reasonable 

will of parents, who, I am confident, I again repeat
it, will never compel you to marry—Have they not already
given you a very strong instance, that they will
not? —In a word, let me hear you declare, that you
will resign yourself to their will, in this article of the
veil; and I shall then, with the more chearfulness,
endeavour to resign to yours, so strongly and repeatedly
declared, in the Letter before me, to, dear Lady, 
Your fraternal Friend, and ever-obliged Servant,
Grandison. 
Lady Olivia, madam, arrived this day at her own
palace. It is impossible that any-thing but civility
can pass between her and your greatly-favoured
correspondent. 

