


Lady Grandison, To Mrs. Shirley. 


St. James's-Square, Monday, June 18. 
Now, at last, my dearest grandmamma, is the
day arrived, that we are setting our for Dover. 
We shall lodge at Canterbury this night, and reach
Dover to-morrow. How sad our hearts! 
Canterbury, Monday Night. 
Here we are! How we look upon one another! 
The parting of dear friends, how grievous! –––How
does Sir Charles endeavour–––But Lady Clementina
is, to outward appearance, an Heroine. What a
grandeur of soul! She would not be thought to be
concerned at leaving Sir Charles Grandison: But I
see she is inwardly a sufferer. Jeronymo is silent. I
hope he repents not his stay to oblige his dear friend,
and us all. The Marquis and Marchioness are continually
comforting themselves (and declare it to
be needful) with the hope of seeing us in a few
months. Thank God, they have a finer season to
go back, than they had to come hither: And they
have found the jewel they had lost. 
I should have told you, that Lord and Lady L.
and Lord and Lady G. took leave of us at Rochester; 
thinking so large a train would be inconvenient to
those to whom they wished to do honour. How tender
was the parting; particularly between Lady Clementina
and Lady L.! 
Ten o'Clock Monday Night. 
I am in my chamber here. Know not what to do
with myself. –––Yet, cannot write. Must again join
company–––Is not my Sir Charles in company? 
Dover, Tuesday Night. 
Here, here, we are! How foolish to attempt the
pen! I know not what to do with myself. The 

vessel is ready; every one is ready. To-morrow
morning by day-light, if the wind—O what company
to one another! How does the dear Clementina
now melt into tears and tenderness! –––Dear
Lady! What prayers has she put up for me! What
tender blessings has she poured out upon me! How
have we blessed, soothed, and endeavoured to console
each other! What vows of more than sisterly
affection! –––Mrs. Beaumont! The excellent Mrs.
Beaumont, She now is also affected–––She never loved,
at so short an acquaintance, she says, any mortal as
she loves me. She blesses my dear Sir Charles for
his tender, yet manly Love to me! –––We have engaged
to correspond with each other, and in Italian
chiefly, as with Lady Clementina, in order to perfect
my self in that language, and to make myself, as
the Marchioness fondly says, an Italian woman, and
her other daughter. 
Dover, Wednesday Morning. 
Cruel tenderness! They would not let me see
them embark. Sir Charles laid his commands upon me
(I will call them so, because I obeyed reluctantly) not
to quit my chamber. Over-night, we parted! What
a solemn parting! Sir Charles and Mrs. Beaumont only
–––But are they gone? They are! Indeed they are––– 
Sir Charles, to whom seas and mountains are nothing,
when either the service or pleasure of his friends call
upon him, is embarked with them. He will see them
landed, and accommodated at Calais, and then will
return to Dover, to his expecting Harriet. His Jeronymo,
his Beauchamp, and good Dr. Bartlett, are left
to protect and comfort her. What a tender farewel
between the Doctor and Father Marescotti last night:
They, also, are to be constant correspondents: The
welfare of each family is to be one of their subjects. 
Lady Clementina was not afraid of passing a boistrous
Sea, and the Bay of Biscay, in a wintry season,
when she pursued the slight that then was first 

in her view. Her noble Mother, while she was in
search of her daughter, had no fears: But now, the
pangs of uncertainty and ardor of impatience being
over, they both very thankfully embraced Sir Charles's
offer (his resolution, I should say; for he would not
have been refused) to accompany them over. The
Marquis complimented him, that every one would
think themselves safe in the company of so good a
man! –––How will they be able to part with him! 
He with them! –––But in a twelvemonth we shall all,
God willing, meet again; and, if the Almighty hear
our prayers, have cause to rejoice in Lady Clementina's
confirmed state of mind. 
Friday Morning. 
The best of Men, of Friends, of Husbands, is
returned from Calais, chearful, gay, lively, lovely,
fraught with a thousand blessings for his Harriet. 
We shall set out, and hope to reach Canterbury this
night on our return to town. 
Sir Charles assures me, that he left the dear Sister of
my heart not unhappy. She was all herself at parting
[His own words]; magnanimous, yet condescendingly
affectionate [His words also]; as one, who was not
afraid or ashamed of her Sisterly Love for him. He
took leave of her with a tenderness worthy of his
friendship for her; a tenderness that the Brave and
the Good ever shew to those who are deserving of
their Love. 
He particularly recommended it to her Father, Mother,
the Bishop, and Father Marescotti (the two latter
to enforce it upon the General) that they would
not urge the noble Lady, not even upon the expectation
she had given them; but leave her wholly to her
own will, and her own way. They all promised
they would; and, the poor Laurana being now no
more, undertook for the General. 
He tells me, that he had engaged the Count of
Belvedere, on his departure from England, to promise, 

to make his court to her only by silent assiduities,
and by those actions of beneficence and generosity
which were so natural to him, and so worthy
of his splendid fortune. 
St. James's-square, Sunday Morning. 
Last night, blessed be God, we came hither in
health and spirits. We are preparing for church. 
There shall we pray for the travellers, and be thankful
for ourselves. 
I expect Lord and Lady L. Lord and Lady G. and
my cousin Reeves's, according to the following billet
from the ever-lively Lady G. 

“My Harriet, thank God, is arrived, and in
health and spirits. Caroline and Mrs. Reeves, I
know, will long to congratulate you. I have
therefore sent to invite them to dinner with you. 
Their good men, and mine of course, must be
admitted. I know my Brother will not be displeased. 
He is indulgent to all the whimsies of
his Charlotte that carry in the face of them, as
this does, affectionate freedom. Besides, it is stealing
time for him: I know he will not long be in
town, and must see us all before he leaves it. 
He will hasten to the Hall, in order to pursue the
glorious schemes of benevolence which he has
formed, and in which hundreds will find their
account. 
“But let the green damask bed-chamber be got
in a little sort of order, for a kind of nursery:
Where we dine, we sup. My marmouset must
be with me, you know. I have bespoke Lady
L's–––Mrs. Reeves is to bring hers. They are to
crow at one another; and we are to have a squalling
concert. As it is Sunday, I will sing an anthem
to them. My pug will not crow, if I don't
sing. Yet I am afraid, the little pagans will be
less alive to a Christian hymn, than to the sprightlier
Phillida, Phillida, of Tom. Durfey. I long 

to see how my agreeable Italian, poor thing! bears
the absence of his father and mother. Bid him
rub himself up, and look chearful, or I shall take
him into our Nursery, to complete the chorus,
when our brats are in a squalling fit. Adieu till
to-morrow, my dear, and ever-dear, Harriet!–––” 

Lady G. is a charming nurse. She must be extraordinary
in whatever she does. Signor Jeronymo
admires her of all women. But she sometimes makes
him look about him. He rejoices that he is with
us; and is in charming spirits. He is extremely fond
of children; particularly so of Lady G's–––It is indeed
one of the finest infants I ever saw: And he
calls it, after her, His Marmouset, hugging it twenty
times a day to his good-natured bosom. It would
delight you to hear her sing to it, and to see her toss
it about. Such a Setting-out in matrimony; who
would have expected Charlotte to make such a wife,
mother, nurse! –––Her brother is charmed with her. 
He draws her into the pleasantry that she loves; lays
himself open to it; and Lord G. fares the better for
their vivacity. Sir Charles generally contrives to
do him honour, by appealing to him, when Charlotte
is, as he complains, over-lively with himself:
But that is, in truth, when he himself takes her
down, and compliments her as if she were an overmatch
for him. She often, at these times, shakes
her head at me, as if she were sensible of his superiority
in her own way. 
But how I trifle! –––I am ready, quite ready, my
dear Sir Charles. Lead your ever-grateful Harriet
to the house of the All-good, All-merciful, All-mighty. 
There shall I, as I always do, edify by
your chearful piety! 
Sunday Afternoon. 
A new engagement, and of a melancholy kind,
calls Sir Charles away from me again. In how 

many ways may a good man be serviceable to his
fellow-creatures! 
About two hours ago, a near relation of Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen came hither in Sir Hargrave's chariot-and-six
(the horses smoaking) to beg he would
set out with him, if possible, to the unhappy man's
house on the forest; where he has been, for a fortnight
past, resigned to his last hope (and usually the
physician's last prescription) The Air. The gentleman's
name is Pollexfen. He will, if the poor man
die childless, enjoy the greatest part of his large
estate. Mr. Pollexfen is a worthy man, I believe,
notwithstanding Sir Hargrave's former disregard to
him, and jealousies (a) ; for, after he had delivered
his message from his cousin, which was to beseech
the comfort of Sir Charles's presence, and to declare
that he could not die in peace, unless he saw him; 
he seconded Sir Hargrave's request, with tears in his
eyes, and an earnestness that had both honesty and
compassion in it. Sir Charles wanted not this to induce
him to go; for he looks upon visiting the Sick,
in such urgent cases, as an indispensable duty: And
waiting but till the horses had baited, he set out with
Mr. Pollexfen with the utmost chearfulness; only
saying to me–––It is a wonder, if the poor man be
sensible, that he thought not of Dr. Bartlett rather
than of me. 
Mr. Merceda, Mr. Bagenhall, and now Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen, in the prime of their youth! –––So
lately revelling in full health, even to wantonness! ––– 
Companions in iniquity! —In so few months! — 
Thou, Almighty! comfort the poor man in his last
agonies! and receive him! From my very soul I
forgive him those injuries which I–––But well I may
–––Since, great as they were, they proved the means 

of my being brought acquainted with the Lord of
my wishes; the best of men. 
Having filled my paper with the journal of near a
week, I will conclude here, my dear grandmamma,
with every tender wish and fervent prayer for the
health and happiness of all my dear friends in Northamptonshire,
who so kindly partake in that of 
Their and Your
Harriet Grandison. 

