


When I arose in the Morning, I went to
wait on Lady Davers, seeing her Door open; 
and she was in Bed, but awake, and talking to her
Woman. I said, I hope I don't disturb your Ladyship: 
No, not at all, said she; I am glad to see you. 
How do you?&blank;&blank;&blank; Well, added she, when do you set
out for Bedfordshire? I said, I can't tell, Madam. 
It was design'd as to-day; but I have heard no
more of it. 
Sit down, said she, on the Bed-side.&blank;&blank;&blank; I find, by
the Talk we had Yesterday and last Night, you have
had but a poor Time of it, Pamela, (I must call you
so yet, said she) since you was brought to this
House, till within these few Days. And Mrs. Jewkes
too has given Beck such an Account, as makes me
pity you. 
Indeed, Madam, said I, if your Ladyship knew
all, you would pity me; for never poor Creature
was so hard put to it. But I ought to forget it all
now, and be thankful. 
Why, said she, as far as I can find, 'tis a Mercy
you are here now. I was sadly moved with some
part of your Story. And you have really made a
noble Defence, and deserve the Praises of all our
Sex. 
It was God enabled me, Madam, reply'd I. Why,
said she, 'tis the more extraordinary, because, I believe,
if the Truth was known, you lov'd the Wretch
not a little. While my Trials lasted, Madam, said I,
I had not a Thought of any thing, but to preserve
my Innocence; much less of Love. 
But tell me truly, said she, Did you not love him
all the time? I had always, Madam, answer'd I, a great
Reverence for my Master, and thought all his good
Actions doubly good; and for his naughty ones,
tho' I abhorr'd his Attempts upon me, yet I could
not hate him; and always wish'd him well; but I
did not know that it was Love. Indeed I had not
the Presumption! 
Sweet Girl! said she; that's prettily said: But
when he found he could not gain his Ends, and begun
to be sorry for your Sufferings, and to admire
your Virtue, and to profess honourable Love to you,
What did you think? 
Think, and please your Ladyship! I did not know
what to think! I could neither hope, nor believe so
great an Honour would fall to my Lot; and I fear'd
more from his Kindness, for some time, than I had
done from his Unkindness: And having had a private
Intimation, from a kind Friend, of a Sham-marriage
intended, by means of a Man who was to
personate a Minister, it kept my Mind in too much
Suspense, to be greatly overjoy'd at his kind Declaration. 
Said she, I think he did make two or three Attempts
upon you in Bedfordshire? Yes, Madam,
said I, he was very naughty, to be sure! 

And here, he proposed Articles to you, I understand? 
Yes, Madam, reply'd I; but I abhorr'd so
much the Thoughts of being a kept Creature, that
I rejected them with great Boldness; and was resolved
to die before I would consent to them. 
He after wards attempted you, I think; Did he not? 
O, yes, Madam! said I, a most sad Attempt he
made; and I had like to have been lost; for Mrs.
Jewkes was not so good as she should have been. 
And so I told her Ladyship that sad Offer, and how
I fell into Fits; and that they, believing me dying, forbore. 
Any Attemps after this base one? said she. 
He was not so good as he should have been,
return'd I, once, in the Garden, afterwards; but I
was so watchful, and so ready to take the Alarm! 
But, said she, did he not threaten you, at times,
and put on his stern Airs, every now-and-then? &blank;&blank;&blank; 
Threaten, Madam! reply'd I; yes, I had enough of
that!&blank;&blank;&blank; I thought I should have dy'd for Fear, several
times. How could you bear that? said she: For
he is a most daring and majestick Mortal! He has
none of your puny Hearts, but as courageous as a
Lion; and, Boy and Man, never fear'd any thing. 
I myself, said she, have a pretty good Spirit; but
when I have made him truly angry, I have always
been forced to make it up with him, as well as I
could. For, Child, he is not one that is easily reconciled,
I'll assure you. 
But, after he had profess'd honourable Love to
you, Did he never attempt you again? No, indeed,
Madam, he did not. But he was a good while
struggling with himself, and with his Pride, as be
called it, before he could stoop so low; and consider'd,
and consider'd again: And once, upon my
saying but two or three Words, that displeas'd him,
when he was very kind to me, he turn'd me out of
Doors; in a manner, at an Hour's Warning; for 
he sent me above a Day's Journey towards my Father's; 
and then sent a Man and Horse, Post-haste,
to fetch me back again; and has been exceedingly
kind and gracious to me ever since, and made me
happy. 
That sending you away, said she, one Hour, and
sending after you the next, is exactly like my Brother; 
and 'tis well if he don't turn you off twice or
thrice before a Year come about, if you vex him: 
And he would have done the same by the first Lady
in the Land, if he had heen marry'd to her. Yet
has he his Virtues, as well as his Faults; for he is
generous, nay, he is noble in his Spirit; hates little
dirty Actions; he delights in doing Good: But does
not pass over a wilful Fault easily. He is wise, prudent,
sober and magnanimous; and will not tell a
Lye, nor disguise his Faults; but you must not expect
to have him all to yourself, I doubt. 
But I'll no more harp upon this String: You see
how he was exasperated at me; and he seem'd to be
angry at you too; tho' something of it was Art, I
believe. 
Indeed, Madam, said I, he has been pleased to
give me a most noble Lecture; and I find he was
angry with me in Earnest, and that it will not be
an easy Task to behave unexceptionably to him: For
he is very nice and delicate in his Notions, I perceive; 
but yet, as your Ladyship says, exceeding
generous. 
Well, says she, I'm glad thou hadst a little bit of
his Anger, else I should have thought it Art; and I
don't love to be treated with low Art, any more
than he; and I should have been vex'd, if he had
done it by me. 
But I understand, Child, says she, that you keep a
Journal of all Matters that pass, and he has several
times found means to get at it: Should you care I 
should see it? It could not be to your Disadvantage; 
for I find it had no small Weight with him in your
Favour; and I should take great Pleasure to read
all his Stratagems, Attempts, Contrivances, Menaces,
and Offers to you, on one hand; and all your pretty
Counter-plottings, which he much praises, your resolute
Resistance, and the noble Stand you have made
to preserve your Virtue; and the Steps by which his
Pride was subdued, and his Mind induced to honourable
Love, till you were made what you now
are: For it must be a rare, an uncommon Story; 
and will not only give me great Pleasure in reading,
but will intirely reconcile me to the Step he has
taken. And that, let me tell you, is what I never
thought to be; for I had gone a great way in bringing
about a Match with him and Lady Betty &sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;; 
and had said so much of it, that the Earl, her Father,
approv'd of it; and so did the Duke of &sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;&sblank;,
her Uncle; and Lady Betty herself was not averse: 
And now shall I be hunted to Death about it; and
this has made me so outrageous as you have seen
me upon the Matter. But when I can find, by your
Writings, that your Virtue is but suitably rewarded,
it will be not only a good Excuse for me, but for
him, and make me love you. 
There is nothing that I would not do, said I, to
oblige your Ladyship; but my poor Father and Mother
(who would rather have seen me buried quick
in the Earth, than to be seduced by the greatest of
Princes) have them in their Hands at present; and
your dear Brother has bespoken them, when they
have done reading them; but if he gives me Leave,
I will shew them to your Ladyship with all my
Heart; not doubting your generous Allowances, as
I have had his; tho' I have treated him very freely
all the way, while he had naughty Views; and that
your Ladyship would consider them as the naked 
Sentiments of my Heart, from Time to Time, deliver'd
to those, whose Indulgence I was sure of; 
and for whose Sight, only, they were written. 
Give me a Kiss now, said her Ladyship, for your
chearful Compliance; for I make no doubt my Brother
will consent I shall see them, because they must
needs make for your Honour; and I see he loves
you better than any one in the World. 
I have heard, continued her Ladyship, a mighty
good Character of your Parents, as industrious,
honest, sensible, good Folks, who know the World; 
and, as I doubt not my Brother's Generosity, I am
glad they will make no ill Figure in the World's
Eye. 
Madam, said I, they are the honestest, the loveingest,
and the most conscientious Couple breatheing. 
They once lived creditably; brought up a great
Family, of which I am the youngest; but had Misfortunes,
thro' their doing beyond their Power for
two unhappy Brothers, who are both dead, and
whose Debts they stood bound for, and so became
reduced, and, by harsh Creditors, (where most of
the Debts were not of their own contracting) turn'd
out of all; and having, without Success, try'd to
set up a little Country School, (for my Father understood
a little of Accompts, and wrote a pretty good
Hand) forced to take to hard Labour; but honest
all the Time; contented; never repining and
loving to one another; and, in the midst of their
Poverty and Disappointments, above all Temptation; 
and all their Fear was, that I should be wicked,
and yield to Temptation, for the sake of worldly
Riches: And to God's Grace, and their good Lessons,
and those I imbib'd from my dear good Lady,
your Ladyship's Mother, it is that I owe the Preservation
of my Innocence, and the happy Station I
now am exalted to. 
She was pleased to kiss me again, and said, There
is such a noble Simplicity in thy Story, such an honest
Artlesness in thy Mind, and such a sweet Humility
in thy Deportment, notwithstanding thy present
Station, that I believe I shall be forced to love thee,
whether I will or not: And the Sight of your Papers,
I dare say, will crown the Work, will disarm
my Pride, banish my Resentment on Lady Betty's
account, and justify my Brother's Conduct; and, at
the same time, redound to your own everlasting
Honour, as well as to the Credit of our Sex: And
so I make no doubt but my Brother will let me see
them. 
Mrs. Worden, said my Lady, I can say any thing
before you; and you will take no Notice of our
Conversation; but I see you are much touched with
it: Did you ever hear any thing prettier, more unaffected,
sincere, free, easy? &blank;&blank;&blank; No, never, Madam,
answer'd she, in my Life; and it is a great Pleasure,
to see so happy a Reconciliation taking Place, where
there is so much Merit. 
I said, I have discover'd so much Prudence in
Mrs. Worden, that, as well for that, as for the Confidence
your Ladyship places in her, I have made
no Scruple of speaking my Mind freely before her; 
and of blaming my dear Master, while he was blameworthy,
as well as acknowledging his transcendent
Goodness to me since; which, I am sure, exceeds
all I can ever deserve. Maybe not, said my Lady. 
I hope you'll be very happy in one another; and I'll
now rise, and tell him my Thoughts, and ask him
to let me have the reading of your Papers; for I
promise myself much Pleasure in them; and shall
not grudge a Journey, and a Visit to you, to the
other House, to fetch them. 
Your Ladyship's Favour, said I, was all I had to
wish for; and if I have that, and the Continuance 
of your dear Brother's Goodness to me, I shall be
easy under whatever else may happen. 
And so I took my Leave, and withdrew; and she
let me hear her say to Mrs. Worden, 'Tis a charming
Creature, Mrs. Worden!&blank;&blank;&blank; I know not which
excels, her Person or her Mind!&blank;&blank;&blank; And so young a
Creature too! ––– Well may my Brother love her! 
I am afraid, my dear Father and Mother, I shall
now be too proud indeed.&blank;&blank;&blank; I had once a good mind
to have asked her Ladyship about Miss Sally Godfrey; 
but I thought it was better let alone, as she did not
mention it herself. May-be, I shall hear it too soon. 
But I hope not!&blank;&blank;&blank; I wonder, tho', whether she be
living or dead! 
We breakfasted together with great good Temper; 
and my Lady was very kind, and asking my
good Master, he gave Leave, very readily, she should
see all my Papers, when you return'd them to me; 
and he said, He was sure, when she came to read
them, she would say, that I had well deserv'd the
Fortune I had met with, and would be of Opinion,
that, all the Kindness of his future Life would hardly
be a sufficient Reward for my Virtue, and make me
Amends for my Sufferings. 
My Lady resolving to set out the next Morning,
to return to her Lord, my Master order'd every
thing to be made ready for his doing the like, to
Bedfordshire; and this Evening our good Neighbours
will sup with us, to take Leave of my Lady
and us. 