



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Saturday, March 11. 
I have had such taunting messages, and such repeated
avowals of ill-offices, brought me from my
brother and sister, if I do not comply with their wills
(delivered, too, with provoking sauciness by Betty
Barnes), that I have thought it proper, before I enter'd
upon my intended address to my uncles, in pursuance
of the hint given me in my mamma's letter, to expostulate
a little with them. But, I have done it in
such a manner, as will give you (if you please to take
it as you have done some parts of my former letters)
great advantage over me. In short, you will have
more cause than ever, to declare me far gone in Love,
if my reasons for the change of my style, in these
letters, with regard to Mr. Lovelace, do not engage
your more favourable opinion. —For I have thought
proper to give them their own way; and, since they
will have it, that I have a preferable regard for Mr.
Lovelace, I give them cause rather to confirm their
opinion than doubt it. 
These are my reasons in brief, for the alteration of
my style. 
In the first place, they have grounded their principal
argument for my compliance with their will,
upon my acknowlegements that my heart is free; 
and so supposing I give up no preferable person, my
opposition has the look of downright obstinacy in
their eyes; and they argue, that, at worst, my aversion
to Solmes, is an aversion that may be easily surmounted,
and ought to be surmounted in duty to my
father, and for the promotion of family views. 
Next, altho' they build upon this argument in order
to silence me, they seem not to believe me, but 

treat me as violently, and as disgracefully, as if I were
in love with one of my father's footmen: —So that
my conditional willingness to give up Lovelace, has
procur'd me no favour. 
In the next place, I cannot but think, that my
brother's antipathy to him is far from being well-grounded: 
His inordinate passion for the sex is his
crime, that is always rung in my ears; and a very
great one it is: But, does my brother recriminate
upon him thus, in love to me? —No—His whole
behaviour shews me, that That is not his motive, and
that he thinks me rather in his way, than otherwise. 
It is then the call of justice, as I may say, to speak
up a little for a man, who, altho' provok'd by my
brother, did not do him all the mischief he could
have done him, and which my brother had endeavour'd
to do him. It might not be amiss therefore, I thought,
to alarm them a little with an apprehension, that the
methods they are taking with me, are the very reverse
of those they should take to answer the end they
design by them: And after all, what is the compliment
I make Mr. Lovelace, if I allow it to be
thought, that I do really prefer him to such a man,
as him they terrify me with? Then, my Miss Howe
(concluded I) accuses me of a tameness, which subjects
me to insults from my brother: I will keep that
dear friend in my eye; and for all these considerations,
try what a little of her spirit will do—sit it ever so
aukwardly upon me. 
In this way of thinking, I wrote to my brother and
sister. This is my Letter to him. 

Treated, as I am treated, and, in a great
measure, if not wholly, by your instigations,
brother, you must permit me to expostulate with you
upon the occasion. It is not my intention to displease
you in what I am going to write: And yet I must
deal freely with you: The occasion calls for it. 

And permit me, in the first place, to remind you,
That I am your sister; and not your servant; and
that, therefore, the bitter revilings and passionate language
brought me from you, upon an occasion, in which
you have no reason to prescribe to me, are neither
worthy of my character to bear, or of yours to offer. 
Put the case, that I were to marry the man you
dislike, and that he were not to make a polite or
tender husband, Is that a reason for you to be an unpolite
and disobliging brother? —Why must you,
Sir, anticipate my misfortunes, were such a case to
happen? —Let me tell you plainly, that the husband
who could treat me, as a wife, worse than you, of
late, have treated me as a sister, must be a barbarous
man indeed. 
Ask yourself, I pray you, Sir, If you would thus
have treated your sister Bella, had she thought fit to
receive the addresses of the man so much hated by
you? —If not, let me caution you, my brother, not
to take your measures by what you think will be
borne, but rather by what ought to be offer'd. 
How would you take it, if you had a brother, who,
in a like case, were to act by you, as you do by me? 
You cannot but remember what a laconic answer
you gave even to my papa, who recommended to
you Miss Nelly D'Oily: —You did not like her, were
your words: And that was thought sufficient. 
You must needs think, that I cannot but know to
whom to attribute my disgraces, when I recollect my
papa's indulgence to me, in permitting me to decline
several offers; and to whom, that a common cause is
endeavoured to be made, in favour of a man whose
person and manners are more exceptionable, than
those of any of the gentlemen I have been permitted
to refuse. 
I offer not to compare the two men together: Nor
is there, indeed, the least comparison to be made between
them. All the difference to the one's disadvantage, 

if I did, is but in one point—Of the
greatest importance, indeed—But to whom of most
importance? —To myself, surely, were I to encourage
his application: —Of the least to you. Nevertheless,
if you do not, by your strange policies, unite that man
and me as joint-sufferers in one cause, you shall find
me as much resolv'd to renounce him, as I am to refuse
the other. I have made an overture to this purpose: 
I hope you will not give me reason to confirm
my apprehensions, that it will be owing to you, if it
be not accepted. 
It is a sad thing, to have it to say, without being
conscious of ever having given you cause of offence,
that I have in you a brother, but not a friend. 
Perhaps you will not condescend to enter into the
reasons of your late conduct with a foolish sister: But,
if politeness, if civility, be not due to that character,
and to my sex, justice is. 
Let me take the liberty further to observe, that
the principal end of a young gentleman's education
at the university, is, to learn him to reason justly,
and to subdue the violence of his passions: I hope,
brother, that you will not give room for any-body
who knows us both, to conclude, that the toilette
has learned the one more of the latter doctrine, than
the university has taught the other. I am truly sorry
to have cause to say, that I have heard it often remarked,
that your uncontrouled passions are not a
credit to your liberal education. 
I hope, Sir, that you will excuse the freedom I
have taken with you: You have given me too much
reason for it, and you have taken much greater with
me, without reason;—so, if you are offended, ought
to look at the cause, and not at the effect: —Then
examining yourself, that cause will cease, and there
will not be any-where a more accomplish'd gentleman
than my brother. 
Sisterly affection, I do assure you, Sir (unkindly, 

as you have used me), and not the pertness which of
late you have been so apt to impute to me, is my
motive in this hint. Let me invoke your returning
kindness, my only brother! And give me cause, I beseech
you, to call you my compassionating friend. For
I am, and ever will be, 
Your affectionate sister,
Cl. Harlowe. 
This is my brother's answer. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
I know, there will be no end of your impertinent
scribble, if I don't write to you. I write therefore: 
But, without entring into argument with such
a conceited and pert preacher and questioner, it is,
to forbid you to plague me with your quaint nonsense. 
I know not what Wit in a woman is good for, but
to make her over-value herself, and despise everybody
else. Yours, Miss Pert, has set you above your
duty, and above being taught or prescrib'd to, either
by parents, or any-body else—But go on, Miss,
your mortification will be the greater; That's all,
child. It shall, I assure you, if I can make it so,
so long as you prefer that villainous Lovelace, who
is justly hated by all your family. We see by your
Letter now, as well as we too justly suspected before,
most evidently, what hold he has got of your forward
heart. But the stronger the hold, the greater
must be the force (and you shall have enough of that)
to tear such a miscreant from it. In me, notwithstanding
your saucy lecturing, and as saucy reflections
before, you are sure of a friend, as well as a brother,
if it be not your own fault. But if you will still
think of such a husband as that Lovelace, never expect
either in 
Ja. Harlowe. 

I will now give you a copy of my letter to my
sister; with her unsisterly answer. 

In what, my dear sister, have I offended you, that
instead of endeavouring to soften my father's anger
against me (as I am sure, I should have done for you,
had my unhappy case been yours) you should, in so
hard-hearted a manner, join to aggravate not only
his displeasure, but my mamma's against me. Make
but my case your own, my dear Bella; and suppose
you were commanded to marry Mr. Lovelace (to
whom you are believed to have an antipathy), would
you not think it a very grievous injunction? —Yet
cannot your dislike to Mr. Lovelace be greater than
mine is to Mr. Solmes. Nor are Love and Hatred
voluntary passions. 
My brother may, perhaps, think it a proof of a
manly spirit, to be an utter stranger to the gentle
passions. We have both heard him boast, that he
never loved with distinction; and, having predominating
passions, and checked in his first attempt,
perhaps he never will: It is the less wonder then,
raw from the college, so lately himself the tutored, that
he should set up for a tutor, a prescriber to our gentler
sex, whose tastes and manners are differently formed; 
For what, according to his account, are colleges, but
classes of tyrants, from the upper students over the
lower, and from them to the tutor? —That he, with
such masculine passions, should endeavour to controul
and bear down an unhappy sister, in a case where
his antipathy, and, give me leave to say, his ambition
(once you would have allowed the latter to be his
fault), can be gratify'd by so doing, may not be quite
so much to be wonder'd at—But, that a sister should
give up the cause of a sister, and join with him to set
her father and mother against her, in a case relative
to sex; in a case that might have been her own— 
Indeed, my Bella, this is not pretty in you. 

There was a time that Mr. Lovelace was thought
reclaimable, and when it was far from being deem'd
a censurable view to hope to bring back to the paths
of virtue and honour, a man of his sense and understanding. 
I am far from wishing to make the experiment: 
—But nevertheless will say, That if I have
not a regard for him, the disgraceful methods taken
to compel me to receive the addresses of such a man
as Mr. Solmes, are enough to inspire it. 
Do you, my sister, for one moment, lay aside all
prejudice, and compare the two men in their births,
their educations, their persons, their understandings,
their manners, their air, and their whole deportments; 
and in their fortunes too, taking in reversions; 
And then judge of both: Yet, as I have frequently
offer'd, I will live single with all my heart, if that
will do. 
I cannot thus live in displeasure and disgrace! —I
would, if I could, oblige all my friends—But will it
be just, will it be honest, to marry a man I cannot
endure? —If I have not been used to oppose the will
of my father, but have always delighted to oblige
and obey, judge of the strength of my antipathy, by
the painful opposition I am obliged to make, and
cannot help it. 
Pity then, my dearest Bella, my sister, my friend,
my companion, my adviser, as you used to be when
I was happy, and plead for, 
Your ever-affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 

To Miss Clary Harlowe.
Let it be pretty, or not pretty, in your wife
opinion, I shall speak my mind, I'll assure you,
both of you and your conduct, in relation to this detested
Lovelace. You are a fond, foolish girl, with
all your wisdom. Your letter shews that enough in 

twenty places. And as to your cant of living single,
nobody will believe you. This is one of your fetches
to avoid complying with your duty, and the will of
the most indulgent parents in the world, as yours
have been to you, I am sure—Tho' now they see
themselves finely requited for it. 
We all, indeed, once thought your temper soft
and amiable: But why was it? —You never was
contradicted before: You had always your own way. 
But no sooner do you meet with opposition in your
wishes to throw yourself away upon a vile rake, but
you shew what you are! —You cannot love Mr.
Solmes! that's the pretence; but sister, sister, let me
tell you, that is because Lovelace has got into your
fond heart: A wretch hated, justly hated, by us all; 
and who has dipped his hands in the blood of your
brother: —Yet him you would make our relation,
would you? 
I have no patience with you, but for putting the
case of my liking such a vile wretch as him. As to
the encouragement you pretend he received formerly
from all our family, it was before we knew him to be
so vile: And the proofs that had such force upon us,
ought to have had some upon you: —And would, had
you not been a foolish forward girl; as on this occasion
every-body sees you are. 
O how you run out in favour of the wretch! — 
His birth, his education, his person, his understanding,
his manners, his air, his fortune—Reversions
too taken in to augment the surfeiting catalogue! 
What a fond string of love-sick praises is here! — 
And yet you would live single—Yes, I warrant! — 
When so many imaginary perfections dance before
your dazled eye! —But no more—I only desire,
that you will not, while you seem to have such an
opinion of your wit, think every one else a fool; 
and that you can at pleasure, by your whining
flourishes, make us all dance after your lead. 

Write as often as you will, this shall be the last answer
or notice you shall have upon this subject from 
Arabella Harlowe. 
I had in readiness a letter for each of my uncles; 
and meeting in the garden a servant of my uncle Harlowe,
I gave them to him to deliver according to their
respective directions. If I am to form a judgment by
the answers I have received from my brother and
sister, as above, I must not, I doubt, expect any
good from them. But when I have try'd every expedient,
I shall have the less to blame myself for, if any
thing unhappy should fall out. I will send you copies
of both, when I shall see what notice they will
be thought worthy of, if of any. 