


Mr. Selby, To Archibald Reeves, Esq;
In answer to the preceding. 


Saturday, Feb. 18. 
O Mr. Reeves! —Dear sweet child! —Flower of
the world!— 
But how could I keep such dreadful tidings within
my own breast?— 
How could I conceal my consternation! —My
wife saw it. She would know the cause of it. 
I could not tell her the fatal news—Fatal news indeed! 
It will be immediate death to her poor grandmother— 
We must keep it from her as long as we can! — 
But keep it from her! —And is the dearest creature
spirited away? —O Mr. Reeves!— 
I gave my wife your letter. She fainted away,
before she had read it thro'. 
Masquerades, I have generally heard said, were more
silly than wicked: But they are now, I am convinced,
the most profligate of all diversions. 
Almost distracted, cousin! —You may well be so:
We shall all be quite distracted—Dear, dear creature! 
What may she not have suffered by this time? 
Why parted we with such a jewel out of our sight? 
You would not be denied: You would have her
to that cursed town. 
Some damn'd villain, to be sure! —Greville it is not. 
Greville was seen late last night, alighting at his
own house from a post-chaise. He had no-body with
him. 
In half an hour, late as it was, he sent his compliments
to us to let us know that he had left the dear
child well, and (in his usual stile) happier than she
would make him. He knows that our lives are bound
up in hers. 

Find out where she is: And find her safe and well:
Or we will never forgive those who were the cause of
her going to London. 
Dear soul! She was over persuaded! —She was not
fond of going! 
The sweetest, obliging creature! —What is now
become of her! —What by this time may she not
have suffered!— 
Search every-where—But you will, no doubt! — 
Suspect every-body—This Lady Betty Williams— 
Such a plot must have a woman in it. Was she not
Sir Hargrave's friend? —This Sir Hargrave! —Greville
it could not be. Had we not the proof I mention'd,
Greville, bad as he is, could not be such a villain. 
The first moment you have any tidings, bad or
good, spare no expence— 
* *
Greville was this moment here. 
We could not see him. We did not let him know
the matter. 
He is gone away, in great surprize, on the servants
telling him that we had received some bad news,
which made us unfit to see any-body. The servants
could not tell him what: Yet they all guess by your
livery, and by our grief, that something has befallen
their beloved young lady. They are all in tears—And
they look at us, when they attend us, with such inquisitive,
yet silent grief! We are speechless before
them; and tell them our wills by motions, and not
by words. 
Good God! —After so many happy years! —Happy
in ourselves! to be at last in so short a time made
the most miserable of wretches! 
But this had not been, if—But no more—Good
God of heaven, what will become of my poor aunt
Shirley! —Lucy, Nancy, will go distracted—But no
more—Hasten your next—And forgive this distracted
letter. I know not what I have written. But I am 
Yours, George Selby. 

