

If it may be thought reasonable to criticise
the Public Taste, in what are
generally supposed to be Works of
mere Amusement; or modest to direct its
Judgment, in what is offered for its Entertainment; 
I would beg leave to introduce
the following Sheets with a few cursory
Remarks, that may lead the common
Reader into some tolerable conception of
the nature of this Work, and the design
of its Author. 
The close connexion which every Individual
has with all that relates to Man in
general, strongly inclines us to turn our
observation upon human affairs, preferably
to other attentions, and impatiently
to wait the progress and issue of them. 
But, as the course of human actions is too
slow to gratify our inquisitive curiosity, 

observant men very easily contrived to satisfy
its rapidity, by the invention of History. 
Which, by recording the principal
circumstances of past facts, and laying them
close together, in a continued narration,
kept the mind from languishing, and gave
constant exercise to its reflections. 
But as it commonly happens, that in all
indulgent refinements on our satisfactions,
the Procurers to our pleasures run into excess; 
so it happened here. Strict matters
of fact, how delicately soever dressed up,
soon grew too simple and insipid to a taste
stimulated by the Luxury of Art: They
wanted something of more poignancy to
quicken and enforce a jaded appetite. 
Hence the original of the first barbarous
Romances, abounding with this false provocative
of uncommon, extraordinary,
and miraculous Adventures. 
But satiety, in things unnatural, soon
brings on disgust. And the Reader, at
length, began to see, that too eager a pursuit
after Adventures had drawn him from
what first engaged his attention, Man and
his Ways, into the Fairy Walks of Monsters
and Chimeras. And now those who 

had run farthest after these delusions, were
the first that recovered themselves. For
the next Species of Fiction, which took its
name from its novelty, was of Spanish invention. 
These presented us with something
of Humanity; but of Humanity in
a stiff unnatural state. For, as every thing
before was conducted by Inchantment; 
so now all was managed by Intrigue. And
tho' it had indeed a kind of Life, it had
yet, as in its infancy, nothing of Manners. 
On which account, those, who could not
penetrate into the ill constitution of its
plan, yet grew disgusted at the dryness of
the Conduct, and want of ease in the Catastrophe. 
The avoiding these defects gave rise to
the Heroical Romances of the French; in
which some celebrated Story of antiquity
was so stained and polluted by modern
fable and invention, as was just enough to
shew, that the contrivers of them neither
knew how to lye, nor speak truth. In these
voluminous extravagances, Love and Honour
supplied the place of Life and Manners. 
But the over-refinement of Platonic
sentiments always sinks into the dross and
feces of that Passion. For in attempting a 

more natural representation of it, in the
little amatory Novels, which succeeded
these heavier Volumes, tho' the Writers
avoided the dryness of the Spanish Intrigue,
and the extravagance of the French Heroism,
yet, by too natural a representation
of their Subject, they opened the door to
a worse evil than a corruption of Taste; 
and that was, A corruption of Heart. 
At length, this great People (to whom,
it must be owned, all Science has been infinitely
indebted) hit upon the true Secret,
by which alone a deviation from strict fact,
in the commerce of Man, could be really
entertaining to an improved mind, or useful
to promote that Improvement. And
this was by a faithful and chaste copy of real
Life and Manners: In which some of
their late Writers have greatly excelled. 
It was on this sensible Plan, that the
Author of the following Sheets attempted
to please, in an Essay, which had the good
fortune to meet with success: That encouragement
engaged him in the present Design: 
In which his sole object being Human
Nature, he thought himself at liberty to
draw a Picture of it in that light which 

would shew it with most strength of Expression; 
tho' at the expence of what such
as read merely for Amusement, may fancy
can be ill-spared, the more artificial composition
of a story in one continued Narrative. 
He has therefore told his Tale in a Series
of Letters, supposed to be written by the
Parties concerned, as the circumstances
related, passed. For this juncture afforded
him the only natural opportunity that could
be had, of representing with any grace those
lively and delicate impressions which Things
present are known to make upon the minds
of those affected by them. And he apprehends,
that, in the study of Human Nature,
the knowlege of those apprehensions leads
us farther into the recesses of the Human
Mind, than the colder and more general
reflections suited to a continued and more
contracted Narrative. 
This is the nature and purport of his Attempt. 
Which, perhaps, may not be so well
or generally understood. For if the Reader
seeks here for Strange Tales, Love Stories,
Heroical Adventures, or, in short, for any
thing but a Faithful Picture of Nature in 

Private Life, he had better be told beforehand
the likelihood of his being disappointed. 
But if he can find Use or Entertainment; 
either Directions for his Conduct,
or Employment for his Pity, in a
History of Life and Manners, where,
as in the World itself, we find Vice, for a
time, triumphant, and Virtue in distress,
an idle hour or two, we hope, may not be
unprofitably lost. 