



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
In Continuation. 

But is it not the divine Clarissa [Harlowe let
me not say; my soul spurns them all but her]
whom I am thus by implication threatening? —If Virtue
be the True Nobility, how is she ennobled, and
how would an alliance with her ennoble, were not contempt
due to the family from which she sprung, and
prefers to me! 
But again, let me stop. —Is there not something
wrong, has there not been something wrong, in this
divine creature? And will not the reflections upon
that wrong (what tho' it may be construed in my favour?) (a)  make me unhappy, when Novelty has lost
its charms, and when, mind and person, she is all my
own? Libertines are nicer, if at all nice, than other
men. They seldom meet with the Stand of Virtue in 

the women whom they attempt. And by the frailty
of those they have triumphed over, they judge of all
the rest. ‘Importunity and Opportunity no woman is
proof against, especially from a persevering Lover,
who knows how to suit Temptations to Inclinations:’ 
This, thou knowest, is a prime article of the
Rakes Creed. 
And what! (methinks thou askest with surprize)
Dost thou question this most admirable of women? — 
The Virtue of a Clarissa dost thou question? 
I do not, I dare not question it. My reverence
for her will not let me directly question it. But let
me, in my turn, ask thee—Is not, may not her Virtue
be founded rather in Pride than in Principle? 
Whose Daughter is she? —And is she not a Daughter? 
If impeccable, how came she by her impeccability? 
The pride of setting an Example to her Sex has run
away with her hitherto, and may have made her till
now invincible. But is not that pride abated? What
may not both men and women be brought to do, in a
mortified state? What mind is superior to calamity? 
Pride is perhaps the principal bulwark of female virtue. 
Humble a woman, and may she not be effectually
humbled? 
Then who says, Miss Clarissa Harlowe is the Paragon
of Virtue? —Is Virtue itself? 
All who know her, and have heard of her, it will
be answered. 
Common Bruit! —Is Virtue to be established by
common Bruit only? —Has her Virtue ever been
proved? —Who has dared to try her Virtue? 
I told thee, I would sit down to argue with myself; 
and I have drawn myself into argumentation before I
was aware. 
Let me enter into a strict discussion of this subject. 
I know how ungenerous an appearance what I have
said, and what I have farther to say, on this topic,
will have from me: But am I not bringing Virtue to 

the touchstone, with a view to exalt it, if it come out
to be proof? —‘Avaunt then, for one moment, all
consideration that may arise from a weakness which
some would miscall gratitude; and is oftentimes the
corrupter of a heart not ignoble!’ 
To the Test then—And I will bring this charming
creature to the strictest Test, ‘that all the Sex, who
may be shewn any passages in my Letters’ [And I
know thou chearest the hearts of all thy acquaintance
with such detached parts of mine, as tend not to dishonour
characters, or reveal names: And this gives
me an appetite to oblige thee by interlardment] that all
the Sex, ‘I say, may see what they ought to be; what
is expected from them; and if they have to deal with
a person of reflection and punctilio [of Pride, if thou
wilt] how careful they ought to be, by a regular
and uniform conduct, not to give him cause to think
lightly of them for favours granted, which may be
interpreted into natural weakness. For is not a
Wise the keeper of a man's honour? And do not
her faults bring more disgrace upon a Husband, than
even upon herself?’ 
It is not for nothing, Jack, that I have disliked the
Life of Shackles. 
To the Test, then, as I said, since now I have the
question brought home to me, Whether I am to have
a Wife? And whether she be to be a Wife at the first,
or at the second hand? 
I will proceed fairly. I will do the dear creature not
only strict, but generous justice; for I will try her by
her own judgment, as well as by our principles. 
She blames herself for having corresponded with me,
a man of free character; and one indeed whose first
view it was, to draw her into this correspondence; and
who succeeded in it, by means unknown to herself. 
‘Now, what were her inducements to this correspondence?’ 
If not what her niceness makes her think
blame-worthy, why does she blame herself? 

Has she been capable of error? Of persisting in that
error? 
Whoever was the tempter, that is not the thing; 
nor what the temptation. The fact, the error, is now
before us. 
Did she persist in it against parental prohibition? 
She owns she did. 
Was a Daughter ever known who had higher notions
of the filial duty, of the parental authority? 
Never. 
‘What must be those inducements, how strong,
that were too strong for Duty, in a Daughter so dutiful? 
—What must my thoughts have been of these
inducements, what my hopes built upon them, at
the time, taken in this light?’ 
Well, but it will be said, That her principal view
was, to prevent mischief between her Brother and her
other friends, and the man vilely insulted by them all. 
But why should she be more concerned for the safety
of others, than they were for their own? And had not
the Rencounter then happened? ‘Was a person of Virtue
to be prevailed upon to break through her apparent,
her acknowleged duty, upon any consideration?’ 
And if not, was she to be so prevailed upon to prevent
an apprehended evil only? 
Thou, Lovelace, the Tempter (thou wilt again
break out and say) to be the Accuser! 
But I am not the Accuser. I am an Arguer only,
and, in my heart, all the time acquit and worship the
divine creature. ‘But let me, nevertheless, examine,
whether the acquittal be owing to her merit, or to
my weakness—Weakness the true name for Love!’ 
But shall we suppose another motive? —And that is
Love; a motive which all the world will excuse her
for. ‘But let me tell all the world that do, not because
they ought, but because all the world is apt to be
misled by it.’ 
Let Love then be the motive: —Love of whom? 

A Lovelace, is the answer. 
‘Is there but one Lovelace in the world? May not
more Lovelaces be attracted by so fine a figure? By
such exalted qualities? It was her Character that
drew me to her: And it was her Beauty and good
Sense, that rivetted my chains: And now all together
make me think her a subject worthy of my attempts; 
worthy of my ambition.’ 
But has she had the candor, the openness, to acknowlege
that Love? 
She has not. 
‘Well then, if Love it be at bottom, is there not
another fault lurking beneath the shadow of that
Love? —Has she not Affectation? —Or is it Pride of
heart?’ 
And what results? —‘Is then the divine Clarissa
capable of loving a man whom she ought not to love? 
And is she capable of Affectation? And is her virtue
founded in Pride? —And, if the answer to these questions
be affirmative, must she not then be a woman?’ 
And can she keep this Lover at bay? Can she make
him, who has been accustomed to triumph over other
women, tremble? Can she so conduct herself, as to
make him, at times, question whether she loves him or
any man; ‘yet not have the requisite command over
the passion itself in steps of the highest consequence
to her honour, as she thinks’ [I am trying her, Jack,
by her own thoughts] ‘but suffer herself to be provoked
to promise to abandon her Father's house, and go off
with him, knowing his character; and even conditioning
not to marry till improbable and remote contingencies
were to come to pass? What tho' the
provocations were such as would justify any other
woman; yet was a Clarissa to be susceptible to
provocations which she thinks herself highly censureable
for being so much moved by?’ 
But let us see the dear creature resolved to revoke
her promise; yet meeting her Lover; a bold and intrepid 

man, who was more than once before disappointed
by her; and who comes, as she knows, prepared
to expect the fruits of her appointment, and resolved
to carry her off. And let us see him actually
carrying her off; and having her at his mercy—‘May
there not be, I repeat, other Lovelaces; other like
intrepid persevering enterprizers; altho' they may not
go to work in the same way? 
‘And has then a Clarissa (herself her judge)
failed? —In such great points failed? —And may she
not further fail? —Fail in the greatest point, to which
all the other points in which she has failed, have but
a natural tendency?’ 
Nor say thou, that Virtue, in the Eye of Heaven,
is as much a manly as a womanly grace. By Virtue in
this place I mean Chastity, and to be superior to temptation; 
my Clarissa out of the question. Nor ask
thou, Shall the man be guilty, yet expect the woman
to be guiltless, and even unsuspectable? Urge thou not
these arguments, I say, since the Wife, by a failure,
may do much more injury to the Husband, than the
Husband can do to the Wife, and not only to her Husband,
but to all his family, by obtruding another man's
children into his possessions, perhaps to the exclusion of
(at least to a participation with) his own; he believing
them all the time to be his. In the Eye of Heaven,
therefore, the sin cannot be equal. Besides I have read
in some place, that the woman was made for the man,
not the man for the woman. Virtue then is less to be
dispensed with in the woman than in the man. 
Thou, Lovelace (methinks some better man than
thyself will say) to expect such perfection in a woman!— 
Yes, I, may I answer. Was not the great Cæsar a
great Rake as to women? Was he not called, by his
very soldiers, on one of his triumphant Entries into
Rome, The bald-pated lecher? and warning given of
him to the Wives, as well as to the Daughters, of his 

fellow-citizens? —Yet did not Cæsar repudiate his Wife
for being only in company with Clodius, or rather because
Clodius, tho' by surprize upon her, was found in
hers? And what was the reason he gave for it? —It
was this (tho' a Rake himself, as I have said) and only
this—The Wife of Cæsar must not be suspected!— 
Cæsar was not a prouder man than Lovelace. 
Go to then, Jack; nor say, nor let any-body say,
in thy hearing, that Lovelace, a man valuing himself
upon his Ancestry, is singular in his expectations of a
Wife's purity, though not pure himself. 
As to my Clarissa, I own, that I hardly think
there ever was such an angel of a woman. But has she
not, as above, already taken steps, which she herself
condemns? Steps, which the world and her own family
did not think her capable of taking? And for
which her own family will not forgive her? 
Nor think it strange, that I refuse to hear any-thing
pleaded in behalf of a standard Virtue, from high provocations. 
‘Are not provocations and temptations the
Tests of Virtue? A standard Virtue must not be allowed
to be provoked to destroy or annihilate itself. 
‘May not then the Success of him, who could
carry her thus far, be allowed to be an encouragement
for him to try to carry her farther?’ 'Tis but
to try. Who will be afraid of a trial for this divine
creature? ‘Thou knowest, that I have more than once,
twice, or thrice, put to the fiery Trial young women
of Name and Character; and never yet met with
one who held out a month; nor indeed so long as
could puzzle my invention. I have concluded against
the whole Sex upon it.’ And now, if I have not
found a Virtue that cannot be corrupted, I will swear
that there is not one such in the whole Sex. Is not
then the whole Sex concerned that this trial should be
made? And who is it that knows this Lady, that would
not stake upon her head the honour of the whole? — 
Let her who would refuse it, come forth, and desire to
stand in her place. 

I must assure thee, that I have a prodigious high
opinion of Virtue; as I have of all those graces and
excellencies, which I have not been able to attain myself. 
Every free-liver would not say this, nor think
thus—Every argument he uses, condemnatory of his
own actions, as some would think. But ingenuousness
was ever a signal part of my character. 
Satan, whom thou mayest, if thou wilt, in this
case, call my instigator, put the good man of old upon
the severest trials. ‘To his behaviour under these trials,
that good man owed his honour and his future rewards.’ 
An innocent person, if doubted, must wish
to be brought to a fair and candid trial. 
Rinaldo indeed in Ariosto put the Mantuan Knight's
Cup of trial from him, which was to be the proof of
his Wife's chastity (a) —This was his argument for
forbearing the experiment: ‘Why should I seek a
thing I should be loth to find? My Wife is a Woman. 
The Sex is frail. I cannot believe better of her
than I do. It will be to my own loss, if I find reason
to think worse.’ But Rinaldo would not have
refused the trial of the Lady, before she became his
Wife, and when he might have found his account in
detecting her. 
For my part, I would not have put the Cup from
me, tho' married, had it been but in hope of finding
reason to confirm my good opinion of my Wife's honour; 
and that I might know whether I had a Snake
or a Dove in my bosom. 
To my point—‘What must that Virtue be, which
will not stand a trial? —What that Woman, who
would wish to shun it?’ 
Well then, a trial seems necessary for the further establishment
of the Honour of so excellent a creature. 

And who shall put her to this trial? —Who, but
the man, who has, as she thinks, already induced her,
in lesser points, to swerve? —And this for her own sake
in a double sense—Not only, as he has been able to
make some impression, but as she regrets the impression
made; and so may be presumed to be guarded against
his further attempts. 
The Situation she is at present in, it must be confessed,
is a disadvantageous one to her: But if she overcome,
that will redound to her honour. 
Shun not, therefore, my dear soul, further trials,
nor hate me for making them. —‘For what woman
can be said to be virtuous till she has been tried?’ 
‘Nor is one effort, one trial, to be sufficient. Why? 
Because a woman's heart may be at one time adamant,
at another wax’—As I have often experienced. 
And so, no doubt, hast thou. 
A fine time of it, methinks, thou sayest, would the
women have, if they were all to be tried!— 
But, Jack, I am not for that neither. Tho' I am
a Rake, I am not a Rake's friend; except thine and
company's. 
And be this one of the morals of my tedious discussion
—‘Let the little rogues who would not be put
to the question, as I may call it, chuse accordingly. 
Let them prefer to their favour good honest sober
fellows, who have not been used to play dogs tricks: 
Who will be willing to take them as they offer; 
and who being tolerable themselves, are not suspicious
of others.’ 
But what, methinks thou askest, is to become of the
Lady, if she fail? 
What? —Why will she not, ‘if once subdued, be
always subdued?’ Another of our Libertine maxims. 
And what an immense pleasure to a Marriage-hater,
what rapture to thought, to be able to prevail upon
such a woman as Miss Clarissa Harlowe to live with
him, without real change of name! 

But if she resist—If nobly she stand her trial?— 
Why then I will marry her; and bless my stars for
such an angel of a Wife. 
But will she not hate thee? —Will she not refuse— 
No, no, Jack! —Circumstanced and situated as we
are, I am not afraid of that. And hate me! Why
should she hate the man who loves her upon proof? 
And then for a little hint at reprisal—Am I not
justified in my resolutions of trying her Virtue; who
is resolved, as I may say, to try mine? who has declared,
that she will not marry me, till she has hopes of
my Reformation? 
And now, to put an end to this sober argumentation,
wilt thou not thyself (whom I have supposed an
advocate for the Lady, because I know that Lord M.
has put thee upon using the interest he thinks thou hast
in me, to persuade me to enter the Pale; wilt thou not
thyself) allow me to try, if I cannot awaken the woman
in her? —To try, if she, with all that glowing
symmetry of parts, and that full bloom of vernal graces,
by which she attracts every eye, be really inflexible as
to the grand article? 
Let me begin then, as opportunity presents. —I will; 
and watch her every step to find one sliding one; her
every moment, to find the moment critical. And the
rather, as she spares not me, but takes every advantage
that offers, to puzzle and plague me; nor expects
nor thinks me to be a good man. 
If she be a woman, and love me, I shall surely catch
her once tripping: For Love was ever a traitor to its
harbourer: And Love within, and I without, she will
be more than woman, as the poet says, or I less than
man, if I succeed not. 
Now, Belford, all is out. The Lady is mine; shall
be more mine. Marriage, I see, is in my power,
now she is so. Else perhaps it had not. If I can have
her without marriage, who can blame me for trying? 

If not, great will be her glory, and my future confidence. 
And well will she merit the sacrifice I shall
make her of my liberty; and from all her Sex Honours
next to divine, for giving a proof, ‘that there was
once a woman whose Virtue no trials, no stratagems,
no temptations, even from the man she hated not,
could overpower.’ 
Now wilt thou see all my Circulation: As in a glass
wilt thou see it. —Cabala, however, is the word (a) ; 
nor let the secret escape thee even in thy dreams. 
Nobody doubts, that she is to be my wife. Let her
pass for such, when I give the word. ‘Mean-time
Reformation shall be my Stalking-horse; some one
of the women in London, if I can get her thither,
my Bird.’ And so much for this time. 