


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


I Was obliged to lay down my pen. My mind was
too much disturbed to write on. 
We had a great deal of discourse before we quitted
Jeronymo's chamber, on this extraordinary subject. 
They all, as I told you, expressed their doubts, that
the Lady would be able to persist in her new resolution. 
The Marquis and Marchioness gave their
opinion, that she should be left entirely to the workings
of her own will: And the Count proposed, by
way of enforcing their opinions, that neither the Bishop
and Father Marescotti on one hand (tho' religion was
in the question) nor Jeronymo and myself on the
other, should endeavour to prevail upon her either to
alter, or persevere in, her way of thinking. Jeronymo
said, he desired only one conversation with his sister
alone, before he complied with this proposal. 
They put it to me. I said, That several passages
in her paper were of too solemn a nature for me to
refuse my consent to their proposal: But, however,
if I should observe, in future conversations between
her and me, that she was inclined to alter her mind,
and seemed to wish to be encouraged to declare the
alteration, they must allow me, for the sake of my
own honour, as a man, and of her delicacy, as a
woman, to shew the ardour of my attachment to her,
by my preventing declaration, and even entreaty. 

The Marchioness bowed to me, with a grateful
smile of approbation. 
Father Marescotti hesitated, as if he had something
of an objection to make; but he was silenced by the
Marquis's saying, On your honour, on your delicacy,
I am sure, Chevalier, we may rely. 
I am absolutely of opinion that we may, said the
Count. The Chevalier can put himself in every
one's situation; and can forget his own interest, when
a right and just measure is to be taken. 
This is true, said Jeronymo—But, let it be our
part to shew the Chevalier, that he is not the only man
in the world who can do so. 
You must remember, my dear Jeronymo, said the
Bishop, that Religion is a consideration superior to all
others. Shall our sister, who follows the example set
her by the Chevalier, be discouraged in an effort so
noble? But I am willing to subscribe to the proposal,
as an equal one. 
Father Marescotti, said I, you must return me the
paper. I must often have recourse to it, to strengthen
my own mind, in order to enable myself to answer
your expectations. 
The Father desired leave to take a copy of it in short-hand; 
and retired for that purpose. 
I have no doubt but he will make great use of it
with the family, and perhaps with the Lady, should
there be occasion, hereafter. For my own part, if
the noble Enthusiast, when the heat of her imagination
is gone off, shall persist in believing that she has
a divine impulse in favour of her resolution, and that
given in answer to her prayers, I will endeavour to
shew her, that her call upon me to support her in it,
tho' against myself, shall be answered, whatever it cost
me. 
They prevailed on me to stay dinner. She excused
herself from being present; but desired to see me,
when it was over. 

Camilla then led me to her. I found her in tears. 
She was afraid, she said, that I would not forgive her:
Yet I would, she was sure, if I knew the conflicts
with which her soul laboured. 
I soothed her disturbed mind. I told her, that I desired
her direction, and was resolved to pursue it. Her
paper should be one of my constant lessons; and her
conscience the rule of my conduct, with regard to my
expectations of her favour. 
O Sir, said she, how good you are! It is from your
generosity, next to the divine assistance, that I expect
support in my resolution. I but imperfectly remember
what I would have done, and what I consented
to, when you were last among us—But
when I best knew myself, I was more inclined to support
my parents and brothers in their expectations,
with regard to the two great articles of religion and
residence, than to comply with yours. My fortune,
my rank, merited your consideration; and my pride
was sometimes piqued. “But it was the regard that
I had to the welfare of your immortal soul, that
weighed most with me. O Sir! could you have
been a Catholic!”— 
She then wrung her clasped hands, and tears trickled
down her cheeks. God Almighty convert you, Chevalier! 
—But you must leave me. I am beginning to
be again unhappy! —Leave me, Sir. But let me see
you to-morrow. I will pray for a composure of mind,
in the mean time. Do you pray for me too. “And
pray for yourself, Chevalier! The welfare of your
soul, your immortal soul, was ever my principal
concern.” 
She began to ramble. Her looks were a little wild. 
I took leave of her; and going hastily from her, in
order to hide my own emotion, I surprised Father
Marescotti, who, as it was at first sight evident to
me, from the confusion I found him in, and the attempts
he hesitatingly made to excuse himself, had 

been listening to what passed between the Lady and
me. Pity! that a well-intended zeal should make a
good man do mean things! 
No apologies, my dear Father, said I. If you
doubted my honour, I can think myself, in some measure,
obliged to your condescension, for taking this method
to prove me. Allow me, my dear Sir, to say
(It is to Father Marescotti) that the man, who, in the
greater actions of his life, thinks himself under the All-seeing
Eye, will not be afraid of a fellow-creature's
ear. 
I beg a thousand pardons, said he, hesitating, and
in confusion. But I will confess the truth; I believed
it was next to impossible, that a young man, whose
Love to one of the most excellent of women is not to
be questioned, should be able to keep the conditions
prescribed to him, and forbear to make use of the
power she acknowleges he has over her affections—But
forgive me, Chevalier. 
Forgive yourself, my dear Father; I do most heartily
forgive you. 
I led him down to Jeronymo's chamber, begging
of him not to say a syllable more of this matter; and
not to let me suffer in his esteem by this accident. 
I have more than once, Dr. Bartlett, experienced
the irreconcileable enmity of a man, whom I have
forgiven for a meanness; and who was less able to
forgive me my forgiveness, than I was him his fault. 
But Father Marescotti cannot be such a man. He is
capable of generous shame. He could hardly hold up
his head all the time I staid. 
I related to the family, in the presence of the Father,
the substance of what passed between the Lady
and me. They seemed surprised at her stedfastness. 
The Bishop told me, that he had dispatched a messenger
post to the General, with a Letter, in which
he had written a faithful account of their present situation. 
He would shew me a copy of it, if I pleased. 

I was sure, I said, I could depend upon his generosity
and honour; and should be glad to know the sentiments
of the General and his Lady upon it, when
they returned an answer. 
I promised to attend them in the morning: And
going to my lodgings, found there, waiting for me,
the Count of Belvedere. Saunders, and his gentleman,
were both together below-stairs, waiting for, yet dreading,
as they said, my return. Saunders had told the
Count, it was uncertain: But he declared that he
would wait for me, were it ever so late. They both
besought me to take care of my own safety. His gentleman
told me, that his master had been very much
disturbed in his mind ever since he was with me last; 
declaring often, that his life was a burden to him. 
He believed, he said, he had a brace of pistols with
him: And then again expressed his care for my safety,
as well as his Lord's. Fear not, said I: The Count is
a man of honour: I would not, for the world, hurt
him: And I dare say he will not hurt me. 
I hastened up. Why, my Lord, said I, taking
his unwilling hands, each in mine, for a double reason,
did you not let me know you intended me this honour? 
Or why did not your Lordship send for me, as soon
as you came? 
Send for you! with a melancholy air; What from
your Clementina? No! —But tell me what is concluded
upon? My soul is impatient to know. Answer me
like a man: Answer me like a man of honour. 
Nothing, my Lord, is concluded upon: Nothing
can be concluded upon till Lady Clementina's mind
be fully known. 
If that be all the obstacle— 
Not a slight one. I assure you, that Clementina
knows her own worth. She will put a just value upon
herself. In her unhappy delirium, she always preserved
a high sense of that delicacy, which distinguishes the
woman of true honour. It shines forth now in all her 

words and actions with redoubled lustre. She will
make the more difficulties, as her friends make less. 
Nothing can be done soon: And if it will make your
Lordship easier (for I see you are disturbed) I will acquaint
you when any-thing is likely to be carried into
effect. 
And is nothing yet concluded on? And will you
give me such notice? 
I will, my Lord. 
Upon your honour? 
Upon my honour. 
Well then, I have some days longer to crawl upon
this earth. 
What means my Lord? 
This I mean, withdrawing his hands from mine,
and taking out of his pockets two pistols: I came resolved,
that you should take one of these, at your
choice, had the affair been concluded upon, as I
dreaded it would. I am no assassin, Sir, nor ever employed
one: Nor would I have deprived Clementina
of her elected husband. All I intended was, that the
hand to which she is to give hers, should have first
taken my life. I will not, I cannot live, to see her
the wife of any man on earth, tho' she has refused to
be mine—You should have found I would not. 
What a rashness! —But I see your mind is disturbed. 
The Count of Belvedere could not otherwise talk in
this manner. 
It is not impossible, surely, my dear Dr. Bartlett (however
improbable, as I begin to apprehend) that Clementina
may change her mind. I could not, therefore,
acquaint the Count with our present situation; because
the hope he would have conceived from it, would, in
case of a change, have added strength to his despair. 
I contented myself, therefore, to reason with him on
his rash intention. And having renewed my assurances,
as above, he took leave of me so much recovered, as
to thank me for the advice I had given him; and to 

promise, that he would make it the foundation of his
prayers to heaven for a calmer mind, than he had
known for some days past. 
Saunders and his valet seemed overjoyed at seeing
us come down together, in an amicable manner; and
in the high civility each paid the other. 
I should have mentioned, that the Count, of his own
accord, in passing thro' my antechamber to the stairs,
laid in one of the windows the two pistols. My dear
Grandison, said he, let these remain in your keeping. 
They are pieces of curious workmanship. Whither
might one of them, by this time, have sent me! — 
And in what difficulties might you the survivor, a foreigner,
have been involved; which then I considered
not; for all my malice was levelled against my unhappy
self! I will not trust myself with them— 
Here I conclude for this night. I will not dispatch
these last-written Letters, till I see what to-morrow
will produce. My dear friend! How grievous is
suspense! —Perhaps I should have thought myself more
obliged to bear it, had I been thus entangled, fettered,
suspended, by my own fault. 

