



My dear Parents,
O let me take up my Complaint, and say,
Never was poor Creature so unhappy, and
so barbarously used, as your Pamela! Indeed,
my dear Father and Mother, my Heart's just
broken! I can neither write as I should do, nor
let it alone; for to whom but you can I vent
my Griefs, and keep my poor Heart from bursting! 
Wicked, wicked Man! —I have no
Patience when I think of him! —But yet,
don't be frighted—for—I hope—I hope, I
am honest!––– But if my Head and my Heart
will let me, you shall hear all. —Is there no
Constable nor Headborough, tho', to take me
out of his House? for I am sure I can safely
swear the Peace against him: But, alas! he is
greater than any Constable: He is a Justice himself; 
such a Justice, deliver me from! –––But
God Almighty, I hope, in time, will right me! 
—For he knows the Innocence of my Heart! 
John went your Way in the Morning; but
I have been too much distracted to send by him; 
and have seen nobody but Mrs. Jervis, and
Rachel, and one I hate to see, or be seen by: 
And indeed I hate now to see any body. 
Strange things I have to tell you, that happen'd
since last Night, that good Mr. Jonathan's
Letter, and my Master's Harshness, put me into
such a Fluster. But I will no more preambulate. 

I went to Mrs. Jervis's Chamber; and,
O dreadful! my wicked Master had hid himself,
base Gentleman as he is! in her Closet,
where she has a few Books, and Chest of Drawers,
and such-like. I little suspected it; tho' I
used, till this sad Night, always to look into
that Closet, and another in the Room, and
under the Bed, ever since the Summer-house
Trick, but never found any thing; and so I did
not do it then, being fully resolved to be angry
with Mrs. Jervis for what had happen'd in the
Day, and so thought of nothing else. 
I sat myself down on one Side of the Bed,
and she on the other, and we began to undress
ourselves; but she on that Side next the
wicked Closet, that held the worst Heart in the
World. So, said Mrs. Jervis, you won't
speak to me, Pamela! I find you are angry
with me. Why, Mrs. Jervis, said I, so I am,
a little; 'tis a Folly to deny it. You see what
I have suffer'd by your forcing me in to my
Master: And a Gentlewoman of your Years
and Experience must needs know, that it was
not fit for me to pretend to be any body else
for my own sake, nor with regard to my
Master. 
But, said she, who would have thought it
would have turn'd out so? Ay, said I, little
thinking who heard me, Lucifer always
is ready to promote his own Work and
Workmen. You see, presently, what Use he
made of it, pretending not to know me, on
purpose to be free with me: And when he 

took upon himself to know me, to quarrel
with me, and use me hardly: And you too,
said I, to cry, Fie, fie, Pamela! cut me to
the Heart: For that encouraged him. 
Do you think, my Dear, said she, that I
would encourage him? —I never said so to you
before; but since you force it from me, I must
tell you, that ever since you consulted me, I
have used my utmost Endeavours to divert him
from his wicked Purposes: And he has promised
fair; but, to say all in a Word, he doats
upon you; and I begin to see it is not in his
Power to help it. 
I luckily said nothing of the Note from
Mr. Jonathan; for I began to suspect all the
World almost: But I said, to try Mrs. Jervis,
Well then, what would you have me do? 
You see he is for having me wait on Lady
Davers now. 
Why, I'll tell you freely, my dear Pamela,
said she, and I trust to your Discretion to conceal
what I say: My Master has been often
desiring me to put you upon asking him to let
you stay.— 
Yes, said I, Mrs. Jervis, let me interrupt
you: I will tell you why I could not think of
that: It was not the Pride of my Heart; but
the Pride of my Honesty: For, what must have
been the Case? Here my Master has been very
rude to me, once and twice; and you say
he cannot help it, though he pretends to be
sorry for it: Well, he has given me Warning
to leave my Place, and uses me very harshly; 

perhaps, to frighten me to his Purposes, as he
supposes I would be fond of staying (as indeed
I should, if I could be safe; for I love you and
all the House, and value him, if he would act
as my Master). Well then, as I know his Designs,
and that he owns he cannot help it; must
I not have ask'd to stay, knowing he would
attempt me again? for all you could assure me
of, was, he would do nothing by Force; so, I,
a poor weak Girl, was to be left to my own
Strength! And was not this to allow him to
tempt me, as one may say? and to encourage
him to go on in his wicked Devices? —How then,
Mrs. Jervis, could I ask or wish to stay? 
You say well, my dear Child, says she; and
you have a Justness of Thought above your
Years; and for all these Considerations, and
for what I have heard this Day, after you ran
away, (and I am glad you went as you did) I
cannot persuade you to stay; and shall be glad,
which is what I never thought I could have
said, that you were well at your Father's; for
if Lady Davers will entertain you, she may as
well have you from thence as here. There's
my good Mrs. Jervis! said I; God will bless
you for your good Counsel to a poor Maiden,
that is hard beset. But pray what did he say,
when I was gone? Why, says she, he was very
angry with you. But he would hear it! said I:
I think it was a little bold; but then he provoked
me to it. And had not my Honesty
been in the Case, I would not by any means
have been so saucy. Besides, Mrs. Jervis, 

consider, it was the Truth; if he does not love
to hear of the Summer-house and the Dressing-room,
why should he not be ashamed to continue
in the same Mind? But, said she, when
you had mutter'd this to yourself, you might
have told him any thing else. Well, reply'd I, I
cannot tell a wilful Lye, and so there's an End
of it. But I find you now give him up, and
think there's Danger in staying. —Lord bless
me! I wish I was well out of the House; tho'
it was at the Bottom of a wet Ditch, on the
wildest Common in England. 
Why, said she, it signifies nothing to tell
you all he said; but it was enough to make me
fear you would not be so safe as I could wish; 
and, upon my Word, Pamela, I don't wonder
he loves you; for, without Flattery, you
are a charming Girl! and I never saw you look
more lovely in my Life, than in that same new
Dress of yours. And then it was such a Surprize
upon us all! —I believe truly, you owe
some of your Danger to the lovely Appearance
you made. Then, said I, I wish the Cloaths
in the Fire. I expected no Effect from them; 
but if any, a quite contrary one. 
Hush! said I, Mrs. Jervis, did you not
hear something stir in the Closet? No, silly
Girl! said she; your Fears are always awake. 
—But indeed, said I, I think I heard something
rustle. —May-be, says she, the Cat may
be got there: But I hear nothing. 
I was hush; but she said, Pr'ythee, my
good Girl, make haste to-bed. See if the Door 

be fast. So I did, and was thinking to look
in the Closet; but hearing no more Noise,
thought it needless, and so went again and sat
myself down on the Bed-side, and went on undressing
myself. And Mrs. Jervis, being by
this time undress'd, stepp'd into Bed, and bid
me hasten, for she was sleepy. 
I don't know what was the Matter; but
my Heart sadly misgave me: Indeed, Mr. Jonathan's
Note was enough to make it do so, with
what Mrs. Jervis had said. I pulled off my
Stays and my Stockens, and all my Cloaths to
an Under-petticoat; and then hearing a Rustling
again in the Closet, I said, Heaven protect us!
but before I say my Prayers, I must look into
this Closet. And so was going to it slip-shod,
when, O dreadful! out rush'd my Master, in
a rich Silk and Silver Morning Gown. 
I scream'd, and ran to the Bed; and Mrs.
Jervis scream'd too; and he said, I'll do you
no Harm, if you forbear this Noise; but otherwise
take what follows. 
Instantly he came to the Bed (for
I had crept into it, to Mrs. Jervis, with my
Coat on, and my Shoes); and, taking me in
his Arms, said, Mrs. Jervis, rise, and just step
up-stairs, to keep the Maids from coming down,
at this Noise: I'll do no Harm to this Rebel. 
O, for Heaven's sake! for Pity's sake! Mrs.
Jervis, said I, if I am not betray'd, don't leave
me; and, I beseech you, raise all the House. 
No, said Mrs. Jervis, I will not stir, my dear
Lamb; I will not leave you. I wonder at you, 

Sir! said she; and kindly threw herself upon my
Coat, clasping me round the Waist: You shan't
hurt this Innocent, said she; for I will lose my
Life in her Defence. Are there not, added she,
enough wicked ones in the World for your base
Purpose, but you must attempt such a Lamb as
this? 
He was desperate angry, and threaten'd to
throw her out of the Window; and to turn her
out of the House the next Morning. You need
not, Sir, said she; for I will not stay in it. 
God defend my poor Pamela till To-morrow,
and we will both go together. —Says he, Let
me but expostulate a Word or two with you,
Pamela. Pray, Pamela, said Mrs. Jervis,
don't hear a Word, except he leaves the Bed,
and goes to the other End of the Room. Ay,
out of the Room, said I; expostulate To-morrow,
if you must expostulate! 
I found his Hand in my Bosom, and when
my Fright let me know it, I was ready to die; 
and I sighed, and screamed, and fainted away. 
And still he had his Arms about my Neck; and
Mrs. Jervis was about my Feet, and upon my
Coat: And all in a cold dewy Sweat was I. 
Pamela! Pamela! said Mrs. Jervis, as she
tells me since, O––––––h, and gave another
Shriek, my poor Pamela is dead for certain! 
—And so, to be sure, I was for a
time; for I knew nothing more of the Matter,
one Fit following another, till about
Three Hours after, as it prov'd to be, I found
myself in Bed, and Mrs. Jervis sitting up on 

one side, with her Wrapper about her, and Rachel
on the other; and no Master, for the wicked
Wretch was gone. But I was so overjoy'd,
that I hardly could believe myself; and I said,
(which were my first Words) Mrs. Jervis, Mrs.
Rachel, can I be sure it is you? Tell me! can I? 
—Where have I been? Hush, my Dear, said
Mrs. Jervis; you have been in Fit after Fit. 
I never saw any body so frightful in my Life. 
By this I judg'd Rachel knew nothing of the
Matter; and it seems my wicked Master had,
upon Mrs. Jervis's second Noise on my fainting
away, slipp'd out; and, as if he had come
from his own Chamber, disturb'd by the Screaming,
went up to the Maids Room, (who hearing
the Noise, lay trembling, and afraid to stir)
and bid them go down and see what was the Matter
with me and Mrs. Jervis. And he charg'd
Mrs. Jervis, and promised to forgive her for
what she had said and done, if she would conceal
the Matter. So the Maids came down; for the
Men lie in the Out-houses; and all went up
again, when I came to myself a little, except Rachel,
who staid to sit up with me, and bear Mrs.
Jervis Company. I believe they guess the Matter
to be bad enough; tho' they dare not say any
thing. 
When I think of my Danger, and the Freedoms
he actually took, tho' I believe Mrs. Jervis
saved me from worse, and she says she did,
(tho' what can I think, who was in a Fit, and
knew nothing of the Matter?) I am almost distracted. 

At first I was afraid of Mrs. Jervis; but I
am fully satisfy'd she is very good, and I should
have been lost but for her; and she takes on
grievously about it. What would have become
of me, had she gone out of the Room, to still
the Maids, as he bid her? He'd certainly have
shut her out, and then, Mercy on me! what
would have become of your poor Pamela? 
I must leave off a little; for my Eyes and
my Head are sadly bad. —This was a dreadful
Trial! This was the worst of all! Oh! that I
was out of the Power of this dreadfully wicked
Man! Pray for 
Your distressed Daughter. 

