



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Edgware, Thursday, May 4. 
I know that thou art so abandoned a man, that to
give thee the best reasons in the world against
what thou hast once resolved upon, will be but acting
the madman whom once we saw trying to buffet
down a hurricane with his hat. I hope, however,
that the Lady's merit will still avail her with thee. 
But if thou persistrest; if thou wilt avenge thyself
on this sweet Lamb, which thou hast singled out
from a flock thou hatest, for the faults of the Dogs
who kept it: If thou art not to be moved by Beauty,
by Learning, by Prudence, by Innocence, all shining
out in one charming object; but she must fall,
fall by the man whom she has chosen for her protector; 
I would not for a thousand worlds have thy
crime to answer for. 
Upon my faith, Lovelace, the subject sticks with
me, notwithstanding I find I have not the honour of
the Lady's good opinion. And the more, when I
reflect upon her Father's brutal curse, and the villainous
hard-heartedness of all her family. But,
nevertheless, I should be desirous to know (if thou
wilt proceed) by what gradations, arts, and contriveances,
thou effectest thy ingrateful purpose. And,
O Lovelace, I conjure thee, if thou art a man, let
not the specious devils thou hast brought her among,
be suffered to triumph over her; nor make her the 

victim of unmanly artifices. If she yield to fair seduction,
if I may so express myself; if thou canst raise
a weakness in her by Love, or by arts not inhuman; 
I shall the less pity her: And shall then conclude,
that there is not a woman in the world who can resist
a bold and resolute Lover. 
A messenger is just now arrived from my Uncle. 
The mortification, it seems, is got to his knee; and
the Surgeons declare, that he cannot live many days. 
He therefore sends for me directly, with these shocking
words, That I will come and close his eyes. My
servant or his must of necessity be in town every day
on his case, or on other affairs; and one of them shall
regularly attend you for any Letter or Commands. It
will be charity to write to me as often as you can. For
altho' I am likely to be a considerable gainer by the
poor man's death, yet I cannot say, that I at all love
these scenes of Death and the Doctor so near me. The
Doctor and Death I should have said; for that's the
natural order, and, generally speaking, the one is but
the harbinger to the other. 
If therefore you decline to oblige me, I shall think
you are displeased with my freedom. But let me tell
you at the same time, that no man has a right to be
displeased at freedoms taken with him for faults he is
not ashamed to be guilty of. 
J. Belford. 