


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Wedn. April 19. 
I shall dispatch this by your Gibson early in the
morning. It was kind in you to bid him call, in
his way down; for now I shall be almost sure of
meeting (if not my uncle) your brother, and who
knows, but my Lucy herself, at Dunstable? Where,
barring accidents, I shall be on Friday night. 
You will see some of the worthiest people in the
world, my dear, if you come, all prepared to love
you; but let not any-body be put to inconvenience to
meet me at Dunstable. My noble friends here will
proceed with me to Stratford, or even to Northampton,
they say; but they will see me safe in the protection
of Somebody I love, and whom they must
love for my sake. 
I don't wonder that Sir Charles Grandison loves
Mr. Beauchamp: He is a very worthy and sensible
man. He, as every-body else, idolizes Sir Charles. 
It is some pleasure to me, Lucy, that I stand high in
his esteem. To be respected by the worthy, is one
of the greatest felicities in this life; for it is to be
ranked as one of them. Sir Harry and his Lady are
come to town. All, it seems, is harmony in that family. 
They cannot bear Mr. Beauchamp's absence
from them for three days together. All the neighbouring
gentlemen are in love with him. His manners
are so gentle; his temper so even; so desirous to
oblige; so genteel in his person; so pleasing in his address; 
he must undoubtedly make a good woman very
happy. 
But Emily, poor girl! sees only Sir Charles Grandison
with eyes of Love. Mr. Beauchamp is, however,
greatly pleased with Emily. He told Lady G. 

that he thought her a fine young creature; and that
her mind was still more amiable than her person. But
his behaviour to her is extremely prudent. He says
finer things of her, than to her: Yet surely I am mistaken
if he meditates not in her, his future wife. Mr.
Beauchamp will be one of my escorte. 
Emily, at her own request, is to go to Colnebrooke
with Lady L. after I am gone. 
Mr. Reeves will ride. Lord L. and Lord G. will
also oblige me with their company on horseback. 
In my cousin's coach will be Lady L. Lady G.
Emily, and I. My cousin Reeves is forbidden to
venture. 
I shall take leave of Lady Olivia and Lady Maffei
to-morrow morning; when they will set out for their
projected tour. To-morrow we and the whole Grandison
family are to dine together at Lord L.'s, for the
last time. It will be a mournful dining-time, on that
account. 
Lady Betty Williams, her daughter, and Miss Clements,
supp'd with us this night, and took leave of
me in the tenderest manner. They greatly regret my
going down so soon, as they call it. 
As to the public diversions, which they wish me to
stay and give into, to be sure I should have been glad
to have been better qualified to have entertained you
with the performances of this or that actor, this or
that musician, and the like: But, frighted by the vile
plot upon me at a masquerade, I was thrown out of
that course of diversion, and indeed into more affecting,
more interesting engagements; into the knowlege
of a family that had no need to look out of itself
for entertainments: And, besides, Are not all the
company we see, as visiters or guests, full of these
things! I have seen the principal performers, in every
way, often enough to give me a notion of their performances,
tho' I have not troubled you with such
common things as revolve every season. 

You know I am far from slighting the innocent
pleasures in which others delight—It would have been
happier for me, perhaps, had I had more leisure to attend
those amusements, than I have found. Yet I am
not sure, neither: For methinks, with all the pangs
that my suspenses have cost me, I would not but have
known Sir Charles Grandison, his Sisters, his Emily,
and Dr. Bartlett. 
I could only have wished to have been spared Sir
Hargrave Pollexfen's vile attempt: Then, if I had
come acquainted with this family, it would have been
as I came acquainted with others: My gratitude had
not been engaged so deeply. 
Well—But what signify all these If's? —What has
been, has; what must be, must. Only love me, my
dear friends, as you used to love me. If I was a good
girl when I left you, I hope I am not a bad one now,
that I am returning to you. My morals, I bless God,
are unhurt: My heart is not corrupted by the vanities
of the great town: I have a little more experience
than I had: And if I have severely paid for it, it is
not at the price of my reputation. And I hope, if
nobody has benefited by me, since I have been in
town, that no one has suffered by me. Poor Mr.
Fowler! —I could not help it, you know. Had I, by
little snares, follies, coquetries, sought to draw him
on, and entangle him, his future welfare would with
reason, be more the subject of my solicitude, than it is
now necessary it should be; tho' indeed I cannot help
making it a good deal so. 
Thursday Morning. 
Dr. Bartlett has just now taken leave of me, in my
own dressing-room. The parting scene between us
was tender. 
I have not given you my opinion of Miss Williams. 
Had I seen her at my first coming to town, I
should have taken as much notice of her, in my Letters
to you, as I did of the two Miss Brambers, 

Miss Darlington, Miss Cantillon, Miss Allestree, and
others of my own Sex; and of Mr. Somner, Mr. Allestree,
Mr. Walden, of the other; who took my
first notice, as they fell early in my way, and with
whom it is possible, as well as with the town-diversions,
I had been more intimate, had not Sir Hargrave's
vile attempt carried me out of their acquaintance
into a much higher; which of necessity, as well as
choice, entirely engrossed my attention. But now
how insipid would any new characters appear to you,
if they were but of a like cast with those I have mentioned,
were I to make such the subjects of my pen,
and had I time before me; which I cannot have, to
write again, before I embrace you all, my dear, my
ever-dear and indulgent friends! 
I will only say, that Miss Williams is a genteel
girl; but will hardly be more than one of the better
fort of modern women of condition; and that she is
to be classed so high, will be owing more to Miss Clements's
lessons, than, I am afraid, to her mother's example. 
Is it, Lucy, that I have more experience and discernment
now, or less charity and good-nature, than
when I first came to town? for then I thought well, in
the main, of Lady Betty Williams. But tho' she is a
good-natur'd, obliging woman; she is so immersed in
the love of public diversions! so fond of routs, drums,
hurricanes—Bless me, my dear! how learned should
I have been in all the gaieties of the modern life; 
what a fine Lady, possibly; had I not been carried into
more rational (however to me they have been more
painful) scenes; and had I followed the lead of this
Lady, as she (kindly, as to her intention) had designed
I should! 
In the afternoon Mr. Beauchamp is to introduce
Sir Harry and Lady Beauchamp, on their first viat to
the two sisters. 
I had almost forgot to tell you, that my cousins and 

I are to attend the good Countess of D. for one half
hour, after we have taken leave of Lady Olivia and
her aunt. 
And now, my Lucy, do I shut up my correspondence
with you from London. My heart beats high
with the hope of being as indulgently received by all
you, my dearest friends, as I used to be after a shorter
absence: For I am, and ever will be, 
The grateful, dutiful, and affectionate
Harriet Byron. 

