



My dearest Daughter,
How shall I do to answer, as they deserve,
your Two last Letters? Surely no happy
Couple ever had such a Child as we have! But
it is in vain to aim at Words like your Words; 
and equally in vain for us to offer to set forth
the Thankfulness of our Hearts, on the kind
Office your honoured Husband has given us; 
for no Reason but to favour us still more, and
to quiet our Minds in the Notion of being useful
to him. God grant I may be able to be so! 
Happy shall I be, if I can! —But I see the generous
Drift of his Proposal; it is only to make
me more easy from the Nature of my Imployment,
and in my Mind too, overloaden, as I
may say, with Benefits; and, at the same time,
to make me more respected in my new Neighbourhood. 
I can only say, I most gratefully accept of the
kind Offer; and since it will ease the worthy
Mr. Longman, shall, with still greater Pleasure,
do all I can in it. But I doubt I shall be
wanting in Ability; I doubt I shall: But I will
be just and honest, however: That, by God's
Grace, will be within my own Capacity; and
that, I hope, I may answer for. 
It is kind, indeed, to put it in my Power to
do good to those who shall deserve it: And I will
take double Pains to find out the true Merit of 

such as I shall recommend to Favour, and that
their Circumstances be really such as I shall
represent them. 
But one thing, my dear Daughter, let me
desire, that I may make up my Accounts to
Mr. Longman, or to his Honour himself, when
he shall make us so happy as to be here with us. 
I don't how—but it will make me uneasy, if
I am to make up my Accounts to you: For so
well known is your Love to us, that tho' you
would no more do an unjust thing, than, by
God's Grace, we should desire you; yet this
same ill-willing world might think it was
like making up Accounts to one's Self. 
Do, my dearest Child, get me off of this
Difficulty, and I can have no other; for already
I am in Hopes I have hit upon a Contrivance to
improve the Estate, and to better the Condition
of the Tenants at the same time, at least, not to
worst them, and which I hope, will please every
body: But I will acquaint Mr. Longman with
this, and take his Advice; for I will not be too
troublesome either to you, my dear Child, or
to your Spouse. —If I could act so for his Interest,
as not to be a Burden, what happy Creatures
should we both be in our own Minds! We
find ourselves more and more respected by every
one; and, so far as shall be consistent with our
new Trust, we will endeavour to deserve it,
that we may interest as many as know us, in
our own good Wishes and Prayers for both
your Happiness. 

But let me say, how much convinced I am
by the Reasons you give for not taking to us
any of our Relations. Every one of those Reasons
has its Force with us. How happy are we
to have so prudent a Daughter to advise with! 
And I think myself obliged to promise this,
That whatever I do for any of them above the
Amount of Forty Shillings at one Time, I will
take your Direction in it, that your wise Hints
of making every one continue their Industry,
and not to rely upon Favour, instead of Merit,
may be followed. I am sure this is the way to
make them happier, as well as better Men and
Women; for, as I have often thought, if one
were to have an Hundred Pounds a Year in good
Comings-in, it would not do without Industry; 
and with that, one may do with a Quarter of it,
and less. 
In short, my dear Child, your Reasons are
so good, that I wonder they came not into my
Head before, and then I needed not to have
troubled you about the Matter: But yet it ran
in my own Thought, that I could not like to
be an Incroacher:—For I hate a dirty thing; 
and in the midst of my distresses, never could
be guilty of one: Thank God for it! 
You rejoice our Hearts beyond Expression at
the Hope you give us of receiving Letters from
you, now-and-then: To be sure it will be the chief
Comfort of our Lives, next to seeing you, as we
are put in hope we sometimes shall. But yet, my
dear Child, don't let us put you to Inconvenience,
neither. Pray, don't! You'll have enough upon 

your Hands without—To be sure you
will. 
The Workmen have made a good Progress,
and wish for Mr. Longman to come down; as
we also do. 
You need not be afraid we should think you
proud, or lifted up with your Condition. You
have weather'd the first Dangers; and but for
your fine Cloaths and Jewels, we should not
see any Difference, indeed we should not, between
our dear Pamela, and the much respected
Mrs. B. —But God has given you too much
Sense to be proud or lifted up. I remember, in
your former Writings, a Saying of the 'Squire's,
speaking of you, my dear Child, That it was
for Persons who were not used to Praise, and
did not deserve it, to be proud of it*  :In like
sort, one may say, it is for Persons of little Sense
to be proud; but you, my dear Child, every one
sees, are above it: And that, methinks, is a
proud Word; Is it not? If one was not,— 
I don't know how—half-stupid, I believe— 
one would be raised by your high Style of
Writing: But I should be more than half-stupid,
I am sure, to aim at it. 
Every Day brings us Instances of the good
Name his Honour and you, my dear Child,
have left behind you, in this Country. Here
comes one, and here comes another, and a third,
and a fourth; and, Goodman Andrews, cries
one, and, Goody Andrews, cries another— 

(and some call us Mr. and Mrs. but we like the
other full as well) When heard you from his
Honour? —How does his Lady do? —What
a charming Couple are they! —How lovingly
they live! —What an Example do they give
to all about them! —Then one cries, God
bless'em both; and another cries, Amen; and
so says a third, and a fourth: And all say,
But when do you expect them down again? — 
Such-an-one longs to see'em;—and such-an-one
will ride a Day's Journey, to have but a Sight of
'em at Church. —And then they say, how
this Gentleman praises them, and that Lady admires
them. —O my dear Child! what an Happiness
is this! How do your poor Mother and
I stand fixed to the Earth, to hear both your
Praises; our Tears trickling down our Cheeks,
and our Hearts heaving, as if they would burst
with Joy, till we are forced to take Leave in
half Words, and hand-in-hand go in together,
to bless God, and bless you both! —O my
Daughter! what a happy Couple have God and
you made us! 
Your poor Mother is very anxious about her
dear Child. I will not touch upon a Matter so
very irksome to you to hear of. But tho' the
Time may be some Months off, she every Hour
prays for your Safety and Happiness, and for
all the Increase of Felicity that his Honour's
generous Heart can wish for. This is all we
will say, at present: Only, that we are, with 

continued Prayers and Blessings, my dearest
Child, 
Your loving Father and Mother,
J. and E. Andrews. 
Yet one Word more!—and that is—Our
Duty to your honoured Husband. We
must say so now; tho'he forbad us so often
before. You cannot, my dear Child, imagine
how I was ashamed to have my poor
Letter shewn to him. I hardly remember
what I wrote; but it was from my Heart,
I'm sure; so I needed not to keep a Copy:
For an honest Mind must always be the
same, in Cases that cannot admit of
Change, such as those of my Thankfulness
to God, and to him. But don't shew him
all I write; for I shall be afraid of what I
say, if I think any body but our Daughter
sees it, who knows how to allow for her
poor Parents Defects. 

