


Lett.
I. II.Lovelace, To Belford. Tells him how much the Laady dislikes
the confraternity; Belford as well as the rest. Has had
a warm debate with her in their behalf. Looks upon her refusing
a share in her bed to Miss Partington, as suspecting and defying
him. Threatens her.—Savagely glories in her grief, on receiving
Mrs. Howe's prohibitory Letter: Which appears to be instigated by
himself.
III.Belford, To Lovelace. His and his compeers high admiration of
Clarissa. They all join to entreat him to do her justice.
IV. V.Lovelace. In Answer. He endeavours to palliate his purposes
by familiar instances of cruelty to birds, &c.—Further characteristic
reasonings in support of his wicked designs. The passive condition to
which he wants to bring the Lady.
VI.Belford In Reply. Still warmly argues in behalf of the Lady.
Is obliged to attend a dying Uncle; and entreats him to write from
time to time an account of all his proceedings.
VII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Lovelace, she says, complains of the
reserves he gives occasion for. His pride a dirty low pride, which has
eaten up his prudence. He is sunk in her opinion. An afflicting
Letter sent her from her Cousin Morden.
Incloses the Letter. In which her Cousin (swayed by the representations
of her Brother) pleads in behalf of Solmes, and the family-views:
and sets before her, in strong and just lights, the character of a
Libertine.
Her heavy reflections upon the contents. Her generous prayer.
VIII.From the same. He presses her to go abroad with him; yet
mentions not the Ceremony, that should give propriety to his urgency.
Cannot bear the life she lives. Wishes her Uncle Harlowe to be
sounded by Mr. Hickman, as to a Reconciliation. Mennell introduced
to her. Will not take another step with Lovelace till she know
the success of the proposed application to her Uncle.
Substance of two Letters from Lovelace to Belford; in which he tells
him who Mennell is, and gives an account of many new contrivances
and precautions. Womens pockets ballast-bags. Mrs. Sinclair's wardrobe.
Good order observed in her house. The Lady's caution, he
says, warrants his contrivances.
IX.Lovelace, To Belford. Will write a Play. The title of it, The
Quarrelsome Lovers. Perseverance his glory: Patience his hand-maid.
Attempts to get a Letter the Lady had dropt as she sat. Her high
indignation upon it. Further plots. Paul Wheatly who; and for
what employed. Sally Martin's reproaches. Has overplotted himself.
Human nature a well-known rogue.

X.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Acquaints her with their present quarrel.
Finds it imprudent to stay with him. Re-urges the application to
her Uncle. Cautions her Sex with regard to the danger of being
misled by the eye.
XI.Miss Howe. In Answer. Approves of her leaving Lovelace. New
stories of his wickedness. Will have her Uncle sounded. Comforts
her. How much her case differs from that of any other female fugitive.
She will be an Example, as well as a Warning. A picture of Clarissa's
happiness before she knew Lovelace. Brief sketches of her exalted
character. Adversity her shining-time.
XII.Clarissa. In Reply. Has a contest with Lovelace about going to
church. He obliges her again to accept of his company to St. Paul's.
XIII.Miss Howe, To Mrs. Norton. Desiring her to try to dispose
Mrs. Harlowe to forward a Reconciliation.
XIV.Mrs. Norton. In Answer.
XV.Miss Howe. In Reply.
XVI.Mrs. Harlowe's pathetic Letter to Mrs. Norton.
XVII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Fruitless issue of Mr. Hickman's
application to her Uncle. Advises her how to proceed with, and what
to say to Lovelace. Endeavours to account for his teazing ways. Who
knows, she says, but her dear friend was permitted to swerve, in order
bring about his reformation? Informs her of her Uncle Antony's intended
address to her Mother.
XVIII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Hard fate to be thrown upon an ungenerous
and cruel man. Reasons why she cannot proceed with Mr.
Lovelace as she advises. Affecting apostrophe to Lovelace.
XIX.From the same. Interesting conversation with Lovelace. He
frightens her. He mentions Settlements. Her modest encouragement
of him. He evades. True generosity what. She requires his Proposals
of Settlement in writing. Examines herself on her whole conduct
to Lovelace. Maidenly niceness not her motive for the distance she
has kept him at. What is. Invites her correction if she deceive herself.
XX.From the same. With Mr. Lovelace's written Proposals. Her
observations on the cold conclusion of them. He knows not what
every wise man knows, of the prudence and delicacy required in a Wife.
XXI.From the same. Mr. Lovelace presses for the day; yet makes a
proposal, which must necessarily occasion a delay. Her unreserved and
pathetic answer to it. He is affected by it. She rejoices that he is
penetrable. He presses for her instant resolution; but at the same
time insinuates delay. Seeing her displeased, he urges for the morrow:
But before she can answer, gives her the alternative of other days.
Yet, wanting to reward himself, as if he had obliged her, she repulses
him on a liberty he would have taken. He is enraged. Her
melancholy reflections on her future prospects with such a man.
The moral she deduces from her story. [A Note, defending her conduct
from the censure which some have passed upon her as over-nice.]
Extracts from four of his Letters: In which he glories in his cruelty.
Hardheartedness he owns to be an essential of the Libertine character.
Enjoys the confusion of a fine woman. His apostrophe to Virtue.
Ashamed of being visibly affected. Enraged against her for repulsing

him. Will steel his own heart, that he may cut thro' a rock of ice
to hers. The women afresh instigate him to attempt her virtue.
XXII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Is enraged at his delays. Will think
of some scheme to get her out of his hands. Has no notion that he
can or dare to mean her dishonour. Women do not naturally hate
such men as Lovelace.
XXIII.Belford, To Lovelace. Warmly espouses the Lady's cause. Nothing
but vanity and nonsense in the wild pursuits of Libertines. For
his own sake, for his family's sake, and for the sake of their common
humanity, he beseeches him to do the Lady justice.
XXIV.Lord M. To Mr. Belford. A proverbial Letter in the Lady's
favour.
XXV.Lovelace, To Belford. He ludicrously turns Belford's arguments
against him. Resistance inflames him. Why the Gallant is
preferred to the Husband. Gives a piece of advice to married women.
Substance of his Letter to Lord M. desiring him to give the Lady to
him in person. His view in this Letter. Ridicules Lord M. for his
proverbs. Ludicrous advice to Belford in relation to his dying Uncle.
What physicians should do when a patient is given over.
XXVI.Belford, To Lovelace. Sets forth the folly, the inconvenience,
in impolicy of Keeping, and the preference of Marriage,
upon the foot of their own principles, as Libertines.
XXVII.Lovelace, To Belford. Affects to mistake the intention of
Belford's Letter, and thanks him for approving his present schemes.
The Seduction-progress is more delightful to him, he says, than the
Crowning act.
XXVIII.From the same. All extremely happy at present. Contrives
a conversation for the Lady to overhear. Platonic Love, how it
generally ends. Will get her to a Play: Likes not Tragedies. Has
too much feeling. Why men of his cast prefer Comedy to Tragedy.
The Nymphs, and Mrs. Sinclair, and all Their acquaintance, of the
same mind. Other artifices of his. Could he have been admitted in
her hours of dishabille and heedlessness, he had been long ago master of
his wishes. His view in getting her to a Play. A Play, and a Collation
afterwards, greatly befriend a Lover's designs. And why. She
consents to go with him to see the Tragedy of Venice Preserved.
XXIX.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Gives the particulars of the overheard
conversation. Thinks her prospects a little mended. Is willing to
compound for tolerable appearances, and to hope, when reason for
hope offers.
XXX.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Her scheme of Mrs. Townsend. Is
not for encouraging dealers in prohibited goods. And why. Her humorous
treatment of Hickman on consulting him upon Lovelace's
proposals of Settlements.
XXXI.From the same. Her account of Antony Harlowe's address to
her Mother, and of what passed on her Mother's communicating it
to her. Copy of Mrs. Howe's Answer to his Letter.
XXXII. XXXIII.Lovelace, To Belford. Comes at several Letters of
Miss Howe. He is now more assured of Clarissa than ever. And
why. Sparkling Eyes, what they indicate. She keeps him at distance.

Repeated instigations from the women. Account of the Letters
he has come at. All rage and revenge upon the contents of
them. Menaces Hickman. Wishes Miss Howe had come up to
town, as she threatened.
XXXIV.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Is terrified by him. Disclaims
Prudery. Begs of Miss Howe to perfect her scheme, that she may
leave him. She thinks her temper changed for the worse. Trembles
to look back upon his encroachments. Is afraid, on the close self-examination
which her calamities have caused her to make, that even
in the best actions of her past life she has not been quite free from secret
pride, &c. Tears almost in two the answer she had written to
his Proposals. Intends to go out next day, and not to return. Her
further intentions.
XXXV.Lovelace, To Belford. Meets the Lady at breakfast. Flings
the tea-cup and sawcer over his head. The occasion. Alarms and
terrifies her by his free address. Romping, the use of it to a Lover.
Will try if she will not yield to nightly surprizes. A lion-hearted
Lady where her honour is concerned. Must have recourse to his
master-strokes. Fable of the Sun and North Wind. Mrs. Fretchville's
house an embarrass. He gives that pretended Lady the Small
Pox. Other contrivances in his head to bring Clarissa back, if she
should get away. Miss Howe's scheme of Mrs. Townsend is, he says,
a sword hanging over his head. He must change his measures to render
it abortive. He is of the true Lady-make. What that is. Another
conversation between them. Her apostrophe to her Father.
He is temporarily moved. Dorcas gives him notice of a paper she has
come at, and is transcribing. In order to detain the Lady, he presses
for the day. Miss Howe he fansies in Love with him. And why.
He sees Clarissa does not hate him.
XXXVI.From the same. Copy of the transcribed paper. It proves to
be her torn Answer to his Proposals. Meekness the glory of a
woman. Ludicrous image of a termagant Wife. He had better
never to have seen this paper. Has very strong remorses. Paints
them in lively colours. Sets forth the Lady's transcendent virtue, and
greatness of mind. Surprised into these arguments in her favour by
his Conscience. Puts it to flight.
XXXVII.From the same. Mennell scruples to aid him further in his
designs. Vapourish people the physical tribe's milch-cows. Advice
to the Faculty. Has done with his project about Mrs. Fretchville's
house. The Lady suspects him. A seasonable Letter for him from
his Cousin Charlotte. Sends up the Letter to the Lady. She writes
to Miss Howe, upon perusing it, to suspend for the present her application
to Mrs. Townsend.
XXXVIII.From the same. An Interview all placid and agreeable. Now
is he in a train. All he now waits for, is a Letter from Lord M. Enquiries
after their Marriage by a stranger of good appearance. The
Lady alarmed at them.
XXXIX.From the same. Curses his Uncle for another proverbial Letter
he has sent him. Permits the Lady to see it. Nine women in ten
that fall, fall, he says, thro' their own fault.
XL.Lord M's characteristic Letter.

XLI.Lovelace, To Belford. The Lady now comes to him at the
first word. Triumphs in her sweetness of temper, and on her patience
with him. Puts his writings into Counsellor Williams's hands,
to prepare Settlements. Shall now be doubly armed. Boasts of his contrivances
in petto. Brings patterns to her. Proposes jewels. Admires
her for her prudence with regard to what he puts her upon doing
for her Norton. What his Wife must Do and Be. She declines a public
Wedding. Her dutiful reasons. She is willing to dispense with Lord
M's presence. He writes to Lord M. accordingly.
Extract from a Letter of Clarissa. After giving Miss Howe an account
of the present favourable appearances, she desires her to keep to herself
all such of the particulars which she has communicated to her
as may discredit Mr. Lovelace.
XLII.Lovelace, To Belford. His projected plot to revenge himself
upon Miss Howe.
XLIII.From the same. Fresh contrivances croud in upon him. He
shall be very sick on the morrow. And why. Women below impertinently
reproachful. He will be no man's successor. Will not
take up with harlots. His story of the French Marquise.
XLIV.From the same. An agreeable airing with the Lady. Delightfully
easy she. Obsequiously respectful he. Miss Howe's plot now no
longer his terror. Gives the particulars of their agreeable conversation
while abroad.
XLV.From the same. An account of his Ipecacuanha-plot. Instructs
Dorcas how to act surprize and terror. Monosyllables and
Trisyllables to what likened. Politeness lives not in a storm. Proclamation-criers.
The lady now he sees loves him. Her generous tenderness
for him. He has now credit for a new score. Defies Mrs.
Townsend.
XLVI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Acknowleges tenderness for Lovelace.
Love for a man of errors punishable.
XLVII.Lovelace, To Belford. Suspicious enquiry after him and the
Lady by a servant in livery from one Captain Tomlinson. Her terrors
on the occasion. His alarming management. She resolves not to
stir abroad. He exults upon her not being willing to leave him.
XLVIII. XLIX.From the same. Arrival of Captain Tomlinson,
with a pretended commission from Mr. John Harlowe, to set on foot
a general Reconciliation, provided he can be convinced that they are
actually married. Different conversations on this occasion.—The
Lady insists that the truth be told to Tomlinson. She carries her
point, tho' to the disappointment of one of his private views. He
forms great hopes of success from the effects of his Ipecacuanha contrivance.
L.From the same. He makes such a fair representation to Tomlinson
of the situation between him and the Lady, behaves so plausibly,
and makes an overture so generous, that she is all kindness and unreserve
to him. Her affecting exultation on her amended prospects.
His unusual sensibility upon it. Reflection on the good effects of
Education. Pride an excellent substitute to virtue.
LI.From the same. Who Tomlinson is. Again makes Belford object,

in order to explain his designs by answering the objections. John
Harlowe a sly sinner. Hard-hearted reasons for giving the Lady a
gleam of joy. Illustrated by a story of two Sovereigns at war.
Extracts from Clarissa's Letter to Miss Howe. She rejoices in her
present agreeable prospects. Attributes much to Mr. Hickman.
Describes Captain Tomlinson. Gives a character of Lovelace [Which
is necessary to be attended to; especially by those who have thought
favourably of him for some of his liberal actions, and hardly of her
for the distance she at first kept him at].
LII.Lovelace, To Belford. Letter from Lord M. His further arts
and precautions. His happy day promised to be soon. His opinion of
the clergy, and of going to church. She pities every-body who wants
pity. Loves every-body. He owns he should be the happiest of men,
could he get over his prejudices against Matrimony. Draughts of
Settlements. Ludicrously accounts for the reason why she refuses to
hear them read to her. Law and Gospel two different things. Sally
flings her handkerchief in his face.
LIII.From the same. Has made the Lady more than once look
about her. She owns that he is more than indifferent to her. Checks
him with sweetness of temper for his encroaching freedoms. Her
proof of true Love. He ridicules the notion of Marriage-purity.
Severely reflects upon public freedoms between Men and their Wives.
Advantage he once made upon such an occasion. Has been after a
Licence. Difficulty in procuring one. Great faults and great virtues
often in the same person. He is willing to believe that women have
no souls. His whimsical reasons.
LIV.From the same. Almost despairs of succeeding (as he had hoped)
by Love and Gentleness. Praises her modesty. His encroaching freedoms
resented by her. The Woman, he observes, who resents
not initiatory Freedoms, must be lost. He reasons,
in his free way, upon her delicacy. Art of the Eastern Monarchs.
LV.From the same. A Letter from Captain Tomlinson makes all
up. Her Uncle Harlowe's pretended proposal, big with art and
plausible delusion. She acquiesces in it. He writes to the pretended
Tomlinson, on an affecting hint of hers, requesting that her Uncle
Harlowe would in person give his Niece to him; or permit Tomlinson
to be his proxy on the occasion.—And now for a little mine,
he says, which he has ready to spring.
LVI.Belford, To Lovelace. Again earnestly expostulates with him in
the Lady's favour. Remembers and applauds the part she bore in the
conversation at his collation. The frothy wit of Libertines how despicable.
Censures the folly, the weakness, the grossness, the unpermanency
of sensual Love. Calls some of his contrivances trite,
stale, and poor. Beseeches him to remove her from the vile house.
How many dreadful stories could the horrid Sinclair tell the Sex!
Serious reflection on the dying State of his Uncle.
LVII.Lovelace, To Belford. Cannot yet procure a Licence. Has secured
a retreat, if not victory. Defends in anger the simplicity of his
inventive contrivances. Enters upon his general defence, compared
with the principles and practices of other Libertines. Heroes and warlike
Kings worse men than he. Epitome of his and the Lady's story

after ten years cohabitation. Caution to those who would censure him.
Had the Sex made Virtue a recommendation to their favour, he says,
he should have had a greater regard to his morals than he has had.
LVIII.Lovelace, To Belford. Preparative to his springing his little
mine, as he calls it. Loves to write to the moment. Alarm begins.
Affectedly terrified.
LIX.From the same. The Lady frighted out of her bed by dreadful
cries of Fire. She awes him into decency. On an extorted promise
of forgiveness, he leaves her. Repenting, he returns; but finds her
door fastened. What a triumph has her Sex obtained by her Virtue!
But how will she see him next morning, as he has made her promise?
Exults in the puzzle he has given her.