



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Friday Morning, Seven o'Clock, April 7. 
My aunt Hervey, who is a very early riser, was
walking in the garden, (Betty attending her, as
I saw from my window this morning) when I arose; 
for, after such a train of fatigue and restless nights, I
had unhappily overslept myself: So all I durst venture
upon, was, to step down to my poultry-yard, and
deposite mine of yesterday, and last night. And I
am just come up; for she is still in the garden: This
prevents me from going to resume my letter, as I
think still to do; and hope it will not be too late. 
I said, I had unhappily overselpt myself. I went
to bed at about half an hour after Two. I told the
quarters till Five; after which I dropt asleep, and
awaked not till past Six, and then in great terror
from a dream, which has made such an impression
upon me, that, slightly as I think of dreams, I cannot
help taking this opportunity to relate it to you. 
‘Methought my brother, my uncle Antony, and
Mr. Solmes, had formed a plot to destroy Mr. 

Lovelace; who discovering it, turned all his rage
against me, believing I had a hand in it. I thought
he made them all fly into foreign parts upon it; 
and afterwards seizing upon me, carried me into a
church-yard; and there, notwithstanding all my
prayers and tears, and protestations of innocence,
stabbed me to the heart, and then tumbled me into
a deep grave ready dug, among two or three
half-dissolved carcases; throwing in the dirt and
earth upon me, with his hands, and trampling it
down with his feet.’ 
I awoke with the terror, all in a cold sweat, trembling,
and in agonies; and still the frightful images
raised by it, remain upon my memory. 
But why should I, who have such real evils to
contend with, regard imaginary ones? This, no
doubt, was owing to my disturbed imagination; huddling
together wildly all the frightful ideas which my
aunt's communications and discourse, my letter to
Mr. Lovelace, my own uneasiness upon it, and the
apprehensions of the dreaded Wednesday, furnished
me with. 
Eight o'Clock. 
The man, my dear, has got the letter! —What a
strange diligence! I wish he mean me well, that he
takes so much pains! —Yet, must own, that I should
be displeased, if he took less—I wish, however, he
had been an hundred miles off! —What an advantage
have I given him over me! 
Now the letter is out of my power, I have more
uneasiness and regret, than I had before. For, till
now, I had a doubt whether it should, or should not
go: And now I think it ought not to have gone. 
And yet is there any-other way, than to do as I
have done, if I would avoid Solmes? But what a
giddy creature shall I be thought, if I pursue the
course to which this letter must lead me? 

My dearest friend, tell me, have I done wrong! 
—Yet do not say I have, if you think it; for
should all the world besides condemn me, I shall have
some comfort, if you do not. The first time I ever
besought you to flatter me. That, of itself, is an
indication, that I have done wrong, and am afraid
of hearing the truth—O tell me [but yet do not tell
me], if I have done wrong! 
Friday, Eleven o'Clock. 
My aunt has made me another visit. She began
what she had to say, with letting me know, That my
friends are all persuaded, that I still correspond with
Mr. Lovelace; as is plain, she said, by hints and
menaces he throws out, which shews, that he is apprized
of several things that have passed between my
relations and me, sometimes within a very little while
after they have happened. 
Altho' I approve not of the method he stoops to
take to come at his intelligence, yet is it not prudent
in me to clear myself by the ruin of the corrupted
servant [as his vileness has neither my connivance,
nor approbation], since my doing so might occasion
the detection of my own correspondence; and so frustrate
all the hopes I have to avoid this Solmes. Yet
it is not at all unlikely, that this very agent of Mr.
Lovelace plays booty between my brother and him: 
How else can our family know (so soon too) his
menaces upon the passages they hint at? 
I assured my aunt, that I was too much ashamed
of the treatment I met with, for every-one's sake,
as well as for my own, to acquaint Mr. Lovelace with
the particulars of it, were the means of corresponding
with him afforded me: That I had reason to think,
that if he were to know of it from me, we must be
upon such terms, that he would not scruple making
some visits, which would give me great apprehensions. 
They all knew, I said, that I had no communication 

with any of my papa's servants, except my sister's
Betty Barnes: For altho' I had a good opinion of them
all, and believed, if left to their own inclinations,
they would be glad to serve me; yet, finding by their
shy behaviour, that they were under particular direction,
I had forborne ever since my Hannah had
been so disgracefully dismissed, so much as to speak to
any of them, for fear I should be the occasion of their
losing their places too: They must, therefore, account
among themselves for the intelligence Mr.
Lovelace met with, since neither my brother, nor
sister, (as Betty had frequently, in praise of their sincerity,
informed me) nor perhaps their favourite Mr.
Solmes, were at all careful who they spoke before,
when they had any thing to throw out against him,
or even against me, whom they took great pride to
join with him on this occasion. 
It was but too natural, my aunt said, for my friends
to suppose, that he had his intelligence, part of it at
least, from me; who, thinking myself hardly treated,
might complain of it, if not to him, to Miss Howe; 
which, perhaps, might be the same thing; for they
knew Miss Howe spoke as freely of them, as they
could do of Mr. Lovelace; and must have the particulars
she spoke of, from some-body, who knew
what was done here. That this determined my papa
to bring the whole matter to a speedy issue, lest fatal
consequences should ensue. 
I perceive you are going to speak with warmth, proceeded
she [And so I was]—For my own part I am
sure, you would not write any thing, if you do write,
to inflame so violent a spirit. —But this is not the end
of my present visit.— 
You cannot, my dear, but be convinced, that
your father will be obeyed. The more you contend
against his will, the more he thinks himself obliged
to assert his authority. Your mamma desires me to
tell you, that if you will give her the least hopes of 

a dutiful compliance, she will be willing to see you
in her closet just now, while your papa is gone to
take a walk in the garden. 
Astonishing persistence, said I! —I am tired with
making declarations and pleadings on this subject; and
had hoped, that my resolution being so well known,
I should not have been further urged upon it. 
You mistake the purport of my present visit, Miss
[looking gravely]. Heretofore you have been desired
and prayed, to obey and oblige your friends: Intreaty
is at an end: They give it up. Now it is resolved
upon, that your father's will is to be obeyed; as it is
fit it should. Some things are laid at your door, as
if you concurred with Lovelace's threatened violence
to carry you off; which your mamma will not believe. 
She will tell you her own good opinion of
you: She will tell you how much she still loves you: 
And what she expects of you on the approaching occasion: 
But yet, that she may not be exposed to an
opposition, which would the more provoke her, she
desires, you will first assure her, that you go down
with a resolution to do that with a grace which must
be done with or without a grace. And besides, she
wants to give you some advice how to proceed, in order
to reconcile yourself to your papa, and to everybody
else. Will you go down, Miss, or will you
not? 
I said, I should think myself happy, could I be admitted
to my mamma's presence, after so long a
banishment from it; but that I could not wish it upon
those terms. 
And This is your answer, Miss? 
It must be my answer, Madam. Come what may,
I never will have Mr. Solmes. I am very much concerned,
that this matter is so often press'd upon me. 
—I never will have that man! 
Down she went with displeasure. I could not help
it. I was quite tired with so many attempts, all to 

the same purpose. I am amazed that They are not! 
—So little variation! And no concession on either
side! 
I will go down and deposite this; for Betty has
seen I have been writing. The saucy creature took
a napkin, and dipt it in water, and with a fleering
air, Here, Miss; holding the wet corner to me. 
What's That for, said I? 
Only, Miss, one of the fingers of your right-hand,
if you please to look at it. 
It was inky. 
I gave her a look; but said nothing. 
But lest I should have another search, I will close
here. 
Cl. Harlowe. 
