


Getting up pretty early, I have written thus far,
while Mrs. Jewkes lies snoring in bed, fetchup
her last Night's Disturbance. I long for her
Rising, to know how my poor Master does. 'Tis
well for her she can sleep so purely. No Love, but
for herself, will never break her Rest, I am sure. I
am deadly sore all over, as if I had been soundly 
beaten. Yet I did not think I could have liv'd under
such Fatigue. 
Mrs. Jewkes, as soon as she got up, went to know
how my Master did, and he had had a good Night; 
and having drank plentifully of Sack-whey, had
sweated much; so that his Fever had abated considerably. 
She said to him, that he must not be
surprized, and she would tell him News. He asked,
What? and she said, I was come. He raised himself
up in his Bed; Can it be? said he: ––– What, already!––– 
She told him, I came last Night. Monsieur
Colbrand coming to inquire of his Health, he
order'd him to draw near him, and was infinitely
pleased with the Account he gave him of the Journey; 
my Readiness to come back, and my Willingness
to reach home that Night. And he said, Why,
these render Fair-ones, I think, bear Fatigue better
than us Men. But she is very good, to give me
such an Jnstance of her Readiness to oblige me. 
Pray, Mrs. Jewkes, said he, take great Care of her
Health; and let her lie a-bed all Day. She told
him, I had been up these two Hours. Ask her, said
he, if she will be so good as to pay me a Visit; if
she won't, I'll rise, and go to her. Indeed, Sir, said
she, you must lie still; and I'll go to her. But don't
urge her too much, said he, if she be unwilling. 
She came to me, and told me all the above; and
I said, I would most willingly wait upon him. For
indeed I longed to see him, and was much grieved
he was so ill. ––– So I went down with her. Will
she come? said he, as I enter'd the Room. Yes,
Sir, said she; and she said, at the first Word, Most
willingly. Sweet Excellence! said he. 
As soon as he saw me, he said, O my beloved
Pamela! you have made me quite well. I'm concern'd
to return my Acknowledgments to you in so
unfit a Place and Manner; but will you give me 
your Hand? I did, and he kissed it with great Eagerness. 
Sir, said I, you do me too much Honour!––– 
I am sorry you are ill. ––– I can't be ill, said he, while
you are with me. I am well already. 
Well, said he, and kissed my Hand again, you
shall not repent this Goodness. My Heart is too
full of it, to express myself as I ought. But I am
sorry you have had such a fatiguing Time of it. –– 
Life is no Life without you! If you had refused me,
and yet I had hardly Hopes you would oblige me,
I should have had a severe Fit of it, I believe; for
I was taken very oddly, and knew not what to make
of myself: But now I shall be well instantly. You
need not, Mrs. Jewkes, added he, send for the Doctor
from Stamford, as we talked yesterday; for
this lovely Creature is my Doctor, as her Absence
was my Diseale. 
He begg'd me to sit down by his Bed-side, and
asked me, If I had obliged him with sending for
my former Pacquet? I said, I had, and hoped it
would be brought. He said, It was doubly kind. 
I would not stay long, because of disturbing him. 
And he got up in the Afternoon, and desir'd ray
Company; and seem'd quite pleas'd, easy, and much
better. He said, Mrs. Jewkes, after this Instance of
my good Pamela's Obligingness in her Return, I am
sure we ought to leave her intirely at her own Liberty; 
and pray, if she pleases to take a Turn in
the Chariot, or in the Garden, or to the Town, or
where-ever she will, she must be lest at Liberty, and
asked no Questions; and do you do all in your Power
to oblige her. She said, she would, to be sure. 
He took my Hand, and said, One thing I will
tell you, Pamela, because I know you will be glad
to hear it, and yet not care to ask me, I have taken
William's Bond for the Money; for how the poor
Man had behaved, I can't tell; but he could get no 
Bail; and if I have no fresh Reason given me, perhaps
I shall not exact the Payment; and he has been
some time at Liberty; and now follows his School; 
but, methinks, I could wish you would not see him
at present. 
Sir, said I, I will not do any thing to disoblige
you wilfully; and I am glad he is at Liberty, because
I was the Occasion of his Misfortunes. I durst say
no more, tho'I wanted to plead for the poor Gentleman; 
which, in Gratitude, I thought I ought,
when I could do him Service. I said, I am sorry,
Sir, Lady Davers, who loves you so well, should
have incurr'd your Displeasure, and there should be
any Variance between your Honour and her. I
hope it was not on my Account. He took out of
his Waistcoat Pocket, as he fat in his Gown, his
Letter-case, and said, Here, Pamela, read that when
you go up Stairs, and let me have your Thoughts
upon it; and that will let you into the Affair. He
said, he was very heavy of a sudden, and would lie
down, and indulge for that Day; and if he was better
in the Morning, would take an Airing in the
Chariot. And so I took my Leave for the present,
and went up to my Closet, and read the Letter he
was pleased to put into my Hands; and which is as
follows: 

‘Brother,
I am very uneasy at what I hear of you; and
must write, whether it please you or not, my
full Mind. I have had some People with me, desiring
me to interpose with you; and they have a
greater Regard for your Honour, than, I am sorry
to say it, you have yourself. Could I think that
a Brother of mine would so meanly run away with
my late dear Mother's Waiting-maid, and keep
her a Prisoner from all her Friends, and to the 
Disgrace of your own. But I thought, when you
would not let the Wench come to me on my
Mother's Death, that you meant no good. ––– I
blush for you, I'll assure you. The Girl was an
innocent, good Girl; but I suppose that's over with
her now, or soon will. What can you mean by
this let me ask you? Either you will have her
for a kept Mistress, or for a Wise. If the former; 
there are enough to be had, without ruining
a poor Wench that my Mother lov'd, and who
really was a very good Girl; and of this you may
be asham'd. As to the other, I dare say, you
don't think of it; but if you should, you would
be utterly inexcusable. Consider, Brother, that
ours is no up-start Family; but is as ancient as
the best in the Kingdom; and, for several Hundreds
of Years, it has never been known that the
Heirs of it have disgraced themselves by unequal
Matches: And you know you have been sought
to by some of the first Families in the Nation, for,
your Alliance. It might be well enough, if you
were descended of a Family of Yesterday, or but
a Remove or two from the Dirt you seen so fond,
of. But, let me tell you, that I, and all mine, will
renounce you for ever, if you can descend so meanly; 
and I shall be ashamed to be called your Sister. 
A handsome Gentleman as you are in your Person; 
so happy in the Gifts of your Mind, that
every body courts your Company; and possess'd
of such a noble and clear Estate; and very rich in
Money besides, left you by the best of Fathers
and Mothers, with such ancient Blood in your
Veins, untainted! for you to throw away yourself
thus, is intolerable; and it would be very wicked
in you to ruin the Wench too. So that I beg
you will restore her to her Parents, and give her
100 l. or so, to make her happy in some honest 
Fellow of her own Degree; and that will be doing
something, and will also oblige and pacify 
‘Your much grieved Sister. 
‘If I have written too sharply, consider it is my
Love to you, and the Shame you are bringing
upon yourself; and I wish this may have
the Effect upon you intended by your very
loving Sister.’ 

This is a sad Letter, my dear Father and Mother; 
and one may see how poor People are despised by the
Proud and the Rich; and yet we were all on a foot
originally: And many of these Gentlefolks, that brag
of their ancient Blood, would be glad to have it as
wholsome, and as really untainted, as ours! ––– Surely
these proud People never think what a short Stage
Life is; and that, with all their Vanity, a Time is
coming, when they shall be obliged to submit to be
on a Level with us; and true said the Philosopher,
when he looked upon the Skull of a King, and that
of a poor Man, that he saw no Difference between
them. Besides, do they not know, that the richest
of Princes, and the poorest of Beggars, are to have
one great and tremendous Judge, at the last Day; 
who will not distinguish between them, according to
their Qualities in Life? ––– But, on the contrary, may
make their Condemnations the greater, as their neglected
Opportunities were the greater? Poor Souls! 
how I pity their Pride! ––– O keep me, gracious God! 
from their high Condition, if my Mind shall ever
be tainted with their Vice! or polluted with so cruel
and inconsiderate a Contempt of the humble Estate
which they behold with so much Scorn! 
But besides, how do these Gentry know, that supposing
they could trace back their Ancestry, for one, 
two, three, or even five hundred Years, that then
the original Stems of these poor Families, tho' they
have not kept such elaborate Records of their Good-
for-nothingness, as it often proves, were not still
deeper rooted?––– And how can they be assured,
that one hundred Years hence or two, some of those
now despised upstart Families, may not revel in their
Estates, while their Descendants may be reduced to
the other's Dunghils?––– And, perhaps, such is the
Vanity, as well as Changeableness of human Estates,
in their Turns set up for Pride of Family, and despise
the others! 
These Reflections occurr'd to my Thoughts, made
serious by my Master's Indisposition, and this proud
Letter, of the lowly Lady Davers, against the high-minded
Pamela. Lowly, I say, because she could stoop
to such vain Pride; and high-minded I, because
I hope I am too proud ever to do the like!––– But,
after all, poor Wretches that we be! we scarce
know what we are, much less what we shall be! ––– 
But, once more, pray I, to be kept from the sinful
Pride of a high Estate! 
On this Occasion I recall the following Lines,
which I have read; where the Poet argues in a much
better manner. 

–––––––––Wise Providence
Does various Parts for various Minds dispense;
The meanest Slaves, or those who hedge and ditch,
Are useful, by their Sweat, to feed the Rich.
The Rich, in due Return, impart their Store;
Which comfortably feeds the lab'ring Poor.
Nor let the Rich the lowest Slave disdain,
He's equally a Link of Nature's Chain;
Labours to the same End, joins in one View;
And both alike the Will divine pursue:
And, at the last, are levell'd, King and Slave,
Without Distinction, in the silent Grave.
