


Miss Jervois, To Miss Byron (a). 



Monday, May 1. 
O My dearest, my honoured Miss Byron, how you
have shamed your Emily by sending a Letter to
her; such a sweet Letter too! before I have paid my
duty to you, in a Letter of thanks for all your love to
me, and for all your kind instructions. But I began
once, twice, and thrice, and wrote a great deal each
time, but could not please myself: You, madam, are
such a writer, and I am such a poor thing at my pen! — 
But I know you will accept the heart. And so my
very diffidence shews pride; since it cannot be expected
from me to be a fine writer: And yet this very
Letter, I foresee, will be the worse for my diffidence,
and not the better: For I don't like this beginning,
neither. —But come, it shall go. Am I not used to 

your goodness? And do you not bid me prattle to
you, in my Letters, as I used to do in your dressing-room? 
O what sweet advice have you, and do you
return for my silly prate! And so I will begin. 
And was you grieved at parting with your Emily
on Saturday morning? I am sure I was very much
concerned at parting with you. I could not help crying
all the way to town; and Lady G. shed tears as
well as I, and so did Lady L. several times; and said,
You were the loveliest, best young Lady in the world. 
And we all praised likewise your aunt, your cousin
Lucy, and young Mr. Selby. How good are all your
relations! They must be good! And Lord L. and
Lord G. for men, were as much concerned as we, at
parting with you. Mr. Reeves was so dull all the
way! poor Mr. Reeves, he was very dull. And Mr.
Beauchamp, he praised you to the very skies; and in
such a pretty manner too! Next to my guardian, I
think Mr. Beauchamp is a very agreeable man. I
fansy these noble sisters, if the truth were known,
don't like him so well as their brother does: Perhaps
that may be the reason, out of jealousy, as I may say,
if there be any-thing in my observation. But they are
vastly civil to him, nevertheless; yet they never praise
him when his back is turned, as they do others, who
can't say half the good things that he says. 
Well, but enough of Mr. Beauchamp. My guardian!
my gracious, my kind, my indulgent guardian!
who, that thinks of him, can praise any body
else? 
O madam! Where is he now? God protect and
guide my guardian, where-ever he goes! This is my
prayer, first and last, and I can't tell how often in the
day. I look for him in every place I have seen him
in (And pray tell me, madam, Did not you do so
when he had left us?); and when I can't find him, I
do so sigh! —What a pleasure, yet what a pain, is
there in sighing, when I think of him! Yet I know I 

am an innocent girl. And this I am sure of, that I
wish him to be the husband of but one woman in the
whole world; and that is you. But then my next
wish is—You know what—Ah my Miss Byron! you
must let me live with you and my guardian, if you
should ever be Lady Grandison. 
But here, madam, are sad doings sometimes, between
Lord and Lady G. I am very angry at her
often in my heart; yet I cannot help laughing, nowand-then,
at her out-of-the-way sayings. Is not her
character a very new one? Or are there more such
young wives? I could not do as she does, were I to
be queen of the globe. Every-body blames her. 
She will make my Lord not love her, at last. Don't
you think so? And then what will she get by her
wit? 
* *
Just this moment she came into my closet— 
Writing, Emily? said she: To whom? —I told her. — 
Don't tell tales out of school, Emily. —I was so afraid
that she would have asked to see what I had written:
But she did not. To be sure she is very polite, and
knows what belongs to herself, and every-body else:
To be ungenerous, as you once said, to her husband
only, that is a very sad thing to think of. 
Well, and I would give any-thing to know if you
think what I have written tolerable, before I go any
farther: But I will go on in this way, since I cannot
do better. Bad is my best; but you shall have quantity,
I warrant, since you bid me write long Letters. 
But I have seen my mother: It was but yesterday. 
She was in a mercer's shop in Covent-Garden. I
was in Lord L.'s chariot; only Anne was with me. 
Anne saw her first. I alighted, and asked her blessing
in the shop: I am sure I did right. She blessed me,
and called me dear love. I stay'd till she had bought
what she wanted, and then I slid down the money, as 

if it were her own doing; and glad I was I had so
much about me: It came but to four guineas. I
begged her, speaking low, to forgive me for so doing:
And finding she was to go home as far as Soho, and
had thoughts of having a hackney coach called; I
gave Anne money for a coach for herself, and waited
on my mother to her own lodgings; and it being
Lord L.'s chariot, she was so good as to dispense with
my alighting. 
She blessed my guardian all the way, and blessed
me. She said, she would not ask me to come to see
her, because it might not be thought proper, as my
guardian was abroad: But she hoped, she might be allowed
to come and see me sometimes. —Was she not
very good, madam? But my guardian's goodness
makes every-body good. —O that my mamma had
been always the same! I should have been but too
happy! 
God bless my guardian, for putting me on enlarging
her power to live handsomely. Only as a coach
brings on other charges, and people must live accordingly,
or be discredited, instead of credited, by it; or I
should hope the additional Two hundred a year might
afford them one. Yet one does not know but Mr.
O-Hara may have been in debt before he married her; 
and I fansy he has people who hang upon him. But
if it pleases God, I will not, when I am at age, and
have a coach of my own, suffer my mother to walk
on foot. What a blessing is it, to have a guardian
that will second every good purpose of one's heart! 
Lady Olivia is rambling about; and I suppose she
will wait here in England till Sir Charles's return:
But I am sure he never will have her. A wicked
wretch, with her poniards! Yet it is pity! She is a
fine woman. But I hate her for her expectation, as
well as for her poniard. And a woman to leave her
own country, to seek for a husband! I could die before
I could do so; tho' to such a man as my guardian. 

Yet once I thought I could have liked to have lived
with her at Florence. She has some good qualities,
and is very generous, and in the main well esteemed
in her own country; every-body knew she loved my
guardian: But I don't know how it is; nobody
blamed her for it, vast as the difference in fortune
then was. But that is the glory of being a virtuous
man; to love him is a credit, instead of a shame. O
madam! Who would not be virtuous? And that not
only for their own, but for their friends sakes, if they
loved their friends, and wished them to be well thought
of? 
Lord W. is very desirous to hasten his wedding. 
Mr. Beauchamp says, that all the Mansfields (He
knows them) bless my guardian every day of their
lives; and their enemies tremble. He has commissions
from my guardian to enquire and act in their
cause, that no time may be lost to do them service,
against his return. 
We have had another visit from Lady Beauchamp,
and have returned it. She is very much pleased with
us: You see I say us. Indeed my two dear Ladies
are very good to me; but I have no merit: It is all
for their brother's sake. 
Mr. Beauchamp tells us, just now, that his motherin-law
has joined with his father, at her own motion,
to settle 1000l. a year upon him. I am glad of it,
with all my heart: Are not you? He is all gratitude
upon it. He says, that he will redouble his endeavours
to oblige her; and that his gratitude to her, as
well as his duty to his father, will engage his utmost
regard for her. 
Mr. Beauchamp, Sir Harry himself, and my Lady,
are continually blessing my guardian: Every-body,
in short, blesses him. —But, ah! madam, Where is he,
at this moment? O that I were a bird! that I might
hover over his head, and sometimes bring tidings to
his friends of his motions and good deeds. I would 

often flap my wings, dear Miss Byron, at your
chamber-window, as a signal of his welfare, and
then fly back again, and perch as near him as I
could. 
I am very happy, as I said before, in the favour of
Lady and Lord L. and Lady and Lord G.; but I
never shall be so happy, as when I had the addition of
your charming company. I miss you and my guardian:
O how I miss you both! But, dearest Miss
Byron, love me not the less, tho' now I have put pen
to paper, and you see what a poor creature I am in my
writing. Many a one, I believe, may be thought tolerable
in conversation; but when they are so silly as
to put pen to paper, they expose themselves; as I have
done, in this long piece of scribble. But accept it,
nevertheless, for the true love I bear you; and a truer
love never flamed in any bosom, to any one the most
dearly beloved, than does in mine for you. 
I am afraid I have written arrant nonsense, because
I knew not how to express half the love that is in the
heart of 
Your ever-obliged and affectionate
Emily Jervois. 

