



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wednesday Night. 
A man is just now arrived from M. Hall, who tells
me, that my Lord is in a very dangerous way. 
The Gout in his Stomach to an extreme degree, occasioned
by drinking a great quantity of Limonade. 
A man of 8000l. a year to prefer his appetite to his
health! —He deserves to die! —But we have all of us our
inordinate passions to gratify: And they generally bring
their punishment along with them. —So witnesses the
Nephew, as well as the Uncle. 
The fellow was sent up on other business; but stretched
his orders a little, to make his court to a successor. 
I am glad I was not at M. Hall, at the time my Lord
took the grateful dose [It was certainly grateful to him
at the time]: There are people in the world, who would
have had the wickedness to say, that I had persuaded
him to drink it. 
The man says, that his Lordship was so bad when he
came away, that the family began to talk of sending
for me, in post-haste. As I know the old Peer has a
good deal of cash by him, of which he seldom keeps
account, it behoves me to go down as soon as I can. 
But what shall I do with this dear creature the while? 
To-morrow over, I shall, perhaps, be able to answer
my own question. I am afraid she will make me desperate. 
For here have I sent to implore her company, and
am denied with scorn. 
* *
I have been so happy as to receive, this moment,
a third Letter from my dear correspondent Miss Howe. 
A little severe devil! —It would have broken the heart 

of my Beloved, had it fallen into her hands. I will inclose
a copy of it. Read it here. 

Tuesday, June 20. 
My dearest Miss Harlowe,
Again I venture to write to you (almost against inclination); 
and that by your former conveyance,
little as I like it. 
I know not how it is with you. It may be bad; and
then it would be hard to upbraid you, for a silence you
may not be able to help. But if not, what shall I say
severe enough, that you have not answered either of my
last Letters?  The first (a)  of which [and I think it imported
you too much to be silent upon it] you owned
the receipt of. The other, which was delivered into
your own hands (b) , was so pressing for the favour of
a line from you, that I am amazed I could not be obliged. 
—And still more, that I have not heard from you since. 
The fellow made so strange a Story of the condition
he saw you in, and of your speech to him, that I know
not what to conclude from it: Only, that he is a simple,
blundering, and yet conceited fellow, who aiming at
description, and the Rustic Wonderful, gives an air of
bumkinly romance to all he tells. That this is his character,
you will believe, when you are informed, that
he described you in grief excessive (c) , yet so improved
in your person and features, and so rosy, that was his
word, in your face, and so flush-coloured, and so
plump in your arms, that one would conclude you were
labouring under the operation of some malignant poison; 
and so much the rather, as he was introduced to you,
when you were upon a couch, from which you offered
not to rise, or sit up. 
Upon my word, Miss Harlowe, I am greatly distressed
upon your account; for I must be so free as to
say, that, in your ready return with your deceiver, you
have not at all answered my expectations, nor acted up 

to your own character: For Mrs. Townsend tells me,
from the women at Hamstead, how chearfully you
put yourself into his hands again: Yet, at the time, it
was impossible you should be married!— 
Lord, my dear, what pity it is, that you took so
much pains to get from the man! —But you know best! 
—Sometimes I think it could not be you to whom the
Rustic delivered my Letter. But it must too: Yet it is
strange I could not have one line by him: —Not one! 
—And you so soon well enough to go with the wretch
back again! 
I am not sure, that the Letter I am now writing
will come to your hands: So shall not say half that I
have upon my mind to say. But if you think it worth
your while to write to me, pray let me know, what
fine Ladies, his relations, those were, who visited you
at Hamstead, and carried you back again so joyfully,
to a place that I had so fully warned you—But I will
say no more: At least till I know more: For I can do
nothing but wonder, and stand amazed. 
Notwithstanding all the man's baseness, 'tis plain,
there was more than a lurking Love—Good Heaven! — 
But I have done! —Yet I know not how to have done,
neither! —Yet I must—I will. 
Only account to me, my dear, for what I cannot at
all account for: And inform me, whether you are really
married, or not. —And then I shall know, Whether
there must, or must not, be a period shorter than that of
one of our lives, to a friendship which has hitherto been
the pride and boast of 
Your Anna Howe. 
Dorcas tells me, that she has just now had a searching
conversation, as she calls it, with her Lady. She is willing,
she tells the wench, still to place a confidence in
her. Dorcas hopes she has re-assured her; but wishes
me not to depend upon it. Yet Captain Tomlinson's
Letter must assuredly weigh with her. I sent it in just 

now by Dorcas, desiring her to re-peruse it. And it
was not returned me, as I feared it would be. And
that's a good sign, I think. 
I say, I think, and I think; for this charming creature,
entangled as I am in my own inventions, puzzles
me ten thousand times more than I her. 