



My dearest Pamela,
Inclosed are all the Letters you send for. I
rejoice with you upon the Turn this afflicting
Affair has taken, thro' your inimitable Prudence,
and a Courage I thought not in you. —A Wretch!
—to give you so much Discomposure! —But I
will not, if he be good now, rave against him, as
I was going to do—I am impatient to hear what
Account he gives of the Matter. I hope he will
be able to aband on this—I won't call her Names; 
for she loves the Wretch; and that, if he be just
to you, will be her Punishment. 
What Care ought these young Widows to
take of their Reputation? —And how watchful
ought they to be over themselves? —She was
hardly out of her Weeds, and yet must go to a
Masquerade, and tempt her Fate, with all her Passions
about her, with an Independence, and an
Affluence of Fortune, that made her able to think
of nothing but gratifying them. 
Then her Lord and she had been marry'd but
barely Two Years; and one of them, she was
forc'd with the gayest Temper in the World, to
be his Nurse: For, always inclin'd to a consumptive 

Indisposition, he languished, without Hope, a
Twelvemonth, and then died. 
She has good Qualities—is generous—noble
—but has strong Passions, and is thoughtless
and precipitant. 
My Lord came home to me last Tuesday, with a
long Story of my Brother and her; for I had kept
the Matter as secret as I could, for his sake and
yours. It seems, he had it from Sir John— 
Uncle to the young Lord C. who is very earnest
to bring on a Treaty of Marriage between her and
his Nephew, who is in Love with her, and is a fine
young Gentleman; but has held back, on the Liberties
she has lately given herself with my Brother. 
I hope she is innocent, as to Fact; but I know
not what to say to it. He ought to be hang'd, if he
did not say she was. Yet I have a great Opinion of
his Veracity: And yet he is so bold a Wretch! — 
And her Inconsideration is so great!— 
But lest I should alarm your Fears, I will wait
till I have the Account he gives you of this dark
Affair; till when, I congratulate you upon the
Leave you have obtained to quit the Town, and
on your setting out to a Place so much nearer to
Tunbridge. Forgive me, Pamela; but he is an
intriguing Wretch, and I would not have you to
be too secure, lest the Disappointment should be
worse for you, than what you knew before: But
assure yourself, that I am, in all Cases and Events, 
Your affectionate Sister and Admirer,
B. Davers. 
P. S. Your Bar, and some other Parts of your
Conduct in your Trial, as you call it, make 

me (as, by your Account, it seemed to do
him) apprehensive, that you would hardly
have been able to have kept your Intellect so
untouched as were to be wish'd, had this Affair
proceeded. And this, as it would have been
the most deplorable Misfortune that could
have befallen us, who love and admire you so
justly, redoubles my Joy, that it is likely to
end so happily. God send it may! 

