


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Colnebrooke, Wedn. Mar. 22. 
Sir Charles arrived this morning, just as we had
assembled to breakfast; for Lady L. is not an
early riser. The moment he entered, sunshine broke
out in the countenance of every one. 
He apologized to all, but me, for his long absence,
especially when they had such a guest, were his words,
bowing to me; and I thought he sighed, and looked
with tender regard upon me; but I dared not ask
Miss Grandison whether she saw any thing particular
in his devoirs to me. 
It was owing to his politeness, I presume, that he
did not include me in his apologies; because that 

would have been to suppose, that I had expected him. 
Indeed I was not displeased, in the main, that he did
not compliment me as a third sister. See, Lucy, what
little circumstances a doubtful mind will sometimes
dwell upon. 
I was not pleased that he had been so long absent,
and had my thoughts to myself upon it; inclining
once to have gone back to London; and perhaps
should, could I have fansied myself of importance
enough to make him uneasy by it [The sex! the sex! 
Lucy, will my uncle say; but I pretend not to be
above its little foibles]: But the moment I saw him,
all my disgusts were over. After the Anderson, the
Danby, the Lord W. affairs, he appeared to me in a
much more shining light than an hero would have
done, returning in a triumphal car covered with laurels,
and dragging captive princes at its wheels. How
much more glorious a character is that of The Friend of
Mankind, than that of The Conqueror of Nations! 
He told me, that he paid his compliments yesterday
to Mr. and Mrs. Reeves. He mentioned Mr. Deane's
visit to him; and said very kind, but just things in his
praise. I read not any thing in his eyes, or manner,
that gave me uneasiness on the visit that other good
man made him. 
My dear Emily sat generously uneasy, I saw, for
the trouble she had been the cause of giving to her best
friend, tho' she knew not of a visit, that her mother,
and O-Hara, and Salmonet, made her guardian on
Monday, as the doctor had hinted to us, without giving
us particulars. 
Sir Charles thanked me for my goodness, as he
called it, in getting the good girl so happily out of her
mother's way, as his Emily would have been too much
terrified to see her: And he thanked Lord L. for his
tenderness to his ward on that occasion. 
My Lord gave him the Letter which Mrs. Jervois
had left for her daughter. Sir Charles presented it to 

the young Lady, without looking into it: She instantly
returned it to him, in a very graceful manner. We
will read it together by-and-by, my Emily, said he. 
Dr. Bartlett tells me, there is tenderness in it. 
The doctor made apologies to him, for having
communicated to us some of his Letters—Whatever
Dr. Bartlett does, said Sir Charles, must be right. 
But what say my sisters to my proposal of correspondence
with them? 
We should be glad, replied Lady L. to see all you
write to Dr. Bartlett; but could not undertake to
write you Letter for Letter. 
Why so? 
Miss Byron, said Miss Grandison, has put us quite
out of heart as to the talent of narrative Letter-writing. 
I should be greatly honoured with a sight of such
Letters of Miss Byron as you, my Lord, have seen. 
Will Miss Byron, applying to me, favour one brother,
and exclude another? 
Brother! Lucy; I thought he was not, at that time,
quite so handsome a man as when he first entered the
room. 
I was silent, and blushed. I knew not what answer
to make; yet thought I should say something. 
May we, Sir Charles, said Miss Grandison, hope
for a perusal of your Letters to Dr. Bartlett for the
same number of weeks past, Letter for Letter, if we
could prevail on Miss Byron to consent to the proposal? 
Would Miss Byron consent, upon that condition? 
What say you, Miss Byron, said my Lord? 
I answered, that I could not presume to think,
that the little chit-chat, which I wrote to please my
partial friends in the country, could appear tolerable
in the eye of Sir Charles Grandison. 
They all answered with high encomiums on my
pen; and Sir Charles, in the most respectful manner, 

insisting upon not being denied to see what Lord L.
had perused; and Miss Grandison having said that I
had, to oblige them, been favoured with the return
of my Letters from the country; I thought it would
look like a too meaning particularity, if I refused to
oblige him, in the light (tho' not a very agreeable
one, I own to you, Lucy) of another brother: I told
him, that I would shew him very willingly, and
without condition, all the Letters I had written, of the
narrative kind, from my first coming to London, down
to the dreadful masquerade affair, and even Sir Hargrave's
barbarous treatment of me, down to the deliverance
he had so generously given me. 
How did he extol me, for what he called my noble
frankness of heart! In that grace, he said, I excelled
all the women he had ever conversed with. He assured
me, that he would not wish to see a line that I was
not willing he should see; and that if he came to a
word or passage that he could suppose would be of that
nature, it should have no place in his memory. 
Miss Grandison called out—But the condition, Sir
Charles— 
Is only this, replied I (I am sure of your candor,
Sir); that you will correct me, where I am wrong, in
any of my notions or sentiments. I have been very
pert and forward in some of my Letters; particularly,
in a dispute that was carried on in relation to Learning
and Languages. If I could not, for improvement-sake,
more heartily bespeak your correction than your approbation,
I should be afraid of your eye there. 
Excellent Miss Byron! Beauty shall not bribe me
on your side, if I think you wrong in any point that
you submit to my judgment: And if I am Beauty-proof,
I am sure nothing on earth can biass me. 
Miss Grandison said, she would number the Letters
according to their dates, and then would give
them to me, that I might make such conditions with 

her brother on the loan, as every one might be the
better for. 
* *
Breakfast being over, Miss Grandison renewed
the talk of the visit made here by Mrs. O-Hara on
Sunday last. Miss Jervois very prettily expressed her
grief for the trouble given her guardian by her unhappy
mother. He drew her to him, as he sat, with
looks of tenderness; and called her his dear Emily; 
and told her, she was the Child of his compassion. You
are called upon, my dear, said he, young as you are,
to a glorious trial; and hitherto you have shone in it:
I wish the poor woman would be but half as much
the mother, as you would be the child! But let us
read her Letter. 
His goodness overwhelmed her. He took her mother's
Letter out of his pocket: She stood before him,
drying her eyes, and endeavouring to suppress her
emotion: And when he had unfolded the Letter, he
put his arm round her waist. Surely, Lucy, he is the
tenderest, as well as bravest of men! What would I
give for a picture drawn but with half the life and
love which shone out in his looks, as he cast his eyes,
now on the Letter, and now up to his Emily! — 
Poor woman! said he, two or three times, as he read:
And, when he had done, You must read it, my dear,
said he; there is the mother in it: We will acknowlege
the mother, where-ever we can find her. 
Why did not the dear girl throw her arms about
his neck, just then? —She was ready to do so. O my
best of guardians! said she; and, it was plain, was
but just restrained, by virgin modesty, from doing so; 
her hands caught back, as it were, and resting for a
moment on his shoulder: And she looked as much
abashed, as if she had not checked herself. 
I took more notice of this her grateful motion,
than any-body else. I was affected with the beautiful
check, and admired her for it. 

And must I, Sir, would you have me, read it? I
will retire to my chamber with it. 
He arose, took her hand, and, coming with her to
me, put it into mine: Be so good, madam, to fortify
this worthy child's heart, by your prudence and
judgment, while she reads the mother, in the only instance
that I have ever known it visible in this unhappy
woman. 
He bowed, and gave me the Letter. I was proud
of his compliment, and Emily and I withdrew into
the next room; and there the good girl read the
Letter, but it was long in reading; her tears often
interrupting her: And more than once, as wanting a
refuge, she threw her arms about my neck, in silent
grief. 
I called her twenty tender names; but I could not
say much: What could I? The Letter in some places
affected me. It was the Letter of a mother who
seemed extremely sensible of hardships. Her guardian
had promised observations upon it: I knew not then
all the unhappy woman's wickedness: I knew not
but the husband might be in some fault. —What could
I say? I could not think of giving comfort to a
daughter at the expence of even a bad mother. 
Miss Grandison came to us: She kissed the sobbing
girl, and with tenderness, calling us her two Loves,
led us into the next room. 
Sir Charles, it seems, had owned, in our absence,
that Mr. and Mrs. O-Hara, and Captain Salmonet,
had made him a visit in town, on their return from
Colnebrooke, and expressed himself to be vexed at his
own behaviour to them. 
Miss Jervois gave the Letter to her guardian, and
went behind his chair, on the back of which she
leaned, while he looked into the Letter, and made
observations upon what he read, as nearly in the following
words as I can remember. 
An unhappy mother, whose faults have been barbarously 

aggravated—My Emily's father was an indulgent
husband! He forgave this unhappy woman
crimes, which very few men would have forgiven:
She was the wife of his choice: He doted on her:
His first forgiveness of an atrocious crime hardened
her. 
When he could not live with her, he removed from
place to place, to avoid her: At last, afraid of her
private machinations, which were of the blackest nature,
he went abroad, in order to pursue that traffick
in person, which he managed to great advantage by
his agents and factors; having first, however, made
an handsome provision for his wife. 
Thither, after some time passed in riot and extravagance,
she followed him. 
I became acquainted with him at Florence. I found
him to be a sensible and honest man; and every one
whom he could serve, or assist, experienced his benevolence. 
Not a single soul who knew him, but loved
him, his wife excepted. 
She at that time insisted upon his giving up to her
management, his beloved Emily; and solemnly promised
reformation, on his compliance. She knew that
the child would be a great fortune. 
I was with Mr. Jervois, on her first visit to him at
Leghorn; and, tho' I had heard her character to be
very bad, was inclined to befriend her. She was specious. 
I hoped that a mother, whatever wife she
made, could not but be a mother; and poor Mr. Jervois
had not been forward to say the worst of her:
But she did not long save appearances. The whole
English factory at Leghorn were witnesses to her flagrant
enormities. She was addicted to an excess that
left her no guard, and made her a stranger to that
grace which is the glory of a woman. 
I am told, that she is less frequently intoxicated
than heretofore. I should be glad of the least shadow
of reformation in her. That odious vice led her into 

every other, and hardened her to a sense of shame. 
Other vices, perhaps, at first, wanted that to introduce
them; but the most flagitious have been long habitual
to her. 
Nothing but the justice due to the character of my
departed friend, could have induced me to say what I
have said of this unhappy woman: Forgive me, my
Emily. But shall I not defend your father? —I have
not said the worst I could say of his wife. 
Yet she writes, That her faults have been barbarously
aggravated, in order to justify the ill usage of an
husband, who, she says, was not faultless. Ill usage
of an husband! Wretched woman! She knew I
must see this Letter: How could she write thus? She
knows that I have authentic proofs in my custody, of
his unexceptionable goodness to her; and confessions,
under her own hand, of her guilt, and ingratitude to
him. 
But, my Emily—and he arose, and took her hand,
her face overwhelmed with tears, You may rejoice in
your father's character: He was a good man, in every
sense of the word. With regard to her, he had but
one fault; and that was, his indulgence. —Shall I say,
That after repeated elopements, after other men had
cast her off, he took her back? When she had forfeited
his love, his pity operated in her favour; and
she was hardened enough to despise the man who could
much more easily forgive than punish her. I am
grieved to be obliged to say this; but repeat, that the
memory of my friend must not be unjustly loaded. 
Would to heaven that I could suggest the shadow of a
plea that would extenuate any part of her vileness,
either respecting him or herself; let whose-soever character
suffer by it, I would suggest it. How often has
this worthy husband wept to me, for those faults of his
wife, for which she could not be sorry! 
I discourage not these tears, my Emily, on what
you have heard me say; but let me now dry them up. 

He took her own handkerchief, and tenderly wiped
her cheeks: It is unnecessary, proceeded he, to say
any-thing farther, at this time, in defence of your
father's character; we come now to other parts of the
Letter, that will not, I hope, be so affecting to the
heart of a good child. 
She insists upon your making her a visit, or receiving
one from her: She longs, she says, to see you; to
lay you in her bosom. She congratulates you, on your
improvements: She very pathetically calls upon you,
not to despise her— 
My dear girl! You shall receive her visit: She
shall name her place for it, provided I am present. I
shall think it a sign of her amendment, if she is really
capable of rejoicing in your improvements. I have
always told you, that you must distinguish between the
crime and the mother: The one is intitled to your
pity; the other calls for your abhorrence—Do you
choose, my dear, to see your mother? —I hope you
do. Let not even the faulty have cause to complain
of unkindness from us. There are faults that must be
left to heaven to punish; and against the consequences
of which, it behoves us only to guard, for our own
sakes. I hope you are in a safe protection, and have
nothing to fear from her: You are guarded, therefore. 
Can my Emily forget the terrors of the last interview,
and calmly, in my presence, kneel to her mother? 
Whatever you command me to do, I will do. 
I would have you answer this Letter. Invite her to
the house of your guardian—I think you should not
go to her lodgings: Yet, if you incline to see her
there, and she insists upon it, I will attend you. 
But, Sir, must I own her husband for my father? 
Leave that to me, my dear: Little things, punctilios,
are not to be stood upon: Pride shall have no
concern with us. But I must first be satisfied, that the
man and she are actually married. Who knows, if
they are, but his dependence on her annuity, and the 

protection she may hope for from him, may make it
convenient to both, to live in a more creditable manner
than hitherto she has aimed to do? If she save
but appearances, for the future, it will be a point
gained. 
I will in every-thing, Sir, do as you would have
me. 
One thing, my dear, I think I will advise: If they
are really married; if there be any prospect of their
living tolerably together; you shall, if you please
(your fortune is very large), make them an handsome
present; and give hope, that it will be an annual one,
if the man behave with civility to your mother. She
complains, that she is made poor, and dependent. 
Poor if she be, it is her own fault: She brought not
200l. to your father. Ungrateful woman! he married
her, as I hinted, for Love. With 200l. a year,
well paid, she ought not to be poor; but dependent,
she must be. Your father would have given her a
larger annuity, had he not known, by experience, that
it was but strengthening her hands to do mischief; 
and to enable her to be more riotous. I found a declaration
of this kind among his papers, after his
death. This his intention, if there could have been
any hope of a good use to be made of it, justifies my
advice to you, to inlarge her stipend: I will put it in
such a way, that you, my dear, shall have the credit
of it; and I will take upon myself the advice of restraining
it to good behaviour, for their own sakes,
and for yours. 
O Sir! how good you are! You now give me
courage to wish to see my poor mother, in hopes that
it will be in my power to do her good: Continue to
your Emily the blessing of your direction, and I shall
be an happy girl indeed. O that my mother may be
married! that so she may be intitled to the best you
shall advise me to do for her. 
I doubt, her man is a man of the town, added he; 

but he may have lived long enough to see his follies. 
She may be tired of the life she has led. I have made
several efforts to do her service; but had no hope to
reclaim her; I wish she may now be a wife in earnest. 
But this, I think, shall be my last effort—Write, my
dear; but nothing of your intention. If she is not
married, things must remain as they are. 
She hastened up-stairs, and very soon returned, with
the following lines: 

Madam,
I Beseech you to believe, that I am not wanting in
duty to my mother. You rejoice my heart,
when you tell me, that you love me. My guardian
was so good, before I could have time to ask him, as
to bid me write to you, and to let you know, that he
will himself present me to you, whenever you please
to favour me with an opportunity to pay my duty to
you, at his house in St. James's Square. 
Let me hope, my dear mamma, that you will not
be so angry with your poor girl, as you was last time I
saw you at Mrs. Lane's; and then I will see you with
all the duty that a child owes to her mother. For I
am, and will ever be, 
Your dutiful Daughter,
Emilia Jervois. 

Sir Charles generously scrupled the last paragraph. 
We will not, I think, Emily, said he, remind a
mother, who has written such a Letter as that before
us, of a behaviour that she should be glad to forget. 
Miss Grandison desired it might stand. Who
knows, says she, but it may make her ashamed of
her outrageous behaviour at that time? 
She deserves not generous usage, said Lady L.; she
cannot feel it. 
Perhaps not, replied Sir Charles; but we should do
proper things, for our own sakes, whether the persons 

are capable of feeling them as they ought, or not. 
What say you, Miss Byron, to this last paragraph? 
I was entirely in his way of thinking, and for the
reason he gave; but the two Ladies having given their
opinion in a pretty earnest manner, and my Lord saying
he thought it might pass, I was afraid it would
look like bespeaking his favour at their expence, if I
adopted his sentiments: I therefore declined giving my
opinion. But being willing to keep Emily in countenance,
who sat suspended in her judgment, as one
who feared she had done a wrong thing; I said, It was
a very natural paragraph, I thought, from Miss Jervois's
pen, as it was written, I dared to say, rather
in apprehension of hard treatment, from what she remembered
of the last, than in a spirit of recrimination
or resentment. 
The good girl declared, it was. Both Ladies, and
my Lord, said, I had distinguished well: But Sir
Charles, tho' he said no more upon the subject, looked
upon each sister with meaning; which I wondered
they did not observe. Dr. Bartlett was withdrawn,
or I believe he would have had the honesty to speak
out, which I had not: But the point was a point of
delicacy and generosity; and I thought I should not
seem to imagine that I understood it better than they:
Nor did I think that Sir Charles would have acquiesced
with their opinion. 
Miss Jervois retired, to transcribe her Letter. We
all separated, to dress; and I, having soon made an
alteration in mine, dropt in upon Dr. Bartlett in his
closet. 
I am stealing from this good man a little improvement
in my geography: I am delighted with my tutor,
and he professes to be pleased with his scholar; but
sometimes more interesting articles slide in: But now
he had just begun to talk of Miss Jervois, as if he
would have led, I thought, to the proposal hinted at
by Miss Grandison, from the Letter she had so clandestinely 

seen, of my taking her under my care, when
Sir Charles entered the doctor's apartment. He would
have withdrawn, when he saw me; but the doctor,
rising from his chair, besought him to oblige us with
his company. 
I was silly: I did not expect to be caught there. 
But why was I silly on being found with Dr. Bartlett? 
—But let me tell you, that I thought Sir Charles
himself, at first, addressing me, seemed a little unprepared. 
You invited me in, doctor: Here I am. But
if you were upon a subject that you do not pursue, I
shall look upon myself as an intruder, and will withdraw. 
We had just concluded one subject, and were beginning
another—I had just mentioned Miss Jervois. 
Is not Emily a good child, Miss Byron? said Sir
Charles. 
Indeed, Sir, she is. 
We then had some general talk of the unhappy
situation she is in from such a mother; and I thought
some hints would have been given of his desire that
she should accompany me down to Northamptonshire; 
and my heart throbbed, to think how it would
be brought in, and how I should behave upon it: And
the more, as I was not to be supposed to have so much
as heard of such a designed proposal. What would
it have done, had I been prevailed upon to read the
Letter? But not one word passed, leading to that
subject. 
I now begin to fear, that he has changed his mind,
if that was his mind. Methinks I am more fond of
having the good girl with us, than I imagined it was
possible I ever could have been. What a different
appearance have things to us, when they are out of
our power, to what they had when we believed they
were in it? 
But I see not, that there is the least likelihood that
any-thing, on which you had all set your hearts, can
happen—I can't help it. 

Emily, flattering girl! told me, she saw great signs
of attachment to me in his eyes and behaviour; but
I see no grounds for such a surmise: His affections
are certainly engaged. God bless him, whatever his
engagements are! —When he was absent, encouraged
by his sisters and Lord L. I thought pretty well of
myself; but, now he is present, I see so many excellencies
shining out in his mind, in his air and address,
that my humility gets the better of my ambition. 
Ambition! did I say? Yes, ambition, Lucy. Is it
not the nature of the passion we are so foolishly apt
to call noble, to exalt the object, and to lower, if not
to debase, one's self? —You see how Lord W. depreciates
me on the score of fortune. I was loth to take
notice of that before, because I knew, that were slenderness
of fortune the only difficulty, the partiality
of all my friends for their Harriet would put them
upon making efforts that I would sooner die than suffer
to be made. 
I forget the manner in which Lord W.'s objection
was permitted to go off—But I remember, Sir Charles
made no attempt to answer it: And yet he tells my
Lord, that fortune is not a principal article with him; 
and that he has an ample estate of his own. No
question but a man's duties will rise with his opportunities. 
A man, therefore, may be as good with a
less estate, as with a larger: And is not goodness the
essential part of happiness? Be our station what it
will, have we any concern but humbly to acquiesce in
it, and fulfil our duties? 
But who, for selfish considerations, can wish to
circumscribe the power of this good man? The greater
opportunities he has of doing good, the higher must
be his enjoyment. —No, Lucy, do not let us flatter
ourselves. 
Sir Charles rejoices, on Sir Hargrave's having just
now, by Letter, suspended the appointment till next
week, of his dining with him at his house on the
forest. 

