



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Saturday, April 1. 
Hasty censurers do indeed subject themselves to
the charge of variableness and inconsistency in
judgment: And so they ought; for, if you, even
you, were really so loth to own a mistake, as, in the
instance before us, you pretend to say you were, I
believe I should not have loved you so well as I really
do love you. Nor could you, my dear, have so
frankly thrown the reflection I hint at, upon yourself,
had you not had one of the most ingenuous minds
that ever woman boasted. 
Mr. Lovelace has faults enow to deserve very severe
censure, altho' he be not guilty of this. If I were
upon such terms with him, as he would wish me to
be, I should give him a hint, that this treacherous 

Joseph Leman cannot be so much his friend, as perhaps
he thinks him. If he had, he would not have
been so ready to report to his disadvantage (and to
Betty Barnes too) this flight affair of the pretty Rustic. 
Joseph has engaged Betty to secrecy; promising to
let her, and her young master too, know more, when
he knows the whole of the matter: And this hinders
her from mentioning it, as she is nevertheless agog to
do, to my sister or my brother. And then she does
not choose to disoblige Joseph; for altho' she pretends
to look above him, she listens, I believe, to some love-stories
he tells her. Women having it not in their power
to begin a courtship, some of them very frequently,
I believe, lend an ear where their hearts incline not. 
But to say no more of these low people, neither
of whom I think tolerably of; I must needs own,
that as I should for ever have despised this man, had he
been capable of such a vile intrigue in his way to Harlowe-place; 
and as I believed he was capable of it,
it has indeed engaged my generosity, as you call it, in
proportion (—I own it has—) in his favour: Perhaps
more than I may have reason to wish it had. And,
railly me, as you will, pray tell me fairly, my dear,
would it not have had such an effect upon you? 
Then the real generosity of the act. —I protest, my
beloved friend, if he would be good for the rest of his
life from this time, I would forgive him a great many
of his past errors, were it only for the demonstration
he has given in This, that he is capable of so good
and bountiful a manner of thinking. 
You may believe I made no scruple to open his
letter, after the receipt of your second on this subject: 
Nor shall I of answering it, as I have no reason to
find fault with it: An article in his favour, procured
him, however, so much the easier (as I must own) by
way of amends for the undue displeasure I took against
him; tho' he knows it not. 
It is lucky enough that this matter was cleared up 

to me by your friendly diligence so soon: For had I
wrote at all before that, it would have been to reinforce
my dismission of him; and perhaps the very motive
mentioned; for it had affected me more than I think it
ought: And then, what an advantage would that have
given him, when he could have clear'd up the matter
so happily for himself? 
When I send you This letter of his, you will see
how very humble he is: What acknowlegements of
natural impatience: What confession of faults, as you
prognosticated. A very different appearance, I must
own, all these make, now the story of the pretty
Rustic is clear'd up, than they would have made, had
it not. —And, methinks too, my dear, I can allow
the girl to be prettier than before I could, tho' I never
saw her—For Virtue is Beauty in perfection. 
You will see how he accounts to me, thro' indisposition,
‘that he could not come for my letter in
person; and he labours the point, as if he thought
I should be uneasy that he did not.’ I am sorry he
should be ill on my account; and I will allow, that
the suspense he has been in, for some time past, must
have been vexatious enough to so impatient a spirit. 
But all is owing originally to himself. 
You will find him (in the presumption of being
forgiven) ‘full of contrivances and expedients for my
escaping the compulsion threatened me.’ 
I have always said, that next to being without fault,
is the acknowlegement of a fault; since no amendment
can be expected, where an error is defended: 
But you will see, in this very letter, an haughtiness
even in his submissions. 'Tis true, I know not where
to find fault, as to the expression, yet cannot I be
satisfy'd, that his humility is humility; or even an
humility upon such conviction as one should be pleased
with. 
To be sure, he is far from being a polite man: 
Yet is he not directly and characteristically un-polite. 

But his is such a sort of politeness, as has, by a carelessness
founded on a very early indulgence, and perhaps
on too much success in riper years, and an arrogance
built upon both, grown into assuredness, and,
of course, as I may say, into indelicacy. 
The distance you recommend, at which to keep
this sex, is certainly right in the main: Familiarity
destroys reverence: But with whom? —Not with
those, surely, who are prudent, grateful, and generous. 
But it is very difficult for persons, who would avoid
running into one extreme, to keep clear of another. 
Hence Mr. Lovelace, perhaps, thinks it the mark of a
great spirit to humour his pride, tho' at the expence
of delicacy: But can the man be a deep man, who
knows not how to make such distinctions, as a person
of moderate parts cannot miss? 
He complains heavily of my ‘readiness to take mortal
offence at him, and to dismiss him for ever: It
is a high conduct, he says he must be sincere enough
to tell me; and what must be very far from contributing
to allay his apprehensions of the possibility
that I may be persecuted into my relations measures
in behalf of Mr. Solmes.’ 
You will see how he puts his present and his future
happiness, ‘with regard to both worlds, intirely upon
me.’ The ardour with which he vows and promises,
I think the heart only can dictate: How else
can any one guess at a man's heart? 
You'll also see, ‘that he has already heard of the
interview I am to have with Mr. Solmes;’ and with
what vehemence and anguish he expresses himself on
the occasion. —I intend to take proper notice of the
ignoble means he stoops to, to come at his early intelligence
out of our family. If persons pretending to
principle, bear not their testimony against unprincipled
actions, who shall check them? 
You'll see, how passionately he presses me to oblige 

‘him with a few lines, before the interview between
Mr. Solmes and me take place (if it must take place)
to confirm his hope, that I have no view, in my displeasure
to him, to give encouragement to Solmes. 
An apprehension, he says, that he must be excused
for repeating; especially as it is a favour granted to
that man, which I have refused to him; since, as
he infers, were it not with such an expectation, why
should my friends press it?’ 
Saturday, April 1. 
I have written; and to this effect: ‘That I had
never intended to write another line to a man, who
could take upon himself to reflect upon my sex and
myself, for having thought fit to make use of my
own judgment. 
‘That I have submitted to this interview with Mr.
Solmes, purely as an act of duty, to shew my
friends, that I will comply with their commands as
far as I can; and that I hope, when Mr. Solmes
himself shall see how determin'd I am, he will no
longer prosecute a suit, in which it is impossible he
should succeed with my consent. 
‘That my aversion to him is too sincere to permit
me to doubt myself on this occasion. But, nevertheless,
he, Mr. Lovelace, must not imagine, that
my rejecting of Mr. Solmes is in favour to him. 
That I value my freedom and independency too
much, if my friends will but leave me to my own
judgment, to give them up to a man so uncontroulable,
and who shews me beforehand, what I have
to expect from him, were I in his power. 
‘I express my high disapprobation of the methods
he takes to come at what passes in a private family: 
That the pretence of corrupting other people's servants,
by way of reprisal for the spies they have set
upon him, is a very poor excuse; a justification of
one meanness by another. 

‘That there is a right and a wrong in every thing,
let people put what glosses they please upon their
actions. To condemn a deviation, and to follow it
by as great a one, what is This doing but propagating
a general corruption? A Stand must be made
by somebody, turn round the evil as many as may,
or virtue will be lost: And shall it not be I, a worthy
mind will say, that shall make this Stand? 
‘I leave it to him to judge, whether his be a worthy
one, try'd by this rule: And whether, knowing
the impetuosity of his disposition; and the improbability
there is, that my family will ever be reconciled
to him, I ought to encourage his hopes? 
‘That these spots and blemishes give me not earnestness
enough for any sake but his own, to wish
him in a juster and nobler train of thinking and acting; 
for that I truly despise many of the ways he allows
himself in: Our minds are therefore infinitely different: 
And as to his professions of reformation, I
must tell him, that profuse acknowlegements, without
amendment, are but to me as so many stop-mouth
concessions, which he may find much easier
to make, than either to defend himself, or amend
his errors. 
‘That I have been lately made acquainted [And
so I have by Betty, and she by my brother] ‘with
the foolish liberty he gives himself of declaiming
against matrimony. I severely reprehend him on
this occasion: And ask him, with what view he can
take so witless, so despicable a liberty, worthy only
of the most abandon'd, and yet presume to address
me? 
‘I tell him, That if I am obliged to go to my
uncle Antony's, it is not to be inferr'd, that I
must therefore necessarily be Mr. Solmes's wife: Since
I may not be so sure, perhaps, that the same exceptions
lie so strongly against my quitting a house
to which I shall be forcibly carry'd, as if I left my 

father's house: And, at the worst, I may be able to
keep them in suspense till my cousin Morden comes,
who will have a right to put me in possession of
my grandfather's estate, if I insist upon it.’ 
This, I doubt, is somewhat of an artifice; being
principally design'd to keep him out of mischief. 
For I have but little hope, if carry'd thither, whether
sensible or senseless, if I am left to my brother's
and sister's mercy, but they will endeavour to force
the solemn obligation upon me. Otherwise, were there
but any prospect of avoiding this, by delaying (or even
by taking things to make me ill, if nothing else would
do) till my cousin comes, I hope I should not think
of leaving even my uncle's house. For I should not
know how to square it to my own principles, to
dispense with the duty I owe to my father, wherever
it shall be his will to place me. 
But while you give me the charming hope, that, in
order to avoid one man, I shall not be under the necessity
of throwing myself upon the friends of the
other; I think my case not absolutely desperate. 
I see not any of my family, nor hear from them in
any way of kindness. This looks, as if they themselves
expected no great matters from that Tuesday's
conference which makes my heart flutter every-time
I think of it. 
My uncle Antony's intended presence I do not
much like: But That is preferable to my brother's
or sister's. My uncle is very impetuous in his anger. 
I can't think Mr. Lovelace can be much more so; at
least, he cannot look it, as my uncle, with his harder
features, can. These sea-prosper'd gentlemen, as my
uncle has often made me think, not used to any but
elemental controul, and even ready to buffet That; 
bluster often as violently as the winds they are accustomed
to be angry at. 
I believe both Mr. Solmes and I shall look like a
couple of fools, if it be true, as my uncle Harlowe 

writes, and Betty often tells me, that he is as much
afraid of seeing me, as I am of seeing him. 
Adieu, my happy, thrice happy, Miss Howe, who
have no hard terms affixed to your duty! —Who
have nothing to do, but to fall in with a choice your
mamma has made for you, to which you have not,
nor can have, a just objection: Except the frowardness
of sex, as our free censurers would perhaps take
the liberty to say, makes it one, that the choice was
your mamma's, at first hand. Perverse nature, we
know, loves not to be prescribed to; altho' youth is
not so well qualify'd, either by sedateness or experience,
to choose for itself. 
To know your own happiness; and that it is now,
nor to leave it to after-reflection to look back upon
the preferable past with a heavy and self-accusing
heart, that you did not choose it when you might
have chosen it, is all that is necessary to complete
your felicity! —And this power is wish'd you by 
Your
CL. Harlowe. 
