


Sir Charles Grandison, To Lady Olivia. 


Bologna, Saturday, Aug. 19–30.
Now, at last, is the day approaching, that the
writer of this will be allowed to consider
himself wholly as an Englishman. He is preparing
to take, perhaps, an everlasting leave of Italy. But
could he do this, and not first bid adieu to two Ladies
at Florence, whose welfare will be ever dear to
him—Lady Olivia, and Mrs. Beaumont? It must be
to both by Letter. 
I told you, madam, when I last attended you, that
possibly I should never see you more. If I told you
so in anger, pardon me. Now, in a farewel Letter,
I would not upbraid you. I will be all in fault, if
you please. I never incurred the displeasure of Olivia,
but I was more concerned for her, than for what I
suffered from it; and yet her displeasure was not a
matter of indifference to me. 
I wish not, madam, for my own happiness, with
more sincerity than I do for yours. Would to Heaven
it were in my power to promote it! I will flatter
myself, that my true regard for your honour, daughter
as you are of a house next to princely, and of fortune
more than princely, will give me an influence,
which will awaken you to your glory. Allow, madam,
the friendly, the brotherly expostulation—Let me
think, let me speak, of Olivia, in absence, as a fond
brother would of a sister most dear to him. I will so
speak, so think of you, madam, when far distant from
you. When I remember my Italian friends, it will
always be with tender blessings, and the most affectionate
gratitude. Allow me, Olivia, to number you
with the dearest of those friends. Your honour, your
welfare, present and future, is, and ever will be, the
object of my vows. 

God and nature have done their parts by you. Let
not your own be wanting. To what purpose live we,
if not to grow wiser, and to subdue our passions? 
Dear Lady! Illustrious woman! How often have you
been subdued by the violence of yours; and to what
submissions has your generous repentance subjected
you, even to your inferiors! Let me not be thought a
boaster—But I will presume to say, that I am the rather
intitled to advise, as I have made it my endeavour
(and, I bless God, have not been always unsuccessful)
to curb my passions. They are naturally violent. 
What do I owe to the advice of an excellent man,
whom I early set up as my monitor? Let me, in this
Letter, be yours. 
Your situation in life, your high birth, your illustrious
line of ancestors, are so many calls upon you, in
whom the riches and the consequence of so many noble
progenitors centre, to act worthy of their names,
of their dignities, of your own; and of the dignity of
your Sex. The world looks up to you (your education,
too, so greatly beyond that of most Italian Ladies)
with the expectation of an example—Yet have
not evil reports already gone out upon your last excursion? 
The world will not see with our eyes, nor
judge as we would have it, and as we sometimes know
it ought to judge. My visit to Italy, when you were
absent from it, and in England, was of service to your
fame. The malignant world, at present, holds itself
suspended in its censures; and expects, from your future
conduct, either a confutation or a confirmation
of them. It is, therefore, still in your power (rejoice,
madam, that it is!) for ever to establish, or for ever to
depreciate, your character, in the judgment both of
friends and enemies. 
How often have I seen passion, and even rage, deform
features that are really lovely! Shall it be said, that
your great fortune, your abundance, has been a snare
to you? That you would have been a happier, nay 

a better woman, had not God so bountifully blessed
you? 
Can your natural generosity of temper allow you to
bear such an imputation, as that the want of power
only can keep you within the limits (Pardon, Olivia,
the lover of your same!) which the gentleness of your
Sex, which true honour, prescribe? 
You are a young Lady. Three fourths of your natural
life (Heaven permitting) are yet to come. You
have noble qualities, shining accomplishments. You
will probably, in a very few years, perhaps in a few
months, be able to establish yourself with the world. 
So far only as you have gone, the inconsideration of
youth will be allowed an excuse for your conduct. 
Blest with means, as you are, you still have it in
your power, let me repeat, to be an honour to your
Sex, to your country, to your splendid house, and to
the age to which you are given. 
The monitor I mentioned (You know him by person,
by manners) from my earlier youth, born as he
knew me to be, the heir of a considerable fortune,
suggested to me an address to Heaven, which my
heart has had no repugnance to make a daily one; 
“That the Almighty will, in mercy, with-hold from
me wealth and affluence, and make my proud heart
a dependent one, even for my daily bread, were
riches to be a snare to me; and, if I found not my
inclinations to do good, as occasions offered, enlarge
with my power.” —O that you, Olivia, were
poor and low, if the being so, and nothing else, would
make you know yourself, and act accordingly! —And
that it were given to me, by acts of fraternal love, to
restore you, as you could bear it, to an independence,
large as your own wishes! 
What an uncontroulable Man would Lady Olivia
have made, had she been a man, with but the same
passions, that now diminish the grandeur of her soul,
and so large a power to gratify them! —What a Sovereign! 

—Look into the characters of absolute princes,
and see whose, of all those who have sullied royalty,
by the violence of their wills, you would have wished
to copy, or to have been compared with. 
How has the unhappy Olivia, though but a subject,
dared! —How often has that tender bosom, whose
glory it would have been to melt at another's woe, and
to rejoice in acts of kindness and benevolence to her
fellow-creatures, been armed by herself (not the mistress,
but the slave, of her passions) not with defensive,
but offensive, steel(a) ! Hitherto Providence has
averted any remediless mischief; but Providence will
not be tempted. 
Believe me, still believe me, madam, I mean not
to upbraid you. My dear Olivia, I will call you,
how often has my heart bled for you! How paternally,
tho' but of years to be your brother, have I lamented
for you in secret! I will own to you, that, but for
the with-holding prudence, and with-holding honour,
that I owed to both our characters, because of a situation
which would not allow me to express my tenderness
for you, I had folded you, in your contrite moments,
to my bosom; and, on my knees, besought you to
act up to your own knowlege, and to render yourself
worthy of your illustrious ancestry. And what but
your glory could have been, what but that is now, my
motive? 
With what joy do I reflect, that I took not (God
be praised for his restraining goodness!) advantage of
the favour I stood in, with a most lovely, and princely-spirited
woman; an advantage that would have given
me cause to charge myself with baseness to her, in the
hour wherein I should have wanted most consolation! 
With what apprehension (dreading for myself, because
of the great, the sometimes almost irresistable, temptation)
have I looked upon myself to be (shall I say?) the
sole guardian of Olivia's honour! More than once, most 

generous and confiding of women, have I, from your
unmerited favour for me, besought you to spare me
my pride; and as often to permit me to spare you
yours—Not the odious vice generally known by that
name (the fault of fallen angels) but that which may
be called a prop, a support, to an imperfect goodness; 
which, properly directed, may, in time, grow into virtue:
—That friendly pride, let me add, which has ever
warmed my heart with wishes for your temporal and
eternal welfare. 
I call upon you once more, my Friend! How
unreproachingly may we call each other by that sacred
name! The Friend of your Fame, the Friend of
your Soul, calls upon you once more, to rejoice with
him, that you have it still in your power to tread the
path of honour. Again I glory, and let us both, that
we have nothing to reproach each other with. I leave
Italy, a country that ever will have a title to my grateful
regard, without one self-upbraiding sigh; though
not without many sighs. I own it to Olivia. Justice
requires it. Justice to a Lady Olivia loves not; but
who deserves, not only hers, but the love of every
woman; for she is an ornament to her Sex, and to
human nature. Yet, be it known to Olivia, that I
am a sufferer by that very magnanimity, for which I
revere her—A rejected man! —Will Olivia rejoice
that I am? —She will. What inequalities are there in
the greatest minds? But subdue them in yours. For
your own sake, not for mine, subdue them. The conquest
will be more glorious to you, than the acquisition
of an empire could be. 
Let me conclude, with an humble, but earnest,
wish, that you will cultivate, as once you promised
me, the friendship of one of the best of women, Mrs.
Beaumont, disposed as she, your neighbour, is to cultivate
yours. I shall then hear often from you, by
the pen of that excellent woman. Your compliance
with this humble advice will give me, madam, for 

your own sake, and for the pleasure I know Mrs. Beaumont
will have in it, the greatest joy that is possible
for you to give to a heart, that overflows with sincere
wishes for your happiness: A heart that will rejoice
in every opportunity that shall be granted to promote
it: For I am, and ever will be, 
The Friend of your Fame, of your true Glory,
and your devoted Servant,
Grandison. 

