


DEAR LEWIS.
LISMAHAGO is more paradoxical than ever. 
—The late gulp he had of his native air, seems to
have blown fresh spirit into all his polemical faculties. 
I congratulated him the other day on the
present flourishing state of his country, observing
that the Scots were now in a fair way to wipe off
the national reproach of poverty, and expressing
my satisfaction at the happy effects of the union,
so conspicuous in the improvement if their agriculture,
commerce, manufactures, and manners 
—The lieutenant, screwing up his features into a
look of dissent and disgust, commented on my remarks
to this effect —“Those who reproach a nation
for its poverty, when it is not owing to
the profligacy or vice of the people, deserve no
answer. The Lacedæmonians were poorer
than the Scots, when they took the lead among
all the free states of Greece, and were esteemed
above them all for their valour and their virtue. 
The most respectable heroes of ancient
Rome, such as Fabricius, Cincinnatus, and
Regulus, were poorer than the poorest freeholder
in Scotland; and there are at this day individuals
in North-Britain, one of whom can 

produce more gold and silver than the whole
public of Rome could raise at those times when
her public virtue shone with unrivalled lustre; 
and poverty was so far from being a reproach,
that it added fresh laurels to her fame, because
it indicated a noble contempt of wealth, which
was proof against all the arts of corruption — 
If poverty be a subject for reproach, it follows
that wealth is the object of esteem and veneration 
—In that case, there are Jews and others
in Amsterdam and London, enriched by usury,
peculation, and different species of fraud and
extortion, who are more estimable than the most
virtuous and illustrious members of the community. 
An absurdity which no man in his
senses will offer to maintain. —Riches are certainly
no proof of merit: nay, they are often
(if not most commonly) acquired by persons
of sordid minds and mean talents: nor do they
give any intrinsic worth to the possessor; but,
on the contrary, tend to pervert his understanding,
and render this morals more depraved. But
granting that poverty were really matter of reproach,
it cannot be justly imputed to Scotland. 
No country is poor that can supply its inhabitants
with the necessaries of life, and even afford
articles for exportation. Scotland is rich
in natural advantages: it produces every species
of provision in abundance, vast herds of cattle
and flocks of sheep, with a great number of
horses; prodigious quantities of wool and flax,
with plenty of copse wood, and in some parts
large forests of timber. The earth is still more
rich below than above the surface. It yields inexhaustible
stores of coal, free-stone, marble,
lead, iron, copper, and silver, with some gold. 
The sea abounds with excellent fish, and salt to
cure them for exportation; and there are creeks 

and harbours round the whole kingdom, for the
convenience and security of navigation. The
face of the country displays a surprising number
of cities, towns, villas, and villages, swarming
with people; and there seems to be no want of
art, industry, government, and police: such a
kingdom can never be called poor, in any sense
of the word, though there may be many others
more powerful and opulent. But the proper
use of those advantages, and the present prosperity
of the Scots, you seem to derive from
the union of the two kingdoms!” 
I said, I supposed he would not deny that the
appearance of the country was much mended; 
that the people lived better, had more trade, and
a greater quantity of money circulating since the
union, than before. “I may safely admit these
premises, (answered the lieutenant) without
subscribing to your inference. The difference
you mention, I should take to be the natural
progress of improvement —Since that period,
other nations, such as the Swedes, the Danes,
and in particular the French, have greatly increased
in commerce, without any such cause
assigned. Before the union, there was a remarkable
spirit of trade among the Scots, as
appeared in the case of their Darien company,
in which they had embarked on less than four
hundred thousand pounds sterling; and in the
flourishing state of the maritime towns in Fife,
and on the eastern coast, enriched by their trade
with France, which failed in consequence of the
union. The only solid commercial advantage
reaped from that measure, was the privilege of
trading to the English plantations; yet, excepting
Glasgow and Dumfries, I don't know any
other Scotch towns concerned in that traffick. 
In other respects, I conceive the Scots were losers 

by the union. —They lost the independency
of their state, the greatest prop of national
spirit; they lost their parliament, and their
courts of justice were subjected to the revision
and supremacy of an English tribunal.” 
“Softly, captain, (cried I) you cannot be said
to have lost your own parliament, while you are
represented in that of Great-Britain.” “True,
(said he, with a sarcastic grin) in debates of national
competition, the sixteen peers and forty-five
commoners of Scotland, must make a formidable
figure in the scale, against the whole
English legislature.” “Be that as it may, (I
observed) while I had the honour to sit in the
lower house, the Scotch members had always
the majority on their side.” “I understand
you, Sir, (said he) they generally side with the
majority; so much the worse for their constituents. 
But even this evil is not the worst they
have sustained by the union. Their trade has
been saddled with grievous impositions, and every
article of living severely taxed, to pay the
interest of enormous debts, contracted by the
English, in support of measures and connections
in which the Scots had no interest nor concern.” 
I begged he would at least allow, that
by the union the Scots were admitted to all the
privileges and immunities of English subjects; by
which means multitudes of them were provided for
in the army and navy, and got fortunes in different
parts of England, and its dominions. “All
these, (said he) become English subjects; to all
intents and purposes, and are in a great measure
lost to their mother-country. The spirit
of rambling and adventure has been always peculiar
to the natives of Scotland. If they had
not met with encouragement in England, they
would have served and settled, as formerly, in 

other countries, such as Muscovy, Sweden,
Denmark, Poland, Germany, France, Piedmont,
and Italy, in all which nations their descendents
continue to flourish even at this day.” 
By this time my patience began to fail, and I
exclaimed, “For God's sake, what has England
got by this union which, you say, has been so
productive of misfortune to the Scots.” “Great
and manifold are the advantages which England
derives from the union (said Lismahago, in a
solemn tone.) First and foremost, the settlement
of the protestant succession, a point which
the English ministry drove with such eagerness
that no stone was left unturned, to cajole and
bribe a few leading men, to cram the union
down the throats of the Scottish nation, who
where surprisingly reverse to the expedient. 
They gained by it a considerable addition of
territory, extending their dominion to the sea
on all sides of the island, thereby shutting up
all back-doors against the enterprizes of their
enemies. They got an accession of above a
million of useful subjects, constituting a never-failing
nursery of seamen, soldiers, labourers,
and mechanics; a most valuable acquisition to
a trading country, exposed to foreign wars, and
obliged to maintain a number of settlements in
all the four quarters of the globe. In the course
of seven years, during the last war, Scotland
furnished the English army and navy with seventy
thousand men, over and above those who
migrated to their colonies, or mingled with them
at home in the civil departments of life. This
was a very considerable and seasonable supply
to a nation, whose people had been for many
years decreasing in number, and whose lands
and manufactures were actually suffering for
want of hands. I need not remind you of the 

hackneyed maxim, that to a nation in such circumstances,
a supply of industrious people is a
supply of wealth; nor repeat an observation,
which is now received as an eternal truth, even
among the English themselves, that the Scots
who settle in South-Britain, are remarkably sober,
orderly, and industrious.” 
I allowed the truth of this remark, adding,
that by their industry, œconomy, and circumspection,
many of them in England, as well as in her
colonies, amassed large fortunes, with which they
returned to their own country, and this was so
much lost to South-Britain. —“Give me leave,
sir, (said he) to assure you, that in your fact
you are mistaken, and in your deduction, erroneous. 
—Not one in two hundred that leave
Scotland ever returns to settle in his own country; 
and the few that do return, carry thither
nothing that can possibly diminish the stock of
South-Britain; for none of their treasure stagnates
in Scotland —There is a continual circulation,
like that of the blood in the human body,
and England is the heart, to which all the
streams which it distributes are refunded and
returned: nay, in consequence of that luxury
which our connexion with England hath greatly
encouraged, if not introduced, all the produce
of our lands, and all the profits of our trade,
are engrossed by the natives of South-Britain; 
for you will find that the exchange between the
two kingdoms is always against Scotland; and
that she retains neither gold nor silver sufficient
for her own circulation. —The Scots, not content
with their own manufactures and produce,
which would very well answer all necessary occasions,
seem to vie with each other in purchasing
superfluities from England; such as broadcloth,
velvets, stuffs, silks, lace, furs, jewels, 

furniture of all sorts, sugar, rum, tea, chocolate,
and coffee; in a word, not only every mode of
the most extravagant luxury, but even many articles
of convenience, which they might find as
good, and much cheaper in their own country. 
For all these particulars, I conceive, England
may touch about one million sterling a-year. — 
I don't pretend to make an exact calculation; 
perhaps, it may be something less, and, perhaps,
a great deal more. —The annual revenue
arising from all the private estates of Scotland
cannot fall short of a million sterling; and, I
should imagine, their trade will amount to as
much more. —I know, the linen manufacture
alone returns near half a million, exclusive of
the home-consumption of that article. —If,
therefore, North-Britain pays a ballance of a
million annually to England, I insist upon it,
that country is more valuable to her in the way
of commerce, than any colony in her possession,
over and above the other advantages which I
have specified: therefore, they are no friends,
either to England or to truth, who affect to depreciate
the northern part of the united kingdom.” 
I must own, I was at first a little nettled to find
myself schooled in so many particulars. Though
I did not receive all his assertions as gospel, I was
not prepared to refute them; and I cannot help
now acquiescing in his remarks so far as to think,
that the contempt for Scotland, which prevails too
much on this side the Tweed, is founded on prejudice
and error. —After some recollection, “Well,
captain, (said I) you have argued stoutly for the
importance of your own country: for my part,
I have such a regard for our fellow-subjects of
North-Britain, that I shall be glad to see the
day, when your peasants can afford to give all 

their oats to their cattle, hogs and poultry, and
indulge themselves with good wheaten loaves,
instead of such poor, unpalitable, and inflammatory
diet.” Here again I brought myself into a
premunire with the disputaceous Caledonian. He
said, he hoped he should never see the common
people lifted out of that sphere for which they were
intended by nature and the course of things; that
they might have some reason to complain of their
bread, if it were mixed, like that of Norway, with
saw-dust and fish-bones; but that oatmeal was
he apprehended, as nourishing and salutary as
wheat-flour, and the Scots in general thought it
at least as savoury. —He affirmed, that a mouse,
which, in the article of self-preservation, might be
supposed to act from infallible instinct, would always
prefer oats to wheat, as appeared from experience; 
for, in a place where there was a parcel of
each, that animal had never begun to feed upon
the latter till all the oats were consumed; for their
nutritive quality, he appealed to the hale, robust
constitutions of the people who lived chiefly upon
oat-meal; and, instead of being inflammatory, he
asserted, that it was a cooling sub-acid, balsamic
and mucilaginous; insomuch, that in all inflammatory
distempers, recourse was had to water-gruel,
and flummery made of oatmeal. 
“At least (said I) give me leave to wish them
such a degree of commerce as may enable them
to follow their own inclinations.” —“Heaven
forbid! (cried this philosopher) Woe be to that
nation, where the multitude is at liberty to follow
their own inclinations! Commerce is undoubtedly
a blessing, while restrained within
its proper channels; but a glut of wealth brings
along with it a glut of evils; it brings false
taste, false appetite, false wants, profusion, venality,
contempt of order, engendering a spirit 

of licentiousness, insolence, and faction, that
keeps the community in continual ferment, and
in time destroys all the distinctions of civil society; 
so that universal anarchy and uproar must
ensue. Will any sensible man affirm, that the
national advantages of opulence are to be sought
on these terms? No, sure; but I am one of
those, who think, that, by proper regulations,
commerce may produce every national benefit,
without the allay of such concomitant
evils.” 
So much for the dogmata of my friend Lismahago,
whom I describe the more circumstantially
as I firmly believe he will set up his rest in Monmouthshire. 
Yesterday, while I was alone with
him, he asked, in some confusion, if I should
have any objection to the success of a gentleman
and soldier, provided he should be so fortunate
as to engage my sister's affection. I answered,
without hesitation, that my sister was old enough
to judge for herself; and that I should be very far
from disapproving any resolution she might take in
his favour. —His eyes sparkled at this declaration. 
He declared, he should think himself the
happiest man on earth to be connected with my
family; and that he should never be weary of
giving me proofs of his gratitude and attachment. 
I suppose Tabby and he are already agreed; 
in which case, we shall have a wedding at
Brambleton-hall, and you shall give away the
bride. —It is the least thing you can do, by way
of atonement for your former cruelty to that poor
love-sick maiden, who has been so long a thorn
in the side of 
Yours,
Matt. bramble 
Sept. 20. 
We have been at Buxton; but, as I did not much
relish either the company or the accommodations,
and had no occasion for the water, we stayed
but two nights in the place. 