


Mrs. Grizzle is indefatigable in gratifying her
sister's longings. Peregrine is born, and managed
contrary to the directions and remonstrances
of his aunt, who is disgusted upon that account; 
and resumes the plan which she had before rejected. 
The success of this device would have encouraged
Mrs. Pickle to practise more of
the same sort upon her sister-in-law, had she not
been deterred by a violent fever which seized her
zealous ally, in consequence of the fatigue and
uneasiness she had undergone; which, while it
lasted, as effectually conduced to her repose, as
any other stratagem she could invent. But Mrs.
Grizzle's health was no sooner restored, than the
other being as much incommoded as ever, was
obliged, in her own defence, to have recourse to
some other contrivance; and managed her artifices
in such a manner, as leaves it at this day a
doubt whether she was really so whimsical and
capricious in her appetites as she herself pretended
to be; for her longings were not restricted to the
demands of the palate and stomach, but also affected
all the other organs of sense, and even invaded 

her imagination, which at this period
seemed to be strangely diseased. 
One time she longed to pinch her husband's
ear; and it was with infinite difficulty that his sister
could prevail upon him to undergo the operation. 
Yet this task was easy, in comparison
with another she undertook for the gratification
of Mrs. Pickle's unaccountable desire; which was
no other than to persuade the commodore to submit
his chin to the mercy of the big-bellied lady,
who ardently wished for an opportunity of plucking
three black hairs from his beard. When this
proposal was first communicated to Mr. Trunnion
by the husband, his answer was nothing but
a dreadful effusion of oaths, accompanied with
such a stare, and delivered in such a tone of voice,
as terrified the poor beseecher into immediate
silence; so that Mrs. Grizzle was fain to take the
whole enterprize upon herself, and next day went
to the garrison accordingly, where having obtained
entrance by means of the lieutenant, who, while
his commander was asleep, ordered her to be admitted
for the joke's sake, she waited patiently
till he turned out, and then accosted him in the
yard, where he used to perform his morning
walk. He was thunder-struck at the appearance
of a woman in a place which he had hitherto
kept sacred from the whole sex, and immediately
began to utter an apostrophe to Tom Pipes, whose
turn it was then to watch; when Mrs. Grizzle
falling on her knees before him, conjured him
with many pathetic supplications, to hear and
grant her request, which was no sooner signified,
than he bellowed in such an outragious manner,
that the whole court re-ecchoed the opprobrious
term bitch; and the word damnation which he 

repeated with surprising volubility, without any
sort of propriety or connection; and retreated
into his penetralia, leaving the baffled devotee in
the humble posture she had so unsuccessfully
chosen to melt his obdurate heart. 
Mortifying as this repulse must have been to a
lady of her stately disposition, she did not relinquish
her aim, but endeavoured to interest the commodore's
counsellors and adherents in her cause. With
this view she sollicited the interest of Mr. Hatchway,
who being highly pleased with a circumstance
in all probability so productive of mirth
and diversion, readily entered into her measures,
and promised to employ his whole influence for
her satisfaction: and as for the boatswain's mate,
he was rendered propitious by the present of a
guinea which she slipt into his hand. In short,
Mrs. Grizzle was continually engaged in this
negotiation for the space of ten days, during
which the commodore was so incessantly pestered
with her remonstrances, and the admonitions
of his associates, that he swore his people
had a design upon his life, which becoming a
burthen to him, he at last complied, and was
conducted to the scene like a victim to the altar,
by the exulting priests; or rather growling like
a reluctant bear, when he is led to the stake
amidst the shouts and cries of butchers and their
dogs. After all, this victory was not quite so decisive
as the conquerors imagined; for the patient
being set, and the performer prepared with a pair
of pincers, a small difficulty occurred: she could
not for some time discern one black hair on the
whole superficies of Mr. Trunnion's face; when
Mrs. Grizzle, very much alarmed and disconcerted,
had recourse to a magnifying glass that 

stood upon her toilette; and after a most accurate
examination, discovered a fibre of a dusky hue,
to which the instrument being applied, Mrs.
Pickle pulled it up by the roots, to the no small
discomposure of the owner, who feeling the
smart much more severe than he had expected,
started up, and swore he would not part with
another hair to save them all from damnation. 
Mr. Hatchway exhorted him to patience and
resignation, Mrs. Grizzle repeated her intreaties
with great humility; but finding him deaf to all
her prayers, and absolutely bent upon leaving the
house, she clasped his knees, and begged for the
love of God that he would have compassion upon
a distressed family, and endure a little more for
the sake of the poor infant, who would otherwise
be born with a grey beard upon its chin. 
Far from being melted, he was rather exasperated
by this reflection; to which he replied with great
indignation, “Damn ye for a yaw-sighted bitch!
he'll be hanged long enough before he has any
beard at all:” so saying, he disengaged himself
from her embraces, flung out at the door, and
halted homewards with such surprising speed,
that the lieutenant could not overtake him until
he had arrived at his own gate; and Mrs. Grizzle
was so much affected with his escape, that
her sister, in pure compassion, desired she would
not afflict herself, protesting that her own wish
was already gratified, for she had plucked three
hairs at once, having from the beginning been
dubious of the commodore's forbearance. But
the labours of this assiduous kinswoman did not
end with the atchievement of this adventure: her
eloquence or industry were employed without
ceasing, in the performance of other tasks imposed 

by the ingenious craft of her sister-in-law,
who at another time conceived an insuppressible
affection for a fricassee of frogs, which should be
the genuine natives of France; so that there was
a necessity for dispatching a messenger on purpose
to that kingdom: but as she could not depend
upon the integrity of any common servant, Mrs.
Grizzle undertook that province, and actually
set sail in a cutter for Bologne, from whence she
returned in eight and forty hours with a tub full
of those live animals, which being dressed according
to art, her sister would not taste them, on
pretence that her fit of longing was past: but
then her inclinations took a different turn, and
fixed themselves upon a curious implement belonging
to a lady of quality in the neighbourhood,
which was reported to be a very great curiosity; 
this was no other than a porcelain chamber-pot of
admirable workmanship, contrived by the honourable
owner, who kept it for her own private use,
and cherished it as an utensil of inestimable value. 
Mrs. Grizzle shuddered at the first hint she received
of her sister's desire to possess this piece of
furniture; because she knew it was not to be
purchased; and the lady's character, which was
none of the most amiable in point of humanity
and condescension, forbad all hopes of borrowing
it for a season; she therefore attempted to reason
down this capricious appetite, as an extravagance
of imagination which ought to be combated and
repressed; and Mrs. Pickle, to all appearance,
was convinced and satisfied by her arguments and
advice: but nevertheless, could make use of no
other convenience, and was threatened with a
very dangerous suppression. Rouzed at the peril
in which she supposed her to be, Mrs. Grizzle 

flew to the lady's house, and having obtained a
private audience, disclosed the melancholy situation
of her sister, and implored the benevolence
of her ladyship, who, contrary to expectation,
received her very graciously, and consented to indulge
Mrs. Pickle's longing: but, as she had not
the pleasure of being acquainted with the family,
she hoped it would not be taken amiss, if she insisted
upon security for her own indemnification,
in case any accident should happen to the machine
while under their protection. Overjoyed at this
condescension, Mrs. Grizzle was loud in her acknowledgments,
embraced the terms of the loan,
in consequence of which, an hundred guineas
were deposited, and brought home this illustrious
Jordan, with as much pleasure and satisfaction, as
the Argonauts enjoyed when they made themselves
masters of the golden fleece. True it is,
her success was attended with a small disaster,
which she could not possibly foresee: next day it
was, at the desire of Mrs. Pickle, committed to
the charge of a trusty servant, who, in carrying
it back to the right owner, had the misfortune to
be overturned by one of her ladyship's valets who
ran against him in the court; and this superb piece
of porcelain falling upon the pavement, was
dashed into a thousand pieces. In vain did the
poor carrier urge his own innocence, by representing
the true cause of this misadventure; her ladyship
was deaf to all his proofs and protestations,
and without any ceremony, detained the pledge
which had been left in her hands; not without
violent suspicion of having acted as the auxiliary
of chance, to which this calamity was imputed. 
Be this as it will, Mr. Pickle began to be out of
humour at the expence to which he was exposed 

by the caprice of his wife, who was herself
alarmed at this last accident, and for the future
kept her fancy within bounds, insomuch, that
without being subject to any more extraordinary
trouble, Mrs. Grizzle reaped the long wished
fruits of her dearest expectation in the birth of a
fine boy, whom her sister in a few months brought
into the world. 
I shall omit the description of the rejoicings,
which were infinite on this important occasion,
and only observe that Mrs. Pickle's mother and
aunt stood godmothers, and the commodore assisted
at the ceremony as godfather to the child,
who was christened by the name of Peregrine,
in compliment to the memory of a deceased uncle. 
While the mother was confined to her bed,
and incapable of maintaining her own authority,
Mrs. Grizzle took charge of the infant by a double
claim; and superintended with surprizing vigilance
the nurse and midwife in all the particulars
of their respective offices, which were performed
by her express direction. But no sooner
was Mrs. Pickle in a condition to re-assume the
management of her own affairs, than she thought
proper to alter certain regulations concerning the
child, which had obtained in consequence of her
sister's orders, directing, among other innovations,
that the bandages with which the infant had
been so neatly rolled up, like an Ægyptian mummy,
should be loosened and laid aside, in order to
rid nature of all restraint, and give the blood free
scope to circulate; and with her own hands she
plunged him headlong every morning in a tub-full
of cold water. This operation seemed so barbarous
to the tender-hearted Mrs. Grizzle, that she
not only opposed it with all her eloquence, shedding 

abundance of tears over the sacrifice when
it was made; but took horse immediately, and
departed for the habitation of an eminent country
physician, whom she consulted in these words. 
“Pray, doctor, is it not both dangerous and
cruel to be the means of letting a poor tender infant
perish, by sousing it in water as cold as ice?” 
“Yes, replied the doctor, downright murder, I
affirm.” “I see you are a person of great learning
and sagacity, said the other; and I must beg
you will be so good as to signify your opinion
in your own hand-writing.” The doctor immediately
complied with her request, and expressed
himself upon a slip of paper to this purpose. 

These are to certify whom it may concern, that
I firmly believe, and it is my unalterable opinion,
that whosoever letteth an infant perish, by
sousing it in cold water, even though the said water
should not be so cold as ice, is in effect, guilty of
the murder of the said infant, as witness my hand 
Comfit Colocynth. 
Having obtained this certificate, for which the
physician was handsomely acknowledged, she returned
in triumph, hoping, with such authority,
to overthrow all opposition; and accordingly next
morning, when her nephew was about to undergo
his diurnal baptism, produced the commission,
whereby she conceived herself impowered to overrule
such inhuman proceedings. But she was disappointed
in her expectation, confident as it was; 
not that Mrs. Pickle pretended to differ in opinion
from Dr. Colocynth, “for whose character
and sentiments (said she) I have such veneration,
that I shall carefully observe the caution implied
in this very certificate, by which, far from condemning
my method of practice, he only asserts 

that killing is murder; an asseveration, the truth
of which, it is to be hoped, I shall never dispute.” 
Mrs. Grizzle, who, sooth to say, had rather
too superficially considered the clause by which
she thought herself authorized, perused the paper
with more accuracy, and was confounded at her
own want of penetration. Yet, though she was
confuted, she was by no means convinced that
her objections to the cold bath were unreasonable; 
on the contrary, after having bestowed
sundry opprobrious epithets on the physician, for
his want of knowledge and candour, she protested
in the most earnest and solemn manner
against the pernicious practice of dipping the
child; a piece of cruelty, which with God's assistance,
she should never suffer to be inflicted on
her own issue; and washing her hands of the melancholy
consequence that would certainly ensue,
shut herself up in her closet, to indulge her sorrow
and vexation. She was deceived, however,
in her prognostic; the boy, instead of declining
in point of health, seemed to acquire fresh vigour
from every plunge, as if he had been resolved to
discredit the wisdom and foresight of his aunt,
who, in all probability, could never forgive
him for this want of reverence and respect. This
conjecture is founded upon her behaviour to
him in the sequel of his infancy, during which
she was known to torture him more than once,
when she had opportunities of thrusting pins into
his flesh, without any danger of being detected. 
In a word, her affections were in a little time
altogether alienated from this hope of her family,
whom she abandoned to the conduct of his mother,
whose province it undoubtedly was to manage
the nature of her own child; while she 

herself resumed her operations upon the commodore,
whom she was resolved at any rate to captivate
and inslave. And it must be owned, that
Mrs. Grizzle's knowledge of the human heart
never shone so conspicuous as in the methods
she pursued for the accomplishment of this important
aim. 
Through the rough unpolished husk that cased
the soul of Trunnion, she could easily distinguish
a large share of that vanity and self-conceit that
generally predominate even in the most savage
breast; and to this she constantly appealed. In
his presence she always exclaimed against the
craft and dishonest dissimulation of the world; 
and never failed of uttering particular invectives
against those arts of chicanry, in which the lawyers
are so conversant to the prejudice and ruin
of their fellow creatures: observing that in a sea-faring
life, so far as she had opportunities of judging
or being informed, there was nothing but
friendship, sincerity, and a hearty contempt for
every thing that was mean or selfish. 
This kind of conversation, with the assistance
of certain particular civilities, insensibly made an
impression on the mind of the commodore; and
that the more effectual, as his former prepossessions
were built upon very slender foundations:
his antipathy to old maids, which he had conceived
upon hearsay, began gradually to diminish,
when he found they were not quite such infernal
animals as they had been represented; and
it was not long before he was heard to observe at
the club, that Pickle's sister had not so much of
the core of bitch in her as he had imagined. 
This negative compliment, by the medium of
her brother, soon reached the ears of Mrs. Grizzle, 

who thus encouraged, redoubled all her arts
and attention; so that in less than three months
after, he in the same place distinguished her with
the epithet of a damned sensible jade. 
Hatchway taking the alarm at this declaration,
which he feared foreboded something fatal to his
interest, told his commander with a sneer, that
she had sense enough to bring him to, under her
stern; and he did not doubt but that such an old
crazy vessel would be the better for being taken
in tow. “But howsomever, added this arch adviser,
I'd have you take care of your upper works; 
for if once you are made fast to her poop, agad!
she'll spank it away, and make every beam in
your body crack with straining.” Our she-projector's
whole plan had like to have been ruined
by the effect which this malicious hint had upon
Trunnion, whose rage and suspicion being wakened
at once, his colour changed from tawny to
a cadaverous pale, and then shifting to a deep and
dusky red, such as we sometimes observe in the
sky when it is replete with thunder, he after his
usual preamble of unmeaning oaths, answered in
these words. “Damn ye, you jury-legg'd dog,
you would give all the stowage in your hold to be
as sound as I am; and as for being taken in tow,
d'ye see, I'm not so disabled but that I can lie my
course, and perform my voyage without any assistance; 
and, agad! no man shall ever see
Hawser Trunnion lagging a-stern in the wake of
e'er a bitch in christendom.” 
Mrs. Grizzle, who every morning interrogated
her brother with regard to the subject of his
night's conversation with his friends, soon received
the unwelcome news of the commodore's
aversion to matrimony; and justly imputing the 

greatest part of his disgust to the satyrical insinuations
of Mr. Hatchway, resolved to level this
obstruction to her success, and actually found
means to interest him in her scheme. She had
indeed, on some occasions, a particular knack at
making converts, being probably not unacquainted
with that grand system of persuasion, which is
adopted by the greatest personages of the age, as
fraught with maxims much more effectual than
all the eloquence of Tully or Demosthenes, even
when supported by the demonstrations of truth:
besides, Mr. Hatchway's fidelity to his new ally,
was confirmed by his foreseeing in his captain's
marriage an infinite fund of gratification for his
own cynical disposition. Thus, therefore, converted
and properly cautioned, he for the future
suppressed all the virulence of his wit against the
matrimonial state; and as he knew not how to
open his mouth in the positive praise of any person
whatever, took all opportunities of excepting
Mrs. Grizzle by name, from the censures he liberally
bestowed upon the rest of her sex. “She
is not a drunkard, like Nan Castick of Deptford,
he would say; nor a nincompoop, like Peg Simper
of Woolwich; nor a brimstone, like Kate
Coddle of Chatham; nor a shrew, like Nell Griffin
on the Point Portsmouth;” (ladies to whom at
different times, they had both paid their addresses)
but a tight, good humoured sensible wench, who
knows very well how to box her compass; well
trimmed aloft, and well sheathed alow, with a
good commodity under her hatches.” The commodore
at first imagined this commendation was
ironical, but hearing it repeated again and again,
was filled with astonishment at this surprising
change in the lieutenant's behaviour; and after a 

long fit of musing, concluded that Hatchway
himself harboured a matrimonial design on the
person of Mrs. Grizzle. 
Pleased with this conjecture, he rallied Jack in
his turn, and one night toasted her health as a
compliment to his passion; a circumstance which
the lady learning next day by the usual canal of
her intelligence, and interpreting as the result of
his own tenderness for her, she congratulated
herself upon the victory she had obtained; and
thinking it unnecessary to continue the reserve
she had hitherto industriously affected, resolved
from that day to sweeten her behaviour towards
him with such a dash of affection, as could not
fail to persuade him that he had inspired her with
a reciprocal flame. In consequence of this determination
he was invited to dinner, and while
he staid, treated with such cloying proofs of her
regard, that not only the rest of the company,
but even Trunnion himself perceived her drift; 
and taking the alarm accordingly, could not help
exclaiming, “Oho! I see how the land lies, and
if I don't weather the point, I'll be damn'd.” 
Having thus expressed himself to his afflicted inamorata,
he made the best of his way to the garrison,
in which he shut himself up for the space of
ten days, and had no communication with his
friends and domesticks but by looks, which were
most significantly picturesque. 