


Which shews there are more ways to kill
a dog than hanging. 
Mr. Fillet no sooner appeared in
the judgment-chamber of justice
Gobble than captain Crowe, seizing
him by the hand, exclaimed, “Body
o'me! Doctor, thou'rt come up in
the nick of time to lend us a hand in
putting about. —We're a little in the
stays here—but howsomever we've got
a good pilot, who knows the coast,
and can weather the point, as the saying
is. As for the enemy's vessel, she
has had a shot or two already a-thwart
her fore-foot: the next, I do suppose,
will strike the hull, and then you'll
see her taken all a-back.” The doctor,
who perfectly understood his dialect,
assured him he might depend
upon his assistance; and advancing to
the knight, accosted him in these
words: “Sir Launcelot Greaves, your
most humble servant. —When I saw 

a croud at the door, I little thought
of finding you within, treated with
such indignity. —Yet I can't help being
pleased with an opportunity of
proving the esteem and veneration I
have for your person and character:
—you will do me a particular pleasure
in commanding my best services.” 
Our adventurer thanked him for this
instance of his friendship, which he told
him he would use without hesitation; 
and desired he would procure immediate
bail for him and his two friends,
who had been imprisoned, contrary to
law, without any cause assigned. During
this short dialogue, the justice,
who had heard of Sir Launcelot's family
and fortune, though an utter
stranger to his person, was seized with
such pangs of terror and compunction,
as a grovelling mind may be supposed
to have felt in such circumstances; and
they seemed to produce the same unsavoury
effects that are so humorously
delineated by the inimitable Hogarth
in the print of Felix on his tribunal,
done in the Dutch stile. Nevertheless,
seeing Fillet retire to execute the 

knight's commands, he recollected
himself so far as to tell the prisoners
there was no occasion to give themselves
any further trouble; for he
would release them without bail or
mainprize. Then discarding all the
insolence from his features, and assuming
an aspect of the most humble
adulation, he begged the knight
ten thousand pardons for the freedoms
he had taken, which were intirely
owing to his ignorance of Sir Launcelot's
quality. “Yes, I'll assure you,
Sir, (said the wife), my husband would
have bit off his tongue, rather than say
black is the white of your eye, if so be
he had known your capacity. —Thank
God, we have been used to deal with
gentlefolks, and many's the good
pound we have lost by them; but
what of that? Sure we know how to
behave to our betters. Mr. Gobble,
thanks be to God, can defy the whole
world to prove that he ever said an
uncivil word, or did a rude thing to a
gentleman, knowing him to be a person
of fortune. Indeed, as to your
poor gentry and riff-raff, your tag, 

rag, and bobtail, or such vulgar scoundrelly
people, he has always behaved
like a magistrate, and treated them
with the rigger of authority.” “In
other words (said the knight), he has
tyrannized over the poor, and connived
at the vices of the rich: your husband
is little obliged to you for this confession,
woman.” “Woman! (cried
Mrs. Gobble, impurpled with wrath,
and fixing her hands on her sides by
way of defiance) I scorn your words. 
—Marry come up, woman! quotha:
no more a woman than your worship.” 
Then bursting into tears, “Husband
(continued she), if you had the soul
of a louse, you would not suffer me
to be abused at this rate: you would
not sit still on the bench, and hear
your spouse called such contemptible
epitaphs. —Who cares for his title and
his knightship? You and I husband,
knew a taylor that was made a knight:
but, thank God, I have noblemen to
stand by me, with their privileges and
beroguetifs.” 
At this instant Mr. Fillet returned
with his friend, a practitioner in the 

law, who freely offered to join in bailing
our adventurer, and the other two
prisoners, for any sum that should be
required. The justice, perceiving the
affair began to grow more and more
serious, declared that he would discharge
the warrants and dismiss the
prisoners. Here Mr. Clarke interposing,
observed, that against the
knight no warrant had been granted,
nor any information sworn to; consequently,
as the justice had not complied
with the form of proceeding directed
by statute, the imprisonment
was coram non judice, void. “Right,
Sir (said the other lawyer), if a justice
commits a felon for trial, without
binding over the prosecutor to the
assizes, he shall be fined.” —“And
again (cried Clarke), if a justice issues
a warrant for commitment, where
there is no accusation, action will lie
against the justice.” “Moreover (replied
the stranger), if a justice of peace
is guilty of any misdemeanour in his
office, information lies against him in
Banco Regis, where he shall be punished
by fine and imprisonment.” 

“And besides, (resumed the accurate
Tom), the same court will grant an
information against a justice of peace,
on motion, for sending even a servant
to the house of correction, or common
jail, without sufficient cause.” “True!
(exclaimed the other limb of the law)
and, for contempt of law, attachment
may be had against justices of peace in
Banco Regis. A justice of the peace
was fined a thousand marks for corrupt
practices.” With these words
advancing to Mr. Clarke, he shook
him by the hand, with the appellation
of Brother, saying, “I doubt the
justice has got into a cursed hovel.” 
Mr. Gobble himself seemed to be of
the same opinion. He changed colour
several times during the remarks
which the lawyers had made; and
now, declaring that the gentlemen
were at liberty, begged, in the most
humble phrase, that the company
would eat a bit of mutton with him,
and after dinner the affair might be
amicably compromised. To this proposal
our adventurer replied, in a
grave and resolute tone, “If your 

acting in the commission as a justice
of the peace concerned my own particular
only, perhaps I should wave
any further inquiry, and resent your
insolence no other way but by silent
contempt. If I thought the errors
of your administration proceeded
from a good intention, defeated by
want of understanding, I should pity
your ignorance, and, in compassion,
advise you to desist from acting a part
for which you are so ill qualified:
but the preposterous conduct of such
a man deeply affects the interest of
the community, especially that part
of it which, from its helpless situation,
is the more entitled to our protection
and assistance. I am moreover
convinced, that your misconduct
is not so much the consequence
of an uninformed head, as the poisonous
issue of a malignant heart, devoid
of humanity, inflamed with pride,
and rankling with revenge. The
common prison of this little town is
filled with the miserable objects of
your cruelty and oppression. Instead
of protecting the helpless, restraining 

the hands of violence, preserving the
public tranquility, and acting as a father
to the poor, according to the intent
and meaning of that institution
of which you are an unworthy member,
you have distressed the widow
and the orphan, given a loose to all
the insolence of office, embroiled your
neighbours by fomenting suits and animosities,
and played the tyrant among
the indigent and forlorn. You have
abused the authority with which you
were invested, intailed a reproach upon
your office, and, instead of being
revered as a blessing, you are detested
as a curse among your fellow-creatures. 
This, indeed, is generally the
case of low fellows, who are thrust
into the magistracy without sentiment,
education, or capacity. Among other
instances of your iniquity, there is
now in prison an unhappy woman,
infinitely your superior in the advantages
of birth, sense, and education,
whom you have, even without provocation,
persecuted to ruin and distraction,
after having illegally and
inhumanly kidnapped her only child, 

and exposed him to violent death in a
foreign land. Ah caitiff! if you were
to forego all the comforts of life, distribute
your means among the poor,
and do the severest penance that ever
priestcraft prescribed, for the rest of your
days, you could not atone for the ruin
of that hapless family; a family through
whose sides you cruelly and perfidiously
stabbed the heart of an innocent
young woman, to gratify the pride
and diabolical malice of that wretched
low-bred woman, who now sits at
your right hand as the associate of
power and presumption. Oh! if
such a despicable reptile shall annoy
mankind with impunity; if such a
contemptible miscreant shall have it in
his power to do such deeds of inhumanity
and oppression, what avails
the law? Where is our admired constitution,
the freedom, the security
of the subject, the boasted humanity
of the British nation? Sacred Heaven!
if there was no human institution
to take cognizance of such atrocious
crimes, I would listen to the
dictates of eternal justice, and, arming 

myself with the right of nature,
exterminate such villains from the
face of the earth!” 
These last words he pronounced in
such a strain, while his eyes lightened
with indignation, that Gobble and his
wife underwent the most violent agitation; 
the constable's teeth chattered
in his head, the jailor trembled, and
the whole audience was overwhelmed
with consternation. 
After a short pause, Sir Launcelot
proceeded in a milder strain: “Thank
Heaven, the laws of this country have
exempted me from the disagreeable
task of such an execution. To them
we shall have immediate recourse, in
three separate actions against you for
false imprisonment; and any other
person who has been injured by your
arbitrary and wicked proceedings, in
me shall find a warm protector, until
you shall be expunged from the commission
with disgrace, and have made
such retaliation as your circumstances
will allow for the wrongs you have
done the community.” 
In order to complete the mortification 

and terror of the justice, the
lawyer, whose name was Fenton, declared,
that, to his certain knowledge,
these actions would be reinforced with
divers prosecutions for corrupt practices,
which had lain dormant until
some person of courage and influence
should take the lead against justice
Gobble, who was the more dreaded
as he acted under the patronage of
lord Sharpington. By this time fear
had deprived the justice and his helpmate
of the faculty of speech. They
were indeed almost petrified with dismay,
and made no effort to speak,
when Mr. Fillet, in the rear of the
knight, as he retired with his company,
took his leave of them in these
words: 
“And now, Mr. Justice, to dinner
with what appetite you may.” 
Our adventurer, though warmly invited
to Mr. Fenton's house, repaired
to a public inn, where he thought
he should be more at his ease, fully
determined to punish and depose Gobble
from his magistracy, to effect a
general jail-delivery of all the debtors 

whom he had found in confinement; 
and, in particular, to rescue poor Mrs.
Oakley from the miserable circumstances
in which she was involved. 
In the mean time, he insisted upon
entertaining his friends at dinner,
during which many sallies of sea-wit
and good-humour passed between
captain Crowe and doctor Fillet,
which last had just returned from a
neighbouring village, whither he was
summoned to fish a man's yard-arm,
which had snapt in the slings. Their
enjoyment, however, was suddenly
interrupted by a loud scream from the
kitchen, whither Sir Launcelot immediately
sprung, with equal eagerness
and agility. There he saw the
landlady, who was a woman in years,
embracing a man dressed in a sailor's
jacket, while she exclaimed, “It is
thy own flesh and blood, so sure as
I'm a living soul. —Ah! poor Greaves,
poor Greaves, many a poor heart has
grieved for thee!” To this salutation
the youth replied, “I'm sorry for
that, mistress. —How does poor mother?
how does Sukey Sedgemore?” 

The good woman of the house
could not help shedding tears at these
interrogations; while Sir Launcelot,
interposing, said, not without emotion,
“I perceive you are the son of
Mrs. Oakley. —Your mother is in a
bad state of health; but in me you
will find a real parent.” Perceiving
that the young man eyed him with
astonishment, he gave him to understand
that his name was Launcelot
Greaves. 
Oakley no sooner heard these words
pronounced, than he fell upon his
knees, and seizing the knight's hand,
kissed it eagerly, crying, “God for
ever bless your honour: I am your
name-son, sure enough—but what of
that? I can earn my bread, without
being beholden to any man.” 
When the knight raised him up, he
turned to the woman of the house,
saying, “I want to see mother. I'm
afraid as how times are hard with her; 
and I have saved some money for her
use.” This instance of filial duty
brought tears into the eyes of our adventurer, 

who assured him his mother
should be carefully attended, and
want for nothing: but that it would
be very improper to see her at present,
as the surprize might shock her too
much, considering that she believed
him dead. “Ey, indeed, (cried the
landlady) we were all of the same
opinion, being as the report went that
poor Greaves Oakley was killed in
battle.” “Lord mistress, (said Oakley)
there wa'n't a word of truth in it,
I'll assure you. —What, d'ye think I'd
tell a lie about the matter? Hurt I
was, to be sure; but that don't signify:
we gave 'em as good as they brought,
and so parted. —Well, if so be I can't
see mother, I'll go and have some chat
with Sukey. —What d'ye look so glum
for? she an't married, is she?” “No,
no, (replied the woman) not married; 
but almost heart-broken. Since
thou wast gone, she has done nothing
but sighed, and wept, and pined herself
into a decay. I'm afraid thou ha'st
come too late to save her life.” 
Oakley's heart was not proof against
this information. Bursting into tears, 

he exclaimed, “O my dear, sweet,
gentle Sukey! Have I then lived to be
the death of her whom I loved more
than the whole world!” He would
have gone instantly to her father's
house; but was restrained by the knight
and his company, who had now joined
him in the kitchen. The young man
was seated at table, and gave them to
understand, that the ship to which he
belonged having arrived in England,
he was indulged with a month's leave
to see his relations; and that he had
received about fifty pounds in wages
and prize-money. After dinner, just
as they began to deliberate upon the
measures to be taken against Gobble,
that gentleman arrived at the inn, and
humbly craved admittance. Mr. Fillet,
struck with a sudden idea, retired
into another apartment with the young
farmer; while the justice, being admitted
to the company, declared that
he came to propose terms of accommodation. 
He accordingly offered to
ask pardon of Sir Launcelot in the public
papers, and pay fifty pounds to the
poor of the parish, as an atonement 

for his misbehaviour, provided the
knight and his friends would grant
him a general release. Our adventurer
told him, he would willingly wave
all personal concessions; but, as the
case concerned the community, he insisted
upon his leaving off acting in
the commission, and making satisfaction
to the parties he had injured and
oppressed. This declaration introduced
a discussion, in the course of which
the justice's petulance began to revive; 
when Fillet, entering the room, told
them he had a reconciling measure to
propose, if Mr. Gobble would for a
few minutes withdraw. He rose up
immediately, and was shewn into the
room which Fillet had prepared for his
reception. While he sat musing on
this untoward adventure, so big with
disgrace and disappointment, young
Oakley, according to the instructions
he had received, appeared all at once
before him, pointing to a ghastly
wound, which the doctor had painted
on his forehead. The apparition no
sooner presented itself to the eyes of
Gobble, than, taking it for granted it 

was the spirit of the young farmer
whose death he had occasioned, he
roared aloud, “Lord have mercy upon
us!” and fell insensible on the floor. 
There being found by the company,
to whom Fillet had communicated
his contrivance, he was conveyed to
bed, where he lay some time before
he recovered the perfect use of his senses. 
Then he earnestly desired to see
the knight, and assured him he was
ready to comply with his terms, inasmuch
as he believed he had not long
to live. Advantage was immediately
taken of this salutary disposition. He
bound himself not to act as a justice
of the peace, in any part of Great-Britain,
under the penalty of five
thousand pounds. He burned Mrs.
Oakley's note; payed the debts of the
shopkeeper; undertook to compound
those of the publican, and to settle
him again in business; and, finally,
discharged them all from prison, paying
the dues out of his own pocket. 
These steps being taken with peculiar
eagerness, he was removed to his own
house, where he assured his wife he 

had seen a vision that prognosticated
his death; and had immediate recourse
to the curate of the parish for
spiritual consolation. 
The most interesting part of the
task that now remained, was to make
the widow Oakley acquainted with
her good fortune, in such a manner
as might least disturb her spirits, already
but too much discomposed. 
For this purpose they chose the landlady,
who, after having received proper
directions how to regulate her
conduct, visited her in prison that same
evening. Finding her quite calm,
and her reflection perfectly restored,
she began with exhorting her to put
her trust in Providence, which would
never forsake the cause of the injured
widow and fatherless; she promised
to assist and befriend her on all occasions,
as far as her abilities would
reach: she gradually turned the conversation
upon the family of the
Greaves; and by degrees informed
her, that Sir Launcelot, having learned
her situation, was determined to
extricate her from all her troubles. 

Perceiving her astonished, and deeply
affected at this intimation, she artfully
shifted the discourse, recommended
resignation to the Divine Will, and
observed, that this circumstance seemed
to be an earnest of further happiness. 
“O! I'm incapable of receiving
more! (cried the disconsolate widow,
with streaming eyes) —Yet I
ought not to be surprised at any blessing
that flows from that quarter. —The
family of Greaves were always virtuous,
humane, and benevolent. — 
This young gentleman's mother was
my dear lady and benefactress:—he
himself was suckled at these breasts. 
—O! he was the sweetest, comeliest,
best conditioned babe! —I loved not
my own Greaves with greater affection
—but, he, alas! is now no more!” 
“Have patience, good neighbour,
(said the landlady of the White Hart)
that is more than you have any right
to affirm. —All that you know of the
matter is by common report, and
common report is commonly false:
besides, I can tell you I have seen a
list of the men that were killed in admiral 

P&wblank;'s ship, when he sought
the French in the East-Indies, and
your son was not in the number.” 
To this intimation she replied, after a
considerable pause, “Don't, my good
neighbour, don't feed me with false
hope. —My poor Greaves too certainly
perished in a foreign land—yet he is
happy:—had he lived to see me in
this condition, grief would soon have
put a period to his days.” “I tell
you then, (cried the visitant) he is
not dead. I have seen a letter that
mentions his being well since the battle. 
You shall come along with me— 
you are no longer a prisoner, but shall
live at my house comfortably, till your
affairs are settled to your wish.” 
The poor widow followed her in
silent astonishment, and was immediately
accommodated with necessaries. 
Next morning her hostess proceeded
with her in the same cautious manner,
until she was assured that her
son had returned. Being duly prepared,
she was blessed with a sight of
poor Greaves, and fainted away in
his arms. 

We shall not dwell upon this tender
scene, because it is but of a secondary
concern in the history of our
knight-errant: let it suffice to say,
their mutual happiness was unspeakable. 
She was afterwards visited by Sir
Launcelot, whom she no sooner beheld,
than, springing forwards with
all the eagerness of maternal affection,
she clasped him to her breast, crying,
“My dear child! my Launcelot!
my pride! my darling! my kind benefactor! 
This is not the first time I
have hugged you in these arms! O!
you are the very image of Sir Everhard
in his youth; but you have got
the eyes, the complexion, the sweetness,
and complacency of my dear
and ever-honoured lady.” This was
not in the strain of hireling praise; 
but the genuine tribute of esteem and
admiration. As such, it could not
but be agreeable to our hero, who
undertook to procure Oakley's discharge,
and settle him in a comfortable
farm on his own estate. 
In the mean time, Greaves went
with a heavy heart to the house of 

farmer Sedgemore, where he found
Sukey, who had been prepared for
his reception, in a transport of joy,
though very weak, and greatly emaciated. 
Nevertheless, the return of
her sweet-heart had such an happy
effect on her constitution, that in a
few weeks her health was perfectly
restored. 
This adventure of our knight was
crowned with every happy circumstance
that could give pleasure to a
generous mind. The prisoners were
released, and reinstated in their former
occupations. The justice performed
his articles from fear; and
afterwards turned over a new leaf
from remorse. Young Oakley was
married to Sukey, with whom he received
a considerable portion. The
new-married couple found a farm
ready stocked for them on the knight's
estate; and the mother enjoyed a
happy retreat in the character of the
house-keeper at Greavesbury-hall. 