


My new acquaintance breaks an appointment
—I proceed, by myself, to the Navy-Office
—address myself to a Person there, who
assists me with his advice—I write to
the board—they grant me a letter to the
Surgeons at the Hall—I am inform'd of
the beau's name and character—I find
him—he makes me his confident in an
amour—desires me to pawn my linen,
for his occasions—I recover what I lent
him—some curious observations of Strap
on that occasion—his vanity. 
In the morning I got up and went to the place
of rendezvous, where I waited two hours in
vain; and was so exasperated against him for
breaking his appointment, that I set out for the
city by myself, in hopes of finding the villain, and
being reveng'd on him for his perfidy. —At length
I found myself at the Navy-Office, which I entered,
and saw crowds of young fellows walking
below; many of whom made no better appearance
than myself—I consulted the physiognomy of
each, and at last made up to one whose countenance
I lik'd; and ask'd, if he could instruct me
in the form of the letter which was to be sent to
the board, to obtain an order for examination: 
He answered me in broad Scotch, that he would
shew me the copy of what he had wrote for himself, 

by the direction of another who knew the
form: And accordingly pulled it out of his pocket
for my perusal; and told me, that if I was expeditious,
I might send it in to the board before
dinner, for they did no business in the afternoon. 
He then went with me to a coffee-house hard by,
where I wrote the letter, which was immediately
delivered to the messenger; who told me,
I might expect an order to-morrow about the
same time. —Having transacted this piece of business,
my mind was a good deal compos'd; and
as I had met with so much civility from this
stranger, I desired further acquaintance with him,
fully resolved however, not to be deceived by
him so much to my prejudice as I had been by the
beau—He agreed to dine with me at the cook's
shop which I frequented; and on our way thither,
carried me to 'Change, where I was in some
hopes of finding Mr. Jackson (for that was the
name of the person who had broke his appointment)
—I sought him there to no purpose, and
on our way to the other end of the town, imparted
to my companion his behaviour towards
me: Upon which, he gave me to understand,
that he was no stranger to the name of beau Jackson
(so he was called at the Navy-Office) altho'
he did not know him personally; that he had the
character of a good-natur'd careless fellow, who
made no scruple of borrowing from any body that
would lend; that most people who knew him,
believed he had a good enough principle at the
bottom; but his extravagance was such, he would
probably never have it in his power to manifest the
honesty of his intention. —This account made me
sweet for my five shillings, which I nevertheless
did not altogether despair of recovering, provided 

I could find out the debtor. —This young man
likewise added another circumstance of 'Squire Jackson's
history, which was, that being destitute of
all means to equip him for sea, when he receiv'd
his last warrant, he had been recommended to a
person who lent him a little money, after he had
signed a will and power, entitling that person to
lift his wages when they should become due, as
also to inherit his effects in case of his death. — 
That he was still under the tutorage and direction
of that gentleman, who advanced him small sums
from time to time upon this security, at the rate of
50 per cent. But at present his credit was very
low, because his funds would do little more than
pay what he had already receiv'd; this moderate
interest included. —After the stranger (whose name
was Thomson) had entertain'd me with this account
of Jackson, he inform'd me, that he himself
had passed for a third mate of a third rate,
about four months ago; since which time, he
had constantly attended at the Navy-Office, in
hopes of a warrant, having been assur'd from the
beginning, both by a Scotch member and one of
the commissioners to whom the member recommended
him, that he should be put into the first
vacancy; notwithstanding which promise, he had
had the mortification to see six or seven appointed
in the same station almost every week—that now
being utterly impoverish'd, his sole hope consisted
in the promise of a friend lately come to town,
to lend him a small matter, for a present to the
f&wblank;t&wblank;y; without which he was persuaded he
might wait a thousand years to no purpose. —I
conceived a mighty liking for this young fellow,
which (I believe) proceeded from the similitude
of our fortunes: We spent the whole day together; 

and as he lived at Wapping, I desir'd him
to take a share of my bed. —Next day we returned
to the Navy-Office, where, after being
called before the board and question'd about the
place of my nativity and education, they order'd
a letter to be made out for me, which, upon paying
half a crown to the clerk, I receiv'd, and deliver'd
into the hands of the clerk at Surgeon's-Hall,
together with a shilling for his trouble in
registering my name. —By this time my whole
stock was diminished to two shillings, and I saw
not the least prospect of relief, even for present
subsistence, much less to enable me to pay the
fees at Surgeon's—Hall for my examination, which
was to happen in a fortnight. —In this state of
perplexity, I consulted Strap, who assured me, he
would pawn every thing he had in the world, even
to his razors, before I should want: but this I
absolutely rejected, telling him, I would a thousand
times rather list for a soldier, of which I
had some thoughts, than be any longer a burthen
to him. —At the word soldier, he grew pale as
death, and begged on his knees, I would think no
more of that scheme. “God preserve us all
in our right wits! (cried he) would you turn
soldier, and perhaps be sent abroad against the
Spaniards, where you must stand and be shot
at like a woodcock? —Heaven keep cold lead
out of my carcass! and let me die in a
bed like a christian, as all my fore-fathers
have done. —What signifies all the riches and
honours of this life, if one enjoys not content
—And in the next, there is no respect of persons. 
Better be a poor honest Barber with a
good conscience, and time to repent of my
sins upon my death bed, than be cut off 

(God bless us) by a musket shot, as it were
in the very flower of one's age, in the pursuit
of riches and fame. —What signifies
riches (my dear friend!) do they not make
unto themselves wings, as the wise-man saith; 
and does not Horace observe, “Non domus
aut fundus, non æris acervus aut auri Ægroto
domini deduxit corpore febrem, non animo curas.
—I could moreover mention many other sayings
in contempt of riches, both from the
bible and other good books; but as I know
you are not very fond of these things, I shall
only assure you, that if you take on to
be a soldier, I will do the same; and then if
we should both be slain, you will not only
have your own blood to answer for, but mine
also: And peradventure the lives of all those
whom we shall kill in battle. —Therefore I
pray you, consider whether you will sit down
contented with small things, and share the
fruits of my industry in peace, 'till providence
shall send better tidings; or by your despair,
plunge both our souls and bodies into everlasting
perdition, which God of his infinite
mercy forbid.” —I could not help smiling at
this harangue, which was delivered with great
earnestness, the tears standing in his eyes all the
time; and promised to do nothing of that sort
without his consent and concurrence. —He was
much comforted with this declaration; and told
me, in a few days he should receive a week's
wages which should be at my service, but advised
me in the mean time, to go in quest of Jackson,
and recover, if possible, what he had borrow'd of
me. —I accordingly trudg'd about from one end
of the town to the other, for several days, without 

being able to learn any thing certain concerning
him: And, one day, being extreamly hungry
and allur'd by the steams that regal'd my nostrils
from a boiling cellar, I went down with an intention
to gratify my appetite with two-penny
worth of beef; when, to my no small surprize, I
found Mr. Jackson sitting at dinner with a footman. 
—He no sooner perceiv'd me than he got up,
and shook me by the hand, saying, “He was
glad to see me, for he intended to have call'd
at my lodgings in the afternoon.” —I was so
well pleas'd with this rencounter, and the apologies
he made for not keeping his appointment,
that I forgot my resentment, and sat down to
dinner, with the happy expectation of not only recovering
my own money before we should part,
but also reaping the benefit of his promise to lend
me wherewithal to pass examination; and this
my sanguine complexion suggested, notwithstanding
the account Thompson gave me of him,
ought to have taught me better. —When we had
feasted sumptuously, he took his leave of the footman,
and adjourned with me to an ale-house hard
by, where after shaking me by the hand again,
he began thus, “I suppose you think me a sad dog,
Mr. Random, and I do confess that appearances
are against me—but I dare say you
will forgive me when I tell you, my not
coming at the time appointed, was owing to
a peremptory message, I receiv'd from a certain
lady, whom—harkee (but this is a great
secret) I am to marry very soon—You think
this strange perhaps, but it is not less true for
all that—a five thousand pounder, I'll assure
you, besides expectations—For my own part,
devil take me if I know what any woman can 

see engaging about me—but a whim you know,
—and then one would not baulk one's
good fortune—You saw that footman who
din'd with us—he's one of the honestest fellows
that ever wore livery—You must know,
it was by his means, I was introduced to her,
for he made me first acquainted with her woman,
who is his mistress—ay, many a crown
has he and his sweet-heart had of my money— 
but what of that! things are now brought to
a bearing. —I have—(come a little this way)
I have propos'd marriage, and the day is fix'd
—she's a charming creature! and writes like
an angel—O lord! she can repeat all the
English tragedies as well as e'er a player in
Drury-Lane; and indeed is so fond of plays,
that to be near the stage, she has taken lodgings
in a court hard by the theatre—But you
shall see—you shall see—here's the last letter
she sent me.” —With these words he put it
into my hand, and I read (to the best of my remembrance
as follows: 

“Dire creatur,
As you are the animable hopjack of my
contempleshons, your aydear is constantanously
skimming before my kimmerical fansie,
when morfeus sheds illeusinary puppies
upon the I's of dreeming mortels; and when
lustroos febus shines from his kotidian throne: 
Wheerpon, I shall consceif old whorie time
has lost his pinners, as also cubit his harrows,
until thou enjoy sweet slumbrs in the lovesick
harrums of thy faithful to commend 'till death. 
“Vingar-yard Droory-lane,
January 12th. 
“Clayrender.” 

While I was reading, he seemed to be in an extasy,
rubbing his hands, and bursting out into fits
of laughter; at last he caught hold of my hand,
and squeezing it, cried out, “There is stile for
you! what do you think of this billet doux?” 
I answer'd, “It might be sublime for aught I
knew, for it was altogether above my comprehension.” 
—“O ho! (said he) I believe it
is—both tender and sublime—she's a divine
creature! and so doats upon me! —Let
me see—what shall I do with this money, when
I have once got it into my hands? —In the
first place I shall do for you—I'm a man of
few words—but, say no more—that's determin'd
—Whether would you advise me to purchase
some post, by which I may rise in the
state; or lay out my wife's fortune in land,
and retire to the country at once?” I gave
my opinion without hesitation, that he could not
do better than buy an estate and improve it; especially
since he had already seen so much of the
world. Then I launch'd out into the praises of
a country life, as describ'd by the poets whose
works I had read—He seem'd to relish my advice,
but withal told me, that although he had
seen a great deal of the world both at land and sea,
having cruiz'd three whole months in the channel,
yet he should not be satisfied until he had visited
France, which he propos'd to do before he should
settle; and to carry his wife along with him. —I
had nothing to object to his proposal; and ask'd
him, how soon he hop'd to be happy. —“As to
that (replied he) nothing obstructs my happiness,
but the want of a little ready cash—for
you must know, my friend in the city has
gone out of town for a week or two; and I 

unfortunately missed my pay at Broad-street,
by being detain'd too long by the dear charmer
—but there will be a recal at Chatham
next week, whither the ship's books are sent,
and I have commission'd a friend in that place
to receive the money.” —“If that be all (said
I) there's no great harm in deferring your marriage
a few days.” —“Yes, faith! but there
is (replied he) you don't know how many rivals
I have, who would take all advantages against
me—I would not baulk the impatience
of her passion for the world—the least appearance
of coldness and indifference would ruin
all: and such offers don't occur every day.” 
I acquiesc'd in this observation, and enquir'd how
he intended to proceed: At this he rubb'd his
chin, and said, “Why, truly I must be oblig'd
to some friend or other—do you know nobody
that would lend me a small sum for a day
or two?” —I assur'd him, I was such an utter
stranger in London, that I did not believe I
could borrow a guinea; if my life depended upon
it. —“No (said he) that's hard—that's hard— 
I wish I had any thing to pawn upon my soul!
you have got excellent linen (feeling the sleeve
of my shirt) how many shirts of that kind
have you got?” —I answer'd, “six ruffled
and six plain.” —At which he testified great
surprize, and swore that no gentleman ought to
have more than four—“How many d'ye think I
have got (continued he;) but this and another as
I hope to be sav'd! —I dare say we shall be
able to raise a good sum out of your superfluity— 
let me see—let me see—each of these
shirts are worth eighteen shillings at a moderate
computation—now suppose we pawn them 

for half price—eight times eight is sixty-four,
that's three pound four—z&wblank;ds! it will do— 
give me your hand.” —“Softly, softly, Mr.
Jackson (said I) don't dispose of my linen
without my consent: first pay me the crown
you owe me, and then we shall talk of other
matters.” —He protested he had not above one
shilling in his pocket, but that he would pay me
out of the first money raised from the shirts— 
This piece of assurance incensed me so much,
that I swore I would not part with him until
I had received satisfaction for what I had lent
him, and as for the shirts I would not pawn one
of them to save him from the gallows. —At
this expression he laughed aloud, and then complained,
it was damned hard, that I should refuse
him a trifle, that would infallibly enable him not
only to make his own fortune, but mine also. — 
“You talk of pawning my shirts (said I) what
would you think of selling this hanger, Mr.
Jackson? I believe it would fetch a good
round sum.” —“No, hang it (said he) I
can't appear decently without my hanger, or
by G&sblank;d it should go.” —However, seeing me
inflexible with regard to my linen, he at length
unbuckled his hanger, and shewing me the sign
of three blue balls, desired me to carry it thither
and pawn it for two guineas. —This office I
would by no means have performed, had I seen
any likelihood of having my money otherwise; 
but not willing, out of a piece of false delicacy, to
neglect the only opportunity I should, perhaps,
ever have, I ventured into a pawn-broker's shop,
where I demanded two guineas on the pledge, in
the name of Thomas Williams. —“Two guineas,
(said the pawn-broker, looking at the hanger) 

this piece of goods has been here several times
before, for thirty shillings; however, since I
believe the gentleman to whom it belongs will
redeem it, he shall have what he wants;” and
accordingly he paid me the money, which I carried
to the house where I had left Jackson, and
calling for change, I counted out to him seven
and thirty shillings, reserving the other five for
myself. —After looking at the money some time,
he said, “D&wblank;n it! don't signify—this won't
do my business; so you may as well take
half a guinea or a whole one, as the five shillings
you have kept.” —I thanked him kindly,
but refused to accept of any more than was my
due, because I had no prospect of repaying it. — 
Upon which he stared in my face, and told me,
I was excessively raw, or I would not talk in
that manner. —“Blood! (cried he) I have a very
bad opinion of a young fellow who won't
borrow of his friend, when he's in want— 
'tis the sign of a sneaking spirit. —Come,
come, Random, give me back the five shillings,
and take this half guinea, and if ever
you are able to pay me, I believe you will; 
if not, d&wblank;n me, if ever I ask it.” —When I
reflected on my present necessity, I suffered myself
to be persuaded, and after making my acknowledgments
to Mr. Jackson, who offered to treat
me with a play, I returned to my lodgings with
a much better opinion of this gentleman than I
had in the morning: and at night, imparted my
day's adventure to Strap, who rejoiced at my
good luck, saying, “I told you, if he was a
Scotchman you was safe enough—and who
knows but this marriage may make us all. — 
You have heard, I suppose, as how a countryman 

of ours, a journeyman baker, run away
with a great lady of this town, and now
keeps his coach—Ecod! I say nothing; but
yesterday morning as I was shaving a gentleman
at his own house, there was a young lady
in the room—a fine buxom wench, i' faith!
and she threw so many sheep's eyes at a certain
person, whom I shall not name, that my heart
went knock, knock, knock, like a fulling mill,
and my hand sh&wblank; sh&wblank; shook so much that I
sliced a piece of skin off the gentleman's nose; 
whereby he swore a deadly oath, and was
going to horsewhip me, when she prevented
him, and made my peace. —O men haud malum! 
Is not a journeyman barber as good as a journeyman
baker? The only difference is, the baker
uses flour for the belly, and the barber uses it
for the head: and as the head is a more noble
member than the belly, so is a barber more
noble than a baker—for what's the belly
without the head? —Besides, I am told he
could neither read nor write; now you know
I can do both: And moreover speak Latin. — 
But I will say no more, for I despise vanity
—nothing is more vain than vanity.” —With
these words he pulled out of his pocket a wax
candle's end, which he applied to his forehead; 
and upon examination, I found he had combed his
own hair over the toupee of his wig, and was
indeed in his whole dress become a very smart
shaver. —I congratulated him on his prospect with
a satirical smile, which he understood very well; 
and shaking his head, observed I had very little
faith, but the truth would come to light in spite
of my incredulity. 