


He projects a plan of revenge, which is executed
against the curate. 
Our hero, exasperated at the villainy of the
curate, in the treacherous misrepresentation
he had made of this rencounter, determined to
practise upon him a method of revenge, which
should be not only effectual, but also unattended
with any bad consequence to himself. For this
purpose he and Hatchway, to whom he imparted
his plan, went to the alehouse one evening, and
called for an empty room, knowing there was
no other but that which they had chosen for the
scene of action. This apartment was a sort of a
parlour that fronted the kitchen, with a window
towards the yard; where, after they had sat
some time, the lieutenant found means to amuse
the landlord in discourse, while Peregrine stepping
out into the yard, by the talent of mimickry,
which he possessed in a surprising degree, counterfeited
a dialogue beteen the curate and Tunley's
wife; which reaching the ears of the publican,
for whose hearing it was calculated, inflamed
his naturally jealous disposition to such a
degree, that he could not conceal his emotion,
but made an hundred efforts to quit the room; 
while the lieutenant, smoaking his pipe with great
gravity, as if he neither heard what passed, nor
took notice of the landlord's disorder, detained
him on the spot by a succession of questions
which he could not refuse to answer; though he
stood sweating with agony all the time, stretching
his neck every instant towards the window thro' 

which the voices were conveyed, scratching his
head, and exhibiting sundry other symptoms of
impatience and agitation. At length, the supposed
conversation came to such a pitch of amorous
complaisance, that the husband, quite frantic
with his imaginary disgrace, rushed out at the
door, crying, “Coming, Sir.” But, as he was
obliged to make a circuit round one half of the
house, Peregrine had got in by the window, before
Tunley arrived in the yard. 
According to the feigned intelligence he had
received, he ran directly to the barn, in expectation
of making some very extraordinary discovery; 
and having employed some minutes in
rummaging the straw to no purpose, returned in
a state of distraction to the kitchen, just as his
wife chanced to enter at the other door. The
circumstance of her appearance confirmed him
in the opinion, that the deed was done; but as
the disease of being hen-peck'd was epidemic in
the parish, he durst not express the least hint of
his uneasiness to her, but resolved to take vengeance
on the libidinous priest, who, he imagined,
had corrupted the chastity of his spouse. 
The two confederates, in order to be certified
that their scheme had taken effect, as well
as to blow up the flame which they had kindled,
called for Tunley, in whose countenance they
could easily discern his confusion; and Peregrine
desiring him to sit down and drink a glass with
them, began to interrogate him about his family,
and among other things, asked him how long he
had been married to that handsome wife? This
question, which was put with an arch significance
of look, alarmed the publican, who began to
fear that Pickle had overheard his dishonour; and 

this suspicion was not at all removed, when the
lieutenant, with a sly regard, pronounced, “Tunley,
wan't you noosed by the curate?” Yes, I
was,” (replied the landlord, with an eagerness
and perplexity of tone, as if he thought the lieutenant
knew, that thereby hangs a tale;) and
Hatchway supported this suspicion, by answering,
“Nay, as for that matter, the curate may be a
very sufficient man in his way.” This transition
from his wife to the curate, convinced him that
his shame was known to his guests; and in the
transport of his indignation, he pronounced with
great emphasis, “A sufficient man! Odds heart!
I believe they are all wolves in sheeps cloathing. 
I wish to God I could see the day, master, when
there shall not be a priest, an exciseman, or a
custom-house officer in this kingdom. As for
that fellow of a curate, if I do catch him—It
don't signify talking—But, by the Lord!— 
Gentlemen, my service to you.” 
The associates being satisfied by these abrupt
insinuations, that they had so far succeeded in
their aim, waited with impatience two or three
days, in expectation of hearing that Tunley had
fallen upon some method of being revenged for
this imaginary wrong: but finding that either his
invention was too shallow, or his inclination too
languid to gratify their desire of his own accord,
they determined to bring the affair to such a crisis,
that he should not be able to withstand the
opportunity of executing his vengeance. With
this view, they one evening hired a boy to run
to Mr. Pickle's house, and tell the curate, that
Mrs. Tunley being taken suddenly ill, her husband
desired he would come immediately, and
pray with her. Mean while, they had taken 

possession of a room in the house; and Hatchway
engaging the landlord in conversation, Peregrine
in his return from the yard observed, as
if by accident, that the parson was gone into the
kitchen, in order, as he supposed, to catechise
Tunley's wife. 
The publican started at this intelligence, and
under pretence of serving another company in
the next room, went out to the barn, and arming
himself with a flail, repaired to a lane thro'
which the curate was under a necessity of passing
in his way home. There he lay in ambush, with
fell intent; and when the supposed author of his
shame arrived, greeted him in the dark with such
a salutation, as forced him to stagger backward
three paces at least. If the second application had
taken effect, in all probability that spot would have
been the boundary of the parson's mortal peregrination; 
but, luckily for him, his antagonist was
not expert in the management of his weapon,
which, by a twist of the thong that connected
the legs, instead of pitching upon the head of the
astonished curate, descended in an oblique direction
on his own pate, with such a swing, that
the skull actually rung like an apothecary's mortar,
and ten thousand lights seemed to dance before
his eyes. The curate recollecting himself
during the respite he obtained from this accident,
and believing his aggressor to be some thief who
lurked in that place for prey, resolved to make a
running fight, until he should arrive within cry
of his habitation. With this design he raised up
his cudgel for the defence of his head, and betaking
himself to his heels, began to roar for help
with the lungs of a Stentor. Tunley throwing
away the flail, which he durst no longer trust 

with the execution of his revenge, pursued the
fugitive with all the speed he could exert; and
the other, either unnerv'd by fear, or stumbling
over a stone, was overtaken before he had
run an hundred paces. He no sooner felt the
wind of the publican's fist that whistled round
his ears, than he fell flat upon the earth at full
length, and the cudgel flew from his unclasping
hand; when Tunley springing like a tyger upon
his back, rained such a shower of blows upon his
carcase, that he imagined himself under the discipline
of ten pair of fists at least: yet the imaginary
cuckold, not satisfied with annoying the
priest in this manner, laid hold on one of his ears
with his teeth, and bit so unmercifully, that the
curate was found almost intranced with pain by
two labourers, at whose approach the assailant retreated
unperceived. 
The lieutenant had posted himself at the window,
in order to see the landlord at his first return; 
and no sooner perceived him enter the
yard, than he called him into the apartment,
impatient to learn the effects of their stratagem. 
Tunley obeyed the summons, and appeared before
his guests in all the violence of rage, disorder
and fatigue; his nostrils were dilated more
than one half beyond their natural capacity, his
eyes rolled, his teeth chattered, he snored in
breathing as if he had been oppressed by the nightmare,
and streams of sweat flowed down each
side of his forehead. 
Peregrine affecting to start at the approach of
such an uncouth figure, asked if he had been
wrestling with a spirit; upon which he answered
with great vehemence, “Spirit! No, no, master,
I have had a roll and tumble with the flesh. 

A dog! I'll teach him to come a caterwauling
about my doors.” Guessing from this reply, that
his aim was accomplished, and curious to know
the particulars of the rencounter, “Well then,
(said the youth) I hope you have prevailed against
the flesh, Tunley.” “Yes, yes, (answered the
publican) I have cooled his capissens, as the saying
is; I have played such a tune about his ears,
that I'll be bound he shan't long for musick this
month. A goatish ram-fac'd rascal! Why,
he's a perfect parish bull, as I hope to live.” 
Hatchway observing that he seemed to have
made a stout battle, desired he would sit down
and recover wind; and after he had swallowed a
brace of bumpers, his vanity prompted him to expatiate
upon his own exploit in such a manner,
that the confederates, without seeming to know
the curate was his antagonist, became acquainted
with every circumstance of the ambuscade. 
Tunley had scarce got the better of his agitation,
when his wife entering the room, told
them by way of news, that some waggish body
had sent Mr. Sackbut the curate to pray with her. 
This name inflamed the husband's choler anew,
and forgetting all his complaisance for his spouse,
he replied with a rancorous grin, “Add rabbit
him! I doubt not but you found his admonitions
deadly comfortable!” The landlady, looking
at her vassal with a sovereign aspect, “What
crotchets (said she) have you got in your fool's
head, I trow? I know no business you have to
sit here like a gentleman with you arms akimbe,
when there's another company in the house to be
served.” The submissive husband took the hint,
and without further expostulation, sneaked out
of the room. 

Next day it was reported, that Mr. Sackbut
had been way-laid, and almost murdered by robbers,
and an advertisement pasted upon the church-door,
offering a reward to any person that should
discover the assassin; but he reaped no satisfaction
from this expedient, and was confined to his
chamber a whole fortnight, by the bruises he had
received. 