


Which is within a hair's breadth of
proving highly interesting. 
Leaving captain Crowe and
his nephew for the present,
though they and even the misanthrope
will reappear in due season,
we are now obliged to attend the
progress of the knight, who proceeded
in a southerly direction, insensible
of the storm that blew, as
well as of the darkness, which was
horrible. For some time Crrbshaw
ejaculated curses in silence; till at
length his anger gave way to his fear,
which waxed so strong upon him,
that he could no longer resist the
desire of alleviating it, by entering
into a conversation with his master. 
By way of introduction, he gave
Gilbert the spur, directing him towards
the flank of Bronzomarte, 

which he encountered with such a
shock, that the knight was almost
dismounted. When Sir Launcelot,
with some warmth, asked the reason
of this attack, the squire replied
in these words: “The devil, (God
bless us) mun be playing his pranks
with Gilbert too, as sure as I'm a
living soul!—I'se wage a teaster,
the foul fiend has left the seaman,
and got into Gilbert, that he has
—when a has passed through an
ass and a horse, I'se marvel what
beast a will get into next.” “Probably
into a mule, (said the knight;)
in that case you will be in some
danger—but I can, at any time,
dispossess you with a horsewhip.” — 
“Aye, aye, (answered Timothy)
your honour has a mortal good
hand at giving a slap with a fox's
tail, as the saying is—'tis a wonderment
you did not try your hand
on that there wiseacre that stole
your honour's harness, and wants
to be an arrant with a murrain to
'un—Lord help his fool's head! 

it becomes him as a sow doth a cart-saddle.” 
“There is no guilt in
infirmity (said the knight;) I punish
the vicious only.” “I would your
honour would punish Gilbert then,
(cried the squire) for 'tis the most
vicious tuoad that ever I laid a leg
over—but as to that same sea-faring
man, what may his distemper
be?” “Madness;” (answered
Sir Launcelot.) “Bodikins, (exclaimed
the squire) I doubt as how
other volks are leame of the same
leg—but a'n't vor such small gentry
as he to be mad: they mun
leave that to their betters.” “You
seem to hint at me, Crabshaw: do
you really think I am mad?” “I
may say as how I have looked your
honour in the mouth; and a sorry
dog should I be, if I did not know
your humours as well as I know
e'er a beast in the steable at Greavesbury-hall.” 
“Since you are so
well acquainted with my madness,
(said the knight) what opinion have
you of yourself, who serve and follow 

a lunatic?” “I hope I han't
served your honour for nothing,
but I shall inherit some of your cast
vagaries—when your honour is
pleased to be mad, I should be very
sorry to be found right in my senses. 
Timothy Crabshaw will never eat
the bread of unthankfulness—It
shall never be said of him that he
was wiser than his measter: as for
the matter of following a madman,
we may say your honour's face is
made of a fiddle; every one that
looks on you loves you.” This compliment
the knight returned by saying,
“If my face is a fiddle, Crabshaw,
your tongue is a fiddle-stick that
plays upon it—yet your music is very
disagreeable—you don't keep time.” 
“Nor you neither, measter, (cried
Timothy) or we shouldn't be here
wandering about under cloud of night,
like sheep-stealers, or evil spirits with
troubled consciences.” 
Here the discourse was interrupted
by a sudden disaster, in consequence
of which the squire uttered 

an inarticulate roar that startled the
knight himself, who was very little
subject to the sensation of fear: but
his surprize was changed into vexation
when he perceived Gilbert
without a rider passing by, and
kicking his heels with great agility. 
He forthwith turned his steed, and,
riding back a few paces, found Crabshaw
rising from the ground. When
he asked what was become of his
horse, he answered in a whimpering
tone, “Horse! would I could once
see him fairly carrion for the hounds
—for my part I believe as how 'tis
no horse but a devil incarnate; and
yet I've been worse mounted, that I
have—I'd like to have rid a horse
that was foaled of an acorn.” 
This accident happened in a hollow
way, overshadowed with trees, one of
which the storm had blown down, so
that it lay over the road, and one of
its boughs projecting horizontally,
encountered the squire as he trotted
along in the dark. Chancing to 

hitch under his long chin, he could
not disengage himself; but hung
suspended like a flitch of bacon; 
while Gilbert, pushing forward, left
him dangling, and, by his aukward
gambols, seemed to be pleased with
the joke. This capricious animal
was not retaken without the personal
endeavours of the knight: for
Crabshaw absolutely refusing to budge
a foot from his honour's side, he
was obliged to alight, and fasten
Bronzomarte to a tree: then they
set out together, and with some difficulty
found Gilbert with his neck
stretched over a five barred gate,
snuffing up the morning-air. The
squire, however, was not remounted,
without having first undergone
a severe reprehension from his master,
who upbraided him with his
cowardice, threatened to chastise him
on the spot, and declared that he
would divorce his dastardly soul from
his body, should he ever be incommoded
or affronted with another instance 

of his base-born apprehension. 
Though there was some risque in
carrying on the altercation at this
juncture, Timothy having bound up
his jaws, could not withstand the inclination
he had to confute his master. 
He therefore, in a muttering accent,
protested that if the knight
would give him leave, he should
prove that his honour had tied a knot
with his tongue which he could not
untie with all his teeth. “How,
caitiff, (cried Sir Launcelot) presume
to contend with me in argument!” 
“Your mouth is scarce
shut, (said the other) since you declared
that a man was not to be punished
for madness, because it was
a distemper: now I will maintain
that cowardice is a distemper as well
as madness; for nobody would be
afraid if he could help it.” “There
is more logic in that remark (resumed
the knight) than I expected from your
clod-pate, Crabshaw: but I must explain
the difference between cowardice
and madness. Cowardice, tho' 

sometimes the effect of natural imbecility,
is generally a prejudice of education,
or bad habit contracted from
misinformation, or misapprehension,
and may certainly be cured by experience,
and the exercise of reason:
but this remedy cannot be applied in
madness, which is a privation or disorder
of reason itself.” “So is cowardice,
as I'm a living soul, (exclaimed
the squire) don't you say a
man is frightened out of his senses?
for my peart, measter, I can neither
see nor hear, much less argufy when
I'm in such a quandary: wherefore,
I believe, odds bodikins! that
cowardice and madness are both distempers,
and differ no more than
the hot and cold fits of an ague. 
When it teakes your honour, you're
all heat and fire and fury, Lord bless
us! but when it catches poor Tim,
he's cold and dead-hearted, he sheakes
and shivers like an aspen-leaf, that
he does.” “In that case, (answered
the knight) I shall not punish
you for the distemper which you cannot 

help, but for engaging in a service
exposed to perils, when you knew
your own infirmity: in the same
manner as a man deserves punishment,
who enlists himself for a soldier, while
he labours under any secret disease.” 
“At that rate (said the squire) my
bread is like to be rarely buttered
o'both sides, I faith. But, I hope,
as by the blessing of God I have
run mad, so I shall in good time
grow valiant, under your honour's
precept and example.” 
By this time a very disagreeable
night was succeeded by a fair, bright
morning, and a market-town appeared
at the distance of three or four
miles, when Crabshaw, having no
longer the fear of hobgoblins before
his eyes, and being moreover cheared
by the sight of a place where he
hoped to meet with comfortable entertainment,
began to talk big, to expatiate
on the folly of being afraid,
and finally set all danger at defiance; 
when all of a sudden he was presented
with an opportunity of putting in 

practice those new adopted maxims. 
In an opening between two lanes,
they perceived a gentleman's coach
stopped by two highwaymen on
horseback, one of whom advanced to
reconnoitre and keep the coast clear,
while the other exacted contribution
from the travellers in the coach. 
He who acted as centinel, no sooner
saw our adventurer appearing from
the lane, than he rode up with a
pistol in his hand, and ordered him to
halt on pain of immediate death. 
To this peremptory mandate the
knight made no other reply than
charging him with such impetuosity
that he was unhorsed in a twinkling,
and lay sprawling on the ground,
seemingly sore bruised with his fall. 
Sir Launcelot commanding Timothy
to alight and secure the prisoner,
couched his launce, and rode full
speed at the other highwayman, who
was not a little disturbed at sight of
such an apparition. Nevertheless, he
fired his pistol without effect; and,
clapping spurs to his horse, fled away 

at full gallop. The knight pursued
him with all the speed that Bronzomarte
could exert; but the robber
being mounted on a swift hunter,
kept him at a distance; and, after a
chace of several miles, escaped thro'
a wood so entangled with coppice,
that Sir Launcelot thought proper to
desist. He then, for the first time,
recollected the situation in which he
had left the other thief, and remembering
to have heard a female shriek,
as he passed by the coach-window,
resolved to return with all expedition,
that he might make a proffer of his
service to the lady, according to the
obligation of knight-errantry. But
he had lost his way; and after an
hour's ride, during which he traversed
many a field, and circled divers hedges,
he found himself in the market-town
aforementioned. Here the first object
that presented itself to his eyes, was
Crabshaw, on foot, surrounded by a
mob, tearing his hair, stamping with
his feet, and roaring out in manifest
distraction, “Shew me the mayor, 

(for the love of God) shew me the
mayor! —O Gilbert, Gilbert! a murrain
take thee, Gilbert! sure thou
wast foaled for my destruction!” 
From these exclamations, and the
antic dress of the squire, the people,
not without reason, concluded that
the poor soul had lost his wits; and
the beadle was just going to secure
him, when the knight interposed, and
at once attracted the whole attention
of the populace. Timothy, seeing
his master, fell down on his knees,
crying “The thief has run away with
Gilbert—you may pound me into a
peast, as the saying is: but now I'se
as mad as your worship; an't afeard
of the devil and all his works.” Sir
Launcelot desiring the beadle would
forbear, was instantly obeyed by that
officer, who had no inclination to put
the authority of his place in competition
with the power of such a figure
armed at all points, mounted on a
fiery steed, and ready for the combat. 
He ordered Crabshaw to attend him
to the next inn, where he alighted; 

then taking him into a separate apartment,
demanded an explanation of
the unconnected words he had uttered. 
The squire was in such agitation, that,
with infinite difficulty, and by dint of
a thousand different questions, his
master learned the adventure to this
effect: Crabshaw, according to Sir
Launcelot's command, had alighted
from his horse, and drawn his cutlass,
in hope of intimidating the discomfited
robber into a tame surrender,
though he did not at all relish the nature
of the service: but the thief was
neither so much hurt, nor so tame as
Timothy had imagined. He started
on his feet with his pistol still in his
hand; and presenting it to the squire,
swore with dreadful imprecations, that
he would blow his brains out in an
instant. Crabshaw, unwilling to hazard
the trial of this experiment, turned
his back, and fled with great precipitation; 
while the robber, whose
horse had run away, mounted Gilbert,
and rode off across the country. It
was at this period, that two footmen 

belonging to the coach, who had
stayed behind to take their morning's
whet, at the inn where they lodged,
came up to the assistance of the ladies,
armed with blunderbusses; and
the carriage proceeded, leaving Timothy
alone in distraction and despair. 
He knew not which way to
turn, and was afraid of remaining on
the spot, lest the robbers should come
back and revenge themselves upon
him for the disappointment they had
undergone. In this distress, the first
thought that occurred, was to make
the best of his way to the town, and
demand the assistance of the civil
magistrate towards the retrieval of
what he had lost: a design which he
executed in such a manner, as justly
entailed upon him the imputation of
lunacy. 
While Timothy stood fronting the
window, and answering the interrogations
of his master, he suddenly
exclaimed, “Bodikins! there's Gilbert!” 
and sprung into the street with
incredible agility. There finding his 

strayed companion brought back by
one of the footmen who attended the
coach, he imprinted a kiss on his
forehead; and hanging about his neck,
with the tears in his eyes, hailed his
return with the following salutation: 
“Art thou come back, my darling?
ah Gilbert, Gilbert! a pize upon thee!
thou hadst like to have been a dear
Gilbert to me! how couldst thou
break the heart of thy old friend,
who has known thee from a colt?
seven years next grass have I fed thee
and bred thee; provided thee with
sweet hay, delicate corn, and fresh
litter, that thou mought lie warm,
dry, and confortable. Ha'n't I currycombed
thy carcase 'till it was as
sleek as a sloe, and cherished thee as
the apple of mine eye? for all that
thou hast played me an hundred
dog's-tricks; biting, and kicking, and
plunging, as if the devil was in thy
body; and now thou couldst run away
with a thief, and leave me to be
flea'd alive by master: what canst
thou say for thyself, thou cruel, hard-hearted, 

unchristian tuoad!” To this
tender expostulation, which afforded
much entertainment to the boys, Gilbert
answered not one word; but
seemed altogether insensible to the
caresses of Timothy, who forthwith
led him into the stable. On the
whole, he seems to have been an unsocial
animal: for it does not appear
that he ever contracted any degree of
intimacy, even with Bronzomarte, during
the whole course of their acquaintance
and fellowship. On the
contrary, he has been more than once
known to signify his aversion by
throwing out behind, and other eruptive
marks of contempt for that elegant
charger, who excelled him as
much in personal merit, as his rider
Timothy was outshone by his all-accomplished
master. While the
squire accommodated Gilbert in the
stable, the knight sent for the footman
who had brought him back; 
and, having presented him with a liberal
acknowledgment, desired to 

know in what manner the horse had been
retrieved. 
The stranger satisfied him in this
particular, by giving him to understand,
that the highwayman, perceiving
himself pursued across the country,
plied Gilbert so severely with
whip and spur, that the animal resented
the usage, and being besides,
perhaps, a little struck with remorse
for having left his old friend Crabshaw,
suddenly halted, and stood
stock still, notwithstanding all the
stripes and tortures he underwent; or
if he moved at all, it was in a retrograde
direction. The thief, seeing
all his endeavours ineffectual, and
himself in danger of being overtaken,
wisely quitted his acquisition, and fled
into the bosom of a neighbouring
wood. 
Then the knight inquired about
the situation of the lady in the coach,
and offered himself as her guard and
conductor: but was told that she was
already safely lodged in the house of 

a gentleman at some distance from the
road. He likewise learned that she
was a person disordered in her senses,
under the care and tuition of a widow
lady her relation; and that in a day
or two they should pursue their journey
northward to the place of her
habitation. After the footman had
been some time dismissed, the knight
recollected that he had forgot to ask
the name of the person to whom he
belonged; and began to be uneasy at
this omission, which indeed was more
interesting than he could imagine:
for an explanation of this nature would
in all likelihood, have led to a discovery,
that the lady in the coach was
no other than Miss Aurelia Darnel,
who seeing him unexpectedly in such
an equipage and attitude, as he passed
the coach, (for his helmet was off)
had screamed with surprize and terror,
and fainted away. Nevertheless,
when she recovered from her swoon,
she concealed the real cause of her
agitation, and none of her attendants 

were acquainted with the person of
Sir Launcelot. 
The circumstances of the disorder,
under which she was said to labour,
shall be revealed in due course. In
the mean time, our adventurer, though
unaccountably affected, never dreamed
of such an occurrence; but being
very much fatigued, resolved to indemnify
himself for the loss of last
night's repose; and this happened to
be one of the few things in which
Crabshaw felt an ambition to follow
his master's example. 