




TRAVELS INTO SEVERAL Remote Nations OF THE WORLD.
By Captain Lemuel Gulliver.
PART IV.
A Voyage to the Houyhnhnms.
LONDON:
Printed in the Year,
M DCC XXVI.





CHAP. I. 
The Author sets out as
Captain of a Ship. His Men conspire against
him, confine him a long time to his Cabbin, set him on Shore in an unknown Land. He travels up in the
Country. The Yahoos a strange Sort
of Animal described. The Author meets two
Houyhnhnms. Page 1.

CHAP. II.
The Author conducted by a Houyhnhnm to his House. The house described. 
The Author's Reception. The
Food of the Houyhnhnms. The Author
in distress for Want of Meat, is at
last relieved. His manner of feeding
in this Country. p. 18.
CHAP. III.
The Author studious to learn the Language,
the Houyhnhnm his Master assists
in teaching him. The Language
described. Several Houyhnhnms of
Quality come out of Curiosity to see the Author. He gives his Master a short
Account of his Voyage. p. 33.
CHAP. IV.
The Houyhnhnms Notion of Truth
and Falshood. The Author's Discourse
disapproved by his Master. The Author 

gives a more particular Account of
himself, and the Accidents of his Voyage. p. 47.
CHAP. V.
The Author at his Master's Command
informs him of the State of England,
The Causes of War among the Princes
of Europe. The Author begins to explain
the English Constitution. p. 60.
CHAP. VI.
A Continuation of the State of England; 
so well governed by a Queen as
to need no first Minister. The Character
of such an one in some European Courts. p. 80.
CHAP. VII.
The Author's great Love of his Native
Country. His Master's Observations
upon the Constitution and Administration 

of England, as described by the Author,
with parallel Cases and Comparisons. 
His Master's Observations upon
Human Nature. p. 98.
CHAP. VIII.
The Author relates several Particulars
of the Yahoos. The great Virtues
of the Houyhnhnms. The Education
and Exercises of their Youth. Their general
Assembly. p. 117.
CHAP. IX.
A grand Dabate at the General Assembly
of the Houyhnhnms, and how
it was determined. The Learning of
the Houyhnhnms. Their Buildings. 
Their manner of Burials. The Defectiveness
of their Language. p. 132.

CHAP. X.
The Author's Oeconomy and happy
Life among the Houyhnhnms. His
great Improvement in Virtue, by conversing
with them. Their Conversations. 
The Author has notice given
him by his Master that he must depart
from the Country. He falls into a
Swoon for Grief, but submits. He contrives
and finishes a Canoo, by the help
of a Fellow-Servant, and puts to Sea
at a venture. p. 145.
CHAP. XI.
The Author's dangerous Voyage. He
arrives at New-Holland, hoping to
settle there. Is wounded with an Arrow
by one of the Natives. Is seized and carried
by Force into a Portugueze
Ship. The great Civilities of
the Captain. The Author arrives at
England. p. 164.

CHAP. XII.
The Author's Veracity. His Design in
publishing this Work. His Censure of
those Travellers who swerve from the
Truth. The Author clears himself from
any sinister Ends in writing. An Objection
answered. The Method of planting
colonies. His Native Country commended. 
The Right of the Crown to
those Countries described by the Author
is justified. The Difficulty of conquering
them. The Author takes his last leave
of the Reader: proposeth his Manner
of Living for the future, gives good Advice,
and concludes. p. 184.



TRAVELS. PART IV. A Voyage to the Country of the Houyhnhnms.




The Author sets out as Captain of a
Ship. His men conspire against him,
confine him a long time to his Cabbin,
set him on shore in an unknown Land. 
He travels up in the Country. The
Yahoos a strange Sort of Animal described. 
The Author meets two
Houyhnhnms. 
I continued at home
with my Wife and Children
about Five Months in
a very happy Condition, if
I could have learned the Lesson of 

knowing when I was well. I left my
poor Wife big with Child, and accepted
an advantagious Offer made me to
be Captain of the Adventure, a stout
Merchant-man of 350 Tuns: For I
understood Navigation well, and being
grown weary of a Surgeon's Employment
at Sea, which however I could
exercise upon occasion, I took a skilful
young Man of that Calling, one
Robert Purefoy, into my Ship. We set
sail from Portsmouth upon the Second
Day of August, 1710; on the Fourteenth,
we met with Captain Pocock of
Bristol, at Tenariff, who was going to
the Bay of Campechy, to cut Logwood. 
On the Sixteenth, he was parted
from us by a Storm; I heard since
my Return, that his Ship foundered,
and none escaped, but one Cabbin-Boy. 
He was an honest Man, and a good
Sailor, but a little too positive in his
own Opinions, which was the Cause of
his Destruction, as it hath been of several
others. For if he had followed my 

Advice, he might have been safe at
home with his Family at this Time, as
well as myself. 
I had several Men died in my Ship
of Calentures, so that I was forced to
get Recruits out of Barbadoes, and the
Leeward Islands, where I touched by
the Direction of the Merchants who employed
me, which I had soon too much
cause to repent; for I found afterwards
that most of them had been Bucaneers. 
I had Fifty Hands on board, and my
Orders were, that I should trade with
the Indians, in the South-Sea, and make
what Discoveries I could. These Rogues
whom I had picked up debauched my
other Men, and they all formed a Conspiracy
to seize the Ship and secure
me; which they did one Morning,
rushing into my Cabbin, and binding me
Hand and Foot, threatning to throw me
over-board, if I offered to stir. I told
them, I was their Prisoner, and would
submit. This they made me swear to 

do, and then they unbound me, only
fastening one of my Legs with a Chain
near my Bed, and placed a Centry at
my Door with his Piece charged, who
was commanded to shoot me dead, if
I attempted my Liberty. They sent me
down Victuals and Drink, and took the
Government of the Ship to themselves. 
Their Design was to turn Pyrates, and
plunder the Spaniards, which they
could not do, till they got more Men. 
But first they resolved to sell the Goods
in the Ship, and then go to Madagascar
for Recruits, several among them
having died since my Confinement. 
They sailed many Weeks, and traded
with the Indians, but I knew not what
Course they took, being kept a close
Prisoner in my Cabbin, and expecting
nothing less then to be murdered, as
they often threatned me. 
Upon the Ninth Day of May 1711.
one James Welch came down to my
Cabbin; and said he had Orders from 

the Captain, to set me a-shore. I expostulated
with him, but in vain; neither
would he so much as tell me who
their new Captain was. They forced
me into the Long-boat, letting me put
on my best Suit of Cloaths, which were
as good as New, and a small Bundle
of Linnen, but no Arms except my
Hanger; and they were so civil as not
to search my Pockets, into which I conveyed
what Money I had, with some
other little Necessaries. They rowed
about a League; and then set me down
on a Strand. I desired them to tell me,
what Country it was. They all swore,
they knew no more than myself, but
said, that the Captain (as they called
him) was resolved, after they had sold
the Lading, to get rid of me in the first
Place, where they could discover Land. 
They pushed off immediately, advising
me to make haste, for fear of being
overtaken by the Tide, and so bad me
Farewell. 

In this desolate Condition I advanced
forward, and soon got upon
firm Ground, where I sate down on
a Bank to rest myself, and consider
what I had best to do. When I was
a little refreshed, I went up into the
Country, resolving to deliver myself
to the first Savages I should meet, and
purchase my Life from them by some
Bracelets, Glass-rings, and other Toys,
which Sailors usually provide themselves
with in those Voyages, and whereof I
had some about me: The Land was
divided by long Rows of Trees not
regularly planted, but naturally growing; 
there was great plenty of Grass,
and several Fields of Oats. I walked
very circumspectly for fear of being
surprized, or suddenly shot with an Arrow
from behind or on either side. I
fell into a beaten Road, where I saw
many Tracks of human Feet, and some
of Cows, but most of Horses. At last
I beheld several Animals in a Field, and 

one or two of the same kind sitting in
Trees. Their Shape was very singular,
and deformed, which a little discomposed
me, so that I lay down behind a
Thicket to observe them better. Some
of them coming forward near the place
where I lay, gave me an Opportunity
of distinctly marking their Form. Their
Heads and Breasts were covered with a
thick Hair, some frizled and others
lank, they had Beards like Goats, and
a long ridge of Hair down their Backs
and the fore-parts of their Legs and Feet,
but the rest of their Bodies were bare
so that I might see their Skins, which
were of a brown buff Colour. They
had no Tails, nor any Hair at all on
their Buttocks, except about the Anus,
which, I presume, Nature had placed
there to defend them as they sate on
the Ground; for the Posture they used
as well as lying down, and often stood
on their hind Feet. They climbed high
Trees, as nimbly as a Squirrel, for
they had strong extended Claws before 

and behind, terminating in sharp points,
hooked. They would often spring, and
bound, and leap with prodigious Agility. 
The Females were not so large as
the Males, they had long lank Hair on
their Faces, nor any thing more than
a sort of Down on the rest of their
Bodies, except about the Anus, and
Pudenda. Their Dugs hung between
their Fore-feet, and often reached almost
to the Ground as they walked. The
Hair of both Sexes was of several Colours,
brown, red, black and yallow. 
Upon the whole, I never beheld in all
my Travels so disagreeable an Animal
nor one against which I naturally conceived
so strong an Antipathy. So that
thinking I had seen enough, full of
Contempt and Aversion, I got up and
pursued the beaten Road, hoping it
might direct me to the Cabbin of some
Indian. I had not gone far when I met
one of these Creatures full in my way,
and coming up directly to me. The
ugly Monster, when he saw me, distorted 

several ways every Feature of
his Visage, and started as at an Object
he had never seen before; then approaching
nearer, lifted up his Fore paw, whether
out of Curiosity or Mischief, I
could not tell. But I drew my Hanger,
and gave him a good Blow with the
flat Side of it, for I durst not strike
him with the Edge, fearing the Inhabitants
might be provoked against me,
if they should come to know, that I
had killed or maimed any of their Cattle. 
When the Beast felt the smart, he
drew back, and roared so loud, that a
Herd of at least forty came flocking
about me from the next Field, houling
and making odious Faces; but I
ran to the Body of a Tree, and leaning
my Back against it, kept them off,
by waving my Hanger. Several of this
cursed Brood getting hold of the Branches
behind leapt up in the Tree, from
whence they began to discharge their
Excrements on my Head: However, I
escaped pretty well, by sticking close 

to the Stem of the Tree, but was almost
stifled with the Filth, which sell
about me on every side. 
In the midst of this Distress, I observed
them all to run away on a sudden
as fast as they could, at which I
ventured to leave the Tree, and pursue
the Road, wondring what it was that
could put them into this Fright. But
looking on my Left-hand, I saw a Horse
walking softly in the Field: which my
Persecutors having sooner discovered, was
the cause of their Flight. The Horse
started a little when he came near me,
but soon recovering himself, looked full in
my Face with manifest Tokens of Wondet: 
He viewed my Hands and Feet,
walking round me several times. I would
have pursued my Journey, but he placed
himself directly in the way, yet looking
with a very mild Aspect, never offering
the least Violence. We stood gazing at
each other for some time; at last I took
the Boldness, to reach my Hand towards 

his Neck, with a Design to stroak it
using the common Style and Whistle of
Jockies when they are going to handle
a strange Horse. But this Animal seeming
to receive my Civilities with Disdain
shook his Head, and bent his
Brows, softly raising up his right Forefoot
to remove my Hand. Then he
neighed three or four times, but in so
different a Cadence, that I almost began
to think he was speaking to himself
in some Language of his own. 
While He and I were thus employed,
another Horse came up; who
applying himself to the first in a very
formal Manner, they gently struck each
others right Hoof before, neighing several
times by turns, and varying the
Sound, which seemed to be almost articulate. 
They went some Paces off, as
if it were to confer together, walking
Side by Side, backward and forward,
like Persons deliberating upon some Affair
of Weight, but often turning their 

Eyes towards me, as it were to watch
that I might not escape. I was amazed
to see such Actions and Behaviours in
Brute Beasts, and concluded with myself,
that if the Inhabitants of this Country
were endued with a proportionable
Degree of Reason, they must needs be
the wisest People upon Earth. This
Thought gave me so much Comfort,
that I resolved to go forward until I
could discover some House or Village, or
meet with any of the Natives, leaving
the two Horses to discourse together as
they pleased. But the first, who was
a Dapple-Gray, observing me to steal
off, neighed after me in so expressive a
Tone, that I fancied myself to understand
what he meant; whereupon I
turned back, and came near him, to expect
his farther Commands. But concealing
my Fear as much as I could,
for I began to be in some Pain, how
this Adventure might terminate; and
the Reader will easily believe I did not
much like my present Situation. 

The two Horses came up close to
me, looking with great Earnestness upon
my Face and Hands. The grey
Steed rubbed my Hat all round with
his right Fore-hoof, and discomposed
it so much, that I was forced to adjust
it better, by taking it off, and settling
it again; whereat both he and his Companion
(who was a brown bay) appeared
to be much surprized, the latter
felt the Lappet of my Coat, and finding
it to hang loose about me, they both
looked with new Signs of Wonder. He
stroked my Right-hand, seeming to admire
the Softness, and Colour; but he
squeezed it so hard between his Hoof
and his Pastern, that I was forced to
roar; after which they both touched me
with all possible Tenderness. They were
under great Perplexity about my Shoes
and Stockings, which they felt very often,
neighing to each other, and using
various Gestures, not unlike those of a
Philosopher, when he would attempt to 

solve some new and difficult Phænomenon. 
Upon the whole, the Behaviour of
these Animals was so orderly and rational,
so acute and judicious, that I at
last concluded, they must needs be Magicians,
who had thus metamorphosed
themselves upon some design, and seeing
a stranger in the way, were resolved
to divert themselves with him; 
or perhaps were really amazed at the
sight of a Man so very different in Habit,
Feature and Complection from those
who might probably live in so remote a
Climate. Upon the strength of this
Reasoning, I ventured to address them
in the following manner: Gentlemen,
if you be Conjurers, as I have good
Cause to believe, you can understand
any Language; therefore I make bold
to let your Worships know, that I am
a poor distressed English Man, driven by
his misfortunes upon your Coast, and
I entreat one of you, to let me ride upon 

on his Back, as if he were a real Horse,
to some House or Village, where I can
be relieved. In return of which Favour,
I will make you a Present of
this Knife and Bracelet, (taking them
out of my Pocket.) The two Creatures
stood silent while I spoke, seeming
to listen with great Attention; and
when I had ended, they neighed frequently
towards each other, as if they
were engaged in serious Conversation. 
I plainly observed, that their Language
expressed the Passions very well, and
their Words might with little Pains be
resolved into an Alphabet more easily
than the Chinese. 
I could frequenly distinguish the
Word Yahoo, which was repeated by
each of them several times; and altho'
it was impossible for me to conjecture
what it meant; yet while the two
Horses were busy in Conversation, I
endeavoured to practice this Word upon
my Tongue; and as soon as they were 

silent, I boldly pronounced Yahoo in a
loud Voice, imitating, at the same time,
as near as I could, the Neighing of a
Horse; at which they were both visibly
surprized, and the Gray repeated the
same Word twice, as if he meant to teach
me the right Accent, wherein I spoke
after him as well as I could, and found
myself perceivably to improve every
time, though very far from any Degree
of Perfection. Then the Bay tried me
with a second Word, much harder to
be pronounced; but reducing it to the
English Orthography, may be spelt thus,
Houyhnhnms. I did not succeed in this
so well as in the former, but after two
or three farther Trials, I had better fortune; 
and they both appeared amazed
at my Capacity. 
After some farther Discourse; 
which I then conjectured might relate
to me, the two Friends took their
Leaves, with the same Compliment of
striking each other's Hoof; and the Gray 

made me signs that I should walk before
them, wherein I thought it prudent
to comply, till I could find a better
Director. When I offered to slacken
my Pace, he would cry Hhuun,
Hhuun; I guessed his meaning, and
gave him to understand, as well as I
could, that I was weary, and not able
to walk faster; upon which, he would
stand a while to let me rest. 





The Author conducted by a Houyhnhnm
to his House. The House described. 
The Author's Reception. The Food of
the Houyhnhnms. The Author in
Distress for Want of Meat, is at last
relieved. His Manner of feeding in
this Country. 
Having travelled about three
Miles, we came to a long kind
of Building, made of Timber, stuck in
the Ground, and wattled a-cross; the
Roof was low, and covered with Straw. 
I now began to be a little comforted,
and took out some Toys, which Travellers
usually carry for Presents to the
Savage Indians of America and other 

Parts, in hopes the People of the House
would be thereby encouraged to receive
me kindly. The Horse made me
a sign to go in first; it was a large
Room with a smooth Clay Floor, and a
Rack and Manger extending the whole
length on one side. There were three
Nags, and two Mares, not eating, but
some of them sitting down upon their
Hams, which I very much wondered
at; but wondered more to see the rest
employed in domestick Business. They
seemed but ordinary Cattle, however
this confirmed my first Opinion, that
a People who could so far civilize brute
Animals, must needs excel in Wisdom
all the Nations of the World. The
Gray came in just after, and thereby
prevented any ill Treatment, which the
others might have given me. He neighed
to them several times in a style of
Authority, and received Answers. 
Beyond this Room there were
three others, reaching the length of the 

House, to which you passed through
three Doors opposite to each other,
in the manner of a Vista; we went
through the second Room towards the
third, here the Gray walked in first,
beckoning me to attend: I waited in
the second Room, and got ready my
Presents, for the Master and Mistress of
the House: They were two Knives,
three Bracelets of false Pearl, a small
Looking-glass and a Bead Necklace. The
Horse neighed three or four times, and
I waited to hear some Answers in a human
Voice, but I observed no other
Returns, than in the same Dialect, only
one or two a little shriller, than his. 
I began to think that this House must
belong to some Person of great Note
among them, because there appeared so
much Ceremony before I could gain
Admittance. But, that a Man of Quality
should be served all by Horses, was
beyond my Comprehension. I feared
my Brain was disturbed by my Sufferings
and Misfortunes: I roused myself, 

and looked about me in the Room
where I was left alone; this was furnished
like the first, only after a more
elegant manner. I rubbed my Eyes
often, but the same Objects still occurred. 
I pinched my Arms and Sides, to
awake myself, hoping I might be in a
Dream. I then absolutely concluded,
that all these Appearances could be nothing
else but Necromancy and Magick. 
But I had no time to pursue these
Reflections; for the Gray Horse came
to the Door, and made me a sign to
follow him into the third Room, where
I saw a very comely Mare, together
with a Colt and Fole, sitting upon their
Haunches, upon Matts of Straw, not
unartfully made, and perfectly neat and
clean. 
The Mare soon after my Entrance,
rose from her Matt, and coming up
close, after having nicely observed my
Hands and Face, gave me a most contemptuous
Look; then turning to the 

Horse, I heard the word Yahoo often
repeated betwixt them; the meaning
of which word I could not then comprehend,
although it were the first I
had learned to pronounce; but I was
soon better informed, to my everlasting
Mortification: For the Horse beckning
to me with his Head, and repeating
the word Hhuun, Hhuun, as he did
upon the Road, which I understood
was to attend him, led me out into a
kind of Court, where was another
Building at some Distance from the
House. Here we enter'd, and I saw
three of these detestable Creatures,
whom I first met after my Landing,
feeding upon Roots, and the Flesh of
some Animals, which I afterwards found
to be that of Asses and Dogs, and now
and then a Cow dead by Accident or
Disease. They were all tyed by the
Neck with strong Wyths, fastened to a
Beam; they held their Food between
the Claws of their Fore-feet, and tore
it with their Teeth. 

The Master Horse ordered a Sorrel
Nag, one of his Servants, to untie
the largest of these Animals, and take
him into the Yard. The Beast and I
were brought close together; and our
Countenances diligently compared, both
by Master and Servant, who thereupon
repeated several times the word Yahoo. 
My Horror and Astonishment are not
to be described, when I observed, in
this abominable Animal, a perfect human
Figure; the Face of it indeed
was flat and broad, the Nose depressed,
the Lips large, and the Mouth
wide. But these Differences are common
to all Savage Nations, where the
Lineaments of the Countenance are distorted
by the Natives suffering their
Infants to lie grovelling on the Earth,
or by carrying them on their Backs,
nuzzling with their Face against the
Mother's Shoulders. The Fore-feet of
the Yahoo differed from my Hands in
nothing else, but the Length of the 

Nails, the Coarseness and Brownness of
the Palms, and the Hairiness on the
Backs. There was the same Resemblance
between our Feet, with the
same Differences, which I knew very
well, tho' the Horses did not, because
of my Shoes and Stockings; the same in
every Part of our Bodies, except as to
Hairiness and Colour, which I have already
described. 
The great Difficulty that seemed to
stick with the two Horses, was, to see
the rest of my Body so very different
from that of a Yahoo, for which I was
obliged to my Cloaths, whereof they
had no Conception: The Sorrel Nag
offered me a Root, which he held (after
their manner, as we shall describe
in its proper place) between his Hoof
and Pastern; I took it in my Hand, and
having smelt it, returned it to him again
as civilly as I could. He brought
out of the Yahoo's Kennel a piece of
Ass's Flesh, but it smelt so offensively 

that I turned from it with loathing; 
he then threw it to the Yahoo, by
whom it was greedily devoured. He
afterwards shewed me a Whisp of Hay,
and a Fetlock full of Oats; but I shook
my Head, to signify, that neither of
these were Food for me. And indeed,
I now apprehended, that I must absolutely
starve, if I did not get to some of
my own Species: For as to those filthy
Yahoos, although there were few greater
Lovers of Mankind, at that time,
than myself; yet I confess I never saw
any sensitive Being so detestable on all
accounts; and the more I came near
them, the more hateful they grew,
while I staid in that Country. This
the Master Horse observed by my Behaviour,
and therefore sent the Yahoo
back to his Kennel. He then put his
Fore-hoof to his Mouth, at which I
was much surprized, although he did
it with Ease, and with a Motion that
appeared perfectly natural, and made
other signs to know what I would eat; 

but I could not return him such an
Answer as he was able to apprehend; 
and if he had understood me, I did
not see how it was possible to contrive
any way for finding myself Nourishment. 
While we were thus engaged,
I observed a Cow passing by, whereupon
I pointed to her, and expressed a
Desire to let me go and milk her. 
This had its Effect; for he led me back
into the House, and ordered a Mare-Servant
to open a Room, where a good
store of Milk lay in Earthen and Wooden
Vessels, after a very orderly and cleanly
manner. She gave me a large Bowl
full, of which I drank very heartily,
and found myself well refreshed. 
About Noon I saw coming towards
the House a kind of Vehicle drawn like
a Sledge by Four Yahoos. There was
in it an old Steed, who seemed to be of
Quality, he alighted with his Hind-feet
forward, having by Accident got a
Hurt in his Left Fore-foot. He came 

to dine with our Horse, who received
him with great Civility. They dined in
the best Room, and had Oats boiled
in Milk for the second Course, which
the old Horse eat warm, but the rest
cold. Their Mangers were placed circular
in the middle of the Room, and
divided into several Partitions, round
which they sate on their Haunches
upon Bosses of Straw. In the middle
was a large Rack with Angles answering
to every Partition of the Manger. 
So that each Horse and Mare
eat their own Hay, and their own
Mash of Oats and Milk, with much Decency
and Regularity. The Behaviour
of the young Colt and Fole appeared
very modest, and that of the Master
and Mistress extremely chearful and
complaisant to their Guest. The Gray
ordered me to stand by him, and much
Discourse passed between him and his
Friend concerning me, as I found by
the Stranger's often looking on me, and 

the frequent Repetition of the Word
Yahoo. 
I happened to wear my Gloves,
which the Master-Gray observing, seemed
perplexed, discovering signs of Wonder
what I had done to my Fore-feet; 
he put his Hoof three or four times to
them, as if he would signify, that I
should reduce them to their former
Shape, which I presently did, pulling
off both my Gloves, and putting them
into my Pocket. This occasioned farther
Talk, and I saw the Company was
pleased with my Behaviour, whereof I
soon found the good Effects. I was ordered
to speak the few Words I understood,
and while they were at Dinner,
the Master taught me the Names
for Oats, Milk, Fire, Water, and some
others; which I could readily pronounce
after him, having from my Youth a
great Facility in learning Languages. 

When Dinner was done, the Master
Horse took me aside, and by signs
and wonders made me understand the
Concern that he was in, that I had nothing
to eat. Oats in their Tongue are
called Hlunnh. This Word I pronounced
two or three times; for although
I had refused them at first, yet upon
second Thoughts, I considered that I
could contrive to make of them a kind
of Bread, which might be sufficient
with Milk to keep me alive, till I could
make my Escape to some other Country,
and to Creatures of my own Species. 
The Horse immediately ordered a White
Mare-servant of his Family to bring
me a good Quantity of Oats in a sort
of wooden Tray. These I heated before
the Fire as well as I could, and
rubbed them till the Husks came off
which I made a shift to winnow from
the Grain; I ground and beat them
between two Stones, then took Water,
and made them into a Paste or Cake, 

which I toasted at the Fire, and eat
warm with Milk. It was at first a
very insipid Diet, though common enough
in many Parts of Europe, but
grew tolerable by Time; and having
been often reduced to hard Fare in my
Life, this was not the first Experiment
I had made how easily Nature is satisfied. 
And I cannot but observe, that
I never had one Hour's Sickness, while
I staid in this Island, 'Tis true, I sometimes
made a shift to catch a Rabbet,
or Bird, by Springes made of Yahoos
Hairs, and I often gathered wholesome
Herbs, which I boiled, or eat as Salades
with my Bread, and now and then,
for a Rarity, I made a little Butter,
and drank the Whey. I was at first
at a great loss for Salt; but Custom
soon reconciled the want of it; and I
am confident that the frequent use of
Salt among us, is an Effect of Luxury,
and was first introduced only as a Provocative
to drink; except where it is
necessary for preserving of Flesh in long 

Voyages, or in Places remote from
great Markets. For we observe no Animal
to be fond of it but Man: And as
to myself, when I left this Country, it
was a great while before I could endure
the Taste of it in any thing that
I eat. 
This is enough to say upon the
Subject of my Dyet, wherewith other
Travellers fill their Books, as if the
Readers were personally concerned,
whether we fare well or ill. However,
it was necessary to mention this
Matter, lest the World should think it
impossible that I could find Sustenance
for three Years in such a Country, and
among such Inhabitants. 
When it grew towards Evening,
the Master Horse ordered a Place for
me to lodge in; it was but Six Yards
from the House, and separated from
the Stable of the Yahoos. Here I got
some Straw, and covering myself with 

my own Cloaths, slept very sound. But
I was in a short time better accommodated,
as the Reader shall know hereafter,
when I come to treat more particularly
about my way of living. 





The Author studious to learn the Language,
the Houyhnhnm his Master
assists in teaching him. The Language
described. Several Houyhnhnms of
Quality come out of Curiosity to see
the Author. He gives his Master a
short Account of his Voyage. 
My principal Endeavour was to
learn the Language, which my
Master (for so I shall henceforth call
him) and his Children, and every Servant
of his House were desirous to
teach me. For they looked upon it as
a Prodigy that a brute Animal should
discover such Marks of a rational Creature. 
I pointed to every thing, and enquired
the Name of it, which I wrote 

down in my Journal-Book when I was
alone, and corrected my bad Accent,
by desiring those of the Family to pronounce
it often. In this Employment,
a Sorrel Nag, one of the under Servants,
was very ready to assist me. 
In speaking, they pronounce through
the Nose and Throat, and their Language
approaches nearest to the High-Dutch
or German, of any I know in
Europe; but is much more graceful and
significant. The Emperor Charles V.
made almost the same Observation, when
he said, That if he were to speak to his
Horse, it should be in High-Dutch. 
The Curiosity and Impatience of my
Master were so great, that he spent
many Hours of his Leisure to instruct
me. He was convinced (as he afterwards
told me) that I must be a Yahoo,
but my Teachableness, Civility and
Cleanliness astonished him; which
were Qualities altogether so opposite to 

those Animals, He was most perplexed
about my Cloaths, reasoning sometimes
with himself, whether they were
a part of my Body; for I never pulled
them off till the Family were asleep,
and got them on before they waked
in the Morning. My Master was eager
to learn from whence I came, how
I acquired those Appearances of Reason,
which I discovered in all my Actions,
and to know my Story from my
own Mouth, which he hoped he should
soon do by the great Proficiency I made
in learning and pronouncing their Words
and Sentences. To help my Memory,
I formed all I learned into the English
Alphabet, and writ the Words down
with the Translations. This last, after
some time, I ventured to do in my
Master's Presence. It cost me much
Trouble to explain to him what I was
doing; for the Inhabitants have not
the least Idea of Books and Literature. 

In about Ten Weeks time I was
able to understand most of his Questions,
and in three Months could give
him some tolerable Answers, He was
extremely curious to know from what
Part of the Country I came, and how
I was taught to imitate a rational Creature,
because the Yahoos, (whom he saw
I exactly resembled in my Head, Hands
and Face, that were only visible,) with
some appearance of Cunning, and the
strongest Disposition to Mischief, were
observed to be the most unteaechble
of all Brutes. I answerd, That I came
over the Sea, from a far Place, with
many others of my own Kind, in a
great hollow Vessel made of the Bodies
of Trees. That my Companions forced
me to land on this Coast, and then
left me to shift for myself. It was
with some Difficulty, and by the help
of many Signs, that I brought him to
understand me. He replied, That I
must needs be mistaken, or that I said 

the Thing which was not. (For they
have no Word in their Languxge to
express Lying or Falsehood. He knew
it was impossible that there could be a
Country beyond the Sea, or that a parcel
of Brutes could move a Wooden
Vessel whither they pleased upon Water. 
He was sure no Houyhnhnm alive
could make such a Vessel, nor would
trust Yahoos to manage it, 
The Word Houyhnhnm, in their
Tongue, signifies a Horse, and in its
Etymology, The Perfection of Nature. 
I told my Master, that I was at a
loss for Expression, but would improve
as fast as I could; and hoped in a short
time I should be able to tell him Wonders: 
He was pleased to direct his
own Mare, his Colt and Fole, and the
Servants of the Family to take all Opportunities
of instructing me, and every
Day for two or three Hours, he
was at the same Pains himself: Several
Horses and Mares of Quality in the 

Neighbourhood came often to our
House upon the Report spread of a
wonderful Yahoo, that could speak like
a Houyhnhnm, and seemed in his Words
and Actions to discover some Glimmerings
of Reason. These delighted to
converse with me; they put many Questions,
and received such Answers, as I
was able to return. By all these Advantages,
I made so great a Progress,
that in five Months from my Arrival,
I understood whatever was spoke, and
could express myself tolerably well. 
The Houyhnhnms who came to visit
my Master, out of a Design of seeing
and talking with me, could hardly believe
me to be a right Yahoo, because
my Body had a different Covering from
others of my Kind. They were astonished
to observe me without the ususal
Hair or Skin, except on my Head, Face
and Hands; but I discovered that Secret
to my Master, upon an Accident,
which happened about a Fortnight before. 

I have already told the Reader,
that every Night when the Family were
gone to Bed, it was my Custom, to strip
and cover myself with my Cloaths: 
It happened one Morning early, that
my Master sent for me, by the Sorrel
Nag, who was his Valet; when he
came, I was fast asleep, my Cloaths fallen
off on one side, and my Shirt above
my Waste. I awaked at the Noise he
made, and observed him to deliver his
Message in some Disorder; after which
he went to my Master, and in a great
Fright gave him a very confused Account
of what he had seen: This I
presently discovered; for going as soon
as I was dressed, to pay my Attendance
upon his Honour, he asked me the meaning
of what his Servant had reported,
that I was not the same Thing when I
slept as I appeared to be at other times; 
that his Valet assured him, some part
of me was White, some Yellow, at least
not so White, and some Brown. 

I had hitherto concealed the Secret
of my Dress, in order to distinguish myself
as much as I could from the cursed
Race of Yahoos; but now I found it in
vain to do so any longer. Besides, I considered
that my Cloaths and Shoes would
soon wear out, which already were in a
declining Condition, and must be supplied
by some Contrivance from the
Hides of Yahoos or other Brutes; whereby
the whole Secret would be known: 
I therefore told my Master, That in the
Country from whence I came, those of
my kind always covered their Bodies
with the Hairs of certain Animals prepared
by Art, as well for Decency, as
to avoid the Inclemencies of Air both hot
and cold; of which, as to my own Person
I would give him immediate Conviction,
if he pleased to command me; only desiring
his Excuse, if I did not expose
those Parts, that Nature taught us to
conceal. He said my Discourse was all
very strange, but especially the last part; 

for he could not understand why Nature
should teach us to conceal what Nature
had given. That neither himself nor
Family were ashamed of any Parts of
their Bodies; but however I might do
as I pleased. Whereupon, I first unbuttoned
my Coat, and pulled it off. I
did the same with my Waste-coat; I
drew of my Shoes, Stockings and Breeches. 
I let my Shirt down to my
Waste, and drew up the Bottom, fastning
it like a Girdle about my middle
to hide my Nakedness. 
My Master observed the whole Performance
with great Signs of Curiosity
and Admiration. He took up all my
Cloaths in his Pastern, one Piece after
another, and examined them diligently; 
he then stroaked my Body very
gently, and looked round me several
times, after which he said, it was plain
I must be a perfect Yahoo; but that I
differed very much from the rest of my
Species, in the Softness, and Whiteness 

and Smoothness of my Skin, my want
of Hair in several Parts of my Body,
the shape and shortness of my Claws
behind and before, and my affectation
of walking continually on my two Hinder-feet,
He desired to see no more,
and gave me leave to put on my Cloaths
again, for I was shuddering with Cold. 
I expressed my uneasiness at his
giving me so often the Appellation of
Yahoo, an odious Animal, for which I
had so utter an Hatred and Contempt,
I begged he would forbear applying
that Word to me, and take the same
Order in his Family, and among his
Friends whom he suffered to see me. 
I requested likewise, that the Secret of
having a false Covering to my Body
might be known to none but Himself,
at least as long as my present Cloathing
should last; for, as to what the
Sorrel Nag his Valet had observed, his
Honour might command him to conceal
it. 

All this my Master very graciously
consented to, and thus the Secret was
kept till my Cloaths began to wear out,
which I was forced to supply by several
Contrivances, that shall hereafter be
mentioned. In the mean time, he desired
I would go on with my utmost
Diligence to learn their Language, because
he was more astonished at my Capacity
for Speech and Reason, than at
the Figure of my Body, whether it
were covered or no; adding, that he
waited with some Impatiencee to hear
the Wonders which I promised to tell
him. 
From thenceforward he doubled the
Pains he had been at to instruct me; 
he brought me into all Company, and
made them treat me with Civility, because,
as he told them privately, this
would put me into good Humour, and
make me more diverting. 

Every Day when I waited on
him, beside the Trouble he was at in
teaching, he would ask me several Questions
concerning myself, which I answered
as well as I could; and by these
means he had already received some
general Ideas, though very imperfect. 
It would be tedious to relate the several
Steps, by which I advanced to a
more regular Conversation: But the
first Account I gave of myself in any
Order and Length, was to this purpose: 
That I came from a very far
Country, as I had alrerdy attempted
to tell him with about Fifty more of
my own Species; that we travelled
upon the Seas, in a great hollow Vessel
made of Wood, and larger than his
Honour's House. I described the Ship
to him in the best terms I could, and
explained by the help of my Handkerchief
displayed, how it was driven forward 

by the Wind. That upon a Quareel
among us, I was set on shore on
this Coast, where I walked forward
without knowing whither, till he delivered
me from the Persecution of those
execrable Yahoos. He asked me, Who
made the Ship, and how it was possible
that the Houyhnhnms of my Country
would leave it to the Management of
Brutes? My Answer was, That I durst
proceed no farther in my Relation, unless
he would give me his Word and
Honour that he would not be offended,
and then I would tell him the Wonders
I had so often promised. He agreed; 
and I went on by assuring him,
that the Ship was made by Creatures
like myself, who in all the Countries
I had travelled, as well as in my
own, were the only governing, rational
Animals; and that upon my Arrival
hither, I was as much astonished to see
the Houyhnhnms act like rational Beings,
as he or his Friends could be in
finding some Marks of Reason in a 

Creature he was pleased to call a Yahoo,
to which I owned my Resemblance in
every Part, but could not account for
their degenerate and brutal Nature. I
said farther, That if good Fortune ever
restored me to my native Country, to
relate my Travels hither, as I resolved
to do, every body would believe that I
said the Thing which was not; that I
invented the Story out of my own Head; 
and with all possible respect to Himself,
his Family, and Friends, and under his
Promise of not being offended, our
Countrymen would hardly think it probable,
that a Houyhnhnm should be the
presiding Creature of a Nation, and a
Yahoo the Brute. 





The Houyhnhnms Notion of Truth and
Falshood. The Author's Discourse disapproved
by his Master. The Author
gives a more particular Account of
himself, and the Accidents of his
Voyage. 
My Master heard me with great
appearances of Uneasiness in his
Countenance, because Doubting or not
believing, are so little known in this
Country, that the Inhabitants cannot
tell how to behave themselves under
such Circumstances. And I remember
in frequent Discourses with my Master
concerning the Nature of Manhood, in
other Parts of the World, having occasion 

to talk of Lying, and false Representation,
it was with much Difficulty
that he comprehended what I meant,
although he had otherwise a most acute
Judgment. For he argued thus: That
the Use of Speech was to make us understand
one another, and to receive Information
of Facts; now if any one said
the Thing which was not, those Ends
were defeated; because I cannot properly
be said to understand him, and I
am so far from receving Information,
that he leaves me worse than in Ignorance,
for I am led to believe a Thing
Black when it is White, and Short when
it is Long. And these were all the Notions
he had concerning that Faculty of
Lying, so perfectly well understood among
human Creatures. 
To return from this Digression; 
when I asserted that the Yahoos were
the only governing Animals in my Country,
which my Master said was altogether
past his Conception, he desired to 

know, whether we had Houyhnhnms among
us, and what was their Employment: 
I told him, we had great Numbers,
that in Summer they grazed in
the Fields, and in Winter were kept
in Houses, with Hay and Oats, when
Yahoo-Servants were employed to rub
their Skins smooth, comb their Manes,
pick their Feet, serve them with Food,
and make their Beds. I understand
you well, said my Master it is now very
plain, from all you have spoken, that
whatever share of Reason the Yahoos
pretended to, the Houyhnhnms are your
Masters; I heartily wish our Yahoos
would be so tractable. I begged his
Honour would please to excuse me
from proceeding any farther, because
I was very certain that the Account
he expected from me would
be highly displeasing. But he insisted
in commanding me to let him know
the best and the worst: I told him, he
should be obeyed. I owned, that the
Houyhnhnms among us, whom we called 

Horses, were the most generous and
comely Animal we had, that they excelled
in Strength and Swiftness; and
when they belonged to Persons of Quality,
employed in Travelling, Racing,
or drawing Chariots, they were treated
with much Kindness and Care, till
they fell into Diseases, or became foundred
in the Feet; and then they were
sold, and used to all kind of Drudgery
till they died; after which their Skins
were stripped and sold for what they
were worth, and their Bodies left to
be devoured by Dogs and Birds of Prey. 
But the common Race of Horses had
not so good Fortune, being kept by
Farmers and Carriers and other mean
People, who put them to greater Labour,
and feed them worse. I described
as well as I could, our way of Riding,
the shape and use of a Bridle, a
Saddle, a Spur, and a Whip, of Harness
and Wheels. I added, that we fastned
Plates of a certain hard Substance called
Iron at the Bottom of their Feet, 

to preserve their Hoofs from being
broken by the stony Ways on which
we often travelled. 
My Master, after some Expressions
of great Indignation, wondered how we
dared to venture upon a Houyhnhnm's
Back, for he was sure, that the meanest
Servant in his House would be
able to shake of the strongest Yahoo,
or by lying down, and rouling on his
Back, squeeze the Brute to Death. I
answered, That our Horses were trained
up from three or four Years old to
the several Uses we intended them for; 
That if any of them proved intolerably
vicious, they were employed for Carriages; 
that they were severely beaten
while they were young, for any mischievous
Tricks: That the Males, designed
for common Use of Riding or
Draught, were generally castrated about
two Years after their Birth, to take down
their Spirits, and make them more tame
and gentle; that they were indeed sensible 

of Rewards and Punishments; but his
Honour would please to consider, that
they had not the least Tincture of Reason
any more than the Yahoos in this
Country. 
It put me to the Pains of many
Circumlocutions to give my Master a
right Idea of what I spoke; for their
Language doth not abound in Variety
of Words, because their Wants and Passions
are fewer than among us. But it
is impossible to repreat his noble Resentment
at our savage Treatment of
the Houyhnhnm Race, particularly after
I had explained the Manner and
Use of Castrating Horses among us, to
hinder them from propagating their
Kind, and to render them more servile. 
He said, if it were possible there could
be any Country where Yahoos alone were
endued with Reason, they certainly must
be the governing Animal, because Reason
will in time always prevail against
Brutal Strength. But, considering 

the Frame of our Bodies, and especially
of mine, he thought no Creature of
equal Bulk was so ill contrived, for employing
that Reason in the common Office
of Life; whereupon he desired to
know whether those among whom I
lived, resembled me or the Yahoos of
his Country. I assured him, that I was
as well shaped as most of my Age:
but the younger and the Females were
much more soft and tender, and the
Skins of the latter generally as White
as Milk. He said, I differed indeed from
other Yahoos, being much more cleanly,
and not altogether so deformed, but in
point of real Advantage, he thought I
differed for the worse. That my Nails
were of no Use either to my Fore or
Hinder-Feet: As to my Fore-Feet he
could not properly call them by that
Name, for he never observed me to
walk upon them; that they were too
soft to bear the Ground; that I generally
went with them uncovered, neither
was the Covering I sometimes wore 

on them, of the same Shape, or so strong
as that on my Feet behind. That I could
not walk with any Security, for if either
of my Hinder-Feet slipped, I must inevitably
fall. He then began to find fault
with other Parts of my Body, that Flatness
of my Face, the Prominence of my
Nose, mine Eyes placed directly in the
Front, so that I could not look on either
Side without turning my Head: 
That I was not able to feed myself,
without lifting my Fore-Feet to my
Mouth: And therefore Nature had
placed those Joynts to answer that Necessity. 
He knew not what could be
the Use of those several Clefts and Divisions
in my Feet behind, that these
were too soft to bear the Hardness and
Sharpness of Stones without a Covering
made from the Skin of some other
Brute; that my whole Body wanted a
Fence against Heat and Cold, which I
was forced to put on and off every Day
with Tediousness and Trouble. And
lastly, that he observed very Animal in 

this Country naturally to abhor the
Yahoos, whom the Weaker avoided, and
the Stronger drove from them. So that
supposing us to have the Gift of Reason,
he could not see how it were possible
to cure that natural Antipathy
which every Creature discovered against
us; nor consequently, how we could
tame and render them serviceable. 
However, he would (as he said) debate
the Matter no farther, because he
was more desirous to know my own
Story, the Country where I was born,
and the several Actions and Events of
my Life before I came hither. 
I assured him, how extremely desirous
I was that he should be satisfied
in every Point; but I doubted much,
whether it would be possible for me to
explain myself on several Subjects whereof
his Honour could have no Conception,
because I saw nothing in his Country
to which I could resemble them. 
That however, I would do my best, 

and strive to express myself by Similitudes,
humbly desiring his Assistance
when I wanted proper words; which
he was pleased to promise me. 
I said, my Birth was of honest Parents
in an Island called England, which
was remote from this Country, as many
Days Journey as the strongest of his
Honour's Servants could travel in the
Annual Course of the Sun. That I was
bred a Surgeon, whose Trade is to cure
Wounds and Hurts in the Body, got by
Accident or Violence; that my Country
was governed by a Female Man, whom
we called Queen. That I left it to get
Riches, whereby I might maintain myself
and Family when I should return. 
That in my last Voyage I was Commander
of the Ship, and had about fifty
Yahoos under me, many of which died
at Sea, and I was forced to supply them
by orhers picked out from several Nations. 
That our Ship was twice in
Danger of being sunk; the first time by 

a great Storm, and the second, by striking
against a Rock. Here my Master
interposed, by asking me, How I could
persuade Strangers out of different Countries
to venture with me, after the
Losses I had sustained, and the Hazards
I had run. I said, they were Fellows
of desperate Fortunes forced to fly from
the Places of their Birth, on account
of their Poverty or their Crimes. Some
were undone by Law-suits; others spent
all they had in Drinking, Whoring and
Gaming; others fled for Treason; many
for Murder, Theft, Poysoning, Robbery,
Perjury, Forgery, Coining false Money,
for committing Rapes or Sodomy,
for flying from their Colours, or deserting
to the Enemy, and most of them
had broken Prison; none of these durst
return to their Native Countries for fear
of being hanged, or of starving in a
Jail; and therefore were under a necessity
of seeking a Livelihood in other
Places. 

During this Discourse, my Master
was pleased to interrupt me several
Times; I had made use of many Circumlocutions
in describing to him the
Nature of the several Crimes, for which
most of our Crew had been forced to
fly their Country. This Labour took
up several Days Conversation before he
was able to comprehend me. He was
wholly at a Loss to know what could
be the Use or Necessity of Practising
those Vices. To clear up which I endeavoured
to give him some Ideas of
the Desire of Power and Riches, of the
terrible Effects of Lust, Intemperance,
Malice and Envy. All this I was forced
to define and describe by putting
of Cases, and making of Suppositions. 
After which, like one whose Imagination
was struck with something never seen
or heard of before, he would lift up
his Eyes with Amazement and Indignation. 
Power, Government, War, Law,
Punishment, and a Thousand other 

Things had no Terms, wherein that
Language could express them, which
made the Difficulty almost insuperable
to give my Master any Conception of
what I meant. But being of an excellent
Understanding, much improved
by Contemplation and Converse, he at
last arrived at a competent Knowledge
of what Human Nature in our Parts
of the World is capable to perform,
and desired I would give him some particular
Account of that Land, which
we call Europe, but especially of my
own Country. 





The Author at his Master's Commands
informs him of the State of England,
The Causes of War among the Princes
of Europe. The Author begins to explain
the English Constitution. 
The Reader may please to observe,
that the following Extract
of many Conversations I had with my
Master, contains a Summary of the
most material Points, of which were discoursed
at several times for above Two
Years; his Honour often desiring fuller
Satisfaction as I farther improved
in the Houyhnhnm Tongue. I laid before
him, as well as I could, the whole
State of Europe; I discoursed of Trade 

and Manufactures, of Arts and Sciences; 
and the Answers I gave to all
the Questions he made, as they arose
upon several Subjects, were a Fund of
Conversation not to be exhausted. But
I shall here only set down the Substance
of what passed between us concerning
my own Country, reducing it into Order
as well as I can, without any Regard to Time or other Circumstances,
while I strictly adhere to Truth. My
only Concern is, that I shall hardly be
able to do Justice to my Master's Arguments
and Expressions, which must
needs suffer by my want of capacity, as
well as by a Translation into our barbarous
English. 
In Obedience therefore to his Honour's
Commands, I related to him the
Revolution under the Prince of Orange,
the long War with France entered into
by the said Prince, and renewed by his
Successor the present Queen, wherein
the greatest Powers of Christendom were 

engaged, and which still continued: I
computed at his Request, that about a
Million of Yahoos might have been killed
in the whole Progress of it, and
perhaps a Hundred or more Cities taken,
and thrice as many Ships burnt
or sunk. 
He asked me what were the usual
Causes or Motives that made one
Country go to War with another. I
answered they were innumerable, but I
should only mention a few of the chief. 
Sometimes the Ambition of Princes,
who never think they have Land or
People enough to govern: Sometimes
the Corruption of Ministers, who engage
their Master in a War in order to
stifle or divert the Clamour of the Subjects
against their Evil Administration. 
Difference in Opinions hath cost many
Millions of Lives: For instance, whether
Flesh be Bread, or Bread be Flesh; 
whether the Juice of a certain Berry
be Blood or Wine; whether Whistling 

be a Vice or a Virtue; whether it be
better to kiss a Post, or throw it into
the Fire; what is the best Colour for
a Coat, whether Black, White, Red or
Gray; and whether it should be long
or short, narrow or wide, dirty or
clean, with many more. Neither are
any Wars so furious and bloody, or of
so long Continuance, as those occasioned
by Difference in Opinion, especially if it
be in things indifferent. 
Sometimes the Quarrel between
two Princes is to decide which of them
shall dispossess a Third of his Dominions,
where neither of them pretend to
any Right. Sometimes one Prince
quarrelleth with another, for fear the
other should quarrel with him. Sometimes
a War is entered upon, because
the Enemy is too strong, and sometimes
because he is too weak. Sometimes
our Neighbours want the Things which
we have, or have the Things which
we want; and we both fight, till they 

take ours or give us theirs. It is a
very justifiable Cause of War to invade
a Country after the People have been
wasted by Famine, destroyed by Pestilence,
or embroiled by Factions among
themselves. It is justifiable to enter into
War against our nearest Ally, when
one of his Towns lies convenient for us,
or a Territory of Land, that would render
our Dominions round and compleat. 
If a Prince sends Forces into a
Nation, where the People are poor and
ignorant, he may lawfully put half of
them to Death, and make Slaves of the
rest, in order to civilize and reduce
them from their barbarous Way of Living. 
It is a very kingly, honourable,
and frequent Practice, when one Prince
desires the Assistance of another to secure
him against an Invasion, that the
Assistant, when he hath driven out the
Invader, should seize on the Dominions
himself, and kill, imprison or banish
the Prince he came to relieve. 
Allyance by Blood or Marriage, is a 

frequant Cause of War between Princes,
and the nearer the Kindred is, the greater
is their Disposition to quarrel: Poor
Nations are hungry, and rich Nations
are proud, and Pride and Hunger will
ever be at Variance. For those Reasons,
the Trade of a Soldier is held the most
honourable of all others: Because a
Soldier is a Yahoo hired to kill in cold
Blood as many of his own Species, who
have never offended him, as possibly
he can. 
There are likewise another Kind
of Princes in Europe, not able to
make War by themselves, who hire out
their Troops to richer Nations, for so
much a Day to each Man; of which
they keep three fourths to themselves,
and it is the best part of their Maintenance; 
such are those in many Northern
Parts of Europe. 
What you have told me, (said my
Master) upon the Subject of War, does 

indeed discover most admirably the Effects
of that Reason you pretend to: 
However, it is happy that the Shame is
greater than the Danger; and that Nature
hath left you utterly uncapable of
doing much Mischief. 
For your Mouths lying flat with
your Faces, you can hardly bite each
other to any purpose, unless by Consent. 
Then as to the Claws upon your
Feet before and behind, they are so
short and tender that one of our Yahoos
would drive a dozen of yours before
him. And therefore in recounting the
Numbers of those who have been killed
in Battle, I cannot but think that you
have said the Thing that is not. 
I could not forbear shaking my
Head and smiling a little at his Ignorance. 
And being no Stranger to the
Art of War, I gave him a Description of
Cannons, Culverins, Muskets, Carabines,
Pistols, Bullets, Powder, Swords, 

Bayonets, Sieges, Retreats, Attacks,
Undermines, Countermines, Bombardments,
Sea-fights; Ships sunk with a
Thousand Men, Twenty thousand killed
on each Side; dying Groans, Limbs
flying in the Air, Smoak, Noise, Confusion,
trampling to Death under Horses
Feet; Flight, Pursuit, Victory; Fields
strewed with Carcases left for Food to
Dogs, and Wolves, and Birds of Prey; 
Plundering, Stripping, Ravishing, Burning,
and Destroying. And to set forth
the Valor of my own dear Countymen,
I assured him, that I had seen them
blow up a Hundred Enemies at once in
a Siege, and as many in a Ship, and
beheld the dead Bodies come down in
pieces from the Clouds, to the great
Diversion of the Spectators. 
I was going on to more Particulars,
when my Master commanded me Silence. 
He said, Whoever understood
the Nature of Yahoos might easily believe
it possible for so vile an Animal, 

to be capable of every Action I had
named, if their Strength and Cunning
equalled their Malice. But as my Discourse
had increased his Abhorrence of
the whole Species, so he found it gave
him a Disturbance in his Mind, to
which he was wholly a Stranger before. 
He thought his Ears being used to
such abominable Words, might by Degrees
admit them with less Detestation. 
That although he hated the Yahoos of
this Country, yet he no more blamed
them for their odious Qualities, than
he he did a Gnnayh (a Bird of Prey) for
its Cruelty, or a sharp Stone for cutting
my Hoof. But when a Creature pretending
to Reason, could be capable
of such Enormities, he dreaded lest the
Corruption of that Faculty might be
worse than Brutality itself. He seemed
therefore confident, that instead of Reason,
we were only possessed of some
Quality fitted to increase our natural
Vices; as the Reflection from a troubled
Stream returns the Image of an 

ill-shapen Body, not only larger, but
more distorted. 
He added, That he had heard too
much upon the Subject of War, both
in this, and some former Discourses. 
There was another Point which a little
perplexed him at present. I had informed
him, that some of our Crew
left their Country on account of being
ruined by Law; that I had already
explained the meaning of the Word; 
but he was a Loss how it should come
to pass, that the Law which was intended
for every Man's Preservation,
should be any Man's Ruin. Therefore
he desired to be farther satisfied what
I meant by Law, and what sort of Dispensers
thereof it could be by whose
Practices the Property of any Person
could be lost, instead of being preserved. 
He added, he saw not what great
Occasion there could be for this thing
called Law, since all the Intentions and
Purposes of it may be fully answered 

by following the Dictates of Nature
and Reason, which are sufficient Guides
for a Reasonable Animal, as we pretended
to be, in shewing us what we
ought to do, and what to avoid. 
I assured his Honour, that Law
was a Science wherein I had not much
conversed, having little more Knowledge
of it than what I had obtained
by employing Advocates, in vain, upon
some Injustices that had been done me,
and by conversing with some others
who by the same Method had first lost
their Substance, and then left their own
Country under the Mortification of such
Disappointments, however I would give
him all the Satisfaction I was able. 
I said that those who made profession
of this Science were exceedingly
multiplied, being almost equal to the
Caterpillars in Number; that they were
of divers Degrees, Distinctions, and
Denominations. The Numerousness of 

those that dedicated themselves to this
Profession were such that the fair and
justifiable Advantage and Income of the
Profession was not sufficient for the decent
and handsome Maintenance of Multitudes
of those who followed it. Hence
it came to pass that it was found needfull
to supply that by Artifice and Cunning,
which could not be procured by
just and honest Methods: The better
to bring which about, very many Men
among us were bread up from their
Youth in the Art of proving by Words
multiplied for the Purpose that White
is Black, and Black is White, according
as they are paid. The Greatness of
these Mens Assurance and the Boldness
of ther Pretensions gained upon the
Opinion of the Vulgar, whom in a
Manner they made Slaves of, and got
into their Hands much the larger Share
of the Practice of their Profession. These
Practitioners were by Men of Discernment
called Pettifoggers, (that is, Confounders,
or rather, Destroyers of Right,) 

as it was my ill Hap as well as the
Misfortune of my suffering Acquaintance
to be engaged only with this
Species of the Profession. I desired his
Honour to understand the Description
I had to give, and the Ruin I had
complained of to relate to these Sectaries
only, and how and by what means
the Misfortunes we met with were
brought upon us by the Management of
these Men, might be more easily conceived
by explaining to him their Method
of proceeding, which could not be better
done than by giving him an Example: 
My Neighbour, said I, I will suppose,
has a mind to my Cow, he hires one of these
Advocates to prove that he ought to have
my Cow from me. I must then hire another
of them to defend my Right, it being
against all Rules of Law that any Man
should be allowed to speak for himself. 
Now in this case, I who am the Right
Owner lie under two great Disadvantages. 
First, my Advocate, being as I 

said before practised almost from his
Cradle in defending Falshood, is quite
out of his Element when he would argue
for Right, which as an Office unnatural
he attempts with great Awkwardness,
if not with an Ill-will. The
Second Disadvantage is that my Advocate
must proceed with great Caution; 
for, since the Maintenance of so many
depend on the keeping up of Business,
should he proceed too summarily, if he
does not incur the Displeasure of his Superiors,
he is sure to gain the Ill-will
and hatred of his Brethren, as being
by them esteemed one that would lessen
the Practice of the Law. This being
the Case, I have but two Methods
to preserve my Cow. The first is, to
gain over my Adversary's Advocate
with a double Fee; from the Manner
and Design of whose Education before
mentioned it is easy to expect he will
be induced to drop his Client and let
the Ballance fall to my Side. The Second
Way is for my Advocate not to 

insist on the Justice of my Cause, by
allowing the Cow to belong to my Adversary; 
and this if it be dexterously
and skilfully done will go a great Way
towards obtaining a favourable Verdict,
it having been found, from a careful
Observation of Issues and Events, that
the wrong Side, under the Management
of such Practitioners, has the fairer
Chance for success, and this more especially
if it happens, as it did in mine
and my Friend's Case, and may have
done since, that the Person appointed
to decide all Controversies of Propriety
as well as for the Tryal of Criminals,
who should be taken out of the most
knowing and wise of his Profession, is
by the Recommendation of a great
Favourite, or Court-Mistress chosen out
of the Sect before mentioned, and so,
having been under a strange Biass all
his Life against Equity and fair dealing,
lies as it were under a fatal Necessity
of favouring, shifting, double dealing
and Oppression, and besides through 

Age, Infirmity, and Distempers grown
lazy, unactive, and inattentive, and
thereby almost incapacitated from doing
any thing becoming the nature of
his Imployment, and the Duty of his
Office. In such Cases, the Decisions and
Determinations of Men so bred, and
so qualified, may with Reason be expected
on the wrong side of the Cause
since those who can take Harangue
and Noise, (if pursued with Warmth,
and drawn out into a Length,) for Reasoning,
are not much to be wondered
at, if they infer the weight of
the Argument from the heaviness of
the Pleading. 
It is a Maxim among these Men,
That whatever has been done before
may legally be done again: And
therefore they take special Care to
record all the Decisions formerly made,
even those which have through Ignorance
or Corruption contradicted the
Rules of common Justice and the general 

Reason of Mankind. These, under
the Name of Precedents, they produce
as Authorities, and thereby endeavour
to justify the most iniquitous Opinions; 
and they are so lucky in this Practice,
that it rarely fails of Decrees answerable
to their Intent and Expectation. 
In pleading, they studiously avoid
entring into the Merits of the Cause; 
but are loud, violent and tedious in
dwelling upon all Circumstances, which
are not to the Purpose. For Instance,
in the Case already mentioned; They
never desire to know what Claim or
Title my Adversary had to my Cow,
but whether the said Cow were Red
or Black, her Horns long or short; 
whether the Field I graze her in be
round or square, whether she was
milked at home or abroad, what Diseases
she is subject to, and the like; 
after which they consult Precedents, adjourn
the Cause, from Time to Time, 

and in Ten, Twenty, or Thirty Years
come to an Issue. 
It is likewise to be observed that
this Society hath a peculiar Cant and
Jargon of their own, that no other
Mortal can understand, and wherein all
their Laws are written, which they
take special Care to multiply; whereby
they have gone near to confound
the very Essence of Truth and Falshood,
of Right and Wrong; so that it
may take Thirty Years to decide whether
the Field, left me by my Ancestors
for Six Generations, belongs to me
or to a Stranger three hundred Miles
off. 
In the Tryal of Persons accused for
Crimes against the State the Method is
much more short and commendable: 
For if those in power, who know well
how to choose Instruments fit for their
Purpose, take care to recommend and
promote out of this Clan a proper Person, 

his Method of Education and Practice
makes it easy to him, when his
Patrons Disposition is understood, without
Difficulty or Study either to condemn
or acquit the Criminal, and at
the same time strictly preserve all due
Forms of Law. 
Here my Master interposing said it
was a Pity, that Creatures endowed
with such prodigious Abilities of Mind
as these Advocates by the Description
I gave of them must certainly be, were
not rather encouraged to be Instructors
of others in Wisdom and Knowledge. 
In answer to which I assured
his Honour that the Business and Study
of their own Calling and Profession
so took up all their Thoughts and
engrossed all their Time, that they minded
nothing else, and that therefore, in
all points out of their own Trade, many
of them were of so great Ignorance
and Stupidity, that it was hard to pick
out of any Profession a Generation of 

Men more despicable in common Conversation,
or who were so much looked
upon as avowed Enemies to all
Knowledge and Learning, being equally
disposed to pervert the general reason
of Mankind in every other Subject
of Discourse, as in that of their own
Calling. 





A Continuation of the State of England,
so well governed by a Queen as to
need no first Minister. The Character
of such an one in some European
Courts. 
My Master was yet wholly at a
Loss to understand what Motives
could incite this Race of Lawyers
to perplex, disquiet, and weary
themselves, and engage in a Confederacy
of Injustice, merely for the Sake of
injuring their Fellow-Animals; neither
could he comprehend what I meant in
saying they did it for Hire. Whereupon
I was at much Pains to describe
to him the Use of Money, the Materials
it was made of, and the Value 

of the Metals, that when a Yahoo had
got a great Store of this precious Substance,
he was able to purchase whatever
he had a mind to, the finest Cloathing,
the noblest Houses, great Tracts
of Land, the most costly Meats and
Drinks, and have his choice of the
most beautiful Females. Therefore
since Money alone, was able to perform
all these Feats, our Yahoos thought,
they could never have enough of it
to spend or to save, as they found
themselves inclined from their natural
Bent either to Profusion or Avarice
That the Rich Man enjoyed the Fruit
of the Poor Man's Labour, and the latter
were a thousand to one in proportion
to the former. That the Bulk of
our People were forced to live miserably,
by labouring every Day for small
Wages to make a few live plentifully. 
I enlarged myself much on these and
many other Particulars to the same purpose: 
But his Honour was still to
seek: For he went upon a supposition 

that all Animals had a Title to their
share in the Productions of the Earth,
and especially those who presided over
the rest. Therefore he desired I would
let him know, what these costly Meats
were, and how any of us happened to
want them. Whereupon I enumerated
as many sorts as came into my Head,
with the various Methods of dressing
them, which could not be done without
sending Vessels by Sea to every
part of the World, as well for Liquors
to Drink, as for Sauces, and innumerable
other Conveniencies. I assured him,
that this whole Globe of Earth must
be at least three times gone round,
before one of our better Female Yahoos
could get her Breakfast, or a Cup to
put it in. He said, That must needs
be a miserable Country which cannot
furnish Food for its own Inhabitants. 
But what he chiefly wondered at was
how such vast Tracts of Grounds as I
described should be wholly without
Fresh-water, and the People put to the 

Necessity of sending over the Sea for
Drink. I replied, that England (the
dear Place of my Nativity) was computed
to produce three times the quantity
of Food, more than its Inhabitants are
able to consume, as well as Liquors extracted
from Grain, or pressed out of
the Fruit of certain Trees, which made
excellent Drink, and the same Proportion
in every other Convenience of Life. 
But in order to feed the Luxury and Intemperance
of the Males, and the Vanity
of the Females, we sent away the
greatest Part of our necessary Things to
other Countries, from whence in return
we brought the Materials of Diseases,
Folly, and Vice, to spend among ourselves. 
Hence it follows of Necessity,
that vast Numbers of our People are
compelled to seek their Livelihood by
Begging, Robbing, Stealing, Cheating,
Pimping, Forswearing, Flattering, Suborning,
Forging, Gaming, Lying,
Fawning, Hectoring, Voting, Scribling,
Stargazing, Poysoning, Whoring, Canting, 

Libelling, Free-thinking, and the
like Occupations: Every one of which
Terms, I was at much Pains to make
him understand. 
That Wine was not imported among
us from foreign Countries, to supply
the want of Water or other Drinks,
but because it was a sort of Liquid
which made us merry, by putting us
out of our Senses; diverted all melancholy
Thoughts, begat wild extravagant
Imaginations in the Brain, raised
our Hopes, and banished our Fears, suspended
every Office of Reason for a
Time, and deprived us of the Use of
our Limbs, till we fell into a profound
Sleep; although it must be confessed,
that we always awaked sick and dispirited,
and that the Use of this Liquor
filled us with Diseases, which made
our Lives uncomfortable and short. 
But beside all this, the Bulk of our
People supported themselves by furnishing 

the Necessities and Conveniencies of
Life to the Rich, and to each other. 
For Instance, when I am at home and
dressed as I ought to be, I carry on my
Body the Workmanship of an Hundred
Tradesmen; the Building and Furniture
of my House employ as many more
and five times the Number to adorn
my Wife. 
I was going on to tell him of another
sort of People, who get their Livelihood
by attending the Sick, having upon
some Occasions informed his Honour
that many of my Crew had died of Diseases. 
But here it was with the utmost
Difficulty, that I brought him to apprehend
what I meant. He could easily
conceive, that a Houyhnhnm grew weak
and heavy a few Days before his Death,
or by some Accident might hurt a
Limb. But that Nature, who works all
Things to Perfection, should suffer any
Pains to breed in our Bodies, he thought
it impossible, and desired to know the 

reason of so unaccountable an Evil. I
told him, we fed on a thousand Things
which operated the one contrary to
each other; that we eat when we were
not hungry, and drank without the Provocation
of Thirst; That we sate whole
Nights drinking strong Liquors without
eating a Bit, which disposed us to Sloth,
enflamed our Bodies, and precipitated
or prevented Digestion. That prostitute
Female Yahoos acquired a certain
Malady, which bred Rottenness in the
Bones of those, who fell into their Embraces; That
this and many other Diseases, were propagated from Father to
Son, so that great Numbers come into
the World with complicated Maladies
upon them; that it would be endless to
give him a Catalogue of all Diseases incident
to human Bodies; for they could
not be fewer than five or six hundred,
spread over every Limb, and
Joynt; in short, every Part, external
and intestine, having Diseases appropriated
to them. To remedy which, there 

was a Sort of People bred up among
us, in the Profession or Pretence of curing
the Sick. And because I had some
Skill in the Faculty, I would in Gratitude
to his Honour, let him know the
whole Mystery and Method by which
they proceed. 
Their Fundamental is, That all
Diseases arise from Repletion, from
whence they conclude, that a great
Evacuation of the Body is necessary,
either through the natural Passage, or
upwards at the Mouth. Their next
Business is, from Herbs, Minerals,
Gums, Oyls, Shells, Salts, Juices, Seaweed,
Excrements, Barks of Trees,
Serpents, Toads, Frogs, Spiders, dead
Mens Flesh and Bones, Beasts and Fishes,
to form a Composition for Smell and
Taste the most abominable, nauseous
and detestable, they can possibly contrive,
which the Stomach immediately
rejects with loathing; and this they
call a Vomit; or else from the same 

Store-house, with some other Poysonous
Additions, they command us to take in
at the Orifice above or below, (just as
the Physician then happens to be disposed)
a Medicine equally annoying
and disgustful to the Bowels, which relaxing
the Belly, drives down all before
it, and this they call a Purge, or a Glyster. 
For Nature (as the Physicians alledge)
having intended the superior anterior
Orifice only for the intromission of Solids
and Liquids, and the inferior for
Ejection, these Artists ingeniously considering
that in all Diseases Nature is
forced out of her Seat; therefore to replace
her in it, the Body must be treated
in a manner directly contrary, by
interchanging the Use of each Orifice,
forcing Solids and Liquids in at the
Anus, and making Evacuations at the
Mouth. 
But, besides real Diseases, we are
subject to many that are only imaginary,
for which the Physicians have invented 

imaginary Cures; these have
their several Names, and so have the
Drugs that are proper for them, and
with these our Female Yahoos are always
infested. 
One great Excellency in this Tribe
is their Skill at Prognosticks, wherein
they seldom fail; their Predictions in
real Diseases, when they rise to any Degree
of Malignity, generally portending
Death, which is always in their Power
when Recovery is not: And therefore,
upon any unexpected Signs of Amendment,
after they have pronounced their
Sentence, rather than be accused as false
Prophets, they know how to approve
their Sagacity to the World by a seasonable
Dose. 
They are likewise of special Use to
Husbands and Wives, who are grown
weary of their Mates, to eldest Sons,
to great Ministers of State, and often
to Princes. 

I had formerly upon occasion discoursed
with my Master upon the Nature
of Government in general, and particularly
of our own excellent Constitution,
deservedly the Wonder and Envy
of the whole World. But having here
accidentally mentioned a Minister of
State; he commanded me some time
after to inform him, what Species of
Yahoos I particularly meant by that
application. 
I told him, that our She Governor
or Queen having no Ambition to
gratify, no Inclination to satisfy of extending
her Power to the Injury of her
Neighbours, or the Prejudice of her
own Subjects, was therefore so far from
needing a corrupt Ministry to carry on
or cover any sinister Designs, that She
not only directs her own Actions to
the Good of her People, conducts them
by the Direction, and restrains them
within the Limitation of the Laws of 

her own Country; but submits the Behaviour
and Acts of those She intrusts
with the Administration of her Affairs
to the Examination of Her great Council,
and subjects them to the Penalties
of the Law; and therefore never puts
any such Confidence in any of her Subjects
as to entrust them with the whole
and entire Administration of her Affairs: 
But I added, that in some former
Reigns here, and in many other
Courts of Europe now, where Princes
grew indolent and careless of their own
Affairs through a constant Love and
Pursuit of Pleasure, they made use of
such an Administrator, as I had mentioned,
under the Title of first or chief
Minister of State, the Description of
which, as far as it may be collected
not only from their Actions, but from
the Letters, Memoirs, and Writings
published by themselves, the Truth of
which has not yet been disputed, may
be allowed to be as follows: That he
is a Person wholly exempt from Joy 

and Grief, Love and Hatred, Pity and
Anger; at least makes use of no other
Passions but a violent Desire of Wealth,
Power, and Titles; That he never tells
Words to all Uses, except to the Indication
of his Mind; That he never tells
a Truth; but with an Intent that you
should take it for a Lye; nor a Lye, but
with a Design that you should take it
for a Truth; That those he speaks
worst of behind their Backs, are in the
surest Way to Preferment; and whenever
he begins to praise you to others or
to yourself, you are from that Day forlorn. 
The worst Mark you can receive
is a Promise, especially when it is confirmed
with an Oath; after which every
wise Man retires, and gives over all
Hopes. 
There are three Methods by which
a Man may rise to be chief Minister. 
The first is, by knowing how with Prudence
to dispose of a Wife, a Daughter,
or a Sister: The second, by betraying or 

undermining his Predecessor: And the
third is by a furious Zeal in publick Assemblies
against the Corruptions of the
Court. But a wise Prince would rather
choose to employ those who practice
the last of these Methods; because
such Zealots prove always the most
obsequious and subservient to the Will
and Passions of their Master. That
these Ministers having all Employments
at their Disposal, preserve themselves
in Power by bribing the Majority of a
Senate or great Council; and at last
by an Act of Indemnity (whereof I described
the Nature to him) they secured
themselves from after Reckonings,
and retired from the Publick, laden
with the Spoils of the Nation. 
The Palace of a Chief Minister, is
a Seminary to breed up others in his
own Trade: The Pages, Lacquies, and
Porter, by imitating their Master, become
Ministers of State in their several
Districts, and learn to excel in the 

three principal Ingredients, of Insolence,
Lying, and Bribery. Accordingly,
they have a Subaltern Court paid
to them by Persons of the best Rank,
and sometimes by the Force of Dexterity
and Impudence, arrive through
several Gradations to be Successors to
their Lord. 
He is usually governed by a decayed
Wench, or favourite Footman,
who are the Tunnels through which
all Graces are conveyed, and may properly
be called, in the last Resort, the
Governors of the Kingdom. 
One Day in Discourse my Master,
having heard me mention the Nobility
of my Country, was pleased to make
me a Compliment which I could not
pretend to deserve: That he was sure,
I must have been born of some Noble
Family, because I far exceeded in
Shape, Colour, and Cleanliness, all the 

Yahoos of his Nation, although I seemed
to fail in Strength and Agility, which
must be imputed to my different Way
of Living from those other Brutes, and
besides, I was not only endowed with
the Faculty of Speech, but likewise
with some Rudiments of Reason, to a
Degree, that with all his Acquaintance
I passed for a Prodigy. 
He made me observe, that among
the Houyhnhnms, the White, the Sorrel,
and the Iron-grey, were not so exactly
shaped as the Bay, the Dapple-grey,
and the Black; nor born with
equal Talents of the Mind, or a Capacity
to improve them; and therefore
continued always in the Condition of
Servants, without ever aspiring to match
out of their own Race, which in that
Country would be reckoned monstrous
and unnatural. 
I made his Honour my most humble
Acknowledgements for the good 

Opinion he was pleased to conceive of
me; but assured him at the same time,
that my Birth was of the lower Sort,
having been born of plain honest Parents,
who were just able to give me
a tolerable Education: That Nobility
among us was altogether a different
Thing from the Idea he had of it; 
That our young Noblemen are bred
from their Childhood in Idleness and
Luxury; that as soon as Years will permit,
they consume their Vigor, and
contract odious Diseases among lewd
Females; and when their Fortunes are
almost ruined, they marry some Woman
of mean Birth, disagreeable Person,
and unsound Constitution, merely
for the Sake of Money, whom they
hate and despise. That the Productions
of such Marriages are generally scrophulous,
ricketty, or deformed Children; 
by which means the Family seldom
continues above Three Generations,
unless the Wife takes care
to provide a healthy Father among 

her Neighbours, or Acquaintance, in
order to improve and continue the
Breed. That a weak diseased Body, a
meager Countenance, and sallow Complexion,
are no uncommon Marks of
a Great Man; and a healthy robust
Appearance is so far disgraceful in a
Man of Quality, that the World is apt
to conclude his real Father to have
been on of the Inferiors of the Family,
especially when it is seen that the
Imperfections of his Mind run parallel
with those of his Body and are little
else than a Composition of Spleen, Dulness,
Ignorance, Caprice, Sensuality,
and Pride. 





The Author's great Love of his Native
Country. His Master's Observations
upon the Constitution and Administration
of England, as described by the
Author, with parallel Cases and
Comparisons. His Master's Observations
upon Human Nature. 
The Reader may be disposed to
wonder how I could prevail on
myself to give so free a Representation
of my own Species, among a Race of
Mortals who were already too apt to
conceive the vilest Opinion of Human
Kind from that entire Congruity betwixt
me and their Yahoos. But I must
freely confess, that the many Virtues of 

those excellent Quadrupeds placed in
opposite View to human Corruptions,
had so far opened my Eyes and enlightened
my Understanding, that I began
to view the Actions and Passions of
Man in a very different Light, and to
think the Honour of my own Kind not
worth managing; which, besides, it
was impossible for me to do before a
Person of so acute a Judgment as my
Master, who daily convinced me of a
thousand Faults in myself, whereof I
had not the least Perception before, and
which among us would never be numbered
even among human Infirmities,
I had likewise learned from his Example
an utter Detestation of all Falsehood
or Disguise; and Truth appeared so amiable
to me, that I determined upon sacrificing
every thing to it. 
Let me deal so candidly with the
Reader, as to confess, that there was
yet a much stronger Motive for the
Freedom I took in my Representation 

of Things. I had not been a Year in
this Country, before I contracted such
a Love and Veneration for the Inhabitants,
that I entered on a firm Resolution
never to return to human Kind,
but to pass the rest of my Life among
these admirable Houyhnhnms in the Contemplation
and Practice of every Virtue; 
where I could have no Example
or Incitement to Vice. But it was decreed
by Fortune, my perpetual Enemy,
that so great a Felicity should not fall
to my share. However, it is now some
Comfort to reflect, that in what I said
of my Countrymen, I extenuated their
Faults as much as I durst before so
strict an Examiner, and upon every Article,
gave as favourable a Turn as the
Matter would bear. For, indeed, who
is there alive that will not be swayed by
his Byass and Partiality to the Place of
his Birth? 
I have related the Substance of several
Conversations I had with my Master, 

during the greatest part of the
Time I had the Honour to be in his Service,
but have indeed for Brevity sake
omitted much more than is here set
down. 
When I had answered all his Questions,
and his Curiosity seemed to be
fully satisfied; he sent for me one Morning
early, and commanding me to sit
down at some distance, (an Honour
which he had never before conferred
upon me) he said, He had been very
seriously considering my whole Story,
as far as it related both to myself and
my Country: That he looked upon us
as a sort of Animals to whose Share, by
what Accident he could not conjecture,
some small Pittance of Reason had fallen,
whereof we made no other Use
than by its Assistance to aggravate our
natural Corruptions, and to acquire
new ones which Nature had not given
us, That we disarmed ourselves of the
few Abilities she had bestowed, had 

been very successful in multiplying our
original Wants, and seemed to spend
our whole Lives in vain Endeavours to
supply them by our own Inventions. 
That as to myself, it was manifest I
had neither the Strength or Agility of a
common Yahoo, that I walked infirmly
on my hinder Feet, had found out a
Contrivance to make my Claws of no
Use or Defence, and to remove the Hair
from my Chin, which was intended as a
shelter from the Sun and the Weather. 
Lastly, That I could neither run with
Speed, nor climb Trees like my Brethren
(as he called them) the Yahoos in this
Country. 
That our Institutions of Government
and Law were plainly owing to
our gross Defects in Reason, and by consequence,
in Vertue; because Reason alone
is sufficient to govern a Rational
Creature; which was therefore a Character
we had no Pretence to challenge,
even from the Account I had given of 

my own People, although he manifestly
perceived, that in order to favour them,
I had concealed many Particulars, and
often said the Thing which was not. 
He was the more confirmed in this
Opinion, because he observed, that as I
agreed in every Feature of my Body
with other Yahoos, except where it was
to my real Disadvantage in point of
Strength, Speed and Activity, the shortness
of my Claws, and some other Particulars
where Nature had no Part; so
from the Representation I had given
him of our Lives, our Manners, and our
Actions, he found as near a Resemblance
in the Disposition of our Minds. He said
the Yahoos were known to hate one another
more than they did any different
Species of Animals; and the Reason usually
assigned, was, the Odiousness of
their own Shapes, which all could see
in the rest, but not in themselves. He
had therefore begun to think it not unwise
in us to cover our Bodies, and by 

that Invention, conceal many of our
own Deformities from each other, which
would else be hardly supportable. But,
he now found he he had been mistaken
and that the Dissentions of those Brutes
in his Country were owing to the
same Cause with ours, as I had described
them. For, if (said he) you throw
among Five Yahoos as much Food as
would be sufficient for Fifty, they will,
instead of eating peaceably, fall together
by the Ears, each single one impatient
to have all to itself; and therefore a
Servant was usually employed to stand
by while they were feeding abroad,
and those kept at home were tied at a
Distance from each other; that if a
Cow died of Age or Accident, before
a Houyhnhnm could secure it for his
own Yahoos, those in the Neighbourhood
would come in Herds to seize
it, and then would ensue such a Battle
as I had described, with terrible Wounds
made by their Claws on both Sides,
although they seldom were able to kill 

one another, for want of such convenient
Instruments of Death as we had
invented. At other times the like Battles
have been fought between the Yahoos
of several Neighbourhoods without
any visible Cause: Those of one
District watching all Opportunities to
surprize the next before they are prepared. 
But if they find their Project
hath miscarried, they return home, and
for want of Enemies, engage in what I
call a Civil War among themselves. 
That in some Fields of his Country,
there are certain shining Stones of
several Colours, whereof the Yahoos are
violently fond, and when Part of these
Stones is fixed in the Earth, as it sometimes
happeneth, they will dig with
their Claws for whole Days to get
them out, then carry them away, and
hide them by Heaps in their Kennels; 
but still looking round with great Caution,
for fear their Comrades should
find out their Treasure. My Master 

said, he could never discover the Reason
of this unnatural Appetite, or how
these Stones could be of any Use to a
Yahoo; but now he believed it might
proceed from the same Principle of Avarice,
which I had ascribed to Mankind; 
that he had once, by way of Experiment,
privately removed a Heap of
these Stones from the Place where one
of his Yahoos had buried it: Whereupon,
the sordid Animal missing his Treasure,
by his loud lamenting brought the
whole Herd to the Place, there miserably
howled, then fell to biting and
tearing the rest, began to pine away,
would neither eat, nor sleep, nor work,
till he ordered a Servant privately to
convey the Stones into the same Hole,
and hide them as before; which when
his Yahoo had found, he presently recovered
his Spirits and good Humour,
but took care to remove them to a
better hiding-place, and hath ever since
been a very serviceable Brute. 

My Master farther assured me, which
I also observed myself, That in the
Fields where the shining Stones abound,
the fiercest and most frequent
Battles are fought, occasioned by perpetual
inroads of the Neighbouring
Yahoos. 
He said, it was common when two
Yahoos discovered such a Stone in a
Field, and were contending which of
them should be the Proprietor, a third
would take the Advantage, and carry
it away from them both; which my
Master would needs contend to have
some kind of Resemblance with our
Suits at Law; wherein I thought it
for our Credit not to undeceive him; 
since the Decision he mentioned was
much more equitable than many Decrees
among us: Because the Plaintiff and
Defendant there lost nothing besides the
Stone they contended for, whereas our
Courts of Equity, would seldom have 

dismissed the Cause while either of
them had any thing left. 
My Master continuing his Discourse,
said, There was nothing that rendered
the Yahoos more odious, than their undistinguishing
Appetite to devour every
Thing that came in their way,
whether Herbs, Roots, Berries, the corrupted
Flesh of Animals, or all mingled
together: And it was peculiar in
their Temper, that they were fonder
of what they could get by Rapine or
Stealth at a greater distance, than much
better Food provided for them at home. 
If their Prey held out, they would eat
till they were ready to burst, after
which Nature had pointed out to them
a certain Root that gave them a general
Evacuation. 
There was also another kind of
Root very juicy, but somewhat rare and
difficult to be found, which the Yahoos
sought for with much Eagerness, and 

would suck it with great Delight; and
it produced the same Effects that Wine
hath upon us. It would make them
sometimes hug, and sometimes tear one
another, they would howl and grin, and
chatter, and tumble, and then fall asleep
in the Dirt. 
I did indeed observe, that the Yahoos
were the only Animals in this
Country subject to any Diseases; which
however, were much fewer than Horses
have among us, and contracted not by
any ill treatment they meet with, but
by the Nastiness, and Greediness of that
sordid Brute. Neither has their Language
any more than a general Appellation
for those Maladies, which is borrowed
from the Name of the Beast, and
called Hnea-Yahoo or the Yahoo's-Evil,
and the Cure prescribed is a Mixture
of their own Dung and Urine forcibly
put down the Yahoo's Throat. This I
have since often taken myself, and do
freely recommend it to my Coutrymen 

for the publick Good, as an admirable
Specifick against all Diseases
produced by Repletion. 
As to Learning, Government, Arts,
Manufactures, and the like, my Master
confessed he could find little or no Resemblance
between the Yahoos of that
Country and those in ours. For, he
only meant to observe what Parity
there was in our Natures. He had
heard indeed some curious Houyhnhnms
observe, that in most Herds there was
a sort of ruling Yahoo, (as among us
there is generally some leading or principal
Stag in a Park) who was always
more deformed in Body, and mischievous
in Disposition, than any of the rest. That
this Leader had usually a Favourite as
like himself as he could get, whose Employment
was to lick his Master's Feet and
Posteriors, and drive the Female Yahoos
to his Kennel; for which he was now
and then rewarded with a piece of Ass's
Flesh. This Favourite is hated by the 

whole Herd, and therefore to protect
himself, keeps always near the Person
of his Leader. He usually continues
in Office till a worse can be found; but
the very Moment he is discarded, his
Successor at the Head of all the Yahoos
in that District, Young and Old, Male
and Female, come in a Body, and discharge
their Excrements upon him from
Head to Foot. But how far this might
be applicable to our Courts and Favourites,
and Ministers of State, my Master
said I could best determine. 
I durst make no return to this
malicious Insinuation, which debased human
Understanding below the Sagacity
of a common Hound, who has Judgment
enough to distinguish and follow the
Cry of the ablest Dog in the Pack, without
being ever mistaken. 
My Master told me, there were
some Qualities remarkable in the Yahoos,
which he had not observed me to 

mention, or at least very slightly, in
the Accounts I had given him of human
Kind; he said, Those Animals, like
other Brutes, had their Females in common; 
but in this they differed, that the
She-Yahoo would admit the Male, while
she was pregnant, and that the Hees
would quarrel and fight with Females
as fiercely as with each other. Both
which Practices were such Degrees of
Brutality, that no other sensitive Creature
ever arrived at. 
Another thing he wondered at in
the Yahoos, was their strange Disposition
to Nastiness and Dirt, whereas
there appears to be a natural Love of
Cleanliness in all other Animals. As
to the two former Accusations, I was
glad to let them pass without any Reply,
because I had not a Word to offer
upon them in Defence of my Species,
which otherwise I certainly had
done from my own Inclinations. But
I could have easily vindicated Human 

Kind from the Imputation of Singularity
upon this Article, if there had been
any Swine in that Country, (as unluckily
for me there were not) which
although it may be a sweeter Quadruped
than a Yahoo, cannot I humbly
conceive in Justice pretend to more
Cleanliness; and so his Honour himself
must have owned, if he had seen their
filthy way of feeding, and their Custom
of wallowing and sleeping in the
Mud. 
My Master likewise mentioned another
Quality which his Servants had
discovered in several Yahoos, and to him
was wholly unaccountable. He said, a
Fancy would sometimes take a Yahoo, to
retire into a Corner, to lie down and
howl, and groan, and spurn away all
that came near him, although he were
young and fat, wanted neither Food
nor Water; nor could the Servants
imagine what could possibly ail him. 
And the only Remedy they found was 

to set him to hard Work, after which
he would infallibly come to himself. 
To this I was silent out of Partiality
to my own Kind; yet here I could
discover the true Seeds of Spleen, which
only seizeth on the Lazy, the Luxurious,
and the Rich; who, if they were
forced to undergo the same Regimen,
I would undertake for the Cure. 
His Honour had farther observed,
that a Female-Yahoo would often stand
behind a Bank or a Bush, to gaze on
the young Males passing by, and then
appear, and hide, using many antick
Gestures and Grimaces, at which time
it was observed, that she had a most
offensive Smell; And when any of the
Males advanced, would slowly retire,
looking often back, and with a counterfeit
shew of Fear, run off into some
convenient Place where she knew the
Male would follow her. 

At other times if a Female Stranger
came among them, three or Four
of her own Sex, would get about her,
and stare, and chatter, and grin, and
smell her all over, and then turn off
with Gestures that seemed to express
Contempt and Disdain. 
Perhaps my Master might refine
a little in these Speculations, which he
had drawn from what he observed himself,
or had been told him by others: 
However, I could not reflect without
some Amazement, and much Sorrow,
that the Rudiments of Lewdness, Coquetry,
Censure, and Scandal, should
have place by Instinct in Womankind. 
I expected every Moment that
my Master would accuse the Yahoos
of those unnatural Appetites in both
Sexes, so common among us. But
Nature it seems hath not been so expert 

a School-mistress; and these politer
Pleasures are entirely the Productions
of Art and Reason, on our side
of the Globe. 





The Author relates several Particulars
of the Yahoos. The great Virtues of
the Houyhnhnms. The Education
and Exercise of their Youth. Their
general Assembly. 
As I ought to have understood
Human Nature much better
than I supposed it possible for my
Master to do, so it was easy to apply
the Character he gave of the Yahoos
to myself and my Countrymen,
and I believed I could yet make farther
Discoveries from my own Observation. 
I therefore often begged
his Favour to let me go among the
Herds of Yahoos in the Neighbourhood,
to which he always very graciously 

consented, being perfectly convinced
that the Hatred I bore those
Brutes would never suffer me to be
corrupted by them; and his Honour
ordered one of his Servants, a strong
Sorrel Nag, very honest and good-natured,
to be my Guard, without whose
Protection I durst not undertake such
Adventures. For I have already told
the Reader how much I was pestered
by those odious Animals upon my first
Arrival. And I afterwards failed very
narrowly three or four times of falling
into their Clutches, when I happened
to stray at any Distance without
my Hanger. And I have reason to believe
they had some Imagination that I
was of their own Species, which I often
assisted myself, by stripping up my
Sleeves, and shewing my naked Arms and
Breast in their sight, when my Protector
was with me. At which times they
would approach as near as they durst,
and imitate my Actions after the manner
of Monkeys, but ever with great 

signs of Hatred, as a tame Jack-Daw
with Cap and Stockings, is always persecuted
by the wild ones, when he
happens to be got among them. 
They are prodigiously nimble from
their Infancy; however, I once caught
a young Male of three Years old, and
endeavoured by all Marks of Tenderness
to make it quiet; but the little
Imp fell a squalling and scratching, and
biting with such Violence, that I was
forced to let it go, and it was high
time, for a whole Troop of old Ones
came about at the Noise; but finding
the Cub was safe, (for away it ran)
and my Sorrel Nag being by, they durst
not venture near us. I observed the
young Animal's Flesh to smell very rank,
and the stink was somewhat between a
Weasel and a Fox, but much more disagreeable. 
I forgot another Circumstance
(and perhaps I might have the
Reader's Pardon, if it were wholly omitted)
that while I held the odious 

Vermin in my Hands, it voided its filthy
Excrements of a Yellow liquid Substance,
all over my Cloaths; but by
good Fortune there was a small Brook
hard by, where I washed myself as clean
as I could, although I durst not come
into my Master's Presence, until I were
sufficiently aired. 
By what I could discover, the Yahoos
appear to be the most unteachable of all
Animals, their Capacities never reaching
higher than to draw or carry Burthens. 
Yet I am of Opinion this Defect
ariseth chiefly from a perverse, restive
Disposition. For they are cunning; 
malicious, treacherous and revengeful. 
They are strong and hardy,
but of a cowardly Spirit, and by consequence,
insolent, abject, and cruel. It
is observed, that the Red-haired of
both Sexes are more libidinous and
mischievous than the rest, whom yet
they much exceed in Strength and Activity. 

The Houyhnhnms keep the Yahoos
for present use in Huts not far from the
House; but the rest are sent abroad in
certain Fields, where they dig up Roots,
eat several kinds of Herbs, and scratch
about for Carrion, or sometimes catch
Weasels and Luhimuhs (a sort of wild
Rat) which they greedily devour. Nature
hath taught them to dig deep Holes
with their Nails on the side of a rising
Ground, wherein they lie by themselves,
only the Kennels of the Females are
larger, sufficient to hold two or three
Cubs. 
They swim from their Infancy like
Frogs, and are able to continue long
under Water, where they often take
Fish, which the Females carry home
to their Young. And upon this Occasion,
I hope the Reader will pardon my
relating an odd Adventure. 

Being one Day abroad with my
Protector the Sorrel Nag, and the Weather
exceeding hot, I entreated him to
let me bathe in a River that was near. 
He consented, and I immediately stripped
myself stark naked, and went down
softly into the Stream. It happened
that a young Female Yahoo standing behind
a Bank, saw the whole Proceeding,
and enflamed by Desire, as the Nag
and I conjectured, came running with
all speed, and leaped into the Water
within five Yards of the Place where I
bathed. I was never in my Life so terribly
frighted; the Nag was grazing at
some Distance, not suspecting any Harm. 
She embraced me after a most fulsome
manner; I roared as loud as I could, and
the Nag came gallopping towards me,
whereupon she quitted her Grasp, with
the utmost Reluctancy, and leaped upon
the opposite Bank, where she stood
gazing and howling all the time I was
putting on my Cloaths. 

This was Matter of Diversion to
my Master and his Family, as well
as of Mortification to myself. For
now I could no longer deny, that I
was a real Yahoo, in every Limb and
Feature, since the Females had a natural
Propensity to me as one of their
own Species: Neither was the Hair
of this Brute of a Red Colour, (which
might have been some Excuse for an
Appetite a little irregular) but Black
as a Sloe, and her Countenance did
not make an Appearance altogether so
hideous as the rest of the Kind; For
I think she could not be above Eleven
Years old. 
Having lived three Years in this
Country, the Reader I suppose will expect,
that I should, like other Travellers,
give him some Account of the
Manners and Customs of its Inhabitants,
which it was indeed my principal
Study to learn. 

As these Noble Houyhnhnms are endowed
by Nature with a general Disposition
to all Virtues, and have no
Conceptions or Ideas of what is Evil
in a Rational Creature, so their grand
Maxim is, to cultivate Reason, and to
be wholly governed by it. Neither is
Reason among them a Point Problematical
as with us, where men can argue
with Plausibility on both sides of
a Question; but strikes you with immediate
Conviction; as it must needs
do where it is not mingled, obscured,
or discoloured by Passion and Interest. 
I remember it was with extream Difficulty
that I could bring my Master
to understand the meaning of the Word
Opinion, or how a Point could be disputable; 
because Reason taught us to
affirm or deny only where we are certain; 
and beyond our Knowledge we
cannot do either. So that Controversies,
Wranglings, Disputes, and Positiveness
in false or dubious Propositions, 

are Evils unknown among the Houyhnhnms. 
In like manner when I used
to explain to him our several Systems
of Natural Philosophy, he would laugh
that a Creature pretending to Reason,
should value itself upon the Knowledge
of other Peoples Conjectures, and in
Things, where that Knowledge, if it
were certain, would be of no Use. 
Wherein he agreed entirely with the
Sentiments of Socrates, as Plato delivers
them; which I mention as the
highest Honour I can do that Prince
of Philosophers. I have often since reflected
what Destruction such a Doctrine
would make in the Libraries of
Europe, and how many Paths to Fame
would be then shut up in the Learned
World. 
Friendship and Benevolence are
the two principal Virtues among the
Houyhnhnms, and these not confined to
particular Objects, but universal to the
whole Race. For a Stranger from the 

remotest Part is equally treated with
the nearest Neighbour, and wherever
he goes, looks upon himself as at home. 
They preserve Decency and Civility
in the highest Degrees, but are altogether
ignorant of Ceremony. They
have no fondness for their Colts or
Foles, but the Care they take in educating
them proceeds entirely from
the Dictates of Reason. And I observed
my Master to shew the same
Affection to his Neighbour's Issue that
he had for his own, They will have it
that Nature teaches them to love the
whole Species, and it is Reason only
that maketh a Distinction of Persons,
where there is a a superior Degree of
Virtue. 
When the Matron Houyhnhnms
have produced one of each Sex, they no
longer accompany with their Consorts,
except they lose one of their Issue by
some Casualty, which very seldom happens: 
But in such a Case they meet 

again, or when the like Accident befals
a Person, whose Wife is past bearing,
some other Couple bestow on him one
of their own Colts, and then go together
again till the Mother is pregnant. 
This Caution is necessary to prevent
the Country from being overburthened
with Numbers. But the Race of
inferior Houyhnhnms bred up to be Servants
is not so strictly limited upon this
Article; these are allowed to produce
three of each Sex, to be Domesticks
in the Noble Families. 
In their Marriages they are exactly
careful to choose such Colours as will
not make any disagreeable Mixture in
the Breed. Strength is chiefly valued
in the Male, and Comeliness in the
Female, not upon the account of Love,
but to preserve the Race from degenerating; 
for where a Female happens to
excell in Strength, a Consort is chosen
with regard to Comeliness. Courtship
Love, Presents, Joyntures, Settlements, 

have no place in their Thoughts; or
Terms whereby to express them in
their Language. The young Couple
meet and are joyned, merely because
it is the Determination of their Parents
and Friends: It is what they
see done every Day, and they look upon
it as one of tha necessary Actions of a
Rational Being. But the Violation of
Marriage, or any other Unchastity, was
never heard of: And the married Pair
pass their Lives with the same Friendship,
and mutual Benevolence that they
bear to all others of the same Species,
who come in their way; without Jealousy,
Fondness, Quarrelling, or Discontent. 
In educating the Youth of both Sexes,
their Method is admirable, and highly
deserves our Imitation. These are not
suffered to taste a Grain of Oats, except
upon certain Days, till Eighteen
Years old, nor Milk, but very rarely; 
and in Summer they graze two Hours 

in the Morning, and as long in the
Evening, which their Parents likewise
observe, but the Servants are not allowed
above half that time, and a great
Part of their Grass is brought home,
which they eat at the most convenient
Hours, when they can be best spared
from Work. 
Temperance, Industry, Exercise
and Cleanliness, are the Lessons equally
enjoyned to the young ones of both
Sexes: And my Master thought it monstrous
in us to give the Females a different
kind of Education from the
Males, except in some Articles of Domestick
Management; whereby as he
truly observed, one half of our Natives
were good for nothing but bringing
Children into the World: And to trust
the Care of our Children to such useless
Animals, he said was yet a greater Instance
of Brutality. 

But the Houyhnhnms train up their
Youth to Strength, Speed, and Hardiness,
by exercising them in running
Races up and down steep Hills, and
over hard and stony Grounds, and
when they are all in a Sweat, they are
ordered to leap over Head and Ears,
into a Pond or a River. Four times
a Year the Youth of a certain District
meet to shew their Proficiency in Running,
and Leaping, and others Feats of
Strength and Agility, where the Victor
is rewarded, with a Song made
in his or her Praise. On this Festival
the Servants drive a Herd of Yahoos
into the Field, laden with Hay, and
Oats, and Milk for a Repast to the
Houyhnhnms; after which, these Brutes
were immediately driven back again,
for fear of being noisome to the Assembly. 
Every fourth Year at the Vernal
Equinox, there is a Representative 

Council of the whole Nation, which
meets in a Plain about twenty Miles
from our House, and continues about
five or six Days. Here they enquire
into the State and Condition of the
several Districts, Whether they abound
or be deficient in Hay or Oats, or Cows
or Yahoos? And wherever there is any
Want (which is but seldom) it is immediately
supplied by unanimous Consent
and Contribution. Here likewise
the Regulation of Children is settled: 
As for Instance, if a Houyhnhnm hath
two Males, he changeth one of them
with another that hath two Females: 
And when a Child hath been lost by
any Casualty, where the Mother is
past Breeding, it is determined what
Family shall breed another to supply
the Loss. 





A grand Debate at the General Assembly
of the Houyhnhnms, and how it
was determined. The Learning of
the Houyhnhnms. Their Buildings. 
Their manner of Burials. The Defectiveness
of their Language. 
One of these Grand Assemblies
was held in my time, about three
Months before my Departure, whither
my Master went as the Representative
of our District. In this Council was
resumed their old Debate, and indeed,
the only Debate that ever happened
in that Country; whereof my Master
after his Return gave me a very particular
Account. 

The Question to be debated, was,
Whether the Yahoos should be extirminated
from the Face of the Earth? 
One of the Members for the Affirmative
offered several arguments of great
Strength and Weight, alledging, That
as the Yahoos were the most filthy, noisome,
and deformed Animal which Nature
ever produced, so they were the
most restive and indocible, mischievous
and malicious: They would privately
suck the Teats of the Houyhnhnms
Cows, kill and devour their
Cats, trample down their Oats and
Grass, if they were not continually
watched, and commit a thousand other
Extravagancies. He took notice
of a general Tradition, That Yahoos
had not been always in that Country: 
But, that many Ages ago, two of these
Brutes appeared together upon a Mountain,
whether produced by the Heat of
the Sun upon corrupted Mud and Slime,
or from the Ooze or Froth of the Sea, 

was never known. That these Yahoos
engendered, and their Brood in a short
time grew so numerous as to over-run
and infest the whole Nation. That the
Houyhnhnms to get rid of this Evil,
made a general Hunting, and at last
enclosed the whole Herd, and destroying
the old Ones, every Houyhnhnm
kept two young Ones in a Kennel, and
brought them to such a degree of Tameness,
as an Animal so savage by Nature
can be capable of acquiring; using
them for Draught and Carriage. That
there seemed to be much Truth in this
Tradition, and that those Creatures
could not be Ylnhniamshy (or Aborigines
of the Land) because of the violent Hatred
the Houyhnhnms, as well as all
other Animals, bore them; which although
their evil Disposition sufficiently
deserved, could never have arrived at
so high a Degree, if they had been
Aborigines, or else they would have long
since been rooted out. That the Inhabitants
taking a Fancy to use the 

Service of the Yahoos, had very imprudently
neglected to cultivate the Breed
of Asses, which were a comely Animal,
easily kept, more tame and orderly,
without any offensive Smell, strong enough
for Labour, although they yield
to the other in Agility of Body; and if
their Braying be no agreeable Sound, it
is far preferable to the horrible Howlings
of the Yahoos. 
Several others declared their Sentiments
to the same purpose, when my
Master proposed an Expedient to the
Assembly, whereof he had indeed borrowed
the Hint from me. He approved
of the Tradition, mentioned by the
Honourable Member, who spoke before,
and affirmed, that the Two Yahoos said
to be first seen among them had been
driven thither over the Sea; that coming
to Land, and being forsaken by
their Companions, they retired to the
Mountains, and degenerating by degrees,
became in process of time, much 

more savage than those of their own
Species in the Country from whence
these two Originals came. The reason
of his Assertion was, that he had now in
his Possession, a certain wonderful Yahoo,
(meaning myself) which most of them
had heard of, and many of them had
seen. He then related to them, how
he first found me, that my Body was
all covered with an artificial Composure
of the Skins and Hairs of other
Animals: That I had a Language of
my own, and had thoroughly learned
theirs: That I had related to him the
Accidents which brought me thither: 
That when he saw me without my Covering,
I was an exact Yahoo in every
Part, only of a whiter Colour, less hairy,
and with shorter Claws. He added,
how I had endeavoured to persuade
him, that in my own and other
Countries the Yahoos acted as the governing,
Rational Animal, and held the
Houyhnhnms in Servitude: That he observed
in me all the Qualities of a Yahoo, 

only a little more civilized by some
Tincture of Reason, which however
was in a degree as far inferior to the
Houyhnhnm Race, as the Yahoos of
their Country were to me: That, among
other things, I mentioned a Custom
we had of Castrating Houyhnhnms
when they were young, in order to
render them tame; that the Operation
was easy and safe; that it was no
Shame to learn Wisdom from Brutes,
as Industry is taught by the Ant, and
Building by the Swallow. (For so I
translate the Word Lyhannh, although
it be a much larger Fowl) That this
Invention might be practiced upon the
younger Yahoos here, which, besides
rendring them tractable and fitter for
Use, would in an Age put an end to
the whole Species without destroying
Life. That, in the mean time the
Houyhnhnms should be exhorted to cultivate
the Breed of Asses, which as
they are in all respects more valuable
Brutes, so they have this Advantage, 

to be fit for Service at Five Years old,
which the others are not till twelve. 
This was all my Master thought
fit to tell me at that time, of what
passed in the Grand Council. But he
was pleased to conceal one Particular,
which related personally to myself,
whereof I soon felt the unhappy Effect,
as the Reader will know in its proper
Place, and from whence I date all the
succeeding Misfortunes of my Life. 
The Houyhnhnms have no Letters,
and consequently, their Knowledge is
all Traditional. But there happening
few Events of any Moment among a
People so well united, naturally disposed
to every Virtue, wholly governed by
Reason, and cut off from all Commerce
with other Nations, the Historical
Part is easily preserved without
burthening their Memory. I have already
observed, that they are subject
to no Diseases, and therefore can have 

no need of Physicians. However, they
have excellent Medicines composed of
Herbs, to cure accidental Bruises and
Cuts in the Pastern or Frog of the Foot
by sharp Stones, as well as other Maims
and Hurts in the several Parts of the
Body. 
They calculate the Year by the Revolution
of the Sun and the Moon
but use no subdivisions into Weeks. 
They are well enough acquainted with
the Motions of those two Luminaries,
and understand the Nature of Eclipses; 
and this is the utmost Progress of their
Astronomy. 
In Poetry they must be allowed to
excell all other Mortals; wherein the
Justness of their Similes, and the Minuteness,
as well as Exactness of their
Descriptions, are indeed inimitable. 
Their Verses abound very much in both
of these, and usually contain either some
exalted Notions of Friendship and Benevolence, 

or the Praises of those who
were Victors in Races, and other bodily
Exercises. Their Buildings, although
very rude and simple, are not inconvenient,
but well contrived to defend them
from all Injuries of Cold and Heat. 
They have a kind of Tree, which at Forty
Years old loosens in the Root, and
falls with the first Storm; they grow
very strait, and being pointed like
Stakes with a sharp Stone, (for the
Houyhnhnms know not the Use of Iron)
they stick them erect in the Ground about
ten Inches asunder, and then weave
in Oat-straw, or sometimes Wattles betwixt
them. The Roof is made after
the same manner, and so are the
Doors. 
The Houyhnhnms use the hollow
Part between the Pastern and the Hoof
of their Fore-feet, as we do our Hands,
and this with greater Dexterity, than I
could first imagine. I have seen a
White Mare of our Family thread a 

Needle (which I lent her on purpose)
with that Joynt. They milk their
Cows, reap their Oats, and do all the
Work which requires Hands, in the
same manner. They have a kind of
hard Flints, which by grinding against
other Stones, they form into Instruments,
that serve instead of Wedges,
Axes, and Hammers. With Tools made
of these Flints, they likewise cut their
Hay, and reap their Oats, which there
groweth naturally in several Fields: 
The Yahoos draw home the Sheaves in
Carriages, and the Servants tread them
in several covered Hutts, to get out
the Grain, which is kept in Stores. They
make a rude kind of earthen and wooded
Vessels, and bake the former in the
Sun. 
If they can avoid Casualties, they
die only of Old-Age, and are buried
in the obscurest Places that can be found,
their Friends and Relations expressing
neither Joy nor Grief at their Departure, 

nor does the dying Person discover
the least Regret that he is leaving
the World, any more than if he
were upon returning home from a Visit
to one of his Neighbours; I remember
my Master having once made an Appointment
with a Friend and his Family
to come to his House upon some
Affair of Importance, on the Day fixed,
the Mistress and her two Children
came very late; she made two Excuses,
first for her Husband, who, as she
said, happened that very Morning to
Shnuwnh. The Word is strongly expressive
in their Language, but not
easily rendered into English, it signifies,
to retire to his first Mother. Her Excuse
for not coming sooner, was, that
her Husband dying late in the Morning,
she was a good while consulting
her Servants about a convenient Place
where his Body should be laid; and I
observed she behaved herself at our
House, as chearfully as the rest, and
died about three Months after. 

They live generally to Seventy or
Seventy-five Years, very seldom to Fourscore: 
Some Weeks before their Death
they feel a gradual Decay, but without
Pain. During this time they are
much visited by their Friends, because
they cannot go abroad, with their usual
Ease and Satisfaction. However, about
ten Days before their Death, which
they seldom fail in computing, they
return the Visits that have been made
them by those who are nearest in the
Neighbourhood, being carried in a convenient
Sledge drawn by Yahoos, which
Vehicle they use, not only upon this
Occasion, but when they grow old upon
long Journeys, or when they are
lamed by any Accident. And therefore
when the dying Houyhnhnms return
those Visits, they take a solemn leave of
their Friends, as if they were going to
some remote Part of the Country, where
they designed to pass the rest of their
Lives. 

I know not whether it may be
worth observing, that the Houyhnhnms
have no Word in their Language to
express any thing that is Evil, except
what they borrow from the Deformities
or ill Qualities of the Yahoos. Thus
they denote the Folly of a Servant, an
Omission of a Child, a Stone that cut
their Feet, a continuance of foul or unseasonable
Weather, and the like, by adding
to each the Epithet of Yahoo, For
Instance, hhnm Yahoo, Whnaholm Yahoo,
Ynlhmndwihlma Yahoo, and an ill contrived
House, Ynholmhnmrohlnw Yahoo. 
I could with great Pleasure enlarge
farther upon the Manners and Virtues
of this excellent People; but intending
in a short time to publish a Volume by
itself expresly upon that Subject, I refer
the Reader thither. And in the mean
time, proceed to relate my own sad
Catastrophe. 





The Author's Oeconomy and happy Life
among the Houyhnhnms. His great
Improvement in Virtue, by conversing
with them. Their Conversations. 
The Author has notice given him by
his Master that he must depart from
the Country. He falls into a Swoon
for Grief, but submits. He contrives
and finishes a Canoo, by the help of
a Fellow-Servant, and puts to Sea
at a venture. 
I had settled my little Oeconomy
to my own Heart's content. My
Master had ordered a Room for me
after their manner, about six Yards
from the House, the Sides and Floors
of which I plaistered with Clay, and 

covered with Rush-matts of my own contriving; 
I had beaten Hemp, which there
grows wild, and made of it a sort of
Ticking: This I filled with the Feathers
of several Birds I had taken with
Springes made of Yahoos Hairs, and
were excellent Food. I had worked
two Chairs with my Knife, the Sorrel
Nag helping me in the grosser and
more laborious Part. When my Cloaths
were worn to Rags, I made myself others
with the Skins of Rabbets, and
of a certain beautiful Animal ahout the
same size, called Nnuhnoh, the Skin of
which is covered with a fine Down. 
Of these I made very tolerable Stockings. 
I soaled my Shoes with Wood, which I
cut from a Tree, and fitted to the upper
Leather, and when this was worn
out, I supplied it with the Skins of
Yahoos dried in the Sun. I often got
Honey out of hollow Trees, which I
mingled with Water, or eat with my
Bread. No Man could more verify the
Truth of these two Maxims, That Nature 

is very easily satisfied; and, That
Necessity is the Mother of Invention. 
I enjoyed perfect Health of Body and
Tranquillity of Mind; I did not find
the Treachery or Inconstancy of a
Friend, nor the Injuries of a secret or
open Enemy. I had no occasion of bribing,
flattering or pimping, to procure
the Favour of any great Man or of his
Minion. I wanted no Fence against
Fraud or Oppression; Here was neither
Physician to destroy my Body, nor Lawyer
to ruin my Fortune; No Informer to
watch my Words, and Actions, or forge
Accusations against me for Hire: Here
were no Gibers, Censurers, Backbiters,
Pick-pockets, Highwaymen, House-breakers,
Attorneys, Bawds, Buffoons,
Gamesters, Politicians, Wits, splenetick
tedious Talkers, Controvertists, Ravishers,
Murderers, Robbers, Virtuoso's,
no Leaders or Followers of Party and
Faction; no Encouragers to Vice, by
Seducement or Examples: No Dungeon,
Axes, Gibbets, Whipping-posts, or Pillories: 

No cheating Shop-keepers or
Mechanicks: No Pride, Vanity or Affectation: 
No Fops, Bullies, Drunkards,
strolling Whores, or Poxes: No ranting,
lewd, expensive Wives: No stupid,
proud Pedants: No importunate, overbearing,
quarrelsome, noisy, roaring,
empty, conceited, swearing Companions: 
No Scoundrels, raised from the
Dust for the sake of their Vices, or
Nobility thrown into it on account of
their Virtues: No Lords, Fidlers,
Judges or Dancing-Masters. 
I had the favour of being admitted
to several Houyhnhmns, who came
to visit or dine with my Master, where
his Honour graciously suffered me to
wait in the Room, and listen to their
Discourse. Both he and his Company
would often descend to ask me Questions,
and receive my Answers. I had
also sometimes the Honour of attending
my Master in his Visits to others. 
I never presumed to speak, except in 

answer to a Question, and then I did
it with inward Regret, because it was
a Loss of so much Time for improving
myself: But I was infinitely delighted,
with the Station of an humble Auditor
in such Conversations, where nothing
passed but what was useful, expressed
in the fewest and most significant
Words: Where the greatest Decency
was observed, without the least Degree
of Ceremony; where no Person spoke
without being pleased himself, and pleasing
his Companions: Where there was
no Interruption, Tediousness, Heat, or
Difference of Sentiments. They have
a Notion, That when People are met
together, a short Silence doth much
improve Conversation: This I found to
be true; for during those little Intermissions
of Talk, new Ideas would arise
in the Thoughts, which very much
enlivened their Discourse. Their Subjects
are generally on Friendship and
Benevolence, on Order and Oeconomy,
sometimes upon the visible Operations of 

Nature, or ancient Traditions, upon the
Bounds and Limits of Virtue, upon the
unerving Rules of Reason, or upon some
Determinations, to be taken at the next
great Assembly; and often upon the various
Excellencies of Poetry. I may
add without Vanity, that my Presence
often gave them sufficient Matter for
Discourse, because it afforded my Master
an Occasion of letting his Friends into
the History of me and my Country, upon
which they were all pleased to descant
in a manner not very advantageous
to Human Kind; and for that
Reason I shall not repeat what they
said: Only I may be allowed to observe,
That his Honour, to my great Admiration,
appeared to understand the Nature
of Yahoos in all Countries, much
better than myself. He went through
all our Vices and Follies, and discovered
many which I had never mentioned
to him, by only supposing what Qualities
a Yahoo of their Country, with a
small proportion of Reason, might be 

capable of exerting; and concluded,
with too much Probability, how vile as
well as miserable such a Creature must
be. 
I freely confess, that all the little
Knowledge I have of any value,
was acquired by the Lectures I received
from my Master, and from hearing
the Discourses of him and his Friends; 
to which I should be prouder to listen,
than to dictate to the greatest and
wisest Assembly in Europe. I admired
the Strength, Comeliness, and Speed of
the Inhabitants; and such a Constellation
of Virtues in such Amiable Persons
produced in me the highest Veneration. 
At first, indeed, I did not feel
that natural Awe which the Yahoos and
all other Animals bear towards them,
but it grew upon me by Degrees, much
sooner than I imagined, and was mingled
with a respectful Love and Gratitude,
that they would condescend to 

distinguish me from the rest of my
Species. 
When I thought of my Family,
my Friends, and my Countrymen, or
Human Race in general, I considered
them as they really were, Yahoos in
Shape and Disposition, only a little
civilized, and qualified with the Gift of
Speech, but making no other use of
Reason, than to improve and multiply
those Vices, whereof their Brethren in
this Country had only the share that
Nature allotted them. When I happened
to behold the Reflection of my
own Form in a Lake or a Fountain,
I turned away my Face in Horror and
Detestation of myself, and could better
endure the sight of a common Yahoo,
than of my own Person. By conversing
with the Houyhnhnms, and looking upon
them with Delight, I fell to imitate
their Gate and Gesture, which is now
grown into an Habit, and my Friends
often tell me, in a blunt way, that I trot 

like a Horse; which, however, I take
for a great Compliment: Neither shall
I disown, that in speaking I am apt
to fall into the Voice and manner of
the Honyhnhnms, and hear myself ridiculed
on that account without the
least Mortification. 
In the midst of all this Happiness,
and when I looked upon myself to be
fully settled for Life, my Master sent
for me one Morning a little earlier
than his usual Hour. I observed by his
Countenance that he was in some Perplexity,
and at a Loss how to begin
what he had to speak. After a short
Silence, he told me, He did not know
how I would take what he was going
to say; that in the last general Assembly,
when the Affair of the Yahoos
was entered upon, the Representatives
had taken offence at his keeping a Yahoo
(meaning myself) in his Family
more like a Houyhnhnm, than a Brute
Animal. That he was known frequently 

to converse with me, as if he could
receive some Advantage or Pleasure in
my Company: That such a Practice
was not agreeable to Reason or Nature,
nor a thing ever heard of before
among them. The Assembly did therefore
exhort him, either to employ me
like the rest of my Species, or command
me to swim back to the Place
from whence I came. That the first
of these Expedients was utterly rejected
by all the Houyhnhnms, who had
ever seen me at his House or their
own: For they alledged, That because
I had some Rudiments of Reason,
added to the natural Pravity of those
Animals, it was to be feared, I might
be able to seduce them into the
woody and mountainous Parts of the
Country, and bring them in Troops
by Night to destroy the Houyhnhnms
Cattle, as being naturally of the ravenous
Kind, and averse from Labour. 

My Master added, That he was
daily pressed by the Houyhnhnms of
the Neighbourhood to have the Assembly's
Exhortation executed, which he
could not put off much longer. He
doubted it would be impossible for me
to swim to another Country, and therefore
wished I would contrive some
sort of Vehicle resembling those I had
described to him, that might carry
me on the Sea, in which Work I should
have the Assistance of his own Servants,
as well as those of his Neighbours. 
He concluded, That for his
own Part he could have been content
to keep me in his Service as long as
I lived, because he found I had cured
myself of some bad Habits and Dispositions,
by endeavouring; as far as my
inferior Nature was capable, to imitate
the Houyhnhnms. 
I should here observe to the Reader,
That a Decree of the general Assembly 

in this Country, is expressed by
the Word Hnhloayn, which signifies an
Exhortation; as near as I can render
it: For they have no Conception how
a rational Creature can be compelled,
but only advised, or exhorted, because
no Person can disobey Reason, without
giving up his Claim to be a rational
Creature. 
I was struck with the utmost Grief
and Despair at my Master's Discourse,
and being unable to support the Agonies
I was under, I fell into a Swoon
at his Feet; when I came to myself,
he told me, that he concluded I
had been dead. (For these People
are subject to no such Imbecillities
of Nature) I answered, in a faint
Voice, That Death would have been
too great an Happiness; that although
I could not blame the Assembly's Exhortation,
or the Urgency of his Friends; 
yet in my weak and corrupt Judgment,
I thought it might consist with 

Reason to have been less rigorous. That
I could not swim a League, and probably
the nearest Land to theirs might
be distant above an hundred: That
many Materials, necessary for making
a small Vessel to carry me off, were
wholly wanting in this Country, which
however, I would attempt in Obedience
and Gratitude to his Honour, although
I concluded the Thing to be
impossible, and therefore looked on my
self as already devoted to Destruction. 
That the certain Prospect of unnatural
Death, was the least of my Evils: For,
supposing I should escape with Life by
some strange adventure, how could I
think with Temper, of passing my
Days among Yahoos, and relapsing into
my old Corruptions, for want of Examples
to lead and keep me within the
Paths of Virtue. That I knew too
well upon what solid Reasons all the
Determinations of the wise Houyhnhnms
were founded, not to be shaken by Arguments
of mine, a miserable Yahoo; 

and therefore after presenting him with
my humble Thanks for the Offer of
his Servants Assistance in making a
Vessel, and desiring a reasonable Time
for so difficult a Work, I told him I
would endeavour to preserve a wretched
Being; and, if ever I returned to England,
was not without Hopes of being
useful to my own Species, by celebrating
the praises of the renowned
Houyhnhnms, and proposing their Virtues
to the Imitation of Mankind. 
My Master in a few Words made
me a very gracious Reply, allowed me
the space of two Months to finish my
Boat; and ordered the Sorrel Nag, my
Fellow-Servant, (for so at this distance
I may presume to call him) to follow
my Instructions, because I told my Master,
that his Help would be sufficient,
and I knew he had a Tenderness for
me. 

In his Company my first Business
was to go to that Part of the Coast,
where my rebellious Crew had ordered
me to be set on Shore. I got upon
a Height, and looking on every side
into the Sea, fancied I saw a small Island,
towards the North-East: I took
out my Pocket-glass, and could then clearly
distinguish it about five Leagues off,
as I computed; but it appeared to the
Sorrel Nag to be only a blue Cloud: 
For, as he had no Conception of any
Country beside his own, so he could not
be as expert in distinguishing remote
Objects at Sea, as we who so much
converse in that Element. 
After I had discovered this Island,
I considered no farther; but resolved, it
should, if possible, be the first Place of
my Banishment, leaving the Consequence
to Fortune. 

I returned home, and consulting
with the Sorrel Nag, we went into
a Copse at some distance, where I
with my Knife, and he with a sharp
Flint fastened very artificially, after
their manner, to a wooden Handle, cut
down several Oak Wattles about the
Thickness of a Walking-staff, and some
larger Pieces. But I shall not trouble
the Reader with a particular Description
of my own Mechanicks; let it
suffice to say, that in six Weeks time,
with the Help of the Sorrel Nag, who
performed the Parts that required most
Labour, I finished a sort of Indian Canoo,
but much larger, covering it
with the Skins of Yahoos well stitched
together, with hempen Threads of my
own making. My Sail was likewise
composed of the Skins of the same Animal; 
but I made use of the youngest I
could get, the older being too tough
and thick, and I likewise provided myself
with four Paddles. I laid in a Stock 

of boiled Flesh of Rabbets and Fowls,
and took with me two Vessels, one filled
with Milk, and the other with
Water. 
I tried my Canoo in a large Pond
near my Master's House, and then corrected
in it what was amiss; stopping
all the Chinks with Yahoos Tallow, till
I found it stanch, and able to bear me,
and my Freight. And when it was as
compleat as I could possibly make it
I had it drawn on a Carriage very gently
by Yahoos, to the Sea-side, under
the conduct of the Sorrel Nag, and another
Servant. 
When all was ready, and the Day
come for my Departure, I took leave of
my Master and Lady, and the whole Family,
mine Eyes flowing with Tears, and
my Heart quite sunk with Grief. But
his honour, out of Curiosity, and perhaps
(if I may speak it without Vanity)
partly out of Kindness, was determined 

to see me in my Canoo, and got
several of his neighbouring Friends to
accompany him. I was forced to wait
above an Hour for the Tide, and then
observing the Wind very fortunately
bearing towards the Island, to which I
intended to steer my Course. I took a
second Leave of my Master: But as I
was going to prostrate myself to kiss his
Hoof, he did me the Honour to raise it
gently to my Mouth. I am not ignorant
how much I have been censured
for mentioning this last Particular. For
my Detractors are pleased to think it
improbable, that so Illustrious a Person
should descend to give so great a Mark
of Distinction to a Creature so inferior
as I. Neither have I forgot, how
apt some Travellers are to boast of
extraordinary Favours they have received. 
But if these Censurers were
better acquainted with the noble and
courteous Disposition of the Houyhnhnms,
they would soon change their
Opinion. 

I paid my respects to the rest of
the Houyhnhnms in his Honour's Company; 
then getting into my Canoo, I
pushed off from Shore. 





The Author's dangerous Voyage. He
arrives at New-Holland, hoping to
settle there. Is wounded with an
Arrow by one of the Natives. Is
seized and carried by Force into a
Portugueze Ship. The great Civilities
of the Captain. The Author
arrives at England. 
I began this desperate Voyage on
February 15, 171&frac45; at 9 o'Clock
in the Morning. The Wind was very
favourable; however, I made use at
first only of my Paddles, but considering
I should soon be weary, and that
the Wind might chop about, I ventured
to set up my little Sail; and thus 

with the help of the Tide, I went
at the rate of a League and a half an
Hour, as near as I could guess. My
Master and his Friends continued on
the Shoar, till I was almost out of
sight; and I often heard the Sorrel
Nag (who always loved me) crying
out, Hnuy illa nyha majah Yahoo, Take
care of thyself, gentle Yahoo. 
My Design was, if possible, to discover
some small Island uninhabited,
yet sufficient by my Labour to furnish
me with the Necessities of Life
which I would have thought a greater
Happiness than to be first Minister
in the Politest Court of Europe; 
so horrible was the Idea I conceived
of returning to live in the Society
and under the Government of Yahoos. 
For in such a Solitude as I desired, I
could at least enjoy my own Thoughts,
and reflect with Delight on the Virtues
of those inimitable Houyhnhnms,
without any Opportunity of degenerating 

into the Vices and Corruptions
of my own Species. 
The Reader may remember what
I related when my Crew conspired
against me, and confined me to my
Cabbin. How I continued there several
Weeks, without knowing what
Course we took, and when I was put
a Shoar in the Long-boat, how the Sailors
told me with Oaths, whether true
or false, that they knew not in what
Part of the World we were. However,
I did then believe us to be about
ten Degrees Southward of the
Cape of Good Hope, or about 45 Degrees
Southern Latitude, as I gathered
from some general Words I over-heard
among them, being I supposed to the
South-East in their intended Voyage
to Madagascar. And although this
were but little better than Conjecture,
yet I resolved to steer my Course Eastward,
hoping to reach the South-West
Coast of New-Holland, and perhaps 

some such Island as I desired, lying
Westward of it. The wind was full
West, and by six in the Evening I computed
I had gone Eastward at least
eighteen Leagues, when I spied a very
small Island about half a League off,
which I soon reached, It was nothing
but a Rock with one Creek naturally
arched by the force of Tempests. Here
I put in my Canoo, ond climbing up
a part of the Rock, I could plainly discover
Land to the East, extending from
South to North. I lay all Night in my
Canoo, and repeating my Voyage early
in the Morning, I arrived in seven
Hours to the South-East Point of New
Holland. This confirmed me in the opinion
I have long entertained, that the
Maps and Charts place this Country at
least three Degrees more to the East
than it really is; which Thought I communicated
many Years ago to my worthy
Friend Mr. Herman Moll, and gave
him my Reasons for it, although he 

hath rather chosen to follow other Authors. 
I saw no Inhabitants in the Place
where I landed, and being unarmed, I
was afraid of venturing far into the
Country. I found some Shell-fish on
the Shore, and eat them raw, not daring
to kindle a Fire, for fear of being
discovered by the Natives. I continued
three Days feeding on Oysters and Limpits,
to save my own Provisions, and
I fortunately found a Brook of excellent
Water, which gave me great Relief. 
On the fourth Day, venturing out
early a little too far, I saw twenty or
thirty Natives upon a Height, not above
five hundred Yards from me. 
They were stark naked, Men, Women,
and Children round a Fire, as I could
discover by the Smoak. One of them
spied me, and gave notice to the rest; 
five of them advanced towards me 

leaving the Women and Children at
the Fire. I made what haste I could
to the Shore, and getting into my Canoo,
shoved off: The Savages observing
me retreat ran after me; and before
I could get far enough into the
Sea, discharged an Arrow, which
wounded me deeply on the inside of my
left Knee (I shall carry the Mark to
my Grave.) I apprehended the Arrow
might be poisoned, and paddling out of
the reach of their Darts (being a calm
Day) I made a shift to suck the Wound,
and dress it as well as I could. 
I was at a Loss what to do, for I
durst not return to the same Landing-place,
but stood to the North, and was
forced to paddle; for the Wind though
very gentle was against me, blowing
North-West. As I was looking about
for a secure Landing-place, I saw a
Sail to the North North-East, which
appearing every Minute more visible. 
I was in some Doubt, whether I should 

wait for them or no, but at last my Detestation
of the Yahoo Race prevailed,
and turning my Canoo, I sailed and paddled
together to the South, and got into
the same Creek from whence I set out
in the Morning, choosing rather to trust
myself among these Barbarians, than
live with European Yahoos. I drew up
my Canoo as close as I could to the
Shore, and hid myself behind a Stone
by a little Brook, which, as I have
already said, was excellent Water. 
The Ship came within half a league
of this Creek, and sent out her Long-Boat
with Vessels to take in fresh Water
(for the Place it seems was very
well known) but I did not observe it
till the Boat was almost on Shore, and
it was too late to seek another Hiding-place. 
The Seamen at their landing observed
my Canoo, and rummaging it all
over, easily conjectured that the Owner
could not be far off. Four of them
well-armed searched every Cranny and 

Lurking-hole, till at last they found me
flat on my Face behind the Stone. They
gazed a while in admiration at my
strange uncouth Dress, my Coat made
of Skins, my wooden soaled Shoes, and
my furred Stockings; from whence,
however, they concluded I was not a
Native of the Place, who all go naked. 
One of the Seamen in portugueze bid
me rise, and asked who I was. I understood
that Language very well, and
getting upon my Feet, said, I was a
poor Yahoo, banished from the Houyhnhnms,
and desired they would please to
let me depart. They admired to hear me
answer them in their own Tongue, and
saw by my Complexion I must be an European; 
but were at a loss to know what
I meant by Yahoos and Houyhnhnms,
and at the same time fell a laughing at
my strange Tone in speaking, which
resembled the Neighing of a Horse. I
trembled all the while betwixt Fear
and Hatred: I again desired leave to
depart, and was gently moving to my 

Canoo; but they laid hold on me, desiring
to know, what Country I was
of? whence I came? with many other
Questions. I told them, I was born in
England, from whence I came about
five Years ago, and then their Country
and ours were at Peace. I therefore
hoped they would not treat me as
an Enemy, since I meant them no harm,
but was a poor Yahoo, seeking some
desolate Place where to pass the Remainder
of his unfortunate Life. 
When they began to talk, I thought
I never heard or saw any thing so
unnatural; for it appeared to me as
monstrous as if a Dog or a Cow
should speak in England, as a Yahoo in
Houyhnhnm-land. The honest Portugueze
were equally amazed at my
strange Dress, and the odd manner of
delivering my words, which however
they understood very well. They
spoke to me with great Humanity, and
said they were sure their Captain would 

carry me gratis to Lisbon, from whence
I might return to my own Country; 
that two of the Seamen would go back
to the Ship, inform the Captain of what
they had seen, and receive his Orders; 
in the mean time, unless I would give
my solemn Oath not to fly, they would
secure me by Force. I thought it best
to comply with their Proposal. They
were very curious to know my Story,
but I gave them very little Satisfaction; 
and they all conjectured, that my Misfortunes
had impaired my Reason. In
two Hours the Boat, which went
loaden with Vessels of Water, returned
with the Captain's Commands to
fetch me on Board. I fell on my
Knees to preserve my Liberty; but all
was in vain, and the Men having tied
me with Cords, heaved me into the
Boat, from whence I was taken into
the Ship, and from thence into the
Captain's Cabbin. 

His Name was Pedro de Mendez,
he was a very courteous and generous
Person; he entreated me to give some
Account of myself, and desired to know
what I would eat or drink; said I
should be used as well as himself, and
spoke so many obliging things, that I
wondered to find such Civilities from
a Yahoo. However, I remained silent
and sullen; I was ready to faint at the
very smell of him and his Men. At
last I desired something to eat out
of my own Canoo; but he ordered me
a Chicken and some excellent Wine,
and then directed that I should be put
to Bed in a very clean Cabbin. I
would not undress myself, but lay on
the Bed-cloaths, and in half an Hour
stole out, when I thought the Crew was
at Dinner, and getting to the side of
the Ship was going to leap into the
Sea, and swim for my Life, rather than
continue among Yahoos. But one of the
Seamen prevented me, and having informed 

the Captain, I was chained to
my Cabbin. 
After Dinner Don Pedro came to
me, and desired to know my reason for
so desperate an Attempt; assured me he
only meant to do me all the Service
he was able, and spoke so very movingly,
that at last I descended to treat
him like an Animal that had some
little portion of Reason. I gave him
a very short Relation of my Voyage, of
the Conspiracy against me by my own
Men, of the Country where they set
me on Shore, and of my three Years
Residence there. All which he looked
upon as if it were a Dream or a Vision; 
whereat I took great Offence; 
for I had quite forgot the Faculty of
Lying, so peculiar to Yahoos in all Countries
where they preside, and consequently
the Disposition of suspecting
Truth in others of their own Species. 
I asked him, Whether it were the Custom
in his Country to say the Thing 

that was not? I assured him I had almost
forgot what he meant by Falsehood,
and if I had lived a thousand
Years in Houyhnhnmland, I should never
have heard a Lye from the meanest
Servant; that I was altogether indifferent
whether he believed me or no; 
but however, in return for his Favours,
I would give so much Allowance to the
Corruption of his Nature, as to answer
any Objection he would please to make,
and then he might easily discover the
Truth. 
The Captain, a wise Man, after
many Endeavours to catch me tripping
in some part of my Story, at last began
to have a better Opinion of my Veracity,
and the rather because he confessed,
he met with a Dutch Skipper, who
pretended to have landed with Five
others of his Crew upon a certain
Island or Continent South of New-Holland,
where they went for fresh Water,
and observed a Horse driving before 

him several Animals exactly resembling
those I described under the
Name of Yahoos, with some other Particulars,
which the Captain said he had
forgot; because he then concluded them
all to be Lies. But he added, that
since I professed so inviolable an Attachment
to Truth, I must give him
my Word of Honour to bear him company
in this Voyage without attempting
any thing against my Life, or else he
would continue me a Prisoner till we
arrived at Lislon. I gave him the
Promise he required; but at the same
time protested that I would suffer the
greatest Hardships rather than return
to live among Yahoos. 
Our Voyage passed without any
considerable Accident. In Gratitude to
the Captain I sometimes sate with him
at his earnest Request, and strove to
conceal my Antipathy to human Kind,
although it often broke out, which he
suffered to pass without Observation. 

But the greatest part of the Day, I
confined myself to my Cabbin, to avoid
seeing any of the Crew. The Captain
had often entreated me to strip myself
of my savage Dress, and offered to
lend me the best Suit of Cloaths he
had. This I would not be prevailed
on to accept, abhorring to cover myself
with any thing that had been on
the Back of a Yahoo. I only desired
he would lend me two clean Shirts
which having been washed since he
wore them, I believed would not so
much defile me. These I changed every
second Day, and washed them myself. 
We arrived at Lisbon, Nov. 5. 1715. 
At our landing the Captain forced me
to cover myself with his Cloak, to prevent
the Rabble from crouding about
me. I was conveyed to his own
House, and at my earnest Request, he
led me up to the highest Room backwards. 
I conjured him to conceal 

from all Persons what I had told him
of the Houyhnhnms, because the least
hint of such a Story would not only
draw Numbers of People to see me,
but probably, put me in Danger of
being imprisoned, or burnt by the Inquisition. 
The Captain persuaded me
to accept a Suit of Cloaths newly
made, but I would not suffer the
Taylor to take my Measure; however,
Don Pedro being almost of my
Size, they fitted me well enough. He
accoutred me with other Necessaries all
new, which I aired for twenty-four
Hours before I would use them. 
The Captain had no Wife, nor
above three Servants, none of which
were suffered to attend at Meals, and
his whole Deportment was so obliging,
added to very good human Understanding,
that I really began to tolerate
his Company. He gained so
far upon me, that I ventured to look
out of the back Window. By degrees 

I was brought into another Room,
from whence I peeped into the Street,
but drew my Head back in a Fright. 
In a Week's time he seduced me
down to the Door. I found my Terror
gradually lessened, but my Hatred
and Contempt seemed to encrease. I
was at last bold enough to walk the
Street in his Company, but kept my
Nose well stopped with Rue, or sometimes
with Tobacco. 
In ten Days Don Pedro, to whom I
had given some account of my Domestick
Affairs, put it upon me as a Matter
of Honour and Conscience, that I
ought to return to my native Country,
and live at home with my Wife
and Children. He told me, there was
an English Ship in the Port just ready
to sail, and he would furnish me with
all things necessary. It would be tedious
to repeat his Arguments, and my
Contradictions. He said it was altogether
impossible to find such a solitary 

Island as I had desired to live in; but
I might command in my own House,
and pass my time in a manner as recluse
as I pleased. 
I complied at last, finding I
could not do better. I left Lisbon the
24th Day of November, in an English
Merchant-Man, but who was the
Master I never enquired. Don Pedro
accompanied me to the Ship, and lent
me Twenty Pounds. He took kind
leave of me, and embraced me at parting,
which I bore as well as I could. 
During the last Voyage I had no Commerce
with the Master or any of his
Men, but pretending I was sick kept
close in my Cabbin. On the Fifth of
December, 1715. we cast Anchor in
the Downs about Nine in the Morning,
and at Three in the Afternoon I
got safe to my House at Rotherhith. 
My Wife and Family received me
with great Surprize and Joy, because 

they concluded me certainly dead; but
I must freely confess the sight of them
filled me only with Hatred, Disgust
and Contempt, and the more by reflecting
on the near Alliance I had to
them. For, although since my unfortunate
Exile from the Houyhnhnm Country,
I had compelled myself to tolerate
the Sight of Yahoos, and to converse with
Don Pedro de Mendez; yet my Memory
and Imaginations were perpetually
filled with the Virtues and Ideas of
those exalted Houyhnhnms. And when
I began to consider, that by copulating
with one of the Yahoo-Species I became
a Parent of more, it struck me with
the utmost Shame, Confusion and Horror. 
As soon as I entered the House, my
Wife took me in her Arms, and kissed
me, at which having not been used to
the Touch of that odious Animal for so
many Years, I fell in a Swoon for almost
an Hour. At the Time I am 

writing it is Five Years since my last
Return to England: During the first
Year I could not endure my Wife or
Children in my Presence, the very
Smell of them was intolerable, much
less could I suffer them to eat in the
same Room. To this hour they dare
not presume to touch my Bread, or
drink out of the same Cup, neither
was I ever able to let one of them
take me by the Hand. The first Money
I laid out was to buy two young
Stone-Horses which I keep in a good
Stable, and next to them the Groom
is my greatest Favourite; for I feel my
Spirits revived by the Smell he contracts
in the Stable. My Horses understand
me tolerably well; I converse
with them at least four Hours every
Day. They are Strangers to Bridle
or Saddle, they live in great Amity
with me, and Friendship to each
other. 





The Author's Veracity. His Design in
publishing this Work. His Censure of
those Travellers who swerve from the
Truth. The Author clears himself
from any sinister Ends in writing. An
Objection answered. The Method of
planting Colonies. His Native Country
commended. The Right of the
Crown to those Countries described by
the Author is justified. The Difficulty
of conquering them. The Author takes
his last leave of the Reader: proposeth
his Manner of Living for the future,
gives good Advice, and concludes. 
Thus, Gentle Reader, I have given
thee a faithful History of my
Travels for Sixteen Years, and above 

Seven Months, wherein I have not
been so studious of Ornament as Truth. 
I could perhaps like others have astonished
thee with strange improbable
Tales; but I rather chose to relate
plain Matter of Fact in the simplest
Manner and Style, because my principal
Design was to inform, and not to
amuse thee. 
It is easy for us who travel into remote
Countries, which are seldom visited
by Englishmen or other Europeans,
to form Descriptions of wonderful Animals
both at Sea and Land. Whereas a
Traveller's chief Aim should be to
make Men wiser and better, and to
improve their Minds by the bad as well
as good Example of what they deliver
concerning foreign Places. 
I could heartily wish a Law was
enacted, that every Traveller before he
were permitted to publish his Voyages,
should be obliged to make Oath before 

the Lord High Chancellor that all he intended
to print was absolutely true to
the best of his Knowledge; for then the
World would no longer be deceived as
it usually is, while some Writers, to make
their Works pass the better upon the
Publick, impose the grossest Falsities on
the unwary Reader. I have perused
several Books of Travels with great Delight
in my younger Days; but having
since gone over most Parts of the Globe,
and been able to contradict many fabulous
Accounts from my own Observation,
it hath given me a great Disgust
against this Part of Reading, and
some Indignation to see the Credulity
of Mankind so impudently abused. 
Therefore since my Acquaintance were
pleased to think my poor Endeavours
might not be unacceptable to my Country,
I imposed on myself as a Maxim,
never to be swerved from, that I would
strictly adhere to Truth; neither indeed
can I be ever under the least temptations
to vary from it, while I retain 

in my Mind the Lectures and Example
of my Noble Master, and the other
Illustrious Houyhnhnms, of whom I had
so long the Honour to be an humble
Hearer. 
—Nec si miserum Fortuna Sinonem
Finxit, vanum etiam, mendacemque
improba finget. 
I know very well how little Reputation
is to be got by Writings which
require neither Genious nor Learning,
nor indeed any other Talent, except a
good Memory, or an exact Journal. I
know likewise, the Writers of Travels,
like Dictionary-Makers, are sunk into
Oblivion by the Weight and Bulk of
those who come after, and therefore
lie uppermost. And it is highly probable,
that such Travellers who shall hereafter
visit the Countries described in
this Work of mine, may by detecting
my Errors, (if there be any) and adding
many new Discoveries of their 

own, justle me out of Vogue, and stand
in my Place, making the World forget
that I was ever an Author. This indeed
would be too great a Mortification
if I wrote for Fame: But, as my sole
Intention was the Publick Good,
I cannot be altogether disappointed. For
who can read of the Virtues I have
mentioned in the Glorious Houyhnhnms,
without being ashamed of his own
Vices, when he considers himself as the
reasoning, governing Animal of his
Country? I shall say nothing of those
remote Nations where Yahoos preside,
amongst which the least corrupted are
the Brobdingnagians, whose wise Maxims
in Morality and Government,
it would be our Happiness to observe. 
But I forbear descanting farther, and
rather leave the Judicious Reader to his
own Remarks and Applications. 
I am not a little pleased that this
Work of mine can possibly meet with
no Censurers: For what Objections can 

be made against a Writer who relates
only plain Facts that happened in such
distant Countries, where we have not
the least Interest with respect either to
Trade or Negotiations? I have carefully
avoided every Fault with which common
Writers of Travels are often too
justly charged. Besides, I meddle not
with any Party, but write without Passion,
Prejudice, or Ill-will against any
Man or number of Men whatsoever. I
write for the noblest End, to inform
and instruct Mankind, over whom I
may, without Breach of Modesty, pretend
to some Superiority from the Advantages
I received by conversing so
long among the most accomplished
Houyhnhnms. I write without any view
towards Profit or Praise. I never suffer
a Word to pass that may look like
Reflection, or possibly give the least Offence
even to those who are most ready
to take it. So that I hope I may with
Justice pronounce myself an Author
perfectly blameless, against whom the 

Tribes of Answerers, Considerers, Observers,
Reflecters, Detecters, Remarkers
will never be able to find Matter
for exercising their Talents. 
I confess, it was whispered to me,
that I was bound in Duty as a Subject
of England, to have given in a Memorial
to a Secretary of State at my first
coming over; because whatever Lands
are discovered by a Subject, belong to
the Crown. But I doubt whether our
Conquests in the Countries I treat of,
would be as easy as those of Ferdinando
Cortez over the naked Americans. The
Lilliputians I think are hardly worth the
Charge of a Fleet and Army to reduce
them, and I question whether it might
be prudent or safe to attempt the Brobdingnagians. 
Or whether an English Army
would be much at their ease with the
Flying Island over their Heads. The
Houyhnhnms, indeed, appear not to be
so well prepared for War, a Science to
which they are perfect Strangers, and 

especially against missive Weapons. 
However, supposing myself to be a Minister
of State, I could never give my
Advice for invading them. Their Prudence,
Unanimity, Unacquaintedness
with Fear, and their Love of their
Country would amply supply all Defects
in the Military Art. Imagine
Twenty thousend of them breaking into
the midst of an European Army,
confounding the Ranks, overturning the
Carriages, battering the Warriors Faces
into Mummy, by terrible Yerks from
their hinder Hoofs. For they would
well deserve the Character given to Augustus; 
Recalcitrat undique tutus. But
instead of Proposals for conquering that
magnanimous Nation. I rather wish
they were in a capacity or Disposition
to send a sufficient Number of their
Inabitants for civilizing Europe, by
teaching us the first Principles of Honour,
Justice, Truth, Temperance, Publick
Spirit, Fortitude, Chastity, Friendship,
Benevolence, and Fidelity. The 

Names of all which Virtues are still
retained among us in most Languages,
and are to be met with in some modern
as well as ancient Authors; which I
am able to assert from my own small
Reading. 
But I had another Reason which
made me less forward to enlarge his
Majesty's Dominions by my Discovery. 
To say the truth, I had conceived a
few Scruples with relation to the Distributive
Justice of Princes upon those
Occasions. For instance, A Crew of
Pyrates are driven by a Storm they
know not whither, at length a Boy
discovers Land from the Top-mast,
they go on Shore to Rob and Plunder; 
they see an harmless People, are
entertained with Kindness, they give
the Country a new Name, they take
formal Possession of it for their King,
they set up a rotten Plank or a Stone
for a Memorial, they murder two or
three Dozen of the Natives, bring 

away a Couple more by Force for a
Sample, return home, and get their
Pardon. Here commences a new Dominion
acquired with a Title by Divine
Right. Ships are sent with the
first Opportunity, the Natives driven
out or destroyed, their Princes tortured
to discover their Gold; a free
Licence given to all Acts of Inhumanity
and Lust, the Earth reeking with
the Blood of its Inhabitants: And this
execrable Crew of Butchers employed
in so pious an Expedition, is a modern
Colony sent to convert and civilize
an idolatrous and barbarous People. 
But this Description, I confess, doth
by no means affect the British Nation,
who may be an Example to the whole
World for their Wisdom, Care, and
Justice in Planting Colonies; their liberal
Endowments for the Advancement of
Religion and Learning; their Choice
of devout and able Pastors to propagate 

Christianity, their Caution in
stocking their Provinces with People
of sober Lives and Conversations from
this the Mother Kingdom; their strict
regard to the Distribution of Justice
in supplying the Civil Administration
through all their Colonies with Officers
of the greatest Abilities, utter
strangers to Corruption; and to crown
all, by sending the most Vigilant and
Virtuous Governors, who have no other
Views than the Happiness of the
People over whom they preside, and
the Honour of the King their Master. 
But, as those Countries which I
have described, do not appear to have a
Desire of being conquered, and enslaved,
murdered or driven out by Colonies,
nor abound either in Gold, Silver, Sugar
or Tobacco; I did humbly conceive
they were by no means proper
Objects of our Zeal, our Valour, or
our Interest. However, if those whom 

it may concern, think fit to be of
another Opinion, I am ready to depose,
when I shall be lawfully called,
That no European did ever visit these
Countries before me. I mean, if the
Inhabitants ought to be believed; unless
a Dispute may arise about the two
Yahoos, said to have been seen many
Ages ago on a Mountain in Houyhnhnmland,
from whence the Opinion is,
that the Race of those Brutes hath
descended; and these, for any thing I
know, may have been English, which
indeed I was apt to suspect from the
Lineaments of their Posterity's Countenances,
although very much defaced. 
But, how far that will go to make out
a Title, I leave to the Learned in Colony-Law. 
But as to the Formality of taking
Possession in my Sovereign's Name, it
never came once into my Thoughts; 
and if it had, yet as my Affairs then
stood, I should perhaps in point of 

Prudence and Self-preservation, have
put it off to a better Opportunity. 
Having thus answered the only
objection that can ever be raised against
me as a Traveller, I here take
a final Leave of all my Courteous Readers,
and return to enjoy my own Speculations
in my little Garden at Reddriff,
to apply those excellent Lessons
of Virtue which I learned among the
Houyhnhnms, to instruct the Yahoos of
my own Family as far as I shall find
them docible Animals, to behold my Figure
often in a Glass, and thus if possible
habituate myself by time to tolerate
the sight of a human Creature: To lament
the Brutality of Houyhnhnms in
my own Country, but always treat
their Persons with Respect, for the
sake of my noble Master, his Family,
his Friends, and the whole Houyhnhnm
Race, whom these of ours have the
Honour to resemble in all their Lineaments, 

however their Intellectuals came
to degenerate. 
I began last Week to permit my
Wife to sit at Dinner with me, at the
farthest End of a long Table, and to
answer (but with the utmost brevity)
the few Questions I ask'd her. Yet the
smell of a Yahoo continuing very offensive,
I always keep my Nose well stopt
with Rue, Lavender, or Tobacco-leaves. 
And although it be hard for
a Man late in life to remove old Habits,
I am not altogether out of Hopes
in some time to suffer a Neighbour
Yahoo in my Company without the Apprehensions
I am yet under of his
Teeth or his Claws. 
My Reconcilement to the Yahoo-kind
in general might not be so difficult
if they would be content with
those Vices and Follies only, which Nature
hath intitled them to. I am not
in the least provoked at the Sight of 

a Lawyer, a Pick-pocket, a Colonel,
a Fool, a Lord, a Gamester, a Politician,
a Whore-master, a Physician,
an Evidence, a Suborner, an Attorney,
a Traitor, or the like: This is all according
to the due Course of Things: 
But when I behold a Lump of Deformity,
and Diseases both in Body and
Mind, smitten with Pride, it immediately
breaks all the Measures of my
Patience; neither shall I be ever able
to comprehend how such an Animal
and such a Vice could tally together. 
The wise and virtuous Houyhnhnms,
who abound in all Excellencies that
can adorn a Rational Creature, have no
Name for this Vice in their Language,
which hath no Terms to express any
thing that is evil, except those whereby
they describe the detestable Qualities of
their Yahoos, among which they were
not able to distinguish this of Pride,
for want of thoroughly understanding
Human Nature, as it sheweth itself in
other Countries, where that Animal 

presides. But I, who had more Experience
could plainly observe some Rudiments
of it among the wild Yahoos. 
But the Houyhnhnms, who live under
the Government of Reason, are no
more proud of the good Qualities they
possess, than I should be for not wanting
a Leg or an Arm, which no Man
in his Wits would boast of, although
he must be miserable without them. 
I dwell the longer upon this Subject
from the Desire I have to make the
Society of an English Yahoo by any
means not insupportable, and therefore
I here entreat those who have any Tincture
of this absurd Vice, that they
will not presume to come in my
Sight. 