



The author giveth some Account of himself and
Family; his first Inducements to travel. He is
shipwrecked, and swims for his Life; gets safe on
shoar in the Country of Lilliput; is made a Prisoner,
and carried up the Country. 

My Father had a small Estate in Nottinghamshire;
I was the Third of five
Sons. He sent me to Emanuel-College
in Cambridge, at Fourteen Years
old, where I resided three Years, and
applied my self close to my Studies: But the 

Charge of maintaining me (although I had a very
scanty Allowance) being too great for a narrow
Fortune; I was bound Apprentice to Mr. James
Bates, an eminent Surgeon in London, with whom
I continued four Years; and my Father now and
then sending me small Sums of Money, I laid them
out in learning Navigation, and other Parts of the
Mathematicks, useful to those who intend to travel,
as I always believed it would be some time or other
my Fortune to do. When I left Mr. Bates, I
went down to my Father; where, by the Assistance
of him and my Uncle John and some other Relations,
I got Forty Pounds, and a Promise of Thirty
Pounds a Year to maintain me at Leyden: There I
studied Physick two Years and seven Months,
knowing it would be useful in long Voyages. 
Soon after my Return from Leyden, I was recommended
by my good Master Mr. Bates, to be
Surgeon to the Swallow, Captain Abraham Pannell
Commander; with whom I continued three Years
and a half, making a Voyage or two into the Levant,
and some other Parts. When I came back, I
resolved to settle in London, to which Mr. Bates,
my Master, encouraged me; and by him I was recommended
to several Patients. I took Part of a
small House in the Old Jury; and being advised to
alter my Condition, I married Mrs. Mary Burton,
second Daughter to Mr. Edmond Burton, Hosier,
in Newgate-street, with whom I received four
Hundred Pounds for a Portion. 
But, my good Master Bates dying in two Years
after, and I having few Friends, my Business began
to fail; for my Conscience would not suffer me to
imitate the bad Practice of too many among my 

Brethren. Having therefore consulted with my
Wife, and some of my Acquaintance, I determined
to go again to Sea. I was Surgeon successively in
two Ships, and made several Voyages, for six Years,
to the East and West-Indies; by which I got some
Addition to my Fortune. My Hours of Leisure I
spent in reading the best Authors, ancient and modern; 
being always provided with a good Number
of Books; and when I was ashore, in observing
the Manners and Dispositions of the People, as well
as learning their Language; wherein I had a great
Facility by the Strength of my Memory. 
The last of these Voyages not proving very fortunate,
I grew weary of the Sea, and intended to
stay at home with my Wife and Family. I removed
from the Old Jury to Fetter-Lane, and from thence
to Wapping, hoping to get Business among the Sailors; 
but it would not turn to account. After
three Years Expectation that things would mend, I
accepted an advantageous Offer from Captain William
Prichard, Master of the Antelope, who was
making a Voyage to the South-Sea. We set sail
from Bristol, May 4th, 1699, and our Voyage at
first was very prosperous. 
It would not be proper for some Reasons, to
trouble the Reader with the Particulars of our Adventures
in those Seas: Let it suffice to inform him,
that in our Passage from thence to the East-Indies,
we were driven by a violent Storm to the Northwest
of Van Diemen's Land. By an Observation,
we found ourselves in the Latitude of 30 Degrees
2 Minutes South. Twelve of our Crew were dead
by immoderate Labour, and ill Food; the rest were 

in a very weak Condition. On the fifth of November,
which was the beginning of Summer in those
Parts, the Weather being very hazy, the Seamen
spyed a Rock, within half a Cable's length of the
Ship; but the Wind was so strong, that we were
driven directly upon it, and immediately split. Six
of the Crew, of whom I was one, having let down
the Boat into the Sea, made a Shift to get clear of
the Ship, and the Rock. We rowed by my Computation,
about three Leagues, till we were able to
work no longer, being already spent with Labour
while we were in the Ship. We therefore trusted
ourselves to the Mercy of the Waves; and in about
half an Hour the Boat was overset by a sudden
Flurry from the North. What became of my
Companions in the Boat, as well as of those who
escaped on the Rock, or were left in the Vessel, I
cannot tell; but conclude they were all lost. For
my own Part, I swam as Fortune directed me, and
was pushed forward by Wind and Tide. I often
let my Legs drop, and could feel no Bottom: But
when I was almost gone, and able to struggle no
longer, I found myself within my Depth; and by
this Time the Storm was much abated. The Declivity
was so small, that I walked near a Mile before
I got to the Shore, which I conjectured was
about Eight o'Clock in the Evening. I then advanced
forward near half a Mile, but could not
discover any Sign of Houses or Inhabitants; at least
I was in so weak a Condition, that I did not observe
them. I was extremely tired, and with that, and
the Heat of the Weather, and about half a Pint of
Brandy that I drank as I left the Ship, I found my
self much inclined to sleep. I lay down on the 

Grass, which was very short and soft; where I slept
sounder than ever I remember to have done in my
Life, and as I reckoned, above Nine Hours; for
when I awaked, it was just Day-light. I attempted
to rise, but was not able to stir: For as I happened
to lie on my Back, I found my Arms and Legs were
strongly fastened on each Side to the Ground; and
my Hair, which was long and thick, tied down in
the same Manner. I likewise felt several slender
Ligatures across my Body, from my Armpits to my
Thighs. I could only look upwards; the Sun began
to grow hot, and the Light offended mine
Eyes. I heard a confused Noise about me, but in
the Posture I lay, could see nothing except the Sky. 
In a little time I felt something alive moving on my
left Leg, which advancing gently forward over my
Breast, came almost up to my Chin; when bending
mine Eyes downwards as much as I could, I perceived
it to be a human Creature not six Inches
high, with a Bow and Arrow in his Hands, and a
Quiver at his Back. In the mean time, I felt at
least Forty more of the same Kind (as I conjectured)
following the first. I was in the utmost
Astonishment, and roared so loud, that they all ran
back in a Fright; and some of them, as I was afterwards
told, were hurt with the Falls they got by
leaping from my Sides upon the Ground. However,
they soon returned; and one of them, who ventured
so far as to get a full Sight of my Face, lifting
up his Hands and Eyes by way of Admiration,
cryed out in a shrill, but distinct Voice, Hekinah
Degul: The others repeated the same Words several
times, but I then knew not what they meant. 
I lay all this while, as the Reader may believe, in 

great Uneasiness: At length, struggling to get loose,
I had the Fortune to break the Strings, and wrench
out the Pegs that fastened my left Arm to the
Ground; for, by lifting it up to my Face, I discovered
the Methods they had taken to bind me; and,
at the same time, with a violent Pull, which gave
me excessive Pain, I a little loosened the Strings
that tied down my Hair on the left Side; so that I
was just able to turn my Head about two Inches. 
But the Creatures ran off a second time, before I
could seize them; whereupon there was a great
Shout in a very shrill Accent; and after it ceased, I
heard one of them cry aloud, Tolgo Phonac; when
in an Instant I felt above an Hundred Arrows discharged
on my left Hand, which pricked me like
so many Needles; and besides, they shot another
Flight into the Air, as we do Bombs in Europe;
whereof many, I suppose, fell on my Body, (though
I felt them not) and some on my Face, which I
immediately covered with my left Hand. When
this Shower of Arrows was over, I fell a groaning
with Grief and Pain; and then striving again to get
loose, they discharged another Volly larger than the
first; and some of them attempted with Spears to
stick me in the Sides; but, by good Luck, I had on
me a Buff Jerkin, which they could not pierce. I
thought it the most prudent Method to lie still; and
my Design was to continue so till Night, when my
left Hand being already loose, I could easily free
myself: And as for the Inhabitants, I had Reason
to believe I might be a Match for the greatest Armies
they could bring against me, if they were all
of the same Size with him that I saw. But Fortune
disposed otherwise of me. When the People observed 

I was quiet, they discharged no more Arrows:
But by the Noise increasing, I knew their
Numbers were greater; and about four Yards from
me, over-against my right Ear. I heard a Knocking
for above an Hour, like People at work; when
turning my Head that Way, as well as the Pegs and
Strings would permit me, I saw a Stage erected about
a Foot and a half from the Ground, capable of holding
four of the Inhabitants, with two or three Ladders
to mount it: From whence one of them, who
seemed to be a Person of Quality, made me a long
Speech, whereof I understood not one Syllable. 
But I should have mentioned, that before the
principal Person began his Oration, he cryed out
three times Langro Dehul san: (these Words and
the former were afterwards repeated and explained
to me.) Whereupon immediately about fifty of
the Inhabitants came, and cut the Strings that fastened
the left side of my Head, which gave me
the Liberty of turning it to the right, and of
observing the Person and Gesture of him who was
to speak. He appeared to be of a middle Age,
and taller than any of the other three who attended
him; whereof one was a Page, who held
up his Train, and seemed to be somewhat longer
than my middle Finger; the other two stood
one on each side to support him. He acted every
part of an Orator; and I could observe many
Periods of Threatnings, and others of Promises,
Pity, and Kindness I answered in a few
Words, but in the most submissive Manner, lifting
up my left Hand and both mine Eyes to the
Sun, as calling him for a Witness; and being almost 

famished with Hunger, having not eaten a
Morsel for some Hours before I left the Ship. 
I found the Demands of Nature so strong upon
me, that I could not forbear shewing my Impatience
(perhaps against the strict Rules of Decency)
by putting my Finger frequently on my
Mouth, to signify that I wanted Food. The
Hurgo (for so they call a great Lord, as I afterwards
learnt) understood me very well: He descended
from the Stage, and commanded that several
Ladders should be applied to my Sides, on
which above an hundred of the Inhabitants mounted,
and walked towards my Mouth, laden with
Baskets full of Meat, which had been provided,
and sent thither by the King's Orders upon the
first Intelligence he received of me. I observed
there was the Flesh of several Animals, but could
not distinguish them by the Taste. There were
Shoulders, Legs, and Loins shaped like those of
Mutton, and very well dressed, but smaller than
the Wings of a Lark. I eat them by two or three
at a Mouthful; and took three Loaves at a time,
about the bigness of Musket Bullets. They supplyed
me as fast as they could, shewing a thousand
Marks of Wonder and Astonishment at my
Bulk and Appetite. I then made another Sign
that I wanted Drink. They found by my eating
that a small Quantity would not suffice me; and
being a most ingenious People, they flung up with
great Dexterity one of their largest Hogsheads; 
then rolled it towards my Hand, and beat out
the Top; I drank it off at a Draught, which I
might well do, for it hardly held half a Pint,
and tasted like a small Wine of Burgundy, but 

much more delicious. They brought me a second
Hogshead, which I drank in the same Manner,
and made Signs for more, but they had none
to give me. When I had performed these Wonders,
they shouted for Joy, and danced upon my
Breast, repeating several times as they did at first,
Hekinah Degul. They made me a Sign that I
should throw down the two Hogsheads, but first
warned the People below to stand out of the Way,
crying aloud, Borach Mivola; and when they saw
the Vessels in the Air, there was an universal
Shout of Hekinah Degul. I confess I was often
tempted, while they were passing backwards and
forwards on my Body, to seize Forty or Fifty of
the first that came in my Reach, and dash them
against the Ground. But the Remembrance of
what I had felt, which probably might not be the
worst they could do; and the Promise of Honour
I made them, for so I interpreted my submissive
Behaviour, soon drove out those Imaginations. 
Besides, I now considered my self as bound
by the Laws of Hospitality to a People who had
treated me with so much Expence and Magnificence. 
However, in my Thoughts I could not
sufficiently wonder at the Intrepidity of these diminutive
Mortals, who durst venture to mount and
walk on my Body, while one of my Hands was
at Liberty, without trembling at the very Sight of
so prodigious a Creature as I must appear to them. 
After some time, when they observed that I made
no more Demands for Meat, there appeared before
me a Person of high Rank from his Imperial
Majesty. His Excellency having mounted on the
Small of my Right Leg, advanced forwards up to 

my Face, with about a Dozen of his Retinue; 
And producing his Credentials under the Signet
Royal, which he applied close to mine Eyes, spoke
about ten Minutes, without any Signs of Anger,
but with a kind of determinate Resolution; often
pointing forwards, which, as I afterwards found
was towards the Capital City, about half a Mile
distant, whither it was agreed by his Majesty in
Council that I must be conveyed. I answered in
few Words, but to no Purpose, and made a Sign
with my Hand that was loose, putting it to the
other, (but over his Excellency's Head, for Fear of
hurting him or his Train) and then to my own
Head and Body, to signify that I desired my Liberty. 
It appeared that he understood me well enough; 
for he shook his Head by way of Disapprobation,
and held his Hand in a Posture to shew
that I must be carried as a Prisoner. However,
he made other Signs to let me understand that
I should have Meat and Drink enough, and very
good Treatment. Whereupon I once more
thought of attempting to break my Bonds; but again,
when I felt the Smart of their Arrows upon
my Face and Hands, which were all in Blisters,
and many of the Darts still sticking in them; and
observing likewise that the Number of my Enemies
encreased; I gave Tokens to let them know
that they might do with me what they pleased. Upon
this, the Hurgo and his Train withdrew, with
much Civility and chearful Countenances. Soon
after I heard a general Shout, with frequent Repetitions
of the Words, Peplom Selan, and I felt great
Numbers of the People on my Left Side relaxing
the Cords to such a Degree, that I was able to turn 

upon my Right, and to ease my self with making
Water; which I very plentifully did, to the great
Astonishment of the People, who conjecturing by
my Motions what I was going to do, immediately
opened to the right and left on that Side, to avoid
the Torrent which fell with such Noise
and Violence from me. But before this, they had
dawbed my Face and both my Hands with a sort
of Ointment very pleasant to the Smell, which in
a few Minutes removed all the Smart of their Arrows. 
These Circumstances, added to the Refreshment
I had received by their Victuals and
Drink, which were very nourishing, disposed me
to sleep. I slept about eight Hours as I was afterwards
assured; and it was no Wonder; for the
Physicians, by the Emperor's Order, had mingled
a sleeping Potion in the Hogsheads of Wine. 
It seems that upon the first Moment I was
discovered sleeping on the Ground after my Landing,
the Emperor had early Notice of it by an
Express; and determined in Council that I should
be tyed in the Manner I have related (which was
done in the Night while I slept) that Plenty of
Meat and Drink should be sent me, and a Machine
prepared to carry me to the Capital City. 
This resolution perhaps may appear very bold
and dangerous, and I am confident would not be
imitated by any Prince in Europe on the like Occasion; 
however, in my Opinion it was extremely
Prudent as well as Generous. For supposing these
People had endeavoured to kill me with their
Spears and Arrows while I was asleep; I should
certainly have awaked with the first Sense of
Smart, which might so far have rouzed my Rage 

and Strength, as to enable me to break the Strings
wherewith I was tyed; after which, as they were
not able to make Resistance, so they could expect
no Mercy. 
These People are most excellent Mathematicians,
and arrived to a great Perfection in Mechanicks
by the Countenance and Encouragement of
the Emperor, who is a renowned Patron of Learning. 
This Prince hath several Machines fixed on
Wheels, for the Carriage of Trees and other great
Weights. He often buildeth his largest Men of
War, whereof some are Nine Foot long, in the
Woods where the Timber grows, and has them
carried on these Engines three or four Hundred
Yards to the Sea. Five Hundred Carpenters and
Engineers were immediately set at work to prepare
the greatest Engine they had. It was a Frame of
Wood raised three Inches from the Ground, about
seven Foot long and four wide, moving upon
twenty two Wheels. The Shout I heard, was
upon the Arrival of this Engine, which, it seems,
set out in four Hours after my Landing. It was
brought parallel to me as I lay. But the principal
Difficulty was to raise and place me in this Vehicle. 
Eighty Poles, each of one Foot high, were
erected for this Purpose, and very strong Cords of
the bigness of Packthread were fastened by Hooks
to many Bandages, which the Workmen had girt
round my Neck, my Hands, my Body, and my
Legs. Nine Hundred of the strongest Men were
employed to draw up these Cords by many Pullies
fastned on the Poles; and thus in less than three
Hours, I was raised and flung into the Engine, 

and there tyed fast. All this I was told; for while
the whole Operation was performing, I lay in a
profound Sleep, by the Force of that soporiferous
Medicine infused into my Liquor. Fifteen hundred
of the Emperor's largest Horses, each about four
Inches and a half high, were employed to draw
me towards the Metropolis, which, as I said, was
half a Mile distant. 
About four Hours after we began our Journey,
I awaked by a very ridiculous Accident; for the
Carriage being stopt a while to adjust something
that was out of Order, two or three of the young
Natives had the Curiosity to see how I looked when
I was asleep; they climbed up into the Engine, and
advancing very softly to my Face, one of them, an
Officer in the Guards, put the sharp End of his
Half-Pike a good way up into my left Nostril,
which tickled my Nose like a Straw, and made
me sneeze violently: Whereupon they stole off
unperceived; and it was three Weeks before I
knew the Cause of my awaking so suddenly. We
made a long March the remaining Part of the
Day, and rested at Night with Five Hundred
Guards on each Side of me, half with Torches, and
half with Bows and Arrows, ready to shoot me
if I should offer to stir. The next Morning at
Sun-rise we continued our March, and arrived
within two Hundred Yards of the City-Gates
about Noon. The Emperor, and all his Court,
came out to meet us; but his great Officers would
by no Means suffer his Majesty to endanger his
Person by mounting on my Body. 

At the Place where the Carriage stopt, there
stood an ancient Temple, esteemed to be the largest
in the whole Kingdom; which having been
polluted some Years before by an unnatural Murder,
was, according to the Zeal of those People,
looked upon as Prophane, and therefore had been
applied to common Use, and all the Ornaments and
Furniture carried away. In this Edifice it was determined
I should lodge. The great Gate fronting
to the North was about four Foot high, and almost
two Foot wide, through which I could easily
creep. On each Side of the Gate was a small
Window not above six Inches from the Ground:
Into that on the Left Side, the King's Smiths conveyed
fourscore and eleven Chains, like those that
hang to a Lady's Watch in Europe, and almost as
large, which were locked to my Left Leg with
six and thirty Padlocks. Over against this Temple,
on the other Side of the great Highway, at
twenty Foot Distance, there was a Turret at least
five Foot high. Here the Emperor ascended
with many principal Lords of his Court, to have
an Opportunity of viewing me, as I was told,
for I could not see them. It was reckoned that
above an hundred thousand Inhabitants came out
of the Town upon the same Errand; and in spight
of my Guards, I believe there could not be fewer
than ten thousand, at several Times, who mounted
upon my Body by the Help of Ladders, But a
Proclamation was soon issued to forbid it, upon
Pain of Death. When the Workmen found it was
impossible for me to break loose, they cut all the
Strings that bound me; whereupon I rose up with 

as melancholly a Disposition as ever I had in my
Life. But the Noise and Astonishment of the
People at seeing me rise and walk, are not to be
expressed. The Chains that held my left Leg
were about two Yards long, and gave me not only the
Liberty of walking backwards and forwards in a
Semicircle; but being fixed within four Inches
of the Gate, allowed me to creep in, and lie at
my full Length in the Temple. 
