



The Author, by a lucky Accident, finds Means to
leave Blefuscu; and, after some Difficulties, returns
safe to his Native Country. 

Three Days after my Arrival, walking
out of Curiosity to the North-East
Coast of the Island; I observed, about
half a League off, in the Sea,
somewhat that looked like a Boat
overturned: I pulled off my Shoes and Stockings,
and wading two or three Hundred Yards, I found
the Object to approach nearer by Force of the
Tide; and then plainly saw it to be a real Boat,
which I supposed might, by some Tempest, have
been driven from a Ship. Whereupon I returned
immediately towards the City, and desired his Imperial
Majesty to lend me Twenty of the tallest
Vessels he had left after the Loss of his Fleet, and
three Thousand Seamen under the Command of his
Vice-Admiral. This Fleet sailed round, while I 

went back the shorted Way to the Coast where I
first discovered the Boat; I found the Tide had
driven it still nearer; the Seamen were all provided
with Cordage, which I had beforehand twisted
to a sufficient Strength. When the Ships came up,
I stript myself, and waded till I came within an
Hundred Yards of the Boat; after which I was
forced to swim till I got up to it. The Seamen
threw me the End of the Cord, which I fastened
to a Hole in the fore-part of the Boat, and the
other End to a Man of War: But I found all my
Labour to little Purpose; for being out of my
Depth, I was not able to work. In this Necessity,
I was forced to swim behind, and push the Boat
forwards as often as I could, with one of my
Hands; and the Tide favouring me, I advanced so
far, that I could just hold up my Chin and feel the
Ground. I rested two or three Minutes, and then
gave the Boat another Shove, and so on till the Sea
was no higher than my Arm-pits. And now the
most laborious Part being over, I took out my other
Cables which were stowed in one of the Ships, and
fastening them first to the Boat, and then to nine
of the Vefsels which attended me; the Wind being
favourable, the Seamen towed, and I shoved
till we arrived within forty Yards of the Shore; 
and waiting till the Tide was out, I got dry to the
Boat, and by the Assistance of two Thousand Men,
with Ropes and Engines, I made a shift to turn it
on its Bottom, and found it was but little damaged. 
I shall not trouble the Reader with the Difficulties
I was under by the Help of certain Paddles,
which cost me ten Days making, to get my Boat 

to the Royal Port of Blefuscu; where a mighty
Concourse of People appeared upon my Arrival, full
of Wonder at the Sight of so prodigious a Vessel. 
I told the Emperor, that my good Fortune had
thrown this Boat in my Way, to carry me to some
Place from whence I might return into my native
Country; and begged his Majesty's Orders for getting
Materials to fit it up; together with his Licence
to depart; which, after some kind Expostulations,
he was pleased to grant. 
I did very much wonder, in all this Time, not to
have heard of any Express relating to me from our
Emperor to the Court of Blefuscu. But I was
afterwards given privately to understand, that his
Imperial Majesty, never imagining I had the least
Notice of his Designs, believed I was only gone to
Blefuscu in Performance of my Promise, according
to the Licence he had given me, which was well
known at our Court; and would return in a few
Days when that Ceremony was ended. But he was
at last in pain at my long absence; and, after consulting
with the Treasurer, and the rest of that
Cabal; a Person of Quality was dispatched with the
Copy of the Articles against me. This Envoy had
Instructions to represent to the Monarch of Belfuscu,
the great Lenity of his Master, who was content
to punish me no further than with the Loss of mine
Eyes: That I had fled from Justice, and if I did
not return in two Hours, I should be deprived of
my Title of Nardac, and declared a Traitor. The
Envoy further added; that in order to maintain the
Peace and Amity between both Empires, his Master
expected, that his Brother of Blefuscu would give 

Orders to have me sent back to Lilliput, bound
Hand and Foot, to be punished as a Traitor. 
The Emperor of Belfuscu having taken three
Days to consult, returned an Answer consisting of
many Civilities and Excuses. He said, that as for
sending me bound, his Brother knew it was impossible; 
that although I had deprived him of his
Fleet, yet he owed great Obligations to me for many
good Offices I had done him in making the Peace. 
That however, both their Majesties would soon be
made easy; for I had found a prodigious Vessel on
the Shore, able to carry me on the Sea, which he
had given order to fit up with my own Assistance
and Direction; and he hoped in a few Weeks both
Empires would be freed from so insupportable an Incumbrance. 
With this Answer the Envoy returned to
Lilliput, and the Monarch of Blefuscu related to
me all that had past; offering me at the same time
(but under the strictest Confidence) his gracious
Protection, if I would continue in his Service; 
wherein although I believed him sincere, yet I
resolved never more to put any Confidence in Princes
or Ministers, where I could possibly avoid it; and
therefore, with all due Acknowledgments for his
favourable Intentions, I humbly begged to be excused. 
I told him, that since Fortune, whether
good or evil, had thrown a Vessel in my Way; I
was resolved to venture myself in the Ocean, rather
than be an Occasion of Difference between two such
mighty Monarchs. Neither did I find the Emperor
at all displeased; and I discovered by a certain Accident,
that he was very glad of my Resolution,
and so were most of his Ministers. 

These Considerations moved me to hasten my
Departure somewhat sooner than I intended; to
which the Court, impatient to have me gone, very
readily contributed. Five hundred Workmen were
employed to make two Sails to my Boat, according
to my Directions, by quilting thirteen fold of their
strongest Linnen together. I was at the Pains of
making Ropes and Cables, by twisting ten, twenty
or thirty of the thickest and strongest of theirs. 
A great Stone that I happened to find, after a long
Search by the Sea-shore, served me for an Anchor. 
I had the Tallow of three hundred Cows for greasing
my Boat, and other Uses. I was at incredible Pains
in cutting down some of the largest Timber Trees
for Oars and Masts, wherein I was, however, much
assisted by his Majesty's Ship-Carpenters, who helped
me in smoothing them, after I had done the
rough Work. 
In about a Month, when all was prepared, I
sent to receive his Majesty's Commands, and to take
my leave. The Emperor and Royal Family came
out of the Palace; I lay down on my Face to kiss
his Hand, which he very graciously gave me; so
did the Empress, and young Princes of the Blood. 
His Majesty presented me with fifty Purses of two
hundred Sprugs a-piece, together with his Picture
at full length, which I put immediately into one of
my Gloves, to keep it from being hurt. The
Ceremonies at my Departure were too many to
trouble the Reader with at this time. 
I stored the Boat with the Carcasses of an
hundred Oxen, and three hundred Sheep, with
Bread and Drink proportionable, and as much Meat
ready dressed as four hundred Cooks could provide. 

I took with me six Cows and two Bulls alive, with
as many Yews and Rams, intending to carry them
into my own Country, and propagate the Breed. 
And to feed them on board, I had a good Bundle
of Hay, and a Bag of Corn. I would gladly have
taken a Dozen of the Natives; but this was a thing
the Emperor would by no Means permit; and besides
a diligent Search into my Pockets, his Majesty
engaged my Honour not to carry away any of his
Subjects, although with their own Consent and
Desire. 
Having thus prepared all things as well as I
was able; I set sail on the Twenty-fourth Day of
September 1701, at six in the Morning; and when
I had gone about four Leagues to the Northward,
the Wind being at South-East; at six in the Evening,
I descryed a small Island about half a League
to the North West. I advanced forward, and cast
Anchor on the Lee-side of the Island, which
seemed to be uninhabited. I then took some Refreshment,
and went to my Rest. I slept well,
and as I conjecture at least six Hours; for I found
the Day broke in two Hours after I awaked. It was
a clear Night; I eat my Breakfast before the Sun
was up; and heaving Anchor, the Wind being favourable,
I steered the same Course that I had done
the Day before, wherein I was directed by my Pocket-Compass. 
My Intention was to reach, if possible,
one of those Islands, which I had reason to believe
lay to the North-East of Van Diemen's Land. 
I discovered nothing all that Day; but upon the
next, about three in the Afternoon, when I had
by my Computation made Twenty-four Leagues
from Blefuscu, I descryed a Sail steering to the 

South-East; my Course was due East. I hailed
her, but could get no Answer; yet I found I gained
upon her, for the Wind slackened. I made all
the Sail I could, and in half an Hour she spyed
me, then hung out her Antient, and discharged a
Gun. It is not easy to express the Joy I was in
upon the unexpected Hope of once more seeing
my beloved Country, and the dear Pledges I left in
it. The Ship slackned her Sails, and I came up
with her between five and six in the Evening,
September 26; but my Heart leapt within me to see
her English Colours. I put my Cows and Sheep
into my Coat-Pockets, and got on board with all
my little Cargo of Provisions. The Vessel was an
English Merchant-man, returning from Japan by
the North and South Seas; the Captain, Mr. John
Biddel of Deptford, a very civil Man, and an excellent
Sailor. We were now in the Latitude of
30 Degrees South; there were about fifty Men in
the Ship; and here I met an old Comrade of mine,
one Peter Williams, who gave me a good Character
to the Captain. This Gentleman treated me
with Kindness, and desired I would let him know
what Place I came from last, and whither I was
bound; which I did in few Words; but he thought
I was raving, and that the Dangers I underwent
had disturbed my Head; whereupon I took my
black Cattle and Sheep out of my Pocket, which,
after great Astonishment, clearly convinced him of
my Veracity. I then shewed him the Gold given
me by the Emperor of Blefuscu, together with his
Majesty's Picture at full Length, and some other
Rarities of that Country. I gave him two Purses
of two Hundred Sprugs each, and promised, when 

we arrived in England, to make him a Present of a
Cow and a Sheep big with Young. 
I shall not trouble the Reader with a particular
Account of this Voyage, which was very prosperous
for the most Part. We arrived in the
Downs on the 13th of April 1702. I had only one
Misfortune, that the Rats on board carried away
one of my Sheep; I found her Bones in a Hole,
picked clean from the Flesh. The rest of my Cattle
I got safe on Shore, and set them a grazing in a
Bowling-Green at Greenwich, where the Fineness
of the Grass made them feed very heartily, although
I had always feared the contrary: Neither
could I possibly have preserved them in so long a
Voyage, if the Captain had not allowed me some
of his best Bisket, which rubbed to Powder, and
mingled with Water, was their constant Food. 
The short Time I continued in England, I made a
considerable Profit by shewing my Cattle to many
Persons of Quality, and others: And before I began
my second Voyage, I sold them for six Hundred
Pounds. Since my last Return, I find the
Breed is considerably increased, especially the Sheep; 
which I hope will prove much to the Advantage
of the Woollen Manufacture, by the Fineness of
the Fleeces. 
I stayed but two Months with my Wife and
Family; for my insatiable Desire of seeing foreign
Countries would suffer me to continue no longer. 
I left fifteen Hundred Pounds with my Wife, and
fixed her in a good Honse at Redriff. My remaining
Stock I carried with me, Part in Money, and
Part in Goods, in Hopes to improve my Fortunes. 
My eldest Uncle, John, had left me an Estate in 

Land, near Epping, of about Thirty Pounds a Year; 
and I had a long Lease of the Black-Bull in Fetter-Lane,
which yielded me as much more: So that I
was not in any Danger of leaving my Family upon
the Parish. My Son Johnny, named so after his
Uncle, was at the Grammar School, and a towardly
Child. My Daughter Betty (who is now well
married, and has Children) was then at her Needle-Work. 
I took Leave of my Wife, and Boy and
Girl, with Tears on both Sides; and went on board
the Adventure, a Merchant-Ship of three Hundred
Tons, bound for Surat, Captain John Nicholas of
Liverpool, Commander. But my Account of this
Voyage must be referred to the second Part of my
Travels. 
