


A Distress arising from the Prospect of an
Advancement in Fortune. 
David and his Family were, to their
great Comfort, quite settled in their
new Habitation before the Return of
Mr. and Mrs. Orgueil; for their Presence
would, in all Probability, only have embarrassed
them, and prevented their following
their own Schemes with proper Alacrity:
and, if any Judgment can be formed by
their general Method of acting, this Couple
would have been very generous of such Advice
as David's Circumstances would not admit
him to follow; which Advice, nevertheless,
they would not have given him the
least Assistance to pursue. But, very unexpectedly, 

on their Return Mr. Orgueil expressed
his Concern for David's broken Fortune,
in Terms as strong as his Philosophy
would suffer him; and kindly made a Proposal
for Valentine and Cynthia, which appeared
highly to their Advantage. For he
shewed them a Letter he had received from
the Governor of Jamaica (with whom he
had lived in a State of Intimacy from his
Youth) acquainting him, that there was at
present such an Opening in the Law, that
if any Friend of his, whom he would recommend,
knowing something of that Profession,
would come over thither, he might
easily make his Fortune. And he also added,
that if the Person recommended was a married
Man, he would give him a Plantation,
as another Chance of providing for his Wife
and Family. 
Valentine, although he had been bred
to no Profession, had acquired such a general
Knowledge of the Laws of his Country,
that, with a very little Application, he
was capable of attaining a sufficient Knowledge
therein; and therefore Mr. Orgueil
proposed to recommend him to his Friend,
the Governor, if he would undertake the
Voyage. They were all filled with Gratitude
for Mr. Orgueil's Kindness, and Valentine 

accepted the Offer with a thankful
Heart. 
But now first did our Society find a Difficulty
in determining their future Proceedings:
for although any Prospect of Success
in worldly Affairs, must, at this Time, be
very pleasing to them all, yet a Separation
from each other, could not but be a great
Abatement to that Pleasure. 
David and Camilla would not one Moment
have deliberated on accompanying
Valentine and Cynthia, and taking with them
their whole Family, had not the old Gentleman's
Age and Infirmities rendered such a
Voyage dangerous, and almost impracticable
for him: yet his Unwillingness to part
with his Son Valentine, would have tempted
him to have undertaken any thing ever so
hazardous. But what rendered this being
torn, I may say, from each other quite unavoidable,
was another Letter that David
just at this time received from Mr. Ratcliff,
acquainting him, that he could now give
him the Pleasure of knowing an Affair he
had hitherto concealed, from Fear of its
Success; which was, that he had been, for
some time (he said) soliciting, in his Behalf,
a very great Man, for a Place, worth Six 

hundred Pounds a Year, requiring no Attendance; 
for, by paying a Deputy Two
hundred, he might live entirely in the
Country. Mr. Ratcliff also added, that he
now found his Friend, the great Man,
strongly disposed to serve him, and had got
from him an absolute Promise of the Place,
on the Death of the present Possessor, who
was so very old and infirm, that it was
thought he could not hold it above a Month. 
And he concluded his Letter with desiring
David not to have a Thought of accompanying
Valentine to Jamaica, whom he congratulated
very highly on his present good
Fortune. 
Thus did all Circumstances at present
combine to force our Society to a Separation. 
This Letter of Mr. Ratcliff's joined
to the old Gentleman's weak State of Body
before mentioned, determined David and
Camilla to remain in England. But Mr.
Ratcliff's total Failure of all his Promises
of assisting David Simple in his Law Suit, had
made too deep an Impression on his Mind,
to suffer him to persuade his Brother Valentine,
on the Strength of his Letter, to lay
aside his Voyage, and to give up what appeared
to him much the most probable Prospect
of Success. They, therefore, at once 

determined to submit to a Parting, which
they hoped might, in a few Years, be the
Means of a happy Meeting to the whole
Society. 
Mr. Orgueil highly approved their Resolution; 
and his Wife, in a very particular
Manner, seemed to rejoice in the good Fortune
of Valentine and Cynthia; but (mixed
with her Congratulations) she could not
forbear advising Camilla to intreat her Friend
Cynthia not to baffle her Husband's Success,
and make Enemies in the Island, by her
Pride; and, above all things, to be careful
not to display her Wit at the Expence of
her Judgment. And she also farther hinted
what a Blessing it would be to Camilla, to
be no longer under the Influence of Cynthia's
governing Spirit. 
But what made the going out of England
still more irksome to Valentine and Cynthia,
was that their little Daughter was in such an
ill State of Health, that they dared not
carry her with them; and drinking the
Bath Waters was, by every one, thought
the only Chance she had of being cured. 
The present untoward Circumstances of our
Society, made it almost impossible for the
Child to come at this Means of Recovery. 

But this Difficulty also seemed to be removed
by Mrs. Orgueil; for her Henrietta-Cassandra
had just now taken such a Fit of
Fondness for little Cynthia, that her Mother,
in order to please her own Daughter, offered,
in very obliging Terms, to carry the
Child with her to the Bath, whither she was
going for the next Season. 
This Offer carried with it the outward
Appearance of every thing that could, at
this Time, be pleasing; yet Cynthia, in her
Heart, was more perplexed than rejoiced at
it. Not from that misplaced Fondness of
desiring, for her own Pleasure, to keep her
Child with her, at the Expence of that
Child's Health or Welfare, for she had
before intended to leave her behind with
Camilla, in order, if possible, for her to be
sent to the Bath; but she dreaded nothing
so much for her dear little Cynthia, as being
subjected to the Power of Mrs. Orgueil. 
Yet here again she was prevailed on to give
up her own Judgment: for Camilla, from
knowing the Softness of her own Heart,
was led into that grand Mistake, of imagining
there are some Circumstances that
render it impossible for any Creature, wearing
a human Form, to exercise Cruelty; 
and she thought, that a helpless, poor, sick 

Infant was too strongly the Object of Compassion
for any human Creature to resist its
Force. Being actuated, therefore, by this
Mistake, and strongly desiring that the
Child might have the Benefit of the Bath
Waters, she urged many Reasons to prevail
on Cynthia to accept Mrs. Orgueil's Offer. 
She dwelt particularly on the Impossibility
of her Daughter's being neglected, as honest
good-natured Betty Dunster was to go
with Mrs. Orgueil, and the Child would be
in a manner under her Care. Cynthia, therefore,
although not without great Reluctance,
yielded at last to the Persuasions of
Camilla, and gave an unwilling Consent. 
A Letter now came to Mr. Orgueil, from
the Master of a West-India Vessel, who said,
that, to oblige him, he would give the
Gentleman and Lady, whom he had mentioned,
their Passage to Jamaica; but that
they must set out in a Day or two, at furthest,
for he could not any longer delay his
Voyage. 
The small Stock of Money David was now
possessed of, he divided with his Friends,
to enable them to defray any unlooked-for
Expences; and this was the first time
the Word DIVIDED could, with any Propriety, 

have been used, in relating the Transactions
of our Society; for SHARING in
common, without any Thought of separate
Property, had ever been their friendly Practice,
from their first Connection. 
It was just three Days before Mrs. Orgueil's
intended Journey to the Bath, that
Valentine and Cynthia, by being forced to
part from their Father—their Children— 
(for in Affection all the little ones of this
united Family, were equally theirs)—their
other selves, I may say, in David and his
Wife, now felt the first Stroke that had
Power to reach their Hearts since their happy
Union. And although they had ever
made it their principal Study to fortify
their Minds against ever Accident, and
their chief Lesson to themselves, as well as
their Children, had ever been, a patient
Resignation to temporary Evils; yet Cynthia
(as no ill Consequence could attend such
Omission) would not, by a tender Farewel,
encounter the Children's streaming Eyes,
lest it should dissolve all her Resolution, and
soften her too much to have any Command
of herself. Therefore, going into their
Room, when the Innocents were asleep,
she killed the little Wretches, who were insensible
of the Loss they were to suffer of so 

indulgent an Aunt. The next Morning Valentine
and Cynthia, accompanied by David and
Camilla, walked to Mr. Orgueil's House,
who lent them his Chariot, to convey them
to the Inn, where the Stage Coach was to
take them up. 
Mrs. Orgueil declared, that she never, in
her whole Life, beheld so contemptible a
Scene, as the parting of these four Friends
—she should have been more affected (she
said) than any one of them, if she had been
to lose her favourite Cat; and she was now
convinced, that the Friendship of our Society
(and of all Societies of Wits) was mere
Pretence; and that there was not one
amongst them, whose Heart did not greatly
resemble Marble in Hardness and Incapacity
of Feeling. And this Incapacity of
Feeling did Mrs. Orgueil infer from observing,
that neither Valentine or Cynthia, David,
or his Camilla, accompanied the Word
FAREWEL, with either Tears or Complaints:
for, instead of putting on sorrowful or
gloomy Countenances, they rather endeavoured,
by an apparent Chearfulness, to
lessen each other's Grief. But as Mrs.
Orgueil understood not real Tenderness, it
was no Wonder she should misinterpret 

such Behaviour; and that for Resolution
she should read Insensibility. 
Such as are acquainted with this Society,
or have themselves experienced a Separation
from those they love, can, without my Help,
inform Mrs. Orgueil, that Valentine and
Cynthia, the Moment the Chariot drove from
the Door, could no longer contain their
Grief. Soft Tears of Sorrow flowed from
their Eyes, which could only be restrained
and wiped away by their Regard to each
other's Peace of Mind. 
Mrs. Orgueil, although she delighted to
relate what she called the insensible Behaviour
of our Society, on their Separation,
yet wilfully omitted publishing the Sorrow
which David and his Camilla could not forbear
expressing as soon as they knew their
Friends were out of the Reach of being hurt
by their Tears. But their Behaviour I also
shall omit relating, as it bore so near a Resemblance
to that of Valentine and Cynthia,
that it might justly be called a Repetition. 
But yet, as Mrs. Orgueil's grand Point was
to prove Cynthia's Insensibility, and Want
of Friendship for Camilla, she would readily
have granted that Camilla had some Degree
of Friendship for Cynthia; and would herself, 

on that Account have published Camilla's
Grief, when the Chariot drove from
the Door, had she not been aware of the
Conclusion that might naturally have been
drawn from thence; namely, that as the four
Friends behaved with equal Strength of
Mind, when together, it was very probable,
they might be equally overcome with
Sorrow, when parted. 
David and his Camilla, on arriving at
their own Cottage, were surprised that not
their own Maid, but Mrs. Dunster, should
open the Door to them; she soon began to
beg them not to be offended with the Maid
and Miss Camilla, who (she said) had set out
on foot, accompanied by her Husband and
Daughter, in order to meet Valentine and
Cynthia at the Inn, where they were to meet
the Stage Coach. “And, indeed, Madam
(adds the good Woman) I believe your
sweet Daughter would have broke her
Heart, had she not seen the last of her
dear Uncle and Aunt.” She had scarce
finished her Tale before the Maid arrived,
leading in the little Camilla, whose usual
Joy on the Sight of her indulgent Parents
was something abated, by the Fear of having
offended, because she was ordered not
to rise that Morning. Yet this Fear did 

not induce this amiable Girl to run from,
but towards her Mother's Arms, and, falling
on her Knees, she, by her streaming
Eyes, implored Pardon for her Fault, and
expressed that Affliction for their general
Loss, which, from the Fullness of her tender
Heart, she was unable to utter. 