


In which is a Letter from a Friend. 
The first thing David now did, was
to write to Valentine and Cynthia. It
was the most difficult Task he had ever undertaken; 
yet he so executed it, that he
omitted no one Alleviation to that Sorrow,
which the chief Purport of his Letter must
occasion: the Sympathy of his own Mind
with the Persons he was writing to, enabled
him to raise such Images, and use such Expressions,
as were best suited to give Comfort. 
And now our Hero and his little Family
were again resuming their former Serenity,
when David received the following
Letter from Mr. Ratcliff. 

SIR,
“I am truly concerned to find by your
Letter, that you have built so strongly on 

my Intentions to serve you; that those,
who will not look on your Actions
through that partial Medium of Friendship,
which I have ever done, will find
too much Reason for taxing you with
Imprudence. How many Men have deprived
themselves of the Means of living
comfortably, whilst they have grasped
after the Power of living luxuriously. 
The Fable of the Dog, who lost the Substance
by catching at the Shadow, though
learnt in our Youth, seldom is remembered
when it will be of Service to us. 
After what I have said, it is almost unnecessary
to tell you, that all Hopes
from the Quarter you so much depended
on, are at an End; and I have received
a positive Refusal; not that my Friend,
the great Man, would deny me any thing
for myself, for he has often urged me to
accept of Places of great Importance,
which I have hitherto declined; nor do
I believe I shall ever bring myself to undergo
the Fatigue of a public Employment. 
—An earnest Desire to serve and
assist my Friends, sometimes makes me
stagger in my Resolution. And should I
ere long have it in my own Power, I need
not repeat my Promises, to use that Power
for the Service of my dear Friend. But 

I desire to raise no Expectations: Good
Fortune will not be the less welcome for
coming unlooked for. It is every one's
Duty, to conform to their Circumstances. 
How many melancholy Examples have
we before our Eyes, of whole Families
falling to Decay through Negligence and
Extravagance; and then expecting to be
supported in Idleness by the Prudent and
Industrious! I mean this as no Reflection
on you, my dear Friend; for I know
your Intentions are, to breed up your
Family in a Way suitable to their Circumstances. 
Mrs. Ratcliff desires me
to tell you, she hopes Miss Camilla does
not neglect her Needle: she read, with
friendly Concern, the Pleasure your Wife
expressed on Miss's Genius for Music and
Painting; such things may be encouraged
in young Ladies born to a Fortune; but
—no longer ago than last Week, a
Person was recommended to wait on
Mrs. Ratcliff—she was a younger Daughter
to a Baronet, who, dying abroad, left
a Family of eleven Children, all unprovided
for. The young Creature was just
nineteen; not handsome, but very genteel
in her Person. She spoke French
extremely well, wrote an exceeding good
hand, and was a perfect Mistress of Accounts; 

had profited also so much by the
Instructions of her Mother's Housekeeper
(while she kept one) that there was no
kind of Sweetmeats, Jellies, &c. that
she was not qualified to make: her own
natural Genius for Music had made her,
without any Master, a great Proficient
that Way; and her Sketches in Drawing
shewed, that, had she applied herself to
that Science, she might have equalled,
if not excelled, the greatest Masters in
that Art: but when my Wife came to
ask her about working at her Needle
(the chief Employment Mrs. Ratcliff delights
in, or confines her Women to) the
Girl answered, that she knew, indeed,
all sorts of Work, and believed no body
could find Fault with the Neatness of her
Performance; but, for want of Use of
her Needle (as she confessed she never
much delighted in it) she had so slow a
Hand at Work, that she could not promise
to make a fine Holland Shirt under
a Week, or five Days at the least: upon
which Mrs. Ratcliff, having heard
enough, soon dismissed her; and advised
her to stick more to her Needle, and
leave off her Pen and her Pencil; and
she might then not have the Misfortune
to lose so good a Place as her's would 

have been to her. I know you and your
Wife have Sense enough to make the
proper Use of this Story, and, if you do,
I doubt not but it may be in Mrs. Ratcliff's
Power hereafter to recommend
Miss Camilla, if she herself should be so
engaged as not to be able to take her to
be about her own Person. 
“I should have been glad (without my asking
it) to have had a Specimen from my
Godson, how he improves in his Writing,
and what Progress he makes in his Latin. 
I would not have him neglect his Book on
any Account; but, as I design him for
the University, he need not apply himself
to Numbers, for which, I find, his
Master boasts of him, as if he was to be
bred a Mechanic. I should be very sorry
that the Expence I have already been at,
should be all thrown away; which I shall
think, if he does not make a great Figure
in the literary World. As I have
no Child of my own, I always consider
him as my adopted Son; and, as he
is likely to be in so different a Station of
Life from the rest of his Family, I should
be glad you would be as sparing as possible
of sending for him from School,
lest, seeing the low way of Life of his 

Brothers and Sisters, he might get into
a mean way of thinking; which is what,
in an Heir of mine, I could not endure. 
“As I have given you a positive Answer
about the Place you hoped for, I
should take it well not to receive any
farther Importunities from you, on that
Head. I cannot answer for the Promises
or Expectations given by another; but
for my own—think of my Behaviour to
your Son, and you cannot doubt my good
Intentions towards him; nor, I hope,
you will never have Cause towards yourself
to doubt the real good Wishes and
Affection of 
“Your very sincere, and
faithful Friend,
Peter Ratcliff. 
“P.S. I have sent, by the Carrier, a new
Suit of Clothes, Hat, Stockings, Shoes,
&c. for my God-son; and in the same
Box my Wife has put up a green Damask
Sack, dirted but on one Side,
which, turned, will make a Nightgown
for Miss Camilla, and a Coat for
little Fanny.” 

However disagreeable the Purport of this
Letter must be to David, yet it was so
worded, that a Mind so much the Reverse
of all Despondency as his was, could not
admit absolute Despair. He considered, that
this Letter was in answer to one, in which
he had set forth his own Circumstances in
much stronger Terms than he would have
done, had he not been frightened by the
Consideration, that if little Cynthia should
linger long in her Illness, he was totally incapable
of supporting her: he therefore endeavoured,
as much as possible, to cherish
the Image, that Mr. Ratcliff's chief View
was to prevent his being too sanguine in
his Hopes; and, consequently, feeling more
sharply any Disappointment. David would
not doubt the Friendship of a Man, who
gave him the Pleasure of thinking, that,
whatever Misfortune befel him, his eldest
Son would, however, have an Education,
and a good Prospect of being provided for. 
The Expression, he would not doubt, may,
at first Sight appear strange; but, I believe,
the Man, who has, with any moderate Degree
of Carefulness, examined his own
Mind, will not think the Discovery very
new, that our Inclinations often stifle and
render abortive Images beginning to arise in 

our Minds, and place others in their
room. 
The suspicious Man may often thank his
Inclination for Discoveries, which he chuses
to place to the Account of his sagacious
Penetration; and to the same Inclination
also he may frequently return Thanks, for
many fancied Discoveries, whose Objects
have no Existence, but in his own Brain. 
But the most sanguine Hopes of David
Simple only served to keep up a Chearfulness
in his own Mind, and enable him to
communicate that Chearfulness to others; 
for they never actuated him to be imprudent:
he, therefore, on the Receipt of this
Letter, changed his small House for a Habitation
yet less, redoubled his Diligence,
and if ever Poverty and Oeconomy subsisted
together, it was in this Family. 
By Poverty I mean distressed, not narrow
Circumstances; and being, with a large
dependent Family, in a Situation in Life,
that you know not how to go out of, and
yet are not able to support; and when you
pay Cent. per Cent. for every Necessary of
Life, by being obliged to buy every thing
by retail: when, if you endeavour to keep 

up a fair Out-side, and paint not your Poverty
in the most ghastly Shape, your nominal
Friends will call you extravagant:
whilst, on the other hand, if you set your
Poverty in full View, such Friends will generously
think you too low for their Regard; 
and comfort themselves, that you are
too impotent to hurt them, even in the
Eyes of the World. Then it is but watching
over every minute Circumstance of your
Life, exaggerating every human Failing,
and it will be easily believed, you deserve
your Fate, and they do right in abandoning
you to it. Nay farther, it is very easy, in
this Case, to deduce, by a malicious Representation
of true Matters of Fact, every
Action of your unhappy Life, from Motives
you never once dreamed of. And
this Advantage is generally taken when
your Mind is in a State of the utmost Timidity,
when the warm Affections of your
Heart make you look with Dread and Horror
on every Step you take, lest the Consequence
of it should be any ways prejudicial
to the chief Object of your Love. —This is
Poverty! this is true Distress! But to eat
the Bread earned by honest Labour, which
Custom has made light, is Riches, and the
Height of Luxury, in the Comparison. 
This, indeed, is the only Situation I can 

imagine dreadful enough to conquer a Mind
endued with true Principles, or armed with
any moderate Degree of Fortitude and Patience. 
In such a Situation, at present, was
David Simple; and, slight as was his Support
by the Hopes of Mr. Ratcliff's Friendship,
yet he dared not let go his Hold, being
then sure of falling to the Ground, and
pulling with him his beloved Camilla, and
their common Care, their tender Infants. 
By the Help of this Timidity both Mr.
Ratcliff and Mr. Orgueil got an Ascendancy
over the Mind of David Simple, that no
Creature on Earth could ever have obtained,
had SELF alone been his Consideration. 
Not even if they had found him in a sick
Bed, loaded with Poverty and Pain, no
human Arm extended for his Assistance, his
only Support a Conscience void of Offence,
and Hope in another Life. But he was entangled
in the Snare of his Love for others,
and his Inclination blinded his Judgment,
till he in a manner forced himself to fancy
he believed that Ratcliff and Orgueil would
be his Friends, against that almost infallible
Proof to the contrary, that the true Words
of Kindness never fell from their Lips. 

But such is human Frailty, that the Timidity
of Mind which generally attends ardent
Wishes, often destroys all our Purposes,
and our Fate precipitates us into
Over-sights, which bar us of that Success
we might possibly obtain, were our Minds
more indifferent, and consequently more at
Liberty to exert themselves. 
Poets feign, that Bodies have by Fear
been turned into Stone; and Experience
teaches us what surprising Effects Fear will
have on the Mind. 
Persons who sit round a warm Fire-side,
their Minds unshaken by any Accident from
Fortune, and free from Affliction, are very
little qualified to judge of the Actions of a
Man, whose Affairs are in such tempestuous
Storms, that they require a Pilot, endued
with more than human Skill, to guide their
Course. 
But here I would not be understood, as
if David Simple, overcome by Timidity and
Despair, raged or raved at his Misfortunes; 
or as if he did not exert the utmost human
Patience, in submitting to them: only that
his Mind was so far weakened and conquered 

by the Distress of his Family, that he
could in some Measure be imposed on by
the Appearance of friendly Colours, although
the most certain Knowledge, Experience
itself, had given him great Reason
to believe those Colours hid beneath them
what is most shocking to a distressed Mind,
namely, Hardness of Heart. 