


In which is a Letter from Cynthia. 
David and Camilla were conversing
on the Subject of the last Chapter of
our last Book, and could not help
(even with all their Experience of the
World) being something astonished at such
an Instance of Perfidy as they found in Mr.
Ratcliff, when their Thoughts were driven
into another Channel by the Receipt of the
following Letter from Cynthia. 

“My dear Friends,
“AS I am sensible of your Anxiety on
my Account, I cannot resist any Opportunity 

of conversing with you, although
my favourite Inducement of writing,
namely, the having it in my Power to
communicate Chearfulness and Joy to my
Friends, is wanting: but although I cannot
acquaint you with any News, at present,
capable of giving you Pleasure, yet
I will impart some Comfort to you, by
assuring you, that I struggle as much as
possible against my being sunk by my
Misfortunes, and still find one Allay to
them, in that I am not an additional
Burthen to those who are already overloaded. 
“Although this Island is reputed famous
for Hospitality to Strangers, yet I have
experienced more Inhumanity and Insult
than I could have expected from the different
Reception we at first met with. 
At the Time when I lost my Valentine,
you may easily imagine that the Behaviour
of the Acquaintance I had contracted
since my Arrival here, had very little
Power to move a Mind so full already
as mine was. But I presently found
every Countenance was so perfectly changed
towards me, that I seemed as much a
Stranger here as at first. I could not well
account for it; and indeed my Thoughts 

were too much fixed, and my Heart too
much rent to suffer me to reflect much
about it. 
“But at the Time when I was most incapable
of looking into worldly Affairs,
a Lawyer, who had professed himself a
great Friend to my Valentine, and who
had undertaken the Management of our
Plantation, on my desiring him to make
up our Accounts (by which Means I
hoped to have set out in the Ship which
brings this Letter, with three hundred
Pounds in my Pocket) brought me in
Debtor to him Seventy Pounds. The
very Night before my dear Husband was
taken ill, he had told me that he intended
to settle with his Lawyer the next Day,
in order to remit you a Bill for whatever
Sum in his Power you wanted. 
“It was impossible for me to contend
with this Man; for, besides his being one
of the richest, he bears the Character of
being one of the honestest Men in his
Profession; and on the Dependance of
his fair Character (most foully and hypocritically
acquired) he had the Assurance
to tell me, that he owned (but he
took Care no Witness should be by) that 

he had formed that Account with an Intent
of getting me into his Power; and
that he would never insist on my paying
him the Balance, if I would comply with
his Conditions. Nay, he went so far as
to confess that all his Friendship to Valentine
was a Pretence on my Account; 
and this the Monster expected I should
look on as a great Favour. 
“When I consider to whom I am writing,
I know I need not say what was my
Indignation and Astonishment at the audacious
Wickedness of this Angelo; nor
how I behaved; but outraged by being
totally disappointed in his Hopes, he
dared me to a Discovery; said, he doubted
not but his Character would support
him against any thing I should say; and
that I might think myself highly obliged
to him, after the Contempt I treated him
with, if he did not sue me for the Balance
of the Account; but as to that, I might
rest easy, for it would pay him better to
have it known (and he should take Care
to publish it) that he had presented the
poor Widow with seventy Pounds. 
“Now the Mystery was all cleared up. 
I could trace the Alteration in all my 

Acquaintance; for I made no doubt but
this Man of a fair Character had already
spread the News of my extreme Poverty
through the Island. Oh! my Friends!
how did I at that Instant rejoice, that my
dear little Infant Cynthia could never be
insulted! that she was fallen into the
Hands of God, and could never fall into
the Hands of Men! 
“But as the Master of the Vessel kindly
offered to give me my Passage home, this
Disappointment in my Affairs should not
have changed my Resolution in setting
out for England, for I could think with
Pleasure of assisting my dear Camilla, and
contributing by my Labour to our general
Support; but was seized with such
a Weakness in all my Limbs, that I am
told I have little Reason to hope for the
Recovery of them; which has determined
me to accept of an Invitation Mrs.
Darkling (the richest Widow in this
Place) has given me, of being, at least
for the present, with her. 
“Mrs. Darkling expressed herself so
kindly, and seemed to have such a Feeling
of my present Circumstances, that I
flattered myself I had found something 

like a Friend; and could not help acquainting
her with the treacherous and
cruel Usage of Mr. Drayton (for that was
the Name of my Lawyer). On which
she drew up herself into a contemptuous
Posture, and, with an Air of Disdain,
advised me, as a Friend, not to let my
Vanity tempt me to expose myself, by
telling such an incredible Story to any
other, lest it should meet with a more severe
Censure than that she would pass on
it, considering how kind Mr. Drayton
had been in forgiving me the seventy
Pounds: but added, that she had always
accustomed herself to look on the most
favourable Side of any one's Actions,
would impute it to Vanity, which was
a Failing she knew how to forgive; and
being above it herself, she pitied those
who were possessed of it, provided it did
not rise to any very high Degree. 
“I could almost have imagined I heard
Mrs. Orgueil speaking; but such kind of
Women are the Growth of every Climate; 
and I believe it is my Fate eternally
to meet with them. But don't, my
Friends, let your kind Affection towards
me, give you unnecessary Anxieties on my
Account; the strongest Stroke my Heart 

is capable of feeling, is already struck in
the Loss of my dear and ever kind Husband; 
and all other Things, but the
Welfare of your Family, are become almost
indifferent in my Eyes; and in every
kind of Misfortune, in every inhuman
Insult I can possibly meet with, it is not
in the Power of any Cruelty to take from
me the Consolation I feel by the Consideration
that my Valentine knows not my
Distresses, and therefore cannot be hurt
by them: and I cherish yet some Hope,
that we shall meet again in Peace and
Plenty. All my sweet little Cousins are
strongly in my Remembrance, and particularly
my innocent Companion, my
young Camilla: and, with a Heart as little
daunted as possible, 
“I am sincerely your's,
Cynthia.” 
On the Receipt of Cynthia's Letter, although
she endeavoured, even in that Situation,
to throw some kind of Chearfulness
into it, and avoided, as much as possible,
drawing any frightful Pictures of Distress,
David and Camilla were both highly sensible
of her Situation; and David wrote to her
in such Terms to come home, as he thought 

she could not resist. He told her, that although
he could not have the Pleasure of
promising her a Protection from Poverty,
yet from Insult he could and would protect
her. But the chief Inducement he made
Use of, was the strongest Assurance, that
now her Absence would produce no Advantage
to herself, neither he nor Camilla
could have a Moment's Peace unless she returned
to them. 
David and Camilla knew enough of such
Characters as that of the Lady mentioned in
Cynthia's Letter, not to have one Grain of
Trust in them. And although their own
Distress was great, yet was their Consideration
and Feeling for Cynthia full as great as
if they had been in any other Situation. 
It is impossible to express the Joy that was
diffused through all the younger Part of the
Family, on hearing that Cynthia would return; 
for little Camilla loved her Aunt with
a most warm Affection. 