


In which is a very uncommon Dialogue. 
David, on Enquiry, discovered that
there lived in his Neighbourhood one
Mr. Nichols, who was Steward to most of
the Men of Fashion in that County, and
who lent out Money on Interest, provided
he had proper Security. This Mr. Nichols
had taken an exact Measure of all the
Lands, and knew, within twenty Shillings,
what every Man was worth in all the Country
round him. But when David applied
to him for the Loan of Money, he at first
was very shy, thinking, by his Appearance
and his known Poverty, that sufficient Security
might not be easily forth-coming:
but when, on his Enquiries, David produced
Valentine's Letter, a Conversation
followed, in which neither Party could well
comprehend the other, and which I will
give my Reader in the Words of the
Speakers. 

Mr. Nichols. “And pray, Sir, please to
shew me the Bond, or Note, or what
kind of Security you are possessed of, by
which, if Mr. Valentine should have the
Success he mentions, you may legally
recover any Monies of him.” 
David. “I have no Bond, or Note, Sir; 
Valentine is my Brother, my Wife's Brother,
and that's the same thing.” 
Nichols. “All's one for that, Sir, as
you observe, whether he is your Wife's
Brother, or your own; but if you have
no Security, no Monies will be forthcoming. 
A Brother, indeed! I have sent
Officers with Executions into may a
Man's House, whose Brothers might
have prevented it, and even with very
inconsiderable Loss to themselves.” 
David. “If there are any such Wretches,
Sir, that's nothing to my Valentine. We
have always lived as one Family, and
considered no separate Property.” 
Nichols. “But you don't live together
now; and if this Mr. Valentine is a wise
Man, he may think it most prudent to 

keep separately what he hath separately
gotten.” 
David. “If you knew my Valentine, Sir,
you would not suspect him of harbouring
the Thought, that he could have any
Enjoyment in which I should not have an
equal Share.” 
Nichols. “If I knew him ever so well, Sir,
I should proceed on no Grounds but good
Security. But, for Curiosity sake, pray,
Sir, answer me one Question, in this
sharing and living as one Family, that
you talk so much about, has it been
most in Mr. Valentine's Power to serve
you, or your's to serve him? in short,
which has conferred the most Obligations?” 
David. “In all our Transactions with
each other, I believe the Word Obligations
was never once thought of by either of
us, from our first Acquaintance.” 
Nichols. “But which of you two had the
most Substance? which was the best Man?” 
Here David Simple remembering the Explanation
once given him of the Phrase, A 

good Man upon 'Change, luckily understood
Mr. Nichols's last Question, and thus answered. 
David. “'Till very lately, indeed, that
I have been impoverished by an uncommon
Train of unfortunate Events, the
Balance of Fortune has been mostly in
my Hands, and I have enjoyed the immense
Pleasure of being able to serve my
Brother.” 
Nichols, shaking his Head. “Ho, ho!
have you so? that's so much the worse; 
a very bad Sign, indeed, if you have
conferred Obligations on him. I have
sometimes known a Man serve his
Friends when he has had no Obligations
to them; but many a Man has come to
me, to mortgage his last Foot of Land,
and all his Complaint has been of Ingratitude
from those he had obliged.” 
David. “You don't talk our Language,
Sir.” 
Here Nichols sneers.
Nichols. “Not your Language, Sir? I
think I talk plain English; and only want
to know what Security I should have,
should I advance any Monies?” 

David. “If you will lend me only so
small a Sum as ten Pounds, I am very
willing to give you my Note, or Bond,
for treble that Money; and will thankfully
repay it, if it pleases God to bless
Valentine: but I have no other means of
so doing.” 
Nichols. “Treble the Sum, you say. — 
Hum!—but so many Contingencies— 
first, this Mr. Valentine may flatter himself
too much;—secondly, he may
die.” 
David. “God forbid!” 
Nichols. “But we are all mortal, you
know, Sir; the Life of Man is but short,
and so many Accidents intervene, that
a wise Man must think of all Contingencies:
and if your Friend should change
his Mind?” 
David. “That's impossible.” 
Here Nichols sneers again.
Nichols. “Let me see, ten Pound— 
but if I should lose it all, the Interest
that might be made of it in five hundred 

Years, with proper Management (and
no one can accuse me of Imprudence)
will be a prodigious Loss. However, I
am so willing to serve you, that I will
consider of it. I shall come your Way
To-morrow, and will call on you.” 
David was so delighted with the Thoughts
of carrying his Camilla any the least Hopes
of Relief, that he took his Leave, thanking
Mr. Nichols for his Promise of even considering
his Request; and earnestly entreated
him not to fail the next Morning: for, be
it deemed ever so imprudent, such was the
Matter of Fact, that he would have given
a Bond for an Hundred Pounds, for that
present though small Relief to his Family. 
But how great was the Astonishment of
David Simple, at the vast Absurdity of the
Man, who could calculate what the Interest
of Ten Pounds would amount to, in the
Space of Five hundred Years, in the very
same Breath in which he was talking of the
Shortness of Man's Life! 
If David was astonished at this Absurdity,
Mr. Nichols was no less so, at his Conversation. 
The Trust and Confidence David
expressed in Valentine's Friendship, sounded
as nonsensical in his Ears, as if he had 

affirmed he could safely trust a Fox with
the Care of his Poultry. For Mr. Nichols
was fully satisfied that Valentine's Friendship
was mere Pretence, and had been hitherto
counterfeited, in order to make an Advantage
of David's Credulity; and he doubted
not but that as soon as Valentine found the desperate
State of his Circumstances, he would
wisely cast him off, and avoid the Expence
of endeavouring to prove himself what such
a Fool as David would call a real Friend. 
Besides, from some Expressions dropped in
the foregoing Conversation, such as—the
Pleasure of serving Friends—sharing Fortunes,
&c.to which Mr. Nichols gave the
Name of unintelligible Gibberish, he at
once had conceived a high Contempt for
David, and a great Opinion of Valentine's
Prudence, in that he had chose so proper a
Person for a Dupe. But Mr. Nichols never
once considered that David himself was a
Proof, and a pretty strong one, that this
Gibberish might enter into the Heads and
Hearts of some at least, amongst the Race
of Mankind. 
However, a Bond for treble the Sum had
staggered Mr. Nichols in his Resolution. 
He could not suspect David of a Design to
cheat him; his Contempt for his Folly 

would not suffer him to entertain such a
Suspicion; and he thought it was gaming
at least with Advantage. He gave up all
Thoughts of Valentine (from a Conviction
in his own Mind, that he would do nothing)
but resolved to keep his Appointment with
David the next Morning, and watch with
a careful Eye, whether the whole of what
his little House and Garden contained,
might, sold to a Disadvantage, amount to
Thirty Pounds; and if so, he would advance
him Five, on a Bond for fifteen. 
Mr. Nichols would have chose David's
Bond before a Security from Mr. Orgueil,
if he would have given it (of which, indeed,
there was no Danger) for Nichols very
well knew Orgueil's Manner of acting in all
Concerns about Money, for he was his
Steward: and although Orgueil would not
lay down the Money for David, yet had he
been once Security for him, he would never
have suffered his Friend to have been torn
to Pieces for his Honour's sake; and Mr.
Nichols would not have dared to have seized
David's Goods, for fear of disobliging Mr.
Orgueil; which he, on Calculation, thought
was hazarding more than their Value. For
Mr. Nichols had a Pair of Compasses, by
which he could take as true a Measure of 

every Man's Disposition concerning Monies,
as of his Lands. And when he did
not meet with such Men as David (an Accident
that did not often occur) he was generally
right in his Judgment: for as his
whole Mind was bent on one Point, and as
the Knowledge of Characters relating to
that Point was the grand Instrument of his
Trade, he as mechanically acquired it as a
Fisherman does the Knowledge of the proper
Baits to catch the several Sorts of Fish. 
It is Idleness of Mind oftener than Incapacity
that bars Men from worldly Knowledge:
and this Idleness never accompanies
a strong Desire and Bent to any one Purpose. 
Nay, Mr. Nichols had even Humour
upon Occasion, and found a Method of
rendering his Conversation acceptable to
those on whom he had any interested View; 
and as all his Ridicule was levelled at Poverty,
he made himself an agreeable Companion
at the rich Man's Table. 
The next Morning, when Mr. Nichols
called on David, he easily found, by observing
the necessary Furniture of his little Habitation,
that he might safely venture Five
Pounds on a Bond of Fifteen; but he insisted
on Judgment being confessed on the 

Bond, in order to have David immediately
in his Power, whenever he pleased; but yet
would not advance one Farthing more than
the Five Pounds; and as small as this Sum
was, it brought a present Relief that was
greatly pleasing to David. 
Mr. Nichols might have laid down the
Ten Pounds without any great Hazard, had
it not been his constant Custom, like Macbeth, 
“To make Assurance doubly sure.”
For every thing in this small Cottage, tho'
poor and plain, yet was preserved in so neat
a Manner, as visibly proved that the Owners
of it could not think themselves debarred of
every Comfort, whilst they enjoyed each
other's Company. Those People, whose
Love of Property arises from the vain Desire
of making a Figure in the Eyes of
others, generally degenerate into Filth and
Nastiness, when they can no longer gratify
that Desire: whereas the Desire of Property
only as far as may contribute to comfort
in a Family, truly united by Love, always
actuates every Individual to contribute by
Labour and Industry to one another's Comforts. 

Therefore in our little Family of Love,
each Day was employed in Endeavours to
promote its common Welfare. Camilla and
her eldest Daughter were industrious in their
pursuit of Houshold Business; not groaning
or repining under their Labour, but looking
chearfully forward to their principal Aim. 
The Sister and the Daughter preserving in
her Mind the Thought that her little Brothers
and Sisters, and her kind Father,
would, by her Industry, better enjoy the
Conveniencies of Life; whilst the Mother
and the Wife turned every domestic Labour
into a pleasing Enjoyment, by the
Consideration that every Work of her Hands
was for the Benefit of her indulgent Husband
and his dear Infants. And David
every Morning employed himself in cultivating
his little Garden, the better to support
his beloved Family: not one Spot of
waste Ground was to be seen; Labour and
Contrivance produced Plenty and Variety,
in a Space so small, it barely appeared at
first View sufficient for the producing any
one kind of Vegetable to support a moderate
Family. And this little Piece of Ground
had been long neglected, as barren and not
worth improving: but the Industry of David
could surmount Difficulties, which to 

others appeared insurmountable, when attended
with the Reward of seeing his Wife,
his Children, or his Friends enjoy the Fruits
of his Labour. He could walk, or rather
turn about in his little Garden, and feel more
solid Happiness from the flourishing of a
Cabbage, or the growing of a Turnip, than
was ever received from the most ostentatious
Shew the Vanity of Man could possibly invent. 
He could delight himself with thinking,
Here will I set such a Root, because
my Camilla likes it; here, such another, because
it is my little David's Favourite. 
And in like Manner did he study something
peculiarly to please each Individual in his
whole Family. 
Some little Flowers too, such as Roses,
Honeysuckle, and Jessamin, which required
no Cost in raising, but which pleasingly
revive and refresh the Senses, did David
contrive his Camilla should gather; and his
Look, when he saw her smile with Pleasure
on the Produce of his Labour, and
express by her Countenance, her joyful
Thanks for his Kindness, was, to a benignent
Heart, a Sight better worth beholding,
than any other this World can afford; 
and this Reward of his Labours David was
always sure to meet with, for his Camilla 

fully possessed that very uncommon Gift
of gratefully and with Chearfulness receiving
true Indulgence. 
All their Children too, to the very
youngest, by their innocent Prattle even
over a Flower, were capable of filling their
Parent's Hearts with the Height of Rapture:
and one Day, at Table, little Fanny
eyeing a Rose in her own Bosom (the Bush
of which she had seen her Father prune)
said to little David, “See, my dear Brother,
what a pretty Flower this is; and
how kind my Papa is, to make these
pretty Flowers for us to play with and
smell to.” The Eyes of David and
Camilla at that Instant mutually expressed
an unbounded Rapture at observing this
opening Blossom of Gratitude in their tender
Infant. 
It would be endless to enumerate the
many Instances of this kind of Pleasure,
which our little united Family daily enjoyed:
a Pleasure that the Great, at their
luxurious Tables, might reflect on with Envy,
and which all the Kingdoms of the
Earth could not give to Minds unqualified
for it, nor by such Minds can it be even
understood. 