




The History of Mrs. Bilson. 
When Lady Dellwyn had silenced
her Lord in his Praises
of Mrs. Saunders, he was obligated
to seek for another Subject for
his future Encomiums, and was so fortunate
as to find one which would not
give Room for her Ladyship to make a
bright Repartee; who had no Resource,
but in declaring that she did not 

pretend to be better than others of her
Rank, Age, and Person; and thought
there was great Pride in contradicting
by one's Conduct the reigning Customs
of the World. 
The Lady, who now engrossed all
Lord Dellwyn's Panegyric, did indeed
deserve much more than he could pay,
having risen to a Degree of Excellence
far above his Lordship's Comprehension; 
his Mind's Eye, according to
Hamlet's Expression, was so shortsighted,
it could only distinguish a
small Part of her Character; but that
contained a sufficient Number of Beauties
to justify his Admiration, if they
had not been heightened by the Contrast
which was uppermost in all his
Thoughts. The very peculiar Fate and
Conduct of this Lady may render a farther
Account of her agreeable, if Variety
can please; for greatly doth she
differ from all who may probably have
fallen under the Reader's Notice. 

Mrs. Bilson (for by that Name I shall
call the Lady I am going to mention)
was Daughter to Colonel Lemster; she
lost her Mother when she was about
Eleven Years old; but by her Father's
Tenderness, and great Care of her Education,
she did not suffer as might
have been expected from so great a
Misfortune. When she was Sixteen,
she became the Object of general Admiration,
where-ever her prudent Father
suffered her to appear in public. 
She was extremely beautiful, and had
that tender Sensibility in her Countenance,
mixed with a modest Vivacity,
as rendered her as much the Object of
Love as of Admiration. Nature had
indeed lavished on her all those Graces,
which the Poets have supposed it in the
Power of Venus's Cestus to bestow. 
Amongst many Admirers, none
seemed more ardent, or more pleasing,
to Miss Lemster, than Mr. Bilson; but
his Fortune was not sufficient to content
a Father, who wished to see his 

Daughter placed in affluent Circumstances,
tho' he did not think Riches
alone sufficient to constitute Happiness. 
Mr. Bilson therefore met with no
Encouragement from the Colonel, and
still less from the young Lady; who
added to the Desire of obeying her Father,
having never suffered herself to
consider her own Inclinations after she
knew his. 
While Mr. Bilson's passion was in
this hopeless Situation, Colonel Lemster
was ordered into an unhealthful
Climate, on a very dangerous Service. 
He had too often braved Death to fear
its Approach when his Duty was concerned,
tho' it threatened him in different
Shapes; but when he viewed
his Daughter, he felt himself a Coward: 
Death appeared armed with
Terrors, when he reflected on the deplorable
Condition in which he must
leaver her. He had, as much from
some unavoidable Accidents, as from 

an Imprudence too common in his
Station, spent his Income, without
having taken care to place his Daughter
above the Danger of Dependance. 
He was of a noble Family, but was at
Variance with the elder Branch of it; 
which deprived his Daughter of that
last, and too often poor Resource, the
Kindness of Relations. In the cruel
Anxiety with which he was oppressed,
he could perceive no Means of Security
for his beloved Child but Marriage; 
and the Time of his Departure was so
near, that it would not afford him Leisure
to wait for such Offers as would be
perfectly agreeable to him; therefore,
tho' he saw that a narrow or precarious
Fortune was not eligible, and that Seventeen
Years of Age is very young to
enter into the Cares and Duties of
Wedlock, yet he found himself in a
manner reduced to look with a more
favourable Eye on Mr. Bilson's Address
to his Daughter. He acquainted
her with his Views, and the Circumstances
that had produced them. 

Miss Lemster had been very wretched
from the Time she first learnt where
her Father's Regiment was destined; 
and less able to bear the Thoughts of
parting with him, as he was in a very
declining State of Health. She had
used all the Arguments her Reason
could suggest, and all the Endearments
of Affection, to obtain Permission to
attend him; but in vain: The Probability
of his dying, and leaving her
friendless and destitute in a far distant
Country, rendered it impossible for him
to grant her Request. I have already
hinted that Mr. Bilson was agreeable to
her, while she had Leisure to consult
her own Inclinations; but when the
Colonel informed her that he was
inclined to favour his Address, her
Thoughts were so entirely engrossed
with the afflicting Expectation of losing
so much-loved a Parent, that weaker
Affections were, at least for the Time,
entirely extinguished; and she acquiesced
in her Father's Determination,
with no other View than to ease him 

of Part of the Burden, which so heavily
oppressed his Mind, that it increased
his Indisposition. 
Mr. Bilson was soon acquainted, that
his Proposals would at least be listened
to with Politeness; and was told the
Colonel's Circumstances. He was too
much enamoured to be deterred by
that Information; pressed his Proposal; 
was accepted; and the anxious Father
had the Satisfaction of leaving his
Daughter under a Husband's Care,
whose Affection had been most substantially
proved by his Insensibility to
a Defect, in most People's Eyes, of such
Importance as the Want of Fortune. 
Mr. Bilson was the Son of an Officer; 
who bred him up to the Law, and at his
Death left him some Thousand Pounds; 
a Sum sufficient to tempt him to neglect
his Studies, but not to enable him
to do without the Fruits which should
arise from them. He was pleasing in
his Person and Manner, and had very 

bright Parts, capable of making a Figure
in his Profession; but he was not
so uncommonly happy as to have Wit
without Vanity: He had all the Talents
of Conversation, was the Delight
of every Company; a sufficient Inducement
for a vain Man to be little alone. 
He had so well employed his Time at
School and College, that he was deficient
in no Branch of the Belles Lettres; 
for as Learning was the Road to Praise
in those Places, no one applied more
assiduously than himself; but he looked
on the Time of his coming into the
World as the Harvest of Flattery, when
he should reap the Fruits of all his Toil
and Labour. Nor was he disappointed; 
the Men flattered, and the Ladies caressed
him; yet none could engage his
Affections but Miss Lemster. His Passion
for her continued in full Force for
upwards of Half a Year after their
Marriage; during which Time she had
the Misfortune to lose her Father, who
died soon after he arrived at the Place
of his Destination; a Misfortune she 

would scarcely have been able to support,
had it not been for the tender Attentions
of a Husband whom she loved
to Excess. 
Mr. Bilson had not given up the Profession
of the Law, tho' he had not begun
the Study of it. He chose his Wife
should be placed near his Chambers; 
and therefore took a House in Chancery
Lane, a considerable Distance from all
her former Acquaintance; but this did
not lead her to make an Objection to it. 
She knew so little of the World, that
she imagined a Wife's Scene of Action
ought to be in her own House, that
there she should spend her Time, and
there, or no-where, find her Happiness. 
Mr. Bilson's Taste was not so domestic; 
his extreme Fondness for his
Wife could not hinder him from going
much into Company; but as she still
enjoyed a great deal of his Conversation
at home, and he always returned to her 

with Pleasure, she was perfectly contented; 
for she did not look upon a
Husband as so domestic a Being: But
when they had been married a little
more than Half a Year, his Stay abroad
grew longer, he returned home with
less Joy in his Countenance, and appeared
less attentive to her while he
was there. This Carelessness in time
grew to Indifference; his Days were
passed in public, and his Evenings at
the Tavern. He always indeed behaved
with good Breeding, and in his Heart
sincerely esteemed her; but the polite
Husband was a bad Exchange for the
tender Friend, and she was most sensibly
afflicted with the Alteration. But
Mrs. Bilson's good Sense convinced her,
that she might, with greater Ease, render
Home detestable to her Husband,
than renew the Delight he once took
in it; therefore her great Study was
not to convert his Indifference into
Aversion. She always received him with
Affection; tho' much of her Tenderness
she suppressed, lest he should find 

it troublesome, as his Heart did not
correspond with hers. She never expressed
a Desire that he should stay
more at home, nor hinted that he had
been too long abroad; secure from Reproaches,
his own House had no Fault,
in his Opinion, but that of being less
lively than a Croud: But as no Restraint
was put upon him, he was never
discontented when he was there. 
He loved his Children (for they had
Three), and esteemed his Wife too
much not to be pleased in their Company; 
but his Mind could not be long
contented without what he called Joy,
which is to a vitiated Taste what Cordials
are to a decayed Stomach; they
give present Relief, but every Dose renders
the Patient a Degree farther from
sound Health. 
In this sort of Life they passed Ten
Years; Mr. Bilson in the constant Pursuit
of Pleasure; Mrs. Bilson in the continual
Exercise of every domestic Virtue. 
She was sensible their Fortune 

could not admit of Mr. Bilson's expensive
Way of Life; but fearing his
Hatred more than Poverty, she forbore
Remonstrances, from which she could
expect but little Effect, and only endeavoured
by her own Frugality to defer
the impending Distress as long as
possible; hoping that Reflexion might
perhaps come time enough to save them
from total Ruin. From this Motive,
she, by degrees, dropped all her Acquaintance,
but those who lived in the
same Street, where she could go without
much Expence; and even them
she visited but seldom, finding sufficient
Employ at home, in the frugal
Plan by which she regulated her Conduct: 
And if she could obtain some
Hours of Leisure, the Evils she suffered,
and those she feared, were more entirely
excluded from her Thoughts by
Reading. 
All Mrs. Bilson's Care could no
longer delay the Misfortune she feared. 
One Day when Mr. Bilson had invited 

Company to Dinner, after they had
waited some time for his Return, Mrs.
Bilson received a Letter from him; informing
her, that he was, on an Arrest
for a Debt he could not pay, lodged in
the Fleet. This he did not tell her
without many Invectives against his
own Folly in distressing himself, and
inexcusable Wickedness in having
brought Ruin on so amiable a Wife
and Offspring. He proceeded to tell
her that he meant that as his last Farewel,
having no Chance of ever getting
out of his loathsome Confinement, and
wishing she might find more Rectitude
and Friendship from some of her Acquaintance
than she had met with in
her Husband. Mrs. Bilson's Distress
was too exquisite to be concealed from
her Company, who soon understood
the Cause of it; and, fearing to be
asked to give any Assistance, they expressed
great Apprehensions lest their
Presence should be inconvenient, and
withdrew as fast as possible. 

As Mrs. Bilson did not expect any
Benefit from them, their Departure
gave her some Satisfaction, in leaving
her at Liberty to vent her Grief without
any Restraint; and, as soon as she grew a
little composed, to consider what she
could best do for her Husband's Relief. 
She flattered herself Affairs could not
be quite so desperate as Mr. Bilson
seemed to intimate, and was desirous of
attributing it partly to Despondency. 
When by this Hope she had stopped
the Torrent of her Tears, she determined
to go to the Prison, and learn the
Truth from Mr. Bilson, and endeavour
to comfort him. As it was now Winter,
Night was come on before she had
been able to form this Resolution; 
and Mr. Bilson's Servant being returned
home, she was afraid of venturing to
go alone, and therefore called on a Bookseller
in the Neighbourhood, to whom
her Husband had been a Customer, and
easily prevailed on him to accompany
her. 

They found Mr. Bilson in the utmost
Dejection; which was rather increased
than abated by his Wife's Endeavour
to console him, as it added to
the Self-reproaches which were his severest
Affliction, in giving him fresh
Proofs of the Merit of the Woman he
had ruined. He soon informed her
that her Hopes of his being extricated
from his present Difficulties were vain; 
for he had not run in Debt till his
whole Fortune was spent. After many
fruitless Attempts to comfort each
other, they parted, and Mrs. Bilson
returned home; where, instead of the
Pleasure she used to enjoy in returning
to her Children, she received all
the Addition that could easily be made
to her Grief, by finding her House in
the Possession of Bailiffs; for her Landlord,
hearing of the total Ruin of the
Family, thought proper to secure himself
from Loss, by distraining. Her
eldest Son and Daughter, and a faithful
Girl, the only Servant she had kept
for above Three Years, were weeping 

with Terror and Grief at this Event; 
but “where the greater Malady is
fixed, the lesser is scarce felt.” Mrs.
Bilson was not so much afflicted, as
shocked, at the Thought of passing the
Night with a Set of Men in the House,
at the very Name of whose Office our
Natures are apt to recoil; but her honest
Companion had the Satisfaction of
giving her some Relief, by promising
to sit with them, not only till the next
Morning, but till some Measures were
taken either to get her or them out of
the House; and prevailed on her and
her Family to go to Bed, that she
might have a Chance for some Rest
after so melancholy a Day, which had
exhausted both her Strength and Spirits. 
Mrs. Bilson's Sleep was short, and
disturbed by the Phantoms of an afflicted
Imagination; but yet she was so
much refreshed by it, as to acquire
Composure enough to consult with her
only Friend, the honest Bookseller, and 

his Wife, who came to them in the
Morning, what Course she could take. 
She had learned from Mr. Bilson, that
the Sum due for Rent by no means
equalled the Value of the Furniture; 
therefore it was thought adviseable,
that she should go to her Landlord,
with whom she had a small Acquaintance
by visiting his Lady, to request of
him Time to sell the Goods to the best
Advantage, that she might have the
just Surplus after he was paid, to satisfy
other Creditors. As she was going out
to execute this Resolution, she met at
the Door a Woman, with a Girl neatly
but coarsely dressed; who informed
her that she came for a Month's Board
for the Girl; Mr. Bilson always having
paid her weekly till the Four past; and
hearing the Misfortune which had happened
to him, she called, for fear of
losing her Due; which, being a poor
Woman, she could not afford. 
Mrs. Bilson, under a great deal of
Surprize, asked what the Girl was to 

Mr. Bilson, and why she should expect
her Board from him? To which the
Woman answered very abruptly, that
truly she thought she might well expect
a Father should pay for his Child,
tho' it were not so honestly come by. 
Upon examining the Girl's Face,
Mrs. Bilson perceived so great a Resemblance
to her Husband, as made
her little inclined to doubt the Truth
of the Woman's Assertion; but, on
asking the Girl's Age, was shocked to
find she was within Three Months as
old as her eldest Child: Had it been
younger, it would have hurt and surprised
her less; but to find Mr. Bilson
so frail, and so void of Delicacy, at the
Time that his Fondness for her appeared
at the greatest Height, was a
sensible Affliction: But as she had never
on any Account reproached him,
so she was now least of all inclined to
add to his Grief, when he was paying
a heavy Tax for all his Vices and Follies. 
She paid the Woman what was 

due; but said she could no longer afford
to continue the Child with her,
but that she should share her Fate and
her Children's, whatsoever that should
be; kissed it, desired it not to cry, and
bid the Maid, who was present at this
Scene, carry it to her Children, without
a Hint who she was. The Maid
obeyed her; but was so angry with her
Master, and so pleased with her Mistress,
that she could not forbear giving
a full Account of all that had passed to
the honest Bookseller and his Wife. 
He blamed Mr. Bilson extremely, and
was perfectly charmed with Mrs. Bilson's
Behaviour. 




The Continuation of the History of
Mrs. Bilson. 
But it is Time to follow Mrs.
Bilson to Mr. Glegg's, her Landlord; 
whom she found at home, and
was carried into his Study. She soon
acquainted him with her Request; to
which he returned no positive Answer,
but enquired into her Intentions for her
future Way of Life. 
Mrs. Bilson was too undetermined
to give him much Satisfaction in that
Particular: All she had resolved upon,
was to endeavour to support herself
and Children, by some Means that
should not deprive her of Mr. Bilson's
Company, and leave him entirely a 

Prey to Solitude and Confinement. 
Mr. Glegg had been little acquainted
with Mrs. Bilson, yet always beheld
her with Admiration; tho', till encouraged
by her distressful Circumstances,
he had never looked upon her
as an Object for his Gallantry. He
found great Fault with her principal
Design; plainly told her that Mr. Bilson
must be left to the Consequences of
his own ill Conduct, and that she
would give great Proof of her Generosity,
if in her Heart she forgave him; 
but that it would be a despicable Meanness
to take any farther Notice of him. 
He then assured her his only View in
the Seizure he had made, was to secure
her Furniture for her Use (tho',
in reality, he had never harboured
the Thought till after she had entered
the Room); and assured her of the quiet
Possession both of that and her House,
and every other Assistance the truest
Friend could give; and offered her
then a Bank Note for any present Exigencies, 

in the most humble Stile of
pretended disinterested Generosity. 
Amongst all the Misfortunes Mrs.
Bilson had apprehended from her present
Distress, she had never foreseen a
Possibility of being subject to such Insolence,
and was shocked beyond Expression; 
but, as the only Resource for
her just Indignation, would not entirely
understand him, but rose up, saying,
that, altho' she should not be ashamed
of labouring for the Support of herself
and Children, yet she was above living
at the Expence of any other Person; 
for if the Motive was genuine disinterested
Generosity, she should abuse it
by accepting the Bounty, at an Age
when she was able to gain her own
Subsistence; and if he, who offered it,
had any other, he greatly abused the
casual Advantage of Fortune by insulting
undeserved Distress. 
Mrs. Glegg entered the Room just
as her Husband ended his Offer; but, 

a Skreen being placed before the Door,
she was not seen, and they were both
too much engrossed by their own
Thoughts to hear the Door open. Mrs.
Glegg had been told Mrs. Bilson was
with her Husband, and came with a
kind Concern to see her; but being
struck with her Voice, which had a
Sound of Indignation and Anger in it,
not natural to her, she stopped; and
knowing her Husband's Disposition,
easily understood the Occasion. 
As Mrs. Bilson was withdrawing
when she had finished her Reply, Mrs.
Glegg and she met. The former accosted
her with Tenderness, having always
conceived a great Regard for her; 
which was not lessened by what she
had just overheard. 
Mrs. Bilson was too much agitated,
to be able immediately to compose
herself sufficiently to make a proper
Return to Mrs. Glegg; whose Husband,
to excuse her Disorder, and carry it off 

with an Air of Innocence, told his
Wife Mrs. Bilson's Situation, and what
had brought her thither. 
Mrs. Glegg inquired whether he had
granted her Request; to which he returned
shuffling Answers, implying the
Difficulty in doing it, and a visible
Backwardness to do Mrs. Bilson a Favour
without a Return. Mrs. Glegg
then begged he would make her a
Present of the Sum due for Rent; but
saw little Prospect of obtaining it: 
Upon which she dropped an Intimation
of having accidentally heard what
had passed; which so discomposed Mr.
Glegg, that he judged it advisable to
purchase his Pardon by Compliance,
and told Mrs. Glegg it was at her Service. 
“Now, my dear Mrs. Bilson,” said
that Lady, “I hope I may be of some
Service, which I have often wished
when the Means of being so were
less conspicuous; for I have always 

highly esteemed you, and perhaps
the more for the little Success I have
had in my Attempts to cultivate an
Intimacy with you, as I saw through
your Reason for avoiding it. The
Present Mr. Glegg has now made
me, I shall transfer to you, rather as
a Loan than a Property; because I
fear, was it your own, it would go
to Creditors whom you could not
satisfy, tho' the Strictness of your
Justice would leave you entirely
destitute.” 
Mrs. Bilson found that Gratitude was
more difficult to express than Indignation; 
but yet hers was very visible,
tho' Mrs. Glegg would not suffer her to
speak on the Subject. Mrs. Glegg carried
her home in her Coach, and freed
her from her troublesome Intruders; 
and then sat down with her two already-mentioned
Friends, to consider
into what Way of Life Mrs. Bilson
could enter. 

Nothing was practicable which would
take her from her Children; and Plainwork
was not profitable enough to support
so large a Family. Trade was
hazardous; and it would rob her of
the warmest Wish of her Heart, if
it prevented her from spending her
Time with Mr. Bilson, whose melancholy
Situation rendered her almost
insensible to her own Distress; well
knowing that Liberty and Self-approbation
are two of the greatest Blessings
any one can enjoy; of both which he
was deprived. 
Mrs. Bilson told them the only
Scheme that occurred to her, likely to
answer the Purpose, was a portable
Shop in the Manner of some Milaners; 
which might enable her to serve such
Persons as she should be recommended
to; for she confessed, that without a
Recommendation, she should not be
able to go to any one; but that such
Sorts of Works were more profitable, and
she was best able to do them; besides 

that she could then perhaps procure a
Room in the Fleet, where she and her
Family might be a Comfort to Mr.
Bilson. 
They all approved Mrs. Bilson's
Scheme; and engaged to assist her in
their different Ranks to the utmost of
their Power, and agreed that the Money
arising from the Furniture should be
expended in Stock. 
As soon as Mrs. Glegg was gone,
Mrs. Bilson proposed that they should
go to the Fleet, and impart a Share of
this Glimmering of good Fortune to
the Prisoner; only suppressing the humiliating
Scene between her and Mr.
Glegg, as it must give a new Shock to
Mr. Bilson to find he had exposed her
to such Treatment. This was readily
agreed to; for few are of so churlish a
Disposition as not to chuse to give
Pleasure; tho' some will not hazard the
least Diminution of their own on that
Account. 

I shall not dwell on what passed on
this Occasion, nor relate any of the
Circumstances preparatory to Mrs. Bilson's
Removal to the Prison; where she
hired a tolerable Room with Two Beds: 
One of which served for Mr. Bilson and
his Two Sons; the other for herself,
her Daughter, and his natural Child. 
The only Difficulty Mrs. Bilson had
found in going to fix in the Fleet with
her Husband, was the carrying of his
Child thither; she feared he would be
distressed at finding her acquainted with
this Transaction, and prepared him for
it as well as she could. Mr. Bilson was
far from having the less Opinion of his
Crime, for the little Stress she laid upon
it; he was overwhelmed with all
her Goodness; and the Fondness which
Variety had suppressed, was rekindled
with double Ardour; I might, not improperly,
say, was arisen almost to a
Degree of Adoration. Here we will
stop to view them in their new Situation. 
Mr. Bilson turned School-master 

to his Sons, the one of Eight, the other
Seven Years of Age, to whose Instruction
he gave his utmost Application
and at other times reading to, or conversing
with, his Wife, wherein he began
to find more solid Comfort than
he had ever enjoyed while at Liberty. 
His Vanity, by Excess of Mortification,
was almost extinguished; Good-sense
was predominant; he had discovered
Virtues in his Wife, which could never
have been shown without her Trials,
and perceived a Depth of Understanding
which he had never sought for, and
a Vivacity of Wit which his Insensibility
had long cast a Cloud over; her
Piety at once edified and instructed
him; from her he learned both the
Truths of, and the Benefits arising
from, Religion. Her Trust in Providence
taught him to hope; the Warmth
of her Devotion taught him to adore; 
from her Resignation he learned to
submit; and from her Patience to suffer
without repining. It was not long
before he grew sensible that God had 

most shewn his Mercy in the painful
Consequences of his Follies, as he had
thereby been taught the Vanity of his
Pursuits, and that all the Blessings of
Prosperity cannot give true and lasting
Happiness without Religion, and that
those who are possessed of that, can by
no Adversity be rendered absolutely
miserable. 
Mrs. Bilson's Charms were not merely
mental; she was not above Seven-and-twenty
Years old, and her Beauty was
still in its highest Lustre, tho' something
of the Bloom which she had at Sixteen
was abated; but the Change was no
other than from the Spring to the
Summer; which varies the Beauties of
Nature, but does not lessen them. 
Mrs. Bilson was entirely employed in
her new Occupation, and contrived to
make their Children her Assistants; her
Husband's natural Child, having been
bred up coarsely, was much stronger
than her own, tho' somewhat younger; 

and having been already accustomed to
hard Work, was very useful; for they
had no Servant; tho' the only Female
belonging to their House, having been
bred up by Mrs. Bilson, begged very
hard to continue to attend her without
Wages; but that Lady would not suffer
her Gratitude to rob her of the Advantages
she might obtain in Service; and
thought herself very fortunate in prevailing
with Mrs. Glegg (who at that
time wanted a Servant) to take her. 
Mrs. Bilson rose every Morning before
it was light, and sat up pretty late; 
and managed so well, that her Girls
assisted much in her Work, tho' the
eldest was little more than Nine Years
old; but, by her Mother's Care, had
been rendered forwarder in those respects
than others of a much more advanced
Age. Mr. Bilson went through
it all with Chearfulness; I might say,
with Pleasure; seeing herself the Means
of making Mr. Bilson's Confinement
not irksome to him; and was so industrious, 

that she soon furnished herself
with a Variety of Female Ornaments,
in which her Rank in Life had
given her a Taste and Elegance, that
made them greatly surpass what most
Shops could exhibit. 
Thus furnished, she went to the
Places where Mrs. Glegg, and her good
Friend the Bookseller's Wife, had recommended
her, and met with an obliging
Reception from all; her Beauty,
and the Gracefulness of her Person,
giving a Dignity even to so low an
Employment. As they had been before
prepossessed with the Notion of her
Distress, they bought of her for the
better Opportunity of satisfying their
Curiosity; and proceeded as slowly as
possible, that they might have Time to
intrude Questions about her Situation. 
She answered all they asked with
Truth and Sincerity; some pitied and
wondered, and, while they looked at
the Frippery they bought of her, forgot
all they had heard: But others were 

touched with real Compassion, and
gave her the Approbation she well deserved; 
these wished to serve her, and
recommended her to their Acquaintance,
and thus her Business was
constantly increasing: Nor did she
find those in a middling Station the
worst Customers. The Novelty of the
Case rendered it a Fashion to buy of
her; and her Employ growing more
than she could perform, Mrs. Glegg resigned
her Servant to her; who longed
to attend again on Mrs. Bilson, whom
she loved as her Mother. 
Mrs. Bilson wished to mend the Situation
of some other of the Prisoners, who
had been recommended to her Notice
by the Gaoler's Wife; a Woman much
more humane than most in her Station. 
These she found were there from Misfortunes
in Trade, or extravagant Children,
and not in consequence of Idleness,
and amongst her Friends procured
them such Work as they could
do; whereby they gained enough to 

supply them with all the Comforts
their Situation would admit of; some
even saved a little, with the flattering
Hope of being able in time to pay the
Debt for which they were confined. 
Many little Advantages besides she
procured for other Prisoners, and lessened
the Distress of Numbers; while
she maintained her own Family, and
saw her Stock, as well as Trade, increase. 
In this Manner Mr. and Mrs. Bilson
lived a Year and a Half, when she met
at the House of one of her Customers
an old Lady, who was greatly charmed
with her Appearance and Behaviour; 
and expressed her Sentiments on that
Occasion, to which the Lady of the
House said: “How much more, Madam,
would you be charmed, if
you knew her Conduct through
Life? for whatsoever you may think
of her Figure, but a small Part of
her Charms are personal.” 

“You raise my Curiosity extremely,” 
replied Lady Dently (for that was her
Title); “and I shall think I have great
Reason to complain, unless you also
gratify it.” 
“That I will readily,” replied the
Lady, “to the best of my Power; but
if Mrs. Bilson will be so good as to
undertake the Task, her Manner
will give it Graces, which indeed
are not requisite, but must render
the Narration more engaging. I
will act the Part of Querist; for I
know otherwise we shall not get
Half her History, since I am assured
the only Insincerity she is ever guilty
of, is concealing the Faults of others
and her own Virtues.” 
Thus was much of Mrs. Bilson's
History extracted from her, though a
great deal of her Merit was concealed; 
being a Secret to the Lady, who put her
under a Necessity of repeating all she
had learned from others of Mrs. Bilson's 

Friends. Lady Dently, who was
endued with great Humanity and Generosity
of Spirit, was much affected
with Mrs. Bilson's Fate. She immediately
shewed her Compassion by the
many Purchases she made, and bespoke
several other Things; with which Mrs.
Bilson was to wait on her the next
Day. 
Lady Dently was so sensibly touched
with the Behaviour and Merit of Mrs.
Bilson, that she was impatient for the
Hour she had appointed her. She enquired
of her what her Name was before
she was married; but was much
surprised to hear it was Lemster, and to
find that she was her Relation. Lady
Dently had lived much in the Country,
and Mrs. Bilson, as I have before hinted,
had little Acquaintance with her Relations,
therefore it was not wonderful that
they should be unknown to each other; 
and Lady Dently had such a Share of
Pride mixed with her many Virtues,
as made her forbear to discover this Secret; 

which Mrs. Bilson was so far
from penetrating, that the Glow which
rose in her Ladyship's Cheeks, at the
Mention of her Name, gave her no
Suspicions. Tho' Lady Dently concealed
this Circumstance, yet she regulated
her Actions by it; treating her
with a polite and friendly Freedom. 
She happened to be disengaged that
Day, and not inclined to see much
Company, being a good deal indisposed; 
she therefore pressed Mrs. Bilson
so much to spend the Day with her,
that she could not in Civility refuse: 
Nor indeed was she unwilling to cultivate
her Ladyship's Favour. 
Lady Dently had lived so much
in Retirement, and been so conversant
with People of Sense, having herself
an exceeding good and improved Understanding,
that she was disgusted with
fashionable Life; from which she had
long withdrawn herself, till Business
had now brought her again to the Metropolis
of the Kingdom and of Folly. 

She was tired of Company without
Conversation, and longed to return to a
few rational Friends. She hoped Mrs.
Bilson might, from her Vicissitudes of
Fortune, have gained so much Experience
and Reflexion, as to render her
more conversible than Persons who
live in the World like Squirrels in a
Cage hung with Bells, in a Round of
Noise, without Variety, till their Heads
are too giddy to think on the future, or
reflect on the past. 
Lady Dently found her Expectations
well answered, and indeed much exceeded; 
for she had never met with a Person
so agreeable; who was at once
blessed with so lively a Wit, so quick
an Imagination, and so sound a Judgment. 
She found in her all the Vivacity
requisite to make the most pleasing
Trifler, and a great Depth of Understanding,
improved by reading the best
Authors; her Studies had been judiciously
directed by her Father, and her
Memory retained all her Judgment approved; 

which, in other Words, was
all that had any Merit. 
Lady Dently had never passed so
agreeable a Day; which she lengthened
out as long as she could prevail
on Mrs. Bilson to stay with her, and
then sent her home in her Coach; but
not till she had obtained a Promise of
another Visit within a few Days; which
she told Mrs. Bilson she should not
think it reasonable to ask but on one
Condition, which was, that she would
suffer her to have another kind of
Traffick with her than the rest of
her Customers had, and that, as they
bought the Produce of her Time, she
might purchase her Time alone; for
that nothing she could make would
be half so valuable to her as her Conversation. 
Mrs. Bilson renewed her Visit, and
Lady Dently her Invitation; who engaged
her to spend every Day with
her that she could spare from her Business. 

Tho' Mrs. Bilson was extremely
sensible of the Honour conferred on
her, and grateful for the Presents Lady
Dently made her; which were beyond
the Value of her Time, when estimated
as a Workwoman; yet she was uneasy
to be taken so much from Mr. Bilson
and her Family: But he represented to
her, in such true Colours, the Advantage
that Lady's Favour might be to
their Children, that her “Poverty, but
not her Will, complied.” 




A Continuation of the History of
Mrs. Bilson. 
Lady Dently's Approbation increased
to the strongest Affection. 
She offered Mrs. Bilson an Apartment
in her House for herself and Children. 
This Invitation had no Chance of being
accepted, while the Person, to
whose Society both Duty and Affection
rendered her most attached, was excluded. 
With all the Acknowlegements
Gratitude could dictate, she declined
it; giving the true and only
Reason, that she could not leave Mr.
Bilson. 
Lady Dently, even if Mr. Bilson had
not been confined, could not think of 

being troubled with a Gentleman in the
House, whom she did not know, whose
Character she did not approve; and
the great Virtues, which his Wife
boasted in him, she looked upon as
the Phantoms of her partial Imagination. 
She offered to provide him with
every Convenience and Pleasure his
Situation would admit of; but Mrs.
Bilson replied, she should be ungrateful
if she did not believe he valued her
Society, and that of his Children,
above all that Money could bestow; 
and that, in reality, her Ladyship's Generosity
had been such, that he had
already enjoyed every thing but Liberty; 
and that One Day in Seven,
which to some is the only one of Liberty,
and to too many of Licence,
they generally went to some Country
Place near London; taking either the
Gaoler or his Wife, who were not bad
People, with them; in hopes, by enjoying
a little fresh Air sometimes, Mr.
Bilson's Health would suffer less by his
Confinement. The Excursion pleased 

the Gaoler; and he was free from any
Apprehensions of their designing to
escape from him, as he knew they had
so much Property in his House. He
would even suffer them to enhance
their own Pleasure, by giving a Share
of it to some of the Prisoners, one at a
time, who had gained his Confidence. 
Lady Dently was sensibly mortified
by this Refusal, yet her Esteem for
Mrs. Bilson was increased by it; and her
Ladyship greatly manifested the uncommon
Goodness of her Mind, by
not being displeased at Mrs. Bilson's
pleading the Conveniencies her Husband
enjoyed from her own Generosity,
against complying with her Request,
and Lady Dently grew still
more importunate for her Company; 
but Visits were soon interrupted by a
Fever, which seized Mrs. Bilson. Lady
Dently was shocked at the News of
her Illness, and resolved to go to the
Fleet to see her. As few polite Ceremonies
are regarded in that Place, her 

Ladyship was introduced without any
previous Notice, and found Mr. Bilson
on his Knees, at the Side of his Wife's
Bed, endeavouring to recover her out
of a fainting Fit, the Tears flowing fast
from his Eyes; all the Children and
Attendants were weeping likewise. So
melancholy a Scene affected Lady
Dently extremely; and she learned a
very bad Account of Mrs. Bilson's
Disorder from them, whose Concern represented
it to them in the worst Light. 
Their Attention was so engrossed by
the poor Invalid, that little Notice was
taken of Lady Dently, till Mrs. Bilson,
by recovering her Senses, set theirs
more at Liberty; whom she perceiving,
and observing her Concern (for she had
joined in Tears with the rest of the
Company); “A Thousand Thanks,” 
said she, “Madam, for this Goodness. 
Heaven hath sent you hither
to ease my Heart, and smooth my
Passage into the other World. After
so many Obligations as I have received
from your Ladyship, it may 

appear great Want of Modesty to
urge any further Request; but in
my Situation, when all I love in the
World is threatened with the utmost
Extremities of Poverty and Distress,
who would not be unreasonable. Your
Goodness will excuse me, in consideration
of the Exigency. Could
I hope that you would continue your
great Goodness to my Husband and
Children, just to save them from
Want, and put the Children in some
Way honestly to gain their subsistence,
I should, with Peace of Mind
and Resignation, leave this World,
with Prayers for you, and Thanksgiving
to the Almighty, who hath
raised me such a Friend in my Distress. 
Believe me, Madam,” continued
she, “there is nothing that
could befal me, only that, which
should make me thus presume on
your Generosity; but, for Persons so
dear to me, what can I not attempt
in this Extremity?” 

Lady Dently was not able to interrupt
her, she was so much affected; 
but when Mrs. Bilson had done speaking,
she gave her all the kind Assurances
which her Grief would let her
utter; promising to do much more
than she requested; and the compassionate
Workings of her Affection at
that Instant baffled her Pride, and she
added, that it was her Duty to provide
for Mrs. Bilson's Family, they being so
nearly related to her. The poor sick
Woman was greatly revived by Lady
Dently's generous Promises; and not
a little, by finding she had a natural
Cause to hope for Lady Dently's Protection
of her little ones, which she
had never suspected. 
As Mrs. Bilson's Disorder had been
greatly increased by the Apprehension
she was under, lest her Husband and
Family would suffer much by her
Death, she received great Benefit by
being relieved from her Fears; and in 

a Week's Time was in a fair Way of
Recovery. 
Lady Dently constantly visited her
during the Time of her Confinement,
and by that means became acquainted
with Mr. Bilson; who, she found, answered
the Character his Wife gave
him, much better than the ill Report
that had been made of him by others. 
This determined her to indulge her
Friendship for Mrs. Bilson, and to receive
her and her whole Family into
her House. 
This Resolution gave infinite Joy to
our poor Prisoners; who esteemed
Lady Dently's Society a Blessing, and
thought it an Honour to be obliged to
one of so noble a Disposition. 
Lady Dently discharged all Mr. Bilson's
Debts, and enabled Mrs. Bilson to
repay Mrs. Glegg what she had so bountifully
given her; with the most sincere 

Assurances, that her Gratitude did
not end with the Debt. 
This Family, equally happy in obliging
and receiving Obligations, retired
into the Country; but their Felicity
was soon disturbed by the Death of
Lady Dently, which filled Mr. and
Mrs. Bilson with the deepest Affliction: 
Nor were they comforted by finding
she had made them sole Heirs to an
Estate of near Four thousand Pounds
per Annum. 
As soon as Mr. and Mrs. Bilson had
performed the last Honours to Lady
Dently, and given such Gratuities
amongst her Domestics as shewed their
Regard for every thing that belonged
to her, they set out to gratify the Wish
that had been nearest their Hearts; 
which was to set at Liberty all such
Prisoners in the Fleet as deserved it. 
But in this Scrutiny they were not so
rigid as to expect to find the human
Perfection of Stoical Invention, before 

they imagined they had found any
proper Objects of Christian Charity. 
Lady Dently had left near Ten thousand
Pounds in ready Money, which
afforded a full Scope to their generous
Intentions. They not only released all
such as were more unfortunate than
faulty, but set them up in their respective
Callings; with all the Advantages
that could tend to their future Success. 
As soon as they had thus effected
their Purpose, and done the same in
the other Prisons, as far as they could
obtain any Insight into the Characters
of the Prisoners, they returned into the
Country, and began to consider how
to shew their Gratitude to the Giver of
so much Happiness as was fallen to
their Share; which they thought they
could no way so well prove, as by
communicating that Happiness to as
many as possible. In order to be able
to do this, they settled the Oeconomy
of their House within very moderate 

Bounds; Convenience and Decency being
their Role, not their Income. 
Their Table was suited to Temperance; 
their Equipage and Attendants to
Use and Convenience. Pomp and Splendor
they despised, and forbore to dazle
the Sight of their Superiors, that they
might make their own Eyes sparkle
with Joy; they excited no Envy in the
Hearts of the Poor, but planted Gratitude
in its stead. It might well be
said of them, that when the Eye saw
them, it blessed them; and when the Ear
heard them, it gave Witness to them. 
They looked on their Fortune, their
Time, and their Understanding, as
Talents which God had intrusted with
them; and that they must, at the Last
Day, give a strict Account whether
they had used them to the Purposes
pleasing to a most merciful and bountiful
Creator; who to some hath given
Poverty, to try their Patience; and to
others Riches, to prove their Temperance,
Charity, and Humility. 

They formed Seminaries for young
People; taking some of the Children
of Families that were overburdened
with them, and those who had lost
their Parents, or had such whose Example
rendered them a Misfortune to
their Offspring. These were educated
in the strictest Principles of Industry,
Virtue, and Religion; and instructed,
according to their several Geniuses, in
such Employments as would provide
them a comfortable Subsistence. 
The Aged were equally the Objects
of their Attention; they built Almshouses
for them, where Age could
find no Evils but the Infirmities incident
to it, and all the Relief for them
that Care and Competence could give. 
Whenever any young Couple married,
they furnished their House, and
stocked them with every thing that
could be useful. The Expences of
Sickness they paid for all the Poor,
and provided them with every Comfort. 

Such as were able to gain more
than was necessary for their Maintenance,
they encouraged to save, by
making an Addition to it when it rose
to a certain Sum, and assisting them in
Ways of throwing it into some kind of
safe Trade; which would not interrupt
their usual Employ. 
In these Charities they supported
some Hundreds, besides the much
greater Numbers who felt occasional
Blessings from their Benevolence; 
whose Circle was as large as their
Knowlege (either by their own Inspection,
or by careful Enquiries) could
extend: But in all, the utmost Oeconomy
was preserved. The Old spun
and knitted for the Young; and those
who were not decrepid served for
Nurses to the Sick; relieving each
other by turns. They were all assistant
to each other; every Institution had
some Correspondence with the rest,
which helped to lessen the Expence of
all; for Mr. and Mrs. Bilson thought 

it as much their Duty to give their
Time and Attention, as their Money; 
and to make their Fortune extend to
the Relief of as many as possible. 
The Compassion of these worthy
Persons was not confined to the lowest
Poor; the Indigent of a higher Rank
still more excited their Pity: Dependants
on the Rich appeared to them
more wretched Beings, than those who
were brought up to Labour. They
hired a large House as a Receptacle for
Gentlewomen, who either had no Fortunes,
or so little that it would not support
them. For these they made the
most comfortable Institution; every
Convenience of Life was provided for
them, and they were under no Restraints,
but to the Rules of the House,
which were regulated in the most exact
and punctual Manner; and the
wisest Regulations were to secure the
Peace and Happiness of the Society,
who were provided with all Conveniencies
for rural Amusements, a Library, 

musical Instruments, and Implements
for various Works. 
Great as the Expences of these several
Institutions may appear, they
were managed with so much Oeconomy,
that Mr. and Mrs. Bilson had
still a Fund appropriated for casual
Relief of Persons of Birth, who were
distressed by Accidents; such as Sickness
of Themselves or Children, or
unforeseen or unavoidable Losses and
Expences: To these they would send
Presents proportionable to the Exigence; 
but in such a manner as not to
be guessed, but by their general Character. 
Their Gratitude to Mrs. Glegg
and the honest Bookseller, who had
been so useful to them, appeared in the
noblest Returns; and Mr. Glegg dying,
she lived chiefly with them. 




A Continuation of the History of
Mrs. Bilson. 
In this manner had this incomparable
Pair lived near Ten Years; 
blessing others, and still more blessed
themselves, as much as it is more blessed
to give than to receive. Where-ever
they turned their Eyes, they saw nothing
but People by them made happy
here; and as far as Education and
Care can go towards rendering them
so in another World, was done for
them. They would have lamented,
more bitterly than Titus, the Loss of a
Day wherein they had done Good to
no one; but were secured from the
painful Reflexion, by the uninterrupted
Course of their Bounties. This Felicity 

they had enjoyed Ten Years, when
Mr. Bilson was seized with a Decline,
which brought them to Bristol; where
the Waters restored this happy Family
to its former Peace, by recovering his
Health. Mrs. Bilson was scarcely ever
absent from him while he was confined,
as that Place could not make any
Alteration in a Mind so steadily fixed
in its virtuous Course. 
They had brought their young Family
with them, for their Gratification,
as well as their own; and had the Pleasure
of seeing the good Effects of an
admirable Education; for Admiration
could not inspire the young Ladies with
Vanity, nor Diversions give the young
Gentlemen a Love for Dissipation. 
Miss Bilson was extremely handsome; 
but seemed so little conscious of
it, that it was some time before People
would believe their own Judgments. 

Mrs. Bilson had had Three Children
after she retired into the Country; 
but at Bristol she was robbed of her
adopted Daughter. A Lady of considerable
Fashion, who had for some
time led a very retired religious Life,
happened at that time to be there. 
The Civilities necessary to People who
have been formerly acquainted, passed
between her and Mr. Bilson, but with
an Air of Constraint and Confusion
which surprised Mrs. Bilson; but as she
saw Mr. Bilson distressed when she
asked him the Reason of it, she turned
the Conversation, and suppressed her
Curiosity. 
The Lady I have mentioned was
charmed with the Behaviour of Mrs.
Bilson, and her Daughters; but expressed
some Surprize at their appearing
of the same Age, and asked some
Questions about it; which threw Mrs.
Bilson into Confusion, as she did not
care to tell the Truth: Her Discomposure
startled the Lady, and infected 

her also; for she was yet more confounded,
and the Subject dropped. She
soon made an Excuse, and followed
Mr. Bilson to the Pump, where he went
to drink the Waters; and, taking him
aside, begged to know what was become
of her Daughter, or whether
she was dead. 
Mr. Bilson then related his Wife's
Behaviour on the Subject, till the Lady
was so oppressed and overcome, she
could hear no more in so public a
Place; but intreated him to bring Mrs.
Bilson directly to her Lodgings, and
immediately left the Room. 
Mr. Bilson, with extreme Agitation,
told his Wife he must desire her to be
present at a Scene which he doubted
not would be affecting to her, tho'
distressing only to others. He was
not capable of explaining himself, nor
she of asking him to do so. He led her
to the House to which the Lady had
directed him; they were carried to her 

Apartment, and found her in Tears. 
She rose on their Appearance; and
taking hold of Mrs. Bilson's Hand: 
“You see, Madam,” said she, “a
Wretch made unfortunate by her
Crimes, but far too mercifully
treated by Heaven. Shame being
stronger in me than even natural
Affection, I abandoned the Offspring
of my Guilt; but you have been a
Mother to my Child (throwing her
Arms about Mrs. Bilson's Neck): 
By me it was introduced into the
World, oppressed by my Crimes, and
the Punishments which followed
them; by me it was exposed, helpless
and forlorn, to casual Care; 
but you have saved it from Want,
perhaps from Guilt equal to its
wretched Mother's; from every
Evil you have saved it for me, who
can make no other Reparation for
the past, than by accepting Shame
as my Portion; and, by declaring
my Crime, punish myself for adding 

to the First that of an unnatural
Mother.” 
The Violence of her Tears at last
stifled her Voice, and gave Mrs. Bilson
Leisure to reflect on what she had said; 
whereby she learned that Mr. Bilson's
natural Child was by this Lady. The
Day was far spent before they could
bring this unhappy Woman to any Degree
of Composure; but at last they
prevailed on her not to declare the
young Lady to be her Child, as it could
be of Service to neither; but as her
Birth had hitherto been a Secret, so to
let it remain. All her Resolution could
not prevent her from discovering the
whole, in the Overflowing of maternal
Tenderness, the next Day, at an Interview
with her Daughter; but before
others she was more prudent. She took
her Child home, was lavish in her
Thanks to Mrs. Bilson, and endeavoured,
by all a Mother's Fondness, to
make some Reparation for her past
Neglect. 

Mrs. Bilson's uncommon Merits rendered
me unwilling to pass her over in
Silence, and especially as her History
gives so strong a Proof of the Efficacy
of religious Principles towards extracting
the sharpest Sting from the highest
Adversity, in as great Proportion as
Lady Dellwyn's Story illustrates the
Power of Vanity to bring to nothing
every real Advantage; but Lord Dellwyn's
Knowlege of her Virtues extended
no farther than her constant Attendance
on her Husband, when Sickness
confined him, and the careful and tender
Manner with which her Eyes
watched every Change in his Countenance
when they were abroad together: 
But that was sufficient to raise
all his Admiration; for his Lordship at
that time would not have so much
esteemed all the cardinal Virtues, as
her conjugal Affection. 




A drawn Battle, in which neither Side
are Conquerors. 
There is yet another kind of
matrimonial Dialect, which naturally
succeeds this of talking at each
other; which may very properly be
stiled The Language Contradictory, and
rises yet to a Degree of more open Defiance. 
In the former, however plain
the Object of the Satire may be exhibited
to the whole Company, yet there
always remains some little Covering,
which admits of an Opportunity to say,
with Sir John Falstaff, “No Abuse,
Hall, no Abuse;” or with the Servants
in Romeo and Juliet, “I bite my
Thumbs, but not by way of Offence.” 
But in this last Method, the Defiance 

becomes more open, and the Impetuosity
with which these Contradictions
are uttered (altho' the Subjects of them
are often of the most indifferent Nature)
evidently prove that they arise
from Passion: And now if the most
apparent Truths had come from Lord
Dellwyn's Lips, his speaking them,
like a magic Wand, had the Power of
transforming them into the most glaring
Falsehoods in the Eyes of his
Lady; altho' it must be confessed, that
Lady Dellwyn sometimes recollected
herself in the midst of a warm Debate,
saying, “My Lord, I must beg your
Lordship's Pardon for that;” as if
she suddenly remembered her own
Rank and Dignity, and threw in those
few civil Words to palliate the Fear of
being rude and vulgar; but the Warmth
of her Contradiction was rather increased
than abated, when she fancied
that she had, by this Method, paid a
Tribute to her Politeness, and put to
Silence the Apprehension of behaving
unlike a Countess. 

On the other hand Lord Dellwyn
could trace the most ridiculous Absurdities
in every Expression of his Lady's,
and constantly deduced some sort of
Satire, or evil Meaning, from her
Words, even when there was none in
her Thoughts. 
Thus did Lord and Lady Dellwyn
go through every matrimonial Dialect
which human Invention could furnish; 
with the Exception only of that which
is the natural Result of a reciprocal
well-founded Affection; a kind of
Language which was by no means adapted
to express the Purposes of their
Hearts. At first indeed Lord Dellwyn
used some Terms that seemed to imitate
such as are proper to Affection,
and his Lady condescended to submit
to Dissimulation: But from thence they
soon began to talk at each other; and
then, by a natural Progress, they arose
to the Dialect Contradictory. 

The frequent Repetitions of these
Kinds of Conversation rendered them
unsatisfactory; which verified the Propriety
of the Observation, That all
human Pleasures by Use become languid,
and send us Mortals to seek our
Gratification by Change and Variety. 
Lord and Lady Dellwyn now therefore
sought a new Method of Indulgence,
by which they might vent their
Passions of mutual Anger (like Jobson
in the Farce, they found it necessary to
come to Action); and as they before
talked, so they now acted, with a stedfast
View to each other's Uneasiness: 
And the slightest Supposition that they
had discovered any Means by which
they could vex and teaze each other,
was always pursued as diligently, and
with as much Alacrity, as if their whole
future Happiness had depended on
Success. 
Mr. Stratam, the young Gentleman
before-mentioned to have been present 

when Lady Dellwyn first provoked her
Lord to Anger, was now absolutely
fixed on by her Ladyship as a proper
Person for an Admirer. She had before
desired to do so; every new Dangler
being a valuable Acquisition in the
Scheme of Gallantry. But here a double
Pleasure was proposed; for Lord Dellwyn
had expressed a peculiar Disapprobation
of Mr. Stratam. Such an Incentive; 
added to her general Love of Admiration,
was sufficient to heighten all
her Charms whensoever Mr. Stratam
approached. Her animal Spirits were
then in such a Flush of Joy, that an uncommon
Lustre darted from her Eyes,
with an enlivening Hope of obtaining
at once a new Conquest, and doing
what was most particularly disobliging
to her Lord. 
Lady Dellwyn seemed now to have
made a Determination, that she would
amply reward herself for the heavy and
painful Chains she had so long laboured
under of living a Life of Deceit, by 

allowing herself free Liberty to give a
Loose to every new Desire, or whimsical
Inclination. The Reflux of Passions,
after they have been long confined,
generally bears down every Opposition,
and is violent in its Course. 
There was an insurmountable Bar to
Lady Dellwyn's indulging her Intention
of gaining Mr. Stratam's Admiration,
which she neither foresaw nor expected: 
In fact, he had none to bestow, but
what was already engaged in such a
Manner, that there was no Probability
of his Inconstancy: He had a Sinking
Fund, that was capable of swallowing
more than he was in Possession of. 
This large Fund was no other than
Himself; altho' he was too fond of his
Eyes to venture the injuring them by
too much Reading, yet if he had perused
all the Philosophy that ever was
wrote, recommending Self-contemplation
as a necessary Part of Wisdom, he
could not possibly have been more assiduous
in his Application to that One 

peculiar Study. A small Mistake indeed
he was led into; for he took a Part
of Wisdom for the Whole. But where
was a human Philosopher ever heard of,
who was never guilty of a trifling Mistake? 
Mr. Stratam reaped many Advantages
from his judicious Choice of the
Object in which he centered all his
Affections and Admiration. He could
never write any Sonnets on Chloe absent,
or Chloe cruel; for dear Self was always
present, and always abounded with
Kindness. Then he enjoyed the inexpressible
Pleasure of discovering a faultless
Mistress, whose every Action could
stand the strictest Test of his Judgment; 
and who, on every Examination,
was found worthy, not only to be
approved, but also to be applauded. 
From the time that Lady Dellwyn
had been introduced into the World,
till within a few Months, she had suffered
a Life of Mortification, and Repentance 

of her own foolish Vanity; 
and during that little Space, Dissipation
had banished Reflexion; by which
means she had a very small Degree of
Knowlege in the Characters of Men: 
She wondered at, but could not penetrate,
the Cause of Mr. Stratam's joining
himself to her Train, and yet falling
so short of her Expectation in the Manners
and Behaviour adapted to Gallantry. 
She could trace no Rival; for that
most dangerous of all others, Himself,
never once came into her Thoughts. 
But altho' Mr. Stratam confined his
Admiration within the Circumference
of his own Person, yet such are the
whimsical Effects of Vanity, that the
Boundaries of his Desires were enlarged
far beyond that Mark. To be admired
by others was as necessary to his Happiness,
as Food to his Existence. He
fattened on Flattery; and pined himself
away, whenever he suspected that he
was not viewed by others in the same
magnifying Glass in which he beheld
himself. 

In order to obtain this desirable End,
he attempted to play every Part; and
was, like Bottom, the Weaver in Shakespeare's
Midsummer Night's Dream, “An
universal Man.” It was amazing with
what Celerity he could change his
Subject, and make an Appearance of
all such Knowlege as he knew nothing
of, according to the different Companies
with whom he conversed. 
With the Learned, Mr. Stratam
practised the Virtue of Prudence, by
guarding his Lips from Utterance; lest
he should betray himself by speaking; 
for which Silence he made himself
ample Amends, by the Volubility of
his Discourse amongst the Ignorant: 
With the Lawyer, he was Master of
the whole Art military; with the Merchant,
he perfectly understood the
Law. Mathematics, Arithmetic, Politics,
had all their different Seasons; 
no human Art escaped him, provided
he was certain that his Company was
ignorant of the Subject of his Eloquence. 

Divinity was the only Topic
on which he did not display his Talents: 
Whether this arose from Modesty,
or a Suspicion of that Road's not
leading to his favourite Pursuit, of being
admired amongst the Company into
which he was admitted, is a Point
undetermined. 
Technical Terms of Sciences often
puzzle the Learner, who is desirous of
Knowlege; but when they are got by
rote, are of admirable Service to conceal
Ignorance. 
Mr. Stratam had the Happiness of a
tolerable Memory; by which means
whenever he happened to fall into
Company where any Sentiments were
to be found, he took the Liberty to
borrow them without asking the Consent
of the Owner; and, very fortunately
for him, they are a kind of Property
for which no Interest is demanded; 
otherwise he would soon have become
a Bankrupt: Nor would the delivering 

up all his whole Stock have
ever discharged the Debt. 
With the Ladies, Mr. Stratam was
metamorphosed into a Scholar. If the
Question arose, whether the e, in Pamela,
should be pronounced long or
short, he had immediate Recourse to
the Greek Prosodia for a Determination; 
scorning to be directed by the
Authority of our best English Poets. 
A Contention for Admiration between
two Persons, whose outward
Pretence is the admiring each other,
makes perhaps as whimsical and as ridiculous
a Scene as many that are presented
on the Theatre. One Evening,
when Mr. Stratam had the Day before
performed the Part of a Mute in the
Company of some Gentlemen of Learning
and Understanding, he accosted
Lady Dellwyn first with the usual civil
Salutations; and then resolved to repay
himself for his Silence the Day before,
by repeating all the technical Terms 

he had then learned, as fast as he could
remember them; altho' indeed in such
a set Form, as was a strong Proof that
they came not from a Son natural to
them: All which great Expence of
Breath might as well have been spared,
for not one Syllable made its Way thro'
Lady Dellwyn's Faculty of Hearing; 
for her Ladyship was otherwise employed. 
She did not indeed talk at
the same time with Mr. Stratam, but
was acting her Part in the Conversation; 
her Eyes spontaneously rolled on
her own white Bosom, she was adjusting
her Tucker, and setting herself off
to the best Advantage, in order to
catch his Eye, instead of giving Attention
to his Discourse. 
When Mr. Stratam had finished his
Speech, the Cessation of the Sound of
his Voice seemed to awaken Lady
Dellwyn, as from a Dream; and with
a vacant Look and careless Air, she replied,
by saying, “I think, Sir, there
was a great deal of Company at my 

Lord &wblank;'s Breakfast this Morning;” 
but her Pains of adjusting her Tucker,
and throwing herself into the most
amiable Attitudes, were full as much
cast away on Mr. Stratam, as his Discourse
had been on her Ladyship; for
he had no sooner completed one elaborate
Speech, than he began collecting
together another; whilst she tried yet
a different Art, and turned her delicate
white Hand and Arm into Variety of
Postures; but vain was the Attempt on
both Sides. Mr. Stratam's Attention
was a steadily fixed at home, as was
Lady Dellwyn's; and they separated; 
without having made any more Impression
towards changing the Object
of each other's Contemplation, than
when they first met. 
Some few of these unavailing Scenes
had passed, when Mr. Stratam declared,
that Lady Dellwyn was filled with Vanity
and Affectation; and her Ladyship
gave him the Character of an insipid
and insensible Animal: She now sought 

no farther Opportunities of conversing
with him, except when her Lord was
present; and then she found sufficient
Reason even to court this insensible
Animal; who also, during the Time
that he perceived himself to be addressed
and singled out by Lady Dellwyn,
clearly perceived that she was
changed from all her Vanity and Affectation
into a reasonable Woman. 
But altho' Lady Dellwyn was so unmoved
by all the borrowed Sentiments
Mr. Stratam could throw forth in the
most rattling Eloquence, yet as a
Proof that every Man hath a Chance
of pleasing some one individual Woman,
this very Mr. Stratam had once
given great Pain to a young Lady, who
was designed for his Wife both by her
own and his Father. Their Estates
were contiguous to each other. They
were both the only Children of their
Parents. Mr. Stratam consented to
obey his Father, without any Inclination
or Value for the Lady; having no 

Choice of his own, and being fixed in
the Object of his sole Admiration, as is
before mentioned. 
The young Lady at first only looked
on him as her destined Husband, and
therefore endeavoured to cultivate an
Affection for him; which arose rather
more from a dutiful Desire of paying
Obedience to her Father's Commands,
that from any Passion of her own; but
she had been bred in the Country,
where she had not been accustomed to
converse with many Men, there being
very few in her Neighbourhood, who
were thought by her Father to be in a
Station that rendered them proper
Company for his Daughter; and Mr.
Stratam displayed so many different
Kinds of Knowlege, as she thought,
before her, that he imposed on her Ignorance; 
and she began to imagine that
he was possessed of the brightest Understanding,
and or more Knowlege
than all the rest of Mankind. This
first pleased her Vanity in the Thoughts 

of being Wife to so extraordinary a
Man, thinking that by that means much
Honour would devolve on her also. 
The Pleasure therefore that she found
in Mr. Stratam's Conversation, by degrees
brought her really to love him,
and fix her Heart on their Marriage, as
the ultimate View of her future Happiness; 
but when she thought she had
full Reason to conclude the Accomplishment
of all her Wishes was nigh,
Mr. Stratam's Father died; which incident
perfectly reversed all her Prospects. 
Mr. Stratam, altho' he had not resisted
his living Father's Commands,
yet did not thnink himself now obliged
to perform what he knew was his Will
after he was dead, and from that time
resolved to break off the Match. The
young Lady's Affection towards him
he never considered as demanding any
Gratitude; for he supposed it was absolutely
his Due, and no more than he 

might obtain from any other Lady
whom he honoured with his Addresses. 
He therefore left her, without the least
Compunction for what she might suffer; 
and being her only and her first
Love, the Disappointment affected her
so deeply, that it withered her Bloom
and destroyed her Health; and being
unlearned in the Ways of receiving
one Lover after another, and then
chuse that Man who could prove the
least Advantage in the Rent-roll of his
Estate over a Rival, she never afterwards
would listen to the Addresses of
any other Lover. 
Mr. Stratam now thought he would
fly at nobler Quarry than a Country
Girl, and was a constant Attendant on
public Places, as he imagined they
were the most calculated for him, both
to borrow other Men's Thoughts, and
to add the Admiration of others to his
own; which he was always certain of
obtaining. And in this manner he 

proceeded from Day to Day, without
ever discovering what yet was an undoubted
Fact, that, whenever he was
an Object of Admiration, he must be
indebted for it to Ignorance alone. 




Various Humours, all tending to the
same material Point of casting off
the heavy Burden of Time. 
In all public Places, the Company
naturally fall into several Classes or
Divisions, according to their various
Dispositions or Tastes. Some are busy
Actors in the Scene; others, like the
Centinels placed at each Corner of the
Theatre, seem to have no other Employment
but to behold the Play; 
altho' if the most minute Criticisms on
the Actions, Dress, or Behaviour of the
Company, could keep the Peace, or prevent
others from running Riot, it might
be imagined that they also were sent,
as well as the Guard, to the Play-house,
to prevent Uproars and Confusion; 

but altho' their Tongues are often
sharpened by Slander, yet they cannot
do equal Execution with the pointed
Bayonet, and therefore are less forcible
to maintain Order and Regularity. 
This Class may, with no Impropriety,
be stiled The Party of Observation; 
they game no more than is absolutely
necessary to keep themselves
in Countenance, and prove their Affinity
to the World. Their chief Delight
is placed in Conversation, and
they are to be found herded together,
in little Clusters, in the Corners of
public Assemblies; every Oddness of
Manner, or Peculiarity of Character,
they can discover, is a valuable Acquisition,
and is immediately published
throughout the whole Set, and serves
to blazon forth their Talent of Ridicule
with the greater Variety. The Oddities
of Figure or Behaviour, which
have been perceived by any of this
Party of Observation in the Evening,
are served up as regularly for a Repast 

the next Morning at Breakfast, as Tea,
Coffee, Chocolate, or any other Ingredient
of which it is generally composed. 
A Degree of Wit and Humour, or
something that so far resembles those
Qualities as to be mistaken for them at
feast by one another, is necessary for
an Introduction to this Party, for as to
to that numberless Race of Mortals, who
continue to the End of their Lives, cherishing
the Hopes that they have been
instrumental in making others ridiculous,
whereas in Truth they have conferred
that Favour on themselves alone, it
is with great Difficulty any of them can
gain Admittance amongst this Society; 
unless they are so fortunate as to be
within such a Degree of Consanguinity
to some Person of Consequence amongst
them, as to have an undoubted Right
of claiming at least a Cousinship; and
in that Case they find it as good to be
related to Wit, as the common Proverb
pronounces what it is, as to be related 

to an Estate; but if it was not for
the Indulgence of that various, Proteus-like
Passion of Vanity, which changes
and twists into Millions of Forms, these
Persons would soon discover what an
extravagant Price they pay for such an
Advantage. 
Their Situation is indeed very unpleasant; 
they reverse the Affectation
of poor Stephen, in Ben Johnson's Comedy
of Every Man in his Humour,
who put on the Humour of Melancholy,
thinking he thereby shewed the
Gentleman; for they, on the contrary,
put on the Humour of Mirth, imagining
that thereby they shew the Wit; 
and are continually putting themselves
to the Pain of forcing Laughter, when
they feel themselves much more inclined
to weep. They are so placed
as to resemble only Pictures of human
Creatures; and are for the greatest Part
of their Time present, where they neither
constitute any Part of the Conversation,
nor receive to themselves any 

Entertainment: Like Puppets, in a
Raree-show, they serve only for Appearances; 
and when they leave the
Company, no Faculty but that of Sight
is sensible of their Absence. 
They are the very Opposites to Sir
John Falstaff; have a two-fold Stupidity,
neither being witty themselves,
nor the Causes of Wit in others; for
there is such an Excess of Dullness in
some Persons, that, like the Torpedo,
they benumb all that approach them; 
with only this Difference, that their
Effect is on the Mind. 
The Party of Observation have a
Custom of bestowing on every one
some Nick-name, signifying the Character
of the Person on whom they
condescend to sit in Judgment; which,
like the Free-mason's Sign, being unknown
to any but themselves, serves
them as an Expedient by which they
can express their Thoughts of whomsoever
they please in public Company, 

and no other Person, except their own
Society, can understand their Meaning,
or be ever the wiser. 
There are a Set also of Gamesters,
who make Play their only Business; 
who entirely lose the Idea of its being
a Diversion, and follow it as closely as
if it were a Trade on which they and
their Families depended: And indeed
their Ruin doth too often depend on it; 
for I speak not of those who are, in
the common Expression, said to play
all the Game; not chusing to enter on
the Subject of the various Kinds of
Pick-pockets with which the World
is infested; but being willing rather to
perform the Office of those Persons,
who, at the coming out of the Playhouse,
caution the Company, by crying
out, with a loud Voice, “Gentlemen,
guard your Pockets.” 
These Gamesters are so swallowed
up in their favourite Employment, that
at Meals, and at such small Spaces of 

Time as their Hands are forced to
cease from it, they, like Bajazet, “enjoy
it in Thought;” and the talking
over the Cards which they have played,
fills up their Conversation: It is probable
their Imagination doth not cease
from Play even in their Sleep; but, as
the Company at the Lord Mayor's
Feast, 

Eat in Dreams the Custard of the Day;
so Night makes no other Difference
with these, than in substituting a Phantom
for a Reality. Out of this Set
Mr. Pope hath composed his Gnomes; 
whose airy Forms play round the Card
Tables, and, tho' they cannot play,
o'erlook the Cards. 
Another Set there is, who, in the
Language of the old Plays, may be
called The Gallants. These, whether
Men or Ladies, fix their Thoughts on
no other Subject but Gallantry; how
they shall look, who they shall coquet 

with, being all their Care; and perhaps
this, if seriously attended to, is full
sufficient; for they find as constant a
Watchfulness, and as many Plots, necessary
to prevent being robbed of their
favourite Admirers, and to shew forth
to the whole Company what mighty
Glories and great Conquests they obtain,
as would serve to direct many
Affairs, which, to vulgar Minds, appear
of greater Consequence. It is a
great Mistake those Persons whose
Situation of Life affords them little
Leisure, fall into, when they imagine
that which is generally called a Life
of Pleasure, is a Life exempted from
Labour; because what is so called
is misnamed, and in reality is nothing
more than leading a Life of
Pursuit, and hunting after a fleeting,
vain Shadow: In comparison with
which we may say, with the Burlesquer
of a great Poet of our Days, 

A Life of Labour is a Life of Ease:
Pain is true Joy, and Want is Luxury.

If it was not the Nature of Envy to
be perfectly blinded against the Admittance
of any Truth, it would perhaps
find more Difficulty to meet with
a proper Object on which to exert itself,
than is generally imagined; it
vainly haunts public Places, populous
Cities, and gay Assemblies, in search of
Food: But could the wise Persons,
who chuse to welcome such a Guest,
behold the Inside of the human Heart,
and be acquainted with all its Motions,
they must frequently perceive more
Cause for Pity and Compassion, than
for Envy, in the Bosoms of those very
Persons, who at first Sight have the
Appearance of being in Possession of
human Happiness. In real Fact, all
that is capable of bestowing any solid
Satisfaction in this World, is so easily
attained by every Individual, that were
the Envious endued with the Power of
discerning, they must be cured of that
painful mental Distemper, in spite of
their Teeth. But “that there is no
Cause,” is no more an Answer to 

Envy than to Jealousy; and the former,
as truly as the latter, 

—Is a Monster,
Begot upon itself, born on itself.
To which also may be added, that it
preys at home, and requires no other
Food but the Vitals of those Persons
with whom it takes up its Habitation; 
who, like the Spider, feed on their own
Entrails, and from those poisonous
Materials spin subtle Webs, wherein
the unwary Flutterers, whose Minds
perceive no Danger, are entangled, till
Fame, and perhaps at last Life, are lost
in one common Ruin. 
Other Parties there are, who are too
volatile to continue long in any Pursuit
whatever; and therefore judiciously
chuse to aim only at being what we
commonly call Fashionable. 
Amongst these also are two Sorts; 
for some are Leaders, and strive with 

as much Labour to be admired for the
Elegance of their Taste, and to be followed
by the Croud, as if they were
certain of obtaining in the End some
great Emolument. Others, more
humble, content themselves with being
Followers only, and are carried by
the Multitude without giving themselves
the Trouble of resisting or distinguishing; 
what they do, or how
they are employed, being perfectly indifferent
to them; whether they walk,
ride, dress, game, or are gallant, they
care not, if they can but obtain the
Honour of (to suit the Style to its Subject)
being a la mode, their Heart's Desire
is fully accomplished; and if a
Beauty, amongst the Leaders of Fashions,
should have any whimsical Invention
in her Dress, which Beauty
alone can bear and adorn, the plainest
amongst the Followers must imitate
her as fast as possible, altho' it should
render her Person highly disagreeable. 
Such is the Force of this Infatuation! 

A humorous Paraphrase on those
well-known Words of Othello, about
the Anthropophagi, which fell accidentally
into my Hand, seems to make
a proper Conclusion to this Chapter: 

Wherein of Ball-rooms vast, and Fidlers idle,
Hot-wells, and Rocks, and Hills whose Heads touch Heaven,
It was my Hint to speak (such was my Process),
And of the Cribagers, which each other eat,
The Rollipollimi, or Men whose Heads
Do grow benumb'd, and brainless; these to hear
Would Leonora seriously incline,
Or Amaryllis, or Desdemona, or
Parthenissa, or Lady Mary, Lady Fanny,
&c. &c. &c.




Strange Times! that weep with Laughing,
not with Weeping. 
I will now introduce to my Reader's
Consideration Shakespeare's Timon
of Athens; a Subject, or prevailing Diversion,
which, if Novelty has any
Charms, cannot fail of pleasing. 

The Poet's Eye, in a fine Frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from Heav'n to Earth, from Earth to Heav'n,
saith Shakespeare: But it may roll and
glance for ever, without being able to
discover in what small imperceptible
Labyrinth of the human Mind the
Seeds are sown, which can branch out
into the most unaccountable Invention. 

It seems, like the Goddess in the Dunciad,
to have been born of the human
Brain; and when the Phantom was
brought forth, it was called a Humbugg. 
I have not the least Intention to insinuate
to my Readers, that they are so ignorant
of the Manners and Customs of
their own Nation, as to be unacquainted
with this Diversion; but only claim
the Honour of being the first who hath
recorded this memorable Entertainment: 
Altho' if there is any Person
now compiling a Volume of Travels
through Europe, in which the Article
of the Customs and Manners of Nations
is inserted, the Account of the
present reigning Fashions in England
must be very deficient, if this so principal
a Part of them is omitted. 
It has indeed been conjectured, that
this Weed is so truly exotic, that it was
at first transplanted from a Race of Beings
who are not visible to our Sight; 
and also that Milton points at it, when
he relates the frippery Jests of the infernal 

Powers, which are vented on so
serious an Occasion. 
Other Critics there are, who imagine
Shakespeare had some Notion of it; for
when Polonius hasteneth to inform
Hamlet of the Arrival of the Players at
Elsinoor, he, having before heard that
News, checks the old Man's Joy; by
answering only in the short Monosyllable
(Buz). It is therefore remarked,
that the Word Buz is, by the Change
of the last Letter, a Corruption of the
Word Bug, and that Hum was left out
for the Sake of Brevity: In the same
manner as a late celebrated Genius
hath recorded, in his Introduction to
Polite Conversation, the Method of
paring Words into a polite Sound in his
Days; such as, “Verdi, for Verdict; 
Lard, for Lord; Larning, for Learning;” 
together with some Abbreviations
exquisitely refined, as “pozz,
for positively; Mob, for Mobile; Phiz,
for Physiognomy; Rep, for Reputation; 
Plenipo, for Plenipotentiary; 

incog, for incognito; Hipps, or Hippo,
for Hypocondriack; bam, for
bamboozle; and bamboozle, for
God knows what* .” 
Hamlet's sneering at the old Man's
being deceived, and his having then
undertaken to personate a Lunatic,
casts a small Glimpse of Probability over
this Conjecture that he meant a Humbugg; 
but as there is not, throughout
all the Works of Shakespeare, any other
Passage that gives the least Authority
for such a Change in Words, it appears
something more judicious to let the Expression
in Hamlet remain as it was before; 
lamenting poor Shakespeare's Ignorance,
and claim for our own Age
the Honour of this Invention: For 

altho' our Ancestors were certainly very
deficient in that Vivacity, which so remarkably
adorns the present Times,
yet there is no Reason to imagine that
they were so totally insipid, as to bury
so valuable a Discovery in Oblivion, if
they had been so fortunate as to have
arrived at such a Piece of Knowlege. 
This Diversion is not only the Offspring
of Deceit, but, unlike all the
other Children of that Parent, boldly
owns, nay even ostentatiously boasts, its
Original. To say the Thing that is
not, so astonishing and hateful to Swift's
Houyhnhnms; to practise Treachery, to
plain the Way to our own Promotion; 
and undermine the Designs of our
Friends, with a partial View to Self-interest; 
are Actions neither new nor
wonderful, and have been justly the
Subjects of Satire throughout all Ages: 
But Falsehood, however black in itself,
has hitherto ever had the Modesty to
endeavour to conceal its Deformity,
under the borrowed Veil of some specious 

Name; such as Policy, Foresight,
Prudence, &c. But to deceive,
in order to imagine we have made a
Jest, and then to plume ourselves on
our own Ingenuity, is nothing more
than a tacit Confession, that we hunger
and thirst after Wit, which swiftly
flies our Pursuit; and that, being hard
driven for a Prop to our own Self-conceit,
we are obliged to substitute any
Buffoonery in the Place of that Wit
we cannot by all our Endeavours attain. 
The Word L&wblank;e is banished from
all polite Assemblies; and if applied
to Gentlemen, they are ready to venture
their Lives, and act in Defiance of
the Religion they profess, to revenge
the Affront: But when the Fact which
fairly deserves that Appellation, is
sheltered under that melodious sounding
Epithet of Humbugg, it suddenly
changes its Nature into all that's amiable; 
and, instead of Shame, it is accompanied
with envied Applause; and 

the Gentleman, who would immediately
draw his Sword on the bold Man
who should venture to apply the banished
Word to him, will, without the
least Scruple, seriously tell a detrimental
Falsehood of his Friend by his own
Professions. And if any Person, so
unfortunate as not to have been initiated
in this fashionable, rational Diversion,
should caution the defamed
Absent to place no Confidence in such
Friendship; a Declaration that it is
only a Humbugg, gains the Laugh of
Applause; the Sneer of Ridicule falls
to the Share of the Person abused; and
the great Glories of the Humbugger
are spread abroad with Envy and Emulation,
by all those Persons who wrestle
and strive with all their Might to obtain
such Glories. Neither the Victor at
the Olympic Games in Greece, nor the
General in the triumphal Carr at Rome,
could be more elated with their Honours,
than the true genuine Humbuggers
are with their successful Atchievements. 

It hath always been the Sport and
Privilege of Folly, to laugh at Men of
Sense; and the Characteristic of Understanding,
calmly and steadily to
submit to such Laughter with an undisturbed
Tranquility: But when Falsehood
loses its Name, and assumes the
Form of Wit or Mirth, the Multitude
are too apt to overbear the better Judgment
of the Few; and particularly in
the dangerous Season of Youth, which,
by its volatile Vivacity and fluctuating
Spirits, is resembled by some Philosopher
to a State of Drunkenness; then
the human Mind is often perverted,
altho' possessed of a much superior Understanding
than the vain Corrupter can
justly boast. 
There seemeth to be implanted in
the human Mind, a natural Delight in
borrowing the Forms, and mimicking
the Manners, of those Persons for
whom we have any Degree of Respect. 
Little Girls introduce their Request to
one another to join in their Diversions,
by the Expression let us make believe 

Visiting. It is pleasant to be a Spectator
at this Scene unknown to the little
Actors in the Play, and to observe, that
from their Size only, they are to be
distinguished from the Persons whose
Manners they are imitating: Their
Eyes fail not to sparkle at the Compliments
made them in the Borrowed
Personages they assume, and their little
Bosoms heave with Indignation at a
smart Joke (for Wit and Jesting are not
excluded the Nursery), levelled at them
in the supposed Persons of Mothers and
Grandmothers; Miss, of four Years
old, resents the least Neglect of her
future Offspring, then represented by
the Wax or Paste Doll, with as much
Warmth and Anger, as her Mother
doth the Disrespect of her living
Daughter. 
The Love of making believe exerts
itself thus innocently, during the State
of Infancy; but it requires Maturity to
invent a Method of making Falsehood
eligible. The Man who deceives others 

for the Sake of any Acquisition, which
he has made himself believe it is his own
Interest to obtain at any Price, with all
the glaring Folly which he nourisheth
in his own Bosom, is however, in the
Degrees of Understanding, far above
the Man whose groveling Spirit condescends
to mimick his insidious Ways,
only for the Reputation of having made
a Jest. In the former Case, the Temptation
comes in the Shape of something
that has the fallacious Appearance of
worldly Good; but in the latter, its
very outside Show is nothing more than
mere Froth and Emptiness. 
When the Palm of Applause is to be
obtained for Actions which are in
themselves shameful, a dangerous Stumbling-block
is placed in the Paths of the
Unwary, which requireth the strictest
Guard over every Degree of human
Vanity to escape. From this Delight
in the Language of Deceit, its next
Progress is to insinuate itself into our
Practice, nay it hath already begun to 

make Advances thereunto; and, as not
a great while ago, Letters were written
with dark Menaces, that if a fixed Sum
of Money was not laid in an appointed
Place, Ruin and Destruction should be
the Consequence; so now threatening
Letters are written for no other Purpose
than to enjoy this pleasant Sport; no
matter at what, or at whose Expence. 
A Lady of Fashion, who was going
to the Bath, received a Letter the Evening
before her intended Journey, to intreat
her by all means to suspend her
Intention; for that some terrible Danger
awaited her on the Road. 
The Lady however disappointed the
Letter-writer, and would not be baulked
in her Purpose; she arrived very
safely at the End of her Journey: No
doubt but that the Inventors of this
noble Humbugg had employed much
Time and Labour before they could
hit on such a Piece of Ingenuity; and
very sensibly felt the ill Success of their 

Scheme to prevent the Lady's Journey,
whether the Design of it was only for
Pleasure, or thought necessary for her
Health. 
Another Person, who was so over-burthened
with Wit, that he could not
find Methods enough to vent it, very
ingeniously set it abroad that a Fire had
happened in the Rooms at Bath, when
they were crowded with Company; 
and that much Mischief was the Consequence. 
It must be confessed, the
Place on which to fix the Report was
judiciously chosen; such a Concourse
from all Parts of the Three Kingdoms,
as well as Foreigners, continually coming
to Bath, as must necessarily spread
the Terror for Relations and Friends,
who were known to be there, very
widely; and consequently the Jest must
travel a great way. 
By Means like these, by degrees, all
Indignation at Treachery will be lost; 

it will grow familiar enough to raise a
Smile on such Instances of it, as will
only bring past Delights to Remembrance. 
There is one Danger that appears
necessary for every Practitioner in this
Act seriously to take into Consideration; 
namely, lest Deceit should become
so habitual, that the Cause for
which it was first embraced should be
forgot, and the Jest be lost; and then
Falsehood must stand forth in all her
true and native Colours: For if the
Jest should be once dropped, it is generally
so very small, that, like Tom
Thumb, a Man might as well seek for a
Needle in a Pottle of Hay, as to attempt
to discover it again. Surely we
may say of Men, who make this Practice
their Sport, what Isabella, in Measure
for Measure, says of Men in Authority,
That they 


Play such fantastic Tricks before high Heav'n,
As makes the Angels weep; who, with our Spleens,
Would all themselves laugh mortal* .

And certainly a noble Employment
it is for rational Creatures, to practise
that with Emulation, which would
induce Angels to weep, and set Monkeys
a grinning. 




A Character. 
Characters either described in
Writing, or personated on the
Theatre, are in a great measure disliked,
or approved, in proportion to the
Acquaintance the Reader, or the Audience,
have before had with them. My
Lord Foppington, and Sir Fopling Flutter,
by their Names on the Bills, could
formerly, at any time, croud the Playhouse
with Spectators; but that Species
of Coxcombs are now as much
out of Mode as the very Dresses in
which they were represented; and if
they were at this time to come on the
Stage as new Characters, it might perhaps
be doubted whether they were the
Produce of Nature, or of the Author's 

Brain only. Frible also so judiciously
chose the Season of his Appearance,
that he was was immediately acknowleged
by the Audience as their Acquaintance,
and consequently received
with due Applause: And I hope the
Character I am now about to introduce
will not be in such an unfortunate Situation,
as to be esteemed a Creature that
nobody knows; but that he will be
owned as an Acquaintance by some
Part at least of the World. 
Sir Harry Cleveland was just entered
into his 22d Year; was tall, well-proportioned,
with an agreeable and lively
Countenance. His Estate, at a moderate
Computation, produced 4000l.
per Annum; his Education had been
liberal, and his Understanding sufficient
to have made a considerable Figure
in his Country; he had, from the first
Dawn of his Capacity, placed a Delight
in Study, which was uncommon in a
young Man of his Age; by which
means he had not only acquired great 

Knowlege in Languages, but also a
very competent Degree of general
Learning. He was chearful in his
Conversation, and pleasing in his Manner
of Address. Such was Sir Harry
Cleveland, when, for a small Indisposition,
he was advised to the Bristol
Waters, and at the same time told that
it was necessary for his Health, whilst
he was there, to avoid Study, and lead
a Life of Dissipation. He loved Retirement; 
and as soon as he came more
into the World, it seemed to him as if
he was entered into a wild Wood,
where the Paths were so obscure, that
he knew not which Way to trace them. 
He before imagined that he could bear
a Part in any Conversation; but soon
found that he was absolutely mistaken,
and that he was perfectly ignorant of
all Things that could be of any Utility
to his present Purpose. 
I have somewhere read a Sentence,
which imports Advice to forbear teaching
Youth any thing, which it will be 

afterwards necessary for them to unlearn. 
Sir Harry Cleveland was now obliged
to forget, or at least to lay perfectly
aside, all the Ideas which he had been
imbibing from his Infancy. He had a
great deal of Humour; but it resembled
that which is to be found in the
Comedies of Terence or Moliere; and
consisted in short, simple Strokes of
Nature; which were either unintelligible
to his present Company, or
esteemed as much too serious for Conversation,
as if he had introduced a
Subject of the gravest Philosophy. He
did not like to act the Part continually
of a Mute; and yet perceived plainly,
that he was not qualified to speak with
any Propriety. Bon-mots, Small-talk,
and the constant Repetition of some
fashionable Word, at all Times, and
on all Occasions, whether applicable to
the Subject or not, were all to him so
much Gibberish; and the famous wild
Boy could not stare more when first he 

heard human Language, than Sir Harry
did at all this valuable Politeness. 
The first Employment Sir Harry
found was entering into a Party at
Cards. If his Tongue was useless; he
thought however he could use his
Hands; and would at that time rather
have played at Push-pin, than have been
totally idle. Custom brought this to be
pleasing to him; and as the Love of
Money had no Place in his Heart, he was
willing to play as deep as any of his
Companions; but still he had a natural
Love of Society, which rendered him
desirous of mutually receiving and communicating
his Ideas. He could not
possibly think of undertaking such an
Herculean Labour, as to make Numbers
conform to his Customs; 

(To mend the World's a vast Design)
and therefore set about the easier Task
of conforming himself to them. Day
by Day he improved; strove manfully 

with all the Knowledge he had before
attained to keep it down, and at length
arrived at the Summit of his Wishes,
by concealing his Understanding. He,
like Varsac, in Les Egarements du
Cœur & de L'Esprit, was as fearful of
letting it be seen that he had any Sense,
as ever any human Creature was of exposing
his Folly: And now he entered
thoroughly into that kind of Conversation
painted in this lively Manner
by the before-mentioned Varsac; of
which, for the Benefit of any Readers
who do not readily read French, I have
given the Substance in English: 
 “Conversation, to be lively, cannot
dwell too short a time on any one
Subject; and even the Speaker, who
but seldom opens his Mouth, must
suffer himself to be interrupted by 

some Lady, who cannot abstain from
sporting Sentiments; and who also,
in the midst of the great Number
of Ideas with which so noble a Subject
inspires her, and of which she
was so perfect a Mistress, is obliged
to listen to some poetic Gallantry; 
and the Singer, in his Turn (altho'
to the great Regret of the Company)
must give way to a Fragment of
Morality. This also is quickly interrupted,
that nothing may be lost
of a scandalous History; which, whether
related well or ill, is attended to
with great Pleasure; but yet is immediately
cut off, by some trifling or 

false Reflexions on Music or Poetry: 
These also, by degrees, disappear,
and are followed by political Remarks
on Government; which are
abridged, by a hasty Transition to
some remarkable Incident that happened
at Play: And at last a Petit-maitre,
after having been in a long Resverie,
crosses the Circle, and throws
all into Confusion, to inform some
Lady that she hath not put on a sufficient
Quantity of Red, or that she
is as handsome as an Angel.” 
It is observable, that the Follies and
Vices of the Mind, in many Particulars,
bear a great Analogy with the 

Distempers of the Body insomuch
that several Terms appropriated to the
one are as applicable to the other, and
are in this Sense made use of by many
Authors of Authority. This Analogy
is not more apparent in any one Instance,
than that all malignant Infections
seize the most vigorous Constitutions of
both Sexes with the greatest Force; 
and it is often seen, that, when any epidemic
Distemper creeps into a Family,
it becomes even mortal to the Strong,
and leaves the Weak and Languid to
continue on in the State of Health they
were in before. 
Sir Harry Cleveland came into the
World with a Mind healthy, and full
of Vigour; but when he began to be
infected with the Foolishness of vain
Customs, he ran greater Lengths than
such Persons as had never known
what a sound Mind was; he concealed
his good Sense from others, lest he
should be ridiculed for being over-wise,
thought pedantic, or lie under that terrible 

Censure of being deficient in the
Knowlege of the World, till he stifled even
the Appearance of it to himself; and
his Imagination, which was naturally
strong, played such Tricks with him,
as quite overturned every other Faculty
but itself. The Sense of Shame is very
forcible in ingenious Minds; and however
absurd it may be for a Man, who
is endued with a good Understanding,
to be laughed out of his own better
Judgment, by those Persons of whose
Sense he has but a very mean Opinion; 
yet that the Fact is commonly true, is
indisputable. 
Sir Harry first connected himself
with the World by entering into Parties
of Play; then he proceeded to damp
all his former Ideas, to unburden
himself of all the Knowlege he had
ever collected together, and to agree
perfectly with Ralpho, in calling 

Learning, that Cobweb of the Brain,
Profane, erroneous, and vain;

A Trade of Knowlege, as replete
As others are with Fraud and Cheat:

A Cheat that Scholars put upon
Other Men's Reason, and their own;
A Fort of Error, to ensconce
Absurdity and Ignorance;
That renders all the Avenues
To Truth impervious and abstruse,
By making plain Things in Debate,
By Art, perplex'd and intricate.
Hudibras.
And therefore he chose now to become
a Scholar to the Admirers of Bon-mots,
Small-talk, &c. and at last finished his
Character, by becoming a Proficient in
the Mystery of Humbugging: He was
now courted and applauded; esteemed
a fine Gentleman, and complimented
with being a Proficient in the Knowlege
of the World; an Expression marked
out by Dean Swift as “The Language
of Idiots.” 

Every Pursuit of the human Mind is
of a restless Nature, and partakes of
that most turbulent of all Passions,
Ambition itself. In fact, every Pursuit,
the End of which is human Applause,
is Ambition; altho' differently
modified from that Passion, to which
we generally give that Appellation; 
and doubtless Sir Harry, when he had
been long enough a Practitioner in this
Art of Deceit, to be fully accomplished
in his Profession, felt just the same
Gratification after he had obtained a
visible Victory over some other noted
Humbugger, as a Hero has enjoyed
after a decisive Battle; and loud Laughter
was to him the pleasing Acclamations
of his Triumph; his very Countenance
shared in the Practice of Deceit: 
For, like Milton's Belial, 

A fairer Person lost not Heav'n; he seem'd
For Dignity compos'd, and high Exploit:
But all was false and hollow.

It was reported, that so wholly was
Sir Harry at last engrossed by this favourite
Amusement, his Imagination
was employed in inventing Schemes to
put it in Practice; and even that sometimes,
for fear they should be lost, he
committed them to Writing; but as
this doth not appear with an Air of
Probability, I would by no means affirm
it to be Truth: But if it is really
Fact, perhaps in the End he may be of
such eminent Service to his Country,
as to reduce this ingenious Art to a regular
Science; and it may become no
uncommon Thing to see advertised, 
The whole Art of Humbugging taught
and explained in the easiest Manner, by
John Trickey, in Grosvenor-street,
Grosvenor-square. 
N. B. Young Gentlemen and Ladies
may be waited on at home, at the
very moderate Consideration of Two
Guineas per Week. 

It may then become one great Part
of genteel Education, and Sir Harry
may have the Satisfaction of reflecting,
that he shall be the Means of saving
Posterity from suffering the laborious
Task he himself had undergone, of
unravelling all the whole Work of his
Education, in order to qualify himself
to converse with the World. 

O fatal Change! O horrid Transformation!
So a majestic Temple, Junk to Ruin,
Becomes the loathsome Shelter and Abode
Of lurking Serpents, Toads, and Beasts of Prey;
And scaly Dragons hiss, and Lions roar,
Where Wisdom taught, and Music charm'd before.
Lillo's Fatal Curiosity.
Sir Harry Cleveland must have been
deficient in this his new-acquired Character,
if he had excluded any Transactions
with the Ladies out of his
Scheme; he only varied his Manner
of them; he spread no false Rumours; 

but to them was liberal of Professions,
in which his Heart had not the least
Share. It was a heathen Sentiment,
That the Gods laugh at Lover's Vows; 
but it never was any Body's Sentiment,
That they laugh at the Vows made by
Persons, who have no Claim to the
Name of Lovers. By the Seriousness
of Sir Harry's Manner, he enjoyed the
Pleasure of deceiving several Ladies; 
many violent Quarrels he caused, and
suddenly broke asunder many of those
firm Friendships, which had subsisted
from the Time the Acquaintance of the
Friends began at the Hot-Wells; and
if neither Sir Harry Cleveland, nor any
other Lover, agreeable or disagreeable
(so that the Name of Lover, or rather
Admirer, might be attributed to him),
had interfered, might perhaps have
continued during the whole Season. 
Lady Dellwyn had a great Share of
Sir Harry's professed Admiration. Her
Ladyship could not prevail on herself
to undergo so hard a Task, as to neglect 

any Compliments made her by a Man
of Sir Harry's Figure and Rank; yet
he did not obtain his desired End. She
perceived that his Gallantry was too
general, and in reality was not deceived; 
however the Complacency with
which she admitted his Conversation,
imposed on him the Belief, that she
was the Dupe of his Professions; which
Belief, in respect to himself, was the
same thing as even the Fact itself. 
It is droll to be a Spectator only,
and not an Actor, of many Scenes in
Life; and to see how very frequently
Deception returns on the Head of its
most assiduous Practisers, and ends
where Charity begins (Oh! that it never
ended there also), even at home. 
If this noble Diversion should increase
and spread in proportion to its
Beginning, Posterity must be greatly
entertained, and imbibe a very honourable
Opinion of their Ancestors, when,
reading the History of these our 

Times, they shall see at the Close of
the Year, in the Account of the several
Deaths of remarkable great Men, some
such summary Characters as these: 
At the latter End of this Year died Sir
Harry Cleveland, the most noted Humbugger
of his Time, to the great Regret
of all true Lovers of that famous Diversion. 
He left behind him no other Works
but a Scheme for the better Regulation of
that ingenious Invention. 




Another Character. 
Captain Drumond, who watched
every Opportunity to assume
that Form which might be the most
conducive to the settled Purpose of his
Life, esteemed himself fortunate in
meeting with Sir Harry Cleveland. All
Fashions which naturally tend to banish
Thought and Reflexion, are of singular
Advantage to the artful and designing
Part of Mankind; who can deceive
without jesting, and have a private
View in flattering such Affectations. 
The loud Laughs of Applause,
which Captain Drumond was always
ready to bestow on every Jest, even attempted
by Sir Harry, enabled him to
impose himself, as an eligible Companion, 

on a Man whose Understanding
was greatly superior to his own. When
Flattery becomes necessity to a Man's
Happiness, he must condescend to converse
with such Company as are both
able and willing to give him that Gratification. 
Captain Drumond carried this Humour
of jesting to such an immoderate
Height, that every Word, which had
not that Tendency, was treated by
him with utter Contempt. Expressions
thrown out carelessly in the Hours of
Mirth and Freedom, by great Geniuses,
by the Misapplication of the Ignorant,
or Mischievous, become either dangerous
or glaringly absurd; and because
Dr. Swift said “Vive la Bagatelle,” 
that Expression must be adopted by
many Persons, who are so truly Bagatelles
themselves, that, whilst they live,
it cannot die, or be absent from whatsoever
Place they are present in. Trifling
is truly pleasing in the leisure Hours of
Men of Sense, but it becomes disgustful 

from such Persons as can never do any
thing else; and who therefore present
us thereby with no Variety, but one
continued Sameness drags thro' every
tedious Hour. 
That Cicero and Atticus were found
in a rural Retreat, diverting themselves
with boyish Plays, is a Fact thought
worthy to be recorded in History; as it
is a Proof of a great Command of their
Minds and Faculties, when they could
alternately trifle and follow serious Business. 
But it is observable, that this is
esteemed worthy of being remembered
only because it was Cicero and Atticus; 
but if this had been their constant
Employment, neither their Names,
nor this Fact, had ever been transmitted
to Posterity; and the Number
100000000000000, in whatever Rank
or Station they are placed, may mimic
Infancy, in every other respect but in
its Innocence, as long as they live, and
yet the Moment they lose their Breath,
will be the same Point of Time in 

which their Memory will be buried in
Oblivion. 
Captain Drumond was ready at all
Seasons to take Advantage of every
Weakness he observed in another, and
in this Particular was very acute and
penetrating; for there is scarcely any
Man so void of Capacity, but that, if
his whole Study is fixed on one Point
only, he may obtain in that some Degree
of Proficiency, especially if he
chuses what is proportionable to his
Faculties; and in this Captain Drumond
was judicious; for human Weakness
must be ever in his Remembrance,
unless he had indeed been so uncommon
a Character as to have forgot
himself. He saw nothing lovely for
its own Sake; he was no Follower of
that Sect of Philosophers, who find
Virtue to have Charms in herself alone,
but had a View to somewhat which he
thought a more substantial Reward; 
and made his Interest, in the too common
Acceptation of the Word, as it 

concerns pecuniary Advantages only,
the principal End of his Consideration. 
Neither Divinity, Philosophy, Arts,
or Sciences, had the Power of engaging
his Attention to Reading: His Prey lay
amongst the Living, and not amongst
the Dead, unless when he fancied he
could extract to himself any kind of
Profit, by casting Reproaches on their
Memory, and then his best Friends
were not spared; neither was Truth
or Falsehood worthy his Deliberation. 
Writings of Imagination he despised; 
his whole Stock of Knowlege
seemed to be centered in a few political
Maxims, by which he constantly
regulated his Conduct; altho'
he had either read The Life of Jonathan
Wild, or his native Genius was sufficient
to form Rules very like those of
that renowned great Man; for his every
Action was a Proof, that he had gleaned
up every selfish Maxim that ever
the human Imagination hath invented. 

Satires which are general, and against
Vice itself, he called morose and ill-natured; 
but such as are particular,
and so heightened to his Palate as to
give him an Opportunity of venting
private Calumny, he never failed of
adopting. Human Nature in general,
he loved to praise; but was very unwilling
to allow any Virtue to Individuals,
except to such Persons of whom
he was conscious that he was singular
in his Opinion; and that therefore he
could not establish their Reputations; 
and then the Utterance of false Praise
was to be a Proof of his great Candour
and Humanity: He had heard the
common and true Observation, That
Vanity has a great Influence on the
Actions of Mankind; and therefore to
the most disinterested Benevolence and
Generosity, nay even to such as are visibly
the Effect of that grand Christian
Virtue, Charity, he gave the Name of
Vanity; and then plumed himself on
the Depth of his own Penetration. 

There was one Person indeed, whom
he cordially allowed to be in Possession
of every Virtue, and that was no other
than himself; and yet there was something
within, that bad him be very suspicious,
lest he should be so unhappy as
to admire himself without a Rival: 
And therefore he thought it prudent
not to trust his Fame to the Report of
others, but to make himself “The
little Hero of each Tale.” 
I would not wrong an Enemy; I
make it my Business to do good; I am
so industrious, that I hardly give myself
Time for necessary Refreshment and
Repose; were Expressions ever in his
Mouth: And as he had a Hesitation in
his Speech, he frequently repeated
I, I, I, I, half a dozen times, before
the weighty Sentences of his own
Praises could find an Utterance. He
perceived that it was as necessary to
publish his own uncommon Goodness,
as it is for the Boy in The Rehearsal to 

declare to the Audience, “I am the bold
Thunder;” or the Girl to introduce
herself with the Words, “The brisk
Lightning, Lightning I;” no human
Sagacity being acute enough to find it
out, unless they were informed of it. 
Sometimes Captain Drumond was
seized with a sudden Fit of Humility; 
and on such Occasions a Torrent of
Self-accusation flowed from his Lips; 
but behold the Mountain brought
forth a Mouse, and his great Crime always
turned out to be some Act of
Imprudence, which was caused by his
great Compassion and Good-nature; 
and which was not however of Magnitude
sufficient to be perceptible to
the Person, for whose Sake he had
been guilty of this mighty Piece of
Improvidence. 
Mr. Addison observes, in The Spectator,
That common Proverbs are built on
the Experience of Mankind; and therefore 

are for the most part evidently
true. If the vulgar Proverb, that
when a Man is forced to publish his own
Praises, he lives by bad Neighbours, has
any Truth in it, no Man surely can be
more unfortunate in his Neighbourhood
than Captain Drumond was: But
what would add greatly to the Energy
of this Proverb, is an Addition which I
believe may be made to it with great
Propriety; namely, That a Man, who
finds himself under a Necessity of thus
venting his own Commendations, is
very justly conscious that his Neighbours
Reports of him are founded in
Reality. 
La Brayere remarks, That the Man
who talks much in his own Praise,
knows not even the Art of counterfeiting
Goodness; and this undoubtedly
was true with regard to himself; for
one half Glance of his Eye would have
pierced through all the Fallacy of such
a Character: But Reflexion and Consideration 

were habitual to Iva Hruyere; 
whereas the Person to whom Captain
Drumond chose to display his innumerable
Virtues, esteemed it much
more eligible to take them upon Trust,
than to impose on themselves the insupportable
Labour of Thinking. 
It was a favourite Opinion of Captain
Drumond's, That all Mankind are, on some
blind Side or other, to be cajoled
and flattered: He therefore, in all His
Converse with such Persons as he imagined
he could extract any Advantage
from, began with this Method: But
whenever he met with an Exception
to this Rule, and was disappointed in His
Hopes, his soothing Words were all
turned into Bitterness. Like the Wasp,
he was provided both with Honey and
a Sting; and on whomsoever Oversweetness
disgusted, he darted the Venom
of his Sting. This method answered
several Purposes; the Rage with which
he was brim-full at finding himself deceived, 

was revenged; the only Way
he had of becoming an Object of Terror
to his Majesty's liege Subjects, was
through this Vehicle of Abuse, which
weak Minds are sometimes afraid of. 
And when he found a Man deaf to his
Flattery, and equally and steadily superior
to all the Efforts of his mean
Malice, then, like a Lunatic, he begins
to practise at home; and flattered himself,
that by throwing Dirt, he should
be able to baffle the ill Effects of another's
bad Opinion: And with whatsoever
his Heart was filled, his Mouth
then gave Utterance to such Ideas only,
as are best expressed in their native
Language of Scurrility. This Character
hath been more particularly delineated,
to shew by what Wretches
Men (of otherwise good Understandings)
are to be imposed on, when they
think it necessary to be flattered for any
favourite Folly. 

Sir Harry Cleveland would have
esteemed a Moment's precious Time to
be very injudiciously squandered away,
in which he had forced himself from
the Consideration of his favourite
Scheme, to examine and discover the
true Character of this his Companion; 
nay, he called him Friend, and as such
he used him: For even true Friends
could not better accommodate each
other's Wants. When Sir Harry had so
unfortunate a Day in his Calendar that
the Laugh went against him, he had a
sure Resource in the Evening, by Captain
Drumond's Complacency; who
was the willing Butt of his Ridicule: 
And Captain Drumond, who was so
much of a Philosopher, that he had
but one earnest Pursuit in the World,
found a bountiful Supply for that one,
in Sir Harry Cleveland's Fortune. Thus
they played the Game into each other's
Hands; and, unlike most Gamesters,
each of them was perfectly satisfied
with his own Share of the Profits. 

Captain Drumond divided his Hours
and his Strategems between Sir Harry
Cleveland and Lord Dellwyn; the former
was the most liberal, and consequently
the most valuable Friend for
the Time present; but then Sir Harry
was young, his Understanding was by
no means despicable, only unfortunately
overshadowed by a whimsical
Affectation of a fashionable Folly; and
the Captain very prudently considered,
that Sir Harry might possibly in time,
like Æneas, break through the Cloud,
and be visible in his own natural Form; 
and that then he could by no means be
any longer necessary to Sir Harry's
Pleasure: For a Man who is inwardly
conscious that he steadily pursues an
eligible Path, has no more Occasion for
a Flatterer to tell him so, than a Man,
whose Time is all filled up with useful
Employments, hath a Necessity for the
Tricks of a Monkey, for an Amusement
to his Mind. 

It was therefore thought adviseable
by Captain Drumond to take fast hold
of Lord Dellwyn, whose Habits had
been too long rooted to admit of any
Suspicion that they would change,
while Life lasted: Besides, there was
yet another Motive for frequenting
Lord Dellwyn's; which, altho' it was
always kept in due Subordination to
his Interest, yet, where he could make
them co-incide, was esteemed an additional
Advantage. 
Altho' Love was greatly beneath a
Man of his profound Wisdom; yet he was
not intirely insensible to the Attraction
of Beauty, and he imagined he might
make a double Use of Lord Dellwyn's
Friendship, without the least Impeachment
of his Understanding; but, on
the contrary, when the Standard of
Cunning is erected, and its Banner displayed,
every successful Piece of Art is
accounted fresh Matter of Triumph. 
The Word Treasury dares not come 

forth; but the military Term of Stratagem
is adopted to veil Deceit. Lady
Dellwyn was very handsome, and Captain
Drumond thought her also worthy
of some of his Contrivances. 