


The Arrival of a Person that will give the
Readers some Pleasure, if they can partake
in the Joy of our small remaining Family. 
David Simple, during his Camilla's
Illness, and indeed for some Time
after her Death, had so totally neglected all
Thoughts of himself, that he in a manner
forgot every necessary Care, except swallowing
the Food that Hunger prompted, just
enough to keep him from starving; and his
Body now seemed resolved to be revenged
on him for the Neglect: for he fell into a
Complication of Disorders, and his Strength
decayed so fast, that he was soon obliged
to take to his Room. He asked his Physician
(the same who had visited his Wife and
Children, and now kindly continued his Attendance
on him) whether he thought his
Disorder mortal: and the Physician knowing
David was sincerely desirous of hearing
the Truth, answered, that there was small 

Probability of his holding it above a Month longer. 
Now did David Simple indeed taste the
highest Pleasure from knowing that his Camilla
could not feel for him what he had
suffered for her. Now might he be truly
said to rejoice in her Death; for he would
not, for all the Kingdoms of the Earth, have
beheld her striving in vain to hide the Sorrow
that his Pains would have given her. One
Witness of them, his gentle, his amiable
Daughter, redoubled every Stroke, and gave
him the additional Fatigue of endeavouring
to hide them. 
David, not many Days before he took to
his Chamber, received from Cynthia the
pleasing Account of her being perfectly recovered,
and that she should set out for
England in the next Ship that sailed, and
hoped to be with them in a very short Time
after her Letter. For little Camilla's sake
did David hourly wish for the Arrival of
Cynthia. He could willingly on his own
Account have spared her a Scene that must
too sensibly affect her. Nor did he want to
give her tender Charges of his Daughter till
her whole Frame was shaken beyond her
Strength to support: for the Confidence he 

had in her Friendship remained to the last; 
and he knew that without his Request, she
would exert her utmost Power to cherish
and protect the young Camilla. But in ten
Days after his Confinement to his Chamber,
Cynthia arrived. 
David was then asleep, a Relief from Pain
he had not for some Time enjoyed; and
young Camilla seeing Cynthia through the
Window, slipped softly down Stairs, and
met her some little Space from the House. 
She begged her not to enter that Moment,
threw her Arms about her Neck, and, in
faltering Accents, in a few Words told her
the whole State of their Family. Cynthia
knew not of Camilla's Death; for David,
thinking she might be in her Passage home,
did not write, especially as such Sort of
News he was not most eager to relate. She
listened to little Camilla with an Attention
that almost turned her into Stone. The only
Motion perceivable in her, was a Tear
dropping from each Eye—she wept—she
could not speak—and in this Posture she
remained some Minutes. Then taking her
loved Niece by the Hand, she went with
her to the House, and was met by Mrs.
Dunster, who begged her not immediately
to go up Stairs; but, if she pleased, she 

might first speak to the Physician, who was
now coming down from David. Cynthia
hastened to meet him, and earnestly intreated
him to inform her truly of what he
thought concerning her Brother. The Physician,
though he had never seen her, knew
by her Questions who she was; and having
told her the weak State of Body he was in,
gave it as his Opinion, that the Sight of a
Person so dear to David as he knew Cynthia
to be, would too much flutter, and might immediately
prove fatal to him; and therefore
begged her, as she had any Regard for her
Friend, not to appear before David, till he
should give her Leave. Cynthia (though in
her own Judgment she thought the Pleasure
of seeing her would do David more Good
than Harm) terrified with the Possibility of
hurting him, consented to follow the Physician's
Commands, and lived three Days
under the same Roof, banished as it were
from the only Spot her Feet were naturally
inclined to tread. But during this Time
she was not once heard to complain, nor
was she once seen in Tears, except one
Evening, when going up to her Bed, as she
passed by David's Chamber, her Niece (who
had been paying her Attendance on her Father)
opened the Door to come out, and
Cynthia standing still, for fear her Footsteps 

should disturb the Sick, heard David mention
her own Name—yet she forbore to
enter—but could not refrain from letting
fall a Shower of Tears, and with some Difficulty
prevented her Sobs from being heard. 
Mrs. Orgueil, notwithstanding her inexorable
Hatred to Cynthia, pretended the
greatest liking in the World for her Company,
and was outwardly very civil to her:
and on hearing of her Arrival, and being
told that she was not suffered as yet to go
into David's Room, sent her a very polite
Message, to desire the Favour of seeing
her. 
Nothing could be more reluctant than
was Cynthia towards making such a Visit. 
She had an Antipathy to all Deceit; she liked
not Mrs. Orgueil; but yet as she was ignorant
of all that had passed in her Absence,
she knew not how far, on David's Account,
Mrs. Orgueil might have a Claim to her
Compliance; besides, having asked her
Niece some Questions, she innocently gave
such Answers as made Cynthia imagine it
incumbent on her to accept the Invitation. 
For as young Camilla had been ever instructed
gratefully to retain in her Memory all
Favours, and to forget Injuries, she, in a 

brief Manner, recounted to her Aunt the
several apparent generous Actions of Orgueil
towards their Family, and particularly
his having buried her dear Mother. Cynthia
knew nothing of the Behaviour of Mrs.
Orgueil to her own Child at the Bath; but
if she had, no Resentment for the Usage of
the Dead would have influenced her to have
taken any Step prejudicial to the Living. 
Mrs. Orgueil received Cynthia with great
Civility, for she always treated her with
more outward Respect than she ever shewed
to Camilla; but entertained her most Part
of the Time with a long Account of Mr.
Orgueil's late Illness and Recovery; and the
dreadful Anxiety of Mind she had undergone. 
Cynthia bore the Visit with all the Patience
she was able; but indeed at present
her Thoughts were so fixed at home, that
had any of her most agreeable Acquaintance
desired her Company, the Visit would have
been almost equally irksome; and she would
have wished to have been excused. 
As David was still at Farmer Dunster's,
Cynthia was satisfied he had, from the honest
Assiduity of Dame Dunster, all the Care 

and proper Attendance he could wish: but
this Situation of passing his Door twice a
Day, and not daring to enter his Room, she
would not endure longer than three Days,
when (having forced from the Physician his
Leave) she bid little Camilla by Degrees tell
her Father she was in the House; and on
the first Information, he begged instantly to
see her. 
David, even in the midst of Sorrow or
Sickness, had a Benignity in his Countenance,
which would baffle a Painter's Art
to imitate, much less can Description pretend
to reach it. But on the Sight of Cynthia,
loaded with Pains and bent down with Weakness
as he was, Joy beamed from his Eyes,
which his Voice could but weakly express. 
Great was Cynthia's Pleasure to be admitted
into his Room, and to have the Sentence of
Banishment, if I may so call it, taken off:
but yet his visible Decay, even chearful as
he was, gave such Wounds to her Heart, as,
following her Example, I am willing to pass
over, and bury in Oblivion. Neither shall
their Conversation be repeated by me. It
is sufficient to say, that they spoke the
Words dictated by the Hearts of Cynthia
and David Simple. 

David told Cynthia he had no Doubt of
her Care of his Daughter. Then mentioning
Mrs. Orgueil's Offer, he desired she
might never fall into her Hands. Whatever
anxious Thoughts he had on her Account
he suppressed, and indeed some he could not
but have: for although he knew Cynthia's
Inclination, yet he knew also her Inability
to provide for her Niece. But Cynthia knew
the true State of his Mind without being
told it; and revolved in her Thoughts ten
thousand Schemes how she might be able,
whilst he was yet alive, to give him the
pleasing Prospect that his Daughter should
be provided for, and protected from any
Insult to which Youth and Beauty, joined
with Poverty, might subject her. For they
are the Objects of the Pursuit, or rather
Persecution not only of all the abandoned
amongst Men, but of all the envious amongst
Women. 