


Some Lights into the Character of Mr. Ratcliff. 
This unexpected Blow of the Death of
Valentine was enough to have driven
most Men to Despair; but David, when he
viewed his Camilla surrounded with his tender
Offspring, suffered not his Thoughts to
wander one Step that Way, but searched
every Corner of his Heart for some Gleam
of Comfort to communicate to his Camilla. 
Mrs. Orgueil's Generosity was now no
more. All Fear that Cynthia could have
the Power of serving her Friend was at an
End; and with that Fear all Mrs. Orgueil's
good-natured Concern for the distressed
Wife of David, vanished into nothing: and
as soon as the Image of Death was a little
subsided, her whole Heart exulted in the
Thoughts of Cynthia's Mortification. For
her fancied Love, her Compassion, her Indignation,
in short, her every Turn of
Mind towards Camilla, depended on some 

Imagination she had formed concerning the
innocent though hated Cynthia. 
David was prohibited from making any
Application to Mr. Ratcliff by his last
Letter; and whilst he had the least Hope,
that his dear Son might, by his means, enjoy
any future Prosperity in the World, he
dared not disoblige him. But now Mr.
Orgueil discovered to him a Secret, which
even then greatly astonished him, though
not quite so much as it would have done at
his first setting out in the World; which
Secret was no other than that Mr. Ratcliff
was himself in Possession of that very Place
of Six hundred a Year, which he had, with
great Professions of Kindness, pretended he
would solicit for him. David could never
conquer his own natural Bent to such a Degree,
as unmoved and with perfect Indifference
to hear that he was treacherously
dealt with by any Person from whom he
hoped the least Shadow of Friendship; and
this Discovery was attended with many Aggravations; 
for it now banished all Prospect
of his eldest Son's future Welfare,
which was almost the last remaining Comfort
he had harboured and cherished in his
distressed Bosom. 

Mr. Orgueil took Care also to accompany
this Information with insulting Insinuations
and sly Reproaches, for his having been so
foolishly imposed on, as to have any Dependance
on Ratcliff's Friendship; shewing
a kind of Indignation that David did not
think it sufficient to have such a Patron as
himself. 
One of the many Blessings such sort of
Friends as Orgueil generously bestow on a
distressed Mind, is the insisting that when
they condescend to honour with their Notice
a Man inferior in Fortune (especially if
so much inferior as to be in a kind of Distress)
he should rest perfectly contented with
whatever little they think proper to do for
him, although it should not prove half
enough to keep his Family from starving:
for Men of this turn of Mind, look on it
as a Reproof, that a Man whom they deign
to call Friend, should in any Extremity
whatever apply to another Patron, although
they are conscious that they themselves will
go but a very little way in relieving him
from that Extremity. 
Such Dependance is Slavery, worse than
working in the Gallies: all Endeavours to 

please are vain: if you exert yourself, and
take any one Step without previously consulting
these Patrons, this they condemn as
throwing them off, and seeking other Protection:
and if you entirely depend upon
them, they accuse you of Imprudence, in
that you seem to think them bound to provide
for you. And the true Source of all
this odd Behaviour seems to be, that such
Friends do not desire that a Man they chuse
for a Slave, should be provided for; but
that he should be kept on in a dependent
State, with only barely enough to prevent
his being starved, and by that means escaping
their Power. The gaining such
nominal Friends 
Is a Consummation devoutly to be shun'd
by all Men who are not in Love with Slavery; 
and so very moderate a Proportion
of Fortune would have been sufficient for
David, that Orgueil's Rule of Rectitude forbid
him doing half so much for him, as it
would have suffered him to have done for a
Man who would have thought himself miserable
with treble the Sum that would have
rendered David and his Family content and
happy. 

But from this Instant David Simple determined
never more to have any Converse
with Mr. Ratcliff; for he was perfectly convinced,
that no good could ever come from
the Man who harboured Treachery in his
Bosom. But just as David had formed this
Resolution, Mr. Ratcliff sent a handsome
Present for his God-son, at the same Time
writing to David, desiring he might be immediately
sent to London. 
Notwithstanding the Timidity that had
seized David's Mind on the Account of his
distressed Family; yet was he not so totally
conquered as to suffer his Son to be educated
under the Tuition of such a Man as
Mr. Ratcliff. He knew temporary Misfortunes
were never irrecoverable; but that the
young Mind of his Son should be warped
and byassed by wrong Principles, and his
Heart should be corrupted by Treachery,
was much more dreaded by him than any
Distress whatever; even although the
Weight of that Distress lay at that Instant
heavy on him, and was not philosophically
descanted on in the midst of a comfortable
Plenty; and with all his fatherly Affection
he would have made it his Choice to have
beheld his Son in Job's Condition, whilst 

he preserved his Integrity, rather than have
seen him revelling in all the Luxuries of
the Earth, by treacherous and dishonest
Means. 
Camilla, softened for her Child's Distress,
wavered in her Thoughts, and was somewhat
inclined to comply with his Godfather's
Request (no Wonder that she unwillingly
parted with this only, the least
probable Prospect of his future Prosperity):
but there was no Danger she should long
preserve this Inclination, when she found
her Husband was firmly bent against giving
up his Son into such Hands. 
But in the mean time young Peter fell ill
of the Small-pox; so that if his Father had
not made a Resolution (which nothing could
have prevailed with him to alter) against
his going, it would, for the present at least,
have been impossible. 
David did not design even to take Notice
of Mr. Ratcliff's Letter: it was a Correspondence
his Soul abhorred, and which had
not subsisted so long, had not the State of
Timidity before-mentioned, taken from him
the Power of acting what, in his own Judgment,
he thought best. But Camilla prevailed 

on him to suffer her to write a civil
Answer to Mr. Ratcliff, and to inform him
that the Boy was at present too ill to take
such a Journey, and they were apprehensive
was breeding the Small-pox. To which
Letter, by the very Return of the Post,
Camilla received from Mr. Ratcliff the following
Answer. 

Madam,
“INGRATITUDE is so common a
Vice in this World, that no Man, who has
any Experience, can be surprised at it,
otherwise I should have been greatly astonished
at the Contents of your Letter. I
did not expect, after my repeated Marks
of Kindness to your Boy, and some Benefactions
to yourself and Husband, since
your reduced Circumstances (which are
too much the Effects of your own Imprudence,
to deserve any Compassion; nor
would meet with it, but from such tender-hearted
Fools as myself.) I did not expect,
I say, to have been insulted by a
Refusal of the Boy's Company, when I
did him the Honour to desire it. I do
not pretend to guess what your Schemes
are (wise ones, no doubt!) or how you 

intend to educate your Son and Heir: but
I plainly see, by your Letter, that this
Illness is trumpt up as a Pretence to keep
the Boy from me—and much Good
may you reap from your Wisdom—but
remember, I am not to be imposed on,
or (whenever you please to change your
Mind) to be wheedled into looking on
the worthless Brat any more; for from
this Hour I renounce him. 
“The Son of such Parents must have
been no other than a Plague to me, had
you not, by your own wise Behaviour,
acquitted me from the Promise my Compassion
and mistaken Opinion of you induced
me to make, of providing for him; 
which I never would have refused doing,
had you not ungratefully taken him out
of my Hands. 
“I know you are both too wise to take
Advice, or I would still endeavour to be
of some Service to you: but I can
only once more repeat, that you must
remember, it is your own Fault that you
have no longer a Friend in” 
“Peter Ratcliff. 

“P. S. I know not but you may have
rewarded all my dear Wife's good
Offices to you, with her Destruction; 
for, by my being abroad, she
unfortunately opened your Letter,
and I found her in Fits on my Return,
with the Fright of seeing the
Name of the Small-pox in your
careless written Letter: and you
know too, she has never had that
Distemper.” 
Notwithstanding the Insults and ill-natured
Insinuations in this Letter, yet so very
fearful was Camilla of doing an Injury, that
she would really have been concerned at the
Postscript, could she have had but the most
distant Thought that by her Means any fatal
Consequence could possibly have happened. 
And she had heard so many Stories,
well attested, of Persons being seized
with the Small-pox by the Force of their
Imaginations, that she would have had some
Fears, lest that should have been Mrs. Ratcliff's
Case, had it not been for one Circumstance,
namely, that she knew Mrs. Ratcliff
had long ago had that Distemper, and
had visible Marks of it in her Face; though, 

in order to have an Opportunity of making
herself of Consequence by her affected
Frights and Fears, she insisted on it, that
they were only Marks of the Chickenpox. 
Mr. Ratcliff was rather a luxurious than
an avaricious Man; and as by the Death of
his Father he became possessed of his Estate
as soon as he was of Age, in all Probability
he would have ruined himself by the Profuseness
of his Expences, had he not married
a young Woman, whose great Beauty
had inspired him with the Height of a Passion
called Love. The Match, on her Side,
was consented to entirely for Interest; and
she had no more Love for him than for any
other Man possessed of an equal Estate. But
as her Disposition did not much lead her
to Love, and she gave him no kind of
Cause for Jealousy, Mr. Ratcliff was perfectly
contented, and she gained an unlimited
Influence over him; and as Mrs.
Ratcliff called all Expences unnecessary,
but such as tended to adorn her own Person,
she restrained both her own and her
Husband's Hands from any other sort of
Extravagance. 

When Mr. Ratcliff became first acquainted
with David, he liked his Company enough
to fancy he had an Affection for him. During
David's Law-Suit, Mr. Ratcliff, spirited
up by his Passion, was really eager for
his carrying it on, and talked himself into an
Indignation, that his Friend should be imposed
on. Nay, when first David's Distress
began to oppress him, he felt some little
Compassion for him, assisted him in some
Degree, and comforted him greatly by giving
him the pleasing Prospect that he would
provide for his eldest Son. 
Mrs. Ratcliff greatly encouraged the Notice
Mr. Ratcliff took of his God-son; for
as she had no Children of her own, the great
Perplexity and Fear of her Life was, lest
he should make his Sister's Son his Heir:
for, by various artful Contrivances and Inventions
she had made him quarrel with all
his Family. But as she was conscious that
her own Contrivances, and not any Offence
on their Part, had blown up all these Quarrels,
she lived in continual Dread lest any
Ancident should open her Husband's Eyes,
and, by the breaking out of the Truth, a
general Reconciliation should be effected. 
Mrs. Ratcliff plainly perceived by Camilla's 

Letter, though it was written with the utmost
Civility, that she had no Intention of
sending up her Son; and she was afraid, if
Mr. Ratcliff should take this Denial, and
send no more for his God-son, that he would
be more forward to be reconciled to the
Mother of his natural Heir. And it was
Fear of this (and not of the Small-pox,
which she knew she had already had) that
had thrown her into the Agonies in which
her Husband found her on his Return
home. 
When Mr. Ratcliff first promised David
to solicit that Place for him (as the Person
possessing it, although old and sickly,
was yet living) he really had a faint
Image of keeping that Promise: but when
it became vacant, and the Friend whom he
solicited gave him an immediate Hope of
succeeding, a sudden Thought arose in his
Mind, that as it was a Sine-Cure, and would
cost him no Trouble, he might full as well
accept it himself. Many Accidents concured
toward strengthening this Thought. 
David was absent—and although it was
impossible such an Action could be always
concealed, yet that the Danger of the Discovery
was at a Distance, made a very essential
Difference. Then Mrs. Ratcliff's 

best Friend and most intimate Acquaintance
was just married to a Gentleman of a much
larger Fortune than Mr. Ratcliff's, and was
preparing to be introduced at Court as highly
adorned as her Husband's Fortune could
admit. 
Mrs. Ratcliff, from this Accident, found
out that she was in great Necessity of a larger
Fortune; which Discovery she had no
sooner made, than she contrived, in his Fits
of Fondness, to convey to her Husband:
for had he been Samson, his Wife might
easily have acted the Part of Dalilah. 
Mr. Ratcliff having entertained a strong
Inclination to let his Goddess out shine her
Friend in Brightness, the Arguments that
it would not be at all wrong in him to accept
that Place himself, which he had at
first solicited for David, all with redoubled
Strength occurred to his Memory. He began
to think it was too much for his Friend
to have the whole Place; and he made himself
believe, that he would allow him enough
out of it, to make him and his little Family
happy; and that by the having it in his
own Possession, he should be enabled to do
a more general Good. 

Then a perplexed Heap of Notions
crowded into his Mind, about Justice, Injustice,
Prudence, Imprudence, Friendship,
and Benevolence; till at last these confused
Notions produced a fixed Opinion, that
Partiality should not make a Man lay
out his whole Stock of Generosity on
one Family; but that his Benevolence
should flow more universally. These and
more such like Arguments had almost conquered,
when they were reinforced by
another, which proved so strong, it was irresistible. 
When Mr. Ratcliff first solicited this Favour
of the great Man, he had not positively
said, whether it was for himself or
another: yet he at that Time very well
knew, that his Friend did not in the least
understand that he was soliciting for himself. 
But now Mr. Ratcliff found a Method
of making himself believe that his
Friend the great Man positively thought he
intended this Place for himself; and therefore
that he was bound in Duty and Justice
to accept it. And the Treachery that had
a little before clearly appeared to be on the
Side of his breaking his Word with David
Simple, he now suddenly, by some hocus-pocus 

Trick, conveyed quite to the other
Side of the Question; and by that Means
put a total Stop to all farther Deliberations. 
Mr. Ratcliff had just been practising this
Legerdemain, when he received that Letter
of David's, setting forth his own Circumstances,
which has been already mentioned. 
The very Sight of David's Hand was odious
to his Eyes, which will clearly account
for the kind of Letter he wrote in Answer; 
and from that Day forward the Image of
what David would think of him, when the
whole Truth came out, joined to the Reflection,
that David Simple partly owed his
Ruin to his repeatedly advising, and almost
forcing him to carry on his Law-Suit, created
in his Mind something so like an inveterate
Hatred, that it had all the Effects
of it, and entirely blotted from his Memory
his fancied Intention of allowing, out of
the Profits of the Place, any thing at all to
David. 
But yet Mr. Ratcliff knew not very well
which Way to get rid of his Promise about
his God-son. It may, perhaps, at first
appear very absurd, that for this Purpose
alone he sent for him to Town. But it is 

certainly true, that when a Man has a Mind
to act harshly or treacherously by another,
he will endeavour, for his own Justification,
to find some Method of making that Person
appear at least to have offended him. 
Now this Method is much easier to be
found when the Person destined to be thus
treated, is present, than when he is absent; 
and I can venture to assure my Reader, that
if David Simple had sent his Son to Mr.
Ratcliff, the Boy would soon have returned
to his Father, stigmatized with an Accusation
of the highest and blackest Ingratitude. 
But poor little Peter escaped all future
Misfortunes, for the Small-pox proved fatal
to him, and the very Day after his
Death Camilla received Mr. Ratcliff's last
Letter, filled with Reproaches, and wrote
with an Intention to strike Daggers into
their Hearts. It seems as if at such a time
this should have afforded them but small
Comfort; yet so it happened, that this
was one of the greatest Comforts they
could have received; for it was so strong
a Picture of Mr. Ratcliff's Heart, that
David, in the Joy that his Son had escaped
all Possibility of having his young 

Mind corrupted by being formed under
such a Hand, smothered his Grief for his
Loss. 
From this Time David Simple buried
Mr. Ratcliff in his Thoughts as much as
possible. Hatred and Indignation found
in David's Breast a barren Soil, in which
they could take no Root; and whenever
Mention was made of any Friend, by
whom he had been deceived, his constant
Answer was, “That they had been long
buried to him:” though he confessed
he was best pleased with Absence from
his dead Friends, and did not chuse to be
haunted by the Ghosts of what he once
thought them. 
Genuine Love can never be so entirely
extinguished, but that some Sparks of it
will remain, and the Idea of Mr. Ratcliff's
treacherous Behaviour would sometimes force
its Way into David's Mind; when he could
not help admitting a transitory melancholy
Reflection at such an additional Instance of
Deceit. 
But on the contrary, whenever the least
Image of David, or his Misfortunes, arose 

in the Mind of Mr. Ratcliff, it constantly
produced the highest Indignation; an
Indignation that encreased on every Consideration:
for Hatred formed in the manner
Mr. Ratcliff's was, is more unconquerable
than all the Monsters the Poets feign to
have been overcome by Hercules. 