

The agreeable Fatigue of the
preceding Night detain'd this
noble Company in their Beds
beyond the wonted Hour; only
Valerius proclaim'd his Contempt of Lassitude,
by rising before the others, having
had his Thoughts employ'd on the Beauty
of Artemisa, the fair Daughter of Mecos,
whose agreeable Mein in her dancing that
Night, added a Grace to her Person, which
in itself was charming. His Mind being
agitated therewith, he walk'd out into the
Grove, to gratify his Thoughts in Solitude
in Contemplation of this pleasing
Object: He had not made many Turns,
when his Ears were saluted with the best
of all Musick, a fine Voice singing these
Words: 


The SONG.

In vain does Nature her free Gifts bestow
 To make us wise or fair;
 If Fortune don't her Favours show,
 Scorn'd and neglected we may go,
Not worth a Look, much less a Lover's Care.

Or if we shou'd some pitying Eyes command,
 Or those of Admiration;
 So unendow'd fair Structures stand
 Admir'd, but not one helping Hand
Will rescue them from Time's Dilapidation.


Then surely vain it is for me to strive
 With native Charms or Art;
 For Beauty may as well survive
 Her Climacterick Twenty five,
As without Wealth to get or keep a Heart.


Having heard the Song, he was curious
to see the Person; and approaching the
Place, he found Artemisa, to whom he address'd,
saying, If your Angelick Form
Yesterday inspir'd my Thoughts with
Admiration, your Seraphick Voice now
charms me even to adore you; therefore,
Madam, refuse not those Sighs and Vows
I shall perpetually offer you as my Life's
Guardian; not like those Votaries your 
Song complains of, who slightly admire,
and so pass: No, my Love shall be constant
as your Beauties are perfect. Sir,
reply'd Artemisa, I know not how constant
you may think yourself; but to me your
Love seems of too hasty a Growth to have
taken any great Root in your Heart; moreover,
a Declaration without the Consent
of my Father, shews a Want of Respect,
which ought to be the Foundation of Affection. 
But, perhaps, you take your Measures
from the unhappy Miscarriages of my
Mother, and so take a Freedom of Speech
with me her Daughter, without being first
authoriz'd by my Father. But be assur'd,
Sir, that altho' Ignominy on my Mother's
Side, and Poverty on my Father's, be all
the Portion I have to thank them for, yet
I resolve to preserve my filial Devoirs entire; 
and since my Circumstances are such
as exclude me from those Respects due to
my Quality, the Object of my Choice
ought to be a Virgin-Life amongst Diana's
Train. Diana, and all the Gods, be my
Witnesses, reply'd Valerius, my Intentions
towards you are vertuous and honourable; 
nor do I measure your Merits or Inclinations
by the Standard of your Parents
Actions, no more than I would be condemn'd
for the Faults of my Progenitors. 
The Truth is, in this Point, our Fortunes 
hold so just a Proportion, that we cannot
upbraid each other with our Relations; 
therefore, certainly we are the most proper
for each other's Circumstances: Yes,
methinks I see that Heaven has design'd it
so. I must confess, (reply'd Artemisa) our
Fortunes have a great Resemblance; and
what is very remarkable, that our Mothers
should be not only both vicious, but both
Mistresses to the same Man Sure Turpius
in his Youth was a most accomplish'd Person,
that, amongst the Multitude of his
amorous Conquests, he led Captive these
two Ladies of Quality. They were about
to pursue their Discourse, when they perceiv'd
Scipio and Cordiala coming at the other
End of the Walk; wherefore they retir'd,
Valerius telling her, that he would
endeavour to enfranchize his Discourse, by
gaining the Suffrage of her Father. 
Cordiala and Scipio seating themselves,
she told him, that his Sister and Cousin,
Scipiana and Clelia, had promis'd to give her
Letters of Recommendation to their Cousin
Fabiell in Ægypt, by the Help of which she
hop'd to make her Fortune, or, at least,
gain a Livelihood; so thither I intend to
direct my Steps as soon as possible; and I
beg you to content yourself with that Felicity
the Gods have provided for you, in
proving you the Son of such an honourable
Father. Testify your Thanks to them in a 
perfect Obedience to him, and think no
more on the unfortunate Cordiala. 
When you command Impossibilities, said
Scipio, you cannot hope to be obey'd; for
you may as well command the Heavens to
cease their Motions, and not influence this
terrestrial Globe, or all Nature to cease her
Work, as to command Scipio not to think
on Cordiala. Ah, Cordiala! I must for ever
think on you, love you, and follow you
where ever you go; therefore extend not
your Commands against these my Resolutions
of loving you, and languishing at
your Feet for ever; then, kissing her Hand
a thousand Times, begg'd her to pronounce
him happy. O Scipio! reply'd Cordiala,
cease to importune me on this Subject; 
leave this unfortunate Creature; stay not
within the Reach of Infection; Misfortunes
may be catching as well as Sickness; leave
me alone to my Sighs and Tears; stay not
at all, lest my unweary Tongue pronounce
your Ruin; leave me, I say, that I may gently
expire without the Agony of seeing you
undone. My charming Fair, reply'd Scipio,
there is no Ruin but in your Rigor, nor
can I be undone but by your Absence; 
therefore dry those Eyes, whose bright
Rays are only capable to enliven the Heart
of your languishing Lover, who dies to see
you weep. 'Tis fit, reply'd Cordiala, that
Criminals should weep, and such are my 
Eyes, since they cause the vertuous Scipio
to transgress his Duty to his Father; therefore
if you would have me cease to weep,
you must cease to love; and if any Thing
I can say may have Influence over you,
let me conjure you to withdraw your tender
Thoughts from me a Wretch unworthy:
At least endeavour it; perhaps the divine
Asistance may co-operate in so just an Enterprize,
and help you to overcome your
self, which will render you a greater Conqueror,
than your noble Brother in his
subduing Asia. My self, reply'd Scipio, is
an useless Part of Mankind without my
Cordiala, a Thing unworthy the Industry
of a Scipio; therefore never perswade me
to any Thing that regards my self, otherwise
than for your Service; I desire not to
live, but for you; I desire no Honour,
Riches, or Happiness, but for you; it is
for your Sake only, that I rejoice to be the
Son of a Scipio; it is for your Sake, that I
glory to have the noble Asiaticus for my
Brother; in fine, it is for your Sake, and
in Hopes of your Favours, that I bear with
human Life, and aim to be a Grandee of
the World. Then never more bid me to
withdraw my Affections, or endeavour at
such a wild Impossibility; but rather endeavour
to unite yours with mine, and
hope the Gods will assist us in the Enterprize. 
As they were in this Discourse, Asiaticus
and Scipiana came towards them; wherefore
they broke off, and arose to go meet
them. Asiaticus, taking Scipio aside, left
Scipiana and Cordiala together: Asiaticus
told him, that he had again discours'd his
Father this Morning on the Subject of his
Amour, but could obtain nothing of him
but a firm Resolution against it, with a
Command never to mention it to him more
on Pain of his Displeasure. Wherefore (continu'd
he) let me beg of you to eradicate
this misplanted Affection, and force your
Heart to a thorough Obedience to your
Father. Ah Brother! (reply'd Scipio, the
Respect I owe to you, as well as my Duty
to my Father, would make me do it if
'twas possible; but it is not in my Power:
I might tear my Heart from my Breast,
but cannot tear my Passion from my
Heart: Dear Brother, let me beg of you
to reflect on your Passion for Clarinthia, and
if you find a Possibility of removing it,
then blame me for not obeying your Advice
and my Father's Commands; if not,
I hope you'll forgive me: I am sure you
cannot say but that Cordiala is truly fair
and vertuous; 'tis true, she is not the
Daughter of a noble Lord; no more am I
the great Conqueror of Asia, though I am
now the Son of the noble Scipio, and your
Brother; yet when my Affection took Root, 
I was only the poor Ismenus, without Family
or Character; in that low State I
gave Cordiala the Assurance of my everlasting
Love; and now the Gods has exalted
me to be the Son of a Scipio, can I recede
from my Word, without fixing a Mark of
Unworthiness on my Name and Family,
was it possible? But, alas! I may as well
tear the Sun from its Cœlestial Orb, and
wear it for a Shield, as tear this Passion
from my Heart. Consider then, dear Brother; 
and if you cannot help, at least pity
me, and let me have a Place in your
Consideration. 
Whilst the two Brothers were in this
Discourse, Scipiana and Cordiala entertain'd
each other on the same Subject Cordiala
told Scipiana, that since she had in much
Goodness offer'd to recommend her to her
Kinswoman the Princess Fabiell, she begg'd
the speedy Performance of this Favour,
that she might retire from the Importunities
of her Brother, the young Scipio. 'Tis
true, reply'd Scipiana, that is the best Way
I can foresee for you, especially since my
Father is so very opposite to Scipio's Inclinations,
and you yourself receive his Address
with so much Indifferency, for which
prudent Conduct you are extreamly to be
commended. Very few, so young as you,
could so perfectly govern themselves, as
not to have a strong Inclination, when 
courted by so fine a Person as my Brother. 
Ah! Madam, reply'd Cordiala, you
are too generous a Benefactrix to me, for
me to disguise the Truth; I am far from
being able to govern my Affections towards
your Brother; it is with great Difficulty
that I make a Shift to govern my Words; 
for, alas! Madam, I love him to the last
Degree: Pardon, dear Madam, this free
Confession; for I count I ought to conceal
nothing from you, no more than from a
Goddess, you having been to me as my
good Genius: Therefore, Madam, do not
interpret this as an indecent Boldness,
which is truly Duty; but be pleas'd to assist
me in my Departure into Ægypt,
thereby to remove from your House the
Odium of your Family. I am truly sorry
for you both, reply'd Scipiana, and wish
it was in my Power to serve you in a
more agreeable Way than assisting towards
your Separation; for, believe it Cordiala,
I truly love and esteem you: Your Vertue
and Wisdom carry with them irresistable
Charms; but it is not in my Power to
serve my own Inclinations in assisting your
Affections. Scipiana was about to proceed
in her Assurances, when a Servant came to
let them know, that their Friends they so
long expected from Rome were arriv'd, to
wit, my Lord Fabius, Lucullus, Marcellus,
and Flavia. Wherefore they hasten'd in 
to pay their Respects to them, which they
did according to the Dignity of their respective
Qualities. They were surpriz'd to
find Fabius and Jemella there; for they
knew not of their being come from Sardinia; 
but most of all they were surpriz'd to
find Clodius in good Intelligence with them; 
but a few Turns of Discourse inform'd them
all the manner of that Proceeding, when,
together with the Intercession of Publius
and the others, they pardon'd Clodius, and
promis'd to obtain the same of the Senate,
as also to intercede on his Behalf with his
fair Widow the bright Libidinia. Flavia,
with the rest, having pardon'd her Nephew,
Scipiana presented to her Cordiala,
begging her to extend her Favour also to
this young Creature, once the Object of
her Kindness, and receive her into the
same Station of her Benevolence as formerly; 
but Flavia reply'd, that it was impossible; 
however, she would, for the Sake
of that honourable Assembly, do what
she could to make her happy in that low
Station in which the Gods had plac'd her. 
Whereupon Cordiala gave her Thanks for
so kind a Promise, and withal begg'd her
Ladyship, to let her know who and where
her poor Parents were to be found, that
she might pay her Duty to them, as a
Means to obtain a Blessing on what her
Ladyship's Goodness would bestow. To 
which Flavia reply'd, That her Mother
was a poor Woman living at Cajeta; and
so forthwith sent a Servant to find the
poor Woman, and bring her thither. In
the mean time Publius propos'd the Marriages
to the noble Romans, according to the
Inclinations of their Children the young
Lovers; to which they all unanimously
agreed. Amongst the rest Turpius and Mecos
were very well pleas'd at the Choice
their Children, Valerius and Artemisa, had
made of each other; and accordingly gave
them their full Consent: So that amongst
all this noble Company, Scipio and Cordiala
were the only Pair likely to be unhappy,
and without Prospect of being otherwise. 
The Servant which Flavia sent to Cajeta
soon return'd, bringing with him the good
Woman, Mother to Cordiala. To whom
Flavia presented Cordiala, telling her, that she
restor'd to her her Child, being sorry that
her Disobedience had been such as had obstructed
her Fortune, which otherwise had
been honourably made in a happy Marriage. 
Nevertheless, continu'd Flavia, I
am willing to assist her and you, to make
her happy in that Rank she has chose for
herself; and when any Person of her Condition
shall espouse her, I will take Care
of an Establishment for them. Which Discourse
so swell'd the Heart of Scipio,
that he burst forth into these Words, which 
he utter'd with more Passion than Prudence:
Madam, be pleas'd to know, that your offer'd
Favour is never to be accepted by
Cordiala; she is of a Composure, both of
Mind and Person, above any Thing below
a Scipio; and, whilst I live, she neither
must nor shall marry any but myself. Then
casting himself at the Feet of his Father,
with great Submission begg'd his Lordship
to forgive that Freedom of Speech, which
his Passion and her Merits had unawares
forc'd from him, adding, That although he
there avow'd that none should espouse her
but himself, nevertheless that he did not
design any Espousals without his Lordship's
Leave; and moreover asserted, That such
was her Vertue and Prudence, as would not
permit her to accept of his Courtship, much
less to resign her Affections, in Opposition
to his Lordship; for which, and divers other
excellent Qualities, I hope (said he)
she deserves the Esteem of all this noble
Company, and I beg they will intercede
in my Behalf: for I dare not presume to
ask my Lord myself, having already receiv'd
his Prohibition. The Company were
all extreamly pleas'd at his modest Freedom,
and every one was sensible of her Personal
Deserts; nevertheless, no body ventur'd
to perswade Publius on their Behalf,
but look'd upon one another with confus'd
Aspects: 'Till Publius begg'd them all to 
remain silent on that Subject, it being a
Thing he neither could nor would grant; 
therefore commanded his Son never more
to mention it to him, nor to employ any
body about it; not but that he esteem'd
Cordiala for her Discretion, and would reward
her for it; and if Scipio would apply
himself to his Duty, he would forget this
Folly, as the Effect of Youth; otherwise
he must expect to be discarded and forgotten
by him; with many other Words to
this Effect, which were as Claps of Thunder
to the Hearts of our young Couple. 
Cordiala retir'd to give Vent to her Sighs,
Tears, and Blushes, whilst Scipio remain'd
still at the Feet of his Father, imploring
him and begging him to pity his Youth,
and pardon his Passion, which he could not
help; protesting, that he would never act
contrary to his Duty, which still gave him
Hopes, that his Lordship would in Time
be a little reconcil'd and indulgent to his
Affection. As Publius was about to reply,
he saw enter into the Room an aged Person,
which he soon knew to be his old Friend
Catullus, whose Banishment had been one
Cause of his leaving Rome. Wherefore,
falling about his Neck, he embrac'd him
most tenderly. At the same Time Exilius
threw himself at the Feet of his Father,
begging Pardon for his long Absence, withal
presenting Scipiana as the Cause, assuring 
him, that nothing less worthy, or
less belov'd, should have detain'd him from
his Presence. This Discovery extreamly
surpriz'd and pleas'd the Company, and
most especially Publius, who was transported
to find his Daughter's Lover, or rather
pretended Husband, to be the Son of his
dearly beloved Friend, and a noble Roman; 
he whose single Merits, whilst unknown,
and without Name, Quality, or
Estate, had so far oblig'd him both in the
Person of Asiaticus and Scipiana, that he
could not refuse his Consent to their Espousals. 
But now his Joy transcended all
Bounds, and not only he, but all the Company
found a Satisfaction at this Discovery,
every one saluting and embracing both
the Father and the Son, according to their
respective Relations; all begging his Lordship
to inform them how he had done to
hide his illustrious Person from the Knowledge
of all the World, in particular from
his Friends, who had been solicitous for
him, to have inform'd him, that the Senate
had recall'd him and restor'd his Estate. 
I was so thorowly unconcern'd (said Catullus)
for the Things of this World, that I
never enquir'd what was done by the Senate
touching me or my Fortune. For I
found so much Injustice in my Banishment,
that I betook my self wholly to the 
Thoughts of Heaven, and look'd with Contempt
on all earthly Things. I accepted
willingly my Sufferings, and with Pleasure
begg'd Pardon of the Gods for those
that had been my Persecutors. Pray give
me Leave, My noble Lords, to avow mine
Innocence, for I know nothing by my self
that might occasion this my Punishment; 
but a Party took a Conceit, that I endeavour'd
to make my self popular, so as to
raise my self above the rest of the Senate:
If I spoke any Thing in the Senate to
maintain the Laws, then I was suppos'd to
cajole the Nobles; if in Favour of the People,
then it was to engage the Mobb; if I
forgave my Tenants their Debts, or abated
their Rents, that was undermining other
Landlords; if I pray'd in the Temple, it
was deem'd Hypocrisy; if I treated my
Friends, it was Lewdness; if I requir'd any
just Debt, it was Cruelty; if I gave
Alms, it was Vain-glory: Thus all that I
did or said was misunderstood or misrepresented
by mine Enemies, 'til they gain'd
both Senate and People on their Party, and
in the End accomplish'd their Design in
my Banishment. I conclude my Son has
told you the Manner of my Life in my
rocky Island, where I intended always to
remain; but having one Day been at Sardinia,
I heard, to my great Sorrow, that
my Friend Publius was in great Affliction 
for the Loss of all his Children; wherefore
I resolv'd to venture once more into my unjust
and unnatural Country, to endeavour to
consolate my Friend, and give him what
Information I could touching his Daughter's
Departure from me. The Execution of
this Design we retarded by long Sickness
and foul Weather; but now, to my unspeakable
Joy, I am come to partake of
the greatest Happiness my Heart could
hope for on this Side Heaven, in the Espousals
of my Son with the fair Daughter
of my Friend: My next Care must be to
find out my Daughter, which I left with
a poor Woman of Cajeta, she being too tender
for my rough Hands to deal withal; 
therefore I left her at that Town, in my
Passage, as I went to imbark. At which
the good Woman, Mother of Cordiala, presented
herself to Catullus, telling him, that
she was the Person to whom his Lordship
had committed the Care of that Treasure:
Wherefore calling Cordiala, she said, Behold
this fair Lady, the Daughter you
left with me; I have carefully kept the
Secret, according to your Commands, that
even when my Lady Flavia took her, I did
not discover whose Daughter she was, but
deliver'd her to her Ladyship as my own; 
and notwithstanding her being my Lady's
Niece, and very like her little Daughter
that dy'd, her Ladyship suspected nothing. 
This Discovery was a joyful Surprize to
all the Company, but in particular to
Catullus her Father, who embrac'd her with
much Tenderness; and for a greater Demonstration
of the Truth of all this, he
shew'd a red Heart on her Arm, a Mark
with which she was born. But above all
Joy and Transport, that of Scipio transcended
all Bounds; wherefore once more kneeling
to his Father, told him, he hoped that now
he would not only give his Consent, but
obtain the same for him of Catullus and Cordiala; 
in which all unanimously consented,
and all with excessive Joy receiv'd and embrac'd
Cordiala, according to their respective
Relations. Catullus adding, that he hoped
to see the Glories of the Scipio's increase in
the Person of this young Man; and that
Africa should give him a Name, as Asia
had done his Brother; for, said he, last
Night I dream'd, that the Gods gave me a
Daughter from the Clouds, which they
told me should command all Africa; and
now, methinks I foresee the Prediction true
in the Person of this young Scipio. At
which Asiaticus call'd to Mind what the
Sybil had foretold him in her Cave, and
Scipiana remember'd what Cordiala's good
Genius had sung to her in the Chapel of
Diana; insomuch that they were almost
ready to salute him Scipio Africanus, by
Way of Advance. Thus was the Troubles 
and Inquietudes of these noble Romans and
many Lovers all brought to a happy Conclusion. 
So we will leave them to agree
amongst themselves, whether they will
celebrate their Nuptials at Publius Scipio's
House, according to his Request, or go to
Rome, to accomplish the same with greater
Splendour and Magnificence. 