



To Mrs. Talbot.
New-York, Nov. 15.






The fear that what I have to communicate
may be imparted more abruptly and with false
or exaggerated circumstances, induces me to
write to you.
Yesterday week, a ship arrived in this port
from Batavia, in which my husband's brother
Stephen Montford came passenger.
You will be terrified at these words; but calm
your apprehensions. Harry does not accompany
him, it is true, nor are we acquainted with
his present situation.
The story of their unfortunate voyage cannot
be minutely related now. Suffice it to say that
a wicked and turbulent wretch, whom they shipped
in the West Indies as mate, the former
dying on the voyage thither, gave rise, by his
intreagues among the crew, to a mutiny.
After a prosperous navigation and some stay
at Nootka, they prepared to cross the ocean to
Asia. They pursued the usual route of former traders,
and after touching at the Sandwich Islands,
they made the land of Japan.







At this period the mutiny which had long been
hatching, broke out. The whole crew including
the mate, joined the conspiracy. Montford and
my brother were the objects of this conspiracy.
The original design was to murder them both
and throw their bodies into the sea, but this
cruel proposal was thwarted both by compassion
and by policy, and it was resolved to set my
brother ashore on the first inhospitable land they
should meet, and retain Montford to assist them
in the navigation of the vessel, designing to destroy
him when his services should no longer
be necessary.
This scheme was executed as soon as they
came in sight of an out lying isle or dry sand
back, on the eastern coast of Japan. Here they
seized the two unsuspecting youths, at day
break, while asleep in their births, and immediately
putting out their boat landed my brother
on the shore, without cloathing or provisions of
any kind. Montford petitioned to share the fate
of his friend, but they would not listen to it.
Six days, afterwards, they lighted on a Spanish
ship bound to Manilla, who was in want of
water. A party of the Spaniards came on board
in search of some supply of that necessary article.

On their coming, Montford was driven below
and disabled from giving by his cries any alarm.
The centinel who guarded him, had received
orders to keep him in that situation till
the visitants had departed. From some impulse
of humanity, or mistake of orders, the centinel
freed him from restraint a few minutes earlier
than had been intended, and he got on deck before




the departing strangers had gone to any considerable
distance from the ship. He immediately
leapt into the sea and made for the boat,
to which, being a very vigorous swimmer, he
arrived in safety.
The mutineers, finding their victim had escaped,
endeavoured to make the best of their
way, but were soon overtaken by the Spanish
vessel, to whose officers Montford made haste
to explain the true state of affairs. They were
carried to Manilla, where Montford sold his vessel
and cargo on very advantageous terms.
From thence, after many delays, he got to Batavia
and from thence returned home.
I have thus given you, my friend, an imperfect
fect account of their misfortunes. I need not
add that no tidings has been received, or can
reasonably be hoped ever to be received of my
brother.
I could not write on such a subject sooner.
For some days I had thoughts of being wholly
silent on this news. Indeed my emotions would
not immediately permit me to use the pen, but
I have concluded, and it is my husband's earnest
advice, to tell you the whole truth.
Be not too much distressed, my sister, my
friend. Fain would I give you that consolation
which I myself want. I entreat you, let me
hear from you soon, and tell me that you are
not very much afflicted. Yet could I not believe
you if you did. Write to me speedily,
however.
