


Containing three Days. 



A Comparison between the World and the
Stage. 
The World hath been often
compared to the Theatre; 
and many grave Writers, as well
as the Poets, have considered
human Life as a great Drama, resembling,
in almost every Particular, those scenical 

Representations, which Thespis is first reported
to have invented, and which have
been since received with so much Approbation
and Delight in all polite Countries. 
This Thought hath been carried so far, and
become so general, that some Words proper
to the Theatre, and which were, at first, metaphorically
applied to the World, are now
indiscriminately and literally spoken of
both: Thus Stage and Scene are by common
Use grown as familiar to us, when we
speak of Life in general, as when we confine
ourselves to dramatic Performances; 
and when we mention Transactions behind
the Curtain, St. James's is more likely to
occur to our Thoughts than Drury-Lane. 
It may seem easy enough to account for
all this, by reflecting that the theatrical
Stage is nothing more than a Representation,
or, as Aristotle calls it, an Imitation
of what really exists; and hence, perhaps,
we might fairly pay a very high Compliment
to those, who by their Writings or
Actions have been so capable of imitating
Life, as to have their Pictures, in a Manner
confounded with, or mistaken for the Originals. 

But, in Reality, we are not so fond of
paying Compliments to these People, whom
we use as Children frequently do the Instruments
of their Amusement; and have
much more Pleasure in hissing and buffeting
them, than in admiring their Excellence. 
There are many other Reasons which have
induced us to see this Analogy between the
World and the Stage. 
Some have considered the larger Part of
Mankind in the Light of Actors, as personating
Characters no more their own, and
to which, in Fact, they have no better
Title, than the Player hath to be in Earnest
thought the King or Emperor whom he represents. 
Thus the Hypocrite may be said
to be a Player; and indeed the Greeks called
them both by one and the same Name. 
The Brevity of Life hath likewise given
Occasion to this Comparison. So the immortal
Shakespear. 

—Life's a poor Player,
That storms and struts his Hour upon the Stage,
And then is heard no more.

For which hackneyed Quotation, I will
make the Reader Amends by a very noble
one, which few, I believe, have read. It is
taken from a Poem called the Deity, published
about nine Years ago, and long since
buried in Oblivion. A Proof that good
Books no more than good Men do always
survive the bad. 

From thee *  all human Actions take their Springs,
The Rise of Empires, and the Fall of Kings!
See the VAST Theatre of Time display'd,
While o'er the Scene succeeding Heroes tread!
With Pomp the shining Images succeed,
What Leaders triumph, and what Monarchs bleed!
Perform the Parts thy Providence assign'd,
Their Pride, their Passions to thy Ends inclin'd:
A while they glitter in the Face of Day,
Then at thy Nod the Phantoms pass away;
No Traces left of all the busy Scene,
But that Remembrance says—The Things have been!

In all these, however, and in every other
Similitude of Life to the Theatre, the Resemblance
hath been always taken from the
Stage only. None, as I remember, have
at all considered the Audience at this great
Drama. 
But as Nature often exhibits some of her
best Performances to a very full House; 
so will the Behaviour of her Spectators no
less admit the above mentioned Comparison
than that of her Actors. In this vast
Theatre of Time are seated the Friend and
the Critic; here are Claps and Shouts,
Hisses and Groans; in short, every Thing
which was ever seen or heard at the Theatre
Royal. 
Let us examine this in one Example: 
For Instance, in the Behaviour of the great
Audience on that Scene which Nature was
pleased to exhibit in the 12th Chapter of
the preceding Book, where she introduced
Black George running away with the 500l.
from his Friend and Benefactor. 
Those who sat in the World's upper
Gallery, treated that Incident, I am well
convinced, with their usual Vociferation; 
and every Term of scurrilous Reproach 

was most probably vented on that Occasion. 
If we had descended to the next Order of
Spectators, we should have found an equal
Degree of Abhorrence, tho' less of Noise
and Scurrility; yet here the good Women
gave Black George to the Devil, and many
of them expected every Minute that the
cloven-footed Gentleman would fetch his
own. 
The Pit, as usual, was no doubt divided: 
Those who delight in heroic Virtue
and perfect Character, objected to the producing
such Instances of Villainy, without
punishing them very severely for the Sake
of Example. Some of the Author's Friends,
cry'd—‘Look'e, Gentlemen, the Man is a
Villain; but it is Nature for all that.’ 
And all the young Critics of the Age, the
Clerks, Apprentices, &c. called it Low,
and fell a Groaning. 
As for the Boxes, they behaved with
their accustomed Politeness. Most of them
were attending to something else. Some
of those few who regarded the Scene at all,
declared he was a bad Kind of Man; while 

others refused to give their Opinion 'till
they had heard that of the best Judges. 
Now we, who are admitted behind the
Scenes of this great Theatre of Nature,
(and no Author ought to write any Thing
besides Dictionaries and Spelling-Books
who hath not this Privilege) can censure
the Action, without conceiving any absolute
Detestation of the Person, whom
perhaps Nature may not have designed to
act an ill Part in all her Dramas: For in
this Instance, Life most exactly resembles
the Stage, since it is often the same Person
who represents the Villain and the Heroe; 
and he who engages your Admiration Today,
will probably attract your Contempt
To-Morrow. As Garrick, whom I regard
in Tragedy to be the greatest Genius
the World hath ever produced, sometimes
condescends to play the Fool; so did Scipio
the Great and Lælius the Wise, according
to Horace, many Years ago: nay,
Cicero reports them to have been ‘incredibly
childish.’ —These, it is true play'd the Fool,
like my Friend Garrick, in Jest only; but
several eminent Characters have, in numberless
Instances of their Lives, played the
Fool egregiously in Earnest; so far as to
render it a Matter of some Doubt, whether 

their Wisdom or Folly was predominant; 
or whether they were better intitled to the
Applause or Censure, the Admiration or
Contempt, the Love or Hatred of Mankind. 
Those Persons, indeed, who have passed
any Time behind the Scenes of this great
Theatre, and are thoroughly acquainted
not only with the several Disguises which
are there put on, but also with the fantastic
and capricious Behaviour of the Passions
who are the Managers and Directors of this
Theatre, (for as to Reason the Patentee, he
is known to be a very idle Fellow, and seldom
to exert himself) may most probably
have learned to construe the famous Nil
admirari of Horace, or in the English Phrase,
To stare at nothing. 
A single bad Act no more constitutes a
Villain in Life, than a single bad Part on
the Stage. The Passions, like the Managers
of a Playhouse, often force Men upon
Parts, without consulting, their Judgement,
and sometimes without any Regard to their
Talents. Thus the Man, as well as the
Player, may condemn what he himself acts; 
nay, it is common to see Vice sit as awkwardly
on some Men, as the Character of 

Iago would on the honest Face of Mr. William
Mills. 
Upon the whole then, the Man of Candour
and of true Understanding, is never
hasty to condemn. He can censure an Imperfection,
or even a Vice, without Rage
against the guilty Party. In a Word, they
are the same Folly, the same Childishness, the
same Ill-breeding, and the same Ill-nature,
which raise all the Clamours and Uproars
both in Life, and on the Stage. The worst
of Men generally have the Words Rogue and
Villain most in their Mouths, as the lowest
of all Wretches are the aptest to cry out
low in the Pit. 



Containing a Conversation which Mr. Jones
had with himself. 
Jones received his Effects from Mr. Allworthy's
early in the Morning, with the
following Answer to his Letter. 

Sir,
‘I am commanded by my Uncle to acquaint
you, that as he did not proceed
to those Measures he hath taken 

with you, without the greatest Deliberation,
and after the fullest Evidence of
your Unworthiness, so will it be always
out of your Power to cause the least Alteration
in his Resolution. He expresses
great Surprize at your Presumption in
saying, you have resigned all Pretensions
to a young Lady, to whom it is impossible
you should ever have had any, her
Birth and Fortune having made her so infinitely
your superior. Lastly, I am commanded
to tell you, that the only Instance
of your Compliance with my Uncle's Inclinations,
which he requires, is, your
immediately quitting this Country. I
cannot conclude this without offering you
my Advice, as a Christian, that you
would seriously think of amending your
Life; that you may be assisted with Grace
so to do, will be always the Prayer of’ 
Your Humble Servant,
W. Blifil. 
Many contending Passions were raised in
our Heroe's Mind by this Letter; but the
Tender prevailed at last over the Indignant
and Irascible, and a Flood of Tears
came seasonably to his Assistance, and possibly 

prevented his Misfortunes from either turning
his Head, or bursting his Heart. 
He grew, however, soon ashamed of
indulging this Remedy; and starting up,
he cried, ‘Well then, I will give Mr. Allworthy
the only Instance he requires of my
Obedience. I will go this Moment— 
but whither?—why let Fortune direct; 
since there is no other who thinks it of
any Consequence what becomes of this
wretched Person, it shall be a Matter of
equal Indifference to myself. Shall I
alone regard what no other? —Ha!
have I not Reason to think there is another? 
—One whose Value is above that
of the whole World! —I may, I must
imagine my Sophia is not indifferent to
what becomes of me. Shall I then leave
this only Friend—and such a Friend? 
Shall I not stay with her? —Where? 
How can I stay with her? Have I any
Hopes of even seeing her, tho' she was
as desirous as myself, without exposing
her to the Wrath of her Father? And to
what Purpose? Can I think of soliciting
such a Creature to consent to her own
Ruin? Shall I indulge any Passion of
mine at such a Price? —Shall I lurk
about this Country like a Thief, with 

such Intentions? —No, I disdain, I detest
the Thought. Farewel, Sophia; 
farewel most lovely, most beloved—’ 
Here Passion stopped his Mouth, and found
a Vent at his Eyes. 
And now, having taken a Resolution to
leave the Country, he began to debate with
himself whither he should go. The World,
as Milton phrases it, lay all before him; and
Jones, no more than Adam, had any Man
to whom he might resort for Comfort or
Assistance. All his Acquaintance were the
Acquaintance of Mr. Allworthy, and he
had no reason to expect any Countenance
from them, as that Gentleman had withdrawn
his Favour from him. Men of great
and good Characters should indeed be very
cautious how they discard their Dependents; 
for the Consequence to the unhappy Sufferer
is being discarded by all others. 
What Course of Life to pursue, or to
what Business to apply himself, was a second
Consideration; and here the Prospect
was all a melancholy Void. Every Profession,
and every Trade, required Length
of Time, and what was worse, Money; for
Matters are so constituted, that ‘Nothing out
of Nothing’ is not a truer Maxim in Physics 

than in Politics; and every Man who
is greatly destitute of Money, is on that
Account entirely excluded from all Means
of acquiring it. 
At last the Ocean, that hospitable Friend to
the Wretched, opened her capacious Arms
to receive him; and he instantly resolved to
accept her kind Invitation. To express
myself less figuratively, he determined to
go to Sea. 
This Thought indeed no sooner suggested
itself, than he eagerly embraced it; 
and having presently hired Horses, he set
out for Bristol to put it in Execution. 
But before we attend him on his Expedition,
we shall resort a while to Mr. Western's,
and see what farther happened to the charming
Sophia. 



Containing several Dialogues. 
The Morning in which Mr. Jones
departed, Mrs. Western summoned
Sophia into her Apartment, and having
first acquainted her that she had obtained 

her Liberty of her Father, she proceeded
to read her a long Lecture on the Subject
of Matrimony; which she treated not as a
romantic Scheme of Happiness arising from
Love, as it hath been described by the Poets; 
nor did she mention any of those Purposes
for which we are taught by Divines to regard
it as instituted by sacred Authority; 
she considered it rather as a Fund in which
prudent Women deposite their Fortunes to
the best Advantage, in order to receive a
larger Interest for them, than they could
have elsewhere. 
When Mrs. Western had finished, Sophia
answered, ‘that she was very incapable of
arguing with a Lady of her Aunt's superior
Knowledge and Experience, especially
on a Subject which she had so very
little considered, as this of Matrimony.’ 
‘Argue with me, Child!’ replied the
other, ‘I do not indeed expect it. I
should have seen the World to very
little Purpose truly, if I am to argue with
one of your Years. I have taken this
Trouble, in order to instruct you. The
ancient Philosophers, such as Socrates,
Alcibiades, and others, did not use to argue
with their Scholars. You are to consider 

me, Child, as Socrates, not asking
your Opinion, but only informing you of
mine.’ From which last Words the Reader
may possibly imagine, that this Lady
had read no more of the Philosophy of Socrates,
than she had of that of Alcibiades; 
and indeed we cannot resolve his Curiosity
as to this Point. 
‘Madam,’ cries Sophia, ‘I have never
presumed to controvert any Opinion of
yours, and this Subject, as I said, I have
never yet thought of, and perhaps never
may.’ 
‘Indeed, Sophy’, replied the Aunt, ‘this
Dissimulation with me is very foolish. 
The French shall as soon persuade me,
that they take foreign Towns in Defence
only of their own Country, as you can
impose on me to believe you have never
yet thought seriously of Matrimony. How
can you, Child, affect to deny that you
have considered of contracting an Alliance,
when you so well know I am acquainted
with the Party with whom you
desire to contract it. An Alliance as unnatural,
and contrary to your Interest,
as a separate League with the French
would be to the Interest of the Dutch! 
But however, if you have not hitherto 

considered of this Matter, I
promise you it is now high Time; for
my Brother is resolved immediately to
conclude the Treaty with Mr. Blifil; and
indeed I am a sort of Guarantee in the
Affair, and have promised your Concurrence.’ 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ cries Sophia, ‘this
is the only Instance in which I must disobey
both yourself and my Father. For
this is a Match which requires very little
Consideration in me to refuse.’ 
‘If I was not as great a Philosopher
as Socrates himself,’ returned Mrs.
Western, ‘you would overcome my Patience. 
What Objection can you have
to the young Gentleman?’ 
‘A very solid Objection, in my Opinion,’ 
says Sophia,—‘I hate him.’ 
‘Will you never learn a proper Use of
Words?’ answered the Aunt. ‘Indeed
Child, you should consult Bailey's Dictionary. 
It is impossible you should hate a
Man from whom you have received no
Injury. By Hatred, therefore, you mean
no more than Dislike, which is no sufficient 

Objection against your marrying of
him. I have known many Couples, who
have entirely disliked each other, lead
very comfortable, genteel Lives. Believe
me, Child, I know these Things better
than you. You will allow me, I think,
to have seen the World, in which I have
not an Acquaintance who would not rather
be thought to dislike her Husband,
than to like him. The contrary is such
out-of-Fashion romantic Nonsense, that
the very Imagination of it is shocking.’ 
‘Indeed Madam,’ replied Sophia, ‘I
shall never marry a Man I dislike. If I
promise my Father never to consent to
any Marriage contrary to his Inclinations, I
think I may hope he will never force me
into that State contrary to my own.’ 
‘Inclinations!’ cries the Aunt, with
some Warmth. ‘Inclinations! I am astonished
at your Assurance. A young
Woman of your Age, and unmarried, to
talk of Inclinations! But whatever your
Inclinations may be, my Brother is resolved; 
nay, since you talk of Inclinations,
I shall advise him to hasten the Treaty. 
Inclinations!’ 

Sophia then flung herself upon her Knees,
and Tears began to trickle from her shining
Eyes. She entreated her Aunt ‘to have
Mercy upon her, and not to resent so
cruelly her Unwillingness to make herself
miserable; often urging, that she alone
was concerned, and that her Happiness
only was at Stake.’ 
As a Bailiff, when well authorised by his
Writ, having possessed himself of the Person
of some unhappy Debtor, views all his
Tears without Concern: In vain the
wretched Captive attempts to raise Compassion; 
in vain the tender Wife bereft
of her Companion, the little prattling Boy,
or frighted Girl, are mentioned as Inducements
to Reluctance. The noble Bumtrap,
blind and deaf to every Circumstance of
Distress, greatly rises above all the Motives
to Humanity, and into the Hands of the
Goaler resolves to deliver his miserable
Prey. 
Not less blind to the Tears, or less deaf
to every Entreaty of Sophia was the politic
Aunt, nor less determined was she to
deliver over the trembling Maid into the
Arms of the Goaler Blifil. She answered 

with great Impetuosity, ‘So far, Madam,
from your being concerned alone, your
Concern is the least, or surely the least
important. It is the Honour of your Family
which is concerned in this Alliance; 
you are only the Instrument. Do you
conceive, Mistress, that in an Intermarriage
between Kingdoms, as when a
Daughter of France is married into Spain,
that  the Princess herself is alone considered
in the Match? No, it is a Match between
two Kingdoms, rather than between
two Persons. The same happens in great
Families, such as ours. The Alliance between
the Families is the principal Matter. 
You ought to have a greater Regard for
the Honour of your Family, than for your
own Person; and if the Example of a Princess
cannot inspire you with these noble
Thoughts, you cannot surely complain at
being used no worse than all Princesses are
used.’ 
‘I hope, Madam,’ cries Sophia, with a
little Elevation of Voice, ‘I shall never do
any Thing to dishonour my Family; but
as for Mr. Blifil, whatever may be the
Consequence, I am resolved against him,
and no Force shall prevail in his Favour.’ 

Western, who had been within hearing
during the greater Part of the preceding
Dialogue, had now exhausted all his Patience; 
he therefore entered the Room in a
violent Passion, crying, ‘D&wblank;n me then if
shatunt ha' un, d&wblank;n me if shatunt, that's
all—that's all—D&wblank;n me if
shatunt.’ 
Mrs. Western had collected a sufficient
Quantity of Wrath for the Use of Sophia; 
but she now transferred it all to the Squire. 
‘Brother,’ said she, ‘it is astonishing that
you will interfere in a Matter which you
had totally left to my Negotiation. Regard
to my Family hath made me take
upon myself to be the mediating Power,
in order to rectify those Mistakes in Policy
which you have committed in your
Daughter's Education. For, Brother, it
is you; it is your preposterous Conduct
which hath eradicated all the Seeds that I
had formerly sown in her tender Mind. –––It is you yourself who have taught her
Disobedience.’ —‘Blood!’ cries the
Squire, foaming at the Mouth, ‘you are
enough to conquer the Patience of the
Devil! Have I ever taught my Daughter
Disobedience? –––Here she stands; Speak
honestly, Girl, did ever I bid you be 

disobedient to me? Have not I done every
thing to humour, and to gratify you,
and to make you obedient to me? And
very obedient to me she was when a little
Child, before you took her in Hand and
spoiled her, by filling her Head with a
Pack of Court Notions. –––Why–––why––– 
why––did not I over-hear you telling her she
must behave like a Princess? You have
made a Whig of the Girl; and how should
her Father, or any body else, expect any
Obedience from her?’ ‘Brother,’ answered
Mrs. Western, with an Air of great
Disdain, ‘I cannot express the Contempt
I have for your Politics of all Kinds; but
I will appeal likewise to the young Lady
herself, whether I have ever taught her
any Principles of Disobedience. On the
contrary, Niece, have I not endeavoured
to inspire you with a true Idea of the several
Relations in which a human Creature
stands in Society? Have I not taken
infinite Pains to shew you, that the Law of
Nature hath injoined a Duty on Children to
their Parents? Have I not told you what
Plato says on that Subject? –––A Subject
on which you was so notoriously ignorant
when you came first under my Care, that
I verily believe you did not know the Relation
between a Daughter and a Father.’ 

‘'Tis a Lie,’ answered Western. ‘The
Girl is no such Fool, as to live to eleven
Years old without knowing that she was
her Father's Relation.’ ‘O more than Gothic
Ignorance,’ answered the Lady. ––– 
‘And as for your Manners, Brother, I must
tell you, they deserve a Cane.’ ‘Why
then you may gi' it me, if you think
you are able,’ cries the Squire; ‘nay, I
suppose your Niece there will be ready
enough to help you.’ ‘Brother,’ said
Mrs. Western, ‘tho' I despise you beyond
Expression, yet I shall endure your Insolence
no longer; so I desire my Coach may
be got ready immediately, for I am resolved
to leave your House this very
Morning.’ ‘And a good Riddance too,’ 
answered he; ‘I can bear your Insolence
no longer, an you come to that. Blood!
it is almost enough of itself, to make my
Daughter undervalue my Sense, when she
hears you telling me every Minute you
despise me.’ ‘It is impossible, it is impossible,’ 
cries the Aunt, ‘no one can undervalue
such a Boor. Boar,’ answered
the Squire, ‘I am no Boar; no, nor Ass; 
no, nor Rat neither, Madam. Remember
that—I am no Rat. I am a true Englishman,
and not of your Hanover Breed,
that have eat up the Nation. Thou art 

one of those wise Men,’ cries she, ‘whose
nonsensical Principles have undone the
Nation; by weakening the Hands
of our Government at home, and by
discouraging our Friends, and encouraging
our Enemies abroad.’ ‘Ho! are
you come back to your Politics,’ cries the
Squire, ‘as for those I despise them as much
as I do a F&wblank;t.’ Which last Word he accompanied
and graced with the very Action,
which, of all others, was the most proper
to it. And whether it was this Word, or
the Contempt exprest for her Politics, which
most affected Mrs. Western, I will not determine; 
but she flew into the most violent
Rage, uttered Phrases improper to be here
related, and instantly burst out of the House. 
Nor did her Brother or her Niece think proper
either to stop or to follow her: For the
one was so much possessed by Concern, and
the other by Anger, that they were rendered
almost motionless. 
The Squire, however, sent after his Sister
the same Holla which attends the Departure
of a Hare, when she is first started before
the Hounds. He was indeed a great
Master of this Kind of Vociferation, and
had a Holla proper for most Occasions in
Life. 

Women who, like Mrs. Western, know
the World, and have applied themselves to
Philosophy and Politics, would have immediately
availed themselves of the present
Disposition of Mr. Western's Mind; by
throwing in a few artful Compliments to
his Understanding at the Expence of his
absent Adversary; but poor Sophia was all
Simplicity. By which Word we do not intend
to insinuate to the Reader, that she was
silly, which is generally understood as a synonimous
Term with simple: For she was
indeed a most sensible Girl, and her Understanding
was of the first Rate; but she wanted
all that useful Art which Females convert
to so many good Purposes in Life, and
which, as it rather arises from the Heart,
than from the Head, is often the Property
of the silliest of Women. 



A Picture of a Country Gentlewoman taken
from the Life. 
Mr. Western having finished his Holla,
and taken a little Breath, began to
lament, in very pathetic Terms, the unfortunate 

Condition of Men, who are, says he,
always whipt in by the Humours of some
d&wblank;nd B&wblank; or other. I think I was
hard run enough by your Mother for one
Man; but after giving her a Dodge, here's
another B&wblank; follows me upon the Foil; 
but curse my Jacket if I will be run down
in this Manner by any o'um. 
Sophia never had a single Dispute with
her Father, till this unlucky Affair of Blifil,
on any Account, except in Defence of
her Mother, whom she had loved most
tenderly, though she lost her in the eleventh
Year of her Age. The Squire, to whom
that poor Woman had been a faithful upper
Servant all the Time of their Marriage,
had returned that Behaviour, by making
what the World calls a good Husband. He
very seldom swore at her (perhaps not above
once a Week) and never beat her: She
had not the least Occasion for Jealousy, and
was perfect Mistress of her Time: for she
was never interrupted by her Husband, who
was engaged all the Morning in his Field Exercises,
and all the Evening with Bottle Companions. 
She scarce indeed ever saw him
but at Meals; where she had the Pleasure
of carving those Dishes which she had before
attended at the Dressing. From these 

Meals she retired about five Minutes after
the other Servants, having only stayed to
drink the King over the Water. Such were,
it seems, Mr. Western's Orders: For it was
a Maxim with him, that Women should
come in with the first Dish, and go out
after the first Glass. Obedience to these
Orders was perhaps no difficult Task: For
the Conversation (if it may be called so) was
seldom such as could entertain a Lady. It
consisted chiefly of Hollowing, Singing, Relations
of sporting Adventures, B&wblank;d&wblank;y, and
Abuse of Women and of the Government. 
These, however, were the only Seasons
when Mr. Western saw his Wife: For
when he repaired to her Bed, he was generally
so drunk that he could not see; and
in the sporting Season he always rose from
her before it was light. Thus was she perfect
Mistress of her Time; and had besides
a Coach and four usually at her Command; 
tho' unhappily indeed the Badness
of the Neighbourhood, and of the Roads,
made this of little Use: For none who had
set much Value on their Necks would have
passed through the one, or who had set any
Value on their Hours, would have visited
the other. Now to deal honestly with the
Reader, she did not make all the Return 

expected to so much Indulgence: For she
had been married against her Will, by a
fond Father, the Match having been rather
advantageous on her Side: For the Squire's
Estate was upwards of 3000l. a Year, and
her Fortune no more than a bare 8000l.
Hence perhaps she had contracted a little
Gloominess of Temper: For she was rather
a good Servant than a good Wife; nor
had she always the Gratitude to return the
extraordinary Degree of roaring Mirth, with
which the Squire received her, even with a
good humoured Smile. She would, more
over, sometimes interfere with Matters which
did not concern her, as the violent Drinking
of her Husband, which in the gentlest
Terms she would take some of the few Opportunities
he gave her of remonstrating
against. And once in her Life she very
earnestly entreated him to carry her for two
Months to London, which he peremptorily
denied; nay, was angry with his Wife for
the Request ever after, being well assured,
that all the Husbands in London are Cuckolds. 
For this last, and many other good Reasons,
Western at length heartily hated his
Wife; and this Hatred as he never concealed 
before her Death, so he never forgot it afterwards; 

but when any Thing in the least
soured him, as a bad scenting Day, or a
Distemper among his Hounds, or any other
such Misfortune, he constantly vented
his Spleen by Invectives against the Deceased; 
saying,—‘If my Wife was alive
now, she would be glad of this.’ 
These Invectives he was especially desirous
of throwing forth before Sophia: 
For as he loved her more than he did any
other, so he was really jealous that she had
loved her Mother better than him. And this
Jealousy Sophia seldom failed of heightening
on these Occasions: For he was not
contented with violating her Ears with the
Abuse of her Mother; but endeavoured to
force an explicit Approbation of all this Abuse,
with which Desire he never could prevail
upon her by any Promise or Threats to
comply. 
Hence some of my Readers will, perhaps,
wonder that the Squire had not hated
Sophia as much as he had hated her Mother; 
but I must inform them, that Hatred is not
the Effect of Love, even through the Medium
of Jealousy. It is, indeed, very possible
for jealous Persons to kill the Objects of
their Jealousy, but not to hate them. 

Which Sentiment being a pretty hard Morsel,
and bearing something of the Air of a
Paradox, we shall leave the Reader to
chew the Cud upon it to the End of the
Chapter. 



The generous Behaviour of Sophia towards
her Aunt. 
Sophia kept Silence during the
foregoing Speech of her Father, nor
did she once answer otherwise than with
a Sigh; but as he understood none of the
Language, or as he called it, Lingo of the
Eyes, so he was not satisfied without some
further Approbation of his Sentiments; 
which he now demanded in the usual Way
of his Daughter; telling her, ‘he expected
she was ready to take the Part of every
Body against him, as she had always
done that of the B&wblank; her Mother.’ 
Sophia remaining still silent, he cry'd
out, ‘What art dumb? why dost
unt speak. Was not thy Mother a d&wblank;d
B&wblank; to me? Answer me that. What,
I suppose, you despise your Father too,
and don't think him good enough to
speak to?’ 

‘For Heaven's Sake, Sir,’ answered
Sophia, ‘do not give so cruel a Turn to
my Silence. I am sure I would sooner die
than be guilty of any Disrespect towards
you; but how can I venture to speak,
when every Word must either offend my
dear Papa, or convict me of the blackest
Ingratitude as well as Impiety to the Memory
of the best of Mothers: For such,
I am certain my Mamma was always to
me?’ 
‘And your Aunt, I suppose, is the best
of Sisters too!’ replied the Squire. ‘Will
you be so kind as to allow that she is a B&wblank;? 
I may fairly insist upon that, I think.’ 
‘Indeed, Sir,’ says Sophia, ‘I have
great Obligations to my Aunt. She hath
been a second Mother to me.’ 
‘And a second Wife to me too,’ returned
Western; ‘so you will take her
Part too! You won't confess that she
hath acted the Part of the vilest Sister in
the World?’ 
‘Upon my Word, Sir,’ cries Sophia,
‘I must belie my Heart wickedly if I did. 
I know my Aunt and you differ very 

much in your Ways of thinking; but I
have heard her a thousand Times express
the greatest Affection for you; and I am
convinced so far from her being the worst
Sister in the World, there are very few
who love a Brother better.’ 
‘The English of all which is,’ answered
the Squire, ‘that I am in the wrong. Ay,
certainly. Ay, to be sure the Woman is
in the Right, and the Man in the Wrong
always.’ 
‘Pardon me, Sir,’ cries Sophia, ‘I do
not say so.’ 
‘What don't you say,’ answered the
Father? ‘you have the Impudence to
say she's in the Right; doth it not follow
then of Course that I'm in the wrong? 
And perhaps I am in the wrong to suffer
such a Presbyterian Hannoverian B&wblank; to
come into my House. She may 'dite me
of a Plot for any Thing I know, and give
my Estate to the Government.’ 
‘So far, Sir, from injuring you or your
Estate,’ says Sophia, ‘if my Aunt had
died Yesterday, I am convinced she
would have left you her whole Fortune.’ 

Whether Sophia intended it or no, I shall
not presume to assert; but certain it is, these
last Words penetrated very deep into the
Ears of her Father, and produced a much
more sensible Effect than all she had said
before. He received the Sound with much
the same Action as a Man receives a Bullet
in his Head. He started, staggered and
turned pale. After which he remained silent
above a Minute, and then began in the following
hesitating Manner. ‘Yesterday! she
would have left me her Esteate Yesterday!
would she? Why Yesterday of all the
Days in the Year? I suppose if she dies
To-morrow she will leave it to somebody
else, and perhaps out of the Vamily:’ 
‘My Aunt, Sir,’ cries Sophia, ‘hath very
violent Passions, and I can't answer what
she may do under their Influence.’ 
‘You can't!’ returned the Father, ‘and
pray who hath been the Occasion of
putting her into those violent Passions? 
Nay, who hath actually put her into
them? Was not you and she hard at it
before I came into the Room? Besides,
was not all our Quarrel about you? I
have not quarreled with Sister these many
Years but upon your Account; and now 

you would throw the whole Blame upon
me, as thou I should be the Occasion of
her leaving her Esteate out o' the Vamily. 
I could have expected no better indeed,
this is like the Return you make to all the
rest of my Fondness.’ 
‘I beseech you then,’ cries Sophia, ‘upon
my Knees I beseech you, if I have
been the unhappy Occasion of this Difference,
that you will endeavour to make
it up with my Aunt, and not suffer her to
leave your House in this violent Rage of
Anger: She is a very good-natured Woman,
and a few civil Words will satisfy
her—Let me intreat you, Sir.’ 
‘So I must go and ask Pardon for your
Fault, must I?’ answered Western. ‘You
have lost the Hare, and I must draw
every Way to find her again? Indeed if
I was certain’—Here he stopt, and Sophia
throwing in more Entreaties, at length
prevailed upon him; and after venting two
or three bitter sarcastical Expressions against
his Daughter, he departed as fast as he
could to recover his Sister, before her Equipage
could be gotten ready. 

Sophia then retired to her Chamber of
Mourning, where she indulged herself (if
the Phrase may be allowed me) in all the
Luxury of tender Grief. She read over
the Letter which she had received from
Jones more than once; her Muff too was
used on this Occasion; and she bathed both
these, as well as herself, with her Tears. In
this Situation, the friendly Mrs. Honour exerted
her utmost Abilities to comfort her
afflicted Mistress. She ran over the Names
of many young Gentlemen; and having
greatly commended their Parts and Persons,
assured Sophia that she might take her
Choice of any. These Methods must have
certainly been used with some Success in
Disorders of the like Kind, or so skilful a
Practitioner as Mrs. Honour would never
have ventured to apply them; nay, I have
heard that the College of Chambermaids
hold them to be as sovereign Remedies as
any in the female Dispensary; but whether
it was that Sophia's Disease differed inwardly,
from those Cases with which it agreed in external
Symptoms, I will not assert; but, in
Fact, the good Waiting-woman did more
Harm than Good, and at last so incensed
her Mistress (which was no easy 

Matter) that with an angry Voice she dismissed
her from her Presence. 



Containing great Variety of Matter. 
The Squire overtook his Sister just
as she was stepping into the Coach,
and partly by Force and partly by Solicitations,
prevailed upon her to order her
Horses back into their Quarters. He succeeded
in this Attempt without much Difficulty: 
For the Lady was, as we have already
hinted, of a most placable Disposition,
and greatly loved her Brother, tho'
she despised his Parts, or rather his little
Knowledge of the World. 
Poor Sophia, who had first set on Foot
this Reconciliation, was now made the Sacrifice
to it. They both concurred in their
Censures on her Conduct; jointly declared
War against her; and directly proceeded
to Council, how to carry it on in the most
vigorous Manner. For this Purpose, Mrs.
Western proposed not only an immediate
Conclusion of the Treaty with Allworthy; 
but as immediately to carry it into Execution; 

saying, ‘That there was no other
Way to succeed with her Niece but by
violent Methods, which she was convinced
Sophia had not sufficient Resolution
to resist. By violent,’ says she, ‘I
mean rather, hasty Measures: For as to
Confinement or absolute Force, no such
Things must or can be attempted. Our
Plan must be concerted for a Surprize, and
not for a Storm.’ 
These Matters were resolved on, when Mr.
Blifil came to pay a Visit to his Mistress. 
The Squire no sooner heard of his Arrival,
than he stept aside, by his Sister's Advice,
to give his Daughter Orders for the proper
Reception of her Lover; which he did with
the most biter Execrations and Denunciations
of Judgment on her Refusal. 
The Impetuosity of the Squire bore down
all before him; and Sophia, as her Aunt
very wisely foresaw, was not able to resist
him. She agreed, therefore, to see Blifil,
tho' she had scarce Spirits or Strength sufficient
to utter her Assent. Indeed, to
give a peremptory Denial to a Father whom
she so tenderly loved, was no easy Task. 
Had this Circumstance been out of the
Case, much less Resolution than what she 

was really Mistress of, would, perhaps,
have served her; but it is no unusual Thing
to ascribe those Actions entirely to Fear,
which are in a great Measure produced by
Love. 
In Pursuance, therefore, of her Father's
peremptory Command, Sophia now admitted
Mr. Blifil's Visit. Scenes, like this,
when painted at large, afford, as we have
observed, very little Entertainment to the
Reader. Here, therefore, we shall strictly
adhere to a Rule of Horace; by which
Writers are directed to pass over all those
Matters, which they despair of placing in
a shining Light. A Rule, we conceive,
of excellent Use as well to the Historian as
to the Poet; and which, if followed, must,
at least, have this good Effect, that many
a great Evil (for so all great Books are called)
would thus be reduced to a small one. 
It is possible the great Art used by Blifil
at this Interview, would have prevailed on
Sophia to have made another Man in his
Circumstances her Confident, and to have
revealed the whole Secret of her Heart to
him; but she had contracted so ill an Opinion
of this young Gentleman, that she was
resolved to place no Confidence in him: 

For Simplicity, when set on it's Guard, is
often a Match for Cunning. Her Behaviour
to him, therefore, was entirely forced, and
indeed such as is generally prescribed to Virgins
upon the second formal Visit from one
who is appointed for their Husband. 
But tho' Blifil declared himself perfectly
satisfied with his Reception to the Squire,
yet that Gentleman, who in Company with
his Sister had overheard all, was not so well
pleased. He resolved, in Pursuance of the
Advice of the sage Lady, to push Matters
as forward as possible; and addressing himself
to his intended Son-in-Law in the hunting
Phrase, he cry'd after a loud Holla,
‘Follow her, Boy, follow her; run in, run
in, that's it, Honeys. Dead, dead, dead. 
—Never be bashful, nor stand shall I,
shall I? —Allworthy and I can finish all
Matters between us this Afternoon, and
let us ha' the Wedding To-morrow.’ 
Blifil having conveyed the utmost Satisfaction
into his Countenance, answered; 
‘As there is nothing, Sir, in this World,
which I so eagerly desire as an Alliance
with your Family, except my Union with
the most amiable and deserving Sophia, you
may easily imagine how impatient I must 

be to see myself in Possession of my two
highest Wishes. If I have not therefore
importuned you on this Head, you will
impute it only to my Fear of offending
the Lady, by endeavouring to hurry on
so blessed an Event, faster than a strict
Compliance with all the Rules of Decency
and Decorum will permit. But if
by your Interest, Sir, she might be induced
to dispence with any Formalities.’— 
‘Formalities! with a Pox!’ answered the
Squire, ‘Pooh, all Stuff and Nonsense. I
tell thee, she shall ha' thee To-morrow; 
you will know the World better hereafter,
when you come to my Age. Women
never gi' their Consent, Man, if they can
help it, 'tis not the Fashion. If I
had staid for her Mother's Consent, I
might have been a Batchelor to this Day. 
—To her, to her, co to her, that's it,
you jolly Dog. I tell thee shat ha' her
To-morrow Morning.’ 
Blifil suffered himself to be overpowered
by the forcible Rhetoric of the Squire; and
it being agreed that Western should close
with Allworthy that very Afternoon, the
Lover departed home, having first earnestly
begged that no Violence might be offered to 

the Lady by this Haste, in the same Manner
as a Poppish Inquisitor begs the Lay
Power to do no Violence to the Heretic,
delivered over to it, and against whom the
Church hath passed Sentence. 
And to say the Truth, Blifil had passed
Sentence against Sophia; for however pleased
he had declared himself to Western, with his
Reception, he was by no means satisfied,
unless it was that he was satisfied  of the
Hatred and Scorn of his Mistress; and this
had produced no less reciprocal Hatred and
Scorn in him. It may, perhaps, be asked,
Why then did he not put an immediate
End to all further Courtship? I answer, for
that very Reason, as well as for several
others equally good, which we shall now
proceed to open to the Reader. 
Tho' Mr. Blifil was not of the Complexion
of Jones, nor ready to eat every
Woman he saw, yet he was far from being
destitute of that Appetite which is said to
be the common Property of all Animals. 
With this, he had likewise that distinguishing
Taste, which serves to direct Men in
their Choice of the Objects, or Food of their
several Appetites; and this taught him to
consider Sophia as a most delicious Morsel, 

indeed to regard her with the same Desires
which an Ortolan inspires into the Soul
of an Epicure. Now the Agonies which
affected the Mind of Sophia rather augmented
than impaired her Beauty; for her
Tears added Brightness to her Eyes, and
her Breasts rose higher with her Sighs. Indeed
no one hath seen Beauty in its highest
Lustre, who hath never seen it in Distress. 
Blifil therefore looked on this human Ortolan
with greater Desire than when he had
viewed her last; nor was his Desire at all
lessened by the Aversion which he discovered
in her to himself. On the contrary,
this served rather to heighten the Pleasure
he proposed in rifling her Charms, as it added
Triumph to Lust; nay, he had some
further Views, from obtaining the absolute
Possession of her Person, which we detest
too much even to mention; and Revenge
itself was not without its Share in the Gratifications
which he promised himself. The
rivalling poor Jones, and supplanting him
in her Affections, added another Spur to
his Pursuit, and promised another additional
Rapture to his Enjoyment. 
Besides all these Views, which to some
scrupulous Persons may seem to savour too
much of Malevolence, he had one Prospect, 

which few Readers will regard with any
great Abhorrence. And this was the Estate
of Mr. Western; which was all to be settled
on his Daughter and her Issue; for so extravagant
was the Affection of that fond
Parent, that provided his Child would but
consent to be miserable with the Husband he
chose, he cared not at what Price he purchased
him. 
For these Reasons Mr. Blifil was so desirous
of the Match, that he intended to
deceive Sophia, by pretending Love to her; 
and to deceive her Father and his own Uncle,
by pretending he was beloved by her. 
In doing this, he availed himself of the
Piety of Thwackum, who held, that if the
End proposed was religious (as surely Matrimony
is) it mattered not how wicked
were the Means. As, to other Occasions
he used to apply the Philosophy of Square,
which taught, that the End was immaterial,
so that the Means were fair and consistent
with moral Rectitude. To say Truth,
there were few Occurrences in Life on
which he could not draw Advantage from
the Precepts of one or other of those great
Masters. 

Little Deceit was indeed necessary to be
practised on Mr. Western; who thought the
Inclinations of his Daughter of as little Consequence,
as Blifil himself conceived them
to be; but as the Sentiments of Mr. Allworthy
were of a very different Kind, so it
was absolutely necessary to impose on him. 
In this, however, Blifil was so well assisted
by Western, that he succeeded without
Difficulty: For as Mr. Allworthy had been
assured by her Father, that Sophia had a
proper Affection for Blifil, and that all
which he had suspected concerning Jones,
was entirely false, Blifil had nothing
more to do, than to confirm these
Assertions; which he did with such Equivocations,
that he preserved a Salvo for his
Conscience; and had the Satisfaction of
conveying a Lie to his Uncle, without the
Guilt of telling one. When he was examined
touching the Inclinations of Sophia,
by Allworthy, who said, ‘he would, on no
Account, be accessary to forcing a young
Lady into a Marriage contrary to her own
Will,’ he answered, ‘That the real Sentiments
of young Ladies were very difficult
to be understood; that her Behaviour
to him was full as forward as he
wished it, and that if he could believe her 

Father, she had all the Affection for him
which any Lover could desire. As for
Jones,’ said he, ‘whom I am loth to
call Villain, tho' his Behaviour to you,
Sir, sufficiently justifies the Appellation,
his own Vanity, or perhaps some wicked
Views, might make him boast of a Falshood; 
for if there had been any Reality
in Miss Western's Love to him, the Greatness
of her Fortune would never have suffered
him to desert her, as you are well informed
he hath. Lastly, Sir, I promise you
I would not myself, for any Consideration,
no not for the whole World, consent to
marry this young Lady, if I was not persuaded
she had all the Passion for me
which I desire she should have.’ 
This excellent Method of conveying a
Falshood with the Heart only, without
making the Tongue guilty of an Untruth,
by the Means of Equivocation and Imposture,
hath quieted the Conscience of many
a notable Deceiver; and yet when we consider
that it is Omniscience on which these
endeavour to impose, it may possibly seem
capable only of affording a very superficial
Comfort; and that this artful and refined
Distinction between communicating a Lie, 

and telling one, is hardly worth the Pains it
costs them. 
Allworthy was pretty well satisfied with
what Mr. Western and Mr. Blifil told him; 
and the Treaty was now, at the End of two
Days, concluded. Nothing then remained
previous to the Office of the Priest, but the
Office of the Lawyers, which threatened to
take up so much Time, that Western offered
to bind himself by all Manner of Covenants,
rather than to defer the Happiness of the young
Couple. Indeed he was so very earnest and
pressing, that an indifferent Person might
have concluded he was more a Principal in
this Match than he really was: But this
Eagerness was natural to him on all Occasions; 
and he conducted every Scheme he
undertook in such a Manner, as if the Success
of that alone was sufficient to constitute
the whole Happiness of his Life. 
The joint Importunities of both Father
and Son-in-law would probably have prevailed
on Mr. Allworthy, who brooked but
ill any Delay of giving Happiness to others,
had not Sophia herself prevented it, and taken
Measures to put a final End to the
whole Treaty, and to rob both Church
and Law of those Taxes which these wise Bodies 

have thought proper to receive from
the Propagation of the human Species, in a
lawful Manner. Of which in the next
Chapter. 



A strange Resolution of Sophia, and a more
strange Stratagem of Mrs. Honour. 
Tho' Mrs. Honour was principally
attached to her own Interest, she was
not without some little Attachment to Sophia. 
To say Truth, it was very difficult
for any one to know that young Lady without
loving her. She no sooner, therefore,
heard a Piece of News, which she imagined
to be of great Importance to her Mistress,
than quite forgetting the Anger which she
had conceived two Days before, at her unpleasant
Dismission from Sophia's Presence,
she ran hastily to inform her of this News. 
The Beginning of her Discourse was as
abrupt as her Entrance into the Room. ‘O
dear Ma'am,’ says she, ‘what doth your
La'ship think? To be sure, I am frightened
out of my Wits; and yet I thought
it my Duty to tell your La'ship, tho' 

perhaps it may make you angry, for we
Servants don't always know what will
make our Ladies angry; for to be sure,
every thing is always laid to the Charge
of a Servant. When our Ladies are out
of Humour, to be sure, we must be
scolded; and to be sure I should not
wonder if your La'ship should be out of
Humour; nay, it must surprize you certainly,
ay, and shock you too.’ —‘Good
Honour! let me know it without any
longer Preface,’ says Sophia; ‘there are
few Things, I promise you, which will
surprize, and fewer which will shock me.’ 
‘Dear Ma'am,’ answered Honour, ‘to be
sure, I overheard my Master talking to
Parson Supple about getting a Licence this
very Afternoon; and to be sure I heard
him say your La'ship should be married
To-morrow Morning,’ Sophia turned
pale at these Words, and repeated eagerly,
‘To-morrow Morning! –––Yes, Madam,’ 
replied the trusty Waiting-woman, ‘I will
take my Oath I heard my Master say so.’ 
‘Honour,’ says Sophia, ‘you have both
surprized and shocked me to such a Degree,
that I have scarce any Breath or
Spirits left. What is to be done in my
dreadful Situation?’ ‘I wish I was
able to advise your La'ship,’ says she. 

‘Do, advise me,’ cries Sophia, ‘pray,
dear Honour advise me. Think what you
would attempt if it was your own Case.’ 
‘Indeed, Ma'am,’ cries Honour, ‘I wish
your La'ship and I could change Situations; 
that is, I mean, without hurting
your La'ship, for to be sure I don't wish
you so bad as to be a Servant; but because
that if so be it was my Case, I
should find no Manner of Difficulty in it; 
for in my poor Opinion, young Squire
Blifil is a charming, sweet, handsome
Man.’ —‘Don't mention such Stuff,’ cries
Sophia.’ –––‘Such Stuff,’ repeated Honour,
‘why there–––Well, to be sure, what's one
Man's Meat is another Man's Poison, and
the same is altogether as true of Women.’ 
‘Honour,’ says Sophia, ‘rather than submit
to be the Wife of that contemptible
Wretch, I would plunge a Dagger into
my Heart.’ ‘O lud, Ma'am,’ answered
the other, ‘I am sure you frighten me out
of my Wits now. Let me beseech your
La'ship not to suffer such wicked Thoughts
to come into your Head. O lud, to be
sure I tremble every Inch of me. Dear
Ma'm, consider–––that to be denied Christian
Burial, and to have your Corpse
buried in the Highway, and a Stake
drove through you, as Farmer Halfpenny 

was served at Ox-Cross, and, to be sure,
his Ghost hath walked there ever since; 
for several People have seen him. To be
sure it can be nothing but the Devil which
can put such wicked Thoughts into the
Head of any body; for certainly it is less
wicked to hurt all the World than one's
own dear Self, and so I have heard said by
more Parsons than one. If your La'ship
hath such a violent Aversion, and hates
the young Gentleman so very bad, that
you can't bear to think of going into Bed
to him; for to be sure there may be such
Antipathies in Nature, and one had lieverer
touch a Toad than the Flesh of some
People.—’ 
Sophia had been too much wrapped in
Contemplation to pay any great Attention
to the foregoing excellent Discourse of her
Maid; interrupting her therefore, without
making any Answer to it, she said, ‘Honour,
I am come to a Resolution. I am determined
to leave my Father's House this very
Night; and if you have the Friendship
for me which you have often professed,
you will keep me Company.’ ‘That I
will, Ma'm, to the World's End,’ answered
Honour; ‘but I beg your La'ship to consider
the Consequence before you undertake 

any rash Action. Where can your
La'ship possibly go?’ ‘There is,’ replied
Sophia, ‘a Lady of Quality in London, a
Relation of mine, who spent several
Months with my Aunt in the Country; 
during all which Time she treated me
with great Kindness, and expressed so
much Pleasure in my Company, that she
earnestly desired my Aunt to suffer me
to go with her to London. As she is a
Woman of very great Note, I shall easily
find her out, and I make no Doubt of
being very well and kindly received by
her?’ ‘I would not have your La'ship
too confident of that,’ cries Honour; ‘for
the first Lady I lived with used to invite
People very earnestly to her House; but
if she heard afterwards they were coming,
she used to get out of the Way. Besides,
tho' this Lady would be very glad to see
your La'ship, as to be sure any body
would be glad to see your La'ship, yet
when she hears your La'ship is run away
from my Master’—‘You are mistaken,
Honour,’ says Sophia, ‘she looks upon
the Authority of a Father in a much
lower Light than I do; for she pressed
me violently to go to London with her,
and when I refused to go without my
Father's Consent, she laughed me to Scorn, 

called me silly Country Girl, and said I
should make a pure loving Wife, since I
could be so dutiful a Daughter. So I
have no Doubt but she will both receive
me, and protect me too, till my Father,
finding me out of his Power, can be
brought to some Reason.’ 
‘Well but, Ma'am,’ answered Honour,
‘how doth your La'ship think of making
your Escape? Where will you get any
Horses or Conveyance? for as for your
own Horse, as all the Servants know a
little how Matters stand between my Master
and your La'ship, Robin will be
hanged before he will suffer it to go out of
the Stable without my Master's express
Orders.’ ‘I intend to escape,’ said Sophia,
‘by walking out of the Doors when
they are open. I thank Heaven my Legs
are very able to carry me. They have
supported me many a long Evening, after
a Fiddle, with no very agreeable
Partner; and surely they will assist me in
running from so detestable a Partner for
Life.’ ‘O Heavens, Ma'm, doth your
La'ship know what you are saying?’ cries
Honour, ‘would you think of walking about
the Country by Night and alone?’ ‘Not
alone,’ answered the Lady, ‘you have 

promised to bear me Company.’ ‘Yes,
to be sure,’ cries Honour, ‘I will follow
your La'ship through the World; but
your La'ship had almost as good be alone; 
for I shall not be able to defend you, if
any Robbers, or other Villains, should
meet with you. Nay, I should be in as
horrible a Fright as your La'ship; for to
be certain, they would ravish us both. 
Besides, Ma'm, consider how cold the
Nights are now, we shall be frozen to
Death.’ ‘A good brisk Pace,’ answered
Sophia, ‘will preserve us from the Cold; 
and if you cannot defend me from a Villain,
Honour, I will defend you; for I
will take a Pistol with me. There are
two always charged in the Hall.’ ‘Dear
Ma'm, you frighten me more and more,’ 
cries Honour, ‘sure your La'ship would not
venture to fire it off! I had rather run
any Chance, than your La'ship should do
that.’ ‘Why so?’ says Sophia, smiling; 
‘would not you, Honour, fire a Pistol at
any one who should attack your Virtue?’ 
‘To be sure, Ma'm,’ cries Honour, ‘one's
Virtue is a dear Thing, especially to us
poor Servants; for it is our Livelihood,
as a Body may say, yet I mortally hate
Fire-arms; for so many Accidents happen
by them.’ ‘Well, well,’ says Sophia, 

‘I believe I may ensure your Virtue
at a very cheap Rate, without carrying
any Arms with us; for I intend to take
Horses at the very first Town we come
to, and we shall hardly be attacked in
our Way thither. Look'ee, Honour, I
am resolved to go, and if you will attend
me, I promise you I will reward you to
the very utmost of my Power.’ 
This last Argument had a stronger Effect
on Honour than all the preceding. And
since she saw her Mistress so determined, she
desisted from any further Dissuasions. They
theh entered into a Debate on Ways and
Means of executing their Project. Here a very
stubborn Difficulty occurred, and this was
the Removal of their Effects, which was
much more easily got over by the Mistress
than by the Maid: For when a Lady hath
once taken a Resolution to run to a Lover,
or to run from him, all Obstacles are considered
as Trifles. But Honour was inspired
by no such Motive; she had no Raptures
to expect, nor any Terrors to shun,
and besides the real Value of her Clothes,
in which consisted great Part of her Fortune,
she had a capricious Fondness for several
Gowns, and other Things; either because
they became her, or because they 

were given her by such a particular Person; 
because she had bought them lately, or because
she had had them long; or for some
other Reasons equally good; so that she
could not endure the Thought of leaving
the poor Things behind her exposed to the
Mercy of Western, who, she doubted not,
would make them suffer Martyrdom in his
Rage. 
The ingenious Mrs. Honour having applied
all her Oratory to dissuade her Mistress
from her Purpose, when she found
her positively determined, at last started the
following Expedient to remove her Clothes,
viz. to get herself turned out of Doors that
very Evening. Sophia highly approved this
Method, but doubted how it might be
brought about. ‘Oh! Ma'm,’ cries Honour,
‘your La'ship may trust that to me; 
we Servants very well know how to obtain
this Favour of our Masters and Mistresses; 
tho' sometimes indeed where
they owe us more Wages than they can
readily pay, they will put up with all our
Affronts, and will hardly take any Warning
we can give them; but the Squire is
none of those; and since your La'ship is
resolved upon setting out to Night, I
warrant I get discharged this Afternoon.’ 

It was then resolved that she should pack
up some Linnen, and a Night-gown for
Sophia, with her own Things; and as for
all her other Clothes, the young Lady
abandoned them with no more Remorse
than the Sailor feels when he throws over
the Goods of others in order to save his own
Life. 



Containing Scenes of Altercation, of no very
uncommon Kind. 
Mrs. Honour had scarce sooner parted
from her young Lady, than something
(for I would not, like the old Woman in
Quivedo, injure the Devil by any false Accusation,
and possibly he might have no
Hand in it) but something, I say, suggested
to her, that by sacrificing Sophia and
all her Secrets to Mr. Western, she might
probably make her Fortune. Many Considerations
urged this Discovery. The fair
Prospect of a handsome Reward for so great
and acceptable a Service to the Squire,
tempted her Avarice; and again, the Danger
of the Enterprize she had undertaken; 
the Incertainty of its Success; Night, Cold,
Robbers, Ravishers, all alarmed her Fears. 

So forcibly did all these operate upon her,
that she was almost determined to go directly
to the Squire, and to lay open the whole
Affair. She was, however, too upright a
Judge to decree on one Side before she had
heard the other. And here, first, a Journey
to London appeared very strongly in Support
of Sophia. She eagerly longed to see
a Place in which she fancied Charms short
only of those which a raptured Saint imagines
in Heaven. In the next Place, as she
knew Sophia to have much more Generosity
than her Master, so her Fidelity promised
her a greater Reward than she could gain
by Treachery. She then cross-examined all
the Articles which had raised her Fears on
the other Side, and found, on fairly sifting
the Matter, that there was very little in
them. And now both Scales being reduced
to a pretty even Ballance, her Love
to her Mistress being thrown into the Scale
of her Integrity, made that rather preponderate,
when a Circumstance struck upon
her Imagination, which might have had a
dangerous Effect, had its whole Weight
been fairly put into the other Scale. This
was the Length of Time which must intervene
before Sophia would be able to fulfil
her Promises; for tho' she was intitled to
her Mother's Fortune, at the Death of her 

Father, and to the Sum of 3000l. left her
by an Uncle when she came of Age; yet these
were distant Days, and many Accidents
might prevent the intended Generosity of
the young Lady, whereas the Rewards she
might expect from Mr. Western were immediate. 
But while she was pursuing this
Thought, the good Genius of Sophia, or
that which presided over the Integrity of
Mrs. Honour, or perhaps mere Chance, sent
an Accident in her Way, which at once
preserved her Fidelity, and even facilitated
the intended Business. 
Mrs. Western's Maid claimed great Superiority
over Mrs. Honour, on several Accounts. 
First, her Birth was higher: For
her great Grand-mother by the Mother's
Side was a Cousin, not far removed, to an
Irish Peer. Secondly, her Wages were
greater. And lastly, she had been at London,
and had of Consequence seen more of
the World. She had always behaved,
therefore, to Mrs. Honour with that Reserve,
and had always exacted of her those
Marks of Distinction, which every Order
of Females preserve and require  in Conversation
with those of an inferior Order. Now
as Honour did not at all Times agree with
this Doctrine; but would frequently break 

in upon the Respect which the other demanded,
Mrs. Western's Maid was not at
all pleased with her Company: Indeed, she
earnestly longed to return home to the
House of her Mistress, where she domineered
at Will over all the other Servants. 
She had been greatly, therefore, disappointed
in the Morning when Mrs. Western
had changed her Mind on the very Point of
Departure, and had been in what is vulgarly
called, a glouting Humour ever
since. 
In this Humour, which was none of the
sweetest, she came into the Room where
Honour was debating with herself, in the
Manner we have above related. Honour no
sooner saw her, than she addressed her in the
following obliging Phrase. ‘Soh! Madam,
I find we are to have the Pleasure of your
Company longer, which I was afraid the
Quarrel between my Master and your
Lady would have robbed us of.’ ‘I
don't know, Madam,’ answered the other,
‘who you mean by We and Us. I
assure you I do not look on any of the
Servants in this House to be proper
Company for me. I am Company, I
hope, for their Betters every Day in the
Week. I do not speak on your Account,
Mrs. Honour; for you are a civilized 

young Woman; and when you have seen
a little more of the World, I should not
be ashamed to walk with you in St. James's
Park.’ ‘Hoity! toity!’ cries Honour,
‘Madam is in her Airs, I protest. Mrs.
Honour forsooth! sure, Madam, you might
call me by my Sir-name; for tho' my
Lady calls me Honour, I have a Sir-name
as well as other Folks. Ashamed to walk
with me, quotha! Marry, as good as
yourself I hope.’ ‘Since you make such
a Return to my Civility,’ said the other,
‘I must acquaint you, Mrs. Honour, that
you are not so good as me. In the Country
one is indeed obliged to take up with all kind
of Trumpery, but in Town I visit none but
the Women of Women of Quality. Indeed,
Mrs. Honour, there is some Difference, I
hope, between you and me.’ ‘I hope so too,’ 
answered Honour, ‘there is some Difference in
our Ages, and—I think in our Persons.’ 
Upon speaking which last Words, she
strutted by Mrs. Western's Maid with the
most provoking Air of Contempt; turning
up her Nose, tossing her Head, and violently
brushing the Hoop of her Competitor
with her own. The other Lady put
on one of her most malicious Sneers, and
said, ‘Creature! you are below my Anger; 
and it is beneath me to give ill Words to such
an audacious saucy Trollop; but, Hussy, 

I must tell you, your Breeding shews the
Meanness of your Birth as well as of your
Education; and both very properly qualify
you to be the mean serving Woman
of a Country Girl.’ ‘Don't abuse
my Lady,’ cries Honour, ‘I won't take
that of you; she's as much better
than yours as she is younger, and ten
thousand Times more handsomer.’ 
Here ill Luck, or rather good Luck
sent Mrs. Western to see her Maid in Tears,
which began to flow plentifully at her Approach; 
and of which being asked the Reason
by her Mistress, she presently acquainted
her, that her Tears were occasioned by
the rude Treatment of that Creature there,
meaning Honour. ‘And, Madam,’ continued
she, ‘I could have despised all she
said to me; but she hath had the Audacity
to affront your Ladyship, and to call
you ugly—Yes, Madam, she called you
ugly old Cat to my Face. I could not
bear to hear your Ladyship called ugly.’ 
‘—Why do you repeat her Impudence so
often?’ said Mrs. Western. And then
turning to Mrs. Honour, she asked her ‘how
she had the Assurance to mention her
Name with Disrespect?’ ‘Disrespect
Madam!’ answered Honour, ‘I never
mentioned your Name at all. I said somebody 

was not as handsome as my Mistress,
and to be sure you know that as well as I.’ 
‘Hussy,’ replied the Lady, ‘I will make
such a saucy Trollop as yourself, know
that I am not a proper Subject of your
Discourse. And if my Brother doth
not discharge you this Moment, I will
never sleep in his House again. I will
find him out and have you discharged this
Moment.’ ‘Discharged!’ cries Honour,
‘and suppose I am, there are more Places
in the World than one. Thank Heaven,
good Servants need not want Places; 
and if you turn away all who do not think
you handsome, you will want Servants
very soon, let me tell you that.’ 
Mrs. Western spoke, or rather thundered
in Answer; but as she was hardly articulate,
we cannot be very certain of the identical
Words: We shall, therefore, omit inserting
a Speech, which, at best, would not
greatly redound to her Honour. She then
departed in Search of her Brother, with a
Countenance so full of Rage, that she resembled
one of the Furies rather than a
human Creature. 
The two Chambermaids being again left
alone, began a second Bout at Altercation,
which soon produced a Combat of a more 

active Kind. In this the Victory belonged
to the Lady of inferior Rank, but not without
some Loss of Blood, of Hair, and of
Lawn and Muslin. 



The wise Demeanour of Mr. Western in the
Character of a Magistrate. A Hint to
Justices of Peace, concerning the necessary
Qualifications of a Clerk; with extraordinary
Instances of paternal Madness, and
filial Affection. 
Logicians sometimes prove too much by
an Argument, and Politicians often
overreach themselves in a Scheme. Thus
had it like to have happened to Mrs. Honour,
who instead of recovering the rest
of her Clothes, had like to have stopped
even those she had on her Back from escaping: 
For the Squire no sooner heard of her
having abused his Sister, than he swore
twenty Oaths he would send her to Bride-well. 
Mrs. Western was a very good-natured
Woman, and ordinarily of a forgiving
Temper. She had lately remitted the Trespass 

of a Stage coach Man, who had overturned
her Post-chaise into a Ditch; nay,
she had even broken the Law in refusing to
prosecute a High-way-man who had robbed
her, not only of a Sum of Money, but of
her Ear-rings; at the same Time d&wblank;ning
her, and saying, ‘such handsome B&wblank;s as
you, don't want Jewels to set them off,
and be d&wblank;nd to you.’ But now, so ununcertain
are our Tempers, and so much do
we at different Times differ from ourselves,
she would hear of no Mitigation; nor could
all the affected Penitence of Honour, nor all
the Entreaties of Sophia for her own Servant,
prevail with her to desist from earnestly
desiring her Brother to execute Justiceship
(for it was indeed a Syllable more
than Justice) on the Wench. 
But luckily the Clerk had a Qualification,
which no Clerk to a Justice of Peace
ought ever to be without, namely, some
Understanding in the Law of this Realm. 
He therefore whispered in the Ear of the
Justice, that he would exceed his Authority
by committing the Girl to Bridewell, as
there had been no Attempt to break the
Peace; ‘for I am afraid, Sir,’ says he,
‘you cannot legally commit any one to
Bridewell only for Ill-breeding.’ 

In Matters of high Importance, particularly
in Cases relating to the Game, the
Justice was not always attentive to these
Admonitions of his Clerk: For, indeed,
in executing the Laws under that Head,
many Justices of Peace suppose they have
a large discretionary Power. By Virtue of
which, under the Notion of searching for,
and taking away Engines for the Destruction
of the Game, they often commit Trespasses,
and sometimes Felony at their Pleasure. 
But this Offence was not of quite so high
a Nature, nor so dangerous to the Society. 
Here, therefore, the Justice behaved with
some Attention to the Advice of his Clerk: 
For, in Fact, he had already had two Informations
exhibited against him in the King's-Bench,
and had no Curiosity to try a third. 
The Squire, therefore, putting on a
most wise and significant Countenance, after
a Preface of several Hum's and Ha's,
told his Sister, that upon more mature Deliberation,
he was of Opinion that ‘as
there was no breaking up of the Peace,
such as the Law,’ says he, ‘calls breaking
open a Door, or breaking a Hedge, 

or breaking a Head; or any such Sort of
Breaking; the Matter did not amount to
a selonious Kind of a Thing, nor Trespasses
nor Damages, and, therefore, there
was no Punishment in the Law for it.’ 
Mrs Western said, ‘she knew the Law
much better; that she had known Servant
very severely punished for affronting
their Masters; and then named a certain
Justice of the Peace in London, who,’ 
she said, ‘would commit a Servant to
Bridewell, at any Time when a Master or
Mistress desired it.’ 
‘Like enough,’ cries the Squire, ‘it
may be so in London; but the Law is
different in the Country.’ Here followed
a very learned Dispute between the Brother
and Sister concerning the Law, which we
would insert, if we imagined many of our
Readers could understand it. This was,
however, at length referred by both Parties
to the Clerk, who decided it in Favour of
the Magistrate; and Mrs. Western was
in the End, obliged to content herself with
the Satisfaction of having Honour turned
away; to which Sophia herself very readily
and chearfully consented. 

Thus Fortune, after having diverted herself,
according to Custom, with two or
three Frolicks, at last disposed all Matters
to the Advantage of our Heroine; who,
indeed, succeeded admirably well in her
Deceit, considering it was the first she had
ever practised. And, to say the Truth, I
have often concluded, that the honest Part
of Mankind would be much too hard for
the knavish, if they could bring themselves
to incur the Guilt, or thought it worth
their while to take the Trouble. 
Honour acted her Part to the utmost Perfection. 
She no sooner saw herself secure
from all Danger of Bridewell, a Word
which had raised most horrible Ideas in her
Mind, than she resumed those Airs
which her Terrours before had a little
abated; and laid down her Place, with as
much Affectation of Content, and indeed
of Contempt, as was ever practised at the Resignation
of Places of a much greater Importance. 
If the Reader pleases, therefore,
we chuse rather to say she resigned—which
hath, indeed, been always held a synonimous
Expression with being turned out, or
turned away. 

Mr. Western ordered her to be very expeditious
in packing: For his Sister declared
she would not sleep another Night under
the same Roof with so impudent a Slut. 
To work therefore she went, and that so
earnestly, that every Thing was ready early
in the Evening; when having received her
Wages, away packed Bag and Baggage,
to the great Satisfaction of every one,
but of none more than of Sophia; who,
having appointed her Maid to meet her
at a certain Place not far from the House,
exactly at the dreadful and ghostly Hour of
Twelve, began to prepare for her own Departure. 
But first she was obliged to give two painful
Audiences, the one to her Aunt, and the
other to her Father. In these Mrs. Western
herself began to talk to her in a more peremptory
Stile than before; but her Father
treated her in so violent and outragious a
Manner, that he frightened her into an affected
Compliance with his Will, which so highly
pleased the good Squire, that he changed
his Frowns into Smiles, and his Menaces into
Promises; he vowed his whole Soul was
wrapped in hers, that her Consent (for so
he construed the Words, You know, Sir, I 

must not, nor can refuse to obey any absolute
Command of yours, had made him the happiest
of Mankind. He then gave her a
large Bank-bill to dispose of in any Trinkets
she pleased, and kissed and embraced her
in the fondest Manner, while Tears of Joy
trickled from those Eyes, which a few Moments
before had darted Fire and Rage against
the dear Object of all his Affection. 
Intances of this Behaviour in Parents are
so common, that the Reader, I doubt not,
will be very little astonished at the whole
Conduct of Mr. Western. If he should, I
own I am not able to account for it; since
that he loved his Daughter most tenderly,
is, I think, beyond Dispute. So indeed
have many others, who have rendered their
Children most compleatly miserable by the
same Conduct; which, tho' it is almost
universal in Parents, hath always appeared
to me to be the most unaccountable of all
the Absurdities, which ever entered into the
Brain of that strange prodigious Creature
Man. 
The latter Part of Mr. Western's Behaviour
had so strong an Effect on the tender
Heart of Sophia, that it suggested a Thought 

to her, which not all the politic Sophistry
of her Aunt, nor all the Menaces of her
Father had ever once brought into her Head. 
She reverenced her Father so piously, and
loved him so passionately, that she had scarce
ever felt more pleasing Sensations, than what
arose from the Share she frequently had of
contributing to his Amusement; and sometimes,
perhaps, to higher Gratifications; 
for he never could contain the Delight of
hearing her commended, which he had the
Satisfaction of hearing almost every Day
of her Life. The Idea, therefore, of the
immense Happiness she should convey to her
Father by her Consent to this Match, made
a strong Impression on her Mind. Again,
the extreme Piety of such an Act of Obedience,
worked very forcibly, as she had a
very deep Sense of Religion. Lastly, when
she reflected how much she herself was to
suffer, being indeed to become little less
than a Sacrifice, or a Martyr, to filial Love
and Duty, she felt an agreeable Tickling
in a certain little Passion, which tho' it bears
no immediate Affinity either to Religion or
Virtue, is often so kind as to lend great
Assistance in executing the Purposes of
both. 

Sophia was charmed with the Contemplation
of so heroic an Action, and began to
compliment herself with much premature
Flattery, when Cupid, who lay hid in her
Muff, suddenly crept out, and, like Punchinello
in a Puppet-shew, kicked all out before
him. In Truth (for we scorn to deceive
our Reader, or to vindicate the Character
of our Heroine, by ascribing her Actions to
supernatural Impulse) the Thoughts of her
beloved Jones, and some Hopes (however distant)
in which he was very particularly concerned,
immediately destroyed all which
filial Love, Piety and Pride had, with their
joint. Endeavours, been labouring to bring
about. 
But before we proceed any farther with
Sophia, we must now look back to Mr.
Jones. 




Containing several Matters natural enough
perhaps, but Low. 
The Reader will be pleased to remember,
that we left Mr. Jones in
the Beginning of this Book, on his Road to,
Bristol; being determined to seek his Fortune
at Sea, or rather, indeed, to fly away
from his Fortune on Shore. 
It happened, (a Thing not very unusual)
that the Guide who undertook to conduct him
on his Way, was unluckily unacquainted
with the Road; so that having missed his
right Track, and being ashamed to ask Information,
he rambled about backwards
and forwards, till Night came on, and it
began to grow dark. Jones suspecting what
had happened, acquainted the Guide with
his Apprehensions; but he insisted on it,
that they were in the right Road, and added,
it would be very strange if he should not
know, the Road to Bristol; tho', in Reality,
it would, have been much stranger if
he had known it, having never past through
it in his Life before. 

Jones had not such implicit Faith in his
Guide; but that on their Arrival at a Village,
he enquired of the first Fellow he
saw, whether they were in the Road to
Bristol. ‘Whence did you come?’ cries the
Fellow. ‘No Matter,’ says Jones, a little
hastily, ‘I want to know if this be the
Road to Bristol.’ ‘The Road to Bristol!’ 
cries the Fellow, scratching his
Head, ‘Why, Master, I believe you will
hardly get to Bristol this Way to Night.’ 
‘Prithee, Friend, then,’ answered Jones
‘do tell us which is the Way.’ ‘—Why,
Measter,’ cries the Fellow, ‘you must
be come out of your Road the Lord
knows whither: For thick Way goeth to
Glocester.’ ‘Well, and which Way goes
to Bristol,’ said Jones.’ ‘Why, you be
going away from Bristol,’ answered the
Fellow.’ —‘Then,’ said Jones, ‘we
must go back again.’ ‘Ay, you must,’ 
said the Fellow. ‘Well, and when we
come back to the Top of the Hill, which
Way must we take?’ ‘Why you must
keep the strait Road.’ ‘But I remember
there are two Roads, one to the Right and
the other to the Left.’ ‘Why you must
keep the right-hand Road, and then
gu strait vorwards; only remember to turn 

first to your Right, and then to your Left
again, and then to your Right; and that
brings you to the Squire's, and then you
must keep strait vorwards, and turn to
the Left.’ 
Another Fellow now came up, and asked
which Way the Gentlemen were going?— 
of which being informed by Jones, he first
scratched his Head, and then leaning upon
a Pole he had in his Hand, began to tell
him, ‘That he must keep the Right-hand
Road for about a Mile or a Mile and
half or zuch a Matter, and then he must
turn short to the Left, which would bring
him round by Measter Jin Bearnes's.’ 
‘But which is Mr. John Bearnes's,’ says
Jones. ‘O Lord,’ cries the Fellow, ‘why
don't you know Measter Jin Bearnes? 
Whence then did you come?’ 
These two Fellows had almost conquered
the Patience of Jones, when a plain well-looking
Man (who was indeed a Quaker)
accosted him thus: ‘Friend, I perceive
thou hast lost thy Way, and if thou
wilt take my Advice thou wilt not attempt
to find it to Night. It is almost
dark, and the Road is difficult to hit; 
besides there have been several Robberies 

committed lately between this and Bristol. 
Here is a very creditable good House
just by, where thou may'st find good
Entertainment for thyself and thy Cattle
till Morning.’ Jones, after a little Persuasion,
agreed to stay in this Place 'till the
Morning, and was conducted by his Friend
to the Public-House. 
The Landlord, who was a very civil
Fellow, told Jones, ‘he hoped he would
excuse the Badness of his Accommodation: 
For that his Wife was gone from
home, and had locked up almost every
Thing, and carried the Keys along with
her.’ Indeed, the Fact was, that a favourite
Daughter of hers was just married,
and gone, that Morning, home with her
Husband; and that she and her Mother
together, had almost stript the poor
Man of all his Goods, as well as Money: 
For tho' he had several Children, this
Daughter only, who was the Mother's Favourite,
was the Object of her Consideration; 
and to the Humour of this one
Child, she would, with Pleasure, have
sacrificed all the rest, and her Husband into
the Bargain, 

Tho' Jones was very unfit for any Kind
of Company, and would have preferred
being alone, yet he could not resist the Importunities
of the honest Quaker; who
was the more desirous of sitting with him,
from having remarked the Melancholy
which appeared both in his Countenance
and Behaviour; and which the poor
Quaker thought his Conversation might in
some Measure relieve. 
After they had past some Time together,
in such a Manner that my honest Friend
might have thought himself at one of his
Silent Meetings, the Quaker began to be
moved by some Spirit or other, probably
that of Curiosity; and said, ‘Friend, I
perceive some sad Disaster hath befallen
thee; but, pray be of Comfort. Perhaps
thou hast lost a Friend. If so, thou
must consider we are all mortal. And
why should'st thou grieve, when thou
knowest thy Grief will do thy Friend no
Good. We are all born to Affliction. 
I myself have my Sorrows as well as
thee, and most probably greater Sorrows. 
Tho' I have a clear Estate of a
100l. a Year, which is as much as I
want, and I have a Conscience, I thank 

the Lord, void of Offence. My Constitution
is sound and strong, and there is
no Man can demand a Debt of me, nor
accuse me of an Injury—yet, Friend,
I should be concerned to think thee as
miserable as myself.’ 
Here the Quaker ended with a deep
Sigh; and Jones presently answered, ‘I
am very sorry, Sir, for your Unhappiness,
whatever is the Occasion of it.’ 
‘Ah! Friend,’ replyed the Quaker, ‘one
only Daughter is the Occasion. One who
was my greatest Delight upon Earth, and
who within this Week is run away from
me, and is married against my Consent. 
I had provided her a proper Match, a sober
Man, and one of Substance; but she,
forsooth, would chuse for herself, and
away she is gone with a young Fellow
not worth a Groat. If she had been dead,
as I suppose thy Friend is, I should have
been happy!’ ‘That is very strange,
Sir,’ said Jones. ‘Why, would it not
be better for her to be dead, than to be
a Beggar?’ replied the Quaker: ‘For, as I
told you, the Fellow is not worth a
Groat; and surely she cannot expect that
I shall ever give her a Shilling. No, as
she hath married for Love, let her live on 

Love if she can; let her carry her Love
to Market, and see whether any one will
change it into Silver, or even into Half-pence.’ 
‘You know your own Concerns
best, Sir,’ said Jones.’ ‘It must
have been,’ continued the Quaker, ‘a
long premeditated Scheme to cheat me: 
For they have known one another from
their Infancy; and I always preached to
her against Love—and told her a thousand
Times over, it was all Folly and
Wickedness. Nay, the cunning Slut pretended
to hearken to me, and to despise
all Wantonness of the Flesh; and yet, at
last, to break out at a Window two Pair
of Stairs: For I began, indeed, a little
to suspect her, and had locked her up
carefully, intending the very next Morning
to have married her up to my Liking. 
But she disappointed me within a
a few Hours, and escaped away to the
Lover of her own chusing, who lost no
Time: For they were married and beded,
and all within an Hour. 
‘But it shall be the worst Hour's Work
for them both that ever they did, for they
may starve, or beg, or steal together for
me. I will never give either of them a
Farthing.’ Here Jones starting up, cry'd, 

‘I really must be excused, I wish you
would leave me.’ ‘Come, come, Friend,’ 
said the Quaker, ‘don't give Way to Concern. 
You see there are other People
miserable, besides yourself.’ ‘I see there
are Madmen and Fools and Villains in
the World,’ cries Jones—‘But let me
give you a Piece of Advice; send for
your Daughter and Son-in-law home,
and don't be yourself the only Cause of
Misery to one you pretend to love.’ ‘Send
for her and her Husband home!’ cries
the Quaker loudly, ‘I would sooner send
for the two greatest Enemies I have in
the World!’ ‘Well, go home yourself,
or where you please,’ said Jones: 
‘For I will sit no longer in such Company.’ 
‘—Nay, Friend,’ answered the Quaker,
‘I scorn to impose my Company on any
one.’ He then offered to pull Money
from his Pocket, but Jones pushed him
with some Violence out of the Room. 
The Subject of the Quaker's Discourse
had so deeply affected Jones, that he stared
very wildly all the Time he was speaking. 
This the Quaker had observed, and this,
added to the rest of his Behaviour, inspired
honest Broadbrim with a Conceit, that his
Companion was, in Reality, out of his 

Seuses. Instead of resenting the Affront,
therefore, the Quaker was moved with Compassion
for his unhappy Circumstances; and
having communicated his Opinion to the
Landlord, he desired him to take great
Care of his Guest, and to treat him with
the highest Civility. 
‘Indeed,’ says the Landlord, ‘I shall
use no such Civility towards him: For it
seems, for all his laced Waistcoat there,
he is no more a Gentleman than myself; 
but a poor Parish Bastard bred up at a
great Squire's about 30 Miles off, and
now turned out of Doors, (not for any
Good to be sure.) I shall get him out of
my House as soon as possible. If I do
lose my Reckoning, the first Loss is always
the best. It is not above a Year ago that
I lost a Silver-spoon.’ 
‘What dost thou talk of a Parish Bastard,
Robin?’ answered the Quaker. 
‘Thou must certainly be mistaken in thy
Man.’ 
‘Not at all,’ replied Robin, ‘the Guide,
who knows him very well, told it me.’ 
For, indeed, the Guide had no sooner
taken his Place at the Kitchin-Fire, than he 

acquainted the whole Company with all he
knew, or had ever heard concerning Jones. 
The Quaker was no sooner assured by
this Fellow of the Birth and low Fortune of
Jones, than all Compassion for him vanished; 
and the honest, plain Man went home fired
with no less Indignation than a Duke would
have felt at receiving an Affront from such
a Person. 
The Landlord himself conceived an equal
Disdain for his Guest; so that when Jones
rung the Bell in order to retire to Bed, he
was acquainted that he could have no Bed
there. Besides Disdain of the mean Condition
of his Guest, Robin entertained violent
Suspicion of his Intentions, which were, he
supposed, to watch some favourable Opportunity
of robbing the House. In reality, he
might have been very well eased of these Apprehensions
by the prudent Precautions of his
Wife and Daughter, who had already removed
every thing which was not fixed to
the Freehold; but he was by Nature suspicious,
and had been more particularly so
since the Loss of his Spoon. In short, the
Dread of being robbed, totally absorbed the
comfortable Consideration that he had nothing
to lose. 

Jones being assured that he could have no
Bed, very contentedly betook himself to a
great Chair made with Rushes, when Sleep,
which had lately shunned his Company in
much better Apartments, generously paid
him a Visit in his humble Cell. 
As for the Landlord, he was prevented
by his Fears from retiring to Rest. He returned
therefore to the Kitchen Fire, whence
he could survey the only Door which opened
into the Parlour, or rather Hole, where
Jones was seated; and as for the Window
to that Room, it was impossible for any
Creature larger than a Cat to have made
his Escape through it. 



The Adventure of a Company of Soldiers. 
The Landlord having taken his Seat
directly opposite to the Door of the
Parlour, determined to keep Guard there
the whole Night. The Guide and another
Fellow remained long on Duty with him,
tho' they neither knew his Suspicions, nor
had any of their own. The true Cause of 

their watching did indeed, at length, put
an End to it; for this was no other than
the Strength and Goodness of the Beer, of
which having tippled a very large Quantity,
they grew at first very noisy and vociferous,
and afterwards fell both asleep. 
But it was not in the Power of Liquor to
compose the Fears of Robin. He continued
still waking in his Chair, with his Eyes
fixed stedfastly on the Door which led into
the Apartment of Mr. Jones, till a violent
Thundering at his outward Gate called him
from his Seat, and obliged him to open it; 
which he had no sooner done, than his
Kitchen was immediately full of Gentlemen
in red Coats, who all rushed upon him in
as tumultuous a Manner, as if they intended
to take his little Castle by Storm. 
The Landlord was now forced from his
Post to furnish his numerous Guests with
Beer, which they called for with great Eagerness; 
and upon his second or third Return
from the Cellar, he saw Mr. Jones
standing before the Fire in the midst of the
Soldiers; for it may easily be believed, that
the Arrival of so much good Company
should put an End to any Sleep, unless that 

from which we are only to be awakened by
the last Trumpet. 
The Company having now pretty well
satisfied their Thirst, nothing remained but
to pay the Reckoning, a Circumstance often
productive of much Mischief and Discontent
among the inferior Rank of Gentry; 
who are apt to find great Difficulty in assessing
the Sum, with exact Regard to distributive
Justice, which directs, that every
Man shall pay according to the Quantity
which he drinks. This Difficulty occurred
upon the present Occasion; and it was the
greater, as some Gentlemen had, in their
extreme Hurry, marched off, after their
first Draught, and had entirely forgot to
contribute any thing towards the said Reckoning. 
A violent Dispute now arose, in which
every Word may be said to have been deposed
upon Oath; for the Oaths were at
least equal to all the other Words spoken. 
In this Controversy, the whole Company
spoke together, and every Man seemed
wholly bent to extenuate the Sum which fell
to his Share; so that the most probable
Conclusion which could be foreseen, was,
that a large Portion of the Reckoning would 

fall to the Landlord's Share to pay, or
(what is much the same thing) would remain
unpaid. 
All this while Mr. Jones was engaged in
Conversation with the Serjeant; for that
Officer was entirely unconcerned in the present
Dispute, being privileged, by immemmorial
Custom, from all Contribution. 
The Dispute now grew so very warm,
that it seemed to draw towards a military
Decision, when Jones stepping forward, silenced
all their Clamours at once, by declaring
that he would pay the whole Reckoning,
which indeed amounted to no more
than three Shillings and Four-pence. 
This Declaration procured Jones the
Thanks and Applause of the whole Company. 
The Terms honourable, noble, and
worthy Gentleman, resounded through the
Room; nay, my Landlord himself began
to have a better Opinion of him, and almost
to disbelieve the Account which the Guide
had given. 
The Serjeant had informed Mr. Jones,
that they were marching against the Rebels,
and expected to be commanded by the glorious 

Duke of Cumberland. By which the
Reader may perceive (a Circumstance which
we have not thought necessary to communicate
before) that this was the very Time
when the late Rebellion was at the highest; 
and indeed the Banditti were now marched
into England, intending, as it was thought,
to fight the King's Forces, and to attempt
pushing forward to the Metropolis. 
Jones had some Heroic Ingredients in his
Composition, and was a hearty Well-wisher
to the glorious Cause of Liberty, and of the
Protestant Religion. It is no wonder, therefore,
that in Circumstances which would
have warranted a much more romantic and
wild Undertaking, it should occur to him
to serve as a Volunteer in this Expedition. 
Our commanding Officer had said all in
his Power to encourage and promote this
good Disposition, from the first Moment he
had been acquainted with it. He now proclaimed
the noble Resolution aloud, which
was received with great Pleasure by the
whole Company, who all cried out, ‘God
bless King George, and your Honour;’ 
and then added, with many Oaths, ‘We
will stand by you both to the last Drops
of our Blood.’ 

The Gentleman, who had been all Night
tippling at the Alehouse, was prevailed on
by some Arguments which a Corporal had
put into his Hand, to undertake the same
Expedition. And now the Portmanteau
belonging to Mr. Jones being put up in the
Baggage-cart, the Forces were about to
move forwards; when the Guide, stepping
up to Jones, said, ‘Sir, I hope you will
consider that the Horses have been kept
out all Night, and we have travelled a
great ways out of our Way.’ Jones was
surprized at the Impudence of this Demand,
and acquainted the Soldiers with the Merits
of his Cause, who were all unanimous in
condemning the Guide for his Endeavours
to put upon a Gentleman. Some said, he
ought to be tied Neck and Heels; others,
that he deserved to run the Gauntlope; 
and the Serjeant shook his Cane at him,
and wished he had him under his Command,
swearing heartily he would make an
Example of him. 
Jones contented himself, however, with
a negative Punishment, and walked off
with his new Comrades, leaving the Guide
to the poor Revenge of cursing and reviling
him, in which latter the Landlord joined, 

saying, ‘Ay, ay, he is a pure one, I warrant
you. A pretty Gentleman, indeed,
to go for a Soldier. He shall wear a laced
Waistcoat truly. It is an old Proverb
and a true one, all is not Gold that
glisters. I am glad my House is well rid
of him.’ 
All that Day the Serjeant and the young
Soldier marched together; and the former,
who was an arch Fellow, told the latter
many entertaining Stories of his Campaigns,
tho' in Reality he had never made any; 
for he was but lately come into the Service,
and had, by his own Dexterity, so well
ingratiated himself with his Officers, that
he had promoted himself to a Halberd,
chiefly indeed by his Merit in recruiting,
in which he was most excellently well skilled. 
Much Mirth and Festivity passed among
the Soldiers during their March. In which
the many Occurrences that had passed at
their last Quarters were remembered, and
every one, with great Freedom, made what
Jokes he pleased on his Officers, some of
which were of the coarser Kind, and very
near bordering on Scandal. This brought
to our Heroe's Mind the Custom which he 

had read of among the Greeks and Romans,
of indulging, on certain Festivals and solemn
Occasions, the Liberty to Slaves, of
using an uncontrouled Freedom of Speech
towards their Masters. 
Our little Army, which consisted of two
Companies of Foot, were now arrived at
the Place where they were to halt that
Evening. The Serjeant then acquainted his
Lieutenant, who was the commanding Officer,
that they had picked up two Fellows
in that Day's March; one of which, he
said, was as fine a Man as ever he saw
(meaning the Tippler) for that he was near
six Feet, well-proportioned, and strongly
limbed; and the other, (meaning Jones,)
would do well enough for the rear Rank. 
The new Soldiers were now produced
before the Officer, who having examined
the six Foot Man, he being first produced,
came next to survey Jones; at the first
Sight of whom, the Lieutenant could not
help shewing some Surprize; for, besides
that he was very well dressed, and was naturally
genteel, he had a remarkable Air
of Dignity in his Look, which is rarely
seen among the Vulgar, and is indeed not 

inseparably annexed to the Features of their
Superiors. 
‘Sir,’ said the Lieutenant, ‘my Serjeant
informed me, that you are desirous of
enlisting in the Company I have at present
under my command; if so, Sir, we shall
very gladly receive a Gentleman who promises
to do much Honour to the Company,
by bearing Arms in it.’ 
Jones answered: ‘That he had not mentioned
any thing of enlisting himself; 
that he was most zealously attached to the
glorious Cause for which they were going
to fight, and was very desirous of serving
as a Volunteer;’ concluding with some
Compliments to the Lieutenant, and expressing
the great Satisfaction he should
have in being under his Command. 
The Lieutenant returned his Civility,
commended his Resolution, shook him by
the Hand, and invited him to dine with
himself and the rest of the Officers. 




The Adventure of a Company of Officers. 
The Lieutenant, whom we mentioned
in the preceding Chapter, and
who commanded this Party, was now near
sixty Years of Age. He had entered very
young into the Army, and had served in
the Capacity of an Ensign at the Battle of
Tannieres; here he had received two Wounds,
and had so well distinguished himself, that
he was by the Duke of Marlborough advanced
to be a Lieutenant, immediately
after that Battle. 
In this Commission he had continued
ever since, viz. near forty Years; during
which Time he had seen vast Numbers
preferred over his Head, and had now the
Mortification to be commanded by Boys,
whose Fathers were at Nurse when he had
first entered into the Service. 
Nor was this ill Success in his Profession
solely owing to his having no Friends among
the Men in Power. He had the Misfortune
to incur the Displeasure of his Colonel, 

who for many Years continued in the Command
of this Regiment. Nor did he owe
the implacable Ill-will which this Man bore
him to any Neglect or Deficiency as an
Officer, nor indeed to any Fault in himself; 
but solely to the Indiscretion of his Wife,
who was a very beautiful Woman, and who,
tho' she was remarkably fond of her Husband,
would not purchase his Preferment
at the Expence of certain Favours which
the Colonel required of her. 
The poor Lieutenant was more peculiarly
unhappy in this, that while he felt the
Effects of the Enmity of his Colonel, he
neither knew, nor suspected, that he really
bore him any; for he could not suspect an
Ill-will for which he was not conscious of
giving any Cause; and his Wife, fearing what
her Husband's nice Regard to his Honour
might have occasioned, contented herself
with preserving her Virtue, without enjoying
the Triumphs of her Conquest. 
This unfortunate Officer (for so I think
he may be called) had many good Qualities,
besides his Merit in his Profession; 
for he was a religious, honest, good-natured
Man; and had behaved so well in his Command,
that he was highly esteemed and 

beloved, not only by the Soldiers of his own
Company; but by the whole Regiment. 
The other Officers who marched with
him were a French Lieutenant, who had
been long enough out of France to forget his
own Language, but not long enough in
England to learn ours, so that he really
spoke no Language at all, and could barely
make himself understood, on the most ordinary
Occasions. There were likewise two
Ensigns, both very young Fellows; one of
whom had been bred under an Attorney,
and the other was Son to the Wife of a
Nobleman's Butler. 
As soon as Dinner was ended, Jones informed
the Company of the Merriment
which had passed among the Soldiers upon
their March; ‘and yet,’ says he, ‘notwithstanding
all their Vociferation, I dare
swear they will behave more like Grecians
than Trojans when they come to the
Enemy.’ ‘Grecians and Trojans!’ says
one of the Ensigns, ‘who the Devil are
they? I have heard of all the Troops
in Europe, but never of any such as
these.’ 

‘Don't pretend to more Ignorance than
you have, Mr. Northerton,’ said the worthy
Lieutenant, ‘I suppose you have heard
of the Greeks and Trojans, tho', perhaps,
you never read Pope's Homer; who, I remember,
now the Gentleman mentions
it, compares the March of the Trojans to
the Cackling of Geese, and greatly commends
the Silence of the Grecians. And
upon my Honour, there is great Justice
in the Cadet's Observation.’ 
‘Begar, me remember dem ver well,’ 
said the French Lieutenant, ‘me ave read
dem at School in dans Madam Daciere,
des Greek, des Trojan, dey fight for von
Woman—ouy, ouy, me ave read all
dat.’ 
‘D&wblank;n Homo with all my Heart,’ says
Northerton, ‘I have the Marks of him in
my A&wblank; yet. There's Thomas of our Regiment,
always carries a Homo in his Pocket: 
D&wblank;n me if ever I come at it, if I
don't burn it. And there's Corderius,
another d&wblank;n'd Son of a Whore that
hath got me many a Flogging.’ 
‘Then you have been at School, Mr.
Northerton?’ said the Lieutenant. 

‘Ay d&wblank;n me have I,’ answered he,
‘the Devil take my Father for sending me
thither. The old Put wanted to make a
Parson of me, but d&wblank;n me, thinks I
to myself, I'l1 nick you there, old Cull: 
The Devil a Smack of your Nonsense,
shall you ever get into me. There's
Jimmey Oliver of our Regiment, he
narrowly escaped being a Pimp too; and
that would have been a thousand Pities: 
For d&wblank;n me if he is not one of the
prettiest Fellows in the whole World; 
but he went farther than I with the old
Cull: For Jimmey can neither write nor
read.’ 
‘You give your Friend a very good
Character,’ said the Lieutenant, ‘and a
very deserved one, I dare say; but
prithee, Northerton, leave off that foolish
as well as wicked Custom of swearing: 
For you are deceived, I promise you,
if you think there is Wit or Politeness
in it. I wish too, you would take my
Advice, and desist from abusing the
Clergy. Scandalous Names and Reflections
cast on any Body of Men, must be
always unjustifiable; but especially so,
when thrown on so sacred a Function: 

For to abuse the Body is to abuse the
Function itself; and I leave to you to
judge how inconsistent such a Behaviour
is in Men, who are going to fight in Defence
of the Protestant Religion.’ 
Mr. Adderley, which was the Name of
the other Ensign, had sat hitherto kicking
his Heels and humming a Tune, without
seeming to listen to the Discourse; he now
answered, ‘O Monsieur, on neparle pas de la
Religion dans la Guerre.’ ‘Well said,
Jack,’ cries Northerton, ‘if la Religion
was the only Matter, the Parsons should
fight their own Battles for me.’ 
‘I don't know, Gentlemen,’ says Jones,
‘what may be your Opinion; but I think
no Man can engage in a nobler Cause
than that of his Religion; and I have
observed in the little I have read of History,
that no Soldiers have fought so
bravely, as those who have been inspired
with a religious Zeal: For my own Part,
tho' I love my King and Country, I hope,
as well as any Man in it, yet the Protestant
Interest is no small Motive to my becoming
a Volunteer in the Cause.’ 

Northerton now winked on Adderley, and
whispered to him slily, ‘Smoke the Prig,
Adderley, smoke him.’ Then turning
to Jones, said to him, ‘I am very glad,
Sir, you have chosen our Regiment to
be a Volunteer in: For if our Parson
should at any Time take a Cup too much,
I find you can supply his Place. I presume,
Sir, you have been at the University,
may I crave the Favour to know
what College?’ 
‘Sir,’ answered Jones, ‘so far from
having been at the University, I have
even had the Advantage of yourself:
for I was never at School.’ 
‘I presumed,’ cries the Ensign, ‘only
upon the Information of your great
Learning’ —‘Oh! Sir,’ answered Jones,
‘it is as possible for a Man to know something
without having been at School; as
it is to have been at School and to know
nothing.’ 
‘Well said, young Volunteer,’ cries the
Lieutenant, ‘upon my Word, Northerton,
you had better let him alone, for he will
be too hard for you’. 

Northerton did not very well relish the
Sarcasm of Jones; but he thought the Provocation
was scarce sufficient to justify a
Blow, or a Rascal, or Scoundrel, which
were the only Repartees that suggested
themselves. He was, therefore, silent at present; 
but resolved to take the first Opportunity
of returning the Jest by Abuse. 
It now came to the Turn of Mr. Jones
to give a Toast, as it is called; who could
not refrain from mentioning his dear Sophia. 
This he did the more readily, as he imagined
it utterly impossible, that any one
present should guess the Person he meant. 
But the Lieutenant, who was the Toastmaster,
was not contented with Sophia only. 
He said, he must have her Sir-name; upon
which Jones hesitated a little, and presently
after named Miss Sophia Western. Ensign
Northerton declared, he would not drink her
Health, in the same Round with his own
Toast, unless somebody would vouch for
her. ‘I knew one Sophy Western,’ says he,
‘that was lain-with by Half the young
Fellows at Bath; and, perhaps, this is
the same Woman.’ Jones very solemnly
assured him of the contrary; asserting that 

the young Lady he named was one of great
Fashion and Fortune. ‘Ay, ay,’ says the
Ensign, ‘and so she is, d&wblank;n me it is the
same Woman, and I'll hold Half a
Dozen of Burgundy, Tom French of our
Regiment brings her into Company with
us at any Tavern in Bridges-street.’ He
then proceeded to describe her Person exactly,
(for he had seen her with her Aunt)
and concluded with saying, ‘That her
Father had a great Estate in Somersetshire.’ 
The Tenderness of Lovers can ill brook
the least jesting with the Names of their
Mistresses. However, Jones, tho' he had
enough of the Lover and of the Heroe
too in his Disposition, did not resent these
Slanders as hastily as, perhaps, he ought
to have done. To say the Truth, having
seen but little of this Kind of Wit, he did
not readily understand it, and for a long
Time imagined Mr. Northerton had really
mistaken his Charmer for some other. But
now turning to the Ensign with a stern
Aspect, he said, ‘Pray, Sir, chuse some
other Subject for your Wit: For I promise
you I will bear no jesting with this
Lady's Character.’ ‘Jesting,’ cries the
other, ‘d&wblank;n me if ever I was more in 

Earnest in my Life. Tom French of our
Regiment had both her and her Aunt at
Bath.’ ‘Then I must tell you in Earnest,’ 
cries Jones, ‘that you are one of
the most impudent Rascals upon Earth.’ 
He had no sooner spoken these Words,
than the Ensign, together with a Volley of
Curses, discharged a Bottle full at the Head
of Jones, which hitting him a little above
the right Temple, brought him instantly
to the Ground. 
The Conqueror perceiving the Enemy to lie
motionless before him, and Blood beginning
to flow pretty plentifully from his Wound,
began now to think of quitting the Field of
Battle, where no more Honour was to be
gotten; but the Lieutenant interposed, by
stepping before the Door, and thus cut off
his Retreat. 
Northerton was very importunate with
the Lieutenant for his Liberty; urging the
ill Consequences of his Stay, asking him,
what he could have done less! ‘Zounds!’ 
says he, ‘I was but in Jest with the Fellow. 
I never heard any Harm of Miss Western
in my Life.’ ‘Have not you?’ said the
Lieutenant, ‘then you richly deserve to be 

hanged, as well for making such Jests, as
for using such a Weapon. You are my
Prisoner, Sir; nor shall you stir from
hence, till a proper Guard comes to secure
you.’ 
Such an Ascendant had our Lieutenant
over this Ensign, that all that Fervency
of Courage which had levelled our poor
Heroe with the Floor, would scarce have
animated the said Ensign to have drawn his
Sword against the Lieutenant, had he then
had one dangling at his Side; but all the
Swords being hung up in the Room, were,
at the very Beginning of the Fray, secured
by the French Officer. So that Mr. Northerton
was obliged to attend the final Issue
of this Affair. 
The French Gentleman and Mr. Adderly,
at the Desire of their Commanding-Officer,
had raised up the Body of Jones; but as
they could perceive but little (if any) Sign
of Life in him, they again let him fall. 
Adderley damning him for having blooded
his Waistcoat; and the Frenchman
declaring, ‘Begar me no tush de Engliseman
de mort, me ave heard de Englise
Ley, Law, what you call, hang up de
Man dat tush him last.’ 

When the good Lieutenant applied himself
to the Door, he applied himself likewise
to the Bell; and the Drawer immediately
attending, he dispatched him for a
File of Musqueteers and a Surgeon. These
Commands, together with the Drawer's
Report of what he had himself seen, not
only produced the Soldiers, but presently
drew up the Landlord of the House, his
Wife and Servants, and, indeed, every
one else, who happened, at that Time, to
be in the Inn. 
To describe every Particular, and to relate
the whole Conversation of the ensuing
Scene, is not within my Power, unless I
had forty Pens, and could, at once, write
with them all together, as the Company now
spoke. The Reader must, therefore, content
himself with the most remarkable Incidents,
and perhaps he may very well excuse
the rest. 
The first Thing done, was securing the
Body of Northerton, who being delivered
into the Custody of six Men with a
Corporal at their Head, was by them conducted
from a Place which he was very
willing to leave, but it was unluckily to a 

Place whither he was very unwilling to go. 
To say the Truth, so whimsical are the Desires
of Ambition, the very Moment this
Youth had attained the above-mentioned
Honour, he would have been well contented
to have retired to some Corner of
the World, where the Fame of it should
never have reached his Ears. 
It surprizes us, and so, perhaps, it may
the Reader, that the Lieutenant, a worthy
and good Man, should have applied his
chief Care, rather to secure the Offender,
than to preserve the Life of the wounded
Person. We mention this Observation,
not with any View of pretending to account
for so odd a Behaviour, but lest some
Critic should hereafter plume himself on
discovering it. We would have these Gentlemen
know we can see what is odd in
Characters as well as themselves, but it is our
Business to relate Facts as they are; which
when we have done, it is the Part of the
learned and sagacious Reader to consult that
original Book of Nature, whence every
Passage in our Work is transcribed, tho'
we quote not always the particular Page for
its Authority. 

The Company which now arrived were of
a different Disposition. They suspended
their Curiosity concerning the Person of the
Ensign, till they should see him hereafter
in a more engaging Attitude. At present,
their whole Concern and Attention were
employed about the bloody Object on the
Floor; which being placed upright in a
Chair, soon began to discover some Symptoms
of Life and Motion. These were no sooner
perceived by the Company (for Jones was,
at first, generally concluded to be dead)
than they all fell at once to prescribing for
him: (For as none of the physical Order
was present, every one there took that
Office upon him.) 
Bleeding was the unanimous Voice of the
whole Room; but unluckily there was no
Operator at hand: Every one then cry'd,
‘Call the Barber;’ but none stirred a Step. 
Several Cordials were likewise prescribed in
the same ineffective Manner; till the Landlord
ordered up a Tankard of his strong
Beer, with a Toast, which he said was the
best Cordial in England. 
The Person principally assistant on this
Occasion, indeed the only one who did any 

Service, or seemed likely to do any, was
the Landlady. She cut off some of her
Hair, and applied it to the Wound to stop
the Blood. She fell to chasing the Youth's
Temples with her Hand; and having exprest
great Contempt for her Husband's Prescription
of Beer, she dispatched one of
her Maids to her own Closet for a Bottle of
Brandy, of which, as soon as it was brought,
she prevailed upon Jones, who was just
returned to his Senses, to drink a very large
and plentiful Draught. 
Soon afterwards arrived the Surgeon,
who having viewed the Wound, having
shaken his Head, and blamed every Thing
which was done, ordered his Patient instantly
to Bed; in which Place, we think
proper to leave him, some Time, to his
Repose, and shall here, therefore, put an
End to this Chapter. 




Containing the great Address of the Landlady; 
the great Learning of a Surgeon,
and the solid Skill in Casuistry of the worthy
Lieutenant. 
When the wounded Man was carried
to his Bed, and the House
began again to clear up from the Hurry
which this Accident had occasioned; the
Landlady thus addressed the commanding
Officer. ‘I am afraid, Sir,’ said she,
‘this young Man did not behave himself
as well as he should do to your Honours; 
and if he had been killed, I suppose he
had had but his Desarts; to be sure,
when Gentlemen admit inferior Parsons
into their Company, they oft to keep
their Distance; but, as my first Husband
used to say, few of em know how to do
it. For my own Part, I am sure, I
should not have suffered any Fellows to
include themselves into Gentlemen's Company:
but I thoft he had been an Officer
himself, till the Serjeant told me he was
but a Recruit.’ 

‘Landlady,’ answered the Lieutenant,
‘you mistake the whole Matter. The
young Man behaved himself extremely
well, and is, I believe, a much better
Gentleman than the Ensign, who abused
him. If the young Fellow dies, the Man
who struck him will have most Reason to
be sorry for it: For the Regiment will
get rid of a very troublesome Fellow, who
is a Scandal to the Army; and if he
escapes from the Hands of Justice, blame
me, Madam, that's all.’ 
‘Ay! Ay! good Lack-a-day!’ said the
Landlady, ‘who could have thoft it? 
Ay, ay, ay, I am satisfied your Honour
will see Justice done; and to be sure it
oft to be to every one. Gentlemen oft
not to kill poor Folks without answering
for it. A poor Man hath a Soul to be
saved as well as his Betters.’ 
‘Indeed, Madam,’ said the Lieutenant,
‘you do the Volunteer wrong; I dare
swear he is more of a Gentleman than the
Officer.’ 
‘Ay,’ cries the Landlady, ‘why look
you there now: Well, my first Husband 

was a wise Man; he used to say, you
can't always know the Inside by the Outside. 
Nay, that might have been well
enough too: For I never saw'd him till
he was all over blood. Who would have
thoft it! mayhap, some young Gentleman
crossed in Love. Good Lack-a-day!
if he should die, what a Concern it
would be to his Parents! Why sure
the Devil must possess the wicked Wretch
to do such an Act. To be sure, he is a
Scandal to the Army, as your Honour
says: For most of the Gentlemen of the
Army that ever I saw, are quite different
Sort of People, and look as if they would
scorn to spill any Christian Blood as much
as any Men. I mean, that is, in a civil
Way, as my first Husband used to say. 
To be sure, when they come into the
Wars, there must be Blood-shed; but
that they are not to be blamed for. The
more of our Enemies they kill there, the
better; and I wish, with all my Heart,
they could kill every Mother's Son of
them.’ 
‘O fie! Madam,’ said the Lieutenant
smiling, ‘All is rather too bloody-minded
a Wish.’ 

‘Not at all, Sir,’ answered she, ‘I am
not at all bloody-minded, only to our
Enemies, and there is no Harm in that. 
To be sure it is natural for us to wish our
Enemies dead, that the Wars may be at
an End, and our Taxes be lowered: 
For it is a dreadful Thing to pay as we
do. Why now there is above forty
Shillings for Window-lights, and yet we
have stopt up all we could; we have almost
blinded the House I am sure: Says
I to the Exciseman, says I, I think you
oft to favour us, I am sure we are very
good Friends to the Government; and
so we are for sartain: For we pay a
Mint of Money to 'um. And yet I
often think to myself, the Government
doth not imagine itself more obliged to
us, than to those that don't pay 'um a
Farthing. Ay, ay; it is the Way of the
World.’ 
She was proceeding in this Manner,
when the Surgeon entered the Room. The
Lieutenant immediately asked how his Patient
did? But he resolved him only by
saying, ‘Better, I believe, than he would
have been by this Time, if I had not
been called; and even as it is, perhaps 

it would have been lucky if I could have
been called sooner.’ ‘I hope, Sir,’ said
the Lieutenant, ‘the Skull is not fractured.’ 
‘Hum,’ cries the Surgeon, ‘Fractures
are not always the most dangerous Symptoms
Contusions and Lacerations are
often attended with worse Phænomena,
and with more fatal Consequences than
Fractures. People who know nothing of
the Matter conclude, if the Skull is not
fractured, all is well; whereas, I had rather
see a Man's Skull broke all to Pieces,
than some Contusions I have met with.’ 
‘I hope,’ says the Lieutenant, ‘there are
no such Symptoms here.’ ‘Symptoms,’ 
answered the Surgeon, ‘are not always regular
nor constant. I have known very
unfavourable Symptoms in the Morning
change to favourable ones at Noon, and
return to unfavourable again at Night. 
Of Wounds, indeed, it is rightly and truly
said, Nemo repente fuit turpissimus. I
was once, I remember, called to a Patient,
who had received a violent Contusion
in his Tibia, by which the exterior
Cutis was lacerated, so that there was a
profuse sanguinary Discharge; and the
interior Membranes were so divellicated,
that the Os or Bone very plainly appeared
through the Aperture of the Vulnus or 

Wound. Some febrile Symptoms intervening
at the same Time, (for the Pulse
was exuberant and indicated much Phlebotomy)
I apprehended an immediate
Mortification. To prevent which I presently
made a large Orifice in the Vein
of the left Arm, whence I drew twenty
Ounces of Blood; which I expected to have
found extremely sizy and glutinous, or
indeed coagulated, as it is in pleuritic
Complaints; but, to my Surprize, it appeared
rosy and florid, and its Consistency
differed little from the Blood of those in
perfect Health. I then applied a Fomentation
to the Part, which highly answered
the Intention, and after three or
four Times dressing, the Wound began to
discharge a thick Pus or Matter, by which
Means the Cohesion—but perhaps
I do not make myself perfectly well
understood.’ ‘No really,’ answered the
Lieutenant, ‘I cannot say I understand a
Syllable.’ ‘Well, Sir,’ said the Surgeon,
‘then I shall not tire your Patience; in
short, within six Weeks, my Patient was
able to walk upon his Legs, as perfectly
as he could have done before he received
the Contusion.’ ‘I wish, Sir,’ said the
Lieutenant, ‘you would be so kind only
to inform me, whether the Wound this 

young Gentleman hath had the Misfortune
to receive is likely to prove mortal?’ 
‘Sir,’ answered the Surgeon, ‘to say
whether a Wound will prove mortal or
not at first Dressing, would be very weak
and fooolish Presumption: We are all mortal,
and Symptoms often occur in a Cure
which the greatest of our Profession could
never foresee.’—‘But do you think him
in Danger?’ says the other. ‘In Danger!
ay, surely,’ cries the Doctor, ‘who is
there among us, who in the most perfect
Health can be said not to be in Danger? 
Can a Man, therefore, with so bad a
Wound as this be said to be out of Danger? 
All I can say, at present, is, that
it is well I was called as I was, and perhaps
it would have been better if I had
been called sooner. I will see him again
early in the Morning, and in the mean
Time let him be kept extremely quiet,
and drink liberally of Water-Gruel.’ 
‘Won't you allow him Sack-whey,’ said
the Landlady? ‘Ay, ay, Sack-whey,’ 
cries the Doctor, ‘if you will, provided it
be very small.’ ‘And a little Chicken-broth
too,’ added she?’ —‘Yes, yes,
Chicken-broth,’ said the Doctor, ‘is very
good.’ ‘May'nt I make him some
Jellies too,’ said the Landlady?’ ‘Ay, 

ay,’ answered the Doctor, ‘Jellies are
very good for Wounds, for they promote
Cohesion.’ And, indeed, it was lucky
she had not named Soop or high Sauces,
for the Doctor would have complied, rather
than have lost the Custom of the House. 
The Doctor was no sooner gone, than
the Landlady began to trumpet forth his
Fame to the Lieutenant, who had not,
from their short Acquaintance conceived
quite so favourable an Opinion of his physical
Abilities, as the good Woman, and
all the Neighbourhood entertained; (and
indeed very rightly) for tho' I am afraid
the Doctor was a little of a Coxcomb,
he might be nevertheless very much of a
Surgeon. 
The Lieutenant having collected from
the learned Discourse of the Surgeon, that
Mr. Jones was in great Danger, gave
Orders for keeping Mr. Northerton under a
very strict Guard, intending in the Morning
to attend him to a Justice of Peace, and to
commit the conducting the Troops to Glocester
to the French Lieutenant, who, tho'
he could neither read, write, nor speak any
Language, was, however, a good Officer. 

In the Evening our Commander sent a
Message to Mr. Jones, that if a Visit would
not be troublesome he would wait on him. 
This Civility was very kindly and thankfully
received by Jones, and the Lieutenant
accordingly went up to his Room, where
he found the wounded Man much better
than he expected; nay, Jones assured his
Friend, that if he had not received express
Orders to the contrary from the Surgeon,
he should have got up long ago: 
For he appeared to himself to be as well as
ever, and felt no other Inconvenience from
his Wound but an extreme Soreness on
that Side of his Head. 
‘I should be very glad,’ quoth the Lieutenant,
‘that you was as well as you fancy
yourself: For then you would be able to
do yourself Justice immediately; for
when a Matter can't be made up, as in
Case of a Blow, the sooner you take him
out the better; but I am afraid you think
yourself better than you are, and he
would have too much Advantage over
you.’ 
‘I'll try, however,’ answered Jones, ‘if
you please, and will be so kind to lend 

me a Sword: For I have none here of
my own.’ 
‘My Sword is heartily at your Service,’ 
my dear Boy, cries the Lieutenant, kissing
him, ‘you are a brave Lad, and I love your
Spirit; but I fear your Strength: For such a
Blow, and so much Loss of Blood, must
have very much weakened you; and tho'
you feel no Want of Strength in your Bed,
yet you most probably would after a
Thrust or two. I can't consent to your
taking him out To-night; buy I hope
you will be able to come up with us before
we get many Days March advance; 
and I give you my Honour you shall have
Satisfaction, or the Man who hath injured
you shan't stay in our Regiment.’ 
‘I wish,’ said Jones, ‘it was possible to
decide this Matter To-night; now you
have mentioned it to me, I shall not be
able to rest.’ 
‘O never think of it,’ returned the other,
‘a few Days will make no Difference. The
Wounds of Honour are not like those in
your Body. They suffer nothing by the
Delay of Cure. It will be altogether as 

well for you, to receive Satisfaction a
Week hence as now.’ 
‘But suppose,’ says Jones, ‘I should
grow worse, and die of the Consequences
of my present Wound.’ 
‘Then your Honour,’ answered the
Lieutenant, ‘will require no Reparation
at all. I myself will do Justice to your
Character, and will testify to the World
your Intention to have acted properly, if
you had recovered.’ 
‘Still,’ replied Jones, ‘I am concerned
at the Delay. I am almost afraid to mention
it to you who are a Soldier; but tho'
I have been a very wild young Fellow,
still in my most serious Moments, and at
the Bottom, I am really a Christian.’ 
‘So am I too, I assure you,’ said the
Officer: ‘And so zealous a one, that I
was pleased with you at Dinner for taking
up the Cause of your Religion; and I am
a little offended with you now, young
Gentleman, that you should express a
Fear of declaring your Faith before any
one.’ 

‘But how terrible must it be,’ cries Jones,
‘to any one who is really a Christian, to
cherish Malice in his Breast, in Opposition
to the Command of him who hath
expressly forbid it? How can I bear to
do this on a sick Bed? Or how shall I
make up my Account, with such an Article
as this in my Bosom against me?’ 
‘Why I believe there is such a Command,’ 
cries the Lieutenant; ‘but a Man
of Honour can't keep it. And you must
be a Man of Honour, if you will be in
the Army. I remember I once put the
Case to our Chaplain over a Bowl of
Punch, and he confessed there was much
Difficulty in it; but said, he hoped there
might be a Latitude granted to Soldiers
in this one Instance; and to be sure it is
our Duty to hope so: For who would
bear to live without his Honour? No,
no, my dear Boy, be a good Christian as
long as you live; but be a Man of Honour
too, and never put up an Affront; 
not all the Books, nor all the Parsons in
the World, shall ever persuade me to that. 
I love my Religion very well, but I love
my Honour more. There must be some
Mistake in the wording the Text, or in 

the Translation, or in the understanding
it, or somewhere or other. But however
that be, a Man must run the Risque, for
he must preserve his Honour. So compose
yourself To-night, and I promise
you, you shall have an Opportunity of doing
yourself Justice.’ Here he gave Jones
a hearty Buss, shook him by the Hand,
and took his Leave. 
But tho' the Lieutenant's Reasoning was
very satisfactory to himself, it was not entirely
so to his Friend. Jones therefore having
revolved this Matter much in his
Thoughts, at last came to a Resolution,
which the Reader will find in the next
Chapter. 



A most dreadful Chapter indeed; and which
few Readers ought to venture upon in an
Evening, especially when alone. 
Jones swallowed a large Mess of
Chicken, or rather Cock, Broth, with
a very good Appetite, as indeed he would
have done the Cock it was made of, with
a Pound of Bacon into the Bargain; and 

now, finding in himself no Deficiency of
either Health or Spirit, he resolved to get
up and seek his Enemy. 
But first he sent for the Serjeant, who was
his first Acquaintance among these military
Gentlemen. Unluckily that worthy Officer
having, in a literal Sense, taken his Fill
of Liquor, had been some Time retired to
his Bolster, where he was snoring so loud,
that it was not easy to convey a Noise in at
his Ears capable of drowning that which
issued from his Nostrils. 
However, as Jones persisted in his Desire
of seeing him, a vociferous Drawer at length
found Means to disturb his Slumbers, and
to acquaint him with the Message. Of
which the Serjeant was no sooner made sensible,
than he arose from his Bed, and having
his Clothes already on, immediately
attended. Jones did not think fit to acquaint
the Serjeant with his Design, tho' he might
have done it with great Safety; for the
Halberdier was himself a Man of Honour,
and had killed his Man. He would therefore
have faithfully kept this Secret, or indeed
any other which no Reward was published
for discovering. But as Jones knew
not these Virtues in so short an Acquaintance, 

his Caution was perhaps prudent and
commendable enough. 
He began therefore by acquainting the
Serjeant, that now he was entered into the
Army, he was ashamed of being without
what was perhaps the most necessary Implement
of a Soldier, namely, a Sword; adding,
that he should be infinitely obliged to
him if he could procure one. ‘For which,’ 
says he, ‘I will give you any reasonable
Price. Nor do I insist upon its being Silver-hilted,
only a good Blade, and such
as may become a Soldier's Thigh.’ 
The Serjeant, who well knew what had
happened, and had heard that Jones was in a
very dangerous Condition, immediately concluded,
from such a Message, at such a
Time of Night, and from a Man in such a
Situation, that he was light-headed. Now
as he had his Wit (to use that Word in its
common Signification) always ready, he
bethought himself of making his Advantage
of this Humour in the sick Man. 
‘Sir,’ says he, ‘I believe I can fit you. 
I have a most excellent Piece of Stuff by
me. It is not indeed Silver-hilted, which,
as you say, doth not become a Soldier; 
but the Handle is decent enough, and the 

Blade one of the best in Europe. —It is a
Blade that—a Blade that—In short, I will
fetch it you this Instant, and you shall see
it and handle it. —I am glad to see your
Honour so well with all my Heart.’ 
Being instantly returned with the Sword,
he delivered it to Jones, who took it and
drew it; and then told the Serjeant it would
do very well, and bid him name his Price. 
The Serjeant now began to harangue in
Praise of his Goods. He said (nay he swore
very heartily) ‘that the Blade was taken
from a French Officer of very high Rank,
at the Battle of Dettingen. I took it myself,’ 
says he, ‘from his Side, after I had
knocked him o' the Head. The Hilt
was a golden one. That I sold to one of
our fine Gentlemen; for there are some
of them, an't please your Honour, who
value the Hilt of a Sword more than the
Blade.’ 
Here the other stopped him; and begged
him to name a Price. The Serjeant, who
thought Jones absolutely out of his Senses,
and very near his End, was afraid, lest he
should injure his Family by asking too little
—However, after a Moment's Hesitation, 

he contented himself with naming twenty
Guineas, and swore he would not sell it for
less to his own Brother. 
‘Twenty Guineas!’ says Jones, in the
utmost Surprize, ‘sure you think I am mad,
or that I never saw a Sword in my Life. 
Twenty Guineas indeed! I did not imagine
you would endeavour to impose
upon me. —Here, take the Sword—No,
now I think on't, I will keep it myself,
and shew it your Officer in the Morning,
acquainting him, at the same Time, what
a Price you asked me for it.’ 
The Serjeant, as we have said, had always
his Wit (in sensu prædicto) about him,
and now plainly saw that Jones was not in the
Condition he had apprehended him to be; he
now, therefore, counterfeited as great Surprize
as the other had shewn, and said, ‘I
am certain, Sir, I have not asked you so
much out of the way. Besides, you are
to consider, it is the only Sword I have,
and I must run the Risque of my Officer's
Displeasure, by going without one myself. 
And truly, putting all this together, I
don't think twenty Shillings was so much
out of the Way.’ 

‘Twenty Shillings!’ cries Jones, ‘why
you just now asked me twenty Guineas.’ 
‘How! cries the Serjeant—Sure your Honour
must have mistaken me; or else I
mistook myself–––and indeed I am but half
awake–––Twenty Guineas indeed! no wonder
your Honour flew into such a Passion. 
I say twenty Guineas too–––No, no, I
meant twenty Shillings, I assure you. 
And when your Honour comes to consider
every thing, I hope you will not think
that so extravagant a Price. It is indeed
true, you may buy a Weapon which
looks as well for less Money. But—’ 
Here Jones interrupted him, saying, ‘I
will be so far from making any Words
with you, that I will give you a Shilling
more than your Demand.’ He then gave
him a Guinea, bid him return to his Bed,
and wished him a good March; adding,
he hoped to overtake them before the Division
reached Worcester. 
The Serjeant very civilly took his Leave,
fully satisfied with his Merchandize, and
not a little pleased with his dextrous Recovery
from that false Step into which his 

Opinion of the Sick Man's Light-headedness
had betrayed him. 
As soon as the Serjeant was departed,
Jones rose from his Bed, and dressed himself
entirely, putting on even his Coat,
which, as its Colour was white, shewed
very visibly the Streams of Blood which had
flowed down it; and now, having grasped
his new-purchased Sword in his Hand, he
was going to issue forth, when the Thought
of what he was about to undertake laid suddenly
hold of him, and he began to reflect
that in a few Minutes he might possibly deprive
a human Being of Life, or might lose
his own. ‘Very well,’ said he, ‘and in
what Cause do I venture my Life? Why,
in that of my Honour. And who is this
human Being? A Rascal who hath injured
and insulted me without Provocation. 
But is not Revenge forbidden by
Heaven? –––Yes, but it is enjoined by the
World. Well, but shall I obey the World
in Opposition to the express Commands
of Heaven? Shall I incur the divine Displeasure
rather than be called––––Ha–––– 
Coward–––Scoundrel? —I'll think no
more, I am resolved and must fight
him.’ 

The Clock had now struck Twelve, and
every one in the House were in their Beds,
except the Centinel who stood to guard
Northerton, when Jones softly opening his
Door, issued forth in Pursuit of his Enemy,
of whose Place of Confinement he had received
a perfect Description from the
Drawer. It is not easy to conceive a much
more tremendous Figure than he now exhibited. 
He had on, as we have said, a
light-coloured Coat, covered with Streams
of Blood. His Face, which missed that
very Blood, as well as twenty Ounces more
drawn from him by the Surgeon, was pallid. 
Round his Head was a Quantity of
Bandage, not unlike a Turban. In the right
Hand he carried a Sword, and in the left a
Candle. So that the bloody Banquo was
not worthy to be compared to him. In
Fact, I believe a more dreadful Apparition
was never raised in a Church-yard, nor in
the Imagination of any good People met
in a Winter Evening over a Christmas Fire
in Somersetshire. 
When the Centinel first saw our Heroe
approach, his Hair began gently to lift up
his Grenadier's Cap; and in the same Instant
his Knees fell to Blows with each 

other. Presently his whole Body was seized
with worse than an Ague Fit. He then
fired his Piece, and fell flat on his Face. 
Whether Fear or Courage was the Occasion
of his Firing, or whether he took Aim
at the Object of his Terror, I cannot say. 
If he did, however, he had the good Fortune
to miss his Man. 
Jones seeing the Fellow fall, guessed the
Cause of his Fright, at which he could not
forbear smiling, not in the least reflecting
on the Danger from which he had just
escaped. He then passed by the Fellow,
who still continued in the Posture in which
he fell, and entered the Room where Northerton,
as he had heard, was confined. Here,
in a solitary Situation, he found—an empty
Quart Pot standing on the Table, on which
some Beer being spilt, looked as if the Room
had lately been inhabited; but at present it
was entirely vacant. 
Jones then apprehended it might lead to
some other Apartment; but, upon searching
all round it, he could perceive no other Door
than that at which he entered, and where
the Centinel had been ported. He then
proceeded to call Northerton several Times by 

his Name; but no one answered; nor did
this serve to any other Purpose than to confirm
the Centinel in his Terrors, who was
now convinced that the Volunteer was
dead of his Wounds, and that his Ghost
was come in Search of the Murtherer: He
now lay in all the Agonies of Horror, and
I wish, with all my Heart, some of those
Actors, who are hereafter to represent a
Man frighted out of his Wits, had seen
him, that they might be taught to copy
Nature instead of performing several antic
Tricks and Gestures, for the Entertainment
and Applause of the Galleries. 
Perceiving the Bird was flown, at least
despairing to find him, and rightly apprehending
that the Report of the Firelock
would alarm the whole House, our Heroe now
blew out his Candle, and gently stole back
again to his Chamber, and to his his Bed: 
Whither he would not have been able to have
gotten undiscovered, had any other Person
been on the same Stair-case, save only one
Gentleman who was confined to his Bed by
the Gout; for before he could reach the
Door to his Chamber, the Hall where the
Centinel had been posted was half full of
People. Some in their Shirts, and others 

not half drest, all very earnestly enquiring
of each other, what was the Matter? 
The Soldier was now found lying in the
same Place and Posture in which we just
before left him. Several immediately applied
themselves to raise him, and some
concluded him dead: But they presently
saw their Mistake; for he not only struggled
with those who laid their Hands on
him, but fell a roaring like a Bull. In
reality, he imagined so many Spirits or
Devils were handling him; for his Imagination
being possessed with the Horror of an
Apparition, converted every Object he
saw or felt, into nothing but Ghosts and
Spectres. 
At length he was overpowered by Numbers,
and got upon his Legs; when Candies
being brought, and seeing two or three
of his Commands present, he came a little
to himself; but when they asked him what
was the Matter? he answered, ‘I am a
dead Man, that's all, I'm a dead Man. 
I can't recover it. I have seen him.’ 
‘What hast thou seen, Jack,’ says one of
the Soldiers. ‘Why, I have seen the young
Volunteer that was killed Yesterday.’ He
then imprecated the most heavy Curses on 

himself, if he had not seen the Volunteer,
all over Blood, vomiting Fire out of his
Mouth and Nostrils, pass by him into the
Chamber where Ensign Northerton was, and
then seizing the Ensign by the Throat, fly
away with him in a Clap of Thunder. 
This Relation met with a gracious Reception
from the Audience. All the Women
present believed it firmly, and prayed
Heaven to defend them from Murther. 
Amongst the Men too, many had Faith in
the Story; but others turned it into Derision
and Ridicule; and a Serjeant who was present,
answered very coolly: ‘Young Man,
you will hear more of this for going to
sleep, and dreaming on your Post.’ 
The Soldier replied, ‘You may punish
me if you please; but I was as broad
awake as I am now; and the Devil carry
me away, as he hath the Ensign, if I did
not see the dead Man, as I tell you, with
Eyes as big and as fiery as two large
Flambeaux.’ 
The Commander of the Forces, and the
Commander of the House, were now both
arrived: For the former being awake at
the Time, and hearing the Centinel fire his 

Piece, thought it his Duty to rise immediately,
tho' he had no great Apprehensions
of any Mischief; whereas the Apprehensions
of the latter were much greater, lest
her Spoons and Tankards should be upon
the March, without having received any such
Orders from her. 
Our poor Centinel, to whom the Sight
of this Officer was not much more welcome
than the Apparition, as he thought it, which
he had seen before, again related the dreadful
Story, and with many Additions of
Blood and Fire: But he had the Misfortune
to gain no Credit with either of the
last-mentioned Persons; for the Officer,
tho' a very religious Man, was free from
all Terrors of this Kind; besides, having so
lately left Jones in the Condition we have
seen, he had no Suspicion of his being dead. 
As for the Landlady, tho' not over religious,
she had no kind of Aversion to the
Doctrine of Spirits; but there was a Circumstance
in the Tale which she well knew
to be false, as we shall inform the Reader
presently. 
But whether Northerton was carried away
in Thunder or Fire, or in whatever other
Manner he was gone; it was now certain, 

that his Body was no longer in Custody. 
Upon this Occasion, the Lieutenant
formed a Conclusion not very different from
what the Serjeant is just mentioned to
have made before, and immediately ordered
the Centinel to be taken Prisoner. So that,
by a strange Reverse of Fortune (tho' not
very uncommon in a military Life) the
Guard became the guarded. 



The Conclusion of the foregoing Adventure. 
Besides the Suspicion of Sleep, the
Lieutenant harboured another, and
worse Doubt, against the poor Centinel,
and this was that of Treachery: For as he
believed not one Syllable of the Apparition,
so he imagined the whole to be an Invention,
formed only to impose upon him, and
that the Fellow had, in Reality, been bribed
by Northerton to let him escape. And this he
imagined the rather, as the Fright appeared
to him, the more unnatural in one who had
the Character of as brave and bold a Man
as any in the Regiment, having been in several
Actions, having received several
Wounds, and, in a Word, having behaved 

himself always like a good and valiant Soldier. 
That the Reader, therefore, may not
conceive the least ill Opinion of such a Person,
we shall not delay a Moment in rescuing
his Character from the Imputation of
this Guilt. 
Mr. Northerton then, as we have before observed,
was fully satisfied with the Glory
which he had obtained from this Action. 
He had, perhaps, seen, or heard, or guessed,
that Envy is apt to attend Fame. Not
that I would here insinuate, that he was
heathenishly inclined to believe in, or to
worship, the Goddess Nemesis; for, in fact,
I am convinced he never heard of her
Name. He was, besides, of an active Disposition,
and had a great Antipathy to those
close Winter Quarters in the Castle of
Gloucester, for which a Justice of Peace
might possibly give him a Billet. Nor was
he moreover free from some uneasy Meditations
on a certain wooden Edifice, which I
forbear to name, in Conformity to the Opinion
of Mankind, who, I think, rather
ought to honour than to be ashamed of this
Building, as it is, or at least might be made,
of more Benefit to Society than almost any 

other public Erection. In a Word, to
hint at no more Reasons for his Conduct,
Mr. Northerton was desirous of departing that
Evening, and nothing remained for him but
to contrive the Quomodo, which appeared to
be a Matter of some Difficulty. 
Now this young Gentleman, tho' somewhat
crooked in his Morals, was perfectly
strait in his Person, which was extremely
strong and well made. His Face too was
accounted handsome by the Generality of
Women, for was broad and ruddy, with
tolerably good Teeth. Such Charms did
not fail making an Impression on my Land-lady,
who had no little Relish for this kind
of Beauty. She had, indeed, a real Compassion
for the young Man; and hearing
from the Surgeon that Affairs were like to
go ill with the Volunteer, she suspected they
might hereafter wear no beign Aspect with
the Ensign. Having obtained, therefore,
leave to make him a Visit, and finding him
in a very melancholy Mood, which she considerably
heightened, by telling him there
were scarce any Hopes of the Volunteer's
Life, she proceeded to throw forth some
Hints, which the other readily and eagerly
taking up, they soon came to a right Understanding; 
and it was at length agreed, 

that the Ensign should, at a certain Signal,
ascend the Chimney, which communicating
very soon with that of the Kitchen, he
might there again let himself down; for
which she would give him an Opportunity,
by keeping the Coast clear. 
But lest our Readers, of a different
Complexion, should take this Occasion of
too hastily condemning all Compassion as a
Folly, and pernicious to Society, we think
proper to mention another Particular, which
might possibly have some little Share in this
Action. The Ensign happened to be at
this Time possessed of the Sum of fifty
Pounds, which did indeed belong to the
whole Company: For the Captain having
quarreled with his Lieutenant, had entrusted
the Payment of his Company to the
Ensign. This Money, however, he thought
proper to deposite in my Landlady's Hand,
possibly by way of Bail or Security that he
would hereafter appear and answer to the
Charge against him; but whatever were the
Conditions, certain it is, that she had the
Money, and the Ensign his Liberty. 
The Reader may, perhaps, expect, from
the compassionate Temper of this good
Woman, that when she saw the poor Centinel 

taken Prisoner for a Fact of which she
knew him innocent, that  she should immediately
have interposed in his Behalf; but
whether it was that she had already exhausted
all her Compassion in the above-mentioned
Instance, or that the Features of this
Fellow, tho' not very different from those
of the Ensign, could not raise it, I will not
determine; but so far from being an Advocate
for the present Prisoner, she urged
his Guilt to his Officer, declaring
with uplifted Eyes and Hands, that she
would not have had any Concern in the
Escape of a Murderer for all the World. 
Every thing was now once more quiet; 
and most of the Company returned again
to their Beds; but the Landlady, either
from the natural Activity of her Disposition,
or from her Fear for her Plate, having no
Propensity to sleep, prevailed with the Officers,
as they were to march within little
more than an Hour, to spend that Time
with her over a Bowl of Punch. 
Jones had lain awake all this while, and
had heard great Part of the Hurry and
Bustle that had passed, of which he had
now some Curiosity to know the Particulars. 
He therefore applied to his Bell, which he 

rung at least twenty Times without any
Effect; for my Landlady was in such high
Mirth with her Company, that no Clapper
could be heard there but her own, and the
Drawer and Chambermaid, who were sitting
together in the Kitchen (for neither
durst he sit up, nor she lie in Bed alone)
the more they heard the Bell ring, the more
they were frightened, and, as it were, nailed
down in their Places. 
At last, at a lucky Interval of Chat, the
Sound reached the Ears of our good Landlady,
who presently sent forth her Summons,
which both her Servants instantly
obeyed. ‘Joo,’ says the Mistress, ‘don't
you hear the Gentleman's Bell ring? why
don't you go up?’ ‘It is not my Business,’ 
answered the Drawer, ‘to wait
upon the Chambers. It is Betty Chambermaid's!’ ‘If you come to that,’ answered
the Maid, ‘it is not my Business to
wait upon Gentlemen. I have done it,
indeed, sometimes; but the Devil fetch
me if ever I do again, since you make
your Preambles about it.’ The Bell still
ringing violently, their Mistress fell into a
Passion, and swore, if the Drawer did not
go up immediately, she would turn him
away that very Morning. ‘If you do, 

Madam,’ says he, ‘I can't help it. I
won't do another Servant's Business.’ 
She then applied herself to the Maid, and
endeavoured to prevail by gentle Means; 
but all in vain, Betty was as inflexible as
Joo. Both insisted it was not their Business,
and they would not do it. 
The Lieutenant then fell a laughing, and
said, ‘Come, I will put an End to this
Contention;’ and then turning to the Servants,
commended them for their Resolution,
in neither giving up the Point; but
added, he was sure, if one would consent
to go, the other would. To which Proposal
they both agreed in an Instant, and
accordingly went up very lovingly and close
together. When they were gone, the Lieutenant
appeased the Wrath of the Landlady,
by satisfying her why they were both so unwilling
to go alone. 
They returned soon after, and acquainted
their Mistress, that the sick Gentleman was
so far from being dead, that he spoke as
heartily as if he was well; and that he gave
his Service to the Captain, and should be
very glad of the Favour of seeing him before
he marched. 

The good Lieutenant immediately complied
with his Disires, and sitting down by
his Bed-side, acquainted him with the Scene,
which had happened below, concluding
with his Intentions to make an Example of
the Centinel. 
Upon this, Jones related to him the
whole Truth, and earnestly begged him not
to punish the poor Soldier, ‘who, I am
confident,’ says he, ‘is as innocent of
the Ensign's Escape, as he is of forging
any Lie, or of endeavouring to impose on
you.’ 
The Lieutenant hesitated a few Moments,
and then answered: ‘Why, as you have
cleared the Fellow of one Part of the
Charge, so it will be impossible to prove
the other; because he was not the only
Centinel. But I have a good mind to
punish the Rascal for being a Coward. 
Yet who knows what Effect the Terror of
such an Apprehension may have; and to
say the Truth, he hath always behaved
well against an Enemy. Come, it is a
good Thing to see any Sign of Religion
in these Fellows; so I promise you he
shall be set at liberty when we march. 

But hark, the General beats. My dear
Boy, give me another Buss. Don't discompose
nor hurry yourself; but remember
the Christian Doctrine of Patience,
and I warrant you will soon be able to do
yourself Justice, and to take an honourable
Revenge on the Fellow who hath injured
you.’ The Lieutenant then departed,
and Jones endeavoured to compose himself
to Rest. 