

As it is possible the mere English
Reader may have a different
Idea of Romance with
the Author of these little Volumes; 
and may consequently expect a kind of
Entertainment, not to be found, nor
which was even intended, in the following
Pages; it may not be improper
to premise a few Words concerning this
kind of Writing, which I do not remember
to have seen hitherto attempted in
our Language. 
The Epic as well as the Drama
is divided into Tragedy and Comedy. 
Homer, who was the Father of this
Species of Poetry, gave us a Pattern
of both these, tho' that of the
latter kind is entirely lost; which
Aristotle tells us, bore the same 

relation to Comedy which his Iliad
bears to Tragedy. And perhaps, that
we have no more Instances of it
among the Writers of Antiquity, is
owing to the Loss of this great Pattern,
which, had it survived, would
have found its Imitators equally
with the other Poems of this great
Original. 
And farther, as this Poetry may
be Tragic or Comic, I will not scruple
to say it may be likewise either in
Verse or Prose: for tho' it wants
one particular, which the Critic
enumerates in the constituent Parts
of an Epic Poem, namely Metre; 
yet, when any kind of Writing contains
all its other Parts, such as
Fable, Action, Characters, Sentiments,
and Diction, and is deficient
in Metre only; it seems, I think,
reasonable to refer it to the Epic; at
least, as no Critic hath thought proper
to range it under any other Head,
nor to assign it a particular Name to
itself. 

Thus the Telemachus of the Arch-Bishop
of Cambray appears to me of
the Epic Kind, as well as the Odyssey
of Homer; indeed, it is much
fairer and more reasonable to give it
a Name common with that Species
from which it differs only in a single
Instance, than to confound it with
those which it resembles in no other. 
Such are those voluminous Works
commonly called Romances, namely,
Clelia, Cleopatra, Astræa, Cassandra,
the Grand Cyrus, and innumerable
others which contain, as I apprehend,
very little Instruction or Entertainment. 
Now a comic Romance is a comic
Epic-Poem in Prose; differing from
Comedy, as the serious Epic from
Tragedy: its Action being more
extended and comprehensive; containing
a much larger Circle of Incidents,
and introducing a greater
Variety of Characters. It differs
from the serious Romance in its Fable
and Action, in this; that as in
the one these are grave and solemn,
so in the other they are light and ridiculous: 

it differs in its Characters, by
introducing Persons of inferiour Rank,
and consequently of inferiour Manners,
whereas the grave Romance,
sets the highest before us; lastly in
its Sentiments and Diction; by preserving
the Ludicrous instead of the
Sublime. In the Diction I think,
Burlesque itself may be sometimes
admitted; of which many Instances
will occur in this Work, as in the
Descriptions of the Battles, and
some other Places, not necessary to
be pointed out to the Classical Reader; 
for whose Entertainment those
Parodies or Burlesque Imitations
are chiefly calculated. 
But tho' we have sometimes admitted
this in our Diction, we have
carefully excluded it from our Sentiments
and Characters: for there
it is never properly introduced, unless
in Writings of the Burlesque
kind, which this is not intended to
be. Indeed, no two Species of Writing
can differ more widely than
the Comic and the Burlesque: for 

as the latter is ever the Exhibition
of what is monstrous and unnatural,
and where our Delight, if we
examine it, arises from the surprizing
Absurdity, as in appropriating the
Manners of the highest to the lowest,
or è converso; so in the former,
we should ever confine ourselves
strictly to Nature from the just
Imitation of which, will flow all
the Pleasure we can this way
convey to a sensible Reader. And
perhaps, there is one Reason, why a
Comic Writer should of all others be
the least excused for deviating from
Nature, since it may not be always
so easy for a serious Poet to meet
with the Great and the Admirable; 
but Life every where furnishes an
accurate Observer with the Ridiculous. 
I have hinted this little, concerning
Burlesque; because, I have often
heard that Name given to Performances,
which have been truly of
the Comic kind, from the Author's
having sometimes admitted it in his 

Diction only; which as it is the
Dress of Poetry, doth like the Dress
of Men establish Characters, (the one
of the whole Poem, and the other of
the whole Man,) in vulgar Opinion,
beyond any of their greater Excellencies: 
But surely, a certain Drollery
in Style, where the Characters
and Sentiments are perfectly natural,
no more constitutes the Burlesque,
than an empty Pomp and Dignity
of Words, where every thing else is
mean and low, can entitle any Performance
to the Appellation of the
true Sublime. 
And I apprehend, my Lord Shaftesbury's
Opinion of mere Burlesque
agrees with mine, when he asserts,
“There is no such Thing to be found
in the Writings of the Antients.” 
But perhaps, I have less Abhorrence
than he professes for it: and that not
because I have had some little Success
on the Stage this way; but rather,
as it contributes more to exquisite
Mirth and Laughter than any other; 
and these are probably more wholesome 

Physic for the Mind, and conduce
better to purge away Spleen, Melancholy
and ill Affections, than is
generally imagined. Nay, I will appeal
to common Observation, whether
the same Companies are not found more
full of Good-Humour and Benevolence,
after they have been sweeten'd
for two or three Hours with Entertainments
of this kind, than when
soured by a Tragedy or a grave Lecture. 
But to illustrate all this by another
Science, in which, perhaps, we
shall see the Distinction more clearly
and plainly: Let us examine the
Works of a Comic History Painter,
with those Performances which the
Italians call Caricatura; where we
shall find the true Excellence of the
former, to consist in the exactest Copy
of Nature; insomuch, that a judicious
Eye instantly rejects any thing
outré; any Liberty which the
Painter hath taken with the Features
of that Alma Mater. —Whereas
in the Caricatura we allow all Licence. 

Its Aim is to exhibit Monsters,
not Men; and all Distortions
and Exaggerations whatever are
within its proper Province. 
Now what Caricatura is in Painting,
Burlesque is in Writing; and in
the same manner the Comic Writer
and Painter correlate to each other. 
And here I shall observe, that as in
the former, the Painter seems to
have the Advantage; so it is in the
latter infinitely on the side of the
Writer: for the Monstrous is much
easier to paint than describe, and the
ridiculous to describe than paint. 
And tho' perhaps this latter Species
doth not in either Science so
strongly affect and agitate the Muscles
as the other; yet it will be owned, I
believe, that a more rational and
useful Pleasure arises to us from it. 
He who should call the Ingenious Hogarth
a Burlesque Painter, would, in
my Opinion, do him very little Honour:
for sure it is much easier,
much less the Subject of Admiration,
to paint a Man with a Nose, or any 

other Feature of a preposterous Size,
or to expose him in some absurd or
monstrous Attitude, than to express
the Affections of Men on Canvas. 
It hath been thought a vast Commendation
of a Painter, to say his
Figures seem to breathe; but surely,
it is a much greater and nobler Applause,
that they appear to think. 
But to return—The Ridiculous
only, as I have before said, falls
within my Province in the present
Work. —Nor will some Explanation
of this Word be thought impertinent
by the Reader, if he considers
how wonderfully it hath been mistaken,
even by Writers who have
profess'd it: for to what but such a
Mistake, can we attribute the many
Attempts to ridicule the blackest
Villanies; and what is yet worse,
the most dreadful Calamities? What
could exceed the Absurdity of an Author,
who should write the Comedy
of Nero, with the merry Incident of
ripping up his Mother's Belly; or what
would give a greater Shock to Humanity, 

than an Attempt to expose the
Miseries of Poverty and Distress to
Ridicule? And yet, the Reader will
not want much Learning to suggest
such Instances to himself. 
Besides, it may seem remarkable,
that Aristotle, who is so fond and
free of Definitions, hath not thought
proper to define the Ridiculous. Indeed,
where he tells us it is proper to
Comedy, he hath remarked that Villany
is not its Object: but he hath
not, as I remember, positively asserted
what is. Nor doth the Abbé 
Bellegarde, who hath writ a Treatise
on this Subject, tho' he shews
us many Species of it, once trace it
to its Fountain. 
The only Source of the true Ridiculous
(as it appears to me) is
Affectation. But tho' it arises from
one Spring only, when we consider
the infinite Streams into which this
one branches, we shall presently cease
to admire at the copious Field it affords
to an Observer. Now Affectation
proceeds from one of these two 

Causes, Vanity, or Hypocrisy: for
as Vanity puts us on affecting false
Characters, in order to purchase Applause; 
so Hypocrisy sets us on an
Endeavour to avoid Censure by concealing
our Vices under an Appearance
of their opposite Virtues. And
tho' these two Causes are often confounded,
(for they require some Difficulty
in distinguishing;) yet, as they proceed
from very different Motives, so
they are as clearly distinct in their Operations:
for indeed, the Affectation
which arises from Vanity is nearer to
Truth than the other; as it hath
not that violent Repugnancy of Nature
to struggle with, which that of
the Hypocrite hath. It may be likewise
noted, that Affectation doth not
imply an absolute Negation of those
Qualities which are affected: and
therefore, tho', when it proceeds from
Hypocrisy, it be nearly allied to Deceit; 
yet when it comes from Vanity
only, it partakes of the Nature
of Ostentation: for instance,
the Affectation of Liberality in a
vain Man, differs visibly from the 

same Affectation in the Avaricious; 
for tho' the vain Man is not what he
would appear, or hath not the Virtue
he affects, to the degree he would be
thought to have it; yet it sits less
aukwardly on him than on the avaricious
Man, who is the very Reverse
of what he would seem to be. 
From the Discovery of this Affectation
arises the Ridiculous— 
which always strikes the Reader
with Surprize and Pleasure; and
that in a higher and stronger Degree
when the Affectation arises from
Hypocrisy, than when from Vanity:
for to discover any one to be the exact
Reverse of what he affects, is
more surprizing, and consequently
more ridiculous, than to find him a
little deficient in the Quality he desires
the Reputation of. I might observe
that our Ben Johnson, who of
all Men understood the Ridiculous
the best, hath chiefly used the hypocritical
Affectation. 
Now from Affectation only, the
Misfortunes and Calamities of Life, 

or the Imperfections of Nature, may
become the Objects of Ridicule. Surely
he hath a very ill-framed Mind,
who can look on Ugliness, Infirmity, or
Poverty, as ridiculous in themselves:
nor do I believe any Man living
who meets a dirty Fellow riding
through the Streets in a Cart, is
struck with an Idea of the Ridiculous
from it; but if he should see the
same Figure descend from his Coach
and Six, or bolt from his Chair with
his Hat under his Arm, he would
then begin to laugh, and with justice. 
In the same manner, were we
to enter a poor House, and behold a
wretched Family shivering with Cold
and languishing with Hunger, it would
not incline us to Laughter, (at least
we must have very diabolical Natures,
if it would:) but should we discover
there a Grate, instead of Coals,
adorned with Flowers, empty Plate
or China Dishes on the Side-board,
or any other Affectation of Riches
and Finery either on their Persons
or in their Furniture; we might then 

indeed be excused, for ridiculing so
fantastical an Appearance. Much less
are natural Imperfections the Objects
of Derision: but when Ugliness
aims at the Applause of Beauty,
or Lameness endeavours to display
Agility; it is then that these unfortunate
Circumstances, which at first
moved our Compassion, tend only to
raise our Mirth. 
The Poet carries this very far; 

None are for being what they are in Fault,
But for not being what they would be thought.
Where if the Metre would suffer the
Word Ridiculous to close the first
Line, the Thought would be rather
more proper. Great Vices are the
proper Objects of our Detestation,
smaller Faults of our Pity: but Affectation
appears to me the only true
Source of the Ridiculous. 
But perhaps it may be objected to
me, that I have against my own 

Rules introduced Vices, and of a
very black Kind into this Work. To
which I shall answer: First, that it
is very difficult to pursue a Series of
human Actions and keep clear from
them. Secondly, That the Vices to be
found here, are rather the accidental
Consequences of some human Frailty,
or Foible, than Causes habitually existing
in the Mind. Thirdly, That they
are never set forth as the Objects of
Ridicule but Detestation. Fourthly,
That they are never the principal Figure
at that Time on the Scene; and
lastly, they never produce the intended
Evil. 
Having thus distinguished Joseph
Andrews from the Productions of
Romance Writers on the one hand,
and Burlesque Writers on the other,
and given some few very short Hints
(for I intended no more) of this Species
of writing, which I have affirmed
to be hitherto unattempted in our
Language; I shall leave to my
good natur'd Reader to apply my Piece
to my Observations, and will detain 

him no longer than with a Word concerning
the Characters in this Work. 
And here I solemnly protest, I have
no Intention to vilify or asperse any
one: for tho' every thing is copied
from the Book of Nature, and scarce
a Character or Action produced which
I have not taken from my own Observations
and Experience, yet I have
used the utmost Care to obscure the
Persons by such different Circumstances,
Degrees, and Colours, that it will
be impossible to guess at them with
any degree of Certainty; and if it
ever happens otherwise, it is only
where the Failure characterized is
so minute, that it is a Foible only
which the Party himself may laugh
at as well as any other. 
As to the Character of Adams, as
it is the most glaring in the whole,
so I conceive it is not to be found in
any Book now extant. It is designed
a Character of perfect Simplicity; 
and as the Goodness of his Heart
will recommend him to the Good-natur'd; 
so I hope it will excuse me 

to the Gentlemen of his Cloth; for
whom, while they are worthy of their
sacred Order, no Man can possibly
have a greater Respect. They will
therefore excuse me, notwithstanding
the low Adventures in which
he is engaged, that I have made
him a Clergyman; since no other Office
could have given him so many
Opportunities of displaying his worthy
Inclinations. 