


In which David and his Camilla suffer a farther
Tryal of their Patience and Resignation. 
Nothing could be more irksome to
young Camilla, than the Thoughts of
spending a Day at Mrs. Orgueil's: she made
it her constant Endeavour to please, and
avoid all manner of Offence; and therefore
knew not what it was, when at home, to
be treated with any Harshness or Unkindness,
nor knew what to make of finding the
Effect of Anger undeserved and unprovoked. 
Besides, her little Brother David
had not been well for two or three Days,
and she did not chuse to leave him. But her
Father and Mother thinking at this Time
that it would be highly improper to refuse
Mrs. Orgueil's Request, especially as it was
Miss Henrietta's Birth-day, Camilla submitted
with no apparent Reluctance. And indeed
a most disagreeable Day she spent; 
for Mrs. Orgueil could not prevail with
herself to be pleased with any thing the
obliging Girl did. The Remembrance that 

Cynthia, whilst at home, had taken a particular
Delight in playing with, and instructing
her Niece Camilla raised in Mrs.
Orgueil's Mind as great an Aversion towards
her, as she had before taken to her God-daughter
Joan, for daring to out-grow her
Henrietta-Cassandra. 
Young Camilla did every thing she could
think of, to humour Miss Henrietta; but
she might as well have spared her Pains,
for it was impossible to please her. If she
ceased playing with her but one Moment,
she cried, and told her Mamma she was above
it; and, on the contrary, if she proposed
any thing to divert her, Henrietta called it
childish, and lamented that she despised
and treated her like an Infant. 
Mrs. Orgueil, when she talked with little
Camilla, endeavoured to intrap her, and
drew such Conclusions from her Words as
the poor Girl never thought of; and from
her innocent Answers to Mrs. Orgueil's
Questions concerning Cynthia's manner of
instructing her, she insisted on it, that from
Camilla's own Mouth she had discovered
what a domineering, insulting, governing
Creature Cynthia was; and that she endeavoured
to teach the Children to be as artful 

and hypocritical as herself. For Mrs. Orgueil
called governing the Passions, cunningly
concealing them, in order to impose
on those good-natured, passionate People,
who were too sincere to have the like
Command of theirs. 
But this Fallacy of Mrs. Orgueil was as
plainly perceived by little Camilla, as it
would have been by any grown Person
whatever; for there is no Difficulty in discovering
such kind of Fallacies, unless the
Indulgence of violent Passions blinds and
perverts the Judgment: and so well did
young Camilla remember the Instructions
she had received from her Infancy, that
notwithstanding this Observation of Mrs.
Orgueil, yet as she knew with what Behaviour
her Parents would be best pleased, she
in Silence heard all the sly Invectives
thrown out against her dear and kind Aunt,
and murmured not: for David and Camilla
would always have their Children so behave
as never to give even the least Appearance
of an Offence. The Reception the innocent
Camilla met with, on her Return to her kind
Parents, always for the present dissipated
any Uneasiness she might have contracted
in her Absence from them; but greatly was
her tender Heart affected by finding her 

poor little Brother David much worse than
when she left him in the Morning. 
Mrs. Orgueil's Daughter Henrietta was
but very lately recovered from the Meazles
when Mrs. Orgueil carried her with her to
see Camilla. But whether it had been over
long enough for the Infection to be gone,
or not, was a Point Mrs. Orgueil never
gave herself the least Trouble about; for
she was fully convinced that it was utterly
impossible any Mischief could ever come
from her poor little Thing. 
Camilla would have been heartily glad if
Mrs. Orgueil could in this Opinion have
been proved in the right. But, to her great
Grief, she experienced what fatal Accidents
might be caused by Miss Henrietta; for the
next Day after Mrs. Orgueil's friendly Visit,
little David sickened of the Measles, and it
proved fatal to him, for in three Days he
was no more. David, his Wife, and eldest
Daughter had before had that Distemper,
but little Joan, Mrs. Orgueil's God-daughter,
caught the Meazles of her Brother; 
and although she in a manner recovered,
yet she never had a Day's Health
afterwards, for it fell on her Lungs, and
all the most assiduous Care that could be 

taken of her, could not prevent her dying
of a galloping Consumption. But just as
little David died, some unknown Friend to
the Distressed, having heard of the Fire,
sent David a Bank Note of Twenty Pounds,
so that they had not, during Joan's Illness,
the additional Burden of not knowing by
what Means to supply her with Necessaries. 
And although their generous Benefactor was
concealed from them, yet they had the Pleasure
of gratefully enjoying his Kindness. Another
Circumstance was added, which gave
no small Comfort to David and his Camilla; 
for there happened to be just settled, within
a Mile of them, a very skilful and good-natured
Physician, who, on Farmer Dunster's
relating David's Situation, attended
the Children without desiring any Reward. 
But notwithstanding these Alleviations of
her Affliction, Camilla now experienced and
acknowledged the Truth of David's former
Observation, that if it were left to our own
Choice, it would be infinitely preferable and
more eligible for us to lose our Friends by the
violent Seizures of mortal Distempers, than
to see them decay in lingering Diseases. 
It is commonly said, that by seeing our
Friends labour a long Time under the
Weight of Sickness, we are more prepared 

for, and consequently more reconciled to
their Loss; and this in the very Instant of
losing them, I believe is true: but small is
the Recompence of this Alleviation of our
Sorrow at that Time, for those Rents and
Tearings of our Hearts, our Friends Sufferings,
and our own Incapacity of relieving
them, must make. 
To reverse the whole Face of Things— 
Day after Day with Fear and Trembling to
enter those very Chambers we used to fly to
for Comfort, and to fly from them with
bleeding Hearts that can contain no longer
without the Vent of Sighs and Tears—to
wake from every short Sleep (obtained only
by long watching) dreading even to ask for
our Friends, and to receive the continual
Answer, that they spent the Night in Pain
—to have each Day bring the same mournful
Prospect of being again Witness of that
Pain—to have our Minds so weakened by
the continual Daggers that pierce it, that
our Judgment is lost, and we hourly accuse
ourselves for something we have done, or
something we have omitted, condemning
ourselves for what we cannot account for— 
this is a Scene of Misery, that, I believe,
whoever has experienced, will think nothing
in this World can equal; and a Scene I purposely 

chuse to mention in general Terms,
lest if any gentle Reader has conceived an
Affection for David and his Camilla, should
I say, thus David, and thus Camilla felt, it
might too much wring and grieve the tender
Heart. But by passing quickly over all
the Sorrows that affected David and his Camilla,
I would not be understood as if they
felt not the paternal Concern for such Children
being torn from them. The true Reason
why I dwell not on that Concern, is,
that Words cannot reach it—the sympathizing
Heart must imagine it—and the
Heart that has no Sympathy, is not capable
of receiving it. David was, on every tender
Occasion, motionless with Grief; and
Camilla, although her Mind was too humble
to distort her Countenance, yet did the
Tears flow in Streams from her Eyes, and
she was at once a Picture of the highest Sorrow
and the highest Resignation; for Clamour
is rather a Proof of Affectation than
of a Mind truly afflicted; and tender Sorrow
neither seeks nor wants Language to
express itself. 