


The Adventures which the Author met
on his first Entrance into Elysium. 
We pursued our way through a delicious
Grove of Orange-Trees, where
I saw infinite Numbers of Spirits, every one 

of whom I knew, and was known by them:
(for Spirits here know one another by Intuition.) 
I presently met a little Daughter,
whom I had lost several Years before. Good
Gods! what Words can describe the Raptures,
the melting passionate Tenderness, with
which we kiss'd each other, continuing in our
Embrace, with the most extatic Joy, a Space,
which if Time had been measured here as
on Earth, could not be less than half a Year. 
The first Spirit, with whom I entered
into Discourse, was the famous Leonidas of
Sparta. I acquainted him with the Honours
which had been done him by a celebrated
Poet of our Nation; to which he answered,
he was very much obliged to him. 
We were presently afterwards entertained
with the most delicious Voice I had ever
heard, accompanied by a Violin, equal to
Signior Piantanida. I presently discovered
the Musician and Songster to be Orpheus and
Sappho. 
Old Homer was present at this Consort,
(if I may so call it) and Madam Dacier sat 

in his Lap. He asked much after Mr. Pope,
and said he was very desirous of seeing him:
for that he had read his Iliad in his Translation
with almost as much delight, as he believed
he had given others in the Original. I had
the Curiosity to enquire whether he had
really writ that Poem in detached Pieces,
and sung it about as Ballads all over Greece,
according to the Report which went of him? 
He smiled at my Question, and asked me
whether there appeared any Connection in
the Poem; for if there did, he thought I
might answer myself. I then importuned
him to acquaint me in which of the Cities,
which contended for the Honour of his
Birth, he was really born? To which he
answered. –––Upon my Soul I can't tell. 
Virgil then came up to me, with Mr.
Addison under his Arm. Well, Sir, said he,
how many Translations have these few last
Years produced of my Æneid? I told him, I
believed several, but I could not possibly remember; 
for that I had never read any but
Dr. Trapp's. –––Ay, said he, that is a curious
Piece indeed! I then acquainted him with
the Discovery made by Mr. Warburton of 

the Eleusinian Mysteries couched in his 6th
Book. What Mysteries? said Mr. Addison. 
The Eleusinian, answered Virgil, which I
have disclosed in my 6th Book. How! replied
Addison. You never mentioned a word
of any such Mysteries to me in all our Acquaintance. 
I thought it was unnecessary,
cried the other, to a Man of your infinite
Learning: besides, you always told me, you
perfectly understood my meaning. Upon this
I thought the Critic looked a little out of
countenance, and turned aside to a very merry
Spirit, one Dick Steele, who embraced him,
and told him, He had been the greatest
Man upon Earth; that he readily resigned up
all the Merit of his own Works to him. 
Upon which, Addison gave him a gracious
Smile, and clapping him on the Back with
much Solemnity, cried out, Well said, Dick. 
I Then observed Shakespeare standing between
Betterton and Booth, and deciding a
Difference between those two great Actors,
concerning the placing an Accent in one of his
Lines: this was disputed on both sides with
a Warmth, which surprized me in Elysium,
till I discovered by Intuition, that every Soul 

retained its principal Characteristic, being, indeed,
its very Essence. The Line was that
celebrated one in Othello; 

Put out the Light, and then put out the Light,
according to Betterton. Mr. Booth contented
to have it thus; 

Put out the Light, and then put out the Light.
I could not help offering my Conjecture on
this Occasion, and suggested it might perhaps
be, 

Put out the Light, and then put out thy Light.
Another hinted a Reading very sophisticated
in my Opinion, 

Put out the Light, and then put out thee, Light;
making Light to be the vocative Case. Another
would have altered the last Word, and
read, 

Put out thy Light, and then put out thy Sight.

But Betterton said, if the Text was to be
disturbed, he saw no reason why a Word
might not be changed as well as a Letter, and
instead of put out thy Light, you might read
put out thy Eyes. At last it was agreed on
all sides, to refer the matter to the Decision
of Shakespeare himself, who delivered his
Sentiments as follows: ‘Faith, Gentlemen,
it is so long since I wrote the Line, I have
forgot my Meaning. This I know, could
I have dreamt so much Nonsense would
have been talked, and writ about it, I would
have blotted it out of my Works: for I am
sure, if any of these be my Meaning, it doth
me very little Honour.’ 
He was then interrogated concerning some
other ambiguous Passages in his Works; but
he declined any satisfactory Answer: Saying,
if Mr. Theobald had not writ about it sufciently,
there were three or four more new
Editions of his Plays coming out, which he
hoped would satisfy every one: Concluding,
‘I marvel nothing so much as that Men will
gird themselves at discovering obscure Beauties
in an Author. Certes the greatest and
most pregnant Beauties are ever the plainest 

and most evidently striking; and when
two Meanings of a Passage can in the least
ballance our Judgements which to prefer,
I hold it matter of unquestionable Certainty,
that neither of them are worth a farthing.’ 
From his Works our Conversation turned
on his Monument; upon which, Shakespeare
shaking his Sides, and addressing himself to Milton,
cried out; ‘On my word, Brother Milton,
they have brought a noble Set of Poets
together, they would have been hanged erst
have convened such a Company at their
Tables, when alive.’ ‘True, Brother, answered
Milton, unless we had been as incapable
of eating then as we are now.’ 