


Wherein Anna Boleyn relates the
History of her Life. 
‘I Am going now truly to recount a Life,
which from the Time of its ceasing,
has been, in the other World, the continual
Subject of the Cavils of contending
Parties; the one making me as black as Hell,
the other as pure and innocent as the Inhabitants
of this blessed Place; the Mist of Prejudice
blinding their Eyes, and Zeal for
what they themselves profess, making every
thing appear in that Light, which they think
most conduces to its Honour. 

‘My Infancy was spent in my Father's
House, in those childish Plays, which are
most suitable to that State, and I think this
was one of the happiest Parts of my Life; 
for my Parents were not among the Number
of those who look upon their Children as so
many Objects of a Tyrannic Power, but I was
regarded as the dear Pledge of a virtuous
Love, and all my little Pleasures were thought
from their Indulgence their greatest Delight. 
At seven Years old, I was carried into France
with the King's Sister, who was married
to the French King, where I lived with a
Person of Quality, who was an Acquaintance
of my Father's. I spent my Time in learning
those Things necessary to give young Persons
of Fashion a polite Education, and did
neither good nor evil, but day passed after
day in the same easy way, till I was Fourteen; 
then began my Anxiety, my Vanity
grew strong, and my Heart fluttered with
Joy at every Compliment paid to my
Beauty: and as the Lady, with whom I
lived, was of a gay chearful Disposition,
she kept a great deal of Company, and my
Youth and Charms made me the continual 

Object of their Admiration. I passed some
little time in those exulting Raptures, which
are felt by every Woman, perfectly satisfied
with her self, and with the Behaviour
of others towards her: I was, when very
young, promoted to be Maid of Honour
to her Majesty. The Court was frequented
by a young Nobleman, whose Beauty
was the chief Subject of Conversation in
all Assemblies of Ladies. The Delicacy of
his Person, added to a great Softness in his
Manner, gave every thing he said and did
such an Air of Tenderness, that every Woman
he spoke to, flattered her self with being
the Object of his Love. I was one of
those who was vain enough of my own
Charms to hope to make a Conquest of him,
whom the whole Court sighed for; I now
thought every other Object below my Notice:
yet the only Pleasure I proposed to myself
in this Design, was, the triumphing over
that Heart, which I plainly saw all the Ladies
of the highest Quality, and the greatest
Beauty would have been proud of possessing. 
I was yet too young to be very artful, but
Nature, without any Assistance, soon discovers
to a Man, who is used to Gallantry, 

a Woman's Desire to be liked by him, whether
that Desire arises from any particular
Choice she makes of him, or only from
Vanity. He soon perceived my Thoughts,
and gratified my utmost Wishes, by constantly
preferring me before all other Women,
and exerting his utmost Gallantry and
Address to engage my Affections. This sudden
Happiness, which I then thought the
greatest I could have had, appeared visible in
all my Actions; I grew so gay, and so full of
Vivacity, that it made my Person appear
still to a better Advantage, all my Acquaintance
pretended to be fonder of me than
ever; tho' young as I was, I plainly saw it
was but Pretence, for through all their Endeavours
to the contrary, Envy would often
break forth in sly Insinuations, and malicious
Sneers, which gave me fresh matter of Triumph,
and frequent Opportunities of insulting
them; which I never let slip, for now
first my Female Heart grew sensible of the
spiteful Pleasure of seeing another languish for
what I enjoy'd. Whilst I was in the height
of my Happiness, her Majesty fell ill of a
languishing Distemper, which obliged her
to go into the Country for the change of
Air; my Place made it necessary for me to 

attend her, and which way he brought it
about, I can't imagine, but my young Hero
found means to be one of that small
Train, that waited on my Royal Mistress,
altho' she went as privately as possible. Hitherto
all the Interviews I had ever had with
him were in public, and I only looked on him
as the fitter Object to feed that Pride which
had no other view, but to shew its Power; 
but now the Scene was quite changed. 
My Rivals were all at a distance: the
Place we went to, was as charming as the
most agreeable natural Situation, assisted by
the greatest Art, could make it; the pleasant
solitary Walks, the singing of Birds, the
thousand pretty Romantic Scenes this delightful
Place afforded, gave a sudden Turn
to my Mind, my whole Soul was melted
into Softness, and all my Vanity was fled. 
My Spark was too much used to Affairs of
this nature, not to perceive this Change; at
first the profuse Transports of his Joy made
me believe him wholly mine, and this belief
gave me such Happiness, that no Language
affords Words to express it, and can
be only known to those who have felt it. 
But this was of a very short duration, for I
soon found I had to do with one of those 

Men, whose only End in the persuit of a
Woman, is to make her fall a Victim to an
insatiable Desire to be admired. His Designs
had succeeded, and now he every day grew
colder, and, as if by Infatuation, my Passion
every day increased; and notwithstanding
all my Resolutions and Endeavours to the
contrary, my Rage at the Disappointment
at once both of my Love and Pride, and at the
finding a Passion fixed in my Breast I knew
not how to conquer, broke out into that
inconsistent Behaviour, which must always
be the Consequence of violent Passions. 
One Moment I reproach'd him, the next I
grew to Tenderness, and blamed my self,
and thought I fancied what was not true; 
he saw my Struggle, and triumphed in it:
but as he had not Witnesses enough there of
his Victory, to give him the full Enjoyment
of it, he grew weary of the Country, and
returned to Paris, and left me in a Condition
it is utterly impossible to describe. My
Mind was like a City up in Arms, all Confusion; 
and every new Thought was a
fresh Disturber of my Peace. Sleep quite
forsook me, and the Anxiety I suffered threw
me into a Fever, which had like to have 

cost me my Life. With great Care I recovered; 
but the Violence of the Distemper
left such a Weakness on my Body, that
the Disturbance of my Mind was greatly
assuaged; and now I began to comfort my
self in the Reflection, that this Gentleman's
being a finish'd Coquet, was very likely
the only Thing could have preserved me; 
for he was the only Man from whom I was
ever in any danger. By that time I was got
tolerable well, we returned to Paris; and I
confess, I both wished and feared to see
this Cause of all my Pain: however, I
hoped by the help of my Resentment, to
be able to meet him with Indifference. This
employed my Thoughts till our Arrival. 
The next day, there was a very full Court
to congratulate the Queen on her Recovery; 
and amongst the rest, my Love appeared
dressed and adorned, as if he designed some
new Conquest. Instead of seeing a Woman
he despised and slighted, he approached
me with that assured Air which is common
to successful Coxcombs. At the same time,
I perceived I was surrounded by all those
Ladies who were on his account my greatest
Enemies; and in revenge, wished for 

nothing more than to see me make a ridiculous
Figure. This Situation so perplexed
my Thoughts, that when he came near
enough to speak to me, I fainted away in his
Arms. (Had I studied which way I could
gratify him most, it was impossible to have
done any thing to have pleased him more.) 
Some that stood by, brought smelling Bottles,
and used means for my Recovery; and I
was welcomed to returning Life, by all those
ill-natured Repartees, which Women enraged
by Envy are capable of venting. One cried,
Well, I never thought my Lord had any thing
so frightful in his Person, or so fierce in his
Manner, as to strike a young Lady dead at
the sight of him. No, no, says another,
some Ladies Senses are more apt to be hurried
by agreeable, than disagreeable Objects. 
With many more such sort of Speeches,
which shewed more Malice than Wit. 
This not being able to bear, trembling,
and with but just Strength enough to move
I crawled to my Coach, and hurried home. 
When I was alone, and thought on what had
happened to me in a public Court, I was at
first driven to the utmost Despair; but afterwards,
when I came to reflect, I believe this 

Accident contributed more to my being
cured of my Passion, than any other could
have done. I began to think the only Method
to pique the Man, who had used me
so barbarously, and to be revenged on my
spightful Rivals, was to recover that Beauty,
which was then languid, and had lost its
Lustre, to let them see I had still Charms
enough to engage as many Lovers as I could
desire, and that I could yet rival them, who
had thus cruelly insulted me. These pleasing
Hopes revived my sinking Spirits, and
worked a more effectual Cure on me, than
all the Philosophy and Advice of the wisest
Men could have done. I now employ'd all
my Time and Care in adorning my Person,
and studying the surest Means of engaging
the Affections of others, while I
myself continued quite indifferent; for I
resolved for the future, if ever one soft
Thought made its way to my Heart, to fly
the Object of it, and by new Lovers to drive
the Image from my Breast. I consulted my
Glass every Morning, and got such a command
of my Countenance, that I could suit it
to the different Tastes of Variety of Lovers; 
and tho' I was young, for I was not yet 

above Seventeen; yet my public Way of Life
gave me such continual Opportunities of
conversing with Men, and the strong Desire
I now had of pleasing them, led me to
make such constant Observations on every
thing they said or did, that I soon found out
the different Methods of dealing with them. 
I observed that most Men generally liked in
Women what was most opposite to their own
Characters; therefore to the grave solid Man
of Sense, I endeavoured to appear sprightly,
and full of Spirit; to the Witty and Gay, soft
and languishing; to the Amorous (for they
want no increase of their Passions) cold and
reserved; to the Fearful and Backward, warm
and full of Fire, and so of all the rest. As
to Beaus, and all those sort of Men, whose
Desires are centered in the Satisfaction of their
Vanity, I had learned by sad Experience,
the only way to deal with them was to
laugh at them, and let their own good Opinion
of themselves be the only Support of
their Hopes. I knew, while I could get other
Followers, I was sure of them; for the only
sign of Modesty they ever give, is that of not
depending on their own Judgments, but following
the Opinions of the greatest Number. 

Thus furnished with Maxims, and
grown wise by past Errors, I in a manner begun
the World again: I appeared in all public
Places handsomer and more lively than
ever, to the Amazement of every one who
saw me, and had heard of the Affair between
me and my Lord. He himself was
much surprized, and vexed at this sudden
Change, nor could he account how it was
possible for me so soon to shake off those
Chains he thought he had fixed on me for
Life, nor was he willing to lose his Conquest
in this manner. He endeavoured by
all means possible to talk to me again of
Love, but I stood fixed to my Resolution,
(in which I was greatly assisted by the
Croud of Admirers that daily surrounded
me) never to let him explain himself: for
notwithstanding all my Pride, I found the
first Impression the Heart receives of Love
is so strong, that it requires the most vigilant
Care to prevent a Relapse. Now I lived three
Years in a constant Round of Diversions,
and was made the perfect Idol of all the
Men that came to Court of all Ages, and
all Characters. I had several good Matches
offered me, but I thought none of them 

equal to my Merit; and one of my greatest
Pleasures was to see those Women, who had
pretended to rival me, often glad to marry
those whom I had refused. Yet notwithstanding
this great Success of my Schemes,
I cannot say I was perfectly Happy; for every
Woman that was taken the least notice of,
and every Man that was insensible to my
Arts, gave me as much Pain as all the rest
gave me Pleasure; and sometimes little underhand
Plots, which were laid against my
Designs, would succeed in spite of my Care:
so that I really begun to grow weary of this
manner of Life, when my Father returning
from his Embassy in France, took me home
with him, and carried me to a little pleasant
Country House, where there was nothing
grand or superfluous, but every thing
neat and agreeable; there I led a Life perfectly
solitary. At first, the time hung very
heavy on my hands, and I wanted all kind
of Employment, and I had very like
to have fallen into the height of the Vapours,
from no other Reason, but from want
of knowing what to do with myself. But
when I had lived here a little time, I found
such a Calmness in my Mind, and such a 

Difference between this, and the restless
Anxieties I had experienced in a Court, that
I began to share the Tranquillity, that visibly
appeared in every thing round me. I set
myself to do Works of Fancy, and to raise
little Flower-Gardens, with many such innocent
rural Amusements; which, altho' they
are not capable of affording any great Pleasure,
yet they give that serene Turn to the
Mind, which I think much preferable to
any thing else Human Nature is made susceptible
of. I now resolved to spend the
rest of my Days here, and that nothing
should allure me from this sweet Retirement,
to be again tossed about with tempestuous
Passions of any kind. Whilst I
was in this Situation, my Lord Peircy, the
Earl of Northumberland's eldest Son, by an
Accident of losing his way after a Fox-Chace,
was met by my Father, about a
Mile from our House; he came home with
him, only with a design of dining with us,
but was so taken with me, that he stay'd
three Days. I had too much Experience in
all Affairs of this kind, not to see presently
the Influence I had on him; but I was at that
time so intirely free from all Ambition, that 

even the Prospect of being a Countess had
no Effect on me; and I then thought nothing
in the World could have bribed me to
have changed my Way of Life. This young
Lord, who was just in his Bloom, found
his Passion so strong, he could not endure
a long Absence, but returned again
in a Week, and endeavoured by all the
Means he could think of, to engage me to
return his Affection. He addressed me with
that Tenderness and Respect, which Women
on Earth think can flow from nothing
but real Love; and very often told me, that
unless he could be so happy, as by his Assiduity
and Care to make himself agreeable
to me, although he knew my Father
would eagerly embrace any Proposal from
him, yet he would suffer that last of Miseries,
of never seeing me more, rather than
owe his own Happiness to any thing that
might be the least Contradiction to my Inclinations. 
This manner of proceeding had
something in it so noble and generous, that
by degrees it raised a Sensation in me, which
I know not how to describe, nor by what
Name to call it; it was nothing like my
former Passion; for there was no Turbulence, 

no uneasy waking Nights attended it, but
all I could with Honour grant to oblige
him, appeared to me to be justly due to his
Truth and Love, and more the Effect of
Gratitude, than of any Desire of my own. 
The Character I had heard of him from
my Father, at my first returning to England,
in discoursing of the young Nobility, convinced
me, that if I was his Wife, I should
have the perpetual Satisfaction of knowing
every Action of his must be approved by
all the sensible Part of Mankind; so that
very soon I began to have no Scruple left,
but that of leaving my little Scene of Quietness,
and venturing again into the World. 
But this by his continual Application, and
submissive Behaviour, by degrees entirely
vanished, and I agreed he should take his
own Time to break it to my Father, whose
Consent he was not long in obtaining; for
such a Match was by no means to be refused. 
There remained nothing now to be
done, but to prevail with the Earl of Northumberland
to comply with what his Son
so ardently desired; for which purpose, he
set out immediately for London, and begged
it as the greatest Favour, that I would accompany 

my Father, who was also to go
thither the Week following. I could not
refuse his Request, and as soon as we arrived
in Town, he flew to me with the greatest
Raptures, to inform me his Father was so
good, that finding his Happiness depended
on his Answer, he had given him free Leave
to act in this Affair as would best please himself,
and that he had now no Obstacle to
prevent his Wishes. It was then the Beginning
of the Winter, and the Time for our
Marriage was fixed for the latter end of
March; the Consent of all Parties made his
Access to me very easy, and we conversed
together both with Innocence and Pleasure. 
As his Fondness was so great, that he contrived
all the Methods possible to keep me
continually in his sight, he told me one
Morning, he was commanded by his Father
to attend him to Court that Evening, and
begg'd I would be so good as to meet him
there. I was now so used to act as he would
have me, that I made no difficulty of complying
with his Desire. Two Days after this,
I was very much surprized at perceiving
such a Melancholy in his Countenance, and
Alteration in his Behaviour, as I could no 

way account for; but by Importunity, at
last, I got from him, that Cardinal Wolsey,
for what Reason he knew not, had peremptorily
forbid him to think any more of me:
and when he urged that his Father was not
displeased with it, the Cardinal in his imperious
Manner answered him, he should
give his Father such convincing Reasons,
why it would be attended with great Inconveniences,
that he was sure he could bring
him to be of his Opinion. On which he
turned from him, and gave him no opportunity
of replying. I could not imagine what Design
the Cardinal could have in intermeddling
in this Match, and I was still more perplexed
to find that my Father treated my Lord
Peircy with much more Coldness than usual; 
he too saw it, and we both wondered
what could possibly be the Cause of
all this. But it was not long before the
Mystery was all made clear by my Father,
who sending for me one day into his Chamber,
let me into a Secret which was as little
wished for as expected; he began with the
surprizing Effects of Youth and Beauty, and
the Madness of letting go those Advantages
they might procure us, till it was too late, 

when we might wish in vain to bring them
back again. I stood amazed at this Beginning; 
he saw my Confusion, and bid me
sit down and attend to what he was going
to tell me, which was of the greatest
Consequence; and he hoped I would be
wise enough to take his Advice, and act as
he should think best for my future Welfare. 
He then asked me, if I should not be much
pleased to be a Queen? I answered with the
greatest Earnestness, that so far from it, I
would not live in a Court again to be the
greatest Queen in the World; that I had a
Lover who was both desirous and able to
raise my Station, even beyond my Wishes. 
I found this Discourse was very displeasing; 
my Father frowned and called me a romantick
Fool, and said, if I would hearken to
him he could make me a Queen; for the
Cardinal had told him, that the King,
from the Time he saw me at Court the
other Night, liked me; and intended to get
a Divorce from his Wife, and to put me
in her place; and ordered him to find some
Method to make me a Maid of Honour to
her present Majesty, that in the mean time
he might have an Opportunity of seeing me. 

It is impossible to express the Astonishment
these Words threw me into; and notwithstanding
that the Moment before, when it
appeared at so great a distance, I was very
sincere in my Declaration, how much it
was against my Will to be raised so high; yet
now the Prospect came nearer, I confess
my Heart fluttered, and my Eyes were dazzled
with the View of being seated on a
Throne. My Imagination presented before
me all the Pomp, Power, and Greatness
that attend a Crown; and I was so perplexed,
I knew not what to answer, but remained
as silent, as if I had lost the Use of my
Speech. My Father, who guessed what it
was that made me in this Condition, proceeded
to bring all the Arguments he thought
most likely to bend me to his Will; at last,
I recovered from this Dream of Grandeur,
and begged him by all the most endearing
Names I could think of, not to urge me
dishonourably to forsake the Man, whom I
was convinced would raise me to an Empire,
if in his power, and who had enough
in his power to give me all I desired. But
he was deaf to all I could say, and insisted,
that by next Week, I should prepare myself 

to go to Court: he bid me consider
of it, and not prefer a ridiculous Notion
of Honour to the real Interest of my
whole Family, but above all things not
to disclose what he had trusted me with. 
On which, he left me to my own
Thoughts. When I was alone, I reflected
how little real Tenderness this Behaviour
shewed to me, whose Happiness he did not
at all consult; but only look'd on me as a
Ladder, on which he could climb to the
Height of his own ambitious Desires: and
when I thought on his Fondness for me in
my Infancy, I could impute it to nothing,
but either the liking me as a Play-thing, or
the Gratification of his Vanity in my Beauty. 
But I was too much divided between
a Crown and my Engagement to Lord
Peircy, to spend much Time in thinking
of any thing else; and altho' my Father had
positively forbid me, yet when he came
next, I could not help acquainting him
with all that had passed, with the Reserve
only of the Struggle in my own Mind on
the first mention of being a Queen. I expected
he would have received the News
with the greatest Agonies; but he shewed 

no vast Emotion; however he could not
help turning pale; and taking me by the
Hand, looked at me with an Air of Tenderness,
and said, If being a Queen will make
you happy, and it's in your power to be so,
I would not for the World prevent it, let me
suffer what I will. This amazing Greatness of
Mind had on me quite the contrary Effect,
from what it ought to have had: for instead
of increasing my Love for him, it almost put
an end to it; and I began to think if he
could part with me, the matter was not
much. And I am convinced, when any
Man gives up the Possession of a Woman,
whose Consent he has once obtained, let
his Motive be ever so generous, he will disoblige
her. I could not help shewing my
Dissatisfaction, and told him, I was very
glad this Affair sat so easily on him. He
had not power to answer, but was so suddenly
struck with this unexpected ill-natur'd
Turn I gave his Behaviour, that he
stood amazed for some time, and then bowed
and left me. Now I was again left to
my own Reflections; but to make any thing
intelligible out of them, is quite impossible; 
I wished to be a Queen, and wished I might 

not be one; I would have my Lord Peircy
happy without me; and yet I would not
have the Power of my Charms be so weak,
that he could bear the Thought of Life
after being disappointed in my Love. But
the Result of all these confused Thoughts was
a Resolution to obey my Father. I am afraid
there was not much Duty in the Case,
tho' at that time I was glad to take hold
of that small Shadow, to save me from
looking on my own Actions in the true
Light. When my Lover came again, I
looked on him with that Coldness that he
could not bear, on purpose to rid my self of
all Importunity: for since I had resolved to
use him ill, I regarded him as the Monument
of my Shame, and his every Look appeared
to me to upbraid me. My Father
soon carried me to Court; there I had no
very hard Part to act; for with the Experience
I had had of Mankind, I could find
no great difficulty in managing a Man who
liked me, and for whom I not only did
not care, but had an utter Aversion to: but
this Aversion he believed to be Virtue; for
how credulous is a Man who has an Inclination
to believe? And I took care sometimes 

to drop Words of Cottages and Love, and
how happy the Woman was who fixed her
Affections on a Man in such a Station of
Life, that she might show her Love, without
being suspected of Hypocrisy or mercenary
Views. All this was swallowed very
easily by the amorous King, who pushed
on the Divorce with the utmost Impetuosity,
although the Affair lasted a good while,
and I remained most part of the time behind
the Curtain. Whenever the King mentioned
it to me, I used such Arguments against
it, as I thought the most likely to
make him the more eager for it; begging,
that unless his Conscience was really touched,
he would not on my account give any
grief to his virtuous Queen; for in being
her Handmaid, I thought my self highly
honoured; and that I would not only forgo
a Crown, but even give up the Pleasure
of ever seeing him more, rather than wrong
my Royal Mistress. This way of talking,
joined to his eager Desire to possess my Person,
convinced the King so strongly of my
exalted Merit, that he thought it a meritorious
Act to displace the Woman (whom he
could not have so good an Opinion of, because
he was tired of her) and to put me 

in her place. After about a Year's stay at Court,
as the King's Love to me began to be talked
of, it was thought proper to remove me,
that there might be no Umbrage given to
the Queen's Party; I was forced to comply
with this, though greatly against my Will; for
I was very jealous that Absence might change
the King's Mind. I retired again with my
Father to his Country Seat, but it had no
longer those Charms for me which I once
enjoyed there; for my Mind was now too
much taken up with Ambition to make
room for any other Thoughts. During my
Stay here, my Royal Lover often sent Gentlemen
to me with Messages and Letters,
which I always answered in the manner I
thought would best bring about my Designs,
which were to come back again to Court. 
In all the Letters that passed between us,
there was something so kingly and commanding
in his, and so deceitful and submissive
in mine, that I sometimes could not
help reflecting on the Difference betwixt this
Correspondence, and that with Lord Peircy; 
yet I was so pressed forward by the Desire of
a Crown, I could not think of turning back. 
In all I wrote, I continually praised his Resolution 

of letting me be at a distance from
him, since at this time it conduced indeed
to my Honour; but what was of ten times
more weight with me, I thought it was necessary
for his; and I would sooner suffer any
thing in the World than be any means of
Hurt to him, either in his Interest, or Reputation. 
I always gave some Hints of ill
Health, with some Reflections how necessary
the Peace of the Mind was to that of
the Body. By these means, I brought him
to recall me again by the most absolute
Command, which I for a little time artfully
delay'd, (for I knew the Impatience of
his Temper would not bear any Contradiction;)
till he made my Father in a manner
force me to what I most wished, with the
utmost Appearance of Reluctance on my
side. When I had gained this Point, I began
to think which way I could separate the
King from the Queen, for hitherto they
lived in the same House. The Lady Mary,
the Queen's Daughter, being then about
Sixteen, I sought for Emissaries of her own
Age, that I could confide in, to instil into
her Mind disrespectful Thoughts of her Father,
and make a Jest of the Tenderness of 

his Conscience about the Divorce. I knew
she had naturally strong Passions, and that
young People of that Age are apt to think
those that pretend to be their Friends are
really so, and only speak their Minds freely; 
I afterwards contrived to have every Word
she spoke of him carried to the King; who
took it all as I could wish, and fancied those
things did not come at first from the young
Lady, but from her Mother. He would
often talk of it to me, and I agreed with
him in his Sentiments; but then as a great
Proof of my Goodness, I always endeavoured
to excuse her, by saying, a Lady so
long time used to be a Royal Queen, might
naturally be a little exasperated with those,
she fancied would throw her from that Station
she so justly deserved. By these sort of
Plots, I found the way to make the King
angry with the Queen; for nothing is easier
than to make a Man angry with a Woman
he wants to be rid of, and who stands in the
way between him and his Pleasures: so that
now the King, on the Pretence of the Queen's
Obstinacy, in a Point where his Conscience
was so tenderly concerned, parted with her. 
Every Thing was now plain before me; I 

had nothing farther to do but to let the King
alone to his own Desires; and I had no reason
to fear, since they had carried him so
far, but that they would urge him on to do
every thing I aimed at. I was created Marchioness
of Pembroke. This Dignity sat very
easy on me; for the Thoughts of a much
higher Title, took from me all feeling of
this; and I looked upon being a Marchioness
as a Trifle, not that I saw the Bauble in
its true Light, but because it fell short of
what I had figured to my self I should soon
obtain. The King's Desires grew very impatient,
and it was not long before I was
privately married to him. I was no sooner
his Wife, than I found all the Queen come
upon me; I felt my self conscious of Royalty,
and even the Faces of my most intimate
Acquaintance seemed to me to be quite
strange. I hardly knew them, Height had
turned my Head, and I was like a Man
placed on a Monument, to whose Sight
all Creatures at a great distance below him,
appear like so many little Pigmies crawling
about on the Earth; and the Prospect
so greatly delighted me, that I did
not presently consider, that in both Cases 

descending a few Steps erected by human
Hands would place us in the Number of
those very Pigmies who appeared so despicable. 
Our Marriage was kept private for
some time, for it was not thought proper
to make it public (the Affair of the Divorce
not being finished) till the Birth of my
Daughter Elizabeth made it necessary. But
all who saw me knew it; for my Manner
of speaking and acting was so much changed
with my Station, that all around me plainly
perceived, I was sure I was a Queen. While
it was a Secret, I had yet something to wish
for; I could not be perfectly satisfied, till
all the World was acquainted with my
Fortune: but when my Coronation was
over, and I was raised to the height of
my Ambition, instead of finding my self
happy, I was in reality more miserable than
ever; for besides that the Aversion I had
naturally to the King was much more difficult
to dissemble after Marriage than before,
and grew into a perfect Detestation, my
Imagination, which had thus warmly pursued
a Crown, grew cool when I was in
the possession of it, and gave me time to
reflect what mighty matter I had gained 

by all this Bustle; and I often used to think
my self in the case of the Fox-hunter, who
when he has toiled and sweated all day in
the Chace, as if some unheard-of Blessing
was to crown his Success, finds at last, all
he has got by his Labour is a stinking nauseous
Animal. But my Condition was yet
worse than his; for he leaves the loathsome
Wretch to be torn by his Hounds, whilst I
was obliged to fondle mine, and meanly
pretend him to be the Object of my Love. 
For the whole time I was in this envied,
this exalted State, I led a continual Life of
Hypocrisy, which I now know nothing on
earth can compensate. I had no Companion
but the Man I hated. I dared not
disclose my Sentiments to any Person about
me; nor did any one presume to enter into
any freedom of Conversation with me; but
all who spoke to me, talked to the Queen,
and not to me; for they would have said
just the same Things to a dress'd-up Puppet,
if the King had taken a fancy to call it his
Wife. And as I knew every Woman in the
Court was my Enemy, from thinking she
had much more right than I had to the
Place I filled, I thought my self as unhappy, 

as if I had been placed in a wild Wood,
where there was no human Creature for me
to speak to, in a continual fear of leaving
any Traces of my Footsteps, lest I should
be found by some dreadful Monster, or stung
by Snakes and Adders: for such are spiteful
Women to the Objects of their Envy. In
this worst of all Situations, I was obliged to
hide my Melancholy, and appear chearful. 
This threw me into an Error the other
way, and I sometimes fell into a Levity in
my Behaviour, that was afterwards made use
of to my disadvantage. I had a Son dead-born,
which I perceived abated something of
the King's Ardor; for his Temper could not
brook the least Disappointment. This gave
me no Uneasiness; for not considering the
Consequences, I could not help being best
pleased when I had least of his Company. 
Afterwards I found he had cast his Eyes on
one of my Maids of Honour; and whether
it was owing to any Arts of her's, or only
to the King's violent Passions, I was in the
End used even worse than my former Mistress
had been by my means. The Decay
of the King's Affection was presently seen
by all those Court-Sycophants, who continually 

watch the Motions of Royal Eyes; 
and the Moment they found they could be
heard against me, they turned my most
innocent Actions and Words, nay even my
very Looks, into Proofs of the blackest Crimes. 
The King, who was impatient to enjoy his
new Love, lent a willing Ear to all my Accusers,
who found ways of making him jealous,
that I was false to his Bed. He would
not so easily have believed any thing against
me before, but he was now glad to flatter
himself that he had found a Reason to do
just what he had resolved upon without a
Reason; and on some slight Pretences, and
hear-say Evidence, I was sent to the Tower,
where the Lady, who was my greatest Enemy,
was appointed to watch me and lie in
the same Chamber with me. This was really
as bad a Punishment as my Death; for she
insulted me with those keen Reproaches, and
spiteful Witticisms, which threw me into such
Vapours and violent Fits, that I knew not
what I uttered in this Condition. She pretended,
I had confess'd talking ridiculous
Stuff with a Set of low Fellows, whom I
had hardly ever taken notice of, as could
have imposed on none but such as were resolved
to believe. I was brought to my 

trial, and to blacken me the more, accused of
conversing criminally with my own Brother,
whom indeed I loved extremely well, but
never looked on him in any other Light
than as my Friend. However, I was condemned
to be beheaded, or burnt, as the
King pleased; and he was graciously pleased,
from the great Remains of his Love, to
chuse the mildest Sentence. I was much
less shocked at this manner of ending my
Life, than I should have been in any other
Station: but I had had so little Enjoyment
from the Time I had been a Queen, that
Death was the less dreadful to me. The
chief Things that lay on my Conscience,
were the Arts I made use of to induce the
King to part with the Queen, my ill Usage
of Lady Mary, and my jilting Lord Peircy. 
However, I endeavoured to calm my Mind
as well as I could, and hoped these Crimes
would be forgiven me: for in other respects
I had led a very innocent Life, and always
did all the good-natur'd Actions I found any
opportunity of doing. From the Time I
had it in my power, I gave a great deal of
Money amongst the Poor, I prayed very devoutly,
and went to my Execution very
composedly. Thus I lost my Life at the 

Age of Twenty-nine, in which short time
I believe I went through more variety of
Scenes, than many People who live to be
very old. I had lived in a Court, where I
spent my Time in Coquetry and Gaiety: I
had experienced what it was to have one of
those violent Passions which makes the
Mind all Turbulence and Anxiety. I had
had a Lover whom I esteemed and valued,
and at the latter part of my Life, I was raised
to a Station as high as the vainest Woman
could wish. But in all these various Changes,
I never enjoyed any real Satisfaction, unless in
the little time I lived retired in the Country
free from all Noise and Hurry; and
while I was conscious, I was the Object of
the Love and Esteem of a Man of Sense
and Honour.’ 
On the Conclusion of this History, Minos
paused for a small time, and then ordered
the Gate to be thrown open for Anne
Bullen's Admittance; on the Consideration,
That whoever had suffered being a Queen
for four Years, and been sensible during all
that time of the real Misery which attends
that exalted Station, ought to be forgiven
whatever she had done to obtain it * . 