


In which the History of Greatness
is continued. 
Matters being thus reconciled,
and the gaming over, from Reasons
before hinted, the Company proceeded
to drink about with the utmost Chearfulness
and Friendship, drinking Healths,
shaking Hands, and professing the most perfect
Affection for each other. All which were
not in the least interrupted by some Designs 

which they then agitated in their
Minds, and which they intended to execute
as soon as the Liquor had prevailed over
some of their Understandings. Bagshot
and the Gentleman intending to rob
each other; Mr. Snap and Mr. Wild the
elder, meditating what other Creditors they
could find out, to charge the Gentlemen
then in Custody with; the Count hoping to
renew the Play, and Wild our Hero, laying
a Design to put Bagshot out of the Way,
or as the Vulgar express it, to hang him
with the first Opportunity. But none of
these great Designs could at present be put
in Execution, for Mr. Snap being soon
after summoned abroad on Business of great
Moment, which required likewise the Assistance
of Mr. Wild the elder and his other
Friend, and as he did not care to trust
to the Nimbleness of the Count's Heels,
of which he had already had some
Experience, he declared he must lock up
for that Evening. And now, Reader, if
thou pleasest, as we are in no great Haste,
we will stop and make a Simile. As when
their Lap is finished, the cautious Huntsman
to their Kennel gathers the nimblefooted 

Hounds, they with lank Ears and
Tails slouch sullenly on, whilst he with
his Whippers-in, follows close at their
Heels, regardless of their dogged Humour,
till having seen them safe within the Door,
he turns the Key, and then retires to whatever
Business or Pleasure calls him thence: 
So with louring Countenance, and reluctant
Steps mounted the Count and Bagshot to
their Chamber, or rather Kennel, whither
they were attended by Snap, and those who
followed him, and where Snap having seen
them deposited, very contentedly locked the
Door and departed. And now, Reader, if
you please we will, in Imitation of the
truly laudable Custom of the World, leave
these our good Friends to deliver themselves
as they can, and pursue the thriving Fortunes
of Wild our Hero, who with that
great Aversion to Satisfaction and Content,
which is inseparably incident to GREAT
Minds, began to enlarge his Views with his
Prosperity: For this restless amiable Disposition,
this noble Avidity which encreases
with Feeding, is the first Principle or constituent
Quality of these our great Men,
to whom, in their Passage on to Greatness, 

it happens as to a Traveller over the Alps,
or if this be a too far fetched Simile, to
one who travels over the Hills near Bath,
were the Simile was indeed made. He sees
not the End of his Journey at once; but
passing on from Scheme to Scheme, and
from Hill to Hill, with noble Constancy,
resolving still to attain the Summit on
which he hath fixed his Eye, however dirty
the Roads may be through which he struggles,
he at length arrives at—some vile
Inn, where he finds no Kind of Entertainment
nor Conveniency for Repose. I fancy,
Reader, if thou hast ever travelled in
these Roads, one Part of my Simile is sufficiently
apparent, (and indeed, in all these
Illustrations one Side is generally much
more apparent than the other) but believe
me, if the other doth not so evidently appear
to thy Satisfaction, it is from no other
Reason than because thou art unacquainted
with these great Men, and hast not
had sufficient Instruction, Leisure, or Opportunity
to consider what happens to those
who pursue what is generally understood
by Greatness: For surely if thou hadst
animadverted not only on the many Perils 

to which great Men are daily liable
while they are in their Progress, but hadst
discerned as it were through a Microscope
(for it is invisible to the naked Eye) that
diminutive Speck of Happiness which they
attain even in the Consummation of their
Wishes, thou wouldst lament with me, the
unhappy Fate of these great Genius's
on whom Nature hath set so superior a
Mark, that the rest of Mankind are born
for their Use and Emolument only, and be
apt to cry out, “It is Pity that Those for
whose Pleasure and Profit Mankind are
to labour and sweat, to be hacked and
hewed, to be pillaged, plundered, and
every Way destroyed, should reap so
LITTLE Advantage from all the Miseries
they occasion to others.” For my Part,
I own myself of that humble Kind of Mortals
who consider themselves born for the
Behoof of some GREAT Man or other, and
could I behold his Happiness carved out
of the Labour and Ruin of a thousand such
Reptiles as myself, I might with Satisfaction
exclaim, Sic, sic juvat: But when I behold
one great Man starving with Hunger
and freezing with Cold in the Midst of 

fifty thousand, who are suffering the same Evils
for his Diversion; when I see another whose
own Mind is a more abject Slave to his own
Greatness, and is more tortured and wrecked
by it than those of all his Vassals: Lastly,
when I consider whole Nations extirpated
only to bring Tears into the Eyes of
a great Man, that he hath no more Nations
to extirpate, then indeed I am almost
inclined to wish that Nature had spared
us this her Master-piece, and that
no great Man had ever been born into
the World. 
But to proceed with our History, which
will, we hope, produce much better Lessons
and more instructive than any we can
preach: Wild was no sooner retired to a
Night-Cellar, than he began to reflect on
the Sweets he had that Day enjoyed from the
Labours of others, viz. First, from Mr.
Bagshot, who had for his Use robbed the
Count; and Secondly, from the Gentleman,
who for the same good Purpose had
picked the Pocket of Bagshot. He then
proceeded to reason thus with himself. 
“The Art of Policy, is the Art of Multiplication; 

the Degrees of Greatness
being constituted by those two little
Words More and Less. Mankind are first
properly to be considered under two
grand Divisions, those that use their
Hands, and those who employ Hands. 
The Former are the Base and Rabble; 
the latter, the genteel Part of the Creation. 
The mercantile Part of the World,
therefore, wisely uses the Term Employing
of Hands, and justly prefer each other,
as they emply more or fewer; for
thus one Merchant says he is greater
than another, because he employs more
Hands. And now indeed the Merchant
should seem to challenge some Character of
Greatness, did we not necessarily come
to a second Division, viz. Of those who
employ Hands for the Use of the Community
in which they live, and of those
who employ Hands merely for their
own Use, without any Regard to the
Benefit of Society. Of the former Sort
are the Yeoman, the Manufacturer, the
Merchant, and, perhaps, the Gentleman. 
The first of these being to manure and
cultivate his native Soil, and to employ 

Hands to produce the Fruits of the
Earth. The second being to improve
them by employing Hands likewise,
and to produce from them those useful
Commodities, which serve as well for the
Conveniencies as Necessaries of Life. 
The third is to employ Hands for the
Exportation of the Redundance of our
own Commodities, and to exchange them
with the Redundancies of foreign Nations,
that thus every Soil and every
Climate may enjoy the Fruits of the
whole Earth. The Gentleman is, by employing
Hands likewise, to embellish his
Country with the Improvement of Arts
and Sciences, with the making and executing
good and wholesome Laws for the
Preservation of Property and the Distribution
of Justice, and in several other
Manners to be useful to Society. Now
we come to the second Part of this Division,
viz. Of those who employ Hands
for their own Use only: And this is
that noble own and GREAT Part, who are
generally distinguished into Conquerors,
absolute Princes, Prime Ministers, and
Prigs. Now all these differ from each 

other in Greatness only, as they employ
more or fewer Hands. And Alexander
the Great was only greater than a Captain
of one of the Tartarian or Arabian
Hords, as he was at the Head of a larger
Number. In what then is a single
Prig inferior to any other GREAT Man,
but because he employs his own Hands
only; for he is not on that Account to
be levelled with the base and vulgar, because
he employs his Hands for his
own Use only. Now, suppose a Prig
had as many Tools as any Prime Minister
ever had, would he not be as
GREAT as any Prime Minister whatsoever? 
Undoubtedly he would. What then
have I to do in the Pursuit of Greatness,
but to procure a Gang, and to
make the Use of this Gang center in
myself. This Gang shall rob for me
only, receiving very moderate Rewards
for their Actions; out of this Gang I
will prefer to my Favour the boldest
and most iniquitous (as the Vulgar express
it;) the rest I will, from Time to
Time, as I see Occasion, transport and
hang at my Pleasure; and thus (which 

I take to be the highest Excellence of a
Prig) convert those Laws which are
made for the Benefit and Protection of
Society, to my single Use.” 
Having thus pre-conceived his Scheme,
he saw nothing wanting to put it in immediate
Execution, but that which is indeed
the Beginning as well as End of all
human Devices: I mean Money. Of which
Commodity he was possessed of no more
than sixty-five Guineas, being all that remained
from the double Benefits he had
made of Bagshot, and which did not seem
sufficient to furnish his House, and every
other Convenience necessary for so grand
an Undertaking. He resolved therefore
to go immediately to the Gaming-House,
which was then sitting, not so much with
an Intention of trusting to Fortune, as to
play the surer Card of attacking the Winner
in his Way home. On his Arrival,
however, he thought he might as well try
his Success at the Dice, and reserve the other
Recourse as his last Expedient. He
accordingly sat down to play, and as Fortune
no more than others of her Sex, is 

observed to distribute her Favours with
strict Regard to great mental Endowments,
so our Hero lost every Farthing in his
Pocket. He then resolved to have immediate
Recourse to his surer Stratagem; and
casting his Eyes round the Room, he soon
perceived a Gentleman sitting in a disconsolate
Posture, who seemed a proper Instrument
or Tool for his Purpose. In short
(to be as concise as possible in these least
shining Parts of our History) he accosted
him, sounded him, sound him fit to execute,
proposed the Matter, received a ready
Assent, and having fixed on the Person
who seemed that Evening the greatest Favourite
of Fortune, they posted themselves
in the most proper Place to surprize the
Enemy as he was retiring to his Quarters,
where he was soon attacked, subdued and
plundered, but indeed of no considerable
Booty; for it seems this Gentleman played
on a common Stock, and had deposited his
Winnings at the Scene of Action. 
This was so cruel a Disappointment to
Wild, and so sensibly affects us, as no doubt 

it will the Reader; that, as it must disqualify
us both from proceeding any farther at
present, we will now take a little Breath; 
and therefore we shall here close this
Book. 