


In which our Hero carries Greatness
to an immoderate Height. 
Let us remove, therefore, as fast as we
can this detestable Picture of Ingratitude,
and present the much more agreeable
Portrait of that Assurance to which the
French very properly annex the Epithet of
Good. Heartfree had scarce done reading
his Letters, when our Hero appeared before
his Eyes, not with that Aspect with which
a pitiful Parson meets his Patron, after
having opposed him at an Election, or 

which a Doctor wears, when sneaking away
from a Door, where he is informed of his
Patient's Death; not with that down-cast
Countenance which betrays the Man, who,
after a strong Conflict between Virtue and
Vice, hath surrendered his Mind to the latter,
and is discovered in his first Treachery; 
but with that noble, bold, GREAT
Confidence with which a Prime Minister
assures his Dependent, that the Place he
promised him was disposed of before. And
such Concern and Uneasiness as he expresses
in his Looks on those Occasions did
Wild testify on the first Meeting of his
Friend. And as the said Prime Minister
chides you for Neglect of your Interest,
in no having asked in Time, so did
our Hero attack Heartfree for his giving
Credit to the Count, and without suffering
him to answer a Word, proceeded in a
Torrent of Words to overwhelm him with
Abuse; which, however friendly its Intention
might be, was scarce to be outdone by
an Enemy. By these Means Heartfree,
who might perhaps otherwise have vented
some little Concern for that Recommendation
which Wild had given him to the 

Count, was totally prevented from any
such Endeavour, and, like an invading
Prince, when attacked in his own Dominions,
forced to recall his whole Strength
to defend himself at home. This indeed
he did so well by insisting on the Figure
and outward Appearance of the Count and
his Equipage, that Wild at length grew a
little more gentle, confessing that he had
the least Reason of all Mankind to censure
another for an Imprudence of this Nature,
as he was himself the most easily to be imposed
upon, and indeed had been so by this
Count, who, if he was insolvent, had, he
said, cheated him of five hundred Pounds. 
“But, for my own Part, said he, I will not
yet despair, nor would I have you. Many
Men have found it convenient to retire,
or abscond for a while, and afterwards
have paid their Debts, or at least
handsomely compounded them. This I am 
certain of, should a Composition take place,
which is the worst can be apprehended,
I shall be the only Loser; for I shall
think myself obliged in Honour to repair
your Loss, even though you must confess
it was principally owing to your 

own Folly. Z&wblank;ds! had I imagined it
necessary, I would have cautioned you; 
but I thought the Part of the Town
where he lived, sufficient Caution not to
trust him. —And such a Sum— 
The Devil must have been in you certainly!” 
Mrs. Heartfree, who had before vented
the most violent Execrations on Wild, was
now thoroughly satisfied of his Innocence,
and begged him not to insist any longer on
what he perceived so deeply affected her
Husband. She said, Trade could not be
carried on without Credit, and surely he
was sufficiently justified in giving it to such
a Person as the Count appeared to be. Besides,
she said, Reflections on what was
past and irretrievable would be of little
Service; that their present Business was to
consider how to prevent the evil Consequences
which threatened, and first to endeavour
to procure her Husband his Liberty. 
Why doth he not procure Bail? said
Wild. Alas! Sir, said she, we have applied
to many of our Acquaintance in vain; we
have met with Excuses even where we
could least expect them. “Not Bail! answered 

Wild, in a Passion, he shall have
Bail, if there is any in the World. It is
now very late, but trust me to procure
him Bail to Morrow Morning.” 
Mrs. Heartfree received these Professions
with Tears, and told Wild he was a
Friend indeed. She then proposed to stay
that Evening with her Husband; but he
would not permit her, on account of his
little Family, whom he would not agree to
trust to the Care of Servants in this Time of
Confusion. 
A Hackney Coach was then sent for,
but without Success; for these, like Hackney
Friends, always offer themselves in the
Sun-shine, but are never to be found when
you want them. And as for a Chair, Mr. Snap
lived in a Part of the Town which Chairmen
very little frequent. The good Woman was
therefore obliged to walk home, whither the
gallant Wild offered to attend her as a Protector. 
This Favour was thankfully accepted,
and the Husband and Wife having
taken a tender Leave of each other, the former 

was locked in, and the latter lock'd out
by the Hands of Mr. Snap himself. 
As this Visit of Mr. Wild's to Heartfree
may seem one of those Passages in History,
which Writers, Drawcansir-like, introduce
only because they dare; indeed as it may
seem somewhat contradictory to the Greatness
of our Hero, and may tend to blemish
his Character with an Imputation of
that kind of Friendship, which favours too
much of Weakness and Imprudence; it may
be necessary therefore to account for this
Visit, especially to our more sagacious
Readers, whose Satisfaction we shall always
consult in the most especial Manner. They
are to know then, that at the first Interview
with Mrs. Heartfree, Mr. Wild had conceived
that Passion, or Affection, or Friendship,
or Desire for that handsome Creature,
which the Gentlemen of this our Age agree
to call LOVE; and which is indeed no other
than that Friendship which, after the
Exercise of the Dominical Day is over, a
lusty Divine is apt to conceive for the well-drest
Sirloin, or handsome Buttock, which
the well-edified 'Squire, in Gratitude, sets 

before him, and which, so violent is his
Love, he is desirous to devour. Not less
ardent was the hungry Passion of our Hero,
who, from the Moment he had cast his
Eyes on that charming Dish, cast about in
his Mind by what Method he might come
at it. This, as he perceived, might most
easily be effected after the Ruin of Heartfree,
which, for other Considerations, he
had intended. So he postponed all Endeavours
for this purpose, till he had first effected
what, by Order of Time, was particularly
to precede this latter Design; 
with such Regularity and true Greatness
did this our Hero conduct all his Schemes,
and so truly superiour was he to all the Efforts
of Passion, which so often disconcert
and disappoint the noblest Views of others. 