


Contains, among other particulars, certain
bridal admonitions. 

Though mr. Francis Thoughtless
did not judge it convenient to reproach
his sister in the presence of mr. Munden,
on the complaints of that gentleman; yet
she had no sooner vented the little spleen
she had been that instant possessed of,
than she began to accuse herself of having
been too poignant to a person, whom she
had promis'd to make her husband. 

To attone, therefore, for the severity
of her late behaviour,—‘This is a good
handsome clean hack,’ said she, with
a smile;—‘one would think my fellow
had pitched on such a one on purpose,
to keep me from regretting my not having
one of my own.’ 
‘I only wish, madam,’ replied mr.
Munden, ‘that you might be reconciled
to such things as are in my power to
accommodate you with, 'till I am so
happy to present you with every thing
you can desire.’ —‘Let us talk no
more of that,’ cried she;—‘be assured
that whatever I may have said, I am
far from thinking the happiness of life
consists in grandeur.’ 
Mr. Munden, on these words, kissed
her hand, and she permitted him to hold
it between his, till they came out of the
coach. 
This, indeed, had been the very last
effort of all the maiden pride and vanity
of miss Betsy, and mr. Munden henceforward
had no reason to complain of her
behaviour towards him. 

Sir Ralph Trusty, in regard to his age
and character, had the honour of nominating
the day for the celebration of their
nuptials, and miss Betsy made no excuses,
in order to protract the time, but agreed
with as much readiness, as her future
bridegroom could have wished. 
The good lady Trusty, as well as the
two mr. Thoughtlesses, however, being
not yet able to assure themselves, that nothing
was to be feared from the uncertainty
of her temper, did every thing in
their power to keep her in good humour
with her fate;—and to their endeavours
it may, perhaps, be ascribed, much more
than to the force of her own resolution,
that she ceased to be guilty of any thing
that might give the least cause of discontent
to mr. Munden, or betray that
which, in spite of all she could do, preyed
upon herself. 
To these assiduities of her friends, another
motive might also be added, for the
keeping up her spirits, which was that of
her mind being continually employed:— 
mr. Munden had taken a very handsome
house;—the upholsterer received all the
orders for the furnishing it from her. — 
There were besides many other things necessary 

for the rendering it compleat, that
were not in his province to supply:— 
the going, therefore, to shops and warehouses
for that purpose, took a very great
part of her time. —What could be spared
from these, and some other preparations
for her wedding, either lady Trusty, or
her brothers, had the address to engage:
—one or other of them were always with
her, 'till the night was far advanced,
and sleep became more welcome than any
meditations she could indulge. 
The appointed day at length arrived; 
—she was conducted to the altar by sir
Ralph Trusty, where being met by mr.
Munden, the ceremony of marriage was
performed,—none being present at it but
lady Trusty, and her two brothers; for
as she could not have it celebrated with
that pomp and eclat, agreeable to a woman
of her humour, she had earnestly desired
it might be done with all the privacy
imaginable. 
The indissoluble knot now tied, they
proceeded to Pontac's, where an elegant
entertainment being prepared for them,
by mr. Munden's orders, they dined, and
afterwards went all together, to a lodging,
mr. Munden had hired for a small time, 

in a little village five or six miles from
London. 
This he had done to oblige his bride,
who had told him, she desired to be lost
to the world, 'till the first discourse of
their marriage should be over, to avoid
the visits and congratulations of their
friends on that occasion. 
It would be needless to tell the reader,
that there was a general scene of joy amidst
this little company:—mr. Munden expressed,
and indeed felt, an infinity of
transport, on having triumphed over so
many difficulties, which had for a long
time continually risen to impede his wishes. 
—The two mr. Thoughtlesses were extremely
overjoyed, on thinking a period
was put to all their cares in relation to
their sister:—lady Trusty also, and sir
Ralph looking on this marriage, as things
were circumstanced, highly convenient
for miss Betsy, were very much pleased; 
—so that it must necessarily follow, that an
event, which cost so much pains to bring
about, must occasion a general contentment
in the minds of all those, who had
so strenuously laboured for it. 
Amidst this scene of joy, miss Betsy
herself was the only person whose countenance 

discovered the least pensiveness; 
nor was her's any more than what might
be attributed to the modesty of a virgin
bride. 
Lady Trusty, however, who had observed
her all day with an attentive eye,
thought it proper to give her some admonitions,
concerning her future behaviour,
before she took her leave. 
To this end, she drew her into another
room, apart from the company, and having
told her, she had something of moment
to say to her, began to entertain her
in the following manner: 
‘My dear child,’ said she, ‘you are
now, I fear, more through your compliance
with the desires of your friends,
than through your own inclination, entered
into a state, the happiness of
which greatly depends on the part you
act in the first scenes of it:—there are
some women, who think they can never
testify too much fondness for their
husbands, and that the name of wife is
a sufficient sanction for giving a loose to
the utmost excesses of an extravagant
and romantic passion;—but this is a
weakness, which I am pretty certain
you will stand in no need of my advice 

to guard agaist. —I am rather apprehensive
of your running into a contrary
extreme, equally dangerous to your future
peace, as to that of your husband. 
—A constant and unmoved insensibility
will in time chill the most warm affection,
and, perhaps, raise suspicions in
him of the cause, which would be terrible
indeed;—beware, therefore, I
conjure you, how you affect to despise,
or treat with any marks of contempt,
or even of too much coldness, a tenderness
which he has a right to expect you
should return in kind, as far at least as
modesty and discretion will permit you
to bestow. 
‘As to your conduct in family affairs,’ 
continued this good lady, ‘I would have
you always confine yourself to such
things, as properly appertain to your
own province, never interfering with
such as belong to your husband:—be
careful to give to him all the rights of
his place, and at the same time maintain
your own, though without seeming
to be too tenacious of them. —If any
dispute happen to arise between you,
concerning superiority, though in matters
of the slightest moment, rather recede
a little from your due, than contend
too far; but let him see you yield 

more to oblige him, than because you
think yourself bound to do so.’ 
‘Mr. Munden, I flatter myself, has
every qualification to make you happy,
and to shew that your friends, in advising
you to marry him, have not misled
your choice; but as perfection is
not to be found on this side the grave,
and the very best of us are not exempt
from the frailties of human nature, whatever
errors he may happen to fall into,
as it does not become you to reprimand
him, I wish you would never take notice
you have observed them. —A man
of the strictest honour and good sense
may sometimes slip,—be guilty of some
slight forgetfulnesses; but then he will
recover of himself, and be ashamed of
his mistake. —Whereas reproaches only
serve to harden the indignant mind,
and make it rather chuse to persevere
in the vices it detests, than to return to
the virtues it admires, if warned by the
remonstrances of another.’ 
‘But above all things,’ added she, ‘I
would wish you to consider, that those
too great gaieties of life you have hitherto
indulged, which, however innocent,
could not escape censure while 

in a single state, will now have a much
worse aspect in a married one.’ 
‘Mistake me not, my dear,’ pursued
she, after a pause, finding by miss Betsy's
countenance, that what she had said on
this score had stung her to the quick, ‘I
would not have you deprive yourself of
those pleasures of life which are becoming
your sex, your age, and character; 
—there is no necessity that because you
are a wife you should become a mope:
—I only recommend a proper medium
in these things.’ 
Her ladyship was going on, when miss
Betsy's servants, whom she had ordered
to bring such part of her baggage as she
thought would be needful while she stayed
in that place, came with it into the chamber,
on which this kind adviser told her
fair friend, that she would refer what she
had farther to say on these subjects, 'till
another opportunity. 
Miss Betsy replied, that she would treasure
up in her heart all the admonitions
she would at any time be pleased to give
her, and that she hoped her future conduct
would demonstrate, that no part of
what her ladyship had said was lost upon
her. 

With these words they returned into
the dining-room, and the close of day
soon after coming on, sir Ralph and his
lady, with the two mr. Thoughtlesses,
took leave of the bride and bridegroom,
and came back to town. 
