

The vicissitude of all human Affairs
is so absolutely necessary to give Mankind
a true Notion of themselves,
that he who seems most fix'd in
Happiness, and fenc'd from every
Blast of adverse Fate, sooner or later,
is generally led by some unavoidable
Impulse to quit his Haven of Peace, and share the
Storm in common with those born under less auspicious
Influences. The Baron de Tortillée, till he was
about the Age of Fifty, had pass'd his Time in a perfect
Tranquility; and tho' the Sweetness of his Disposition
made him commiserate, and, to the utmost
of his Power, assist all who labour'd under any Affliction,
yet he himself was wholly insensible what it was to
be uneasy: He had from his Infancy been bred at
Court, and still continued to frequent it; but as he
had preserv'd his Soul untainted with any of those 

modish Vices, which few of the gay Part of it are
free from, so he also did from that Spirit of Faction,
which the graver Sort, and those who aim at being
thought Politicians, are so much sway'd by. He was
entirely contented with his Lot, had no ambitious
Views, and enjoy'd the Goods of Fortune in that
Medium which alone can make Life happy; neither
maintaining a Port greater than his Estate would conveniently
allow, nor below what was becoming his
Quality. This Manner of Behaviour made him unenvy'd
by his Equals, esteem'd by those of a superior
Rank, and infinitely belov'd by his Inferiors; in fine,
never was a Man more universally spoke well of. 
Thus he liv'd, and thus, in all Probability, had he
died, had not his ill Fortune introduc'd him to the
Acquaintance of Madamoiselle La Motte, in whose Conversation
he found Charms sufficient to make him
wish to change his Condition, if by it he cou'd obtain
her for a Wife. This was a Lady of none of
the meanest Families in France, and at the Death of
her Father, was left Mistress of a considerable Fortune; 
but tho' she wanted not Wit, she had been extremely
deficient in her Conduct, and the Extravagance
of her Expences reduced her in a short Time
to have nothing of the Woman of Fashion remaining
but a few rich Cloaths; with these, however, and a
tolerable Face and Air, she found Means for a good
while to escape that, by the Young and Proud, dreaded
Evil, the Shew of Poverty. Those on whom
before she had bestow'd her Favours gratis, were now
oblig'd to purchase; and as soon as one grew weary
of the Bargain, she still had the Address to gain another
Bidder: Sometimes three or four had an equal
Share in the Property; but she had Artifice enough
to make each believe himself the sole Possesser. Don
Philip d'Esperanz, a Spaniard, was the last that supported
her in this Manner; but he being soon to return
to his own Country, where he had a Wife and
Family, she was beginning to cast about in her Mind
where she shou'd find a fresh Supply, at the Time 

when she first became acquainted with the Baron. 
It is not to be imagin'd, that a Woman, in the Circumstances
she then was, wou'd refuse an Offer,
which, in all her Bloom of Youth and Innocence,
she might have been proud to accept:––––No, she
knew the World too well; and pretending her speedy
Compliance with his Desires was the Effect of a Passion,
which Desert, like his, cou'd not but create, deluded
the enamour'd Baron with a Belief he was the
happiest of his Sex; and they contriv'd to huddle up
the Wedding in such a Manner, that they were marry'd
before any of his Friends had the least Notion
there was such a Thing in Agitation. At the first
Discovery of it, 'tis hard to say, whether Pity or
Amazement had the greatest Share in the Hearts of
those who heard it; but being depriv'd of the Opportunity
of informing him what she was in time,
forbore to let him know the Ruin it was now too
late to prevent, and contented themselves with silently
commiserating his Condition. 
If this Woman had been possess'd of the smallest
Grain of Honour, Gratitude, or even common good
Nature, she wou'd have endeavour'd, by her future
Manner of Behaviour, to retrieve the Errors of the
past. ––––To be taken from a State of Life, which,
if not abandon'd by all Sense of Shame, must have
been odious to her;––––to be reliev'd from all those
Terrors which attend Uncertainty;––––to be deliver'd
from the Insults of the judging World, and those,
more galling ones, the Man who keeps has a Privilege
of inflicting; and rais'd from the lowest and
most contemptible Degree of Infamy, to Wealth, to
Credit, and to Ease, were Blessings, such as one wou'd
think she shou'd have been too sensible of not to acknowledge,
and wish, at least, to prove they were
not ill bestow'd. But she was wholly dead to such
Considerations: She look'd on the large Fortune she
was now become Mistress of, only as a larger Means
to gratify her Inclinations; and as before she had so
much Regard to her Reputation, as to endeavour to 

hinder the World from believing her so vile as she
really was, she now gave a Loose to all the Sallies
of her ungovern'd Passions, imagining her Quality a
sufficient Sanction for her Vices, and that no body
would dare to say of the Baroness De Tortillée, what
they would have made no Scruple to alledge of Madamoiselle
La Motte. 
The Truth is, the Baron's singular good Qualities,
and affable Behaviour, had gain'd him so universal an
Esteem, that, in respect to his Character, (since Custom
has made the Errors of the Wife a Reflection
on the Husband,) People were infinitely more sparing
of their Censures than otherwise they would have
been, or than her Actions indeed deserved. When
she was first married, Women of the best Reputation
thought it no Scandal to visit her, and be seen
abroad with her; and had still continued to do so,
if she could have restrain'd her Inclinations within
the Bounds of even common Decency: But, alas!
she had no Sense of Honour or Decorum, but, behav'd
herself in so wild, so dissolute a Manner, that
in a little Time none, who but wish'd to be thought
virtuous, would take notice of her: The very Men,
who gloried not in Debauchery, shunn'd her Acquaintance,
or were asham'd to own it. This, which to
a Woman capable of any solid Reflection, must have
made her look back with Horror on the Vices
which had so justly render'd her contemptible, did
not in the least alarm her; she still had a Set of Company
who humour'd her Vanity, and, indeed, she
was easy in no other. 
But, oh! how blind is Love! the Baron still continued
to adore her! So much was he deluded by her
Artifices, that even her Vices appeared Virtues; the
Profuseness of her Expences seem'd to proceed from
a Generosity and noble Magnanimity of Soul, which,
however destructive to his Fortune, he could not but
applaud: The Liberties she took in her Conversation
with Men, pass'd for an innocent Freedom which he
could not imagine a Woman really criminal would 

dare to make use of. In fine, every Thing she said, every
Thing she did, was a new Charm to him; and neither
the palpable Neglect which he found the whole
World treated her with, nor the Remonstrances
which some of his Friends, griev'd at his Infatuation,
at last, grew free enough to make him, could
oblige him to look with a jealous Eye on her Conduct,
or in the least abate his Dotage. Indeed, how
little soever she seem'd to regard the rest of the
World's taking notice of her Faults, she, for the
most part, was cautious enough to prevent him
from making any Discovery of them; or, if at any
Time, she was conscious of an Irregularity which
might occasion his Suspicion, she knew how to bring
herself off; she had Sighs, Tears, Swoonings, Languishments,
at command: No Woman that ever liv'd
was Mistress of more Artifice, nor had less the Appearance
of being so: Nature had given her a Countenance
extremely favourable for her Purpose; and
whenever she was pleas'd to join to those Looks of
Sincerity and Innocence any Asseverations that she
was so, it was hardly possible to believe her otherwise:
Her Voice too had a perswasive Softness in it,
which it was very difficult to withstand; and one
had need to be perfectly acquainted with her Actions
before one cou'd distrust her Words. And this is all
that can be said to vindicate the unhappy Baron from
that Imputation of Stupidity, which the long Series
of his Delusions have drawn upon him. 
But to return to her History, which alone can
give the Reader any just Notion of her Character:
There was among the Number of those who now
frequented her Drawing-Room, a Fellow call'd Du
Lache: He was too disagreeable to be receiv'd in the
Quality of a Lover; neither did he visit her with
any such View: Fortune had been less kind to him
than Nature, for what he wanted in Beauty was
abundantly made up in Cunning; but he was so
wretchedly indigent, that tho' he had been employ'd
in the Management of several Intrigues, (for which 

no Body was more fit,) he never had met with Persons
who thought the Service he did merited the
Supply of even the common Necessaries of Life:
He was half perish'd for Want, when Chance
brought him into the Baroness's Acquaintance. They
soon found in each other sufficient to create an Intimacy; 
and she thought herself no less fortunate
in engaging to her Interest a Person whose Brain
was capable of projecting every Thing, and whose
Principle was to scruple nothing, than he did in having
it in his Power to oblige a Patroness, whose
Humour, he perceiv'd, was not to make scanty Retributions
for Service such as his. In a short Time
his Tatters were exchanged for Embroidery and Brocade;
he had Money in his Pocket; went to Court,
to the Opera's, Gaming-Houses, Assemblies; kept Company
with Gentlemen; and to those who knew him not
before, appeared like one himself. His Business was,
in all publick Places, to extol the Wit and Beauty
of the Baroness Tortillée! to make all Women appear
vile in Competition with her;–––if he heard one
fam'd for any Excellence, to form some Story to degrade
her;–––to break of intended Marriages;–––to
render those already wedded the Objects of each
other's Hate; and, in fine, wherever he found a noble
Friendship between Persons of different Sexes,
to endeavour to disunite, or make it appear scandalous. 
Malice is seldom barren of Invention, and People
that apply themselves to this kind of Mischief,
have generally a Manner of insinuating what they
would have believ'd, which Truth and Honesty disdaining
to make use of, are perfect Strangers to. 
Du Lache was so successful in his Employment,
that tho' the Marquis De Sonville had long lov'd,
and been belov'd by one of the finest Women of the
Age, not all her Charms, her Tenderness, her Constancy
could maintain the Place she held in his Affections,
when once attack'd by the Artifices of this
subtle Villian: He soon was brought to lessen his Esteem;
and that destroy'd, all that remains of Love is 

scarce worth calling so; Indifference immediately succeeds,
and the Heart is free to receive the Idea of
the first agreeable Object that presents itself. No
Body can doubt but that the Baroness, for whose
sake all this was done, was the Person introduc'd. 
He was no sooner discover'd to grow cool towards
his former Mistress, than he was brought to visit
her; and she being extremely desirous of engaging
him, and knowing how to form her Behaviour to
all Humours, found it no Difficulty to suit herself
to his. 
She also found her Account in the Addresses of
the young Chevalier St. Aumar: He was handsome,
gay, gallant, and liberal to an Excess: He profess'd
publickly his Admiration of her, waited on her
wherever she went, treated, and made her very rich
Presents. One would think, indeed, that this last
Article should have but little Sway with a Woman
of the Station she now was rais'd to; but, alas! if
the Baron's Estate had been twice doubled, it would
have been too small for those Expences, which, to
indulge a Temper such as her's, were absolutely necessary. 
She was now above making Assignations
at any of those mean Places of Entertainment she
had formerly been accustom'd to; all must now be
done with an Air of Grandeur; her Embroiderer, her
Milliner, her Mantua-Maker, her Tire-Woman, had all
of them Houses of their own, handsomely furnish'd
at her Charge, and adorn'd fit to receive a Messalina
equal to the first in Greatness. It must be confess'd
that in this she was politick enough; for whoever
had seen her at any of those People's Houses, would
not have believ'd she came thither out of any other
Design than to consult about her Dress; but then it
requir'd almost a Prince's Revenue to supply the Demands
of those Creatures, and purchase the least tolerable
Assurance of their Secrecy. The Jewels,
therefore, and other valuable Things, which the Prodigality
of St. Aumar bestow'd on her, were of
great Service; for the poor Baron, who was always 

pleas'd to see her appear magnificent, imagin'd
they were bought with that Money which was
really employ'd in Bribery on the Instruments of his
Dishonour. 
But, tho' she found it very much to the Advantage
of her Interest, as well as Pleasure, to converse
with St. Aumar, her Acquaintance with La Sourbe
was infinitely more so to the one, tho' far incapable
of the other. He was old, deform'd, diseas'd, and
had nothing either in his Person or Address which
could render his Caresses supportable to a Woman
of any Taste; but the Abundance of his Wealth counterballanc'd
all other Deficiencies; and this fine Lady
receiv'd him in his Turn, with all the Softness and
obliging Tenderness that the most lovely of her Admirers
thought themselves happy in possessing. 
'Twas to them all, indeed, but feigned; and therefore
the same Arts she practis'd to impose on others might
easily be us'd on him; for in reality she never knew
what 'twas to love sincerely; and at a Time, when,
perhaps there were twenty (tho' each believ'd himself
the only bless'd) who possess'd all the Favours
she was capable of bestowing, she was over-heard
to say, (to one that was Partner in all her Secrets,)
That that Woman was a Fool that ever gave herself
the least real Uneasiness on the Account of Love. –––– 
A Topknot tied amiss, said she, would give me
greater Pain than the eternal Damnation of all Mankind! 
–––Not to be ador'd, indeed, is not to live! and
to engage the Assiduity of a Fellow one likes, 'tis
necessary to counterfeit a Passion! 'Tis certain she
did it with such Success, that the most discerning
Eye might have been deceiv'd; how then could
La Sourbe escape the Snare? He had but little been
accustom'd to the Conversation of Women, and was
utterly ignorant of the Wiles laid for him:–––He
thought himself in Heaven; and could scarce contain
his Senses amidst that Profusion of Delight her Wit,
her Gaiety, her endearing Softness shower'd upon
him. He knew not how, sufficiently, to shew the 

Sense he had of such a Blessing as her Love, and
thought of nothing but the Means of returning it to
the utmost of his Power. ––––All his Hours, his Fortune,
his very Life, was wholly at her Devotion; 
and she had so absolute a Command over him, and
knew so well her Power, that she even made him
the Instrument of forwarding her Amours with others. 
But it was not only to her own Management she was
indebted for making this deluded Gentleman subservient
to her Ends, Du Lache, as in all the rest of her
Intrigues, was no inconsiderable Assistant here: He
was extremely ready at Invention, had a thousand little
Stratagems to prompt decaying Desire, and as
many Ways to make the Person whom he found it
his Interest to deceive, deaf to all Arguments but
those he undertook to maintain. 
But notwithstanding all his Cunning, he was extremely
put to a Stand, when coming one Morning,
as was his Custom, to visit the Baroness, and receive
her Commands, he found her at her Toilet, uneasy to
the last Degree: She had two or three Attendants in
the Room, whom, as soon as she saw him enter,
she dismiss'd, and stepping to him with something
of a disorder'd Motion, O Du Lache, said she, I have
wish'd for you this Hour! –––– I am distracted in my
Thoughts; and if your hitherto successful Wit should
now fail me, I am undone for ever. –––– Forbid it
Heaven! answer'd he, strangely surpriz'd. Yes, resum'd
she, I again repeat it, I am undone, ruin'd for
ever, unless you find the Means to help me:–––– 
All in my Power, Madam, added he, you know
you may command. Talk not of Power, interrupted
she impatiently, this must,–––– this shall be in your
Power, unless you wish to see me do some desperate
Deed:–––– If disappointed here,–––– in the extreamest
Wish my Soul e'er knew, I'll murder you,––––myself,
and all who want the Means to ease me. She
join'd to these Words so wild a Look and Motion,
that Du Lache repented he had seem'd to doubt of
his Ability to serve her, and endeavour'd to remedy 

that Fault, by swearing that he would bring about
whatever she employ'd him in, let the Nature or
Consequence be what it wou'd. She appear'd something
more tranquil at this Assurance, and seating herself,
and obliging him to do so; I am satisfy'd, said
she, that your Zeal to serve me will carry you to
great Lengths; nor do I think, when I have the
Power of reflecting, that the Task I now enjoin is
at all more difficult than those you have already gone
through, with all the Success I cou'd desire; but, alas!
continu'd she, beginning to relapse into her former
Disorder, the excessive Eagerness with which my
Spirits are agitated in Pursuit of the Blessing I wou'd
possess, and the certain everlasting Misery I must endure,
shou'd my Endeavours fail, confuses, drives
me mad:–––– My Soul will never know a Moment's
Peace, till sure Enjoyment shall destroy Suspence: I
cannot rest while there remains a Possibility of being
wretched:–––– Wretched, did I say? How poor are
Words to express what 'tis I mean? –––– 'Twou'd be
a Curse beyond Damnation! –She utter'd many more
the like Extravagancies, till Du Lache, a little recover'd
from the Astonishment her Behaviour had put
him in, interrupted her by saying, That, if to be
disappointed of her Aim, wou'd plunge her in such
Horrors the Possession of it must certainly afford her
adequate Delight, and begg'd her to think on that,
and rely on his Industry to compass it, as soon as
she shou'd inform him by what Means. Well then,
(said the Baroness, composing herself as much as possible,)
I will no longer doubt a Management which
never yet has fail'd me; nor in the least imagine, that
in the Perplexity you see me you will not do your
utmost for my Relief: Know then, continu'd she
sighing, my present Disorders are occasion'd by a
Passion, the Force of which I ne'er before experienc'd. 
–––Oft have I lik'd, but never, never lov'd till
now. –––One fatal Moment has inform'd me more,
than all the various Amours of many Years cou'd
do. –––Oh! I have seen a Man, whose Looks, whose 

Voice, whose every Motion is Enchantment! –––At
the first View my melting Soul dissolv'd;–––but
when he talk'd, methought, my very Life flew from
me,–––the soft Delight was more than Sense cou'd
bear! –––O Du Lache, thou know'st this Prodigy of
Charms!–––this Wonder of his Sex!–––this more than
Angel!–––yet, dull, dull, as thou art, thou never
spok'st him as he is! –––Oft have I heard thy Tongue
repeat the Name of Beauclair; but not with Raptures
to enflame Desire! ––––Why, too ungrateful
Friend, wert thou so careless of my Happiness, as
not to let me know that there were Joys in Love
beyond all I had already tasted? –––Cou'dst thou,––– 
tell me, I say, is it owing to thy Stupidity, or the
Thanklessness of thy Nature, that thou cou'dst converse
with Beauclair! the adorable Beauclair! without
a Wish Tortillée might be blest in his Possession! 
'Tis impossible to represent the Confusion that Du
Lache was in, when he heard the Name Beauclair
mention'd in that Manner: He knew, indeed, that
he had all the Perfections that the Baroness had describ'd,
and was not at all surpriz'd to find her so
much more charm'd with him than ever she had appear'd
to be with any other; but he knew also, that,
all lovely as he was, the Graces of his Mind were far
superior to the Beauties of his Person, and was sensible
there were some Obstacles which he had good
Reason to fear wou'd be invincible ones in her way
to the Happiness she aim'd at. In the first Place, the
Heart of Beauclair had long been devoted to a young
Lady, fam'd for, and really Mistress of every Excellence
that cou'd adorn a Woman; that he was contracted
to her before he went to his Travels, (from
which he was but lately return'd;) and that there
wanted nothing to compleat the solemnizing the
Nuptials of this accomplish'd Pair, but the Recovery
of a darling Brother, who, at that Time, lay ill of a
Fever. But tho' this of itself was sufficient to deter
Du Lache from entertaining any presumptuous Hopes
in Favour of Tortillée, yet the Character of Beauclair 

was infinitely more so: He had Honour, Constancy,
good Nature, and to all these Virtues an excellent Penetration,
which render'd it almost an Impossibility
to impose upon his Judgment: He plac'd not his Affections
on Montamour, (for that was the Name of
his intended Bride,) without a perfect Knowledge
how worthy she was of them: And the Charms of
the one, and the Wisdom of the other, was a Bulwark
which this insiduous Villain fear'd wou'd be
impregnable to all the Stratagems his Cunning cou'd
invent. The Vexation this Consideration gave him
kept him from making an immediate Answer to what
the Baroness had said, 'till guessing the true Reason
of his Silence, she prosecuted her Discourse in this
Manner. I wonder not, resum'd she, that you appear
disorder'd at the Request I make: A Lady who
sat by me last Night at the Opera, where I beheld
this Idol of my Soul, gave me his whole History; 
and I suppose 'tis his Engagement with Montamour
makes you doubtful how far you may be able to
prevail in Behalf of Tortillée. You think, perhaps,
her Charms maintain too forcible a Lustre to be
eclips'd by mine, and are unwilling to embark in a
Design which you imagine cannot easily be accomplish'd; 
but know, (continu'd she with a Frown,)
that I am resolv'd to triumph over this happy Rival,
or die in the Attempt:–––– Therefore contrive some
Means, and that this Moment too, to make me blest,
or be assur'd I will not brook the Disappointment
unreveng'd. Du Lache, who knew the natural Obstinacy
of her Temper, made much more so by the
Violence of her present Desires, found it wou'd be altogether
fruitless to set before her Eyes the little Likelihood
there was for her to succeed. All he cou'd do,
was to entreat her Patience, and protest by all the
Oaths he cou'd invent, that he wou'd exert his utmost
Abilities to procure the Satisfaction she requir'd:
And perceiving nothing but an absolute Dependance
cou'd make her less desperate, he was oblig'd to give
her Hopes, (which himself believ'd were but fallacious,) 

that in a few Days she shou'd be in Possession
of all her Soul was bent on. 
It was now that he found himself in the greatest
Perplexity he had ever been in all his Life: The more
he consider'd on the Promise he had made, the less
Probability there appear'd of making it good; and to
fail, he knew wou'd ruin him with the Baroness
for ever: His Present Subsistance, and his Hopes of
making his future Fortune, depended on her Favour; 
and he grew almost distracted, when, after a thousand
various Projections, he cou'd find none that
seem'd feasible to preserve it. He endeavour'd, however,
to delay the Misfortune he dreaded, and by
concealing his inward Perturbations, and always, in
her Presence appearing with his former Gaiety, made
her indeed believe he really had found the Means of
doing what she expected from him. To divert her
Thoughts as much as possible from Beauclair, he
never suffer'd her to be alone; and whenever the Baron's
Absence gave them an Opportunity, he contriv'd
that either the Marquis De Sonville, the Chevalier St.
Aumar, or Monsieur La Sourbe, or some one or other
of her Devotees, shou'd be perpetually with her. But
all this was of but little Efficacy; she was so far
of the Humour of Mankind, that if Beauclair had
been less agreeable yet he was unenjoy'd, and therefore
most desirable. She was willing, however, to
trifle away the Time in these Amusements, till that
happy Moment shou'd arrive, which was to give
her more exstatick Joys: And knowing the Subtilty
of Du Lache, and how much it was his Interest to
oblige her, did not greatly doubt but that some way
or other he wou'd bring it about. The Truth is, it
ever was uppermost in his Thoughts; but he found
so little likelihood that any Efforts he shou'd make
wou'd meet with Success, that he was beginning to
despair; when, on a sudden, his prompting Fiend,
which seldom left him long unaided, put it into his
Head, that Madamoiselle Sansfoy might be of Use in
the Mischief he endeavour'd. This was a Lady whose 

extream Love of hearing herself speak, made her often
the Instrument of both Good and Ill, without any
Intention of her own to serve the End of either:
She had a great deal of Vanity in her Nature, and
therefore could not be without an equal Share of
Coquetry in her Behaviour; and as she was excessive
fond of being admir'd by the Men, could not be capable
of any real Regard for the Women. She took
a vast Pleasure in picquing any one more aimable
than herself, and was never so happy as when she
had the Power of giving Pain. She dress'd well,
was young, gay, and perfectly well shap'd, had very
regular Features, and a most delicate Complection;––– 
and to all this an uncommon Quickness of Apprehension,
and a ready Thought, and a free and easy Delivery
of her Words, and an entertaining Turn in Conversation,
which made her Company every where desir'd. 
She was acquainted both with Beauclair and Montamour,
and had with the latter as great an Intimacy as
the Difference of their Humours would permit. It was
not difficult for a Person of much less Discernment
than Du Lache to find out what Manner of Address
would be most acceptable to this fine Lady: He had
several Times happen'd to meet her at a Place where
he had visited, and from that took the Liberty of
going to see her at her House: He wanted not
Words to excuse, nor she good Humour to for give
the Boldness; and perceiving himself favourably receiv'd,
after a thousand Encomiums on her Beauty
had usher'd in the Discourse, he told her, That nothing
had ever so much the Power of giving him Surprise
as that Beauclair, who had seen the Wonders of her
Charms, could so far wrong his Judgment, and the
good Opinion the World had of his Wit, to give
Montamour the Preference in his Esteem. It must be
confess'd, indeed, said this subtle Detractor, that she
has lovely Eyes, a fine Shape and Air, a vast deal of
Wit, and, where Sansfoy is absent, is Mistress of a
thousand soul-attracting Graces; but when you both
appear together, I cannot help believing that Beauclair, 

and all (as many such there are) who think
like him, are blind. He very well knew the Effect
these Words would produce; and that a Woman of
the Temper she was, to whom they were directed,
is not so angry with the Praiser as the Prais'd. Sansfoy
immediately grew pale with Envy; and imagining
that what Du Lache had said of the Passion of
Beauclair for Montamour, only express'd a mannerly
Commiseration of her Want of Charms, who had
not Power to engage him, was ready to burst with
inward Spite all the Time he had been talking; till,
able to contain no longer, I know not (said she, with
a disdainful Toss of her Head) how many there may
be of Beauclair's Mind in his Admiration of Montamour,
but I am very sure that none, besides himself,
take any Pains to be well in her Esteem; and, perhaps,
the little Interruption he has to fear in his Addresses
there, is the greatest Inducement to his making
'em. Security, added she, is a valuable Article
in Marriage, and as he designs her for a Wife, Housewifry,
Silence, Meekness, Obedience, and Humility,
are the Accomplishments he thinks most necessary. 
But Madam, (resum'd Du Lache, rejoic'd he had
wrought her to a Disposition proper for his Purpose,)
do you really believe this seeming virtuous Lady is
what she appears to be? Is there no favourite Lover,
who in the dark triumphs over Beauclair? –––I have
heard odd Stories, which yet bear a Possibility of
Truth. –––For Heaven's sake, what? (interrupted
Sansfoy eagerly,) who is the Man? Pardon me Madam,
answered he, I dare not make Reports, which
I am not sure may not be fabulous. –––I would not
for the World be guilty of Injustice:–––Nay, tho'
I knew all I have been told were positively true,
I am too tender of Ladies Honour to repeat it. 
The natural Curiosity which always made her inquisitive
into the Affairs of every Body, pointed
now with Malice, fill'd her with perfect Agonies; 
she would have given almost a Limb to be let into
this Secret, and the greater Unwillingness he pretended 

to divulge it, the more she grew impatient
to discover it. She entreated him with so much
Earnestness, and so many Conjurations, that at last
he seem'd won by 'em, and told her a long Story
which he had before invented; the Sum of which
was, That Monsieur Galliard had long been an Admirer,
and in secret possess'd all the Favours that
Montamour could give. The Reason why this artful
Villain made this Gentleman a Property to further
his Designs, was, that he knew Sansfoy had a prodigious
Desire to engage him, and of Consequence
wou'd more industriously blaze abroad the Scandal
he aim'd at, than if he had mention'd a Person more
indifferent to her: He knew also that he had been
acquainted with Montamour from her Childhood; 
that he was accounted of an amorous Disposition; 
and that he profess'd an extraordinary Friendship for
that Lady. And tho' there needed not all these Probabilities
to make the censorious Sansfoy believe all he
said, yet he was sensible there was Occasion for many
more, and stronger, to oblige the rest of the World
to entertain an ill Opinion of a Woman who had
ever behav'd with an exemplary Discretion. 
This was the first Step Du Lache had made toward
the disuniting the Affections of these two amiable
Persons; the next was to ingratiate himself as
much as possible with Beauclair. He had a good
Voice, and Judgment in Musick; and being told that
Gentleman was a great Admirer of it, found means
to oblige him to a liking of his Conversation, by
presenting him with some fine Compositions, which
he pretended had been sent him by some of the best
Masters in Italy, whom he kept a Correspondence
with. Not all Beauclair's Wisdom could defend his
good Nature from being deluded by the Artifice of
this common Traytor to all Honour and Virtue; he
became extremely pleas'd with him; and far from
suspecting his Designs, let him into all his Affairs
with a Freedom which some Time after he found
he had sufficient Reason to repent. One Day as they 

were alone together, he told him he had been the
Night before at Montamour's; that Sansfoy was with
her; and staying till it was late, he had waited on
her Home; that as they went, she had given him
some Hints he was not so happy in the Affections
of his Mistress as she had made him hope; and that
Galliard was mention'd by her in a Manner which,
tho' he was not inclinable to Jealousy, had given him
much Disquiet. 'Twas with a vast deal of Satisfaction
that Du Lache found his Plot had so well
succeeded on Sansfoy, and now began to hope there
was a Possibility of deceiving them all, by the same
means he had done her: He dissembled his Sentiments,
however, and seem'd to regard what Beauclair had
told him, but as a Thing in which he had no manner
of Concern, tho' all the Time he was in his
Company, his Invention was at work how to make
the best Use of what he heard; and having hit on a
Thought which seem'd to be a lucky one, disengag'd
himself as soon as possible, and went about
the Execution of it. 
He saw that with Wisdom, Honour, Generosity,
Sweetness of Disposition, and a thousand shining Qualities
which made up the Character of Beauclair,
there were certain Frailties mix'd, which prov'd him
not absolutely Divine. From their last Conversation,
he gather'd, that an Impatience of Indignities, and a
too great Aptitude to credit all Reports that shou'd
be made him, gave Treachery an advantageous Ground
to dart her Arrows from; and perceiving that those
little Reflections Sansfoy had made, had been sufficient
to give him Pain, he resolv'd to strengthen what she
said, by Proofs which shou'd wear the Appearance
of Infallibility. 
Toncarr and Le Songe were Men that had no other
Dependance than their Wits; and if employ'd in any
Design which they found it their Interest to undertake,
thought it the least of their Business to enquire
whether it were honourable, or not. A publick Oath,
 or private Assassination, were what at any Time a 

Prospect of Advantage wou'd lead them to. Du
Lache was perfectly acquainted with their Principles,
and in his Days of Poverty had been one of their
Associates, and therefore made no doubt but he
shou'd find them both willing and able to serve him
in his present Affair. The Moment he left Beauclair
he sent for 'em to his Lodgings; and having communicated
the whole Matter to them, and receiv'd their
Promises of Assistance, they all together agreed on a
Stratagem, which was accordingly executed the next
Morning in the Manner following: 
Du Lache went pretty early to give the Bonjour to
Beauclair at his Lodgings; and after some little Discourse
of ordinary Affairs, ask'd that Gentleman,
whom he knew to be a Lover of it; to walk with
him, it being a Morning full of Temptation. The
Proposition was agreeable; and as soon as he was
dress'd they went together on Foot towards the Louvre,
designing for the Gardens: But as they turn'd
the Corner of a little back Lane, which carried them
to the great Street before the Palace, they heard a
sudden Clash of Swords; and immediately saw two
Men engag'd in so furious a Manner, as if each had
vow'd the other's Death: But one of them seem'd
less skilful in the Use of his Weapon, and was press'd
upon by his Adversary with so much Advantage, that,
in all Appearance, he must have fallen or yielded, if
Beauclair and Du Lache, no other Persons happening
to be near, had not run in to his Relief. The Moment
they advanc'd, the Person that seem'd to be the
Foil'd, took to his Heels, and was immediately out
of Sight: His Antagonist made an offer of pursuing,
yet not so eagerly but that he was easily withheld
by Beauclair, who asking what had been the Occasion
of their Quarrel, and how it happen'd that they
had made Choice of a Place so unfit for their Purpose,
cou'd get no other Answer from him, than
that he was undone! and that to have been hinder'd
from pursuing the Person with whom he had been
fighting, was a more cruel Misfortune than the Loss 

of his Life wou'd have been, had the other got the
better. Beauclair was prodigiously amaz'd at these
Words: He cou'd not imagine that a Fellow of the
Rank he appear'd to be, (being dress'd after the Manner
of a Valet,) cou'd have so nice a Sense of Honour
as to prefer it to his Life, and had a great Curiosity
to know of what Nature this Affair was; 
which made him extremely pleas'd when Du Lache,
pretending an equal Astonishment, press'd the Man
to relate it. At last, seemingly overcome by the
Perswasions of Gentlemen to whom he ow'd his
Safety, he told 'em, (after he had engag'd their Promises
never to reveal the Secret he was about to intrust
'em with,) That he was a Dependant on Monsieur
Galliard, had formerly liv'd with him, and
was now employ'd by him in the Conduct of an
Amour which, if discover'd, wou'd certainly be of
fatal Consequence. The young Lady, said he, with
whom my Master (for I still call him so) is enamour'd,
is of Quality, and has a Brother whom the
least Occasion of Suspicion wou'd set on fire for the
Honour of his Family. Every Body knows the
Temper of Madamoiselle Galliard, that she is one of
the most jealous Women on Earth; and being fix'd
in a Belief that she is not so well in her Husband's
Affections as she cou'd wish, makes it her whole
Study to find out what Woman is the Cause, for
some such one she is sure there is, and if discover'd
will not fail to expose her in the most gross and
shameful Manner imaginable. Now you must know,
Messieurs, (continu'd he,) that this Lady being pretty
closely observ'd by the Brother I told you of, and a
Gentleman whom she is shortly to be married to,
cannot oblige my Master with her Conversation, neither
so frequently nor so long as both of 'em desire; but
his Impatience had contriv'd a Way to remedy that
Misfortune. He provided a little Ladder of Ropes,
which she fastening to her Window, he might easily
enter, and pass a whole Night with her. This very
Ladder, and a Letter appointing the Hour he was to 

go, I was this Morning to deliver to her; but, O
unlucky Accident! Madamoiselle, whether she overheard
the Orders he was giving me, or whether she
only suspected my so often coming to the House,
and being in private with my Master, was on some
such Design, I know not, but she immediately sent
a Fellow, a Creature entirely at her Devotion, after
me, who following me without my taking Notice,
or in the least imagining he was behind me, till we
came into this Bye-Lane, where he snatch'd my
Bundle from me, which, unsuspecting any such Thing,
I held carelesly in my Hand, he immediately whipp'd
it into his Pocket, and drawing his Sword to defend
his Prize, perceiving I was doing the same to recover
it, engag'd me in the Manner in which you found
us. 
There was a visible Alteration in Beauclair's Countenance
from the first Moment this Fellow mention'd
the Name of Galliard; but when he heard him say
the Lady, to whom he should have deliver'd the Ladder
of Ropes, had a Brother, and that she was in a
short Time to be married, his Face seem'd dy'd in
Crimson, his Eyes shot Fire, and wild Impatience
distorted every Feature. With what a Pleasure Du Lache
observ'd it, the Reader will easily imagine; for
I believe none will be so stupid, as not to see that
this was the Contrivance which had been form'd the
Night before; and that those Fellows who seem'd
such Foes, were no other than Le Songe and Toncarr,
who had confederated with the other, and invented
this Story, which was likely enough to confirm the
Suspicions Beauclair had already, thro' Sansfoy's Suggestions,
conceiv'd of the unblameable Montamour. 
This artful Villain, to farther the base Design so successfully
begun, immediately cry'd out in a seeming
Astonishment, O Heavens! This Lady whom you
have been speaking of is no other than Montamour, and
this Gentleman, to whom with me you have been discovering
her Weakness, the very Man who was design'd
to make her happy in a Hasband. A thousand Circumstances 

concur to make me know my Fears are but too
true. –––What have I done? (return'd the other with a
well counterfeited Terror,) what have I said? –––– 
Wretch that I am, ––– has my unwary Tongue let
slip ought that may discover what my Master would
not for his Soul have known?–––has any inadvertent
Word escap'd me, that give you Reason to imagine
'tis Montamour who is enamour'd of Galliard to so
high a Degree, that for his sake she can consent to
suffer Freedoms, such as I have been speaking of? ––– 
O too, too sure! (continued he tearing his Hair,) I
am by some fatal Accident made guilty; the Secret
of my Master is betray'd; the Lady is expos'd; and
we are all ruin'd! No, no, (said Beauclair, assuming
as much as possible his accustom'd Serenity of
Countenance,) you are so far from being guilty of
any Thing that can be call'd a Crime, that in making
this Discovery, tho' undesign'd by you, you have obliged
a Gentleman who never will be ungrateful. Take
this, (added he, giving him a Purse of Gold,) and
ever be assur'd to find a Friend in Beauclair. The
Fellow seem'd to start at the Name of Beauclair;
and, after having several Times repeated, Good God,
is it possible! fell on his Knees, entreating him, that
in what Manner soever he express'd his Resentments,
that he would take no notice of him in the Affair. 
I am an unfortunate Gentleman, added he, who have
a large Family, and no other Dependance than the
Favour of my Master; and as it was not thro' Design,
but Accident, I have made you acquainted with
this History, (little suspecting, Heaven knows, how
deeply you were interested in it,) I beg my unhappy
Children may not suffer for the Folly of their
Father; for sure, I am, if Monsieur Galliard should
know it is from me you learned the Secret, my
Life would be the first Sacrifice he would offer to
his Mistress's Reputation. All the Rage of Temper
which Beauclair had been endeavouring to quell, return'd
at this last Word, with greater Violence than
ever, and wholly unable to contain his Fury–––– 

His Mistress! interrupted he, O Damnation on the
Thought! Ten thousand Fiends torture her false deceiving
Soul:–––Curse on her treacherous Charms, ––– 
her counterfeited Modesty, ––– her cool Reserve! ––– 
the Jilt, –––the Hypocrite! Was there no Man but
me to have made a Property? –––Am I, of all my
Sex, chose out as fittest for the Cover of her secret
Lewdness? He would doubtless have vented the
o'er-boiling Passions of his Mind in many more such
like Exclamations, if Du Lache had not reminded
him of the Place they were in, and entreated him
to conceal his Disorders till he should come into one
where Privacy should more conveniently permit
him to indulge them. Beauclair thank'd him for
this friendly Admonition, and turning to Le Songe,
(for it was he who had entertain'd him with this
fine Invention,) bad him be easy; for whatever he
should determine to revenge the Wrongs Galliard
had done him, it should never be known by what
Means he made a Discovery of them. Du Lache
parted from his confederate Villain with an applauding
Smile, for the Success of an Enterprize which
they promis'd themselves to be very merry at hereafter,
and follow'd Beauclair, who, with an Air that
spoke his inward Agitations, was walking toward
the Palace-Gardens. They took two or three Turns
there; but the Charms of the Morning having drawn
a good deal of Company, it grew troublesome to
this distracted Lover: He went home again, and giving
Orders not to be disturb'd, shut himself into his
Closet with Du Lache. It was now this subtle
Insinuater had an Opportunity of making every
Thing appear as he would have it. The prudent
and reserv'd Behaviour which render'd Montamour
an envy'd Example to all the young Ladies of her
Time, by his Suggestions now seem'd all Artifice; 
and the Heart which had so long, and so justly paid
Homage to her as the most truly adorable of her
Sex, was now brought to consider her as the vilest. 
At first his Resolutions were to send a Challenge to 

Galliard; but his mischevious Adviser, with Reason,
fearing that if they fought, which ever got the better,
such an Encounter might produce an Eclaircissement
sufficient to detect his Villany, perswaded him,
that as she had render'd herself unworthy of his
Affection, she also had of his Regard; and that it was
too much to hazard his Life in a Cause which when
known, could neither add to his Honour, or restore
that of the Person for whom he fought. To what
End, Monsieur, said he, should you engage in a Quarrel
of this Nature? Galliard is not a Rival, whose
Addresses may, but already have obtain'd every Thing
to the Prejudice of your Passion; and should your
Sword have all the Advantages you could desire,
what would it avail? Montamour would not be less
unsullied; his Blood could never wash her Stains
away, nor could his Death give back that Virtue
which alone can make her worthy of your Love. 
He us'd many more Arguments of this Nature; and
finding the other inclinable to listen to every Thing
he said, Methinks, resum'd he, it better would become
a Passion injur'd to that Degree yours is, to
pay the Injustice with Scorn than Anger;––– and
since Heaven, by a Means so unexpected, has given
you a perfect Knowledge of her Perfidy, to imagine
you will still continue any Professions of Tenderness
there, would be to harbour the most despicable Notions
of your Understanding; to desist from them,
without condescending to give her any Reasons for
so doing, would be the most galling Revenge you
can take:–––Let all those who have seen your Adorations,
be Witness of your Contempt;–––if Chance
should bring you into her Presence, behold her with
Indifference;–––speak of her with Disdain; and, if
possible, think of her as she deserves, with Hate:
Or, (continu'd he, perceiving Beauclair could not
forbear sighing at that Word,) if that is a Task too
difficult to be accomplish'd presently, feign at least
to do so. –––Believe me, who am perfectly well acquainted
with the Humour of the Sex, that nothing 

is so great a Shock as cool Indifference:–––Rage, tho'
express'd in the rudest Manner, still discovers there
are Remains of Passion in the Heart which harbours
it, and only feeds the Pride of her 'tis vented on; 
but a sedate, an unregarding Air, stabs the vain Coquette
in the tenderest Part. You speak my Sense,
answered Beauclair; I do not believe any Thing so
truly stinging to Womankind, as when they find their
Power of creating Inquietudes are past; and yet (cried
he after a Pause) I ne'er observ'd in Montamour that
Humour;––– but (added he, changing his Voice) she
is all Artifice, ––– all damn'd Deceit, and knows how
to dress the worst of Vices with a Shew of Virtue:
Du Lache, I hate her, by Heaven I do, ––– and she
shall know I do:–––I'll write and tell her so this very
Moment. Alas! reply'd he, how little is a Soul,
in the Condition yours is, capable of judging of its
own Conceptions;–––To say you hate, is to confess
you love; ––– for Heaven's sake do not thus unman
yourself; ––– if you must write, let it be–––What?
interrupted Beauclair. I wish, rejoin'd the other,
you'd give me leave to dictate. With all my Heart,
(answered he,) write what you think most proper,––– 
what you yourself in the like Circumstance would
say; but take care, be sure not to let slip one Word
which may look like Tenderness, and I will copy it
over, and send it to her strait. 
Thus did this unsuspecting Gentleman, blinded by
Passion, and sooth'd by the base Arts of the most
treacherous of all Villains, join in the Deceit against
himself, and aid the Ruin of his own Hopes. Du
Lache was too assiduous in Mischief to give him
Time for Reflection; and taking Pen and Paper immediately
writ in this Manner; 


To Madamoiselle Montamour.
Tho' nothing is more base than for the Tongue or
Pen to make Professions of a Passion which the
Heart is a Stranger to, yet nothing is more in
fashion even among those who pretend to the greatest
Honour of both Sexes; but as I resolve to be for ever
out of it, so I will not accuse you, because I will not
give you the Trouble of endeavouring at a Justification,
which will be altogether vain. 
This, therefore, comes to bid you an eternal Adieu;
wishing you a long Series of Contentment in those Amusements
you are pleas'd, at present, to place your Felicity
in; and that the Memory of what has pass'd between
us, may not hereafter afford a more just Occasion of
Disquiet to you, than to the 
Once passionate
Beauclair. 

This being extremely approv'd of by Beauclair,
was immediately copied over by him, and sent to
Montamour; but notwithstanding the Rage he was
in, and the seeming Reason he had to be so, the Respect
he had always been accustom'd to pay this Lady,
not all his Belief of her Unworthiness cou'd utterly
eraze: He could not bring himself to treat her
in this Manner, without giving to his own Soul
a Shock the most sensible it could sustain; and tho'
he was perswaded to an Assurance that what he
did was entirely right, he could not do it without
Agonies inexpressible. 
But if the Sender of these cruel Lines felt such
Disquiets, how infinitely more terrible must their
Influence be on the unfortunate Receiver, the innocent,
injur'd Montamour? Tho' her Modesty, and the
natural Reservedness of her Temper had kept her 

from making such violent Declarations of her Passion,
as many of her Sex are too apt to do, yet never
Woman lov'd to a greater or more sublime Degree:
Had Life and Beauclair's Satisfaction been at
stake, she would have made no Scruple to relinquish
the one, if by it she might have purchas'd him the
other: With such a Profusion of Tenderness she
regarded him, that her whole Soul was taken up, and
render'd incapable of any other Thought; nor had she,
till this unhappy Moment, thro' the Course of her
Affection ever met with the least Cause to make
her wish she could be less devoted to him. How
prodigious then, how much beyond what Words can
represent, or even Thought, unfeeling it, conceive,
must be her Astonishment, her Grief, her Indignation,
at these distracting Lines! It was but two
Days since he had parted from her with all the Tokens
of a soul-raptur'd Passion, and what now cou'd
move him to abjure it, and renounce his Vows,
was something so amazing, that it seem'd impossible. 
––––She could not presently believe her Eyes:––– 
She read the fatal Scroll again and again; and being
perfectly assur'd it was his Hand, had not the least
Hold for Hope his Heart was untainted with the
Vices common to his Sex. –––She found herself utterly
abandon'd; the Letter told her so, in Words
too plain to suffer her to make a Doubt of it; and
what she endur'd in that Reflection, none, but those in
the like Circumstance, can guess. The Hints he gave,
that she plac'd her Felicity in Amusements in which
he had no Part, she consider'd as the common Artifice
of Mankind, who, when they no longer find
it to their Satisfaction to continue their Professions,
to veil their own Inconstancy and Levity of Nature,
throw the Odium on the Person they forsake; and
in this View he appeared so black, that for some
Moments she found Ease in Hate: Stripp'd of those
Graces (said she to herself) which distinguish'd him
from the rest of Men, and which alone cou'd excuse
the Idolatry of my fond Soul, I should deserve the 

Contempt he treats me with, shou'd I persist to
love;–––No, I'll despise him, drive him from my Heart
for ever, ––– ingrateful as he is, ––– unworthy even
of my Remembrance. This Resolution seem'd, indeed,
most consonant to Reason; but, alas! how little
are the Slaves of Love capable of obeying such Dictates? 
The Weakness of her Sex, or rather the Weakness
of her Passion, threw her immediately into soft
Complainings: Beauclair's ten thousand Charms, his
flowing Wit, his sweet enchanting Air, his tender
Protestations, Languishments, and Vows, all came
fresh into her Mind, and Streams of Tears put out
the Fire of Rage. It was about Noon when she
receiv'd this surprising Letter; and altogether unfit
for Conversation, she was oblig'd to feign herself indispos'd,
to avoid dining with her Brother, who liv'd
in the House with her, and was but just recovering
from a long Fit of Sickness. The Necessity she had
of shunning his Presence till she had a little overcome
her Disorders, was no small Addition to them:
The Marriage Ceremony between her and Beauclair
waited only for this Gentleman's Return of Health,
and what Pretence she shou'd make for breaking it
off, she knew not; for the Thought of telling him
in what Manner she was us'd by her ungrateful
Lover was insupportable, not out of a womanish
Pride of disdaining to confess she had been forsaken,
but because she knew not how far and how fatally
his Resentment might transport him in the Vindication
of a Sister affronted in so unpardonable a Manner. 
If her Tenderness for Beauclair had, by his
late Behaviour, been render'd less prevalent, she had
a Generosity in her Soul which made her look upon
Revenge as a Passion justly to be abhor'd; and how
to prevent it, her Brother being naturally violent,
gave her Disturbances little inferior to her others. 
She had also a long and uneasy Debate within herself
in what Terms she should answer those Lines which
had made so sudden an Alteration in her Fate, or
whether she ought to answer them at all; and the 

Uncertainty in what Way it was best for her to proceed
in an Affair so every way distracting, took
from her the Power of doing any Thing for some
Time. 
Tho' 'tis possible whatever she had writ Du Lache
might have found Means to confute, and by construing
her Words turn'd 'em to favour his Design,
yet her Silence furnish'd him with an Opportunity
of perswading Beauclair, that it was not only an Argument
of her Guilt, but also, that had she but the
least Desire to retain a Place in his Affections, she
wou'd have made a Tryal of her Power, and endeavour'd
to regain him: Her taking no notice of your
Letter (said he,) is a Proof that she rejoices in an Occasion
to break with you; and thinks to be esteem'd
by you is of so little Consequence, that she will not be
at the Pains of one Invention (of which her Brain
is sufficiently stor'd) to purchase it. With these kind
of Suggestions he was always at his Ear, haunted
him like his Shadow wheresoever he went, and never
suffer'd his Resentments, by a Moment's Cessation,
to grow cool, till he thought he had entirely
brought about his End of extirpating all Remembrances
which might rise in his Soul in favour of
Montamour. 
Things being in this favourable Position, he thought
it now high Time to introduce the Baroness into his
Acquaintance: He had often mention'd her to him
as a Person the most extraordinary of her Sex, and
every now and then took Occasion to tell him he
had several Times heard her speak the Name of Beauclair
with a kind of Transport. Were she unmarried,
(said the cunning Villian,) and Mistress of an Empire,
the Admiration she pays your Virtues (for she
is no Stranger either to your Person or Character)
would most certainly entitle you to share it with
her. There are very few People, if any, of either
Sex, tho' never free from what we call Vanity, that
feel not a secret Pleasure in hearing themselves prais'd; 
and indeed where such a Desire is not immoderate, 

it is rather an Argument of a noble, than a base Nature. 
Ambition is laudable when it extends no farther
than to excel in those Qualities which may render
us agreeable to Society, serviceable to the World,
and pleasing to Heaven; but when, disregarding the
Substance, and grasping at the Shadow, we aim only
at the Reputation of a Perfection, without taking any
Pains to make us worthy of it, 'tis idle Ostentation,
and often draws the Owner into worse Vices, Envy
and Detraction. Such a Person can hardly endure
another to be spoke well of; whereas the other hears
his Companion extoll'd with no other Uneasiness
than a secret Indignation against himself, for either
his Inability, or Want of Application to attain those
Virtues he finds so universally applauded. Beauclair
cou'd not be possess'd of ten thousand inimitable
Graces, and be ignorant they merited Admiration; 
and tho' he was so accustom'd to create it, that he
cou'd not be much transported at what Du Lache
told him of the Baroness, yet the Sweetness of his
Disposition made him always think himself oblig'd
to the good Opinion of any one, much more to a
Lady's, of whom he heard such Wonders. He seem'd
very well pleas'd to encourage an Acquaintance
with her; and the rather, because he hop'd the Conversation
of a Woman so agreeable and witty, as
she had been represented, might be a Means more
effectual to drive Montamour from his Thoughts,
than he found all the Efforts he had been able to
make. 
The Day which was appointed for him to accompany
Du Lache in his Visit to her being arriv'd, it is
not to be doubted but that, having Notice of it, she
took all imaginable Care to appear aimable in his
Eyes: If there be any Charm which Art and Study
can acquire, neither was here wanting to procure it:
Her Dress, her Looks, and her Behaviour, were
all fram'd to please; and having throughly inform'd
herself by Du Lache what best wou'd suit his Humour,
she threw the vain Coquette entirely off, and 

wore the Appearance of the Woman of Honour. –––– 
Her Carriage, tho' affable and complaisant, was all on
the Reserve; nor did she (so exact was she in Dissimulation)
in the least Word or Action, all the Time
he stay'd with her, swerve from the most nice
Punctilio of Modesty. They parted extremely satisfy'd
with each other: He consider'd her an agreeable
Acquaintance, and she him, as a Man, whom in Time
she might be able to subdue. 
After this, they had frequent Interviews, sometimes
at her own House, and sometimes at Madamoiselle
D'ovrier's, where Du Lache had also introduc'd
him, as if it were by Chance, and not with
any Design of meeting the Baroness; tho' this indeed
was one of those Places of Rendezvous before
mention'd: But tho' his Carriage was full of Gallantry
and Complaisance, yet neither his Words nor
Actions had any Symptoms of that Passion she was
ambitious of inspiring, and which alone could make
her easy. To inform this Dulness of Nature (as she
accounted it.) she began to lessen her Reserve, and
assuming an Air all soft and tender, talk'd to him,
and look'd on him with that sort of kind Concern
as is usual between the most near and affectionate
Relations; and believing it necessary to give some
little Hints that there was something yet more
endearing in her Soul, would now and then let
fall a Word, cast an amorous Glance, and vent
a Sigh, as if it had escap'd her in spite of her Endeavours
to restrain it. In fine, she manag'd with
such Artifice, that he must have been as insensible as
he was really discerning, not to have perceiv'd she
lov'd him; but the Reluctance with which she seem'd
to let any Thing slip which might give him Cause
to imagine he had made an Impression on her, extremely
heighten'd his Esteem; and tho' he had not
been able to drive the Idea of Montamour so much
out of his Mind as to be capable of entertaining a
new Flame, yet he could not help feeling a secret
Satisfaction in the Influence he found he had over a 

Soul so nicely virtuous, and full of noble Sentiments, as
he believ'd hers to be. The good Opinion he had
of her, may, perhaps, seem strange, considering in
what a vastly different Light her Character appear'd
in the Eyes of most People; but till Du Lache (who
had taken care to prepossess him with Notions all
to her Advantage) introduc'd him to her, he was
utterly unacquainted either with her Fame or Person. 
His Travels had taken him up some Years, and since
his Return to Paris, his Engagement with Montamour,
and the sincere Tenderness he had for her, entirely
engross'd all his Hours, and left him not a
Moment to throw away on Enquiries after any
other Woman; and as the Sweetness of his Disposition
made him always ready to think the best of
every Body, it is not to be wonder'd at, that for a
Time he was deceiv'd into a Belief of the Baroness's
Virtue. 
But the Respect which his too-favourable Opinion
had inspir'd him with, was far from forwarding
what her Wishes aim'd at: She easily perceiv'd it,
and truly judging by the Fire she observ'd in his
Composition, by the tender Languor which sometimes
trembled in his shining Eyes, and by the Air
of all his Motions, that he was no Enemy to soft
Desires, and that the distant Complaisance with which
he treated her, was more owing to the Belief he
had, that to offer at a nearer Familiarity wou'd not
be receiv'd, than to any Dislike to her, or Coldness
in his own Nature, she resolv'd to act in such a
Manner for the future, as should let him see that it
was impossible for him to presume beyond a Pardon. 
She communicated her Intention to Du Lache,
and order'd him, that on all Opportunities he shou'd
hint to Beauclair something of her Passion, seem to
be surpris'd at the Discovery he made of it, and pity
the Conflicts he must imagine she endur'd between
her Virtue and Desire. He extremely approv'd of
what she said, and obey'd her Commands with such
Success, that by what he told him, and by what 

himself had of late gather'd from the Baroness's Behaviour,
the other was convinc'd it would be no
Difficulty to obtain from that Lady the greatest Condescension
he cou'd require. If thus encourag'd he
had refus'd to take the Advantages were offer'd him,
he either must not have been a Man, or of a Soul
much more refin'd than Man is ordinarily possess'd
of. Tho' Vanity and Curiosity wear the Name of
Female Foiblesses, yet they are often (without any
other Incitement) the Occasion of making the most
deserving Woman lament the Inconstancy of her
Husband, or Lover. But to those two Motives,
Beauclair had, indeed, a third: The Desire of banishing
as much as possible all Remembrance of a Person
he thought so utterly unworthy as Montamour,
and, as he has since confess'd, and as by the rest of
his Character one may reasonably believe, this last was
the most prevailing Argument which induc'd him to
imagine an Affair like this cou'd be of any Consequence
to his Happiness. But not withstanding all that
his Resentments to Montamour, or that Levity of
Nature (too incident to his Sex) cou'd suggest, his
Inclinations were not so much upon the Wing as to
engage him to make any great Haste to prosecute
the Consummation of it; and he had, perhaps, delay'd
so long, till something had happen'd to prevent
all Desires of attempting it, if the Lady's Impatience
had not made her take such Measures as, in a manner,
oblig'd him to declare himself. 
One Evening as they were alone together at Madamoiselle
D'ovrier's, (Du Lache having excus'd himself
from waiting on Beauclair,) she, artfully waving
all other Subjects of Conversation, turn'd it in such a
manner, that it more wore the Face of Chance than
Design, into an Argument on the Force of Love:
She pretended to prove that whatever Indecorums
were the Consequences of that Passion, they were
wholly unavoidable, and therefore cou'd not but be
pardonable. A Man must have been very uncourtly,
indeed, that, whatever his Thoughts were, wou'd 

have disputed with a Lady on that Topick; Beauclair
was more gallant; and believing that if ever he
desir'd any greater Testimonies of the Conquest he
had made of her Heart, than what her Eyes declar'd,
now was the Time to obtain them: He catch'd her
suddenly in his Arms, and strenuously embracing her,
cry'd out in a sort of Extacy, O Madam! how
divinely good you are to declare your Willingness to
forgive Actions which cannot, by him who gazes on
your Charms, but with Torments inexpressible be
restrain'd! And perceiving she affected a little Astonishment
at his Proceeding; Nay, Madam, continu'd
he, by your own Words you stand condemn'd, I own
my self a Lover, an Adorer of your Perfections! ––– 
I am no longer Master of my Passion! –––I must indulge
the burning Wishes of my Soul! –––And you
must pardon 'em! –––You have said you will; ––– and
sure, you are too heavenly to retract your Promise. ––– 
A thousand melting Kisses, on her Lips, on her
Eyes, her Breasts, made a delightful Parenthesis between
almost every Word he spoke, and took from
her the Power of answering, if she had attempted
it; but she, who was truly charm'd with him, and
had long languish'd for the Blessing she now so unexpectedly
possess'd, was for some Moments too
much transported to have Recourse to Artifice: Scarce
knowing what she did, she mix'd her Breath with
his; and as he held her, press'd him closer still! But
Presence of Mind (which till this Juncture never had
been absent from her Breast) resuming its former
Place, and reminding her, how cheap, in his Esteem,
a too easy Yielding would make her appear, oblig'd
her to make some faint Efforts to get loose from his
Embrace. ––––O unhappy and unguarded Woman
that I am, (said she, seeming to weep,) by my own
Inadvertency I am lost! –––This dangerous Charmer has
search'd into my Soul, and found the fatal Secret out,
which till this Moment I durst not tell my self. –––– 
Oh! I am undone for ever (pursu'd she after a Pause,
and mustering all her Force to dart one piercing 

Glance) unless Beauclair, the wondrous,–––the lovely,
dear destroying Beauclair, will be kind enough to
hate me,–––to take himself for ever from me,–––and
let me see that all-undoing Form no more. First
perish this Form, (interrupted he, by this Time fir'd,
if not with Love, with something which too often
bears the Name of it,) blind these Eyes! and new,
and unimagin'd Curses light on each Limb and Faculty
of Beauclair, when he consents even in a Thought
to quit the divine Tortilée! Ah! then, cry'd she, there
is no Power in Heaven or Earth can save me! ––– 
Fame, Duty, Virtue, are too weak Defence––––against
those conquering Eyes, that Shape, that Air, that
Mein, that Wit, that Voice, those thousand, thousand
Worlds of Charms! Death only is a Refuge for Tortilée! 
As she spoke these Words she sunk by degrees,
and at last fell quite back, in a counterfeited Swoon,
in the Chair she was sitting in: Beauclair started immediately
from his, and run to the Door, but not to
call any Assistance, or bring Water to revive her, (as
perhaps some over-aw'd Lovers might have been
stupid enough to have done,) but to make it fast, and
prevent any other Person from sharing with him in
the Glory of restoring her to Life; nor was he, at
his Return, at a Loss for Means to bring her back to
Sense: But if he cou'd have had Power to inform
that Sense with a just Notion of the Happiness she
was Mistress of, she had indeed been blest; his extravagant
Extent of charming, if not a sufficient
Sanction for the Crime, was yet a prodigious Excuse,
and his unquestion'd Honour a Security for the Concealment
of it: But, alas! not all the Glories of his
Form or Soul, not all the countless Wonders of his
Wit and Beauty could work that Miracle, and triumph
over the Inconstancy of this universal Dispenser
of her Favours: She who, engag'd with a Multiplicity
of Lovers, cou'd find no Satisfaction while
wanting Beauclair; languish'd for others, when possest
of him; and this accomplish'd Gentleman, in a
little Time, serv'd but to swell the Number of her 

Admirers, scarce distinguish'd, in her Esteem, from
those among 'em of the least Pretence to Merit. 
But to go on gradually with her History: She now
accounted herself superlatively blest, and perhaps was,
for a Time, of the Opinion she never shou'd wish a
Joy more elevated than what she had possess'd in
Beauclair; while he, deluded by his own good Nature,
the Insinuations of Du Lache, and the Subtilty
of this fair Imposture, rioted in Imagination, and
grew almost vain on the Influence of his own
Charms, which, without an Attempt, or even a Wish
that way, had vanquish'd a Heart he believ'd impregnable
to the united Force of the whole World besides. 
Montamour was now no more remember'd; her Beauty,
and her reported Falshood were lost amidst the
Hurry of his present Transports: But the fallacious
Pleasure was hardly more than momentary; an Idea
which once has made a true Impression, and which
Length of Time has rivetted in the Soul, is not with
so much Ease eraz'd, tho' exil'd for a while, by Cares,
by Business, or another Object, a thousand tender Passages,
in spite of us, occur, and bring the Charmer
back; and he that once has lov'd sincerely is in great
Danger of always loving. This was at least the Case
of Beauclair: He was no sooner at home, and had
Leisure for Reflection, than Montamour, adorn'd
with all her Graces, came fresh into his Mind; and
when he endeavour'd to extirpate her by thinking on
Tortilée, he but gave himself Disorders which he
found it impossible to quell:–––If he compar'd, either
the Beauties of their Minds, or Persons, how infinitely
superior to the latter (setting aside the Belief
of her Inconstancy) did the former appear! The
Raptures he so lately enjoy'd, already pall'd, and made
Desire grow sick: The more he consider'd how
much he was belov'd by Tortilée, the more he was
distracted at the Thoughts that he had been unable to
inspire the same Degree of Tenderness in Montamour:
Glad wou'd he have been to have had it in his Power
to return with something more than Gratitude that 

Vehemence of sincere Affection, which the one seem'd
so profusely to lavish on him, and to have paid the
imaginary Contempt and Ingratitude of the other
with Hatred and Disdain. But both these Wishes
were impossible; and he found, in spite of all the
Strength of Reason he was Master of, that Love is
not a Passion liable to controul. To add to his Disquiets,
and put Reflection more upon the Rack, just
as he was going to Bed, a Page from Montamour
brought him a Letter from her; which hastily opening,
he found in it these Lines: 

To Monsieur Beauclair.
That I answer'd yours no sooner, was only owing
to the Uncertainty I was in if I should answer it at
all. The Levity of a Mind which could dictate
Lines like those you writ, is, indeed, worthy of nothing
but Contempt; but I am of a Temper constant to a
Fault, and confess my self unable, immediately, to
despise, what I have once, tho' causelesly, esteem'd. 
You need not, however, be under the least Apprehension,
that after this you shall receive any Persecutions
either from my Love, or Resentment; and am so far
from endeavouring to be justify'd in your Opinion, that
I do not so much as ask of what I am accus'd; and,
conscious of no other real Guilt, on your Account, than
in putting a too-great Confidence in your seeming Sincerity
and Honour, shall make use of so much Discretion
as not to regard whatever imaginary Crime your
Baseness may alledge against me, to vindicate your
Change of Behaviour. 
I think my self too much indebted to Heaven, for
putting so early a Stop to any future Engagements with
you, to look back with Regret on the past; much less
to languish for a Renewal of those fictitious Protestations
with which you once had the Power of deceiving 
The Unthinking
Montamour. 

P. S. To let you see with how much Tranquility of
Mind I bear the eternal Loss of you, I have perswaded
my Brother, that our breaking off is owing
only to my self; you therefore have nothing to fear
either from his or my Resentments. If you never endure
more from a too-late Repentance, and the Reproaches
of your own Conscience, you will be happy–––– 
Adieu––––for Ever. 

With what sort of Emotions the Soul of Beauclair
was agitated at the reading this Letter, wou'd
be as impossible to describe, as it was for him to fix
on any one Sentiment to give him Ease. The cold
Disdain with which it seem'd to be writ, fir'd him,
at first, with Indignation: He thought she gloried in
her Falshood, and rejoic'd in an Opportunity to break
with him; but when he consider'd it more carefully,
he fancy'd he found a certain Stiffness in the Stile,
which perswaded him her Indifference was but
feign'd. –––One Moment she appear'd to his Imagination,
as she really was, all heavenly Truth and Innocence,
languishing, dying with the cruel Alteration
of her Fortune, and only counterfeiting to despise a
Heart which had so ungenerously abandon'd her:––– 
The next, he thought he saw her, as her Enemies had
represented her, false, perjur'd, and inconstant; in
private, dissolutely lavish of her Favours, and only
hypocritically modest and reserv'd in publick:–––Sometimes,
in spite of all Appearances, he was inclin'd to
think her virtuous, but then the manner in which he
was impos'd on to believe her otherwise, check'd the
Suggestions of his Tenderness. ––––Long did the
Fondness of his Passion struggle against all Opposition; 
till at last, resolving to give the Victory to that
which seem'd to be the Result of Reason,–––I will
no more debate, (said he to himself,) nor join to be
my own Deceiver:–––Heaven is not more true than
Montamour is false. –––'Tis plain; and to have made a 

Doubt of it, after the Proofs I have had, is most
ridiculous and vain. ––––No Envy, no Malice, no
Design, cou'd have the least Share in the Discovery
of her Perfidy:–––The very Fellow who betrayed
her to me, knew not that he did so:–––I 'scap'd the
dishonourable Title of her Husband by a very Miracle,
and to deliberate has made me half unworthy
the Deliverance. O (continu'd he, ready to burst
with stifled Love, and madding Jealousy) how wou'd
the fair Apostate, and her curs'd Minion, the detested
Galliard, triumph in his Pains, and deride my
weak and shameful Irresolution, should any Chance
but give them leave to guess it. 
In this Confusion of Thought he pass'd the Night,
nor did the Morning bring him any Return of Peace,
and Du Lache coming pretty early to visit him, (as
indeed he was seldom from him but in those Hours
commonly allow'd for Repose,) was a little startled
to find, that all he had done had been unable to fix
him in that Disposition of Mind which the Baroness
requir'd; and being from her perfectly acquainted
with the Condescentions she had made him the Day
before, had hop'd, till now, that in the possessing
her all his Wishes for Montamour were utterly extinguish'd; 
but finding himself deceiv'd, bethought
him of another Stratagem, which he had reserv'd
as a saving Card, in case there shou'd be an Occasion
to make use of it, to strengthen the Accusations
he had already laid on that unhappy Lady by the
Means of Le Songe. As soon as Beauclair had given
him an Opportunity, by communicating his
Inquietudes to him, he exerted all his Policy in aspersing
her, yet in such a Manner, as if he did it
with Reluctance, and only forc'd to it by the Friendship
he had for him. Alas! said he, her Intrigue
with Galliard is not a Thing of Yesterday: I long
have been acquainted with the Secret, and so have
many more, tho' every one, knowing the Violence
of your Passion, forbore to speak of it to you: Tho'
never Man (continu'd he) had a more great and sincere 

Esteem for another, than my admiring Soul
has ever paid you, yet, to have been Master of an
Empire, would not I have been the first to have divulg'd
this to you, because I see, (with an Infinity of
Concern I speak it,) I see in spite of all, you still must
love; and to know her Crime but racks your Peace,
and Reason never can restore you to that Quiet which
happy Ignorance bestow'd. At these Words Beauclair
flew into the utmost Rage, swore she was
hateful to him;–––that he thought not on her but
with Contempt; and, to engage the other to a Belief
of what he said, protested his whole Soul was
now devoted to another. I wish, indeed, (resum'd
this vile Incendiary,) that there was a Possibility for
you to do so, for I am most sure you cannot any
where bestow the Treasure of your Affection more
undeservedly:––––To convince you of the Truth of
what I say, if you please, I will wait on you to a
Gentleman, a near Relation of mine, who, by his
Intimacy some time ago with Galliard, was privy
to the whole Affair. At my Request, I know, he
will inform you of all the Circumstances, which he
well knows; and there are some Particulars concerning
the Treachery of this Montamour to Madamoiselle
Galliard, to whom she once was dear, which
I believe you will confess to be such, as vastly extenuate
the Foulness of the Fact. Tho' Beauclair
thought himself but already too well assur'd, yet the
Resolution he had made to hate her, and the Difficulty
he found it would be to keep it, made him willing
to listen to every Tongue that should repeat her
Name in such a Manner as might hush the Pleas of
Love, and drown all soft Remoras in the Voice of
Scandal. An Appointment was presently made, and
in the Aternoon Beauclair, Du Lache, and Toncarr,
who pass'd for his Kinsman, met at a neighbouring
Tavern. It was impossible for Beauclair to have
any Notion of Toncarr, having never seen him
but once, and then only in the Struggle with Le
Songe, when he immediately fled, as was his Part: 

Besides, he appear'd now dress'd en Cavalier, and had
a Mein and Air agreeable enough to make him be
taken for a Man of Fashion. After some few Compliments,
Du Lache entreated him by their Nearness
of Blood, and that much nearer Tie of Friendship
which was between them, to relate what he had
been privy to of the History of Galliard, as to his
Concern with Montamour. He seem'd at first a little
scrupulous; but aferwards, artfully pretending to be
angry with himself for denying him so long: Why,
said he, shou'd I make any Objections against obliging
a Man of Honour and my Friend, when what
I have to say can turn only to the Prejudice of a
Villain and my Enemy? I have renounc'd all Friendship
with Galliard; and when I gave him his Life, at
his Request, and promis'd Secrecy of all had past, the
Conditions on which I made the Promise being
broke, to proclaim it now to the whole World can be
no Breach of Trust: Know then, Gentlemen, (continued
he,) I owe my Birth to Naples; but my Parents
dying young, I was sent over under the Care
of some of my Mother's Relations to Orleans, where
I had an Uncle. As soon as I arriv'd at the Age of
distinguishing Perfections, I became an Admirer of a
Lady allow'd to be Mistress of all that Woman can be
bless'd with; but Fortune not then enough my
Friend to embolden me to make any Declarations
of my Passion with Hopes of Success, prompted
me to seek Preferment in the Army. Hungary was
then the Seat of War: And four Campaigns sent
me home in a Condition which I thought wou'd
not appear despicable in her Eyes, by whom alone I
wish'd to be well thought of. –––But at my Return,
I found she was remov'd with her Mother. It was
some Time before I heard she went to Paris: I soon
follow'd, but tho' I made all possible Enquiry, was
not able to inform myself any Thing of her. I
went to all publick Places, hoping to see her, knowing
she was of a Disposition naturally inclin'd to
Gaiety; but all my Search was vain. In this Time 

I became acquainted with Galliard: He seem'd extremely
pleas'd with my Company, took all Opportunities
to oblige me, made me the Confident of his
Amours, and, among the rest, of his Affair with
Madamoiselle Montamour. Her Brother, as he told me,
had forbad him his House, and he found some Difficulty
in conveying Letters to her; he form'd a Pretence
for me to introduce myself to the Family,
which, as it would take up too much Time, and be
of no Consequence to the Story, I shall forbear to
repeat. In fine, to repay some Obligations I had
receiv'd from him, I took upon me to be his Emissary,
and they had frequent Opportunities of meeting
through my Means. I could not avoid condemning
him, indeed, in my private Opinion, because
I knew he had a Wife, who, I heard by others, was
a most beautiful and deserving Woman, though he
spoke of her as the Reverse. However, as she was an
utter Stranger to me, I thought it would be Imprudence
to interfere with any Advice, which,
'twas probable, would only occasion a Breach of
Friendship between us, and be of no Service to the
Lady. Thus it pass'd on, till one Day he invited
me to his House, where I had never been before:
But, Good God! how shall I express the Astonishment,
when in Madamoiselle Galliard I found the Charmer
I so long had sought. The Confusion with which
I beheld her as his Wife, and as a Wife so injur'd by
him, must have been visible to him, had he been
present; but he was that Moment as she came into
the Room retir'd to his Closet to write a Letter,
which I was to convey to Montamour. She blush'd
at Sight of me, and burst into a Flood of Tears at
rememb'ring the Tranquillity of her Condition when
last she saw me, and perhaps mix'd with a Sensibility
of the Tenderness my Eyes, tho' not my Tongue
had often taken the Liberty of telling her I felt on
her Account. There was then no Opportunity of
private Conversation; he soon return'd to us. But
after that I had frequent Opportunities of discoursing 

her, and she made no Scruple of complaining to me
of his Unkindness. –––I was almost mad at the Inhumanity
of my Fate; and tho' I thought myself
most wretched in being depriv'd of her, yet I solemnly
protest I was not so much troubled that she
was married, as that she was so unhappily married. 
I could no longer be passive to the Affair: I told
Galliard, that now I had seen his Wife, and found
her a Woman so infinitely deserving, I could not approve
of his Proceedings. At first he laugh'd at my
Admonitions, but finding I persisted, seem'd to take
it ill, and assur'd me, he should always follow the
Dictates of his Inclinations, without any Regard to
what those who had no Business with it, should
think of his Behaviour. Pretty well warm'd before,
this Answer set me all on Fire, and I return'd it in a
manner he knew not how to brook:––––In short, we
fought, I had the good Fortune to disarm him, and
was about to revenge his Lady's Wrongs, when he entreated
me to spare his Life, and swore ten thousand
Oaths never to injure her again in the Manner he
had done. ––––On this I threw him back his Sword,
and went immediately to Montamour, told her what
I done, and the Promise I had exacted from her Lover. 
––––She appeared enrag'd at my Presumption, as
she call'd it; but as Women are generally pretty artful
in penetrating into those kinds of Secrets, she
presently guessing my sudden Dislike of their Intimacy
proceeded from my Friendship to his Wife, soon
grew calm; and changing her Voice, Well Monsieur,
said she, I see the Charms you have found in Madamoiselle
Galliard have made you an Enemy to her
Husband; but suppose I value your Friendship at so
high a Rate, that to oblige you to my Interest, I
contrive some way to put you in Possession of the
Wife, will you refuse me then your Assistance in the
Continuance of my Happiness with the Husband. 
So strange a Proposition coming from a Woman,
who, bating her criminal Affection for Galliard, I
always look'd on as Mistress of a good deal of Honour, 

took from me the Power of making an immediate
Answer; and she interpreting my Silence
as a Token of Consent, I will not, resum'd she,
promise that Madamoiselle will yield to your Desires; 
she is too foolishly fond of her Husband, tho' he
despises her, and too great a Bigot to her Matrimonial
Vow; but this I will engage, to bring her to a Place,
where, if you think fit to make use of the Advantage,
Denials shall be in vain. I vow to you, Gentlemen,
(pursu'd he,) that the Shock with which I heard
her speak thus, was greater than I am able to represent:
The violent Passion I had bore to Madamoiselle
Galliard, while I believ'd her in a Condition
capable of returning it, was now converted to a sincere
and noble Friendship; my Affection was too
pure to wish to obtain more of her than Honour
would permit, tho' with her free Consent; how
then cou'd brutal Force have any Place in my Intentions? 
I soon convinc'd this mistaken Lady, that the
Person she was speaking to, was of a Temper vastly
different from what he imagin'd; and endeavour'd,
by all the Arguments I could invent, to perswade her
to consider the Injustice she was guilty of to herself,
as well as to her Rival. But all was of no Effect; 
she seem'd harden'd in her Crime, and pretended to
vindicate what she did with so much Haughtiness,
and so little Shame, that I question if the most common
Fille de Joye in Paris cou'd with such Assurance
have behav'd: She call'd me Sot, Fool, and every
opprobrious Name her Spite and Anger cou'd put
into her Mouth: Told me she regarded not what my
Thoughts were of her Actions; but if I dar'd to report
'em, she had a Brother who wou'd not suffer
the Abuse to go unpunish'd. Talking never was my
Talent; and being altogether unaccustom'd to such
Kind of Encounters, she had very much the Advantage
of me, and I was at last glad to leave her unconverted. 
I heard afterwards, that all I had done
prov'd ineffectual to break the Correspondence between
her and Galliard; and I had not fail'd to call 

that dishonourable Wretch a second Time to account,
if his Wife had not writ to me, conjuring me to
take no farther Notice of the Affair, for it but encreas'd
his ill Usage of her in private, and gave occasion
for publick Ridicule. 
Toncarr here finish'd his monstrous Lye; and Du
Lache, tho' he had order'd him to form some Story
which might seem plausible, to scandalize Montamour
on the Account of Galliard, was himself astonish'd at
the Power of an Invention, which, out of nothing
cou'd create such a well-connected Pile of Falshood:
For in reality he knew no more of Montamour or
her Brother, Galliard or his Wife, than their Names
and Places of Abode. How then cou'd Beauclair,
already prepossess'd, (by Proofs, which he thought
were undeniable,) suspect the Truth of what he
heard? He ask'd several Questions, not to entrap
him, but to satisfy his own Curiosity; as, how they
look'd when together; what they said; and in what
manner they behav'd. To all which Toncarr replied
with such an Aptitude and Readiness, as whoever
had listen'd to their Discourse, would have sworn he
utter'd nothing but Sincerity. 
Tho' such a Story as this, of Montamour, some
few Weeks past, wou'd have kindled such a Fire of
Indignation in the Soul of Beauclair, as nothing but
the Blood of him that told it cou'd have quench'd,
yet now he heard it with no other Disorder than what
sprung from the Shame of having been so much deceiv'd
in his Opinion. If he had had Leisure for
Reflection, 'tis probable that in spite of all Opposers,
Love wou'd still have exerted itself in favour of
that Lady; but the Company he was in took Care
to keep off an Enemy so dangerous to their Designs:
Toncarr was of a gay facetious Disposition, had a
good deal of Wit, and knew how to make himself
perfectly entertaining in Conversation: The Subtilty
of his Companion furnish'd him with Themes, such
as he knew wou'd be agreeable to Beauclair; and between
them both it was no difficult Matter to work 

on that good Nature and Softness of Disposition, the
Excess of which was the only Foible of this deluded
Gentleman. The Glass went briskly round, and the
Sprightliness of the Wine gave Life to the Conversation; 
not a celebrated Beauty in Paris, but was toasted; 
and it coming to Du Lache's Turn to begin, Come
Gentlemen, said he, here is all Health, and an eternal
Round of Happiness to Her whose exterior Charms
(tho' by far surpassing all her Sex besides) are but as
Foils, when brought in Comparison with the more
shining Graces of her Mind; and when I thus describe
her, none who boast of a distinguishing Capacity,
will need be told I mean the Divine Baroness
de Tortillée. Immediately, Toncarr, before instructed,
took the Hint, and fell into such Encomiums on her,
as in Reality no Woman ever did, or cou'd deserve. 
Beauclair, tho' he was far from being of their Opinion,
thought himself oblig'd in Gratitude, for the
Favours he had so lately receiv'd, to join with them
in the Praises they gave her; and as most People are
apt to admire what they find the rest of the World
do, and having never had the Opportunity of hearing
the least Tittle to her Disadvantage, began to think on
her as a Woman who had more Perfections than he
had hitherto found out: He imagin'd it was owing to
the Remains of his former Passion, that he had so
long been blind, resolv'd to open his whole Soul to
receive her Idea, and accus'd himself of Stupidity
that he was able to love her no better. 
They broke not up till it was late; and Du Lache
fearing, with good Reason, that if Beauclair was left
too suddenly to himself, some Accident might happen
to render all they had done of no Effect, and discover
that neither Montamour nor Tortilée were the
Persons they had been represented, was resolv'd to
trust nothing to Chance, but he went home with
him, and carry'd him the next Morning to drink Tea
with the Baroness, in the Afternoon met by Appointment
at Madamoiselle d'Ovrier's, engag'd him
to pass the next Day with Toncarr, the ensuing 

one with the Baroness again. –––In fine, for a considerable
Time he had scarce a Moment which was
not taken up by one or other of this Confederacy; 
and they took Care by ten thousand various Artifices
to keep his Thoughts in a perpetual Whirl, till
they imagin'd all Remembrance of Montamour was
utterly extingnish'd. 
In the mean Time, never was a Heart more greatly
distress'd than that of this unhappy Lady; to all
the Softness of her own Sex, she had that Constancy
of Mind, and Steadiness of Resolution, which those of
the other boast, but rarely prove themselves Masters of. 
Difficult it was to make her entertain a Passion, but
much more difficult to extinguish it. Beauclair
was the only Man who ever had the Power to inspire
her with one tender Wish; but now not
Beauclair's self cou'd change her Sentiments: The Impression
which his Charms had made, not all his Ingratitude
cou'd eraze: She lov'd, she worshipp'd, she
ador'd him still; within her gentle Soul no Storms
of Anger rag'd, no wild Revenge, no Jealousy had
place; and when she reflected how cruelly she was
abandon'd, how causelesly affronted, she consider'd
it only as a Flaw in his Disposition, a Frailty influenc'd
by Fate, unavoidable, and therefore pardonable. 
Never Woman bore the Disappointment of her Hopes
with so little Resentment, nor so strongly defended
herself from making any Endeavours to recover 'em. 
In spite of the most ardent Love, the softest Languishment,
the tenderest secret Meltings of her Soul,
cou'd urge, she chose to die away in fruitless Wishes,
rather than let the dear Unkind be sensible of what she
felt. She was so far from desiring to take any Advantage
of his ten thousand Times repeated Vows,
or the solemn Contract that was between them, that
her greatest Fear was, lest her Brother, (if he knew
the Truth of his Behaviour,) shou'd take some Measures
to oblige him to the Performance of it; and
for that reason blinded him as much as possible: She
told him, that she had discover'd some little Foibles 

in the Humour of Beauclair, which she was afraid
might not be very agreeable in a married State;–––– 
that she was determin'd to continue as she was for
some Time; and that she had pretended to be piqu'd
at something he had done, on purpose to create a
Quarrel to retard the Match. The Turn she gave to
this Affair succeeded well enough, to engage the Belief
of a Person, who, by reason of his great Employments,
(being Judge of the criminal Causes, one of
the Council, and taken up with many other Concerns
of the State,) had not too much leisure to
consider the Occurrences of his Family; but to the
rest of her Acquaintance it was obvious that in this,
tho' in this alone, she was not free from Dissimulation:
Her Eyes, whenever she attempted to speak of
Beauclair with Indifference, declar'd her Heart was far
from consenting to what she said: His very Name
but mention'd spread soft Confusion over all her Face; 
with stifled Sighs her lovely Bosom heav'd, and gentle
Tumults trembled in each Limb. She was sensible
of it herself; and therefore, tho' her Thoughts were
full of nothing else, forbore as much as possible all
Discourse of him. But the Violence she did her Inclination
was such, as Words wou'd but vainly endeavour
to represent: To avoid it, she shunn'd all Conversation
as much as she cou'd without being taken
Notice of, and pass'd her Hours in Solitude and Silence. 
Contemplation afforded her widely different
Entertainments, unutterable Pleasure, unutterable Pain! 
When retir'd, shut up within her Closet, no impertinent
Interruption near, and Beauclair's lov'd Idea only
present, his Letters fill'd with ten thousand thousand
tender Vows and soft Professions, lying before her,
how did she indulge Imagination, how dwell on
each enchanting Syllable! And when read o'er and
o'er, Fancy grew warmer still, how did she call the
past blest Moments of his Presence back! how reenjoy
each Word, each Look, each Touch, and sink
in Rapture at the dear Remembrance! ––––But then,
O dreadful Change! Imagination tir'd, the visionary 

Joy dissolv'd, and Sense, distracting Sense, return'd,
what Racks of Thought, what unmatch'd Horrors
sad Despair presented! To be supremely curst, one
must be supremely blest; never to have been happy,
is not to be unhappy; such only linger out a Life in
dull Stupidity, untasting Pleasure, and unknowing
Pain; equally ignorant of refin'd Delight, or exquisite
Disquiet;––––but, to have lost,––––to have lost, for
ever, all the Soul holds dear!––––to have the Joys,
once ours, torn from our bleeding Breasts by the
black Hand of seperating Fate, no more to be restor'd!
––––the chearful Land of Hope obscur'd in
Shades, and all before our Eyes a barren Prospect,
and a Wild of Woe! that, that, indeed, is finish'd
Wretchedness, consummate Misery! 
But if to the being forsaken and affronted by the
Man in whose Society she plac'd her whole Felicity,
there needed any Thing to make her the most unhappy
Woman breathing, malicious Fortune found the
Way to give it. Mademoiselle Bellfleur, Embroiderer,
one of those Creatures whose Houses had been
at the Baroness's Devotion, whenever she had occasion
for a private Rendezvous, had by some Accident discover'd
that Madamoiselle D'ovrier's was now the
Place that Lady had made choice of for the carrying
on her Amour with Beauclair; and being excessively
piqu'd at it, set herself on being reveng'd some Way
or other. She was sensible that nothing was more
known than the Loves of Beauclair and Montamour,
and that the whole Town was surpris'd at the Delay
of a Marriage which so long had been expected; 
and imagining she had found out the Cause, resolv'd
it should no longer be a Secret. She had formerly
been employ'd by Montamour in the working her
some fine Gowns and Petticoats, and making that a
Pretence for waiting on her, introduc'd a Story
which the Hearer of it had little Reason to thank
her for repeating; for tho' it was much more difficult
to gain any Credit from this generous Lady to
the Prejudice of her ungrateful Lover, than her Enemies 

had found from him even for the greatest
Falshoods, yet the bare Probability that such a Thing
might be true, was a Shock which cannot well be
represented. In Justice to herself, she could not
avoid being of Opinion, that to be abandon'd for a
Woman of the Baroness's Character and Humour,
was an Indignity such as ought to make the Man
that offer'd it odious to her Memory: But all that
Pride or Reason could suggest, was too, too weak to
bring her to either Scorn or Hate; nor, though the
causeless Change of his Behaviour, the Suddenness of
it, and the cold, neglectful, and indeed, affrontive
Style of his last Letter, made it seem likely enough
that nothing but a new Passion could occasion it, yet
Jealousy was so great a Stranger to her Nature, that
she could not, but with great Difficulty, entertain
it. However, the little Touches she now began to
feel of that eternal Enemy to Tranquility, gave her
Perturbations far beyond all she ever knew before. 
