


Contains the catastrophe of lady Mellasin's
and her daughter Flora's adventures,
while on this side the globe. 

While this unhappy little family
were in their concealment, each of
them set her whole wits to work to find
some means, by which lady Mellasin might
be extricated from that terrible dilemma
she had brought herself into. 
But as this was a thing in its very nature,
as affairs had been managed, morally
impossible to be accomplished, all their
endeavours for that purpose only served
to shew them the extreme vanity of the
attempt, and consequently to render them
more miserable. 
Despair at length, and the near prospect
of approaching want, so humbled the once
haughty spirit of lady Mellasin, that she 

resolved on writing to mr. Edward Goodman,
—to make use of all her rhetoric
to sooth him into forgiveness for the
troubles she had occasioned him, and in
fine to petition relief from the very man,
whom she had made use of the most villainous
arts to prejudice. 
The contents of her letter to that much
injured gentleman were as follows: 

To Edward Goodman, Esq;
‘Sir,
Appearances are so much against me,
that I scarce dare say I am innocent,
though I know myself so, as to any intention
of doing you injustice:—I cannot,
however, forbear giving you a
short sketch of the imposition which
has been practised upon me, and in my
name attempted to be put on you. 
‘The will, which has occasioned this
long contest between us, was brought
me by a person, who told me, he had
drawn it up exactly according to my
late husband's instructions, the very
evening before he died;—the subscribing
witnesses gave me the same assurance,
and also added, that mr. Goodman
was so well convinced of my integrity, 

and the wrong he had done me
by suspecting it, that had he lived only
to the next morning, he had resolved
to send for me home, and be reconciled
to me in the face of the world;—so
that if the thing was a peice of forgery,
these men are only guilty,—I am entirely
free from any share in it. 
‘But as these proceedings, which I
have unhappily been prevailed upon to
countenance, have given you a great
deal of trouble and expence, I sincerely
ask your pardon for it:—this is all the
attonement I can make to heaven for
offences more immediately my own. 
‘I am very sensible, notwithstanding,
that by what I have done, I have not only
forfeited my claim to such part of the
effects of mr. Goodman as appertain to
the widow of an eminent and wealthy
citizen, but likewise all my pretensions
to the friendship and favour of the person
he has made his heir;—yet, sir,
however guilty I may seem to you, or
how great my faults in reality may have
been, I cannot help being of opinion,
that when you remember I was once
the wife of an uncle, whose memory
you have so much cause to value, you
will think the name and character I have 

borne ought to defend me from public
infamy, parish alms, and beggary. 
‘Reduced as I am, it would ill become
me to make any stipulations, or lay a
tax on the goodness I am necessitated to
implore. —No, sir; as I can now demand
nothing, so also I can hope for
nothing but from your compassion and
generosity, and to these two amiable
qualities alone shall ascribe whatever
provision you shall think fit to make
for me, out of that abundance I was once
in full possession of. 
‘I shall add no more, than to intreat
you will consider, with some portion of
attention and good-nature, on what I
have lately been, and what I at present
am, 
‘The most unfortunate,
And most forlorn of womankind,
M. Mellasin Goodman. 
‘P. S. My daughter Flora, the innocent
partaker of my griefs and sufferings,
will have the honour to deliver this
to you, and, I hope, return with a
favourable answer.’ 


Lady Mellasin chose to send miss Flora
with this letter, as believing her agreeable
person and manner of behaviour would
have a greater effect on the youthful heart
of the person it was addressed to, than
could have been expected from the formal
and affected gravity of mrs. Prinks. 
It is not unlikely too, but that she
might flatter herself with the hopes of
greater advantages, by her daughter's going
in person to mr. Goodman's, than
those, which her letter had petitioned for:
—she had often heard, and read, of men,
whose resentment had been softened and
melted into tenderness, on the appearance
of a lovely object:—as the poet somewhere
or other expresses it, 

‘Beauty, like ice, our footing does betray;
‘Who can tread sure on the smooth slipp'ry way?’

Miss Flora herself was also very far from
being displeased at going on this errand,
and as it was not proper for her to dress
in the manner she would have done, on
making a visit to any other person, it
cost her some time before her setting out,
to equip herself in such a deshabillee, as 

she thought would be most genteel and become
her best. 
She had the good fortune to find mr.
Goodman at home, and was immediately
introduced to him;—he was a little surprized
at a visit made him by a young
lady, whom he had never seen before, but
not enough to prevent him from receiving
her with the utmost complaisance;— 
he saluted her,—seated her in a chair,
and then asked, what commands she had
to favour him with:—on which taking
out the letter, and giving it to him;— 
‘This, sir,’ said she, with a deep sigh,
‘will inform you of the request that
brings me here.’ 
Mr. Goodman read it hastily over; but
while he was doing so, could not forbear
shaking his head several times, but spoke
nothing, 'till after a pause of some minutes,
‘Madam,’ said he, ‘as this is a business,
which I could not expect to have
heard of, I must confess myself altogether
unprepared how to proceed in
it. —If lady Mellasin,’ added he, ‘will
give herself the trouble to send in three
or four days, she may depend on an
answer from me.’ 

The coldness of these words, and the
distant air he assumed while speaking
them, so widely different from that with
which he had accosted this lady on her
first entrance, made her presently see, she
had nothing to hope from this embassy,
on her own account, and made her also
tremble for that of her mother. 
As he urged her not to stay, nor even
gave the least hint, that he was desirous
of her doing so, she rose, and with a most
dejected air took her leave, telling him,
in going out, that she should not fail of
acquainting lady Mellasin with his commands,
who, she doubted not, would be
punctual in obeying them. 
Mr. Goodman was, indeed, too well
acquainted with the character of miss Flora
to be capable of receiving any impression
from the charms nature had bestowed upon
her, even though they had been a thousand
times more brilliant, than in effect
they were, and she had not been the
daughter of a woman, who had rendered
herself so justly hateful to him. 
Lady Mellasin was shocked to the very
soul, at being told the reception her
daughter had met with, and could not 

help looking upon it as a very bad omen
of her future success;—she doubted not
but by his saying, that he must have time
for deliberation, he meant, that he would
do nothing in this point without having
first consulted his friends, and she had no
reason to expect, that any of those he
conversed with would give council in her
favour. 
To be reduced from a state of opulence
and respect, to one of poverty, contempt,
and wretchedness, is terrible indeed; but
much more so, when accompanied with a
consciousness of having deserved by our
vices, and ill conduct, all the misfortunes
we complain of. 
Lady Mellasin having no pleasing reflection
of having done her duty in any
one point in life, it would not have been
strange, that thus destitute of all comfort
from within, all succour from without, if
she had yielded herself to the last despair. 
She, nevertheless, amidst all the distraction
of her thoughts, still continued to
testify a resolution, seldom to be found
among women of her abandoned principles,
never departing from this maxim, that in
the worst of events nothing was to be neglected:
—on the third day she sent mrs. 

Prinks to wait on mr. Goodman for his
answer, having experienced the little effect
her daughter's presence had produced. 
It is a thing well worth the observation
of all degrees of people, that the truly generous
never keep long in suspence the
persons they think proper objects of their
bounty. —A favour that costs too much
pains in obtaining, loses great part of its
value;—it palls upon the mind of the
receiver, and looks more like being extorted
than bestowed. 
Mr. Cowley, though a man, whose
great merit one would think should have
set him above the necessity of making any
request of a pecuniary nature, was certainly
obliged sometimes to sollicitations that
were very uneasy to him, and drew from
him this emphatic exclamation, 

‘If there's a man, ye gods, I ought to hate,
‘Attendance and dependance be his fate.’

It soon occurred to mr. Goodman in
what manner it would best become him
to act towards this unhappy woman, and
also what conditions ought to be stipulated
on her part; he had been told, both by 

the lawyer, and the two mr. Thoughtlesses,
that it was his late uncle's intention, that
she should not be left without a decent
provision, and being willing to conform,
as much as possible, to all the desires of
a person, whom he had always esteemed
as a parent, he passed by the injury which
since his death she had attempted to do
to himself, and within the time he had
mentioned to miss Flora, wrote an answer
to her request, in the following terms: 

To lady Mellasin Goodman.
‘Madam,
Though you cannot but be sensible,
that your late base attempt to
invalidate my dear uncle's will, excludes
you from receiving any benefit from it,
yet as I am determined, as far as in my
power, to make the example of that
excellent man the rule of all my actions,
I shall not carry my resentment for the
injustice you have done me, beyond
what he expressed for those much greater
injuries he sustained, by your infidelity
and ungratitude:—it was not his intention
you should starve, nor is it my
desire you should do so. 
‘I am willing, madam, to allow you a
pension of one hundred pounds per Ann. 

to be quarterly paid into whose hands
soever you shall think fit to appoint for
that purpose;—but it must be on condition,
that you retire forthwith, and
pass the whole remainder of your days
in some remote part of the kingdom:
—the farther you remove from a town,
where your ill conduct has rendered you
so obnoxious, the better. 
‘This, madam, is what I insist upon,
and is indeed no more than what your
own safety demands from you:—a
very strict search is making after your
accomplices, and if they, or any of
them, shall happen to be found, it will
be in vain for you to flatter yourself
with escaping that punishment, which
the offended laws inflict on crimes of
this nature;—nor would it be in my
power to shield you from that fate,
which even the meanest and most abject
of those concerned with you must
suffer. 
‘As I should be extremely sorry to
see this, I beg you, for your own sake,
to be speedy in your resolution, which,
as soon as you inform me of, I shall
act accordingly. —I am, 
‘Yours, &c.
E. Goodman.’ 


This he ordered to be delivered to any
one, who should say they came from lady
Mellasin, and mrs. Prinks accordingly received
it. 
Lady Mellasin, in the miserable circumstances
to which she had reduced herself,
was transported to find she should not be
entirely left without support:—as for her
being obliged to quit London, she was
not in the least shocked at it, as there
was no possibility for her ever to appear
publicly in it, and she was rather desirous
than averse to be out of a place, which
could no longer afford her those pleasures
and amusements, she had once so much
indulged herself in the enjoyment of. 
But when she considered on her banishment,
and ran over in her mind, what
part of England she should make choice
of for her asylum, the whole kingdom
appeared a desert to her, when driven
from the gaieties of the court and capital; 
—she, therefore, resolved to go farther,
and enter into a new scene of life,
which might be more likely to obliterate
the memory of the former;—she had
heard much talk of Jamaica,—that it
was a rich and opulent place,—that the
inhabitants thought of little else, but how 

to divert themselves in the best manner
the country afforded; and that they were
not too strict in their notions, either as
to honour or religion;—that reputation
was a thing little regarded among them; 
—so that in case the occasion which had
brought her thither should happen to be
discovered, she would not find herself in
the less estimation. 
She therefore hesitated not to write a
second letter to mr. Goodman, acquainting
him with her desire of going to that
plantation, and hinting to him, that, as
it would be giving him too great a trouble
to remit the quarterly payments he mentioned,
she should take it as a particular
favour, if he would be pleased to bestow
on her such a sum as he should think proper,
in lieu of the annuity he had offered. 
Mr. Goodman was extremely pleased
with this proposal, and several letters having
passed between them, concerning the
conditions, he agreed to give her two
hundred pounds in specie, to provide herself
with sufficient necessaries for the voyage,
and eight hundred more to be deposited
in the hands of the captain of the
ship, to be paid her on her arrival, with
which she appeared very well satisfied, 

and gave him the most solemn assurances
never to trouble him again. 
But miss Flora was all distraction at
this event:—the thoughts of leaving dear
London were equally irksome to her with
those of death itself:—fain would she
have stayed behind; but what could she
do?—without reputation,—without
friends,—without money,—there was
no remedy but to share her mother's fortune; 
—mrs. Prinks also, who, by living
so long with lady Mellasin,—known to
be in all her secrets, and agent in her
iniquitous proceedings, could have no character
to recommend her to any other service,
continued with the only person she,
indeed, was fit to live with, and they all
embarked together on board a ship that
was then ready to sail. 
All mr. Goodman's friends congratulated
him on the service he had done his
country, in ridding it of three persons,
who, by perverting the talents heaven had
bestowed upon them to the most vile purposes,
were capable of doing the greatest
mischiefs to the more innocent and unwary. 
It was on this occasion, that he
made the invitation before mentioned. 
