
Returns to what has doubtless been long ago expected, and opens a new scene of various and entertaining occurrences. 
I am very much afraid that poor Jemmy has lain for a great while under the displeasure of my fair readers, and that few among them will be quite so ready as Jenny has been to take his bear word for a sufficient proof of his honour, and the sincerity of his passion. 
It is high time therefore to let his actions speak for themselves; and if they cannot shew him so wholly blameless as could be wish'd, from the frailties of youth and nature, they will at least defend his character from the more gross imputations of perfidiousness, ingratitude, and deceit. 
As I have no view to self-interest in this work,—no time-server, no patron to please, it may be depended on that I shall present my hero such as he truly is, and not like some political historians of a modern date, attempt to mislead the judgment by any false glosses or misrepresentations of facts. 
The writers I have been speaking of, will not allow the person on whom fortune has not vouchsafed to smile any one virtue or good quality;—he must be all black, without a single speck of white, even to excite the compassion of the world;—what false steps he may have been guilty of are ascribed to his own innate propensity to evil, not to any inadvertency, nor to the wicked insinuations of those on whom he may unhappily have depended, and who perhaps have 
found their interest in pushing him on things purposely to betray and ruin him. 
Whereas, on the other hand, the man whom a concurrence of fortuitious events, or perhaps some indirect measures of his own or partisans contrivance, have raised to prosperity, shall be mounted on the pinnacle of fame,—his virtues, if he has any, be resounded even to the remotest borders of the earth, and all his vices, though numerous as the hairs upon his head, and glaring with red impiety, be so screen'd and shadow'd over with the incense of panegyric, as not to be discern'd but by a few eagle-eyed observers;—but I shall say no more,—these authors perhaps earn their sustenance by the labour of the pen;—these are not times for truth to go clad in velvet, and there is no serving God and mammon. 
I cannot, however, without great injustice, close this reflection till I have taken notice, that there is one who bravely and almost alone, has courage to enter the lifts of battle against an host of adversaries, and attempts to rescue injured innocence from the claws of cruel and all-devouring scandal;—may his honest endeavours meet the success they merit, and in spite of prejudice and partiality 
open the eyes of too long hood-wink'd reason. 
And now—for our Jemmy Jessamy;—nothing is more certain than that he had determined to follow his dear Jenny to Bath, according to his promise, as soon as the affairs which brought his steward to town should be dispatch'd; nor was he less uneasy than one of his letters inserted in a former chapter had intimated to her, on finding himself likely to be detained in London so much longer than he had expected at the time of her departure. 
Business of any kind, especially of that sort in which he was now engaged, was no way agreeable to his humour;—to be obliged to sit for hours together reading over leases, bonds and ejectments, instead of poetry and books of diversion;—to converse every day with men of the law instead of the men of pleasure, was extremely distasteful to him; but in the midst of all this he met with something which though he did not think of any very great moment, served however to add to the perplexity of his mind, and involve him in an embarrassment he had never dreamt of. 
He was at breakfast one morning when his servant inform'd him, that a gentleman who call'd himself Morgan desir'd to speak with him;—this was a person for whom Jemmy had a very great esteem, not only on account of many good qualities he was posses'd of, but likewise as he knew he had been always highly respected by his father. 
He gave orders that he should be immediately introduced, and when he was so, began to testify, with as much sincerity as politeness, how much he thought himself indebted to him for the favour of this visit; but he was soon interrupted by the other, who with an honest plainness replied in these terms: 
‘Mr. Jessamy, said he, this is not a visit of mere ceremony;—I come not hither at this time either to make or receive any compliments, but to do you a more essential service, and myself a more real pleasure:—to be free with you, continued he, I am very much troubled at some things I have heard in relation to you, and would gladly offer you such advice as my long experience of the world may enable me to give you.’ 
Few young people like to have their conduct call'd in question;—Jemmy presently imagined that the old gentleman had been inform'd of some little slights,—some trifling irregularities which company and the gaiety of his own temper might have led him into, and expected to be entertain'd with a grave lesson on that occasion:—he told him, however, he should willingly listen to any instructions he should give him. 
‘I believe, resumed mr. Morgan, that you are convinced I wish you well; but if you are not I hope what I have to say will make you so:—mistake me not, pursued he, seeing the other look very serious,—I am not going to reprimand you,—I know not as yet whether you deserve it;—I have not seen miss Jessamy since she was an infant;—I have heard, indeed, a very good character both of her person and accomplishments; but you are the best judge of her merits as well as of your own heart;—I am confident that when your parents agreed upon a marriage between you, they meant not it should render either of you miserable, so have nothing to say as to that;—but whatever be the motive of your breaking 
with her, I would not have you, me thinks, transfer your addresses to any one where there is not a greater probability of being more happy.’ 
Jemmy was so confounded,—so astonish'd at hearing him speak in this manner, that he had not the power, for some moments, of uttering one syllable, and when he had, it was only to cry,—‘Breaking with her, sir,—what,—breaking with miss Jessamy?’ 
‘You have doubtless your own reasons for so doing, reply'd the good old gentleman; but let that pass,—I would only have you be wary how you make a second choice;—it is not in my nature to traduce the character of any one;—miss Chit may be a very deserving young woman for any thing I have to accuse her of; but you know very well that her family is doubtful,—her fortune precarious,—and if she should have any, it will be little for her husband's honour to receive,—besides, this is not the worst, for though she may be virtuous in fact, yet she keeps company with some persons of both sexes, which does not become a woman who has any regard for reputation; in fine, my 
dear mr. Jessamy, she is in no respect a fit wife for you.’ 
‘A wife for me! said Jemmy not yet recover'd from this amazement;—for heaven's sake, sir, explain the meaning of all this;—you talk of things which have so little analogy with my intentions, that they never once enter'd into my head or heart;—to break my engagements with miss Jessamy, or to make my addresses to miss Chit, are both of them equally inconsistent with my inclination as with my reason; and it is not possible for me to conceive how such chimeras could come into the thoughts of any one.’ 
‘As to the first, answer'd mr. Morgan, I have heard it mention'd in several companies where I have been, as an event past all dispute; and as to what concerns miss Chit, I was not only told it by a person who frequently visits her, but also had it confirm'd yesterday at the coffee-house by her own father, who being asked if there was any truth in the report of an intended marriage between his daughter and mr. Jessamy, reply'd with his usual stiffness and formality, that he believed a treaty of that nature was upon the carpet.’ 
Jemmy, on hearing this, was fully persuaded that so idle a rumour could proceed from nothing but the vanity of that young lady, which so incensed him against her, that he could not forbear, in the first emotions of passion, speaking of her in terms which nothing but the occasion could excuse. 
As he was discussing the matter with mr. Morgan, and convincing that gentleman of the entire fallacy of all he had reproach'd him with, a card was brought from miss Chit, in which was wrote these words: 
“Miss Chit gives her compliments to mr. Jessamy, and desires his company to a concert to be performed by private hands this evening at her house.” 
‘Now, sir, said he to mr. Morgan, you shall see the little influence the charms of this vain girl has over me,—I will send her a letter instead of a card, and such a one as shall put an effectual stop to all the foolish imaginations she may have conceiv'd on my account.’ 
He then took pen and paper, and without giving himself much time to consider what he was about, wrote to her in these terms: 
To miss Chit.
“Madam,
Business denies me the pleasure of accepting your invitation; but I lay hold of this opportunity of taking my leave of you, as I cannot do it in person. 
“Love and honour summon me to Bath, where my dear miss Jessamy is gone before;—as it is impossible but you must have heard of my engagements with that lady, you will not wonder that I am in the utmost impatience to follow her. 
‘Whenever you venture on marriage, I wish you all the happiness which I hope very shortly to enjoy in that state, with the admirable lady to whom I am going. —I am, 
“With thanks for all favours,
Madam,
Your most obedient
humble servant,
J. Jessamy.” 

This letter, after having shew'd it to mr. Morgan and received his approbation, Jemmy sent directly away, and gave orders that it should be left for the lady without waiting for any answer. 
On talking farther of this affair, they both concluded that the report must have taken rise originally from the vanity of the daughter and the stupidity of the father, who misconstruing the civilities Jemmy treated them with as the effects of an amorous inclination, had boasted of the imaginary conquest to some of their acquaintance,—those again had whisper'd it to others, till it went round, and became, as is common in such cases, the universal secret. 
Thus had the artifices of Belpine made miss Chit and her father, who were in reality no more than the dupes of his design, appear as the principal contrivers of it;—there is nothing, indeed, in which the judgment is so liable to be deceived, as in endeavouring to discover the first author of a calumny,—those generally take care to stand behind the curtain,—content themselves with the invention, and leave the work of malice to be performed 
by others,—as one of our poets says: 
'Tis difficult, when rumour once is spread,
To trace its windings to their fountain-head.
The injustice which Jemmy and his friend were guilty of in this point, may however have some claim to absolution, as their belief was founded on the most strong probability of truth that could be. 
These gentlemen parted not till the clock striking three reminded them of dinner;—mr. Morgan, being engaged at home, would fain have taken Jemmy with him; but he was not at present in a humour for much company,—therefore desired to be excused from complying with the invitation. 
