

Lord Colambre had waited with great
impatience for an answer to the letter
of inquiry, which he had written
about miss Nugent's mother. A letter
from lady Clonbrony arrived: he
opened it with the greatest eagerness— 
passed over
“Rheumatism—warm weather— 
warm bath—Buxton balls—miss Broadhurst—your
friend, sir Arthur Berryl,
very assiduous!” The name of Grace
Nugent he found at last, and read as
follows:
“Her mother's maiden-name was
St. Omar; and there was a faux pas; 
certainly. She was, I am told, (for it
was before my time) educated at a
convent abroad; and there was an

affair with a captain Reynolds, a
young officer, which her friends were
obliged to hush up. She brought an
infant to England with her, and took
the name of Reynolds—but none of
that family would acknowledge her:
and she lived in great obscurity, till
your uncle Nugent saw, fell in love
with her, and (knowing her whole
history) married her. He adopted
the child, gave her his name, and,
after some years, the whole story
was forgotten. Nothing could be
more disadvantageous to Grace, than
to have it revived: this is the reason
we kept it secret.”
Lord Colambre tore the letter to
bits.
From the perturbation which lady
Dashfort saw in his countenance, she
guessed the nature of the letter which
he had been reading, and for the arrival
of which he had been so impatient.
“It has worked!” said she, to herself.—

“Pour le coup Philippe je te
tiens!”
Lord Colambre appeared this day
more sensible, than he had ever yet
seemed, to the charms of the fair
Isabel.
“Many a tennis-ball, and many a
heart is caught at the rebound,” said
lady Dashfort.—“Isabel! now is your
time!”
And so it was—or so, perhaps, it
would have been, but for a circumstance,
which her ladyship, with all
her genius for intrigue, had never taken
into her consideration. Count O'Halloran
came to return the visit, which had been
paid to him; and, in the course of conversation,
he spoke of the officers who
had been introduced to him, and told
lady Dashfort, that he had heard a report
which shocked him much—he hoped
it could not be true—that one of these
officers had introduced his mistress as
his wife to lady Oranmore, who lived
in the neighbourhood. This officer, it

was said, had let lady Oranmore send
her carriage for this woman; and that
she had dined at Oranmore with her
ladyship and her daughters .—“But I
cannot believe it! I cannot believe it
to be possible, that any gentleman, that
any officer, could do such a thing!” 
said the count.
“And is this all?” exclaimed lady
Dashfort.—“Is this all the terrible
affair, my good count, which has
brought your face to this prodigious
length?”
The count looked at lady Dashfort
with astonishment.
“Such a look of virtuous indignation,” 
continued she, “did I never
behold, on or off the stage.—Forgive
me for laughing, count; but believe
me, comedy goes through the world
better than tragedy, and, take it all in
all, does rather less mischief. As to
the thing in question, I know nothing

about it; I dare say, it is not true:
but, now, suppose it was—it is only a
silly quiz, of a raw, young officer, upon
a prudish old dowager. I know nothing
about it, for my part: but, after
all, what irreparable mischief has been
done? Laugh at the thing, and then
it is a jest—a bad one, perhaps, but
still only a jest—and there's an end of
it: but take it seriously, and there is
no knowing where it might end—in
half a dozen duels, may be.”
“Of that, madam,” said the count,
“lady Oranmore's prudence and presence
of mind have prevented all danger.
Her ladyship would not understand the
insult. She said, or she acted as if she
said, ‘Je ne veux rien voir, rien écouter,
rien savoir.’ Lady Oranmore is one of
the most respectable—” 
“Count, I beg your pardon!” interrupted
lady Dashfort; “but I must
tell you, that your favourite, lady Oranmore,
has behaved very ill to me; purposely
omitted to invite Isabel to her

ball; offended and insulted me:—her
praises, therefore, cannot be the most
agreeable subject of conversation you
can choose for my amusement; and as
to the rest, you, who have such variety
and so much politeness, will, I
am sure, have the goodness to indulge
my caprice in this instance.”
“I shall obey your ladyship, and be
silent, whatever pleasure it might give
me to speak on that subject,” said the
count.—“And I trust lady Dashfort
will reward me by the assurance, that,
however playfully she may have just now
spoken, she seriously disapproves and
is shocked.”
“Oh, shocked! shocked to death!
if that will satisfy you, my dear
count.”
The count obviously was not satisfied:
he had civil, as well as military
courage, and his sense of right and
wrong could stand against the raillery
and ridicule of a fine lady.
The conversation ended: lady Dashfort

thought it would have no farther
consequences; and she did not regret
the loss of a man like count O'Halloran,
who lived retired in his castle, and who
could not have any influence upon the
opinion of the fashionable world. However,
upon turning from the count to
lord Colambre, who she thought had
been occupied with lady Isabel, and
to whom she imagined all this dispute
was uninteresting, she perceived by his
countenance, that she had made a great
mistake. Still she trusted, that her
power over lord Colambre was sufficient
easily to efface whatever unfavourable
impression this conversation had
made upon his mind. He had no personal
interest in the affair; and she had
generally found, that people are easily
satisfied about any wrong or insult,
public or private, in which they have
no immediate concern. But all the
charms of her conversation were now
tried in vain, to reclaim him from the
reverie into which he had fallen.

His friend sir James Brooke's parting advice occured to our hero: his eyes began to open to lady Dashfort's character; and he was, from this moment, freed from her power. Lady Isabel, however, had taken no part in all this—she was blameless; and, independently of her mother, and in pretended opposition of sentiment, she might have continued to retain the influence she had gained over lord Colambre, but that a slight accident revealed to him her real disposition.
It happened, on the evening of this day, that lady Isabel came into the library with one of the young ladies of the house talking very eagerly, without perceiving lord Colambre, who was sitting in one of the recesses reading.
“My dear creature, you are quite mistaken,” said lady Isabel, “he was never a favourite of mine; I always detested him; I only flirted with him to plague his wife. O that wife! my dear Elizabeth, I do hate;” cried she, clasping

her hands, and expressing hatred with all her soul and with all her strength. “I detest that lady de Cresey to such a degree, that, to purchase the pleasure of making her feel the pangs of jealousy for one hour, look, I would this moment lay down this finger and let it be cut off.”
The face, the whole figure of lady Isabel at this moment appeared to lord Colambre suddenly metamorphosed; instead of the soft, gentle, amiable female, all sweet charity and tender sympathy, formed to love and to be loved, he beheld one possessed and convulsed by an evil spirit; her beauty, if beauty it could be called, the beauty of a fiend. Some ejaculation, which he unconsciously uttered, made lady Isabel start. She saw him—saw the expression of his countenance, and knew that all was over.
Lord Colambre, to the utter astonishment and disappointment of lady Dashfort, and to the still greater mortification

of lady Isabel, announced this night,
that it was necessary he should immediately
pursue his tour in Ireland. We
pass over all the castles in the air, which
the young ladies of the family had built,
and which now fell to the ground. We
pass all the civil speeches of lord and
lady Killpatrick; all the vehement remonstrances
of lady Dashfort; and the
vain sighs of lady Isabel. To the last
moment lady Dashfort said,
“He will not go.”
But he went; and when he was gone,
lady Dashfort exclaimed, “That man
has escaped from me.” And after a
pause, turning to her daughter, she in
the most taunting and contemptuous
terms reproached her as the cause of
this failure, concluding by a declaration
that she must in future manage her
own affairs, and had best settle her
mind to marry Heathcock, since every
one else was too wise to think of her.”
Lady Isabel of course retorted. But
we leave this amiable mother and

daughter to recriminate in appropriate
terms, and we follow our hero, rejoiced
that he has been disentangled from
their snares. Those who have never
been in similar peril will wonder much,
that he did not escape sooner; those
who have ever been in like danger
will wonder more, that he escaped at all.
Those who are best acquainted with
the heart or imagination of man will
be most ready to acknowledge, that the
combined charms of wit, beauty, and
flattery, may, for a time, suspend the
action of right reason in the mind of
the greatest philosopher, or operate
against the resolutions of the greatest
of heroes.
Lord Colambre pursued his way to
Castle Halloran, desirous, before he
quitted this part of the country, to take
leave of the count, who had shown him
much civility, and for whose honourable
conduct, and generous character, he
had conceived a high esteem, which no

little peculiarities of antiquated dress
or manner could diminish. Indeed the
old fashioned politeness of what was
formerly called a well-bred gentleman
pleased him better than the indolent, or
insolent selfishness of modern men of
the ton.—Perhaps, notwithstanding our
hero's determination to turn his mind
from every thing connected with the
idea of miss Nugent, some latent curiosity,
about the burial-place of the
Nugents, might have operated to make
him call upon the count.—In this hope
he was disappointed; for a cross miller,
to whom the abbey-ground was set, on
which the burial-place was found, had
taken it into his head to refuse admittance,
and none could enter his
ground.
Count O'Halloran was much pleased
by lord Colambre's visit.—The very
day of lord Colambre's arrival at
Halloran-castle, the count was going
to Oranmore; he was dressed, and his
carriage was waiting, therefore lord

Colambre begged that he might not
detain him, and the count requested his
lordship to accompany him.
“Let me have the honour of introducing
you, my lord, to a family,
with whom I am persuaded you will
be pleased, by whom you will be
appreciated; and at whose house you
will have an opportunity of seeing
the best manner of living of the Irish
nobility.” Lord Colambre accepted the
invitation, and was introduced at Oranmore.
The dignified appearance and
respectable character of lady Oranmore,
the charming unaffected manners of her
daughters; the air of domestic happiness
and comfort in her family; the
becoming magnificence, free from ostentation,
in her whole establishment; 
the respect and affection with which she
was treated by all, who approached her,
delighted and touched lord Colambre.
The more, perhaps, because he had
heard this family so unjustly abused; 
and because he saw lady Oranmore

and her daughter, in immediate contrast
to lady Dashfort and lady Isabel.”
A little circumstance, which occurred
during this visit, increased his interest
for the family. When lady de Cresey's
little boys came in after dinner, one of
them was playing with a seal, which
had just been torn from a letter. The
child showed it to lord Colambre, and
asked him to read the motto.—The
motto was, “Deeds, not words.”— 
His friend, sir James Brooke's motto,
and his arms.—Lord Colambre eagerly
inquired, if this family was acquainted
with sir James, and he soon perceived
that they were, not only acquainted
with him, but that they were particularly
interested about him.
Lady Oranmore's second daughter,
lady Harriot, appeared particularly
pleased by the manner in which lord
Colambre spoke of sir James.—And
the child, who had now established
himself on his lordship's knee, turned

round, and whispered in his ear,— 
“'Twas aunt Harriet gave me the seal; 
sir James is to be married to aunt
Harriet, and then he will be my uncle.”
Some of the principal gentry of
this part of the country happened to
dine at Oranmore, one of the days lord
Colambre was there. He was surprised
at the discovery, that there were so
many agreeable, well informed, and well
bred people, of whom, while he was at
Killpatrickstown, he had seen nothing.
He now discerned how far he had been
deceived by lady Dashfort.
Both the count, and lord and lady
Oranmore, who were warmly attached
to their country, exhorted him to make
himself amends for the time he had lost,
by seeing with his own eyes, and
judging with his own understanding, of
the country and it's own inhabitants,
during the remainder of the time he
was to stay in Ireland. The higher
classes, in most countries, they observed,
were generally similar; but in

the lower class, he would find many
characteristic differences.
When he first came to Ireland, he
had been very eager to go and see his
father's estate, and to judge of the conduct
of his agents, and the condition of
his tenantry; but this eagerness had
subsided, and the design had almost
faded from his mind, whilst under the
influence of lady Dashfort's misrepresentations.
A mistake, relative to some
remittance from his banker in Dublin,
obliged him to delay his journey a few
days, and, during that time lord and
lady Oranmore showed him the neat
cottages, the well attended schools, in
their neighbourhood. They showed him
not only what could be done, but what
had been done by the influence of great
proprietors residing on their own estates,
and encouraging the people by judicious
kindness.
He saw, he acknowledged, the
truth of this; but it did not come home
to his feelings now, as it would have

done a little while ago. His views
and plans were altered: he looked forward
to the idea of marrying and settling
in Ireland, and then every thing in the
country was interesting to him; but
since he had forbidden himself to think
of a union with miss Nugent, his mind
had lost it's object and it's spring; he
was not sufficiently calm to think of
the publick good, his thoughts were
absorbed by his private concern. He
knew, and repeated to himself, that
he ought to visit his own and his father's
estates, and to see the condition
of his tenantry; he desired to fulfil his
duties, but they ceased to appear to
him easy and pleasurable, for hope and
love no longer brightened his prospects.
That he might see and hear more
than he could as heir apparent to the
estate, he sent his servant to Dublin
to wait for him there. He travelled
incognito, wrapped himself in a shabby
reat-coat, and took the name of Evans.

He arrived at a village, or as it was
called a town, which bore the name of
Colambre. He was agreeably surprised
by the air of neatness and finish in the
houses and in the street, which had a
nicely swept paved foot-way. He
slept at a small, but excellent inn,— 
excellent, perhaps, because it was small
and proportioned to the situation and
business of the place. Good supper,
good bed, good attendance; nothing out
of repair; no things pressed into services,
for what they were never intended
by nature or art; none of what
are vulgarly called make-shifts. No
chambermaid slipshod, or waiter
smelling of whiskey; but all tight and
right, and every body doing their
own business, and doing it as if it was
their every day occupation, not as if
it was done by particular desire, for
first or last time this season. The landlord
came in at supper, to inquire
whether any thing was wanted. Lord
Colambre took this opportunity of entering

into conversation with him, and
asked him to whom the town belonged,
and who were the proprietors of the
neighbouring estates.
“The town belongs to an absentee
lord—one lord Clonbrony, who lives
always beyond the seas, in London; 
and never seen the town since it was a
town, to call a town.”
“And does the land in the neighbourhood
belong to this lord Clonbrony?”
“It does, sir, he's a great proprietor; 
but knows nothing of his property nor
of us—Never set foot among us, to my
knowledge, since I was as high as the
table.—He might as well be a West
India planter, and we negroes, for any
thing he knows to the contrary—has no
more care, nor thought about us, than
if he were in Jamaica, or the other
world—Shame for him!—But there's
too many to keep him in countenance.”

“Lord Colambre asked him, what
wine he could have; and then inquired
who managed the estate for this absentee.”
“Mr. Burke, sir.—And I don't
know why God was so kind to give
so good an agent to an absentee, like
lord Clonbrony except it was for the
sake of us, who is under him, and
knows the blessing, and is thankful for
the same.”
“Very good cutlets,” said lord
Colambre.
“I am happy to hear it, sir. They
have a right to be good, for Mrs. Burke
sent her own cook, to teach my wife
to dress cutlets.”
“So the agent, is a good agent, is
he?”
“He is, thanks be to Heaven!— 
And that's what few can boast, espepecially
when the landlord's living over
the seas: we have the luck to have
got a good agent over us, in Mr. Burke,

who is a right bred gentleman; a snug
little property of his own, honestly
made; with the good will and good
wishes, and respect of all.”
“Does he live in the neighbourhood?”
“Just convanient .—At the end of
the town; in the house on the hill,
as you passed, sir; to the left with the
trees about it, all of his planting, finely
grown too—for there's a blessing on all
he does—and he has done a deal.”—
“There's salad, sir, if you are
partial to it.—Very fine lettuce.—Mrs.
Burke sent us the plants, herself.”—
“Excellent salad! So this Mr.
Burke has done a great deal, has he? In
what way?”
“In every way, sir,—sure was not it
he that had improved, and fostered,
and made the town of Colambre—no
thanks to the proprietor, nor to the
young man whose name it bears, neither.”
“Have you any porter, pray sir?”
“We have sir, as good, I hope, as

you'd drink in London, for it's the
same you get there, I understand, from
Cork. And I have some of my own
brewing, which, they say, you could not
tell the difference between it and Cork
quality—if you'd be pleased to try.
Harry, the corkscrew.”
The porter of his own brewing was
pronounced to be extremely good; and
the landlord observed it was Mr. Burke
encouraged him to learn to brew, and
lent him his own brewer for a time
to teach him.
“Your Mr. Burke, I find, is apropos
to porter, apropos to salad, apropos
to cutlets, apropos to every thing,” said
lord Colambre, smiling: “he seems to
be a non-pareil of an agent. I suppose
you are a great favourite of his, and
you do what you please with him.”
“O, no, sir, I could not say that; 
Mr. Burke does not have favourites any
way; but according to my deserts, I
trust, I stand well enough with him,
for, in truth, he is a right good agent.”

Lord Colambre still pressed for particulars; 
he was an Englishman, and a
stranger, he said, and did not exactly
know what was meant in Ireland by a
good agent.
“Why he is the man that will encourage
the improving tenant; and show
no favour or affection, but justice,
which comes even to all, and does best
for all at the long run; and residing always
in the conntry, like Mr. Burke, and
understanding country business, and
going about continually among the tenantry,
he knows when to press for the
rent, and when to leave the money to
lay out upon the land; and, according as
they would want it, can give a tenant a
help or a check properly. Then no duty
work called for, no presents, nor glove-money,
nor sealing-money even, taken or
offered; no underhand hints about
proposals, when land would be out of
lease; but a considerable preference, if
desarved, to the old tenant, and if not,
a fair advertisement, and the best offer

and tenant accepted: no screwing of
the land to the highest penny, just to
please the head landlord for the minute,
and ruin him at the end, by the tenants
racking the land and running off with
the year's rent: nor no bargains to his
own relations or friends did Mr. Burke
ever give or grant, but all fair between
landlord and tenant; and that's the thing
that will last; and that's what I call the
good agent.”
Lord Colambre poured out a glass of
wine, and begged the innkeeper to drink
the good agent's health, in which he
was heartily pledged.—“I thank your
honour:—Mr Burke's health! and long
may he live over and amongst us: he
saved me from drink and ruin, when I
was once inclined to it, and made a
man of me and all my family.”
The particulars we cannot stay to
detail: this grateful man, however,
took pleasure in sounding the praises of
his benefactor, and in raising him in the
opinion of the traveller.

“As you've time, and are curious
about such things, sir, perhaps you'd
walk up to the school that Mrs. Burke
has for the poor children; and look at
the market-house, and see how clean
he takes a pride to keep the town: and
any house in the town, from the priest
to the parson's, that you'd go into, will
give you the same character as I do of
Mr. Burke: from the brogue to the
boot all speak the same of him, and
can say no other. God for ever bless
and keep him over us!”
Upon making further inquiries, every
thing the innkeeper had said was confirmed
by different inhabitants of the
village. Lord Colambre conversed with
the shopkeepers, with the cottagers; 
and, without making any alarming inquiries,
he obtained all the information
he wanted. He went to the village
school—a pretty, cheerful house, with
a neat garden and a play-green; met
Mrs. Burke; introduced himself to her
as a traveller. The school was shown

to him: it was just what it ought
to be—neither too much nor too little
had been attempted; there was neither
too much interference, nor too little
attention. Nothing for exhibition; 
care to teach well, without any vain
attempt to teach in a wonderfully short
time. All that experience proves to be
useful, in both Dr. Bell's and Mr. Lancaster's
modes of teaching, Mrs. Burke
had adopted; leaving it to ‘graceless
zealots’ to fight about the rest. That
no attempts at proselytism had been
made, and that no illiberal distinctions
had been made in this school, lord Colambre
was convinced in the best manner
possible, by seeing the children of
protestants and catholics sitting on the
same benches, learning from the same
books, and speaking to one another
with the same cordial familiarity. Mrs.
Burke was an unaffected, sensible woman,
free from all party prejudices,
and, without ostentation, desirous and
capable of doing good. Lord Colambre

was much pleased with her, and very
glad that she invited him to dinner.
Mr. Burke did not come in till late; 
for he had been detained portioning out
some meadows, which were of great
consequence to the inhabitants of the
town. He brought home to dine with
him the clergyman and the priest of the
parish, both of whom he had taken
successful pains to accommodate with
the land which suited their respective
convenience. The good terms on which
they seemed to be with each other, and
with him, appeared to lord Colambre to
do honour to Mr. Burke. All the favourable
accounts his lordship had received
of this gentleman were confirmed
by what he saw and heard.
After the clergyman and priest had
taken leave, upon lord Colambre's expressing
some surprise, mixed with
satisfaction, at seeing the harmony which
subsisted between them, Mr. Burke
assured him, that this was the same
in many parts of Ireland. He observed,

that, “as the suspicion of ill-will
never fails to produce it,” so he had
often found, that taking it for granted
that no ill-will exists has the most
conciliating effect. He said, to please
opposite parties, he used no arts; but
he tried to make all his neighbours live
comfortably together, by making them
acquainted with each other's good qualities; 
by giving them opportunities of
meeting sociably, and, from time to
time, of doing each other little services
and good offices.—“Fortunately, he
had so much to do,” he said, “that he
had no time for controversy. He was a
plain man, made it a rule not to meddle
with speculative points, and to avoid
all irritating discussions; he was not to
rule the country, but to live in it, and
make others live as happily as he
could.”
Having nothing to conceal in his
character, opinions, or circumstances,
Mr. Burke was perfectly open and unreserved
in his manner and conversation;

freely answered all the traveller's
inquiries, and took pains to show him
every thing he desired to see. Lord
Colambre said, he had thoughts of settling
in Ireland; and declared with
truth, that he had not seen any part of
the country he should like better to live
in, than this neighbourhood. He went
over most of the estate with Mr. Burke,
and had ample opportunities of convincing
himself, that this gentleman
was indeed, as the innkeeper had described
him, “a right good gentleman,
and a right good agent.”
He paid Mr. Burke some just compliments
on the state of the tenantry,
and the neat and flourishing appearance
of the town of Colambre.
“What pleasure it will give the proprietor,
when he sees all you have
done!” said lord Colambre.
“O, sir! don't speak of it!—that
breaks my heart: he never has shown
the least interest in any thing I have
done; he is quite dissatisfied with

me; because I have not ruined his
tenantry, by forcing them to pay more
than the land is worth; because I have
not squeezed money from them, by
fining down rents; and, but all this,
as an Englishman, sir, must be unintelligible
to you.—The end of the
matter is, that, attached as I am to
this place, and the people about me,
and as I hope the tenantry are to me; 
I fear I shall be obliged to give up
the agency.
“Give up the agency! How so,
you must not,” cried lord Colambre,
and, for the moment, he forgot himself; 
but Mr. Burke took this only for an
expression of good will.
“I must, I am afraid,” continued
he.—“My employer, lord Clonbrony,
is displeased with me—continual calls
for money come upon me from England,
and complaints of my slow remittances.”
“Perhaps lord Clonbrony is in embarrassed
circumstances,” said lord Colambre.

“I never speak of my employer's
affairs, sir,” replied Mr. Burke; now,
for the first time, assuming an air of
reserve.
“I beg pardon, sir,—I seem to have
asked an indiscreet question.”—Mrs.
Burke was silent.
“Lest my reserve should give
you a false impression, I will add, sir,” 
resumed Mr. Burke, “that I really
am not acquainted with the state of
his lordship's affairs in general. I
know only what belongs to the estate
under my own management. The
principal part of his lordship's property,
the Clonbrony estate, is under another
agent, Mr. Garraghty.”
“Garraghty!” repeated lord Colambre,
“what sort of a person is he?
But I may take it for granted, that it
cannot fall to the lot of one and the
same absentee, to have two such agents
as Mr. Burke.”
Mr. Burke bowed, and seemed pleased
by the compliment, which he knew he

deserved.—But not a word did he say
of Mr. Garraghty: and lord Colambre,
afraid of betraying himself by some
other indiscreet question, changed the
conversation.
That very night, the post brought
a letter to Mr. Burke, from lord Clonbrony,
which Mr. Burke gave to his
wife as soon as he had read it,
saying,— 
“See the reward of all my services!”
Mrs. Burke glanced her eye over the
letter, and being extremely fond of
her husband, and sensible of his deserving
far different treatment, burst
into indignant exclamations.
“See the reward of all your services,
indeed!—What an unreasonable, ungrateful
man!—So, this is the thanks
for all you have done for lord Clonbrony!”
“He does not know what I have
done, my dear.—He never has seen
what I have done.”

“More shame for him!”
“He never, I suppose, looks over
his accounts, or understands them.”
“More shame for him!”
“He listens to foolish reports, or
misrepresentations, perhaps. He is at
a distance, and cannot find out the
truth.”
“More shame for him!”
“Take it quietly, my dear; we have
the comfort of a good conscience. The
agency may be taken from me by this
lord; but the sense of having done my
duty, no lord or man upon Earth can
give or take away.”
“Such a letter!” said Mrs. Burke,
taking it up again.—Not even the
civility to write with his own hand!— 
only his signature to the scrawl—looks
as if it was written by a drunken man,
does not it, Mr. Evans?” said she, showing
the letter to lord Colambre, who
immediately recognised the writing of
sir Terence O'Fay.

“It does not look like the hand of
a gentleman, indeed,” said lord Colambre.
“It has lord Clonbrony's own signature,
let it be what it will,” said
Mr. Burke, looking closely at it; “lord
Clonbrony's own writing the signature
is, I am clear of that.”
Lord Clonbrony's son was clear of
it also; but he took care not to give
any opinion on that point.
“O pray, read it, sir, read it,” said
Mrs. Burke, pleased by his tone of indignation; 
“read it, pray; a gentleman
may write a bad hand, but no
gentleman could write such a letter as
that to Mr. Burke—pray read it, sir; 
you who have seen something of what
Mr. Burke has done for the town of
Colambre, and what he has made of
the tenantry and the estate of lord
Clonbrony.”
Lord Colambre read and was convinced,
that his father had never written

or read the letter, but had signed it,
trusting to sir Terence O'Fay's having
expressed his sentiments properly.
“Sir,
“As I have no further occasion for
your services, you will take notice,
that I hereby request you will forthwith
handover, on or before the 1st of November
next, your accounts, with the balance
due of the hanging-gale (which, I understand,
is more than ought to be at this
season) to Nicholas O'Garraghty, Esq.
College-green, Dublin, who in future
will act as agent, and shall get, by post,
immediately, a power of attorney for the
same, entitling him to receive and manage
the Colambre as well as the Clonbrony
estate, for
“Sir, your obedient humble servant,
“Clonbrony.”
“Grosvenor Square.”
Though misrepresentation, caprice, or
interest might have induced lord Clonbrony

to desire to change his agent, yet
lord Colambre knew that his father never
could have anounced his wishes in
such a style: and as he returned the
letter to Mrs. Burke he repeated, he was
convinced, that it was impossible that
any nobleman could have written such
a letter; that it must have been written
by some inferior person; and that his
lordship had signed it without reading
it.
“My dear, I'm sorry you showed
that letter to Mr. Evans,” said Mr.
Burke; “I don't like to expose lord
Clonbrony; he is a well meaning gentleman,
misled by ignorant or designing
people; at all events, it is not for us to
expose him.”
“He has exposed himself,” said Mrs.
Burke; “and the world should know
it.”
“He was very kind to me when I was
a young man,” said Mr. Burke; “we
must not forget that now, because we
are angry, my love.”

“Why no, my love, to be sure we
should not; but who could have recollected
it just at this minute but yourself?
And now, sir,” turning to lord
Colambre, “you see what kind of a man
this is: now is it not difficult for me to
bear patiently to see him ill treated?”
“Not only difficult, but impossible,
I should think, madam,” said lord Colambre; 
“I know, even I, who am a
stranger, cannot help feeling for both of
you, as you must see I do.”
“And half the world, who don't
know him,” continued Mrs. Burke,
“when they hear that lord Clonbrony's
agency is taken from him, will think,
perhaps, that he is to blame.”
“No, madam,” said lord Colambre,
“that you need not fear, Mr. Burke
may safely trust to his character; from
what I have within these two days seen
and heard, I am convinced that such is
the respect he has deserved and acquired,
that no blame can touch him.”
“Sir, I thank you,” said Mrs. Burke,

the tears coming into her eyes; “You
can judge—you do him justice; but
there are so many who don't know
him, and who will decide without knowing
any of the facts.”
“That, my dear, happens about every
thing to every body,” said Mr. Burke; 
but we must have patience, time sets
all judgments right, sooner or later.”
“But the sooner the better,” said
Mrs. Burke. “Mr. Evans, I hope you
will be so kind, if ever you hear this business
talked of—” 
“Mr. Evans lives in Wales, my dear.”
“But he is travelling through Ireland,
my dear, and he said he should return
to Dublin, and you know, there he certainly
will hear it talked of; and I hope
he will do me the favour to state what
he has seen and knows to be the truth.”
“Be assured, that I will do Mr.
Burke justice—as far as it is in my
power,” said lord Colambre, restraining
himself much, that he might not say
more than became his assumed character.

He took leave of this worthy family
that night, and early the next morning
departed.
“Ah!” thought he, as he drove
away from this well-regulated and flourishing
place, “how happy I might be,
settled here with such a wife as—her
of whom I must think no more!”
He pursued his way to Clonbrony,
his father's other estate, which was at a
considerable distance from Colambre.
He was resolved to know what kind of
agent Mr. Nicholas Garraghty might be,
who was to supersede Mr. Burke, and by
power of attorney to be immediately entitled
to receive and manage the Colambre
as well as the Clonbrony estate.