

The baronet determined the next day
upon the grand attack. He waited upon
miss Portman, with the certainty of being
favourably received; but he was, nevertheless,
somewhat embarrassed to know
how to begin the conversation, when he
found himself alone with the lady.
He twirled and twisted a short stick
that he held in his hand, and put it in and
out of his boot twenty times, and at last
he began with—
“Lady Delacour's not gone to Harrowgate
yet?”

“No—her ladyship has not yet felt herself
well enough to undertake the journey.”
“That was a cursed unlucky overturn— 
she may thank Clarence Hervey for that
—it's like him—he thinks he's a better
judge of horses, and wine, and every
thing else, than any body in the world.— 
Damme now if I don't believe he thinks
nobody else but himself has eyes enough
to see that a fine woman's a fine woman
—but I'd have him to know, that miss
Belinda Portman has been sir Philip Baddely's
toast these two months.”
As this intelligence did not seem to
make the expected impression upon miss
Belinda Portman, sir Philip had recourse
again to his little stick, with which he
went through the sword exercise—after a
silence of some minutes, and after walking
to the window, and back again, as if
to look for sense, he exclaimed—
“How is Mrs. Stanhope now, pray,
miss Portman?—and your sister, Mrs.
Tollemache—she was the finest woman, I

thought, the first winter she came out,
that ever I saw, damme.—Have you ever
been told that you're like her?”
“Never, sir.”
“O, damn it then, but you are, only
ten times handsomer.”
“Ten times handsomer than the finest
woman you ever saw, sir Philip?” said
Belinda, smiling.
“Than the finest woman I had ever
seen then,” said sir Philip, “for damme
I did not know what it was to be in love
then,” (here the baronet heaved an audible
sigh) “I always laughed at love, and
all that, then, and marriage particularly
—I'll trouble you for Mrs. Stanhope's
direction, miss Portman; I believe, to do
the thing in style, I ought to write to her
before I speak to you.”
Belinda looked at him with astonishment,
and laying down the pencil, with
which she had just begun to write a direction
to Mrs. Stanhope, she said—
“Perhaps, sir Philip, to do the thing in
style, I ought to pretend at this instant

not to understand you—but such false delicacy
might mislead you—permit me
therefore to say, that if I have any concern
in the letter which you are going to
write to my aunt Stanhope—”
“Well guessed!” interrupted sir Philip,
“to be sure you have, and you're a
charming girl, damn me if you aren't, for
meeting my ideas in this way—which
will save a cursed deal of trouble,” added
the polite lover, seating himself on the
sofa, beside Belinda.
“To prevent your giving yourself any
farther trouble then, sir, on my account,” 
said miss Portman—
“Nay, damme, don't catch at that unlucky
word, trouble, nor look so cursed
angry; though it becomes you too, uncommonly,
and I like pride in a handsome
woman, if it was only for variety's sake,
for it's not what one meets with often,
nowadays.—As to trouble, all I meant
was, the trouble of writing to Mrs. Stanhope,
which of course I thank you for
saving me; for to be sure, damn it, I'd

rather (and you can't blame me for that)
have my answer from your own charming
lips, if it was only for the pleasure of
seeing you blush in this heavenly sort of
style.”
“To put an end to this heavenly sort of
style, Sir,” said Belinda, withdrawing her
hand, which the baronet took, as if he
was confident of it's being his willing
prize—“I must explicitly assure you,
that it is not in my power to encourage
your addresses.—I am fully sensible,” added
miss Portman, “of the honour sir
Philip Baddely has done me, and I hope
he will not be offended by the frankness
of my answer.”
“You can't be in earnest, miss Portman!” 
exclaimed the astonished baronet.
“Perfectly in earnest, sir Philip.”
“Confusion seize me!” cried he, starting
up, “if this isn't the most extraordinary
thing I ever heard!—Will you do me
the honour, madam, to let me know your
particular objections to sir Philip Baddely.”

“My objections,” said Belinda, “cannot
be obviated, and therefore it would be
useless to state them.”
“Nay—pray—ma'am—do me the favour
—I only ask for information sake—is
it to sir Philip Baddely's fortune, 15,000l.
a year, you object, or to his family, or to
his person.—O, curse it!” said he, changing
his tone, you're only quizzing me to
see how I should look—damn me you did
it too well, you little coquet.”
Belinda again assured him that she was
entirely in earnest, and that she was incapable
of the sort of coquetry which he
ascribed to her.
“O, damme, ma'am, then I've no more
to say—a coquet is a thing I understand
as well as another, and if we had been
only talking in the air, it would have
been another thing; but when I come at
once to a proposal in form, and a woman
seriously tells me she has objections that
cannot be obviated, damme, what must
I, or what must the world conclude, but
that she's very unaccountable, or that

she's engaged—which last I presume to
be the case, and it would have been a satisfaction
to me to have known it sooner
—at any rate, it is a satisfaction to me to
know it now.”
“I am sorry to deprive you of so much
satisfaction,” said miss Portman, “by assuring
you, that I am not engaged to any
one.”
Here the conversation was interrupted
by the entrance of lord Delacour, who
came to inquire from miss Portman how
his lady did. The baronet, after twisting
his little black stick into all manner of
shapes, finished by breaking it, and then
having no other resource, suddenly wished
miss Portman a good morning, and decamped
with a look of silly ill humour.— 
He was determined to write to Mrs. Stanhope,
whose influence over her niece he
had no doubt would be decisive in his favour.
“Sir Philip seems to be a little out
of sorts this morning,” said lord Delacour,
“I am afraid he's angry with me for interrupting
his conversation; but really I did

not know he was here, and I wanted to
catch you a moment alone, that I might,
in the first place, thank you for all your
goodness to lady Delacour—she has had a
tedious sprain of it; these nervous fevers
and convulsions—I don't understand them,
but I think Dr. X&wblank;'s prescriptions seem
to have done her good, for she is certainly
better of late, and I am glad to hear music
and people again in the house, because I
know all this is what my lady Delacour
likes, and there is no reasonable indulgence
that I would not willingly allow a
wife; but I think there is a medium in all
things.—I am not a man to be governed
by a wife, and when I have once said a
thing, I like to be steady, and always shall.
And I am sure miss Portman has too much
good sense to think me wrong; for now
miss Portman, in that quarrel about the
coach and horses, which you heard part of
one morning at breakfast—I must tell you
the beginning of that quarrel.”
“Excuse me, my lord, but I would rather

hear of the end than of the beginning
of quarrels.”
“That shows your good sense as well
as your good nature. I wish you could
make my lady Delacour of your taste— 
she does not want sense—but then (I speak
to you freely of all that lies upon my mind,
miss Portman, for I know—I know you
have no delight in making mischief in a
house)—between you and me, her sense
is not of the right kind.—A woman may
have too much wit—now too much is as
bad as too little, and in a woman, worse; 
and when two people come to quarrel, then
wit on either side, but more especially on
the wife's, you know, is very provoking— 
'tis like concealed weapons, which are
wisely forbidden by law.—If a person kill
another in a fray with a concealed weapon,
ma'am, by a sword in a cane for instance,
'tis murder by the law. Now even if it
were not contrary to law, I would never
have such a thing in my cane to carry
about with me; for when a man's in a

passion he forgets every thing, and would
as soon lay about him with a sword as with
a cane—so it is better such a thing should
not be in his power.—And it is the same
with wit, which would be safest and best
out of the power of some people.”
“But is it fair, my lord, to make use of
wit yourself to abuse wit in others?” said
Belinda with a smile, which put his lordship
into perfect good humour with both
himself and his lady. “Why really,” said
he, “there would be no living with lady
Delacour, if I did not come out with a little
fly bit of wit now and then; but it is what
I am not in the habit of doing, I assure
you, except when very hard pushed.—But
miss Portman, as you like so much to hear
the end of quarrels, here's the end of one
which you have a particular right to hear
something of,” continued his lordship,
taking out his pocket-book and producing
some bank notes—“you should have received
this before, madam, if I had known
of the transaction sooner—of your part of
it, I mean.”

“Milord, de man call to speak about
de burgundy you order, milord,” said
Champfort, who came into the room with
a sly inquisitive face.
“Tell him I'll see him immediately— 
show him into the parlour, and give him a
newspaper to read.”
“Yes, milord—milord has it in his
pocket since he dress.”
“Here it is,” said his lordship, and as
Champfort came forward to receive the
newspaper, his eye glanced at the banknotes,
and then at miss Portman.
“Here,” continued lord Delacour, as
Champfort had left the room—“here are
your two hundred guineas, miss Portman,
and as I am going to this man about my
burgundy, and shall be out all the rest of
the day, let me trouble you the next time
you see lady Delacour to give her this
pocketbook from me.—I should be sorry
miss Portman, from any thing that has
passed, should run away with the idea that
I am a niggardly husband, or a tyrant,
though I certainly like to be master in my

own house.—What are you doing, madam?
—that is your note, that does not go
into the pocketbook, you know.
“Permit me to put it in, my lord,” said
Belinda, returning the pocketbook to him,
“and to beg you will give lady Delacour
the pleasure of seeing you: she has inquired
several times whether your lordship
were at home. I will run up to her dressing
room and tell her that you are here.”
“How lightly she goes, on the wings of
good nature!” said lord Delacour, “I can
do no less than follow her; for though I
like to be treated with respect in my own
house, there is a time for every thing.—I
would not give lady Delacour the trouble
of coming down here to me with her
sprained ancle, especially as she has inquired
for me several times.”
His lordship's visit was not of unseasonable
length; for he recollected that the
man who came about the burgundy was
waiting for him. But, perhaps, the shortness
of the visit rendered it the more pleasing,

for lady Delacour afterward said to
Belinda—
“My dear, would you believe it, my
lord Delacour was absolutely a perfect
example of the useful and agreeable this
morning—who knows but he may become
the sublime and beautiful in time—en attendant.
Here are your two hundred guineas,
my dear Belinda—a thousand thanks
for the thing, and a million for the manner
—manner is all in all in conferring favours.
My lord, who, to do him justice, has too
much honesty to pretend to more delicacy
than he really possesses, told me that he
had been taking a lesson from miss Portman
this morning in the art of obliging; 
and really, for a grown gentleman, and for
the first lesson, he comes on surprisingly.
I do think, that by the time he is a widower,
his lordship will be quite another
thing—quite an agreeable man—not a genius,
not a Clarence Hervey, that you cannot
expect.—Apropos, what is the reason
that we have seen so little of Clarence

Hervey lately? He has certainly some
secret attraction elsewhere.—It cannot be
that girl sir Philip mentioned.—No—she's
nothing new. Can it be at lady Anne
Percival's?—or where can it be? Whenever
he sees me I think he asks, when we
go to Harrowgate.—Now Oakly-park is
within a few miles of Harrowgate. I will
not go there, that's decided. Lady Anne
is an exemplary matron, so she is out of the
case; but I hope she has no sister excellence,
no niece, no cousin, to entangle our
hero.”
“Ours!” said Belinda.
“Well, yours, then,” said lady Delacour.
“Mine!”
“Yes, yours: I never in my life saw a
better struggle between a sigh and a smile.
But what have you done to poor sir Philip
Baddely?—My lord Delacour told me— 
you know all people who have nothing else
to say tell news quicker than others—my
lord Delacour told me, that he saw sir Philip
part from you this morning in a terrible
bad humour.—Come, whilst you tell your

story, help me to string these pearls; that
will save you from the necessity of looking
at me, and will conceal your blushes.— 
You need not be afraid of betraying sir
Philip's secrets; for I could have told you
long ago, that he would inevitably propose
for you—the fact is nothing new or surprising
to me, but I should really like to
hear how ridiculous the man made himself.”
“And that,” said Belinda, “is the only
thing which I do not wish to tell your ladyship.
“Lord, my dear, surely it is no secret
that sir Philip Baddely is ridiculous—but
you are so good natured that I can't be
out of humour with you.—If you won't
gratify my curiosity, will you gratify my
taste, and sing for me once more that
charming song which none but you can
sing to please me—I must learn it from
you absolutely.”
Just as Belinda was beginning to sing,
Marriott's macaw began to scream, so
that lady Delacour could not hear any
thing else.

“O, that odious macaw!” cried her
ladyship, “I can endure it no longer”— 
and she rang her bell violently—“It kept
me from sleeping all last night—Marriott
must give up this bird.—‘Marriott, I cannot
endure that macaw—you must part
with it for my sake Marriott.—It cost
you four guineas, I am sure I would give
five with the greatest pleasure to get rid of
it, for it is the torment of my life.”
“Dear my lady! I can assure you it is
only because they will not shut the doors
after them below as I desire—I am certain
Mr. Champfort never shut a door
after him in his life, nor never will if he
was to live to the days of Methusalon.”
“That is very little satisfaction to me,
Marriott,” said lady Delacour.
“And indeed, my lady, it is very little
satisfaction to me, to hear my macaw
abused as it is every day of my life, for
Mr. Champfort's fault.”
“But it cannot be Champfort's fault
that I have ears.”
“But if the doors were shut, my lady,
you wouldn't or couldn't hear—as I'll

prove immediately.” said Marriott, and
she ran directly and shut, according to her
own account, “eleven doors which were
stark staring wide open.”—“Now, my
lady, you can't hear a single syllable of the
macaw.”
“No, but one of the eleven doors will
open presently,” said lady Delacour— 
“you will observe it is always more than
ten to one against me.”
A door opened, and the macaw was
heard to scream.
“The macaw must go, Marriott, that
is certain,” said her ladyship—firmly—
“Then I must go, my lady,” said
Marriott—angrily—“that is certain—for
to part with my macaw is a thing I cannot
do to please any body.”—Her eyes
turned with indignation upon Belinda— 
from association merely; because the last
time that she had been angry about her
macaw, she had also been angry with
miss Portman, whom she imagined to be
the secret enemy of her favourite.
“To stay another week in the house,

after my macaw's discarded in disgrace,
is a thing nothing shall prevail upon me to
do.”—She flung out of the room in a fury.
“Good Heavens! am I reduced to
this?” said lady Delacour—“she thinks
that she has me in her power—No—I can
die without her—I have but a short time
to live, I will not live a slave—let the
woman betray me if she will—follow her
this moment, my dear—generous friend!
—tell her never to come into this room
again—take this pocketbook—pay her
whatever is due to her in the first place,
and give her fifty guineas—observe!— 
not as a bribe, but as a reward.”
It was a delicate and difficult commission—Belinda
found Marriott at first incapable
of listening to reason—“I am sure
there is nobody in the world, that would
treat me and my macaw in this manner,
except my lady!” cried she, “and somebody
must have set her against me, for it is
not natural to her—but since she can't bear
me about her any longer, 'tis time I should
be gone.”

“The only thing of which lady Delacour
complained, was the noise of this macaw,” 
said Belinda; “it was a pretty bird—how
long have you had it?”
“Scarcely a month,” said Marriott,
sobbing.
“And how long have you lived with
your lady?”
“Six years!—And to part with her
after all!—”
“And for the sake of a macaw! And
at a time when your lady is so much in
want of you, Marriott!—You know she
cannot live long, and she has much to
suffer before she dies, and if you leave
her, and if in a fit of passion you betray
the confidence she has placed in you, you
will reproach yourself for it ever afterward.—This
bird—no, nor all the birds
in the world, will not be able to console
you—for you are of an affectionate disposition,
I know, and sincerely attached to
your poor lady.”
“That I am!—and to betray her!— 
O, miss Portman, I would sooner cut off
my hand than do it.—And I have been

tried more than my lady knows of, or you
either (for Mr. Champfort, who is the
greatest mischief-maker in the world, and
is the cause, by not shutting the door, of
all this dilemma—for now, ma'am, I'm
convinced, by the tenderness of your
speaking, that you are not the enemy to
me I supposed—and I beg your pardon)
but I was going to say that Mr. Champfort,
who saw the frecas between my lord
and me, about the key and the door, the
night of my lady's accident, has whispered
it about at lady Singleton's and every
where—Mrs. Luttridge's maid, ma'am,
who is my cousin, has pestered me with
so many questions and offers, from Mrs.
Luttridge and Mrs. Freke, of any money,
if I would only tell who was in the boudoir—and
I have always answered, nobody—and
I defy them to get any thing
out of me.—Betray my lady! I'd sooner
cut my tongue out this minute—can she
have such a base opinion of me, or can
you, ma'am?”
“No, indeed, I am convinced that you

are incapable of betraying her, Marriott, but
in all probability after you have left her—”
“If my lady would let me keep my
macaw,” interrupted Marriott, “I should
never think of leaving her.”
“The macaw she will not suffer to remain
in the house—and is it reasonable
that she should?—it deprives her of sleep
—it kept her awake three hours this
morning.”
Marriott was beginning the history of
Champfort and the doors again, but miss
Portman stopped her by saying—
“All this is past now.—How much is
due to you, Mrs. Marriott? Lady Delacour
has commissioned me to pay you
every thing that is due to you.”
“Due to me!—Lord bless me, ma'am
—am I to go?”
“Certainly—it was your own desire— 
it is consequently your lady's—she is perfectly
sensible of your attachment to her,
and of your services, but she cannot suffer
herself to be treated with disrespect— 
here is a fifty guinea note, which she gives
you as a reward for your past fidelity—

not as a bribe to secure your future secresy.—You
are at liberty, she desires me
to say, to tell her secret to the whole
world, if you choose to do so.”
“O, miss Portman, take my macaw— 
do what you will with it—only make my
peace with my lady,” cried Marriott,
clasping her hands in an agony of grief— 
“here are the fifty guineas, ma'am, don't
leave it with me—I will never be disrespectful
again—take my macaw and all!— 
No, I'll carry it myself to my lady.”
Lady Delacour was surprised by the
sudden entrance of Marriott, and her macaw; 
the chain which held the bird Marriott
put into her ladyship's hand without
being able to say any thing more than— 
“Do what you please, my lady, with it— 
and with me.”
Pacified by this submission, lady Delacour
granted Marriott's pardon, and she
most sincerely rejoiced at this reconciliation.
The next day Belinda asked the dowager
lady Boucher, who was going to a
bird fancier's, to take her with her, in hopes

that she might be able to meet with some
bird more musical than a macaw, to console
Marriott for the loss of her screaming
favourite.—Lady Delacour commissioned
miss Portman to go to any price she
pleased.—“If I were able, I would accompany
you myself, my dear, for poor
Marriott's sake, though I would almost
as soon go to the Augean stable.”
There was a bird-fancier in High-Holborn,
who had bought several of the
hundred and eighty beautiful birds, which,
as the newspapers of the day advertised,
had been “collected after great labour and
expense, by mons. Marten, and Co. for
the Republican Museum at Paris; and
lately landed out of the French brig Urselle,
taken on her voyage from Cayenne
to Brest, by his Majesty's ship Unicorn.”
When lady Boucher and Belinda arrived
at this bird-fancier's, they were long
in doubt to which of the feathered beauties
they should give the preference. Whilst
the dowager was descanting upon their
various perfections, a lady and three children
came in; she immediately attracted

Belinda's attention, by her likeness to
Clarence Hervey's description of lady Ann
Percival.—It was lady Ann, as lady Boucher,
who was slightly acquainted with
her, informed Belinda in a whisper.
The children were soon eagerly engaged
looking at the birds.
“Miss Portman,” said lady Boucher,
“as lady Delacour is so far from well, and
wishes to have a bird that will not make
any noise in the house, suppose you were
to buy for Mrs. Marriott this beautiful
pair of green paroquets—or stay—a goldfinch
is not very noisy, and here is one that
can play a thousand pretty tricks.—Pray
sir, make it draw up water in it's little
bucket for us?”
“O! mamma,” said one of the little
boys, “this is the very thing that is mentioned
in Bewick's History of Birds. Pray
look at this goldfinch, Helena—now it is
drawing up it's little bucket—but where
is Helena?—here's room for you, Helena.”
Whilst the little boys were looking at
the goldfinch, Belinda felt somebody
touch her gently.—It was Helena Delacour.

“Can I speak a few words to you?” 
said Helena.
Belinda walked to the farthest end of
the shop with her.
“Is my mamma better?” said she, in a
timid tone, “I have some gold fish, which
you know cannot make the least noise; 
may I send them to her?—I heard that
lady call you miss Portman; I believe you
are the lady who wrote such a kind postscript
to me in mamma's last letter—that is
the reason I speak so freely to you now.
—Perhaps you would write to tell me, if
mamma will see me; and lady Ann Percival
would take me at any time, I am
sure—but she goes to Oakly-park in a few
days—I wish I might be with mamma,
whilst she is ill, I would not make the
least noise.—But don't ask her if you think
it will be troublesome—only let me send
the gold fish.”
Belinda was touched by the manner in
which this affectionate little girl spoke to
her. She assured her that she would say
all she wished to her mother, and she

begged Helena to send the gold fish
whenever she pleased.
“Then,” said Helena, “I will send
them as soon as I go home—as soon as I
go back to lady Anne Percival's, I mean.”
Belinda, when she had finished speaking
to Helena, heard the man, who was
showing the birds, lament that he had not
a blue macaw, which lady Anne Percival
was commissioned to procure for Mrs.
Margaret Delacour.
“Red macaws, my lady, I have in
abundance; but unfortunately, a blue
macaw I really have not, at present; nor
have I been able to get one, though I
have inquired amongst all the bird fanciers
in town; and I went to the auction at
Haydon square, on purpose, but could
not get one.”
Belinda requested lady Boucher would
tell her servants to bring in the cage that
contained Marriott's blue macaw; and
as soon as it was brought, she gave it to
Helena, and begged that she would carry
it to her aunt Delacour.
“Lord, my dear miss Portman,” said

lady Boucher, drawing her aside, “I am
afraid you will get yourself into a scrape,
for lady Delacour is not upon speaking
terms with this Mrs. Margaret Delacour; 
she cannot endure her; you know she is
my lord Delacour's aunt.”
Belinda persisted in sending the macaw,
for she was in hopes that these terrible
family quarrels might be made up, if
either party would condescend to show
any disposition to oblige the other.
Lady Anne Percival understood first
Portman's civility as it was meant.
“This is a bird of good omen,” said she,
“it augurs family peace.”
“I wish you would do me the favour,
lady Boucher, to introduce me to miss
Portman,” continued lady Anne.
“The very thing I wished!” cried
Helena.
A few minutes conversation passed
afterward upon different subjects, and
lady Anne Percival and Belinda parted
with a mutual desire to see more of each
other.