

In the middle of the night our hero
was wakened by a loud bellowing. It
was only king Corny in a paroxysm of
the gout. His majesty was naturally of
a very impatient temper, and his maxims
of philosophy encouraged him to
the most unrestrained expression of his
feelings.—The maxims of his philosophy— 
for he had read, though in a most desultory
manner, and he had thought
often deeply, and not seldom justly.— 
The turns of his mind, and the questions
he asked, were sometimes utterly
unexpected—
“Pray now,” said he to Harry, who
stood beside his bed—“now, that I've

a moment's ease—did you ever hear of
the stoics that the bookmen talk of, and
can you tell me what good any one of
them ever got by making it a point to
make no noise, when they'd be punished
and racked with pains of body or
mind. Why I will tell you all they got— 
all they got was no pity—who would
give them pity, that did not require it?— 
I could bleed to death in a bath, as well
as the best of them, if I chose it; or
chew a bullet, if I set my teeth to it,
with any man in a regiment—but
where's the use? nature knows best, and
she says roar!”
And he roared—for another twinge
seized him—nature said—sleep! several
times this night to Harry, and to
every body in the palace, but they did
not sleep, they could not, while the
roaring continued. So all had reason to
rejoice, and Moriarty in particular,
when his majesty's paroxysm was past.
Harry was in a sound sleep at twelve

o'clock, the next day, when he was
summoned into the royal presence. He
found king Corny sitting at ease in his
bed, that bed strewed over with a variety
of roots and leaves, weeds and
plants. An old woman was hovering
over the fire, stirring something in a
black kettle.—
“Simples these! of wonderful unknown
power,” said king Corny to
Harry, as he approached the bed, “and
I'll engage you don't know the name
even of the half of them.”— 
Harry confessed his ignorance.
“No shame for you—was you as wise
as King Solomon himself, you might
not know them, for he did not, nor
couldn't, he that had never set his foot
a grousing on an Irish bog.—Sheelah!
come you over, and say what's this?”
The old woman now came to assist
at this bed of botany, and with spectacles
slipping off, and pushed on her
nose continually, peered over each green

thing, and named in Irish, “every herb
that sips the dew.”
Sheelah was deeper in Irish lore, than
king Corny could pretend to be: but
then he humbled her with the “black
hellebore of the antients,” and he had,
in an unaccountable manner, affected
her imagination by talking of “that famous
bowl of narcotic poisons, which
that great man Socrates drank off.”— 
Sheelah would interrupt herself in the
middle of a sentence and curtsy, if she
heard him pronounce the name of Socrates— 
and at the mention of the bowl,
she would regularly sigh, and exclaim:—
“Lord save us!—But that was a
wicked bowl.”
Then after a cast of her eyes up to
heaven, and crossing herself on the
forehead, she would take up her discourse
at the word where she had left
off.
King Corny set to work compounding

plaisters and embrocations, preparing
all sorts of decoctions of roots,
and leaves famous through the country.
And while he directed and gesticulated
from his bed, the old woman worked
over the fire in obedience to his commands.
Sometimes, however, not with
that “prompt and mute obedience,” 
which the great require.
It was fortunate for Moriarty, that
king Corny, not having the use of his
nether limbs, could not attend even in
his gouty chair to administer the medicines
he had made, and to see them
fairly swallowed.—Sheelah, whose conscience
was easy on this point, contented
herself with giving him a strict
charge to “take every bottle to the last
drop.” All she insisted upon for her
own part was, that she must tie the
charm round his neck and arm. She
would fain have removed the dressings
of the wound to substitute plaisters of
her own, over which she had pronounced

certain prayers or incantations: but Moriarty,
who had seized and held fast one
good principle of surgery, that the air
must never be let into the wound, held
mainly to this maxim, and all Sheelah
could obtain was permission to clap
on her charmed plaister over the dressing.
In due time, or as king Corny triumphantly
observed, in “a wonderful short
period,” Moriarty got quite well, long
before the king's gout was cured, even
with the assistance of the black hellebore
of the antients.—King Corny was
so well pleased with his patient for doing
such credit to his medical skill, that
he gave him and his family a cabin, and
spot of land, in the Islands—a cabin near
the palace—and at Harry's request made
him his wood-ranger and his gamekeeper,
the one a lucrative place—the
other a sinecure.
Master Harry—Prince Harry, was
now looked up to as a person all powerful
with the master, and petitions and

requests to speak for them, to speak just
one word, came pouring from all sides; 
but however enviable his situation as
favourite and prince presumptive might
appear to others, it was not in all respects
comfortable to himself.
Formerly when a boy in his visits to
the Black Islands he used to have a
little companion of whom he was fond— 
Dora—king Corny's daughter. Missing
her much, he inquired from her father
where she was gone, and when she was
likely to return.
“She is gone off to the continent, to
the continent of Ireland, that is; but not
banished for any misdemeanour. You
know,” said king Corny, “'tis generally
considered as a punishment in the
Black Islands to be banished to Ireland.
A threat of that kind I find sufficient to
bring the most refractory and ill-disposed
of my subjects, if I had any of that description,
to rason in the last resort; but
to that ultimate law I have not recourse,

except in extreme cases: I understand
my business of king too well to wear out
either shame or fear; but you are no
legislator yet, prince Harry. So what
was you asking me about Dora; she is
only gone a trip to the continent, to her
aunt's, by the mother's side, Miss O'Faley,
that you never saw, to get the advantage
of a dancing-master, which myself don't
think she wants,—a natural carriage,
with native graces, being, in my unsophisticated
opinion, worth all the dancing- 
master's positions, contorsions, or drillings; 
but her aunt's of a contrary
opinion, and the women say it is essential— 
so let 'em put Dora in the stocks, and
punish her as they will, she'll be the
gladder to get free, and fly back from
their continent to her own Black Islands
and to me, and to you and me—I ax
your pardon, Harry Ormond; but you
know, or I should tell you in time, she
is engaged already to White Connal, of
Glynn—from her birth. That engagement

I made with the father over a bowl
of punch—I promised—I'm afraid it was
a foolish business—He had two sons,
twins, at that time, and I had no daughter— 
but I promised, if ever I should
have one—and I had one unluckily ten
years after, which is Dora—I promised,
I say, and took my oath, I'd give the
daughter in marriage to Connal of
Glynn's eldest son, which is White Connal.
Well, it was altogether a rash act!— 
So you'll consider her as a married
woman, though she is but a child—It
was a rash act between you and I—for
Connal's not grown up a likely lad for
the girl to fancy; but that's neither here
nor there; no—my word is passed—when
half drunk may be—but no matter—it
must be kept sober—drunk or sober, a
gentleman must keep his word—a-fortiori
a king—a-fortiori king Corny—See!— 
was there this minute no such thing as
parchment, deed, stamp, signature, or
seal in the wide world, when once Corny

has squeezed a friend's hand on a bargain,
or a promise, 'tis fast, was it ever so
much against me—'tis as strong to me as
if I had squeezed all the lawyer's wax
in the creation upon it.”
Ormond admired the honourable sentiment; 
but was sorry there was any occasion
for it—and he sighed; but it was
a sigh of pity for Dora—not that he had
ever seen White Connal, or known any
thing of him; but White Connal did not
sound well, and her father's avowal that
it had been a rash engagement did not
seem to promise happiness to Dora in
this marriage.
From the time he had been a boy,
Harry Ormond had been in the habit of
ferrying over to the Black Islands, whenever
Sir Ulick could spare him. The
hunting and shooting, and the life of lawless
freedom he led on the Islands, had
been delightful. King Corny, who had
the command not only of boats, and of
guns, and of fishing tackle, and of men,

but of carpenters' tools, and of smiths
tools; and of a lathe, and of brass and
ivory; and of all the things that the heart
of boy could desire, had appeared to
Harry, when he was a boy, the richest,
the greatest, the happiest of men.—The
cleverest too—the most ingenious;—for
king Corny had with his own hands
made a violin and a rat-trap; and had
made the best coat, and the best pair of
shoes, and the best pair of boots, and the
best hat; and had knit the best pair of
stockings, and had made the best dunghill
in his dominions; and had made a
quarter of a yard of fine lace, and had
painted a panorama. No wonder that
king Corny had been looked up to by
the imagination of childhood, as “a
personage, high as human veneration
could look.”
But now, although our hero was still
but a boy in many respects, yet in consequence
of his slight commerce with
the world, he had formed some comparisons,

and made some reflexions. He
had heard, accidentally, the conversation
of a few people of common sense, besides
the sly, witty, and satirical remarks of Sir
Ulick, upon Cousin Cornelius; and it had
occurred to Harry to question the utility
and real grandeur of some of those things,
which had struck his childish imagination.— 
For example, he began to doubt, whether
it were worthy of a king, or a gentleman,
to be his own shoemaker, hatter, and
taylor; whether it were not better managed
in society, where these things are
performed by different tradesmen; still
the things were wonderful, considering
who made them, and under what disadvantages
they were made; but Harry
having now seen and compared Corny's
violin with other violins, and having discovered
that so much better could be
had for money, with so much less trouble,
his admiration had a little decreased.
There were other points relative to external
appearance, on which his eyes

had been opened. In his boyish days,
king Corny, going out to hunt with
hounds and horn, followed with shouts
by all who could ride, and all who could
run, king Corny hallooing the dogs,
and cheering the crowd, appeared to
him the greatest, the happiest of mankind.
But he had since seen hunts in a very
different style, and he could no longer
admire the rabble rout.
Human creatures, especially young
human creatures, are apt to swing suddenly
from one extreme to the other, and
utterly to despise that which they had
extravagantly admired. From this propensity,
Ormond was in the present instance
guarded by affection and gratitude.
Through all the folly of his kingship,
he saw that Cornelius O'Shane was
not a person to be despised. He was
indeed a man of great natural powers,
both of body and mind;—of inventive
genius, energy, and perseverance, which

might have attained the greatest objects; 
though from insufficient knowledge, and
self-sufficient perversity, they had wasted
themselves on absurd or trivial purposes.
There was a strong contrast between
the characters of Sir Ulick, and his cousin
Cornelius O'Shane; they disliked and
despised each other. Differing as far in
natural disposition, as the subtle and the
bold, their whole course through life,
and the habits contracted during their
progress, had widened the original difference.
The one living in the world, and mixing
continually with men of all ranks
and characters, had, by bending easily,
and being all things to all men, won his
courtier-way onwards and upwards to
the possession of a seat in Parliament,
and the prospect of a peerage.
The other, inhabiting a remote island,
secluded from all men but those over
whom he reigned, caring for no earthly
consideration, and for no human opinion

but his own—had for himself, and by himself,
hewed out his way to his own objects— 
and then rested, satisfied—
“Lord of himself, and all his (little) world his
own.”