



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 
[Her preceding not at the time received.] 

Friday, March 3. 
O my dear friend, I have had a sad conflict! Trial
upon trial; Conference upon conference! —But
what Law, what Ceremony, can give a man a right
to a heart which abhors him more than it does any
living creature? 
I hope my Mother will be able to prevail for me. — 
But I will recount all, tho' I sit up the whole night to
do it; for I have a vast deal to write; and will be as
minute as you wish me to be. 
I concluded my last in a fright. It was occasioned
by a conversation that passed between my Mother and
my Aunt, part of which Hannah overheard. I need
not give you the particulars; since what I have to relate
to you from different conversations that have
passed between my Mother and me in the space of a
very few hours, will include them all. I will begin
then. 
I went down this morning when breakfast was
ready with a very uneasy heart, from what Hannah
had informed me of yesterday afternoon; wishing for
an opportunity, however, to appeal to my Mother,
in hopes to engage her interest in my behalf, and purposing
to try to find one when she retired to her own
apartment after breakfast: But, unluckily, there was
the odious Solmes sitting asquat between my Mother
and Sister, with so much assurance in his looks! —But
you know, my dear, that those we love not, cannot
do any-thing to please us. 
Had the wretch kept his seat, it might have been
well enough: But the bent and broad-shouldered
creature must needs rise, and stalk towards a chair; 
which was just by that which was set for me. 

I removed it to a distance, as if to make way to
my own: And down I sat, abruptly I believe; what
I had heard all in my head. 
But this was not enough to daunt him. The man
is a very confident, he is a very bold, staring man! — 
Indeed, my dear, the man is very confident! 
He took the removed chair, and drew it so near
mine, squatting in it with his ugly weight, that he
pressed upon my hoop. —I was so offended (all I had
heard, as I said, in my head) that I removed to another
chair. I own I had too little command of myself. 
It gave my Brother and Sister too much advantage. 
I dare say they took it. But I did it involuntarily,
I think. I could not help it. —I knew not
what I did. 
I saw that my Father was excessively displeased. 
When angry, no man's countenance ever shews it so
much as my Father's. Clarissa Harlowe! said he
with a big voice—and there he stopped. —Sir! said I,
trembling and courtesying (for I had not then sat
down again): And put my chair nearer the wretch,
and sat down—My face, as I could feel, all in a
glow. 
Make Tea, child, said my kind Mamma: Sit by
me, Love; and make Tea. 
I removed with pleasure to the seat the man had
quitted; and being thus indulgently put into employment,
soon recovered myself; and in the course of the
breakfasting officiously asked two or three questions of
Mr. Solmes, which I would not have done, but to
make up with my Father. —Proud spirits may be
brought to! whisperingly spoke my Sister to me, over
her shoulder, with an air of triumph and scorn: But
I did not mind her. 
My Mother was all kindness and condescension. I
asked her once, if she were pleased with the Tea? She
said softly (and again called me dear) she was pleased
with all I did. I was very proud of this encouraging 

goodness: And all blew over, as I hoped, between
my Father and me; for he also spoke kindly to me
two or three times. 
Small incidents these, my dear, to trouble you
with; only as they lead to greater, as you shall hear. 
Before the usual breakfast-time was over, my Father
withdrew with my Mother, telling her he wanted
to speak to her. Then my Sister and next my
Aunt (who was with us) dropt away. 
My Brother gave himself some airs of insult, which
I understood well enough; but which Mr. Solmes
could make nothing of: And at last he arose from
his seat—Sister, said he, I have a curiosity to shew
you. I will fetch it. And away he went, shutting
the door close after him. 
I saw what all this was for. I arose; the man
hemming up for a speech, rising, and beginning to set
his splay-feet [Indeed, my dear, the man in all his
ways is hateful to me!] in an approaching posture. — 
I will save my Brother the trouble of bringing to me
his curiosity, said I. I courtesied—Your servant, Sir
—The man cried, Madam, Madam, twice, and
looked like a fool. —But away I went—to find my
Brother, to save my word. —But my Brother, indifferent
as the weather was, was gone to walk in the
garden with my Sister. A plain case, that he had left
his curiosity with me, and designed to shew me no
other. 
I had but just got into my own apartment, and
began to think of sending Hannah to beg an Audience
of my Mother (the more encouraged by her condescending
goodness at breakfast) when Shorey her
woman brought me her commands to attend her in
her closet. 
My Father, Hannah told me, was just gone out
of it with a positive angry countenance. Then I as
much dreaded the audience as I had wished for it
before. 

I went down however; but, apprehending the subject
she intended to talk to me upon, approached her
trembling, and my heart in visible palpitations. 
She saw my concern. Holding out her kind arms,
as she sat, Come kiss me, my dear, said she, with a
smile like a sun-beam breaking through the cloud
that overshadowed her naturally benign aspect. Why
flutters my jewel so? 
This preparative sweetness, with her goodness just
before, confirmed my apprehensions. My Mother
saw the bitter pill wanted gilding. 
O my Mamma! was all I could say; and I clasped
my arms round her neck, and my face sunk into her
bosom. 
My child! my child! restrain, said she, your
powers of moving! I dare not else trust myself with
you. —And my tears trickled down her bosom, as
hers bedewed my neck. 
O the words of kindness, all to be expressed in
vain, that flowed from her lips! 
Lift up your sweet face, my best child, my own
Clarissa Harlowe? —O my daughter, best-beloved of
my heart, lift up a face so ever-amiable to me! — 
Why these sobs? —Is an apprehended duty so affecting
a thing, that before I can speak—But I am glad,
my Love, you can guess at what I have to say to you. 
I am spared the pains of breaking to you what was
a task upon me reluctantly enough undertaken to break
to you. 
Then rising, she drew a chair near her own, and
made me sit down by her, overwhelmed as I was
with tears of apprehension of what she had to say,
and of gratitude for her truly maternal goodness to
me—Sobs still my only language. 
And drawing her chair still nearer to mine, she
put her arms round my neck, and my glowing cheek,
wet with my tears, close to her own: Let me talk
to you, my child. Since Silence is your choice,
hearken to me, and be silent. 

You know, my dear, what I every day forego, and
undergo, for the sake of peace. Your Papa is a very
good man, and means well; but he will not be controuled; 
nor yet persuaded. You have sometimes
seemed to pity me, that I am obliged to give up
every point. Poor man! his reputation the less for
it; mine the greater: Yet would I not have this credit,
if I could help it, at so dear a rate to him and to
myself. You are a dutiful, a prudent, and a wise child,
she was pleased to say, in hope, no doubt, to make me
so: You would not add, I am sure, to my trouble: 
You would not wilfully break that peace which costs
your Mother so much to preserve. Obedience is
better than sacrifice. O my Clary Harlowe, rejoice
my heart, by telling me I have apprehended too much! 
—I see your concern! I see your perplexity! I see
your conflict [loosing her arm, and rising, not willing
I should see how much she herself was affected]. I
will leave you a moment. —Answer me not—[For I
was essaying to speak, and had, as soon as she took
her dear cheek from mine, dropt down on my knees,
my hands clasped, and lifted up in a supplicating manner]. 
I am not prepared for your irresistible expostulation,
she was pleased to say. I will leave you to
recollection: And I charge you, on my blessing,
that all this my truly maternal tenderness be not
thrown away upon you. 
And then she withdrew into the next apartment; 
wiping her eyes, as she went from me; as mine overflowed; 
my heart taking in the whole compass of her
meaning. 
She soon returned, having recovered more steadiness. 
Still on my knees, I had thrown my face cross the
chair she had sat in. 
Look up to me, my Clary Harlowe—No sullenness,
I hope! 
No, indeed, my ever-to-be-revered Mamma. — 
And I arose. I bent my knee. 

She raised me. No kneeling to me, but with knees
of duty and compliance. Your heart, not your knees,
must bend. It is absolutely determined—Prepare
yourself therefore to receive your Father, when he
visits you by-and-by, as he would wish to receive you. 
But on this one quarter of an hour depends the peace
of my future life, the satisfaction of all the family,
and your own security from a man of violence: And
I charge you besides, on my blessing, that you think
of being Mrs. Solmes. 
There went the dagger to my heart, and down I
sunk: And when I recovered, found myself in the
arms of my Hannah, my Sister's Betty holding open
my reluctantly-opened palm, my laces cut, my linen
scented with hartshorn; and my Mother gone. Had
I been less kindly treated, the hated name still forborne
to be mentioned, or mentioned with a little
more preparation and reserve, I had stood the horrid
sound with less visible emotion—But to be bid, on the
Blessing of a Mother so dearly beloved, so truly
reverenced, to think of being Mrs. Solmes—what
a denunciation was that! 
Shorey came in with a message (delivered in her
solemn way): Your Mamma, Miss, is concerned
for your disorder: She expects you down again in an
hour; and bid me say, that she then hopes everything
from your duty. 
I made no reply; for what could I say? And
leaning upon my Hannah's arm, withdrew to my
own apartment. There you will guess how the
greatest part of the hour was employed. 
Within that time, my Mother came up to me. 
I love, she was pleased to say, to come into this
apartment! —No emotions, child! No flutters! — 
Am I not your Mother! —And I not your fond, your
indulgent Mother! —Do not discompose me by discomposing
yourself! Do not occasion me uneasiness, 

when I would give you nothing but pleasure. Come,
my dear, we will go into your closet. 
She took my hand, led the way, and made me sit
down by her: And after she had enquired how I did,
she began in a strain as if she had supposed I had
made use of the intervening space to overcome all my
objections. 
She was pleased to tell me, that my Father and
she, in order to spare my natural modesty, had taken
the whole affair upon themselves— 
Hear me out; and then speak; for I was going to
expostulate. You are no stranger to the end of Mr.
Solmes's visits— 
O Madam!— 
Hear me out; and then speak. —He is not indeed
every-thing I wish him to be: But he is a man of
probity, and has no vices— 
No vices, Madam!— 
Hear me out, child—You have not behaved much
amiss to him: We have seen with pleasure that you
have not— 
O Madam, must I not now speak!— 
I shall have done presently—A young creature of
your virtuous and pious turn, she was pleased to say,
cannot surely love a profligate: You love your Brother
too well, to wish to marry one who had like to
have killed him, and who threatened your Uncles,
and defies us all. You have had your own way Six
or Seven times: We want to secure you against a
man so vile. Tell me (I have a right to know) whether
you prefer this man to all others? —Yet God forbid
that I should know you do! for such a declaration
would make us all miserable. Yet, tell me, are
your affections engaged to this man? 
I knew what the inference would be, if I had said
they were not. 
You hesitate—You answer me not—You cannot 

answer me. —Rising—Never more will I look upon
you with an eye of favour— 
O Madam, Madam! Kill me not with your displeasure
—I would not, I need not, hesitate one moment,
did I not dread the inference, if I answer you
as you wish. —Yet be that inference what it will, your
threatened displeasure will make me speak. And I
declare to you, that I know not my own heart, if it
be not absolutely free. And pray, let me ask my
dearest Mamma, in what has my conduct been faulty,
that, like a giddy creature, I must be forced to marry,
to save me from—From what? Let me beseech you,
Madam, to be the guardian of my reputation—Let
not your Clarissa be precipitated into a State she wishes
not to enter into with any man! And this upon a
supposition that otherwise she shall marry herself, and
disgrace her whole family. 
Well then, Clary [passing over the force of my
plea] if your heart be free— 
O my beloved Mamma, let the usual generosity of
your dear heart operate in my favour. Urge not
upon me the inference that made me hesitate. 
I won't be interrupted, Clary—You have seen in
my behaviour to you, on this occasion, a truly maternal
tenderness; you have observed that I have
undertaken this task with some reluctance, because
the man is not every-thing; and because I know
you carry your notions of perfection in a man too
high— 
Dearest Madam, this one time excuse me! —Is
there then any danger that I should be guilty of an
imprudent thing for the man's sake you hint at? 
Again interrupted! —Am I to be questioned, and
argued with? You know this won't do somewhere
else. You know it won't. What reason then, ungenerous
girl, can you have for arguing with me thus,
but because you think from my indulgence to you,
you may? 

What can I say? What can I do? What must
that cause be that will not bear being argued upon? 
Again! Clary Harlowe!— 
Dearest Madam, forgive me: It was always my
pride and my pleasure to obey you. But look upon
that man—see but the disagreeableness of his person— 
Now, Clary, do I see whose person you have in
your eye! —Now is Mr. Solmes, I see, but comparatively
disagreeable; disagreeable only as another man
has a much more specious person. 
But, Madam, are not his manners equally so? — 
Is not this person the true representative of his mind? 
—That other man is not, shall not be, any-thing to
me, release me but from this one man, whom my
heart, unbidden, resists. 
Condition thus with your Father. Will he bear,
do you think, to be thus dialogued with? Have I
not conjured you, as you value my peace—What is
it that I do not give up? —This very task, because I
apprehended you would not be easily persuaded, is a
task indeed upon me. And will you give up nothing? 
Have you not refused as many as have been
offered to you? If you would not have us guess for
whom, comply; for comply you must, or be looked
upon as in a state of defiance with your whole family. 
And saying this, she arose, and went from me. 
But at the chamber-door stopt; and turned back: I
will not say below in what a disposition I leave you. 
Consider of every-thing. The matter is resolved
upon. As you value your Father's Blessing and mine,
and the satisfaction of all the family, resolve to comply. 
I will leave you for a few moments. I will
come up to you again. See that I find you as I wish
to find you; and since your heart is free, let your
duty govern it. 
In about half an hour, my Mother returned. She
found me in tears. She took my hand: It is my
part evermore, said she, to be of the acknowleging 

side. I believe I have needlesly exposed myself to
your opposition, by the method I have taken with
you. I first began as if I expected a denial, and by
my indulgence brought it upon myself. 
Do not, my dearest Mamma! do not, say so! 
Were the occasion for this debate, proceeded she,
to have risen from myself; were it in my power to
dispense with your compliance; you too well know
what you can do with me. 
Would any-body, my dear Miss Howe, wish to
marry, who sees a Wife of such a temper, and blessed
with such an understanding as my Mother is noted
for, not only deprived of all power; but obliged to
be even active in bringing to bear points of high importance,
which she thinks ought not to be insisted
upon? 
When I came to you a second time, proceeded she,
knowing that your opposition would avail you nothing,
I refused to hear your reasons: And in this I
was wrong too, because a young creature who loves
to reason, and used to love to be convinc'd by reason,
ought to have all her objections heard: I now, therefore,
this third time, see you; and am come resolved
to hear all you have to say: And let me, my dear, by
my patience engage your gratitude; your generosity,
I will call it; because it is to You I speak, who used
to have a mind wholly generous. —Let me, if your
heart be really free, let me see what it will induce you
to do to oblige me: And so as you permit your usual
discretion to govern you, I will hear all you have to
say; but with this intimation, that say what you will,
it will be of no avail elsewhere. 
What a dreadful saying is that! But could I engage
your pity, Madam, it would be somewhat. 
You have as much of my Pity, as of my Love. 
But what is person, Clary, with one of your prudence,
and your heart disengaged? 
Should the eye be disgusted, when the heart is to be 

engaged? —O Madam, who can think of marrying
when the heart is shocked at the first appearance, and
where the disgust must be confirmed by every conversation
afterwards? 
This, Clary, is owing to your prepossession. Let
me not have cause to regret that noble firmness of
mind in so young a creature which I thought your
glory, and which was my boast in your character. 
In this instance it would be obstinacy, and want of
duty. —Have you not made objections to several— 
That was to their minds, to their principles, Madam
—But this man— 
Is an honest man, Clary Harlowe. He has a good
mind. He is a virtuous man. 
He an honest man! His a good mind, Madam! 
He a virtuous man!— 
No-body denies him these qualities. 
Can he be an honest man who offers terms that will
rob all his own Relations of their just expectations? — 
Can his mind be good— 
You, Clary Harlowe, for whose sake he offers so
much, are the last person that should make this observation. 
Give me leave to say, Madam, that a person preferring
happiness to fortune, as I do; that want not
even what I have, and can give up the use of that, as
an instance of duty— 
No more, no more of your merits! —You know
you will be a gainer by that chearful instance of your
duty; not a loser. You know you have but cast
your bread upon the waters—So no more of that! — 
For it is not understood as a merit by every-body, I
assure you; tho' I think it a high one; and so did
your Father and Uncles at the time— 
At the time, Madam! —How unworthily do my
Brother and Sister, who are afraid that the favour I
was so lately in— 
I hear nothing against your Brother and Sister— 

What family-feuds have I in prospect, at a time when
I hoped most comfort from you all! 
God bless my Brother and Sister in all their worthy
views! You shall have no family-feuds, if I can prevent
them. You yourself, Madam, shall tell me
what I shall bear from them, and I will bear it: But
let my actions, not their misrepresentations (as I am
sure by the disgraceful prohibitions I have met with has
been the case) speak for me. 
Just then, up came my Father, with a sternness in
his looks that made me tremble. —He took two or
three turns about my chamber, tho' pained by his
gout. —And then said to my Mother, who was silent
as soon as she saw him— 
My dear, you are long absent. —Dinner is near
ready. What you had to say, lay in a very little
compass. Surely, you have nothing to do but to
declare your will, and my will—But perhaps you may
be talking of the preparations—Let us have you soon
down—Your Daughter in your hand, if worthy of
the name. 
And down he went, casting his eye upon me with
a look so stern, that I was unable to say one word to
him, or even for a few minutes to my Mother. 
Was not this very intimidating, my dear? 
My Mother, seeing my concern, seemed to pity
me. She called me her good child, and kissed me; 
and told me that my Father should not know I had
made such opposition. He has kindly furnished us
with an excuse for being so long together, said she. — 
Come, my dear—Dinner will be upon table presently
—Shall we go down? —And took my hand. 
This made me start: What, Madam, go down to
let it be supposed we were talking of preparations! — 
O my beloved Mamma, command me not down upon
such a supposition. 
You see, child, that to stay longer together, will
be owning that you are debating about an absolute 

duty: And that will not be borne. Did not your
Father himself some days ago tell you, he would be
obeyed? I will a third time leave you. I must say
something by way of excuse for you: And that you
desire not to go down to dinner—That your modesty
on the occasion— 
O Madam! say not my modesty on such an occasion: 
For that will be to give hope— 
And design you not to give hope? —Perverse girl! 
—Rising, and flinging from me; Take more time
for consideration! —Since it is necessary, take more
time—And when I see you next, let me know what
blame I have to cast upon myself, or to bear from
your Father, for my indulgence to you. 
She made, however, a little stop at the chamberdoor; 
and seemed to expect that I would have besought
her to make the gentlest construction for me; for,
hesitating, she was pleased to say, I suppose you would
not have me make a report— 
O Madam, interrupted I, whose favour can I hope
for, if I lose my Mamma's? 
To have desired a favourable report, you know,
my dear, would have been qualifying upon a point
that I was too much determined upon, to give room
for any of my friends to think I have the least hesitation
about it. And so my Mother went down stairs. 
I will deposit thus far; and, as I know you will
not think me too minute in my relation of particulars
so very interesting to one you honour with your Love,
proceed in the same way. As matters stand, I don't
care to have papers so freely written about me. 
Pray let Robert call every day, if you can spare
him, whether I have any-thing ready or not. 
I should be glad you would not send him empty-handed. 
What a generosity will it be in you, to write
as frequently from friendship, as I am forced to do
from misfortune! The Letters being taken away will
be an assurance that you have them. As I shall write 

and deposit as I have opportunity, the formality of
super and sub scription will be excused. For I need
not say how much I am, 
Your sincere and ever-affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 