


Sir Charles Grandison, To Lady Grandison. 


Monday, Febr. 19. 
You requested me, my dearest Harriet, to write
minutely to you. Now I have been admitted to
the presence of Clementina, and have hopes that she
will soon recover her peace of mind, I can the more
chearfully obey you. 
I was exactly at the hour at the appointed place. 
Laura guessed at my chair, and my servants, as they
crossed the way; and stood out on the pavement, that
I might see her. When she found she had caught my
eye, she ran into the house, wringing her clasped
hands—God be praised! God be praised! were her
words, as I followed her in, in her own language. 
Laura can speak no other. Shew me, shew me, to
your Lady, good Laura! said I, with emotion. 
She ran up one pair of stairs before me. She entered
the dining-room, as it is called. I stopt at the
stairs head till I had Clementina's commands. Laura
soon came out. She held open the door for me, courtesying
in silence. 
The drawn window-curtains darkened the room:
But the dignity of Clementina's air and motion left
me not in doubt. She stood up, supporting herself
on the back of an elbow chair. 

On one knee, taking her trembling hand; Welcome,
thrice welcome to England, dearest Lady Clementina! 
I pressed her hand with my lips; and, rising, seated
her: For she trembled; she sobbed; she endeavoured
to speak, but could not for some moments. 
I called to Laura, fearing she was fainting. 
O that well-known voice! said she. And do you,
can you, bid me welcome? —Me, a fugitive, an ingrate,
undutiful! —O Chevalier, lower not your unsullied
character, by approving so unnatural a step as
that which I have taken! 
I do bid you welcome, madam! Your brother, your
friend, from his soul, welcomes you to England. 
Let me know, Chevalier, before another word passes,
Whether I have a Father, whether I have a Mother? 
Blessed be God, madam, you have both. 
She lifted up her clasped hand: Thank God! 
God, I thank thee! Distraction would have been my
portion, if I had not! I was afraid to ask after them. 
I should have thought myself the most detestable of
parricides, if either of them had been no more. 
They are in the utmost distress for your safety. 
They will think themselves happy, when they know
you are well, and in the protection of your brother
Grandison. 
Will they, Sir? O what a paradox! They so indulgent,
yet so cruel—I, so dutiful, yet a fugitive! 
But tell me, Sir; determined as I was against entering
into a state I too much honour to enter into it
with a reluctant heart, could I take any other step than
that I have taken, to free myself from the cruelty of
persuasion? O that I might have been permitted to
take the veil! —But answer my question, Chevalier? 
Surely, madam, they would not have compelled
you. They always declared to me they would not. 
Not compelled me, Sir! Did not my father kneel
to me? My mother's eyes spoke more than her lips 

could have utter'd. The Bishop had influenced good
Father Marescotti (against the interests of Religion, I
had almost said) to oppose the wish of my heart. Jeronymo,
your Jeronymo, gave into their measures:
What refuge had I? —Our Giacomo was inexorable. 
I was to be met on my return from Florence to Bologna,
by the Count of Belvedere, and all those of
his house; the General was to be in his company: I
had secret intelligence of all this: And I was to be
received as an actual bride at Bologna, or made to
promise I would be so within a few days after my
arrival. My Sister-in-law, my only advocate among
my Italian friends, pitied me, it is true: But, for that
reason, she was not to be allowed to come to Bologna. 
I was at other times denied to go to Urbino,
to Rome, to Naples—Could I do otherwise than I
have done, if I would avoid profaning a Sacrament? 
My dearest sister Clementina sometimes accuses herself
of rashness, for taking a step so extraordinary. 
At this moment, does she not receive her brother in
darkness? Whence this sweet consciousness? But what
is done, is done. Your Conscience is a Law to you. 
If that accuse you, you will repent: If it acquit you,
who shall condemn? —Let us look forward, madam. I
approve not of the vehemence of your friends persuasions. 
Yet what parents ever meant a child more
indulgence; what brothers, a sister more disinterested
affection? 
I own, Sir, that my heart at times misgives me. 
But answer me this: Are you of opinion that I ought,
at the instance of my parents and brothers, however
affectionate, however indulgent in all other instances,
to marry against inclination, against justice, against
conscience? 
Against any one of these you ought not. 
Well, Sir, then I will endeavour to make myself
easy as to this article. But will you undertake, Sir,
(A woman wants a protector) to maintain this argument
for me? 

I will, madam, and shall hope for the more success,
if you will promise to lay aside all thoughts of
the veil. 
Ah, Chevalier! 
Will my dearest Sister answer me one question? Is
it not your hope, that by resisting their wishes, you
may tire out opposition, and at last bring your friends
to consent to a measure to which they have always
been extremely averse? 
Ah, Chevalier! —But if I could get them to consent— 
Dear madam! is not their reasoning the same—If
they could get you to consent? 
Ah, Chevalier! 
May not this be a contention for months, for
years? And— 
I know, Sir, your inference: You think that in a
contention between parents and child, the child should
yield. Is not that your inference? 
Not against reason, against justice, against conscience. 
But there may be cases, in which neither ought to be
their own judge. 
Well, Sir, you that have yielded to a plea of conscience
(God has blessed you, and may God continue
to bless you, for it!)— 
Admirable Clementina! 
—Are fit to be a judge between us—You shall be
mine, if ever the debate be brought on. 
No consideration, in that case, shall byas me! — 
But may I not hope, that the dear Lady I stand before,
will permit me to behold a person, whose mind I ever
revered? 
Laura, said she, let the tea be got ready: I have
been taught to drink tea, Sir, since my arrival. The
gentlewoman of the house is very obliging. Permit
me, Sir, to withdraw for a few moments. 
She sighed as she went out, leaning upon Laura. 
Laura returned soon after with lights. She set them 

on the table; and giving way to a violent emotion,
O Milord Grandison, said the poor girl, falling down,
and embracing my knees: For the blessed Virgin's
sake, prevail on my Lady to return to dear, dear Bologna! 
Have patience, Laura: All will be well. 
I, the unhappy Laura, shall be the sacrifice. The
General will kill me—O that I had never accompanied
my Lady in this expedition! 
Have patience, Laura! If you have behaved well
to your Lady, I will take you into my protection. 
Had you a good voyage? Was the master of the vessel,
were his officers, obliging? 
They were, Sir; or neither my Lady or I should
have been now living. O Sir, we were in a dying
way all the voyage; except the three last days of it. 
The master was the civillest of men. 
I asked after her fellow-servant, naming him from
Jeronymo's Letters. Gone out, was the answer, to
buy some necessaries! O Sir, we live a sad life! 
Strangers to the language, to the customs of the
country, all our dependence is upon this young man. 
I asked her after the behaviour and character of the
people of the house (a widow and her three daughters)
that if I heard but an indifferent account of them, I
might enforce by it my intended plea to get her to
Lady L's. Laura spoke well of them. The Captain
of the vessel who brought them over, is related to
them, and recommended them, when he knew what
part of the town her Lady chose. 
What risques did the poor Lady run! Such different
people as she had to deal with, in the contrivance and
prosecution of her wild scheme; yet all to prove
honest; how happy! Poor Lady! how ready was she
to fly from what she apprehended to be the nearest
evil! But she could not be in a capacity to weigh the
dangers to which she exposed herself. 
Often and often, said Laura, have I, on my knees, 

besought my Lady to write to you. But she was not
always well enough to resolve what to do; and when
she was sedate, she would plead, that she was afraid
to see you: You would be very angry with her: You
would condemn her as a rash creature: And she could
not bear your displeasure: She was conscious that the
act she had done, bore a rash, and even a romantic,
appearance: Had you been in town, Antony should
have made enquiries at distance, and she might have
yielded to see you: But for several days her thoughts
were not enough composed to write to you. At last,
being impatient to hear of the health of her father
and mother, she did write. 
Why stays she so long from me, Laura? Attend
your Lady, and tell her, that I beg the honour of
her presence. 
Laura went to her. Her Lady presented herself
with an air of bashful dignity. I met her at her entrance
—My Sister, my Friend, my dearest Lady Clementina,
kissing her hand, welcome, welcome, I repeat,
to England. Behold your fourth Brother, your
Protector: Honour me with your confidence: Acknowlege
my protection. Your honour, your happiness,
is dear to me as my life. 
I led her trembling, sighing, but at the moment
speechless, to a seat, and sat down by her, holding
both her hands in mine: She struggled for speech:
Compose yourself, madam: Assure yourself of my
tenderest regard, of my truest brotherly affection. 
Generous Grandison! Can you so give me? Can
you from your heart bid me welcome? I will endeavour
to compose myself. You told me I was conscious:
Conscious indeed I am: The step I have taken
has a disgraceful appearance: But yet will I not condemn,
nor consent that you should, my motive. 
I condemn not your motive, madam. All will, all
must, be happy! Rely on my brotherly advice and
protection. My Sisters, and their Lords, every one I 

love, admires you. You are come to families of
Lovers, who will think themselves honoured by your
confidence. 
You pour balm into the wounds of my mind. 
What is woman when difficulties surround her! When
it was too late, and the ship that I embarked in was
under sail, then began my terror: That took away
from me all power of countermanding the orders I
had given; till the winds that favoured my voyage,
opposed my return. Then was I afraid to trust myself
with my own reflexions, lest, if I gave way to
them, my former malady should find me out. But
let me not make you unhappy. Yet, permit me to
observe, that when you mentioned the kind reception
I might expect to meet with, among your friends,
you forbore to mention the principal person—What
will She think of the poor Clementina? But be assured,
and assure her, That I would not have set my
foot on the English shore, had you not been married. 
O Chevalier! if I make you and her unhappy, no
creature on earth can hate me so much as I shall hate
myself. 
Generous, noble Clementina! —Your happiness is
indeed essential to that of us both. My Harriet is
another Clementina! You are another Harriet! Sister-excellencies
I have called you to her, to all her relations. 
In the Letter you favoured me with, you
wished to know her: You must know her; and I am
sure you will love her. Your wishes that she would
accept of my vows, were motives with her to make
me happy. She knows our whole history. She is
prepared to receive you, as the dearest of her sisters. 
Generous Lady Grandison! I have heard her character. 
I congratulate you, Sir. You have reason
to think, that I should have been grieved, had you
not met with a woman who deserved you. To know
you are happy in a wife, and think yourself so, that
no blame lies upon me for declining your addresses, 

will contribute more than I can express, to my peace
of mind. When I have more courage, and my heart
is eased of some part of its anguish, you shall present
me to her. Tell her, mean time, that I will love
her; and that I shall hold myself everlastingly bound
to her in gratitude, for making happy the man, whom
once, but for a superior motive, I had the vanity to
think I could have made so. 
She turned away her glowing face, tears on her
cheek. My admiration of her greatness of mind, so
similar to that of my own Harriet, would not allow
me to pour out my heart in words. I arose; and, taking
both her hands, bowed upon them. Tears more
plentifully flowed from her averted eyes; and we were
both for one moment speechless. 
It would be injurious to a mind equally great and
noble as that which informs the person of this your
Sister-excellence, to offer to apologize for faithfully
relating to you those tender emotions of hearts, one
of them not less pure than my Harriet's; the other all
your own. 
I broke silence, and urged her to accept of apartments
at Lady L's. Let me acquaint the gentlewoman
of the house, I beseech you, madam, that
to-morrow morning the sister I have named, and I,
will attend you to her house. We will thank her for
you, as you have almost forgotten your English, for
the civilities which she and her daughters have shewn
you: And I will make it my business to find out the
honest Captain, who, Laura tells me, has been very
civil to you also, and thank him too in the names of
all our common friends, for his care of you. 
I will think myself honoured, now you have encouraged
me to look up, by a visit from either or both
your sisters. But let me advise with you, Sir, Is the
kind offer you make me, a proper offer for me to
accept of? I shall be ready to take your advice— 
Little regard as I may seem, by the step I have taken, 

to have had for my own honour; I would avoid, if
possible, suffering a first error to draw me into a second. 
Do you, Sir, as my brother and friend, take
care of that honour in every step you shall advise me
to take. 
Your honour, madam, shall be my first care. I
sincerely think this is the rightest measure you can
now pursue. 
Now pursue!—sighing. 
This argument admitted of a short debate. She
was scrupulous from motives too narrow for a Clementina
to mention. I made her blush for mentioning
them; and, in short, had the happiness to convince
her, that the protection of the sister of her
fourth brother was the most proper she could choose. 
I went down, and talked to the gentlewomen below. 
They were pleased with what I said to them. 
They prayed for the Lady and her family, and for a
happy reconciliation between them; for Antony had
given them briefly her story. 
I requested them to make my compliments to her
relation Captain Henderson, and desire him to give
me an opportunity to thank him in person for his civility
to a Lady beloved by all who have the honour
of knowing her. 
I went up again to the Lady; and sat with her most
of the evening, Laura only attending us. 
I talked to Clementina of Mrs. Beaumont, and the
Ladies at Florence; and intimated, that her mother
had prevailed on that Lady to come to England, in
hopes, as she is an English woman, that her company
would be highly acceptable to her. She blessed her
mother! What an instance of forgiving goodness was
this! she said, with tears of gratitude; and blessed
Mrs. Beaumont for her goodness to her; and the
Ladies at Florence for parting with one so dear to
them. 
I was happy throughout this latter conversation in 

her serenity; not one instance of wandering did I observe. 
I chose not, however, so early, to acquaint her,
with the intention of the dearest and nearest of her
friends, to come over with Mrs. Beaumont; tho' I
expressed my earnest hope, that if we could make
England agreeable to her, I should have the honour
of the promised visit from some of the principals of
her family, before she left it. 
This, my dearest Life, is a minute account of our
interview. One of the greatest pleasures I can know
is to obey the gentle, the generous commands of my
Harriet. 
This morning I attended Lady L. to breakfast
with the excellent Lady, as proposed. My Sister and
her Lord are charmed with their guest: Their guest
she is: And Lady Clementina is as much pleased with
them. She is every hour more and more sensible of
the danger she has run; and censures herself very
freely for the rash step, as she calls it herself. 
She longs, yet is ashamed to see you, my dearest
life; and listens with delight to the praises my Lord
and Lady L. so justly give to my Harriet. 
Monday afternoon. 
I have introduced Lord and Lady G. to Lady
Clementina, at her own request; being assured, she
said, that the place of her refuge would be kept secret
by all my friends. Both sisters occasionally joining
in praising my angel; How happy, said she, are
those marriages which give as much joy to the relations
on both sides as to the parties themselves! 
Adieu, my dearest Love. With the tenderest affection
I am, and ever will be, 
Your most faithful and obliged
Ch. Grandison. 

