



Colonel Morden, To Miss Cl. Harlowe. 

Tuesday, Aug. 29. 
&dotup;I should not, my dearest Cousin, have been a
fortnight in England, without either doing myself
the honour of waiting upon you in person, or
of writing to you; if I had not been busying myself
almost all the time in your service, in hopes of
making my Visit or Letter still more acceptable to
you—acceptable as I have reason to presume either
will be from the unquestionable Love I ever bore
you, and from the Esteem you always honoured
me with. 
&dotup;Little did I think, that so many days would have
been required to effect my well-intended purpose,
where there used to be a Love so ardent on one
side, and where there still is, as I am thoroughly
convinced, the most exalted Merit on the other!&dotup; 
I was yesterday with Mr. Lovelace and Lord M.
I need not tell you, it seems, how very desirous the
whole family and all the Relations of that Nobleman
are of the honour of an alliance with you; nor how
exceedingly earnest the ungrateful man is to make you
all the reparation in his power. 
I think, my dear Cousin, that you cannot now do
better than to give him the honour of your hand. He
says such just and great things of your virtue, and so 

heartily condemns himself, that I think there is honourable
room for you to forgive him: And the more
room, as it seems you are determined against a legal
prosecution. 
Your effectual forgiveness of Mr. Lovelace, it is
evident to me, will accelerate a general Reconciliation: 
For, at present, my other Cousins cannot persuade
themselves, that he is in earnest to do you justice; 
or that you would refuse him, if you believed
he was. 
But, my dear Cousin, there may possibly be something
in this affair, to which I may be a stranger. If
there be, and you will acquaint me with it, all that
a naturally warm heart can do in your behalf shall be
done. 
I hope I shall be able, in my next visits to my several
Cousins, to set all right with them. Haughty
spirits, when convinced that they have carried resentments
too high, want but a good excuse to condescend: 
And parents must always love the child they
once loved. 
But if I find them inflexible, I will set out, and
attend you without delay; for I long to see you, after
so many years absence. 
Mean while, I beg the favour of a few lines, to
know if you have reason to doubt Mr. Lovelace's
Sincerity. For my part, I can have none, if I am
to judge from the conversation that passed between us
yesterday, in presence of Lord M. 
You will be pleased to direct for me at your Uncle
Antony's. 
Permit me, my dearest Cousin, till I can procure
a happy Reconciliation between you and your Father,
and Brother, and Uncles, to supply the place to you
of all those near relations, as well as that of 
Your affectionate Kinsman, and humble Servant,
Wm. Morden. 