



Mrs. Norton, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 

Tuesday, Aug. 22. 
After I had sealed up the inclosed, I had the
honour of a private visit from your Aunt Hervey; 
who has been in a very low-spirited way, and
kept her chamber for several weeks past; and is but
just got abroad. 
She longed, she said, to see me, and to weep with
me, on the hard fate that had befallen her beloved
Niece. 
I will give you a faithful account of what passed
between us; as I expect, that it will, upon the whole,
administer hope and comfort to you. 
‘She pitied very much your good Mother, who,
she assured me, is obliged to act a part entirely
contrary to her inclinations; as she herself, she
owns, had been in a great measure. 
‘She said, that the poor Lady was with great difficulty
with-held from answering your Letter to
her; which had (as was your Aunt's expression) almost
broken the heart of every one: That she had
reason to think, that she was neither consenting to
your two Uncles writing, nor approving of what
they wrote. 
‘She is sure they all love you dearly; but have
gone so far, that they know not how to recede. 
‘That, but for the abominable league which your
Brother had got every-body into (he refusing to set
out for Scotland till it was renewed, and till they
had all promised to take no step towards a Reconciliation
in his absence but by his consent; and to
which your Sister's resentments kept them up); 
all would before now have happily subsided. 
‘That nobody knew the pangs which their inflexible
behaviour gave them, ever since you had 

begun to write to them in so affecting and humble
a style. 
‘That, however, they were not inclined to believe
that you were either so ill, or so penitent, as
you really are; and still less, that Mr. Lovelace is
in earnest in his Offers of Marriage. 
‘She is sure however, she says, that all will soon
be well: And the sooner for Mr. Morden's arrival: 
Who is very zealous in your behalf. 
‘She wished to Heaven, that you would accept of
Mr. Lovelace, wicked as he has been, if he were
now in earnest. 
‘It had always, she said, been matter of astonishment
to her, that so weak a pride in her Cousin
James, of making himself the whole family, should
induce them all to refuse an alliance with such a
family as Mr. Lovelace's was. 
‘She would have it, that your going off with Mr.
Lovelace was the unhappiest step for your honour
and your interest that could have been taken; for
that altho' you would have had a severe trial the
next day, yet it would probably have been the
last; and your pathetic powers must have drawn
you off some friends—hinting at your Mother, at
your Uncle Harlowe, at your Uncle Hervey, and
herself.’ 
But here (that the regret that you did not trust to
the event of that meeting, may not, in your present
low way, too much afflict you) I must observe, that
it seems a little too evident even from this opinion of
your Aunt's, that it was not so absolutely determined
that all compulsion was designed to be avoided, since
your freedom from it must have been owing to the
party to be made among them by your persuasive eloquence
and dutiful expostulation. 
‘She owned, that some of them, were as much
afraid of meeting you, as you could be of meeting 

them:’ —But why so, if they designed, in the last
instance, to give you your way? 
Your Aunt told me, ‘That Mrs. Williams (a) 
had been with her, and asked her opinion, if it
would be taken amiss, if she desired leave to go up,
to attend her dearest young Lady in her calamity. 
Your Aunt referred her to your Mother: But had
heard no more of it. 
‘Her Daughter (Miss Dolly) she said, had been
frequently earnest with her on the same subject; 
and renewed her request with the greatest fervor
when your first Letter came to hand.’ 
Your Aunt says, ‘That she being then very ill,
wrote to your Mother upon it, hoping it would not
be taken amiss, if she permitted Miss Dolly to go; 
but that your Sister, as from your Mother, answered
her, That now you seemed to be coming to,
and to have a due sense of your faults, you must be
left entirely to their own management. 
‘Miss Dolly, she said, had pined ever since she
had heard of Mr. Lovelace's baseness; being doubly
mortified by it: First, on account of your sufferings; 
next, because she was one who rejoiced in
your getting off, and vindicated you for it: And
had incurred censure and ill-will on that account; 
especially from your Brother and Sister; so that she
seldom went to Harlowe-Place.’ 
Make the best use of these intelligences, my dearest
young Lady, for your consolation. 
I will only add, that I am, with the most fervent
prayers for your Recovery and Restoration to favour, 
Your ever-faithful
Judith Norton. 