


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Tuesday, Jan. 31. 
I Am already, my dear Lucy, quite contrary to my
own expectation, enabled to obey the third general
injunction laid upon me at parting by you, and all
my dear friends; since a gentleman, neither inconsiderable
in his family or fortune, has already beheld
your Harriet with partiality. 
Not to heighten your impatience by unnecessary
parade, his name is Fowler. He is a young gentleman
of an handsome independent fortune, and still
larger expectations from a Welsh Uncle now in town,
Sir Rowland Meredith, knighted in his Sheriffalty, on
occasion of an address which he brought up to the
King from his County. 
Sir Rowland, it seems, requires from his Nephew,
on pain of forfeiting his favour for ever, that he marries
not without his approbation: Which, he declares,
he never will give, except the woman be of a good family; 
has a gentlewoman's fortune; has had the benefit 

of a religious education; which he considers as the
best security that can be given for her good behaviour
as a wife, and as a mother; so forward does the good
Knight look! Her character unsullied: Acquainted
with the theory of the domestic duties, and not ashamed,
occasionally, to enter into the direction of the
practic. Her fortune, however, as his Nephew will
have a good one, he declares to be the least thing he
stands upon; only that he would have her possessed of
from six to ten thousand pounds, that it may not appear
to be a match of mere Love, and as if his Nephew
were taken in, as he calls it, rather by the eyes,
than by the understanding. Where a woman can
have such a fortune given her by her family, tho' no
greater, it will be an earnest, he says, that the family
she is of have worth, as he calls it, and want not to
owe obligations to that of the man she marries. 
Something particular, something that has the look
of forecast and prudence, you'll say, in the old Knight. 
O but I had like to have forgot; his future Niece
must also be handsome. He values himself, it seems,
upon the breed of his horses and dogs; and makes
polite comparisons between the more noble, and the
less noble animals. 
Sir Rowland himself, as you will guess by his particularity,
is an old bachelor, and one who wants
to have a woman made on purpose for his Nephew; 
and who positively insists upon qualities, before
he knows her, not one of which, perhaps, his
future Niece will have. 
Don't you remember Mr. Tolson of Derbyshire? 
He was determined never to marry a widow. If he
did, it should be one, who had a vast fortune, and
who never had a child. And he had still a more particular
exception; and that was to a woman who had
red hair. He held his exceptions till he was forty. 
Look'd upon then as a determin'd bachelor, no family
thought it worth their while to make proposals to him: 

No woman to throw out a net for him (to express myself
in the stile of the gay Mr. Greville); and he at
last fell in with, and married the laughing Mrs. Turner:
A widow, who had little or no fortune, had one child,
a daughter, living, and that child an absolute idiot; 
and, to complete the perverseness of his fate, her hair
not only red, but the most disagreeable of reds. The
honest man was grown splenetic: disregarded by everybody,
he was become disregardful of himself: He
hoped for a cure of his gloominess, from her chearful
vein; and seemed to think himself under obligation
to one who had taken notice of him, when nobody
else would. Bachelors wives! Maids children! 
These old saws always mean something. 
Mr. Fowler saw me at my Cousin Reeves's the first
time. I cannot say he is disagreeable in his person. 
But he seems to want the mind I would have a man
bless'd with to whom I am to vow love and honour. 
I purpose, whenever I marry, to make a very good
and even a dutiful wife [Must I not vow obedience? 
And shall I break my marriage-vow?]: I would not,
therefore, on any consideration, marry a man, whose
want of knowlege might make me stagger in the performance
of my duty to him; and who would perhaps
command from caprice or want of understanding,
what I should think unreasonable to be complied with. 
There is a pleasure and a credit in yielding up even
one's judgment in things indifferent, to a man who is
older and wiser than one's self. But we are apt to
doubt in one of a contrary character, what in the
other we should have no doubt about: And doubt, you
know, of a person's merit, is the first step to disrespect:
And what, but disobedience, which lets in
every evil, is the next? 
I saw instantly that Mr. Fowler beheld me with a
distinguished regard. We women, you know [Let
me for once be aforehand with my Uncle] are very
quick in making discoveries of this nature. But everybody 

at table saw it. He came again next day, and
besought Mr. Reeves to give him his interest with me,
without asking any questions about my fortune; tho'
he was even generously particular as to his own. He
might, since he has an unexceptionable one. Who is
it in these cases that forgets to set foremost the advantages
by which he is distinguished? While fortune
is the last thing talk'd of by him who has little or
none: And then Love, Love, Love, is all his cry. 
Mr. Reeves, who has a good opinion of Mr. Fowler,
in answer to his enquiries, told him, that he believed
I was disengaged in my affection: Mr. Fowler
rejoiced at that. That I had no questions to ask; 
but those of duty; which indeed, he said, was a
stronger tie with me than interest. He prarsed my
temper, and my frankness of heart; the latter at the
expence of my sex; for which I least thank'd him,
when he told me what he had said. In short, he
acquainted him with every-thing that was necessary,
and more than was necessary, for him to know, of
the favour of my family, and of my good Mr. Deane,
in referring all proposals of this kind to myself; mingling
the detail with commendations, which only could
be excused by the goodness of his own heart, and
accounted for by his partiality to his Cousin. 
Mr. Fowler expressed great apprehensions on my
Cousin's talking of these references of my Grandmother,
Aunt, and Mr. Deane, to myself, on occasions
of this nature; which, he said, he presumed had
been too frequent for his hopes. 
If you have any hope, Mr. Fowler, said Mr.
Reeves, it must be in your good character; and that
much preferably to your clear estate and great expectations. 
Altho' she takes no pride in the number of
her admirers, yet is it natural to suppose, that it has
made her more difficult; and her difficulties are enhanced,
in proportion to the generous confidence
which all her friends have in her discretion. And 

when I told him, proceeded Mr. Reeves, that your
fortune exceeded greatly what Sir Rowland required
in a wife for him; and that you had, as well from
inclination, as education, a serious turn; Too much,
too much, in one person, cried he out. As to fortune,
he wish'd you had not a shilling; and if he could obtain
your favour, he should be the happiest man in the
world. 
O my good Mr. Reeves, said I, how have you
over-rated my merits! Surely, you have not given
Mr. Fowler your interest? If you have, should you
not, for his sake, have known something of my mind
before you had set me out thus, had I even deserved
your high opinion? —Only that you men break not
your hearts now a-days for Love, or Mr. Fowler might
have reason to repent the double well-meant kindness
of his friend. 
It is the language I do and must talk of you in, to
every-body, return'd Mr. Reeves: Is it not the language
that those most talk who know you best? 
Where the world is inclined to favour, replied I,
it is apt to over-rate, as much as it will under-rate
where it disfavours. In this case, you should not
have proceeded so far as to engage a gentleman's
hopes. What may be the end of all this, but to
make a compassionate nature, as mine has been
thought to be, if Mr. Fowler should be greatly in
earnest, uneasy to itself, in being obliged to shew
Pity, where she cannot return Love? 
What I have said, I have said, replied Mr. Reeves. 
Pity is but one remove from Love. Mrs. Reeves
(There she sits) was first brought to pity me; for
never was man more madly in love than I; and then
I thought myself sure of her. And so it proved. I
can tell you I am no enemy to Mr. Fowler. 
And so, my dear, Mr. Fowler seems to think he
has met with a woman who would make a fit wife
for him: But your Harriet, I doubt, has not in Mr. 

Fowler met with a man whom she can think a fit
husband for her. 
The very next morning, Sir Rowland himself— 
But now, my Lucy, if I proceed to tell you all the
fine things that are said of me and to me, what will my
Uncle Selby say? Will he not attribute all I shall repeat
of this sort, to that pride, to that vanity, to that
fondness of admiration, which he, as well as Mr.
Greville, is continually charging upon all our Sex? 
Yet he expects that I shall give a minute account of
every thing that passes, and of every conversation in
which I have any part. How shall I do to please him? 
And yet I know I shall best please him, if I give him
room to find fault with me. But then should he for
my faults blame the whole Sex? Is that just? 
You will tell me, I know, that if I give speeches
and conversations, I ought to give them justly: That
the humours and characters of persons cannot be known
unless I repeat what they say, and their manner of
saying: That I must leave it to the speakers and complimenters
to answer for the likeness of the pictures
they draw: That I know best my own heart, and
whether I am puffed up by the praises given me: That
if I am, I shall discover it by my superciliousness, and
be enough punished on the discovery, by incurring,
from those I love, deserved blame, if not contempt,
instead of preserving their wish'd-for esteem. —Let me
add to all this, that there is an author (I forget who)
who says, “It is lawful to repeat those things, tho'
spoken in our praise, that are necessary to be known
and cannot otherwise be come at.” 
And now let me ask, Will this preamble do, once
for all? 
It will. And so says my Aunt Selby. And so says
every one but my Uncle. Well then I will proeeed,
and repeat all that shall be said, and that as well to
my disadvantage as advantage; only resolving not to
be exalted with the one, and to do my endeavour to 

amend by the other. And here, pray tell my Uncle,
that I do not desire he will spare me; since the faults
he shall find in his Harriet shall always put her upon
her guard—Not, however, to conceal them from his
discerning eye; but to amend them. 
And now, having, as I said, once for all, prepared
you to guard against a surfeit of self-praise, tho' delivered
at second or third hand, I will go on with my
narrative—But hold —my paper reminds me that I
have written a monstrous letter—I will therefore,
with a new sheet, begin a new one. Only adding
to this, that I am, and ever will be, 
Your affectionate
Harriet Byron. 
P. S. Well, but what shall I do now? —I have just
received my Uncle's letter. And, after his charges
upon me of Vanity and Pride, will my parade,
as above, stand me in anystead? —I must trust to
it. Only one word to my dear and ever-honoured
Uncle—Don't you, Sir, impute to me a
belief of the truth of those extravagant compliments
made by men professing love to me: And
I will not wish you to think me one bit the wiser,
the handsomer, the better for them, than I was
before. 

