



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq;
In Continuation. 

I obliged the dear creature highly, I could perceive,
by bringing Mrs. Greme to attend her, and to suffer
that good woman's recommendation of lodgings to take
place, on her refusal to go to The Lawn. 
She must believe all my views to be honourable,
when I had provided for her no particular lodgings,
leaving it to her choice, whether she would go to M.
Hall, to The Lawn, to London, or to either of the
Dowagers of my family. 
She was visibly pleased with my motion of putting
Mrs. Greme into the chaise with her, and riding on
horseback myself. 
Some people would have been apprehensive of what
might pass between her and Mrs. Greme. But as all
my relations either know or believe the justice of my intentions
by her, I was in no pain on that account; 
and the less, as I have been always above hypocrisy,
or wishing to be thought better that I am. And indeed,
what occasion has a man to be an Hypocrite,
who has hitherto found his views upon the Sex better
answered, for his being known to be a Rake? —Why,
even my Beloved here denied not to correspond with
me, tho' her friends had taught her to think me a
Libertine—Who then would be trying a new and
worse character? 
And then Mrs. Greme is a pious matron, and 

would not have been biassed against the truth on any
consideration. She used formerly, while there were
any hopes of my Reformation, to pray for me. She
hardly continues the good custom, I doubt; for her
worthy Lord makes no scruple, occasionally, to rave
against me to man, woman, and child, as they come
in his way. He is very undutiful, as thou knowest. 
Surely, I may say so; since all duties are reciprocal. But
for Mrs. Greme, poor woman! when my Lord has the
gout, and is at The Lawn, and the Chaplain not to
be found, she prays by him, or reads a chapter to him
in the Bible, or some other good book. 
Was it not therefore right, to introduce such a
good sort of woman to the dear creature; and to
leave them, without reserve, to their own talk? — 
And very busy in talk I saw they were, as they rode; 
and felt it too; for most charmingly glowed my
cheeks. 
I hope I shall be honest, I once more say: But as
we frail mortals are not our own masters at all times,
I must endeavour to keep the dear creature unapprehensive,
until I can get her to our acquaintance's in
London, or to some other safe place there. Should I,
in the interim, give her the least room for suspicion; 
or offer to restrain her; she can make her appeals to
strangers, and call the country in upon me; and, perhaps,
throw herself upon her Relations on their own
terms. And were I now to lose her, how unworthy
should I be to be the Prince and Leader of such a Confraternity
as ours! —How unable to look up among
men! or to shew my face among women! 
As things at present stand, she dare not own, that
she went off against her own consent; and I have
taken care to make all the Implacables believe, that she
escaped with it. 
She has received an Answer from Miss Howe, to
the Letter written to her from St. Albans (a)  

Whatever are the contents, I know not; but she
was drowned in tears on the perusal of it. And I am
the sufferer. 
Miss Howe is a charming creature too; but confoundedly
smart and spiritful. I am a good deal afraid
of her. Her Mother can hardly keep her in. I must
continue to play off old Antony, by my honest Joseph,
upon That Mother, in order to manage That Daughter,
and oblige my Beloved to an absolute dependence upon
myself (a) . 
Mrs. Howe is impatient of contradiction. So is
Miss. A young Lady who is sensible that she has all
the maternal requisites herself, to be under maternal
controul;—fine ground for a man of intrigue to build
upon! —A Mother over-notable; a Daughter over-sensible; 
and their Hickman, who is—over-neither; 
but merely a passive— 
Only that I have an object still more desirable!— 
Yet how unhappy, that these two young Ladies
lived so near each other, and are so well acquainted! 
Else how charmingly might I have managed them
both! 
But one man cannot have every woman worth having
—Pity tho'—when the man is such a very clever
fellow! 