



Mrs. Harlowe, To Mrs. Norton.
[Not communicated till the Letters came to be collected.] 

Saturday, May 13. 
I return an answer in writing, as I promised, to
your communication. But take no notice either
to my Bella's Betty (who I understand sometimes
visits you) or to the poor wretch herself, nor to anybody,
that I do write. I charge you don't. My
heart is full: Writing may give some vent to my
griefs, and perhaps I may write what lies most upon
my heart, without confining myself strictly to the
present subject. 
You know how dear this ingrateful creature ever 

was to us all. You know how sincerely we joined
with every one of those who ever had seen her, or conversed
with her, to praise and admire her; and exceeded
in our praise even the bounds of that modesty,
which, because she was our own, should have restrained
us; being of opinion, that to have been silent
in the praise of so apparent a merit, must rather have
argued blindness or affectation in us, than that we
should incur the censure of vain partiality to our own. 
When therefore any-body congratulated us on such
a Daughter, we received their congratulations without
any diminution. If it was said, You are happy in
this child; we owned, that no parents ever were happier
in a child. If more particularly, they praised her
dutiful behaviour to us, we said, She knew not how
to offend. If it was said, Miss Clarissa Harlowe has
a wit and penetration beyond her years; we, instead
of disallowing it, would add—And a judgment no
less extraordinary than her wit. If her prudence was
praised, and a forethought, which every one saw supplied
what only years and experience gave to others; 
Nobody need to scruple taking lessons from Clarissa
Harlowe, was our proud answer. 
Forgive me, O forgive me, my dear Norton— 
But I know you will; for yours, when good, was
this child, and your glory as well as mine. 
But have you not heard strangers, as she passed to
and from church, stop to praise the angel of a creature,
as they called her; when it was enough for
those who knew who she was, to cry, Why, it is Miss
Clarissa Harlowe! —As if every-body were obliged to
know, or to have heard of Clarissa Harlowe, and of
her excellencies. While, accustomed to praise, it was
too familiar to her, to cause her to alter either her
look or her pace. 
For my own part, I could not stifle a pleasure, that
had perhaps a faulty vanity for its foundation, whenever
I was spoken of, or addressed to, as the Mother 

of so sweet a child: Mr. Harlowe and I, all the time,
loving each other the better for the share each had in
such a Daughter. 
Still, still, indulge the fond, the overflowing heart
of a Mother! I could dwell for ever upon the remembrance
of what she was, would but that remembrance
banish from my mind what she is! 
In her bosom, young as she was, could I repose all
my griefs—Sure of receiving from her prudence advice
as well as comfort; and both insinuated in so
humble, in so dutiful a manner, that it was impossible
to take those exceptions which the distance of
years and character between a Mother and a Daughter
would have made one apprehensive of from any other
Daughter. She was our glory when abroad, our delight
when at home. Every-body was even covetous
of her company; and we grudged her to our Brothers
Harlowe, and to our Sister and Brother Hervey. 
No other contention among us, then, but who
should be next favoured by her. No chiding ever
knew she from us, but the chiding of Lovers, when
she was for shutting herself up too long together from
us, in pursuit of those charming amusements and
useful employments, for which, however, the whole
family was the better. 
Our other children had reason (good children as
they always were) to think themselves neglected. 
But they likewise were so sensible of their Sister's superiority,
and of the honour she reflected upon the
whole family, that they confessed themselves eclipsed,
without envying the eclipser. Indeed there was not
any-body so equal with her, in their own opinions, as
to envy what all aspired but to emulate. The dear
creature, you know, my Norton, gave an eminence
to us all! 
Then her acquirements. Her skill in music, her
fine needleworks, her elegance in dress; for which
she was so much admired, that the neighbouring Ladies 

used to say, that they need not fetch fashions
from London; since whatever Miss Clarissa Harlowe
wore, was the best fashion, because her choice of natural
beauties set those of Art far behind them. Her
genteel ease, and fine turn of person; her deep reading; 
and these, joined to her open manners, and her
chearful modesty—O my good Norton, what a sweet
child was once my Clary Harlowe! 
This, and more, you knew her to be: For many
of her excellencies were owing to yourself; and with
the milk you gave her, you gave her what no other
nurse in the world could give her. 
And do you think, my worthy woman, do you
think, that the wilful lapse of such a child is to be
forgiven? Can she herself think, that she deserves
not the severest punishment for the abuse of such talents
as were entrusted to her? 
Her fault was a fault of premeditation, of cunning,
of contrivance. She has deceived every-body's expectations. 
Her whole Sex, as well as the family she
sprung from, is disgraced by it. 
Would any-body ever have believed, that such a
young creature as this, who had by her advice saved
even her over-lively friend from marrying a fop, and
a libertine, would herself have gone off with one of
the vilest and most notorious of libertines? A man
whose character she knew; and knew it to be worse
than the character of him from whom she saved her
friend; a man against whom she was warned: One
who had had her Brother's life in his hands; and who
constantly set our whole family at defiance. 
Think for me, my good Norton; think what my
unhappiness must be, both as a Wife and a Mother. 
What restless days, what sleepless nights; yet my
own rankling anguish endeavoured to be smoothed
over, to soften the anguish of fiercer spirits, and to
keep them from blazing out to further mischief! O
this naughty, naughty girl! who knew so well what 

she did; and who could look so far into consequences,
that we thought she would have died, rather than
have done as she has done! 
Her known character for prudence leaves her absolutely
without excuse. How then can I offer to
plead for her, if, thro' motherly indulgence, I would
forgive her myself? —And have we not, moreover,
suffered all the disgrace that can befal us? Has not
she? 
If now she has so little liking to his morals, had
she not reason before to have as little? Or has she suffered
by them in her own person? —O my good woman,
I doubt—I doubt—Will not the character of
the man make one doubt an angel, if once in his
power? The world will think the worst. I am told
it does. So likewise her Father fears; her Brother
hears; and what can I do? 
Our antipathy to him she knew before, as well as
his character. These therefore cannot be new motives
without a new reason. —O my dear Mrs. Norton, how
shall I, how can you, support ourselves under the apprehensions
to which these thoughts lead! 
He continually pressing her, you say, to marry him: 
His friends likewise. She has reason, no doubt she
has reason, for this application to us: And her crime
is glossed over, to bring her to us with new disgrace! 
Whither, whither, does one guilty step lead the
misguided heart! —And now, truly, to save a stubborn
spirit, we are only to be sounded, that the application
may be occasionally retracted or denied! 
Upon the whole: Were I inclined to plead for
her, it is now the most improper of all times. Now
that my Brother Harlowe has discouraged (as he last
night came hither on purpose to tell us) Mr. Hickman's
insinuated application; and been applauded for
it. Now, that my Brother Antony is intending to
carry his great fortune, thro' her fault, into another
family: —She expecting, no doubt, herself, to be put 

into her Grandfather's Estate, in consequence of a Reconciliation,
and as a reward for her fault: And insisting
still upon the same terms which she offered before,
and which were rejected—Not thro' my fault,
I am sure, rejected! 
From all these things, you will return such an answer
as the case requires. It might cost me the peace
of my whole life, at this time, to move for her. God
forgive her! If I do, nobody else will. And let it, for
your own sake, as well as mine, be a secret that you
and I have entered upon this subject. And I desire
you not to touch upon it again but by particular permission: 
For, O my dear good woman, it sets my
heart a bleeding in as many streams as there are veins
in it! 
Yet think me not impenetrable by a proper contrition
and remorse—But what a torment is it to have
a will without a power! 
Adieu! adieu! God give us both comfort; and to
the once dear—the ever-dear creature (for can a Mother
forget her child?) repentance, deep repentance! 
And as little suffering as may befit His blessed will,
and her grievous fault, prays 
Your real Friend,
Charlotte Harlowe. 