


Miss Byron, To Sir Charles Grandison. 


Wednesday, Nov. 1.
How, Sir, have the contents of your friend Jeronymo's
Letter affected me! —I am more and
more convinced, that, however distinguished my lot
may be, Clementina only can deserve you. What a
vain creature must I be, if I did not think so! And 

what a disingenuous one, so thinking, if I did not acknowlege
it! 
I cannot, Sir, misconstrue your delicate sensibilities. 
My own teach me to allow for yours. 
‘Best of men,’ I can, I do, with Clementina,
think you: But Harriet's ambition will be gratified,
in being accounted second to Her. 
And does Clementina ‘wish us One!’ —Most noble,
most generous of women! 
‘Grandison, you say, will make me happy.’ 
But ah, my lovely pattern! can Harriet be happy,
even with her Grandison, if you are not so? 
Believe me, Lady! your happiness will be essential
to hers. 
God give You happiness! Harriet prays for it! 
My next-to Divine Monitress, it shall be my study
to make Him happy! 
But, most excellent of women, have you regrets? 
Regrets, which can only be lessened by the joy you
will have in his happiness! —And with another! 
Superlative goodness! 
Why, why, when he would allow to you the exercise
of your Religion, and only insists on the like
liberty, are the obstacles you hint at invincible! 
O Sir! I can pursue this subject no further. Thus
far an irresistable impulse carried me. 
How should I be able to stand before this Lady,
were the visit she was so earnest to be allowed to make
to England to take place; yet, in such a case, with
what pleasure should I pay my reverence to her mind
in her person! 
And does She, do her family, do You, Sir, wish
us speedily One? —Are you not satisfied with the
given month? —Is not a month, Sir, your declaration
so lately made, a short term? (And let me ask you, but
within parentheses, Do you not, on an occasion so
very delicate, in your limited three days after your return
to us, treat the not-insensible Harriet a little more 

—Help me, Sir, to a word—than might have been expected
from a man so very polite?) —And can you so
generously, yet so seriously, ask me, From which parts
of the Nuptial Life, the Last (What a dreadful idea
do you raise in that solemn word!) or the First, I
would deduct the week's or fortnight's supposed delay? 
—O Sir! what a way of putting it is this! —Thus I
answer—‘From neither!’ My honour is your honour. 
Determine You, most generous of men, for 
Your Harriet Byron. 

