



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Saturday, April 1. 
Hasty censurers do indeed subject themselves to
the charge of variableness and inconsistency in
judgment: And so they ought; for, if you, even
you, my dear, were so loth to own a mistake, as in
the instance before us you pretend you were, I believe
I should not have loved you so well as I really do love
you. Nor could you, in that case, have so frankly
thrown the reflection I hint at upon yourself, had not
your mind been one of the most ingenuous that ever
woman boasted. 
Mr. Lovelace has faults enow to deserve very severe 

censure, altho' he be not guilty of this. If I were
upon such terms with him as he would wish me to be,
I should give him a hint, that this treacherous Joseph
Leman cannot be so much attached to him, as perhaps
he thinks him to be. If he were, he would not have
been so ready to report to his disadvantage (and to Betty
Barnes too) this slight affair of the pretty Rustic. Joseph
has engaged Betty to secrecy; promising to let
her, and her young master too, know more, when
he knows the whole of the matter: And this hinders
her from mentioning it, as she is nevertheless agog to
do, to my Sister or Brother. And then she does not
chuse to disoblige Joseph; for altho' she pretends to
look above him, she listens, I believe, to some Love
Stories he tells her. 
Women having it not in their power to begin a
courtship, some of them very frequently, I believe,
lend an ear where their hearts incline not. 
But to say no more of these low people, neither of
whom I think tolerably of; I must needs own, that as
I should for ever have despised this man, had he been
capable of such a vile intrigue in his way to Harlowe-Place,
and as I believed he was capable of it, it has indeed
[I own it has] proportionably engaged my Generosity,
as you call it, in his favour: Perhaps more than
I may have reason to wish it had. And, railly me as
you will, pray tell me fairly, my dear, would it not
have had such an effect upon you? 
Then the real generosity of the act. —I protest, my
beloved friend, if he would be good for the rest of his
life from this time, I would forgive him a great many
of his past errors, were it only for the demonstration he
has given in This, that he is capable of so good and
bountiful a manner of thinking. 
You may believe I made no scruple to open his Letter,
after the receipt of your second on this subject: 
Nor shall I of answering it, as I have no reason to find
fault with it. —An article in his favour, procured him, 

however, so much the easier (I must own) by way of
amends for the undue displeasure I took against him; 
tho' he knows it not. 
It is lucky enough that this matter was cleared up
to me by your friendly diligence so soon: For had I
written before it was, it would have been to reinforce
my dismission of him; and perhaps I should have mentioned
the very motive; for it affected me more than
I think it ought: And then, what an advantage would
that have given him, when he could have cleared up
the matter so happily for himself! 
When I send you This Letter of his, you will see
how very humble he is: What acknowlegements of natural
impatience: What confession of faults, as you
prognosticated. 
A very different appearance, I must own, all these
make, now the Story of the pretty Rustic is cleared
up, to what they would have made, had it not. 
You will see how he accounts to me, ‘that he
could not, by reason of indisposition, come for my
Letter in person: And the forward creature labours
the point, as if he thought I should be uneasy that
he did not.’ I am indeed sorry he should be ill on
my account; and I will allow, that the suspense he
has been in for some time past, must have been
vexatious enough to so impatient a spirit. But all is
owing originally to himself. 
You will find him (in the presumption of being forgiven)
‘full of contrivances and expedients for my
escaping the threatened compulsion.’ 
I have always said, that next to being without fault,
is the acknowlegement of a fault; since no amendment
can be expected where an error is defended: But
you will see, in this very Letter, an haughtiness even
in his submissions. 'Tis true, I know not where to
find fault as to the expression; yet cannot I be satisfied,
that his humility is humility; or even an humility
upon such conviction as one should be pleased with. 

To be sure, he is far from being a polite man: Yet
is not directly and characteristically, as I may say, impolite. 
But his is such a sort of politeness, as has by
a carelessness founded on a very early indulgence, and
perhaps on too much success in riper years, and an arrogance
built upon both, grown into assuredness, and,
of course, as I may say, into indelicacy. 
The distance you recommend at which to keep these
men, is certainly right in the main: Familiarity destroys
reverence: But with whom? —Not with those,
surely, who are prudent, grateful, and generous. 
But it is very difficult for persons, who would avoid
running into one extreme, to keep clear of another. 
Hence Mr. Lovelace, perhaps, thinks it the mark of
a great spirit to humour his pride, tho' at the expence
of his politeness: But can the man be a deep man,
who knows not how to make such distinctions as a
person of but moderate parts cannot miss? 
He complains heavily of my ‘readiness to take mortal
offence at him, and to dismiss him for ever: It
is a high conduct, he says, he must be frank enough
to tell me; a conduct that must be very far from
contributing to allay his apprehensions of the possibility
that I may be persecuted into my Relations
measures in behalf of Mr. Solmes.’ 
You will see how he puts his present and his future
happiness, ‘with regard to both worlds, entirely upon
me.’ The ardour with which he vows and promises,
I think the heart only can dictate: How else can one
guess at a man's heart? 
You will also see, ‘that he has already heard of the
Interview I am to have with Mr. Solmes;’ and with
what vehemence and anguish he expresses himself on
the occasion. —I intend to take proper notice of the
ignoble means he stoops to, to come at his early intelligence
out of our family. If persons pretending to
principle bear not their testimony against unprincipled
actions, what check can they have? 

You will see, how passionately he presses me to oblige
‘him with a few lines, before the Interview between
Mr. Solmes and me take place (if, as he says, it
must take place) to confirm his hope, that I have no
view, in my present displeasure against him, to give
encouragement to Solmes. An apprehension, he
says, that he must be excused for repeating; especially
as the Interview is a favour granted to that
man, which I have refused to him; since, as he infers,
were it not with such an expectation, why
should my friends press it?’ 
* *
I have written; and to this effect: ‘That I had
never intended to write another line to a man, who
could take upon himself to reflect upon my Sex and
myself, for having thought fit to make use of my
own judgment. 
‘I tell him, That I have submitted to this Interview
with Mr. Solmes, purely as an act of duty, to shew
my friends, that I will comply with their commands
as far as I can; and that I hope, when Mr. Solmes
himself shall see how determined I am, he will cease
to prosecute a suit, in which it is impossible he should
succeed with my consent. 
‘I assure him, That my aversion to Mr. Solmes is
too sincere to permit me to doubt myself on this occasion. 
But, nevertheless, he must not imagine,
that my rejecting of Mr. Solmes is in favour to him. 
That I value my freedom and independency too
much, if my friends will but leave me to my own
judgment, to give them up to a man so uncontroulable,
and who shews me beforehand what I have to
expect from him, were I in his power. 
‘I express my high disapprobation of the methods
he takes to come at what passes in a private family: 
The pretence of corrupting other peoples servants by
way of reprisal for the Spies they have set upon him,
I tell him, is a very poor excuse; and no more
than an attempt to justify one meanness by another. 

‘There is, I observe to him, a right and wrong in
every-thing, let people put what glosses they please
upon their actions. To condemn a deviation, and
to follow it by as great a one, what, I ask him, is
This, but propagating a general corruption? A
Stand must be made by somebody, turn round the
evil as many as may, or virtue will be lost: And
shall it not be I, a worthy mind would ask, that
shall make this Stand? 
‘I leave to him to judge, whether his be a worthy
one, tried by this rule: And whether, knowing
the impetuosity of his own disposition, and the improbability
there is that my Father and family will
ever be reconciled to him, I ought to encourage his
hopes? 
‘These spots and blemishes, I further tell him,
give me not earnestness enough for any sake but his
own, to wish him in a juster and nobler train of
thinking and acting; for that I truly despise many
of the ways he allows himself in: Our minds are
therefore infinitely different: And as to his professions
of Reformation, I must tell him, that profuse
acknowlegements, without amendment, are
but to me as so many anticipating concessions, which
he may find much easier to make, than either to
defend himself, or amend his errors. 
‘I inform him, that I have been lately made acquainted’ 
[And so I have by Betty, and she by my
Brother] ‘with the weak and wanton Airs he gives
himself of declaiming against Matrimony. I severely
reprehend him on this occasion: And ask him, with
what view he can take so witless, so despicable a
liberty, in which only the most abandoned of men
allow themselves, and yet presume to address me? 
‘I tell him, That if I am obliged to go to my
Uncle Antony's, it is not to be inferred, that I must
therefore necessarily be Mr. Solmes's Wife: Since I
may not be so sure perhaps that the same exceptions 

lie so strongly against my quitting a house to which I
shall be forcibly carried, as if I left my Father's
house: And, at the worst, I may be able to keep
them in suspense till my Cousin Morden comes, who
will have a right to put me in possession of my Grandfather's
Estate, if I insist upon it.’ 
This, I doubt, is somewhat of an artifice; which
can only be excuseable, as it is principally designed to
keep him out of mischief. For I have but little hope,
if carried thither, whether sensible or senseless, if I
am left to the mercy of my Brother and Sister, but
they will endeavour to force the solemn obligation
upon me. Otherwise, were there but any prospect of
avoiding this, by delaying (or even by taking things to
make me ill, if nothing else would do) till my Cousin
comes, I hope I should not think of leaving even my
Uncle's house. For I should not know how to square
it to my own principles, to dispense with the duty I
owe to my Father, where-ever it shall be his Will to
place me. 
But while you give me the charming hope, that, in
order to avoid one man, I shall not be under the necessity
of throwing myself upon the Friends of the
other; I think my case not absolutely desperate. 
* *
I see not any of my family, nor hear from them
in any way of kindness. This looks as if they themselves
expected no great matters from that Tuesday's
conference which makes my heart flutter every time I
think of it. 
My Uncle Antony's presence on the occasion I do
not much like: But I had rather meet him than my
Brother or Sister: Yet my Uncle is very impetuous. 
I can't think Mr. Lovelace can be much more so; at
least he cannot look Anger, as my Uncle, with his
harder features, can. These sea-prospered Gentlemen,
as my Uncle has often made me think, not used to
any but elemental controul, and even ready to buffet 

That, bluster often as violently as the Winds they are
accustomed to be angry at. 
I believe Mr. Solmes will look as much like a fool
as I shall do, if it be true, as my Uncle Harlowe writes,
and as Betty often tells me, that he is as much afraid
of seeing me, as I am of seeing him. 
Adieu, my happy, thrice happy Miss Howe, who
have no hard terms affixed to your duty! —Who have
nothing to do, but to fall in with a choice your Mother
has made for you, to which you have not, nor can
have, a just objection: Except the frowardness of our
Sex, as our free censurers would perhaps take the liberty
to say, makes it one, that the choice was your
Mother's, at first hand. Perverse nature, we know,
loves not to be prescribed to; altho' youth is not so well
qualified, either by sedateness or experience, to chuse
for itself. 
To know your own happiness, and that it is now,
nor to leave it to after-reflection to look back upon the
preferable past with a heavy and self-accusing heart,
that you did not chuse it when you might have chosen
it, is all that is necessary to complete your felicity! — 
And this power is wished you by 
Your
Clarissa Harlowe. 