


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Tuesday Night, Wednesday Morning, April 11. 12. 
Miss Grandison is no longer to be called by that
name. She is Lady G. May she make Lord G.
as happy as I dare say he will make her, if it be not
her own fault! 
I was early with her, according to promise. I found
her more affected than she was even last night with
her approaching change of condition. Her brother
had been talking to her, she said; and had laid down
the duties of the state she was about to enter into, in
such a serious manner, and made the performance of
them of so much importance to her happiness both
here and hereafter, that she was terrified at the thoughts
of what she was about to undertake. She had never
considered matrimony in that formidable light before. 
He had told her, that he was afraid of her vivacity; 
yet was loth to discourage her chearfulness, or to say
any-thing that should lower her spirits. All he besought
of her was, to regard times, tempers, and occasions; 
and then it would be impossible but her lively
humour must give delight not only to the man whom
she favoured with her hand, but to every one who had
the pleasure of approaching her. If, Charlotte, said
he, you would have the world around you respect your
husband, you must set the example. While the wife
gives the least room to suspect, that she despises her
husband, she will find, that she subjects him to double
contempt, if he resents it not; and if he does, can 

you be happy? Aggressors lay themselves open to severe
reprisals. If you differ, you will be apt to make bystanders
judges over you. They will remember when
you are willing to forget; and your fame will be the
sport of those beneath you, as well in understanding
as degree. 
She believed, she told me, that Lord G. had been
making some complaints of her. If he had— 
Hush, my dear, said I—Not one word of threatening:
Are you more solicitous to conceal your fault,
than to mend it? 
No—But you know, Harriet, for a man, before
he has experienced what sort of a wife I shall make,
to complain against me for foibles in courtship, when
he can help himself if he will, has something so very
little— 
Your conscience, Charlotte, tells you, that he had
reason for complaint; and therefore you think he
has complained. Think the best of Lord G. for your
own reputation's sake, since you thought fit to go thus
far with him. You have borne nothing from him:
he has borne a great deal from you. 
I am fretful, Harriet: I won't be chidden: I will
be comforted by you: You shall sooth me: Are you
not my sister? She threw her arms round me, and
kissed my cheek. 
I ventured to railly her, tho' I was afraid of her retort,
and met with it: But I thought it would divert
her. I am glad, my dear, said I, that you are capable
of this tenderness of temper: You blustering
girls! —But Fear, I believe, will make cowards loving. 
Harriet, said she, and flung from me to the window,
remember this: May I soon see you in the
same situation! I will then have no mercy upon you. 
* *
The subject, which Sir Charles led to at breakfast,
was the three weddings of Thursday last. He spoke 

honourably of marriage, and made some just compliments
to Lord and Lady L.; concluding them with
wishes, that his sister Charlotte and Lord G. might
be neither more nor less happy than they were. Then
turning to Lord W. he said, He questioned not his
Lordship's happiness with the Lady he had so lately
seen; for I cannot doubt, said he, of your Lordship's
affectionate gratitude to her, if she behaves, as I am
sure she will. 
My Lord had tears in his eyes. Never man had
such a nephew as I have, said he. All the joy of my
present prospects, all the comforts of my future life,
are and will be owing to you. 
Here had he stopt, it would have been well: But
turning to me, he unexpectedly said, Would to God,
madam, that you could reward him! I cannot; and
nobody else can. 
All were alarmed for me; every eye was upon
me. A sickishness came over my heart—I know not
how to describe it. My head sunk upon my bosom. 
I could hardly sit; yet was less able to rise. 
Sir Charles's face was overspread with blushes. He
bowed to my Lord. May the man, said he, who shall
have the honour to call Miss Byron his, be, if possible,
as deserving as she is! Then will they live together the
life of angels. 
He gracefully looked down, not at me; and I got
a little courage to look up: Yet Lady L. was concerned
for me: So was Lord L.: Emily's eye dropt a
tear upon her blushing cheek. 
Was it not, Lucy, a severe trial? —Indeed it was. 
My Lord, to mend the matter, lamented very pathetically,
that Sir Charles was under an obligation to
go abroad; and still more, that he could not stay to
be present at the celebration of his nuptials with Miss
Mansfield. 
The Earl, Lord G. Lady Gertrude, and the Doctor,
were to meet the Bride and us at church. Lord and 

Lady L. Sir Charles, and Emily, went in one coach:
Miss Grandison and I in another. 
As we went, I don't like this affair at all, Harriet,
said she. My brother has long made all other men indifferent
to me. Such an infinite difference! 
Can any-body be happier than Lord and Lady L.
Charlotte? Yet Lady L. admires her brother as much
as you can do. 
They happy! —And so they are. But Lady L. soft
soul! fell in love with Lord L. before my brother came
over. So the foundation was laid: And it being a
first flame with her, she, in compliment to herself,
could not but persevere. But the sorry creature Anderson,
proving a sorry creature, made me despise the
sex: And my brother's perfections contributed to my
contempt of all other men. 
Indeed, my dear, you are wrong. Lord G. loves
you: But were Sir Charles not your brother, it is not
very certain, that he would have returned your
Love. 
Why, that's true. I believe he would not, in that
case, have chosen me. I am sure he would not, if
he had known you: But for the man one loves, one
can do any-thing, be every-thing, that he would wish
one to be. 
Do you think you cannot love Lord G.? —For Heaven's
sake, Charlotte, tho' you are now almost within
sight of the church, do not think of giving your
hand, if you cannot resolve to make Lord G. as happy,
as I have no doubt he will make you, if it be not
your own fault. 
What will my brother say? What will— 
Leave that to me. I will engage Sir Charles and
Dr. Bartlett to lend me their ear in the vestry; and I
am sure your brother, if he knows that you have an
antipathy to Lord G. or that you think you cannot be
happy with him, will undertake your cause, and bring
you off. 

Antipathy! That's a strong word, Harriet. The
man is a good-natured silly man— 
Silly! Charlotte! —Silly then he must be for loving
you so well, who, really, have never yet given him
an opportunity to shew his importance with you. 
I do pity him sometimes. 
The coach stopt—Ah, Lord! Harriet! The church! 
The church! 
Say, Charlotte, before you step out—Shall I speak
to your brother, and Dr. Bartlett, in the vestry? 
I shall look like a fool either way. 
Don't act like one, Charlotte, on this solemn occasion. 
Say, you will deserve, that you will try to
deserve, Lord G's love. 
Lord help me! —My brother! —I'll try, I'll try,
what can be done. 
Sir Charles appeared. He gave each his hand in
turn: In we flew: The people began to gather about
us. Lord G. all rapture, received her at the entrance. 
Sir Charles led me: And the Earl and Lady Gertrude
received us with joy in their countenances. I overheard
the naughty one say, as Lord G. led her up to
the altar, You don't know what you are about, man. I
expect to have all my way: Remember that's one of
my articles before marriage. 
He returned her an answer of fond assent to her
condition. I am afraid, thought I, poor Lord G.
you will be more than once reminded of this previous
article. 
When she was led to the altar, and Lord G. and
she stood together, she trembled. Leave me not,
Harriet, said she. —Brother! Lady L.!— 
I am sure she looked sillier than Lord G. at that instant. 
The good doctor began the office. No dearly beloveds,
Harriet! whispered she, as I had said, on a
really terrible occasion. I was offended with her in my
heart: Again she whispered something against the 

office, as the doctor proceeded to give the reasons for
the institution. Her levity did not forsake her even at
that solemn moment. 
When the Service was over, every one (Sir Charles
in a solemn and most affectionate manner) wished her
happy. My Lord G. kissed her hand with a bent
knee. 
She took my hand. Ah! Lord, what have I done? 
—And am I married? whispered she—And can it
never be undone? —And is that the man, to whom I
am to be obedient? —Is be to be my Lord and Master? 
Ah, Lady G. said I, it is a solemn office. You have
vowed: He has vowed. —It is a solemn office. 
Lord G. led her to the first coach. Sir Charles led
me into the same. The people, to my great confusion,
whispered. That's the Bride! What a charming
couple! Sir Charles handed Miss Emily next. 
Lord G. came in: As he was entering, Harkee,
friend, said Charlotte, and put out her hand, You
mistake the coach: You are not of our company. 
The whole world, reply'd my Lord, shall not now
divide us: And took his seat on the same side with
Emily. 
The man's a rogue, Harriet, whispered she: See! 
He gives himself airs already! 
This, said Lord G. as the coach drove on, taking
one hand, and eagerly kissing it, is the hand that
blessed me. 
And that, said she, pushing him from her with the
other, is the hand that repulses your forwardness. 
What came you in here for? —Don't be silly. 
He was in raptures all the way. 
When we came home, every-one embraced and
wished joy to the Bride. The Earl and Lady Gertrude
were in high spirits. The Lady re-saluted her
niece, as her dear niece: The Earl recognized his
beloved daughter. 
But prepare to hear a noble action of Lord W. 

When he came up to compliment her—My dearest
niece, said he, I wish you joy with all my soul. I
have not been a kind nncle. There is no fastening
any-thing on your brother. Accept of this; [and he
put a little paper into her hand—It was a Bank-note
of 1000l.] My sister's daughter, and your brother's
sister, merits more than this. 
Was not this handsomely presented, Lucy? 
He then, in a manner becoming Lady Grandison's
brother, stept to Lady L. My niece, Charlotte, is
not my only niece. I wish you, my dear, as if this
was your day of marriage, all happiness; accept these
two papers [The one, Lucy, was a note for 1000l.
and the other for 100l.]: And he said, The lesser note
is due to you for interest on the greater. 
When the Ladies opened their notes, and saw what
they were, they were at first at a loss what to say. 
It was most gracefully done: But see, Lucy, the
example of a good and generous man can sometimes
alter natures; and covetous men, I have heard it
observed, when their hearts are open'd, often act
nobly. 
As soon as Lady G. (so now I must call her) recovered
herself from the surprize into which my Lord's
present and address had put her, she went to him:
Allow me, my Lord, said she, and bent one knee to
him, to crave your blessing; and at the same time to
thank you for your paternal present to your ever obliged
Charlotte. 
God bless you, my dear! saluting her—But thank
your noble brother: You delight me with your graceful
acceptance. 
Lady L. came up. My Lord, you overcome me
by your bounty. —How shall I— 
Your brother's princely spirit, Lady L. said he,
makes this present look mean. Forgive me only, that
it was not done before. And he saluted her. 
Lord L. came up. Lady L. shew'd him the open'd 

notes—See here, my Lord, said she, what Lord W.
has done: And he calls this the interest due on
that. 
Your Lordship oppresses me with your goodness to
your niece, said Lord L. May health, long-life, and
happiness, attend you in your own nuptials! 
There, there, said Lord W. pointing to Sir Charles
(who had withdrawn, and then entered) make your
acknowlegement: His noble spirit has awakened mine:
It was only asleep. My late sister's brother wanted
but the force of such an example. That son is all
his mother. 
Sir Charles joining them, having heard only the
last words,—If I am thought a son not unworthy of
the most excellent of mothers, said he, and by her
brother, I am happy. 
Then you are happy, reply'd my Lord. 
Her memory, resumed Sir Charles, I cherish; and
when I have been tempted to forget myself, that memory
has been a means of keeping me steady in my
duty. Her precepts, my Lord, were the guide of my
early youth. Had I not kept them in mind, how
much more blameable than most young men had I
been! —My Charlotte! Have that mother in your
memory, on this great change of your condition! 
You will not be called to her tryals. —His eyes glisten'd. 
Tender be our remembrance of my father. —Charlotte,
be worthy of your mother! 
He withdrew with an air so noble! —But soon returning,
with a chearful look, he was told what Lord
W. had done—Your Lordship was before, said he,
intitled to our duty, by the ties of blood: But what
is the relation of body to that of mind? You have
bound me for my sisters, and that still more by the
manner, than by the act, in a bond of gratitude that
never can be broken! 
Thank yourself, thank yourself, my noble nephew. 

Encourage, my Lord, a family intimacy between
your Lady, and her Nieces and Nephews. You will
be delighted, my Sisters, with Miss Mansfield; but
when she obliges my Lord with her hand, you will
reverence your Aunt. I shall have a pleasure, when
I am far distant, in contemplating the family union. 
Your Lordship must let me know your Day in time; 
and I will be joyful upon it, whatever, of a contrary
nature, I may have to struggle with on my own account. 
My Lord wept—My Lord wept, did I say? —Not
one of us had a dry eye! —This was a solemn scene,
you will say, for a wedding day: But how delightfully
do such scenes dilate the heart? 
The day, however, was not forgotten as a day of
festivity. Sir Charles himself, by his vivacity and
openness of countenance, made every one joyful:
And, except that now-and-then a sigh, which could
not be check'd, stole from some of us, to think that
he would so soon be in another country (far distant
from the friends he now made happy) and engaged in
difficulties; perhaps in dangers; every heart was present
to the occasion of the day. 
O Charlotte! Dear Lady G.! Hitherto, it is in your
power, to make every future day, worthy of this! — 
‘Have your mother, your noble mother, in your
memory, my dear.’ And give credit to the approbation
of such a brother. 
I should have told you, that my cousin Reeves's
came about two, and were received with the utmost
politeness by every-body. 
Sir Charles was called out just before dinner; and
returned introducing a young gentleman, dressed as if
for the day—This is an earlier favour, than I had
hoped for, said Sir Charles; and leading him to Lady
G. This, Sir, is the Queen of the Day. My dear
Lady G. welcome (The house is yours—Welcome)
the man I love: Welcome my Beauchamp. 

Every one, except Emily and me, crouded about
Mr. Beauchamp, as Sir Charles's avowedly beloved
friend, and bid him cordially welcome; Sir Charles
presenting him to each by name. 
Then leading him to me—I am half ashamed,
Lucy, to repeat—But take it as he spoke it—Revere,
said he, my dear friend, that excellent young Lady:
But let not your admiration stop at her Face and Person:
She has a Mind as exalted, my Beauchamp, as
your own. Miss Byron, in honour to my sister, and
of us all, has gilded this day by her presence. 
Mr. Beauchamp respectfully took my hand; Forgive
me, madam, bowing upon it—I do revere you. 
The Lady whom Sir Charles Grandison admires, as
he does you, must be the first of women. 
I might have said, that he, who was so eminently
distinguished as the friend of Sir Charles Grandison,
must be a most valuable man: But my spirits were
not high. I courtesied to his compliment; and was
silent. 
Sir Charles presented Emily to him. —My Emily,
Beauchamp. I hope to live to see her happily married. 
The man whose heart is but half so worthy as
hers, must be an excellent man. 
Modesty might look up, and be sensible to compliments
from the lips of such a man. Emily looked
at me with pleasure, as if she had said, Do you hear,
madam, what a fine thing my guardian has said of
me? 
Sir Charles asked Mr. Beauchamp, how he stood
with my Lady Beauchamp? 
Very well, answered he. After such an introduction
as you had given me to her, I must have been to
blame, had I not. She is my father's wife: I must
respect her, were she ever so unkind to me: She is not
without good qualities. Were every family so happy
as to have Sir Charles Grandison for a mediator when
misunderstandings happened, there would be very few 

lasting differences among relations. My father and
mother tell me, that they never sit down to table together,
but they bless you: And to me they have
talked of nobody else: But Lady Beauchamp depends
upon your promise of making her acquainted with the
Ladies of your family. 
My Sisters, and their Lords, will do honour to my
promise in my absence. Lady L. Lady G. let me
recommend to you Lady Beauchamp as more than a
common visiting acquaintance. Do you, Sir, to Mr.
Beauchamp, see it cultivated. 
Mr. Beauchamp is an agreeable, and, when Sir
Charles Grandison is not in company, a handsome
and genteel man. I think, my dear, that I do but
the same justice that every-body would do, in this exception. 
He is chearful, lively, yet modest, and not
too full of words. One sees both love and respect in
every look he casts upon his friend; and that he is
delighted when he hears him speak, be the subject
what it will. He once said to Lord W. who praised
his nephew to him, as he does to every-body near
him; The universal voice, my Lord, is in his favour
where-ever he goes. Every one joins almost in the
same words, in different countries, allowing for the
different languages, that for sweetness of manners,
and manly dignity, he hardly ever had his equal. 
Sir Charles was then engaged in talk with his Emily; 
she before him; he standing in an easy genteel attitude,
leaning against the wainscot, listening, smiling,
to her prattle, with looks of indulgent love, as a father
might do to a child he was fond of; while she
looked back every now-and-then towards me, so
proud, poor dear! of being singled out by her guardian. 
She tript to me afterwards, and leaning over my
shoulder, as I sat, whispered—I have been begging of
my guardian to use his interest with you, madam, to
take me down with you to Northamptonshire. 

And what is the result? —She paused. —Has he denied
your request? —No, madam—Has he allowed
you to go, my dear, if I comply? turning half round
to her with pleasure. 
She paused, and seemed at a loss. I repeated my
question. 
Why, no, he has not consented neither—But he
said such charming things, so obliging, so kind, both
of you, and of me, that I forgot my question, tho' it
was so near my heart: But I will ask him again. 
And thus, Lucy, can he decline complying, and
yet send away a requester so much delighted with him,
as to forget what her request was. 
Miss Grandison—Lady G. I would say—singled me
out soon after—This Beauchamp is really a very pretty
fellow, Harriet. 
He is an agreeable man, answered I. 
So I think. She said no more of him at that time. 
Between dinner and tea, at Lady L.'s motion, they
made me play on the harpsichord; and after one lesson,
they besought Sir Charles to sing to my playing. He
would not, he said, deny any request that was made
him on that day. 
He sung. He has a mellow manly voice, and great
command of it. 
This introduced a little concert. Mr. Beauchamp
took the violin; Lord L. the bass-viol; Lord G. the
German-flute; Lord W. sung base; Lady L. Lady
G. and the Earl, joined in the chorus. The song
was from Alexander's Feast: The words, 

Happy, happy, happy pair!
None but the good deserves the fair;

Sir Charles, tho' himself equally brave and good,
preferring the latter word to the former. 
Lady L. had always insisted upon dancing at her
sister's wedding. We were not company enough for
country dances: But music having been order'd, and 

the performers come, it was insisted upon that we
should have a dance, tho' we were engaged in a conversation,
that I thought infinitely more agreeable. 
Lord G. began by dancing a minuet with his bride:
She danced charmingly: But on my telling her so afterwards,
she whispered me, that she should have performed
better, had she danced with her brother. Lord
G. danced extremely well. 
Lord L. and Lady Gertrude, Mr. Beauchamp and
Mrs. Reeves, Mr. Reeves and Lady L. danced all of
them very agreeably. 
The Earl took me out: But we had hardly done,
when, asking pardon for disgracing me, as he too modestly
expressed himself; he and all but my cousins
and Emily, called out for Sir Charles to dance with
me. 
I was abashed at the general voice calling upon us
both: But it was obeyed. 
He deserved all the praises that Miss Gran&wblank; Lady
G. I would say, gave him in her Letter to me; and
had every one's silent applause, while we danced; so
silent, that a whisper must have been heard. And
when he led me to my seat, every one clapt their
hands, as at some well-performed part, or fine sentiment,
in a play. —Lord bless me, my dear, this man
is every-thing: But his conversation has ever been
among the politest people of different nations. 
Lord W. wished himself able, from his gout, to
take out Miss Jervois. The Bridegroom was called upon
by Sir Charles: And he took out the good girl; who
danced very prettily. I fansied, that he chose to call
out Lord G. rather than Mr. Beauchamp. He is the
most delicate and considerate of men. 
Sir Charles was afterwards called upon by the Bride
herself: And she danced then with a grace indeed! I
was pleased that she could perform so well at her own
wedding. 
Once more he and I were called upon. He, whisperingly, 

as if all the approbation so loudly given before,
when we danced together, was due to me, and
none to himself, condition'd for me, with every one,
that no notice should be taken of my performance:
For he saw that I could hardly stand the applauses
given on our dancing before. 
Sir Charles, when we had done, called me, inimitable. 
The word was caught by every mouth, and I
sat down with reason enough for pride, if their praises
could have elevated me. But I was not proud. My
spirits were not high—I fansy, Lucy, that Lady Clementina
is a fine dancer. 
Supper was not ready till twelve. Mr. Reeves's
coach came about that hour; but we got not away
till two. Perhaps the company would not have broke
up so soon, had not the Bride been perverse, and refused
to retire. Was she not at home? she asked Lady
L. who was put upon urging her: And should she
leave her company? 
She would make me retire with her: She took a
very affectionate leave of me. 
Marriage, Lucy, is an awful rite. It is supposed
to be a joyful solemnity: But on the woman's side it
can be only so, when she is given to the man she loves
above all the men in the world; and even to her, the
anniversary day, when doubt is turned into certainty,
must be much happier than the day itself. What a victim
must that woman look upon herself to be, who is compelled,
or even over-persuaded, to give her hand to a
man who has no share in her heart? Ought not a parent
or guardian, in such a circumstance, especially if the
child has a delicate, an honest mind, to be chargeable
with all the unhappy consequences that may follow
from such a cruel compulsion? 
But this is not the case with Miss Grandison. Early
she cast her eye on an improper object. Her pride
convinced her in time of the impropriety. And this,
as she owns, gave her an indifference to all men. She 

hates not Lord G. There is no man whom she prefers
to him. And in this respect, may perhaps, be upon a
par with eight women out of twelve, who marry, and
yet make not bad wives. As she played with her passion
till she lost it, she may be happy, if she will:
And since she intended to be, some time or other, Lady
G. her brother was kind in persuading her to shorten
her days of coquetting and teazing, and allow him to
give her to Lord G. before he went abroad. 

