



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

I have a Letter from Mr. Lovelace, full of transports,
vows, and promises. I will send it to you
inclosed. You'll see how ‘he engages in it for Lady
Betty's protection, and for Miss Charlotte Montague's
accompanying me. I have nothing to do,
but to persevere, he says, and prepare to receive the
personal congratulations of his whole family.’ 
But you'll see, how he presumes upon my being
his, as the consequence of throwing myself into that
Lady's protection. 
‘The chariot-and-six is to be ready at the place
he mentions. You'll see as to the slur upon my
reputation about which I am so apprehensive, how
boldly he argues.’ Generously enough, indeed, were
I to be his; and had given him to believe that I
would. —But that I have not done. 
How one step brings on another with this encroaching
Sex! How soon may a young creature, who gives
a man the least encouragement, be carried beyond
her intentions, and out of her own power! You would
imagine, by what he writes, that I have given him
reason to think that my aversion to Mr. Solmes is all
owing to my favour for him. 
The dreadful thing is, that, comparing what he
writes from his intelligencer of what is designed against
me (though he seems not to know the threatened day)
with what my Aunt and Betty assure me of, there can
be no hope for me, but that I must be Solmes's wife,
if I stay here. 
I had better have gone to my Uncle Antony's at
this rate. I should have gained time, at least, by it. 
This is the fruit of his fine contrivances! 
‘What we are to do, and how good he is to be: 

How I am to direct all his future steps.’ All this
shews, as I said before, that he is sure of me. 
However, I have replied to the following effect: 
‘That altho' I had given him room to expect, that
I would put myself into the protection of one of the
Ladies of his family; yet as I have three days to
come, between this and Monday, and as I still hope
that my friends will relent, or that Mr. Solmes
will give up a point they will find it impossible
to carry; I shall not look upon myself as absolutely
bound by the appointment: And expect therefore,
if I recede, that I shall not again be called to
account for it by him. That I think it necessary to
acquaint him, that if by throwing myself upon
Lady Betty Lawrance's protection, as he proposed,
he understands, that I mean directly to put myself into
his power, he is very much mistaken: For that
there are many points in which I must be satisfied; 
several matters to be adjusted, even after I have left
this house (if I do leave it) before I can think of
giving him any particular encouragement: That in
the first place he must expect that I will do my utmost
to procure my Father's Reconciliation and Approbation
of my future steps; and that I will govern
myself entirely by his commands, in every reasonable
point, as much as if I had not left his house: That
if he imagines, I shall not reserve to myself this
liberty, but that my withdrawing is to give him any
advantages which he would not otherwise have had; 
I am determined to stay where I am, and abide the
event, in hopes that my friends will still accept of
my reiterated promise Never to marry him, or anybody
else, without their consent.’ 
This I will deposit as soon as I can. And as he
thinks things are near their crisis, I dare say it will
not be long before I have an Answer to it. 

Friday, Four o'Clock. 
&dotup;I am really ill. I was used to make the best of
any little accidents that befell me, for fear of making
my then affectionate friends uneasy: But now I
shall make the worst of my indisposition, in hopes
to obtain a suspension of the threatened evil of Wednesday
next.’ And if I do obtain it, will postpone
my appointment with Mr. Lovelace. 
Betty has told them that I am very much indisposed. 
But I have no pity from any-body. 
I believe, I am become the object of every-one's
aversion; and that they would all be glad I were dead. 
Indeed, I believe it. ‘What ails the perverse creature,’ 
cries one? —‘Is she love-sick,’ another? 
I was in the Ivy Summer-house, and came out shivering
with cold, as if aguishly affected. Betty observed
this, and reported it. —‘O, no matter! —Let
her shiver on! —Cold cannot hurt her. Obstinacy
will defend her from harm. Perverseness is a Bracer
to a love-sick girl, and more effectual than the Cold
Bath to make hardy, altho' the constitution be ever
so tender.’ 
This said by a cruel Brother, and heard said by
the dearer friends of one, for whom, but a few months
ago, every-body was apprehensive at the least blast of
wind to which she exposed herself! 
Betty, it must be owned, has an admirable memory
on these occasions. Nothing of this nature is
lost by her repetition: Even the very air with which
she repeats what she hears said, renders it unnecessary
to ask, Who spoke This or that severe thing. 
Friday, Six o'Clock. 
My Aunt, who again stays all night, has just left
me. She came to tell me the result of my friends
deliberations about me. It is this. 
Next Wednesday morning they are all to be assembled: 

To wit, my Father, Mother, my Uncles,
Herself, and my Uncle Hervey; my Brother and Sister
of course: My good Mrs. Norton is likewise to
be admitted: And Dr. Lewen is to be at hand, to
exhort me, it seems, if there be occasion: But my
Aunt is not certain whether he is to be among them,
or to tarry till called in. 
When this awful Court is assembled, the poor prisoner
is to be brought in, supported by Mrs. Norton; 
who is to be first tutored to instruct me in the
duty of a child; which it seems I have forgotten. 
Nor is the success at all doubted, my Aunt says: 
Since it is not believed that I can be hardened enough
to withstand the expostulations of so venerable a judicature,
altho' I have withstood those of several of
them separately. And still the less, as she hints at extraordinary
condescensions from my Father. But what
condescensions, from even my Father, can induce me
to make such a sacrifice as is expected from me? 
Yet my spirits will never bear up, I doubt, at such
a tribunal—My Father presiding in it. 
Indeed I expected, that my trials would not be at
an end till he had admitted me into his awful presence. 
What is hoped from me, she says, is, That I will
chearfully, on Tuesday night, if not before, sign the
articles; and so turn the succeeding day's solemn convention
into a day of festivity. I am to have the Licence
sent me up, however, and once more the Settlements,
that I may see how much in earnest they are. 
She further hinted, that my Father himself would
bring up the Settlements for me to sign. 
O my dear! what a trial will This be! —How
shall I be able to refuse to my Father the writing of
my name? —To my Father, from whose presence I
have been so long banished! —He commanding and
entreating, perhaps, in a breath! —How shall I be able
to refuse this to my Father! 

They are sure, she says, something is working on
Mr. Lovelace's part, and perhaps on mine: And my
Father would sooner follow me to the grave, than
see me his Wife. 
I said, I was not well: That the very apprehensions
of these trials were already insupportable to me; 
and would encrease upon me, as the time approached; 
and I was afraid I should be extremely ill. 
They had prepared themselves for such an artifice
as That, was my Aunt's unkind word; and she could
assure me, it would stand me in no stead. 
Artifice! repeated I: And this from my Aunt
Hervey? 
Why, my dear, said she, do you think people are
fools? —Can they not see, how dismally you endeavour
to sigh yourself down within doors? —How you
hang down your sweet face [those were the words she
was pleased to use] upon your bosom: —How you
totter, as it were, and hold by this chair, and by that
door-post, when you know that Any-body sees you
[This, my dear Miss Howe, is an aspersion to fasten
hypocrisy and contempt upon me: My Brother's or
Sister's aspersion! —I am not capable of arts so low]. 
But the moment you are down with your poultry, or
advancing upon your garden-walk, and, as you imagine,
out of every-body's sight, it is seen how nimbly
you trip along; and what an alertness governs all
your motions. 
I should hate myself, said I, were I capable of such
poor artifices as these. I must be a fool to use them,
as well as a mean creature; for have I not had experience
enough, that my friends are incapable of being
moved in much more affecting instances? —But
you'll see how I shall be by Tuesday. 
My dear, you will not offer any violence to your
health? —I hope, God has given you more grace than
to do that. 
I hope he has, Madam. But there is violence 

enough offered, and threatened, to affect my health; 
and so it will be found, without my needing to have
recourse to any other, or to artifice either. 
I'll only tell you one thing, my dear : And that is; 
Ill or well, the Ceremony will probably be performed
before Wednesday night: —But This, also, I will tell
you, altho' beyond my present commission, that Mr.
Solmes will be under an engagement (if you should
require it of him as a favour) after the Ceremony is
passed, and Lovelace's hopes thereby utterly extinguished,
to leave you at your Father's, and return to
his own house every evening, until you are brought
to a full sense of your duty, and consent to acknowlege
your change of name. 
There was no opening of my lips to such a speech
as This. I was dumb. 
And these, my dear Miss Howe, are They, who,
some of them at least, have called me a romantic girl! 
—This is my chimerical Brother, and wise Sister; 
both joining their heads together, I dare say. And
yet, my Aunt told me, that the last part was what
took in my Mother; who had, till that expedient
was found out, insisted, that her child should not be
married, if, thro' grief or opposition, she should
be ill, or fall into fits. 
This intended violence my Aunt often excused,
by the certain information they pretended to have, of
some plots or machinations, that were ready to break
out, from Mr. Lovelace (a) : The effects of which
were thus cunningly to be frustrated. 
Friday, Nine o'Clock. 
And now, my dear, what shall I conclude upon? 
You see how determined—But how can I expect your 

advice will come time enough to stand me in any
stead? For here I have been down, and already have
another Letter from Mr. Lovelace [The man lives
upon the spot, I think]: And I must write to him,
either that I will or will not stand to my first resolution
of escaping hence on Monday next. If I let
him know, that I will not (appearances so strong
against him, and for Solmes, even stronger than
when I made the appointment) will it not be justly
deemed my own fault, if I am compelled to marry
their odious man? And if any mischief ensue from
Mr. Lovelace's rage and disappointment, will it not
lie at my door? —Yet, he offers so fair! —Yet, on
the other hand, to incur the censure of the world, as
a giddy creature—But that, as he hints, I have already
incurred—What can I do? —O that my Cousin
Morden—But what signifies wishing? 
I will here give you the substance of Mr. Lovelace's
Letter. The Letter itself I will send, when I
have answered it; but that I will defer doing as long
as I can, in hopes of finding reason to retract an appointment
on which so much depends. And yet it
is necessary you should have all before you as I go
along, that you may be the better able to advise me
in this dreadful crisis. 
‘He begs my pardon for writing with so much
assurance; attributing it to his unbounded transport; 
and entirely acquiesces in my will. He is full of
alternatives and proposals. He offers to attend me
directly to Lady Betty's; or, if I had rather, to my
own Estate; and that my Lord M. shall protect
me there’ [He knows not, my dear, my reasons
for rejecting this inconsiderate advice]. ‘In either
case, as soon as he sees me safe, he will go up to
London, or whither I please; and not come near
me, but by my own permission; and till I am satisfied
in every-thing I am doubtful of, as well with
regard to his Reformation, as to Settlements, &c.’ 

‘To conduct me to You, my dear, is another of his
proposals, not doubting, he says, but your Mother
will receive me (a) : Or, if That be not agreeable
to you, or to your Mother, or to me, he will put
me into Mr. Hickman's protection; whom, no doubt
he says, you can influence; and that it may be
given out, that I am gone to Bath, or Bristol, or
Abroad; where-ever I please. 
‘Again, If it be more agreeable, he proposes to attend
me privately to London, where he will procure
handsome lodgings for me, and both his Cousins
Montague to receive me in them, and to accompany
me till all shall be adjusted to my mind; and till a
Reconciliation shall be affected; which he assures me
nothing shall be wanting in him to facilitate; greatly
as he has been insulted by all my family. 
‘These several measures he proposes to my choice; 
as it was unlikely, he says, that he could procure,
in the time, a Letter from Lady Betty, under her
own hand, to invite me in form to her house, unless
he had been himself to go to that Lady for it; 
which, at this critical conjuncture, while he is attending
my commands, is impossible. 
‘He conjures me, in the most solemn manner, if I
would not throw him into utter despair, to keep to
my appointment. 
‘However, instead of threatening my relations, or
Solmes, if I recede, he respectfully says, that he
doubts not, but that, if I do, it will be upon such
reasons, as he ought to be satisfied with; upon no
slighter, he hopes, than their leaving me at full
liberty to pursue my own inclinations: In which
(whatever they shall be) he will entirely acquiesce; 
only endeavouring to make his future good behaviour
the sole ground for his expectation of my favour. 
‘In short, he solemnly vows, that his whole view
at present, is To free me from my imprisonment; 

and to restore me to my own free-will, in a point
so absolutely necessary to my future happiness. He
declares, that neither the hopes he has of my future
favour, nor the consideration of his own and family's
honour, will permit him to propose anything
that shall be inconsistent with my own most scrupulous
notions: And, for my mind's sake, should
chuse to have the proposed end obtained by my
friends declining to compel me. But that nevertheless,
as to the world's opinion, it is impossible
to imagine, that the behaviour of my relations to
me has not already brought upon my family those
free censures which they deserve, and caused the
step which I am so scrupulous about taking, to be
no other than the natural and expected consequence
of their treatment of me.’ 
Indeed, I am afraid all this is true: And it is
owing to some little degree of politeness, that Mr.
Lovelace does not say all he might say on this subjects: 
For I have no doubt, that I am the talk, and
perhaps the bye-word of half the county. If so, I
am afraid I can now do nothing that will give me
more disgrace than I have already so causlesly received
by their indiscreet persecutions: And let me be whose
I will, and do what I will, I shall never wipe off the
stain which my confinement, and the rigorous usage
I have received, have fixed upon me; at least in my
own opinion. 
I wish, if ever I am to be considered as one of the
eminent family this man is allied to, some of them
do not think the worse of me, for the disgrace I have
received. In that case, perhaps, I shall be obliged to
him, if he do not. You see how much this harsh, this
cruel treatment from my own family has humbled
me! But perhaps I was too much exalted before. 
Mr. Lovelace concludes, ‘with repeatedly begging
an Interview with me; and That, this night,
if possible: An honour, he says, he is the more 

encouraged to solicit for, as I had twice before made
him hope for it. But whether he obtain it or not,
he beseeches me to chuse one of the alternatives he
offers to my acceptance; and not to depart from
my resolution of escaping on Monday, unless the
reason ceases on which I had taken it up; and that
I have a prospect of being restored to the favour of
my friends; at least to my own liberty, and freedom
of choice.’ 
He renews all his vows and promises on this head
in so earnest and so solemn a manner, that (his own
interest, and his family's honour, and their favour for
me, co-operating) I can have no room to doubt of
his sincerity. 