

It is thought fit in this Edition, instead of prefixing the
whole Contents to the first Volume (as was done in
the last) to subjoin to each its particular Contents: 
Which will serve not only for an Index of the principal
Historical Matters, but as a Recapitulation,
that will enable the Reader, without anticipating
Events, to enter into the succeeding Volume
with the Attention that is bespoke in favour of a
History of Life and Manners; and
which, as such, is designed for more than a transitory
Amusement. 

Lett.
I.Miss Howe, To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. Desires from her the
particulars of the Rencounter between Mr. Lovelace and her
Brother; and of the usage she receives upon it: Also the
whole of her Story from the time Lovelace was introduced as a Suitor
to her Sister Arabella. Admires her great qualities, and glories in
the friendship between them.
II. III. IV.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Gives the requested particulars.––– 
Together with the grounds of her Brother's and Sister's ill-will to her; 
and of the animosity between her Brother and Lovelace.–––Her Mother
connives at the private correspondence between her and Lovelace,
for the sake of preventing greater evils. Character of Lovelace, from
an Enemy.—Copy of the preamble to her Grandfather's Will.
V.From the same. Her Father, Mother, Brother, briefly characterized.
Her Brother's consequence in the family. Wishes Miss
Howe had encouraged her Brother's address. Endeavours to find excuses
for her Father's ill temper, and for her Mother's passiveness.
VI.From the same. Mr. Symmes, Mr. Mullins, Mr. Wyerley, in
turn, proposed to her, in malice to Lovelace; and, on their being
rejected, Mr. Solmes. Leave given her to visit Miss Howe for a
few days. Her Brother's insolent behaviour upon it.
VII.From the same. The harsh reception she meets with on her return
from Miss Howe. Solmes's first visit.
VIII.From the same. All her family determined in Solmes's favour.
Her aversion to him. She rejects him, and is forbid going to church,
visiting, receiving visits, or writing to any body out of the house.

IX.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Her expedient to carry on a private correspondence
with Miss Howe. Regrets the necessity she is laid under
to take such a clandestine step.
X.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Inveighs against the Harlowe family for
proposing such a man as Solmes. Characterizes them. Is jealous of
Antony Harlowe's visits to her Mother. Raillies her friend on her
supposed regard to Lovelace.
XI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Is nettled and alarmed at her raillery.
Her reasons for not giving way to a passion for Lovelace.
XII.Miss Howe in Reply. Continues her raillery. Gives Lovelace's
character from Mrs. Fortescue.
XIII. XIV.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. The views of her Family in
favouring the address of Solmes. Her Brother's and Sister's triumph
upon the difficulties into which they have plunged her.
XV.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. She accounts for Arabella's malice:
Blames her for having given up the power over the Estate left her
by her Grandfather.
XVI. XVII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Offends her Father by her
behaviour to Solmes in his presence. Tender conversations between
her Mother and her.—Offers to give up all thoughts of Lovelace,
if she may be freed from Solmes's address. Substance of one of Lovelace's
Letters, of her Answer, and of his Reply. Makes a proposal.
Her Mother goes down with it.
XVIII.From the same. The proposal rejected. Her Mother affects
severity to her. Another interesting conversation between them.
XIX.From the same. Her dutiful motives for putting her Estate
into her Father's power. Why she thinks she ought not to have
Solmes. Afflicted on her Mother's account.
XX. XXI.From the same. Another conference with her Mother, who
leaves her in anger.—She goes down to beg her favour. Solmes
comes in. She offers to withdraw; but is forbid. What follows upon it.
XXII.From the same. Substance of a Letter from Lovelace. She
desires leave to go to church. Is referred to her Brother, and insultingly
refused by him. Her Letter to him. His Answer.
XXIII. XXIV. XXV.From the same. Her faithful Hannah disgracefully
dismissed. Betty Barnes her Sister's maid set over her.— 
A Letter from her Brother forbidding her to appear in the presence of
any of her Relations without leave. Her Answer.—Writes to her
Mother. Her Mother's Answer. Writes to her Father. His Answer.
XXVI.From the same. Is desirous to know the opinion Lord M's family
have of her. Substance of a Letter from Lovelace, resenting the
indignities he receives from her Relations. She freely acquaints him
that he has nothing to expect from her contrary to her duty. Insists
that his next Letter shall be his last.
XXVII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. Advises her to resume her Estate.
Her satirical description of Solmes. Raillies her on her curiosity to
know what opinion Lord M. and his family have of her. Ascribes
to the difference in each of their tempers their mutual Love. Gives

the particulars of a conversation between her Mother and her, on
Clarissa's case. Reflects on the Harlowe family, and particularly on
Mrs. Harlowe, for her passiveness.
XXVIII.Clarissa. In Answer. Chides her for the liberties she takes
with her Relations. Particularly defends her Mother. Chides her also
for her lively airs to her own Mother. Desires her to treat her freely; 
but wishes not, that she should impute Love to her; and why.
XXIX.From the same. Her expostulatory Letter to her Brother and
Sister. Their Answers.
XXX.From the same. Exceedingly angry with Lovelace, on his coming
to their church. Reflections on Pride, &c.
XXXI.Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; Pride, Revenge, Love,
Ambition, or a Desire of Conquest, his avowedly predominant passions.
His early vow to ruin as many of the Fair Sex, as he can get into his
power. His pretence for it. Breathes revenge against the Harlowe-family.
Glories in his contrivances. Is passionately in Love with
Clarissa. His high notions of her beauty and merit. Yet is incensed
against her for preferring her own Relations to him. Clears her,
however, of intentional Pride, Scorn, Haughtiness, or Want of Sensibility.
What a triumph over the Sex, and over her whole family,
if he can carry off a Lady so watchful, and so prudent! Is resolved,
if he cannot have the Sister, to carry off the Brother. Libertine as
he is, can have no thoughts of any other woman but Clarissa. Warns
Belford, Mowbray, Tourville, and Belton, to hold themselves in readiness
to obey his summons, on the likelihood there is of room for
what he calls glorious mischief.
XXXII. XXXIII.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Copies of her Letters to
her two Uncles; and of their characteristic Answers.—Her expostulatory
Letter to Solmes. His Answer. An insolent Letter from
her Brother, on her writing to Solmes.
XXXIV.Lovelace, To Belford. He directs him to come down to him.
For what end. Description of the poor Inn he puts up at in disguise; 
and of the innocent Daughter there, whom he calls his Rosebud. He
resolves to spare her. Pride and policy his motives, and not principle.
Ingenuous reflections on his own vicious disposition. He had been a
rogue, he says, had he been a plough-boy. Resolves on an act of
generosity to his Rosebud, by way of atonement, as he calls it, for
some of his bad actions; and for other reasons which appear in the
sequel.
XXXV.From the same. His artful contrivances and dealings with Joseph
Leman. His Revenge and his Love uppermost by turns. If the
latter succeeds not, he vows that the Harlowes shall feel the former,
altho' for it he become an exile from his country for ever. He will
throw himself into Clarissa's presence in the Woodhouse. If he
thought he had no prospect of her favour, he would attempt to carry
her off: That, he says, would be a Rape worthy of a Jupiter. The
Arts he is resolved to practise when he sees her, in order to engage her
future reliance upon his honour.
XXXVI.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. Lovelace in disguise surprises her in

the Woodhouse. Her terrors on first seeing him. He greatly engages
her confidence (as he had designed) by his respectful behaviour.
XXXVII.Miss Howe, To Clarissa. After raillying her on her not
readily owning the passion which she supposes she has for Lovelace,
she desires to know how far she thinks him eligible for his best qualities,
how far rejectible for his worst.
XXXVIII. XXXIX.Clarissa, To Miss Howe. She disclaims tyranny
to a man who respects her. Her unhappy situation to be considered,
in which the imputed Love is held by her Parents to be an undutiful,
and therefore a criminal passion, and where the supposed object of it is
a man of faulty morals.—Is interrupted by a visit from Mrs. Norton,
who is sent up to her to influence her in Solmes's favour. An
affecting conversation between them. What passes upon it, and after it.
XL.From the same. Resumes the requested subject. What sort of
man she could have preferred to Mr. Lovelace. Arguments she has
used to herself in his favour, and in his disfavour. Frankly owns,
that were he now a moral man, she would prefer him to all the men
she ever saw. Yet is persuaded, that she could freely give up the one
man, to get rid of the other, as she had offered to her friends. Her delicacy
affected by Miss Howe's raillery: And why, Gives her opinion of
the force which Figure or Person may be allowed to have upon her Sex.
XLI.From the same. A Letter from her Mother (with patterns of
rich silks) in which she entreats her to comply with all their wishes.
What ought to be the principal view of a good Wife in adorning her
person. Her distress. Begs leave to wait upon her Mother alone. Her
Father's angry Letter, ordering her to prepare for her Wedding-day.
Solmes requests to see her. She refuses. All in tumults below upon it.
Her Brother and Sister desire that she may be left to their management.
XLII.From the same. A very warm dialogue between her Sister
and her. Her Sister's envy, unnatural behaviour, and violence.
Clarissa sends down proposals in writing to her Friends, and a Letter
to her Brother. His insolent Answer; in which he tells her, that
her proposals will be considered in full assembly. next morning; but
that, if they shall be complied with, he will retire to Scotland, and
never more return to Harlowe-Place.
XLIII.From the same. Hardly doubts but her Proposals will be accepted.
Paints to herself, as her relations arrive one by one, what
their deliberations, and the result of them, will be, when they are all
assembled. Her Proposals rejected. Her Sister's cruel insults on the
occasion produce another warm dialogue between them. Her Sister
leaves her in a fury. She is greatly disturbed at the contents of a
Letter from Lovelace.
XLIV.From the same. Her Aunt Hervey, accompanied by her Sister,
makes her a visit. Further insults from her Sister. Her Aunt's
fruitless pleas in Solmes's favour.
XLV.From the same. Another visit from her Aunt and Sister. The
latter spitefully insults her with the patterns. A tender scene between
her Aunt and her in Arabella's absence. She endeavours to account
for the inflexibility of her Parents and Uncles.