



Mrs. Hervey To Miss Clarissa Harlowe. 
[In answer to Letter xlv.] 

Dear Niece,
It would be hard not to write a few lines, so much
pressed to write, to one I ever loved. Your former
Letter I received; yet was not at liberty to answer it. 
I break my word to answer you now. 
Strange informations are every day received about
you. The wretch you are with, we are told, is every 

hour triumphing and defying—Must not these informations
aggravate? You know the uncontroulableness of
the man. He loves his own humour better than he
loves you—tho' so fine a creature as you are! I warned
you over and over: No young Lady was ever more
warned! —Miss Clarissa Harlowe to do such a thing! 
You might have given your friends the meeting. If
you had held your aversion, it would have been complied
with. As soon as I was entrusted myself with
their intention to give up the point, I gave you a hint
—a dark one perhaps (a) —But who would have thought
—O Miss! —Such an artful flight! —Such cunning
preparation! 
But you want to clear up things—What can you
clear up? Are you not gone off? —With a Lovelace
too? —What, my dear, would you clear up? 
You did not design to go, you say. Why did you
meet him then, chariot-and-six, horsemen, all prepared
by him? O, my dear, how Art produces Art! 
—Will it be believed? —If it would, what power will
he be thought to have had over you! —He! —Who? 
Lovelace! —The vilest of Libertines! —Over whom? — 
A Clarissa! —Was your Love for such a man above
your reason? Above your resolution? What credit
would a belief of this, if believed, bring you? —How
mend the matter? —Oh! that you had stood the next
meeting! 
I'll tell you all that was intended if you had. 
It was indeed imagined, that you would not have
been able to resist your Father's entreaties and commands. 
He was resolved to be all condescension, if
anew you had not provoked him. I love my Clary Harlowe,
said he, but an hour before the killing tidings
were brought him; I love her as my life: I will kneel
to her, if nothing else will do, to prevail upon her to
oblige me! 

Your Father and Mother (the reverse of what should
have been!) would have humbled themselves to you: 
And if you could have denied them, and refused to sign
the Settlements previous to the meeting, they would
have yielded, although with regret. 
But it was presumed, so naturally sweet your temper,
so self-denying, as they thought you, that you could
not have withstood them, notwithstanding all your dislike
of the one man, without a greater degree of headstrong
passion for the other, than you had given any of
us reason to expect from you. 
If you had, the meeting on Wednesday would have
been a lighter trial to you. You would have been presented
to all your assembled friends, with a short speech
only, ‘That this was the young creature, till very
lately faultless, condescending, and obliging; now
having cause to glory in a triumph over the wills of
Father, Mother, Uncles, the most indulgent; over
family-interests, family-views; and preferring her
own will to every-body's; and this for a transitory
preference to Person only; there being no comparison
between the men as to their Morals.’ 
Thus complied with, and perhaps blessed, by your
Father and Mother, and the consequences of your disobedience
deprecated in the solemnest manner by your
inimitable Mother, your generosity would have been
appealed to, since your duty would have been found too
weak an inducement, and you would have been bid to
withdraw for one half-hour's consideration: Then
would the Settlements have been again tendered for
your signing, by the person least disobliging to you; by
your good Norton perhaps; she perhaps seconded by
your Father again: And if again refused, you would
again have been led in, to declare such your refusal. 
Some restrictions which you yourself had proposed,
would have been insisted upon. You would have been
permitted to go home with me, or with your Uncle 

Antony (with which of us was not agreed upon, because
they hoped you might be persuaded) there to stay till
the arrival of your Cousin Morden; or till your Father
could have borne to see you; or till assured, that the
views of Lovelace were at an end. 
This the intention, your Father so set upon your
compliance, so much in hopes that you would have
yielded, that you would have been prevailed upon by
methods so condescending and so gentle; no wonder
that he, in particular, was like a distracted man, when
he heard of your flight—of your flight, so premeditated; 
—with your Ivy Summer-house dinings, your arts to
blind me, and all of us!—naughty, naughty young
creature! 
I, for my part, would not believe it, when told of
it. Your Uncle Hervey would not believe it. We rather
expected, we rather feared, a still more desperate
adventure. There could be but one more desperate; 
and I was readier to have the cascade first resorted to,
than the garden back-door. —Your Mother fainted
away, while her heart was torn between the two apprehensions. 
—Your Father, poor man! your Father
was beside himself for near an hour—What imprecations! 
—What dreadful imprecations! —To this day he
can hardly bear your name: Yet can think of nobody
else. Your merits, my dear, but aggravate your fault. 
—Something of fresh aggravation almost every hour. 
—How can any favour be expected? 
I am sorry for it; but am afraid, nothing you ask
will be complied with. 
Why mention you, my dear, the saving you from
mortifications, who have gone off with a man? What
a poor pride is it to stand upon any-thing else? 
I dare not open my lips in your favour. Nobody
dare. Your Letter must stand by itself. This has
caused me to send it to Harlowe-Place. Expect therefore
great severity. May you be enabled to support the
lot you have drawn! O my dear! how unhappy have 

you made every-body! Can you expect to be happy? 
Your Father wishes you had never been born. Your
poor Mother—But why should I afflict you? There is
now no help! —You must be changed indeed, if you
are not very unhappy yourself in the reflections your
thoughtful mind must suggest to you. 
You must now make the best of your lot. Yet not
married, it seems! 
It is in your power, you say, to perform whatever
you shall undertake to do. You may deceive yourself: 
You hope that your reputation and the favour of your
friends may be retrieved. Never, never, both, I doubt; 
if either. Every offended person (and that is all who
loved you, and are related to you) must join to restore
you: When can these be of one mind in a case so notoriously
wrong? 
It would be very grievous, you say, to be precipitated
upon measures, that may make the desireable Reconciliation
more difficult. Is it now, my dear, a time
for you to be afraid of being precipitated? At present,
if ever, there can be no thought of Reconciliation. 
The upshot of your precipitation must first be seen. 
There may be murder yet, as far as we know. Will
the man you are with part willingly with you? If not,
what may be the consequence? If he will—Lord bless
me! what shall we think of his reasons for it? —I will
fly this thought. I know your purity—But, my dear,
are you not out of all protection? —Are you not unmarried? 
—Have you not (making your daily prayers
useless) thrown yourself into temptation? And is not
the man the most wicked of plotters? 
You have hitherto, you say (and I think, my dear,
with an air unbecoming your declared penitence) no
fault to find with the behaviour of a man from whom
every evil was apprehended: Like Cæsar to the Roman
augur, which I heard you tell of, who had bid him
Beware of the Ides of March: The Ides of March, said
Cæsar, seeing the augur among the croud, as he marched 

in state to the Senate-house, from which he never was
to return alive, The Ides of March are come. But they
are not past, the augur replied. Make the application,
my dear: May you be able to make this reflection upon
his good behaviour to the last of your knowledge of him! 
May he behave himself better to you, than he ever did
to any-body else over whom he had power! Amen! 
No answer, I beseech you. I hope your messenger
will not tell any body that I have written to you. And
I dare say you will not shew what I have written to
Mr. Lovelace—For I have written with the less reserve,
depending upon your prudence. 
You have my prayers. 
My Dolly knows not that I write. No-body does (a) : 
Not even Mr. Hervey. 
Dolly would have several times written: But having
defended your fault with heat, and with a partiality
that alarmed us [Such a fall as yours, my dear, must be
alarming to all parents] she has been forbidden, on pain
of losing our favour for ever: And this at your family's
request, as well as by her Father's commands. 
You have the poor girl's hourly prayers, I will, however,
tell you, tho' she knows not that I do, as well as
those of 
Your truly afflicted Aunt,
D. Hervey. 
Friday, April 21. 