



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday, July 27. 
My dearest Miss Howe,
After I have thankfully acknowleged your favour
in sending Mr. Hickman to visit me before
you set out upon your intended journey, I must chide
you (in the sincerity of that faithful Love, which
could not be the Love it is if it would not admit of
that cementing freedom) for suspending the decisive
Negative, which, upon such full deliberation, I had
entreated you to give to Mr. Lovelace's relations. 
I am sorry, that I am obliged to repeat to you, my
dear, who know me so well, that, were I sure I
should live many years, I would not have Mr. Lovelace: 
Much less can I think of him, as it is probable
I may not live one. 
As to the world and its censures, you know, my
dear, that however desirous I always was of a fair
fame, yet I never thought it right to give more than
a second place to the world's opinion. The challenges
made to Mr. Lovelace by Miss D'Oily, in public
company, are a fresh proof that I have lost my Reputation: 
And what advantage would it be to me,
were it retrievable, and were I to live long, if I could
not acquit myself to myself? 
Having in my former said so much on the freedoms
you have taken with my friends, I shall say the less
now: But your hint, that something else has newly
passed between some of them and you, gives me great 

concern, and that as well for my own sake, as for
theirs; since it must necessarily incense them against
me. I wish, my dear, that I had been left to my
own course on an occasion so very interesting to myself. 
But since what is done cannot be helped, I must
abide the consequences: Yet I dread, more than before,
what may be my Sister's Answer, if an Answer
be at all vouchsafed. 
Will you give me leave, my dear, to close this subject
with one remark? —It is this: That my beloved
friend, in points where her own laudable zeal is concerned,
has ever seemed more ready to fly from the
rebuke, than from the fault. If you will excuse this
freedom, I will acknowlege thus far in favour of your
way of thinking, as to the conduct of some parents in
these nice cases, That indiscreet Opposition does frequently
as much mischief as giddy Love. 
As to the invitation you are so kind as to give me,
to remove privately into your neighbourhood, I have
told Mr. Hickman, that I will consider of it: But
believe, if you will be so good as to excuse me, that
I shall not accept of it, even should I be able to remove. 
I will give you my reasons for declining it; 
and so I ought, when both my Love, and my Gratitude,
would make a visit now-and-then from my
dear Miss Howe the most consolatory thing in the
world to me. 
You must know then, that this great town, wicked
as it is, wants not opportunities of being better; 
having daily prayers at several Churches in it; and I
am desirous, as my strength will permit, to embrace
those opportunities. The method I have proposed to
myself (and was beginning to practise when that cruel
Arrest deprived me both of freedom and strength) is
this: When I was disposed to gentle exercise, I took
a chair to St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet-street, where
are prayers at Seven in the morning: I proposed, if 

the weather favoured, to walk (if not, to take chair)
to Lincoln's-Inn chapel; where, at Eleven in the
morning, and at Five in the afternoon, are the same
desirable opportunities; and at other times to go no
farther than Covent-garden Church, where are early
morning prayers likewise. 
This method, pursued, I doubt not, will greatly
help, as it has already done, to calm my disturbed
thoughts, and to bring me to that perfect resignation,
after which I aspire: For I must own, my dear, that
sometimes still my griefs and my reflections are too
heavy for me; and all the aid I can draw from religious
duties is hardly sufficient to support my staggering
reason. I am a very young creature, you know,
my dear, to be left to my own conduct in such circumstances
as I am in. 
Another reason why I chuse not to go down into
your neighbourhood, is, The displeasure that might
arise on my account between your Mother and you. 
If indeed you were actually married, and the
worthy man (who would then have a title to all your
regard) were earnestly desirous of my near neighbourhood,
I know not what I might do: For altho' I
might not perhaps intend to give up my other important
reasons at the time I should make you a congratulatory
visit, yet I might not know how to deny
myself the pleasure of continuing near you when
there. 
I send you inclosed the copy of my Letter to my
Sister. I hope it will be thought to be written with
a true penitent spirit; for indeed it is. I desire that
you will not think I stoop too low in it; since there
can be no such thing as that in a child to parents whom
she has unhappily offended. 
But if still (perhaps more disgusted than before at
your freedom with them) they should pass it by with
the contempt of silence (for I have not yet been favoured 

with an Answer). I must learn to think it
right in them so to do; especially as it is my first
direct application: For I have often censured the
boldness of those, who, applying for a favour, which
it is in a person's option to grant, or to refuse, take
the liberty of being offended, if they are not gratified; 
as if the petitioned had not as good a right to reject, as
the petitioner to ask. 
But if my Letter should be answered, and that in
such terms as will make me loth to communicate it to
so warm a friend—you must not, my dear, take upon
you to censure my relations; but allow for them, as
they know not what I have suffered; as being filled
with just resentments against me (just to them, if
they think them just); and as not being able to judge
of the reality of my penitence. 
And after all, what can they do for me? —They
can only pity me: And what will that do, but augment
their own grief; to which at present their resentment
is an alleviation? For can they by their pity
restore to me my lost reputation? Can they by it purchase
a sponge that will wipe out from the year the
past fatal five months of my life (a) ? 
Your account of the gay unconcerned behaviour
of Mr. Lovelace, at the Colonel's, does not surprise
me at all, after I am told, that he had the intrepidity
to go thither, knowing who were invited and expected. 
—Only this, my dear, I really wonder at, that
Miss Howe could imagine, that I could have a thought
of such a man for a Husband. 
Poor wretch! I pity him, to see him fluttering
about; abusing talents that were given him for excellent
purposes; taking inconsideration for courage; 
and dancing, fearless of danger, on the edge of a
precipice! 

But indeed his threatening to see me most sensibly
alarms and shocks me. I cannot but hope that I
never, never more, shall see him in this world. 
Since you are so loth, my dear, to send the desired
Negative to the Ladies of his family, I will only
trouble you to transmit the Letter I shall inclose for
that purpose; directed indeed to yourself, because it
was to you that those Ladies applied themselves on
this occasion; but to be sent by you to any one of
the Ladies at your own choice. 
I commend myself, my dearest Miss Howe, to
your prayers; and conclude with repeated thanks for
sending Mr. Hickman to me; and with wishes for
your health and happiness, and for the speedy celebration
of your Nuptials; 
Your ever-affectionate and obliged
Clarissa Harlowe. 