



Miss Cl. Harlowe, To Alex. Wyerley, Esq; 

Sat. Aug. 26. 
SIR,
The generosity of your purpose would have commanded
not only my notice, but my thanks, altho'
you had not given me the alternative you are pleased to 

call artful. And I do therefore give you my thanks for
your kind letter. 
At the time you distinguished me by your favourable
opinion, I told you, Sir, that my choice was the single life. 
And most truly did I tell you so. 
When that was not permitted me, and I looked round
upon the several gentlemen who had been proposed to me,
and had reason to believe that there was not one of them
against whose morals or principles there lay not some exception,
it would not have been much to be wondered at, if
Fancy had been allowed to give a preference, where
Judgment was at a loss to determine. 
Far be it from me to say this with a design to upbraid
you, Sir, or to reflect upon you. I always wished you well. 
You had reason to think I did. You had the generosity to
be pleased with the frankness of my behaviour to you; as
I had with that of yours to me: And I am sorry to be now
told, that the acquiescence you obliged me with, gave you
so much pain. 
Had the option I have mentioned been allowed me afterwards,
(as I not only wished but proposed) things had
not happened that did happen. But there was a kind of
fatality, by which our whole family was impelled, as I may
say; and which none of us were permitted to avoid. But
this is a subject that cannot be dwelt upon. 
As matters are, I have only to wish, for your own sake,
that you will encourage and cultivate those good motions
in your mind, to which many passages in your kind and
generous letter now before me, must be owing. Depend
upon it, Sir, that such motions wrought into habit, will
yield you pleasure at a time when nothing else can. And
at present, shining out in your actions and conversation,
will commend you to the worthiest of our Sex. For, Sir,
the man who is good upon choice, as well as by education,
has that quality in himself, which ennobles the human race,
and without which the most dignified by birth or rank are
ignoble. 
As to the resolution you so solemnly make not to marry
while I live, I should be concerned at it, were I not morally
sure, that you may keep it, and yet not be detrimented
by it. Since a few, a very few days, will convince 

you, that I am got above all human dependence— 
and that there is no need of that protection and favour,
which you so generously offer to, Sir, 
Your obliged Well-wisher, and humble Servant,
Cl. Harlowe. 