



Miss Cl. Harlowe, To Ant. Harlowe, Esq; 

Sunday, Aug. 13. 
Honoured Sir,
I am very sorry for my pert Letter to my Uncle
Harlowe. Yet I did not intend it to be pert. People
new to misfortune may be too easily moved to
impatience. 
The fall of a regular person, no doubt, is dreadful
and inexcuseable. It is like the sin of Apostasy. 
Would to Heaven, however, that I had had the circumstances
of mine enquired into! 
If, Sir, I make myself worse than I am in my
health, and better than I am in my penitence, it is
fit I should be punished for my double dissimulation: 
And you have the pleasure of being one of my punishers. 
My sincerity in both respects will, however, be best
justified by the event. To that I refer. —May Heaven
give you always as much comfort in reflecting
upon the reprobation I have met with, as you seem
to have pleasure in mortifying a poor creature, extremely
mortified; and that from a right sense, as she
presumes to hope, of her own fault! 
What you have heard of me I cannot tell. When
the nearest and dearest relations give up an unhappy
wretch, it is not to be wondered at, that those who
are not related to her are ready to take up and propagate
slanders against her. Yet I think I may defy
calumny itself, and (excepting the fatal, tho' involuntary
step of April 10.) wrap myself in my own innocence,
and be easy. I thank you, Sir, nevertheless,
for your caution, mean it what it will. 
As to the question required of me to answer, and
which is allowed to be too shocking either for a Mother
to put to a Daughter, or a Sister to a Sister; 
and which however, you say, I must answer:—O Sir! 
—And must I answer? —This then be my answer: 

—‘A little time, a much less time than is imagined,
will afford a more satisfactory answer to my whole
family, and even to my Brother and Sister, than I
can give in words.’ 
Nevertheless, be pleased to let it be remembred,
that I did not petition for a restoration to favour. I
could not hope for that. Nor yet to be put in possession
of any part of my own Estate. Nor even for means
of necessary subsistence from the produce of that
Estate—But only for a Blessing; for a Last Blessing! 
And this I will further add, because it is true, that
I have no wilful crime to charge against myself: No
free living at bed and at board, as you phrase it! 
Why, why, Sir, were not other enquiries made of
me, as well as this shocking one? —Enquiries that
modesty would have permitted a Mother or a Sister to
make; and which, if I may be excused to say so,
would have been still less improper, and more charitable,
to have been made by Uncles (were the Mother
forbidden, or the Sister not inclined, to make them)
than those they have made. 
Altho' my humble application has brought upon
me so much severe reproach, I repent not that I have
written to my Mother (altho' I cannot but wish that
I had not written to my Sister); because I have satisfied
a dutiful consciousness by it, however unanswered
by the wished-for success. Nevertheless, I
cannot help saying, that mine is indeed a hard fate,
that I cannot beg pardon for my capital error, without
doing it in such terms, as shall be an aggravation
of the offence. 
But I had leave off, lest, as my full mind, I
find, is rising to my pen, I have other pardons to beg,
as I multiply lines, where none at all will be given. 
God Almighty bless, preserve, and comfort my
dear sorrowing and grievously offended Father and
Mother! —And continue in honour, favour, and
merit, my happy Sister! —May God forgive my 

Brother, and protect him from the violence of his
own temper, as well as from the destroyer of his
Sister's honour! —And may you, my dear Uncle,
and your no less now than ever dear Brother, my
second Papa, as he used to bid me call him, be
blessed and happy in them, and in each other! — 
And, in order to this, may you all speedily banish
from your remembrance for ever 
The unhappy
Clarissa Harlowe! 