


Sir Charles Grandison, To Miss Grandison. 


Friday, March 17. 
My dear Charlotte,
I Have already seen Captain Anderson. Richard
Saunders, whom I sent with your Letter, as soon as
I came to town, found him at his lodgings near
Whitehall. He expressed himself, on reading it, before
the servant, with indiscreet warmth. I would
not make minute enquiries after his words, because I
intended an amicable meeting with him. 
We met at four yesterday afternoon, at the Cocoa-tree
in Pallmall: Lieut. Col. Mackenzie, and Major
Dillon, two of his friends, with whom I had no acquaintance,
were with him. The Captain and I
withdrew to a private room. The two gentlemen
enter'd it with us. 
You will on this occasion, I know, expect me to
be particular: Yet must allow, that I had no good
cause to manage; since those points that had most
weight (and which were the ground of your objections
to him, when you saw him in a near light)
could not be pleaded without affronting him; and
if they were, would hardly meet with his allowance; 
and could therefore have no force in the
argument. 

On the two gentlemen entering the room with us,
without apology or objection, I ask'd the Captain, If
they were acquainted with the affair we met upon? 
He said, They were his dear and inseparable friends,
and knew every secret of his heart. Perhaps in this
case, Captain Anderson, returned I, it were as well
they did not. 
We are men of honour, Sir Charles Grandison,
said the Major, briskly. 
I don't doubt it, Sir. But where the delicacy of a
Lady is concern'd, the hearts of the principals should
be the whole world to each other. But what is done,
is done. I am ready to enter upon the affair before
these gentlemen, if you choose it, Captain. 
You will find us to be gentlemen, Sir Charles, said
the Colonel. 
The Captain then began, with warmth, his own
story. Indeed he told it very well. I was pleased,
for my sister's sake (pardon me, Charlotte) that he
did. He is not contemptible, either in person or understanding. 
He may be said, perhaps, to be an illiterate,
but he is not an ignorant man; tho' not the
person whom the friends of Charlotte Grandison
would think worthy of the first place in her heart. 
After he had told his story (which I need not repeat
to you) he insisted upon your promise. And his two
friends declared in his favour, with airs, each man, a
little too peremptory. I told them so; and that they
must do me the justice to consider me as a man of
some spirit, as well as themselves. I came hither
with a friendly intention, gentlemen, said I. I do
not love to follow the lead of hasty spirits. But if
you expect to carry any point with me, it must not
be either by raised voices, or heightened complexions. 
Their features were all at once changed. And they
said, they meant not to be warm. 
I told the Captain, That I would not enter into a
minute defence of the Lady, tho' my sister. I owned, 

that there had appeared a precipitation in her conduct. 
Her treatment at home, as she apprehended, was not
answerable to her merits. She was young, and knew
nothing of the world. Young Ladies were often
struck by appearances. You, Captain Anderson,
said I, have advantages in person and manner, that
might obtain for you a young Lady's attention. And
as she believed herself circumstanced in her family, I
wonder not that she lent an ear to the address of a
gallant man; whose command in that neighbourhood,
and, I doubt not, whose behaviour in that command,
added to his consequence. But I take it for
granted, Sir, that you met with difficulties from her,
when she came to reflect upon the disreputation of a
young woman's carrying on clandestinely a correspondence
with a man, of whose address her father, then
living, was not likely to approve. There was none of
that violent passion on either side, that precludes reason,
discretion, duty. It is no wonder then, that a
woman of Charlotte Grandison's known good sense,
should reflect, should consider: And perhaps the less,
that you should therefore seek to engage her by promise. 
But what was the promise? It was not the
promise that, it seems, you sought to engage her to
make; To be absolutely yours, and no other man's:
But it was, That she would not marry any other man
without your consent, while you remained single. An
unreasonable promise, however, I will presume to say,
either to be proposed, or submitted to. 
Sir! said the Captain, and looked the Soldier. 
I repeated what I last said. 
Sir! again said the Captain; and looked upon his
friends, who pointed each his head at the other, and
at him, by turns—as if they had said, Very free
language! 
For, Sir, proceeded I, did it not give room to
think, that you had either some doubts of your own
merit with the Lady, or of her affection and steadiness? 

And in either case, ought it to have been proposed?
ought it to have been made? For my part,
I should disdain to think of any woman for a wife,
who gave me reason to imagine, that she was likely
to balance a moment, as to her choice of me, or any
other man. 
Something in that! said the Colonel. 
As you explain yourself, Sir Charles, said the
Major— 
The Captain, however, sat swelling. He was not
so easily satisfied. 
Your motive, we are not to question, Captain, was
Love. Miss Grandison is a young woman whom any
man may love. By the way, where a man is assured
of a return in Love, there is no occasion for a promise. 
But a promise was made. My sister is a woman
of honour. She thinks herself bound by it; and
she is content to lead a single life to the end of it, if
you will not acquit her of this promise. Yet she leaves,
and at the time did leave, you free. You will have
the justice, Sir, to allow, that there is a generosity in
her conduct to you, which remains for you to shew to
her, since a promise should not be made but on equal
terms. Would you hold her to it, and be not held
yourself? She desires not to hold you. Let me tell
you, Captain, that if I had been in your situation, and
had been able to prevail upon myself to endeavour to
bring a Lady to make me such a promise, I should
have doubted her love of me, had she not sought to
bind me to her by an equal tie. What! should I
have said to myself, Is this Lady dearer to me than
all the women upon earth? Do I seek to bind her to
me by a solemn promise, which shall give me a power
over her? And has she so little regard for me, as not
to value, whether I marry any other woman? 
The Gentlemen looked upon one another; but
were silent. I proceeded. 
Let us set this matter in its true light. Here is a 

young woman, who had suffered herself to be embarrassed
in a treaty, that her whole heart, she assures
me, was never in. This was her fault. But know we
not how inextricable are the entanglements of Love,
as it is called, when young women are brought to enter
into correspondence with men? Our Sex have opportunities
of knowing the world, which the other have
not. Experience, gentlemen, engaging with inexperience,
and perhaps to the difference of twice the
number of years [Sir! said the Captain!] the combat
must be too unequal. How artfully do men endeavour
to draw in the women whom they think it worth
their while to pursue! —But would any man here wish
to marry a woman, who declares that she was insensibly
drawn in beyond her purpose? Who shewed,
when she refused to promise that she would be his,
in preference to all other men, that she did not love
him above all other men? Who, when she was prevailed
on to fetter herself, made him not of consequence
enough to herself to bind him? And, in a
word, who has long ago declared to him, and steadily
persists in the declaration, That she never will be his? 
—You seem, gentlemen, to be men of spirit. Would
you wish to marry the first woman on earth on these
terms, if you could obtain her?—which, however, is
not the case; since Miss Grandison's promise extends
not so far as to oblige her to marry Captain
Anderson. 
The Captain did not, he told me, like some part of
what I had said; and still less some of the words I had
used;—And seemed to be disposing his features to take
a livelier turn than became the occasion. I interrupted
him therefore: I meet you not, Captain, said I, either
to hear, or to obviate, cavils upon words. When I
have told you, that I came with an amicable intention,
I expect to be believed. I intend not offence. 
But let us be men. I am perhaps a younger man by
ten years, than any one present; but I have seen the 

world, as much as any man of my age; and know
what is due to the character of a Gentleman, whether
it be Captain Anderson's, or my own: And expect
not wilful misconstructions. 
All I mean is, Sir, said the Captain, that I will
not be treated contemptuously, no, not even by the
brother of Miss Grandison. 
The brother of Miss Grandison, Sir, is not accustomed
to treat any man contemptuously. Don't
treat yourself so, and you are safe from unworthy
treatment from me. Let me add, Sir, that I permit
every man to fix his character with me, as he pleases. 
I will venture to say, I have a large charity; but I extend
it not to tameness: But yet will always allow
a third person to decide upon the justice of my intentions
and actions. 
The Captain said, That he ascribed a great deal of
my sister's positiveness in her denial of him (those were
his words) to the time of my arrival in England; and
he doubted not, that I had encouraged the proposals,
either of Sir Walter Watkyns, or of Lord G. because
of their quality and fortunes: And hence his difficulties
were encreased. 
And then up he rose, slapt one hand upon the table,
put the other on his sword, and was going to say some
very fierce things, prefacing them with damning his
blood; when I stood up: Hold, Captain; be calm,
if possible—Hear from me the naked truth: I will
make you a fair representation; and, when I have
done, do you resume, if you think it necessary, that
angry air you got up with, and see what you'll make
of it. 
His friends interposed. He sat down, half out of
breath with anger. His swelled features went down
by degrees. 
The truth of the matter is strictly and briefly this. 
All my sister's difficulties (which, perhaps, were
greater in apprehension than in fact) ended with my 

father's life. I made it my business, on my arrival,
as soon as possible, to ascertain my sisters' fortunes. 
Lord L. married the elder. The two gentlemen you
have mentioned, made their addresses to the younger. 
I knew nothing of you, Captain Anderson. My sister
had wholly kept the affair between you and her, in her
own breast. She had not revealed it, even to her sister. 
The reason she gives, and to which you, Sir, could
be no stranger, was, That she was determined never
to be yours. The subject requires explicitness, Captain
Anderson: And I am not accustomed to palliate,
whenever it does. She hoped to prevail upon you to
leave her as generously free, as she had left you. I do
assure you, upon my honour, that she favours not either
of the gentlemen. I know not the man she does
favour. It is I, her brother, not herself, that am solicitous
for her marrying. And, upon the indifference
she expressed to change her condition, on terms to
which no objection could be made, I supposed she
must have a secret preference to some other man. I
was afterwards informed, that letters had passed between
her and you, by a Lady, who had it from a
Gentleman of your acquaintance. You have shewn
me, Sir, by the presence of these Gentlemen, that
you were not so careful of the secret, as my sister
had been. 
I charged my sister, upon this discovery, with reserve
to me: But offered her my service in her own
way; assuring her, that if her heart were engaged,
the want of quality, title, and fortune, should not be
of weight with me; and that whomsoever she accepted
for her husband, him would I receive for my
brother. 
The Colonel and the Major extravagantly applauded
a behaviour on this occasion, which deserved no more
than a common approbation. 
She solemnly assured me, proceeded I, that altho'
she held-herself bound by the promise which youth, 

inexperience, and solicitation, had drawn her in to
make, she resolved to perform it by a perpetual single
life, if it were insisted upon. And thus, Sir, you see,
that it depends upon you to keep Charlotte Grandison
a single woman, till you marry some other Lady (A
power, let me tell you, that no man ought to seek to
obtain over any young woman) or, generously to acquit
her of it, and leave her as free as she has left you. — 
And now, gentlemen (to the Major and Colonel) if
you come hither not so much parties as judges, I leave
this matter upon your consideration; and will withdraw
for a few moments. 
I left every mouth ready to burst into words; and
walked into the public room. There I met with Colonel
Martin, whom I had seen abroad; and who
had just asked after Major Dillon. He, to my great
surprize, took notice to me of the business that brought
me thither. 
You see, my sister, the consequence you were of to
Captain Anderson. He had not been able to forbear
boasting of the honour which a daughter of Sir Thomas
Grandison had done him, and of his enlarged
prospects, by her interest. Dear Charlotte—How unhappy
was the man, that your pride should make you
think yourself concern'd to keep secret an affair that
he thought a glory to him to make known to many! 
For we see (shall I not say, to the advantage of this
gentleman's character) that he has many dear and inseparable
friends, from whom he concealed not any secret
of his heart. 
Colonel Mackenzie came out soon after, and we
withdrew to the corner of the room. He talked a
great deal of the strength of the captain's passion; of
the hopes he had conceived of making his fortune,
thro' the interest of a family to which he imputed
consideration: He made me a great many compliments:
He talk'd of the great detriment this long-suspended
affair had been to his friend; and told me, 

with a grave countenance, that the Captain was grown
as many years older, as it had been in hand; and was
ready to rate very highly so much time lost in the prime
of life. In short, he ascribed to the Captain the views
and the disappointments of a military fortune-hunter
too plainly for his honour in my eye, had I been disposed
to take proper notice of the meaning of what
he said. 
After having heard him out, I desired the Colonel
to let me know what all this meant, and what were
the Captain's expectations. 
He paraded on again, a long time; and asked me,
at last, If there were no hopes that the Lady— 
None at all, interrupted I. She has steadily declared
as much. Charlotte Grandison is a woman of
fine sense. She has great qualities. She has insuperable
objections to the Captain, which are founded on
a more perfect knowlege of the man, and of her own
heart, than she could have at first. It is not my intention
to depreciate him with his friend: I shall not,
therefore, enter into particulars. Let me know, Colonel,
what the gentleman pretends to. He is passionate,
I see: I am not a tame man: But God forbid,
that Captain Anderson, who hoped to be benefited
by an alliance with the daughter of Sir Thomas
Grandison, should receive hurt, or hard treatment,
from her brother! 
Here Colonel Martin, who had heard something of
what was said, desired to speak with Colonel Mackenzie. 
They were not so distant, but my ear unavoidably
caught part of their subject. Colonel Martin
expatiated, in a very high manner, on my character,
when I was abroad. He imputed bravery to me
(a great article among military men, and with you Ladies)
and I know not how many good qualities—And
Colonel Mackenzie took him in with him to the
other two gentlemen: Where, I suppose, every-thing
that had passed was repeated. 

After a while, I was desired by Colonel Martin, in
the name of the gentlemen, to walk in; he himself
sitting down in the public room. 
They received me with respect. I was obliged to
hear and say a great many things, that I had said and
heard before: But at last two proposals were made
me; either of which, they said, if complied with,
would be taken as laying the Captain under very high
obligation. 
Poor man! I had compassion for him, and closed
with one of them; declining the other for a reason
which I did not give to them. To say truth, Charlotte,
I did not choose to promise my interest in behalf
of a man, of whose merit I was not assured, had
I been able to challenge any, as perhaps I might by
Lord W.'s means; who stands well with proper persons. 
A man ought to think himself, in some measure,
accountable for warm recommendations; especially
where the public is concerned: And could I
give my promise, and be cool as to the performance? 
And I should think myself also answerable to a worthy
man, and to every one connected with him, if I were
a means of lifting one less worthy over his head. I
chose therefore to do that service to him, for which I
am responsible only to myself. After I have said this,
my sister must ask me no questions. 
I gave a rough draught, at the Captain's request, of
the manner in which I would have releases drawn. 
Colonel Martin was desired to walk in. And all the
gentlemen promised to bury in silence all that had ever
come to their knowlege, of what had passed between
Charlotte Grandison, and Captain Anderson. 
Let not the mentioning to you these measures, hurt
you, my sister. Many young Ladies of sense and family
have been drawn into still greater inconveniencies
than you have suffered. Persons of eminent
abilities (I have a very high opinion of my Charlotte's)
seldom err in small points. Most young women, who 

begin a correspondence with our designing Sex,
think they can stop when they will. But it is not so. 
We, and the dark spirit that sets us at work, which
we sometimes mis-call Love, will not permit you to do
so. Men and Women are Devils to one another. 
They need no other tempter. 
All will be completed to-morrow; and your written
promise, of consequence, given up. I congratulate
my sister on the happy conclusion of this affair. 
You are now your own mistress, and free to choose
for yourself. I should never forgive myself, were I,
who have been the means of freeing you from one
controul, to endeavour to lay you under another. 
Think not either of Sir Walter or of Lord G. if your
heart declare not in favour of either. You have
sometimes thought me earnest in behalf of Lord G. 
But I have never spoken in his favour, but when you
have put me upon answering objections to him, which
I have thought insufficient: And indeed, Charlotte,
some of your objections have been so slight, that I was
ready to believe, you put them for the pleasure of
having them answered. 
My Charlotte need not doubt of admirers, where-ever
she sets her foot. And I repeat, that whoever
be the man she inclines to favour, she may depend
upon the approbation and good offices of 
Her ever-affectionate brother,
Charles Grandison. 

