


Mrs. Shirley, To Miss Byron. 


Sunday, March 5. 
Don't be afraid, don't be ashamed, my dearest
Life, to open your whole heart to your aunt
Selby and me. You know how we all dote upon
you. It is no disgrace for a young woman of virtue to
be in love with a worthy man. Love is a natural passion. 
You have shewn, I am sure, if ever young creature
did shew, that you are no giddy, no indiscreet
person. Not Greville, with all his gaiety; not
Fenwick, with all his adulation; not the more respectable
Orme, with all his obsequiousness; nor yet
the imploring Fowler; nor the terrifying, the shocking
Sir Hargrave Pollexfen; have seen the least shadow
of vanity or weakness in you. How happily
have you steer'd thro' difficulties, in which the love of
being admired often involves meaner minds! And how
have you, with mingled dignity and courteousness, entitled
yourself to the esteem, and even veneration, of
those whom you refused! And why refused! Not
from pride, but principle; and because you could not
love any one of them, as you thought you ought to
love the man to whom you gave your hand. 
And at last, when the man appeared to you, who
was worthy of your love; who had so powerfully protected
you from the lawless attempt of a fierce and
cruel pretender; a man who proved to be the best of
brothers, friends, landlords, masters, and the bravest
and best of men; is it to be wonder'd at, that an heart,
which never before was won, should discover sensibility,
and acknowlege its fellow-heart? —What reason
then can you have for shame? And why seeks my
Harriet to draw a curtain between herself and her sympathizing
friends? You see, my dear, that we are 

above speaking slightly, because of our uncertainty, of
a man that all the world praises. Nor are you, child,
so weak as to be treated with such poor policy. 
You were not educated, my dear, in artifice. Disguises
never sat so ill upon any woman, as they do, in
most of your late letters, upon you. Every child in
love-matters would find you out. But be it your
glory, whether our wishes are, or are not answered,
that your affection is laudable; that the object of it is
not a man mean in understanding, profligate in morals,
nor sordid in degree; but such an one as all we
your friends are as much in love with as you can be. 
Only, my dear Love, my Harriet, the Support of my
life, and Comfort of my evil days, endeavour, for my
sake, and for the sake of us all, to restrain so far your
laudable inclination, as that, if it be not your happy
lot to give us, as well as yourself, so desirable a blessing,
you may not suffer in your health (an health so
precious to me) and put yourself on a foot with vulgar
girls run away with by their headstrong passions. 
The more desirable the object, the nobler the conquest
of your passion, if it is to be overcome. Nevertheless,
speak out, my dear, your whole heart to us,
in order to intitlo yourself to our best advice: And as
to your uncle Selby, don't let his raillery pain you:
He diverts us as well as himself by it: He gains nothing
over us in the arguments he affects to hold with
us: And you must know, that his whole honest heart
is wrapt up in his and our Harriet. Worthy man! 
He would not, any more than I, be able to support
his spirits, were any misfortune to befal his niece. 
Your aunt Selby has just now shewn me her letter
to you. She repeats in it, as a very strong expression
in yours, “That you had rather converse with this
excellent man but one hour in a week, than be the
wife of any man you have ever seen or known.” 
It is a strong expression; but, to me, is an expression
greatly to your honour; since it shews, that the mind, 

and not the person, is the principal object of your
love. 
I knew that, if ever you did love, it would be a
love of the purest kind. As therefore it has not so
much person in it, as most loves; suffer it not to triumph
over your reason; nor, because you cannot
have the man you could prefer, resolve against having
any other. Have I not taught you, that marriage is a
duty, whenever it can be enter'd into with prudence? 
What a mean, what a selfish mind must that person
have, whether man or woman, who can resolve against
entering into the state, because it has its cares, its fatigues,
its inconveniencies! Try Sir Charles Grandison,
my dear, by this rule. If he forbears to marry
on such narrow motives, this must be one of his great
imperfections. Nor be afraid to try. No man is absolutely
perfect. 
But Sir Charles may have engagements, from which
he cannot free himself. My Harriet, I hope, will
not give way to a passion, which is not likely to be
returned, if she find that to be the case. You hope,
you prettily said in one of your letters, “that you shall
not be undone by a good man.” After such an
escape as you had from Sir Hargrave, I have no fear
from a bad one: But, my child, if you are undone by
a good one, it must be by your own fault, while neither
he nor his sisters give you encouragement. 
I know, my dear, how these suppositions will hurt
your delicacy: But then you must doubly guard yourself; 
for the reality will be worse wounding to that
delicacy, than the supposition ought to be. If there be
but one man in the world that can undo you, will you
not guard against him? 
I long to fold my dearest Harriet to my fond heart:
But yet, this that follows, is the advice I give, as to the
situation you are now in: Lose no opportunity of cultivating
the friendship of his amiable sisters [By the
way, if Miss Grandison guesses at your mind, she is 

not so generous in her raillery as is consistent with
the rest of her amiable character]. Never deny them
your company, when they request it. Miss Grandison
has promised you the history of their family. 
Exact the performance of that promise from her. 
You will thus come at further lights, by which you
may be guided in your future steps. —In particular,
you will find out, whether the sisters espouse the interest
of any other woman; tho' Sir Charles's reservedness,
even to them, may not let them know the
secrets of his heart in this particular. And if they
do not espouse any other person's interest, why may
they not be made your friends, my dear? —As to fortune,
could we have any hint what would be expected,
we would do every thing in our power to make
that matter easy; and must be content with moderate
settlements in your favour. 
But as I approve of your aunt's having forborn to
write, as you would have had her, to Lady D. What
shall we do in that affair? it will be ask'd. 
What? Why thus: Lady D. has made it a point,
that you are disengaged in your affections: Your aunt
has signified to her that you are: You have given that
lady an hint, which, you say, overclouded her brow. 
She will be here on Saturday next. Then will she, no
doubt, expect the openest dealing. —And she ought to
have it. Her own frankness demands it; and the character
we have hitherto supported, and I hope always
shall support, requires it. I would therefore let Lady D.
know the whole of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen's attempt
[You, my dear, was so laudably frank as to hint it to
her] and of the generous protection given you by Sir
Charles Grandison. Truth never leaves room for
self-reproach. Let your aunt Selby then own, that
you had written to her; declining, with the most respectful
gratitude, the honour intended you: Which
she could no otherwise account for, than by supposing,
and indeed believing, that you would prefer Sir Charles 

Grandison, from motives of gratitude, to any other
man: But that you knew nothing of his engagements; 
nor had reason to look upon any part of his behaviour
to you, but as the effect of his general politeness; 
nor that his sisters meant more by calling you sister,
than their brother's sister, as well as theirs. 
All this shall be mentioned to Lady D. in strict confidence. 
Then will Lady D. know the whole truth. 
She will be enabled, as she ought, to judge for herself. 
You will not appear in her eye as guilty of affectation. 
We shall all act in character. If Lady L. and Miss
Grandison did (as you suppose) acquaint Lady D. that
you were not addressed by their brother, they will be
found to have said the truth; and you know, my dear,
that we should be as ready to do justice to others veracity,
as to our own. She will see, that your regard for
Sir Charles (if a regard you have, that may be an obstacle
to her views) is owing to a laudable gratitude for
his protection given to a young woman, whose heart
was before absolutely disengaged. 
And what will be the consequence? —Why, either
that her ladyship will think no more of the matter; 
and then you will be just where you were; or, that
she will interest herself in finding out Sir Charles's engagements:
And as you have communicated to Lady
L. and Miss Grandison the letters that have passed between
Lady D. and your aunt, together with the contents
of yours, so far as relates to the proposal; and
as Lady D. is acquainted with those two ladies; she
will probably inform herself of their sentiments in relation
to the one affair and the other; and the matter
on every side, by this means, will sooner come to a decision,
than probably it can any other way. 
I don't know whether I express myself clearly. I
am not what I was: But, blessed be God, that I am
what I am! I did not think, that, in so little a time,
I could have written so much as I have. But my dear
Harriet is my subject; and her happiness is, and has 

ever been, my only care, since I lost the husband of
my youth, the dear man who divided with me that,
and all my cares; who had a love for you equal to my
own; and who, I think, would have given just such
advice. What would Mr. Shirley have thought? 
How would he, in the like case, have acted? are the
questions I always ask myself, before I give my opinion
in any material cases, especially in those which relate
to you. 
And here let me commend a sentiment of yours,
that is worthy of your dear grandfather's pupil: “I
should despise myself,” say you, “were I capable of
keeping one man in suspense, while I was balancing
in favour of another.” 
Good young creature, hold fast your principles,
whatever befals you. Look upon this world as you
have been taught to look upon it. I have lived to a
great age: Yet, to look backward to the time of my
youth, when I was not a stranger to the hopes and
fears that now agitate you, what a short space does it
seem to be! Nothing with-holds my wishes to be released,
but my desire of seeing the darling of my heart,
my sweet orphan-girl, happy in a worthy man's protection. 
O that it could be in—But shall we, my
dear, prescribe to Providence? How know we what
that has designed for Sir Charles Grandison? His welfare
is the concern of hundreds, perhaps. He, compared
to us, is as the public to the private. I hope we
are good people: Comparatively, I am sure, we are
good. That, however, is not the way by which we
shall be judged hereafter. But yet, to him, we are but
as that private. 
Don't think, however, my best Love, that I have
lived too long to be sensible of what most affects you. 
Of your pleasures, your pains, I can and do partake. 
Your late harassings, so tender, so lovely a blossom, cost
me many a pang; and still my eyes bear witness to
my sensibility, as the cruel scenes are at times read to 

me again, or as I recal them to memory. But all I
mean is, to arm you against feeling too sensibly, when
it is known, the event which is now hidden in the bosom
of Providence, should it, as is but too likely, prove
unfavourable. 
You have a great deal of writing upon your hands. 
We cannot dispense with any of that. But if you
write to your aunt Selby (as the time till next Saturday
is short) that will be writing to us both. 
God preserve, direct, and bless, my sweet orphan-child! 
—This is the hourly prayer of 
Your ever-affectionate Grandmother,
Henrietta Shirley. 

