


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Feb. 24. & 25. 
Now have I near a week to go back, my Lucy,
with my current narrative, having been thrown
behind-hand by the long letters I have been obliged
to write, to give you an account of my distress, of
my deliverance, of the characters of this noble brother
and sister, and a multitude of coincidences and reflexions,
which all my dear friends expect, as they
fall in, from the pen of their Harriet. And this letter
shall therefore be a kind of diary of that week; only
that I will not repeat what my cousin Reeves has told
me he has written. 
On Monday I was conducted home in safety, by my
kind protector, and his amiable sister. 
Mrs. Reeves, Lady Betty, and Miss Clements, are
in love with them both. 
My cousin has told you, how much they disappointed
us, in declining to stay dinner. What shall we 

do, if they are not as fond of our company as we are
of theirs? We are not used to be slighted, you know:
And to be slighted by those we love, there can be no
bearing of that. But I hope this will not be the case. 
At tea, the name of Sir Rowland Meredith carried
me instantly down. 
Mr. Reeves had told the good Knight, on his calling
on the Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and on this day,
before we returned from Colnebrooke, that I had been
over-fatigued at the Masquerade on Thursday night
[And so I was]; and was gone a little way out of town. 
Carried he should have said: I was carried with a
witness. 
Sir Rowland took notice, that I must have had a
smart illness for the time, by my alter'd countenance. 
You are, and must be, ever lovely, Miss Byron:
But I think you look not quite so serene, you don't
look so composed, as you used to do. But I was afraid
you was denied to my longing sight. I was afraid
you would let your papa go down to Caermarthen,
without giving him an opportunity to bless his cross
girl. It was in vain, he feared, to urge me—He stopt,
and look'd full in my face—Pray, Sir Rowland, said
I, how does my brother Fowler? 
Why, ay, that's the duce of it! Your brother Fowler. 
But as the honest man says, so say I; I will not teaze
you. But never, never, will you have—But no more
of that—I come to take my leave of you. I should
have set out this very morning, could I have seen you
on Saturday, or yesterday. But I shall go to-morrow
morning early. You are glad of that, madam, I am
sure. 
Indeed, Sir Rowland, I shall always respect and
value you. And I hope I shall have your good wishes,
Sir— 
Yes, yes, madam, you need not doubt it. And
I will humble all the proud women in Wales, by telling
them of Miss Byron. 

You tell me, my Lucy, that you were all moved
at one of the conversations I gave you between the
Knight, Mr. Fowler, and myself. 
Were I to be as particular in my account of what
passed on Sir Rowland's taking leave of me, as I was
on that other occasion, and were to judge by the effect
his honest tenderness had on me, as I craved his blessing,
and as he blessed me (the big tears, unheeded by himself,
straying down his reverend cheeks) I think you
would have been in like manner affected. 
Mr. Fowler is to go down after him—If—if—if,
said the Knight, looking fervently in my face— 
I should be glad, I said, to see, and to wish my
brother a good journey. 
Tuesday morning early I had a kind enquiry after
my rest, from Miss Grandison, in her brother's name,
as well as in her own. And about eleven o'clock
came the dear lady herself. She would run up stairs
to me, following Sally—In her dressing-room, say
you? —She shall not come down. 
She entered with the maid—Writing, my dear, said
she, I one day hope, my Harriet, you will shew me all you
write—There, there, sitting down by me, no bustle. 
And how does my fair friend? —Well—I see very well
—To a lover—or of a lover—that's the same thing.— 
Thus, sweetly familiar, ran she on. 
Mrs. Reeves entered: Excuse me, madam, said
Miss Grandison: This is but one of my flying visits,
as I call them: My next shall be to you. But perhaps
I may not make it in form neither: We are relations,
you know. How does Mr. Reeves? He is a good
man. At home?— 
He is, madam, and will be rejoiced— 
I know he will—Why, madam, this our Byron,
our Harriet, I should say, looks charmingly! —You
had best lock her up. There are many more Sir Hargrave's
in the world, than there are Miss Byron's. 

She told me, that Sir Charles had set out that morning
early for Canterbury. He will be absent two or
three days, said she. He charged me with his compliments. 
He did nothing but talk of his new-found
sister, from the time he parted with you. I shall promote
your interest with him, in order to strengthen
my own. I want to find him out. 
Some love-engagements, I suppose, madam? said
Mrs. Reeves—It is impossible, but the ladies— 
The ladies! Ay, that's the thing! The duce is in
them! They will not stay to be asked. These men,
the best of them, love nothing but what is attended
with difficulty. But all his love matters he keeps to
himself; yet knows all mine—Except one little entanglement
—Mr. Reeves hears not what we say (looking
about her): But you, my dear, shall reveal to me your
sneaking passion, if you have one, and I will discover
mine—But not to you, Mrs. Reeves. No married
women shall I trust with what lies in the innermost
sold of my heart. Your husbands are always the wiser
for what you know; tho' they can keep their own
counsel; and then, Harriet, Satan-like, the ungenerous
wretches, becoming both tempters and accusers,
laugh at us, and make it wonderful for a woman to
keep a secret. 
The ladies will not stay to be asked, my Lucy! —An
odd hint! —These men, the best of them, love nothing
but what comes to them with difficulty. —He keeps all his
love-matters to himself. —All, my Lucy! —But indeed
she had said before, that if Sir Charles married,
half a dozen hearts would be broken! 
This is nothing to me indeed. But, once more, I
wonder why a man of a turn so laudable, should have
any secrets? The more a good man permits any one
to know of his heart, the more good he might do,
by way of example. —And has he, can he have, so
many love-secrets, and yet will he not let them transpire
to such a sister? —Whom (and so she once hinted) 

it imported to know something of them. But, he
knows best. I am very impertinent to be more concerned
for his sister, than she is for herself. But I do
love her. And one can no more bear to have those
slighted whom we love, than one's self. 
It is very difficult, Lucy, to know one's self. I am
afraid I have a little spice of censoriousness in my temper,
which I knew nothing of till now: But, no, it
is not censoriousness neither: I cannot be so mean, as
to be censorious: And yet I can now, methinks (for
the first time) a little account for those dark spirits who
may be too much obliged; and who, despairing to be
able ever to return the obligation, are ready to quarrel
with the obliger. 
Spiteful men say, that we women know not ourselves; 
know not our own hearts. I believe there is
something of truth in the aspersion: But as men and
women are brothers and sisters, as I may say, are not
the men equally censurable? And should not we women
say so, were we to be as spiteful as they? Must
it needs be, that a sister of the same father and mother
must be more silly, more unsteady, more absurd,
more impertinent, than her brother? I hope not. 
Mrs. Reeves not knowing, as she said afterwards,
but Miss Grandison might have something to say to
me, withdrew. 
I believe I told you last Sunday, said Miss Grandison,
of a cousin that we have: A good-natured
young fellow: He supped with us last night. Sir
Charles was so full of your praises, yet not letting him
into your history, that he is half-wild to see you. 
God forbid, thought I, when she had gone only
thus far, that this cousin should be proposed! What
an easy thing is it, my Lucy, to alarm a woman on
the side of her vanity! 
He breakfasted with me this morning, continued
she, after Sir Charles had set out; and knowing that I
intended to make you a flying visit, he besought me 

to take him with me: But I would not, my dear,
bring an inundation of new admirers upon you: He
has a great acquaintance; and is very bold, tho' not
indecent: He is thought to be a modern wit, you
must know; and, to speak after an admirable writer,
a minute philosopher; and thinks he has something to
say for himself when his cousin is not present. Before
Sir Charles arrived, and when we were in expectation
of his coming, being appris'd that Sir
Charles had a serious turn, he threatened to play upon
him, and, as he phrased it, to bamboozle him; for
these wits and witlings have a language peculiar to
themselves. But on Sir Charles's arrival, in two conversations,
he drew in his horns, as we say; and now
reverences those good qualities which he has not, however,
the grace to imitate. Now I will not answer,
but you may have a visit from him to see the loveliest
woman in England. If he comes, see him, or not,
as you please; and think not yourself under any civil
obligation to my brother, or me, to go out of your
own way: But I hope he will not be so impertinent. 
I don't wish you to see him out of my brother's company; 
because you will see him then to his own advantage. 
And yet he has such a notion that we women
love to be admired, and to have handsome things
said to us, that he imagines, the visit of a man, made
for that purpose, will give him as free a welcome to
the finest woman in the world, as painters give to
those who come to see their pictures, and for the like
reason. But no more of Mr. Grandison. Yet I thought
proper to prepare you, if he should take so confident
a liberty. 
I thanked her. 
Well but, my dear, you seem to have a long parcel
of writing before you: One, two, three, four—Eight
leaves—Upon my word! —But Mr. Reeves told me
you are a writer; and that you gave an account of all
that befel you, to our grandmother Shirley, to our 

uncle and aunt Selby, to our cousins Lucy and Nancy— 
You see I remember every name: And will you one
day let me see what you write? 
Most willingly, madam— 
Madam! interrupted she. So formal! Charlotte say. 
With all my heart, my ever-amiable, my ever-kind,
Charlotte. 
So, so—Well may the men say, we love flattery,
when rather than want it, we will flatter one another. 
I was going to disclaim flattery: Hush, hush, hush,
my dear, I doubt not your sincerity. You are a grateful
and good girl: But dare you, will you, shew me
all and every-thing about that Greville, that Orme,
that Fowler, that Fenwick? —You see, I forget none
of the names that your cousin Reeves told me of on
Saturday last, and which I made you talk of last Sunday. 
All and every-thing, Miss Grandison: But will you
tell me of your gentleman?— 
Will I! No doubt of it: How can young women
be together one quarter of an hour, and not lead one
another into talk of their lovers! Lord, my dear,
those secrets, Sir Charles once said, are the cement of
young womens friendships. 
And could Sir Charles— 
Could Sir Charles? —Yes, yes, yes. Do you think
a man can be a judge of human nature, and leave
women out of the question? Why, my dear, he finds
us out in a minute. Take care of yourself, Harriet—If— 
I shall be afraid of him— 
What if you have a good conscience, my dear!— 
She then looked very archly. She made me blush. 
She look'd more archly. I blush'd, I believe, a
deeper dye. 
Did I not tell you, Lucy, that she could do what
she pleased with her eyes? —But what did she mean
by this? 

In my conscience, my Harriet, little or much, I
believe we women are all rogues in our hearts. 
And does Miss Grandison say that from her own
conscience? 
I believe I do: But I must fly: I have ten more
visits to pay before I go home to dress. You will tell
me all about your fellows, you say? 
And you will tell me, about your entanglement, as
you called it. 
Why that's a difficulty upon me: But you must
encourage me by your freedom, and we will take up
our fellows and lay them down again, one by one, as
we run them over, and bid them lie still and be quiet
till we recal them to our memory. 
But I have not one lover, my Charlotte, to tell you
of: I always gave them their dismission— 
And I have but two, that at present I care to own; 
and they won't be dismissed: But then I have half a
dozen, I believe, that have said extravagant things to
me; and we must look upon them as lovers elect,
you know, who only want to be coquetted with. 
Miss Grandison, I hope, cannot think of coquetting? 
Not much: Only a little now-and-then, to pay the
men in their own coin. 
Charming vivacity! said I. I shall be undone, if
you don't love me. 
No fear, no fear of that! —I am a whimsical creature:
But the sun in his course is not more constant
than I am steady in my friendships. And these communications
on both sides will rivet us to each other,
if you treat me not with reserve. 
She arose to go in a hurry. Abate, my dear Charlotte,
of half your other visits, and favour me with
your company a little longer. 
Give me some chocolate then; and let me see your
cousin Reeves's: I like them. Of the ten visits, six of
the ladies will be gone to sales, or to plague tradesmen, 

and buy nothing: Any-where rather than at home:
The devil's at home, is a phrase: And our modern
ladies live as if they thought so. Two of the other
four called upon me, and hardly alighted: I shall do
so by them. The other two I shall have paid my compliments
to in one quarter of an hour. 
I rang for chocolate; and to beg my cousins company. 
They wanted but the word: In they came. My
apartment (which she was pleased to admire) then became
the subject of a few inoments conversation: And
then a much better took place: Sir Charles, I mean. 
I asked, If her brother had any relations at Canterbury? 
I protest I don't know, said she: But this I know,
That I have none there. Did I not hint to you, that
Sir Charles has his secrets? —But he sometimes loves
to play with my curiosity: He knows, I have a reasonable
quantity of that. 
Were I his sister— 
Then you must do as he would have you, Harriet. 
I know him to be steady in his purposes: But he is
besides so good, that I give up any-thing to oblige
him— 
Your entanglement, Charlotte? asked I, smiling. 
Mr. Reeves knows nothing from that word. 
Why, yes, my entanglement; and yet I hate to
think of it: So no more of that. It is the only secret
I have kept from him; and that is, because he has no
suspicion of the matter: If he had, tho' my life were
to be the forfeit, I believe he would have it. 
She told us, that she expected us soon to dine with
her in St. James's Square: But that she must fix Sir
Charles. I expect, said she, you will often drop in
upon me, as I will upon you. From this time, we
will have nothing but conversation-visits between us; 
and we will leave the modern world to themselves; 
and be Queen Elizabeth's women. I am sorry to tell
you—Let me whisper it. 

And she did; but loud enough for every one to
hear: Altho' I follow the fashion, and make one fool
the more for it, I despise above one half of the women
I know. 
Miss Grandison, affectedly whispered I again, should
not do so; because her example is of weight enough
to mend them. 
I'll be hang'd if Miss Byron thinks so, re-whisper'd
she. The age is too far gone. Nothing but a national
calamity can do it. But let me tell you, that, at the
same time, I despise more than one half of the fellows. 
But, speaking out, you and I will try to think ourselves
wiser than any-body else; and we shall have
this comfort, we shall not easily find any of our sex,
who by their superior wisdom will give us reason to
think ourselves mistaken. 
But adieu, adieu, and adieu, my agreeable friends! 
Let me see you, and you, and you, turning to each
of the three, as often as is convenient, without ceremony:
And remember we have been acquainted these
hundred years. 
Away she hurried, forbidding me to go out of my
apartment. Mrs. Reeves could not overtake her. Mr.
Reeves had much ado to be in time to make his compliments. 
She was in her chariot before he could offer
his hand. 
How pretty it was, my Lucy, in Miss Grandison,
to remember the names of all my dear friends! She
told me indeed, on Sunday, that she should. 
If travelling into foreign countries gives ease and
politeness, would not one think that Miss Grandison
has visited every European court, as well as her brother? 
If she has not, was it necessary for Sir Charles
to go abroad to acquire that freedom and ease which
his sister has so happily attained without stirring out of
the kingdom? 
These men had not best despise us, Lucy. There
is not, I hope, so much difference in the genius of 

the two sexes as the proud ones among theirs are apt
to imagine; especially when you draw comparisons
from equal degrees in both. 
O Mr. Walden, take care of yourself, if ever again
you and I meet at Lady Betty's! —But this abominable
Sir Hargrave! Not one word more of meeting at Lady
Betty's! There saw I first the wretch that still, on
recollection, strikes terror into my heart. 
Wednesday, a visit from Miss Clements and Lady
Betty took me off my writing about two hours; yet
I over-writ myself, and was obliged to lie down for
about two more. At night we had Sir John Allestree,
and his nephew, and Miss Allestree, and Miss Clements,
and Lady Betty, at supper, and cards. But,
my Stomach paining me, about eleven I was permitted
to retire to bed. 
On Thursday I finished my long letter, relating my
distresses, and deliverance. It was a dreadful subject. 
I rejoiced when I had done it. 
The same day Mr. Reeves received Sir Charles's letter,
inclosing that of the wretched Wilson. I have often
heard my grandfather observe, that men of truly great
and brave spirits are most tender and merciful; and
that, on the contrary, men of base and low minds
are cruel, tyrannical, insolent, where-ever they have
power. What this short letter, so full of lenity, of
mercy, of generous and humane care for the future
good of a criminal, and extended to unborn families,
as well as to all his acquaintance and friends in being,
enables one to judge of the truly heroic Sir Charles
Grandison; and what I have experienced of the low,
groveling, unmanly insults of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen
(I a poor defenseless silly girl, trick'd into his power); 
are flagrant proofs of the justice of the observation. 
I wish, with all my heart, that the best woman in
the world were queen of a great nation; and that it
was in my power, for the sake of enlarging Sir Charles's
to do good, to make him her royal consort. Then 

am I morally sure, that I should be the humble means
of making a whole people happy! 
But as we had all been informed from other hands,
of Sir Hargrave's threatnings of Sir Charles's life, Wilson's
postscript has fastened a weight on my heart, that
will not be removed till the danger is overblown. 
This day I had Miss Grandison's compliments,
with tender enquiries, brought me; and a desire, that
as she supposed my first visit would be one of thankful
duty, meaning to church (for so I had told her it should)
my next might be to her. 
Yesterday I received the welcome packet, from
so many kind friends: And I prosecuted with the more
vigour, for it, my writing-task. How easily do we
glide into subjects that please us! —How swiftly flies
the pen! —The characters of Sir Charles and of Miss
Grandison were the subjects; and I was amazed to find
how much I had written in so short a time. 
Miss Grandison sent me in the evening of this day
her compliments, joined with those of her brother,
who was but just returned from Canterbury. 
I wonder what Sir Charles could do at Canterbury
so many days, and to have nobody there whom his
sister knows. 
She would have made me a visit, she sent me word; 
but that as she expected her brother in the morning,
she had intended to have brought him with her. She
added, that this morning (Saturday) they should both
set out for Colnebrooke, in hopes of the Earl and Countess
of L. arriving there as this night from Scotland. 
Do you think, Lucy, it would not have been generous
in Sir Charles to have made one visit, before
he set out for so many days, to that Canterbury, to
the creature on whom he had laid such an obligation? 
I can only mean as to the civility of the thing, you
must think; since he was so good to join in, nay, to
propose, the farther intimacy, as a brother, and friend,
and so-forth—I wish that Sir Charles be as sincere in 

his professions as his sister. He may in his travels (possibly
he may) have mistaken some gay weeds for fine
flowers, and pick'd them up, and brought them with
him to England: And yet, if he has done so, he
will, even then, be superior to thousands, who travel,
and bring home nothing but the weeds of foreign climates. 
He once said, as Miss Grandison told me, that the
Countess of L. is still a more excellent woman than
my Charlotte. Ah! Sir Charles! You can tell fibs,
I believe. I will not forgive in you, those slighter deviations,
which we are too apt to pass by in other,
even tolerable, men. 
I wish you may be in earnest, my good Sir, in proposing
to cultivate an intimate friendship with me, as
that of a brother to a sister [Shake your head, my Lucy,
if you will, I mean no more] that I may be intitled
to tell you your faults, as I see them. In your sister
Harriet you shall find, tho' a respectful, yet an open-eyed
monitor. Our Charlotte thinks you cannot be
wrong in any-thing. 
All I fear is, that Sir Charles's tenderness was designed
to be excited only while my spirits were weak. Yet
he bespoke a brotherly relation to me, before Mr.
Reeves, when he brought me home, and supposed me
stolen from his family in my infancy. That was going
farther than was necessary, if he thought to drop the
fraternal character soon. 
But might not my own behaviour alarm him? The
kind, the considerate man, is perhaps compassionate
in his intention. Not distinguishing aright my bashful
gratitude, and down-cast eye, he might be afraid,
lest I should add one to the half-score, that his sister
says will die if he marry. 
If this be so, what, my dear, will your Harriet deserve,
if his caution does not teach her some? 
After all, I believe, these men in general think our
hearts are made of strange combustible materials. A 

spark struck, a match thrown in—But the best of men,
this admirable man, will, I hope, find himself mistaken,
if he think so of your Harriet. 
What ails me, that I am grown such a boaster! 
Surely, this horrid attempt of Sir Hargrave has not
affected my brain. Methinks I am not, some how
or other, as I used to be in my head, or heart, I know
not which. 
Do you, Lucy, bring me back again, by your
reminding love, if you think there is any alteration
in your Harriet, for the worse: And the rather, as
it may prevent my uncle— 
But what makes me so much more afraid of my
uncle, than I used to be? —Yet men, in their raillery,
[Don't, however, read this paragraph to him] are
so—I don't know how—so un-tender—But let me fall
into the hands of my indulgent grandmamma, and
aunt Selby, and into your gentle hands, and all will
be as it should be. 
But what was my subject, before this last seized,
and ran away with, my pen? I did not use to wander
thus, when I had a beaten path before me. O this
vile, vile Sir Hargrave! If I have a fault in my head,
that did not use to be there, it is entirely owing to him. 
I am sure my heart is not wrong. 
But I can write nothing now but of Miss Grandison
and her brother. What entirely new scenes are
opened to me by my distress? —May I have cause, as
Sir Charles wished, to reap good from the evil! 
I will endeavour to bring Miss Clements into an
acquaintance with these worthies; that is to say, if I
have myself the interest to preserve my footing in their
favour. 
Lady Betty resolves to recommend herself. She
will be acquainted with them, she says, whether they
will or not. And yet I could not bear for Lady Betty
that she should be slighted by those whom she dotes
upon. That, surely, is one of the heaviest of evils. 

And yet self-love, where it is evidently inherent, will
enable one to get over it, I believe, pretty soon; tho'
nothing but that and pride can, in such. Of some use
therefore, you'll be apt to say, are pride and self-love. 
Why, yes, and so they are, where they are a part of
a person's habit. But, O my Lucy, will not a native
humility render this pride, whose genuine offspring
are resentment and ill-will, absolutely unnecessary,
and procure for us, unmingled with mortification, the
esteem we wish for in the hearts of the worthy? 
As to the rest of my new acquaintance in town, who,
till I knew this admirable sister and brother, took up
so much of my paper, tho' some of them are doubtless
very worthy; Adieu—That is to say, as chosen subjects,
—Adieu! says 
Your Harriet Byron. 

