



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Monday, June 5. 
I am now almost in despair of succeeding with this
charming-Frost-piece by Love or Gentleness. — 
A copy of the draughts, as I told thee, has been sent
to Captain Tomlinson; and that by a special messenger. 
Engrossments are proceeding with. I have
been again at the Commons. —Should in all probability
have procured a Licence by Mallory's means,
had not Mallory's friend the proctor been suddenly
sent for to Cheshunt, to make an old Lady's Will. 
Pritchard has told me by word of mouth, though my
Charmer saw him not, all that was necessary for her
to know in the Letter my Lord wrote, which I could
not shew her; and taken my directions about the 

Estates to be made over to me on my Nuptials. —Yet,
with all these favourable appearances, no conceding
moment to be found, no improveable tenderness to
be raised. 
&dotup;But never, I believe, was there so true, so delicate
a modesty in the human mind as in that of
this Lady. And this has been my security all along; 
and, in spite of Miss Howe's advice to her, will be
so still; since, if her Delicacy be a fault, she can
no more overcome it than I can my aversion to
Matrimony. Habit, habit, Jack, seest thou not?
may subject us both to weaknesses. And should
she not have charity for me, as I have for her?&dotup; 
Twice indeed with rapture, which once she called
rude, did I salute her; and each time, resenting the
freedom, did she retire; tho', to do her justice, she
favoured me again with her presence at my first entreaty,
and took no notice of the cause of her withdrawing. 
Is it policy to shew so open a resentment for innocent
liberties, which, in her situation, she must so
soon forgive? 
Yet the woman who resents not initiatory freedoms
must be lost. For Love is an encroacher. Love never
goes backward. Love is always aspiring. Always
must aspire. Nothing but the highest act of
Love can satisfy an indulged Love. And what advantages
has a Lover who values not breaking the
peace, over his Mistress who is solicitous to keep it! 
I have now at this instant wrought myself up, for
the dozenth time, to a half-resolution. A thousand
agreeable things I have to say to her. She is in the
Dining-room. Just gone up. She always expects
me when there. 
* *
High displeasure!—followed by an abrupt departure. 
I sat down by her. I took both her hands in mine. 

I would have it so. All gentle my voice. Her Father
mentioned with respect. Her Mother with reverence. 
Even her Brother amicably spoken of. I
never thought I could have wished so ardently, as I
told her I did wish, for a Reconciliation with her
family. 
A sweet and grateful flush then overspread her fair
face; a gentle sigh now-and-then heaved her handkerchief. 
I perfectly longed to hear from Captain Tomlinson. 
It was impossible for her Uncle to find fault with the
draught of the Settlements. I would not, however,
be understood by sending them down, that I intended
to put it in her Uncle's power to delay my happy
Day. When, when, was it to be? 
I would hasten again to the Commons; and would
not return without the Licence. 
The Lawn I proposed to retire to, as soon as the
happy Ceremony was over. This day and that day
I proposed. 
It was time enough to name the Day, when the
Settlements were completed, and the Licence obtained. 
Happy should she be, could the kind Captain
Tomlinson obtain her Uncle's presence privately. 
A good hint! —It may perhaps be improved upon
—Either for a delay or a pacifier. 
No new delays for Heaven's sake, I besought her; 
and reproached her gently for the past. Name but
the Day—(an early day, I hoped it would be, in the
following week)—that I might hail its approach, and
number the tardy hours. 
My cheek reclined on her shoulder—kissing her
hands by turns. Rather bashfully than angrily reluctant,
her hands sought to be withdrawn; her
shoulder avoiding my reclined cheek—Apparently
loth, and more loth, to quarrel with me; her downcast
eye confessing more than her lips could utter. 
Now surely, thought I, is my time to try if she 

can forgive a still bolder freedom than I had ever yet
taken. 
I then gave her struggling hands liberty. I put
one arm round her waist: I imprinted a kiss on her
sweet lips, with a Be quiet only, and an averted face,
as if she feared another. 
Encouraged by so gentle a repulse, the tenderest
things I said; and then, with my other hand, drew
aside the handkerchief that concealed the Beauty of
beauties, and pressed with my burning lips the most
charming breast that ever my ravished eyes beheld. 
A very contrary passion to that which gave her bosom
so delightful a swell, immediately took place. 
She struggled out of my encircling arms with indignation. 
I detained her reluctant hand. Let me go,
said she. I see there is no keeping terms with you. Base
encroacher! Is this the design of your flattering
speeches? —Far as matters have gone, I will for ever
renounce you. You have an odious heart. Let me
go, I tell you.— 
I was forced to obey, and she flung from me, repeating
base, and adding flattering, encroacher. 
* *
In vain have I urged by Dorcas for the promised
favour of dining with her. She would not dine at
all. She could not. 
But why makes she every inch of her person thus
sacred? —So near the time too, that she must suppose,
that all will be my own by deed of purchase
and settlement? 
She has read, no doubt, of the Art of the Eastern
Monarchs, who sequester themselves from the eyes
of their subjects, in order to excite their adoration,
when, upon solemn occasions, they think fit
to appear in public. 
But let me ask thee, Belford, whether (on these
solemn occasions) the preceding cavalcade; here a
great officer, and there a great minister, with their 

Satellites, and glaring equipages; do not prepare the
eyes of the wondering beholders, by degrees, to
bear the blaze of Canopy'd Majesty (what tho' but
an ugly old man perhaps himself? yet) glittering in
the collected riches of his vast Empire? 
And should not my Beloved, for her own sake,
descend, by degrees, from Goddess-hood into Humanity? 
If it be Pride that restrains her, ought not
that pride to be punished? If, as in the Eastern Emperors,
it be Art as well as Pride, Art is what she
of all women need not use. If Shame, what a shame
to be ashamed to communicate to her adorer's sight
the most admirable of her personal graces? 
Let me perish, Belford, if I would not forego the
brightest diadem in the world, for the pleasure of
seeing a Twin Lovelace at each charming breast,
drawing from it his first sustenance; the pious task,
for physical reasons (a) , continued for one month
and no more! 
I now, methinks, behold this most charming of
women in this sweet office: Her conscious eye now
dropt on one, now on the other, with a sigh of maternal
tenderness; and then raised up to my delighted
eye, full of wishes, for the sake of the pretty varlets,
and for her own sake, that I would deign to legitimate; 
that I would condescend to put on the
nuptial fetters. 