



Mr. Belford, To Robert Lovelace, Esq; 

Thursday Night. 
I was forced to take back my twenty guineas. 
How the women managed it, I can't tell (I suppose
too readily found a purchaser for the rich suit); but
she mistrusted, that I was the advancer of the money; 

and would not let the cloaths go. But Mrs. Lovick
has actually sold, for fifteen guineas, some rich Lace
worth three times the sum: Out of which she repaid
her the money she borrowed for fees to the doctor, in
an illness occasioned by the barbarity of the most savage
of men. Thou knowest his name! 
The Doctor called on her in the morning it seems,
and had a short debate with her about fees. She insisted,
that he should take one every time he came,
write or not write; mistrusting, that he only gave
verbal directions to Mrs. Lovick, or the Nurse, to
avoid taking any. 
He said, That it would have been impossible for
him, had he not been a Physician, to forbear enquiries
after the health and welfare of so excellent a person. 
He had not the thought of paying her a compliment
in declining the offered fee: But he knew her
case could not so suddenly vary, as to demand his
daily visits. She must permit him, therefore, to enquire
of the women below after her health; and he
must not think of coming up, if he were to be pecuniarily
rewarded for the satisfaction he was so desirous
to give himself. 
It ended in a compromise for a fee each other time: 
Which she unwillingly submitted to; telling him, that
tho' she was at present desolate and in disgrace, yet her
circumstances were, of right, high; and no expences
could rise so, as to be scrupled, whether she lived or
died. But she submitted, she added, to the compromise,
in hopes to see him as often as he had opportunity; 
for she really looked upon him, and Mr. Goddard,
from their kind and tender treatment of her,
with a regard next to filial. 
I hope thou wilt make thyself acquainted with this
worthy Doctor, when thou comest to town; and
give him thy thanks, for putting her into conceit
with the Sex that thou hast given her so much reason
to execrate. 
Farewel. 