


Lady G. To Miss Byron. 


Saturday, Nov. 11.
I Write a few lines, if, writing to you, I can write a
few, by the special messenger that carries down
all the remaining apparatus, which was committed to
my care. We women are sad creatures for delaying
things to the last moment. We hurry the men: We
hurry our workwomen, milaners, mantuamakers,
friends, allies, confederates, and ourselves. When once
we have given the Day, night and day, we neither take
rest, nor give it: When, if we had the rare felicity
of knowing our minds sooner, all might go on fair
and softly. But then the gentle passion, I doubt,
would glide into insipidity. Well, and I have heard
my brother say, ‘That things in general are best as
they are.’ Why I believe so; for all these honest
souls, as mantuamakers, attire-women, work-women, 

enjoy a hurry that is occasioned by a wedding, and are
half as well pleased with it, as if it were their own. 
They simper, smirk, gossip, over Bridal finery; spread
this upon their arms or shoulders; admire that—Look
you here—Look ye there! And is not this? —Is not
that? —And, Did you ever! —No, never, in my born
days! —And is the Bride, do you say, such a lovely
creature? —And is the Bridegroom as handsome a man,
as she a woman? —O lud! O dear! —Would to
Heaven Northamptonshire were nearer, that one might
see how charming, how graceful, how becoming! and-so-forth. 
And why should not we women, after all, contrive
to make hurry-skurries [You see how I correct
myself as I go along] and make the world think our
affairs a great part of the business of it, and that nothing
can be done without us? Since, after a sew
months are over, new novelties take place, and we
get into corners, sigh, groan, look silly and meagre,
and at last are thrown into straw, as it is called; poor
Caroline's case; who repines, that she can't be present
on this new bustle in the family. But I am to
write her word of every-thing—Look to your behaviour,
Harriet, on the great occasion. 
But a word about Caroline—Were it not for her
being deprived of this pleasure, the good creature would
be very happy. Lord L. and she are as fond as apes. 
She has quite forgot all her sufferings for him. He
thanks her for his boy. She follows with her eye the
little stranger, and is delighted with all that is done
with him, to him, for him: Is pleased with everybody,
even with the very servants, who croud in, by
permission, to see his little Lordship, and already claim
an interest in him. Upon my word, she makes a very
pretty fond mother. And aunt Nell, who, by the
way, was at the Crying-out, and was then so frighted!
so thankful to God! and so happy in her own situation! 
[No, not for the world, would she be other than
she was!] now grudges the nurses half their cares. 

What good creatures are we women! 
Well, but I don't know what to do about Emily. 
The first vice of the first woman was curiosity, and
it runs through all her daughters. She has written to
her Guardian, and nothing but an absolute prohibition
will hinder her from making one in your train. Did
the dear girl know the state of her own heart, she
would choose to be a thousand miles off, rather than
go. I have set her woman and mine to discourage
her. I have reasoned with her myself; but there is
no such thing as giving her one's true reasons; nor
would I, willingly: Because she herself, having not
found out her Love to be Love, I hope the fire may
be smothered in her own heart, by the aid of time and
discretion, before discovery; whereas, if the doors of
it were to be opened, and the air let in, it might set
the whole tenement in a blaze. Her Guardian's denial
or assent will come, perhaps, in time; yet hardly,
neither; for we shall set out on Monday. Aunt Nell
is so pleased with her nursery of the little Peer, as she
primly calls him, that you are rid of even her wishes
to be with you. Being sure of this, I complimented
her, that I knew your aunt Selby would have invited
her, but that Lady L. would not be able to live without
her company, all the world, and the world's wife,
attentive and engrossed by your affair. She, good
creature! was pleased—So as she could but be thought
of importance by somebody, I knew she would be
happy. I told her, that you invited nobody, but left
all to your friends—Ay, poor dear Soul, said she; she
has enough to think of, well as she loves your brother
—And sighed for you—Worthy Ancient! The sigh a
little deeper, perhaps, for some of her own Recollections. 
Mr. and Mrs. Reeves would not stay for us. What
will you do with us all? —Croud you, I fear. But
dispose of us, at Shirley-manor, or Selby-house, as
you please. Yours, and aunt Selby's, and grandmamma 

Shirley's concern for us, is all we are solicitous
about. But servants rooms, nay, cocklofts, haylofts,
will do. We like to be put to our shifts, now-and-then
—Something to talk of— 
But I can tell you, if you don't know it already,
Lord W. and his Lady are resolved to do you honour
on this occasion; but they will be but little trouble to
you. My Lord's steward has a half-brother, a gentleman-farmer,
in your neighbourhood—Sheldon— 
They will be there: But perhaps you know of this a
better way. They will make a splendid part of your
train. Gratitude is their inducement. 
Lord L. has just now told me, that my sister, in
tenderness to him, and in honour to you, has besought
him to be present. O Harriet! what will you do with
yourself? —Aunt Nell and I have the heart-burn for
you. But Lord L. must be welcome: He is one of
those who so faithfully kept your secret. 
So, in our equipages, will be Lord L. my honest
man, Emily, and your Charlotte: Lord L's equipages
will be at the service of any of your guests; as will
our spare one—I wish Beauchamp could permit himself
to be present (I hope he will) on the nuptials
of the friend so dear to him, with a Lady he so greatly
admires. 
My woman and Emily's will be all our Female attendants:
One nook will serve them both. 
My poor man will be mad, before the day comes. 
He does love you, Harriet. My brother, he says, will
be the happiest man in the world—himself excepted— 
A hypocrite! He just popt this in, to save himself— 
Why dost make this exception, friend? said I—Thou
knowest it to be a mere compliment—Indeed, indeed
(two indeeds, which implied, that one might have been
doubted) I am now (A sarcasm in his word now) as
happy as mortal man can be—Ah, flatterer! and shook
my head—A recognition of my sovereignty, however,
in his being afraid to speak his conscience. A little of 

the old leaven, Harriet! I can't help it. It is got out
of my heart, half out of my head; but, when I take
the pen, it will tingle now-and then, at my finger's
end. 
Adieu, my Love! God bless you! —I can enter
into your joy. A Love so pure, and so fervent. The
man Sir Charles Grandison. —And into your pain,
also, in view of a solemnity so near, and to you so
awful. With all my roguery, I sympathize with you. 
I have not either a wicked or unfeeling heart. Such
as yours, however, are the true spirits; such as mine
are only bully and flash. 
Lucy, you are a good girl. I like the whim of
your concluding for Harriet; I also like your tenants
dining-room, and other managements, as the affair
must unavoidably be a public one. 
Neither of you say a word of good Mr. Deane: I
hope he is with you. He cannot be a cypher where-ever
he comes, except on the right-side of the figure,
to increase its consequence. Don't be afraid of your
uncle; I, I, I, will manage him, never fear. 
There are other passages, Harriet, in your last Letter,
which I ought to have answered to—But forgive
me, my dear; I had laid it by (tho' pleased with it in
the main); and, having answered the most material
part, by dispatching your things, forgot it as much
as if I had not received it, till the moment I came
to conclude. Once more, Adieu, my dearest Harriet. 
Ch. G. 

