


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Monday, April 17. 
The Countess is just gone. 
Mr. Reeves was engaged before to breakfast
with Lady Betty Williams; and we were only Mrs.
Reeves, Lady D. and I. 
My heart aked at her entrance; and every moment
still more, as we were at breakfast. Her looks, I
thought, had such particular kindness and meaning in
them, as seemed to express, ‘You have no hopes,
Miss Byron, any-where else; and I will have you to
be mine.’ 
But my suspense was over the moment the tea-table
was removed. I see your confusion, my dear, said
the Countess [Mrs. Reeves, you must not leave us]; 
and I have sat in pain for you, as I saw it increase. 

By this I know that Sir Charles Grandison has been as
good as his word. Indeed I doubted not but he would. 
I don't wonder, my dear, that you love him. He is
the finest man in his manners, as well as person, that
I ever saw. A woman of virtue and honour cannot
but love him. But I need not praise him to you; nor
to you, neither, Mrs. Reeves; I see that. 
Now you must know, proceeded she, that there is
an alliance proposed for my son, of which I think very
well; but still should have thought better, had I never
seen you, my dear. I have talked to my Lord about
it: You know I am very desirous to have him married. 
His answer was; I never can think of any proposal
of this nature, while I have any hope that I can
make myself acceptable to Miss Byron. 
What think you, my Lord, said I, if I should directly
apply to Sir Charles Grandison, to know his
intentions; and whether he has any hopes of obtaining
her favour? He is said to be the most unreserved
of men. He knows our characters to be as unexceptionable
as his own; and that our alliance cannot
be thought a discredit to the first family in the kingdom. 
It is a free question, I own; as I am unacquainted
with him by person: But he is such a man,
that methinks I can take pleasure in addressing myself
to him on any subject. 
My Lord smiled at the freedom of my motion; 
but not disapproving it, I directly went to Sir Charles,
and, after due compliments, told him my business. 
The Countess stopt. She is very penetrating. She
looked at us both. 
Well, madam, said my cousin, with an air of curiosity— 
Pray, your Ladyship— 
I could not speak for very impatience— 
I never heard in my life, said the Countess, such a
fine character of any mortal, as he gave you. He
told me of his engagements to go abroad as the very
next day. He highly extolled the Lady for whose 

sake, principally, he was obliged to go abroad; and he
spoke as highly of a brother of hers, whom he loved
as if he were his own brother; and mentioned very
affectionately the young Lady's whole family. 
‘God only knows, said he, what may be my destiny! 
—As generosity, as justice, or rather as Providence,
leads, I will follow.’ 
After he had generously opened his heart, proceeded
the Countess, I asked him, If he had any hope, should
the foreign Lady recover her health, of her being
his? 
‘I can promise myself nothing, said he. I go over
without one selfish hope. If the Lady recover her
health, and her brother can be amended in his, by
the assistance I shall carry over with me, I shall have
joy inexpressible. To Providence I leave the rest. 
The result cannot be in my own power.’ 
Then, Sir, proceeded the Countess, you cannot in
honour be under any engagements to Miss Byron? 
I arose from my seat. Whither, my dear? —I
have done, if I oppress you. I moved my chair behind
hers, but so close to hers, that I leaned on the back
of it, my face hid, and my eyes running over. She
stood up. Sit down again, madam, said I, and proceed
—Pray proceed. You have excited my curiosity. 
Only let me sit here, unheeded, behind you. 
Pray, madam, said Mrs. Reeves (burning also with
curiosity, as she has since owned) go on; and indulge
my cousin in her present seat. What answer did Sir
Charles return? 
My dear Love, said the Countess (sitting down, as
I had requested) let me first be answered one question. 
I would not do mischief. 
You cannot do mischief, madam, replied I. What
is your Ladyship's question? 
Has Sir Charles Grandison ever directly made his
addresses to you, my dear? 
Never, madam. 

It is not for want of love, I dare aver, that he has
not. But thus he answered my question: ‘I should
have thought myself the unworthiest of men, knowing
the difficulties of my own situation, how great
soever were the temptation from Miss Byron's merit,
if I had sought to engage her affections.’ 
[O, Lucy! How nobly is his whole conduct towards
me justified!] 
‘She has, madam’ (proceeded the Countess in his
words) ‘a prudence that I never knew equalled in a
woman so young. With a frankness of mind, to
which hardly ever young Lady before her had pretensions,
she has such a command of her affections,
that no man, I dare say, will ever have a share in
them, till he has courted her favour by assiduities
which shall convince her that he has no heart but for
her.’ 
O my Lucy! What an honour to me would these
sentiments be, if I deserved them! And can Sir
Charles Grandison think I do? —I hope so. But if
he does, how much am I indebted to his favourable,
his generous opinion! Who knows but I have reason
to rejoice, rather than to regret, as I used to do, his
frequent absences from Colnebrooke? 
The Countess proceeded. 
Then, Sir, you will not take it amiss, if my son,
by his assiduities, can prevail upon Miss Byron to think
that he has merit, and that his heart is wholly devoted
to her. 
‘Amiss, madam!—No! —In justice, in honour,
I cannot. May Miss Byron be, as she deserves to
be, one of the happiest women on earth in her nuptials. 
I have heard a great character of Lord D.
He has a very large estate. He may boast of his
mother—God forbid, that I, a man divided in myself,
not knowing what I can do, hardly sometimes
what I ought to do, should seek to involve in my
own uncertainties the friend I revere; the woman I 

so greatly admire: Her beauty so attracting; so
proper therefore for her to engage a generous protector
in the married state!’ 
Generous man! thought I. O how my tears ran
down my cheeks, as I hid my face behind the Countess's
chair! 
But will you allow me, Sir, proceeded the Countess,
to ask you, Were you freed from all your uncertainties— 
‘Permit me, madam, interrupted he, to spare you
the question you were going to put. Miss Byton
may come to hear the substance of a conversation
that is of a very delicate nature—As I know not
what will be the result of my journey abroad, I
should think myself a very selfish man, and a very
dishonourable one to two Ladies of equal delicacy
and worthiness, if I sought to involve, as I hinted
before, in my own uncertainties, a young Lady
whose prudence and great qualities must make herself
and any man happy, whom she shall favour with
her hand. 
‘To be still more explicit, proceeded he, With
what face could I look up to a woman of honour
and delicacy, such a one as the Lady before whom
I now stand, if I could own a wish, that, while my
honour has laid me under obligation to one Lady, if
she shall be permitted to accept of me, I should
presume to hope, that another, no less worthy, would
hold her favour for me suspended, till she saw what
would be the issue of the first obligation? No,
madam; I could sooner die, than offer such indignity
to both! I am fettered, added he; but Miss
Byron is free: And so is the Lady abroad. My attendance
on her at this time, is indispensable; but I
make not any conditions for myself—My reward
will be in the consciousness of having discharged the
obligations that I think myself under, as a man of
honour.’ 

The countess's voice changed in repeating this
speech of his: And she stopt to praise him; and then
went on. 
You are THE man, indeed, Sir! —But then give
me leave to ask you, As I think it very likely that you
will be married before your return to England, Whether
now that you have been so good as to speak favourably
of my son, and that you call Miss Byron
Sister, you will oblige him with a recommendation to
that sister? 
‘The Countess of D. shews, by this request, her
value for a young Lady who deserves it; and the
more, for its being, I think (Excuse me, madam) a
pretty extraordinary one. But what a presumption
would it be in me, to suppose that I had Such aninterest
with Miss Byron, when she has relations as
worthy of her, as she is of them?’ 
You may guess, my dear, said the Countess, that I
should not have put this question, but as a trial of his
heart. However, I asked his pardon; and told him,
that I would not believe he gave it me, except he
would promise to mention to Miss Byron, that I had
made him a visit on this subject [Methinks, Lucy, I
should have been glad that he had not let me know that
he was so forgiving!]. 
And now, my dear, said the Lady, let me turn
about. —She did; and put one arm round my neck,
and with my own handkerchief wiped my eyes, and
kissed my cheek; and when she saw me a little recovered,
she addressed me as follows: 
Now, my good young creature, [O that you would
let me call you daughter in my own way! for I think
I must always call you so, whether you do, or not]
let me ask you, as if I were your real mother, ‘Have
you any expectation that Sir Charles Grandison will
be yours?’ 
Dear madam, Is not this as hard a question to be put
to me, as that which you put to him? 

Yes, my dear—full as hard. And I am as ready
to ask your pardon, as I was his, if you are really displeased
with me for putting it. Are you, Miss Byron? 
Excuse me, Mrs. Reeves, for thus urging your lovely
cousin: I am at least entitled to the excuse Sir Charles
Grandison made for me, that it is a demonstration of
my value for her. 
I have declared, madam, returned I, and it is from
my heart, that I think he ought to be the husband of
the Lady abroad: And tho' I prefer him to all the
men I ever saw, yet I have resolved, if possible, to
conquer the particular regard I have for him. He
has in a very noble manner offered me his friendship,
so long as it may be accepted without interfering with
any other attachments on my part: And I will be satisfied
with that. 
A friendship so pure, replied the Countess, as that
of such a man, is consistent with any other attachments. 
My Lord D. will, with his whole Soul, contribute
all in his power to strengthen it: He admires
Sir Charles Grandison: He would think it a double
honour to be acquainted with him through you. 
Dearest Miss Byron, take another worthy young man
into your friendship, but with a tenderer name: I
shall then claim a fourth place in it for myself. O my
dear! What a quadruple knot will you tie! 
Your Ladyship does me too much honour, was all
I could just then reply. 
I must have an answer, my dear: I will not take
up with a compliment. 
This, then, madam, is my answer—I hope I am an
honest creature: I have not a heart to give. 
Then you have expectations, my dear. —Well, I
will call you mine, if I can. Never did I think that I
could have made the proposal, that I am going to
make you: But in my eyes, as well as in my Lord's,
you are an incomparable young woman. —This is it— 
We will not think of the alliance proposed to us (It 

is yet but a proposal, and to which we have not returned
any answer) till we see what turn the affair Sir
Charles is gone upon, takes. You once said, you
could prefer my son to any of the men that had hitherto
applied to you for your favour. Your affections
to Sir Charles were engaged before you knew us. 
Will you allow my son this preference, which will be
the first preference, if Sir Charles engages himself
abroad? 
Your Ladyship surprises me: Shall I not improve
by the example you have just now set before me? 
Who was it that said, and a man too? ‘With what
face could I look up to a woman of honour and delicacy,
such a one as the Lady before whom I now
stand, if I could own a wish, that, while my heart
leaned to one person, I should think of keeping another
in suspense till I saw whether I could or could
not be the other's?’ ‘No, madam, I would sooner
die,’ as Sir Charles said, ‘than offer such an indignity
to both.’ But I know, madam, that you
only made this proposal, as you did another to Sir
Charles Grandison, as a trial of my heart. 
Upon my word, my dear, I should, I think, be
glad to be entitled to such an excuse: But I was really
in earnest; and now take a little shame to myself. 
What charming ingenuousness in this Lady! 
She clasped her arms about me, and kissed my
cheek again. I have but one plea to make for myself; 
I could not have fallen into such an error (the
example so recently given to the contrary) had I not
wished you to be, before any woman in the world,
Countess of D.—Noble creature! No title can give
you dignity. May your own wishes be granted! 
My cousin's eyes ran over with pleasure. 
The Countess asked, When I returned to Northhamptonshire? 
I told her my intention. She charged
me to see her first. But can tell you, said she, my
Lord shall not be present when you come: Not once 

more will I trust him in your company; and if he
should steal a visit, unknown to me, let not your
cousin see him, Mrs. Reeves. He does indeed admire
you, Love, looking at me. 
I acknowleged, with a grateful heart, her goodness
to me. She engaged me to correspond with her when
I got home. Her commands were an honour done
me, that I could not refuse myself. Her son, she
smilingly told me, should no more see my Letters,
than my Person. 
At her going away—I will tell you one thing, said
she: I never before, in a business which my heart was
set upon, was so effectually silenced by a precedent
produced by myself in the same conversation. I came
with an assurance of success. When our hearts are
engaged in a hope, we are apt to think every step
we take for the promoting it, reasonable: Our passions,
my dear, will evermore run away with our
judgment. But now I think of it, I must, when I
say our, make two exceptions; one for you, and one
for Sir Charles Grandison. 
But, Lucy, tell me—May I, do you think, explain
the meaning of the word Selfish used by Sir
Charles in the conclusion of the Library-conference at
Colnebrooke (and which puzzled me then to make out)
by his disclaiming of selfishness in the conversation with
the Countess above-recited? If I may, what an opening
of his heart does that word give in my favour,
were he at liberty? Does it not look, my dear, as if
his Honour checked him, when his Love would have
prompted him to wish me to preserve my heart disengaged
till his return from abroad? Nor let it be
said, that it was dishonourable in him to have such a
thought, as it was checked and overcome; and as it was
succeeded by such an emotion, that he was obliged to
depart abruptly from me. —Let me repeat the words— 
You may not have my Letter at hand which relates
that affecting address to me; and it is impossible for 

me, while I have memory, to forget them. He had
just concluded his brief history of Clementina—‘And
now, madam, what can I say? —Honour forbids
me! —Yet honour bids me—Yet I cannot be unjust,
ungenerous, selfish!’ —If I may flatter myself, Lucy,
that he did love me when he said this, and that he had
a conflict in his noble heart between the Love on one
side so hopeless (for I could not forgive him, if he did
not love, as well as pity, Clementina), and on the other
not so hopeless, were there to have been no bar between
—Shall we not pity him for the arduous
struggle? Shall we not see that honour carried it, even
in favour of the hopeless against the hopeful, and applaud
him the more for being able to overcome? How
shall we call virtue by its name, if it be not tried; 
and if it hath no contest with inclination? 
If I am a vain self-flatterer, tell me, chide me,
Lucy; but allow me, however, at the same time, this
praise, if I can make good my claim to it, that my
conquest of my passion is at least as glorious for me,
as his is for him, were he to love me ever so well; 
since I can most sincerely, however painfully, subscribe
to the preference which Honour, Love, Compassion,
unitedly, give to Clementina. 

