



From Mrs. B. to Lady Davers. 


My good Lady,
You command me to acquaint you with the
Proceedings between Mr. Murray and Miss
Nanny Darnford: And Miss Polly makes it very
easy for me to obey you, in this Particular, and
in very few Words; for she says, every thing was
adjusted before she came away, and the Ceremony,
she believes, may be performed by this
time. She rejoices that she was out of the
way of it: For she says, Love is so aukward a
Thing to Mr. Murray, and Good-humour so uncommon
a one to Miss Nancy, that she hopes she
shall never see such another Courtship. 
Mr. B. teizes Miss, that she is a little piqu'd,
(and that she shew'd it by a satirical Fling or two
in a former Letter to me) that her humble Servant
took her at her Word: And yet he acknowleges,
that he believes she despises him; and indeed
Mr. Murray has shewn, that he deserves to be despised
by her. 
She says, Nothing has piqu'd her in the whole
Affair, but the Triumph it gave to that ill-natur'd
Girl, as she justly calls her Sister, who has insulted
her unmercifully on that Account; and yet with 

so low and mean a Spite, that she has been vex'd
at herself to shew the least Concern on the Occasion. 
But ungenerous Teizing is an intolerable
thing, as she says; and often repeated, will vex
a Mind naturally above it: Had it, says she, come
from any body else, I should not have heeded it; 
but how can one despise a Sister? 
We have been at the Play-house several times; 
and, give me Leave to say, Madam, (for I have
now read as well as seen several) That I think the
Stage, by proper Regulations, might be made a profitable
Amusement. But nothing more convinces
one of the Truth of the common Observation, That
the best Things, corrupted, prove the worst, than
these Representations. The Terror and Compunction
for evil Deeds, the Compassion for a just Distress,
and the general Beneficence which those lively
Exhibitions are so capable of raising in the human
Mind, might be of great Service, when directed to
right Ends, and induced by proper Motives: Particularly,
where the Actions which the Catastrophe is
design'd to punish, are not set in such advantageous
Lights, as shall destroy the End of the Moral, and
make the Vice that ought to be censured, imitable; 
where Instruction is kept in View all the Way; and
where Vice is punished, and Virtue rewarded. 
But give me Leave to say, that I think there is
hardly one Play I have seen or read hitherto, but
has too much of Love in it, as that Passion is generally
treated. How unnatural in some, how inflaming
in others, are the Descriptions of it! 
—In most, rather Rant and Fury, like the Loves of
the fiercer Brute Animals, as Virgil, translated by
Dryden, describes them, than the soft, sighing, 

fearfully-hopeful Murmurs, that swell the Bosoms
of our gentler Sex; and the respectful, timorous,
submissive Complainings of the other, when the
Truth of the Passion humanizes, as one may say,
their more rugged Hearts. 
In particular, my dear Lady, what strange Indelicates
do these Writers of Tragedy often make of
our Sex? They don't enter into the Passion at all,
if I have any Notion of it: But when the Authors
want to paint it strongly, (at least in those Plays I
have seen and read) their Aim seems to be to raise
a Whirlwind, as I may say, which sweeps down
Reason, Religion, and Decency; and carries every
laudable Duty away before it; so that all the Example
can serve to shew, is, how a disappointed
Lover may rage and storm, resent and revenge. 
The Play I first saw was the Tragedy of the
Distress'd Mother, and a great many beautiful
Things I think there are in it: But half of it is
a tempestuous, cruel, ungovern'd Rant of Passion,
and ends in Cruelty, Bloodshed, and Desolation,
which the Truth of Story not warranting, as Mr. B.
tells me, makes it the more Pity, that the original
Author (for it is a French Play translated, you
know, Madam) had not conducted it, since it was
in his Choice, with less Terror, and with greater
Propriety, to the Passions intended to be raised,
and actually raised in many Places. 
I need not tell your Ladyship what the Story
is; and yet it is necessary, as you demand my Opinion,
that I should give a little Sketch of it. It is
this, then: ‘Pyrrhus, the Son of Achilles, is betrothed
to Hermione, the Daughter of Menelaus;
but Hector's Widow, Andromache, with 

Astyanax, her Son by Hector, in the Division of
the Trojan Captives, falls to the Lot of Pyrrhus,
who slighting Hermione, (actually sent to his
Court, and in his Court, waiting his good Pleasure
to espouse her) falls in Love with Andromache. 
Orestes, the Son of Agamemnon, in
Love with Hermione, is sent Embassador from
the other Greek Princes to demand the Life of
Astyanax, for fear the poor Infant should become
another Hector, and avenge his Father's Death; 
a most improbable, unprincely, and base-hearted
Fear, as Pyrrhus himself represents it. Pyrrhus,
in hopes to gain the Mother's Love, which he
seeks on honourable Terms, offers to break with
all his Allies, rather than give up the Child; but
finding her resolv'd on Widowhood, determines
to sacrifice the Child, and to marry Hermione.
This creates a fine Distress in Andromache, between
a laudable Purpose to continue the Widow
of so great and so deserving a Prince, and her
Desire to preserve the Life of her Son by that
beloved Hero; and at last, overcome by maternal
Tenderness, finding no other Way, she resolves to
marry Pyrrhus, and yet to destroy herself after
the Marriage Ceremony had intitled her Son to
her new Husband's Protection: (A very strange,
and not very certain Expedient to answer her
View!) and so to die the Widow of Hector.
tho' she gave her Hand to Pyrrhus, and vow'd
herself his at the Altar, and of consequence had
a still less Power over her own Life than before. 
—Hermione, a high-spirited Lady, raging in
her Love to Pyrrhus, and for the Slight and Disappointment
she met with, obliges Orestes, on 

Promise of giving her Heart and Hand to him,
to murder Pyrrhus at the Altar, while the Ceremony
of Marriage with Andromache is performing. 
He causes this to be done. When done,
he applies to Hermione, expecting her Applause,
who then violently upbraids him for having
obey'd her; and flying towards the Temple,
meets the Body of Pyrrhus, and stabs herself
upon it. 
‘Upon this, Orestes runs mad, and it is said
to be the finest mad Scene in any English Play. 
—Andromache remains Queen; her Son lives; 
and being diverted from her own bloody Purpose,
she has nothing to do, but to give Orders for
the Funeral of Pyrrhus, and to bring her Son in
Triumph from a Prison to a Palace.’ 
This is, in brief, the Story. Now, Madam,
since you expect it from me, I will tell you, in
my artless Way, what I think not quite so pretty,
and what is great and beautiful in this Play; which,
upon the Whole, however, I was much pleased
with, and should have been more, had there been
less Terror in it, and more Probability, as I presume
to say, in some of its Parts; and had not the
softest Passion in Nature been treated as such a
flaming Thing, as cannot be a worthy Example
to Female Minds. 
And first, I could not but observe, that the
Plea of the Princes of Greece for the Murder of
Astyanax, a helpless Infant, to procure which, and
for nothing else, they send one of the chief Princes
of Greece Embassador to Pyrrhus, is a very poor
one, and most easily answer'd. —For thus Orestes
says, among other very pompous Things: 


Have you so soon forgot the mighty Hector?
The Greeks remember his high-brandish'd Sword,
That fill'd their States with Widows and with Orphans;
For which they call for Vengeance on his Son.
Who knows what he may one Day prove?—

And in another Place: 

Troy may again revive, and a new Hector
Rise in Astyanax.—

And in another Place: 

Sir, call to mind th' unrivall'd Strength of Troy,
Her Walls, her Bulwarks, and her Gates of Brass,
Her Kings, her Heroes, and imbattled Armies.

What Tragedy Pomp is this! How poor the
Plea from Princes and Heroes, when it is so easily
answer'd by Pyrrhus, in this manner! 

I call them all to mind; and see them all
Confus'd in Dust; all mix'd in one wide Ruin;
All but a Child, and he in Bondage held.
What Vengeance can we fear in such a Troy?

And a little before: 

Let dastard Souls be timorously wise:
But tell them, Pyrrhus knows not how to form
Far-fansy'd Ills, and Dangers out of Sight.

And still with greater Contempt: 

—I thought your Kings were met
On more important Counsels. When I heard
The Name of their Embassador, I hop'd
Some glorious Enterprize was taking Birth.

Is Agamemnon's Son dispatch'd for this?
And do the Grecian Chiefs, renown'd in War,
A Race of heroes, join in close Debate,
To plot an Infant's Death?—

But, what if this very Pyrrhus, after Twenty
humane and generous Things, which the Poet
makes him say, shews, that all this right Thinking
is only owing to his Passion for the Mother? And
as soon as she gives him to understand she is resolv'd
to remain Hector's Widow, he determines to give
way to the Embassy and Threats of the Grecian
Princes, which he had so justly despised, and to
destroy the Infant. But first he tells her: 

'Tis true, Hermione was sent to share
My Throne and Bed—

A fine Errand for a high-spirited Lady; and
to wait afterwards his good Pleasure in his own
Court, thro' a Series of Slights and Contempts,
for the Performance of his Vows! And he generously,
like a true insulting Man, boasts: 

 —And would with Transport hear
The Vows which you neglect.—

To which Andromache nobly answers: 

 —She has no Troy,
No Hector, to lament: She has not lost
A Husband by your Conguests: Such a Husband,
Tormenting Thought! whose Death alone has made
Your Sire immortal!—

This inrages the Hero; and what he should
have admired her for, had his Soul been half as
noble as hers, he thus resents: 


I've been too tame; I will awake to Vengeance!
The Son shall answer for his Mother's Scorn.
The Greeks demand him: Nor will I indanger
My Realms, to pleasure an ungrateful Woman.

Accordingly he resolves to sacrifice the
Child; to do Justice to Hermione, out of Spite to
Andromache: And, most ungenerously, knowing
Orestes loves Hermione to Distraction, tells him,
he shall grace his Nuptial Rites, and he will receive
Hermione from his Hands. 
But now again, see what succeeds to this:
One Look of Favour from Andromache reverses all
his new Resolves, makes him throw new Indignities
on Hermione, new Contempts upon the Greek
Princes, and shew, that if he acts right in one
Point, the Saving of the Child, it is from wrong
and unjustifiable Motives; and yet the Poet seems
to design him an amiable Character. 
Now, Madam, could not a Distress have been
formed in this Story from more laudable and proper
Motives? Should this Passion of unbridled Love
be represented in such a strong, such an irresistible
Light, to an Audience, who must be taught, that
the highest Ingratitude, the most rageful Extreme
of sensual Passion, the most unjustifiable Actions,
and the Sacrifice of all Considerations of publick
Good, and private Right, had Examples all in this
Piece to warrant them? 
'Tis true, Pyrrhus is punished by a cruel Assassination
—Hermione falls by her own Hand
for causing Orestes to procure him to be murder'd,
and the Phrensy of Orestes becomes his Punishment:
But what a Scene of Terror does all this 

raise? How unlikely to be an Exemplar either to
publick or private Life? And what a hard Fate is
that of Hermione, slighted, despised, insulted, by
the Man she lov'd, to whom she was betrothed,
and whose Resentment therefore was warranted,
had it shewn itself in almost any Act short of the
Murder, which, in the Violence of her Passion,
she commanded Orestes to perpetrate? 
Then, Madam, the Love of Hermione for
Pyrrhus, is not, I think, of that delicate Sort
which ought to be set before our Sex for an Example. 
—'Tis Rage, not Love, that of a Woman
slighted and, however just, supposing our Sex to
Have such revengeful Hearts, when slighted by the
Man they love, is not so exemplary as one would
with: And besides, she is represented as sometimes
sighing and wishing for Orestes; when a true Love
bears not the Thought of any Object, but that
one it sighs for, even should that one be thought
ungrateful. Thus it is said of Orestes by her Confidante: 

Orestes, whose Return you oft had wish'd,
The Man whose Suff' rings you so oft lamented,
And often prais'd his Constancy and Love.

Then Hermione repeats her Woman's Words: 

That Love, that Constancy, so ill requited—
Upbraids me to myself: I blush, to think
How I have us'd him; and would shun his Presence.

The Motive for this, however, is neither Justice
nor Generosity, but Pride; indeed, it must be
own'd, a Pride very natural to a Female Mind, in
such Circumstances as hers: 


What will be my Confusion, when he sees me
Neglected and forsaken, like himself?
“Her Insolence at last is well repaid!”
I cannot bear the Thought.—

And then, the Moment she sees him,—this
is her blunt Question to him, notwithstanding all
her Shame to see him: 

How am I to interpret, Sir, this Visit?
Is it a Compliment of Form, or Love?

Does this, Madam, shew any thing of the
Delicacy of Sex or Condition? —And would one
think it right, after she has thus extorted from him
a repeated Confession of his Love, or Weakness, as
he calls it, to upbraid him, that it ill becomes the
Embassador of Greece, to talk of Love or Dying? 
In short, Madam, I think none of the Love in
this Piece is such a Love, however suited to Hermione's
Character and Circumstances, as is fit to be
recommended to our Example: 'Tis a Love that
shocks one, and is rather Rage and Tumult than
Love, and succeeds accordingly. So that of Pyrrhus
is ungovern'd, wild, unjust, ungenerous Caprice. 
Hermione's is founded in confess'd Ingratitude
to Orestes, and she perseveres in it to Pyrrhus,
when the Indignities put upon her should have
made her sooner wish for Death, than for so perjured
a Man; and yet, I think, she shews an inconsistent
Tenderness for Orestes, (as I have hinted)
while her Passion for Pyrrhus flames out with so
much Violence. 
The Motive of Andromache, (for hers is the
most perfect Character in the Piece, and designed 

to be so by the Poet) to save her Son, is the best a
Woman could have to excuse her for marrying the
Man who had slaughter'd all her Relations. But the
Uncertainty of securing that Point, by the mere
Formality of joining Hands with Pyrrhus, and
her Resolution to destroy herself, in Defiance of
her Vows just plighted to be his, was a strange Expedient
to preserve her Widowhood, and her Child:
For, was it very likely, that a Man so wildly in
Love with her, as to forego all other just and prudent
Considerations for her, (and who had shewn,
that he would have destroy'd her Son, but for the
sake of her Person) would, when disappointed by
so great a Rashness, have hazarded his Realms in
Defence of her Son? 
But of all Things, commend me to the noble
Regard for Self, in her Woman and Confidante
Cephisa, to whom Andromache communicates her
rash Purpose, injoining her a willing Secrecy; the
only way the Poet had to let us know it, since it
was not put in Execution; for she shews that Regard
to her dear Self, in this tragick Performance,
which, in a Comedy, would have raised a Laugh,
no doubt, as a Satire on Ladies Women: 

Alas! I fear—I—never shall outlive you!

These Things struck me, Madam, when I saw
the Play; and when I came to read it, I was more
confirm'd in my Sentiments. But now I will transcribe
some Passages, which pleased me much. 
The Storms, and Doubts, and Uncertainty of
wild ungovern'd Love, are very naturally, I humbly
think, painted in several Scenes of this Play,
in the Characters of Hermione and Pyrrhus; and 

nowhere more affectingly than in the Upbraidings
of Hermione to Orestes, after she found her bloody
Purposes too well comply'd with. Thus: 

What, if, transported by my boundless Passion,
I could not bear to see him wed another?
Were you t' obey a jealous Woman's Phrensy?
You should have div'd into my inmost Thoughts:
My Heart, tho' full of Rage, was free from Malice;
And all my Anger was Excess of Love.
Why did you take me at my Word? You saw
The Struggles of my Soul; you heard me rave.
You should have question'd me a thousand times;
Yet still have doubted, still have question'd on,
Before you ventur'd on a Life so precious.
Why did you not return? Why not consult me
A second time? And, undetermin'd still,
Again return, and still find new Delays?

The Scene between Andromache and Hermione,
when the former supposes the latter on the
Point of marrying Pyrrhus, and bespeaks her
Interest for her Son's Life, affected me much, and
was nobly acted by Mrs. Oldfield; who, after assuring
her, that her Love to her slain Lord, was
the only Love she could ever indulge, as Hermione
flies her, cries— 

Ah! Madam, whither, whither do you fly?
Where can your Eyes behold a Sight more pleasing
Than Hector's Widow, suppliant, and in Tears?
I come not an alarm'd, a jealous Foe,
To envy you the Heart your Charms have won.—
But oh! I have a Son:—And you, one Day,
Will be no Stranger to a Mother's Fondness.


Was not this, Madam, a moving and interesting
Plea? And is not what follows affectingly
noble? 

But Heav'n forbid, that you should ever know
A Mother's Sorrow for an only Son,
Her Joy! her Bliss! her last surviving Comfort!
When ev'ry Hour she trembles for his Life.
Your Pow'r o'er Pyrrhus may relieve my Fears.
Alas! what Danger is there in a Child,
Sav'd from the Wreck of a whole ruin'd Empire?
Let me go hide him in a desart Isle.
You may rely upon my tender Care
To keep him far from Perils of Ambition:
All he can learn of me, will be to weep.

This is sweetly moving, nobly pathetick. But
I am angry at the Poet, if he could have help'd it,
for drawing in Hermione such an ungenerous and
unprincely Insult upon the Royal Mourner, when
in the Height of her own Prosperity, as she imagin'd,
and her Rival subjected beneath her Feet. 
—Fie upon him, thus to make her say, like a
true Woman, as our Censurers will reflect! 

Madam, if Pyrrhus must be wrought to Pity,
No Woman does it better than yourself:
If you gain him, I shall comply of course.

This from one Woman to another, much
more from one Princess to another; from the
Elated to the Captive, could not be said surely. — 
Nor do I see there was any need of it: For had the
Poet made Hermione on this Occasion (her own
Empire secured, as she thought) give a more generous
and humane Answer, would it not have heighten'd 

the Distress, when such a Character should
sink, as she had been basely injur'd by the Man she
lov'd, and whose Crime was owing to the Rage of
slighted Love? Why should he chuse to make Andromache's
Part thus nobly moving at the Expence
of the other Character, in a Point, where Justice,
Generosity, and Humanity, were so much concern'd? 
And would not a fine Instruction have lain
here for the Audience, to have had Compassion
for the Distresses of another; and so much the
more, as that other was a Rival sunk at the Feet
of the Prosperous? —Indeed Hermione, which
by the way Mrs. Porter acted incomparably, is a
Character full of Rage and Violence; of Jealousy,
and great Cause she had for it: But what then? 
Could she not, a Princess as she was, when her own
Love was secured, for so she thought, have been
made capable of feeling a Distress so nobly pleaded,
by Motives so becoming a Mother's Lips, and a
bridal Virgin's Prospects? —But I am upon the
Author's Beauties. 
Andromache's Plea to Pyrrhus, when,
thus insulted by Hermione, she sees no Hope of
any way to preserve her Son, but by soothing the
proud Heart of the Prince, whom her Refusal had
incensed, is very sweet in the Mouth of captive
Royalty: 

 —Oh, Sir, excuse,
The Pride of Royal Blood, that checks my Soul,
And knows not how to be importunate.
You know, alas! I was not born to kneel,
To sue for Pitty, and to own a Master.

And afterwards: 


Behold, how low you have reduc'd a Queen!
These Eyes have seen my Country laid in Ashes;
My Kindred fall in War; my Father slain;
My Husband dragg'd in his own Blood; my Son
Condemn'd to Bondage; and myself a Slave.
Yet, in the midst of these unheard-of Woes,
'Twas some Relief to find myself your Captive;
And that my Son, deriv'd from antient Kings,
Since he must serve, had Pyrrhus for his Master.
When Priam kneel'd, the great Achilles wept;
I hop'd I should not find his Son less noble:
I thought the Brave were still the most compassionate.
O do not, Sir, divide me from my Child,
If he must die—

Then there is a fine Scene recollected by Andromache
to her Woman, between Hector and
herself, on the Morning he set out for the Action
in which he was slain: 

That Morn, Cephisa! that ill-fated Morn!
My Husband bid thee bring Astyanax.
He took him in his Arms; and, as I wept,
My Wife, my dear Andromache, said he,
(Heaving with stifled Sighs, to see me weep)

Finely said, and the Hero all preserv'd! He
sigh'd, not for Fear of the Foe, but to see his
beloved Lady weep! —From that Humanity,
which should always be inseparable, whether in
Fiction or Fact, from true Heroism: And that
other Inseparable, Piety; as follows: 

What Fortune may attend my Arms, the Gods
Alone can tell. To thee I give the Boy;

Preserve him as the Token of our Loves.
If I should fall, let him not miss his Sire,
While thou surviv'st; but, by thy tender Care,
Let the Son see, that thou didst love his Father.

And the Advice, left by Andromache with
Cephisa, for her Son, when she resolves to kill
herself, after the Nuptial Ceremony is perform'd,
is very worthy; after a Scene of passionate Fondness
well express'd: 

 —Let him know,
I dy'd to save him—And would die again.—
Season his Mind with early Hints of Glory:
Make him acquainted with his Ancestors;
Trace out their shining Story in his Thoughts:
Dwell on th' Exploits of his immortal Father;
And sometimes—

Very pretty: 

 —let him hear his Mother's Name:
Let him reflect upon his Royal Birth
With modest Pride. Pyrrhus will prove a Friend:
But let him know, he has a Conqu'ror's Right.
He must be taught to stifle his Resentments,
And sacrifice his Vengeance to his Safety.

And to his Gratitude too, Madam, should it
not have been said, when he was so generously protected
against the Demand and Menaces of confederate
Kings? 

Should he prove headstrong, rash, or unadvis'd,
He then would frustrate all his Mother's Virtue,
Provoke his Fate, and I shall die in vain!


Very nobly said! But I cannot forbear making
one Observation on Occasion of Self-murder,
which, however the Poets may be justify'd by the
Examples of the Greeks and Romans, when they
draw their Stories from them, yet, in such a
gloomy, saturnine Nation as ours, where Self-murders
are more frequent, than in all the Christian
World besides, methinks all those Stories
should be avoided, for publick Entertainment:
Or, where there is a Necessity, as in the Play of
Cato, for Instance, to introduce such a wicked Practice,
the bad Example should be obviated, and
the Poison it may administer, antidoted, by more
forcible Lessons than what these few doubtful
Words express: 

I fear I've been too hasty!—

So, in this Tragedy I am speaking of, when
Hermione destroysherself, and Andromache designs
to do the like, should the English Poet have left
this Practice unguarded or unaccompany'd by proper
Lessons and Censures in such a Country as ours? 
The staggering Doubts and Distress of Hermione,
after she had engaged Orestes in the Murder
of Pyrrhus, between her Love and Resentment; 
her Questions to her Woman, whether, as he approach'd
the Temple to marry her Rival, in Breach
of his Vows of Betrothment to her, his Countenance
shewed not some Tokens of Remorse; are
very natural to one in her amorous Circumstance,
I fansy: 

But say, Cleone, didst thou mark him well?
Was his Brow smooth? Say, did there not appear

Some Shade of Grief? Some little Cloud of Sorrow?
Did he not stop? Did he not once look back?
Didst thou approach him? Was he not confounded?
Did he not—Oh! be quick, and tell me all.

This, Madam, I think, is charmingly natural. 
And on Cleone's Answer, That he went to the
Temple with Joy and Transport, unguarded, and
all his Cares imploy'd to gratify Andromache in
her Son's Safety, it is the less to be wonder'd at,
that she should be quite exasperated, and, forgetting
all her Love for the ingrateful Prince, should say: 

Enough! he dies!—the Traitor!—Where's Orestes?

There are several Circumstances of Horror
in this Play, that made me shudder; but I think
none like the Description the Poet puts into the
Mouth of Pylades, the inseparable Friend of Orestes,
who, far from avoiding to shock the Soul of
his Friend, by gently insinuating the Fate of that
Hermione, on whom he had fixed his Happiness,
thus terribly, with all the Aggravations that could
attend such a Tragedy, points out the horrid Action; 
taking care even to make her as impious in her Reproaches
of the Deity for her own Rashness, as
she was in the Violence by which she dies; and so
leaving a dreadful Example (which I presume was
not needful to be left) of final Impenitence, especially
in a suffering Character, that had not merited
the Evils she met with. 
Thus it is describ'd; and I am affected with the
Transcription of a Passage, which the Poet has labour'd,
more than he ought, I think, to shew the
Force of his descriptive Vein: 


Full of Disorder, Wildness in her Looks,
With Hands expanded, and dishevell'd Hair,
Breathless and pale, with Shrieks she sought the Temple.
In the Midway she met the Corps of Pyrrhus:
She startled at the Sight: Then, stiff with Horror,
Gaz'd frightful! Waken'd from the dire Amaze,
She rais'd her Eyes to Heav'n, with such a Look,
As spoke her Sorrows, and reproach'd the Gods.
Then plung'd a Poniard deep within her Breast,
And fell on Pyrrhus, grasping him in Death.

This, from a Friend, to a Lover of the miserable
Hermione, tho' the Poet might think it the
only Way he had left to make Orestes run quite
distracted, yet was not, I presume to say, very judiciously
put into the Mouth of a beloved Friend,
anxious for his Safety, and to get him off, after the
Murder; and whose Part, till now, had been rather
that of soothing, like a true Friend, the Sorrows
of his Mind. 
The Moral of the Whole only regards Andromache;
nor is there, indeed, any thing but Violence
and Terror in the rest of the Story and Characters; 
as if the Poet was determin'd to sink all
into one, and make that great, at the Expence of
the rest. 'Tis, however, in my humble Opinion,
a good one, to shew that Persons in Distress ought
never to despond, be their Afflictions what they
will; and ought to have weigh'd with Andromache
herself, to make her avoid the Crime of Suicide,
which she had resolv'd upon, since this Moral is
put into her Mouth; but so late, that it seems
rather to make her good by an Event she could not 

foresee, than by the Prudence of her Reflections,
which would not, without that Event, have prevented
her from a rash Action, that must have render'd
the Moral ineffectual: 

Tho' plung'd in Ills, and exercis'd in Care,
Yet never let the noble Mind despair.
Where press'd by Dangers, and beset with Foes,
The Gods their timely Succour interpose;
And when our Virtue sinks, o'erwhelm'd with Grief,
By unforeseen Expedients bring Relief.

Now, Madam, good as this Moral is, I should
rather, in Generosity, have had it recommended
from any Mouth than that of Andromache: For
what is the Consolation she receives? What are
the Expedients she so much rejoices in? Why, in
the first Place, the Murder of a Prince who lov'd
her more than his own Glory, and to whom she
had just given her Faith, as a second Husband, tho'
forced to it, from a laudable Motive: And next,
The Self-murder of Hermione, the Distraction of
Orestes, and the Prospect of succeeding with her
Son to the Throne of the murder'd Prince; from
which, however, she could not expect but be driven,
and her Son at last to be destroy'd, by those
vengeful Confederates, who had joined, by a solemn
Embassy, to demand his Life, and who now, by
his Elevation, had stronger Reasons to apprehend
Danger from him; and less Difficulty to effect his
Ruin, since Pyrrhus was no more. 
But judge, my dear Lady, what, after the Play was
over, I must think of the Epilogue, and indeed of that
Part of the Audience, which called out for it. 

An Epilogue spoken by Mrs. Oldfield in the
Character of Andromache, that was more shocking
to me, than the most terrible Parts of the Play; as
by lewd, and even senseless Double Entendre, it
could be calculated only to efface all the tender,
all the virtuous Sentiments, which the Tragedy
was design'd to raise. 
The Pleasure this was receiv'd with by the Men,
was equally barbarous and insulting; every one
turning himself to the Boxes, Pit, and Galleries,
where Ladies were, to see how they look'd, and
how they stood an emphatical and too well pronounc'd
Ridicule, not only upon the Play in general,
but upon the Part of Andromache in particular,
which had been so well sustain'd by an excellent
Actress; and I was extremely mortify'd to see my
favourite (and the only perfect) Character, debas'd
and despoil'd, and the Widow of Hector,
Prince of Troy, talking Nastiness to an Audience,
and setting it out with all the wicked Graces of
Action, and affected Archness of Look, Attitude,
and Emphasis. 
I stood up—Dear Sir! —Dear Miss!— 
said I. 
What's the Matter, my Love? said Mr. B.
smiling, who expected, as he told me afterwards,
to see me mov'd by this vile Epilogue—for it is
always call'd for, it seems. 
Why have I wept the Distresses of the injur'd
Hermione? whisper'd I: Why have I been mov'd
by the Murder of the brave Pyrrhus, and shock'd
by the Madness of Orestes? Is it for this? See you
not Hector's Widow, the noble Andromache, inverting
the Design of the whole Play, satirizing 

her own Sex, but indeed most of all ridiculing and
shaming, in my Mind, that Part of the Audience,
who have call'd for this vile Epilogue, and those
who can be delighted with it, after such Scenes of
Horror and Distress? 
He was pleas'd to say, smiling, I expected, my
Dear, that your Delicacy, and Miss's too, would
be shock'd on this preposterous Occasion. I never
saw this Play, Rake as I was, but the Impropriety
of the Epilogue sent me away dissatisfy'd with it,
and with human Nature too: And you only see,
by this one Instance, what a Character that of an
Actor or Actress is, and how capable they are to
personate any thing for a sorry Subsistence. 
Well, but, Sir, said I, are there not, think
you, extravagant Scenes and Characters enough in
most Plays, to justify the Censures of the Virtuous
upon them, that the wicked Friend of the Author
must crown the Work in an Epilogue, for fear the
Audience should go away improv'd by the Representation? 
It is not, I see, always Narrowness of
Spirit, as I have heard some say, that opens the
Mouths of good People against these Diversions. 
In this wild way, talk'd I; for I was quite out
of Patience at this unnatural and unexpected Piece
of Ridicule, tack'd to so serious a Play, and coming
after such a Moral. 
Here is a Specimen, my dear Lady, of my
Observations on the first Play I saw. How just, or
how impertinent, I must leave to your better Judgment. 
I very probably expose my own Ignorance
and Folly in them; but I will not say, Presumption,
because you have put me upon the Task,
which otherwise I should hardly have attempted. 

I have very little Reason therefore to blame myself
on this score; but, on the contrary, (if I can escape
your Ladyship's Censure) have Cause to pride myself
in the Opportunity you have thereby given
me to shew my Readiness to obey you; and the
rather, since I am sure of your kindest Indulgence,
now you have given me Leave to style myself 
Your Ladyship's obliged Sister,
and humble Servant,
P. B. 

