



My dearest Mr. B.
I will continue my Subject, altho' I have not
had an Opportunity to know whether you approve
of my Notions or not, by reason of the Excursions
you have been pleas'd to allow me to make in your
beloved Company, to the Sea-ports of this Kingdom,
and to the more noted inland Towns of
Essex, Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, and Dorsetshire,
which have given me infinite Delight and Pleasure,
and inlarg'd my Notions of the Wealth and Power
of the Kingdom, in which God's Goodness has
given you so considerable a Stake. 
My next Topick will be upon an Home Education,
which Mr. Locke prefers, for several weighty
Reasons, to a School one, provided such a Tutor can
be procur'd, as he makes next to an Impossibility to
procure. The Gentleman has set forth the Inconveniencies
of both, and was himself so discourag'd
on a Review of them, that he was ready, as he
says, to throw up his Pen. My chief Cares, dear
Sir, on this Head, are threefold: 1st, The Difficulty,
which, as I said, Mr. Locke makes almost insuperable, 

to find a Tutor qualify'd. 2dly, The Necessity there
is, according to Mr. Locke, of keeping the Youth
out of the Company of the meaner Servants, who
may set him bad Examples. And, next, Those still
greater Difficulties, which will arise from the Examples
of his Parents, if they are not very discreet and
circumspect. 
As to the Qualifications of the Tutor, Mr. Locke
supposes, that he is to be so learned, so discreet, so
wise, in short, so perfect a Man, that, I doubt, and
so does Mr. Locke, such an one is hardly possible to
be met with for this humble and slavish Imployment. 
I presume, Sir, to call it so, because of the
too little Regard that is generally paid to these useful
Men in the Families of the Great, where they
are too frequently put upon a Foot with the uppermost
Servants, and the rather, if they happen to be
Men of Modesty. 
“I would,” says this Gentleman, “from Childrens
first beginning to talk, have some discreet,
sober, nay, wise Person about them, whose Care
it should be to fashion them right, and to keep
them from all Ill; especially the Infection of bad
Company. I think,” continues he, “this Province
requires great Sobriety, Temperance, Tenderness,
Diligence, and Discretion; Qualities hardly
to be found united in Persons that are to be had
for ordinary Salaries, nor easily to be found anywhere.” 
If this, Sir, be the Case, does not this excellent
Author recommend a Scheme, that is render'd in a
manner impracticable from this Difficulty? 
As to these Qualities being more rarely to be met
with in Persons that are to be had for ordinary Salaries,
I cannot help being of Opinion, (altho', with
Mr. Locke, I think, no Expence should be spared,
if that would do) that there is as good a Chance of 

finding such an one among the needy Scholars, as
among those better provided for: Because the Necessities
of the former, as they became a Spur to
his own Learning and Improvement, so will they, at
first setting out in the World, quicken his Diligence,
and, in Hopes of recommending him to a worthier
Lot, make him be glad of embracing an Offer of
this kind, in a Family, which has Interest enough to
prefer him. 
I say not this, dear Sir, to encourage that wretched
Niggardliness, which this Gentleman justly censures,
of those who grudge an handsome Consideration to
so necessary and painful a Labour as that of a Tutor,
which, where a deserving Man can be met with,
cannot be too genteelly rewarded, nor himself too
respectfully treated. I only take the Liberty to
deliver my Opinion, that an humble Condition is
as likely as any other to produce a Gentleman of
these good Qualities, as well for the Reason I have
hinted at, as for others, which might be mention'd. 
To which, to name no more, the Merit of Mr.
Williams and Mr. Adams will bear Witness. 
But Mr. Locke proceeds with his Difficulties in
this Particular: “To form a young Gentleman as
he should be,” says he, “'tis fit his Governor
should be well-bred, understand the Ways of
Carriage, and Measures of Civility, in all the
Variety of Persons, Times, and Places; and keep
his Pupil, as far as his Age requires, constantly to
the Observation of them. This is an Art,” continues
he, “not to be learnt or taught by Books. 
Nothing can give it, but good Company, and
Observation, join'd together.” 
And in another Place, “Besides being well-bred,
the Tutor should know the World well; the Ways,
the Humours, the Follies, the Cheats, the Faults
of the Age he is fallen into, and particularly of 

the Country be lives in: These he should be able
to shew to his Pupil, as he finds him capable; 
teach him Skill in Men, and their Manners; pull
off the Mask, which their several Callings and
Pretences cover them with; and make his Pupil
discern what lies at the Bottom, under such Appearances,
that he may not, as unexperienc'd
young Men are apt to do, if they are unwarn'd,
take one thing for another, judge by the Outsides,
and give himself up to Shew, and the Insinuation
of a fair Carriage, or an obliging Application:
Teach him to guess at, and beware of, the Designs
of Men he hath to do with, neither with
too much Suspicion, nor too much Confidence.” 
This, dear Sir, is excellently said: 'Tis noble
Theory. And if the Tutor is a Man void of Resentment
and Caprice, and will not be govern'd by
partial Considerations in his own Judgment of Persons
and Things, it will be well: But if otherwise,
he may take Advantage of the Confidence plac'd in
him, to the Injury of some worthy Person, and by
Degrees monopolize the young Gentleman to himself,
and govern his Passions as absolurely, as I have
heard some First Ministers have done those of their
Prince, equally to his own personal Disreputation,
and to the Disadvantage of his People. But, 
All this, and much more, according to Mr. Locke,
is the Duty of a Tutor; and on the finding out such
an one, depends his Scheme of an Home Education. 
No Wonder then, that he himself says, “When
I consider the Scruples and Cautions, I here lay
in your Way, methinks it looks as if I advised
you to something, which I would have offer'd
at, but in Effect not done,” &c. Permit me,
dear Sir, in this Place, to express my Fear, that it
is hardly possible for any one, of Talents inferior to
those of Mr. Locke himself, to come up to the 

Rules he has laid down on this Subject; and 'tis to
be question'd, whether even he, with all that vast
Stock of natural Reason, and solid Sense, for which,
as you tell me, Sir, he was so famous, had attain'd
to these Perfections, at his first setting out into Life. 
Now, therefore, dear Sir, you can't imagine, how
these Difficulties perplex me, as to my knowing
how to judge which is best, an Home or a School
Education! –––For hear what this excellent Author
so justly observes on the latter, among other things
no less to the Purpose: “I am sure, he who is able
to be at the Charge of a Tutor at Home, may
there give his Son a more genteel Carriage, more
manly Thoughts, and a Sense of what is worthy
and becoming, with a greater Proficiency in
Learning into the Bargain, and ripen him up sooner
into a Man, than any at School can do. Not
that I blame the School-master, in this,” says he,
or think it to be laid to his Charge. The Difference
is great between two or three Pupils in the
same House, and three or fourscore Boys lodg'd
up and down: For, let the Master's Industry and
Skill be never so great, it is impossible he should
have 50 or 100 Scholars under his Eye, any
longer than they are in the School together.” But
then, Sir, if there be such a Difficulty, as Mr.
Locke says, to meet with a proper Tutor, what a
perplexing thing is this? And what shall one say, as
to the Preference he gives to an Home Education, in
which such a Tutor is to be suppos'd necessary? 
But then, according to this Gentleman, there is
another Difficulty attending an Home Education; and
is, what I hinted at before, in my second Article,
The Necessity there is to keep the Youth out of
the Company of the meaner Servants, who may
set him bad Examples. For thus he says: “Here
is another great Inconvenience, which Children 

receive from the ill Examples, which they meet
with from the meaner Servants. They are wholly,
if possible, to be kept from such Conversation:
For the Contagion of these ill Precedents, both
in Civility and Virtue, horribly infects Children,
as often as they come within Reach of it. They
frequently learn from unbred or debauched Servants,
such Language, untowardly Tricks, and
Vices, as otherwise they would be ignorant of,
all their Lives. 'Tis an hard Matter wholly to
prevent this Mischief,” continues he; “you will
have very good Luck; if you never have a clownish
or vicious Servant, and if from them your Children
never get any Infection.” 
Then, Sir, my next Point (which I mention'd in
the Beginning of this Letter) is a still greater Difficulty,
as it may happen in an Home Education; 
to wit, The Example of the Parents themselves, if
they be not very circumspect and discreet. 
All these Difficulties in an Home Education being
put together, let me, dear Sir, humbly propose
it, as a Matter for your Consideration and Determination,
Whether there be not a middle way to
be found out in a School Education, that may remedy
some of these Inconveniencies? For suppose,
Sir, you cannot, as the Task is so difficult, get a
Tutor so qualified, as Mr. Locke thinks he ought to
be, for your Billy, as he grows up. Suppose there
is Danger from your meaner Servants; and suppose
we his Parents should not be able to lay ourselves
under the requisite Restraints, in order to form his
Mind by our own Examples, which, I hope, by
God's Grace, however, will not be the Case–––– 
Cannot some Master be found out, who shall be
so well rewarded for his Care of a few young
Gentlemen, as shall make it worth his while to be
contented with those few? suppose Five, Six, Seven, 

or Eight at most; whose Morals and Breeding he
may attend to, as well as to their Learning? The
farther this Master lives from the young Gentlemens
Friends, the better it may be. We will hope, that
he is a Man of a mild Disposition, but strict in
his Discipline, and who shall make it a Rule not to
give Correction for small Faults, or till every other
Method has been try'd; who carries such a just
Dignity in his Manner, without the Appearance of
Tyranny, that his Looks may be of greater Force,
than the Words of some, and his Words than the
Blows of others; and who will rather endeavour to
shame than terrify a Youth out of his Faults. Then,
Sir, suppose such an one was to allot such a Portion
of Time for the more learned Studies; and before
the Youth was tir'd with them, suppose such another
Portion was allotted for the Writing and Arithmetick
Parts; and then, to relieve his Mind from
both, suppose the Dancing-master should take his
Part; and innocent Exercises of mere Diversion, to
fill up the rest, at his own Choice, in which, diverted
by such a Rotation of Imployments, (all
thus render'd delightful by their successive Variety)
he would hardly wish to pass much Time. For
the Dancing of itself will answer both Parts, that of
good Breeding, and that of Exercise: And thus different
Studies, at one time, may be master'd. 
Moreover the Emulation, which will be inspir'd,
where there are several young Gentlemen, will be
of inconceivable Use both to Tutor and Pupil, in
lessening the Trouble of the one, and advancing the
Learning of the other, which cannot be expected,
where there is but a single young Gentleman to
take care of. 
Such a Master will know it to be his Interest, as
well as his Duty, to have a watchful Eye over the
Conduct and Behaviour of his Servants. His Assistants, 

in the different Branches of Science and
Education, will be Persons of approved Prudence,
for whom he will think himself answerable, since
his own Reputation will depend upon their Behaviour,
as well as his Livelihood. The young Gentlemen
will have young Gentlemen for their Companions,
all under the Influence of the same Precepts
and Directions; and if some chosen Period
were fixed, once a Week, as a Reward for some
Excellence, where, at a little Desk, rais'd a Step or
two above the other Seats, the excelling Youth
should be set to read, under the Master's Direction,
a little Portion from the best Translations of the
Greek and Roman Historians, and even from the best
English Authors; this might, in a very engaging
manner, initiate them into the Knowlege of the
History of past Times, and of their own Country,
and give them a Curiosity to pass some of their
vacant Hours in the same laudable Pursuit: For,
dear Sir, I must still insist, that Rewards, and innocent
Gratifications, as also little Honours and Distinctions,
must needs be very attractive to the Minds
of Youth. 
And don't you think, dear Sir, that the little
Ride, and Dairy-house Breakfasting*  , by which Miss
Goodwin's Governess distinguishes the little Ladies,
who excel in their allotted Tasks, is a sweet pretty
Encouragement to their ductile Minds? –––Yes, it is,
to be sure! –––And I have often thought of it with
Pleasure, and have partaken, in a manner, of the
Delight, that I have supposed their pretty Hearts
must be fill'd with, on the Occasion. And why may
not such little Triumphs be, in Proportion, as incentive
to Children to master laudable Tasks, as
the Roman Triumphs, of different Kinds, and their 

Mural and Civick Crowns, all which I have heard
you speak of, were to their Heroes and Warriors of
old? For Mr. Dryden well observes, That 

Men are but Children of a larger Growth.
Our Appetites are apt to change, as theirs,
And full as craving too, and full as vain.

Permit me, Sir, to transcribe four or five Lines
more, for the Beauty of the Thought: 

And yet the Soul, shut up in her dark Room,
Viewing so clear abroad, at home sees nothing:
But like a Mole in Earth, busy and blind,
Works all her Folly up, and casts it outward
To the World's open View–––

Improving the Thought; methinks, I can see the
dear little Miss, who has, in some eminent Task,
borne away the Palm, making her publick Entry,
as I may call it, after her Dairy Breakfast, and pretty
Airing, into her Governess's Court-yard, through a
Row of her School-fellows, drawn out on each
Side, to admire her; her Governess and Assistants
receiving her at the Porch, their little Capitol, and
lifting her out with Applauses and Encomiums, with
a Thus shall it be done to the Miss, whom her Governess
delighteth to honour! I see not, my Mr. B.
why the dear Miss, in this Case, as she moves thro'
her admiring School-fellows, may not have her little
Heart beat with as much Delight, be as gloriously
elated, proportionally, as that of the greatest Hero
in his Triumphal Car, who has return'd from Exploits,
perhaps, much less laudable. 
But how I ramble! –––Yet, surely, Sir, you don't
expect Method or Connexion from your Girl. The
Education of our Sex will not permit that, where it
is best. We are forced to struggle for Knowlege, 

like the poor feeble Infant, in the Month, who, as
I describ'd in my first Letter on this Subject, is
pinn'd and fetter'd down upon the Nurse's Lap; and
who, if its little Arms happen, by Chance, to escape
its Nurse's Observation, and offer but to expand
themselves, are immediately taken into Custody, and
pinion'd down to their passive Behaviour. So, when
a poor Girl, in spite of her narrow Education,
breaks out into Notice, her Genius is immediately
tamed by trifling Imployments, lest perhaps she
should become the Envy of one Sex, and the Equal
of the other. But you, Sir, act more nobly by
your Pamela; for you throw in her Way all the
Opportunities of Improvement that can offer; and
she has only to regret, that she cannot make a better
Use of them, and, of consequence, render herself
more worthy of your generous Indulgence. 
I know not how, Sir, to recover my Thread; 
and so must break off, with that Delight, which I
always take, when I come near the Bottom of my
Letters to your dear Self; because then I can boast
of the Honour which I have in being 
Your ever dutiful
P. B. 

