



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Mrs. Norton. 

Wednesday, Aug. 2. 
You give me, my dear Mrs. Norton, great pleasure
in hearing of yours and your Son's recovery. 
May you continue, for many, many years, a blessing
to each other! 
You tell me, that you did actually write to my
Mother, offering to inclose to her mine of the 24th
past: And you say, It was not required of you. 
That is to say, altho' you cover it over as gently as
you could, that your offer was rejected; which
makes it evident, that no plea will be heard for me. 
Yet, you bid me hope, that the grace I sued for
would, in time, be granted. 
The grace I then sued for was indeed granted: 
But you are afraid, you say, that they will wait for
Mr. Brand's report, before favour will be obtained in
return to the second Letter which I wrote to my Sister: 
And you add, That I have an indulgent Mother,
were she at liberty to act according to her own
inclination; and that all will end well at last. 
But what, my dear Mrs. Norton, what is the grace
I sue for in my second Letter? —It is not that they
will receive me into favour—If they think it is, they
are mistaken. I do not, I cannot expect that: Nor,
as I have often said, should I, if they would receive
me, bear to live in the eye of those dear friends
whom I have so grievously offended. 'Tis only,
fimply, a Blessing I ask: A Blessing to die with; not
to live with. —Do they know that? And do they
know, that their unkindness will perhaps shorten my
date? So that their favour, if ever they intend to
grant it, may come too late? 
Once more, I desire you not to think of coming
to me. I have no uneasiness now, but what proceeds 

from the apprehension of seeing a man I would not
see for the world, if I could help it; and from the
Severity of my nearest and dearest relations: A Severity
entirely their own, I doubt; for you tell me,
that my Brother is at Edinburgh! You would therefore
heighten their Severity, and make yourself enemies
besides, if you were to come to me—Don't you
see that you would? 
Mr. Brand may come, if he will. He is a Clergyman,
and must mean well; or I must think so, let
him say of me what he will. All my fear is, that,
as he knows I am in disgrace with a family whose
esteem he is desirous to cultivate; and as he has obligations
to my Uncle Harlowe and to my Father; 
he will be but a languid acquitter—Not that I am
afraid of what he, or any-body in the world, can
hear as to my conduct. You may, my reverend and
dear friend, indeed you may, rest satisfied, that That
is such as may warrant me to challenge the enquiries
of the most officious. 
I will send you copies of what passes, as you desire,
when I have an Answer to my second Letter. I
now begin to wish, that I had taken the heart to write
to my Father himself; or to my Mother, at least; 
instead of to my Sister; and yet I doubt my poor
Mother can do nothing for me of herself. A strong
confederacy, my dear Mrs. Norton (a strong confederacy
indeed!) against a poor girl, their Daughter,
Sister, Niece! —My Brother, perhaps, got it renewed
before he left them. He needed not—His
work is done; and more than done. 
Don't afflict yourself about money-matters on my
account. I have no occasion for money. I am glad
my Mother was so considerate to you. I was in pain
for you, on the same subject. But Heaven will not
permit so good a woman to want the humble blessings
she was always satisfied with. I wish every individual
of our family were but as rich as you! —O my Mamma 

Norton, you are rich! You are rich indeed! —The
true Riches are such Content as you are blessed with. 
—And I hope in God, that I am in the way to be
rich too. 
Adieu, my ever-indulgent friend. You say, all
will be at last happy—And I know it will—I confide
that it will, with as much security, as you may, that
I will be to my last hour 
Your ever-grateful and affectionate
Cl. Harlowe. 