


Sir Charles Grandison. In Continuation. 


Bologna, June 13–24.
The Conte della Porretta, and the two young
Lords Sebastiano and Juliano, came hither
yesterday, to rejoice on the hopeful prospects before
us. 
I thought I saw a little shiness and reserve sit upon
the brow of the Marchioness, which I had not observed
till the arrival of the Count. A complaisance
that was too civil for friendship; for our friendship. 
I never permit a cloud to hang for one hour upon the
brow of a friend, without examining into the reason
of it, in hopes it may be in my power to dispel it. 
An abatement in the freedom of one I love, is a charge
of unworthiness upon me, that I must endeavour to
obviate the moment I suspect it. I desired a private
audience of the good Lady. 
She favoured me with it at the first word. But as
soon as I had opened my heart to her, she asked, If
Father Marescotti, who loved me, she said, as if I
were his own son, might be allowed to be present at
our conversation? I was a little startled at the question; 
but answered, By all means. 
The Father was sent to, and came. Tender concern
and reserve were both apparent in his countenance. 
This shewed that he was apprised of the occasion
of the Marchioness's reserve; and expected to
be called upon, or employed in the explanation, had
I not demanded it. 
I repeated, before him, what I had said to the
Marchioness, of the reserve that I had thought I saw
since yesterday in one of the most benign countenances
in the world. 
Chevalier, said she, if you think that every one of
our family, as well those of Urbino and Naples, as 

those of this place, do not love you as one of their
own family, you do not do us justice. 
She then enumerated and exaggerated their obligations
to me. I truly told her, that I could not do
less than I had done, and answer it to my own heart. 
Leave us, replied she, to judge for ourselves on this
subject. And, for God's sake, do not think us capable
of ingratitude. We begin with pleasure to see
the poor child, after a course of sufferings and distresses,
that few young creatures have gone thro', reviving to
our hopes. She must in gratitude, in honour, in
justice, be yours, if you require her of us, and upon
the terms you have formerly proposed. 
I think so, said the Father. 
What can I say? proceeded she: We are all distressed. 
I am put upon a task that grieves me. Ease my heart,
Chevalier, by sparing my speech. 
Explain yourself no further, madam: I fully understand
you. I will not impute ingratitude to any
heart in this family. Tell me, Father Marescotti, if
you can allow for me, as I could for you, were you in
my circumstances (and you cannot be better satisfied
in your religion, than I am in mine) tell me, by
what you could do, what I ought. 
There is no answering a case so strongly put, replied
the Father. But can a false religion, an heresy,
persuade an ingenuous mind as strongly as the
true? 
Dear Father Marescotti, you know you have said
nothing: It would sound harshly to repeat your own
question to you; yet that is all I need to do. But let
us continue our prayers, that the desirable work may
be perfected: That Lady Clementina may be quite
recovered. You have seen, madam, that I have not
offered to give myself consequence with her. You
see the distance I have observed to her: You see nothing
in her, not even in her most afflicting resveries,
that can induce you to think she has marriage in view. 

As I told your Ladyship at first, I have but one wish
at present; and that is, her prefect recovery. 
What, Father, can we say? resumed the Marchioness. 
Advise us, Chevalier. You know our situation. 
But do not, do not impute ingratitude to us. Our
child's salvation, in our own opinion, is at stake—If
she be yours, she will not be long a Catholic—Once
more, advise us. 
You generously, I know, madam, think you speak
in time, both for the young Lady's sake and mine. 
You say she shall be mine upon the terms I formerly
offered, if I insist upon it. I have told the General,
that I will have the consent of all three brothers, as
well as yours, madam, and your good Lord's, or I
will not hope for the honour of your alliance: And
I have declared to you, that I look upon myself as
bound; upon you all, as free. If you think that the
sense of supposed obligation, as Lady Clementina advances
in her health, may engage her further than
you wish, let me decline my visits by degrees, in order
to leave her as disengaged as possible in her own mind; 
and that I may not be thought of consequence to her
recovery. In the first place, I will make my promised
visit to the General. You see she was not the worse,
but, perhaps, the better, for my absence of ten days. 
I will pass twenty, if you please, at Rome, and at
Naples; holding myself in readiness to return post, at
the first call. Let us determine nothing in the interim. 
Depend upon the honour of a man, who once more
assures you, that he looks upon himself as bound, and
the Lady free; and who will act accordingly by her,
and all your family. 
They were both silent, and looked upon each other. 
What say you, madam, to this proposal? What
say you, Father Marescotti? Could I think of a more
disinterested one, I would make it. 
I say, you are a wonderful man. 

I have not words, resumed the Lady—She wept. 
Hard, hard fate! The man, that of all men— 
There she stopt. The Father was present, or, perhaps,
she had said more. 
Shall we, said she, acquaint Jeronymo with this
conversation? 
It may disturb him, replied I. You know, madam,
his generous attachment to me. I have promised the
General a visit. Signor Jeronymo was as much
pleased with the promise, as with the invitation. The
performance will add to his pleasure. He may get
more strength: Lady Clementina may be still better:
And you will, from events so happy, be able to resolve. 
Still be pleased to remember, that I hold myself bound,
yourselves to be free. 
Yet I thought at the time, with a concern, that,
perhaps, was too visible, When, when shall I meet
with the returns, which my proud heart challenges as
its due? But then my pride (shall I call it?) came in
to my relief—Great God! I thank thee, thought I,
that thou enablest me to do what my conscience,
what humanity tells me, is fit and right to be done,
without taking my measures of right and wrong from
any other standard. 
Father Marescotti saw me affected. Tears stood in
his eyes. He withdrew, to conceal his emotion. The
Marchioness was still more concerned. She called
me the most generous of men. I took a respectful
leave, and withdrew to Jeronymo. 
As I was intending to return to my lodgings, in
order to try to calm there my disturbed mind, the
Marquis and his Brother, and the Bishop, sent for me
into the Marchioness's drawing-room, where were she
and Father Marescotti; who had acquainted them
with what had passed between her, himself, and me. 
The Bishop arose, and embraced me—Dear Grandison,
said he, how I admire you! —Why, why will 

you not let me call you brother? —Were a prince your
competitor, and you would be a Catholic— 
O that you would! said the Marchioness; her hands
and eyes lifted up. 
And will you not? Can you not? said the Count. 
That, my Lord, is a question kindly put, as it shews
your regard for me—But it is not to be answered
now. 
The Marquis took my hand. He applauded the
disinterestedness of my behaviour to his family. He
approved of my proposal of absence; but said, that
I must myself undertake to manage that part, not only
with their Clementina, but with Jeronymo; whose
grateful heart would otherwise be uneasy, on a surmise,
that the motion came not from myself, but them. 
We will not resolve upon any measures, said he. 
God continue and improve our prospects; and the
result we will leave to his providence. 
I went from them directly to Jeronymo; and told
him my intention of setting out for Rome and Naples,
in discharge of my promise to the General and his
Lady. 
He asked me, What would become of Clementina
in the mean time? Was there not too great a danger
that she would go back again? 
I told him I would not go, but with her approbation. 
I pleaded my last absence of ten days, in favour
of my intention. Her recovery, said I, must be a
work of time. If I am of the consequence your friendship
for me supposes, her attention will, probably,
be more engaged by short absences, and the expectations
raised by them, than by daily visits. I remember
not, my dear Jeronymo, continued I, a single instance,
that could induce any one to imagine, that your
Clementina's regard for the man you favour was a
personal one. Friendship never lighted up a purer
flame in a human heart, than in that of your sister. 
Was not the future happiness of the man she esteemed, 

the constant, I may say, the only object of her cares? 
In the height of her malady, Did she not declare, that
were that great article but probably secured, she would
resign her life with pleasure? 
True, very true: Clementina is an excellent creature:
She ever was. And you only can deserve her. 
O that she could be now worthy of you! But are my
father, mother, brother, willing to part with you? 
Do they not, for Clementina's sake, make objections? 
The last absence sitting so easy on her mind, they
doubt not but frequent absences may excite her attention. 
Well, well, I acquiesce. The General and his
Lady will rejoice to see you. I must not be too selfish. 
God preserve you, where-ever you go! —Only let not
the gentle heart of Clementina be wounded by your
absence. Don't let her miss you. 
To-morrow, replied I, I will consult her. She
shall determine for me. 

