


Miss Byron. In Continuation. 


Wednesday Morning, Nov. 8.
Sir Charles let my grandmother come hither by
herself. He is gone to visit that Greville. We
are all in pain for him: But Mr. Deane comforts us. 
After breakfast, thus began my uncle upon me. 
Here, Dame Selby, are we still at a fault. Harriet
knows not what she would be at; and you uphold
her in her nonsenses. Delicacy! Delicacy! The duce
take me, if I have any notion of it! —What a pize are
you about? 
Dear Sir! why am I blamed? said I. What
would you have me do, that I have not done? 
Do! why I would have you give him his Day, and
keep to it; that I would have you do: And not shilly-shally
for ever—and subject the best of men to insults. 
All your men will be easy and quiet, when the ceremony
is over, and they know there is no remedy. 
My good Mr. Selby, said my grandmamma, you 

now blame without reason. Sir Charles was full hasty. 
Harriet was a little more nice, perhaps, her Lover
considered, than she needed to be. Yet I don't know,
but I, in her case, should have done as she did; and
expected as much time as she was willing to take. It
was not a very long one, Mr. Selby, from the declaration
he made; and he is a man himself of great delicacy. 
Harriet very readily acknowleged to him the
preference she gave him to all men; and when she
found him very earnest for a short day, she, by her
last Letter, threw herself generously into his power. 
He is full of acknowlegements upon it; and so he
ought to be. To me he has said all that a man should
say of his gratitude, upon the occasion; and he declared
to me last night, that it was with difficulty he
forbore taking advantage of her goodness to him:
But that he checked himself, and led to other subjects,
seeing how much the dear creature was disordered,
and being apprehensive, that if he had begun upon
one so interesting, or even wished to talk with her
alone, he should have increased her disorder. 
Oy, Oy! Sir Charles is considerate; and Harriet
should be grateful: But indeed my Dame Selby is as
silly, to the full, as Harriet. She is for having Harriet
keep her in countenance in the dance she led me,
so many years ago—Lady G. for my money. She
finds you all out in your Masonry. 
Mr. Selby, said my aunt, I only refer myself to
what our venerable parent just said. 
And so don't think it worth while to hold an argument
with me, I suppose? 
I did not know, my dear, that you wanted to hold
an argument. 
Your servant, madam—with that sly leer—So like
Harriet! and Harriet so like you! 
But, Mr. Selby, said my grandmamma, will you
be pleased to tell the dear child, if you think her wrong,
what is the next step she should take? 

Think her wrong! —Next step! —Why the next
step is, as she has promised to oblige him, and to be
directed by him, to keep her word; and not hum nor
haw about the matter. 
Mr. Deane, who had been shewn and told everything
that had passed since we saw him last, said, You
don't know that my daughter Byron will make unnecessary
parade, Mr. Selby. Sir Charles you find, in
tenderness to her, asked no question yesterday; made
no claim—She could not begin the subject. 
But, said Lucy, I cannot but say, that my cousin is
in some fault. 
Look you there, now! said my uncle. 
We all stared at Lucy; for she spoke and looked
very seriously. 
Might she not have said, proceeded she, when Sir
Charles surprised her at his first arrival (what tho' her
heart was divided between past terror, and present joy?) 
Here I am, Sir, at your service: Are you prepared
for to-morrow? —And then made him one of her best
courtesies. 
Sauce-box! —Well, well, I believe I have been a
little hasty in my judgment (rapping under the table
with his knuckles): But I am so afraid that something
will happen between the cup and the lip—Here, last
night, I dreamt that Lady Clementina and he were
going to be married—Give me your hand, my dear
Harriet, and don't revoke the kindness in your last
Letter to him, but whatever be the day he proposes,
comply; and you will win my heart for ever. 
As Sir Charles leads, Harriet must follow, resumed
my grandmamma. You men are sad prescribers in
these delicate cases, Mr. Selby. You will be put to
it, my dear love, taking my hand, before this day is
over, now you seem so purely recovered. Sir Charles
Grandison is not a dreaming Lover. Prepare your
mind, my child: You'll be put to it, I do assure
you. 

Why, oy; I can't but say, Sir Charles is a man— 
Don't you, my lovely Love, be too much a woman!— 
Too close a copier of your aunt Selby here!—and, as
I said, you will have my heart for ever—Oy, and Sir
Charles's too; for he is not one of your sorry fellows
that can't distinguish between a favour and a folly. 
My uncle then went out with a flourish, and took
Mr. Deane with him; leaving only my grandmamma,
my aunt, my Lucy, and your Harriet, together. 
We had a good deal of talk upon the important
subject. The conclusion was, that I would refer Sir
Charles to my grandmamma, if he were urgent for
the day, and she was vested with a discretionary power
to determine for her girl. 
Such of my cloaths, then, as were near finished,
were ordered to be produced, with some of the nuptial
ornaments. They were all to sit in judgment
upon them. 
Surely, Lady G. these are solemn circumstances,
lightly as my uncle thinks of them. Must not every
thoughtful young creature, on so great a change, and
for life, have conflicts in her mind, be her prospects
ever so happy, as the day approaches? Of what materials
must the hearts of runaways, and of fugitives,
to men half-strangers to them, be compounded? 
My aunt has just left with me the following Billet,
from Sir Charles, directed to my uncle, from Mr.
Greville's: 

Dear Mr. Selby,
I regret every moment that I pass out of Selby-house,
or Shirley-manor: And as I have so few
particular friends in these parts out of your family, I
think I ought to account to you for the hours I do:
Nor will I, now our friendship is so unalterably fixed
and acknowledged, apologize for giving myself, by this
means, the consequence with your family, that every
one of yours, for their single sakes, are of to me, 

superadded to the tenderest attachments to one dear
person of it. 
I found the gentleman in a less happy disposition
than I expected. 
It is with inexpressible reluctance that he thinks, as
my happy day draws near, of giving up all hopes of
an object so dear to him. He seemed strangely balancing
on this subject, when I was introduced to him. 
He instantly proposed to me, and with some fierceness,
that I would suspend all thoughts of marriage for two
months to come, or at least for one. I received his
request with proper indignation. He pretended to give
reasons respecting himself: I allowed not of them. 
After some canvassings, he swore, that he would be
complied with in something. His alternative was, the
dining with him, and with some of his chosen friends,
whom he had invited. 
I have reason to think these friends are those to
whom he expressed himself with violence at the
George, as overheard, I suppose, by the waiter
there. 
He rode out, he owned, yesterday morning, with
intent to meet me; for he boasts, that he knows all
my motions, and those of a certain beloved young
Lady. Let him; let every-body, who think it their
concern to watch our steps, be made acquainted with
them: The honest heart aims not at secrets. I should
glory in receiving Miss Byron's hand, from yours, Sir,
before ten thousand witnesses. 
Mr. Greville had rode out the night before; he did
not say to meet me; but he knew I was expected at
Selby-house, either on Monday night, or yesterday
morning: And on his return, not meeting me, he and
his friends passed their night at the George, as mentioned,
and rode out together in the morning—In
hopes of meeting me, he said; and to engage me to
suspend my happy day. Poor man! Had he been in
his right mind, he could not have hoped (had he met 

me on the road) to have been heard on such a subject. 
An act of oblivion, and thorough reconciliation, he
calls it, is to pass, in presence of his expected friends. 
You will not take notice of what I have hinted at,
out of the family, whatever was designed. 
In the temper he would have found me in, had he
met me, nothing unhappy could have happened; for
he is really to be pitied. 
We are now perfect friends. He is full of good
wishes. He talks of a visit to Lady Frampton, of a
month. I write thus particularly, that I may not allow
such a subject as this to interfere with that delightful
one which engrosses my whole attention; and
which I hope, in the evening, will be honoured with
the attention of the beloved and admired of every
heart, as well as of that of 
Your ever-obliged and affectionate
Ch. Grandison. 

Poor wicked Greville! —May he go to Lady
Frampton's, or where-ever else, so it be fifty miles
distant from us. I shall be afraid of him, till I hear
he has quitted, for a time, his seat in this neighbourhood. 
What a glorious quality is courage, when it is divested
of rashness! When it is founded on integrity
of heart, and innocence of life and manners! But,
otherwise founded, Is it not rather to be called savageness,
and brutality? 
How much trouble have I given your brother! 
What dangers have I involved him in! It cannot be
possible for me ever to reward him. —But the proudest
heart may deem it a glory to owe obligation to Sir
Charles Grandison. 

