


Miss Byron, To Miss Selby. 


Monday, Feb. 20. 
Is it again given me to write to you, my Lucy! and
in you, to all my revered friends! To write with
chearfulness! To call upon you all to rejoice with
me! —God be praised! 
What dangers have I escaped! How have my head
and my heart been affected! I dare not, as yet, think
of the anguish you all endured for me. 
With what wretched levity did I conclude my last
letter! Giddy creature, that I was, vain and foolish! 
But let me begin my sad story. Your impatience
all this while must be too painful. Only let me premise,
that gaily as I boasted, when I wrote to you so
conceitedly, as it might seem, of my dress, and of
conquests, and I know not what nonsense, I took no
pleasure at the place, in the shoals of fools that swam
after me. I despised myself and them. Despised! I
was shocked at both. 
Two Lucifers were among them: But the worst,
the very worst Lucifer of all, appeared in an Harlequin
dress. He hopped and skipt, and played the fool
about me; and at last told me, He knew Miss Byron; 
and that he was, as he called himself, the despised,
the rejected, Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. 

He behaved, however, with complaisance; and I
had no apprehension of what I was to suffer from his
villainy. 
Mr. Reeves has told you, that he saw me into the
chair, provided for me by my vile new servant. O my
Lucy! One branch of my vanity is entirely lopt off. 
I must pretend to some sort of skill in physiognomy! 
Never more will I, for this fellow's sake, presume to
depend on my judgment of people's hearts framed
from their countenances. 
Mr. Reeves has told you every-thing about the
chair, and the chairmen. How can I describe the
misgivings of my heart when I first began to suspect
treachery! But when I undrew the curtains, and found
myself farther deluded by another false heart, whose
help I implored, and in the midst of fields, and soon
after the lights put out, I pierced the night air with
my screams, till I could scream no more. I was
taken out in fits: And when I came a little to my
senses, I found myself on a bed, three women about
me, one at my head, holding a bottle to my nose,
my nostrils sore with hartshorn, and a strong smell of
burnt feathers; but no man near me. 
Where am I? Who are you, madam? And who
are you? Where am I? Were the questions I first
asked. 
The women were a mother and two daughters. 
The mother answered, You are not in bad hands. 
God grant you say truth! said I. 
No harm is intended you; only to make you one
of the happiest of women. We would not be concerned
in a bad action. 
I hope not: I hope not: Let me engage your pity,
madam. You seem to be a mother. These young
gentlewomen, I presume, are your daughters. Save
me from ruin; I beseech you, madam: Save me from
ruin, as you would your daughters. 
Those young women are my daughters. They are 

sober and modest women. No ruin is intended you. 
One of the richest and noblest men in England is
your admirer. He dies for you. He assures me that
he intends honourable marriage to you. You are not
engaged, he says: And you must and you shall be
his. You may save murder, madam, if you consent. 
He resolves to be the death of any lover whom you
encourage. 
This must be the vile contrivance of Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen, immediately cried I out: Is it not? Is it
not? Tell me; I beg of you to tell me. 
I arose, and sat on the bed-side; and at that moment
in came the vile, vile Sir Hargrave. 
I screamed out. He threw himself at my feet. I
reclined my head on the bosom of the elderly person,
and by hartshorn and water they had much ado to
keep me out of a fit. Had he not withdrawn; had
he kept in my fight; I should certainly have fainted. 
But holding up my head, and seeing only the women,
I revived: And began to pray, to beg, to offer rewards,
if they would facilitate my escape; or procure my
safety: But then came in again the hated man. 
I beg of you, Miss Byron, said he, with an air of
greater haughtiness than before, to make yourself easy,
and hear what I have to say. It is in your own choice,
in your own power, to be what you please, and to
make me what you please. Do not therefore needlesly
terrify yourself. You see I am a determined
man. Ladies, you may withdraw— 
Not and leave me here! —And as they went out,
I pushed by the mother, and between the daughters,
and followed the foremost into the parlour; and then
sunk down on my knees, wrapping my arms about
her: O save me! save me! said I. 
The vile wretch entered. I left her, and kneeled to
him. I knew not what I did. I remember, I said,
wringing my hands, If you have mercy; If you have
compassion; let me now, now, I beseech you, Sir, this
moment, experience your mercy. 

He gave them some motion, I suppose, to withdraw
(for by that time the widow and the other
daughter were in the parlour) and they all three retired. 
I have besought you, madam, and on my knees too,
to shew me mercy; but none would you shew me,
inexorable Miss Byron! Kneel, if you will; in your
turn kneel, supplicate, pray; you cannot be more in
earnest, than I was. Now are the tables turned. 
Barbarous man! said I, rising from my knees. My
spirit was raised: But it as instantly subsided. I beseech
you, Sir Hargrave, in a quite frantic way,
wringing my hands, and coming near him, and then
running to the window, and then to the door (without
meaning to go out at either, had they been open; 
for whither could I go?) and then again to him; Be
not, I beseech you, Sir Hargrave, cruel to me. I never
was cruel to any-body. You know I was civil to you; 
I was very civil— 
Yes, yes, and very determined. You called me
no names. I call you none, Miss Byron. You were
very civil. Hitherto I have not been uncivil. But
remember, madam—But, sweet and ever-adorable
creature, and he clasped his arms about me, your
very terror is beautiful! I can enjoy your terror, madam
—And the savage would have kiss'd me. My
averted head frustrated his intention; and at his feet
I besought him not to treat the poor creature whom
he had so vilely betrayed, with indignity. 
I don't hit your fancy, madam! 
Can you be a malicious man, Sir Hargrave? 
You don't like my morals, madam! 
And is this the way, Sir Hargrave, are these the
means you take, to convince me that I ought to like
them? 
Well, madam, you shall prove the mercy in me
you would not shew. You shall see that I cannot be
a malicious man; a revengeful man: And yet you 

have raised my pride. You shall find me a moral
man. 
Then, Sir Hargrave, will I bless you from the bottom
of my heart! 
But you know what will justify me for the steps I
have taken in every eye. Be mine, madam. Be legally
mine. I offer you my honest hand. Consent
to be Lady Pollexfen—No punishment, I hope— 
Or, take the consequence. 
What, Sir! justify by so poor, so very poor a compliance,
steps that you have so basely taken! —Take
my life, Sir: But my hand and my heart are my own:
They never shall be separated. 
I arose from my knees, trembling, and threw myself
upon the window-seat, and wept bitterly. 
He came to me. I look'd on this side and on that,
as if I wished to avoid him. 
You cannot fly, madam. You are securely mine:
And mine still more securely you shall be. Don't
provoke me: Don't make me desperate. By all that's
Good and Holy— 
He cast his eyes at my feet, then at my face; then
threw himself at my feet, and embraced my knees
with his odious arms. 
I was terrified. I screamed. In ran one of the
daughters—Good Sir! Pray, Sir! —Did you not say
you would be honourable? 
Her mother followed her in—Sir, Sir! In my
house— 
Thank God, thought I, the people here are better
than I had reason to apprehend they were. But, O my
Lucy, they seemed to believe, that marriage would
make amends for every outrage. 
Here let me conclude this letter. I have a great
deal more to say. 

