



My dear Father and Mother,
I have shew'd your Letter to my Best-beloved. 
—Don't be uneasy that I have; —for you
need not be ashamed of it, since it is my Pride
to have such honest and grateful Parents: And
I'll tell you what he said to it, as the best Argument
I can use why you should not be uneasy; 
but enjoy, without Pain or Anxiety, all the
Benefits of your happy Lot. 
Dear, good Souls! said he, how does every
thing they say, and every thing they write, manifest 
the Worthiness of their Hearts! No Wonder,
Pamela, you love and revere such honest
Minds; for that you would do, were they not
your Parents: And tell them, that I am so far
from having them believe, that what I have
done for them, is only the Effect of my Affection 

for their Daughter, that let 'em find out
another Couple, as worthy as themselves, and
I will do as much for them. Indeed I would
not place them, continued the dear Obliger, in
the same County, because I would wish Two
Counties to be bless'd for their sakes. Tell
them, my Dear, that they have a Right to
what they enjoy, on the foot of their own proper
Merit; and bid them enjoy it as their Patrimony:
And if there can any thing arise, that
is more than they themselves can wish for, in
the way of Life they chuse to live, let them
look round among their own Relations, where
it may be acceptable, and communicate to them
the like solid Reasons for rejoicing in the Situation
they are pleased with: And do you, my
Dear, continued he, still further inable them, as
you shall judge proper, to gratify their inlarged
Hearts, for fear they should deny any Comfort
to themselves, in order to do good to others. 
I could only fly to his generous Bosom,
(for this is a Subject which most affects me) and,
with my Eyes swimming in Tears of grateful Joy,
and which overflow'd as soon as my bold Lips
touch'd his dear Face, bless God, and bless him,
with my whole Heart; for, speak I could not! 
—But, almost choak'd with my Joy, sobb'd
to him my grateful Acknowlegements—He
clasped me in his Arms, and said, How, my
Dearest, do you overpay me for the little I have
done for your Parents! If it be thus to be
bless'd for conferring Benefits so insignificant
to a Man of my Fortune, what Joys is it not in 

the Power of rich Men to give themselves whenever
they please! —Foretastes, indeed, of those
we are bid to hope for; which can surely only
exceed these, as then we shall be all Intellect,
and better fitted to receive them! —'Tis too
much!—too much! said I, in broken Accents:
—How am I oppress'd with the Pleasure
you give me! —Oh, Sir, bless me more gradually, 
and more cautiously;—for I cannot
bear it! And indeed, my Heart went flutter,
flutter, flutter, at his dear Breast, as if it wanted
to break its too narrow Prison, to mingle
still more intimately with his own. 
Surely, surely, my dear, my beloved
Parents, nobody's Happiness is so great as
mine! —If it proceeds thus from Degree to
Degree, and is to be augmented by the Hope,
the charming Hope, that the dear second Author
of your Blessings and mine, be the uniformly
good, as well as the partially kind Man
to us, what a Felicity will this be! And if our
Prayers shall be heard, and we shall have the
Pleasure to think, that his Advances in Piety
are owing not a little to them, and to the
Example God shall give us Grace to set; then,
indeed, may we take the Pride to think, we
have repaid his Goodness to us, and that we
have satisfied the Debt, which nothing less can
discharge. 
Thus, then, do I set before you imperfectly,
as I am forced to do, the Delight your
grateful, your honest Hearts give us. I say,
imperfectly, and well I may; for I might as 

easily paint Sound, as describe the noble, the
sublime Pleasures, that wind up my Affections
to even a painful Height of Rapture, on such
Occasions as this: And I desire, as he often bids
me, that you will take to yourselves the Merit
of thus delighting us both, and then think
with less Uneasiness of the Obligation you are
under to the best of Friends! —And indeed it
is but doing Justice to his beneficent Temper,
to think, that we have given him an Opportunity
of exercising it, in a way so agreeable to
it; and I can tell by the Ardour of his Speech,
by the additional Lustre that it lights up in his
Eyes, naturally so lively, and by the virtuous
Indearments, refined on these Occasions above
what Sense can know, that he has a Pleasure,
a Joy, a Transport, in doing what he does of
this sort, that is its own Reward; as every
virtuous and noble Action must be to a Mind
that can be delighted with Virtue for its own
sake, and can find itself inlarged by the Power
of doing Good to worthy Objects. Even I,
my dear Parents, know this by Experience,
when I can be an humble Means to make an
honest Creature happy, tho' not related to myself; 
and yet I am but a Third-hand Dispenser,
as I have*  elsewhere said, of these Comforts; 
and all the Light I can communicate, as I once
before observed†  , like that of the Moon, is
but borrow'd from his sunny Radiance. 
Forgive me, my dear, my worthy Parents,
if my Style on this Subject be raised 

above that natural Simplicity which is more
suited to my humble Talents. But how can I
help it? For when the Mind is elevated, ought
not the Sense we have of our Happiness, to
make our Expressions soar equally? Can the
Affections be so highly rais'd, as mine are on
these Occasions, and the Thoughts creep, groveling,
like one's ordinary Self? No, indeed! 
—Call not this, therefore, the Gift of Utterance,
if it should appear to you in a better Light
than it deserves. It is the Gift of Gratitude: A
Gift, which makes you, and me too, speak and
write, as I hope it will make us act, above
ourselves. —And thus will our Gratitude be
the Inspirer of Joy to our common Benefactor; 
and his Joy will heighten our Gratitude; and
so we shall proceed, as Cause and Effect to each
other's Happiness, to bless the dear Gentleman
that blesses us. —And will it be right then to
say, you are so uneasy under such (at least as to
your Wills) return'd and discharged Obligations? 
God Almighty requires only a thankful Heart for
all the Mercies he heaps upon the Children of
Men: My dear Mr. B. who, in these Particulars,
imitates Divinity, desires no more: — 
—You have this thankful Heart;—yes, you
have; and that to such an high Degree of Gratitude,
that nobody can exceed you. 
But yet, my dear Parents, when your worthy
Minds would be too much affected with
your Gratitude, so as to lay you under the
Restraints you mention, to the dear Gentleman,
and, for his sake, to your dependent Daughter; 

then, let me humbly advise you, that you will,
at such Times, with more particular, more
abstracted Aspirations, than at others, raise
your Thoughts upwards, and consider who it
is that gives him the Opportunity; and pray for
him and for me; for him, that all his future
Actions may be of a Piece with this noble
Disposition of Mind; for me, that I may continue 
humble, and consider myself bless'd for
your sakes, and in order that I may be, in some
sort, a Rewarder, in the Hands of Providence,
of this its dear excellent Agent; and then we
shall look forward, all of us, with Pleasure
indeed, to that State, where there is no Distinction 
of Degree, and where the humble Cottager
shall be upon a Par with the proudest
Monarch. 
O my dear, dear Parents! how can you, as
in your Postscript, say—May we not be favour'd
now-and-then with a Letter? Call me
your Daughter, your Pamela—I am no Lady
to you—I have more Pleasure to be called
your Comfort, and to be thought to act worthy
of the Sentiments with which your Examples,
Cautions and Instructions, have inspired me,
than in any one thing in this Life, my determin'd
Duty to our common Benefactor, the
best of Gentlemen and Husbands, excepted. 
And I am sure, God has bless'd me for your
sakes, and has thus answer'd for me all your
Prayers; nay, more than answer'd all you or I
could have wished or hoped for. We only
prayed, only hoped, that God would preserve 

you honest, and me virtuous: And see, O see,
my excellent Parents! how we are crown'd with
Blessings upon Blessings, till we are the Talk
of all that know us:—You for your Honesty! 
I for my Humility and Virtue!—that Virtue
which God's Grace inspired, and your Examples
and Lessons, with those of my dear good Lady,
cultivated; and which now have left me nothing
to do but to reap all the Rewards which
this Life can afford; and if I walk humbly,
and improve my blessed Opportunities, will
heighten and perfect all in a still more joyful
Futurity! 
Hence, my dear Parents, (I mean, from
the Delight I have in writing to you; a Delight
which transports me so much above my own
Sphere) you'll see that I must write to you, and
cannot help it, if I would. And will it be a
great Joy to you! —And is there any thing that
can add to your Joy, think you, that is in the
Power of your Pamela, that she would not do! 
—O that the Lives and Healths of my dearest
Mr. B. and my dearest Parents, may be continued 
to me! And who then can be so bless'd as
your Pamela? 
I will write; depend upon it, I will— 
on every Occasion:—And you augment my
Joys, to think it is in my Power to add to your
Comforts. Nor can you conceive the Pleasure
I have in hoping, that this your new, happy Lot,
may, by relieving you from corroding Care,
and the too wearing Effects of hard Labour,
add, in these your advanced Years, to both 

your Days! —For, so happy am I, I can have
no Grief, no Pain, in looking forward, but
from such Thoughts as remind me, that, one
Day, either you from me, or I from you, must
be separated. 
But it is fit, that we so comport ourselves,
as that we should not imbitter our present Happiness 
with Prospects too gloomy—but bring
our Minds to be chearfully thankful for the
present, wisely to injoy that present as we go
along,—and at last, when all is to be wound
up, lie down, and say, Not mine, but thy
Will be done! 
But I have written a great deal; yet have
much still to say, relating to other Parts of
your kind, your acceptable Letter; and so will
soon write again: For I must think every Opportunity
happy, whereby I can assure you,
how much I am, and will ever be, without
any Addition to my Name, if that will make
you easier, 
Your dutiful Pamela. 

