



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Wedn. March 1. 
I now take up my pen, to lay before you the inducements
and motives which my friends have to
espouse so earnestly the address of this Mr. Solmes. 
In order to set this matter in a clear light, it is necessary
to go a little back, and even perhaps to mention
some things which you already know: And so
you may look upon what I am going to relate, as a
kind of Supplement to my Letters of the 15th and
20th of January last (a) . 

In those Letters, of which I have kept memorandums,
I gave you an account of my Brother's and
Sister's antipathy to Mr. Lovelace; and the methods
they took (so far as they had then come to my knowlege)
to ruin him in the opinion of my other friends: 
And I told you, that after a very cold, yet not a directly
affrontive behaviour to him, they all of a sudden
(a)  became more violent, and proceeded to personal
insults; which brought on at last the unhappy
Rencounter between my Brother and him. 
Now you must know, that from the last conversation
which passed between my Aunt and me, it
comes out, that this sudden vehemence on my Brother's
and Sister's parts, was owing to stronger reasons
than to the College-begun antipathy on his side,
or to slighted Love on hers; to wit, to an apprehension
that my Uncles intended to follow my Grandfather's
example in my favour; at least in a higher degree
than they wish they should. An apprehension
founded it seems on a conversation between my two
Uncles and my Brother and Sister; which my Aunt
communicated to me in confidence, as an argument to
prevail upon me to accept of Mr. Solmes's noble Settlements; 
urging, that such a seasonable compliance
would frustrate my Brother's and Sister's views, and
establish me for ever in the Love of my Father and
Uncles. 
I will give you the Substance of this communicated
conversation, after I have made a brief introductory
observation or two: Which however I hardly need to
make to you who are so well acquainted with us all, did
not the series or thread of the Story require it. 
I have more than once mentioned to you the darling
view some of us have long had of raising a family,
as it is called: A reflection, as I have often thought,
upon our own; which is no inconsiderable or upstart
one, on either side: On my Mother's, especially. — 

A view too frequently it seems entertained by families
which having great substance, cannot be satisfied without
Rank and Title. 
My Uncles had once extended this view to each of
us three children; urging, that as they themselves
intended not to marry, we each of us might be so
portioned, and so advantageously matched, as that our
posterity, if not ourselves, might make a first figure
in our country—While my Brother, as the only Son,
thought the two girls might be very well provided for
by Ten or Fifteen thousand pounds apiece: And that
all the real Estates in the family, to wit, my Grandfather's,
Father's, and two Uncles, and the remainder
of their respective personal Estates, together with what
he had an expectation of from his Godmother, would
make such a noble fortune, and give him such an interest,
as might entitle him to hope for a Peerage. Nothing
less would satisfy his ambition. 
With this view he gave himself airs very early; 
‘That his Grandfather and Uncles were his Stewards: 
That no man ever had better: That Daughters
were but incumbrances and drawbacks upon a
family:’ And this low and familiar expression was
often in his mouth, and uttered always with the self-complaisance
which an imagined happy thought can
be supposed to give the speaker; to wit, ‘That a man
who has Sons brings up chickens for his own table,
[tho' once I made his comparison stagger with him,
by asking him, If the Sons, to make it hold, were to
have their necks wrung off?] whereas Daughters are
chickens brought up for the tables of other men.’ 
This accompanied with the equally polite reflection,
‘That, to induce people to take them off their hands,
the family-stock must be impaired into the bargain,’ 
used to put my Sister out of all patience: And altho'
she now seems to think a younger Sister only can be an
incumbrance, she was then often proposing to me to
make a party in our own favour against my Brother's 

rapacious views, as she used to call them: While I
was for considering the liberties he took of this sort as
the effect of a temporary pleasantry; which in a
young man not naturally good-humoured, I was glad
to see; or as a foible that deserved raillery, but no
other notice. 
But when my Grandfather's Will (of the purport
of which in my particular favour, until it was opened,
I was as ignorant as they) had lopped off one branch
of my Brother's expectation, he was extremely dissatisfied
with me. No-body indeed was pleased: For
altho' every-one loved me, yet being the youngest
child, Father, Uncles, Brother, Sister, all thought
themselves postponed, as to matter of right and power
[Who loves not power?]: And my Father himself
could not bear that I should be made Sole, as I may
call it, and Independent; for such the Will, as to that
Estate and the powers it gave (unaccountably as they
all said) made me. 
To obviate therefore every one's jealousy, I gave
up to my Father's management, as you know, not
only the Estate, but the Money bequeathed me (which
was a moiety of what my Grandfather had by him at
his death; the other moiety being bequeathed to my
Sister); contenting myself to take as from his bounty
what he was pleased to allow me, without desiring the
least addition to my annual stipend. And then I hoped
I had laid all envy asleep: But still my Brother and
Sister (jealous, as now is evident, of my two Uncles
favour for me, and of the pleasure I had given my Father
and them by this act of duty) were every now-and-then
occasionally doing me covert ill offices: 
Of which, however, I took the less notice, when I was
told of them, as I thought I had removed the cause of
their envy; and I imputed every-thing of that sort to
the petulance they are both pretty much noted for. 
My Brother's acquisition then took place. This
made us all very happy; and he went down to take 

possession of it: And his absence (on so good an account
too) made us still happier. Then followed Lord
M's proposal for my Sister: And this was an additional
felicity for the time. I have told you how exceedingly
good-humoured it made my Sister. 
You know how that went off: You know what
came on in its place. 
My Brother then returned; and we were all wrong
again: And Bella, as I observed in my Letters above-mentioned,
had an opportunity to give herself the credit
of having refused Mr. Lovelace, on the score of
his reputed faulty morals. This united my Brother
and Sister in one cause. They set themselves on all
occasions to depreciate Mr. Lovelace, and his family
too (a family which deserves nothing but respect): 
And this gave rise to the conversation I am leading to
between my Uncles and them: Of which I now
come to give the particulars; after I have observed,
that it happened before the Rencounter, and soon after
the enquiry made into Mr. Lovelace's affairs had
come out better than my Brother and Sister hoped it
would (a) . 
They were bitterly inveighing against him, in their
usual way, strengthening their invectives with some
new Stories in his disfavour; when my Uncle Antony,
having given them a patient hearing, declared, ‘That
he thought the gentleman behaved like a gentleman; 
his Niece Clary with prudence; and that a
a more honourable alliance for the family, as he had
often told them, could not be wished for: Since Mr.
Lovelace had a very good paternal Estate; and that,
by the evidence of an enemy, all clear. Nor did it
appear, that he was so bad a man as he had been
represented to be: Wild indeed; but it was at a gay
time of life: He was a man of sense: And he was
sure that his Niece would not have him, if she had
not good reason to think him reformed, or that there 

was a likelihood that she could reform him by her
example.’ 
My Uncle then gave one instance, my Aunt told
me, as a proof of a generosity in Mr. Lovelace's spirit,
which convinced him, that he was not a bad man
in nature; and that he was of a temper, he was pleased
to say, like my own: Which was, That when he
(my Uncle) had represented to him, that he might,
if he pleased, make three or four hundred pounds a
year of his paternal Estate, more than he did; he answered,
‘That his tenants paid their rents well: That
it was a maxim with his family, from which he
would by no means depart, Never to rack-rent old
tenants, or their descendents; and that it was a pleasure
to him, to see all his tenants look fat, sleek,
and contented.’ 
I indeed had once occasionally heard him say something
like this; and thought he never looked so well
as at the time;—except once; and that was in an
instance given by him on the following incident. 
An unhappy tenant of my Uncle Antony came petitioning
to my Uncle for forbearance, in Mr. Lovelace's
presence. When he had fruitlesly withdrawn,
Mr. Lovelace pleaded his cause so well, that the man
was called in again, and had his suit granted. And
Mr. Lovelace privately followed him out, and gave
him two guineas, for present relief; the man having
declared, that, at the time, he had not five shillings in
the world. 
On this occasion, he told my Uncle (but without
any airs of ostentation) That he had once observed an
old tenant and his wife in a very mean habit at church; 
and questioning them about it next day, as he knew
they had no hard bargain in their farm, the man said,
He had done some very foolish things with a good intention,
which had put him behind-hand, and he could
not have paid his rent, and appear better. He asked
him how long it would take him to retrieve the foolish 

step he acknowleged he had made. He said, Perhaps
two or three years. Well then, said he, I will abate
you five pounds a year for seven years, provided you
will lay it out upon your wife and self, that you may
make a Sunday-appearance like MY tenants. Mean
time, take This (putting his hand in his pocket, and
giving him five guineas) to put yourselves in present
plight; and let me see you next Sunday at church,
hand in hand, like an honest and loving couple; and
I bespeak you to dine with me afterwards. 
Altho' this pleased me when I heard it, as giving
an instance of generosity and prudence at the same
time, not lessening (as my Uncle took notice) the
yearly value of the farm, yet, my dear, I had no
throbs, no glows upon it! —Upon my word, I had not. 
Nevertheless I own to you, that I could not help
saying to myself on the occasion, ‘Were it ever to
be my lot to have this man, he would not hinder
me from pursuing the methods I so much delight to
take.’ —With ‘A pity, that such a man were not
uniformly good!’ 
Forgive me this digression. 
My Uncle went on (as my Aunt told me) ‘That,
besides his paternal Estate, he was the immediate
heir to very splendid fortunes: That, when he was
in treaty for his Niece Arabella, Lord M. told him
(my Uncle) what great things he and his two Half-sisters
intended to do for him, in order to qualify
him for the Title, which would be extinct at his
Lordship's death, and which they hoped to procure
for him, or a still higher, that of those Ladies Father,
which had been for some time extinct on
failure of heirs male: That it was with this view
that his relations were all so earnest for his marrying: 
That as he saw not where Mr. Lovelace
could better himself; so, truly, he thought there
was wealth enough in their own family to build up
three considerable ones: That therefore he must 

needs say, he was the more desirous of this alliance,
as there was a great probability, not only from Mr.
Lovelace's descent, but from his fortunes, that his
Niece Clarissa might one day be a Peeress of Great
Britain: —And upon that prospect [Here was the
mortifying stroke] he should, for his own part,
think it not wrong to make such dispositions as
should contribute to the better support of the dignity.’ 
My Uncle Harlowe, it seems, far from disapproving
of what his Brother had said, declared, ‘That
there was but one objection to an alliance with Mr.
Lovelace; to wit, his faulty morals: Especially as
so much could be done for Miss Bella, and for my
Brother too, by my Father; and as my Brother
was actually possessed of a considerable Estate by
virtue of the Deed of Gift and Will of his Godmother
Lovell.’ 
Had I known this before, I should the less have
wondered at many things I have been unable to account
for in my Brother's and Sister's behaviour to
me; and been more on my guard than I imagined
there was a necessity to be. 
You may easily guess how much this conversation
affected my Brother at the time. He could not, you
know, but be very uneasy to hear two of his Stewards
talk at this rate to his face. 
He had from early days, by his violent temper,
made himself both feared and courted by the whole
family. My Father himself, as I have lately mentioned,
very often (long before my Brother's acquisitions
had made him still more assuming) gave way
to him, as to an only Son who was to build up the
name, and augment the honour of it. Little inducement
therefore had my Brother to correct a temper
which gave him so much consideration with everybody 
‘See, Sister Bella,’ said he in an indecent passion 

before my Uncles, on the occasion I have mentioned
‘—See how it is! —You and I ought to look about
us! —This little Syren is in a fair way to out-uncle,
as she has already out-grandfather'd us both!’ 
From this time (as I now find it plain upon recollection)
did my Brother and Sister behave to me, as
to one who stood in their way; and to each other, as
having but one interest: And were resolved therefore
to bend all their force to hinder an alliance from taking
effect, which they believed was likely to oblige
them to contract their views. 
And how was this to be done, after such a declaration
from both my Uncles? 
My Brother found out the way. My Sister (as I
have said) went hand in hand with him. Between
them, the family-union was broken, and every-one
was made uneasy. Mr. Lovelace was received more
and more coldly by all: But not being to be put out
of his course by Slights only, personal Affronts succeeded; 
Defiances next; then the Rencounter: 
That, as you have heard, did the business: And now,
if I do not oblige them, my Grandfather's Estate is
to be litigated with me; and I, who never designed
to take advantage of the independency bequeathed
me, am to be as dependent upon my Father's will, as a
Daughter ought to be who knows not what is good for
herself. This is the language of the family now. 
But if I will suffer myself to be prevailed upon,
how happy (as they lay it out) shall we all be! — 
Such presents am I to have, such jewels, and I cannot
tell what, from every one of the family! Then
Mr. Solmes's fortunes are so great, and his proposals
so very advantageous (no Relation whom he values)
that there will be abundant room to raise mine upon
them, were the high-intended favours of my own
Relations to be quite out of the question. Moreover
it is now, with this view, found out, that I have qualifications
which of themselves will be a full equivalent 

to Mr. Solmes for the Settlements he is to make; and
still leave him under an obligation to me for my compliance. 
He himself thinks so, I am told—So very
poor a creature is he, even in his own eyes, as well
as in theirs. 
These desirable views answered, how rich, how
splendid, shall we all three be! And I—what obligations
shall I lay upon them all! —And that only by
doing an act of duty so suitable to my character, and
manner of thinking; if indeed I am the generous
as well as dutiful creature, I have hitherto made them
believe I am. 
This is the bright side that is turned to my Father
and Uncles, to captivate them: But I am afraid, that
my Brother's and Sister's design is to ruin me with
them at any rate. Were it otherwise, would they
not on my return from you have rather sought to
court than frighten me into measures which their hearts
are so much bent to carry? A method they have followed
ever since. 
Mean time, orders are given to all the servants to
shew the highest respect to Mr. Solmes; the generous
Mr. Solmes is now his character with some of our family! 
But are not these orders a tacit confession, that
they think his own merit will not procure him respect? 
He is accordingly, in every visit he makes,
not only highly caressed by the principals of our family,
but obsequiously attended and cringed to by
the menials. —And the noble Settlements are echoed
from every mouth. 
Noble is the word used to enforce the offers of a
man who is mean enough avowedly to hate, and
wicked enough to propose to rob of their just expectations,
his own family (every one of which at the
same time stands in too much need of his favour) in
order to settle all he is worth upon me; and if I die
without children, and he has none by any other Marriage,
upon a family which already abounds. Such
are his proposals. 

But were there no other motive to induce me to
despise the upstart man, is not this unjust one to his
family enough? —The upstart man, I repeat; for he
was not born to the immense riches he is possessed of: 
Riches left by one niggard to another, in injury to
the next heir, because that other is a niggard. And
should I not be as culpable, do you think, in my acceptance
of such unjust Settlements, as he is in the
offer of them, if I could persuade myself to be a
sharer in them, or suffer a reversionary expectation
of possessing them to influence my choice? 
Indeed it concerns me not a little, that my friends
could be brought to encourage such offers on such motives
as I think a person of conscience should not presume
to begin the world with. 
But this it seems is the only method that can be
taken to disappoint Mr. Lovelace; and at the same
time to answer all my Relations have to wish for each
of us. And surely I will not stand against such an
accession to the family as may happen from marrying
Mr. Solmes: Since now a possibility is discovered
(which such a grasping mind as my Brother's can
easily turn into a probability) that my Grandfather's
Estate will revert to it, with a much more considerable
one of the man's own. Instances of Estates falling
in, in cases far more unlikely than this, are insisted
upon; and my Sister says, in the words of an
old Saw, It is good to be related to an estate. 
While Solmes, smiling no doubt to himself at a
hope so remote, by offers only, obtains all their interests; 
and doubts not to join to his own the Estate
I am envied for; which, for the conveniency of its
situation between two of his, will it seems be of twice
the value to him that it would be of to any other
person; and is therefore, I doubt not, a stronger motive
with him than the Wife. 
These, my dear, seem to me the principal inducements
of my Relations to espouse so vehemently as 

they do this man's suit. And here, once more, must
I deplore the family-fault, which gives those inducements
such a force as it will be difficult to resist. 
And thus far, let matters with regard to Mr. Solmes
and me come out as they will, my Brother has succeeded
in his views; that is to say, he has, in the
first place, got my Father to make the cause his
own, and to insist upon my compliance as an act of
duty. 
My Mother has never thought fit to oppose my
Father's will, when once he has declared himself determined. 
My Uncles, stiff, unbroken, highly-prosperous
Bachelors, give me leave to say (tho' very worthy
persons in the main) have as high notions of a Child's
duty, as of a Wife's obedience; in the last of which,
my Mother's meekness has confirmed them, and
given them greater reason to expect the first. 
My Aunt Hervey (not extremely happy in her
own Nuptials, and perhaps under some little obligation)
is got over, and chuses not to open her lips in
my favour against the wills of a Father and Uncles
so determined. 
This passiveness in my Mother and in my Aunt, in
a point so contrary to their own first judgments, is too
strong a proof that my Father is absolutely resolved. 
Their treatment of my worthy Mrs. Norton is
a sad confirmation of it: A woman deserving of all
consideration for her wisdom; and every-body thinking
so; but who, not being wealthy enough to have
due weight in a point against which she has given her
opinion, and which they seem bent upon carrying, is
restrained from visiting here, and even from corresponding
with me, as I am this very day informed. 
Hatred to Lovelace, family-aggrandizement, and
this great motive paternal authority! —What a force
united must they be supposed to have, when singly each
consideration is sufficient to carry all before it! 

This is the formidable appearance which the address
of this disagreeable man wears at present. 
My Brother and my Sister triumph. —They
have got me down, as Hannah over-heard them exult. 
And so they have (yet I never knew that I was insolently
up); for now my Brother will either lay me
under an obligation to comply to my own unhappiness,
and so make me an instrument of his revenge upon
Lovelace; or, if I refuse, will throw me into disgrace
with my whole family. 
Who will wonder at the intrigues and plots carried
on by undermining Courtiers against one another,
when a private family, but three of which can possibly
have clashing interests, and one of them (as she
presumes to think) above such low motives, cannot
be free from them? 
What at present most concerns me, is, the peace
of my Mother's mind! How can the Husband of such
a Wife (a good man too! —But oh! this prerogative
of manhood!) be so positive, so unpersuadeable, to
one who has brought into the family, means, which
they know so well the value of, that methinks they
should value her the more for their sake? 
They do indeed value her: But, I am sorry to
say, she has purchased that value by her compliances: 
Yet has merit for which she ought to be venerated; 
prudence which ought of itself to be conformed to in
every-thing. 
But whither roves my pen? How dare a perverse
girl take these liberties with Relations so very respectable,
and whom she highly respects? What an unhappy
situation is that which obliges her, in her own
defence as it were, to expose their failings? 
But you, who know how much I love and reverence
my Mother, will judge what a difficulty I am
under, to be obliged to oppose a scheme which she
has engaged in. Yet I must oppose it (to comply is
impossible); and must without delay declare my opposition, 

or my difficulties will increase; since as I am
just now informed, a Lawyer has been this very day
consulted [Would you have believed it?] in relation
to Settlements. 
Were ours a Roman Catholic family, how much
happier for me, that they thought a Nunnery would
answer all their views! —How happy, had not a certain
person slighted somebody! All then would have
been probably concluded on between them before my
Brother had arrived to thwart the match: Then had
I had a Sister; which now I have not; and Two Brothers; 
—both aspiring; possibly both titled: While I
should only have valued that in Either which is above
Title, that which is truly noble in Both! 
But by what a long-reaching selfishness is my Brother
governed! By what remote, exceedingly remote
views! Views, which it is in the power of the slightest
accident, of a fever, for instance (the seeds of which
are always vegetating, as I may say, and ready to
burst forth, in his own impetuous temper) or of the
provoked weapon of an adversary, to blow up and
destroy! 
I will break off here. Let me write ever so freely
of my friends, I am sure of your kind construction: 
And I confide in your discretion, that you will avoid
reading to or transcribing for others, such passages as
may have the appearance of treating too freely the
Parental, or even the Fraternal character, or induce
others to censure for a supposed failure in duty to the
one, or decency to the other, 
Your truly affectionate,
Cl. Harlowe. 