



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Tuesday Afternoon, June 6. 
Difficulties still to be got over in procuring this
plaguy Licence. I ever hated, and ever shall
hate, these spiritual Lawyers, and their Court. 
And now, Jack, if I have not secured victory, I
have a retreat. 
But hold—Thy servant with a Letter— 
* *
A confounded long one, tho' not a narrative one— 

Once more in behalf of the Lady! —Lie thee down,
oddity! What canst thou write that can have force
upon me at this Crisis? —And have I not, as I went
along, made thee to say all that was necessary for thee
to say? 
* *
Yet once more, I will take thee up. 
Trite, stale, poor (sayest thou) are some of my contrivances? 
That of the widow particularly? —I have
no patience with thee. Had not that contrivance its
effect at the time, for a procrastination? —And had
I not then reason to fear, that the Lady would find
enough to make her dislike this house? And was it
not right (intending what I intended) to lead her on
from time to time, with a notion, that a house of her
own would be ready for her soon, in order to induce
her to continue here till it was? 
Trite, stale, and poor! —Thou art a silly fellow,
and no judge, when thou sayest this. Had I not, like
a blockhead, revealed to thee, as I went along, the
secret purposes of my heart, but had kept all in, till
the event had explained my mysteries, I would have
defied thee to have been able, any more than the
Lady, to have guessed at what was to befal her, till
it had actually come to pass. Nor doubt I, in this
case, that, instead of presuming to reflect upon her for
credulity, as loving me to her misfortune, and for
hoping against probability, thou wouldest have been
readier by far, to censure her for Nicety and Overscrupulousness. 
And, let me tell thee, that had she
loved me as I wished her to love me, she could not
possibly have been so very apprehensive of my designs,
nor so ready to be influenced by Miss Howe's precautions,
as she has always been, altho' my general
character made not for me with her. 
But in thy opinion, I suffer for that Simplicity in
my contrivances, which is their principal excellence. 
No Machinery make I necessary. No unnatural 

Flights aim I at. All pure Nature, taking advantage
of Nature, as Nature tends; and so simple my devices,
that when they are known, thou, even thou,
imaginest, thou couldest have thought of the same. 
And indeed thou seemest to own, that the slight thou
puttest upon them, is owing to my letting thee into
them before-hand—undistinguishing, as well as ungrateful
as thou art! 
Yet, after all, I would not have thee think, that I
do not know my weak places. I have formerly told
thee, that it is difficult for the ablest general to say
what he will do, or what he can do, when he is
obliged to regulate his motions by those of a watchful
enemy (a) . If thou givest due weight to this consideration,
thou wilt not wonder that I should make
many marches and countermarches, some of which
may appear to a slight observer unnecessary. 
But let me cursorily enter into debate with thee on
this subject, now I am within sight of my journey's end. 
Abundance of impertinent things thou tellest me in
this Letter; some of which thou hadst from myself; 
others that I knew before. 
All that thou sayest in this charming creature's
praise, is short of what I have said and written, on the
inexhaustible subject. 
Her virtue, her resistance, which are her merits,
are my stimulatives. Have I not told thee so twenty
times over? 
Devil, as these girls between them call me, what
of devil am I, but in my Contrivances? I am not more
a devil, than others, in the End I aim at; for when
I have carried my point, it is still but one seduction. 
And I have perhaps been spared the guilt of many seductions
in the time. 
What of uncommon would there be in this case,
but for her watchfulness? —As well as I love intrigue
and stratagem, dost think, that I had not rather have
gained my end with less trouble and less guilt? 

The man, let me tell thee, who is as wicked as he
can be, is a worse man than I am. Let me ask any
Rake in England, if, resolving to carry his point, he
would have been so long about it? or have had so much
compunction as I have had? 
Were every Rake, nay, were every Man, to sit
down, as I do, and write all that enters into his head
or into his heart, and to accuse himself with equal
freedom and truth, what an army of miscreants should
I have to keep me in countenance! 
It is a maxim with some, that if they are left alone
with a woman, and make not an attempt upon her,
she will think herself affronted—Are not such men as
these worse than I am? What an opinion must they
have of the whole Sex? 
Let me defend the Sex I so dearly love. If these
Elder brethren of ours think they have general reason
for their assertion, they must have kept very bad company,
or must judge of womens hearts by their own. 
She must be an abandoned woman, who will not
shrink as a Snail into its shell, at a gross and sudden
attempt. A modest woman must be naturally cold,
reserved, and shy. She cannot be so much, and so
soon affected, as Libertines are apt to imagine. She
must, at least, have some confidence in the honour
and silence of a man, before desire can possibly put
forth in her, to encourage and meet his flame. For
my own part, I have been always decent in the company
of women, till I was sure of them. Nor have
I ever offered a great offence, till I have found little
ones passed over; and that they shunned me not,
when they knew my character. 
My divine Clarissa has puzzled me, and beat me
out of my play: At one time, I hoped to overcome
by intimidating her; at another by Love; by the
amorous See-saw, as I have called it (a) . And I
have only now to join Surprize to the other two, and
see what can be done by all three. 

And whose property, I pray thee, shall I invade,
if I pursue my schemes of Love and Vengeance? Have
not those who have a right in her, renounced that
right? Have they not wilfully exposed her to dangers? 
Yet must know, that such a woman would be considered
as lawful prize, by as many as could have the
opportunity to attempt her? —And had they not thus
cruelly exposed her, is she not a Single woman? And
need I tell thee, Jack, that men of our cast, the
best of them [the worst stick at nothing] think it
a great grace and favour done to the married men,
if they leave them their Wives to themselves; and
compound for their Sisters, Daughters, Wards, and
Nieces? Shocking as these principles must be to a reflecting
mind, yet such thou knowest are the principles
of thousands (who would not act so generously,
as I have acted by almost all of the Sex, over whom
I have obtained a power); and as often carried into
practice, as their opportunities or courage will permit. 
—Such therefore have no right to blame me. 
Thou repeatedly pleadest her sufferings from her family. 
But I have too often answered this plea, to
need to say any more now, than that she has not suffered
for my sake. For has she not been made the
victim of the malice of her rapacious Brother and envious
Sister, who only waited for an occasion to ruin
her with her other relations; and took this as the first,
to drive her out of the house; and, as it happened,
into my arms? —Thou knowest how much against
her inclination. 
As for her own sins, how many has the dear creature
to answer for to Love and to me! —Twenty
times, and twenty times twenty, has she not told
me, that she refused not the odious Solmes in favour
to me? And as often has she not offered to renounce
me for the Single Life, if the Implacables would have
received her on that condition? —Of what repetitions
does thy weak pity make me guilty? 

To look a little farther back: Canst thou forget
what my sufferings were from this haughty Beauty in
the whole time of my attendance upon her proud motions,
in the purlieus of Harlowe-Place, and at the
little White Hart at Neale, as we called it? —Did I
not threaten vengeance upon her then (and had I not
reason?) for disappointing me of a promised interview? 
O Jack! what a night had I in the bleak coppice
adjoining to her Father's paddock! My linen and wig
frozen; my limbs absolutely numbed; my fingers
only sensible of so much warmth, as enabled me to
hold a pen; and that obtained by rubbing the skin off,
and by beating with my hands my shivering sides! 
Kneeling on the hoar moss on one knee, writing on
the other, if the stiff scrawl could be called writing! 
My feet, by the time I had done, seeming to have
taken root, and actually unable to support me for
some minutes! —Love and Rage kept then my heart
in motion [and only Love and Rage could do it] or
how much more than I did suffer, must I have suffered! 
I told thee, at my melancholy return, what were
the contents of the Letter I wrote (a) . And I
shewed thee afterwards, her tyrannical Answer to
it (b) . Thou, then, Jack, lovedst thy friend; and
pitiedst thy poor suffering Lovelace. Even the affronted
God of Love approved then of my threatened
vengeance against the fair promiser; tho' now with
thee, in the Day of my power, forgetful of the
Night of my sufferings, he is become an advocate for
her. 
Nay, was it not he himself that brought to me my
adorable Nemesis; and both together put me upon
this very vow, ‘That I would never rest till I had
drawn in this goddess daughter of the Harlowes to
cohabit with me; and that in the face of all their
proud family?’ 

Nor canst thou forget this vow. —At this instant I
have thee before me, as then thou sorrowfully lookedst. 
Thy strong features glowing with compassion
for me; thy lips twisted; thy forehead furrowed; 
thy whole face drawn out from the stupid round into
the ghastly oval; every muscle contributing its power
to complete the aspect-grievous; and not one word
couldst thou utter, but Amen to my vow. 
And what of distinguishing Love, or Favour, or
Confidence, have I had from her since, to make me
forego this vow? 
I renewed it not, indeed, afterwards; and actually,
for a long season, was willing to forget it; till repetitions
of the same faults revived the remembrance
of the former. And now adding to those the contents
of some of Miss Howe's virulent Letters, so
lately come at, what canst thou say for the Rebel,
consistent with thy loyalty to thy Friend? 
Every man to his genius and constitution. Hannibal
was called The father of warlike stratagems. 
Had Hannibal been a private man, and turned his
plotting head against the other Sex; or had I been a
general, and turned mine against such of my fellow-creatures
of my own, as I thought myself entitled to
consider as my enemies, because they were born and
lived in a different climate; Hannibal would have
done less mischief; Lovelace more. —That would
have been the difference. 
Not a Sovereign on earth, if he be not a good man,
and if he be of a warlike temper, but must do a
thousand times more mischief than I. And why? 
Because he has it in his power to do more. 
An honest man, perhaps thou'lt say, will not wish
to have it in his power to do hurt. He ought not, let
me tell him: For, if he have it, a thousand to one
but it makes him both wanton and wicked. 
In what, then, am I so singularly vile? 

In my Contrivances, thou wilt say (for thou art my
echo) if not in my proposed End of them. 
How difficult does every man find it, as well as I,
to forego a predominant passion! I have three passions
that sway me by turns; all imperial ones. Love,
Revenge, Ambition, or a desire of conquest. 
As to this particular contrivance of Tomlinson and
the Uncle, which perhaps thou wilt think a black
one; that had been spared, had not these innocent
Ladies put me upon finding a husband for their Mrs.
Townsend: That device, therefore, is but a preventive
one. Thinkest thou, that I could bear to
be outwitted? And may not this very contrivance
save a word of mischief? for, dost thou think, I
would have tamely given up the Lady to Townsend's
Tars? 
What meanest thou, except to overthrow thy own
plea, when thou sayest, that men of our cast know no
other bound to their wickedness, but want of power; 
yet knowest this Lady to be in mine? 
Enough, sayest thou, have I tried this paragon of
virtue. Not so; for I have not tried her at all. —All
I have been doing, is but preparation to a trial. 
But thou art concerned for the means that I may
have recourse to in the trial, and for my veracity. 
Silly fellow! —Did ever any man, thinkest thou,
deceive a woman, but at the expence of his veracity? 
How, otherwise, can he be said to deceive? 
As to the means, thou dost not imagine, that I expect
a direct consent. My main hope is but in a
yielding reluctance; without which I will be sworn,
whatever Rapes have been attempted, none ever were
committed, one person to one person. And good
Queen Bess of England, had she been living, and
appealed to, would have declared herself of my
mind. 
It would not be amiss for the Sex to know, what
our opinions are upon this subject. I love to warn 

them. I wish no man to succeed with them but myself. 
I told thee once, that tho' a Rake, I am not a
Rake's friend (a) . 
Thou sayest, that I ever hated wedlock. And
true thou sayest. And yet as true, when thou tellest
me, that I would rather marry than lose this Lady. 
And will she detest me for ever, thinkest thou, if I
try her, and succeed not? —Take care—Take care,
Jack! —Seest thou not, that thou warnest me, that
I do not try without resolving to conquer? 
I must add, that I have for some time been convinced,
that I have done wrong, to scribble to thee
so freely as I have done (and the more so, if I make
the Lady legally mine); for has not every Letter I
have written to thee, been a Bill of Indictment
against myself? I may partly curse my vanity for it; 
and I think I will refrain for the future; for thou art
really very impertinent. 
A good man, I own, might urge many of the
things thou urgest; but, by my soul, they come very
aukwardly from thee. And thou must be sensible,
that I can answer every tittle of what thou writest,
upon the foot of the maxims we have long held and
pursued. —By the specimen above, thou wilt see that
I can. 
And pr'ythee tell me, Jack, what but this that
follows would have been the epitome of mine and
my Beloved's Story, after ten years Cohabitation, had
I never written to thee upon the subject, and had I
not been my own accuser? 
‘Robert Lovelace, a notorious woman-eater,
makes his addresses in an honourable way to Miss
Clarissa Harlowe; a young Lady of the highest
merit—Fortunes on both sides out of the question. 
‘After encouragement given, he is insulted by
her violent Brother; who thinks it his interest to
discountenance the match; and who at last challenging 

him, is obliged to take his worthless life at
his hands. 
‘The family, as much enraged, as if he had taken
the life he gave, insult him personally, and find out
an odious Lover for the young Lady. 
‘To avoid a forced marriage, she is prevailed upon
to take a step, which throws her into Mr. Lovelace's
protection. 
‘Yet, disclaiming any passion for him, she repeatedly
offers to renounce him for ever, if, on
that condition, her relations will receive her, and
free her from the address of the man she hates. 
‘Mr. Lovelace, a man of strong passions, and,
as some say, of great pride, thinks himself under
very little obligation to her on this account; and
not being naturally fond of marriage, and having so
much reason to hate her relations, endeavours to
prevail upon her to live with him, what he calls
the life of honour: And at last, by stratagem, art,
and contrivance, prevails. 
‘He resolves never to marry any other woman: 
Takes a pride to have her called by his name: 
A Church-rite all the difference between them: 
Treats her with deserved tenderness. Nobody
questions their marriage but those proud relations
of hers whom he wishes to question it. Every
year a charming Boy. Fortunes to support the encreasing
family with splendor. A tender Father. 
Always a warm Friend; a generous Landlord,
and a punctual Paymaster. Now-and-then however,
perhaps, indulging with a new object, in order
to bring him back with greater delight to his
charming Clarissa—His only fault Love of the Sex
—Which nevertheless, the women say, will cure
itself—Defensible thus far, that he breaks no contracts
by his rovings.’— 
And what is there so very greatly amiss, AS THE
WORLD GOES, in all this? 

Let me aver, that there are thousands and ten
thousands, who have worse Stories to tell than this
would appear to be, had I not interested thee in the
progress to my great end. And besides, thou knowest
that the character I gave myself to Joseph Leman,
as to my treatment of my mistresses, is pretty near
the truth (a) . 
Were I to be as much in earnest in my defence,
as thou art warm in my arraignment, I could convince
thee, by other arguments, observations, and
comparisons [Is not all human good and evil comparative?]
that tho' from my ingenuous temper (writing
only to Thee, who art master of every secret of my
heart) I am so ready to accuse myself in my narrations; 
yet I have something to say for myself to myself,
as I go along; tho' no one else perhaps that
was not a Rake, would allow any weight to it. — 
And this caution might I give to thousands, who
would stoop for a stone to throw at me: ‘See that
your own predominant passions, whatever they be,
hurry you not into as much wickedness, as mine do
me. See, if ye happen to be better than I in some
things, that ye are not worse in others; and in
points too, that may be of more extensive bad
consequence, than that of seducing a girl (and
taking care of her afterwards) who from her cradle
is armed with cautions against the delusions of
men.’ And yet I am not so partial to my own
follies as to think lightly of this fault, when I allow
myself to think. 
Another grave thing will I add, now my hand is
in: ‘So dearly do I love the Sex, that had I found,
that a character for virtue had been generally necessary
to recommend me to them, I should have
had a much greater regard to my morals, as to
the Sex, than I have had.’ 
To sum up all—I am sufficiently apprised, that 

men of worthy and honest hearts, who never allowed
themselves in premeditated evil, and who take into
the account the excellencies of this fine creature, will
and must not only condemn, but abhor me, were
they to know as much of me as thou dost. But,
methinks, I would be glad to escape the censure of
those men, and of those women too, who have never
known what capital trials and temptations are; 
of those who have no genius for enterprize; of those
who want rather courage than will; and most particularly
of those, who have only kept their secret
better than I have kept, or wished to keep, mine. 
&dotup;Were these exceptions to take place, perhaps, Jack,
I should have ten to acquit, to one that would condemn
me. Have I not often said, That human nature
is a rogue?&dotup; 
* *
I threatened above to refrain writing to thee. 
But take it not to heart, Jack—I must write on, and
cannot help it. 