


This Morning my Master came up to me,
and talk'd with me on various Subjects
for a good while together in the most kind
manner. Among other Things he ask'd me,
if I chose to order any new Cloaths against my
Marriage (O how my Heart flutters, when he
mentions this Subject so freely!). I said, I left
every thing to his good Pleasure, only repeating
my Request, for the Reasons afore given,
that I might not be too fine. 
He said, I think, my Dear, it shall be very
private: I hope you are not afraid of a Sham-marriage; 
and pray get the Service by heart, 

that you may see nothing is omitted. I glow'd
between Shame and Delight. O how I felt
my Cheeks burn! 
I answered, I fear'd nothing, I apprehended
nothing, but my own Unworthiness. 
Said he, I think it shall be done within these
Fourteen Days, from this Day, at this House. O
how I trembled; but not with Grief, you may
believe! —What says my Girl? Have you to
object against any Day of the next Fourteen?
because my Affairs require me to go to my
other House, and I think not to stir from this,
till I am happy with you? 
I have no Will but yours, said I (all glowing
like the Fire, as I could feel): But, Sir, did
you say in the House? Ay, said he; for I care
not how privately it be done; and it must be
very publick, if we go to Church. It is a
Holy Rite, Sir, said I, and would be better,
methinks, in a Holy Place. 
I see, (said he, most kindly) my lovely
Maid's Confusion; and your trembling Tenderness
shews I ought to oblige you all I may. Therefore
I will order my own little Chapel, which
has not been us'd for Two Generations, for any
thing but a Lumber-room, because our Family
seldom resided here long together, to be clear'd
and clean'd, and got ready for the Ceremony,
if you dislike your own Chamber or mine. 
Sir, said I, that will be better than the
Chamber; and I hope it will never be lumber'd
again, but kept to the Use, for which, as I presume,
it has been consecrated. O yes, said he, it has 

been consecrated, and that several Ages ago, in
my Great Great Grandfather's Time, who built
that and the good old House together. 
But now, my dear Girl, if I do not too
much add to your sweet Confusion, shall it be
in the first Seven Days, or the second of this
Fortnight? I look'd down, quite out of Countenance. 
Tell me, said he? 
In the Second, if you please, Sir, said I. 
—As you please, return'd he most kindly; but
I should thank you, Pamela, if you would
chuse the first. I'd rather, Sir, if you please,
reply'd I, have the second. Well, said he, be
it so; but don't defer it till the last Day of the
Fourteen. 
Pray, Sir, said I, since you embolden me
to talk on this important Subject, may I not
send my dear Father and Mother Word of my
Happiness? –––You may, reply'd he; but charge
them to keep it secret, till you or I direct the
contrary. And I told you, I would see no more
of your Papers; but I meant, I would not without
your Consent: But if you will shew me
what you have written, since the last I saw, (and
now I have no other Motive for my Curiosity,
but the Pleasure I take in reading what you
write) I shall acknowledge it as a Favour. 
If, Sir, return'd I, you will be pleased to let
me write over again one Sheet, I will; tho' I had
rely'd upon your Word, and not written them
for your Perusal. What is that? said he; tho'
I cannot consent to it beforehand: For I more
desire to see them, because they are your true 

Sentiments at the Time, and because they were
not written for my Perusal. Sir, said I, what
I am loth you should see, are very severe Reflections
on the Letter I received by the Gypsey,
when I apprehended your Design of the Sham-marriage; 
tho' there are other things I would
not have you see; but that is the worst. It
can't be worse, reply'd he, my dear Sauce-box,
than I have seen already; and I will allow
your treating me in ever so black a manner
on that Occasion, because it must have a very
black Appearance to you. —Well, Sir, said
I, I think I will obey you before Night. But
don't alter a Word, said he. I won't, Sir,
reply'd I, since you order it. 
While we were talking, Mrs. Jewkes
came up, and said Thomas was return'd. O,
said my Master, let him bring up the Papers. 
For he hoped, and so did I, that you had sent
them by him. But it was a great Balk, when
he came up and said, Sir, Mr. Andrews did
not care to deliver them; and would have it,
that his Daughter was forced to write that Letter
to him: And indeed, Sir, said he, the old
Gentleman took on sadly, and would have it
that his Daughter was undone, or else, he said,
she would not have turn'd back, when on her
Way, (as I told him she did, said Thomas) instead
of coming to them. I began to be afraid
now, that all would be bad for me again. 
Well, Tom, said he, don't mince the
Matter. Tell me, before Mrs. Andrews, what 

they said. Why, Sir, both he and Goody Andrews,
after they had conferr'd together upon
your Letter, Madam, came out, weeping bitterly,
that griev'd my very Heart; and they
said, Now all was over with their poor Daughter; 
and either she had written that Letter by
Compulsion, or had yielded to your Honour,
so they said, and was, or would be ruin'd! 
My Master seem'd vex'd, as I fear'd. And
I said, Pray, Sir, be so good to excuse the
Fears of my honest Parents! They cannot know
your Goodness to me. 
And so (conntiued he, without answering
me)they refus'd to deliver the Papers? Yes, and
please your Honour, said Thomas, tho' I told
them, that you, Madam, of your own Accord,
on a Letter I had brought you, very chearfully
wrote what I carry'd. But the old Gentleman
said, Why, Wife, there are in these Papers
Twenty Things nobody should see but ourselves,
and especially not the 'Squire. O the poor
Girl has had so many Stratagems to struggle
with! And now, at last, she has met with
one that has been too hard for her! And
can it be possible for us to account for her setting
out to come to us, and in such Post-haste,
and when she had got above Half-way, to send
us this Letter, and to go back again of her own
Accord, as you say; when we know, that all
her Delight would have been to come to us,
and to escape from the Perils she has been so
long contending with? And then, and please
your Honour, he said he could not bear this; 

for his Daughter was ruin'd, to be sure, before
now. And so, continued Thomas, the good
old Couple sat themselves down, and hand inhand,
leaning upon each other's Shoulder, did
nothing but lament. —I was piteously griev'd,
said he; but all I could say could not comfort
them; nor would they give me the Papers, tho'
I told them I should deliver them only to Mrs.
Andrews herself. And so, and please your
Honour, I was forced to come away without
them. 
My good Master saw me all bathed in Tears
at this Description of your Distress and Fears for
me, and he said, I would not have you take on
so. I am not angry with your Father in the
main; he is a good Man; and I would have
you write out of hand, and it shall be sent by
the Post, to Mr. Atkins, who lives within Two
Miles of your Father, and I'll inclose it in a
Cover of mine, in which I'll desire Mr. Atkins,
the Moment it comes to his Hand, to convey
it safely to your Father or Mother: And say
nothing of their sending the Papers, that it
may not make them uneasy; for I want not
how to see them on any other score than that
of mere Curiosity; and that will do at any time. 
And so saying, he saluted me, before Thomas,
and with his own Handkerchief wip'd my Eyes; 
and said to Thomas, The good old Folks are
not to be blam'd in the main. They don't
know my honourable Intentions by their dear
Daughter; who, Tom, will in a little time
be your Mistress; tho' I shall keep the Matter 

private some Days, and would not have it
spoken of by my Servants out of my House. 
Thomas said, God bless your Honour! 
You know best. And I said, O Sir, you are
all Goodness! —How kind is this, to forgive
the Disappointment, instead of being angry,
as I fear'd you would. Thomas then withdrew. 
And my Master said, I need not remind
you of writing out of hand, to make the good
Folks easy: And I will leave you to yourself
for that purpose; only send me down such of
your Papers, as you are willing I should see,
with which I shall entertain myself for an Hour
or two. But, one Thing, added he, I forgot
to tell you: The neighbouring Gentry I mention'd,
will be here To-morrow to dine with
me, and I have order'd Mrs. Jewkes to prepare
for them. And must I, Sir, said I, be shewn
to them? O yes, reply'd he, that's the chief
Reason of their coming. And, don't be concern'd: 
You'll see nobody equal to yourself. 
I opened my Papers, as soon as my Master
had left me, and laid out those beginning on
the Thursday Morning he set out for Stamford,
with the Morning Visit he made me before
I was up, and the Injunctions of Watchfulness,
&c. to Mrs. Jewkes; the next Day's
Gypsey Affair, and my Reflections, in which
I call'd him truly diabolical, and was otherwise
very severe, on the strong Appearances
the Matter had then against him. His Return
on Saturday, with the Dread he put me in, 

on the offering to search me for my Papers
which follow'd those he had got by Mrs.
Jewkes's Means. My being forced to give
them up. His Carriage to me after he had
read them, and Questions to me. His great
Kindness to me, on seeing the Dangers I had
escaped, and the Troubles I had undergone. 
And how I unseasonably, in the midst of his
Goodness, express'd my Desire of being sent
to you, having the Intelligence of a Sham-marriage,
from the Gypsey, in my Thoughts. 
How this inraged him, and made him turn
me that very Sunday out of his House, and
send me on my Way to you. The Particulars
of my Journey, and my Grief at parting
with him; and my free Acknowledgments
to you, that I found, unknown to
myself, I had begun to love him, and could
not help it. His sending after me, to beg my
Return; but yet generously leaving me at
my Liberty, when he might have forced me
to return, whether I was willing or not. 
My Resolution to oblige him, and fatiguing
Journey back. My Concern for his Illness
on my Return. His kind Reception of me,
and shewing me his Sister Davers's angry
Letter, against his Behaviour to me, desiring
him to set me free, and threatening to renounce
him as a Brother, if he should degrade
himself by marrying me. My serious Reflections
on this Letter, &c.” (all which, I hope,
with the others, you will shortly see) and this
carry'd Matters down to Tuesday Night last. 

All that followed was so kind on his Side,
being our Chariot Conference, as above, on
Wednesday Morning, and how good he has
been ever since, that I thought I would go no
further; for I was a little asham'd to be so
very open on that tender and most grateful
Subject, tho' his great Goodness to me deserves
all the Acknowledgments I can possibly make. 
And when I had look'd these out, I carry'd
them down myself into the Parlour to him,
and said, putting them into his Hands, Your
Allowances, good Sir, as heretofore; and if I
have been too open and free in my Reflections
or Declarations, let my Fears on one Side, and
my Sincerity on the other, be my Excuse. You
are very obliging, my good Girl, said he. You
have nothing to apprehend from my Thoughts,
any more than from my Actions. 
So I went up, and wrote the Letter to you,
briefly acquainting you with my present Happiness,
and my Master's Goodness, and expressing
the Gratitude of Heart, which I owe to the
kindest Gentleman in the World, and assuring
you, that I should soon have the Pleasure of
sending back to you, not only those Papers,
but all that succeeded them to this Time, as I
know you delight to amuse yourself in your
Leisure Hours with my Scribble; and I said,
carrying it down to my Master, before I seal'd
it, Will you please, Sir, to take the Trouble of
reading what I write to my dear Parents? 
Thank you, Pamela, said he, and set me on
his Knee while he read it, and seem'd much 

pleas'd with it; and giving it me again, You
are very happy, said he, my beloved Girl, in
your Style and Expressions: And the affectionate
Things you say of me, are inexpressibly
obliging; and again, with this Kiss, said he, do
I confirm for Truth all that you have promised
for my Intentions in this Letter. —O what
Halcyon Days are these! God continue them! 
—A Change now would kill me quite. 
He went out in his Chariot in the Afternoon; 
and in the Evening return'd, and sent
me Word, he would be glad of my Company
for a little Walk in the Garden; and down I
went that very Moment. 
He came to meet me. So, said he, how
does my dear Girl do now? —Whom do you
think I have seen since I have been out? —I
don't know, Sir, answer'd I. Why, said he, there
is a Turning in the Road, about Five Miles off,
that goes round a Meadow, that has a pleasant
Foot-way, by the Side of a little Brook, and a
double Row of Limes on each Side, where
now-and-then the Gentry in the Neighbourhood
walk, and angle, and divert themselves. 
—I'll shew it you the next Opportunity.— 
And I stepp'd out of my Chariot, to walk
cross this Meadow, and bid Robin meet me
with it on the further Part of it. And who
should I spy there, walking, with a Book in
his Hand, reading, but your humble Servant,
Mr: Williams? —Don't blush, Pamela, said
he. —As his Back was towards me, I thought
I would speak to the Man; and before he saw 

me, I said, How do you, old Acquaintance!
(for, said he, you know we were of one College
for a Twelvemonth) I thought the Man
would have jump'd into the Brook, he gave
such a Start at hearing my Voice, and seeing
me. 
Poor Man! said I. Ay, said he, but not
too much of your poor Man, in that soft Accent,
neither, Pamela. —I am sorry my Voice
is so startling to you, Mr. Williams, said I. 
What are you reading? Sir, said he, and stammer'd
with the Surprize, it is the French Telemachus;
for I am about perfecting myself, if
I can, in the French Tongue—Thought I, I
had rather so, than perfecting my Pamela in it. 
—You do well, reply'd I. —Don't you think,
that yonder Cloud may give us a small Shower?
and it did a little begin to wet. —He said, he
believed not much. 
If, said I, you are for the Village, I'll give
you a Cast; for I shall call at Sir Simon's, in my
Return from the little Round I am taking. 
He ask'd me, If it was not too great a Favour? 
—No, said I, don't talk of that; let us walk
to the further Opening there, and we shall
meet my Chariot. 
So, Pamela, continu'd my Master, we fell
into Conversation, as we walk'd. He said, He
was very sorry he had incurr'd my Displeasure; 
and the more, as he had been told by Lady
Jones, who had it from Sir Simon's Family,
that I had a most honourable View than at first
was apprehended. I said, We Fellows of Fortune, 

Mr. Williams, take a little more Liberty
with the World than we ought to do; wantoning,
very probably, as you contemplative
Folks would say, in the Sun-beams of a dangerous
Affluence; and cannot think of confining
ourselves to the common Paths, tho' the
safest and most eligible, after all. And, you
may believe, I could not very well like to be
supplanted in a View that lay next my Heart; 
and that by an old Acquaintance, whose Good,
before this Affair, I was studious to promote. 
I would only say, Sir, answer'd he, that
my first Motive was intirely such as became my
Function: And, very politely, said my Master,
he added, And I am very sure, that however
inexcusable I might seem in the Progress of
the Matter, yourself, Sir, would have been
sorry to have it said, you had cast your Thoughts
on a Person, that nobody could have wish'd for
but yourself. 
Well, Mr. Williams, said I, I see you are
a Man of Gallantry as well as Religion: 
But what I took most amiss was, that, if you
thought me doing a wrong thing, you did
not expostulate with me upon it, as your Function
might have allow'd you to do; but immediately
determin'd to counterplot me, and
attempt to secure to yourself a Prize, you would
have robb'd me of, and that from my own
House. But the Matter is at an End, and I retain
not any Malice upon it; tho you did not
know, but I might, at last, do honourably by
her, as I actually intend. 

I am sorry for myself, Sir, said he, that I
should so unhappily incur your Displeasure; 
but I rejoice for her sake, in your honourable Intentions: 
Give me Leave only to say, That if
you make Mrs. Andrews your Lady, she will do
Credit to your Choice with every body that
sees her, or comes to know her; and for
Person and Mind both, you may challenge the
County. 
In this manner, continued my Master, did the
Parson and I confabulate; and I set him down
at his Lodgings in the Village. But he kept
your Secret, Pamela, and would not own,
that you gave any Encouragement to his Addresses. 
Indeed, Sir, reply'd I, he could not say that
I did; and I hope you believe me. I do, I do,
said he: but 'tis still my Opinion, that if, when
I saw Plots set up against my Plots, I had not
discover'd the Parson as I did, the Correspondence
between you might have gone to a Length,
that would have put our present Situation out
of both our Powers. 
Sir, said I, when you consider, that my
utmost Presumption could not make me hope for
the Honour you now seem to design me; that I
was so hardly used; and had no Prospect before
me but Dishonour; you will allow, that I
should have seem'd very little in Earnest in my
Professions of Honesty, if I had not endeavour'd
to get away: But yet I resolv'd not to think of
Marriage; for I never saw the Man I could love, 

till your Goodness embolden'd me to look up
to you. 
I should, my dear Pamela, return'd he,
make a very ill Compliment to my Vanity, if
I did not believe you; tho' at the same time,
Justice calls upon me to say, that it is, some
things consider'd, beyond my Merit. 
There was a sweet noble Expression for
your poor Daughter, my dear Father and Mother! 
—And from my Master too! 
I was glad to hear this Account of the Interview
between Mr. Williams and himself; but
I dar'd not to say so. I hope in time he will
be reinstated in his good Graces. 
He was so good as to tell me, he had given
Orders for the Chapel to be clear'd. O how I
look forward with inward Joy, yet with Fear
and Trembling! 
