



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Sat. Night. 
I have been down. I am to be unlucky in all I
do, I think, be my intention ever so good. I have
made matters worse instead of better: As I shall
now tell you. 
I found my Mother and Sister together in my
Sister's parlour. My Mother, I fear, by the glow in
her fine face (and as the browner, sullener glow in
my Sister's confirmed) had been expressing herself
with warmth, against her unhappier child: Perhaps
giving such an account of what had passed, as should
clear herself, and convince Bella, and thro' her, my
Brother and Uncles, of the sincere pains she had
taken with me. 
I entered like a dejected criminal; and besought
the favour of a private audience. My Mother's return,
both looks and words, gave but too much reason
for my above surmize. 
You have, said she [looking at me with a sternness
that never sits well on her sweet features] rather a
requesting than a conceding countenance, Clarissa Harlowe: 
If I am mistaken, tell me so; and I will withdraw 

with you where-ever you will. —Yet whether
so, or not, you may say what you have to say before
your Sister. 
My Mother, I thought, might have withdrawn
with me, as she knows, that I have not a friend in
my Sister. 
I come down, Madam, said I, to beg of you to
forgive me for any-thing you may have taken amiss in
what passed above respecting your honoured self; and
that you will be pleased to use your endeavours to
soften my Papa's displeasure against me, on his return. 
Such aggravating looks; such lifting up of hands
and eyes; such a furrowed forehead, in my Sister! 
My Mother was angry enough without all that; 
and asked me, To what purpose I came down, if I
were still so untractable? 
She had hardly spoken the words, when Shorey
came in to tell her, that Mr. Solmes was in the hall,
and desired admittance. 
Ugly creature! What, at the close of day, quite
dark, brought him hither? —But, on second thoughts,
I believe it was contrived, that he should be here at
Supper, to know the result of the conference between
my Mother and me, and that my Father, on his return,
might find us together. 
I was hurrying away; but my Mother commanded
me (since I had come down only, as she said, to mock
her) not to stir; and at the same time see if I could
behave so to Mr. Solmes, as might encourage her to
make the favourable report to my Father which I had
besought her to make. 
My Sister triumphed. I was vexed to be so caught,
and to have such an angry and cutting rebuke given
me, with an aspect more like the taunting Sister than
the indulgent Mother, if I may presume to say so: 
For she herself seemed to enjoy the surprize upon
me. 

The man stalked in. His usual walk is by pauses,
as if (from the same vacuity of thought which made
Dryden's Clown whistle) he was telling his steps: And
first paid his clumsy respects to my Mother; then to
my Sister; next to me, as if I were already his Wife,
and therefore to be last in his notice; and sitting down
by me, told us in general what weather it was. Very
cold he made it; but I was warm enough. Then
addressing himself to me; And how do you find it,
Miss? was his question; and would have taken my
hand. 
I withdrew it, I believe with disdain enough. My
Mother frowned. My Sister bit her lip. 
I could not contain myself: I never was so bold in
my life; for I went on with my plea, as if Mr. Solmes
had not been there. 
My Mother coloured, and looked at him, at my
Sister, and at me. My Sister's eyes were opener and
bigger than ever I saw them before. 
The man understood me. He hemmed, and removed
from one chair to another. 
I went on, supplicating for my Mother's favourable
report: Nothing but invincible dislike, said I— 
What would the girl be at, interrupted my Mother? 
Why, Clary! Is this a subject! —Is this! —Is
this! —Is this a time—And again she looked upon
Mr. Solmes. 
I am sorry, on reflection, that I put my Mamma
into so much confusion—To be sure it was very saucy
in me. 
I beg pardon, Madam, said I. But my Papa will
soon return. And since I am not permitted to withdraw,
it is not necessary, I humbly presume, that Mr.
Solmes's presence should deprive me of this opportunity
to implore your favourable report; and at the
same time, if he still visit on my account [looking at
him] to convince him, that it cannot possibly be to
any purpose— 

Is the girl mad? said my Mother, interrupting me. 
My Sister, with the affectation of a whisper to my
Mother—This is—This is spite, Madam [Very spitefully
she spoke the word] because you commanded her
to stay. 
I only looked at her, and turning to my Mother,
Permit me, Madam, said I, to repeat my request. I
have no Brother, no Sister! —If I lose my Mamma's
favour, I am lost for ever! 
Mr. Solmes removed to his first seat, and fell to
gnawing the head of his hazel; a carved head, almost
as ugly as his own—I did not think the man was so
sensible. 
My Sister rose, with a face all over scarlet; and
stepping to the table, where lay a fan, she took it up,
and, altho' Mr. Solmes had observed that the weather
was cold, fanned herself very violently. 
My Mother came to me, and angrily taking my
hand, led me out of that parlour into my own; 
which, you know, is next to it—Is not this behaviour
very bold, very provoking, think you, Clary? 
I beg your pardon, Madam, if it has that appearance
to you. But indeed, my dear Mamma, there
seem to be snares laying for me. Too well I know
my Brother's drift. With a good word he shall have
my consent for all he wishes to worm me out of— 
Neither he, nor my Sister, shall need to take half this
pains— 
My Mother was about to leave me in high displeasure. 
I besought her to stay: One favour, but one favour,
dearest Madam, said I, give me leave to beg
of you— 
What would the girl? 
I see how every-thing is working about. —I never,
never, can think of Mr. Solmes. My Papa will be
in tumults when he is told that I cannot. They will
judge of the tenderness of your heart to a poor child 

who seems devoted by every one else, from the willingness
you have already shewn to hearken to my
prayers. There will be endeavours used to confine
me, and keep me out of your presence, and out of the
presence of every one who used to love me [This,
my dear Miss Howe, is threatened]. If This be effected; 
if it be put out of my power to plead my
own cause, and to appeal to You, and to my Uncle
Harlowe, of whom only I have hope; then will
every ear be opened against me, and every tale encouraged
—It is, therefore, my humble request, That,
added to the disgraceful prohibitions I now suffer
under, you will not, if you can help it, give way to
my being denied your ear. 
Your listening Hannah has given you this intelligence,
as she does many others. 
My Hannah, Madam, listens not—My Hannah— 
No more in Hannah's behalf—Hannah is known
to make mischief—Hannah is known—But no more
of that bold intermeddler—'Tis true, your Father
threatened to confine you to your chamber, if you
complied not, in order the more assuredly to deprive
you of the opportunity of corresponding with those
who harden your heart against his will. He bid me
tell you so, when he went out, if I found you refractory. 
But I was loth to deliver so harsh a declaration; 
being still in hope that you would come down
to us in a compliant temper. Hannah has overheard
this I suppose; and has told you of it; as also, that
he declared he would break your heart, rather than
you should break his. And I now assure you, that
you will be confined, and prohibited making teazing
appeals to any of us: And we shall see who is to submit,
You to us, or Every-body to you. 
Again I offered to clear Hannah, and to lay the
latter part of the intelligence to my Sister's Echo,
Betty Barnes, who had boasted of it to another servant: 
But I was again bid to be silent on that head. 

I should soon find, my Mother was pleased to say,
that others could be as determined as I was obstinate: 
And, once for all, would add, that since she saw that
I built upon her indulgence, and was indifferent about
involving her in contentions with my Father, and his
Brothers, and with her other children, she would now
assure me, that she was as much determined against
Mr. Lovelace, and for Mr. Solmes and the family-schemes,
as any-body; and would not refuse her consent
to any measures that should be thought necessary
to reduce a stubborn child to her duty. 
I was ready to sink. She was so good as to lend me
her arm to support me. 
And this, said I, is all I have to hope for from my
Mamma? 
It is. But, Clary, this one further opportunity I
give you—Go in again to Mr. Solmes, and behave
discreetly to him; and let your Father find you together,
upon civil terms at least. 
My feet moved [of themselves, I think] farther from
the parlour where he was, and towards the stairs; and
there I stopped and paused. 
If, proceeded she, you are determined to stand in
defiance of us all—then indeed may you go up to
your chamber (as you are ready to do)—And God
help you! 
God help me indeed! for I cannot give hope of
what I cannot intend—But let me have your prayers,
my dear Mamma! —Those shall have mine, who
have brought me into all this distress. 
I was moving to go up— 
And will you go up, Clary? 
I turned my face to her: My officious tears would
needs plead for me: I could not just then speak; and
stood still. 
Good girl, distress me not thus! —Dear, good girl,
do not thus distress me! holding out her hand; but
standing still likewise. 

What can I do, Madam? —What can I do? 
Go in again, my child—Go in again, my dear
child!—repeated she; and let your Father find you
together. 
What, Madam, to give him hope? —To give hope
to Mr. Solmes? 
Obstinate, perverse, undutiful Clarissa! with a rejecting
hand, and angry aspect; then take your own
way, and go up! —But stir not down again, I charge
you, without leave, or till your Father's pleasure be
known concerning you. 
She flung from me with high indignation: And I
went up with a very heavy heart; and feet as slow as
my heart was heavy. 
* *
My Father is come home, and my Brother with
him. Late as it is, they are all shut up together. 
Not a door opens; not a soul stirs. Hannah, as she
moves up and down, is shunned as a person infected. 
* *
The angry assembly is broken up. My two Uncles
and my Aunt Hervey are sent for, it seems, to
be here in the morning to breakfast. I shall then, I
suppose, know my doom. 'Tis past Eleven, and I
am ordered not to go to bed. 
Twelve o' clock. 
This moment the keys of every-thing are taken
from me. It was proposed to send for me down: 
But my Father said, he could not bear to look upon
me. —Strange alteration in a few weeks! —Shorey was
the messenger. The tears stood in her eyes when she
delivered her message. 
You, my dear, are happy—May you always be
so—And then I can never be wholly miserable. 
Adieu, my beloved friend! 
Cl. Harlowe. 