



Miss Clarissa Harlowe, To Miss Howe. 

Thursday Morning, Mar. 23. 
My Letter has set them all in tumults: For, it
seems, none of them went home last night; 
and they all were desired to be present to give their
advice, if I should refuse compliance with a command
thought so reasonable as it seems this is. 
Betty tells me, That at first my Father, in a rage,
was for coming up to me himself, and for turning
me out of his doors directly. Nor was he restrained,
till it was hinted to him, that That was no doubt my
wish, and would answer all my perverse views. But
the result was, That my Brother (having really, as
my Mother and Aunt insisted, taken wrong measures
with me) should write again in a more moderate manner: 
For nobody else was permitted or cared to write
to such a ready scribbler. And, I having declared,
that I would not receive any more of his Letters without
command from a superior authority, my Mother
was to give it hers: And accordingly has done so in
the following lines, written on the superscription of
his Letter to me: Which Letter also follows; together
with my Reply. 

Clary Harlowe,
Receive and Read This, with the temper that
becomes your Sex, your Character, your Education,
and your Duty: And return an Answer to it,
directed to your Brother. 
Charlotte Harlowe. 

To Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
Thursday Morning. 
Once more I write, altho' imperiously prohibited
by a younger Sister. Your Mother will have me 

do so, that you may be destitute of all defence, if you
persist in your pervicacy. Shall I be a pedant, Miss,
for this word? She is willing to indulge in you the
least appearance of that delicacy for which she once,
as well as every-body else, admired you—Before you
knew Lovelace; I cannot, however, help saying
that: And she, and your Aunt Hervey, will have it
—[They would fain favour you, if they could] that
I may have provoked from you the Answer they
nevertheless own to be so exceedingly unbecoming. I
am now learning, you see, to take up the softer language,
where you have laid it down. This then is
the case: 
They entreat, they pray, they beg, they supplicate
[Will either of these do, Miss Clary?] That you
will make no scruple to go to your Uncle Antony's: 
And fairly I am to tell you, for the very purpose
mentioned in my last—or, 'tis presumable, they need
not entreat, pray, beg, supplicate. Thus much is promised
to Mr. Solmes, who is your advocate, and very
uneasy that you should be under constraint, supposing
that your dislike to him arises from That. And,
if he finds that you are not to be moved in his favour,
when you are absolutely freed from what you call a
controul, he will forbear thinking of you, whatever
it costs him. He loves you too well: And in this, I
really think, his understanding, which you have reflected
upon, is to be questioned. 
Only for one fortnight, therefore, permit his visits. 
Your Education [You tell me of mine, you know]
ought to make you incapable of rudeness to anybody. 
He will not, I hope, be the first man, myself
excepted, whom you ever treated rudely, purely because
he is esteemed by us all. I am, what you have
a mind to make me, Friend, Brother, or Servant— 
I wish I could be still more polite, to so polite, so delicate,
a Sister. 
Ja. Harlowe. 

You must still write to me, if you condescend to
reply. Your Mother will not be permitted to
be disturbed with your nothing-meaning Vocatives! 
—Vocatives, once more, Madam Clary,
repeats the Pedant your Brother! 

To James Harlowe junior, Esq;
Thursday, March 23. 
Permit me, my ever-dear and honoured Papa
and Mamma, in this manner to surprise you into
an audience (presuming This will be read to you)
since I am denied the honour of writing to you directly. 
Let me beg of you to believe, that nothing
but the most unconquerable dislike could make me
stand against your pleasure. What are Riches, what
are Settlements, to Happiness? Let me not thus
cruelly be given up to a man my very Soul is averse
to. Permit me to repeat, that I cannot honestly be
his. Had I a slighter notion of the matrimonial duty
than I have, perhaps I might. But when I am to
bear all the misery, and That for life; when my
heart is less concerned in this matter, than my soul; 
my temporary, perhaps, than my future good; why
should I be denied the liberty of refusing? That
liberty is all I ask. 
It were easy for me to give way to hear Mr. Solmes
talk for the mentioned fortnight, altho' it is impossible
for me, say what he would, to get over my
dislike to him. But the Moated-house, the Chapel
there, and the little mercy my Brother and Sister,
who are to be there, have hitherto shewn me, are
what I am extremely apprehensive of. And why
does my Brother say, my restraint is to be taken off
(and that too at Mr. Solmes's desire) when I am to
be a still closer prisoner than before; the Bridge
threatened to be drawn up; and no dear Papa and
Mamma near me, to appeal to, in the last resort? 

Transfer not, I beseech you, to a Brother and Sister
your own authority over your child—To a Brother
and Sister, who treat me with unkindness and reproach; 
and, as I have too much reason to apprehend,
misrepresent my words and behaviour; or, greatly
favoured as I used to be, it is impossible I should be
sunk so low in your opinions, as I unhappily am! 
Let but this my hard, my disgraceful confinement
be put an end to. Permit me, my dear Mamma, to
pursue my needleworks in your presence, as one of
your maidens; and you shall be witness, that it is not
either wilfulness or prepossession that governs me. Let
me not, however, be put out of your own house. 
Let Mr. Solmes come and go, as my Papa pleases: 
Let me but stay or retire when he comes, as I can; 
and leave the rest to Provdence. 
Forgive me, Brother, that thus, with an appearance
of Art, I address myself to my Father and Mother, to
whom I am forbidden to approach, or to write. Hard
it is to be reduced to such a contrivance! Forgive
likewise the plain-dealing I have used in the above,
with the nobleness of a Gentleman, and the gentleness
due from a Brother to a Sister. Altho' of late
you have given me but little room to hope either for
your favour or compassion; yet, having not deserved
to forfeit either, I presume to claim both: For I am
confident it is at present much in your power, altho'
but my Brother (my honoured Parents both, I bless
God, in being) to give peace to the greatly disturbed
mind of 
Your unhappy Sister,
Cl. Harlowe. 
Betty tells me, my Brother has taken my Letter all
in pieces; and has undertaken to write such an Answer
to it, as shall confirm the wavering—So, it is
plain, that I should have moved somebody by it, but
for this hard-hearted Brother—God forgive him! 