


Sir Charles Grandison, To Dr. Bartlett. 


Bologna, Sat. Evening.
I Sit down, now, my dear and reverend friend, to
write to you particulars which will surprise you! 
Clementina is the noblest woman on earth! What at
last—But I find I must have a quieter heart, and fingers
too, before I can proceed. 
* *
I think I am a little less agitated than I was. 
The above few lines shall go; for they will express to
you the emotions of my mind, when I attempted to
write an account of what had then so newly passed. 
As soon as I entered the palace, Camilla met me,
and conducted me to the Marchioness. The Marquis
and the Bishop were with her. O Chevalier! said
she, we have been greatly disturbed by a visit from the
Count of Belvedere. Poor man! —He says he waited
on you at your lodgings. 
He did. I then, at the Bishop's request, told them
all that had passed between us, except his last words,
which implied, that it was better to die by the hand of
another man, than by his own. 
They expressed their concern for him, and their
apprehensions for me; but I found that his unexpected
visit had not altered their purpose in my favour. They
were convinced, they told him, that the restoration of
their daughter's tranquillity of mind depended upon
giving her entirely her own way; and not one word
more of opposition or contradiction should she meet
with from them. 
I have been hindered, said the Marchioness, by
this unhappy man's visit, and his vehemence, which
moved me to pity him (for I am afraid that he will be
in our daughter's unhappy way) from watching in 

person the humour of my child; which, two hours
ago, Camilla told me, was very particular. I was
going to her, when you came; but I will send for
Camilla. —She did. 
As soon as she saw me in the morning, continued
the Marchioness, she apologized to me for sending
Camilla to you, to suspend your visit till the afternoon. 
She was not, she said, prepared to see you. —I asked
her, continued she, What preparation was wanted to
see a man esteemed by us all, and who had given
such instances of his regard to her? 
Madam, answered she, and seemed as if gasping
for breath, Am I not now to see him in a light, in
which hitherto I never beheld him? I have a thousand
things to say to him, none of which perhaps I shall
be able to say, except he draws them from me. He
hinted once, very lately, that he could only be rewarded
by a family act. We cannot reward him; that
is my grief: I must see him with a heart overwhelmed
with obligation. He will appear as a prince to me:
I must to myself as his vassal. I have been putting
down, in writing, what I should say to him; but I
cannot please myself. O madam! he is great in my
eyes, because I am unable to reward him as he deserves. 
I told her, that her fortune, her quality, the
sacrifice she would make of her Country (tho' never,
I hoped, of her Religion) ought to give her a higher
opinion of herself; tho' all these were far from cancelling
the obligation we all were under to him, on
our Jeronymo's account, as well as on hers. 
Well, madam, replied she, Heaven only knows
how I shall be able to behave to him, now you have
left every-thing to myself; and now he will talk to
me, by permission, on a subject so new, yet so very
interesting. O that this day were over! 
I asked her, proceeded the Marchioness, if she
would yet take further time? —A week, or more? 
O no, said she: That must not be. I shall be 

prepared to see him, I hope, by the afternoon. Pray
let him come then. I am very clear now, putting her
hand to her forehead: I may not be so a week, nor a
day hence. 
Camilla then entered the room. Camilla, said the
Marchioness, In what way is the dear creature now? 
Ever since your Ladyship left her, she has been
more reserved, and thoughtful; yet her spirits are
high: Her mind seems full of the Chevalier's next
visit; and twice, within this half-hour, she asked, If
he were come? She reads over and over, something
she has written; lays it down, takes it up; walks
about the room, sometimes with an air of dignity, at
others hanging down her head. I don't like her frequent
startings. Within this hour she has several
times shed tears. She sighs often. She was not to be
pleased with her dress. Once she would be in black; 
then in colours; then her white and silver was taken
out: But that, she said, would give her a bridal appearance:
She at last chose her plain white satten. 
She looks like an Angel. But O that her eyes, and
her motions, shewed greater composure! 
You have a task before you, Chevalier, said the
Bishop. What tokens are these of a disordered, yet
a raised mind! We may see, from these extraordinary
agitations, on the expectation of a conversation that
is to end in her consent to crown your wishes, how
much her heart has been in that event: May it be
happy to you both! 
I fear nothing, said the Marchioness, as to the happiness
of my child, that lies within the power of the
Chevalier: I am sure of his tenderness to her. 
I think, said the Marquis, we will allow the Chevalier
to carry his bride over to England for the first
six months, and return with her to us in the second:
It may give a new turn to the course of her ideas. 
The same places, the same persons, always in view,
may sadden her reflecting heart. And, besides, the 

mind of the poor Count of Belvedere may be strengthened
by this absence. 
The Bishop applauded this thought. The Marchioness
said, Reason may approve the motion; but can
the mother so soon part with her child? —Yet for her
happiness, I must submit. 
Let us, said the Marquis, leave this to her choice,
as the rest. Camilla, let my daughter know, that
the Chevalier attends her pleasure. You would have
it so, Chevalier? 
I bowed my assent. 
Camilla returned not presently: When she did; I
could not come sooner, said she. My young Lady is
strangely fluttered. I have been reasoning with her. — 
Madam, turning to the Marchioness, Will you be
pleased to walk up to her? 
Had this been the first interview, said the Bishop, I
should not have wondered at her discomposure: But
this disorder shews itself in a strange variety of
shapes! 
The Marchioness, attended by Camilla, went up. 
I was soon sent for. The Marchioness met me at the
entrance of the young Lady's dressing-room—and retiring,
whispered—I believe she had rather be alone
with you. Dear creature! I don't know what to
make of her. She has, I fansy, something to propose
to you. Camilla, come with me. We will be but in
the next room, Chevalier. 
When I entered the room, the young Lady was sitting
in a pensive mood, at her toilette; her hand supporting
her head. A fine glow overspread her cheeks,
as soon as she saw me: She arose, and, courtesying
low, advanced a few steps towards me; but trembled,
and looked now down, now aside, and now consciously
glancing towards me. 
I approached her, and, with profound respect, took
her hand with both mine, and pressed it with my lips. 
I address not myself now to Lady Clementina as my 

pupil: I have leave given me to look upon her in a
nearer light; and she will have the goodness to pardon
the freedom of this address. 
Ah, Chevalier! said she, turning her face from me,
but not withdrawing her hand—And hesitating, as if
not knowing how to speak her mind, sighed, and was
silent. 
I led her to her chair. She sat down, still trembling. 
God be praised, said I, bowing my face on
both her hands, as I held them in mine, for the
amended health of the Lady so dear to all who have
the happiness of knowing her! May her recovery,
and that of our dear Jeronymo, be perfected! 
Happy man! said she, happy in the power given
you to oblige as you have done! —But how, how shall
I—O, Sir! you know not the conflict that has rent
my heart in pieces, ever since—I forget when. —O
Chevalier! I have not power—She stopt, wept, and
remained silent. 
It is in your power, madam, to make happy the
man to whom you own obligations which are already
overpaid. 
I took my seat by her, at her silent motion to a
chair. 
Speak on, Sir: My Soul is labouring with great
purposes. Tell me, tell me, all you have to say to
me. My heart is too big for its prison, putting her
hand to it: It wants room, methinks; yet utterance
is denied me—Speak, and let me be silent. 
Your Father, Mother, Brothers, Uncle, are all of
one mind. I am permitted to open my heart to their
Clementina; and I promise myself a gracious audience. 
Father Marescotti befriends me. —The terms,
madam, are those I offered when I was last in Italy. 
She hung down her head, in listening silence— 
Every other year I am to be happy with my Clementina
in England— 
Your Clementina, Sir! —Ah Chevalier! —She 

blushed, and turned away her face—Your Clementina,
Sir! repeated she—and looked pleased; yet a tear
stole down on her glowing cheek. 
Yes, madam, I am encouraged to hope you will
be mine. —You are to have your confessor, madam. 
Father Marescotti will do me the honour of attending
you in that function. His piety, his zeal, my own
charity for all those who differ from me in opinion,
my honour so solemnly engaged to the family who
condescend to entrust me with their dearest pledge,
will be your security. 
Ah, Sir! interrupted she, And are not you then to
be a Catholic? 
You consented, madam, when I was last in Italy,
that I should pursue the dictates of my conscience. 
Did I? said she, and sighed! —Well, Sir— 
Your father or mother, madam, will acquaint you
with every other particular in which you shall want to
be satisfied. 
Tears stood in her eyes; she seemed in great perplexity. 
She would twice or thrice have spoken; but
speech was denied her: At last, she gave me her hand,
and directed her steps, trembling, to her closet. She
entered it. Leave me, leave me, said she; and putting
a paper in my hand, and shutting to the door,
instantly, as I saw, fell on her knees; and I, to avoid
hearing sobs which pierced my heart, went into the
next apartment, where were her mother and Camilla,
who had heard part of what had passed between us. 
The Marchioness went to her; but presently returning,
The dear creature, said she, is quite sensible,
thank God, tho' in grief. She besought me to leave
her to her own struggles. If she could but be assured
that you, Chevalier, would forgive her, she should be
better. She had given you a paper. Let him read it,
said she; and let me stay here till he sends for me, if
he can bear in his sight, after he has read it, a creature
unworthy of his goodness. —What, said the Marchioness,
can be the meaning of all this? 

I was as much surprised as she. I had not opened
the paper, and offered to read it in her presence; but
she desired to hear it read in her Lord's, if it were
proper; and precipitately withdrew, leaving me in the
young Lady's dressing-room, Camilla attending in the
next apartment, to wait her commands. I was astonished
at the contents. These are they (a) : 

O Thou whom my heart best loveth, forgive me! — 
Forgive me, said I, for what? —For acting, if I
am enabled to act, greatly? The example is from
thee, who, in my eyes, art the greatest of human
creatures. My duty calls upon me one way: My
heart resists my duty, and tempts me not to perform
it: Do thou, O God, support me in the arduous
struggle! Let it not, as once before, overthrow my
reason; my but just-returning reason! —O God! do
thou support me, and strengthen my reason. My
effort is great! It is worthy of the creature, which
thou, Clementina, didst always aspire to be. 
My Tutor, my Brother, my Friend! O most beloved
and best of men! seek me not in marriage! I
am unworthy of Thee. Thy Soul was ever most
dear to Clementina: Whenever I meditated the gracefulness
of thy person, I restrained my eye, I checked
my fancy: And how? Why, by meditating the superior
graces of thy mind. And is not that Soul,
thought I, to be saved? Dear obstinate, and perverse! 
And shall I bind my Soul to a Soul allied to perdition? 
That so dearly loves that Soul, as hardly to wish to
be separated from it in its future lot. —O thou most
amiable of men! How can I be sure, that, were I
thine, thou wouldst not draw me after thee, by Love,
by sweetness of Manners, by condescending Goodness? 
I, who once thought a Heretic the worst of beings,
have been already led, by the amiableness of thy
piety, by the universality of thy charity to all thy 

fellow-creatures, to think more favourably of all Heretics,
for thy sake? Of what force would be the admonitions
of the most pious Confessor, were thy condescending
goodness, and sweet persuasion, to be exerted
to melt a heart wholly thine! I know that I
should not forbear arguing with thee, in hopes to convince
thee: Yet, sensible of thy superior powers, and
of my duty, might I not be entangled? My Confessor
would, in that case, grow uneasy with me. Women
love not to be suspected. Opposition arises from suspicion
and contradiction; thy Love, thy Gentleness,
thrown in the other scale, should I not be lost? 
And what have my Father, my Mother, my Brothers
done, that I should shew myself willing to leave
them, and a beloved Country, for a Country but lately
hated too, as well as the Religion? But now, that
that hatred is gone off, and so soon, gives another instance
of my weakness, and thy strength, O most
amiable of men! —O thou, whom my Soul loveth,
seek not to entangle me by thy Love! Were I to be
thine, my duty to thee would mislead me from that I
owe to my God, and make me more than temporarily
unhappy: Since wert thou to convince me at the
time, my doubts would return; and whenever thou
wert absent, I should be doubly miserable. For canst
Thou, can I, be indifferent in these high matters? 
Hast thou not shewn me, that thou canst not? And
shall I not be benefited by thy example? Shall a
wrong Religion have a force, an efficacy, upon thee,
which a right one cannot have upon me? —O thou
most amiable of men! seek not to entangle me by
thy Love! 
But dost thou indeed love me? Or is it owing to
thy generosity, thy compassion, thy nobleness, for a
creature, who, aiming to be great like thee, could not
sustain the effort? I call upon thee, blessed Virgin, to
witness, how I formerly struggled with myself! How
much I endeavoured to subdue that affection which I 

ever must bear to him! —Permit me, most generous
of men, to subdue it! It is in thy power to hold me
fast, or to set me free. I know thou lovest Clementina:
It is her pride to think that thou dost. But she
is not worthy of thee. Yet let thy heart own, that
thou lovest her Soul, her immortal Soul, and her future
peace. In that wilt thou shew thy Love, as she
has endeavoured to shew hers. Thou art all magnanimity:
Thou canst sustain the effort which she was
unequal to. Make some other woman happy! —But
I cannot bear that it shall be an Italian. If it must
be an Italian, not Florence, but Bologna, shall give
an Italian to thee! 
But can I shew thee this paper, which has cost me
so many tears, so much study, so much blotting-out,
and revising and transcribing, and which yet I drew
up with an intent to shew thee? I verily think I cannot:
Nor will I, till I can see, by conversing with
thee face to face, what I shall be enabled to do, in
answer to prayers to Heaven, that it would enable
me! —O how faint, at times, have been those prayers! 
You, my Father, my Mother, my Brothers, and
you my spiritual Father, pious and good man! have
helped to subdue me, by your generous goodness. 
You have all yielded up your own judgments to mine. 
You have told me, that if the choice of my heart can
make me happy, happy I shall be. But do I not
know, that you have complied with me, for my sake
only? —Shall I not, if it please God to restore my
memory, be continually recollecting the arguments
which you, Father Marescotti, in particular, formerly
urged against an alliance with this noblest of men,
because he was of a religion so contrary to my own,
and so pertinacious in it? And will those recollections
make me happy? O permit, permit me, my dearest
friends, still to be God's child, the spouse of my Redeemer
only! Let me, let me yet take the veil!— 

And let me, in a place consecrated to his glory, pass
the remainder of my life (It may not be a long one)
in prayers for you all, and in prayers for the conversion
and happiness of the man, whose soul my soul
loveth, and ever must love. What is the portion of
this world, which my grandfathers have bequeathed
to me, weighed against this motive, and my soul's everlasting
welfare? Let me take a great revenge of my
cruel cousin Laurana. Let hers be the estate so truly despised,
and so voluntarily forfeited, by the happier Clementina! 
—Are we not all of us rich and noble? 
Shall I not have a great revenge, if I can be enabled
to take it in this way? 
O thou whom my soul loveth, let me try the greatness
of thy love, and the greatness of thy soul, by
thy endeavours to strengthen, and not impair, a resolution,
which, after all, it will be in thy power to
make me break or keep: For God only knoweth
what this struggle from the first hath cost me; and
what it will still further cost me! But, my brain
wounded, my health impaired, can I expect a long
life? And shall I not endeavour to make the close of
it happy? Let me be great, my Chevalier! how
fondly can I nevertheless call thee my Chevalier! 
Thou canst make the unhappy Clementina what thou
pleasest. 
But, O my friends, what can we do for this great
and good man, in return for the obligations he hath
heaped upon us all? In return for his goodness to two
of your children? These obligations lie heavy upon
my heart. Yet who knows not his magnanimity? 
Who, that knows him, knows not that he can enjoy
the reward in the action? Divine, almost divine, Philanthropist,
canst thou forgive me? —But I know thou
canst. Thou hast the same notions that I have of the
brevity and vanity of this world's glory, and of the
duration of that to come! And can I have the presumption
to imagine, that the giving thee in marriage 

so wounded a frame, would be making thee happy? 
Once more, if I have the courage, the resolution, to
shew thee this paper, do thou enable me, by thy
great example, to complete the conquest of myself; 
and do not put me upon taking advantage of my honoured
friends generosity: But do God and thou enable
me to say, Not my will, but his and theirs, be
done! —Yet, after all, it must be, let me own, in thy
choice (for I cannot bear to be thought ungrateful to
such exalted merit) to add what name thou pleasest,
to that of 
Clementina&wblank; 

Never was man more astonished, perplexed, confounded. 
For a few moments, I forgot that the angel
was in her closet, expecting the issue of my contemplations; 
and walking out of her dressing-room,
I threw myself on a soffa, in the next room, not
heeding Camilla, who sat in the window. My mind
tortured; how greatly tortured! Yet filled with admiration
of the angelic qualities of Clementina, I
tried to look again into the paper; but the contents
were all in my mind, and filled it. 
She rang. Camilla hastened to her. I started as
she passed me. I arose; yet trembled: And for a
moment sat down to re-assure my feet. But Camilla,
coming to me, roused me out of the stupidity that
had seized me. Never was I so little present to myself,
as on this occasion—A woman so superior to all
her own Sex, and to all that I had read of, of ours. 
—O Sir, said Camilla, my Lady dreads your anger. 
She dreads to see you: Yet hopes it—Hasten, hasten,
and save her from fainting—O how she loves you! 
How she fears your displeasure! —Hers indeed is true
Love! 
She said this as she conducted me in, as I now recollect; 
for then all my faculties were too much engaged,
to attend to her. 

I hastened in. The admirable Lady met me halfway; 
and throwing herself at my feet—Forgive me,
forgive the creature, who must be miserable, if you
are offended with her. 
I would have raised her; but she would not be
raised, she said, till I had forgiven her. 
I kneeled to her, as she kneeled; and clasping her
in my arms, Forgive you, madam! Inimitable woman! 
More than woman! —Can you forgive me for
having presumed, and for still presuming, to hope
such an angel mine! 
She was ready to faint; and cast her arms about
me to support herself. Camilla held to her her salts:
—I myself, for the first time, was sensible of benefit
from them, as my cheek was joined to hers, and
bathed with her tears. 
Am I, am I, forgiven—Say that I am!— 
Forgiven! madam! You have done nothing that
requires forgiveness. I adore your greatness of mind! 
—What you wish, bid me be, and that I will be. 
Rise, most excellent of human creatures! 
I raised her; and leading her to a chair, involuntarily
kneeled on one knee to her, holding both her
hands in mine as she sat; and looking up to her with
eyes that spoke not my heart, if they were not full of
love and reverence. 
Camilla had run down to the Marchioness—O
madam! it seems she said—Such a scene! Hasten,
hasten up. They will faint in each other's arms. Virtuous
Love! how great is thy glory! 
The Marquis, his Lady, the Bishop, the Count, and
Father Marescotti, were together, waiting the event of
my visit. They were surprised at Camilla's address— 
But little imagined to what the intellectual scene she
spoke of, was owing. 
The Marchioness hastened after Camilla, and found
me in this kneeling posture, her daughter's hands both
in mine—Dear Chevalier, said she, restrain your grateful 

rapture! For the sake of the sweet child's head,
grateful as I see by her eyes it must be to her—restrain
it. 
O madam, quitting Clementina's hands, and rising,
and taking one of hers—Glory in your daughter? 
You always loved and admired her; but you will
now glory in her. She is an angel—Give me leave,
madam (to Clementina) to present this paper to the
Marchioness. I gave it to her—Read it, madam— 
Let your Lord, let the Bishop, let Father Marescotti,
read it—But read it with compassion for me; and then
direct me what to say, what to do! I resign myself
wholly to your direction, and theirs; and to yours,
my dear Lady Clementina. 
You say, you forgive me, Chevalier:—Now shall
I forgive myself. God's goodness and yours will, I
hope, perfectly restore me. This is my direction,
Chevalier—Love my Mind, as yours ever was the
principal object of my love! 
What, what, my dear, can be in this paper? said
the Marchioness, holding it in her hand, trembling,
and afraid to open it. Pardon me, madam, answered
Clementina—I could not shew it to you first. I could
not reveal my purpose to Camilla neither. How could
I, when I knew not whether I could or could not
maintain it, or even mention it? —But now, best of
men, and, rising, laid her hand on my arm, leave me
for a few moments. My heart is disturbed. Be so
good as to excuse me, madam. 
She again retired to her closet. We heard her
sob: And Camilla hastening to her—O these hysterical
disorders! said she—They tear her tender constitution
in pieces. 
The Marchioness left her to Camilla; and offered
me her hand. Surprising! said she, as we went. 
Where will all this end? What can be in this paper? 
I was unable to answer. And coming to the passage
that led to her drawing-room, where she had left 

the gentlemen, I bowed on her hand; and, the same
passage leading to the back-stairs, took that way into
the garden, in order to try to recover and compose my
spirits—Who, my dear friend, could have expected
such a turn as this? 
I had not walked long, before Mr. Lowther came
to me—Signor Jeronymo, Sir, said he, is greatly disturbed,
on reading a paper that has been put into
his hands. He begs to see you instantly. 
Mr. Lowther left me at Jeronymo's chamber-door. 
He was on his couch. O my Grandison, said he, as
I approached him with a thoughtful air, how much
am I concerned for you! I cannot bear, that such a
spirit as yours should be subjected to the petulance of
a brain-sick girl! 
Hush, my Jeronymo! Let not the friend forget
the brother. Clementina is the noblest of women. 
It is true, I was not prepared for this blow. But I
reverence her for her greatness of mind—You have
read her paper? 
I have; and am astonished at its contents. 
The Marquis, the Count, the Bishop, and Father
Marescotti, entered. The Bishop embraced me. He
disclaimed, in the name of every one, the knowlege
of her intentions: He expected, he said, that she
would have received my address with raptures of
joy. But she must, she will, be yours, Chevalier. 
We are all engaged in honour to you. This is only
a start of female delicacy, operating on a raised imagination. 
She leaves it to you, after all, to call her
by what name you please. 
May it be so! But ah, my Lords! you see not the
force of her arguments. With a Lady so zealous in
her religion, and so justly fond of her relations and
country, they must have weight—Instruct me, tell
me, however, my Lords: Be pleased, madam [The
Marchioness joined us just before] to advise me, what 

to do? —I am yours. —I will withdraw. Consult together; 
and let me know what I am to be. 
I withdrew, and walked again into the garden. 
Camilla came to me. O Chevalier! What strange
things are these? My Lady has taken a resolution she
never will be able to support. She commanded me to
find you out, and to watch your looks, your behaviour,
your temper. She cannot live, she says, if you
are displeased with her—I see that your mind is greatly
disturbed. Must I report it so? 
Tell her, Camilla, that I am all resignation to her
will: Disturbed as she has been, tell her, that her
peace of mind is dear to me as my own life: That I
can have no anger, no resentment; and that I admire
her more than I can express. 
Camilla left me. Father Marescotti came to me
presently after, with a request, that I would attend
the family in Jeronymo's chamber. 
We went up together. All that the good Father
said, as we walked in, was, that God knew what was
best for us: For his part, he could only wonder and
adore in silence. 
When we were all seated, the Bishop said, My
dear Chevalier, you have intitled yourself to our utmost
gratitude. It is confirmed, that Clementina shall
be yours. Jeronymo will have it so: We are all of
his mind. Her mother will enter into conversation
with her in your favour. 
I am equally obliged and honoured by this goodness. 
But should she persist, what can I say, when
she calls upon me in the most solemn manner, to
support her in her resolution; and not to put her
upon taking advantage of the generosity of her
friends? 
She will be easily persuaded, no doubt, Chevalier,
answered the Bishop. She loves you. Does she not
say in this very paper, “that it is in your power to 

make her break or keep her resolution? and to
add what name you please to her Christian name?” 
Nor can I, said the Marquis, bear that flight, in
Laurana's favour. If her mind were sound, her duty
would not permit her to think of it. 
It is our unanimous opinion, resumed the Bishop,
that she will not be able to support her resolution. 
You see she is obliged to court your assistance, to enable
her to keep it. Father Marescotti, it is true,
has laid a stress upon some passages, in which she
shews a doubt of her own strength, and dreads yours
in a certain article nearest our hearts: But she must
be cautioned to leave all arguments of that kind to
her confessor and you; and to content herself to be
an auditor, not an arguer; and we doubt not your
honour. The marriage-articles will bind you, as they
shall us—And now allow me to be before-hand with
your Jeronymo, and ours, in saluting you our Brother. 
He took my hand; and, embracing me as such,
You deal nobly with me, my Lord, said I. I resign
myself to your direction. 
Jeronymo affectionately held out his arms, and joyfully
saluted me as his Brother. The Marquis, the
Count, each took my hand: And, the Marchioness
offering hers, I pressed it with my lips; and, withdrawing,
hastened to my lodgings; with a heart, O
Dr. Bartlett, how penetrated by a suspense so strange
and unexpected! 
But when they attribute to flight, and unsoundness
of mind, that glorious passage, in which she proposes
to take a revenge so noble on the cruel Laurana, they
seem unable to comprehend, as I can easily do, the
greatness of mind of this admirable woman. 

