



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Sunday. 
Have been at Church, Jack—Behaved admirably
well too! My Charmer is pleased with me now: 
For I was exceedingly attentive to the discourse, and
very ready in the auditor's part of the Service. —Eyes
did not much wander. How could they, when the
loveliest object, infinitely the loveliest, in the whole
Church, was in my view? 
Dear creature! how fervent, how amiable, in her 

devotions! I have got her to own, that she prayed for
me. I hope a prayer from so excellent a mind will not
be made in vain. 
There is, after all, something beautifully solemn in
devotion. The Sabbath is a charming institution to
keep the heart right, when it is right. One day in seven,
how reasonable! —I think I'll go to Church once a day
often. I fansy it will go a great way towards making
me a reformed man. To see multitudes of well-appearing
people, all joining in one reverent act: An exercise
how worthy of a rational being! —Yet it adds a
sting or two to my former stings, when I think of my
projects with regard to this charming creature. In my
conscience, I believe, if I were to go constantly to
Church, I could not pursue them. 
I had a scheme come into my head while there: But
I will renounce it, because it obtruded itself upon me in
so good a place. Excellent creature! How many ruins
has she prevented by attaching me to herself; by engrossing
my whole attention! 
But let me tell thee what passed between us in my
first visit of this morning; and then I will acquaint
thee more largely with my good behaviour at Church. 
I could not be admitted till after eight. I found her
ready prepared to go out. I pretended to be ignorant
of her intention, having charged Dorcas not to own
that she had told me of it. 
Going abroad, Madam?—with an air of indifference. 
Yes, Sir; I intend to go to Church. 
I hope, Madam, I shall have the honour to attend
you. 
No: She designed to take a chair, and go to the
next Church. 
This startled me: A chair to carry her to the next
Church from Mrs. Sinclair's, her right name not Sinclair,
and to bring her back hither, in the face of people
who might not think well of the house! —There 

was no permitting That. Yet I was to appear indifferent. 
But said, I should take it for a favour, if she
would permit me to attend her in a coach, as there was
time for it, to St. Paul's. 
She made objections to the gaiety of my dress; and
told me, that, if she went to St. Paul's, she could go
in a coach without me. 
I objected Singleton and her Brother, and offered to
dress in the plainest suit I had. 
I beg the favour of attending you, dear Madam, said
I. I have not been at Church a great while: We shall
sit in different Stalls: And the next time I go, I hope
it will be to give myself a title to the greatest blessing
I can receive. 
She made some further objections: But at last permitted
me the honour of attending her. 
I got myself placed in her eye, that the time might
not seem tedious to me; for we were there early. And
I gained her good opinion, as I mentioned above, by
my behaviour. 
The subject of the discourse was particular enough: 
It was about a prophet's story or parable of an Ewe-lamb
taken by a rich man from a poor one, who dearly loved
it, and whose only comfort it was: Designed to strike
remorse into David, on his adultery with Uriah's wife
Bathsheba, and his murder of the husband. These
women, Jack, have been the occasion of all manner of
mischief from the beginning! Now, when David, full
of indignation, swore [King David would swear, Jack: 
But how shouldst thou know who King David was? 
The story is in the Bible] that the rich man should surely
die; Nathan, which was the prophet's name, and a
good ingenious fellow, cried out (which were the words
of the text) Thou art the man! —By my soul I thought
the parson looked directly at me: And at that moment
I cast my eye full on my Ewe-lamb. But I must tell thee
too, that I thought a good deal of my Rosebud. —A 

better man than King David, in that point, however,
thought I! 
When we came home, we talked upon the subject; 
and I shewed my Charmer my attention to the discourse,
by letting her know where the doctor made the most
of his subject, and where it might have been touched to
greater advantage: For it is really a very affecting story,
and has as pretty a contrivance in it as ever I read. 
And this I did in such a grave way, that she seemed
more and more pleased with me; and I have no doubt,
that I shall get her to favour me to-morrow night with
her company at my collation. 
Sunday Evening. 
We all dined together in Mrs. Sinclair's parlour. 
All excessively right! The two Nieces have topp'd their
parts; Mrs. Sinclair hers. Never so easy as now! — 
‘She really thought a little oddly of these people at first,
she said: Mrs. Sinclair seemed very forbidding! Her
Nieces were persons with whom she could not wish
to be acquainted. But really we should not be too
hasty in our censures. Some people improve upon us. 
The widow seems tolerable.’ She went no farther
than tolerable. ‘Miss Martin and Miss Horton are
young people of good sense, and have read a great
deal. What Miss Martin particularly said of marriage,
and of her humble servant, was very solid. She believes,
with such notions, she cannot make a bad
wife.’ —I have said, Sally's humble servant is a woolen-draper
of great reputation; and she is soon to be married. 
I have been letting her into thy character, and into
the characters of my other three Esquires, in hopes to
excite her curiosity to see you to-morrow night. I have
told her some of the worst, as well as best parts of your
characters, in order to exalt myself, and to obviate any
sudden surprizes, as well as to teach her, what sort of
men she may expect to see, if she will oblige me with
her company. 
By her after-observations upon each of you, I shall 

judge what I may or may not do to obtain or keep her
good opinion; what she will like, what not; and so
pursue the one, or avoid the other, as I see proper. — 
So, while she is penetrating into your shallow heads, I
shall enter her heart, and know what to bid my own
to hope for. 
The house is to be taken in three weeks: All will be
over in three weeks, or bad will be my luck! —Who
knows but in three days? —Have I not carried that great
point of making her pass for my Wife to the people below? 
And that other great one, of fixing myself here
night and day? —What woman ever escaped me, who
lodged under one roof with me? —The house too, THE
house; the people, people after my own heart: Her servants,
Will and Dorcas, both my servants. —Three days
did I say! Pho! pho! pho! —Three hours! 
* *
&dotup;I have carried my third point; but so extremely
to the dislike of my Charmer, that I have been threatened,
for suffering Miss Partington to be introduced
to her without her leave. Which laid her under a
necessity to deny or comply with the urgent request of
so fine a young Lady; who had engaged to honour
me at my Collation, on condition that my Beloved
would be present at it. 
&dotup;To be obliged to appear before my friends as what
she was not! She was for insisting, that I should acquaint
the women here with the truth of the matter; 
and not go on propagating stories for her to countenance; 
making her a sharer in my guilt. 
&dotup;But what points will not perseverance carry? especially
when it is cover'd over with the face of yielding
now, and Parthian-like returning to the charge anon. 
Do not the Sex carry all their points with their men
by the same methods? Have I conversed with them
so freely as I have done, and learnt nothing of them? 
Didst thou ever know that a woman's denial of any
favour, whether the least or the greatest, that my 

heart was set upon, stood her in any stead? The more
perverse she, the more steady I; that is my rule. 
&dotup;But the point thus so much against her will carried,
I doubt thou wilt see in her more of a sullen
than of an obliging Charmer. For when Miss Partington
was withdrawn, “What was Miss Partington
to her? In her situation she wanted no new
acquaintance. And what were my four friends to
her in her present circumstances? She would assure
me, if ever again” —And there she stopt, with a
twirl of her hand. 
&dotup;When we meet, I will, in her presence, tipping
thee a wink, shew thee the motion; for it was a very
pretty one. Quite new. Yet have I seen an hundred
pretty passionate twirls too, in my time, from
other Fair-ones. How universally engaging it is to
put a woman of sense, to whom a man is not married,
in a passion, let the reception given to every ranting
scene in our plays testify. Take care, my Charmer,
now thou art come to delight me with thy angry
twirls, that thou tempest me not to provoke a variety
of them from one, whose every motion, whose
every air, carries in it so much sense and soul. 
&dotup;But, angry or pleased, this charming Creature must
be all loveliness. Her features are all harmony, and
made for one another. No other feature could be
substituted in the place of any one of hers, but must
abate of her perfection: And think you that I do not
long to have your opinion of my fair Prize?&dotup; 
If you love to see features that glow, tho' the heart
is frozen, and never yet was thawed; if you love fine
sense, and adages flowing through teeth of ivory, and
lips of coral; an eye that penetrates all things; a voice
that is harmony itself; an air of grandeur, mingled with
a sweetness that cannot be described; a politeness that,
if ever equalled, was never excelled —You'll see all these
excellencies, and ten times more, in this my Gloriana. 


 Mark her majestic fabric!—She's a temple
 Sacred by birth, and built by hands divine;
 Her Soul the deity that lodges there:
 Nor is the pile unworthy of the god.
Or, to describe her in a softer style with Rowe, 

The bloom of op'ning flow'rs, unsully'd beauty,
Softness, and sweetest innocence, she wears,
And looks like nature in the world's first spring.
Adieu, varlets four! —At Six on Monday evening'
I expect ye all. 