

Dear Sir,
I have had inexpressible Pleasure in the Perusal
of your Pamela. It intirely answers the
Character you give of it in your Preface; nor
have you said one Word too much in Commendation
of a Piece that has Advantages and Excellencies
peculiar to itself. For, besides the beautiful
Simplicity of the Style, and a happy Propriety
and Clearness of Expression (the Letters being written
under the immediate Impression of every Circumstance
which occasioned them, and that to those
who had a Right to know the fair Writer's most
secret Thoughts) the several Passions of the Mind
must, of course, be more affectingly described, and
Nature may be traced in her undisguised Inclinations
with much more Propriety and Exactness,
than can possibly be found in a Detail of Actions
long past, which are never recollected with the
same Affections, Hopes, and Dreads, with which
they were felt when they occurred. 
This little Book will infallibly be looked upon as
the hitherto much-wanted Standard or Pattern for
this Kind of Writing. For it abounds with lively
Images and Pictures; with Incidents natural, surprising,
and perfectly adapted to the Story; with
Circumstances interesting to Persons in common 

Life, as well as to those in exalted Stations. The
greatest Regard is every where paid in it to Decency,
and to every Duty of Life: There is a constant Fitness
of the Style to the Persons and Characters described; 
Pleasure and Instruction here always go
hand in hand: Vice and Virtue are set in constant
Opposition, and Religion every-where inculcated in
its native Beauty and chearful Amiableness; not
dressed up in stiff, melancholy, or gloomy Forms,
on one hand, nor yet, on the other, debased below
its due Dignity and noble Requisites, in Compliment
to a too fashionable but depraved Taste. And this
I will boldly say, that if its numerous Beauties are
added to its excellent Tendency, it will be found
worthy a Place, not only in all Families (especially
such as have in them young Persons of either Sex)
but in the Collections of the most curious and polite
Readers. For, as it borrows none of its Excellencies
from the romantic Flights of unnatural Fancy, its
being founded in Truth and Nature, and built upon
Experience, will be a lasting Recommendation to
the Discerning and Judicious; while the agreeable
Variety of Occurrences and Characters, in which it
abounds, will not fail to engage the Attention of the
gay and more sprightly Readers. 
The moral Reflections and Uses to be drawn from
the several Parts of this admirable History, are so
happily deduced from a Croud of different Events
and Characters, in the Conclusion of the Work, that I
shall say the less on that Head. But I think, the Hints
you have given me, should also prefatorily be given
to the Publick; viz. That it will appear from several
Things mentioned in the Letters, that the Story must
have happened within these Thirty Years past: That
you have been obliged to vary some of the Names
of Persons, Places, &c. and to disguise a few of
the Circumstances, in order to avoid giving Offence 

to some Persons, who would not chuse to be pointed
out too plainly in it; tho' they would be glad it
may do the Good so laudably intended by the Publication. 
And as you have in Confidence submitted
to my Opinion some of those Variations, I am much
pleased that you have so managed the Matter, as to
make no Alteration in the Facts; and, at the same
time, have avoided the digressive Prolixity too frequently
used on such Occasions. 
Little Book, charming Pamela! face the World,
and never doubt of finding Friends and Admirers,
not only in thine own Country, but far from Home; 
where thou mayst give an Example of Purity to the
Writers of a neighbouring Nation; which now shall
have an Opportunity to receive English Bullion in
Exchange for its own Dross, which has so long
passed current among us in Pieces abounding with
all the Levities of its volatile Inhabitants. The
reigning Depravity of the Times has yet left Virtue
many Votaries. Of their Protection you need not
despair. May every head-strong Libertine whose
Hands you reach, be reclaimed; and every tempted
Virgin who reads you, imitate the Virtue, and meet
the Reward of the high-meriting, tho' low-descended,
Pamela. I am, Sir, 
Your most Obedient,
and Faithful Servant, 
J. B. D. F.
