



My dear Father and Mother,
I write to you both, at this time, for
your Advice in a particular Dispute, which
is the only one I have had, or I hope ever shall
have, with my dear Benefactor; and as he is
pleased to insist upon his Way, and it is a Point 

of Conscience with me, I must resolve to be
determined by your joint Advice; for, if my
Father and Mother, and Husband, are of one
Opinion, I must, I think, yield up my own. 
This is the Subject:—I think a Mother
ought, if she can, to be the Nurse to her own
Children. 
Mr. B. says, He will not permit it. 
It is the first will not I have heard from him,
or given Occasion for: And I tell him, That as
it is a Point of Conscience with me, I hope he
will indulge me: But the dear Gentleman has
an odd way of arguing, that sometimes puzzles
me. He pretends to answer me from Scripture; 
but I have some Doubts of his Exposition; and
he gives me Leave to write to you, tho' yet he
won't promise to be determined by your Opinions,
if they are not the same with his own. 
And I say to him, Is this fair, my dearest Mr. B.? 
Is it? 
He has got the Dean's Opinion with him; 
for our Debate began before we came to Town:
But then he would not let me state the Case; 
but did it himself; and yet it is but an half
Opinion, as I may say, neither. For it is, That
if the Husband is set upon it, it is a Wife's Duty
to obey. 
But I can't see how that is; for if it be the
natural Duty of a Mother, it is a Divine Duty; 
and how can a Husband have Power to discharge
a Divine Duty? —As great as a Wife's Obligation
is to obey her Husband, which is, I own,
one Indispensable of the Marriage Contract, it 

ought not to interfere with what one takes to be
a superior Duty: And must not one be one's
own Judge of Actions, by which we must stand
or fall? 
I'll tell you my Plea: 
I say, That where Mothers are unhealthy; 
subject to communicative Distempers, as scrophulous,
or scorbutick, or consumptive Disorders,
which have infected the Blood or Lungs; or
where they have not Plenty of Nourishment for
the Child, as, I have heard, is the Case of some; 
that, in these Cases, a Dispensation lies of course. 
But where there is good Health, free Spirits,
and plentiful Nourishment, I think it an indispensable
Duty. 
For this was the Custom of old, of all the
good Wives we read of in Scripture. 
Then the Nourishment of the Mother must
be most natural to the Child. 
Then a Nurse may have a bad Husband,
may have Distempers, may have private Vices,
as to Liquors, &c. may be careless, and a Self-lover; 
while a Mother prefers the Health of her
Child to her own private Satisfactions, or Appetites. 
A Nurse may be of a sordid Nature; and
when I have heard Mr. B. so satirical on Lords
and Gentlemen in Coach-boxes, why may not
Charity make one think, that the Lady of the
Family was innocent of sordid and unpardonable
Crimes, imputed by severe Judges; and that the
Child, when grown up, owes its Taste to the
Coach-box, to its Nurse's being the Coachman's 

Wife, or the Wife of one of like Degree, who
may not have a Mind or Qualities above that
Degree? For, as the Blood and Spirits are augmented,
with the Child's Growth, by the Food
it takes in, a sordid Nature may as well be communicated
from a sound Woman, as bad Health
by an unsound, as I should imagine. 
Then the Child, by the Designation of
Nature, generally brings its Nourishment into
the World with it: And Art must be used, as I
presume, to dry up the Fountains of such its
Nourishment: And is not this quite unnatural? 
And is not what is unnatural, sinful? 
Then I have lately read, my Circumstances
having made me curious on this Subject, That
a new-born Child has, in its little Bowels, a
pitchy Substance, that wants to be purged off; 
and when it is not, occasions those Gripings and
Convulsions which destroy so many miserable
Infants, even (as one finds by the Weekly Bills
here in Town) more than half of those who
die in Infancy: Whereas Nature has design'd, it
seems, a Cure for this, in the purgative Quality,
and fine thin Blueness given to the first Milk,
which in Three Weeks, or a Month, or may-be
less, carries off that pitchy Substance, and gives
Freedom and Ease to the Bowels of Babies; 
which Quality not being in staler Milk, the
poor Child often falls a Sacrifice to this Negligence
or Inattention; and the Mother's Pains
and Hazards are all cast away; and her Griefs,
at losing the dear Infant, are much greater than
her Joys at its Birth, when all the Danger was
over. 

Then, dear Sir, said I, there is another
Point; respecting the Health of our Sex: Great
Hurts to one's Constitution may arise from too
frequently being in this Way; and, for my own
Part, you have made me so happy, that I cannot
help being covetous of Life, if I may so say.— 
But the Sin, dear Sir, the Sin of committing
that Task to others, which is so right to be
performed by one's self, if one has Health and
Strength to perform it, is the chief thing with
me; and, you know, Sir, that even a Husband's
Will is not sufficient to excuse one from a
natural or divine Obligation. 
These were my Pleas, among others: And
this is his Answer; for he was so good as to
give it me in Writing: 
‘As to what you allege, my Dear, of old
Customs; Times and Fashions are much
changed. If you tell me of Sarah's, or Rachel's,
or Rebekah's, or Leah's, nursing their
own Children, I can answer, That the one
drew Water at a Well, for her Father's Flocks; 
another kneaded Cakes, and baked them on
the Hearth, for her Guests; another personally
dress'd savoury Meat, for her Husband; 
and all of them performed the common Offices
of the Houshold: And when our modern
Ladies are willing to follow such Examples in
every thing, their Plea ought to be allow'd in
this. 
‘As to the Matter of sordid Natures; We
read, that there were among Jacob's Twelve 

Sons, bad as well as good Natures, although
born of, and nursed by, the same Mothers. 
Reuben particularly committed an unpardonable
Crime: You are too well read in Scripture-History,
to need being told what it was. Two
others were Murderers, treacherous Murderers,
in cold Blood; and how did all their
Hearts burn with sordid and unbrotherly
Envy against their Father's favourite Son! 
‘Then it requires but the more Care in
finding out a wholsome Woman, who has an
honest and good-natur'd Husband: And, let
me tell you, Pamela, that the best Natures,
and the best Constitutions, (tho' your Case is
an Exception) are not always to be met with
in High Life; and the less, perhaps, because
they don't exercise themselves, as the patriarchal
Nurses you hinted at, used to do. Indeed
I have seen Spirits, in some of the Highborn
of your Sex, that one would not wish
to be propagated; but, contrarily, (if there
be so much in the Nature of the Nourishment)
I should think it matter of Prudence,
that the Child should have any other Nurse
than its Mother. 
‘As to the Nurse's private Vices, with
regard to Liquors, Distempers, &c. this will
be answered, by what I have hinted, of the
greater Care to be taken in the Choice of the
Nurse. And I am so well pleased with your
Apprehensions of this Nature, that it is a
moral Security to me, that you will make a
proper Choice; and I shall be intirely easy, 

in committing this Province to so prudent and
discreet a Wife. 
‘I allow, that there is a great deal in
what you say, as to the pitchy Substance in
new-born Children; and I think it very proper,
that the Child should have the first Milk:
But cannot such a Nurse be found, as may
answer this Intention? —If she cannot, I
will, provided you deal by me with your
usual Sincerity, and not make Scruples against
a Recommendation, on purpose to carry your
own Point, permit you to be your own Nurse
for one Month, or so, if, by the Opinion of
proper Judges, it be found necessary. But
then, as I know the pretty wire-drawing ways
of your Sex, you must not so much as ask to
go farther; for I shall not care to have my
Rest disturbed; and it may not be quite so
well, perhaps, to lay us under the Necessity
of separate Beds. 
‘Besides, my Fondness for your personal
Graces, and the laudable, and, I will say,
honest Pleasure, I take in that easy, genteel
Form, which every body admires in you, at
first Sight, oblige me to declare, that I can by
no means consent to sacrifice these to the Carelessness
into which I have seen very nice Ladies
sink, when they became Nurses. Moreover,
my chief Delight in you is for the Beauties of
your Mind; and, unequall'd as they are, in
my Opinion, you have still a Genius capable
of great Improvement; and I shan't care,
when I want to hear my Pamela read her 

French and Latin Lessons, which I take so
much Delight to teach her, (and to endeavour
to improve myself from her Virtue and Piety,
at the same time) to seek my Beloved in the
Nursery; or to permit her to be ingross'd by
those Baby Offices, which will better befit
weaker Minds. 
‘No, my Dear, you must allow me to look
upon you as my Scholar, in one Sense; as
my Companion in another; and as my Instructress,
in a third. You know I am not
govern'd by the worst Motives: I am half
overcome by your Virtue; and you must take
care, that you leave not your Work half done. 
But I cannot help looking upon the Nurse's
Office, as an Office beneath my Pamela. Let
it have your Inspection, your Direction, and
your sole Attention, if you please, when I am
abroad: But when I am at home, even a Son
and Heir, so jealous am I of your Affections,
shall not be my Rival in them: Nor will I
have my Rest broken in upon, by your Servants
bringing to you, as you once propos'd,
your dear Little-one, at Times, perhaps, as
unsuitable to my Repose, and your own, as
to the Child's Necessities; for I have no Notion
of stifling even a Cry, by cramming its little
Stomach, when that very Cry shall, perhaps,
be necessary for Exercise to its Lungs, and to
open its little Organs. 
‘You have been often somewhat uneasy,
when I have talk'd, for Argument's sake, in
favour of Polygamy. But when you mention 

the Designations of Nature, and form from
thence your Notions of Duty on this Subject,
what will you say, if I could, from your very
Arguments of this kind, plead for that Practice,
and bring all your good patriarchal Folks
on my Side, on whom you lay such Stress, in
one Instance? —For Example, my Dear:
Suppose I put you in mind, that while Rachel
was giving her Little-one all her Attention,
as a good Nurse, the worthy Patriarch had
several other Wives. —Don't be shock'd, my
dearest Love. —The Laws of one's own
Country are a sufficient Objection to me against
Polygamy; at least, I will not think of any
more Wives, till you convince me, by your
Adherence to the Example given you by the
Patriarch Wives, that I ought to follow those
of the Patriarch Husbands.’ 
So here is that nasty Word Polygamy again! 
Mr. B. knows, I had rather he should mention
any thing than that. —But be so good as to
mind his next Argument: He is pleased to entertain
very high Notions (tho' he puts them not
in Practice; and, indeed, I think it my Duty to
avoid giving him Occasion for it) of the Prerogative
of a Husband. Upon my Word, he
sometimes, for Argument's sake, makes a body
think a Wife should not have the least Will of
her own. He sets up a dispensing Power, in
short, altho' he knows, that that Doctrine once
cost a Prince his Crown. And thus, proceeding
with his Answer to my Plea, he argues: 

‘The chief Thing, that sticks with you, my
dear Pamela, is, that you think it unnatural
in a Mother not to be a Nurse to her own
Child, if she can; and what is unnatural,
you say, is a Sin. Now, my Dear, although
your Practice be so unexceptionable, you seem
not to have a right Notion of the Obedience
which a Wife naturally owes, as well as voluntarily
vows, to a Husband's Will— 
‘In all lawful Things, you'll say—But
suppose, my Dear, you were to make a solemn
Vow, either as a single Woman, or as a Wife,
to do any thing, that you had a natural Power
to do. No doubt you would think yourself
under an Obligation to perform it, let the
Consequence be what it would. But to shew
you, who are so learned in the old Law, of
how little Force even the Vows of your Sex
are, and how much you are under the Controul
of ours, read the following Verses in Numbers
xxx. If a Man vow a Vow unto the Lord,
or swear an Oath to bind his Soul with a
Bond, he shall not break his Word; he shall
do according to all that proceedeth out of his
Mouth. The Reason of this is, he is sole and
independent, and Master of his own Will and
Actions. —But what follows? If a Woman
also vow a Vow unto the Lord, and bind herself
by a Bond, being in her Father's House,
in her Youth; and her Father hear her Vow,
and her Bond, wherewith she hath bound her
Soul, and her Father shall hold his Peace at
her: Then all her Vows shall stand; and 

every Bond, wherewith she hath bound her
Soul, shall stand. But if her Father disallow
her, in the Day that he heareth, not any of
her Vows, or of her Bonds, wherewith she
hath bound her Soul, shall stand: And the
Lord shall forgive her, because her Father
disallowed her. 
‘The very same Thing is, with equal
Strength, expressed in the Verses immediately
following, in relation to a Husband's allowing
or disallowing his Wife's Vows; nor is
it distinguish'd at all, whether the Vow be
just or unjust: And it is worthy of Observation
too, that the Laws of England, in Consideration
of the Obedience a Wife owes to
a Husband, will acquit a Woman of certain
Crimes, for which they will punish a Man
with Death. 
‘What I have mentioned, therefore, shews
how much the Daughter is under the absolute
Controul of her Father, and the Wife of her
Husband: So that, you see, my Dear, even
in such a strong Point as a solemn Vow to the
Lord, the Wife may be absolv'd by the Husband,
from the Performance of it. 
‘And by the way, this is no bad Piece of
Information to young Ladies, who are urged
by their designing Lovers to enter into Vows
and Contracts in their Favour: Not one of
which, you see, is of Force, unless the Father,
and, by the same Rule, those who have
Authority over her, and stand in the Father's
Place, approve and confirm it. 

‘If this, therefore, be the Case in so solemn
a Point, surely, a Husband may take upon
himself to dispense with such a supposed Obligation,
as that which you seem so loth to
give up, even although you had made a Vow,
that you would nurse your own Child.— 
And the rather, if the Principle a Husband
acts upon, is laudable, a Desire to continue
his affectionate and faithful Regards to his
Wife, to preserve in her, as long as may be
preserved, those Graces, and those Delicacies
of Person, which he admires in her, and which
it is impossible a thorough Nurse should keep
up; and as, moreover, in your Case, her Time
may be imploy'd to so much greater Improvement
to her own Mind, and her Husband's
Morals, while he can look upon her in a Light
above that of an insipid prattling Nurse, who
must become a Fool and a Baby herself, before
she can be complete in the Character, into
which you, my Dear, want to dwindle. 
‘Some Gentlemen may be fond of having
their Ladies undertake this Province, and very
good Reasons may be assigned for such their
Fondness; but it suits not me at all. And yet
no Man would be thought to have a greater
Affection for Children than myself, or be
more desirous to do them Justice; for I think
every one should look forward to Posterity
with a Preference: But if my Pamela can be
better imploy'd; if the Office can be equally
well perform'd; if your Direction and Superintendence
will be sufficient; and if I cannot 

look upon you in that way with equal Delight,
as if it was otherwise; I insist upon it, my
Pamela, that you acquiesce with my Dispensation;
and don't think to let me lose my
beloved Wife, and have an indelicate Nurse
put upon me instead of her. 
‘As to that Hint, the nearest to me of all,
of Dangers to your Constitution; there is as
much Reason to hope it may not be so, as to
fear that it may. For Children sometimes
bring Health with them, as well as Infirmity; 
and it is not a little likely, that the Nurse's
Office may affect the Health of a dear Lady,
who has no very robust Constitution, and
thinks it so much her Duty to attend it,
that she will abridge herself of half the Pleasures
of Life, and on that Account confine
herself within Doors, or, in the other Case,
must take with her, her Infant and her Nursery-maid,
where-ever she goes; and I shall
either have very fine Company, (shall I not?)
or be obliged to deny myself yours. 
‘Then, as I propose to give you a Smattering
of the French and Italian, I know not
but I may take you with me on a little Tour
into France and Italy; at least to Bath, to
Tunbridge, to Oxford, to York, and the principal
Places of England: Wherefore, as I
love to look upon you as the Companion of
my Pleasures, I advise you, my dearest Love,
not to weaken, or, to speak in a Phrase proper
to the present Subject, wean me from that
Love to you, and Admiration of you, which 

hitherto has been rather increasing than otherwise,
as your Merit, and Regard for me, have
increased.’ 
These, my dear Parents, are charming
Allurements, almost irresistible Temptations! 
And that makes me distrust myself the more,
and be the more diffident—For we are but too
apt to be persuaded into any thing, when the
Motives are so tempting as these last. —But do
you take it indeed, that a Husband has such a
vast Prerogative? Can it be, now, under the
Gospel, that this setting themselves, as it were,
in God's Place, and dispensing with our Wills,
as pleases theirs, is still in Force? —Yet it is
said, that our Saviour came not to break the
Law, but to fulfil it. 
I take it for granted, that many Ladies will
not chuse to dispute this Point so earnestly as I
have done; for we have had several little Debates
about it; and it is the only Point I have
ever yet debated with him: But one would not
be altogether implicit neither. It is no Compliment
to him to be quite passive, and to have no
Will at all of one's own: Yet would I not dispute
one Point, but in Supposition of a superior
Obligation: And this, he says, he can dispense
with:—But, alas! my dear Mr. B. was never
yet thought so intirely fit to fill up the Character
of a Casuistical Divine, as that one may absolutely
rely upon his Decisions in these serious
Points: And, you know, we must all stand or
fall by our own Judgments. 

Upon Condition, therefore, that he requires
not to see this my Letter, nor your Answer to
it, unless I please, I write for your Advice; for
you both have always made a Conscience of
your Duties, and taught me to do so too, or
perhaps I had not been what I am; and I know,
moreover, that nobody is more conversant with
the Scriptures than you are; and, some how or
other, he has got the Dean against me; and I
care not to be so free with the worthy Minister
of our Parish here, and still less with the younger
Clergymen I am acquainted with. 
But this I see plainly enough, that he will
have his own Way; and if I cannot get over my
Sctuples, what shall I do? For if I think it a
Sin to submit to the Dispensation he insists upon
as in his Power to grant, and yet do submit to
it, what will become of my Peace of Mind? 
For it is not in our Power to believe as one
will. Then weak Minds will have their Doubts,
and the Law allows a Toleration for scrupulous
and rehder Consciences: But my beloved Husband,
my Lawgiver, and my Prince, I doubt,
will allow none to poor me! 
As to the Liberty he gives me for a Month, I
should be loth to take it; for one does not
know the Inconveniencies that may-attend a
Change of Nourishment; or if I did, I should
rather— 
But I know not what I would say; for I
am but a young Creature to be in this Way,
and very unequal to it in every respect. So I 

commit myself to God's Direction, and your
Advice, as becomes 
Your ever-dutiful Daughter,
P. B. 

