


Sir Charles Grandison, To Tho. Deane, Esq; 


Thursday, Oct. 5.
You know not, my dear Mr. Deane, upon what
an unthankful man you would bestow your favours. 
I pretend not to be above complying with the 

laudable customs of the world. Princes are examples
to themselves. I have always, in things indifferent,
been willing to take the world as I find it; and conform
to it. 
To say Miss Byron is a treasure in herself, is what
every man would say, who has the honour to know
her: Yet I would not, in a vain ostentation, as the interest
of a man and his wife is one, make a compliment
to my affection by resigning or giving from her
her natural right; especially as there is no one of her
family that wants to be benefited by such gifts or resignations. 
But then I will not allow, that any of her
friends shall part with what is theirs, to supply— 
What? A supposed deficiency in her fortune. And
by whom, as implied by you, supposed a deficiency? — 
By me; and it is left to me to confirm the imputation
by my acceptance of the addition so generously, as to
the intention, offered. Had I incumbrances on my
estate, which, undischarged, would involve in difficulties
the woman I love; I know not what, for her sake,
I might be tempted to do. But avarice only can induce
a man, who wants it not, to accept of the bounty
of a Lady's friends, in their life-time especially— 
When those friends are not either father or mother; 
one of them not a relation by blood, tho' he is by a
nearer tye, that of Love: And is not the fortune
which the Lady possesses, in her own right, an ample
one? 
I am as rich as I wish to be, my dear Mr. Deane. 
Were my income less, I would live within it; were
it more, it would increase my duties. Permit me, my
good Sir, to ask, Has the Man, as you call him (and
a Man indeed he appears to me to be) who intends to
make so noble a present to a stranger, no relations,
no friends, who would have reason to think themselves
unkindly treated, if he gave from them such a
large portion of his fortune? 
I would not be thought romantic; neither aim I at 

ostentation. I would be as glad to follow, as to set, a
good example. Can I have a nobler, if Miss Byron
honours me with her hand, than she, in that case,
will give in preferring me to the Earl of D. a worthy
man, with a much more splendid fortune than mine? 
Believe me, my dear Mr. Deane, it would, on an
event so happy, be a restraint to my own joy before
friends so kindly contributing to the increase of her
fortune, lest they should imagine that their generosity,
on the occasion, was one of the motives of my gratitude
to her for her goodness to me. 
You tell me, that Miss Byron knows nothing of
your proposals: I beseech you, let her not know anything
of them: Abase not so much, in her eyes, the
man who presumes on her favour for the happiness of
the rest of his life, by supposing (Your supposition, Sir,
may have weight with her) he could value her the
more for such an addition to her fortune. No, Sir:
Let Miss Byron (satisfied with the consciousness of a
worth which all the world acknowleges) in one of the
most solemn events of her life, look round among her
congratulating friends with that modest confidence
which the sense of laying a high obligation on a favoured
object gives to diffident merit; and which the
receiving of favours from all her friends, as if to supply
a supposed defective worth, must either abate; or,
if it do not, make her think less of the interested man,
who could submit to owe such obligations. 
If these friendly expostulations conclude against the
offer of your generous friend, they equally do so against
that of Mr. Selby. Were that Gentleman and his
Lady the parents of Miss Byron, the case would be
different: But Miss Byron's fortune is an ascertained
one; and Mr. Selby has relations who stand in an
equal degree of consanguinity to him, and who are
all intitled, by their worthiness, to his favour. My best
respects and thanks are however due; and I beg you 

will make my acknowlegements accordingly, as well
to your worthy friend, as to Mr. Selby. 
I take the liberty to send you down the rent-roll of
my English estate. Determine for me as you please,
my dearest Mr. Deane: Only take this caution—Affront
me not a second time; but let the settlements
be such, as may be fully answerable to my fortune; 
altho', in the common methods of calculation, it may
exceed that of the dear Lady. That you may be the
better judge of this, you will find a brief particular of
my Irish Estate, subjoined to the other. 
I was intending, when I received yours, to do myself
the honour of a visit to Selby-house. I am impatient
to throw myself at the feet of my dear Miss
Byron, and to commend myself to the favour of Mr.
and Mrs. Selby, and every one of a family I am prepared
by their characters, as well as by their relation
to Miss Byron, to revere and love. But as you seem
to choose that the requisite preliminaries should be first
adjusted by pen and ink, I submit, tho' with reluctance,
to that course; but with the less, as I may, in
the interim, receive Letters from abroad, which, tho'
they can now make no alteration with regard to the
treaty so happily begun, may give me an opportunity
of laying the whole state of my affairs before Miss
Byron; by which means she will be enabled to form
a judgment of them, and of the heart of, dear Sir, 
Her and your most affectionate,
obliged, and faithful
humble Servant,
Ch. Grandison. 

