



Mr. Belford. In Continuation. 

You will imagine how affecting her noble speech
and behaviour were to me, at the time, when the
bare recollecting and transcribing them obliged me to 

drop my pen. The women had tears in their eyes. 
I was silent for a few moments. —At last, Matchless
excellence! inimitable goodness! I called her, with a
voice so accented, that I was half-ashamed of myself,
as it was before the women—But who could stand such
sublime generosity of soul, in so young a creature,
her loveliness giving grace to all she said? —Methinks,
said I [and I really, in a manner involuntarily, bent
my knee] I have before me an angel indeed. I can
hardly forbear prostration, and to beg your influence
to draw me after you, to the world you are aspiring
to! —Yet—But what shall I say—Only, dearest excellence,
make me, in some small instances, serviceable
to you, that I may (if I survive you) have the
glory to think I was able to contribute to your satisfaction,
while among us. 
Here I stopt. She was silent. I proceeded—Have
you no commission to employ me in; deserted as you
are by all your friends; among strangers, though, I
doubt not, worthy people? Cannot I be serviceable
by message, by letter-writing, by attending personally,
with either message or letter, your Father, your Uncles,
your Brother, your Sister, Miss Howe, Lord
M. or the Ladies his Sisters? —Any office to be employ'd
in to serve you, absolutely independent of my
friend's wishes, or of my own wishes to oblige him? 
Think, Madam, if I cannot? 
I thank you, Sir: Very heartily I thank you: But
in nothing that I can at present think of, or at least
resolve upon, can you do me service. I will see what
return the Letter I have written will bring me. —Till
then— 
My Life and my Fortune, interrupted I, are devoted
to your service. Permit me to observe, that here
you are, without one natural friend; and (so much
do I know of your unhappy case) that you must be in
a manner destitute of the means to make friends— 
She was going to interrupt me, with a prohibitory
kind of earnestness in her manner. 

I beg leave to proceed, Madam: I have cast about
twenty ways how to mention this before, but never
dared till now. Suffer me, now that I have broken the
ice, to tender myself—as your Banker only. —I know
you will not be obliged: You need not. You have
sufficient of your own, if it were in your hands; 
and from that, whether you live or die, will I consent
to be reimbursed. I do assure you, that the unhappy
man shall never know either my offer, or your
acceptance—Only permit me this small— 
And down behind her chair I dropt a Bank Note of
100l. which I had brought with me, intending some
how or other to leave it behind me: Nor shouldst
thou ever have known it, had she favoured me with
the acceptance of it; as I told her. 
You give me great pain, Mr. Belford, said she,
by these instances of your humanity. And yet,
considering the company I have seen you in, I am
not sorry to find you capable of such. Methinks I am
glad, for the sake of human nature, that there could
be but one such man in the world, as he you and I
know. But as to your kind offer, whatever it be, if
you take it not up, you will greatly disturb me. I
have no need of your kindness. I have effects enough,
which I never can want, to supply my present occasions: 
And, if needful, can have recourse to Miss
Howe. I have promised that I would—So, pray, Sir,
urge not upon me this favour. —Take it up yourself. — 
If you mean me peace and ease of mind, urge not this
favour. —And she spoke with impatience. 
I beg, Madam, but one word— 
Not one, Sir, till you have taken back what you
have let fall. I doubt not either the honour, or the
kindness, of your offer; but you must not say one
word more on this subject. I cannot bear it. 
She was stooping, but with pain. I therefore prevented
her; and besought her to forgive me for a tender,
which, I saw, had been more discomposing to 

her than I had hoped (from the purity of my intentions)
it would be. But I could not bear to think,
that such a mind as hers should be distressed: Since
the want of the conveniencies she was used to abound
in might affect and disturb her in the divine course she
was in. 
You are very kind to me, Sir, said she, and very
favourable in your opinion of me. But I hope, that
I cannot now be easily put out of my present course. 
My declining health will more and more confirm me
in it. Those who arrested and confined me, no
doubt, thought they had fallen upon the ready method
to distress me so, as to bring me into all their
measures. But I presume to hope, that I have a mind
that cannot be debased, in essential instances, by temporal
calamities: Little do those poor wretches know
of the force of innate principles (forgive my own implied
vanity, was her word) who imagine, that a prison,
or penury, can bring a right-turned mind to be guilty
of a wilful baseness, in order to avoid such short-lived
evils. 
She then turned from me towards the window, with
a dignity suitable to her words; and such as shewed
her to be more of soul than of body, at that instant. 
What magnanimity! —No wonder a virtue so solidly
founded could baffle all thy arts: —And that it
forced thee (in order to carry thy accursed point) to
have recourse to those unnatural ones, which robbed
her of her charming senses. 
The women were extremely affected, Mrs. Lovick
especially; who said whisperingly to Mrs. Smith,
We have an angel, not a woman, with us, Mrs.
Smith! 
I repeated my offers to write to any of her friends; 
and told her, that, having taken the liberty to acquaint
Dr. H. with the cruel displeasure of her relations, as
what I presumed lay nearest her heart, he had proposed
to write himself, to acquaint her friends how ill
she was, if she would not take it amiss. 

It was kind in the Doctor, she said: But begged,
that no step of that sort might be taken without her
knowlege and consent. She would wait to see what
effects her Letter to her Sister would have. All she
had to hope for, was, that her Father would revoke
his Malediction, previous to the last Blessing she should
then implore: For the rest, her friends would think
she could not suffer too much; and she was content
to suffer: For, now nothing could happen that could
make her wish to live. 
Mrs. Smith went down; and, soon returning,
asked, If the Lady and I would not dine with her that
day? For it was her Wedding-day. She had engaged
Mrs. Lovick, she said; and should have nobody else,
if we would do her that favour. 
The charming creature sighed, and shook her head. 
—Wedding-day, repeated she! —I wish you, Mrs.
Smith, many happy Wedding-days! —But you will
excuse me. 
Mr. Smith came up with the same request. They
both applied to me. 
On condition the Lady would, I should make no
scruple; and would suspend an engagement: Which
I actually had. 
She then desired they would all sit down. You have
several times, Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith, hinted
your wishes, that I would give you some little history
of myself: Now, if you are at leisure, that this gentleman,
who, I have reason to believe, knows it all,
is present, and can tell you if I give it justly, or not,
I will oblige your curiosity. 
They all eagerly, the man Smith too, sat down; 
and she began an account of herself, which I will endeavour
to repeat, as nearly in her own words, as I
possibly can: For I know you will think it of importance
to be apprised of her manner of relating your
barbarity to her, as well as what her sentiments are of
it; and what room there is for the hopes your friends
have in your favour from her. 

‘At first when I took these lodgings, said she, I
thought of staying but a short time in them; and so,
Mrs. Smith, I told you: I therefore avoided giving
any other account of myself, than that I was a very
unhappy young creature, seduced from good friends,
and escaped from very vile wretches. 
‘This account I thought myself obliged to give,
that you might the less wonder at seeing a young
creature rushing thro' your shop, into your back
apartment, all trembling, and out of breath; an
ordinary garb over my own; craving lodging and
protection; only giving my bare word, that you
should be handsomely paid: All my effects contained
in a pocket-handkerchief. 
‘My sudden absence, for three days and nights together,
when arrested, must still further surprise you: 
And altho' this gentleman, who, perhaps, knows
more of the darker part of my Story than I do myself,
has informed you (as you, Mrs. Lovick, tell me)
that I am only an unhappy, not a guilty creature; 
yet I think it incumbent upon me not to suffer honest
minds to be in doubt about my character. 
‘You must know, then, that I have been, in one
instance (I had like to have said but in one instance; 
but that was a capital one) an undutiful child to the
most indulgent of parents: For what some people
call cruelty in them, is owing but to the excess of
their Love, and to their disappointment, having had
reason to expect better from me. 
‘I was visited (at first, with my friends connivance)
by a man of birth and fortune, but of worse principles,
as it proved, than I believed any man could
have. My Brother, a very headstrong young man,
was absent at that time; and, when he returned
(from an old grudge, and knowing the gentleman,
it is plain, better than I knew him) entirely disapproved
of his visits: And, having a great sway in
our family, brought other gentlemen to address me: 

And at last (several having been rejected) he introduced
one extremely disagreeable: In every indifferent person's
eyes disagreeable. I could not love him. They
all joined to compel me to have him; a rencounter
between the gentleman my friends were set against, and
my Brother, having confirmed them all his enemies. 
‘To be short; I was confined, and treated so very
hardly, that, in a rash fit, I appointed to go off
with the man they hated. A wicked intention,
you'll say! But I was greatly provoked: Nevertheless,
I repented, and resolved not to go off with
him: Yet I did not mistrust his honour to me
neither; nor his Love; because nobody thought
me unworthy of the latter, and my fortune was not
to be despised. But foolishly (wickedly and contrivingly,
as my friends still think, with a design,
as they imagine, to abandon them) giving him a
private meeting, I was tricked away: Poorly enough
tricked away, I must needs say; tho' others, who
had been first guilty of so rash a step as the meeting
of him was, might have been so deceived and surprised
as well as I. 
‘After remaining some time at a farm-house in the
country, and behaving to me all the time with honour,
he brought me to handsome lodgings in town,
till still better provision could be made for me. But
they proved to be (as he indeed knew and designed)
at a vile, a very vile creature's; tho' it was long before
I found her to be so; for I knew nothing of the
town, or its ways. 
‘There is no repeating what followed: Such unprecedented
vile Arts! —For I gave him no opportunity
to take me any disreputable advantage.’— 
And here (half covering her sweet face, with her
handkerchief put to her tearful eyes) she stopt. 
Hastily, as if she would fly from the hateful remembrance,
she resumed: —‘I made my escape afterwards
from the abominable house in his absence, and 

came to yours: And this gentleman has almost prevailed
on me to think, that the ungrateful man did
not connive at the vile Arrest: Which was made,
no doubt, in order to get me once more to those
wicked lodgings: For nothing do I owe them, except
I were to pay them’—[She sighed, and again
wiped her charming eyes—adding in a softer, lower
voice]—‘for being ruined.’ 
Indeed, Madam, said I, guilty, abominably guilty,
as he is in all the rest, he is innocent of this last wicked
outrage. 
‘Well, and so I wish him to be. That evil, heavy
as it was, is one of the slightest evils I have suffered. 
But hence you'll observe, Mrs. Lovick (for you
seemed this morning curious to know if I were not
a wife) that I never was married. —You, Mr. Belford,
no doubt, knew before, that I am no wife: 
And now I never will be one. Yet, I bless God,
that I am not a guilty creature! 
‘As to my parentage, I am of no mean family: I
have in my own right, by the intended favour of
my Grandfather, a fortune not contemptible: Independent
of my Father, if I had pleased; but I never
will please. 
‘My Father is very rich. I went by another name
when I came to you first: But that was to avoid
being discovered to the perfidious man: Who now
engages, by this gentleman, not to molest me. 
‘My real name you now know to be Harlowe: 
Clarissa Harlowe. I am not yet twenty years of
age. 
‘I have an excellent Mother, as well as Father; a
woman of family, and fine sense—Worthy of a better
child! —They both doated upon me. 
‘I have two good Uncles: Men of great fortune; 
jealous of the honour of their family; which I have
wounded. 
‘I was the joy of their hearts; and, with theirs 

and my Father's, I had three houses to call my own; 
for they used to have me with them by turns, and
almost kindly to quarrel for me: So that I was two
months in the year with the one; two months with
the other; six months at my Father's; and two at
the houses of others of my dear friends, who thought
themselves happy in me: And whenever I was at
any one's, I was crouded upon with Letters by all
the rest, who longed for my return to them. 
‘In short, I was beloved by every-body. The
Poor—I used to make glad their hearts: I never
shut my hand to any distress, where-ever I was— 
But now I am poor myself! 
‘So, Mrs. Smith, so, Mrs. Lovick, I am not married. 
It is but just to tell you so. And I am now,
as I ought to be, in a state of humiliation and penitence
for the rash step which has been followed by so
much evil. God, I hope, will forgive me, as I am
endeavouring to bring my mind to forgive all the
world, even the man who has ungratefully, and by
dreadful perjuries [Poor wretch! he thought all his
wickedness to be wit!] reduced to this, a young
creature, who had his happiness in her view, and in
her wish, even beyond this life; and who was believed
to be of rank, and fortune, and expectations,
considerable enough to make it the interest of
any gentleman in England to be faithful to his vows
to her. But I cannot expect that my parents will
forgive me: My refuge must be death; the most
painful kind of which I would suffer, rather than be
the wife of one who could act by me, as the man has
acted, upon whose birth, education, and honour, I
had so much reason to found better expectations. 
‘I see, continued she, that I, who once was every
one's delight, am now the cause of grief to every
one—You, that are strangers to me, are moved for
me! 'Tis kind! —But 'tis time to stop. Your compassionate
hearts, Mrs. Smith, and Mrs. Lovick, 

are too much touched’ [For the women sobbed,
and the man was also affected]. ‘It is barbarous in
me, with my woes, thus to sadden your Wedding-day.’ 
Then turning to Mr. and Mrs. Smith— 
‘May you see many happy ones, honest, good couple! 
—How agreeable is it to see you both join so kindly
to celebrate it, after many years are gone over you! 
—I once—But no more! —All my prospects of felicity,
as to this life, are at an end. My hopes,
like opening buds or blossoms in an over-forward
spring, have been nipt by a severe frost! —Blighted
by an eastern wind! —But I can but once die; and
if life be spared me, but till I am discharged from a
heavy Malediction, which my Father in his wrath
laid upon me, and which is fulfilled literally in
every article relating to this world; that, and a
Last Blessing, are all I have to wish for; and Death
will be welcomer to me, than Rest to the most wearied
traveller that ever reached his journey's end.’ 
And then she sunk her head against the back of her
chair, and, hiding her face with her handkerchief,
endeavoured to conceal her tears from us. 
Not a soul of us could speak a word. Thy presence,
perhaps, thou hardened wretch, might have
made us ashamed of a weakness, which perhaps thou
wilt deride me in particular for, when thou readest
this!— 
She retired to her chamber soon after, and was
forced it seems to lie down. We all went down together; 
and, for an hour and half, dwelt upon her
praises; Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick repeatedly expressing
their astonishment, that there could be a man
in the world, capable of offending, much more of
wilfully injuring, such a Lady; and repeating, that
they had an Angel in their house. —I thought they
had; and that as assuredly as there is a devil under
the roof of good Lord M. 
I hate thee heartily! —By my faith I do! —Every
hour I hate thee more than the former!— 
J. Belford. 