



Mr. Lovelace, To John Belford, Esq; 

Wednesday Morn. Aug. 23. 
All alive, dear Jack, and in ecstasy! —Likely to
be once more a happy man! For I have received
a Letter from my beloved Miss Harlowe; in consequence,
I suppose, of that which I mentioned in my
last to be left for her from her Sister. And I am
setting out for Berks directly, to shew the contents to
my Lord M. and to receive the congratulations of all
my kindred upon it. 
I went, last night, as I intended, to Smith's: But
the dear creature was not returned at near Ten o'clock. 
And, lighting upon Tourville, I took him home with
me, and made him sing me out of my Megrims. I
went to bed tolerably easy at Two; had bright and
pleasant dreams (not such a frightful one as that I gave
thee an account of); and at Eight this morning, as I
was dressing, to be in readiness against the return of
my fellow, whom I had sent to enquire after the
Lady, I had this Letter brought me by a chairman. 

To Robert Lovelace, Esq;
Tuesday Night, 11 o'clock (Aug. 22). 
Sir,
I have good news to tell you. I am setting out
with all diligence for my Father's House. I am
bid to hope that he will receive his poor penitent with
a goodness peculiar to himself; for I am overjoyed
with the assurance of a thorough Reconciliation, thro'
the interposition of a dear blessed friend, whom I always
loved and honoured. I am so taken up with
my preparation for this joyful and long-wished-for
journey, that I cannot spare one moment for any
other business, having several matters of the last importance
to settle first. So, pray, Sir, don't disturb 

or interrupt me—I beseech you don't. You may
possibly in time see me at my Father's; at least, if it
be not your own fault. 
I will write a Letter, which shall be sent you when
I am got thither and received: Till when, I am, &c. 
Clarissa Harlowe. 
I dispatched instantly a Letter to the dear creature,
assuring her, with the most thankful joy, ‘That I
would directly set out for Berks, and wait the issue
of the happy Reconciliation, and the charming hopes
she had filled me with. I poured out upon her a
thousand blessings. I declared, that it should be the
study of my whole life to merit such transcendent
goodness: And that there was nothing which her
Father or Friends should require at my hands, that I
would not for her sake comply with, in order to promote
and complete so desirable a Reconciliation.’ 
I hurried it away without taking a copy of it; and
I have ordered the chariot-and-six to be got ready; 
and hey for M. Hall! Let me but know how Belton
does. I hope a Letter from thee is on the road. And
if the poor fellow can spare thee, make haste, I command
thee, to attend this truly divine Lady. Thou
mayest not else see her of months perhaps; at least,
not while she is Miss Harlowe. And oblige me, if
possible, with one Letter before she sets out, confirming
to me and accounting for this generous change. 
But what accounting for it is necessary? The
dear creature cannot receive consolation herself but
she must communicate it to others. How noble! 
She would not see me in her adversity; but no sooner
does the Sun of prosperity begin to shine upon her,
than she forgives me. 
I know to whose mediation all this is owing. It is
to Col. Morden's. She always, as she says, loved and
honoured him: And he loved her above all his relations. 
I shall now be convinced that there is something in 

dreams. The opening cloud is the Reconciliation in
view. The bright Form, lifting up my Charmer
through it to a firmament stuck round with golden
Cherubims and Seraphims, indicates the charming
little Boys and Girls, that will be the fruits of this
happy Reconciliation. The welcomes, thrice repeated,
are those of her family, now no more to be
deemed implacable. Yet are they a family too, that
my Soul cannot mingle with. 
But then what is my tumbling over and over thro'
the floor into a frightful hole, descending as she
ascends? Ho! only This; it alludes to my disrelish
to matrimony: Which is a bottomless pit, a gulph,
and I know not what. And I suppose, had I not
awoke, in such a plaguy fright, I had been soused into
some river at the bottom of the hole, and then been
carried (mundified or purified from my past iniquities)
by the same bright Form (waiting for me upon the
mossy banks) to my beloved Girl; and we should
have gone on cherubiming of it and carolling to the
end of the chapter. 
But what are the black sweeping mantles and robes
of Lord M. thrown over my face? and what are those
of the Ladies? Oh, Jack! I have these too: They
indicate nothing in the world but that my Lord will
be so good as to die, and leave me all he has. So,
rest to thy good-natured Soul, honest Lord M. 
Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrance, will
also die, and leave me swindging legacies. 
Miss Charlotte and her Sister—what will become of
them? —O! they will be in mourning of course for
their Uncle and Aunts—That's right! 
As to Morden's flashing through the window, and
crying, Die, Lovelace, and be damned, if thou wilt
not repair my Cousin's wrongs! That is only, that
he would have sent me a challenge, had I not been
disposed to do the Lady justice. 
All I dislike is This part of the dream: For, even 

in a dream, I would not be thought to be threatened
into any measure, though I liked it ever so well. 
And so much for my prophetic dream. 
Dear charming creature! What a meeting will
there be between her and her Father and Mother and
Uncles! What transports, what pleasure, will this
happy, long-wished-for Reconciliation give her dutiful
heart! And indeed now methinks I am glad
she is so dutiful to them; for her duty to parents is
a conviction to me that she will be as dutiful to her
husband: Since duty upon principle is an uniform thing. 
Why pr'ythee, now, Jack, I have not been so
much to blame, as thou thinkest: For had it not been
for me, who have led her into so much distress, she
could neither have received nor given the joy that will
now overwhelm them all. So here rises great and
durable good out of temporary evil! 
I knew they loved her (the pride and glory of their
family) too well to hold out long! 
I wish I could have seen Arabella's Letter. She has
always been so much eclipsed by her Sister, that, I dare
say, she has signified this Reconciliation to her with
intermingled phlegm and wormwood; and her invitation
most certainly runs all in the rock-water style. 
I shall long to see the promised Letter too when she
is got to her Father's, which I hope will give an account
of the reception she will meet with. 
There is a Solemnity, however, I think, in the style
of her Letter, which pleases and affects me at the same
time. But as it is evident she loves me still, and hopes
soon to see me at her Father's, she could not help being
a little solemn, and half-ashamed [dear blushing
pretty rogue!] to own her Love, after my usage of her. 
And then her subscription: Till when, I am Clarissa
Harlowe: As much as to say, After that, I
shall be, if not your own fault, Clarissa Lovelace! 
O my best Love! My ever-generous and adorable
creature! How much does this thy forgiving goodness 

exalt us both!— Me, for the occasion given thee! 
Thee for turning it so gloriously to thy advantage,
and to the honour of both! 
And if, my beloved creature, you will but connive
at the imperfections of your adorer, and not play the
Wife upon me: If, while the charms of Novelty have
their force with me, I should happen to be drawn
aside by the love of intrigue, and of plots that my
Soul delights to form and pursue; and if thou wilt
not be open-eyed to the follies of my youth [a transitory
state!]; every excursion shall serve but the more
to endear thee to me, till in time, and in a very little
time too, I shall get above Sense; and then, charmed
by thy soul-attracting converse; and brought to despise
my former courses; what I now, at distance,
consider as a painful duty, will be my joyful choice,
and all my delight will centre in thee! 
* *
Mowbray is just arrived with thy Letters. I
therefore close my agreeable subject, to attend to one,
which I doubt will be very shocking. 
I have engaged the rough varlet to bear me company
in the morning to Berks; where I shall file off
the rust he has contracted in his attendance upon the
poor fellow. 
He tells me, that between the dying Belton, and
the preaching Belford, he shan't be his own man
these three days: And says, that thou addest to the
unhappy fellow's weakness, instead of giving him courage
to help him to bear his destiny. 
I am sorry he takes the unavoidable lot so heavily. 
But he has been long ill; and sickness enervates the
mind, as well as the body; as he himself very significantly
observed to thee. 