

The History draws near a Period. 
Universal was the applause which they
acquired by this noble sacrifice of their
resentment: the afternoon was spent in the
utmost harmony and good humour: and at the
earnest solicitation of Renaldo, whose fancy
still harboured the apprehensions of another
separation, don Diego consented that the indissolable
knot should be tied between that
young gentleman and Serafina in two days,
and the place appointed for the ceremony
was the very church where they had been restored
to the arms of each other. 
The lovely bride, with a silent blush that set
her lover's heart on fire, submitted to this determination,
in consequence of which, the
company was bespoke for that auspicious hour,
and the evening being pretty far advanced,
they took leave of the ladies, and retired to 

their respective homes; don Diego and his
future son-in-law being re-conducted to their
lodgings, in the coach of the Jew, who taking
an opportunity of being alone with Melvile,
observed that it would be necessary on this occasion
to supply the Castilian with a sum of
money, in order to support his dignity and
independance, in furnishing Serafina with every
thing suitable to her rank and merit; and
that he would willingly accommodate him,
provided he knew how to propose it so as to
give no offence to his punctilious disposition. 
Renaldo thanking him for this generous anticipation,
advised him to sollicit the Spaniard's
correspondence in the way of business,
and to put the whole on the footing of his
own interest; by which means don Diego's
delicacy could sustain no affront. Fraught
with this instruction, the Israelite desired a
private audience of the Castilian, in which
after an apology for the freedom of his demand,
“Signior don Diego, (said he) as your
fortune hath been so long embezzled by your
adversary in Spain, and your correspondence
with that country intirely cut off, it is not to
be supposed that your finances are at present
in such a condition, as to maintain the splendour
of your family. Count de Melvile's whole
fortune is at your command; and had not he
been afraid of giving umbrage to the peculiar
delicacy of your sentiments, he would have
pressed you to use it for your convenience. 
For my own part, over and above the inclination
I have to serve don Diego, I consult my
own private advantage in desiring you to accept
my service on this occasion. Money is
the chief commodity in which I deal, and if 

you honour me with your commands, I shall
be a gainer by my obedience.” 
Don Diego replied with a smile that denoted
how well he understood the meaning of
this address; “Surely, Signior, I am bound
by the strongest ties, to exert my utmost endeavours
for your advantage; and I pray God
this your proposal may have that issue: I am
well acquainted with the Count's generosity
and refined notions of honour; and too much
obliged by him already, to hesitate with punctilious
reserve in accepting his future assistance:
nevertheless, since you have contrived a scheme
for removing all scruples of that sort, I shall
execute it with pleasure; and in the form of
business, you shall have all the security I can
give for what shall be necessary to answer my
present occasions.” 
The preliminaries being thus settled, Joshua
advanced for his use a thousand pounds,
for which he would take neither bond, note,
nor receipt, desiring only that the Castilian
would mark it in his own pocket book, that
the debt might appear, in case any accident
should befal the borrower. Although the
Spaniard had been accustomed to the uncommon
generosity of Melvile, he could not help
wondering at this nobleness of behaviour, so
little to be expected from any merchant, much
less from a Jewish broker. 
While this affair was on the anvil, Renaldo,
who could no longer with-hold the communication
of his happiness from his sister and relations
in Germany, took up the pen, and in a
letter to his brother in law, recounted all the circumstances
of the surprizing turn of fate which
he had experienced since his arrival in England! 

he likewise related the story of don
Diego, informed them of the day appointed for
his nuptials, and intreated the major to make
a journey to London with his wife! or if that
should be impracticable, to come as far as Brussels,
where they should be met by him and his
Serafina. There was now but one day between
him and the accomplishment of his dearest
wish, and that was spent in procuring a license
and adjusting the preparations for the grand
festival. Don Diego in the forenoon visited
madame Clement, to whom he repeated his
warm acknowledgments of her bounty and
maternal affection to his daughter, and presented
to Serafina bank notes to the amount
of five hundred pounds, to defray the necessary
expence of her wedding ornaments. 
All the previous steps being taken for the
solemnization of this interesting event, and the
hour of appointment arrived, the bridegroom,
accompanied by his father in law, hastened to
the place of rendezvous, which was the vestry
room of the church we have already described,
where they were received by the good clergyman
in his canonicals; and here they had not
waited many minutes, when they were joined
by madame Clement and the amiable bride, escorted
by the friendly physician, who had all
along bore such a share in their concerns. Serafina
was dressed in a sack of white sattin, and
the ornaments of her head were adjusted in
the Spanish fashion, which gave a peculiar air
to her appearance, and an additional spirit to
those attractions, which engaged the heart of
each beholder. There was nothing remarkable
in the habit of Renaldo, who had copied
the plainness and elegance of his mistress; but 

when she entered the place, his features were
animated with a double proportion of vivacity,
and their eyes meeting, seemed to kindle a
blaze which diffused warmth and joy thro' the
countenances of all present. 
After a short pause her father led her to the
altar, and give her away to the transported
Renaldo, before the priest who performed the
ceremony, and bestowed the nuptial benediction
on this enraptured pair. The sanction of the
church being thus obtained, they withdrew into
the vestry, where Melvile sealed his title on her
rosy lips, and presented his wife to the company,
who embraced her in their turns, with
fervent wishes for their mutual happiness. 
Tho' the scene of this transaction was remote
from any inhabited neighbourhood, the church
was surrounded by a crowd of people, who
with uncommon demonstrations of surprize and
admiration, petitioned heaven to bless so fair a
couple. Such indeed was their eagerness to
see them, that some lives were endangered by
the pressure of the crowd, which attended them
with loud acclamations to the coach, after the
bridegroom had deposited in the hands
of the minister, one hundred pounds for the
benefit of the poor of that parish, and thrown
several handfuls of money among the multitude. 
Serafina reimbarked in madame Clement's
convenience, with that good lady and
don Diego, while Renaldo with the clergyman
and doctor followed in Joshua's coach, to a
pleasant country-house upon the Thames, at
the distance of a few miles from London. This
the Jew had borrowed from the owner, for a
few days, and there they were received by that
honest Hebrew, who had provided a very elegant 

entertainment for the occasion: he had
also bespoke a small but excellent band of musick,
which regaled their ears while they sat
at dinner; and the afternoon being calm and
serene, he prevailed on them to take the air
on the river, in a barge which he had prepared
for the purpose. 
But, notwithstanding this diversity of amusement,
Renaldo would have found it the
longest day he had ever passed, had not his
imagination been diverted by an incident
which employed his attention during the remaining
part of the evening. They had drank
tea, and engaged in a party at whist, when
they were surprized with a noise of contention
from a publick house, that fronted the
windows of the apartment in which they sat. 
Alarmed at this uproar, they forsook their
cards, and throwing up the casements, beheld
a hearse surrounded by four men on horseback,
who had stopped the carriage, and violently
pulled the driver from his seat. This
uncommon arrest had engaged the curiosity
of the publican's family, who stood at the
door to observe the consequence, when all
of a sudden, appeared a person in canonicles,
well-mounted, who riding up to those who
maltreated the driver, bestowed upon one of
them, such a blow with the but-end of his
whip, as laid him sprawling on the ground,
and springing from his saddle upon the box,
took the reins into his own hand, swearing
with great vehemence, that he would murther
every man who should attempt to obstruct
the hearse. 
The good priest who had married Renaldo,
was not a little scandalized at this ferocious 

behaviour in a clergyman, and could not help
saying aloud, he was a disgrace to the cloth; 
when the horseman looking up to the window,
replied, “Sir, may I be d&wblank;n'd if
any man in England has a greater respect for
the cloth than I have; but at present I am
quite distracted. So saying, he whipped up
the horses, and had actually disentangled the
hearse from those who surrounded it, when he
was opposed by another troop, one of whom
alighted with great expedition, and cut the
harness so as that he could not possibly proceed; 
finding himself thus driven to bay, he
leaped upon the ground, and exercised his
weapon with such amazing strength and agility,
that several of his antagonists were left
motionless on the field, before he was over-powered
and disarmed by dint of numbers,
who assailed him on all sides. 
The mad parson being thus taken prisoner,
an elderly person of a very prepossessing appearance,
went up to the hearse, and unbolting
the door, a young lady sprung out, and
shrieking, ran directly to the public house,
to the infinite astonishment and affright of
the whole family, who believed it was the
spirit of the deceased person, whose body lay
in the carriage. Renaldo, who was with difficulty
restrained from interposing in behalf
of the clergyman against such odds, no sooner
perceived this apparition, than supposing her
to be some distressed damsel, his Quixotism
awoke, he descended in an instant, and rushed
into the house, among those who pursued
the fair phantome. Don Diego and the physician
took the same road, while the real clergyman
and Joshua tarried with the ladies, who 

were, by this time, very much interested in
the event. 
Melvile found the young lady in the hands
of the old gentleman, who had released her
from the hearse, and who now bitterly upbraided
her for her folly, and disobedience:
while she protested, with great vivacity, that
whatever she might suffer from his severity,
she would never submit to the hateful match
he had proposed, nor break the promise she
had already made to the gentleman who had
now attempted to rescue her from the tyranny
of a cruel father. This declaration was followed
by a plentiful shower of tears, which
the father could not behold with unmoistened
eyes, altho' he reviled her with marks of uncommon
displeasure, and turning to the count,
“I appeal to you, Sir, said he, whether I
have not reason to curse the undutiful obstinacy
of that pert baggage, and renounce her for
ever as an alien to my blood. She has, for
some months, been sollicited in marriage by
an honest citizen, a thirty thousand pound
man; and instead of listening to such in advantageous
proposal, she hath bestowed her
heart upon a young fellow, not worth a groat. 
Ah! you degenerate hussy, this comes of
your plays and romances; if thy mother were
not a woman of an unexceptionable life and
conversation, I should verily believe thou art
no child of mine: run away with a beggar!
for shame!” 
“I suppose, replied Renaldo, the person to
whom your daughter's affection inclined, is
that clergyman who exerted himself so manfully 
at the door.” Clergyman! cried the
other, adad! he hath more of the devil than 

the church about him. A ruffian! he has,
for ought I know, murthered the worthy
gentleman whom I intended for my son-in-law; 
and the rogue, if I had not kept out of
his way, would, I suppose, have served me
with the same sauce: me! who have been his
master for many years, and had resolved to
make a man of him. Sir, he was my own
clerk; and this is the return I have met with
from the serpent which I cherished in my bosom.” 
Here he was interrupted by the arrival of
the citizen for whom he had expressed such
concern: that gentleman had received a contusion
upon one eye, by which the sight was
altogether obstructed; so that he concluded he
should never retrieve the use of that organ,
and with great clamour took all the spectators
to witness the injury he had sustained; he entered
the room with manifest perturbation,
demanded satisfaction of the father, and peremptorily
declared it should not be a lost eye
to him, if there was law in England. This
unseasonable demand, and the boisterous manner
in which it was made, did not at all suit
the present humour of the old gentleman, who
told him peevishly he owed him no eye, and
bade him go and ask reparation of the person
who had done him wrong. 
The young lady, snatching this favourable
occasion, earnestly entreated Melvile and his
company to intercede with her father in behalf
of her lover, who, she assured them, was
a young gentleman of a good family, and uncommon
merit; and, in compliance with her
request, they invited him and his daughter to
the house in which they lodged, where they 

would be disincumbered of the croud which
this dispute had gathered together, and more
at leisure to consult about the measures necessary
to be taken. The old gentleman thanked
them for their courtesy, which he did not
think proper to refuse, and while he led, or
rather hauled mademoiselle over the way, under
the auspices of the Castilian, Renaldo set
the lover at liberty, made him a tender of his
good offices, and advised him to wait at the
public house for an happy issue of their negotiation. 
The pseudo-parson was very much affected
by this generous proffer, for which he made
suitable acknowledgments, and protested before
God, he would die a thousand deaths, rather
than part with his dear Charlotte. Her father
no sooner entered the apartment, than he was
known by Joshua to be a considerable trader
in the city of London, and the merchant was
glad to find himself among his acquaintance. 
He was so full of the story which had brought
him thither, that he had scarce sat down, when
he began to complain of his hard fate, in having
an only child, who was so mean, stubborn
and contumacious; and every sentence was
concluded with an apostrophe of reproaches to
the delinquent. 
The Jew having allowed him to ring out his
alarm, condoled his misfortune, and gravely
counselled the young lady to wean her affections
from such an unworthy object; for he
supposed her favourite was a man of no principle,
or liberal endowments, otherwise her father
would not exclaim so bitterly against her
conduct. Charlotte, who wanted neither beauty,
nor understanding, assured him, that her 

lover's character was, in all respects, unblemished:
for the truth of which assertion she appealed
to her papa, who owned, with reluctance,
that the young man was a gentleman by birth,
that he had served him with remarkable diligence
and integrity, and that his accomplishments
were far superior to his station in life. 
“But then, said he, the fellow has not a shilling
of his own, and would you have me give
away my daughter to a beggar?” 
“God forbid! cried the Jew, I always understood
you possessed an ample fortune, and
am sorry to find it otherwise.” Otherwise! replied
the citizen, with some ceremony, take
care what you say, Sir, a merchant's credit is
not to be tampered with.” “I beg your
pardon, answered the Hebrew, I concluded
that your circumstances were bad, because you
objected to the poverty of the young man, after
you had owned he was possessed of every other
qualification to make your daughter happy; for
it is not to be imagined, that you would thwart
her inclinations, or seek to render an only child
miserable, on account of an obstacle which you
yourself could easily remove. Let us suppose
you can afford to give with your daughter ten
thousand pounds, which would enable this
young man to live with credit and reputation,
and engage advantageously in trade, for which
you say he is well qualified: The alternatve
then will be, whether you would rather see her
in the arms of a deserving youth, whom she
loves, enjoying all the comforts of life, with a
moderate fortune, which it will always be in
your own power to improve: or tied for life
to a monied man, whom she detests, cursing
her hard fate, and despising that superfluity of 

wealth, in spite of which she finds herself so
truly wretched.” 
The old gentleman seemed to be startled at
this observation, which was reinforced by Renaldo's
saying, that he would, moreover, enjoy
the unutterable pleasure of giving happiness to
a worthy man, whose gratitude would co-operate
with his love, in approving himself a dutiful
son, as well as an affectionate husband. He
then represented the family disquiets, and dismal
tragedies, produced from such mercenary
and compulsive matches; and in conclusion
related the story of don Diego and his daughter,
which when the merchant heard, he started
up with marks of terror in his countenance,
and throwing up the casement, called upon
Valentine with great vociferation; this was the
name of his daughter's admirer, who no sooner
heard the summons, than he flew to the spot
from whence it came, and the merchant, without
any further preamble, seizing his hand,
joined it with that of Charlotte, saying, with
great trepidation, “Here, take her, in the name
of God, and thank this honourable company for
your good fortune.” 
The lovers were transported with exquisite
joy at this sudden determination in their favour. 
Valentine having kissed the hand of his mistress,
with all the eagerness of rapture, and acknowledged
the merchant's generosity, paid
his respects to the ladies with a very polite address,
and with demonstrations of uncommon
gratitude and sensibility, thanked the gentlemen,
and the count in particular, for their
good offices, to which he attributed the happiness
he now enjoyed. While Serafina and
madame Clement caressed the amiable Charlotte, 

the rest of the company congratulated her
admirer upon his choice and success; though
the clergyman could not help reprehending
him for profaning the sacerdotal habit. 
Valentine heartily asked pardon for having given
such cause of offence, and hoped he should
be forgiven, as it was a disguise which he thought
absolutely necessary for the execution of a
scheme upon which his happiness altogether depended. 
He then, at the request of Renaldo,
unfolded the mystery of the hearse, by giving
them to understand, that Charlotte's father
having got inkling of their mutual passion, had
dismissed his clerk, and conveyed his daughter
to a country-house in the neighbourhood
of London, in order to cut off their correspondence; 
notwithstanding these precautions,
they had found means to communicate
with each other by letters, which were managed
by a third person, and his rival being very importunate
in his sollicitations, they had concerted
the expedient of the hearse, which he provided
and conducted through a road contiguous
to the end of the merchant's garden, where
Charlotte being apprized of the design, waited
for its approach, and embarked in it without
hesitation. Valentine thought himself sufficiently
screened from discovery by his disguise,
but he was unfortunately met by a servant
of the family, who recollected his features,
and immediately gave the alarm, upon which
the father and his friends took horse, and pursued
them by two different roads, untill they
were overtaken at this place. 
He had scarce finished this short relation,
when his rival bluntly entering the apartment,
with an handkerchief tied round his eye, committed 

Valentine to the charge of a constable,
who attended him, by a warrant from a justice
of the peace in that neighbourhood; and threatned
to prosecute the merchant on an action
of damages for the loss of an eye, which he
said he had sustained in his service. The company
endeavoured to appease this citizen, by
representing, that his misfortune was no other
than a common inflammation; nor was it
owing to malice aforethought, but entirely to
the precipitate passion of an incensed young
man, who, by the bye, acted in his own defence. 
At the same time the merchant promised
to make any reasonable satisfaction; 
upon which the other demanded an obligation,
importing, that he would, in ten days
from the date, bestow upon him his daughter
in marriage, with a portion of fifteen thousand
pounds, or, in case of failure, pay him double
the sum. 
The merchant, exasperated at this extravagant
demand, told him flatly, he had already
disposed of his daughter to Valentine, who
he believed was a much more deserving man; 
and that he was ready to wait upon the magistrate
who had granted the warrant, in order
to give bail for his future son-in-law. This
was a mortifying declaration to the plaintiff,
though he condoled himself with the hope of
being a gainer by the loss of his eye; and now
the pain was over, would have been very sorry
to find his sight retrieved. The old gentleman,
Joshua, and Renaldo, accompanied the
prisoner to the house of the justice, where he
was immediately admitted to bail: upon their
return, Valentine shifted his dress, and they
supped together with great cordiality and 

mirth, maintained at the expence of the discarded
lover. 
After supper, Don Diego walked a minuet
with madame Clement, for whom, by this
time, he had contracted an extraordinary degree
of affection. Valentine had the honour
to dance with the incomparable Serafina,
whose beauty and attractions dazzled the eyes
of the new comers, and struck her bashful
partner with awe and confusion; and Melvile
presented his hand to the agreeable Charlotte,
who performed so much to the satisfaction of
her father, that he could not help expressing
his joy and pride: he praised God for throwing
him in the way of our company, and engaged
the clergyman to unite the young couple; 
after having appointeed a day for the
ceremony, and invited all present to the wedding. 
The evening having been insensibly
consumed in these avocations, and the night
pretty far advanced, the ladies withdrew without
ceremony; and the retreat of Serafina filled
Renaldo's breast with tumult and emotion:
his blood began to flow in impetuous tides, his
heart to beat with redoubled vigour and velocity,
while his eye seemed to flash with more
than human splendor: now his imagination
began to anticipate with the enthusiastic rage
of an inspired Sybil; he was instantaneously
transported from the conversation, and every
nerve was braced to such a degree of impatience,
that human nature could not long endure
the tension. 
He therefore, having withstood the impulse
about a quarter of an hour, at length gave
way to his impetuosity, and springing from
his friends, found himself in a dark passage, 

at the farther end of which he perceived madame
Clement comnig out of a chamber with
a light, which at sight of him she set down,
and vanished in a moment. This was the star
that pointed to his paradise: he hailed the
signal, entered the apartment, and like a lion
rushing on his prey, approached the nuptial
bed, where Serafina, surrounded by all the
graces of beauty, softness, sentiment, and
truth, lay trembling as a victim at the altar,
and strove to hide her blushes from his view; 
the door was shut, the light extinguished: he
owned his lot was more than mortal man could
claim. 
Here let me draw the decent veil, that ought
to shade the sacred mysteries of Hyman: away
unhallowed scoffers, who profane with
idle pleasantry, or immodest hint, these holy
rites; and leave those happy lovers to enjoy,
in one another's arms, unutterable bless, the
well-earned palm of virtue and of constancy,
which had undergone the most severe refinement:
a more deserving pair night's curtain
shrouds not in its dark extent. 
The thoughts of Renaldo's felicity threw a
damp on the spirits of Valentine, who saw the
term of his probation protracted a few days
longer, and could not help wishing in his heart,
that he had atchieved the adventure which
would have abridged his expectation, though
at the expence of the old gentleman's displeasure. 
He filled a bumper to the health of the
bride and bridegroom, and throwing up his
eyes, with marks of admiration, exclaimed,
“How happy is the count! alas! five days
longer must I rein my impatience!” “It is
but reasonable, you rogue, that your betters 

should have the start of you,” said the merchant,
who did him justice in the glass, and
counselled him to drown his impatience with
good claret. The youth followed his advice,
and it was late before the company retired to
rest. 
These citizens, however, resolved to seize an
opportunity of rallying the new married
couple, according to custom, and with that
view arose early in the morning, on the supposition
of finding them still asleep; but they
were not a little surprized, when they entered
the breakfasting room, to see Renaldo, and his
amiable bedfellow, already dressed, and waiting
to do the honours of the house. The old gentleman
would fain have cracked a joke upon
their extraordinary dispatch, but he was so
much over-awed by the dignity, and tamed by
the sweetness of Serafina's carriage, that he
durst not give utterance to his conception; 
and Valentine stood silent and abashed, as in
the presence of a superior being. After breakfast,
these gentlemen and Charlotte again expressed
their sense of the obligations they owed
to this happy family, repeated their invitation,
and teaking leave, returned to London in a
coach that was provided over night. 
Our friends being thus left to themselves,
don Diego turning towards Melvile, “Now,
said he, that I have yielded to the impatience
of your love, as well as to the eagerness of my
own desire to make you happy, I must beg leave
to interrupt for a little while, the stream of
your mutual pleasure, and propose a melancholy
excursion, which, however, will not be
wholly void of enjoyment. I have too long delayed
the performance of my duty at Antonia's 

grave; let us spend the forenoon in that pious
pilgrimage; I will drop a few tears to the memory
of that excellent woman, and never afterwards
shall my friends be troubled with my grief.” 
The proposal being universally approved,
they set out for the place, which had oft been
visited by the gentle Serafina, who conducted
her father to a black marble stone, which Renaldo
had ordered to be laid over the grave,
and as he kneeled to kiss the monument, he
perceived this plain inscription in the Spanish
Tongue: Antonia de Zelos primera en todo lo
que es ser bueno, y sin secundo en todo lo que
fue ser desdichado, quedad con Dios! That is,
Antonia de Zelos, unmatched in virtue, and
unequalled in misfortune, Adieu! “O faithful
record! (cried the Castilian, smiting his
breast, while his tears distilled upon the marble)
thy goodness was the gift of heaven, but
thy misfortunes were derived from the guilt
of don Diego; yet his sorrow shall expiate
his offence, and his penitence find favour in
the sight of heaven: rest, rest, ill-fated virtue!
eternal peace shall guard thy tomb, and
angels minister to thy unspotted shade; nor
shall thine ashes lie in dark obscurity: here
will I raise a monument, more suited to thy
excellence and name.” Serafina melted with
filial tenderness; nor were the rest unmoved
at this affecting scene, which don Diego did
not quit without reluctance. 