


They set out in company, breakfast at Abbe Ville,
dine at Amiens, and about eleven o'clock arrive
at Chantilly, where Peregrine executes a plan
which he had concerted upon Hornbeck. 
The whole company by agreement rose and
departed before day, and breakfasted at Abbe
Ville, where they became acquainted with the
finesse of their Bernay landlord, who had imposed
upon them, in affirming that they would not
have been admitted after the gates were shut. 
From thence they proceeded to Amiens, where
they dined and were pestered by begging friars; 
and the roads being deep, it was eleven o'clock
at night before they reached Chantilly, where
they found supper already dressed, in consequence
of having dispatched the valet de chambre
before them on horseback. 
The constitution of Horneck being very much
impaired by a life of irregularity, he found himself
so fatigued with this day's journey, which
amounted to upwards of an hundred miles, that
when he sat down at table, he could scarce sit
upright; and in less than three minutes began to
nod in his chair. Peregrine, who had foreseen 

and provided for this occasion, advised him to
exhilarate his spirits with a glass of wine; and the
proposal being embraced, tipt his valet de chambre
the wink, who, according to the instructions
he had received, qualified the Burgundy with
thirty drops of laudanum, which this unfortunate
husband swallowed in one glass. The dose cooperating
with his former drowsiness, lulled him
so fast asleep, as it were instantaneously, that it
was found necessary to convey him to his own
chamber, where his footman undressed and put
him to bed. Nor was Jolter (naturally of a sluggish
disposition) able to resist his propensity to
sleep, without suffering divers dreadful yawns,
which encouraged his pupil to administer the same
dose to him, which had operated so successfully
upon the other Argus. This cordial had not such
a gentle effect upon the rugged organs of Jolter
as upon the more delicate nerves of Hornbeck; 
but discovered itself in certain involuntary startings,
and convulsive motions in the muscles of
his face; and when his nature at length yielded
to the power of this medicine, he sounded the
trumpet so loud through his nostrils, that our
adventurer was afraid the noise would awake his
other patient, and consequently prevent the accomplishment
of his aim. The governor was
therefore committed to the care of Pipes, who
lugged him into the next room, and having stripped
off his cloaths, tumbled him into his nest,
while the two lovers remained at full liberty to
indulge their mutual passion. 
Peregrine, in the impatience of his inclination,
would have finished the fate of Hornbeck immediately; 
but his inamorata disapproved of his intention,
and represented that their being together 

by themselves for any length of time, would be
observed by her servant, who was kept as a spy
upon her actions; so that they had recourse to
another scheme, which was executed in this
manner: He conducted her into her own apartment,
in presence of her footman, who lighted
them thither, and wishing her good rest, returned
to his own chamber, where he waited till every
thing was quiet in the house; and then stealing
softly to her door, which had been left open for
his admission in the dark, he found the husband
still secure in the embraces of sleep, and the lady
in a loose gown, ready to seal his happiness. He
seized opportunity by the forelock, and bearing
her in his arms to the place from whence he
came, she was revenged upon the cuckold for the
uneasy life he had made her lead, and our hero
enjoyed the luscious fruits of his conquest. 
Their guilty raptures, however, were not without
allay. The opium which had been given to
Jolter, together with the wine he had drank,
produced such a perturbation in his fancy, that he
was visited with horrible dreams, and among other
miserable situations, imagined himself in danger
of perishing in the flames, which he thought had
taken hold on his apartment. This vision made
such an impression upon his faculties, that he
alarmed the whole house with the repeated cries
of Fire! Fire! and even leaped out of his bed,
though he still remained fast asleep. The lovers
were very disagreeably disturbed by this dreadful
exclamation, and Mrs. Hornbeck running in great
confusion to the door, had the mortification to
see the footman with a light in his hand, enter
her husband's chamber, in order to give them
notice of this accident. She knew that she would 

be instantly missed, and could easily divine the
consequence, unless her invention could immediately
trump up some plausible excuse for her absence. 
Women are naturally fruitful of expedients in
cases of such emergency; she employed but a few
seconds in recollection, and rushing directly towards
the apartment of the governor, who still
continued to hollow in the same note, exclaimed
in a screaming tone, “Lord have mercy upon
us! where! where!” By this time, all the servants
were assembled in strange attire; Peregrine
slipt on his breeches, burst into Jolter's room, and
seeing him stalking in his shirt with his eyes shut,
bestowed such a slap upon his buttocks, as in a
moment dissolved his dream, and restored him to
the use of his senses. He was astonished and
ashamed at being discovered in such an indecent
attitude; and taking refuge under the cloaths,
asked pardon of all present for the disturbance he
had occasioned; solliciting with great humility
the forgiveness of the lady, who, to a miracle,
counterfeited the utmost agitation of terror and
surprize. Mean while, Hornbeck being awakened
by the repeated efforts of his man, no sooner understood
that his wife was missing, than all the
chimera's of jealousy taking possession of his imagination,
he started up in a sort of frenzy, and
snatching his sword, flew straight to Peregrine's
chamber, where, though he found not that which
he looked for, he unluckily perceived upon the
bed an under-petticoat, which his wife had forgot
in the hurry of her retreat. This discovery added
fuel to the flame of his resentment. He
seized the fatal proof of his dishonour, and meeting
his spouse in her return to bed, presented it 

to her view, saying, with a most expressive countenance,
“Madam, you have dropped your under-petticoat
in the next room.” Mrs. Hornbeck,
who inherited from nature a most admirable presence
of mind, looked earnestly at the object in
question, and with incredible serenity of countenance,
affirmed that the petticoat must belong to
the house, for she had none such in her possession. 
Peregrine, who walked behind her, hearing this
asseveration, immediately interposed, and pulling
Hornbeck by the sleeve into his chamber, “Gadszooks!
said he, what business had you with that
petticoat? Can't you let a young fellow enjoy a
little amour with an innkeeper's daughter, without
exposing his infirmities to your wife? Pshaw!
that's so malicious, because you have quitted
these adventures yourself, to spoil the sport of
other people.” The poor husband was so confounded
at the effrontery of his wife, and this
cavalier declaration of the young man, that his
faith began to waver; he distrusted his own conscious
diffidence of temper, which that he might
not expose, he expressed no doubts of Peregrine's
veracity, but asking pardon for the mistake he
had committed, retired with a grim look, not
yet satisfied with the behaviour of his ingenious
helpmate, but on the contrary determined to inquire
more minutely into the circumstances of
this adventure; which turned out so little to his
satisfaction, that he ordered his servant to get
every thing ready for his departure by break of
day; and when our adventurer rose next morning,
he found that his fellow-travellers were gone
above three hours, though they had agreed to
stay all the forenoon, with a view of seeing the 

prince of Conde's palace, and to proceed all together
for Paris in the afternoon. 
Peregrine was a little chagrined, when he understood
that he was so suddenly deprived of this
almost untasted morsel; and Jolter could not
conceive the meaning of their abrupt and uncivil
disappearance, which after many profound conjectures,
he accounted for, by supposing that
Hornbeck was some sharper who had run away
with an heiress, whom he found it necessary to
conceal from the inquiry of her friends. 
The pupil, who was well assured of the true
motive, allowed his governor to enjoy the triumph
of his own penetration, and consoled himself with
the hope of seeing his Dulcinea again at some of
the public places in Paris, which he proposed to
frequent. Thus comforted, he visited the magnificent
stables and palace of Chantilly, and immediately
after dinner set out for Paris, where
they arrived in the evening, and hired apartments
at an hotel in the Fauxbourg St. Germaine, not
far from the playhouse. 