


CHAP. XCIV.
Peregrine receives a letter from Hatchway, in
consequence of which he repairs to the garison,
and performs the last offices to his aunt. He is
visited by Mr. Gauntlet, who invites him to his
marriage. p. 1.
CHAP. XCV.
Peregrine sets out for the garison, and meets with
a nymph of the road, whom he takes into keeping,
and metamorphoses into a fine lady. p. 22
CHAP. XCVI.
He is visited by Pallet; contracts an intimacy with
a New-market nobleman; and is by the knowing-ones
taken in. p. 33

CHAP. XCVII.
He is taken into the protection of a great man; 
sets up for member of parliament; is disappointed
in his expectation, and finds himself
egregiously outwitted. p. 41
CHAP. XCVIII.
Peregrine commences minister's dependent; meets
by accident with Mrs. Gauntlet; and descends
gradually, in the condition of life. p. 57
CHAP. XCIX.
Cadwallader acts the part of a comforter to his
friend; and is in his turn consoled by Peregrine,
who begins to find himself a most egregious dupe. p. 70
CHAP. C.
He is indulged with a second audience by the minister,
of whose sincerity he is convinced. His
pride and ambition revive, and again are mortified. p. 80
CHAP. CI.
Peregrine commits himself to the publick, and is
admitted member of a college of authors. p. 87
CHAP. CII.
Further proceedings of the college. p. 100

CHAP. CIII.
The young gentleman is introduced to a virtuoso
of the first order, and commences Yelper. p. 123
CHAP. CIV.
Peregrine finding himself neglected by Sir Steady
Steerwell, expostulates with him in a letter; in
consequence of which, he is forbid his house,
loses his pension, and incurs the reputation of a
lunatick. p. 133
CHAP. CV.
He writes against the minister, by whose instigation
he is arrested, and moves himself by Habeas
Corpus into the Fleet. p. 149
CHAP. CVI.
Pickle seems tolerably well reconciled to his cage; 
and is by the clergyman entertained with the memoirs
of a noted personage, whom he sees by accident
in the Fleet. p. 172
CHAP. CVII.
He is surprised with the appearance of Hatchway
and Pipes, who take up their habitation in his
neighbourhood, contrary to his inclination and express
desire. p. 244

CHAP. CVIII.
These associates commit an assault upon Crabtree,
for which they are banished from the Fleet. 
Peregrine begins to feel the effects of confinement. p. 255
CHAP. CIX.
He receives an unexpected visit; and the clouds of
misfortune begin to separate. p. 263
CHAP. CX.
Peregrine reconciles himself to the lieutenant; and
renews his connection with society. Divers plans
are projected in his behalf; and he has occasion
to exhibit a remarkable proof of self-denial. p. 273
CHAP. CXI.
He is engaged in a very extraordinary correspondence,
which is interrupted by a very unexpected
event. p. 279
CHAP. CXII.
Peregrine holds a consultation with his friends; in
consequence of which he bids adieu to the Fleet. 
He arrives at his father's house, and asserts his
right of inheritance. p. 290

CHAP. CXIII.
He performs the last offices to his father, and returns
to London, upon a very interesting design. p. 298
CHAP. the Last.
He enjoys an interview with Emilia, and makes
himself ample amends for all the mortifications
of his life. p. 302