


He is visited by Pallet; contracts an intimacy with
a New-market nobleman; and is by the knowing-ones
taken in. 
This affair being settled, and our adventurer,
for the present, free of all female connexions,
he returned to his former course of fast
living, among the bucks of the town, and performed 

innumerable exploits among whores, bullies,
rooks, constables, and justices of the peace. 
In the midst of these occupations, he was one
morning visited by his old fellow-traveller Pallet,
whose appearance gave him equal surprize and
concern. Tho' the weather was severe, he was
cloathed in the thin summer-dress which he had
wore at Paris, and was now not only threadbare,
but in some parts actually patched; his stockings,
by a repetition of that practice known among
œconomists by the term of coaxing, hung like
pudding-bags about his ankles; his shirt, tho'
new-wash'd, was of the saffron hue, and in divers
places appeared through the crannies of his
breeches; he had exchanged his own hair for a
smoke-dry'd tye-periwig, which all the flour in
his drudging-box had not been able to whiten; 
his eyes were sunk, his jaws lengthened beyond
their usual extension; and he seemed twenty
years older than he looked when he and our hero
parted at Rotterdam. 
In spite of all these evidences of decay, he accosted
him with a meagre affectation of content
and good humour, struggled piteously to appear
gay and unconcerned, professed his joy at seeing
him in England, excused himself for having delayed
so long to come and present his respects; 
alledging, that since his return he had been a
meer slave to the satisfaction of some persons of
quality and taste, who had insisted upon his
finishing some pieces with the utmost expedition. 
Peregrine received him with that compassion
and complaisance which was natural to his disposition,
inquired about the healths of Mrs. Pallet 

and his family, and asked if his friend the
doctor was in town. The painter seemed to have
resumed his resentment against that gentleman,
of whom he spoke in contemptuous terms. “The
doctor (said he) is so much overshadowed with
presumption and self-conceit, that his merit has
no relief. It does not rise. There is no keeping
in the picture, my dear Sir. All the same as if I
were to represent the moon under a cloud; 
there would be nothing but a deep mass of
shade, with a little tiny speck of light in the
middle, which would only serve to make, as it
were, the darkness visible. You understand me. 
Had he taken my advice, it might have been
better for him; but he's bigotted to his own
opinion. You must know, Mr. Pickle, upon
our return to England, I counselled him to compose
a little, smart, clever ode upon my Cleopatra. 
As Gad shall judge me, I thought it
would have been of some service, in helping him
out of obscurity; for you know, as Sir Richard
observes, 

Soon will that die, which adds thy fame to mine.
Let me then live, join'd to a work of thine.
By the bye, there is a most picturesque contrast
in these lines, of thy and me, living and dying,
and thine and mine. Ah! a pize upon it! 
Dick, after all, was the man. Ecod! he
rounded it off. But, to return to this unhappy
young man, would you believe it, he tossed up
his nose at my friendly proposal, and gabbled
something in Greek, which is not worth repeating. 
The case was this, my dear Sir, he
was out of humour at the neglect of the world. 

He thought the poets of the age were jealous of
his genius, and strove to crush it accordingly,
while the rest of mankind wanted taste sufficient
to discern it. For my own part, I profess myself
one of these; and as the clown in Billy
Shakespear says of the courtier's oath, had I
sworn by the doctor's genius, that the pancakes
were naught, they might have been for all that
very good, yet shouldn't I have been forsworn. 
Let that be as it will, he retired from town in
great dudgeon, and set up his rest near a hill in
Derbyshire, with two tops, resembling Parnassus,
and a well at the bottom, which he had christened
Hyp-o-the-Green. Egad! if he stays in that habitation,
'tis my opinion he'll soon grow green
with the hip indeed. He'll be glad of an opportunity
to return to the flesh-pots of Egypt, and
pay his court to the slighted queen Cleopatra. 
Ha! well remembered, by this light. You shall
know, my good Sir, that this same Egyptian
princess has been courted by so many gallants of
taste, that as I hope to live, I found myself in
some sort of a dilemma, because in parting with
her to one, I should have disobliged all his rivals. 
Now a man would not chuse to give offence to
his friends, at least I lay it down as a maxim, to
avoid the smallest appearance of ingratitude. 
Perhaps I may be in the wrong. But every man
has his way. For this reason, I proposed to all
the candidates, that a lottery or raffle should be
set on foot, by which every individual would
have an equal chance for her good graces, and
the prize to be left to the decision of fortune. 
The scheme was mightily relished, and the terms
being such a trifle as half a guinea, the whole
town crouded into my house, in order to subscribe. 

But there I was their humble servant. 
Gentlemen, you must have a little patience till
my own particular friends are served. Among
that number, I do myself the honour to consider
Mr. Pickle. Here is a copy of the proposals; 
and if the list should be adorned with his name,
I hope, notwithstanding his merited success
among the young ladies, he will for once be
shunned by that little vixen called Miss Fortune; 
he, he, he!” 
So saying, he bowed with a thousand apish
congês, and presented his paper to Peregrine,
who seeing the number of subscribers was limited
to one hundred, said he thought him too
moderate in his expectations, as he did not doubt
that his picture would be a cheap purchase at five
hundred, instead of fifty pounds, at which the
price was fixed. To this unexpected remark
Pallet answered, that among connoisseurs he
would not pretend to appraise his picture; but
that, in valuing his works, he was obliged to
have an eye to the Gothic ignorance of the age
in which he lived. 
Our adventurer saw at once into the nature of
this raffle, which was no other than a begging
shift to dispose of a paultry piece, that he could
not otherwise have sold for twenty shillings. 
However, far from shocking the poor man in
distress, by dropping the least hint of his conjecture,
he desired to be favoured with six
chances, if the circumstances of his plan would
indulge him so far; and the painter, after some
hesitation, condescended to comply with his request,
out of pure friendship and veneration; 
tho' he observed, that in so doing he must exclude
some of his most intimate companions. 

Having received the money, he gave Pickle his
address, desiring he would, with his convenience,
visit the princess, who, he was sure, would display
her most engaging attractions, in order to
captivate his fancy; and took his leave, extremely
well pleased with the success of his application. 
Tho' Peregrine was tempted with the curiosity
of seeing this portrait, which he imagined must
contain some analogy to the ridiculous oddity of
the painter, he would not expose himself to the
disagreeable alternative of applauding the performance,
contrary to the dictates of conscience
and common sense, or of condemning it, to the
unspeakable mortification of the miserable author; 
and therefore never dreamt of returning
the painter's visit: nor did he ever hear of the
lottery's being drawn. 
About this time he was invited to spend a few
weeks at the country-seat of a certain nobleman,
with whom he had contracted an acquaintance,
in the course of his debauches, which we have
already described; and his lordship being remarkable
for his skill and success in horse-racing, his
house was continually filled with the connoisseurs
and admirers of that sport, upon which the
whole conversation turned, insomuch that Peregrine
gradually imbibed some knowledge in
horse-flesh, and the diversions of the course; for
the whole occupation of the day, exclusive of
eating and drinking, consisted in viewing, managing
and exercising his lordship's stud. 
Our hero looked upon these amusements with
an eye of taste, as well as curiosity; he contemplated
the animal as a beautiful and elegant part
of the creation, and relished the surprising exertion 

of its speed with a refined and classical delight. 
In a little time he became personally acquainted
with every horse in the stable, and interested
himself in the reputation of each; while
he also gratified his appetite for knowledge, in
observing the methods of preparing their bodies,
and training them to the race. His landlord saw
and encouraged his eagerness, from which he
promised himself some advantage; he formed several
private matches for his entertainment, and
flattered his discernment, by permitting him to
be successful in the first betts he made. Thus
was he artfully decoyed into a spirit of keenness
and adventure, and disposed to depend upon his
own judgment, in opposition to that of people
who had made coursing the sole study of their
lives. He accompanied my lord to Newmarket,
and entering at once into the genius of the place,
was marked as fair game, by all the knowing
ones there assembled, many of whom found
means to take him in, in spite of all the cautions
and admonitions of his lordship, who wanted to
reserve him for his own use. 
It is almost impossible for any man, let him
be never so fearful or phlegmatic, to be an unconcerned
spectator in this busy scene. The
dæmon of play hovers in the air, like a pestilential
vapour, tainting the minds of all present
with infallible infection, which communicates
from one person to another, like the circulation
of a general pannic. Peregrine was seized with
this epidemic distemper to a violent degree; and
after having lost a few loose hundreds, in his
progress through the various rookeries of the
place, entered into partnership with his noble
friend in a grand match, upon the issue of which 

he ventured no less than three thousand pounds. 
Indeed, he would not have risqued such a considerable
sum, had not his own confidence been
reinforced by the opinion and concurrence of his
lordship, who hazarded an equal bett upon the
same event. These two associates engaged themselves
in the penalty of six thousand pounds, to
run one chaise and four against another, three
times round the course; and our adventurer had
the satisfaction of seeing his antagonists distanced
in the first and second heat; but all of a sudden,
one of the horses of his machine was knocked
up, by which accident, the victory was ravished
almost from his very grasp, and he was obliged
to endure the damage and the scorn. 
He was deeply affected with this misfortune,
which he imputed to his own extravagance and
temerity, but discovered no external signs of affliction,
because his illustrious partner bore his
loss with the most philosophic resignation, consoling
himself, as well as Pickle, with the hope
of making it up, on some other occasion. Nevertheless,
our young gentleman could not help
admiring and even envying his equanimity, not
knowing that his lordship had managed matters
so as to be a gainer by the misfortune; which to
retrieve, Peregrine purchased several horses, at
the recommendation of his friend; and instead
of returning to London, made a tour with him
to all the celebrated races in England, at which,
after several vicissitudes of fortune, he made
shift, before the end of the season, to treble
his loss. 
But his hopes seemed to increase with his ill
luck; and in the beginning of winter he came
to town, fully persuaded that fortune must necessarily 

change, and that next season he should
reap the happy fruits of his experience. In this
confidence, he seemed to drown all ideas of prudence
and œconomy; his former expence was
mere parsimony, compared with that which he
now incurred: he subscribed to the opera, and
half a dozen concerts at different parts of the
town; was a benefactor to several hospitals, purchased
a collection of valuable pictures, took an
house, and furnished it in a most magnificent
taste, laid in a large stock of French wines, and
gave extravagant entertainments to his quality-friends,
who in return loaded him with compliment,
and insisted upon his making use of their
interest and good-will. 