


Exhibiting an interview, which it is to
be hoped, will interest the curiosity of
the reader. 
The mind of the delicate Aurelia
was strangely agitated by
the intelligence which she received,
with her pocket-book, from Dolly. 
Confounded as she was by the nature
of her situation, she at once perceived 

that she could not, with any regard to
the dictates of gratitude, refuse complying
with the request of Sir Launcelot; 
but, in the first hurry of her
emotion, she directed Dolly to beg,
in her name, that she might be excused
for wearing a masque at the interview
which he desired, as she had
particular reasons, which concerned
her peace, for retaining that disguise. 
Our adventurer submitted to this preliminary
with a good grace, as he had
nothing in view but the injunctions of
his order, and the duties of humanity; 
and he was admitted without further
preamble. When he entered the
room, he could not help being struck
with the presence of Aurelia. Her
stature was improved since he had
seen her; her shape was exquisitely
formed; and she received him with
an air of dignity, which impressed
him with a very sublime idea of her
person and character. She was no
less affected at the sight of our adventurer,
who, though cased in armour,
appeared with his head uncovered; 

and the exercise of travelling had
thrown such a glow of health and
vivacity on his features, which were
naturally elegant and expressive, that
we will venture to say, there was not
in all England a couple that excelled
this amiable pair in personal beauty
and accomplishments. Aurelia shone
with all the fabled graces of nymph
or goddess; and to Sir Launcelot
might be applied what the divine
poet Ariosto says of the prince Zerbino: 

Natura il fece e poi ruppe la stampa.
‘When Nature stamp'd him, she the dye destroy'd.’
Our adventurer, having made his
obeisance to this supposed Miss Meadows,
told her, with an air of pleasantry,
that altho' he thought himself
highly honoured in being admitted to
her presence, and allowed to pay his
respects to her, as superior beings are
adored, unseen; yet his pleasure 

would receive a very considerable addition,
if she would be pleased to
withdraw that invidious veil, that he
might have a glimpse of the divinity
which it concealed. Aurelia immediately
took off her masque, saying,
with a faultering accent, “I cannot
be so ungrateful as to deny such a
small favour to a gentleman who has
laid me under the most important obligations.” 
The unexpected apparition of Miss
Aurelia Darnel, beaming with all the
emanations of ripened beauty, blushing
with all the graces of the most lovely
confusion, could not but produce a
violent effect upon the mind of Sir
Launcelot Greaves. He was, indeed,
overwhelmed with a mingled transport
of astonishment, admiration,
affliction, and awe. The colour vanished
from his cheeks, and he stood
gazing upon her, in silence, with the
most emphatic expression of countenance. 
Aurelia was infected by his
disorder: she began to tremble, and
the roses fluctuated on her face. — 

“I cannot forget (said she) that I
owe my life to the courage and humanity
of Sir Launcelot Greaves, and
that he at the same time rescued from
the most dreadful death a dear and venerable
parent.” “Would to heaven
she still survived! (cried our adventurer
with great emotion.) She was
the friend of my youth, the kind patroness
of my felicity! my guardian
angel forsook me when she expired!
her last injunctions are deep engraven
on my heart!” 
While he pronounced these words
she lifted her handkerchief to her fair
eyes, and, after some pause, proceeded
in a tremulous tone, “I hope, Sir
—I hope you have—I should be sorry
—pardon me, Sir, I cannot reflect
upon such an interesting subject unmoved—” 
Here she fetched a deep
sigh, that was accompanied with a
flood of tears; while the knight continued
to bend his eyes upon her with
the utmost eagerness of attention. 
Having recollected herself a little,
she endeavoured to shift the conversation: 

“You have been abroad since
I had the pleasure to see you—I hope
you were agreeably amused in your
travels.” “No, madam, (said our
hero, drooping his head) I have been
unfortunate.” 
When she, with the
most enchanting sweetness of benevolence,
expressed her concern to
hear he had been unhappy, and her
hope that his misfortunes were not
past remedy; he lifted up his eyes,
and fixing them upon her again with
a look of tender dejection, “Cut off
(said he) from the possession of what
my soul held most dear, I wished for
death, and was visited by distraction. 
—I have been abandoned by my reason
—my youth is for ever blasted.”— 
The tender heart of Aurelia could
bear no more—her knees began to
totter: the lustre vanished from her
eyes, and she fainted in the arms of
her attendant. Sir Launcelot, aroused
by this circumstance, assisted Dolly in
seating her mistress on a couch, where
she soon recovered, and saw the
knight on his knees before her. “I 

am still happy (said he) in being able
to move your compassion, though I
have been held unworthy of your
esteem.” “Do me justice, (she replied:)
my best esteem has been always
inseparably connected with the
character of Sir Launcelot Greaves”— 
“Is it possible? (cried our hero) then
surely I have no reason to complain. 
If I have moved your compassion,
and possess your esteem, I am but one
degree short of supreme happiness— 
that, however, is a gigantic step — 
O Miss Darnel! when I remember
that dear, that melancholy moment.” 
—So saying, he gently
touched her hand, in order to press
it to his lips, and perceived on her
finger the very individual ring which
he had presented in her mother's presence,
as an interchanged testimony
of plighted faith. Starting at the
well known object, the sight of which
conjured up a strange confusion of
ideas, “This (said he) was once the
pledge of something still more cordial
than esteem.” Aurelia, blushing at 

this remark, while her eyes lightened
with unusual vivacity, replied, in a
severer tone, “Sir, you best know how
it lost its original signification.” “By
heaven! I do not, madam, (exclaimed
our adventurer.) With me it was
ever held a sacred idea throned within
my heart, cherished with such fervency
of regard, with such reverence
of affection, as the devout anchorite
more unreasonably pays to those sainted
reliques that constitute the object of
his adoration—” “And, like those
reliques, (answered Miss Darnel) I
have been insensible of my votary's
devotion. —A saint I must have been,
or something more, to know the
sentiments of your heart by inspiration.” 
“Did I forbear (said he)
to express, to repeat, to enforce the
dictates of the purest passion that
ever warmed the human breast, until
I was denied access, and formally
discarded by that cruel dismission.”— 
“I must beg your pardon, Sir, (cried
Aurelia, interrupting him hastily) I
know not what you mean.” “That 

fatal sentence, (said he) if not pronounced
by your own lips, at least
written by your own fair hand, which
drove me out an exile for ever from
the paradise of your affection.” “I
would not (she replied) do Sir Launcelot
Greaves the injury to suppose
him capable of imposition: but you
talk of things to which I am an utter
stranger. —I have a right, Sir, to demand
of your honour, that you will
not impute to me your breaking off a
connection, which—I would—rather
wish—had never.” —“Heaven and
earth! what do I hear? (cried our
impatient knight) have I not the baleful
letter to produce? What else but
Miss Darnel's explicit and express declaration
could have destroyed the
sweetest hope that ever cheared my
soul; could have obliged me to resign
all claim to that felicity for which
alone I wished to live; could have
filled my bosom with unutterable sorrow
and despair; could have even
divested me of reason, and driven
me from the society of men, a poor, 

forlorn, wandering lunatic, such as
you see me now prostrate at your feet; 
all the blossoms of my youth withered,
all the honours of my family decayed?” 
Aurelia looking wistfully at her lover,
“Sir, (said she) you overwhelm
me with amazement and anxiety! you
are imposed upon, if you have received
any such letter: you are deceived,
if you thought Aurelia Darnel
could be so insensible, ungrateful,
and—inconstant.” 
This last word she pronounced with
some hesitation, and a downcast look,
while her face underwent a total suffusion,
and the knight's heart began
to palpitate with all the violence of
emotion. He eagerly imprinted a
kiss upon her hand, exclaiming, in
interrupted phrase, “Can it be possible? 
—Heaven grant—Sure this is no
illusion. —O, madam!—shall I call
you my Aurelia? My heart is bursting
with a thousand fond thoughts
and presages. You shall see that dire
paper which hath been the source of 

all my woes—it is the constant companion
of my travels. —Last night I
nourished my chagrin with the perusal
of its horrid contents.” 
Aurelia expressed great impatience
to view the cruel forgery; for such she
assured him it must be: but he could
not gratify her desire till the arrival of
his servant with the portmanteau. 
In the mean time, tea was called. 
The lovers were seated: he looked
and languished; she flushed and faultered:
all was doubt and delirium,
fondness and flutter. Their mutual
disorder communicated itself to the
kind-hearted sympathizing Dolly, who
had been witness to the interview, and
deeply affected with the disclosure of
the scene. Unspeakable was her surprize
when she found her mistress
Miss Meadows was no other than
the celebrated Aurelia Darnel, whose
elogium she had heard so eloquently
pronounced by her sweet-heart Mr.
Thomas Clarke; a discovery which
still more endeared her lady to her
affection. She had wept plentifully 

at the progress of their mutual explanation; 
and was now so disconcerted,
that she scarce knew the meaning of
the orders she had received. She set
the kettle on the table, and placed
the tea-board on the fire. Her confusion,
by attracting the notice of
her mistress, helped to relieve her
from her own embarrassing situation. 
She, with her own delicate hands,
rectified the mistake of Dolly; who
still continued to sob, and said, “Yaw
may think, my leady Darnel, as haw
I 'aive yeaten hool-cheese; but it
y'an't soa. —I'se think, vor maai peart,
as how I'aive bean bewitched.” Sir
Launcelot could not help smiling at
the simplicity of Dolly, whose goodness
of heart and attachment, Aurelia
did not fail to extol, as soon as her
back was turned. It was in consequence
of this commendation, that,
the next time she entered the room,
our adventurer, for the first time,
considered her face, and seemed to
be struck with her features. He
asked her some questions, which she 

could not answer to his satisfaction,
applauded her regard for her lady,
and assured her of his friendship and
protection. He now begged to know
the cause that obliged his Aurelia to
travel at such a rate, and in such an
equipage; and she informed him of
those particulars which we have already
communicated to the reader. 
Sir Launcelot glowed with resentment,
when he understood how his
dear Aurelia had been oppressed by
her perfidious and cruel guardian. He
bit his nether lip, rolled his eyes
around, started from his seat, and
striding across the room, “I remember
(said he) the dying words of her
who is now a saint in heaven— 
“That violent man, my brother-in-law,
who is Aurelia's sole guardian,
will thwart her wishes with every obstacle
that brutal resentment and implacable
malice can contrive.” —What
followed, it would ill become me to
repeat: but she concluded with these
words—“The rest we must leave to
the dispensations of Providence.” — 

Was it not Providence that sent me
hither, to guard and protect the injured
Aurelia?” Then turning to
Miss Darnel, whose eyes streamed
with tears, he added, “Yes, divine
creature! heaven, careful of your
safety, and in compassion to my sufferings,
hath guided me hither, in
this mysterious manner, that I might
defend you from violence, and enjoy
this transition from madness to deliberation,
from despair to felicity.” So
saying, he approached this amiable
mourner, this fragrant flower of beauty,
glittering with the dew-drops of
the morning; this sweetest, and gentlest,
loveliest ornament of human
nature: he gazed upon her with
looks of love ineffable: he sat down
by her; he pressed her soft hand in
his; he began to fear that all he saw
was the flattering vision of a distempered
brain. He looked and sighed; 
and turning up his eyes to heaven,
breathed, in broken murmurs, the
chaste raptures of his soul. The tenderness
of this communication was 

too painful to be long endured. Aurelia
industriously interposed other
subjects of discourse, that his attention
might not be dangerously overcharged,
and the afternoon passed insensibly
away. 
Though he had determined, in his
own mind, never more to quit this
idol of his soul, they had not yet concerted
any plan of conduct, when
their happiness was all at once interrupted
by a repetition of cries, denoting
horror; and a servant, coming
in, said he believed some rogues were
murdering a traveller on the highway. 
The supposition of such distress operated
like gunpowder on the disposition
of our adventurer, who, without considering
the situation of Aurelia, and
indeed without seeing, or being capable
to think on her, or any other subject,
for the time being, ran directly
to the stable, and mounting the first
horse which he found saddled, issued
out in the twilight, having no other
weapon but his sword. He rode full
speed to the spot whence the cries 

seemed to proceed; but they sounded
more remote as he advanced. Nevertheless
he followed them to a considerable
distance from the road, over
fields, ditches, and hedges; and at
last came so near, that he could plainly
distinguish the voice of his own
squire, Timothy Crabshaw, bellowing
for mercy, with hideous vociferation. 
Stimulated by this recognition,
he redoubled his career in the
dark, till at length his horse plunged
into a hole, the nature of which he
could not comprehend; but he found
it impracticable to disengage him. 
It was with some difficulty that he
himself clambered over a ruined wall,
and regained the open ground. Here
he groped about, in the utmost impatience
of anxiety, ignorant of the
place, mad with vexation for the fate
of his unfortunate squire, and between
whiles invaded with a pang of
concern for Aurelia, left among strangers,
unguarded, and alarmed. In
the midst of this emotion, he bethought
himself of hollowing aloud, 

that, in case he should be in the neighbourhood
of any inhabited place, he
might be heard and assisted. He accordingly
practised this expedient,
which was not altogether without effect; 
for he was immediately answered
by an old friend, no other than
his own steed Bronzomarte, who,
hearing his master's voice, neighed
strenuously at a small distance. The
knight, being well acquainted with
the sound, heard with astonishment; 
and, advancing in the right direction,
found his noble charger fastened to a
tree. He forthwith untied and mounted
him; then, laying the reins upon
his neck, allowed him to chuse his
own path, in which he began to travel
with equal steadiness and expedition. 
They had not proceeded far
when the knight's ears were again saluted
by the cries of Crabshaw; which
Bronzomarte no sooner heard than he
pricked up his ears, neighed, and
quickened his pace, as if he had been
sensible of the squire's distress, and
hastened to his relief. Sir Launcelot, 

notwithstanding his own disquiet,
could not help observing and admiring
this generous sensibility of his horse:
he began to think himself some hero
of romance mounted upon a winged
steed, inspired with reason, directed
by some humane inchanter, who pitied
virtue in distress. All circumstances
considered, it is no wonder that the
commotion in the mind of our adventurer
produced some such delirium. 
All night he continued the
chace; the voice, which was repeated
at intervals, still retreating before
him, till the morning began to appear
in the East, when, by divers
piteous groans, he was directed to
the corner of a wood, where he beheld
his miserable squire stretched upon
the grass, and Gilbert feeding by
him altogether unconcerned, the helmet
and the launce suspended at the
saddle-bow, and the portmanteau
safely fixed upon the crupper. 
The knight, riding up to Crabshaw,
with equal surprize and concern, asked
what had brought him there; and 

Timothy, after some pause, during
which he surveyed his master with a
rueful aspect, answered, “The devil.” 
“One would imagine, indeed,
you had some such conveyance, (said
Sir Launcelot.) I have followed your
cries since last evening I know not
how, nor whither, and never could
come up with you till this moment. 
But, say, what damage have you
sustained, that you lie in that wretched
posture, and groan so dismally?” 
“I can't guess, (replied the squire)
if it bean't that mai hoole carcase is
drilled into oilet hools, and my flesh
pinched into a jelly.” —“How!
wherefore? (cried the knight)—who
were the miscreants that treated you
in such a barbarous manner? Do you
know the ruffians?” “I know nothing
at all, (answered the peevish
squire) but that I was tormented by
vive houndred and vifty thousand legions
of devils, and there's an end
oon't.” “Well, you must have a
little patience, Crabshaw—there's a
salve for every sore.” —“Yaw mought 

as well tell ma, for every zow there's
a zirreverence.” “For a man in
your condition, methinks you talk
very much at your ease—Try if you
can get up and mount Gilbert, that
you may be conveyed to some place
where you can have proper assistance. 
—So—well done—chearly.”— 
Timothy actually made an effort
to rise; but fell down again, and uttered
a dismal yell. Then his master
exhorted him to take advantage of a
park-wall by which he lay, and raise
himself gradually upon it. Crabshaw,
eying him askance, said, by
way of reproach, for his not alighting
and assisting him in person,
“Thatch your house with t&wblank;d,
and you'll have more teachers, than
reachers.” —Having pronounced this
inelegant adage, he made shift to stand
upon his legs; and now, the knight
lending a hand, was mounted upon
Gilbert, though not without a world
of oh's! and ah's! and other ajaculations
of pain and impatience. As
they jogged on together, our adventurer 

endeavoured to learn the particulars
of the disaster which had befallen
the squire; but all the information
he could obtain amounted
to a very imperfect sketch of the adventure. 
By dint of a thousand interrogations
he understood, that Crabshaw
had been, in the preceding
evening, encountered by three persons
on horseback with Venetian
masques on their faces, which he
mistook for their natural features, and
was terrified accordingly: that they
not only presented pistols to his breast,
and led his horse out of the highway; 
but pricked him with goads, and
pinched him, from time to time, till
he screamed with the torture: that he
was led through unfrequented places
across the country, sometimes at an
easy trot, sometimes at full gallop,
and tormented all night by those hideous
dæmons, who vanished at day-break,
and left him lying on the spot
where he was found by his master. 
This was a mystery which our hero
could by no means unriddle: it was 

the more unaccountable, as the squire
had not been robbed of his money,
horses, and baggage. He was even
disposed to believe, that Crabshaw's
brain was disordered, and the whole
account he had given, no more than
a chimera. This opinion, however,
he could no longer retain, when he
arrived at an inn on the post-road,
and found, upon examination, that
Timothy's lower extremities were covered
with blood, and all the rest of
his body speckled with livid marks of
contusion. But he was still more chagrined
when the landlord informed
him, that he was thirty miles distant
from the place where he had left Aurelia,
and that his way lay through
cross-roads, which were almost impassable
at that season of the year. 
Alarmed at this intelligence, he gave
directions that his squire should be
immediately conveyed to bed in a
comfortable chamber, as he complained
more and more; and indeed was
seized with a fever, occasioned by the
fatigue, the pain, and terror he had 

undergone. A neighbouring apothecary
being called, and giving it
as his opinion that he could not for
some days be in a condition to travel,
his master deposited a sum of money
in his hands, desiring he might be
properly attended, till he should hear
further. Then mounting Bronzomarte,
he set out with a guide for the
place he had left, not without a thousand
fears and perplexities, arising
from the reflection of having left the
jewel of his heart with such precipitation. 