


The characters of Mr. Lavement, his wife
and daughter—some anecdotes of the
family—the mother and daughter rivals
—I am guilty of a mistake that gives
me present satisfaction, but is attended
with troublesome consequences. 
Next day, while I was at work in the
shop, a bouncing damsel well dressed came
in, on pretence of finding a vial for some use or
other; and taking an opportunity when she
thought I did not mind her, of observing me narrowly,
went away with a silent look of disdain— 
I easily guessed her sentiments, and my pride
took the resolution of entertaining the same indifference
and neglect towards her—At dinner, the
maids with whom I dined in the kitchen, gave
me to understand that this was my master's only
daughter, who would have a very handsome fortune,
on account of which, and her beauty, a
great many young gentlemen made their addresses
to her—that she had been twice on the brink of
marriage, but disappointed by the stinginess of her
father, who refused to part with a shilling as long
as he should live—for which reason the young lady
did not behave to her father with all the filial veneration
that might be expected: In particular,
she harbour'd the most perfect hatred for his countrymen,
in which disposition her mother join'd,
who was an English woman; and by the hints 

they dropp'd, I learn'd the grey mare was the
better horse—that she was a matron of a high spirit,
which was often manifested at the expence
of her dependants: That she lov'd diversions; 
and look'd upon miss as her rival in all parties; 
which was indeed the true cause of her disappointments; 
for had the mother been hearty in her interest,
the father would not have ventur'd to refuse
her demands. —Over and above this intelligence,
I of myself, soon made more discoveries; 
Mr. Lavement's significant grins at his wife,
while she look'd another way, convinc'd me that
he was not at all content with his lot: And his
behaviour in presence of the captain, made me
believe his chief torment was jealousy. —As
for my own part, I was consider'd in no other
light than that of a menial servant, and had been
already six days in the house without being honour'd
with one word from either mother or
daughter, the latter (as I understood from the
maids) having at table one day, expressed some
surprize that her papa should entertain such an
aukward, mean-looking journeyman. —I was nettled
at this piece of information, and next sunday,
(it being my turn to take my diversion) dressed
myself in my new cloaths to the greatest advantage,
and, vanity apart, made no contemptible figure. — 
After having spent most part of the day in company
with Strap and some of his acquaintance, I
came home in the afternoon, and was let in by
miss, who not knowing me, dropt a low courtesy
as I advanced, which I returned with a profound
bow, and shut the door—By that time I had
turn'd about, she had perceiv'd her mistake, and
chang'd colour, but did not withdraw. The passage
being narrow, I could not get away without 

jostling her; so, I was forc'd to remain where
I was, with my eyes fix'd on the ground, and my
face glowing with blushes—At length her vanity
coming to her assistance, she went away tittering,
and I could hear her pronounce the word “creature:” 
From this day forward, she came into
the shop fifty times every day, upon various pretences,
and put in practice so many ridiculous airs,
that I could easily perceive her opinion of me
was chang'd, and that she did not think me altogether
an unworthy conquest—But my heart was
so steel'd against her charms by pride and resentment,
which were two chief ingredients in my
disposition, that I remain'd insensible to all her
arts; and notwithstanding some advances she
made, could not be prevail'd upon to yield her
the least attention—This neglect soon banish'd all
the favourable impressions she felt for me, and the
rage of a slighted woman took place in her heart; 
which she manifested not only in all the suggestions
her malice could invent to my prejudice
with her father, but also in procuring for me
such servile employments, as she hoped, would
sufficiently humble my spirit. One day in particular,
she order'd me to brush my master's coat,
but I refusing, a smart dialogue ensued, which
ended in her bursting into tears of rage; when
her mother interposing, and examining into the
merits of the cause, determin'd it in my favour; 
and this good office I ow'd not to any esteem or
consideration she had for me, but solely to the desire
of mortifying her daughter, who on this occasion
observ'd, that let people be never so much
in the right, there were some folks who would
never do them justice; but to be sure, they had
their reason for it, which some people were not 

ignorant of, although they despised their little
arts. 
—This insinuation of some people and some
folks, put me upon observing the behaviour of my
mistress more narrowly for the future; and it
was not long before I had reason to believe that
she look'd upon her daughter as a rival in the affections
of captain Odonnell, who lodged in the
house. —In the mean time my industry and knowledge
gain'd me the good will of my master,
who would often say in French, “Mardy! c'est
un bon Garçon.” He had a great deal of business; 
but as he was mostly employ'd among his
fellow refugees, his profits were small. —However,
his expence for medicines was not great, he being
the most expert man at a succedaneum, of
any apothecary in London, so that I have been
sometimes amaz'd to see him without the least
hesitation, make up a physician's prescription,
though he had not in his shop one medicine
mention'd in it. —Oyster-shells he could convert
into crab's eyes; common oil into oil of sweet
almonds; syrup of sugar into balsamic syrup; 
Thames water into aqua cinnamomi; turpentine
into capivi; and a hundred more costly preparations
were produc'd in an instant, from the
cheapest and coursest drugs of the materia medica: 
And when any common thing was order'd for a
patient, he always took care to disguise it in colour
or taste, or both, in such a manner, as that
it could not possibly be known. —For which purpose,
cochineal and oil of cloves were of great
service among many nostrums which he possess'd; 
there was one for the venereal disease, that brought
him a good deal of money; and this he conceal'd
so artfully from me, that I could never learn its
composition: But during the eight months I stay'd 

in his service, he was so unfortunate in the use of
it, that three parts in four of those who took it,
were fain to confirm the cure with a salivation
under the direction of another doctor. —This bad
success, in all appearance, attach'd him the more
to his specifick; and before I left him, I may
venture to say, he would have sooner renounc'd
the Trinity (notwithstanding his being a good
Huegonot) than his confidence in the never-failing
power of this remedy. —Mr. Lavement had
attempted more than once, to introduce a vegetable
diet into his family, by launching out into
the praise of it, and decrying the use of flesh, both
as a Physician and Philosopher; but all his rhetoric
could not make one proselyte to his opinion,
and even the wife of his bosom declared against the
proposal. —Whether it was owing to the little regard
she paid to her husband's admonition in this
particular, or to the natural warmth of her constitution,
I know not; but this lady's passions became
every day more and more violent, till at
last she look'd upon decency as an unnecessary
restraint; and one afternoon, when her husband
was abroad, and her daughter visiting, order'd
me to call a hackney coach, in which she and the
captain drove off towards Covent-Garden. —Miss
came home in the evening, and supping at her
usual hour, went to bed. —About eleven a clock
my master enter'd, and ask'd if his wife was gone
to sleep: Upon which I told him, my mistress
went out in the afternoon, and was not yet return'd. 
—This was like a clap of thunder to the
poor Apothecary, who starting back, cried “Mort
de ma vie! vat you tell a me? —My wife not,
at home!” —At that instant a patient's servant
arriv'd with a prescription for a draught, 

which my master taking, went into the shop to
make it up himself. —While he rubb'd the ingredients
in a glass mortar, he enquir'd of me, whether
or no his wife went out alone; and no sooner
heard that she was in company with the captain,
than with one blow he split the mortar into a
thousand pieces, and grinning like the head of a
bass viol, exclaim'd, “Ah traitresse!” —It
would have been impossible for me to have preserv'd
my gravity a minute longer, when I was
happily reliev'd by a rap at the door, which I
open'd, and perceiv'd my mistress coming out of
a coach; she flounc'd immediately into the shop,
and addressed her husband thus: “I suppose you
thought I was lost, my dear—Captain Odonnell
has been so good as to treat me with a play.” 
—“Play—play (replied he) Oho! yes by gar,
I believe ver prettie play.” —“Bless me!
(said she) what's the matter?” —“Vat de
matter? (cried he, forgetting all his former complaisance)
by gar, you be one damn dog's wife
—ventre bleu! me vill show you vat it is
to put one horn upon mine head. Pardieu!
le capitaine Odonnell be one.” —Here the
captain, who had been all the while at the door
discharging the coach, entering, said with a terrible
voice, “D&wblank;mme! what am I?” —Mr.
Lavement changing his tone, immediately saluted
him with, “Oh serviteur monsieur le capitaine,
vous etes un galant homme—ma femme est fort
obligée.” —Then turning about towards me,
pronounc'd with a low voice, “Et diablement
obligeante sans doute.” —“Harkee, Mr. Lavement,
(said the captain) I am a man of honour,
and I believe you are too much of a gentleman
to be offended at the civility I shew your 

wife.” —This declaration had such
an effect on the apothecary, that he resum'd all
the politesse of a Frenchman; and with the utmost
prostration of compliment, assur'd the captain
that he was perfectly satisfied with the honour
he had done his wife. —Matters being thus compos'd,
every body went to rest. —Next day I
perceiv'd thro' a glass door that open'd from the
shop into a parlour, the captain talking earnestly
to miss, who heard him with a look that expressed
anger mingled with scorn; which however he
at last found means to mollify, and seal'd his reconciliation
with a kiss. —This soon convinc'd me
of the occasion of the quarrel; but notwithstanding
all my vigilance, I could never discover any
other commerce between them. —In the mean
while, I had reason to believe I had inspir'd one
of the maids with tender sentiments for me; and
one night when I thought every other person in
the house asleep, I took the opportunity of the
other maid's absence (for she had got leave to go
and visit her sick father who liv'd at Richmond)
to avail myself of my conquest: Accordingly I got
up, and (naked as I was) explor'd my way in
the dark, to the garret where she lay. —I was ravish'd
to find the door open, and moved softly to
her bed-side, transported with the hope of compleating
my wishes. —But what horrors of jealousy
and disappointment did I feel, when I found
her asleep, fast locked in the arms of a man,
whom I easily guessed to be no other than the
captain's servant! I was upon the point of doing
some rash thing, when the noise of a rat scratching
behind the wainscoat, put me to flight, and
I was fain to get back to my own bed in safety. 
—Whether this alarm had disorder'd my mind, 

or that I was led astray by the power of destiny, I
know not; but instead of turning to the left
when I descended to the second story, I persu'd
the contrary course, and mistook the young lady's
bed-chamber for my own. I did not perceive my
mistake before I had run against the bed posts; 
and then it was not in my power to retreat undiscover'd:
for the nymph being awake, felt my
approach, and with a soft voice, bid me make
less noise lest the Scotch-booby in the next room
should over-hear us. This hint was sufficient to
inform me of the nature of the assignation; and
as my passions, at any time high, were then in a
state of exaltation, I was resolved to profit by
my good fortune. —Without any more ceremony
therefore, I made bold to slip into bed to this charmer,
who gave me as favourable a reception as I
could desire. —Our conversation was very sparing
on my part, but she upbraided the person
whom I represented, with his jealousy of me,
whom she handled so roughly, that my resentment
had well nigh occasion'd a discovery more
than once; but I was consoled for her hatred of
me, by understanding from her own mouth, that
it was now high time to salve her reputation by
matrimony; for she had reason to fear she could
not much longer conceal the effects of their mutual
intercourse. —While I was meditating an answer
to this proposal, I heard a noise in my room,
like something heavy falling down upon the floor: 
Upon which, I started up, and creeping to the
door of my chamber, observ'd by moon-light,
the shadow of a man groping his way out; whereupon,
I retir'd to one side to let him pass, and
saw him go down stairs as expeditiously as he
could. —It was an easy matter to divine that this 

was the captain, who having over-slept himself, had
got up at last to keep his assignation; and finding
my door open, had enter'd into my apartment
instead of that of his mistress, where I supplied
his place. —But finding his mistake, by falling
over my chair, was afraid the noise might alarm
the family, and for that reason made off, delaying
the gratification of his desire till another opportunity. 
—By this time, I was satisfied; and
instead of returning to the place from whence I
came, retreated to my own castle, which I fortified
by bolting the door; and in the congratulation
of my own happiness fell asleep. —But the
truth of this adventure could not be long conceal'd
from my young mistress, who next day came to
an eclaircisement with the captain, upon his lamenting
his last night's disappointment, and begging
pardon for the noise he had made. —Their
mutual chagrin, when they came to the knowledge
of what had happen'd, may be easily conjectur'd,
though each had a peculiar grief unfelt
by the other; for she was conscious of having
not only betray'd to me the secrets of her commerce
with him; but also, of having incensed
me by the freedoms she had taken with my name,
beyond a hope of reconciliation. —On the other
hand, his jealousy suggested, that her sorrow was
all artifice; and that I had supplied his place with
her own privity and consent. —That such was
the situation of their thoughts, will appear in the
sequel—for that very day she came into the shop
where I was alone, and fixing her eyes, swimming
in tears, upon me, sigh'd most piteously: But I
was proof against her distress, by recollecting the
epithets with which she had honour'd me the night
before; and believing that the good reception I enjoy'd 

was destin'd for another. I therefore took
no notice of her affliction; and she had the mortification
to find her disdain return'd four-fold. — 
However, from thenceforward she thought proper
to use me with more complaisance than usual,
knowing that it was in my power at any time
to publish her shame. —By these means my life
became much more agreeable (though I never
could prevail upon myself to repeat my nocturnal
visit) and as I every day improv'd in my knowledge
of the town, I shook off my aukward air
by degrees, and acquir'd the character of a polite
journeyman apothecary. 