


He receives an unexpected visit; and the clouds of
misfortune begin to separate. 
While he pined in this forlorn condition,
with an equal abhorrence of the
world and himself, captain Gauntlet arrived in
town, in order to employ his interest for promotion
in the army; and, in consequence of his
wife's particular desire, made it his business to
inquire for Peregrine, to whom he longed to be 

reconciled, even at the expence of a slight submission. 
But he could hear no tidings of him,
at the place to which he was directed; and, on
the supposition that our hero had gone to reside
in the country, applied himself to his own business,
with intention to renew his enquiries, after
that affair should be transacted. He communicated
his demands to his supposed patron, who
had assumed the merit of making him a captain,
and been gratified with a valuable present on that
consideration; and was cajoled with hopes of succeeding
in his present aim, by the same interest. 
Mean while, he became acquainted with one
of the clerks belonging to the war office, whose
advice and assistance, he was told, would be a
furtherance to his scheme; and as he had occasion
to discourse with this gentleman, upon the circumstances
of his expectation, he learned that
the nobleman, upon whom he depended, was a
person of no consequence in the state, and altogether
incapable of assisting him in his advancement. 
At the same time, his counsellor expressed
his surprize that captain Gauntlet did not
rather interest in his cause the noble peer, to
whose good offices he owed his last commission. 
This remark introduced an explanation, by
which Godfrey discovered, to his infinite astonishment,
the mistake in which he had continued
so long, with regard to his patron; tho' he could
not divine the motive which induced a nobleman,
with whom he had no acquaintance or connection,
to interpose his influence in his behalf. 
Whatsoever that might be, he thought it was his
duty to make his acknowledgment; and for that
purpose, went next morning to his house, where
he was politely received, and given to understand, 

that Mr. Pickle was the person to whose friendship
he was indebted for his last promotion. 
Inexpressible were the transports of gratitude,
affection, and remorse, that took possession of
the soul of Gauntlet, when this mystery was unfolded. 
“Good heaven! (cried he, lifting up
his hands) have I lived so long in a state of animosity
with my benefactor? I intended to have
reconciled myself to him, at any rate, before I
was sensible of this obligation; but now I shall
not enjoy a moment's quiet, until I have an opportunity
of expressing to him my sense of his
heroic friendship. I presume, from the nature of
the favour conferred upon him, in my behalf,
that Mr. Pickle is well known to your lordship; 
and I should think myself extremely happy, if
you could inform me in what part of the country
he is to be found: for the person with whom
he lodged, some time ago, could give me no intelligence
of his motions.” 
The nobleman, touched with this instance of
generous self-denial in Peregrine, as well as with
the sensibility of his friend, lamented the unhappiness
of our hero, while he gave Gauntlet to
understand that he had been long disordered in
his intellects, in consequence of having squandered
away his fortune; and that his creditors
had thrown him into the Fleet-prison: but whether
he still continued in that confinement, or
was released from his misfortunes by death, his
lordship did not know, because he had never
enquired. 
Godfrey no sooner received this intimation,
than (his blood boiling with grief and impatience)
he craved pardon for his abrupt departure; and
quitting his informer on the instant, reimbarked 

in his hackney-coach, and ordered himself to be
conveyed directly to the Fleet. As the vehicle
proceeded along one side of the market, he was
surprised with the appearance of Hatchway and
Pipes, who stood cheapening collyflowers at a
green-stall, their heads being cased in worsted
night-caps, half covered with their hats, and a
short tobacco-pipe in the mouth of each. He
was rejoiced at sight of the two seamen, which
he took for an happy omen of finding his friend; 
and, ordering the coachman to stop the carriage,
called to the lieutenant by his name. Jack replying
with an Hilloah, looked behind him, and
recognizing the face of his old acquaintance, ran
up to the coach with great eagerness, and shaking
the captain heartily by the hand, “Odd's heart!
(said he) I'm glad thou ha'st fallen in with us:
we shall now be able to find the trim of the vessel,
and lay her about on the other tack. For
my own part, I have had many a consort in my
time, that is, in the way of good-fellowship, and
I always made shift to ware 'em at one time or
another: but this headstrong toad will neither
obey the helm nor the sheet; and, for aught I
know, will founder where he lies at anchor.” 
Gauntlet, who conceived part of his meaning,
alighted immediately; and being conducted to
the sailor's lodging, was informed of every thing
that had passed between the lieutenant and Pickle. 
He, in his turn, communicated to Jack the discovery
which he had made, with regard to his
commission; at which the other gave no signs of
surprize: but taking the pipe from his mouth,
“Why, look ye, captain, (said he) that's not
the only good turn you have owed him. That
same money you received from the commodore, 

as an old debt, was all a sham, contrived by
Pickle for your service; but a' wool drive under
his bare poles, without sails and rigging, or a
mess of provision on board, rather than take the
same assistance from another man.” 
Godfrey was not only amazed, but chagrined
at the knowledge of this anecdote; which gave
umbrage to his pride, while it stimulated his desire
of doing something in return for the obligation. 
He enquired into the present circumstances
of the prisoner; and understanding that he was
indisposed, and but indifferently provided with
the common necessaries of life, tho' still deaf to
all offers of assistance, began to be extremely
concerned at the account of his savage obstinacy
and pride, which would, he feared, exclude him
from the privilege of relieving him in his distress. 
However, he resolved to leave no expedient untried,
that might have any tendency to surmount
such destructive prejudice; and, entering the jail,
was directed to the apartment of the wretched
prisoner. He knocked softly at the door, and
when it was opened, started back with horror
and astonishment: the figure that presented itself
to his view, was the remains of his once happy
friend; but so miserably altered and disguised,
that his features were scarce cognizable. The
florid, the sprightly, the gay, the elevated youth,
was now metamorphosed into a wan, dejected,
meagre, squalid spectre; the hollow-eyed representative
of distemper, indigence and despair:
yet his eyes retained a certain ferocity, which
threw a dismal gleam athwart the cloudiness of
his aspect, and he, in silence, viewed his old
companion with a look betokening confusion and
disdain. As for Gauntlet, he could not, without 

emotion, behold such a woful reverse of fate,
in a person for whom he entertained the noblest
sentiments of friendship, gratitude and esteem:
his sorrow was at first too big for utterance, and
he shed a flood of tears before he could pronounce
one word. 
Peregrine, in spite of his misanthropy, could
not help being affected with this uncommon testimony
of regard; but he strove to stifle his sensations:
his brows contracted themselves into a
severer frown, his eyes kindled into the appearance
of live coals; he waved with his hand, in
signal for Godfrey to be gone, and leave such a
wretch as him to the miseries of his fate; and
finding nature too strong to be suppressed, uttered
a deep groan, and wept aloud. 
The soldier, seeing him thus melted, unable
to restrain the strong impulse of his affection,
sprung forwards, and clasping him in his arms,
“My dearest friend, and best benefactor, (said
he) I am come hither to humble myself for the
offence I was so unhappy as to give, at our last
parting; to beg a reconciliation, to thank you
for the ease and affluence I have enjoyed through
your means, and to rescue you, in spite of yourself,
from this melancholy situation; of which,
but an hour ago, I was utterly ignorant. Do not
deny me the satisfaction of acquitting myself, in
point of duty and obligation. You must certainly
have had some regard for a person, in
whose favour you have exerted yourself so much; 
and if any part of that esteem remains, you will
not refuse him an opportunity of approving himself,
in some measure, worthy of it. Let me
not suffer the most mortifying of all repulses,
that of slighted friendship; but kindly sacrifice 

your resentment and inflexibility to the request of
one, who is at all times ready to sacrifice his
life for your honour and advantage. If you will
not yield to my intreaties, have some regard to
the wishes of my Sophy, who laid me under the
strongest injunctions to solicit your forgiveness,
even before she knew how much I was indebted
to your generosity; or, if that consideration
should be of no weight, I hope you will relax a
little for the sake of poor Emilia, whose resentment
hath been long subdued by her affection,
and who now droops in secret at your neglect.” 
Every word of this address, delivered in the
most pathetic manner, made an impression upon
the mind of Peregrine: he was affected with the
submission of his friend, who, in reality, had
given him no just cause to complain. He knew
that no ordinary motive had swayed him to a
condescension, so extraordinary in a man of his
punctilious temper: he considered it, therefore,
as the genuine effect of eager gratitude and disinterested
love, and his heart began to relent accordingly. 
When he heard himself conjured in
the name of the gentle Sophy, his obstinacy was
quite overcome; and when Emilia was recalled
to his remembrance, his whole frame underwent
a violent agitation. He took his friend by the
hand, with a softened look; and soon as he recovered
the faculty of speech, which had been
overpowered in the conflict of passions that transported
him, protested, that he retained no vestige
of animosity, but considered him in the light
of an affectionate comrade, the ties of whose
friendship, adversity could not unbind. He mentioned
Sophy in the most respectful terms; spoke
of Emilia with the most reverential awe, as the 

object of his inviolable love and veneration; but
disclaimed all hope of ever more attracting her
regard; and excused himself from profiting by
Godfrey's kind intention, declaring, with a resolute
air, that he had broke off all connection
with mankind, and that he impatiently longed
for the hour of his dissolution, which, if it should
not soon arrive by the course of nature, he was
resolved to hasten with his own hands, rather
than be exposed to the contempt, and more intolerable
pity, of a rascally world. 
Gauntlet argued against this frantic determination
with all the vehemence of expostulating
friendship; but his remonstrances did not produce
the desired effect upon our desperate hero, who
calmly refuted all his arguments, and asserted the
rectitude of his design from the pretended maxims
of reason and true philosophy. 
While this dispute was carried on with eagerness
on one side, and deliberation on the other,
a letter was brought to Peregrine, who threw it
carelesly aside unopened, tho' the superscription
was in an hand-writing to which he was a
stranger; and, in all probability, the contents
would never have been perused, had not Gauntlet
insisted upon his waving all ceremony, and
reading it forthwith. Thus solicited, Pickle unsealed
the billet, which, to his no small surprize,
contained the following intimation. 

Mr. P. Pickle, 
SIR,
This comes to inform you, that, after many
dangers and disappointments, I am, by the
blessing of God, safely arrived in the Downs, on 

board of the Gomberoon Indiaman, having
made a tolerable voyage; by which I hope I shall
be enabled to repay, with interest, the seven
hundred pounds which I borrowed of you before
my departure from England. I take this opportunity
of writing by our purser, who goes express
with dispatches for the company, that you may
have this satisfactory notice, as soon as possible,
relating to one whom I suppose you have long
given over as lost. I have inclosed it in a letter
to my broker, who, I hope, knows your address,
and will forward it accordingly: and I am, with
respect, Sir, 
Your most humble servant,
Benjamin Chintz. 
He had no sooner taken a cursory view of this
agreeable epistle, than his countenance cleared
up, and reaching it to his friend, with a smile,
“There (said he) is a more convincing argument,
on your side of the question, than all the
casuists in the universe can advance.” Gauntlet,
wondering at this observation, took the paper,
and casting his eyes greedily upon the contents,
congratulated him upon the receit of it, with
extravagant demonstrations of joy: “Not on
account of the sum (said he) which, upon my
honour, I would, with pleasure, pay three times
over for your convenience and satisfaction; but
because it seems to have reconciled you to life,
and disposed your mind for re-enjoying the comforts
of society.” 
The instantaneous effect which this unexpected
smile of fortune produced in the appearance of
our adventurer, is altogether inconceivable! it 

plumped up his cheeks in a moment, unbended
and enlightened every feature of his face; elevated
his head, which had begun to sink, as it
were, between his shoulders; and from a squeaking,
dispirited tone, swelled up his voice to a
clear, manly accent. Godfrey, taking advantage
of this favourable change, began to regale
him with prospects of future success: he reminded
him of his youth and qualifications, which were
certainly designed for better days than those he
had as yet seen; he pointed out various paths,
by which he might arrive at wealth and reputation; 
he importuned him to accept of a sum
for his immediate occasions; and earnestly begged,
that he would allow him to discharge the debt
for which he was confined: observing, that
Sophy's fortune had enabled him to exhibit that
proof of his gratitude, without any detriment to
his affairs; and protesting, that he should not
believe himself in possession of Mr. Pickle's
esteem, unless he was permitted to make some
such return of good-will to the man, who had
not only raised him from indigence and scorn to
competence and reputable rank, but also impowered
him to obtain the possession of an excellent
woman, who had filled up the measure of
his felicity. 
Peregrine declared himself already overpaid for
all his good offices, by the pleasure he enjoyed
in employing them, and the happy effects they
had produced, in the mutual satisfaction of two
persons so dear to his affection; and assured his
friend, that one time or other he would set his
conscience at ease, and remove the scruples of
his honour, by having recourse to his assistance:
but, at present, he could not make use of his 

friendship, without giving just cause of offence
to honest Hatchway, who was prior to him in
point of solicitation, and had manifested his attachment
with surprising obstinacy and perseverance. 