

Letter from Caroline to Erasmus
“MY DEAR ERASMUS,
Your friend and patient,
Mr. Gresham, was so eager to take your
advice, and so quick in his movements,
that your letter, announcing his intended
visit, reached us but a few days before
his arrival at the Hills.—And ... Mark
how great and little events, which seem
to have no possible link of connexion,
depend upon one another—Alfred or
Mr. Gresham must have sat up all night,
or slept on the floor, had not Alfred,
that morning, received a letter from
Mrs. Hungerford, summoning him to
town to draw her son's marriage settlements
—It is thought that Col. Hungerford,
whose leave of absence from his

regiment has, by special favor, been repeatedly
removed, will be very soon sent
abroad.—Lady Elizabeth Pembroke has,
therefore, consented to his urgent desire
for their immediate union; and Alfred
will, I am sure, give them as little reason
as possible to complain of the law's
delay. Lady Elizabeth, who has all
that decision of mind and true courage,
which you know is so completely compatible
with the most perfect gentleness
of disposition and softness, even timidity
of manners, resolves to leave all her relations
and friends, and to go abroad.
She says, she knew what sacrifices she
must make in marrying a soldier, and
she is prepared to make them without
hesitation or repining.
“And now to return to your friend,
Mr. Gresham—The more we see of him
the more we like him. Perhaps he bribed
our judgment a little at first by the kind,
affectionate manner in which he spoke
of you; but, independently of this prepossession,
we should, I hope, soon

have discovered his merit. He is a good
English merchant. Not a ‘M. Friport,
qui sçait donner, mais qui ne sçait pas vivre,’ 
but a well-bred, well-informed gentleman,
upright, liberal, and benevolent,
without singularity or oddities of any
sort. His quiet, plain manners, free
from ostentation, express so well the
kind feelings of his mind, that I prefer
them infinitely to what are called polished
manners. Last night Rosamond
and I were amusing ourselves by contrasting
him with our recollection of the
polished M. de Tourville—but as you
were not at home at the memorable time
of the shipwreck, and of M. de Tourville's
visit, you cannot feel the force of
our parallel between these two beings,
the most dissimilar I have ever seen— 
an English merchant and a diplomatic
Frenchman.—You will ask, what put it
into our heads to make the comparison?
A slight circumstance, which happened
yesterday evening.—Rosamond was
showing Mr. Gresham some of my drawings,

and among them the copy of that
beautiful miniature in M. de Tourville's
snuff-box—My father told him the history
of Euphrosyne, of her German
prince, and Count Albert. &wblank; Mr.
Gresham's way of listening struck us,
by it's contrast to the manner of M. de
Tourville—and this led us on to draw a
parallel between their characters.— 
Mr. Gresham, instead of shrugging his
shoulders, and smiling disdainfully—like
the Frenchman, at the quixotism of the
young nobleman, who lost his favor at
court by opposing the passion of his
prince, was touched with Count Albert's
disinterested character, and quite forgetting,
as Rosamond observed, to compliment
me upon my picture of Euphrosyne,
he laid down the miniature with a
negligence, of which M. de Tourville
never would have been guilty, and went
on eagerly to tell some excellent traits of
the Count—For instance, when he was
a very young man in the Prussian
or Austrian service, I forget which,

in the heat of an engagement he had his
sabre lifted over the head of one of the
enemy's officers, when, looking down,
he saw that the officer's right arm was
broken. The Count immediately stopped,
took hold of the disabled officer's
bridle, and led him off to a place of
safety.—This and many other anecdotes
Mr. Gresham heard, when he spent
some time on the Continent a few years
ago, whilst he was transacting some
commercial business.—He had full opportunities
of learning the opinions of
different parties; and he says, that it
was the prayer of all the good and wise
in Germany, whenever the hereditary
prince should succeed to the throne,
that Count Albert Altenberg might be
his minister.
“By the by, Mr. Gresham, though
he is rather an elderly man, and looks
remarkably cool and composed, shows
all the warmth of youth, whenever any of
his feelings are touched. He has enthusiasm
of character, though not of manner.

M. de Tourville had enthusiasm of
manner, but not of character.
“I wish you could see how much my
father is pleased with your friend.—He
has frequently repeated—that Mr. Gresham,
long as he has been trained in the
habits of mercantile life, is quite free
from the spirit of monopoly in small or
great affairs. My father rejoices, that
his son has made such a friend.—Rosamond
charged me to leave her room to
write to you at the end of my letter; 
but she is listening so intently to something
Mr. Gresham is telling her, that I
do not believe she will write one line. I
hear a few words, which so much excite
my curiosity, that I must go and listen
too—Adieu.
Affectionately yours,
Caroline Percy.”
Another letter from Caroline to Erasmus,
dated some weeks after the preceding:

Tuesday, 14th.
“Yes, my dear Erasmus, your friend,
Mr. Gresham, is still with us; and he
declares, that he has not, for many
years, been so happy as since he came
here. He is now sufficiently intimate in
this family to speak of himself, and of
his own feelings and plans. You, who
know what a horror he has of egotism,
will consider this as a strong proof of
his liking us, and of his confidence in
our regard. He has related many of the
instances, which, I suppose, he told you,
of the ingratitude and disappointments
he has met with from persons whom he
attempted to serve.—He has kept us all,
for hours, Rosamond especially, in a
state of alternate pity and indignation.
For all that has happened, he blames
himself more than he blames any one
else; and with a mildness and candor,
which makes us at once admire and love
him, he adverts to the causes of his own
disappointment.

“My father has spoken to him as
freely as you could desire. He has
urged, that as far as the public good is
concerned, free competition is more
advantageous to the arts and to artists,
than any private patronage can be.—
“If the productions have real merit,
they will make their own way—If
they have not merit, they ought not to
make their way—And the same argument
he has applied to literary merit,
and to the merit, generally speaking, of
persons as well as of things; he has also
plainly told Mr. Gresham, that he considers
the trade of a patron as one of the
most thankless, as it is the least useful,
of all trades.
“All this has made such an impression
upon your candid friend, that he
has declared it to be his determination
to have no more protégées,—convinced
that it is much better to leave artists and
men of letters to advance themselves by
their own efforts, and to let the competition
of talents work fairly without the

interference, or, as he expressed it, any
of the bounties and drawbacks of patronage.
‘But then,’ he added, with a
sigh, ‘I am an isolated being—Am I to
pass the remainder of my days without
objects of interest or affection—While
Constance Panton was a child, she was
an object to me, but now she must live
with her parents, or she will marry, at
all events she is rich,—and is my wealth
to be only for my selfish gratification?
—How happy you are, Mr. Percy, who
have such an amiable wife, such a large
family, and so many charming domestic
objects of affection!’—
“Mr. Gresham then walked away
with my father to the end of the room,
and continued his conversation in a low
voice, to which I did not think I ought
to listen, so I came up stairs to write to
you.—I think you told me, that Mr.
Gresham had suffered some disappointment
early in life, which prevented his
marrying; but if I am not mistaken, his
mind now turns again to the hopes of

domestic happiness—If I am not mistaken,
Rosamond has made an impression
on his heart. I have been as conveniently
and meritoriously deaf, blind,
and stupid for some time past, as possible
—But though I shut my eyes, and stop
my ears, yet my imagination will act,
and I can only say to myself, as we used
to do when we were children,
“I will not think of it till it comes,
that I may have the pleasure of the
surprise—*&gap;*&gap;*&gap;*&gap;
Affectionately yours,
Caroline Percy.”
Caroline was right—Rosamond had
made a great impression upon Mr. Gresham's
heart.—His recollection of the
difference between his age and Rosamond's,
and his consciousness of the
want of the gayety and attractions of
youth, rendered him extremely diffident,
and for some time suppressed his passion,
at least delayed the declaration of his
attachment. But Rosamond seemed

evidently to like his company and conversation,
and she showed that degree of
esteem and interest for him, which, he
flattered himself, might be improved into
a more tender affection. He ventured
to make his proposal—He applied first
to Mrs. Percy, and entreated that she
would make known his sentiments to her
daughter.
When Mrs. Percy spoke to Rosamond,
she was surprised, by the very decided
refusal which Rosamond immediately
gave. Both Mrs. Percy and Caroline
were inclined to think, that Rosamond
had not only a high opinion of Mr. Gresham,
but that she had felt a preference
for him, which she had never before shown
for any other person—and they thought
that, perhaps, some refinement of delicacy
about accepting his large fortune,
or some fear that his want of high birth,
and what are called good connexions,
would be objected to by her father and
mother, might be the cause of this refusal.
Mrs. Percy felt extremely anxious

to explain her own sentiments, and
fully to understand Rosamond's feelings
—In this anxiety Caroline joined most
earnestly; all the kindness, sympathy,
and ardent affection, which Rosamond
had ever shown for her, when the interests
of her heart were in question,
were strong in Caroline's recollection,
and these were now fully returned.
Caroline thought Mr. Gresham was too
old for her sister, but she considered that
this objection, and all others, should
yield to Rosamond's own opinion and
taste. She agreed with her mother in
imagining, that Rosamond was not quite
indifferent to his merit and to his attachment.
Mrs. Percy began by assuring Rosamond,
that she should be left entirely at
liberty to decide according to her own
judgment and feelings.—
“You have seen, my dear, how your
father and I have acted towards your
sister; and you may be sure, that we shall
show you equal justice. Though parents

are accused of always rating ‘a good
estate above a faithful lover,’ yet you
will recollect, that Mr. Barclay's good
estate did not induce us to press his suit
with Caroline. Mr. Gresham has a large
fortune; and, to speak in Lady Jane
Granville's style, it must be acknowledged,
my dear Rosamond, that this
would be a most advantageous match; 
but for this very reason we are particularly
desirous, that you should determine
for yourself—At the same time let
me tell you, that I am a little surprised by
the promptness of your decision—Let
me be sure, that this negative is serious
—Let me be sure, that I rightly understand
you, my Love—Now, when only
your own Caroline is present, tell me
what are your objections to Mr. Gresham?”
Thanks for her mother's kindness; 
thanks, repeated, with tears in her eyes,
were, for a considerable time, all the
answer that could be obtained from Rosamond.
At length, she said:

“Without having any particular objection
to a person, surely, if I cannot
love him, that is sufficient reason for my
not wishing to marry him”—
Rosamond spoke these words in so
feeble a tone, and with so much hesitation,
coloring at the same time so
much, that her mother and sister were
still uncertain how they were to understand
her if—and Mrs. Percy replied:
“Undoubtedly, my dear, if you cannot
love him—but that is the question.
Is it quite certain that you cannot love
him?”
“Oh! quite certain. ... I believe.”
“This certainty seems to have come
very suddenly,” said her mother, smiling.
“What can you mean, mother?”
“I mean, that you did not show any
decided dislike to him till within these
few hours, my dear.”
“Dislike!—I don't feel. ... I hope
I don't show any dislike—I am sure I

should be very ungrateful. ... On the
contrary ... It would be impossible for
any body, who is good for any thing, to
dislike Mr. Gresham.”
“Then you can neither like him, nor
dislike him?—You are in a state of absolute
indifference.”
“That is, except ... gratitude—gratitude
for all his kindness to Erasmus,
and for his partiality to me—gratitude
I certainly feel.”
“And esteem?”
“Yes, to be sure, esteem”—
“And I think,” continued her mother,
“that before he committed this
crime of proposing for you, Rosamond,
you used to show some of the indignation
of a good friend against those ungrateful
people who used him so ill.”
“Indignation! yes,” interrupted Rosamond,
“who could avoid feeling indignation?”
“And pity?—I think I have heard
you express pity for poor Mr. Gresham.”

“Well, Ma'am, because he really
was very much to be pitied—Don't you
think so?”
“I do—and pity ... you know to
what it is akin?” said Mrs. Percy,
smiling.
“No, indeed, mother, you need not
smile—nor you, Caroline—for the sort
of pity which I feel is not akin to ... it
was merely pity, by itself plain pity— 
Why should people imagine and insist
upon it, that more is felt than is expressed?”
“My dear,” said Mrs. Percy, “I
do not insist upon your feeling more
than you really do—But let us see—You
are in a state of absolute indifference,
and yet you feel esteem, indignation,
pity—How is this, Rosamond? How
can this be?”
“Very easily, Ma'am, because, by
absolute indifference, I mean. ... Oh!
you know very well what I mean ...
absolute indifference as to ...”

“Love, perhaps, is the word which
you cannot pronounce this morning”—
“Now, mother!&wblank;Now Caroline!—You
fancy that I love him
&wblank;But only tell why, supposing there
were any if in the case on my side ...
tell me only why I should refuse him?”
“Nay, my dear, that is what we wait
to hear from you,” said Mrs. Percy.
“Then I will tell you why,” said
Rosamond—“In the first place, Mr.
Gresham has a large fortune, and I have
none. And I have the greatest horror
of the idea of marrying for money, or of
the possibility of it's being suspected, that
I might do so.”
“I thought that was the fear!” cried
Caroline; “but, my dear Rosamond,
with your generous mind you know it is
quite impossible, that you should marry
from interested motives.”
“Absolutely impossible,” said her
mother. “And when you are sure of
your own mind, it would be weakness,

my dear, to dread the suspicions of
others, even if such were likely to be
formed”—
“Oh! do not, my dearest Rosamond,” 
said Caroline, taking her sister's
hand, pressing it between hers, and
speaking in the most urgent, almost supplicating
tone, do not, generous as you
are, sacrifice your happiness to mistaken
delicacy!”—
“But”—said Rosamond, after a
moment's silence—“But you attribute
more than I deserve to my delicacy and
generosity. I ought not to let you think
me so much better than I really am— 
I had some other motives—You will
think them very foolish ... very ridiculous ...
perhaps wrong—But you
are so kind and indulgent to me, mother,
that I will tell you all my follies.
—I do not like to marry a man who is
not a hero—You are very good not to
laugh, Caroline”—
“Indeed, I am too seriously interested
at present to laugh”—said Caroline.

“And you must be sensible,” continued
Rosamond, “that I could not, by
any effort of imagination, or by any illusion
of love, convert a man of Mr.
Gresham's time of life and appearance,
with his wig, and sober kind of understanding,
into a hero.”
“As to the wig,” replied Mrs. Percy,
“you will recollect, that both Sir Charles
Grandison and Lovelace wore wigs—But,
my dear, granting that a man cannot,
in these days, be a hero in a wig; and
granting, that a hero cannot, or should
not, have a sober understanding, will
you give me leave to ask, whether you
have positively determined, that none
but heroes and heroines should live, or
love, or marry, or be happy in this
mortal world?”
“Heaven forbid!” said Rosamond,
“particularly as I am not a heroine.”
“And as only a few hundred millions
of people in the world are in the
same condition,” added Mrs. Percy.—
“And those, perhaps, not the least

happy of human beings,” said Caroline
—“Be that as it may, I think it cannot
be denied, that Mr. Gresham has, in a
high degree, one of the qualities which
ought to distinguish a hero.”
“What?” said Rosamond, eagerly.
“Generosity,” replied Caroline— 
“and his large fortune, puts it in his
power to show that quality upon a scale,
more extended than is usually allowed,
even to the heroes of romance.”
“True—very true”—said Rosamond,
smiling—“generosity might make a hero
of him if he were not ... a merchant
... a merchant!—A Percy ought not to
marry a merchant.”
“Perhaps, my dear,” said Mrs. Percy,
“you don't know that half, at least,
of all the nobility in England, have
married into the families of merchants; 
therefore, in the opinion of half the nobility
of England, there can be nothing
discreditable or derogatory in such an
alliance.”
“I know, Ma'am, such thing, are,

but, then, you will allow, they are
usually done for money, and that makes
the matter worse. If the sons of noble
families marry the daughters of mercantile
houses, it is merely to repair the family
fortune. But a nobleman has great
privileges.—If he marry beneath himself,
his low wife is immediately raised by her
wedding-ring to an equality with the
high and mighty husband—her name is
forgotten in her title,—her vulgar relations
are left in convenient obscurity; 
the husband never thinks of taking notice
of them; and the wife, of course,
may let it alone if she pleases—But a
woman, in our rank of life, usually bears
her husband's name, and must also bear
all his relations, be they ever so vulgar
—Now, Caroline, honestly—how should
you like this?”
“Honestly, not at all,” said Caroline; 
“but as we cannot have every
thing we like, or avoid every thing we
dislike in life, we must balance the good
against the evil, when we are to make

our choice—And if I found certain amiable,
estimable qualities in a character,
I think that I might esteem, love, and
marry him, even though he had a vulgar
name, and vulgar connexions. I
fairly acknowledge, however, that it
must be something superior in the man's
character, which could balance the objection
to vulgarity in my mind.”
“Very well, my dear,” said Rosamond,
“do you be a martyr to vulgarity
and philosophy, if you like it—but
excuse me, if you please—Since you,
who have so much strength of mind,
fairly acknowledge, that this objection is
barely to be overcome by your utmost
efforts, do me the favor, do me the justice,
not to expect from me a degree of
civil courage quite above my powers.”
Caroline still believing, that Rosamond
was only bringing forward all the
objections that might be raised against
her wishes, replied—
“Fortunately, my dear Rosamond,

you are not called upon for any such
effort of philosophy, for Mr. Gresham is
not vulgar, nor is even his name vulgar,
and he cannot have any vulgar relations,
because he has no relations of any description—I
heard him say, the other
day, that he was an isolated being.”—
“That is a comfort,” said Rosamond,
laughing, “that is a great thing in his
favor—but if he has not relations he has
connexions. What do you think of
those horrible Pantons? This instant I
think I see Old Panton cooling himself
—wig pushed back—waistcoat unbuttoned—and
protuberant Mrs. Panton
with her bay wig and artificial flowers.
And not the Pantons only, but you may
be sure there are hordes of St. Mary
Axe cockneys, that would pour forth upon
Mrs. Gresham, with overwhelming force,
and with partnership and old-acquaintance-sake
claims upon her public notice
and private intimacy—Come! come,
my dear Caroline, don't speak against

your conscience—You know you never
could withstand the hordes of vulgarians.”
“These vulgarians in buckram,” said
Caroline, “have grown from two to two
hundred in a trice, in your imagination,
Rosamond—but consider that Old
Panton, against whom you have such an
invincible horror, will, now that he has
quarrelled with Erasmus, probably very
soon eat himself out of the world; and
I don't see that you are bound to Mr.
Gresham's dead partner's widow—Is this
your only objection to Mr. Gresham?”—
“My only objection!—Oh! no, don't
flatter yourself, that in killing Old Panton
you have struck off all my objections—Independently
of vulgar relations,
or connexions, my grand objection remains—But
I will address myself to my
mother, for you are not a good person
for judging of prejudices—You really
don't understand them, my dear Caroline—One
might as well talk to Socrates

—You go to work with logic, and get
one between the horns of a wicked dilemma
directly—I will talk to my mother,
she understands prejudices.”
“Your mother thanks you,” said
Mrs. Percy, smiling, “for your opinion
of her understanding.”—
“My mother is the most indulgent
of mothers, and besides, the most candid,
and, therefore, I know she will
confess to me, that she herself cherishes
a little darling prejudice in favor of birth
and family, a leetle prejudice ... well
covered by good nature and politeness
... but still a secret, invincible antipathy
to low-born people.”
“To low-bred people, I grant.”
“Oh, mother! you are upon your
candor; my dear mother, not only lowbred,
but low-born,—confess you have
a, what shall I call it? ... an indisposition
towards low-born people.”
“Since you put me upon my candor,” 
said Mrs. Percy, “I am afraid I must

confess, that I am conscious of a little of
the aristocratic weakness you impute to
me.”
“Impute!—No imputation in my
opinion,” cried Rosamond. “I do not
think it any weakness.”
“But I do—” said Mrs. Percy, “I
consider it as a weakness; and bitterly
should I reproach myself, if I saw any
weakness, any prejudice of mine, influence
my children injuriously in the most
material circumstance of their lives, and
where their happiness is at stake.—So,
my dear Rosamond, let me entreat ...”
“Oh! mother, don't let the tears
come into your eyes, and without any
entreaties, I will do just as you please.”
“My love,”—said Mrs. Percy, “I
have no pleasure but that you should
please yourself—and judge for yourself
—without referring to any prepossession
of mine.—And lest your imagination
should deceive you as to the extent of
my aristocratic prejudices, let me explain.

The indisposition, which I have
acknowledged I feel towards low-born
people, arises, I believe, chiefly from
my taking it for granted, that they cannot
be thoroughly well-bred. I have
accidentally seen examples of people of
inferior birth, who, though they had
risen to high station, and though they
had acquired, in a certain degree, polite
manners, and had been metamorphosed
by fashion, to all outward appearance,
into perfect gentry, yet betrayed some
marks of their origin, or of their early
education, whenever their passions or
their interests were touched: then some
awkward gesture, some vulgar expression,
some mean or mercenary sentiment,
some habitual contraction of
mind, recurred.”
“True, true! most true!” cried Rosamond.—“It
requires two generations,
at least, to wash out the stain of vulgarity.
Neither a gentleman nor a gentlewoman
can be made in less than two

generations. Therefore, I never will
marry a low-born man, if he had every
perfection under the sun.”
“Nay, my dear, that is too strong,” 
said Mrs. Percy.—“Hear me, my dearest
Rosamond. I was going to tell you,
that my experience has been so limited,
that I am not justified in drawing from
it any general conclusion.—And even
to the most positive and rational general
rules, you know there are exceptions.”
“That is a fine general softening
clause,” said Rosamond, “but now positively,
mother, would you have ever
consented to marry a merchant?”
“Certainly, my dear, if your father
had been a merchant, I should have
married him,” replied Mrs. Percy.
“Well, I except my father. To put
the question more fairly, may I ask, do
you wish that your daughter should
marry a merchant?”
“As I endeavored to explain to you
before, that depends entirely upon what

the merchant is, and upon what my
daughter feels for him.”
Rosamond sighed.
“I ought to observe, that merchants
are now quite in a different class from
what they were at the first rise of commerce
in these countries,” continued her
mother.—“Their education, their habits
of thinking, knowledge, and manners,
are improved, and, consequently,
their consideration, their rank in society,
is raised. In our days, some of the best
informed, most liberal, and most respectable
men in the British dominions, are
merchants.—I could not, therefore, object
to my daughter's marrying a merchant,
but I should certainly inquire
anxiously what sort of a merchant he
was.—I do not mean, that I should inquire
whether he was concerned in this
or that branch of commerce, but whether
his mind was free from every thing
mercenary and illiberal.—I have done
so with respect to Mr. Gresham, and I
can assure you solemnly, that Mr. Gresham's

want of the advantage of high
birth is completely counterbalanced in
my opinion by his superior qualities. I
see in him a cultivated, enlarged, generous
mind.—I have seen him tried, where
his passions and his interests have been
nearly concerned, and I never saw in
him the slightest tincture of vulgarity,
in manner or sentiment. Therefore, my
dear daughter, if he has made an impression
on your heart, do not, on my account,
conceal or struggle against it; 
because, far from objecting to Mr. Gresham
for a son in law, I should prefer
him to any gentleman or nobleman, who
had not his exalted character.”—
“There!” cried Caroline, with a look
of joyful triumph, “there! my dear
Rosamond, now your heart must be
quite at ease!”—
But looking at Rosamond at this moment,
she saw no expression of joy or
pleasure in her countenance; and Caroline
was now convinced, that she had

been mistaken about Rosamond's feelings.—
“Really and truly, mother, you think
all this.”—
“Really and truly, my dear, no motive
upon Earth would make me disguise
my opinions, or palliate even my prejudices,
when you thus consult me, and
depend upon my truth.—And now, that
I have said this much, I will say no
more, lest I should bias you on the other
side: I will leave you to your own excellent
understanding and affectionate
heart.”
Rosamond's affectionate heart was
touched so by her mother's kindness,
that she could not, for some minutes,
repress her tears. When she recovered
her voice, she assured her mother and
Caroline, with a seriousness and an earnest
frankness, which at once convinced
them of her truth, that she had not the
slightest partiality for Mr. Gresham.
She said, she had feared, that her friends

might wish for the match, and that being
conscious, she had no objection to
make to Mr. Gresham, except that she
could not love him; she had hesitated
for want of a better reason, when her
mother first began this cross examination.
Relieved by this thorough explanation,
and by the conviction that her father,
mother, and sister, were perfectly satisfied
with her decision, Rosamond was
at ease, as far as she herself was concerned.
But she still dreaded to see
Mr. Gresham again. She was excessively
sorry to have given him pain, and
she feared not a little, that in rejecting
the lover she should lose the friend.—
Mr. Gresham, however, was of too
generous a character to cease to be the
friend of the woman he loved, merely
because she could not return his passion
—It is wounded pride, not disappointed
affection, that turns immediately from
love to hatred.
Rosamond was spared the pain of

seeing Mr. Gresham again at this time,
for he left the Hills, and set out immediately
for London, where he was recalled
by news of the sudden death of
his partner. Old Mr. Panton had been
found dead in his bed, after having supped
inordinately the preceding night
upon eelpie. It was indispensably necessary,
that Mr. Gresham should attend
at the opening of Panton's will,
and Mrs. Panton wrote to represent this
in urgent terms. Mr. Henry was gone
to Amsterdam; he had, for some time
previously to the death of Mr. Panton,
obtained the partnership's permission to
go over to the Dutch merchants, their
correspondents in Amsterdam, to fill a
situation in their house, for which his
knowledge of the Dutch, French, and
Spanish languages eminently qualified
him.
When Mr. Henry had solicited this
employment, Mr. Gresham had been
unwilling to part with him, but had
yielded to the young man's earnest entreaties,

and to the idea that this change
would, in a lucrative point of view, be
materially for Mr. Henry's advantage.—
Some apology to the lovers of romance
may be expected for this abrupt transition
from the affairs of the heart to
the affairs of the counting-house, but so
it is in real life—We are sorry, but we
cannot help it—We have neither sentiments
nor sonnets ready for every occasion.