

Ormond was wakened at the proper
hour—went immediately to &wblank; 's bank.
It was but just open, and beginning to
do business. He had never been there
before—his person was not known to any
of the firm. He entered a long narrow
room, so dark at the entrance from the
street, that he could at first scarcely see
what was on either side of him—a clerk
from some obscure nook, and from a
desk higher than himself, put out his
head, with a long quill behind his ear,
and looked at Ormond as he came in.
“Pray, Sir, am I right?—Is this Mr.
&wblank;'s bank?”
“Yes, surely, Sir.”

With mercantile economy of words
the clerk, with a motion of his head,
pointed out to Ormond the way he
should go—and continued casting up his
books. Ormond walked down the
narrow aisle, and it became light as he
advanced towards a large window at the
farther end, before which three clerks
sat at a table opposite to him. A person
stood with his back to Ormond, and was
speaking earnestly to one of the clerks,
who leaned over the table listening.
Just as Ormond came up, he heard his
own name mentioned—he recollected the
voice—he recollected the back of the
figure—the very bottle-green coat—it
was Patrickson!—Ormond stood still
behind him—and waited to hear what
was going on— 
“Sir,” said the clerk, “it is a very
sudden order for a very large sum.”
“True, Sir—but you see my power— 
you know Mr. Ormond's hand-writing— 
and you know Sir Ulick O'Shane's—”

“Mr. James,” said the principal
clerk, turning to one of the others, “be
so good to hand me the letters we have
of Mr. Ormond's—As we have never
seen the gentleman sign his name, Sir,
it is necessary that we should be more
particular in comparing.”
“Oh, Sir, no doubt, compare as much
as you please—no doubt people cannot
be too exact and deliberate in doing
business.”
“It certainly is his signature,” said
the clerk.
“I witnessed the paper,” said Patrickson.”
“Sir—I don't dispute it,” replied
the clerk, “but you cannot blame us
for being cautious, when such a very
large sum is in question, and when
we have no letter of advice from the
gentleman.”
“But I tell you I come straight from
Mr. Ormond; I saw him last Tuesday at
Paris—

“And you see him now, Sir,” said
Ormond, advancing— 
Patrickson's countenance changed beyond
all power of control.
“Mr: Ormond!—I thought you were
at Paris!”
“Mr. Patrickson! I thought you were
at Havre de Grace—What brought you
here so suddenly?”
“I acted for another,”—hesitated
Patrickson,—“I therefore made no delay.”
“And thank Heaven!” said Ormond,
“I have acted for myself!—but just in
time!—Sir,” continued he, addressing
himself to the principal clerk; “Gentlemen,
I have to return you my thanks for
your caution—it has actually saved me
from ruin—for I understand—” 
Ormond suddenly stopped, recollecting,
that he might injure Sir Ulick
O'Shane essentially, by a premature disclosure,
or by repeating a report, which
might be ill-founded.

He turned again to speak to Patrickson,
but Patrickson had disappeared.
Then continuing to address himself to
the clerks, “Gentlemen,” (said Ormond,
speaking carefully) “have you heard
any thing of or from Sir Ulick O'Shane
lately, except what you may have heard
from this Mr. Patrickson?”
“Not from, but of Sir Ulick O'Shane
we heard from our Dublin correspondent,
in due course we have heard,” 
replied the head clerk. “Too true, I am
afraid, Sir, that his bank had come to
paying in sixpences on Saturday.”
The second clerk seeing great concern
in Ormond's countenance, added— 
“But Sunday, you know, is in their
favour, Sir; and Monday and Tuesday
are holidays, so they may stand the run
and recover yet.”
“With the help of this gentleman's
thirty thousand, they might have recovered,
perhaps—but Mr. Ormond would
scarce have recovered it.”

As to the ten thousand pounds in the
three per cents. of which Sir Ulick had
obtained possession a month ago, that was
irrecoverable, if his bank should break.”— 
“If.”—The clerks all spoke with due
caution;—but their opinion was sufficiently
plain—They were honestly indignant
against the guardian who had
thus attempted to ruin his ward.
Though almost stunned and breathless
with the sense of the danger he had so narrowly
escaped, yet Ormond's instinct of
generosity, if we may use the expression,
and his gratitude for early kindness operated; 
he would not believe that Sir Ulick
had been guilty of a deliberate desire to injure
him. At all events, he determined
that, instead of returning to France, as
he had intended, he would go immediately
to Ireland, and try if it were possible
to assist Sir Ulick, without materially
injuring himself.
Having ordered horses, he made inquiry
wherever he thought he might

obtain information with respect to the
Annalys.—All that he could learn was,
that they were at some sea-bathing
place in the south of England, and that
Miss Annaly was still unmarried. A ray
of hope darted into the mind of our hero— 
and he began his journey to Ireland
with feelings, which every good and
generous mind will know how to appreciate.
He had escaped at Paris from a
temptation, which it was scarcely possible
to resist. He had by decision and
activity preserved his fortune from ruin— 
he had under his protection an humble
friend, whom he had saved from banishment
and disgrace, and whom he hoped
to restore to his wretched wife and
family. Forgetful of the designs that
had been meditated against him by his
guardian, to whose necessities he attributed
his late conduct, he hastened to
his immediate assistance, determined to
do every thing in his power to save Sir

Ulick from ruin, if his difficulties arose
from misfortune, and not from criminality— 
if, on the contrary, he should
find that Sir Ulick was fraudulently a
bankrupt—he determined to quit Ireland
immediately, and to resume his scheme
of foreign travel.
The system of posting had at this time
been carried to the highest perfection in
England. It was the amusement and
the fashion of the time to squander large
sums in hurrying from place to place,
without any immediate motive for arriving
at the end of a journey, but
that of having the satisfaction of boasting
in what a short time it had been performed— 
or, as it is expressed in one of
our comedies, “to enter London like a
meteor, with a prodigious tail of dust.”
Moriarty Carroll, who was perched
upon the box with Ormond's servant,
made excellent observations, wherever
he went. His English companion could
not comprehend how a man of common

sense could by ignorant of various things,
which excited the wonder and curiosity
of Moriarty. Afterwards, however,
when they travelled in Ireland, Moriarty
had as much reason to be surprised at
the impression, which Irish manners and
customs made upon his companion.
After a properous and rapid journey
to Holyhead, our hero found to his mortification,
that the packet had sailed with
a fair wind about half an hour before his
arrival.
Notwithstanding his impatience, he
learned that it was impossible to overtake
the vessel in a boat, and that he
must wait for the sailing of the next
day's packet.
Fortunately, however, the Lord Lieutenant's
secretary arrived from London
at Holyhead time enough for the tide,
and as he had an order from the Post-office
for a packet to sail, whenever he
should require it, the intelligent landlord
of the inn suggested to Ormond, that he

might probably obtain permission from
the secretary to have a birth in this
packet.
Ormond's manner and address were
such as to obtain from the good-natured
and well-bred secretary the permission
he required; and, in a short time, he
found himself out of sight of the coast of
Wales. During the beginning of their
voyage, the motion of the vessel was so
steady, and the weather so fine, that
every body remained on deck; but on
the wind shifting and becoming more
violent, the landsmen soon retired below
decks, and poor Moriarty and his
English companion slunk down into the
steerage, submitting to their fate. Ormond
was never sea-sick; he walked
the deck, and enjoyed the admirable
manœuvring of the vessel. Two or three
naval officers, and some other passengers,
who were used to the sea, and who had
quietly gone to bed during the beginning
of the voyage, now came from below, to

avoid the miseries of the cabin. As one
of these gentlemen walked backwards
and forwards upon deck, he eyed our
hero from time to time with looks of
anxious curiosity—Ormond perceiving
this, addressed the stranger, and enquired
from him whether he had mistaken
his looks, or whether he had any
wish to speak to him.—“Sir,” said the
stranger, “I do think that I have seen
you before, and I believe that I am
under considerable obligations to you—I
was supercargo to that vessel that was
wrecked on the coast of Ireland, when
you and your young friend exerted yourselves
to save the vessel from plunder.— 
After the shipwreck, the moment I
found myself on land, I hastened to the
neighbouring town to obtain protection
and assistance. In the mean time, your
exertions had saved a great deal of our
property, which was lodged in safety in
the neighbourhood. I had procured a
horse in the town to which I had gone,

and had ridden back to the shore with
the utmost expedition. Along with the
vessel which had been shipwrecked, there
had sailed another American sloop.—We
were both bound from New York to
Bourdeaux. In the morning after the
shipwreck, our consort hove in sight of
the wreck, and sent a boat on shore, to
inquire what had become of the crew,
and of the cargo, but they found not a
human creature on the shore, except myself.— 
The plunderers had escaped to
their hiding places, and all the rest of
the inhabitants had accompanied the
body of the poor young gentleman, who
had fallen a sacrifice to his exertions in
our favour.
“It was of the utmost consequence to
my employers, that I should arrive as
soon as possible at Bourdeaux, to give
an account of what had happened.—I
therefore, without hesitation, abandoned
my horse, with its bridle and saddle,
and I got on board the American vessel

without delay.—In my hurry I forgot my
great coat on the shore, a loss which
proved extremely inconvenient to me— 
as there were papers in the pockets,
which might be necessary to produce before
my employers.”
“I arrived safely at Bourdeaux, settled
with my principals to their satisfaction,
and I am now on my way to Ireland, to
reclaim such part of my property, and
that of my employers, as was saved from
the savages, who pillaged us in our distress.”— 
--This detail, which was given
with great simplicity and precision, excited
considerable interest among the
persons upon the deck of the packet.
Moriarty, who was pretty well recovered
from his sickness, was now summoned
upon deck. Ormond confronted him with
the American supercargo, but neither of
them had the least recollection of each
other.—“And yet,” said Ormond to the
American, “though you do not know this
man—he is at this moment under sentence

of transportation for having robbed
you—and he very narrowly escaped
being hanged for your murder.—A fate
from which he was saved by the patience
and sagacity of the judge who tried him.”
Moriarty's surprise was expressed with
such strange contortions of delight, and
with a tone, and in a phraseology, so
peculiarly his own, as to astonish and
entertain the spectators.—Among these
was the Irish secretary, who, without any
application being made to him, promised
Moriarty to procure for him a free
pardon.
On Ormond's landing in Dublin, the
first news he heard, and it was repeated
a hundred times in a quarter of an hour,
was that “Sir Ulick O'Shane was bankrupt— 
that his bank shut up yesterday.— 
It was a public calamity, a private
source of distress, that reached lower
and farther than any bankruptcy had
ever done in Ireland.”—Ormond heard
of it from every tongue, it was written

in every face—in every house it was the
subject of lamentation, of invective. In
every street poor men, with ragged notes
in their hands, were stopping to pore
over the names at the back of the notes,
or hurrying to and fro, looking up at the
shop windows for “half price given here
for O'Shane's notes.” Groups of people, of
all ranks, gathered—stopped—dispersed,
talking of Sir Ulick O'Shane's bankruptcy— 
their hopes—their fears—their
losses—their ruin—their despair—their
rage. Some said it was all owing to Sir
Ulick's shameful extravagance!—“His
house in Dublin, fit for a duke!—Castle
Hermitage full of company to the last
week—balls—dinners, champagne, burgundy!— 
scandalous!—” 
Others accused Sir Ulick's absurd speculations.— 
Many pronounced the bankruptcy
to be fraudulent, and asserted
that an estate had been made over to
Marcus, who would live in affluence on
the ruin of the creditors.

At Sir Ulick's house in town, every
window shutter was closed.—Ormond
rang and knocked in vain—not that he
wished to see Sir Ulick—no, he would
not have intruded on his misery for the
world,—but Ormond longed to inquire
from the servants how things were with
him.—No servant could be seen.—Ormond
went to Sir Ulick's bank.—Such
crowds of people filled the street, that it
was with the utmost difficulty, and after a
great working of elbows, that in an
hour or two, he made his way to one of
the barred windows.—There was a place
where notes were handed in and accepted,
as they called it, by the clerks, who
thus for the hour soothed and pacified
the sufferers, with the hopes that this
acceptance would be good, and would
stand in stead at some future day.—They
were told, that when things should come
to a settlement, all would be paid.— 
There was property enough to satisfy the
creditors, when the commissioners should

look into it.—Sir Ulick would pay all
honourably—as far as possible—fifteen
shillings in the pound, or certainly ten
shillings—the accepted notes would pass
for that any where—the crowd pressed
closer and closer, arms crossing over
each other to get notes in at the window,
the clerks' heads appearing and disappearing.
It was said they were laughing,
while they thus deluded the people.
All the intelligence, that Ormond, after
being nearly suffocated, could obtain
from any of the clerks, was, that Sir
Ulick was in the country. “They believed
at Castle Hermitage—could not be
certain—had no letters from him to day— 
he was ill when they heard last—so
ill he could do no business—confined to
his bed.”
The people in the street hearing these
answers replied—“confined in his bed
is he?—In the jail it should be, as many
will be—along with him—Ill is he, Sir
Ulick?—Sham sickness may be—all his

life a sham.”—All these, and innumerable
other taunts and imprecations, with which
the poor people vented their rage—Ormond
heard as he made his way out of
the crowd.
Of all who had suffered, he who had
probably lost the most, and who certainly
had been on the brink of losing
the greatest part of what he possessed, was
the only individual who uttered no reproach.
He was impatient to get down to
Castle Hermitage, and if he found that
Sir Ulick had acted fairly, to be some
comfort to him, to be with him at least
when deserted by all the rest of the
world.
At all the inns upon the road, as he
went from Dublin to Castle Hermitage,
even at the villages where he stopped to
water the horses, every creature, down
to the hostlers, were talking of the bankruptcy— 
and abusing Sir Ulick O'Shane
and his son. The curses that were deep,

not loud, were the worst—and the faces
of distress worse than all. Gathering
round his carriage, wherever it stopped,
the people questioned him and his servants
about the news, and then turned
away, saying they were ruined. The
men stood in unutterable despair.—The
women crying, loudly bewailed,—“their
husbands, their sons, that must waste in
the jail, or fly the country, for what
should they do for the rents that had been
made up in Sir Ulick's notes, and no
good now.”
Ormond felt the more on hearing these
complaints, from his sense of the absolute
impossibility of relieving the universal
distress.
He pursued his melancholy journey,
and took Moriarty into the carriage with
him, that he might not be recognized on
the road.
When he came within sight of Castle
Hermitage, he stopped at the top of the
hill at a cottage, where many a time in his

boyish days he had rested with Sir Ulick
out hunting. The mistress of the house,
now an old woman, came to the door.
“Master Harry! dear!” cried she,
when she saw who it was.—But the sudden
flash of joy in her old face was over
in an instant.
“But did you hear it?” cried she,
“and the great change it caused him— 
poor Sir Ulick O'Shane.—I went up
with eggs on purpose to see him, but
could only hear—he was in his bed— 
wasting with trouble—nobody knows
any thing more—all is kept hush and
close.—Mr. Marcus took off all he could
rap and ran, even to—” 
“Well, well, I don't want to hear
of Marcus—can you tell me whether
Dr. Cambray is come home?”
“Not expected to come till Monday.”
“Are you sure?”
“Oh!—not a morning but I'm there
the first thing, asking, and longing for
them.”

“Lie back Moriarty in the carriage,
and pull your hat over your face,” whispered
Ormond, “postillions, drive on to
that little cabin, with the trees about it,
at the foot of the hill.”—This was Moriarty's
cabin—when they stopped, poor
Peggy was called out.—Alas! how altered
from the dancing, sprightly, blooming
girl, whom Ormond had known so few
years since in the Black Islands.—How
different from the happy wife, whom he
had left, comfortably settled in a cottage
suited to her station and her wishes.
She was thin, pale, and haggard—her
dress was neglected—an ill-nursed child,
that she had in her arms, she gave to a
young girl near her.—Approaching the
carriage, and seeing Harry Ormond, she
seemed ready to sink into the earth,— 
however, after having drank some water,
she recovered sufficiently to be able to
answer Ormond's enquiries.
“What do you intend to do, Peggy?”
“Do, Sir!—go to America to join

my husband sure; every thing was to
have been sold, Monday last—but nobody
has any money—and I am tould it
will cost a great deal to get across the
sea.”
At this she burst into tears, and cried
most bitterly—at this moment the carriage
door burst open—Moriarty's impatience
could be no longer restrained— 
he flung himself into the arms of his wife.
Leaving this happy and innocent couple
to enjoy their felicity—we proceed to
Castle Hermitage.
Ormond directed the postillions to go
the back way to the house.—They drove
on down an old avenue.
Presently they saw a boy, who seemed
to be standing on the watch, run back towards
the Castle—leaping over hedge and
ditch with desperate haste.—Then came
running from the house three men, calling
to one another to shut the gates for the
love of God!

They all ran towards the gateway,
through which the postillions were going
to drive—reached it, just as the foremost
horses turned, and flung the gate
full against the horses' heads.—The men,
without looking or caring, went on locking
the gate.
Ormond jumped out of the carriage— 
at the sight of him, the padlock
fell from the hand of the man who
held it.
“Master Harry, himself!—and is it
you?—We ask your pardon, your honour.”
The men were three of Sir Ulick's
workmen—Ormond forbad the carriage
to follow.
“For perhaps you are afraid of the
noise disturbing Sir Ulick?” said he.
“No, please your honour,” said the
foremost man, “it will not disturb him— 
as well let the carriage come on— 
only,” whispered he, “best to send the
hack postillions with their horses, always

to the inn, afore they'd learn anything.”
Ormond walked on quickly, and as
soon as he was out of hearing of the
postillions, again asked the men— 
“What news?—how is Sir Ulick?”
“Poor gentleman! he has had a deal
of trouble—and no help for him,” said
the man.
“Better tell him plain,” whispered
the next.—“Master Harry, Sir Ulick
O'Shane's trouble is over in this world,
Sir.”
“Is he—” 
“Dead, he is, and cold, and in his
coffin—this minute—and thanks be to
God—if he is safe there even,—from
them that are on the watch to seize on
his body!—In dread of them creditors,
orders were given to keep the gates locked.— 
He is dead since Tuesday, Sir,— 
but hardly one knows it out of the
castle—except us.”
Ormond walked on silently, while they
followed, talking at intervals.

“There is a very great cry against
him, Sir, I hear in Dublin,—and here in
the country too,” said one.
“The distress they say is very great,
he caused, but they might let his body
rest any way—what good can that do
them?”
“Bad or good, they sha'n't touch it,” 
said the other—“by the blessing, we
shall have him buried safe in the morning,
afore they are stirring. We shall
carry the coffin through the under ground
passage, that goes to the stables, and out
by the lane to the churchyard easy— 
and the gentleman, the clergyman, has
notice all will be ready, and the housekeeper
only attending.”
“Oh! the pitiful funeral,” said the
eldest of the men, “the pitiful funeral
for Sir Ulick O'Shane, that was born to
better.”
“Well, we can only do the best we
can,” said the other, “let what will happen
to ourselves; for Sir Marcus said he

wouldn't take one of his father's notes
from any of us.”
Ormond involuntarily felt for his purse.
“Oh! don't be bothering the gentleman,
don't be talking,” said the old man.
“This way, Master Harry, if you please,
Sir, the under ground way to the back
yard. We keep all close till after the
burying, for fear—that was the housekeeper's
order. Sent all off to Dublin
when Sir Ulick took to his bed, and Lady
Norton went off.”
Ormond refrained from asking any
questions about his illness, fearing to inquire
into the manner of his death. He
walked on more quickly and silently.— 
When they were going through the dark
passage, one of the men, in a low voice'
observed to Mr. Ormond, that the housekeeper
would tell him all about it.
When they got to the house, the housekeeper
and Sir Ulick's man appeared,
seeming much surprised at the sight of
Mr. Ormond. They said a great deal

about the unfortunate event, and their
own sorrow and distress—but Ormond
saw that theirs were only the long faces,
dismal tones, and outward shew of grief.
They were just a common housekeeper
and gentleman's gentleman, neither worse
nor better than ordinary servants in a
great house. Sir Ulick had treated them
only as such.
The housekeeper, without Ormond's
asking a single question, went on to tell
him, “That Castle Hermitage was as
full of company, even to the last week,
as ever it could hold, and all as grand as
ever; the first people in Ireland—champagne
and burgundy, and ices, and all
as usual—and a ball that very week. Sir
Ulick was very considerate, and sent
Lady Norton off to her other friends; he
took ill suddenly that night with a
great pain in his head;—he had been
writing hard, and in great trouble, and
he took to his bed, and never rose from
it—he was found by Mr. Dempsey, his

own man, dead in his bed in the morning,
died of a broken heart to be sure!—Poor
gentleman!—Some people in the neighbourhood
was mighty busy talking how
the coroner ought to be sent for, but that
blew over, Sir. But then we were in
dread of the seizure of the body for debt,
so the gates was kept locked; and now
you know all we know about it, Sir.”
Ormond said he would attend the funeral.
There was no attempt to seize upon
the body:—only the three workmen, the
servants, a very few of the cottagers, and
Harry Ormond, attended to the grave the
body of the once popular Sir Ulick
O'Shane. This was considered by the
country people as the greatest of all the
misfortunes that had befallen him; the
lowest degradation to which an O'Shane
could be reduced. They compared him
with king Corny, and “see the difference,” 
said they, “the one was the true
thing, and never changed—and after all
where is the great friends now?—the

quality that used to be entertaining at
the castle above? Where is all the favour
promised him now? What is it
come to? See, with all his wit, and
the schemes upon schemes, broke and
gone, and forsook and forgot, and buried
without a funeral, or a tear, but from
Master Harry.”
Ormond was surprised to hear, in the
midst of many of their popular superstitions
and prejudices, how justly they
estimated Sir Ulick's abilities and character.
As the men filled up the grave, one of
them said— 
“There lies the making of an excellent
gentleman—but the cunning of his
head spoiled the goodness of his heart.”
The day after the funeral, an agent
came from Dublin to settle Sir Ulick
O'Shane's affairs in the country.
On opening his desk, the first thing
that appeared was a bundle of accounts,
and a letter, directed to H. Ormond,
Esq.

He took it to his own room, and read
‘Ormond,
‘I intended to employ your money to
reestablish my falling credit, but I never
intended to defraud you.’
‘Ulick O'Shane.’