

In several successive letters of Alfred's
to his brother, the progress of his attachment
to Miss Leicester is described. Instead
of paying a visit of a few days to
her uncle, it appears that she stays at
the vicarage during the whole of Alfred's
vacation. Her mother dies, and, contrary
to the expectations of some of her
admirers, Miss Leicester is left in possession
of only a moderate fortune.—She
shows much dignity under these adverse
circumstances, with a charming mixture
of spirit and gentleness of disposition.
The change in her expectations, which
deprived her of some of her fashionable
admirers, showed her the superior sincerity
and steadiness of Alfred's sentiments.
—No promises are given on either side; 
but it appears, that Alfred is permitted

to live and labor upon hope. He returns
to London more eager than ever to pursue
his profession.
We trust that our readers will be fully
satisfied with this abridgment of the affair,
and will be more inclined to sympathize
with Alfred, and to wish well to
his attachment, than if they had been
fatigued with a volume of his love-letters,
and with those endless repetitions of the
same sentiments with which most lovers'
letters abound.
Let us now go on to the affairs of
Erasmus Percy, explain the cause of old
Panton's quarrel with him, and give an
account of what Alfred called the green
ribbon scene at Lady Spilsbury's.—
Mr. Panton, provoked by his daughter's
coldness towards Lord Roadster,
had begun shrewdly to suspect, that the
lady must be in love with some other
person. His young physician was the
only man, on whom he could fix his suspicions.
Constance seemed to be on a
more confidential footing with him than

with any of the visitors who frequented
his house; she had spoken of him in
terms of high approbation, and had not
contradicted her father when he had,
purposely to try her, pronounced Dr.
Percy to be the handsomest young fellow
he knew.—While these suspicions were
secretly gaining strength in the father's
mind, a circumstance occurred, which
confirmed them at once, and caused
them to burst forth with uncontrolled
violence of expression.
Dr. Percy was called in to prescribe
for a sick lawyer, and from this lawyer's
conversation he learnt, that Lord Runnymede
was a ruined man, and that his
son Lord Roadster's extravagance had
been the cause of his ruin. Erasmus
determined to put Mr. Panton upon his
guard, and thus, if possible, to prevent
the amiable Constance from becoming a
victim to her father's absurd ambition.
With this view he went to Mr. Panton's.
The old gentleman was gone to dine with
his club. Mrs. Panton, in her elegant

language, desired he would leave his
business with her. When he had explained
the purport of his visit, after a
variety of vulgar exclamations denoting
surprise and horror, and after paying
many compliments to her own sagacity,
all which appeared incompatible with
her astonishment, Mrs. Panton expressed
much gratitude to Erasmus, mixed with
suppressed satisfaction and significant
nods, which he could not quite comprehend.
Her gratitude was interrupted,
and the whole train of her ideas changed,
by the entrance of a milliner with new
caps and artificial flowers. She, however,
retained sufficient recollection of
what had passed to call after Erasmus
when he had taken his leave, and to insist
upon his coming to her party that
evening. This he declined. Then she
said he must dine with her next day,
for “let him be never so busy, he must
dine somewhere, and as good dine with
somebody as with nobody—in short, she
would take no denial.” The next day

Erasmus was received with ungracious
oddity of manner by old Panton—the
only person in the drawing-room when
he arrived. Erasmus was so much struck
with the gloom of his countenance, that
he asked whether Mr. Panton felt himself
ill.—Panton bared his wrist, and
held out his hand to Erasmus to feel his
pulse—then withdrawing his hand, he
exclaimed—“Nonsense! I'm as well as
any man in England.—Pray, now, Doctor
Percy, why don't you get a wig?”— 
“Why should I, Sir, when I have hair?” 
said Erasmus, laughing.—“Pshaw!
Doctor, what signifies laughing when
I am serious!—Why, Sir, in my youth
every decent physician wore a wig, and
I have no notion of a good physician
without a wig—particularly a young
one.—Sir, many people have a great objection
to a young physician for many
reasons.—And take my advice in time,
Doctor Percy—a wig, a proper wig, not
one of your modern natural scratches,
but a decent powdered Doctor's bob,

would make you look ten years older at
one slap, and trust me, you'd get into
practice fast enough then, and be sent
for by many a sober family, that would
never think of letting you within their
doors without the wig—for, Sir, you are
too young and too handsome for a physician— 
Hey—what say you to the wig?” 
concluded Panton, in a tone of such
serious, yet comical impatience, that
Erasmus found it difficult to restrain a
smile, whilst he answered “that he really
did not think his charms were so dangerous,
that it was necessary to disguise
them by a wig; that as to his youth, it
was an objection which every day would
tend to lessen, and that he trusted he
might obtain the credit of being a good
physician, if he could cure people of
their diseases, and they would feel it to
be a matter of indifference whether they
were restored to health by a Doctor in a
wig, or without one.”
“Indifference!” cried Panton, starting

upright in his chair with passion.— 
“I don't know what you call a matter
of indifference—Sir, I can tell you it's
no matter of indifference to me, if you
mean me, for say, that with God's mercy
you carried me through, what then, if
you are doing your best to break my
heart after all—.”
Mr. Panton stopped short, for, at this
instant, Constance came into the room,
and her father's look of angry suspicion,
and her blush, immediately explained to
Erasmus what had the moment before
appeared to him unintelligible.—He felt
provoked with himself for coloring in
his turn, and feeling embarrassed without
any reason, but he recovered his
presence of mind directly, when Constance,
with a dignified ingenuous modesty
of manner, advanced towards him,
notwithstanding her father's forbidding
look, and with a sweet, yet firm voice,
thanked him for his yesterday's friendly
visit to her mother.

“I wonder you a'nt ashamed of yourself,
girl!”—cried old Panton, choking
with passion.
“And I'm sure I wonder you a'nt
ashamed of yourself, Mr. Panton, if you
come to that,” cried Mrs. Panton, “exposing
of your family affairs this way,
by your unseasonable passions, when
one has asked people to dinner too.”
“Dinner, or no dinner!” cried old
Panton, and he must have been strangely
transported beyond himself when he
made that exclamation.—“Dinner, or
no dinner! Mrs. Panton, I will speak
my mind, and be master in my own
house; so, Doctor Percy, if you please,
we'll leave the ladies, and talk over our
matters our own way, in my own room
here within.”
Dr. Percy willingly acceded to this
proposal.—Old Panton waddled as fast
as he could to show the way through
the antichamber, whilst Mrs. Panton
called after him, “Don't expose yourself
no more than you can help, my

dear.”—And as Erasmus bowed to her
in passing, she whispered, “Never mind
him, Doctor—stand by yourself—I'll
stand by you, and we'll stand by you— 
won't we, Constance?—see her color!”— 
“We have reason to be grateful to
Doctor Percy,” said Constance, gravely,
with an air of offended modesty, “and
I hope, added she, with softened sweetness
of tone, as she looked at him,
and saw his feelings in his countenance,
“I hope Doctor Percy is assured
of my gratitude, and of my perfect
esteem.”—
“Come! ... what the devil?”—cried
Old Panton, “I thought you were close
behind me.”
“Now, Doctor,” cried he, as soon
as he had fairly got Erasmus into his
closet, and shut the door—“Now, Doctor,
I suppose you see I'm not a man to
be imposed upon.”
“Nor, if you were, am I a man to
impose upon you, Sir?” said Erasmus.
—“If I understand you rightly, Mr.

Panton, you suspect me of some designs
upon your daughter—I have none.”
“And you won't have the assurance
to deny, that you are in love with her?”
“I am not in love with Miss Panton,
Sir; she has charms and virtues, which
might create the strongest attachment
in the heart of any man of feeling and
discernment, who could permit himself
to think of her. But I am not in a situation
in which I could, with honor, seek
to win her affections, and, fortunately
for me, this reflection has probably preserved
my heart from danger.—If I felt
any thing like love for your daughter,
Sir, you may be assured that I should
not, at this instant, be in your house.”
“A mighty fine speech, Sir! and well
delivered for aught I know.—You are a
scholar, and can speak sentences, but
that won't impose on me, a plain man
that has eyes.—Why ... tell me! ...
Didn't I see you within these two minutes
blushing up to the eyes, both of
you, at one another—Don't I know

when I see men and women in love ...
tell me! Mrs. Panton—fudge!—And did
not I see behind my back just now, the
women conjuring with you?—And
aren't you coloring over head and ears
with conscience this very instant?—Tell
me!”—
Erasmus in vain asserted his own and
the young lady's innocence, and maintained,
that blushing was no proof of
guilt—he even adverted to the possibility
of a man's blushing for others instead
of himself.
“Blush for me as much as you please,
if it's me you allude to,” cried the coarse
father.—“But when my daughter's at
stake, I make no bones of speaking
plain, and cutting the matter short in
the beginning—for we all know what
love is when it comes to a head.—Marrow-bones!
don't I know that there
must be some reason why that headstrong
girl won't think of my Lord Runnymede's
son and heir, and such a looking
youth, title and all, as my Lord

Roadster! And you are the cause, Sir,
and I thank you for opening my eyes to
it, as you did by your information to
Mrs. Panton yesterday, in my absence.”
Erasmus protested with such an air
of truth, as would have convinced any
person capable of being convinced, that,
in giving that information, he had been
actuated solely by a desire to save Miss
Panton from a ruinous match, by honest
regard for her and all her family.
“Ruinous!—You are wrong, Sir—I
know better—I know best—I saw my
Lord Runnymede himself this very morning—a
little temporary want of cash,
only from the estate's being tied up, as
they sometimes tie estates, which all noble
families is subject to—Tell me! don't
I know the bottom of these things, for
though I havn't been used to land, I
know all about it.—And at worst, my
Lord Roadster, my son in law that is to
be, is not chargeable with a penny of
his father's debts.—So your informer is
wrong, Sir, every way, and no lawyer,

Sir, for I have an attorney at my back
—and your information's all wrong, and
you had no need to interfere.”
Erasmus felt, and acknowledged the
imprudence of his interference, but hoped
it might be forgiven in favor of the motive
—and he looked so honestly glad to
hear that his information was all wrong,
that old Panton at the moment believed
in his integrity, and said, stretching out
his hand towards him—“Well, well, no
harm done—then it's all as it should be,
and we may ring for dinner—. But” 
—recurring again to his favorite idea— 
“You'll get the wig, Doctor?”
“Excuse me,” said Erasmus, laughing.
“Your confidence in me cannot
depend upon a wig.”
“It can, Sir, and it does,” cried Panton,
turning again, with all his anger
revived.—“Excuse you! no, Sir, I won't,
for the wig's my test, and I told Mrs.
Panton so last night—the wig's my test
of your uprightness in this matter, Sir; 
and I fairly tell you, that if you refuse

this, all the words you can string don't
signify a button with me.”
“And by what right, Sir, do you
speak to me in this manner,”—cried
Erasmus, proudly, for he lost all sense
of the ludicrous in indignation, at the
insolent doubt of his integrity, which,
after all the assurances he had given,
these last words from Mr. Panton, implied
—“By what right, Sir, do you
speak to me in this manner?—And what
reason can you have to expect that I
should submit to any tests to convince
you of the truth of my assertions.”
“Right!—Reason!”—cried Panton.
“Why, Doctor, don't you know that
I'm your patron!”
“My patron!”—repeated Erasmus,
in a tone which would have expressed
much to the mind of any man of sense
or feeling, but which conveyed no idea
to the gross apprehension of old Panton,
except that Dr. Percy was ignorant of
the fact.
“Your patron—yes, Doctor,—why,

don't you know that ever since you set
me upon my legs, I have been going up
and down the city puffing ... that is, I
mean, recommending you to all my
friends, and you see you're of consequence,
getting into fine practice for so
young a man.—And it stands to reason,
that when one takes a young man by
the hand, one has a right to expect one's
advice should be followed, and as to the
wig, I don't make it a test, you've an
objection to a test, but, as I've mentioned
it to Mrs. Panton, I must make it a
point, and you know I'm not a man to
go back.—And you'll consider, that if
you disoblige me, you can't expect that
I should continue my friendship, and
protection, and patronage, and all that.”
“Be assured, Sir, I expect nothing
from you,” said Erasmus, “and desire
nothing; I have the happiness and honor
to belong to a profession, in which,
if a man does not merit confidence, no
patronage can long be of use to him,
and in which, if he does deserve it, he

will succeed, without requiring any man's
patronage.”—Much less the patronage
of such a one as you!—Erasmus
would have said, but that he commanded
his indignation, or, perhaps, it was extinguished
by contempt.
A servant now came to announce that
dinner was waiting. In very bad humor
Mr. Panton, nevertheless, eat an excellent
dinner, growling over every thing
as he devoured it.—Constance seemed
much grieved by her father's unseasonable
fit of rudeness and obstinacy; with
sweetness of temper and filial duty she
bore with his humor, and concealed it as
far as she could from observation. Mrs.
Panton was displeased with this, and
once went so far, as to whisper to Erasmus,
“that her step-daughter wanted
spirit sadly, but that he ought never to
mind that, but to take a broad hint, and
keep his ground.”—Constance blushed
scarlet at these hints of Mrs. Panton,
from which she evidently suffered more,
than from her father's preposterous ill

humor. Erasmus, who with great simplicity,
and an upright character, had
quick observation and tact, perceived
pretty nearly what was going on in the
family. He saw that the step-mother,
under an air of frank and coarse good
nature, was cunning and interested; that
she wished to encourage the daughter to
open war with the father; knowing that
nothing could incense him so much as
Constance's thinking of a poor physician,
instead of accepting of an Earl's
son; Mrs. Panton wished then to fan to
a flame the spark, which she was confident
existed in his daughter's heart.
Erasmus, who was not apt to fancy that
ladies liked him, endeavored to relieve
Constance from the agonizing apprehension,
which he saw she felt of his being
misled by her mother's hints, he appeared
sometimes not to hear, and at other
times not to understand, what Mrs. Panton
said; and at last talked so loud across
the table to Mr. Henry, about letters
from Godfrey, and the officers of all the

regiments in or out of England, that no
other subject could be introduced, and
no other voice could be heard.—As soon
as he decently could, after dinner, Dr.
Percy took his leave, heartily glad to
escape from his awkward situation, and
from the patronage of Mr. Panton.— 
Erasmus was mistaken, however, in supposing
that Mr. Panton could do him
no harm.—It is true that he could not
deny, that Dr. Percy had restored him
to health, and the opinion, which had
spread in the city, of Dr. Percy's skill,
was not, and could not, be diminished
by Mr. Panton's railing against him; 
but when he hinted that the young physician
had practised upon his daughter's
heart, all the rich citizens, who had
daughters to watch, began to consider
him as a dangerous person, and resolved
never to call him in, except in some desperate
case. Mrs. Panton's gossiping
confidences did more harm than her husband's
loud complaints; and the very
eagerness which poor Constance showed

to vindicate Dr. Percy, and to declare
the truth, served only to confirm the sagaciously
nodding mothers and overwise
fathers in their own opinions.—Mr.
Henry said and did what he could for
Erasmus, but what could be done by a
young man shut up all day in a counting-house?
or who would listen to any
thing that was said by a young man
without station or name? Mr. Gresham
unluckily was at this time at his country
seat.—Poor Erasmus found his practice
in the city decline as rapidly as it had
risen, and he began a little to doubt the
truth of that noble sentiment, which he
had so proudly expressed. He was comforted,
however, by letters from his father; 
who strongly approved his conduct,
and who maintained, that truth
would at last prevail, and that the prejudice
which had been raised against
him would, in time, be turned to his advantage.
It happened that, while old Panton,
in his present ludicrous fit of obstinacy,

was caballing against our young physician
with all his might in the city, the
remote consequences of one of his previous
fits of equally absurd positive obstinacy
were operating in Dr. Percy's
favor at the west end of the town. Our
readers may recollect having heard of a
footman, whom Mr. Panton turned away
for refusing to swallow the dregs of various
phials of physic. Erasmus had at
the time pleaded in the poor fellow's favor,
and had, afterwards, when the servant
was out of place, in distress, and ill,
humanely attended him, and cured a
child of his, who had inflamed eyes.— 
This man was now in the service of a
rich and very fine lady, who lived in
Grosvenor Square—Lady Spilsbury.— 
Her Ladyship had several sickly children
—children rendered sickly by their
mother's overweening and injudicious
care. Alarmed successively by every
fashionable medical terror of the day,
she dosed her children with every specific
which was publicly advertised, or

privately recommended. No creatures
of their age had taken such quantities
of Ching's lozenges, Godbold's elixir, or
Dixon's antibilious pills. The consequence
was, that the dangers, which had
at first been imaginary, became real; 
these little victims of domestic medicine
never had a day's health; they looked,
and were, more dead than alive. Still the
mother, in the midst of hourly alarms,
was in admiration of her own medical
skill, which she said had actually preserved,
in spite of nature, children of
such sickly constitutions. In consequence
of this conviction, she redoubled
her vigilance, and the most trivial accident
was magnified into a symptom of
the greatest importance.
It happened on the day when the
eldest Miss Spilsbury had miraculously
attained her seventh year, a slight inflammation
was discerned in her right
eye, which was attributed by her mother
to her having neglected the preceding
day, to bathe it in elder-flower water;

by her governess, to her having sat up the
preceding night to supper; by her maid,
to her “having been found peeping
through a windy key-hole;” and by the
young lady herself, to her “having been
kept poring for two hours over her French
lesson.”
Whatever might have been the original
cause, the inflammation evidently
increased, either in consequence, or in
spite of the innumerable remedies applied
internally and externally.—In vain the
apothecary cleared the passages, in vain
mercurial ointment, and blistering, and
leeches, took their course—the eye grew
redder and redder, and as red as blood,
the nose inflamed, and the mother, in
great alarm for the beauty, as well as
health of her child, sent for Sir Amyas
Courtney. He had already won Lady
Spilbury's heart, by recommending to
her the honan tcha, or Tartar tea; which
enables the Tartars to digest raw flesh,
and tinges water of a red color.
Sir Aymas pronounced, that the young

lady had hereditary nerves, besought
Lady Spilsbury to compose herself, assured
her the inflammation was purely
symptomatic, and as soon as he could
subdue the continual nervous inclination
to shrivel up the nose, which he
trusted he could in time master, all would
go well.—But Sir Amyas attended
every day for a month, yet never got
the mastery of this nervous inclination.
—Lady Spilsbury then was persuaded
it could not be nerves, it must be scrofula,
and she called in Dr. Frumpton,
the man for scrofula.—He of course confirmed
her Ladyship in her opinion; for
a week d—d nerves and Sir Amyas; 
threw in desperate doses of calomel for
another month, reduced the poor child to
what the maid called an attomy, and still
the inflammation increased—Lady Spilsbury
desired a consultation of physicians,
but Dr. Frumpton would not consult
with Sir Amyas, nor would Sir Amyas
consult with Doctor Frumpton.—Lady
Spilsbury began to dread, that the sight

of the eye would be injured, and this
idea terrified the mother almost out of
her senses. In the suspension of authority,
which terror produces in a family,
the lady's maid usually usurps considerable
power.
Now, her Ladyship's maid had been
offended by Dr. Frumpton's calling her
my good girl, and by Sir Amyas Courtney's
having objected to a green silk
bandage, which she had recommended; 
so that she could not abide either of the
gentlemen, and she was confident the
young lady would never get well, while
they had the management of affairs; she
had heard—but she did not mention from
whom, she was too diplomatic to give up
her authority,—she had heard of a young
physician, a Dr. Percy, who had performed
wonderful great cures in the city,
and had in particular cured a young lady,
who had an inflamed eye, just for all the
world like Miss Spilsbury's—In this last
assertion there was, perhaps, some little
exaggeration; but it produced a salutary

effect upon Lady Spilsbury's imagination; 
the footman was immediately
dispatched for Dr. Percy, and ordered
to make all possible haste. Thus, by
one of those petty under plots of life,
which, often unknown to us, are continually
going on, our young physician
was brought into a situation, where he had
an opportunity of showing his abilities.
These favorable accidents happen to
many men, who are not able to make
use of them, and thus the general complaint
is preferred of want of good fortune,
or of opportunity for talents to
distinguish themselves.
Upon Dr. Percy's arrival at Lady
Spilsbury's, he immediately perceived,
that parties ran high, and that the partisans
were all eager to know, whether
he would pronounce the young lady's
case to be nervous or scrofulous. He
was assailed by a multitude of female
voices, and requested particularly to attend
to innumerable contradictory symptoms,
before he was permitted even to see

his patient. He attended carefully to
whatever facts he could obtain, pure
from opinion and misrepresentation.
The young lady was in a darkened room,
he begged to have a little more light admitted,
though she was in such pain,
that she could scarcely endure it. Our
young physician had the great advantage
of possessing the use of his senses and
understanding, unbiassed by medical
theories, or by the authority of great
names: he was not always trying to
force symptoms to agree with previous
descriptions, but he was actually able to
see, hear, and judge of them, as they
really appeared. There was a small
protuberance on the left side of the nose,
which, on his pressing it, gave great
pain to the child.
“Dear me! Miss, you know,” said
the maid, “it is not in your nose you
feel the great pain. ... You know you
told Sir Amyas Courtney t'other day.
 ... that is, Sir Amyas Courtney told
you. ...”

Dr. Percy insisted, that the child should
be permitted to speak for herself; and,
relieved from the apprehension of not
saying the thing that she was expected to
say, she described her present and past
feelings.—She said, “that the pain seemed
lately to have changed from where it was
before—that it had changed ever since Dr.
Frumpton's opening his snuff-box near her
had made her sneeze.” This sneeze was
thought by all but Dr. Percy, to be a circumstance
too trivial to be worth mentioning.
But on this hint he determined to
repeat the experiment. He had often
thought, that many of the pains, which
are supposed to be symptoms of certain
diseases, many disorders, which baffle
the skill of medicine, originate in accidents,
by which extraneous substances
are taken or forced into different parts of
the body.—He ordered some cephalic
snuff to be administered to the patient.
—All present looked with contempt at
the physician, who proposed such a
simple remedy.—But soon after the

child had sneezed violently and repeatedly,
Dr. Percy saw a little bit of green
silk appear, which was drawn from the
nostril, to the patient's great and immediate
relief—her brothers and sisters then
recollected having seen her, two months
before, stuffing up her nose a bit of green
ribbon, which she said she liked, because
it smelt of some perfume.—The cause of
the inflammation removed, it soon subsided,
the eye and nose recovered their
natural size and color; and every body
said, “who would have thought it?” 
All but Dr. Frumpton, and Sir Amyas
Courtney, who, in the face of demonstration,
maintained each his own opinion; 
declaring, that the green ribbon
had nothing to do with the business.
The sudden recovery of the child, Sir
Amyas said, proved to him in the most
satisfactory manner, that the disease was,
as he at first pronounced—nervous— 
Dr. Frumpton swore, that scrofula would
soon break out again in another shape; 
and, denouncing vengeance against

generations yet unborn, he left Lady
Spilsbury's children to take the consequence
of trusting to a youngster, whom
he had turned by the shoulders out of his
hospital, for his impertinent interference.
—In spite of all that the two angry and
unsuccessful physicians could say, the
recovery of the child's eye redounded
much to Dr. Percy's honor, and introduced
him to the notice of several men
of science and celebrity, who frequented
Lady Spilsbury's excellent dinners.— 
Even the intemperance of Dr. Frumpton's
anger was of service, for in consequence
of his assertion, that Dr. Percy
had been turned out of the Hospital, inquiry
was made into the circumstances,
and the friends of Erasmus had then an
opportunity of producing in his defence
the Irish porter. His cause could not
be in better hands.
With that warmth and eloquence of
gratitude, characteristic of his country,
the poor fellow told his story so as to
touch every heart. Among others it

particularly affected an officer, just returned
from our armies on the continent.
And by him it was the next day repeated
at the table of a celebrated General,
when the conversation turned upon the
conduct of certain army surgeons. Lord
Oldborough happened to be one of the
company; the name of Percy struck his
ear; but the moment
Erasmus was thus brought to his recollection,
he attended particularly to what
the officer was saying, and after hearing
two circumstances, which were so marked
with humanity and good sense, his
Lordship determined to give what assistance
he could to the rising credit of the
son of his old friend, by calling him in
for Lady Oldborough, who was in a declining
state of health.—But Sir Amyas
Courtney, who had long attended her
Ladyship, endeavoured with all the address
of hatred, to prejudice her against
his young rival, and to prevent her complying
with her Lord's request. Depending

on her habitual belief, that he
was essential to her existence, Sir Amyas
went so far as to declare, that, if Dr.
Percy should be sent for, he must discontinue
his visits. Lord Oldborough,
however, whom the appearance of opposition
to his will always confirmed in
his purpose, cut short the matter by a
few peremptory words.
Sir Amyas, the soft silken Sir Amyas,
could not for an instant stand before the
terror of Lord Oldborough's eye—the
moment he was told that he was at perfect
liberty to discontinue his visits— 
“his regard ... his attachment. ...
his devotion for Lady Oldborough, prevented
the possibility of abandoning her
Ladyship, he was willing to sacrifice his
private feelings, perhaps, his private prejudices,
his judgment, in short any
thing, every thing, sooner than disoblige
Lord Oldborough, or any of his family.” 
—Lord Oldborough satisfied, with the
submission, scarcely staid to hear the
end of the speech, but rang the bell,

ordered that Dr. Percy should be sent
for, and went to attend a cabinet council.
Lady Oldborough received him as it
might be supposed that a very sickly,
very much prejudiced, very proud lady
of quality, would receive a physician
without a name, who was forced upon
her in opposition to her long habits of
reliance on her courtly favorite. Her
present disease, as Dr. Percy believed,
was water upon her chest, and there was
some chance of saving her, by the remedies
which have been found successful in
a first attack of that complaint; but Sir
Amyas had pronounced, that her Ladyship's
disorder was merely nervous spasms,
consequent upon a bilious attack, and
he could not, or would not, recede from
his opinion; his prescriptions, to which
her Ladyship devoutly adhered to the
last, were all directed against bile and
nerves. She would not hear of water on
the chest, or take any of the remedies
proposed by Dr. Percy. Lady Oldborough

died ten days after he was called
in.—Those who knew nothing of the
matter, that is, above nine tenths of all
who talked about it, affirmed, that poor
Lady Oldborough's death was occasioned
by her following the rash prescriptions
of a young physician, who had been
forced upon her by Lord Oldborough,
and who, unacquainted with her Ladyship's
constitution, had mistaken the
nature of her complaint. All her Ladyship's
female relations joined in this
clamor, for they were most of them
friends or partisans of Sir Amyas Courtney.
The rank and conspicuous situation
of Lord Oldborough interested vast
numbers in the discussion, which was
carried on in every fashionable circle the
day after her Ladyship's decease.
Dr. Percy took a decided step in this
emergency. He went to the minister,
to whom no one, friend or enemy, had
ventured to give the slightest hint of the
reports in circulation. Dr. Percy plainly
stated the facts, represented, that his

character and the fate of his whole life
were at stake, and besought his Lordship
to have the truth examined into,
by eminent and impartial physicians.— 
Erasmus was aware of all he hazarded in
making this request—aware that he must
hurt Lord Oldborough's feelings—that
he must irritate him by bringing to his
view at once, and in this critical moment,
a number of family cabals, of which he
was ignorant—aware that Lord Oldborough
was oppressed with business,
public and private; and that, above all
things, he was impatient of any intrusion
upon his hours of privacy.—But all
these subordinate considerations vanished
before Lord Oldborough's magnanimity.
Without saying one word, he sat down
and wrote an order, that proper means
should be taken, to ascertain the disease
of which Lady Oldborough died.
The report made, in consequence of
this order, by the surgeons, confirmed
Dr. Percy's opinion, that her Ladyship's
disease was water on the chest—and

Lord Oldborough took effectual means
to give the truth publicity.
“You need not thank me, Dr. Percy
—You have a right to expect justice,
more you will never want. My assistance
might, it seems, have been injurious,
but can never be necessary to your
reputation.”
These few words—much from Lord
Oldborough—and which he took care to
say when they could be heard by numbers,
were quickly circulated.—The
physicians and surgeons, who had given
in their report, were zealous in maintaining
the truth; medical and political parties
were interested in the affair, the name
of Dr. Percy was joined with the first
names in the medical world, and repeated
by the first people in the great
world, so that with surprising celerity he
became known and fashionable.—And
thus the very circumstance, that threatened
his ruin, was by his civil courage
and decided judgment converted into
the means of his rising into eminence.

Late one night, after a busy and fatiguing
day, just as Erasmus had got
into bed, and was settling himself comfortably
to sleep, he heard a loud knock
at the door.
“Mr. Henry, Sir, from Mr. Panton's
in the city, wishes, to speak with
you.”
“Show him in.—So Old Panton I
suppose. ... Some indigestion has
brought him to reason?”—
“Oh no such thing,” interrupted Mr.
Henry, “I would not have disturbed
you at this time of night for any such
trifle, but our excellent friend Mr. Gresham”. ...
“What of him?” cried Erasmus,
starting up in bed.
“Is ill—but whether dangerously or
not I cannot tell you. An express from
his house in the country has just arrived; 
I heard the letter read, but could not
get it to bring to you.—It was written to
Old Panton from Mr. Gresham's housekeeper,
without her master's knowledge,

as he has no opinion of physicians,
she said, except of a young Dr. Percy,
and did not like to send for him for such
a trifle as a sore throat, lest it should
hurt his practice to leave town at this
season.
Erasmus staid to hear no more, but
ordered horses instantly, set out, and
travelled with all possible expedition.
He had reason to rejoice that he had
not made a moment's delay.—He found
Mr. Gresham actually suffocating from
a quinsey—A surgeon had been sent
for from the next town, but was not
at home. Erasmus, the instant he saw
Mr. Gresham, perceiving the danger,
without saying one syllable, sprang to
the bed, lanced the throat, and saved
the life of his valuable friend.—The surgeon,
who came the next day, said that
“Dr. Percy ought to have waited for his
arrival, and that a physician might be
severely blamed for performing a surgical
operation ... that it was a very
indelicate thing.”

But Mr. Gresham, who had fallen
into a comfortable sleep, did not hear
him; nor did Dr. Percy, who was writing
the following letter to his father:
&lblank;
“You will sympathize
with me, my dear father, and all my
friends at home will sympathize in the
joy I feel at seeing this excellent man,
this kind friend, recovering under my
care. These are some of the happy moments
which, in my profession, repay
us for years of toil, disappointment, and
sufferings—Yes, sufferings—for we must
suffer with those that suffer—We must
daily and hourly behold every form of
pain, acute or lingering: numbers, every
year of our lives, we must see perish,
the victims of incurable disease. We
are doomed to hear the groans of the
dying, and the lamentations, sometimes
the reproaches, of surviving friends; often
and often must the candid and humane
physician deplore the insufficiency of his

art. But there are successful, gloriously
successful moments, which reward us
for all the painful duties, all the unavailing
regrets of our profession.
This day—I shall recal to my mind,
whenever my spirits sink, or whenever
my fortitude begins to fail—I wish you
could see the gratitude and joy in the
looks of all Mr. Gresham's servants— 
He is much beloved and esteemed—His
death would have been a public loss, for
the beneficent use he makes of his
princely fortune has rendered numbers
dependent on him for the comforts of
life.—He lives here in a palace, and
every thing he has done, whether in
building or planting, in encouraging the
useful or the fine arts, has been done
with a judicious and magnificent spirit; 
—Surely this man ought to be happy in
his own reflections, and yet he does not
seem to me as happy as he deserves to
be.—I shall stay here till I see him
out of all danger of relapse—He has just
wakened—Adieu—for the present.”

In continuation of this letter the following
was written the next day.—
“All danger is over—my friend is
convalescent, and I shall return to town
to morrow—But would you think, my
dear father, that the real cause of Mr.
Gresham's being unhappy—is Patronage
—By accident I made use of that
word in speaking of Old Panton's quarrel
with me, and he cursed the word the
moment I pronounced it—“Yes!” he
exclaimed, “It is twice accursed, once
in the giving, and once in the receiving.” 
—Then he began, in a most feeling
manner, to describe the evils attendant
upon being a patron—He has done his
utmost to relieve and encourage genius
in distress; but among all the poets,
painters, artists, and men of letters,
whom, in various ways, he has obliged,
he has scarcely been able to satisfy the
vanity or the expectations of any.— 
Some have passed from excessive adulation
to gross abuse of him—many more
torment him continually with their complaints

and invectives against each other; 
and, instead of having done good by his
generosity, he finds that in a variety of
instances, of which he detailed the circumstances,
he has done much mischief,
and, as he says, infinite injury to his
own peace of mind—for he has burdened
himself with the care of a number
of people, who cannot be made happy.
—He has to deal with men but partially
cultivated; with talents, unaccompanied
by reason, justice, or liberality of sentiment.
—With great feeling himself, he
suffers acutely from all their jealousies
and quarrels, and from the near and perpetual
view of the littlenesses by which
artists too often degrade themselves.— 
Another man in Mr. Gresham's situation
would become a misanthropist, and
would comfort himself by railing against
the ingratitude of mankind, but this
would not comfort Mr. Gresham.—He
loves his fellow-creatures, and sees their
faults in sorrow rather than in anger.
—I have known him, and intimately

for a considerable time, and yet I never
heard him speak on this subject but once
before, when the painter, whom I used
to call the irritable genius, had caricatured
him in return for all his kindness.
“Though it is not easy to change
the habits, or to alter the views and objects
of a man like Mr. Gresham, past
the meridian of life, yet I cannot help
flattering myself, that this might be effected.
If he would, by one bold effort,
shake off these dependants, the evening
of his days might yet be serene and
happy. He wants friends, not protégées.
—I have advised him, as soon as his
strength will permit, to take a little
tour, which will bring him into your
part of the country. He wishes much
to become acquainted with all our family,
and I have given him a note of
introduction. You, my dear father,
can say to him more than I could with
propriety.
“Mr. Gresham knows how to accept

as well as to give.—He allows me to
have the pleasure of proving to him,
that, where my friends are concerned, I
am above pecuniary considerations.— 
My love to my dear mother, Rosamond,
and Caroline.
Your affectionate son,
E. Percy.”
Though Mr. Gresham would not hurt
the feelings of his young friend and physician,
by pressing upon him at the moment
any remuneration, or by entering
into any calculation of the loss he would
sustain by his absence from London at
this critical season, he took his own
methods of justly recompensing Dr.
Percy.—Erasmus found at his door, the
day after his return to town, a plain, but
excellent chariot and horses, with a note
from Mr. Gresham, written in such terms
as precluded the possibility of refusing
the offer.
The celebrated London physician, who
said that he was not paid for three weeks'

attendance in the country, by a draught
for two thousand pounds, and who,
when the pen was put into his own hands,
wrote four in the place of two; would
smile in scorn, at the generosity of Mr.
Gresham, and the disinterestedness of
Dr. Percy.