

Two hours after her ladyship had retired
to her own room, as Belinda was
passing by the door to go to her own
bed-chamber, she heard lady Delacour
call to her.
“Belinda, you need not walk so softly,
I am not asleep. Come in, will you, my
dear? I have something of consequence
to say to you. Is all the world
gone?”
“Yes; and I thought that you were
asleep. I hope you are not in pain?”

“Not just at present, thank you; but
that was a terrible embrace of poor little
Helena's. You see to what accidents I
should be continually exposed, if I had
that child always about me; and yet she
seems of such an affectionate disposition,
that I wish it were possible to keep her
at home. Sit down by my bedside, my
dear Belinda! and I will tell you what I
have resolved upon.”
Belinda sat down, and lady Delacour
was silent for some minutes.
“I am resolved,” said she, “to make
one desperate effort for my life. New
plans, new hopes of happiness, have
opened to my imagination, and with my
hopes of being happy, my courage rises.
I am determined to submit to the dreadful
operation, which alone can radically
cure me;—you understand me. But it
must be kept a profound secret. I know
of a person who could be got to perform
this operation with the utmost secrecy.”
“But surely,” said Belinda, “safety
must be your first object?”

“No; secrecy is my first object. Nay,
do not reason with me; it is a subject on
which I cannot, will not, reason. Hear
me—I will keep Helena with me for a
few days; she was surprised by what
passed in the library this evening; I
must remove all suspicion from her
mind.”
“There is no suspicion in her mind,” 
said Belinda.
“So much the better; she shall go immediately
to school, or to Oakly-park.
—I will then stand my trial for life or
death; and if I live, I will be, what I
have never yet been, a mother to Helena.
If I die, you and Clarence Hervey will take
care of her;—I know you will. That
young man is worthy of you, Belinda. If
I die, I charge you to tell him that I
knew his value; that I had a soul capable
of being touched by the eloquence of
virtue.” Lady Delacour, after a pause,
said, in an altered tone,
“Do you think, Belinda, that I shall
survive this operation?”

“The opinion of doctor X&wblank;,” said Belinda,
“must certainly be more satisfactory
than mine;” and she repeated what
the doctor had left with her in writing
upon this subject.
“So it is the doctor's opinion that I shall
inevitably destroy myself, if, from a vain
hope of secrecy, I put myself into ignorant
hands? These are his own words, are
they?—Very strong—and he is prudent to
leave that opinion in writing. Now,
whatever happens, he cannot be answerable
for ‘measures which he does not
guide.’ Nor you either, my dear!—you
have all done what is prudent and proper.— 
But I must beg you to recollect
that I am neither a child nor a fool; 
that I am come to years of discretion,
and that I am not now in the delirium of
a fever; consequently there can be no
pretence for managing me. In this particular
I must insist upon managing myself.
I have confidence in the skill of
the person whom I shall employ. Dr.

X&wblank;, very likely, would have none, because
the man may not have a diploma
for killing or curing in form. That is
nothing to the purpose. It is I that am
to undergo the operation. It is my
health, my life, that is risked; and if I am
satisfied, that is enough.—Secrecy, as I
told you before, is my first object.”
“And cannot you,” said Belinda,
“depend with more security upon the
honour of a surgeon who is at the head
of his profession, and who has a high reputation
at stake, than upon a vague promise
of secrecy from some obscure quack,
who has no reputation to lose?”
“No,” said lady Delacour: “I tell
you, my dear! that I cannot depend upon
any of these ‘honourable men.’ I have
taken means to satisfy myself on this
point; their honour and foolish delicacy
would not allow them to perform such
an operation for a wife, without the
knowledge, privity, consent, &c. &c. &c.
of her husband. Now lord Delacour's

knowing the thing is quite out of the
question.”
“Why, my dear lady Delacour!
why?” said Belinda with great earnestness.
“Surely a husband has the strongest
claim to be consulted upon such an
occasion! Let me entreat you to tell
lord Delacour your intentions, and then
all will be right. Say Yes; my dear
friend! let me prevail upon you,” said
Belinda, taking her ladyship's hand, and
pressing it between both of her's with
the most affectionate eagerness.
Lady Delacour made no answer, but
fixed her eyes upon Belinda's.
“Lord Delacour,” continued miss
Portman, “deserves this from you, by
the great interest, the increasing interest,
that he has shown of late about your
health: his kindness and handsome conduct
the other morning certainly pleased
you; and you have now an opportunity of
showing that confidence in him, which
his affection and constant attachment to
you merit.”

“I trouble myself very little about the
constancy of lord Delacour's attachment
to me,” said her ladyship, coldly withdrawing
her hand from Belinda. “Whether
his lordship's affection for me have
of late increased, or diminished, is an
object of perfect indifference to me. But
if I were inclined to reward him for his
late attentions, I should apprehend that
we might hit upon some better reward
than you have pitched upon. Unless
you imagine that lord Delacour has
a peculiar taste for surgical operations, I
cannot conceive how his becoming my
confident upon this occasion could have
an immediate tendency to increase his
affection for me—about which affection
I don't care a straw; as you, better than
any one else, must know. For I am no hypocrite; 
I have laid open my whole heart
to you, Belinda.”
“For that very reason,” said miss
Portman, “I am eager to use the influence
which I know I have in your heart,
for your happiness. I am convinced that

it will be absolutely impossible, that
you should carry on this scheme in
the house with your husband, without
it's being discovered. If he discover
it by accident, he will feel very differently
from what he would do, if he
were trusted by you.”
“For Heaven's sake, my dear!” cried
lady Delacour, “let me hear no more
about lord Delacour's feeling.”
“But allow me then to speak of my
own,” said Belinda; “I cannot be concerned
in this affair, if it is to be concealed
from your husband.”
“You will do about that as you think
proper,” said lady Delacour haughtily.
“Your sense of propriety towards lord
Delacour is, I observe, stronger than
your sense of honour towards me. But
I make no doubt that you act upon principle
—just principle. You promised
never to abandon me;—but when I most
want your assistance you refuse it, from
consideration for lord Delacour A
scruple of delicacy absolves a person of

nice feelings, I find, from a positive promise!
—A new and convenient code of
morality!”
Belinda, though much hurt by the
sarcastic tone in which her ladyship
spoke, mildly answered, “That the promise
she had made to stay with her
ladyship during her illness was very
different from an engagement to assist
her in such a scheme as she had now in
contemplation.”
Lady Delacour suddenly drew the
curtain between her and Belinda, saying,
“Well, my dear! at all events, I am glad
to hear you don't forget your promise
of staying with me. You are, perhaps,
prudent to refuse me your assistance
—all circumstances considered.
Good night! I have kept you up too
long. Good night!”
“Good night!” said Belinda, drawing
aside the curtain. “You will not be
displeased with me, when you reflect
coolly.”
“The light blinds me,” said lady Delacour;

and she turned her face away
from miss Portman, and added, in a
drowsy voice, “I will think of what has
been said, some time or other: but just
now I would rather go to sleep, than say
or hear any more; for I am more than
half asleep already.”
Belinda closed the curtains, and left
the room. But lady Delacour, notwithstanding
the drowsy tone in which she
pronounced these last words, was not in
the least inclined to sleep. A passion
had taken possession of her mind, which
kept her broad awake the remainder of
the night,—the passion of jealousy. The
extreme eagerness with which Belinda
had urged her to consult lord Delacour,
and to trust him with her secret, displeased
her; not merely as an opposition
to her will, and an undue attention to his
lordship's feelings, but as “confirmation
strong” of a hint which had been
dropped by sir Philip Baddely, but which
never till now had appeared to her
worthy of a moment's consideration, Sir

Philip had observed, that “if a young
lady had any hopes of being a viscountess,
it was no wonder she thought a baronet
beneath her notice.”—“Now,” thought
lady Delacour, “this is not impossible. In
the first place, Belinda Portman is niece to
Mrs. Stanhope; she may have all her
aunt's art, and the still greater art to
conceal it under the mask of openness
and simplicity: Volto sciolto, pensieri
stretti, is the grand maxim of the Stanhope
school.” The moment lady Delacour's
mind turned to suspicion, her
ingenuity rapidly supplied her with circumstances
and arguments to confirm
and justify her doubts.
“Miss Portman fears that my husband
is growing too fond of me: she says, he
has been very attentive to me of late.
Yes, so he has; and on purpose to disgust
him with me, she immediately urges me to
tell him that I have a loathsome disease,
and that I am about to undergo a horrid
operation. How my eyes have been
blinded by her artifice! This last stroke

was rather too bold, and has opened
them effectually, and now I see a thousand
things that escaped me before.
Even to night, the sortes Virgilianæ, the
myrtle leaf, miss Portman's mark, left in
the book exactly at the place where
Marmontel gives a receipt for managing
a husband of lord Delacour's character.
Ah, ha! By her own confession, she had
been reading this; studying it. Yes, and
she has studied it to some purpose; she
has made that poor weak lord of mine
think her an angel. How he ran on in her
praise the other day, when he honoured
me with a morning visit! That morning
visit, too, was of her suggestion; and the
bank notes, as he, like a simpleton, let
out in the course of the conversation,
had been offered to her first. She, with
a delicacy that charmed my short-sighted
folly, begged that they might go through
my hands. How artfully managed!
Mrs. Stanhope herself could not have
done better. So, she can make lord
Delacour do whatever she pleases; and

she condescends to make him behave
prettily to me, and desires him to bring
me peace-offerings of bank notes! She
is, in fact, become my banker; mistress
of my house, my husband, and myself.
Ten days I have been confined to my
room. Truly, she has made a good use
of her time; and I, fool that I am, have
been thanking her for all her disinterested
kindness!
“Then her kindness to my daughter!
disinterested, too, as I thought!—But,
Good Heavens, what an idiot I have
been! She looks forward to be the
mother-in-law of Helena; she would
win the simple child's affections even
before my face, and show lord Delacour
what a charming wife and mother she
would make! He said some such thing
to me, as well as I remember, the other
day. Then her extreme prudence! She
never coquettes, not she, with any of
the young men who come here on purpose
to see her. Is this natural? Absolutely
unnatural; artifice! artifice! To

contrast herself with me in lord Delacour's
opinion, is certainly her object.
Even to Clarence Hervey, with whom
she was, or pretended to be, smitten,
how cold and reserved she is grown of
late! And how haughtily she rejected my
advice, when I hinted that she was not
taking the way to win him! I could not
comprehend her; she had no designs on
Clarence Hervey, she assured me. Immaculate
purity! I believe you.
“Then her refusal of sir Philip Baddely!
—A baronet with fifteen thousand a year
to be refused by a girl who has nothing,
and merely because he is a fool! How
could I be such a fool as to believe it?
Worthy niece of Mrs. Stanhope, I know
you now! And now I recollect that
extraordinary letter of Mrs. Stanhope's,
which I snatched out of miss Portman's
hands some months ago, full of blanks,
and inuendoes, and references to some
letter which Belinda had written about
my disputes with my husband! From
that moment to this, miss Portman has

never let me see another of her aunt's
letters. So I may conclude they are all in
the same style; and I make no doubt
that she has instructed her niece, all this
time, how to proceed. Now I know why
she always puts Mrs. Stanhope's letters
into her pocket the moment she receives
them, and never opens them in my presence.
And I have been laying open
my whole heart, telling my whole history,
confessing all my faults and follies,
to this girl! And I have told her that I
am dying; I have taught her to look
forward, with joy and certainty, to the
coronet on which she has fixed her heart.
“On my knees I conjured her to stay
with me to receive my last breath. Oh,
dupe, miserable dupe, that I am! could
nothing warn me? In the moment that
I discovered the treachery of one friend,
I went and prostrated myself to the artifices
of another—of another a thousand
times more dangerous—ten thousand
times more beloved! For what was
Harriet Freke in comparison with Belinda

Portman? Harriet Freke, even
whilst she diverted me most, I half despised.
But Belinda!—Oh, Belinda!
how entirely have I loved! trusted! admired!
adored! respected! revered
you!”
Exhausted by the emotions to which
she had worked herself up by the force
of her powerful imagination, lady Delacour,
after passing several restless hours
in bed, fell asleep late in the morning; 
and when she awaked, Belinda was
standing by her bed-side. “What could
you be dreaming of?” said Belinda smiling.
“You started, and looked at me
with such horrour, when you opened your
eyes, as if I had been your evil genius.”
It is not in human nature, thought
lady Delacour, suddenly overcome by
the sweet smile and friendly tone of Belinda,
—it is not in human nature to be so
treacherous; and she stretched out both
her arms to Belinda, saying, “You my
evil genius? No. My guardian angel, my

dearest Belinda! kiss me, and forgive
me.”
“Forgive you for what?” said Belinda; 
“I believe you are dreaming still, and I am
sorry to awaken you; but I am come to
tell you a wonderful thing—that lord
Delacour is up, and dressed, and actually
in the breakfast room; and that he has
been talking to me this half hour—of
what do you think?—of Helena. He was
quite surprised, he said, to see her grown
such a fine girl, and he declares that he
no longer regrets that she was not a boy; 
and he says that he will dine at home to
day, on purpose to drink Helena's health
in his new burgundy; and, in short, I
never saw him in such good spirits, or so
agreeable—I always thought he was one
of the best natured men I had ever seen.
Will not you get up to breakfast? Lord
Delacour has asked for you ten times
within these five minutes.”
“Indeed!” said Lady Delacour, rubbing
her eyes. “All this is vastly wonderful;

but I wish you had not awakened me
so soon.”
“Nay, nay,” said Belinda, “I know,
by the tone of your voice, that you do not
mean what you say; I know you will get
up, and come down to us directly—so I
will send Marriott.”
Lady Delacour got up, and went down
to breakfast, in much uncertainty what to
think of miss Portman; but ashamed to
let her into her mind, and still more afraid
that lord Delacour should suspect her
of doing him the honour to be jealous.— 
Belinda had not the least guess at what
was really passing in her ladyship's heart; 
she implicitly believed her expressions of
complete indifference to her lord; and
jealousy was the last feeling which
miss Portman would have attributed to
lady Delacour, because she unfortunately
was not sufficiently aware that
jealousy can exist without love. The
idea of lord Delacour, as an object of
attachment; or of a coronet, as an object
of ambition; or of her friend's death, as

an object of joy, were so foreign to Belinda's
innocent mind, that it was scarcely
possible she could decipher lady Delacour's
thoughts. Her ladyship affected
to be in “remarkably good spirits this
morning,” declared that she had never
felt so well since her illness, ordered her
carriage as soon as breakfast was over,
and said she would take Helena to Maillardet's,
to see the wonders of his little
conjurer and his singing bird. “Nothing
equal to Maillardet's singing bird
has ever been seen or heard of, my dear
Helena! since the days of Aboulcasem's
peacock in the Persian Tales.—Since
lady Anne Percival has not shown you
these charming things, I must.”
“But I hope you won't tire yourself,
mamma,” said the little girl.
“I am afraid you will,” said Belinda.
“And you know, my dear!” added lord
Delacour, “that miss Portman, who is
so very obliging and good natured, could
go just as well with Helena; and, I am
sure, would, rather than that you should

tire yourself, or give yourself any unnecessary
trouble.”
“Miss Portman is very good,” answered
lady Delacour, hastily; “but I
think it no unnecessary trouble to give
my daughter any pleasure in my power— 
As to its tiring me, I am neither dead,
nor dying, yet—For the rest, miss Portman,
who understands what is proper,
blushes for you, as you see, my lord,
when you propose that she, who is not
yet a married woman, should chaperon a
young lady. It is quite out of rule; and
Mrs. Stanhope would be shocked if her
niece could, or would, do such a thing to
oblige any body.”
Lord Delacour was too much in the
habit of hearing sarcastic, and to him incomprehensible,
speeches from her ladyship,
to take any extraordinary notice
of this;—and if Belinda blushed, it was
merely from the confusion into which
she was thrown by the piercing glance
of lady Delacour's black eyes—a glance,
which neither guilt nor innocence could

withstand. Belinda imagined, that her
ladyship still retained some displeasure
from the conversation that had passed
the preceding night; and the first time
that she was alone with lady Delacour,
she again touched upon the subject,
in hopes of softening or convincing her.
“At all events, my dear friend!” said
she, “you will not, I hope, be offended
by the sincerity with which I speak— 
I can have no object but your safety and
happiness.”
“Sincerity never offends me,” was her
ladyship's cold answer. And all the
time that they were out together, she
was unusually ceremonious to miss Portman; 
and there would have been but
little conversation, if Helena had not
been present, to whom her mother talked
with fluent gayety. When they got to
Spring-gardens, Helena exclaimed, “O!
there's lady Anne Percival's carriage,
and Charles and Edward with her— 
They are going to the same place that
we are, I dare say, for I heard Charles

ask lady Anne to take him to see Maillardet's
little bird—Mr. Hervey mentioned
it to us, and he said it was a
curious piece of machinery.”
“I wish you had told me sooner that lady
Anne was likely to be there, I don't wish
to meet her so awkwardly—I am not
well enough yet, indeed, to go to these
odious, hot, close places; and, besides,
I hate seeing sights.”
Helena, with much good humour, said,
that she would rather give up seeing
the sight than be troublesome to her
mother.—When they came to Maillardet's,
however, lady Delacour saw Mrs.
&wblank;getting out of her carriage, and to
her she consigned Helena and miss Portman,
saying, that she would take a turn or
two in the park, and call for them in half
an hour. When the half hour was over,
and her ladyship returned, she carelessly
asked, as they were going home, whether
they had been pleased with their visit to
the bird and the conjurer. “O, yes,
mamma!” said Helena: “and do you

know, that one of the questions that the
people ask the conjurer is, ‘Where is
the happiest family to be found?’ And
Charles and Edward immediately said,
if he is a good conjurer, if he tells truth,
he'll answer, ‘At Oakly-Park.’”
“Miss Portman, had you any conversation
with lady Anne Percival?” said
lady Delacour, coldly.
“A great deal,” said Belinda, “and
such as I am sure you would have liked:
and so far from being a ceremonious
person, I think I never saw any body
who had such easy engaging manners.”
“And did she ask you, Helena, again
to go with her to that place where the
happiest family in the world is to be
found?”
“Oakly-park?—No, mamma; she said
that she was very glad that I was with
you; but she asked miss Portman to
come to see her whenever it was in her
power.”
“And could miss Portman withstand
such a temptation?”

“You know that I am engaged to
your ladyship,” said Belinda.
Lady Delacour bowed. “But from
what passed last night,” said she, “I
was afraid that you might repent your
engagement to me; and if so, I give up
my bond. I should be miserable if I
apprehended that any one, but more
especially miss Portman, felt herself a
prisoner in my house.”
“Dear lady Delacour! I do not feel
myself a prisoner; I have always, till now,
felt myself a friend in your house: but
we'll talk of this another time. Do not
look at me with so much coldness; do
not speak to me with so much politeness.
I will not let you forget that I am
your friend.”
“I do not wish to forget it, Belinda,” 
said lady Delacour, with emotion; “I
am not ungrateful, though I may seem
capricious—bear with me.”
“There now, you look like yourself
again, and I am satisfied,” cried Belinda.
“As to going to Oakly-park, I give you

my word I have not the most distant
thoughts of it. I stay with you from choice,
and not from compulsion, believe me.”
“I do believe you,” said lady Delacour,
and for a moment she was convinced,
that Belinda staid with her for her
own sake alone; but the next minute she
suspected, that lord Delacour was the
secret cause of her refusing to go to
Oakly-park. His lordship dined at home
this day, and two or three succeeding
days, and he was not intoxicated from
Monday till Thursday. These circumstances
appeared to his lady very extraordinary.
In fact, he was pleased and
amused with his little daughter, Helena; 
and whilst she was yet almost a stranger
to him, he wished to appear to her in the
most agreeable and respectable light possible.
One day after dinner lord Delacour,
who was in remarkably good humour,
said to her ladyship—“My dear! you
know that your new carriage was broken
almost to pieces the night when you
were overturned. Well, I have had it all

set to rights again, and new painted, and
it is all complete, except the hammer-cloth,
which must have new fringe.
What colour will you have the fringe?”
“What do you say, miss Portman?” 
said her ladyship.
“Black and orange would look well,
I think,” said Belinda, “and would suit
the lace of your liveries—would not it?”
“Certainly—Black and orange then,” 
said lord Delacour, “it shall be.”
“If you ask my opinion,” said lady
Delacour, “I am for blue and white, to
match the cloth of the liveries.”
“Blue and white then it shall be,” 
said lord Delacour.
“Nay, miss Portman has a better taste
than I have; and she says black and
orange, my lord.”
“Then you'll have it black and orange,
will you?” said lord Delacour.
“Just as you please,” said lady Delacour,
and no more passed.
Soon afterward a note came from
lady Anne Percival, with some trifles

belonging to Helena, for which her
mother had sent. The note was for
Belinda—another pressing invitation to
Oakly-park—and a very civil message
from Mrs. Margaret Delacour, and
thanks to lady Delacour for the macaw.
Ay, thought lady Delacour, miss Portman
wants to ingratiate herself in time
with all my husband's relations. “Mrs.
Margaret Delacour should have addressed
these thanks to you, miss Portman, for I
had not the grace to think of sending her
the macaw.” Lord Delacour, who was
very fond of his aunt, immediately joined
his thanks, and observed, that miss Portman
was always considerate—always
obliging—always kind. Then he drank
her health in a bumper of burgundy, and
insisted upon his little Helena's drinking
her health. “I am sure you ought, my
dear! for miss Portman is very good—too
good to you, child.”
“Very good—not too good, I hope,” 
said lady Delacour. “Miss Portman,
your health.”

“And I hope,” continued his lordship,
after swallowing his bumper, “that
my lady Anne Percival does not mean
to enveigle you away from us, miss Portman.
You don't think of leaving us,
miss Portman, I hope? Here's Helena
would break her little heart;—I say nothing
for my lady Delacour, because
she can say every thing so much better
for herself; and I say nothing for myself,
because I am the worst man in the world
at making speeches, when I really have a
thing at heart—as I have your staying
with us, miss Portman.”
Belinda assured him, that there was no
occasion to press her to do what was
perfectly agreeable to her, and said that
she had no thoughts of leaving lady Delacour.
Her ladyship, with some embarrassment,
expressed herself “extremely
obliged, and gratified, and happy.” 
Helena, with artless joy, threw her arms
about Belinda, and exclaimed, “I am
glad you are not going!—for I never

liked any body so much, of whom I knew
so little.”
“The more you know of miss Portman,
the more you will like her, child— 
at least, I have found it so,” said lord
Delacour.
“Clarence Hervey would, I am sure,
have given the Pigot diamond, if it were in
his gift, for such a smile as you bestowed
on lord Delacour just now,” whispered
lady Delacour.—For an instant Belinda
was struck with the tone of pique and
reproach, in which her ladyship spoke.
“Nay, my dear! I did not mean to make
you blush so piteously,” pursued her
ladyship: “I really did not think it a
blushing matter—but you know best.
Believe me, I spoke without malice; we
are so apt to judge from our own feelings
—and I could as soon blush about
the old man of the mountains as about
my lord Delacour.”
“Lord Delacour!” said Belinda, with
a look of such unfeigned surprise, that
her ladyship instantly changed countenance,

and, taking her hand with gayety,
said, “So, my little Belinda! I have
caught you—the blush belongs then to
Clarence Hervey? Well, any man of
common sense would rather have one
blush than a thousand smiles, for his
share—Now we understand one another.
And will you go with me to the exhibition
to morrow? I am told there are
some charming pictures this year. Helena,
who really has a genius for drawing,
should see these things; and whilst
she is with me, I will make her as happy
as possible. You see the reformation is
beginning—Clarence Hervey and Miss
Portman can do wonders. If it be my
fate, at last, to be la bonne mère, or la
femme comme il y en a peu, how can I
help it? There is no struggling against
fate, my dear!”
Whenever lady Delacour's suspicions
of Belinda were suspended, all her affections
returned with double force; she
wondered at her own folly, she was
ashamed that she could have let such ideas

enter her mind, and she was beyond
measure astonished that any thing relative
to lord Delacour could so far have
interested her attention. “Luckily,” 
said she to herself, “he has not the penetration
of a blind beetle; and, besides,
he has little snug jealousies of his own; 
so he will never find me out. It would
be an excellent thing indeed, if he were
to turn my ‘master torment’ against myself
—it would be a judgment upon me.
The manes of poor Lawless would then
be appeased. But it is impossible I
should ever be a jealous wife: I am only
a jealous friend, and I must satisfy myself
about Belinda. To be a second time a
dupe to the treachery of a friend, would
be too much for me—too much for my
pride—too much for my heart.”
The next day, when they came to the
exhibition, lady Delacour had an opportunity
of judging of Belinda's real feelings.
As they went up the stairs, they
heard the voices of sir Philip Baddeley
and Mr. Rochfort, who were standing

upon the landing-place, leaning over the
banisters, and running their little sticks
along the iron rails, to try which would
make the loudest noise.
“Have you been much pleased with
the pictures, gentlemen?” said lady Delacour,
as she passed them.
“O, damme! no; 'tis a cursed bore;— 
and yet there are some fine pictures; one
in particular,—hey, Rochfort? one damned
fine picture!” said sir Philip: And the two
gentlemen, laughing significantly, followed
lady Delacour and Belinda into
the rooms.
“Ay, there's one picture that's worth
all the rest, 'pon honour!” repeated Rochfort; 
“and we'll leave it to your ladyship's
and miss Portman's taste and judgment
to find it out;—Mayn't we, sir
Philip?”
“O, damme! yes,” said sir Philip,
“by all means.” But he was so impatient
to direct her eyes, that he could not
keep himself still an instant.
“O, curse it! Rochfort, we'd better

tell the ladies at once, else they may be
all day looking and looking.”
“Nay, sir Philip, may not I be allowed
to guess? Must I be told which is your
fine picture?—This is not much in favour
of my taste.”
“O, damn it! your ladyship has the
best taste in the world, every body
knows; and so has miss Portman—and
this picture will hit her taste particularly,
I'm sure. It is Clarence Hervey's fancy; 
but this is a dead secret—dead—Clary
no more thinks that we know it than the
man in the moon.”
“Clarence Hervey's fancy!—Then I
make no doubt of it's being good for
something,” said lady Delacour, “if the
painter have done justice to his imagination; 
for Clarence has really a fine imagination.”
“O, damme! 'tis not amongst the history
pieces,” cried sir Philip: “'Tis a
portrait.”
“And a history piece, too, 'pon honour!” 
said Rochfort:—“a family history

piece, I take it, 'pon honour! it will turn
out,” said Rochfort; and both the gentlemen
were, or affected to be, thrown into
convulsions of laughter, as they repeated
the words “family history piece—'pon
honour! family history piece, damme!”
“I'll take my oath as to the portrait's
being a devilish good likeness,” added
sir Philip; and, as he spoke, he turned to
miss Portman—“Miss Portman has it!
damme! miss Portman has him!”
Belinda hastily withdrew her eyes from
the picture at which she was looking.— 
“A most beautiful creature!” exclaimed
lady Delacour.—
“O, faith! yes—I always did Clary
the justice to say, he was a damned good
taste for beauty.”—“But this seems to be a
foreign beauty,” continued lady Delacour,
“if one may judge by her air,
her dress, and the scenery about her
—cocoa-trees, plantains—miss Portman,
what think you?”
“I think,” said Belinda (but her voice
faultered so much that she could hardly

speak), “that it is a scene from Paul and
Virginia. I think the figure is St. Pierre's
Virginia.”
“Virginia St. Pierre! ma'am,” cried
Mr. Rochfort, winking at sir Philip.
“No, no, damme! there you are wrong,
Rochfort. Say Hervey's Virginia, and then
you have it, damme! or, may be, Virginia
Hervey,—who knows?”
“This is a portrait,” whispered the
baronet to lady Delacour, “of Clarence's
mistress.” Whilst her ladyship
leant her ear to this whisper, which was
sufficiently audible, she fixed a seemingly
careless, but most observing, inquisitive
eye upon poor Belinda. Her confusion,
for she heard the whisper, was excessive.
“She loves Clarence Hervey—she has
no thoughts of lord Delacour and his
coronet—I have done her injustice,” 
thought lady Delacour, and instantly
she dispatched sir Philip out of the room,
for a catalogue of the pictures, begged
Mr. Rochfort to get her something else,

and, drawing miss Portman's arm within
hers, she said, in a low voice, “Lean
upon me, my dearest Belinda! depend
upon it, Clarence will never be such a
fool as to marry the girl—Virginia Hervey
she will never be!”
“And what will become of her? can
Mr. Hervey desert her? she looks like
innocence itself! and so young, too!
Can he leave her for ever to sorrow, and
vice, and infamy?” thought Belinda, as
she kept her eyes fixed, in silent anguish,
upon the picture of Virginia:—“No, he
cannot do this; if he could, he would be
unworthy of me, and I ought to think
of him no more. No; he will marry
her; and I must think of him no
more.”
She turned abruptly away from the
picture, and she saw Clarence Hervey
standing beside her.
“What do you think of this picture?
Is it not beautiful? We are quite enchanted
with it; but you do not seem to

be struck with it, as we were at the first
glance.”
“Because,” answered Clarence, gayly,
“it is not the first glance I have had at
that picture—I admired it yesterday, and
admire it to day.”
“But you are tired of admiring it, I
see. Well, we shall not force you to
be in raptures with it—shall we miss
Portman? A man may be tired of the
most beautiful face in the world, or the
most beautiful picture; but really there
is so much sweetness, so much innocence,
such tender melancholy in this
countenance, that, if I were a man, I
should inevitably be in love with it, and
in love for ever! Such beauty, if it were
in nature, would certainly fix the most inconstant
man upon earth.”
Belinda ventured to take her eyes for
an instant from the picture, to see whether
Clarence Hervey looked like the
most inconstant man upon earth. He
was intently gazing upon her; but as soon

as she looked up, he suddenly exclaimed,
as he turned to the picture— 
“A heavenly countenance indeed!— 
the painter has done justice to the poet.”
“Poet!” repeated lady Delacour: “the
man's in the clouds!”
“Pardon me,” said Clarence; “does
not M. de St. Pierre deserve to be called
a poet? Though he does not write in
rhyme, surely he has a poetical imagination?”
“Certainly,” said Belinda;—and from
the composure with which Mr. Hervey
now spoke, she was suddenly inclined to
believe, or to hope, that all sir Philip's
story was false. “M. de St. Pierre undoubtedly
has a great deal of imagination,
and deserves to be called a
poet.”
“Very likely, good people!” said lady
Delacour; “but what has that to do with
the present purpose?”
“Nay,” cried Clarence, “your ladyship
certainly sees that this is St. Pierre's
Virginia?”

“St. Pierre's Virginia!—O, I know
who it is, Clarence, as well as you do. I
am not quite so blind, or so stupid, as you
take me to be.” Then recollecting her
promise, not to betray sir Philip's secret,
she added, pointing to the landscape of
the picture—“These cocoa-trees, this
fountain, and the words Fontaine de Virginie,
inscribed on the rock—I must
have been stupidity itself, if I had not
found it out. I absolutely can read, Clarence,
and spell, and put together.—But
here comes sir Philip Baddeley, who, I
believe, cannot read, for I sent him an
hour ago for a catalogue, and he pores
over the book as if he had not yet made
out the title.”
Sir Philip had purposely delayed, because
he was afraid of rejoining lady
Delacour whilst Clarence Hervey was
with her, and whilst they were talking of
the picture of Virginia.
“Here's the catalogue; here's the
picture your ladyship wants—St. Pierre's
Virginia;—damme! I never heard of that

fellow before; he is some new painter; 
damme! that is the reason I did not know
the hand.—Not a word of what I told
you, lady Delacour—you won't blow us
to Clary,” added he aside to her ladyship.
“Rochfort keeps aloof; and so will
I, damme!”
A gentleman at this instant beckoned
to Mr. Hervey with an air of great eagerness.
Clarence went and spoke to him; 
then returned with an altered countenance,
and apologized to lady Delacour
for not dining with her, as he had promised.
Business, he said, of great importance,
required that he should leave
town immediately.—Helena had just
taken miss Portman into a little room,
where Westal's drawings were hung, to
show her a group of lady Anne Percival
and her children; and Belinda was
alone with the little girl, when Mr. Hervey
came to bid her adieu. He was in
much agitation.
“Miss Portman, I shall not, I am
afraid, see you again for some time;—perhaps

I may never have that—hem!— 
happiness. I had something of importance,
that I wished to say to you before
I left town; but I am forced to go so
suddenly, I can hardly hope for any moment
but the present to speak to you,
madam. May I ask, whether you purpose
remaining much longer with lady
Delacour?”
“Yes;” said Belinda much surprised,
“I believe—I am not quite certain— 
but—I believe I shall stay with her ladyship
some time longer.”
Mr. Hervey looked painfully embarrassed,
and his eyes involuntarily fell
upon little Helena. Helena drew her
hand gently away from Belinda, left the
room, and retired to her mother.
“That child, miss Portman, is very
fond of you,” said Mr. Hervey. Again
he paused, and looked round, to see
whether he could be overhead. “Pardon
me for what I am going to say. This is
not a proper place. I must be abrupt; 
for I am so circumstanced, that I have
not a moment's time to spare. May I

speak to you with the sincerity of a
friend?”
“Yes. Speak to me with sincerity,” 
said Belinda, “and you will deserve
that I should think you my friend.” She
trembled excessively, but spoke and
looked with all the firmness that she
could command.
“I have heard a report,” said Mr.
Hervey, “which is most injurious to
you.”
“To me!”
“Yes. No one can escape calumny. It
is whispered, that if lady Delacour should
die—” 
At the word die, Belinda started.
“That if lady Delacour should die,
miss Portman would become the mother of Helena!”
“Good Heavens! what an absurd report!
Surely you could not for an instant
believe it, Mr. Hervey?”
“Not for an instant. But I resolved, as
soon as I heard it, to mention it to you; 
for I believe that half the miseries of the
world arise from foolish mysteries—from

the want of courage to speak the truth.
Now that you are upon your guard, your
own prudence will defend you sufficiently.
I never saw any of your sex,
who appeared to me to have so much
prudence, and so little art—But—farewell
—I have not a moment to lose,” added
Clarence, suddenly checking himself; and
he hurried away from Belinda, who stood
fixed to the spot where he left her, till
she was roused by the voices of several
people who came into the room to see
the drawings. She started as if from a
dream, and went immediately in search
of lady Delacour.
Sir Philip Baddeley was in earnest conversation
with her ladyship; but he stopped
speaking when Belinda came within
hearing, and lady Delacour turned to
Helena, and said, “My dear, if you are
satisfied, for mercy's sake let us begone,
for I am absolutely overcome with heat
—and with curiosity,” added she in a low
voice to Belinda—“I long to hear how
Clarence Hervey likes Westal's drawings.”

As soon as they got home, lady Delacour
sent her daughter to practise a new
lesson upon the harpsichord. “And
now sit down, my dear Belinda!” said
she, “and satisfy my curiosity. It is the
curiosity of a friend, not of an impertinent
busy-body. Has Clarence declared himself?
He chose an odd time and place; 
but that is no matter, I forgive him, and
so do you, I dare say. But why do you
tear that unfortunate carnation to pieces?
Surely you cannot be embarrassed in
speaking to me! What's the matter? I
once did tell you, that I would not give
up my claim to Clarence's adorations
during my life—But I intend to live a
few years longer after the amazonian
operation is performed, you know—And
I could not have the conscience to keep
you waiting whole years. It is better to
do things with a good grace, lest one
should be forced at last to do them with
an ill grace. Therefore I give up all
manner of claim to every thing but— 
flattery!—that, of course, you will allow

me from poor Clarence. So now do not
begin upon another flower; but, without
any further superfluous modesty, let me
hear all the pretty things Clarence said or
swore.”
Whilst Belinda was pulling the carnation
to pieces, she recollected what Mr.
Hervey had said to her about mysteries:
his words still sounded in her ear. “I
believe that half the miseries of the world
arise from foolish mysteries—from the want
of courage to speak the truth.” I will have
the courage to speak the truth, thought
she, whatever it may cost me.
“The only pretty thing that Mr. Hervey
said was, that he never saw any woman
who had so much prudence and so
little art,” said Belinda.
“A very pretty thing indeed, my
dear! But it might have been said in
open court by your grandfather, or
your great-grandfather. I am sorry, if
that was all, that Helena did not
stay to hear such a charming moral
compliment—Moralité à la glace—.

The last thing I should have expected in
a tête-à-tête with Clarence Hervey. Was
it worth while to pull that poor flower to
pieces for such a pretty speech as this?— 
And so that was all?”
“No, not all; but you overpower me
with your wit; and I cannot stand the
lightining of your eyes.”
“There!” said her ladyship, letting
down her veil over her face, “the fire
of my eyes is not too much for you now.” 
“Helena was showing me Westal's
drawing of lady Anne Percival and her
children—”
“And Mr. Hervey wished that he was
the father of such a charming group of
children, and you the mother? Hey! was
not that it? It was not put in such plain
terms, but that was the purport, I presume?”
“No, not at all; he said nothing about
lady Anne Percival's children, but—” 
“But—why then did you bring in her
ladyship and her children? To gain time?
—Bad policy!—Never whilst you live,

when you have a story to tell, bring in a
parcel of people who have nothing to do
with the beginning, the middle, or the
end of it. How could I suspect you of
such false taste? I really imagined these
children were essential to the business; 
but I beg pardon for giving you these
elements of criticism. I assure you I
interrupt you, and talk on so fast, from
pure good nature, to give you time to
recollect yourself; for I know you've the
worst of memories, especially for what
Clarence Hervey says. But come, my
dear, dash into the middle of things at
once, in the true epic style.”
“Then, to dash into the midst of
things at once,” said miss Portman,
speaking very quick, “Mr. Hervey observed,
that miss Delacour was growing
very fond of me.”
“Miss Delacour, did you say?” cried
her ladyship—“Et puis?”
At this instant Champfort opened the
door, looked in, and, seeing lady Delacour,
immediately retired.

“Champfort, whom do you want?— 
or what do you want?” said her ladyship.
“Miladi, c'est que—I did come from
milord, to see if miladi and mademoiselle
were visible. I did tink miladi
was not at home.”
“You see I am at home though,” said
her ladyship. “Has lord Delacour any
business with me?”
“No, miladi; not with miladi,” said
Champfort; “it was with mademoiselle.”
“With me, monsieur Champfort?
Then you will be so good as to tell lord
Delacour I am here.”
“And that I am not here, Champfort; 
for I must be gone to dress.”
She rose hastily to leave the room, but
Miss Portman caught her hand—“You
won't go, I hope, lady Delacour,” said
she, “till I have finished my long story?” 
Lady Delacour sat down again, ashamed
of her own embarrassment, when she
saw that Belinda was so calm and composed.

Whether this be art, innocence, or
assurance, thought she, I cannot tell; 
but we shall see.
Lord Delacour now came in, with a
half-unfolded newspaper and a packet of
letters in his hand. He came to apologize
to miss Portman for having, by
mistake, broken the seal of a letter to
her, which had been sent under cover to
him. He had simply asked Champfort
whether the ladies were at home, that he
might not have the trouble of going
up stairs if they were out. Monsieur
Champfort possessed, in an eminent degree,
the mischievous art of appearing
mysterious about the simplest things in
the world.
“Though I was so thoughtless as to
break the seal before I looked at the
direction of the letter,” said lord Delacour,
“I assure you I went no farther
than the three first words; for I knew
‘my dear niece’ could not possibly mean
me. He gave miss Portman the letter,
and left the room. This explanation was

perfectly satisfactory to Belinda; but
lady Delacour, prejudiced by the hesitation
of Champfort, could not help suspecting,
that this letter was merely the
ostensible cause of his lordship's visit.
“From my aunt Stanhope,” said miss
Portman, as she opened her letter. She
folded it up again after glancing over the
first page, and put it into her pocket,
colouring deeply.
All lady Delacour's suspicions about
Mrs. Stanhope's epistolary counsels and
secrets instantly recurred with almost the
force of conviction to her mind.
“Miss Portman,” said she, “I hope
your politeness to me does not prevent
you from reading your letter? Some ceremonious
people think it vastly rude to
read a letter in company; but I am not
one of them: I can write whilst you
read, for I have fifty notes and more to
answer. So pray read your letter at your
ease.”
Belinda had but just unfolded her letter
again, when lord Delacour returned,

followed by Champfort, who brought
with him a splendid hammer-cloth.
“Here, my dear lady Delacour!” said
his lordship, “is a little surprise for you:
here is a new hammer-cloth of my bespeaking
and taste, which I hope that you
will approve.”
“Very handsome, upon my word!” 
said lady Delacour coldly, and she fixed
her eyes upon the fringe, which was black
and orange—“Miss Portman's taste, I
see!”
“Did not you say black and orange
fringe, my dear?”
“No. I said blue and white, my
lord.”
His lordship declared he did not know
how the mistake had happened; it was
merely a mistake:—But her ladyship
was convinced that it was done on purpose.
And she said to herself, “Miss
Portman will order my liveries next! I
have not even the shadow of power left
in my own house! I am not treated with
even a decent show of respect! But this

shall go on till I have full conviction of
her views.”
Dissembling her displeasure, she
praised the hammer-cloth, and especially
the fringe. Lord Delacour retired satisfied; 
and miss Portman sat down to read
the following letter from her aunt Stanhope.