

Fortune, as if she had been piqued by
Mr. Percy's disdain, and jealous of his
professed reliance upon the superior
power of her rival, Prudence, seemed
now determined to humble him and all
his family, to try if she could not force
him to make some of the customary sacrifices
of principle to propitiate her
favor.—
Unsuspicious of the designs that were
carrying forward against him in secret,
Mr. Percy had quite forgotten his fears,
that his wicked relation Sir Robert Percy
and Solicitor Sharpe might take advantage
of the loss of that deed, which had
never been found since the night of the
fire at Percy-Hall.—It was nearly two
years afterwards, that Mr. Percy received
a letter from his cousin, Sir Robert, informing

him, that he had been advised to
dispute the title to the Percy estate, that
he had the opinion of the first lawyers in
England in his favor,—and that he had
given directions to his Solicitor, Mr.
Sharpe, to commence a suit, to reinstate
the lawful heir in the property of his ancestors.
—Sir Robert Percy added something
about his reluctance to go to law,
and a vast deal about candor, justice,
and family friendship, which it would
be needless and unreasonable to repeat.
Fresh search was now made for the
lost deed, but in vain.—And in vain Rosamond
reproached herself with having
betrayed the secret of that loss to the revengeful
attorney.—The ensuing post
brought notice from Mr. Sharpe, that
proceedings were commenced.—In Sir
Robert's letter, though not in the attorney's,
there was obviously left an opening
for an offer to compromise; this was done
either with intent to lure Mr. Percy on
to make an offer, which might afterwards
appear against him, or it was done in the

hope, that, intimidated by the fear of an
expensive and hazardous suit, Mr. Percy
might give up half his estate, to secure
the quiet possession of the remainder.
But they knew little of Mr. Percy, who
argued in this manner; he was neither
to be lured nor intimidated from his
right.—All compromise, “all terms of
commerce he disdained.”—He sent no
answer, but prepared to make a vigorous
defence. For this purpose he wrote to
his son Alfred, desiring him to spare no
pains or expense, to engage the best
counsel, and to put them in full possession
of the cause. Alfred regretted, that
he was not of sufficient standing at the
bar to take the lead in conducting his father's
cause. He, however, prepared all
the documents with great care and ability; 
from time to time, as the business went
on, he wrote to his father in good spirits,
saying, that he had excellent hopes they
should succeed, notwithstanding the unfortunate
loss of the deed; that the more
he considered the case, the more clearly

the justice of their cause, and the solidity
of their right appeared. Alas!
Alfred showed himself to be but a young
lawyer, in depending so much upon right
and justice, while a point of law was
against him. It is unnecessary, and
would be equally tedious and unintelligible
to most readers, to dwell upon
the details of this suit. Contrary to the
usual complaints of the law's delay, this
cause went through the Courts in a short
time, because Mr. Percy did not make
use of any subterfuge to protract the
business. A decree was given in favor
of Sir Robert Percy, and he became the
legal possessor of the great Percy estate
in Hampshire, which had been so long
the object of his machinations.
Thus, at one stroke, the Percy family
fell from the station and affluence, which
they had so long, and, in the opinion of
all who knew them, so well enjoyed.
Great was the regret among the higher
classes, and great, indeed, the lamentations
of the poor in the neighbourhood,

when the decree was made known.—It
seemed as if the change in their situation
was deplored as a general misfortune,
and as if it were felt by all more
than by the sufferers themselves, who
were never seen to give way to weak
complaints, or heard to utter an invective
against their adversary. This
magnanimity increased the public sympathy,
and pity for them was soon converted
into indignation against Sir Robert
Percy.&wblank;Naturally insolent, and
now elated with success, he wrote post
after post to express his impatience to
come and take possession of his estate,
and to hasten the departure of his relations
from the family seat. This was
as cruel as it was unnecessary, for from
the moment when they learnt the event
of the trial, they had been occupied
with the preparations for their departure; 
for the resignation of all the conveniences
and luxuries they possessed,
all the pleasures associated with the idea
of home; for parting with all the animate

and inanimate objects, to which
they had long and early habits of affection
and attachment. This family
had never been proud in prosperity, nor
were they abject in adversity. They
submitted with fortitude to their fate.
Yet they could not, without regret, leave
the place where they had spent so many
happy years.
It had been settled, that the improvements
which Mr. Percy had made on
the estate, the expense of the buildings
and furniture at Percy-Hall, of which a
valuation had been made, should be
taken in lieu of all arrears of rent, to
which Sir Robert might lay claim. In
consequence of this award, Mr. Percy
and his family were anxious to leave
every thing about the house and place
in perfect order, that they might fulfil
punctually their part of the agreement.
The evening before they were to quit
Percy-Hall, they went into every room,
to take a review of the whole. The
house was peculiarly convenient and well

arranged. Mr. Percy had spared nothing
to render it in every respect agreeable,
not only to his guests, but to his
family, to make his children happy in
their home. His daughters' apartments
he had fitted up for them in the neatest
manner, and they had taken pleasure in
ornamenting them with their own work
and drawings. They felt very melancholy
the evening they were to take
leave of these for ever. They took down
some of their drawings, and all the little
trophies preserved from childhood, memorials
of early ingenuity or taste, which
could be of no use or value to any one
except to themselves; every thing else
they agreed to leave as usual, to show
how kind their father had been to them
—a sentiment well suited to their good
and innocent minds. They opened their
writing-tables and their drawing-boxes
for the last time; for the last time they
put fresh flowers into their flower-pots,
and, with a sigh, left their little apartments.

All the family then went out to walk
in the park and through the shrubberies.
It was a delightful summer's evening,
the birds were singing—“Caring little,” 
as Rosamond said, “for our going away.” 
—The sun was just setting, and they
thought they had never seen the place
look so beautiful. Indeed Mr. and Mrs.
Percy had, for many years, delighted in
cultivating the natural beauties of this
picturesque situation, and their improvements
were now beginning to appear to
advantage.—But they were never to
enjoy the success of their labors!— 
The old steward followed the family in
this walk. He stopped every now and
then to deplore over each fine tree or
shrub as they passed, and could scarcely
refrain from bursting into invectives
against “him that was coming after them
into possession.”—
“The whole country cries shame
upon the villain” ... John began, but
Mr. Percy, with a smile, stopped him.
“Let us bear our misfortunes, John,

with a good grace—Let us be thankful
for the happiness which we have enjoyed,
and submit ourselves to the will of
Providence.—Without any hypocrisy or
affected resignation, I say, at this instant,
what, with my whole heart, I
feel, that I submit, without repining, to
the will of God, and firmly believe that
all is for the best.”—
“And so I strive to do”—said John— 
“But only, I say, if it had pleased God
to order it otherwise, it's a pity the
wicked should come just after us to enjoy
themselves, when they have robbed
us of all”—
“Not of all”—said Mr. Percy.
“What is it they have not robbed us
of,” cried John, “not a thing but they
must have from us”—
“No; the best of all things we keep
for ourselves—It cannot be taken from
us— a good conscience.”
“Worth all the rest—that's true”— 
said John, “and that is what he will
never have, who is coming here to morrow

—Never—never—They say he don't
sleep at nights—But I'll say no more
about him—Only ... he's not a good
man ...”
“I am sure, John, you are not a
good courtier,” said Mrs. Percy, smiling— 
“You ought to prepare to pay your
court to your new master.”
“My new master!” cried John,
growing red, “the longest day ever I
live, I'll never have a new master—All
that I have in the world came from you,
and I'll never have another master—Sure
you will let me follow you? ... I will
be no trouble: though but little, may
be I can do something, still. Surely,
Madam ... Surely, Sir ... young ladies,
you'll speak for me ... I shall be
let to follow the fortunes of the family,
and go along with you into banishment.”
“My good John,” said Mr. Percy,
“since you desire to follow us into banishment,
as you call it, you shall; and
as long as we have any thing upon
Earth, you shall never want. You must

stay here to morrow, after we are gone,
to give up possession” ... (John could
not stand this, but turned away to hide
his face) ... “When your business is
done,” continued Mr. Percy, “you
may set out and follow us as soon as you
please.”—
“I thank you, Sir, kindly,” said
John, with a most grateful bow, that
took in all the family, “that's new life
to me.”—
He said not a word more during the
rest of the walk, except just as he passed
near the beach where the ship was
wrecked, he exclaimed, “There was
the first beginning of all our misfortunes:
who would have thought, that
when we gave them shelter we should be
turned out so soon ourselves? 'twas that
drunken rascal of a Dutch carpenter was
the cause of all!”
The next morning the whole family
set out in an open carriage, which had
been made for the purpose of carrying
as many of the young people as possible

upon excursions of pleasure. It was a
large sociable, which they used to call
their caravan.
At the great gate of the park old John
stopped the carriage, and leaning over
to his master, whispered—“I beg
your pardon, Sir, but God bless you,
and don't drive through the village—If
you please take the back road, for I've
just learned, that he is on the great road,
and as near hand as the turn at the
school-house, and they say he wants to
be driving in his coach and four through
the village as you are all going out— 
Now I would n't for any thing he had
that triumph over us.”
“Thank you, good John,” said Mr.
Percy, “but such triumphs cannot
mortify us.”
Poor John reluctantly opened the gate
and let the carriage pass—They drove
on—They cast a lingering look behind
as they quitted the park.
—“Must I then leave thee, Paradise!”—

As they passed through the village
the poor people came out of their houses
to take leave of their excellent landlord; 
they flocked round the carriage, and
hung upon it till it stopped, and then,
with one voice, they poured forth praises,
and blessings, and prayers for better
days. Just at this moment Sir Robert
Percy made his appearance. His equipage
was splendid; his coachman drove
his four fine horses down the street, the
middle of which was cleared in an instant.— 
The crowd gazed at the show as
it passed,—Sir Robert gave a signal to
his coachman to drive slower, that he
might longer enjoy the triumph—He
put his head out of the coach window,
but no one cried, “God bless him.” 
—His insolence was obviously mortified
as he passed the Percy family, for
Mr. Percy bowed with an air of dignity
and cheerfulness which seemed to say
—“My fortune is yours—but I am
still myself.”—Some of the spectators
clapped their hands, and some wept.

Mr. Percy seemed to have prepared
his mind for every circumstance of his
departure, and to be perfectly composed,
or at least master of his feelings—But a
small incident, for which he had been
unprepared, suddenly moved him almost
to tears. As they crossed the bridge,
which was at the farthest end of the village,
they heard the  muffled bells of
the church toll as if for a public calamity.
Instantly recollecting the resentment
to which these poor people were
exposing themselves by this mark of
their affection and regret, Mr. Percy
went by a short path to the church as
quickly as possible, and had the bells
unmuffled.