

They found lady Ann Percival in the
midst of her children; who all turned
their healthy, rosy, intelligent faces towards
the door the moment that they
heard their father's voice. Clarence
Hervey was so much struck with the expression
of happiness in lady Anne's countenance,
that he absolutely forgot to compare
her beauty with lady Delacour's.
Whether her eyes were large or small,
blue or hazle, he could not tell; nay,
he might have been puzzled if he had
been asked the colour of her hair— 
Whether she were handsome by the rules of

art, he knew not; but he felt that she had
the essential charm of beauty, the power of
prepossessing the heart immediately in her
favour. The effect of her manners, like
that of her beauty, was rather to be felt
than described. Every body was at ease
in her company, and none thought themselves
called upon to admire her.—To
Clarence Hervey, who had been used to
the brilliant and exigeante lady Delacour,
this respite from the fatigue of admiration
was peculiarly agreeable. The unconstrained
cheerfulness of lady Anne Percival
spoke a mind at ease, and immediately
imparted happiness by exciting sympathy; 
but in lady Delacour's wit and
gayety there was an appearance of art and
effort, which often destroyed the pleasure
that she wished to communicate.—Some
people may admire, but none can sympathise
with affectation.—Mr. Hervey was,
perhaps, unusually disposed to reflection,
by having just escaped from drowning; 
for he made all these comparisons, and
came to this conclusion with the accuracy

of a metaphysician, who has been accustomed
to study cause and effect—indeed
there was no species of knowledge for
which he had not taste and talents, though,
to please fools, he too often affected “the
bliss of ignorance.”
The children at lady Anne Percival's
happened to be looking at some gold fish,
which were in a glass globe, and Dr.
X&wblank;, who was a general favourite with
the younger, as well as with the elder
part of the family, was seized upon the
moment he entered the room: a pretty
little girl of five years old took him prisoner
by the flap of the coat, whilst two
of her brothers assailed him with questions
about the ears, eyes, and fins of fishes.
One of the little boys flipped the glass
globe, and observed, that the fish immediately
came to the surface of the water,
and seemed to hear the noise very quickly; 
but his brother doubted, whether the fish
heard the noise, and remarked, that they
might be disturbed by seeing or feeling

the motion of the water, when the glass
was struck.
Dr. X&wblank;observed, that this was a
very learned dispute, and that the question
had been discussed by no less a person
than the abbé Nollet; and he related
some of the ingenious experiments tried
by that gentleman to decide, whether
fishes can or cannot hear.—Whilst the doctor
was speaking, Clarence Hervey was
struck with the intelligent countenance of
one of the little auditors—a girl of about
ten or twelve years old; he was surprised
to discover in her features, though not
in their expression, a singular resemblance
to lady Delacour. He remarked this to
Mr. Percival, and the child, who overheard
him, blushed as red as scarlet.— 
Dinner was announced at this instant, and
Clarence Hervey thought no more of the
circumstance, attributing the girl's blush
to confusion at being looked at so earnestly.
—One of the little boys whispered
as they were going down to dinner,

“Helena, I do believe that this is the
good natured gentleman, who went out of
the path to make room for us, instead of
running over us as the other man did.”— 
The children agreed that Clarence Hervey
certainly was the good natured gentleman,
and upon the strength of this observation,
one of the boys posted himself
next to Clarence at dinner, and by all the
little playful manœuvres in his power
endeavoured to show his gratitude, and
to cultivate a friendship which had been
thus auspiciously commenced.—Mr.
Hervey, who piqued himself upon being
able always to suit his conversation to his
companions, distinguished himself at dinner
by an account of the Chinese fishing-bird,
from which he passed to the various
ingenious methods of fishing practised by
the Russian Cossacks. He asked Dr.
X&wblank;what he thought could be the
cause of the prejudice, which prevents the
Russian peasants from eating the chad,
which is so plentiful in their fisheries.— 
Then from modern he went to ancient

fish, and he talked of that which was so
much admired by the Roman epicures
for exhibiting a succession of beautiful
colours whilst it is dying; and which was,
upon that account, always suffered to die
in the presence of the guests, as part of
the entertainment.—Clarence was led on
by the questions of the children from fishes
to birds; he spoke of the Roman aviaries,
which were so constructed, as to keep
from the sight of the prisoners that they
contained, “the fields, woods, and every
object which might remind them of their
former liberty.”—From birds Clarence
Hervey was going on to beasts, when he
was nearly struck dumb by the forbidding
severity, with which an elderly lady, who
sat opposite to him, fixed her eyes upon
him.—He had not, till this instant, paid
the smallest attention to her; but her
stern countenance was now so strongly
contrasted with the approving looks of
the children, who sat next to her, that
Clarence could not help remarking it.— 
He asked her to do him the honour to

drink a glass of wine with him.—She declined
doing him that honour; observing,
that she never drank more than one glass
of wine at dinner, and that she had just
taken one with Mr. Percival.—Her manner
was well-bred, but haughty in the
extreme; and she was so passionate, that
her anger sometimes conquered even her
politeness. Her dislike to Clarence Hervey
was apparent, even in her silence.— 
“If the old gentle woman have taken an antipathy
to me at first sight, I cannot help
it,” thought he, and he went on to the
beasts. The boy, who sat next him, had
asked some questions about the proboscis
of the elephant, and Mr. Hervey mentioned
Ives's account of the elephants in
India, who have been set to watch young
children, and who draw them back gently
with their trunks, when they go out of
bounds. He talked next of the unicorn; 
and addressing himself to Dr. X&wblank;and
Mr. Percival, he declared, that in his
opinion Herodotus did not deserve to be
called the father of lies; he cited the

mammoth to prove, that the apocryphal
chapter in the history of beasts
should not be contemned—that it would in
all probability be soon established as true
history.—The desert was on the table
before Clarence had done with the mammoth.
As the butler put a fine dish of cherries
upon the table, he said,
“My lady, these cherries are a present
from the old gardener to miss Delacour.”
“Set them before miss Delacour then,” 
said lady Anne. “Helena, my dear, distribute
your own cherries.”
At the name of Delacour, Clarence.
Hervey, though his head was still half full
of the mammoth, looked round in astonishment,
and when he saw the cherries
placed before the young lady, whose resemblance
to lady Delacour he had before
observed, he could not help exclaiming,
“That young lady then is not a daughter
of your ladyship's?
“No; but I love her as well as if she
were,” replied lady Anne.—“What were
you saying about the mammoth?”

“That the mammoth is supposed to
be—” but interrupting himself, Clarence
said, in an inquiring tone—“A niece
of lady Delacour's?”
“Her ladyship's daughter, sir,” said
the severe old lady, in a voice more terrific
than her looks.
“Shall I give you some strawberries,
Mr. Hervey,” said lady Anne, “or will
you let Helena help you to some cherries?”
“Her ladyship's daughter!” exclaimed
Clarence Hervey, in a tone of surprise.
“Some cherries, sir?” said Helena,
but her voice faltered so much, that she
could hardly utter the words.
Clarence perceived that he had been
the cause of her agitation, though he
knew not precisely by what means, and he
now applied himself in silence to the
picking of his strawberries with great diligence.
The ladies soon afterward withdrew, and
as Mr. Percival did not touch upon the
subject again, Clarence forbore to ask any

farther questions, though he was considerably
surprised by this sudden discovery.— 
When he went into the drawing-room to
tea, he found his friend, the stern old
lady, speaking in a high declamatory
tone.—The words which he heard as he
came into the room were—
“If there were no Clarence Herveys,
there would be no lady Delacours.”— 
Clarence bowed, as if he had received a
high compliment—the old lady walked
away to an antichamber, fanning herself
with great energy.
“Mrs. Margaret Delacour,” said lady
Anne, in a low voice to Hervey, “is an
aunt of lord Delacour's.—A woman
whose heart is warmer than her temper.
“And that is never cool” said a young
lady, who sat next to lady Anne—“I call
Mrs. Margaret Delacour the volcano; I'm
sure I am never in her company without
dreading an explosion.—Every now and
then out comes, with a tremendous noise,
fire, and smoke, and rubbish.”
“And precious minerals,” said lady
Anne, “amongst the rubbish.”

But the best of it is,” continued the
young lady, “that she is seldom in a passion
without making a hundred mistakes,
for which she is usually obliged afterward
to ask a thousand pardons.”
“By that account,” said lady Anne,
“which I believe to be just, her contrition
is always ten times as great as her
offences.”
“Now you talk of contrition, lady
Anne,” said Mr. Hervey, “I should
think of my own offences; I am very
sorry that my indiscreet questions gave
miss Delacour any pain—my head was so
full of the mammoth, that I blundered
on without seeing what I was about, till it
was too late.”
“Pray sir,” said Mrs. Margaret Delacour,
who now returned, and took her
seat upon a sofa, with the solemnity of a
person who was going to sit in judgment
upon a criminal—“pray sir, may I ask
how long you have been acquainted with
my lady Delacour?”
Clarence Hervey took up a book, and

with great gravity kissed it, as if he had
been upon his oath in a court of justice,
and answered,
“To the best of my recollection, madam,
it is now four years since I had first
the pleasure and honour of seeing lady
Delacour.”
“And in that time, intimately as you
have had the pleasure of being acquainted
with her ladyship, you have never discovered
that she had a daughter?”
“Never,” said Mr. Hervey.
“There, lady Anne!—There!” cried
Mrs. Delacour, “will you tell me after
this, that lady Delacour is not a monster.”
“Every body says, that she's prodigy,” 
said lady Ann, “and prodigies and
monsters are sometimes thought synonymous
terms.”
“Such a mother was never heard of,” 
continued Mrs. Delacour, “since the
days of Savage and lady Macclesfield.—I
am convinced that she hates her daughter.
—Why she never speaks of her—she
never sees her—she never thinks of her!”

“Some mothers speak more than they
think of their children, and others think
more than they speak of them,” said lady
Anne.
“I always thought,” said Mr. Hervey,
“that lady Delacour was a woman of
great sensibility.”
“Sensibility!” exclaimed the indignant
old lady—“She has no sensibility, sir— 
none—none.—She who lives in a constant
round of dissipation; who performs no
one duty; who exists only for herself; 
how does she show her sensibility?—Has
she sensibility for her husband—for her
daughter—for any one useful purpose
upon earth?—O, how I hate the cambrick-handkerchief
sensibility, that is brought
out only to weep at a tragedy!—Yes; 
lady Delacour has sensibility enough, I
grant ye, when sensibility is the fashion.
—I remember well her performing the
part of a nurse with vast applause; and
I remember, too, the sensibility she
showed, when the child that she nursed

fell a sacrifice to her dissipation.—The second
of her children, that she killed—”
“Killed!—O, surely my dear Mrs.
Delacour, that is too strong a word,” said
lady Anne—“You would not make a
Medea of lady Delacour.”
“It would have been better if I had,” 
cried Mrs. Delacour—“I can understand
that there may be such a thing in nature as
a jealous wife, but an unfeeling mother
I cannot comprehend—That passes my
powers of imagination.”
“And mine, so much,” said lady Anne,
“that I cannot believe such a being to exist
in the world—notwithstanding all the
descriptions I have heard of it, as you
say, my dear Mrs. Delacour, it passes my
powers of imagination.—Let us leave it
in Mr. Hervey's apocryphal chapter of
animals, and he will excuse us if I never
admit it into true history—at least without
some better evidence than I have yet
heard.”
“Why my dear, dear lady Anne,”

cried Mrs. Delacour—“bless me, I've
made this coffee so sweet, there's no
driking it—what evidence would you
have?”
“None,” said lady Anne, smiling, “I
would have none.”
“That is to say, you will take none,” 
said Mrs. Delacour, “but can any thing
be stronger evidence than her ladyship's
conduct to my poor Helena—to your Helena
I should say—for you have educated,
you have protected her, you have been a
mother to her.—I am an infirm, weak,
ignorant, passionate old woman—I could
not have been what you have been to that
child—God will bless you!—God will
bless you!”
She rose as she spoke, to set down her
coffeecup on the table. Clarence Hervey
took it from her with a look which said
much, and which she was perfectly capable
of understanding.
“Young man,” said she, “it is very unfashionable
to treat age and infirmity with
politeness.—I wish that your friend, lady

Delacour, may at my time of life meet
with as much respect, as she has met with
admiration and gallantry in her youth.— 
Poor woman, her head has absolutely
been turned with admiration—and if fame
say true, Mr. Clarence Hervey has had
his share in turning that head by his flattery.”
“I am sure her ladyship has turned
mine by her charms,” said Clarence, “and
I certainly am not to be blamed for admiring
what all the world admires.”
“I wish,” said the old lady, “for her own
sake, for the sake of her family, and for the
sake of her reputation, that my lady Delacour
had fewer admirers, and more friends.”
“Women, who have met with so many
admirers, seldom meet with many friends,” 
said lady Anne.
“No,” said Mrs. Delacour, “for they
seldom are wise enough to know their
value.”
“We learn the value of all things, but
especially of friends, by experience,” said
lady Anne, “and it is no wonder, therefore,

that those who have little experience
of the pleasures of friendship should not
be wise enough to know their value.”
“This is very good natured sophistry— 
but lady Delacour is too vain ever to have
a friend,” said Mrs. Delacour.—“My
dear lady Anne, you don't know her as
well as I do—she has more vanity than
ever woman had.”
“That is certainly saying a great deal,” 
said lady Anne, “but then we must consider,
that lady Delacour, as an heiress, a
beauty, and a wit, has a right to a triple
share of vanity at least.”
“Both her fortune and her beauty are
gone; and if she have any wit left, it is
time it should teach her how to conduce
herself, I think,” said Mrs. Delacour,
“but I give her up—I give her up.”
“O, no,” said lady Anne, “you must
not give her up yet.—I have been informed,
and upon the best authority, that
lady Delacour was not always the unfeeling
dissipated fine lady that she now appears

to be.—This is only one of the transformations
of fashion—the period of her
enchantment will soon be at an end, and
she will return to her natural character.— 
I should not be at all surprised, if lady
Delacour were to appear at once, ‘la
femme comme il y en a peu.”
“Or ‘la bonne mère?” said Mrs.
Delacour, sarcastically, “after leaving
her daughter.”
“Pour bonne bouche,” interrupted lady
Anne, “when she is tired of the insipid
taste of other pleasures, she will have a
higher relish for those of domestic life,
which will be new and fresh to her.”
“And so you really think, my dear
lady Anne, that my lady Delacour will
end by being a domestic woman.—Well,” 
said Mrs. Margaret, after taking two
pinches of snuff, “some people believe
in the millennium—but I confess I am not
one of them—are you, Mr. Hervey?”
“If it were foretold to me by a good
angel,” said Clarence, smiling, as his

eye glanced at lady Anne—“If it were
foretold to me by a good angel, how could
I doubt it?”
Here the conversation was interrupted
by the entrance of one of lady Anne's
little boys, who came running eagerly up
to his mother, to ask whether he might
have “the sulphurs to show to Helena
Delacour.—I want to show her Vertumnus
and Pomona, mamma,” said he.— 
“Were not the cherries, that the old
gardener sent, very good?”
“What is this about the cherries and
the old gardener, Charles?” said the young
lady who sat beside lady Anne: “come
here and tell me the whole story.”
“I will, but I should tell it to you a
great deal better another time,” said the
boy, “because now Helena's waiting for
Vertumnus and Pomona.”
“Go your ways then to Helena,” said
lady Anne, “and I will tell the story for
you.”
Then turning to the young lady, she
began—“Once upon a time there lived

an old gardener at Kensington; and this old
gardener had an aloe, which was older than
himself; for it was very near a hundred
years of age, and it was just going to
blossom, and the old gardener calculated
how much he might make by showing his
aloe, when it should be in full blow, to
the generous public—and he calculated
that he might make a hundred pounds; 
and with this hundred pounds he determined
to do more than ever was done
with a hundred pounds before; but, unluckily,
as he was thus reckoning his blossoms
before they were blown, he chanced
to meet with a fair damsel, who ruined all
his calculations.”
“Ay, Mrs. Stanhope's maid, was not
it?” interrupted Mrs. Margaret Delacour.
“A pretty damsel she was, and almost
as good a politician as her mistress.— 
Think of that jilt's tricking this poor old
fellow out of his aloe—and—O, the meanness
of lady Delacour, to accept of that
aloe for one of her extravagant entertainments!”

“But I always understood, that she paid
fifty guineas for it,” said lady Anne.
“Whether she did or not,” said Mrs.
Delacour, “her ladyship and Mrs. Stanhope
between them were the ruin of this
poor old man.—He was taken in to marry
that jade of a waiting maid; she turned out
just as you might expect from a pupil of
Mrs. Stanhope's—the match-making Mrs.
Stanhope—you know, sir.” (Clarence
Hervey changed colour.)—“She turned
out,” continued Mrs. Delacour, “every
thing that was bad—ruined her husband
—ran away from him—and left him a
beggar.”
“Poor man!” said Clarence Hervey.
“But now,” said lady Anne, “let's
come to the best part of the story—mark
how good comes out of evil.—If this poor
man had not lost his aloe and his wife, I
prebably should never have been acquainted
with Mrs. Delacour, or with
my little Helena.—About the time that
the old gardener was left a beggar, as I
happened to be walking one fine evening

in Sloane street, I met a procession of
school girls—an old man begged from
them in a most moving voice; and as they
passed, several of the young ladies threw
halfpence to him.—One little girl, who
observed that the old man could not stoop
without great difficulty, staid behind the
rest of her companions, and collected the
halfpence which they had thrown to the
old man, and put them into his hat.—He
began to tell his story over again to her,
and she stayed so long listening to it, that
her companions had turned the corner of
the street, and were out of sight.—She
looked about in great distress; and I never
shall forget the pathetic voice with which
she said, ‘O, what will become of me?
every body will be angry with me!’—I
assured her that nobody should be angry
with her, and she gave me her little hand
with the most innocent confidence.—I
took her home to her schoolmistress, and
I was so pleased with the beginning of
this acquaintance, that I was determined
to cultivate it.—One good acquaintance I

have heard always leads to another.—Helena
introduced me to her aunt Delacour,
as her best friend.—Mrs. Margaret Delacour
has had the goodness to let her little
niece spend the holidays, and all her leisure
time with me, so that our acquaintance
has grown into friendship.—Helena
has become quite one of my family.”
“And I am sure she has become quite
a different creature, since she has been so
much with you,” cried Mrs. Delacour,
“her spirits were quite broken by her mother's
neglect of her—young as she is, she
has a great deal of real sensibility—but as
to her mother's sensibility&wblank;.”
At the recollection of lady Delacour's
neglect of her child, Mrs. Delacour was
going again to launch forth into indignant
invective, but lady Anne stopped her, by
whispering&wblank;
“Take care what you say of the
mother, for here is the daughter coming,
and she has, indeed, a great deal of real
sensibility.”
Helena and her young companions now

came into the room, bringing with them
the sulphurs at which they had been
looking.
“Mamma,” said little Charles Percival,
“we have brought the sulphurs to you,
because there are some of them that I
don't know.”
“Wonderful!” said lady Anne, “and
what is not quite so wonderful, there are
some of them that I don't know.”
The children spread the sulphurs upon
a little table, and all the company gathered
round it.
“Here are all the nine muses for you!” 
said the least of the boys, who had taken
his seat by Clarence Hervey at dinner&wblank; 
“Here are all the muses for you, Mr.
Hervey; which do you like best?—O,
that's the tragic muse that you have
chosen!—You don't like the tragic better
than the comic muse, do you?”
Clarence Hervey made no answer, for
he was at that instant recollecting how
Belinda looked in the character of the
tragic muse.

“Has your ladyship ever happened to
meet with the young lady, who has spent
this winter with lady Delacour?” said
Clarence to lady Anne.
“I sat near her one night at the opera,” 
said lady Anne, “she has a charming countenance.”
“Who!—Belinda Portman do you
mean?” said Mrs. Delacour—“I am sure
if I were a young man, I would not trust
to the charming countenance of a young
lady, who is a pupil of Mrs. Stanhope's
and a friend of&wblank;Helena, my dear,
shut the door—the most dissipated woman
in London.”
“Indeed,” said lady Anne, “miss Portman
is in a dangerous situation—but some
young people learn prudence by being
placed in dangerous situations, as some
young horses, as I have heard Mr. Percival
say, learn to be sure footed, by being
left to pick their own way on bad roads.”
Here Mr. Percival, Dr. X&wblank;, and
some other gentlemen, came up stairs to
tea, and the conversation took another

turn.—Clarence Hervey endeavoured to
take his share in it with his usual vivacity,
but he was thinking of Belinda Portman,
dangerous situations, stumbling horses,
&c. and he made several blunders, which
showed his absence of mind.
“What have you there, Mr. Hervey?” 
said Dr. X&wblank;, looking over his
shoulder—“The tragic muse?—this tragic
muse seems to rival lady Delacour in your
admiration.”
“O,” said Clarence, smiling, “you
know I was always a votary of the
muses.”
“And a favoured votary,” said Dr.
X&wblank;. “I wish for the interests of literature,
that poets may always be lovers,
though I cannot say that I desire lovers
should always be poets.—But Mr. Hervey,
you must never marry, remember,” 
continued Dr. X&wblank;, “never—for your
true poet must always be miserable.— 
You know, Petrarch tells us, he would
not have been happy if he could; he
would not have married his mistress if it

had been in his power; because, then
there would have been an end of his
beautiful sonnets.”
“Every one to his taste,” said Clarence; 
“for my part, I have even less ambition
to imitate the heroism, than hope of being
inspired with the poetic genius of Petrarch.
—I have no wish to pass whole
nights composing sonnets.—I would (am
not I right, Mr. Percival?) infinitely
rather be a slave of the ring, than a slave
of the lamp.”
Here the conversation ended—Clarence
took his leave, and Mrs. Margaret Delacour
said, the moment he had left the
room—
“Quite a different sort of young man
from what I expected to see!”