

However sincere the general pity and
esteem for the Percy family, they did
not escape the common lot of mortality; 
they had their share of blame, as well as
of condolence, from their friends and acquaintance.
Some discovered, that all
the misfortunes of the family might have
been avoided, if they had listened to good
advice—others were quite clear, that the
lawsuit would have been decided in Mr.
Percy's favor, if he had employed
their solicitor or their barrister, or in
short, if every step of the suit had been
directed differently.—
Commissioner Falconer now joined
the band of reproaching friends. He
did not blame Mr. Percy, however, for
the conduct of the lawsuit, for of that
he confessed himself to be no judge, but

he thought he understood the right way
of advancing a family in the world, and
on this subject he now took a higher
tone than he had formerly felt himself
entitled to assume—Success gives such
rights!—especially over the unfortunate.
—The Commissioner said loudly in all
companies, that he had hoped his relation,
Mr. Percy, who certainly was a
man of talents, and he was convinced
well-intentioned, would not have shown
himself so obstinately attached to his
peculiar opinions—especially to his
strange notions of independence, which
must disgust, ultimately, friends whom
it was most the interest of his family to
please—that he doubted not that the
young men of the Percy family bitterly
regretted, that their father would not
avail himself of the advantages of his connexions,
of the favorable dispositions,
and, to his knowledge, most condescending
offers that had been made to him
—offers which, the Commissioner said,
he must term really condescending, when

he considered, that Mr. Percy had never
paid the common court that was expected
by a minister.—Other circumstances,
too, enhanced the favor.—Offence had
undoubtedly been given by the ill-timed,
injudicious interference of Captain Godfrey
Percy about regimental business,— 
some Major Gascoigne,—yet, notwithstanding
this, a certain person, whose
steadiness in his friendships the Commissioner
declared he could never sufficiently
admire, had not, for the son's
errors, changed his favorable opinion or
disposition towards the father.
Mr. Falconer concluded, with a sigh,
“There are some men whom the best of
friends cannot serve—and such we can
only leave to their fate.”
The Commissioner now considering
Mr. Percy as a person so obstinately odd,
that it was unsafe for a rising man to have
any thing more to do with him, it was
agreed in the Falconer family, that it
was necessary to let the Percys drop
gently. Mrs. Falconer and her daughters

having always resided in London during
the winter, and at some watering-place
in summer, knew scarcely any thing of
the female part of the Percy family. Mrs.
Falconer had occasionally met Mrs.
Percy, but the young ladies, who had
not yet been in town, she had never
seen since they were children. Mrs.
Falconer now considered this as a peculiarly
fortunate circumstance, because
she could not be blamed for cutting them,
and should escape all the unpleasantness
of breaking off an intimacy with relations.
The Commissioner acceded to all his
lady's observations, and easily shook off
that attachment, which he had professed
for so many years, perhaps felt, for his
good cousin Percy—perhaps felt, we say; 
because we really believe, that he was
attached to Mr. Percy while that gentleman
was in prosperity. There are persons
who have an exclusive sympathy
with the prosperous.
There was one, however, who, in this

respect, felt differently from the rest of
the family. Buckhurst Falconer, with a
generous impulse of affection and gratitude,
declared that he would not desert
Mr. Percy or any of the family in adversity; 
he could never forget how kind
they had been to him, when he was in
distress. Buckhurst's resentment against
Caroline for her repeated refusals suddenly
subsided, his attachment revived
with redoubled force. He protested, that
he loved her the better for having lost
her fortune, and he reiterated this protestation
more loudly, because his father
declared it was absurd and ridiculous.
The son persisted, till the father, though
not subject to make violent resolutions,
was wrought to such a pitch as to swear,
that if Buckhurst should be fool enough
to think seriously of a girl who was now
a beggar, he would absolutely refuse his
consent to the match, and would never
give his son a shilling.
Buckhurst immediately wrote to Caroline,
a passionate declaration of the constancy

and ardor of his attachment, and
entreated her permission to wait upon
her immediately.
“Do not sacrifice me,” said Buckhurst,
“to idle niceties.—That I have
many faults I am conscious, but none, I
trust, for which you ought utterly to
condemn me—none but what you can
cure.—I am ready to be every thing
which you approve.—Give me but leave
to hope.—There is no sacrifice I will not
make to facilitate, to expedite our union.
I have been ordained, one living I possess,
and that which Colonel Hauton has
promised me will soon come into my
possession—Believe me I was decided
to go into the church by my attachment.
To my passion for you, every
scruple, every consideration gave way.
—As to the rest, I shall never be deterred
from following the dictates of my
heart, by the opposition of ambitious
parents.—Caroline, do not sacrifice
me to idle niceties—I know I have the
misfortune not to please your brother

Alfred—to do him justice, he has fairly
told me that he does not think me worthy
of his sister Caroline—I forgive him,
I admire him for the pride with which he
pronounces the words, my sister Caroline
—But though she may easily find a
more faultless character, she will never
find a warmer heart, or one more truly,
more ardently attached.”
There was something frank, warm,
and generous in this letter, which pleased
Rosamond, and which, she said, justified
her good opinion of Buckhurst.—Indeed
the great merit of being ardently attached
to her sister Caroline was sufficient, in
Rosamond's eyes, to cover a multitude
of sins; and the contrast between his
warmth at this moment, and the coldness
of the rest of his family, struck her foreibly.
Rosamond thought that Alfred
had been too severe in his judgment, and
observed, that it was in vain to look
with a lantern all over the world for a
faultless character—a monster!—It was
quite sufficient, if a woman could find an

honest man—that she was sure Buckhurst
had no faults, but what love would
cure.
“But love has not cured him of any
yet,” said Caroline.
“Try marriage,” said Rosamond,
laughing.
Caroline shook her head,—“Consider
at what expense that trial must be
made.”—
At the first reading of Buckhurst's letter,
Caroline had been pleased with it; 
but on a second perusal, she was dissatisfied
with the passage about his parents,
nor could she approve of his giving up
what he now called his scruples, to obtain
a competence for the woman he professed
to adore. She knew that he had
been leading a dissipated life in town; 
that he must, therefore, be less fit than
he formerly was, to make a good husband,
and still less likely to make a respectable
clergyman. He had some
right feeling, but no steady principle,
as Caroline observed. She was grateful

for the constancy of his attachment, and
for the generosity he showed in his whole
conduct towards her, nor was she insensible
to the urgency with which Rosamond
pleaded in his favor; but she was
firm in her own judgment, and her refusal,
though expressed in the terms
that could best soften the pain it must
give, was as decided as possible.
Soon after her letter had been sent,
she and Rosamond had taken a longer
walk, one evening, than usual, and
eager in conversation, went on so far in
this wild unfrequented part of the country,
that when they saw the sun setting,
they began to fear they should not reach
home before it was dark. They wished
to find a shorter way home than that by
which they went, and they looked about
in hopes of seeing some labourer (some
swinked hedger) returning from his work,
or a cottage where they could meet with
a guide.—But there was no person or
house within sight. At last Caroline,
who had climbed upon a high bank in

the lane where they were walking, saw a
smoke rising between some trees at a
little distance; and toward this spot they
made their way through another lane,
the entrance to which had been stopped
up with furze bushes.—They soon came
within sight of a poor looking cottage, and
saw a young woman walking very slowly
with a child in her arms. She was going
towards the house, and did not perceive
the young ladies till they were close to
her. She turned suddenly when they
spoke, started—looked frightened and
confused; the infant began to cry, and
hushing it as well as she could, she answered
to their questions with a bewildered
look, “I don't know indeed—I can't tell
—I don't know any thing, ladies—ask at
the cottage, yonder.”—Then she quickened
her pace, and walked so fast to the
house, that they could hardly keep
up with her. She pushed open the hatch
door, and called “Dorothy! Dorothy,
come out.”—But no Dorothy answered.
—The young woman seemed at a loss

what to do; and as she stood hesitating,
her face, which had at first appeared
pale and emaciated, flushed up to her
temples. She looked very handsome, but
in ill-health.
“Be pleased, ladies” ... said she
with diffidence, and trembling from head
to foot—“Be pleased to sit down and
rest, ladies.—One will be in directly, who
knows the ways—I am a stranger in these
parts.”
As soon as she had set the chairs, she
was retiring to an inner room, but her
child, who was pleased with Caroline's
face as she smiled and nodded at him,
stretched out his little hands towards her.
“Oh! let my sister give him a kiss,” 
said Rosamond.—The mother stopped,
yet appeared unwilling. The child
patted Caroline's cheek, played with her
hair, and laughed aloud.—Caroline offered
to take the child in her arms, but
the mother held him fast, and escaped
into the inner room, where they heard
her sobbing violently.—Caroline and

Rosamond looked at one another in silence,
and left the cottage by tacit consent,
sorry that they had given pain, and
feeling that they had no right to intrude
farther.—“We can go home the same
way that we came,” said Caroline, “and
that is better than to trouble any body.”
“Certainly,” said Rosamond: “yet
I should like to know something more
about this poor woman if I could, without.
 ... If we happened to meet Dorothy,
whoever she is.”
At this instant they saw an old woman
come from a copse near the cottage,
with a bundle of sticks on her
back, and a tin can in her hand. This
was Dorothy; she saved them all the
trouble and delicacy of asking questions,
for there was not a more communicative
creature breathing, nor a better natured.
She in the first place threw down her
faggots, and offered her service to guide
the young ladies home; she guessed they
belonged to the family that was newly
come to settle at the Hills, which she

described, though she could not tell the
name.—She would not be denied the
pleasure of showing them the shortest
and safest way, and the only way by
which they could get home before it was
night fall. So they accepted her kind
offer, and she trudged on, talking as she
went.
“It is a weary thing, ladies, to live
in this lone place, where one does not
see a soul to speak to from one month's
end to another—especially to me that
has lived afore now in my younger days
in Lon'on. But it's as God pleases!— 
and I wish none had greater troubles in
this world than I&wblank;You were up at
the house, ladies? There within at my
little place—Ay—then you saw the
greatest and the only great trouble I
have, or ever had in this life.&wblank;Did
not you, ladies, see the young woman
with the child in her arms?—But may
be you did not mind Kate, and she's nothing
now to look at, quite faded and
gone, though she's only one month past

nineteen years of age.—I am sure I
ought to know, for I was at her christening,
and nursed her mother.—She's
of very good parentage, that is, of a
farmer's family, that has, as well as his
neighbours,—that lives a great way off,
quite on the other side of the country.— 
And not a year, at least not a year and
a half ago, I remember Kate Robinson
dancing on the green at Squire Burton's
there with the rest of the girls of the village,
and without compare the prettiest
and freshest, and most blithsome and innocent
of them all&wblank;Ay, she was innocent
then, none ever more so, and she
had no care, but all looking kind upon
her in this world, and fond parents taking
pride in her—and now look at her
what she is?—Cast off by all, shamed,
and forgotten, and broken-hearted, and
lost as much as if she was in her grave.
—And better she was in her grave than
as she is—”
The old woman now really felt so

much, that she stopped speaking, and
was silent for several minutes.
“Ah! dear ladies,” said she, looking
up at Rosamond and Caroline, “I see
you have kind hearts within you, and I
thank you for pitying poor Kate.”
“I wish we could do any thing to
serve her,” said Caroline.
“Ah! Miss, that I am afraid you
can't, that's what I am afraid none can
now.”—The good woman paused and
looked, as if she expected to be questioned.
—Caroline was silent, and the old
woman looked disappointed.—
“We do not like to question you,” 
said Rosamond, “lest we should ask
what you might not like to answer, or
... what the young woman would be
sorry that you should answer.”
“Why, Miss, that's very considerate
in you, and only that I know it would
be for her benefit, I am sure I would
not have said a word—but here I have
so very little to give her, and that little

so coarse fare to what she been used to,
both when she was at service, and when
she was with her own people, that I be
afraid, weak as she be grown now, she
won't do.—And though I have been a
good nurse in my day, I think she wants
now a bit better Doctor than I be—and
then if she could see the minister, to
take the weight off her heart, to make
her not fret so, to bid her look up above
for comfort, and to raise her with the
hope and trust, that God will have more
mercy upon her than her father and mother
do have ... and to make her,— 
hardest of all!—forget him that has forsaken
her and her little one, and been
so cruel ... Oh! ladies, to do all that
needs a person that can speak to her
better, and with more authority than I
can.”
The poor woman stopped again for
some minutes, and then recollecting that
she had not told what she had intended
to tell, she said:
“I suppose, ladies, you guess now

how it be, and I ought to beg pardon
for speaking of such a thing, or such a
one as ... as poor Kate is now, to you
young ladies ... but though she is fallen
so low, and an outcast, she is not hardened
... and if it had been so that it
had pleased Heaven that she had been a
wife to one in her own condition ... Oh!
what a wife, and what a mother there
was lost in her!—The man that wronged
her has a deal to answer for—but he has
no thought of that, nor care for her, or
his child—but is a fine man about
Lon'on, they say, driving about with
Colonels, and Lords, and dancing with
Ladies ... Oh! if they saw Kate, one
would guess they would not think so
much of him ... but yet, may be they'd
think more ... there's no saying how the
quality, ladies, judge on these matters.
—But this I know, that though he was
very free of his money, and generous to
Kate at the first, and even for some
months after he quit the country, till I
suppose he forgot her, yet he has not

sent her a guinea for self or child these
four months, nor a line of a letter of any
kind, which she pined for more, and we
kept thinking the letters she did write,
did not get to him by the post, so we
sent one by a grandson of my own, that
we knowed would put the letter safe into
his hands, and did, just as the young
gentleman was, as my grandson told me,
coming out of a fine house in Lon'on,
and going, with a long whip in his hand,
to get upon the coach-box of a coach,
with four horses too ... and he looks at
the letter, and puts it in his pocket, and
calls to my boy—‘No answer now, my
good friend—but I'll write by post to
her.’ Those were the very words, and
then that Colonel that was with him,
laughing and making game like, went to
snatch the letter out of the pocket, saying,
‘Show us that love-letter, Buckhurst.’.
... Lord forgive me! What
have I done now!”—said the old woman,
stopping short, struck by the sudden

change in the countenance of both
her auditors.—
“Mr. Buckhurst Falconer is a relation
of ours,”—said Rosamond, “and we
are shocked!” ...
“Dear ladies, how could I think you
knew him even,”—interrupted the old
woman. “I beg your pardon, Kate
says he's not so cruel as he seems, and
that if he was here this minute, he'd be
as kind and generous to her as ever ...
It's all forgetfulness just, and giddiness,
she says ... or may be, as to the money,
that he has not it to spare.”
“To spare!” repeated Caroline, indignantly.—
“Lord love her! what a color she
has now—and what a spirit spoke there!
—But, ladies, I'd be sorry to hurt the
young gentleman, for Kate would be
angry at me for that worse than at any
thing ... And as to all that has happened,
you know it's nothing extraordinary,
but what happens every day, by

all accounts, and young gentlemen, such
as he be, thinks nothing of it ... and the
great ladies, I know, by what I noticed,
when I was in sarvice once in Lon'on
myself, the great ladies thinks the better
of them for such things.
“I am not a great lady,” said Caroline.
“Nor I, thank God!” said Rosamond.
—“Well, for certain, if you are not
great, you're good ladies,” said the old
woman.—
As they were now within sight of
their own house, they thanked and dismissed
their loquacious, but kind-hearted
guide, putting into her hand some money
for poor Kate, Caroline promising to
make further inquiries—Rosamond, without
restriction, promising all manner of
assistance pecuniary, medical, and spiritual.
The result of the inquiries that were
made confirmed the truth of all that old
Dorothy had related, and brought to

light other circumstances relative to the
seduction and desertion of this poor girl,
which so shocked Rosamond, that in
proportion to her former prepossession
in Buckhurst's favor was now her abhorrence; 
and as if to repair the imprudence
with which she had formerly used
her influence over her sister's mind in
his favor, she now went as far on the
opposite side, abjuring him with the
strongest expressions of indignation, and
wishing that Caroline's last letter had
not gone to Buckhurst, that she might
have given her refusal on this special
account, in the most severe and indignant
terms the English language could
supply.
Mrs. Percy, however, on the contrary,
rejoiced that Caroline's letter had been
sent, before they knew any thing of this
affair.
“But, Ma'am,” cried Rosamond,— 
“surely it would have been right for
Caroline to have given this reason for
her refusal, and to have declared, that

this had proved to her beyond a possibility
of doubt, that her former objections
to Mr. Buckhurst Falconer's principles
were too well founded—and it
would have become Caroline to have
written with strong indignation.—I am
persuaded,” continued Rosamond, “that
if women would reprobate young men
for such instances of profligacy and cruelty,
instead of suffering such conduct
to go under the fine plausible general
names of gallantry and wildness, it would
make a greater impression, than all the
sermons that could be preached.—And
Caroline, who has beauty and eloquence,
can do this with effect.—I remember
Godfrey once said, that the peculiar
characteristic of Caroline, that in which
she differed most from the common herd
of young ladies, is in her power of feeling
and expressing virtuous indignation.
I am sure that Godfrey, partial as he is
to Mr. Buckhurst Falconer, would think
that Caroline ought, on such an occasion,
to set an example of that proper

spirit, which, superior to the fear of ridicule
and fashion, dares to speak the indignation
it feels.”
“Very well spoken, and better felt,
my dear daughter,” said Mrs. Percy.— 
“And Heaven forbid I should lower the
tone of your mind, or the honest indignation
you feel against vice.—But, Rosamond,
my dear, let us be just.—I must
do even those, whom Godfrey calls the
common herd of young ladies, the justice
to believe, that there are many
among them, who have good feeling
enough to be angry, very angry with
a lover upon such an occasion—angry
enough to write him a most indignant,
and, perhaps, very eloquent letter.—You
may recollect more than one heroine of
a novel, who discards a lover upon such
a discovery as was made by you last
night. It is a common novel incident,
and, of course, from novels, every young
lady, even who might not have felt without
a precedent, knows how she ought
to express herself in such circumstances.

But you will observe, my dear, that both
in novels and in real life, young ladies
generally like and encourage men of
feeling, in contradistinction to men of
principle, and too often men of gallantry
in preference to men of correct morals.
—In short, that such a character as
that of Mr. Buckhurst Falconer is just
the kind of person, with whom many
women would fall in love.—By suffering
this to be thought the taste of our sex,
ladies encourage libertinism in general,
more than they can possibly discourage
it by the loudest display of indignation
against particular instances.—If, like
your sister Caroline, young ladies would
show, that they really do not prefer such
men, it would do essential service. And,
observe, my dear Rosamond, this can be
done by every young woman with perfect
delicacy: but I do not see how she
can, with propriety or good effect, do
more. It is a subject ladies cannot well
discuss; a subject upon which the manners
and customs of the world are so

much at variance with religion and morality,
that entering upon the discussion
would lead to greater difficulties than
you are aware of. It is, therefore, best
for our sex to show their disapprobation
of vice, and to prove their sense of virtue
and religion by their conduct, rather
than to proclaim it to the world. Had
Caroline in her letter expressed her indignation
in the most severe terms that
the English language could supply, she
would only have exposed herself to the
ridicule of Mr. Buckhurst Falconer's
fashionable companions, as a prating,
preaching prude, without doing the least
good to him, or to any one living.”
Rosamond reluctantly acknowledged
that “perhaps her mother was right.”
“But, Caroline, how quietly you sit
by, while we are talking of you and
your lover,” cried Rosamond; “I do
not know whether to be provoked with
you, or to admire you.”—
“Admire me, pray,” said Caroline,
“if you can.”

“I do not believe you will ever be in
love,” said Rosamond.—“I confess I
should admire, or at least, love you better,
if you had more feeling,”—added
Rosamond hastily.
“By what do you judge that I want
feeling?” said Caroline, coloring deeply
—and with a look and tone that expressed
her keen sense of injustice.
“What proof have I ever given you of
my want of feeling?”—
“No proof, that I can recollect,” said
Rosamond, laughing, “no proof, but
that you have never been in love.”
“And is it a crime never to have
been in love? or is it a proof I am incapable
of feeling, that I have never
loved one who has proved himself utterly
unworthy of my love—against
whose conduct my sister cannot find
words sufficiently severe to express her
indignation?—Rosamond, if I had ever
given him any encouragement, if I had
loved him, what would have been my

misery at the moment you said those
words?”
“Ah! my dear, but then if you had
been very miserable, I should have pitied
you so much, and loved you so heartily
for being in love,” said Rosamond, still
laughing&wblank;
“Oh! Rosamond,” continued Caroline,
whose mind was now too highly
wrought for raillery—“Is love to be
trifled with?—no, only by trifling minds,
or by rash characters, by those who do
not conceive it's power, it's danger. Recollect
what we have just seen.—A
young beautiful woman sinking into the
grave with shame—deserted by her parents—wishing
her child unborn.—Do
you remember her look of agony when
we praised that child—the strongest
charm of nature reversed—the strongest
ties dissolved—and—love brought her to
this!—She is only a poor servant girl.
—But the highest and the fairest,
those of the most cultivated understandings,

of the tenderest hearts, cannot love
bring them down to the same level, to the
same fate?—And not only our weak sex,
but over the stronger sex, and the strongest
of the strong, and the wisest of the
wise, what is, what has ever been the
power, the delusions of that passion, which
can cast a spell over the greatest hero,
throw a blot on the brightest glory, blast
in a moment a life of fame!—What must
be the power of that passion, which can
inspire genius in the dullest and the coldest,
waken heroism in the most timid of
creatures, exalt to the highest point, or to
the lowest degrade our nature—the bitterest
curse, or the sweetest blessing
Heaven bestows on us in this life!—Oh!
sister, is love to be trifled with?”—
Caroline paused, and Rosamond, for
some instants, looked at her and at her
mother in silence; then exclaimed— 
“All this from Caroline!&wblank;Are not
you astonished, mother?”
“No,” said Mrs. Percy, “I was
aware that this was in Caroline's mind.”

“I was not”&wblank;said Rosamond,
“She who never spoke of love!—I little
imagined that she thought of it so highly,
so seriously.”
“Yes, I do think of it seriously,
highly may Heaven grant!” cried Caroline,
looking fervently upwards as she
spoke with an illuminated countenance.
“May Heaven grant that love be a
blessing and not a curse to me!—Heaven
grant that I may never, in any moment
of selfish vanity, try to excite a
passion which I cannot return! Heaven
grant that I never may feel the passion
of love but for one, whom I shall entirely
esteem, who shall be worthy to fill
my whole soul!”
“Mother!” continued Caroline, turning
eagerly, and seizing her mother's
hand—“My guide, my guardian, whenever
you see in me any, the slightest
inclination, to coquetry, warn me ...
as you wish to save me from that which
I should most dread, the reproaches of
my own conscience ... in the first,

the very first instance, reprove me, mother,
if you can ... with severity.— 
And you, my sister, my bosom friend,
do not use your influence to soften, to
open my mind to love; but if ever you
perceive me yielding my heart to the
first tenderness of the passion, watch
over me, if the object be not every way
worthy of me, my equal, my superior.
 ... Oh! as you would wish to snatch
me from the grave, rouse me from the
delusion—save me from disappointment,
regret, remorse, which I know that I
could not bear, and live.”—
Her mother, into whose arms she
threw herself, pressed Caroline close to her
heart, while Rosamond, to whom she had
given her hand, held it fast and stood motionless
between surprise and sympathy.
—Caroline, to whose usual manners and
disposition every thing theatrical or romantic
was so foreign, seemed, as soon
as she recollected herself, to be ashamed
of the excessive emotion and enthusiasm
she had shown; withdrawing her hand

from her sister, she turned away, and
left the room.
Her mother and sister both remained
silent for a considerable time, fully occupied
with their own thoughts and feelings.
The mother's reverie looked to the
future prospects of her daughter;—confident
in Caroline's character, yet uncertain
of her fate, she felt a pleasing yet
painful solicitude.
Rosamond's thoughts turned rather to
the past than to the future; she recollected
and compared words and looks, yet
found insuperable difficulty in connecting
all she had ever before known or fancied
of Caroline, with what she had just seen
and heard.—Rosamond did not fairly recover
from her surprise, and from her
look of perplexity, during a full hour
that she remained absolutely silent, poring
upon a screen, upon which she saw
nothing.
She then went in search of Caroline,
in hopes of renewing the conversation; 
but she found her busied in some of the

common affairs of life, and apparently a
different person.
Rosamond, though she made divers attempts,
could not lead Caroline back
again to the same train of thought, or
tone of expression. Indeed, Rosamond
did not attempt it very skilfully, but rather
with the awkward impatience of one
not accustomed to use address.—Caroline,
intent upon the means of assisting
the poor young woman whom they had
seen at the cottage, went there again as
soon as she could, to warn old Dorothy,
in the first place, to be less communicative,
and not on any account to mention
to any one else the names and circumstances
which she had told them with so
little reserve. Caroline next applied to
Dr. Leicester, the vicar of their former
parish, a most amiable and respectable
clergyman, who had come from his vicarage,
near Percy-Hall, to spend what
time he could spare from his duties with
his favorite parishioners; at Caroline's
request he willingly went to see this unhappy

young woman, endeavored, and
succeeded in his endeavors, to sooth and
tranquillize her mind by speaking to her
words of peace. His mild piety raised
and comforted the trembling penitent; 
and while all prospect of forgiveness from
her parents, or of happiness in this
world, was at an end, he fixed her
thoughts on those better hopes and promises,
which religion only can afford. Her
health appeared suddenly to mend when
her mind was more at ease: but this was
only transient, and Dr. Erasmus Percy,
to whom Caroline applied for his medical
opinion, gave little hopes of her recovery.
—All that could be done by medicine,
and proper kindness, to assuage her sufferings
during her decline, was done in
the best manner by Mrs. Percy and her
daughters—especially by Caroline.—The
young woman, nevertheless, died in six
weeks—and was buried without Buckhurst
Falconer's making any inquiry concerning
her—probably without his knowing
of her death.—A few days after she

was no more, a letter came to her, from
him, which was returned unopened by
Dorothy, who could just write well
enough to make these words intelligible
in the cover.
“Sir,
Kate Robinson is dead— 
this four days—your child is with me still,
and well—She bid me tell you, if ever you
asked more concerning her—she left you
her forgiveness on her death-bed, and
hopes you will be happy, Sir.—
Your humble servant,
Dorothy White.”
A bank-note of ten pounds was received
by Dorothy soon afterwards for the use
of the child, and deep regret was expressed
by the father for the death of it's mother.
—But, as Dorothy said—“that came
too late to be of any good to her.”