

It is said that the Turks have a very
convenient recording angel, who, without
dropping a tear to blot out that which
might be wished unsaid or undone, fairly
shuts his eyes, and forbears to record
whatever is said or done by man in three
circumstances: when he is drunk, when
he is in a passion, and while he is under
age. What the under age, or what the
years of discretion of a Turk may be,
we do not at this moment recollect. We
know only that our own hero is not yet
twenty.—Without being quite as accommodating
as the Mahommetan angel,
we should wish to obliterate from our
record some months of Ormond's existence.

He felt and was ashamed of his
own degradation; but, after having lost,
or worse than lost, a winter of his life, it
was in vain to lament; or it was not
enough to weep over the loss, how to repair
it was the question.
Whenever Ormond returned to his
better self,—whenever he thought of improving,
he remembered Lady Annaly:— 
and he now recollected with shame,
that he had never had the grace to answer
or to thank her for her letter. He
had often thought of writing, but he had
put it off from day to day, and now
months had passed; he wrote a sad
scrawling hand, and he had always been
ashamed that Lady Annaly should see it; 
but now the larger shame got the better
of the lesser, and he determined he would
write. He looked for her letter, to read
it over again before he answered it—the
letter was very safe, for he considered it
as his greatest treasure.
On reading the letter over again, he

found that she had mentioned a present
of books which she intended for him.— 
A set of books which belonged to her
son, Sir Herbert Annaly, and of which
she found they had duplicates in their
library. She had ordered the box, containing
them, to be sent to Annaly: she
had desired her agent there, to forward
it to him; but in case any delay should
occur, she begged Mr. Ormond would
take the trouble to inquire for them himself.
This whole affair about the books
had escaped Mr. Ormond's memory: he
felt himself blush all over when he read
the letter again: he sent off a messenger
immediately to the agent at Annaly,
who had kept the box till inquired for.
It was too heavy for the boy to carry,
and he returned saying that two men
would not carry it, nor four, a slight
exaggeration! A car was sent for it, and
at last Harry obtained possession of the
books. It was an excellent collection of
what may be called the English and

French classics: the French books were,
at this time, quite useless to him, for
he could not read French. Lady Annaly,
however, sent these books on purpose
to induce him to learn a language,
which, if he should go into the army, as
he seemed inclined to do, would be particularly
useful to him. Lady Annaly
observed, that Mr. Ormond, wherever
he might be in Ireland, would probably
find even the priest of the parish a person
who could assist him sufficiently in learning
French, as most of the Irish parish
priests were, at that time, educated
at St. Omer's, or Louvain.
Father Jos had been at St. Omer's,
and Harry resolved to attack him with
a French grammar and dictionary, but
the French father Jos had learnt at St.
Omer's was merely from ear, he could
not bear the sight of a French grammar.
Harry was obliged to work on by himself.
He again put off writing to thank Lady
Annaly, till he could tell her that he had

obeyed her commands; and that he could
read at least a page of Gil Blas. But
before he had accomplished this, he learnt
from the agent that Lady Annaly was in
great affliction about her son, who had
broken a blood-vessel. He could not
think of intruding upon her at such a
time—and, in short, he put it off till he
thought it was too late to do it at all.
Among the English books was one in
many volumes, which did not seize his
attention forcibly, like Tom Jones, at
first, but which won upon him by degrees,
drew him on against his will, and against
his taste. He hated moralizing and reflections; 
and there was here an abundance
both of reflections and morality; 
these he skipped over, however, and
went on. The hero and the heroine too
were of a stiff fashion, which did not suit
his taste, yet still there was something in
the book, that, in spite of the terrible
array of good people, captivated his attention.
The heroine's perpetual egotism

disgusted him—she was always too good
and too full of herself—and she wrote
dreadfully long letters. The hero's dress
and manner were too splendid, too stiff,
for every day use—at first he detested Sir
Charles Grandison—he was so different
from the friends he loved in real life, or the
heroes he had admired in books; just as
in old portraits, we are at first struck with
the costume, but soon, if the picture be
really by a master hand, our attention is
fixed on the expression of the features and
the life of the figure.
Sensible as Ormond was of the power
of humour and ridicule, he was still more
susceptible, as all noble natures are, of
sympathy with elevated sentiments, and
with generous character. The character
of Sir Charles Grandison, in spite of his
ceremonious bowing on the hand, touched
the nobler feelings of our young hero's
mind, inspired him with virtuous emulation,
made him ambitious to be a gentleman
in the best and highest sense of the

word. In short, it completely counteracted
in his mind the effect of Tom Jones— 
all the generous feelings which were so
congenial to his own nature, and which
he had seen combined in Tom Jones, as
if necessarily, with the habits of an adventurer,
a spendthrift, and a rake, he
now saw united with high moral and religious
principles, in the character of a
man of virtue, as well as a man of honour; 
a man of cultivated understanding and accomplished
manners. In Sir Charles
Grandison's history he read that of a gentleman,
who, fulfilling every duty of his
station in society, eminently useful, respected
and beloved, as brother, friend,
master of a family, guardian, and head of
a large estate, was admired by his own
sex, and, what struck Ormond far more
forcibly, loved, passionately loved by
women—not by the low and profligate,
but by the highest and most accomplished
of the sex.
Ormond has often declared, that Sir

Charles Grandison did him more good,
than any fiction he ever read in his life.
Indeed, to him it appeared no fiction— 
while he was reading it, his imagination
was so full of Clementina, and the whole
Porretta family, that he saw them in his
sleeping and waking dreams. The deep
pathos so affected him, that he could
scarcely recall his mind to the low concerns
of life. Once, when king Corny
called him to go out shooting—he found
him with red eyes.—Harry was ashamed
to tell him the cause, lest he should laugh
at him. But Corny was susceptible of
the same kind of enthusiasm himself; 
and though he had, as he said, never been
regularly what is called a reading man,
yet, the books he had read, which were
always for his own pleasure, left ineffaceable
traces in his memory. Fictions, if
they touched him at all, struck him with
all the force of reality, and he never spoke
of characters as in a book, but as if they
had lived and acted. Harry was glad

to find that here again, as in most
things, they sympathized and suited each
other.
But Corny, if ready to give sympathy,
was likewise imperious in requiring it,
and Harry was often obliged to make
sudden transitions from his own thoughts
and employments to those of his friend.
These transitions, however difficult and
provoking at the time, were useful discipline
to his mind, giving him that versatility
in which persons of powerful
imagination, accustomed to live in retirement
and to command their own time
and occupations, are often most deficient.
At this period, when our young hero
was suddenly seized with a voracious appetite
for books, it was trying to his patience
to be frequently interrupted.
“Come, come! Harry Bookworm,
you are growing—no good!—come out!” 
cried king Corny—“Lay down whatever
you have in your hand, and come

off this minute, till I shew you a badger
at bay, with half a dozen dogs, and
defending itself in the keenest manner.”
“Yes, Sir, this minute—be kind
enough to wait one minute.”
“It has been hiding and skulking this
week from me—we have got it out of its
snug hole at last. I bid them keep the
dogs off till you came. Don't be waiting
any longer. Come off, Harry, come!— 
Phoo! Phoo! That book will keep
cold, and what is it? Oh! the last volume
of Sir Charles, not worth troubling
your eyes with. The badger is worth a
hundred of it, not a pin's worth in that
volume but worked stool and chairs, and
china jugs and mugs. Oh! throw it
from you. Come away.”
Another time, at the very death of
Clarissa, king Corny would have Harry
out to see a Solan goose.
“Oh! let Clarissa die another time; 
come now, you that never saw a Solan

goose—it looks for all the world as if it
wore spectacles; Moriarty says so.”
Harry was carried off to see the goose
in spectacles, and was pressed into the
service of king Corny for many hours
afterwards, to assist in searching for its
eggs. One of the Black Islands was a
bare, high, pointed, desart rock, in which
the sea-fowl built; and here, in the
highest point of rock, this Solan goose
had deposited some of her eggs, instead
of leaving them in nests on the ground,
as she usually does. The more dangerous
it was to obtain the eggs, which the
bird had hidden in this pinnacle of the
rock, the more eager king Corny was
to have them; and he, and Ormond, and
Moriarty, were at this perilous work for
hours. King Corny directing and bawling,
and Moriarty and Ormond with
pole, net, and pole-hook, swinging and
leaping from one ledge of rock to another,
clambering, clinging, sliding, pushing,
and pulling each other alternately,

from hold to hold, with frightful precipices
beneath them. As soon as Ormond
had warmed to the business, he was delighted
with the dangerous pursuit; but
suddenly, just as he had laid his hand on
the egg, and that king Corny shouted in
triumph, Harry, leaping back across the
cleft in the rock, missed his footing and
fell, and must have been dashed to pieces,
but for a sort of projecting landing place,
on which he was caught, where he lay
for some minutes stunned. The terror
of poor Corny was such, that he could
neither move nor look up, till Moriarty
called out to him, that Master Harry was
safe, all to a sprained ancle. The fall,
and the sprain, would not have been
deemed worthy of a place in these memoirs
of our hero, but from their consequences.— 
the consequences, not on his body, but
on his mind. He could not for some
weeks afterwards stir out, or take any
bodily exercise: confined to the house,
and forced to sit still, he was glad to

read, during these long hours, to amuse
himself. When he had read all the
novels in the collection, which were very
few, he went on to other books. Even
those, which were not mere works of
amusement, he found more entertaining,
than netting fishing nets, or playing back-gammon
with father Jos, who was always
cross when he did not win. Kind-hearted
king Corny, considering always
that Harry's sprain was got in his service,
would have sat with him all day
long, but this Harry would not suffer,
for he knew that it was the greatest
punishment to Corny to stay within doors
a whole day. When Corny in the evening
returned from his various out-of-doors
occupations and amusements, Harry was
glad to talk to him of what he had been
reading, and to hear his odd summary
reflexions.
“Well, Harry, my boy, now I've told
you how it has been with me all day,
now let's hear how you have been getting

on with your bookmen;—has it been a
good day with you to-day?—was you
with Shakespear—worth all the rest— 
all the world in him?”
Corny was no respecter of authorities
in books; a great name went for nothing
with him—did not awe his understanding
in the slightest degree.
“Did it touch the heart, or inflame”— 
if it was poetry—“the imagination?”— 
If it was history, “was it true?”—If it
was philosophy, “was it sound reasoning?” 
These were the questions he asked.—“No
cramming any thing down his throat,” 
he said. This daring temper of mind,
though it sometimes led him wrong, was
advantageous to his young friend. It
wakened Ormond's powers, and prevented
his taking upon trust the assertions,
or the reputations, even of great
writers.
The spring was now returning, and
Dora was to return with spring. He
looked forward to her return, as to a

new era in his existence: then he should
live in better company, he should see
something better than he had seen of
late—be something better. His chief,
his best occupations during this winter,
had been riding, leaping, and breaking
horses: he had broke a beautiful mare
for Dora. Dora, when a child, used to
be very fond of riding, and constantly
rode out with her father. At the time
when Harry Ormond's head was full
of Tom Jones, Dora had always been
his idea of Sophy Weston, though nothing
else that he could recollect in her
person, mind, or manner, bore any resemblance
to Sophia: and now that Tom
Jones had been driven out of his head
by Sir Charles Grandison,—now that his
taste for women was a little raised, by
the pictures which Richardson had left
in his imagination, Dora, with equal facility,
turned into his new idea of a
heroine—not his heroine, for she was
engaged to White Connal—merely a

heroine in the abstract.—Ormond had
been warned, that he was to consider
Dora as a married woman;—well, so he
would, of course.—“She was to be Mrs.
Connal—so much the better;—he should
be quite at ease with her, and she should
teach him French, and drawing, and
dancing, and improve his manners. He
was conscious that his manners had, since
his coming to the Black Islands, rusticated
sadly, and lost the little polish
they had acquired at Castle Hermitage,
and during one famous winter in Dublin.
His language and dialect, he was afraid,
had become somewhat vulgar; but Dora,
who had been refined by her residence
with her aunt, and by her dancing-master,
would polish him up, and set all
to rights, in the most agreeable manner
possible” In the course of these his speculations
on his rapid improvements, and
his reflections on the perfectibility of
man's nature under the tuition of woman,
some idea of its fallibility did cross

his imagination or his memory; but then
he blamed, most unjustly, his imagination,
for the suggestion. The danger
would prove, as he would have it, to be
imaginary. “What danger could there
be, when he knew,” as he began and
ended, by saying to himself, “that he was
to consider Dora as a married woman— 
Mrs. Connal.”
Dora's aunt, an aunt by the mother's
side, a maiden aunt, who had never before
been at the Black Islands, and whom
Ormond had never seen, was to accompany
Dora on her return to Corny Castle; 
our young hero had settled it in his head,
that this aunt must be something like
Aunt Ellenor, in Sir Charles Grandison; 
a stiff-backed, prim, precise, old fashioned
looking aunt. Never was man's astonishment
more visible in his countenance,
than was that of Harry Ormond,
on the first sight of Dora's aunt. His
surprise was so great, as to preclude the
sight of Dora herself.

There was nothing surprising in the
lady, but there was, indeed, an extraordinary
difference between our hero's
preconceived notion, and the real person
whom he now beheld! Mademoiselle,
as Miss O'Faley was called, in honour
of her French parentage and education,
and in commemoration of her having at
different periods spent above half her life
in France, looking for an estate that
could never be found.—Mademoiselle was
dressed in all the peculiarities of the
French dress of that day—she was of
that indefinable age, which the French
describe by the happy phrase of “une
femme d'un certain age,” and which
Miss O'Faley happily translated, “a
woman of no particular age.” Yet
though of no particular age in the eye of
politeness, to the vulgar eye she looked
like what people, who knew no better,
might call an elderly woman, but she
was as alert and lively as a girl of fifteen,— 
a little wrinkled, but withal in fine

preservation. She wore abundance of
rouge, obviously—still more obviously
took superabundance of snuff—and without
any obvious motive, continued to
play unremittingly a pair of large black
French eyes, in a manner impracticable
to a mere English woman, and which
almost tempted the spectator to beg she
would let them rest.—Mademoiselle or
Miss O'Faley was in fact half French,
and half English—born in France she
was the daughter of an officer of the
Irish Brigade, and of a French lady
of good family. In her gestures, tones,
and language, there was a striking
mixture, or rapid succession of French
and Irish. When she spoke French,
which she spoke well, and with a true
Parisian accent, her voice, gestures,
air, and ideas were all French, and she
looked and moved a well born, well
bred woman.—The moment she attempted
to speak English, which she spoke
with an inveterate brogue, her ideas,

manner, air, voice, and gestures were
Irish; she looked and moved a vulgar
Irishwoman.
“What do you see so wonderful in
aunt O'Faley?” said Dora.
“Nothing—only—”
The sentence was never finished, and
the young lady was satisfied, for she
perceived that the course of his thoughts
was interrupted, and all idea of her
aunt effaced, the moment he turned his
eyes upon herself. Dora, no longer a
child and his playfellow, but grown and
formed, was, and looked, as if she expected
to be treated as a woman.—She
was exceedingly pretty, not regularly
handsome, but with most brilliant eyes— 
there was besides a childishness in her
face, and in her slight figure, which
disarmed all criticism on her beauty,
and which contrasted strikingly, as our
hero thought agreeably, with her womanish
airs and manner.—Nothing but her external
appearance could be seen this first

evening—she was tired, and went to bed
early.
Ormond longed to see more of her,
on whom so much of his happiness was
to depend.