

Letter from Alfred to Caroline.
“MY DEAR CAROLINE,”
“I am going to surprise you—I
know it is the most imprudent thing a
story-teller can do, to give notice, or
promise of a surprise—but you see, I
have such confidence at this moment in
my fact, that I hazard this imprudence— 
Who do you think I have seen? Guess— 
guess all round the breakfast table— 
father, mother, Caroline, Rosamond—I
defy you all—Ay, Rosamond, even you,
with all your capacity for romance; the
romance of real life is beyond all other
romances; it's coincidences beyond the
combinations of the most inventive fancy
—even of yours, Rosamond—Granted— 
go on—Patience, ladies, if you please, and

don't turn over the page, or glance to
the end of my letter to satisfy your
curiosity, but read fairly on, says my
father.
“You remember, I hope, the Irishman
O'Brien, to whom Erasmus was so good,
and whom Mr. Gresham, kind as he
always is, took for his porter—When
Mr. Gresham set off last week for Amsterdam,
he gave this fellow leave to go
home to his wife, who lives at Greenwich.
This morning, the wife came to see my
Honor to speak to me, and when she did
see me she could not speak, she was crying
so bitterly; she was in the greatest
distress about her husband; he had, she
said, in going to see her, been seized by
a press gang, and put on board a tender
now on the Thames. Moved by the poor
Irish woman's agony of grief, and helpless
state, I went to Greenwich where
the tender was lying, to speak to the
Captain, and to offer what money might
be necessary to obtain O'Brien's release.
But upon my arrival there, I found that

the woman had been mistaken in every
point of her story—In short, her husband
‘was not on board the tender, had never
been pressed, and had only stayed away
from home the preceding night, in consequence
of having met with the Captain's
servant, one of his countrymen,
from the County of Leitrim dear, who
had took him home to treat him, and had
kept him all night to sing, ‘St. Patrick's
day in the morning,’—and to drink a
good journey, and a quick passage, across
the salt-water to his master, which he
could not refuse.'—I was rather provoked,
to find that I had wasted my precious
time and my compassion; but, as
some comforting philosopher observes,
no effect is ever lost, and often the little
incidents, which we think unlucky, tend
to the most fortunate circumstances of
our lives. Whilst I was looking at my
watch, and regretting my lost morning,
a gentleman, whose servant had really
been pressed, came up to speak to the
captain, who was standing beside me.

The gentleman had something striking
and noble in his whole appearance; but
his address and accent, which were those
of a foreigner, did not suit the fancy of
my English Captain, who, putting on
the surly air, with which he thought it
for his honor, and for the honor of his
country to receive a Frenchman, as he
took this gentleman to be, replied in the
least satisfactory manner possible, and in
the short language of some seamen,
‘Your footman's an Englishman, Sir; 
has been pressed for an able-bodied seaman
—which I trust he'll prove—he's
aboard the tender—and there he will
remain.’—The foreigner, who notwithstanding
the politeness of his address,
seemed to have a high spirit, and to be
fully sensible of what was due from
others to him, as well as from him to
them, replied with temper and firmness.
—The captain, without giving any reasons,
or attending to what was said,
reiterated— ‘I am under orders, Sir, I
am acting according to my orders—I

can do neither more nor less. The law is
as I tell you, Sir.’
The foreigner bowed submission to the
law, but expressed his surprise, that such
should be law in a land of liberty—With
admiration he had heard, that by the
English law, and British Constitution,
the property and personal liberty of the
lowest, the meanest subject, could not be
injured or oppressed by the highest nobleman
in the realm, by the most powerful
minister, even by the king himself.— 
He had always been assured, that the
king could not put his hand into the
purse of the subject, or take from him to
the value of a single penny; that the
Sovereign could not deprive the meanest
of the people unheard, untried, uncondemned,
of a single hour of his liberty,
or touch a hair of his head,—he had always,
on the Continent, heard it the
boast of Englishmen, that when even a
slave touched English ground he became
free; ‘yet now, to my astonishment,’ pursued
the foreigner— ‘what do I see?—a

freeborn British subject returning to his
native land, after an absence of some
years, unoffending against any law, innocent,
unsuspected of all crime, a faithful
domestic, an excellent man, torn from
the midst of his family, dragged from
that castle his home, put on board a king's
ship, unused to hard labour, condemned
to work like a galley slave, doomed to
banishment, perhaps to death!—Good
Heavens! In all this where is your English
liberty? Where is English justice,
and the spirit of your English law?’
“And who the devil are you, Sir?” 
cried the captain, ‘who seem to know so
much, and so little of English law.’—
“My name, if that be of any consequence,
is Count Albert Altenberg.”
“Well, Caroline, you are surprised,
— ‘No,’ says Rosamond, ‘I guessed it
was him, from the first moment I heard
he was a foreigner, and had a noble
air).’—
“Altenberg,” repeated the captain—

‘that's not a French name:—Why!— 
you are not a Frenchman!’
“No Sir—a German.”
“Ah, Ha!”—cried the captian, suddenly
changing his tone— ‘I thought
you were not a Frenchman, or you could
not talk so well of English law, and feel
so much for English liberty—And now
then, since that's the case, I'll own to
you frankly, that in the main I'm much
of your mind,—and for my own particular
share, I'd as lieve the Admiralty
had sent me to Hell, as have ordered me
to press on the Thames—But my business
is to obey orders—which I will do by the
blessing of God—So good morning to
you—As to law, and justice, and all
that, talk to him,’ said the Captain,
pointing with his thumb over his left
shoulder to me, as he walked off hastily.
“Poor fellow!” said I— ‘this is the
hardest part of a British Captain's duty,
and so he feels it.’
“Duty,”—exclaimed the Count—

‘Duty! pardon me for repeating your
word—But can it be his duty?—I hope
I did not pass proper bounds in speaking
to him; but now he is gone, I may say
to you, Sir—to you, who if I may presume
to judge from your countenance,
sympathize in my feelings—this is a fitter
employment for an African slave merchant,
than for a British Officer—The
whole scene which I have just beheld
there on the river, on the banks, the
violence, the struggles I have witnessed
there, the screams of the women and
children, it is not only horrible, but in
England incredible!—Is it not like what
we have heard of on the coast of Africa
with detestation—What your humanity
has there forbidden—abolished—And is
it possible that the cries of those negroes
across the Atlantic can so affect your
philanthropists’ imaginations, whilst you
are deaf or unmoved by these cries of
your countrymen, close to your metropolis,
at your very gates!—I think I
hear them still’—said the Count, with a

look of unaffected horror. ‘Such a
scene I never-before beheld—I have seen
it—and yet I cannot believe that I have
seen it in England.’
“I acknowledged, that the sight was
terrible; I could not be surprised, that the
operation of pressing men for the sea
service should strike a foreigner as inconsistent
with the notion of English justice
and liberty, and I admired the energy
and strength of feeling which the Count
showed; but I defended the measure as
well as I could, on the plea of necessity.
“Necessity!” said the Count— ‘pardon
me if I remind you, that Necessity
is the tyrant's plea.’
“I mended my plea, and changed
Necessity, into—Utility—general utility.
It was essential to England's defence—to
her existence—she could not exist without
her navy, and her navy could not be
maintained without a press-gang—as I
was assured by those who were skilled in
the affairs of the Navy.

“The Count smiled at my evident
consciousness of the weakness of my concluding
corollary, and observed, ‘that
by my own statement, the whole argument
depended on the assertions of those
who maintained, that a navy could not
exist without a press-gang.’—He urged
this no further, and I was glad of it; his
horses and mine, were at this moment
up, and we both rode together to
Town.—
“I know that Rosamond, at this instant,
is gasping with impatience, to hear whether
in the course of this ride I spoke of
M. de Tourville—and the Shipwreck— 
I did—but not of Euphrosyne—Upon
that subject I could not well touch. He
had heard of the Shipwreck, and of the
hospitality with which the sufferers had
been treated by an English gentleman,
and he was surprised and pleased,
when I told him, that I was the son of
that gentleman—Of M. de Tourville
the Count I fancy thinks much the same
as you do. He spoke of him as an intriguing

diplomatist, of quick talents,
but of a mind incapable of any thing
great or generous.—The Count went on
from speaking of M. de Tourville to
some of the celebrated public characters
abroad, and to the politics and manners
of the different courts and countries of
Europe. For so young a man, he has
seen and reflected much. He is indeed
a very superior person, as he convinced
me even in this short ride. You know,
that Dr. Johnson says, ‘that you cannot
stand for five minutes with a great man
under a shed, waiting till a shower is
over, without hearing him say something,
that another man could not say.’— 
But though the Count conversed with
me so well and so agreeably, I could see
that his mind was from time to time,
absent and anxious; and as we came
into Town, he again spoke of the pressgang,
and of his poor servant—a faithful
attached servant he called him, and I am
sure the Count is a good master, and a
man of feeling. He had offered money

to obtain the man's release in vain. A
substitute it was at this time difficult to
find—The Count was but just arrived in
London, had not yet presented any of his
numerous letters of introduction; he mentioned
the names of some of the people
to whom these were addressed, and he
asked me, whether application to any of
them, could be of service. But none of
his letters were to any of the men now
in power.—Lord Oldborough was the
only person I knew, whose word would
be law in this case, and I offered to go
with him to his Lordship.—This I ventured,
my dear father, because I wisely
—yes, wisely, as you shall see, calculated
that the introduction of a foreigner, fresh
from the Continent, and from that Court,
where Cunningham Falconer is now
resident Envoy, would be agreeable,
and might be useful to the Minister.
“My friend Mr. Temple, who is as
obliging and as much my friend now he
is secretary to the great man, as he was

when he was a scrivening nobody in his
garret, obtained audience for us directly
—I need not detail—indeed I have not
time—Graciously received—Count's
business done by a line—Temple ordered
to write to Admiralty—Lord Oldborough
—seemed obliged to me for introducing
the Count—I saw he wished to have
some private conversation with him— 
rose and took my leave. Lord Oldborough
—paid me for my discretion on the spot,
by a kind look—a great deal from him— 
and following me to the door of the antichamber.
— ‘Mr. Percy, I cannot
regret, that you have followed your own
independent professional course—I congratulate
you upon your success—I have
heard of it from many quarters, and
always, believe me, with pleasure on
your father's account, and on your
own.’—
“Next day found on my table, when
I came from the Courts, the Count's
card—When I returned his visit, Commissioner

Falconer was with him in close
converse—confirmed by this, in opinion,
that Lord Oldborough is sucking information; 
I mean, political secrets out
of the Count—The Commissioner could
not, in common decency, help being
‘exceedingly sorry, that he and Mrs.
Falconer had seen so little of me of late’ 
—nor could he well avoid asking me to
a concert, to which he invited the
Count, for the ensuing evening. As
the Count promised to go, so did I, on
purpose to meet him. You may be sure
that I will miss no opportunity of cultivating
his acquaintance, for I am entirely
of my father's opinion, that though seeking
common acquaintance is absolute
waste of time, yet that a man cannot
employ his leisure better than in cultivating
the society of those who are superior
in abilities and character. Even
from the glance I have had I can decide,
that this Count Altenberg is a superior
person, there is something about
him so commanding, and yet so engaging,

... But I will not overpraise him— 
Adieu, dearest Caroline.
Most affectionately yours,
Alfred Percy.”
To give an account of Mrs. Falconer's
concert in fashionable style, we should
inform the public, that Dr. Mudge for
ever established his fame in “Buds of
Roses;” and Miss La Grande was astonishing,
absolutely astonishing in “Frenar
vorrei le lagrime”—quite in Catalani's
best manner—But Miss Georgiana
Falconer was divine in “O Giove Omnipotente,” 
and quite surpassed herself
in “Quanto O quanto è amor possente” 
—In which Dr. Mudge was also capital
—Indeed it would be doing injustice to
this gentleman's powers not to acknowledge
the universality of his genius.
Perhaps our readers may not feel quite
satisfied with this general eulogium, and
may observe, that all this might have
been learnt from the newspapers of the
day. Then we must tell things plainly

and simply, but this will not sound
nearly so grand, and letting the public
behind the scenes will destroy all the
stage effect and illusion.—Alfred
Percy went to Mrs. Falconer's unfashionably
early, in hopes that, as Count
Altenberg dined there, he might have a
quarter of an hour's conversation with
him before the musical party should assemble.
In this hope Alfred was mistaken.
He found in the great drawingroom
only Mrs. Falconer and two other
ladies, whose names he never heard, all
standing round the fire; the unknown
ladies were in close and eager converse
about Count Altenberg—
“He is so handsome! so polite! so
charming!—He is very rich—has immense
possessions abroad, has not he?
—Certainly he has a fine estate in York-shire
—But when did he come to England?
—How long does he stay?— 
£15,000, no, 20,000 per annum—Indeed!
—Mrs. Falconer, has not Count
Altenberg £20,000 a year?”

Mrs. Falconer, seemingly uninterested,
stood silent, looking through her glass
at the man who was lighting the argand
lamps—
“Really, my dear,” answered she,
“I can't say ... I know nothing of
Count Altenberg ... Take care! that
argand! ... He's quite a stranger to us
 ... the Commissioner met him at Lord
Oldborough's, and on Lord Oldborough's
account of course ... Vigor, we must
have more light, Vigor,—wishes to pay
him attention—But here's Mr. Percy,” 
continued she, turning to Alfred,
“can, I dare say, tell you all about these
things. I think the Commissioner mentioned
that it was you, Mr. Percy, who
introduced the Count to Lord Oldborough.”
The ladies immediately fixed their
surprised and inquiring eyes upon Mr.
Alfred Percy—He seemed to grow in an
instant several feet in their estimation:
but he shrunk again when he acknowledged,
that he had merely met Count

Altenberg accidentally at Greenwich— 
that he knew nothing of the Count's
estate in Yorkshire, or of his foreign possessions,
and was utterly incompetent to
decide whether he had £10,000 or
20,000 per annum.
“That's very odd,” said one of the
ladies—But this much, I know, that he
is passionately fond of music, for he told
me so at dinner.”
“Then I am sure he will be charmed
to night with Miss Georgiana”—said the
confidants.
“But what signifies that,” replied
the other lady, “if he has not. ...”
“Mr. Percy!” interrupted Mrs. Falconer,
“I have never seen you since
that sad affair of Lady Harriot H&wblank; 
and Lewis Clay;” and putting her arm
within Alfred's, she walked him away,
talking over the affair, and throwing in
a proper proportion of compliment. As
she reached the folding doors, at the
farthest end of the room, she opened
them.

“I have a notion the young people
are here”—She introduced him into
the music room. Miss Georgiana Falconer,
at the piano-forte, with performers,
composers, masters, and young ladies,
all with music-books round her,
sat high in consultation, which Alfred's
appearance interrupted—a faint struggle
to be civil—An insipid question or
two was addressed to him—
“Fond of music, Mr. Percy?— 
Captain Percy, I think, likes music?
—You expect Captain Percy home
soon?”—
Scarcely listening to his answers, the
young ladies soon resumed their own
conversation, forgot his existence, and
went on eagerly with their own affairs.
As they turned over their music-books,
Alfred, for some minutes, heard only the
names of La Tour, Winter, Von Esch,
Lenza, Portugallo, Mortellari, Guglielmi,
Sacchini, Sarti, Paisiello, pronounced
by male and female voices in
various tones of ecstasy and of execration.

Then there was an eager search
for certain favorite duets, trios, and sets
of cavatinas. Next he heard, in rapid
succession, the names of Tenducci, Pachierotti,
Marchesi, Vieganoni, Braham,
Gabrielli, Mara, Banti, Grassini, Billington,
Catalani. Imagine our young
barrister's sense of his profound ignorance,
whilst he heard the merits of all
dead and living composers, singers, and
masters, decided upon by the Miss Falconers.
By degrees he began to see a
little through the palpable obscure, by
which he had at first felt himself surrounded:
he discerned that he was in a
committee of the particular friends of the
Miss Falconers, who were settling what
they should sing and play. All, of
course, were flattering the Miss Falconers,
and abusing their absent friends,
those especially who were expected to
bear a part in this concert—For instance
—“Those two eternal Miss
Byngs, with voices like cracked bells,

and with their old-fashioned music.
Handel, Corelli, and Pergolese, horrid!
—And odious little Miss Crotch, who
has science but no taste, execution but
no judgment—Then her voice!—How
people can call it fine!—powerful if you
will—but overpowering!—For my part
I can't stand it, can you?—Every
body knows an artificial shake, when
good, is far superior to a natural shake
—As to the Miss Barhams, the eldest
has no more ear than the table, and the
youngest such a thread of a voice!”—
“But, Mamma,” interrupted Miss
Georgiana Falconer, “are the Miss La
Grandes to be here to night?”
“Certainly, my dear, you know I
could not avoid asking the Miss La
Grandes.”—
“Then, positively,” cried Miss Georgiana,
her whole face changing, and ill
humor swelling in every feature—
“Then, positively, ma'am, I can't, and
won't sing a note!”—

“Why, my dear love,” said Mrs.
Falconer, “surely you don't pretend to
be afraid of the Miss La Grandes.”
“You!”—cried one of the chorus of
flatterers—“You! to whom the La
Grandes are no more to be compared!...”
“Not but that they certainly sing
finely, I am told,” said Mrs. Falconer,
“yet I can't say I like their style of
singing,—and knowledge of music, you
know, they don't pretend to.”
“Why! that's true,” said Miss Georgiana,
“but still, somehow, I can never
bring out my voice before those girls
—If I have any voice at all, it is in the
lower part, and Miss La Grande always
chooses the lower part—Besides, Ma'am,
you know she regularly takes ‘O Giove
Omnipotente’ from me—But I should not
mind that even, if she would not attempt
poor ‘Quanto Oh quanto è amor possente’ 
—There's no standing that! Now,
really, to hear that so spoiled by Miss
La Grande.”
“Hush! my dear,” said Mrs. Falconer,

just as Mrs. La Grande appeared
—“Oh! my good Mrs. La Grande,
how kind is this of you to come to me
with your poor head!—And Miss La
Grande and Miss Eliza—We are so
much obliged to you, for you know that
we could not have done without you.”
The Miss La Grandes were soon followed
by the Miss Barhams and Miss
Crotch, and they were all “so good, and
so kind, and such dear creatures”—But
after the first forced compliments, silence
and reserve spread among the
young ladies of the Miss Falconers’ party.
It was evident, that the fair professors
were mutually afraid and envious
of each other, and there was little prospect
of harmony of temper at this concert.
—At length the gentlemen arrived
—Count Altenberg appeared, and
came up to pay his compliments to the
Miss Falconers. As he had not been behind
the scenes, all was charming illusion
to his eyes.—No one could appear more
good-humored, agreeable, and amiable

than Miss Georgiana Falconer; she was
in delightful spirits, well dressed, and admirably
supported by her mother. The
concert began. But who can describe
the anxiety of the rival mothers, each in
agonies to have their daughters brought
forward and exhibited to the best advantage.
Some grew pale, some red,
all according to their different powers of
self-command, and address endeavored
to conceal their feelings. Mrs. Falconer
now shone superior in ease inimitable.
She appeared absolutely unconcerned
for her own daughter, quite intent upon
bringing into notice the talents of the
Miss Barhams, Miss Crotch, the Miss
La Grandes, &c.
These young ladies in their turn knew
and practised the various arts, by which
at a musical party the unfortunate mistress
of the house may be tormented. Some,
who were sensible that the company were
anxious for their performance, chose to
be “quite out of voice,” till they had been
pressed and flattered into acquiescence;

one sweet bashful creature must absolutely
be forced to the instrument, as a
new Speaker of the House of Commons
was formerly dragged to the chair. Then
the instrument was not what one young
lady was used to; the lights were so placed,
that another who was near-sighted could
not see a note—another could not endure
such a glare. One could not sing
unless the windows were all open—another
could not play unless they were all
shut. With perfect complaisance Mrs.
Falconer ordered the windows to be
opened and shut, and again opened and
shut; with admirable patience she was,
or seemed to be, the martyr to the caprices
of the fair musicians. While all
the time she so manœuvred as to divide,
and govern, and finally to have every
thing arranged as she pleased. None
but a perfectly cool stander-by, and one
previously acquainted with Mrs. Falconer's
character, could have seen all
that Alfred saw. Perhaps the interest he
began to take about Count Altenberg,

who was the grand object of all her operations,
increased his penetration. While
the Count was engaged in earnest political
conversation in one of the inner rooms
with the Commissioner, Mrs. Falconer
besought the Miss La Grandes to favor
the company. It was impossible for them
to resist her polite entreaties. Next she
called upon Miss Crotch, and the Miss Barhams,
and she contrived, that they should
sing and play, and play and sing, till they
had exhausted the admiration and complaisance
of the auditors. Then she relieved
attention with some slight things from
Miss Arabella Falconer, such as could
excite no sensation or envy. Presently,
after walking about the room, carelessly
joining different conversation parties, and
saying something obliging to each, she
approached the Count and the Commissioner.
Finding that the Commissioner
had finished all he had to say, she began
to reproach him for keeping the Count
so long from the ladies, and leading him,
as she spoke, to the piano-forte, she declared,

that he had missed such charming
things.—“She could not ask Miss
Crotch to play any more, till she had
rested—Georgiana! for want of something
better, do try what you can give
us—she will appear to great disadvantage
of course—My dear, I think we have
not had O Giove Omnipotente.”
“I am not equal to that, Ma'am,” 
said Georgiana, drawing back, “you
should call upon Miss La Grande.”
“True, my love, but Miss La Grande
has been so very obliging, I could not
ask. ... Try it, my love—I am not
surprised you should be diffident after
what we have heard ... but the
Count, I am sure, will make allowances.”
With amiable and becoming diffidence
Miss Georgiana was compelled to comply
—The Count was surprised and
charmed by her voice—Then she was
prevailed upon to try “Quanto O quanto
è amor possente”—The Count, who
was enthusiastically fond of music, seemed
quite enchanted, and Mrs. Falconer

took care, that he should have this impression
left full and strong upon his
mind—Supper was announced—The
Count was placed at the table between
Mrs. Falconer and Mrs. Lady Trant; 
but just as they were sitting down, Mrs.
Falconer called to Georgiana, who was
going, much against her will, to another
table.
“Take my place, my dear Georgiana,
for you know I never eat supper.”
Georgiana's countenance, which had
been black as night, became all radiant instantly.
She took her mamma's place beside
the Count. Mrs. Falconer walked about
all supper time smiling, and saying obliging
things with self-satisfied grace. She
had reason indeed to be satisfied with the
success of this night's operations. Never
once did she appear to look towards the
Count, or her daughter, but assuredly she
saw that things were going on as she wished.
In the mean time Alfred Percy was as
heartily tired by the exhibitions of this

evening, as were many fashionable young
men, who had been loud in their praises
of the performers. Perhaps Alfred was
not however a perfectly fair judge, as he
was disappointed in his own manœuvres,
not having been able to obtain two minutes'
conversation with the Count during
the whole evening. In a letter to
Rosamond, the next day, he said, that
Mrs. Falconer's concert had been very
dull, and he observed that
“People can see more of one another
in a single day in the country, than they
can in a year in town.” He was further
very eloquent “on the folly of
meeting in crowds to say commonplace
nothings to people you do not
care for, and to see only the outsides
of those with whom you desire to
converse.”
“Just as I was writing this sentence,” 
continues Alfred,—“Count
Altenberg called—how fortunate—how
obliging of him to come so early, before
I went to the courts. He has put me

into good humor again with the whole
world—even with the Miss Falconers— 
He came to take leave of me—He is
going down to the country—with whom
do you think?—With Lord Oldborough,
during the recess. Did I not tell you, that
Lord Oldborough would like him—that
is, would find that he has information,
and can be useful.—I hope you will all
see the Count; indeed I am sure you
will. He politely spoke of paying his
respects to my father, by whom his ship-wrecked
countrymen had been so hospitably
succoured in their distress—I told
him, that our family no longer lived in the
same place; that we had been obliged
to retire to a small estate, in a distant
part of the county—I did not trouble
him with the history of our family
misfortunes; nor did I even mention
how the shipwreck, and the carelessness
of the Dutch sailors had occasioned the
fire at Percy Hall—though I was tempted
to tell him this when I was speaking
of M. de Tourville.

“I forgot to tell my father, that this
morning, when I went with the Count
to Lord Oldborough's, among a heap of
books of heraldry, with which his table
was covered, I spied an old book of my
father's on the arte of deciphering, which
he had lent Commissioner Falconer years
ago. Lord Oldborough, whose eye is
quick as a hawk's, saw my eye turn towards
it, and he asked me if I knew any
thing of that book, or of the art of deciphering
—Nothing of the art, but
something of the book, which I recollected
to be my father's—His Lordship
put it into my hands, and I showed some
pencil notes of my father's writing.— 
Lord Oldborough seemed surprised—and
said, he did not know this had been
among the number of your studies—I
told him, that you had once been much
intent upon Wilkins and Leibnitz's
scheme of a universal language, and
that I believed this had led you to the
art of deciphering—He repeated the
words ‘Universal language’—Ha!—

Then I suppose it was from Mr. Percy,
that Commissioner Falconer learnt all
he knew on this subject’—
“I believe so, my Lord”—
“Ha!”—He seemed lost for a moment
in thought, and then added— ‘I
wish I had known this sooner—Ha!’
“What these Haes meant, I was unable
to decipher—but I am sure they
related to some matter very interesting to
him—He explained himself no further,
but immediately turned away from me to
the Count, and began to talk of the affairs
of his court, and of M. de Tourville,
of whom he seems to have some
knowledge I suppose through the means
of his envoy, Cunningham Falconer.
“I understand, that a prodigious
party is invited to Falconer-Court. The
Count asked me if I was to be one of
them, and seemed to wish it—I like him
much—They are to have balls, and
plays, and great doings—If I have time
I will write to morrow, and tell you who
goes, and give you a sketch of their characters

—Mrs. Falconer cannot well avoid
asking you to some of her entertainments,
and it will be pleasant to you to know
who's who beforehand.”