

When Belinda got home, lady
Delacour was busy in the library, looking
over a collection of French plays with
the ci-devant comte de N&wblank;; a gentleman
who possessed such singular talents
for reading dramatic compositions, that
many people declared that they would
rather hear him read a play, than see it
performed at the theatre. Even those
who were not judges of his merit, and
who had little taste for literature, crowded

to hear him because it was the fashion.— 
Lady Delacour engaged him for a reading
party at her house, and he was
consulting with her what play would be
most amusing to his audience.—“My
dear Belinda! I am glad you are come to
give us your opinion,” said her ladyship,
“no one has a better taste: but first I
should ask you what you have done at
your bird-fancier's; I hope you have
brought home some horned cock , or some
monstrously beautiful creature for Marriott.
If it has not a voice like the
macaw I shall be satisfied; but even if it
be the bird of paradise, I question whether
Marriott will like it as well as its screaming
predecessor.”
“I am sure she will like what is coming
for her,” said Belinda, “and so will your
ladyship; but do not let me interrupt you
and monsieur le comte.” And, as she
spoke, she took up a volume of plays
which lay upon the table.
“Nanine, or La Prude? which shall we

have?” said lady Delacour: “or what do
you think of L'Ecossaise?”
“The scene of L'Ecossaise is laid in London,” 
said Belinda; “I should think with
an English audience it would therefore
be popular.”
‘Yes! so it will,” said lady Delacour:
“then let it be L'Ecossaise. M. le comte
I am sure will do justice to the character
of Friport the Englishman, ‘qui
sçEait donner, mais qui ne sçait pas vivre.’ 
My dear, I forgot to tell you that Clarence
Hervey has been here: it is a pity
you did not come a little sooner, you
would have heard a charming scene of the
School for Scandal read by him.—M. le
comte was quite delighted—but Clarence
was in a great hurry, he would only
give us one scene, he was going to Mr.
Percival's on business.—I am sure what
I told you the other day is true:—but,
however, he has promised to come back
to dine with me—M. le comte, you will
dine with us, I hope?”
The count was extremely sorry that it

was impossible—he was engaged.—Belinda
suddenly recollected that it was
time to dress for dinner; but just as the
count took his leave, and as she was going
up stairs, a footman met her, and told
her that Mr. Hervey was in the drawing-room,
and wished to speak to her. Many
conjectures were formed in Belinda's
mind as she passed on to the drawing-room; 
but the moment that she opened
the door, she knew the nature of Mr.
Hervey's business, for she saw the glass
globe containing Helena Delacour's gold
fishes standing on the table beside him.
“I have been commissioned to present
these to you for lady Delacour,” said Mr.
Hervey; “and I have seldom received a
commission that has given me so much
pleasure—I perceive that miss Portman
is indeed a real friend to lady Delacour
—How happy she is to have such a
friend!”
After a pause Mr. Hervey went on
speaking of lady Delacour, and of his
earnest desire to see her as happy in domestic

life as she appeared to be in public.
He frankly confessed, that when
he was first acquainted with her ladyship,
he had looked upon her merely as a dissipated
woman of fashion, and he had considered
only his own amusement in cultivating
her society—“But,” continued he,
“of late I have formed a different opinion
of her character; and I think, from what
I have observed, that miss Portman's
ideas on this subject agree with mine.
I had laid a plan for bringing her ladyship
acquainted with lady Anne Percival, who
appears to me one of the most amiable
and one of the happiest of women.
Oakly-park is but a few miles from Harrowgate
—But I am disappointed in this
scheme; lady Delacour has changed her
mind, she says, and will not go there.
Lady Anne, however, has just told me,
that, though it is July, and though she
loves the country, she will most willingly
stay in town a month longer, as she thinks
that, with your assistance, there is some
probability of her effecting a reconciliation

between lady Delacour and her
husband's relations, with some of whom
lady Anne is intimately acquainted. To
begin with my friend Mrs. Margaret
Delacour: the macaw was most graciously
received, and I flatter myself that
I have prepared Mrs. Delacour to think
somewhat more favorably of her niece
than she was wont to do. All now depends
upon lady Delacour's conduct
towards her daughter—If she continues
to treat her with neglect, I shall be convinced
that I have been mistaken in her
character.”
Belinda was much pleased by the
openness and the unaffected good nature
with which Clarence Hervey spoke, and
she certainly was not sorry to hear from
his own lips a distinct explanation of his
views and sentiments. She assured him
that no effort that she could make with
propriety should be wanting, to effect
the desirable reconciliation between her
ladyship and her family; as she perfectly
agreed with him in thinking, that lady

Delacour's character had been generally
misunderstood by the world.
“Yes,” said Mr. Hervey, “her connexion
with that Mrs. Freke hurt her
more in the eyes of the world, than she
was aware of. It is tacitly understood
by the public, that every lady goes bail
for the character of her female friends.
If lady Delacour had been so fortunate,
as to meet with such a friend as miss
Portman in her early life, what a different
woman she would have been!—She
once said some such thing to me herself,
and she never appeared to me so amiable
as at that moment.”
Mr. Hervey pronounced these last words
in a manner more than usually animated; 
and whilst he spoke, Belinda stooped to
gather a sprig from a myrtle, which stood
on the hearth. She perceived that the
myrtle, which was planted in a large
china vase, was propped up on one side
with the broken bits of sir Philip Baddely's
little stick: she took them up, and
threw them out of the window.—“Lady

Delacour stuck those fragments there this
morning,” said Clarence, smiling, “as
trophies. She told me of miss Portman's
victory over the heart of sir Philip Baddely; 
and miss Portman should certainly
have allowed them to remain there, as
indisputable evidence in favour of the
baronet's taste and judgment.”
Clarence Hervey appeared under some
embarrassment, and seemed to be restrained
by some secret cause from laying
open his real feelings: his manner
varied continually.—Belinda could not
avoid seeing his perplexity—she had recourse
again to the gold fishes, and to
Helena: upon these subjects they could
both speak very fluently. Lady Delacour
made her appearance by the time
that Clarence had finished repeating the
abbé Nollet's experiments, which he
had heard from his friend doctor X&wblank;.
“Now, miss Portman, the transmission
of sound in water,” said Clarence— 
“Deep in philosophy, I protest!” said
lady Delacour, as she came in: “What is

this about the transmission of sound in
water?—Ha! whence come these pretty
gold fishes?”
“These gold fishes,” said Belinda, “are
come to console Marriott for the loss of
her macaw.”
“Thank you, my dear Belinda! for
these mute comforters,” said her ladyship— 
‘The very best things you could
have chosen!”
“I have not the merit of the choice,” 
said Belinda, “but I am heartily glad
that you approve of it.”
“Pretty creatures!” said lady Delacour:
“no fish were ever so pretty since the
days of the prince of the Black Islands
in the Arabian Tales. And am I obliged
to you, Clarence, for these subjects?”
“No; I have only had the honour of
bringing them to your ladyship from—” 
“From whom?—Amongst all my numerous
acquaintance, have I one in the
world who cares a gold fish about me?— 
Stay—don't tell me, let me guess— 
Lady Newland?—No. You shake

your heads—I guessed her ladyship
merely because I know she wants to
bribe me some way or other to go to one
of her stupid entertainments; she wants
to pick out of me taste enough to spend
a fortune. But, you say it was not lady
Newland?—Mrs. Hunt, then, perhaps; 
for she has two daughters whom she
wants me to ask to my concerts?—It was
not Mrs. Hunt?—Well, then, it was Mrs.
Masterson; for she has a mind to go with
me to Harrowgate, where, by the by, I
shall not go—so I won't cheat her out of
her gold fishes—It was Mrs. Masterson,
ay?”
“No. But these little gold fishes came
from a person, who would be very glad to
go with you to Harrowgate,” said Clarence
Hervey—“or who would be very
glad to stay with you in town,” said Belinda
—“from a person who wants nothing
from you but—your love.”
“Male or female?” said lady Delacour.
“Female.”
“Female? I have not a female friend

in the world but yourself, my dear Belinda!
nor do I know another female in
the world, whose love I should think
about for half an instant. But pray tell
me the name of this unknown friend of
mine, who wants nothing from me but
love?”
“Excuse me,” said Belinda; “I cannot
tell her name, unless you will promise to
see her.”
“You have really made me impatient
to see her,” said lady Delacour; “but I
am not able to go out, you know, yet; 
and with a new acquaintance one must
go through the ceremony of a morning
visit, &c.—Now, en conscience, is it worth
while?”
“Very well worth while,” cried Belinda
and Clarence Hervey eagerly.
“Ah pardi!” as M. le comte exclaims
continually—“Ah pardi! You are
both wonderfully interested in this business.
—It is some sister, niece, or cousin,
of lady Anne Percival's—or—No; Belinda
looks as if I were wrong.—Then, perhaps,

it is lady Anne herself?—Well, take me
where you please, my dear Belinda! and
introduce me where you please; I depend
on your taste and judgment in all
things; but I really am not yet able to
pay morning visits.”
“The ceremony of a morning visit is
quite unnecessary here,” said Belinda:
“I will introduce the unknown friend to
you to morrow, if you will let me invite
her to your reading party.”
“With pleasure. She is some charming
émigrée of Clarence Hervey's acquaintance.
But where did you meet with
her this morning?—You have both of you
conspired to puzzle me.—Take it upon
yourselves, then, if this new acquaintance
should not, as Ninon de l'Enclos
used to say, quit coft.—If she be half
as agreeable and graceful, Clarence,
as madame la comtesse de Pomenars,
I should not think her acquaintance too
dearly purchased by a dozen morning
visits.”

Here the conversation was interrupted
by a thundering knock at the door.
“Whose carriage is it?” said lady Delacour
—“O! lady Newland's ostentatious
livery; and here is her ladyship
getting out of her carriage as awkwardly,
as if she had never been in one before.— 
Overdressed like a true city dame!—Pray,
Clarence, look at her, entangled in her
bale of gold muslin, and conscious of
her bulse of diamonds!—‘Worth, if I'm
worth a farthing, five hundred thousand
pounds Bank currency!’ she says, or
seems to say, whenever she comes into
a room.—Now let us see her entrée.
“But, my dear!” cried lady Delacour,
starting at the sight of Belinda, who
was still in her morning dress—“Absolutely
below par!—Make your escape to
Marriott, I conjure you; by all your
fears of the contempt of a lady, who
will at the first look estimate you, au
juste, to a farthing a yard.”
As she left the room, Belinda heard

Clarence Hervey repeat to lady Delacour— 
“Give me a look, give me a face,
That makes simplicity a grace;
Robes loosely flowing, hair as free—”
he paused—but Belinda recollected the
remainder of the stanza— 
“Such sweet neglect more taketh me
Than all th' adulteries of art,
That strike mine eyes, but not mine heart.”
It was observed, that miss Portman
dressed herself this day with the most
perfect simplicity.
Lady Delacour's curiosity was raised
by the description which Belinda and
Clarence Hervey had given of the new
acquaintance who sent her the gold
fishes, and who wanted nothing from
her but her love.
Miss Portman told her, that the unknown
would probably come half an
hour earlier to the reading party than

any of the rest of the company. Her
ladyship was alone in the library, when
lady Anne Percival brought Helena, in
consequence of a note from Belinda.
Miss Portman ran down stairs to the hall
to receive her: the little girl took her hand
in silence.—“Your mother was much
pleased with the pretty gold fishes,” said
Belinda, “and she will be still more
pleased, when she knows that they came
from you:—she does not know that yet.”
“I hope she is better to day? I will
not make the least noise,” whispered Helena,
as she went up stairs on tiptoe.
“You need not be afraid to make a
noise—you need not walk on tiptoe, nor
shut the doors softly; for lady Delacour
seems to like all noises except the screaming
of the macaw.—This way, my dear.”
“O, I forgot—it is so long since!
—Is mamma up and dressed?”
“Yes. She has had concerts and balls
since her illness.—You will hear a play
read to night,” said Belinda, “by
that French gentleman whom lady

Anne Percival mentioned to me yesterday.”
“But is there a great deal of company,
then, with mamma?”
“Nobody is with her now: so come
into the library with me,” said Belinda.
—“Lady Delacour, here is the young lady
who sent you the gold fishes.”
“Helena!” cried lady Delacour.
“You must, I am sure, acknowledge
that Mr. Hervey was in the right, when
he said that the lady was a striking resemblance
of your ladyship.”
“Mr. Hervey knows how to flatter.
I never had that ingenuous countenance,
even in my best days—But certainly the
air of her head is like mine—and her
hands and arms—But why do you tremble,
Helena? Is there any thing so very
terrible in the looks of your mother?”
“No, only—” 
“Only what, my dear?”
“Only—I was afraid—you might not
like me.”
“Who has filled your little foolish head

with these vain fears?—Come, simpleton,
kiss me—and tell me how comes it that
you are not at Oakly-hall;—or—what's
the name of the place?—Oakly-park?”
“Lady Anne Percival would not take
me out of town, she said, whilst you
were ill; because she thought that you
might wish—I mean she thought that I
should like, to see you—if you pleased.”
“Lady Anne is very good—very obliging
—very considerate.”
“She is very good natured,” said Helena.
“You love this lady Anne Percival, I
perceive.”
“O yes, that I do. She had been so
kind to me! I love her as if she
were—” 
“As if she were—What?—Finish your
sentence.”
“My mother,”—said Helena, in a
low voice, and she blushed.
“You love her as well as if she were
your mother,”—repeated lady Delacour:
“that is intelligible: speak intelligibly

whatever you say, and never leave a sentence
unfinished.”
“No, ma'am.”
“Nothing can be more ill-bred, nor
more absurd; for it shows that you
have the wish without the power to conceal
your sentiments.—Pray, my dear!” 
continued lady Delacour, “go to Oakly-park
immediately—all further ceremony
towards me may be spared.”
“Ceremony, mamma!” said the little
girl, and the tears came into her eyes— 
Belinda sighed; and for some moments
there was a dead silence.
“I mean only to say, miss Portman,” 
resumed lady Delacour, “that I hate ceremony:
but I know that there are
people in the world who love it, who
think all virtue, and all affection, depend
on ceremony—who are
“Content to dwell in decencies for ever.”
“I shall not dispute their merits.
Verily, they have their reward in the

good opinion and good word of all little
minds; that is to say, of above half the
world. I envy them not their hard-earned
fame. Let ceremony curtsy to ceremony
with Chinese decorum; but, when ceremony
expects to be paid with affection,
I beg to be excused.”
“Ceremony sets no value upon affection,
and therefore would not desire to
be paid with it,” said Belinda.
“Never yet,” continued lady Delacour,
pursuing the train of her own thoughts
without attending to Belinda,—“never
yet was any thing like real affection
won by any of these ceremonious people.”
“Never,” said miss Portman, looking
at Helena; who, having quickness enough
to perceive, that her mother aimed this
tirade against ceremony at lady Anne
Percival, sat in the most painful embarrassment,
her eyes cast down, and her
face and neck colouring all over.—“Never
yet,” said miss Portman, “did a mere
ceremonious person win any thing like
real affection; especially from children,

who are often excellent, because unprejudiced,
judges of character.”
“We are all apt to think, that an opinion
that differs from our own is a prejudice,” 
said lady Delacour—“What is to
decide?”
“Facts, I should think,” said Belinda.
“But it is so difficult to get at facts,
even about the merest trifles,” said
lady Delacour.—“Actions we see, but
their causes we seldom see—An aphorism
worthy of Confucius himself—Now
to apply:—Pray, my dear Helena! how
came you by the pretty gold fishes, that
you were so good as to send to me yesterday?”
“Lady Anne Percival gave them to
me, ma'am.”
“And how came her ladyship to give
them to you, ma'am?”
“She gave them to me,” said Helena
hesitating.
“You need not blush, nor repeat to
me that she gave them to you; that I
have heard already—that is the fact—

now for the cause: unless it be a secret.
—If it be a secret, which you have been
desired to keep, you are quite right
to keep it.—I make no doubt of it's
being necessary, according to some systems
of education, that children should
be taught to keep secrets; and I am convinced
(for lady Anne Percival is, I have
heard, a perfect judge of propriety) that
it is peculiarly proper that a daughter
should know how to keep secrets from
her mother:—therefore, my dear! you
need not trouble yourself to blush or hesitate
any more—I shall ask no farther
questions.—I was not aware, that there
was any secret in the case.”
“There is no secret in the world in
the case, mamma,” said Helena; “I only
hesitated because—” 
“You hesitated only because, I suppose,
you mean.—I presume lady Anne
Percival will have no objection to your
speaking good English?”
“I hesitated only because I was afraid
it would not be right to praise myself.

Lady Anne Percival one day asked us
all—”
“Us all?”
“I mean Charles, and Edward, and me,
to give her an account of some experiments
on the hearing of fishes, which
doctor X&wblank;had told to us; she promised
to give the gold fishes, of which
we were all very fond, to whichever of
us should give the best account of them
—lady Anne gave the fishes to me.”
“And is this all the secret?—So, it
was real modesty made her hesitate, Belinda?
I beg your pardon, my dear—and
lady Anne's—You see how candid I am,
Belinda. But one question more, Helena:
Who put it into your head to send me
your gold fishes?”
“Nobody, mamma; no one put it into
my head—But I was at the bird-fancier's
yesterday, when miss Portman was trying
to get some bird for Mrs. Marriott, that
could not make any noise to disturb you:
so I thought my fishes would be the nicest
things for you in the world; because

they cannot make the least noise, and
they are as pretty as any birds in the
world—prettier, I think—and I hope
Mrs. Marriott thinks so too.”
“I don't know what Marriott thinks
about the matter, but I can tell you what
I think,” said lady Delacour, “that you
are one of the sweetest little girls in the
world, and that you would make me love
you if I had a heart of stone—which I
have not, whatever some people may
think—Kiss me, my child!”
The little girl sprang forwards, and
threw her arms round her mother, exclaiming
—“Oh, mamma! are you in earnest?” 
and she pressed close to her mother's
bosom, clasping her with all her force.
Lady Delacour screamed, and pushed
her daughter away.
“She is not angry with you, my love!” 
said Belinda, “she is in sudden and violent
pain—Don't be alarmed—she will be
better soon. No—don't ring the bell, but
try whether you can open these window-shutters,
and throw up the sash.”

Whilst Belinda was supporting lady
Delacour, and whilst Helena was trying
to open the window, a servant came into
the room, to announce the count de
N&wblank;.
“Show him into the drawing-room,” 
said Belinda.—Lady Delacour, though
in great pain, rose and retired to her
dressing-room.—“I shall not be able to
go down to these people yet,” said she; 
“you must make my excuses to the count
and every body; and tell poor Helena
I was not angry, though I pushed her
away. Keep her below stairs, I will
come as soon I am able—Send Marriott— 
Do not forget, my dear! to tell Helena I
was not angry.”
The reading party went on, and lady
Delacour made her appearance as the
company were drinking orgeat, between
the fourth and fifth act. “Helena, my
dear!” said she, “will you bring me a
glass of orgeat?”—Clarence Hervey looked
at Belinda with a congratulatory
smile:—“Do not you think,” whispered

he, “that we shall succeed? Did you see
that look of lady Delacour's?”
Nothing tends more to increase the
esteem and affection of two people for
each other, than their having one and
the same benevolent object. Clarence
Hervey and Belinda seemed to know
one another's thoughts and feelings this
evening, better than they had ever done
before during the whole course of their
acquaintance.
After the play was over, most of the
company went away; only a select party
of beaux esprits staid to supper; they were
standing at the table at which the count
had been reading: several volumes of
French plays and novels were lying
there, and Clarence Hervey, raking up
one of them, cried: “Come, let us try our
fate by the sortes Virgilianæ.”
Lady Delacour opened the book, which
was a volume of Marmontel's Tales.
“La femme commeily en a peu!” exclaimed
Hervey.
“Who will ever more have faith

in the sortes Virgilianæ?” said lady
Delacour laughing: but whilst she
laughed she went closer to a candle, to
read the page which she had opened.
Belinda and Clarence Hervey followed
her. “Really, it is somewhat singular,
Belinda, that I should have opened upon
this passage,” continued she in a low
voice, pointing it out to miss Portman.
It was a description of the manner in
which la femme comme il y en a peu
managed a husband, who was excessively
afraid of being thought to be governed
by his wife. As her ladyship turned over
the page, she saw a leaf of myrtle which
Belinda, who had been reading the story
the preceding day, had put into the book
for a mark.
“Whose mark is this? Yours, Belinda, I
am sure, by it's elegance,” said lady Delacour.
“So! this is a concerted plan between
you two, I see,” continued her
ladyship with an air of pique—“you
have contrived prettily de me dire des
vérités! One says, ‘Let us try our fate by

the sortes Virgilianæ:’—the other has dexterously
put a mark in the book, to make
it open upon a lesson for the naughty
child.”
Belinda and Mr. Hervey assured her,
that they had used no such mean arts— 
that nothing had been concerted between
them.
“How came this leaf of myrtle here,
then?” said lady Delacour.
“I was reading that story yesterday,
and I left it as my mark.”
“I cannot help believing you, because
you never yet deceived me, even
in the merest trifle:—you are truth itself,
Belinda.—Well, you see that you were
the cause of my drawing such an extraordinary
lot; the book would not have
opened here but for your mark. My fate,
I find, is in your hands: if lady Delacour
is ever to be la femme comme il y en a
peu, which is the most improbable thing
in the world, miss Portman will be the
cause of it.”
“Which is the most probable thing in

the world,” said Clarence Hervey. “This
myrtle has a delightful perfume,” added
he, rubbing the leaf between his fingers.
“But, after all,” said lady Delacour,
throwing aside the book, “this heroine
of Marmontel's is not la femme comme
il y en a peu,—but la femme comme il
n'y en a point.”
“Mrs. Margaret Delacour's carriage,
my lady, for miss Delacour!”—said a footman
to her ladyship.
“Helena stays with me to night,—my
compliments,”—said lady Delacour.— 
“How pleased the little gipsey looks!” 
added she, turning to Helena, who heard
the message, “and how handsome she
looks when she is pleased!—Do these auburn
locks of yours, Helena, curl naturally
or artificially?”
“Naturally, mamma.”
“Naturally?—So much the better. So
did mine at your age.”
Some of the company now took notice
of the astonishing resemblance between
Helena and her mother; and the more

lady Delacour considered her daughter
as a part of herself, the more she was inclined
to be pleased with her. The glass
globe containing the gold fishes was
put in the middle of the table at supper; 
and Clarence Hervey never paid her ladyship
such respectful attention in his life,
as he did this evening.
The conversation at supper turned upon
a magnificent and elegant entertainment
which had lately been given by a fashionable
duchess, and some of the company
spoke in high terms of the beauty and
accomplishments of her grace's daughter,
who had for the first time appeared in
public on that occasion.
“The daughter will eclipse, totally
eclipse, the mother,” said lady Delacour.
“That total eclipse has been foretold by
many knowing people,” said Clarence
Hervey; “but how can there be an eclipse
between two bodies which never cross
one another?—And that I understand to
be the case between the duchess and
her daughter.”

This observation seemed to make a
great impression upon lady Delacour.
Clarence Hervey went on, and with much
eloquence expressed his admiration of
the mother, who had stopped short in
the career of dissipation to employ her
inimitable talents in the education of her
children; who had absolutely brought
virtue into fashion by the irresistible
powers of wit and beauty.
“Really, Clarence,” said lady Delacour,
rising from table, “vous parlez
avec beaucoup d'onction. I advise you
to write a sentimental comedy, a comédie
larmoyante, or a drama on the German
model, and call it The School for
Mothers, and beg her grace of&wblank;to
sit for your heroine.”
“Your ladyship, surely, would not be
so cruel as to send a faithful servant a
begging for a heroine?” said Clarence
Hervey.
Lady Delacour smiled at first at the
compliment, but a few minutes afterward
she sighed bitterly. “It is too

late for me to think of being a heroine,” 
said she.
“Too late?” cried Hervey, following
her eagerly as she walked out of the
supper-room—“Too late?—Her grace
of&wblank;is some years older than your
ladyship.”
“Well,—I did not mean to say too
late,” said lady Delacour: “but let us go
on to something else—Why were not
you at the fête champétre the other day?
and where were you all this morning?— 
And pray can you tell me when your
friend doctor X&wblank;returns to town?”
“Mr. Horton is getting better,” said
Clarence, “and I hope that we shall
have doctor X&wblank;soon amongst us
again. I hear that he is to be in town in
the course of a few days.”
“Did he inquire for me?—Did he ask
how I did?”
“No. I fancy he took it for granted
that your ladyship was quite well; for I
told him you were getting better every

day, and that you were in charming
spirits.”
“Yes,” said lady Delacour, “but I
wear myself out with these charming
spirits. I am very nervous still, I assure
you, and sitting up late is not good for
me. So I shall wish you and all the
world a good night—You see I am absolutely
a reformed rake.”