

Curiosity was not, at this instant,
the strongest passion in Belinda's mind.
When the carriage stopped at Mrs. Delacour's
door, her heart almost ceased to
beat; but she summoned resolution to go
through, with firmness and dignity, the
task she had undertaken.
Clarence Hervey was not in the room
when they entered, nor was Virginia: Mrs.
Ormond said, that she had been extremely
feverish during the night, and that she
had advised her not to get up, till late in
the day. But Mrs. Delacour immediately
went for her, and in a few minutes she
made her appearance.
Belinda and lady Delacour exchanged a
glance of surprise and admiration. There

was a grace and simplicity in her manner,
joined to an air of naiveté, that made an
irresistible impression in her favour. Lady
Delacour, however, after the first surprise
was over, seemed to relapse into her former
opinion; and the piercing looks, which her
ladyship from time to time cast upon
Virginia as she spoke, produced their effect.
She was abashed and silent. Belinda
endeavoured to engage her in conversation,
and to her she talked with ease, and even
with freedom. Virginia examined miss
Portman's countenance with a species of
artless curiosity and interest, that was not
restrained by factitious politeness. This
examination was not peculiarly agreeable
to Belinda, yet it was made with so much
apparent simplicity, that she could not be
displeased.
On the first pause in the conversation,
Mrs. Delacour said, “Pray, my dear lady
Delacour, what is this wonderful present
that you sent to me this morning, which
you desire that no one should see, till you
came?”

“I cannot satisfy your curiosity yet,” 
replied lady Delacour. “I must wait till
Clarence Hervey comes, for the present is
intended for him.”
An air of solemn mystery in her ladyship's
manner, as she pronounced these
words, excited general attention. There
was a dead silence, which lasted several
minutes: some feeble attempts were then
made by each of the company, to start a
fresh subject of conversation; but it would
not do—all relapsed into the silence of expectation.
At last, Clarence Hervey arrived.
Belinda rejoiced, that the universal
curiosity, which lady Delacour had inspired,
prevented any one's observing the
sudden change in Mr. Hervey's countenance,
when he beheld her.
“A pretty set of curious children you
are!” cried lady Delacour, laughing. “Do
you know, Clarence, that they are all
dying with impatience, to see un gage
d' amitié that I have brought for you; 
and the reason that they are so curious is
simply, because I had the address to say,

in a solemn voice, ‘I cannot satisfy your
curiosity, till Clarence Hervey arrives.’ 
Now, follow me, my friends; and if you
be disappointed, lay the blame not to me,
but to your own imaginations.”
She led the way to Mrs. Delacour's
dressingroom, and all the company followed.
“Now, what do you expect to see?” 
said she, putting the key into the door.
After waiting some moments for a reply,
but in vain, she threw open the door, and
they saw, hung before the wall opposite to
them, a green curtain.
“I thought, my dear Clarence,” resumed
lady Delacour, “that no present
could be more agreeable to you, than a
companion for your Virginia. Does this
figure,” continued she, drawing back the
curtain—“does this figure give you the
idea of Paul?”
At these words Virginia turned her eyes
upon the picture—uttered a piercing
shriek, and fell senseless upon the floor.
“Take it coolly,” said lady Delacour,

“and she will come to her senses presently.
Young ladies must shriek and faint
upon certain occasions; but men, (looking
at Clarence Hervey) need not always be
dupes. This is only a scene; consider it
as such, and admire the actress as I do.”
“Actress! O, she is no actress!” cried
Mrs. Ormond.
Clarence Hervey raised her from the
ground, and Belinda sprinkled water over
her face.
“She's dead!—she's dead! O, my
sweet child! she's dead!” exclaimed Mrs.
Ormond, trembling so violently, that she
could not sustain Virginia's weight.
“She is no actress, indeed,” said Clarence
Hervey; “her pulse is gone!”
Lady Delacour looked at Virginia's pale
lips, touched her cold hands, and, with a
look of horrour, cried out, “Good Heavens!
what have I done? What shall we
do with her?”
“Give her air—give her air, air, air!” 
cried Belinda.
“You keep the air from her, Mrs. Ormond,”

said Mrs. Delacour. “Let us
leave her to miss Portman; she has more
presence of mind than any of us.” And
as she spoke, she forced Mrs. Ormond
away with her out of the room.
“If Mr. Hartley should come, keep
him with you, Mrs. Delacour,” said Clarence
Hervey. “Is her pulse quite
gone?”
“No; it beats stronger and stronger,” 
said Belinda.
“Her colour is returning,” said lady
Delacour. “There! raise her a little,
dear Belinda; she is coming to herself.”
“Had not you better draw the curtain
again before that picture,” said miss
Portman; “lest she should see it, the moment
that she opens her eyes?”
Virginia came slowly to her recollection,
saw lady Delacour drawing the curtain before
the picture, then fixed her eyes upon
Clarence Hervey, without uttering a word.
“Are you better now?” said he, in a
gentle tone.

“O, do not speak—do not look so
kindly!” cried Virginia. “I am well— 
quite well—better than I deserve to be”— 
and she pressed Belinda's hand, as if to
thank her for assisting and supporting her.
“We may safely leave her now,”whispered
Belinda to lady Delacour; “we are
strapgers, and our presence only distresses
her.”
They withdrew. But the moment Virginia
found herself alone with Mr. Hervey,
she was seized with an universal tremout; 
she tried to speak, but could not
articulate. At last, she burst into a flood
of tears; and when this had in some measure
relieved her, she threw herself upon
her knees, and clasping her hands, exclaimed,
as she looked up to Heaven—
“O, if I knew what I ought to do!— 
if I knew what I ought to say!—”
“Shall I tell you, Virginia? And will
you believe me?”
“Yes, yes, yes!”
“You ought to say—the truth—whatever
it may be.”

“But you will think the most ungrateful
of human beings?”
“How often must I assure you, Virginia,
that I make no claim upon your gratitude.
Speak to me—I conjure you, as
you value your happiness and mine—speak
to me without disguise! What is all this
mystery? Why should you fear to let
me know what passes in your heart? Why
did you shrick at the sight of that picture?”
“O, forgive me! forgive me!” cried
Virginia; and she would have sunk at his
feet, if he had not prevented her.
“I will—I can forgive any thing, but
deceit. Do not look at me with so much
terrour, Virginia—I have not deserved it
—my wish is to make you happy—I would
sacrifice even my own happiness, to secure
yours—but do not mislead me; or you ruin
us both. Cannot you give me a distinct
answer to this simple question?—Why did
you shriek at the sight of that picture?”
“Because—but you will call me ‘perfidious,
ungrateful Virginia!’—because

I have seen that figure—he has knelt to
me—he has kissed my hand—and I—”
Clarence Hervey withdrew his arms,
which had supported her, and placing her
upon a sofa, left her, whilst he walked up
and down the room for some minutes, in
silence.
“And why, Virginia,” said he, stopping
short, “was it necessary to conceal
all this from me? Why was it necessary
to persuade me that I was beloved? Why
was it necessary that my happiness should
be the sacrifice?”
“It shall not!—it shall not! Your
happiness shall not be the sacrifice. Heaven
is my witness, that there is no sacrifice
I would not make for you. Forgive
me that shriek! I could not help fainting
indeed! But I will be yours; I ought to
be yours; and I am not perfidious, I am
not ungrateful; do not look upon me as
you did in my dream!”
“Do not talk to me of dreams, my
dear Virginia; this is no time for trifling;

I ask no sacrifice from you, I ask nothing
but truth.”
“Truth! Mrs. Ormond knows all the
truth. I have concealed nothing from
her.”
“But she has concealed every thing
from me,” cried Clarence; and, with a
sudden impulse of indignation, he was
going to summon her: but when his hand
was upon the lock of the door,! he paused,
returned to Virginia, and said, “Let me
hear the truth from your lips; it is all I
shall ever ask from you. How!—when!— 
where did you see this man?”
“What man?” said Virginia, looking
up, with the simple expression of innocence
in her countenance.
Clarence pointed to the picture.
“At the village in the New Forest, at
Mrs. Smith's house,” said Virginia, “one
evening when I walked with her from my
grandmother's cottage.”
“And your grandmother knew of this?”
“Yes,” said Virginia, blushing, “and
she was very much displeased.”

“And Mrs. Ormond knew of this?” 
pursued Clarence.
“Yes; but she told me that you would
not be displeased at it.”
Mr. Hervey made another hasty step
toward the door, but, restraining his impetuous
temper, he again stopped, and,
leaning over the back of a chair, opposite
to Virginia, waited in silence for her to
proceed.—He waited in vain.
“I do not mean to distress you, miss
Hartley,” said he.
She burst into tears.—“I knew, I
knew,” cried she, “that you would be displeased; 
I told Mrs. Ormond so. I knew
you would never forgive me.”
“In that you were mistaken,” said
Clarence, mildly; “I forgive you without
difficulty, as I hope you may forgive
yourself; nor can it be my wish to extort
from you any mortifying confessions. But,
perhaps, it may yet be in my power to
serve you, if you will trust to me. I will
myself speak to your father. I will do
every thing to secure to you the object of

your affections, if you will, in this last
moment of our connexion, treat me with
sincerity, and suffer me to be your friend.”
Virginia sobbed so violently for some
time, that she could not speak—at last
she said—
“You are—you are—the most generous
of men! You have always been my
best friend! I am the most ungrateful of
human beings! But I am sure I never
wished, I never intended, to deceive you.
Mrs. Ormond told me&wblank;”
“Do not speak of her at present, or
perhaps I may lose my temper,” interrupted
Clarence, in an altered voice; “only tell
me, I conjure you—tell me, in one word, who
is this man? and where is he to be found?”
“I do not know. I do not understand
you,” said Virginia.
“You do not know!—You will not
trust me—Then I must leave you to—to
Mr. Hartley.”
“Do not leave me—O, do not leave
me in anger!” cried Virginia, clinging to
him—“Not trust you!—I!—not trust

you!—O, what can you mean? I have no
confessions to make! Mrs. Ormond knows
every thought of my mind, and so shall
you, if you will only hear me. I do not
know who this man is, I assure you; nor
where he is to be found.”
“And yet you love him? Can you
love a man whom you do not know, Virginia?”
“I only love his figure, I believe,” 
said Virginia.
“His figure!”
“Indeed I am quite bewildered,” said
Virginia, looking round wildly; “I know
not what I feel.”
“If you permitted this man to kneel
to you, to kiss your hand, surely you
must know that you love him, Virginia?”
“But that was only in a dream; and
Mrs. Ormond said—”
“Only a dream! But you met him at
Mrs. Smith's, in the New Forest?”
“That was only a picture.”
“Only a picture!—but you have seen
the original?”

“Never—never in my life; and I wish
to Heaven I had never, never seen that fatal
picture! The image haunts me day and
night. When I read of heroes in the day,
that figure rises to my view, instead of
yours. When I go to sleep at night I see
it, instead of yours, in my dreams; it
speaks to me, it kneels to me. I long
ago told Mrs. Ormond this, but she
laughed at me. I told her of that frightful
dream. I saw you weltering in your
blood; I tried to save you, but could
not. I heard you say, ‘Perfidious, ungrateful
Virginia! you are the cause of
my death!’ O, it was the most dreadful
night I ever passed I Still this figure, this
picture, was before me; and he was
the knight of the white plumes; and it
was he who stabbed you: but when I
wished him to be victorious, I did not
know that he was fighting against you.
So Mrs. Ormond told me, that I need
not blame myself; and she said, that you
were not so foolish as to be jealous of a picture; 
but I knew you would be displeased—

I knew you would think me ungrateful— 
I knew you would never forgive me.”
Whilst Virginia rapidly uttered all this,
Clarence marked the wild animation of her
eyes, the sudden changes of her countenance; 
he recollected her father's insanity; 
every feeling of his mind gave way to terrour
and pity; he approached her with all
the calmness that he could assume, took
both her hands, and holding them in his,
said, in a soothing voice—
“My dear Virginia! you are not ungrateful.
I do not think you so. I am
not displeased with you. You have done
nothing to displease me. Compose yourself,
dear Virginia.”
“I am quite composed, now you again
call me dear Virginia. Only I am afraid,
as I always told Mrs. Ormond, that I do
not love you enough; but she said, that
I did, and that my thinking so was the
strongest proof of my affection.”
Virginia now spoke in so consistent a
manner, that Clarence could not doubt,
that she was in the clear possession of her

understanding. She repeated to him all
that she had said to Mrs. Ormond; and
he began to hope, that, without any intention
to deceive, Mrs. Ormond's ignorance
of the human heart led her into a
belief, that Virginia was in love with him; 
whilst, in fact, her imagination, exalted
by solitude and romance, embodied and
became enamoured of a phantom.
“I always told Mrs. Ormond, that she
was mistaken,” said Clarence. “I never
believed, that you loved me, Virginia,
till&wblank;(he paused, and carefully examined
her countenance)—till you yourself gave
me reason to think so. Was it only a
principle of gratitude, then, that dictated
your answer to my letter?”
She looked irresolute; and at last, in a
low voice, said—
“If I could see, if I could speak to
Mrs. Ormond—”
“She cannot tell what are the secret
feelings of your heart, Virginia. Consult
no Mrs. Ormond. Consult no human
creature but yourself.”

“But Mrs. Ormond told me, that you
loved me, and that you had educated me
to be your wife.”
Mr. Hervey made an involuntary exclamation
against Mrs. Ormond's folly.
“How, then, can you be happy,” continued
Virginia, “if I am so ungrateful as to say
I do not love you? That I do not love
you!—Oh! that I cannot say; for I
do love you, better than any one living,
except my father, and with the same sort
of affection that I feel for him. You ask
me to tell you the secret feelings of my
heart.—The only secret feeling, of which I
am conscious, is—a wish not to marry, unless
I could see in reality such a person as&wblank; 
But that I knew was only a picture,
a dream; and I thought, that I ought at
least to sacrifice my foolish imaginations
to you, who have done so much for me.
I knew that it would be the height of ingratitude
to refuse you; and besides, my
father told me, that you would not accept
of my fortune without my hand, so I consented
to marry you: forgive me, if these

were wrong motives, I thought them right.
Only tell me what I can do to make you
happy, as I am sure I wish to do; to that
wish I would sacrifice every other feeling.”
“Sacrifice nothing, dear Virginia. We
may both be happy without making any
sacrifice of our feelings,” cried Clarence.
And, transported at regaining his own freedom,
Virginia's simplicity never appeared
to him so charming as at this moment.— 
“Dearest Virginia, forgive me for suspecting
you for one instant of any thing unhandsome.
Mrs. Ormond, with the very
best intentions possible, has led us both to
the brink of misery. But I find you such
as I always thought you, ingenuous, affectionate,
innocent.”
“And you are not angry with me?” 
interrupted Virginia, with joyful eagerness,
“and you will not think me ungrateful?
And you will not be unhappy? And Mrs.
Ormond was mistaken? And you do not
wish, that I should love you, that I should
be your wife I mean? O, don't deceive

me, for I cannot help believing whatever
you say.”
Clarence Hervey, to give her a convincing
proof, that Mrs. Ormond had misled
her as to his sentiments, immediately
avowed his passion for Belinda.
“You have relieved me from all doubt,
all fear, all anxiety,” said Virginia, with
the sweetest expression of innocent affection
in her countenance. “May you
be as happy as you deserve to be! May
Belinda—is not that her name?—May
Belinda—”
At this moment lady Delacour half
opened the door, exclaiming—
“Human patience can wait no longer!”
“Will you trust me to explain for you,
dear Virginia?” said Clarence.
“Most willingly,” said Virginia, retiring
as lady Delacour advanced. “Pray
leave me here alone, whilst you, who are
used to talk before strangers, speak for
me.”
“Dare you venture, Clarence,” said
her ladyship, as she closed the door, “to

leave her alone with that picture? You
are no lover, if you be not jealous.”
“I am not jealous,” said Clarence,
“yet I am a lover—a passionate lover.”
“A passionate lover!” cried lady Delacour,
stopping short as they were crossing
the antichamber;—“then I have done
nothing but mischief. In love with Virginia?
—I will not—cannot believe it.”
“In love with Belinda!—Cannot you,
will not you believe it?”
“My dear Clarence, I never doubted
it for an instant. But are you at liberty to
own it to any body but me?”
“I am at liberty to declare it to all the
world.”
“You transport me with joy! I will
not keep you from her a second. But
stay—I am sorry to tell you, that as she
informed me this morning, her heart is not
at present inclined to love. And here are
half a dozen poor wretches in this room
dying with curiosity. Curiosity is as
strong a passion as love, and has as good
a right to compassion.”

As he entered the room, Clarence Hervey's
first glance was at Belinda, and rapid
as it was, it explained his whole
heart.
“What is become of Mr. Hartley?” 
said Clarence, looking round—“I do not
see him.”
“No: for I have hid him,” said lady
Delacour: “he shall be forthcoming presently.”
“Dear Mr. Clarence Hervey, what
have you done with my Virginia?” said
Mrs. Ormond.
“Dear Mrs. Ormond, what have
you done with her?” replied Clarence.
“By your mistaken kindness, by insisting
upon doing us both good against
our wills, you were very near making us
both miserable for life. But I blame nobody,
I have no right to blame any one so
much as myself. All this has arisen from
my own presumption and imprudence.
Nothing could be more absurd than my
scheme of educating a woman in solitude,
to make her fit for society. I might have

foreseen what must happen, that Virginia
would consider me as her tutor, her father,
not as her lover, or her husband; that,
with the most affectionate of hearts, she
could for me feel nothing but gratitude.”
“Nothing but gratitude!” repeated
Mrs. Ormond, with a degree of amazement
in her countenance, which made
every body present smile: “I am sure. I
thought she was dving for love of you.”
“My dear Belinda,” whispered lady
Delacour, “if I might judge by the colour
of this cheek, which has been for some
moments permanent crimson, I should
guess, that you were beginning to find out
of what use the sun is to the dial.”
“You will not let me hear what Mr.
Hervey is saying,” replied Belinda; “I am
very curious.”
“Curiosity is a stronger passion than
love, as I told him just now,” said lady
Delacour.
In spite of all his explanations, Mrs.
Ormond could not be made to comprehend

Virginia's feelings. She continually repeated&wblank;
“But it is impossible for Virginia, or
for any body, to be in love with a picture.”
“It is not said that she is in love with a
picture,” replied Mrs. Delacour, “though
even for that I could find you a precedent.”
“My dear lady Delacour,” said Mrs.
Ormond, “will you explain to us how
that picture came into your possession,
and how it came here, and, in short, all
that is to be known about it?”
“Ay, explain! explain! my dear lady
Delacour,” cried Mrs. Delacour—“I am
afraid, I am grown almost as curious as my
lady Boucher. Explain! explain!”
“Most willingly,” said lady Delacour.
“To Marriott's ruling passion for birds
you are all of you indebted for this discovery.
A few weeks ago, whilst we were
at Twickenham, as Marriott was waiting
at a stationer's, to bid her last adieus to a
bullfinch, a gentleman came into the shop

where she and Bobby (as she calls this
bird) were coquetting, and the gentleman
was struck even more than Marriott with
the bullfinch. He went almost distracted
on hearing a particular tune, which this
bird sung. I suspected, from th symptoms,
that the gentleman must be, or
must have been, in love with the bullfinch's
mistress. Now the bullfinch was
traced home to the ci-devant Virginia St.
Pierre, the present miss Hartley. I had
my reasons for being curious about her
loves and lovers, and as soon as I learned
the story from Marriott, I determined, if
possible, to find out who this stranger,
with the strange passion for bullfinches,
might be. I questioned and cross-questioned
all those people at the stationer's
who were present, when he fell into extacies; 
and from the shopman, who had been
bribed to secrecy, I learned that our gentleman
returned to the stationer's the day
after he met Marriott, and watched till
he obtained a sight of Virginia, as she
came to her window. Now it was believed

by the girl of this shop, who had lived for
some time with Mrs. Ormond&wblank;Forgive
me, Mr. Hervey, for what I am going to
say—forgive me, Mrs. Ormond—scandal,
like death, is comon to all.—It was
believed that Virginia was Mr. Hervey's
mistress. My stranger no sooner learnt
this, than he swore that he would think
of her no more, and after bestowing a variety
of seaman's execrations upon the
villain who had seduced his heavenly creature,
he departed from Twickenham, and
was no more seen or heard of. My inquiries
after him were indefatigable, but for
some time unsuccessful. And so they
might have continued, and we might have
been all making one another miserable at
this moment, if it had not been for Mr.
Vincent's great dog Juba—miss Annabella
Luttridge's billet-doux&wblank;sir Philip
Baddely's insolence—my lord Delacour's
belief in a quack balsam—and captain Sunderland's
humanity.”
“Captain Sunderland! who is captain

Sunderland? we never heard of him before,” 
cried Mrs. Ormond.
“You shall hear of him just as I did,
if you please,” said lady Delacour, “and
if Belinda will submit to hear me tell the
same story twice.”
Here her ladyship repeated the history
of the battle of the dogs; and of sir
Philip Baddely's knocking down Juba the
man, for struggling in defence of Juba the
dog.
“Now the gentleman, who assisted my
lord Delacour in bringing the disabled
negro across the square to our house,
was captain Sunderland. My lord summoned
Marriott to produce lady Boucher's
infallible balsam, that it might be tried
upon Juba's sprained ankle. Whilst my
lord was intent upon the balsam, Marriott
was intent upon captain Sunderland. She
recollected, that she had met him some
where before, and the moment he spoke,
she knew him to be the gentleman, who
had fallen into extacies, in the shop at
Twickenham, about the bullfinch. Marriott

hastened to me with the news; I
hastened to my lord, made him introduce
captain Sunderland to me, and I never
rested, till he had told me all that I wanted
to know. Some years ago, just before he
went to sea, he paid a visit to his mother,
who then lodged with a widow Smith, in
the New Forest. Whilst he was there, he
heard of the young beauty who lived in the
Forest, with a grandmother, who was not
a little particular; and who would not
permit any body to see her.
“My captain's curiosity was excited; 
he took out his spyglass one day, and, unseen
by the duenna, obtained a distinct
view of Virginia, watering her roses and
tending her bees. Struck with her uncommon
beauty, he approached carefully
to the thicket, in which the cottage was
inclosed, and found a lair, where he concealed
himself, day after day, and contemplated
at leisure the budding charms of
the fair woodnymph. In short, he became
so enamoured, that he was determined

to gain admittance at the cottage,
and declare his passion.
“For ought I know, he is the first
knight or squire upon record, who ever
fell in love with his mistress through a
telescope. But Virginia, who, according
to your account, Clarence, is better read
in romances than any of us, can set me
right, if I am incorrect. At all events, I
hope the novelty and delicacy of this mode
of courtship will recommend him to her
favour. To his honour be it told, that
when the history of the poor girl's mother,
the situation and fears of the old lady,
who was her only friend, were known to
him, in consideration of the extreme youth
of the ward, and the extreme age of her
guardian, he determined to defer his addresses,
till his return from the West Indies,
whither he was shortly to sail, and
where he had hopes of making a fortune,
that might put him in a situation to render
the object of his affections independent.
He left a bullfinch with Mrs.
Smith, who gave it to Virginia, without

telling to whom it had belonged, lest her
grandmother might be displeased.
“I really thought, that all this showed too
nice a moral sense for a young dashing
lieutenant in the navy, and I was persuaded,
that my gentleman was only keeping
his mistress's secret like a man of honour.
With this belief, I regretted, that
Clarence Hervey should throw himself
away upon a girl, who was unworthy of
him.”
“I hope,” interrupted Clarence, “you
are perfectly convinced of your mistake.”
“Perfectly! perfectly!—I am convinced
that Virginia is only half mad. But
let me go on with my story. I was determined
to discover whether she had any
remains of affection for this captain. It was
in vain he assured me, that she had never
seen him. I prevailed upon him to let
me go on my own way, and I required
nothing from him, but to sit for his picture
in the character of Paul, in St. Pierre's
romance. ‘If,’ thought I, ‘he speak truth,

Virginia will see this picture without emotion,
and it will only seem to be a present
for Clarence. But if she had ever seen him
before, or had any secret to conceal, she
will betray herself on the sudden appearance
of this picture.’ Things have turned
out contrary to all my expectations, and
yet better.—And now, Clarence, I must
beg you will prevail on miss Hartley to
appear, I can go on no farther without
her.”
Lady Delacour took Virginia by the
hand the moment she entered the room.
“Will you trust yourself with me, miss
Hartley?” said she; “I have made you
faint once to day by the sight of a picture,
will you promise me not to faint
again, when I produce the original?”
“The original!” said Virginia—“I
will trust myself with you, for I am sure
you cannot mean to laugh at me—though,
perhaps, I deserve to be laughed at.”
Lady Delacour threw open the door of
another apartment. Mr. Hartley appeared,
and with him captain Sunderland.

“My dear daughter,” said Mr. Hartley,
“give me leave to introduce to you
a friend, to whom I owe more obligations
than to any man living, except to Mr.
Hervey. This gentleman was stationed
some years ago at Jamaica, and in a rebellion
of the negroes on my plantation
he saved my life. Fortune has accidentally
thrown my benefactor in my way. To
show my sense of my obligations is out
of my power.”
Virginia's surprise was extreme; her
vivid dreams, the fond wishes of her waking
fancy, were at once accomplished.
For the first moment, she gazed as on an
animated picture, and all the ideas of love
and romance, associated with this image,
rushed upon her mind.
But when the realities, by which she
was surrounded, dispelled the illusion, she
suddenly withdrew her eyes, and blushed
deeply, with such timid and graceful modesty
as charmed every body present.
“To prevent all difficulties and embarrassments,
I must inform you, miss Hartley,”

said lady Delacour, “that captain
Sunderland will not insist upon prompt
payment of your father's debt of gratitude; 
he has but one quarter of an hour to spend
with us, he is actually under sailing orders,
and he must be absent for some weeks,
so that you will have time to become accustomed
to the idea of a new lover, before
his return. Clarence, I advise you
to accompany captain Sunderland on this
cruise, don't you, Belinda?”
“And now, my good friends,” continued
lady Delacour, “shall I finish the
novel for you?”
“If your ladyship pleases; nobody can
do it better.”
“But I hope you will remember, dear
lady Delacour,” said Belinda, “that there
is nothing in which novellists are so apt to
err, as in hurrying things toward the
conclusion. In not allowing time enough
for that change of feeling, which change
of situation cannot instantly produce.”
“That's right, my dear Belinda, true
to your principles to the last gasp. Fear

nothing—you shall have time enough to
become accustomed to Clarence. Would
you choose that I should draw out the
story to five volumes more? With your advice
and assistance, I can, with the greatest
ease, my dear.—A declaration of love, you
know, is only the beginning of things; 
there may be blushes, and sighs, and
doubts, and fears, and misunderstandings,
and jealousies without end or common
sense, to fill up the necessary space, and
to gain the necessary time; but if I might
conclude the business in two lines, I
should say,
‘Ye Gods, annihilate both space and time,
And make four lovers happy.’
“O, that would be cutting matters
too short,” said Mrs. Margaret Delacour.
“I am of the old school, and though I
could dispense with the description of miss
Harriet Byron's worked chairs and fine
china, yet I own, I like to hear something
of the preparation for a marriage, as well
as of the mere wedding. I like to hear

how people become happy in a rational
manner, better than to be told in the huddled
style of an old fairy tale—and so they
were all married, and they lived very
happily all the rest of their days.”
“We are not in much danger of hearing
such an account of modern marriages,” 
said lady Delacour.—“But how shall I
please you all?—Some people cry—‘Tell me
every thing’—Others say, that,
‘Le secret d'ennuyer est celui de tout dire.’
“Something must be left to the imagination.
Positively I will not describe
wedding dresses, or a procession to church.
I have no objection to saying, that the
happy couples were united by the worthy
Mr. Moreton; that Mr. Percival gave Belinda
away; and that immediately after
the ceremony, he took the whole party down
with him to Oakly-park.—Will this do?— 
Or, we may conclude, if you like it better,
with a characteristic letter of congratulation
from Mrs. Stanhope to her
dearest niece, Belinda, acknowledging that

she was wrong to quarrel with her, for refusing
sir Philip Baddely, and giving her
infinite credit for that admirable management
of Clarence Hervey, which she hopes
will continue through life.”
“Well, I have no objection to ending
with a letter,” said Mrs. Delacour, “for
last speeches are always tiresome.”
“Yes,” said her ladyship; “it is so
difficult, as the critic says, to get lovers
off upon their knees. Now I think of it,
let me place you all in proper attitudes
for stage effect. What signifies being happy,
unless we appear so?—Captain Sunderland
—kneeling with Virginia, if you
please, sir, at her father's feet—You in the
act of giving them your blessing, Mr.
Hartley—Mrs. Ormond clasps her hands
with joy—Nothing can be better than
that, madam—I give you infinite credit
for the attitude—Clarence, you have a
right to Belinda's hand, and may kiss it
too—Nay, miss Portman, it is the rule of
the stage—Now, where's my lord Delacour?
—He should be embracing me, to

show that we are reconciled—Ha! here
he comes—Enter lord Delacour, with little
Helena in his hand—Very well! a good
start of surprise, my lord—Stand still, pray,
you cannot be better than you are—Helena,
my love, do not let go your father's
hand—There! quite pretty and natural!
—Now, lady Delacour, to show that she
is reformed, comes forward to address the
audience with a moral—a moral!—yes,
“Our tale contains a moral, and, no doubt,
“You all have wit enough to find it out.”