

The opening of her gala, the display
of her splendid reception rooms,
the Turkish tent, the Alhambra, the pagoda,
formed a proud moment to lady Clonbrony.
Much did she enjoy, and much
too naturally, notwithstanding all her
efforts to be stiff and stately, much too
naturally, did she show her enjoyment of
the surprise excited in some, and affected
by others, on their first entrance.
One young, very young lady, expressed
her astonishment so audibly, as to attract
the notice of all the bystanders— 
Lady Clonbrony, delighted, seized both
her hands, shook them, and laughed
heartily; then, as the young lady, with
her party, passed on, her ladyship recovered
herself, drew up her head, and
said, to the company near her—

“Poor thing!—I hope I covered her
little naiveté properly?—How NEW she
must be!—” 
Then, with well practised dignity, and
half-subdued self complacency of aspect,
her ladyship went gliding about—most
importantly busy, introducing my lady
this to the sphynx candelabra, and my
lady that to the Trebisond trellice; placing
some delightfully for the perspective
of the Alhambra; establishing others
quite to her satisfaction on seraglio ottomans; 
and honouring others with a seat
under the statira canopy—Receiving and
answering compliments, from successive
crowds of select friends, imagining herself
the mirror of fashion, and the admiration
of the whole world, lady Clonbrony
was, for her hour, as happy certainly,
as ever woman was in similar circumstances.
Her son looked at her, and wished,
that this happiness could last.—Naturally
inclined to sympathy, lord Colambre
reproached himself for not feeling as gay,

at this instant, as the occasion required.
But the festive scene, the blazing lights,
the “universal hubbub,” failed to raise
his spirits. As a dead weight upon them
hung the remembrance of Mordicai's denunciations; 
and, through the midst of
this eastern magnificence, this unbounded
profusion, he thought he saw future domestic
misery and ruin to those he loved
best in the world.
The only object present, on which his
eye rested with pleasure, was Grace Nugent
—Beautiful! in elegant and dignified
simplicity—thoughtless of herself
—yet, with a look of thought, and with
an air of melancholy, which accorded
exactly with his own feelings, and which
he believed to arise from the same reflections,
that had passed in his own
mind.
“Miss Broadhurst! Colambre—all
the Broadhursts!” said his mother, wakening
him, as she passed by, to receive
them, as they entered.—Miss Broadhurst
appeared, plainly dressed—plainly, even

to singularity—without any diamonds
or ornament.
“Brought Philippa to you, my dear
lady Clonbrony, this figure, rather than
not bring her at all,” said puffing Mrs.
Broadhurst—“and had all the difficulty
in the world to get her out at all, and
now I've promised she shall stay but half
an hour—Sore throat—terrible cold she
took in the morning—I'll swear for her,
she'd not have come for any one but
you—” 
The young lady did not seem inclined
to swear, or even to say this for herself; 
she stood wonderfully unconcerned and
passive, with an expression of humour
lurking in her eyes, and about the corners
of her mouth; whilst lady Clonbrony
was “shocked,” and “gratified,” and
“concerned,” and “flattered;” and
whilst every body was hoping, and fearing,
and busying themselves about her— 
“Miss Broadhurst, you'd better sit here.” 
—“O! for Heaven's sake! miss Broadhurst,
not there!”—“Miss Broadhurst,

if you'll take my opinion”—and, “Miss
Broadhurst, if I may advise—”
“Grace Nugent!” cried lady Clonbrony
—“Miss Broadhurst always listens
to you—Do, my dear, persuade miss
Broadhurst to take care of herself, and
let us take her to the inner little pagoda,
where she can be so warm and so retired
—the very thing for an invalide—Colambre!
pioneer the way for us, for the
crowd's immense.”
Lady Anne and lady Catharine H—,
lady Langdale's daughters, were at this
time leaning on miss Nugent's arm, and
moved along with this party to the inner
pagoda.—There was to be cards in one
room, music in another, dancing in a
third, and, in this little room, there
were prints and chess boards, &c.
“Here you will be quite to yourselves,” 
said lady Clonbrony; “let me
establish you comfortably in this, which
I call my sanctuary—my snuggery— 
Colambre. That little table!—Miss
Broadhurst, you play chess?—Colambre,

you'll play with Miss Broadhurst
—”
“I thank your ladyship,” said miss
Broadhurst—“but I know nothing of
chess, but the moves—Lady Catharine,
you will play, and I will look on.”
Miss Broadhurst drew her seat to the
fire—lady Catharine sat down to play
with lord Colambre—lady Clonbrony
withdrew, again recommending miss
Broadhurst to Grace Nugent's care.— 
After some commonplace conversation,
lady Anne H—, looking at the company
in the adjoining apartment, asked
her sister how old miss somebody was,
who passed by. This led to reflections
upon the comparative age and youthful
appearance of several of their acquaintance,
and upon the care, with which
mothers concealed the age of their
daughters. Glances passed between
lady Catharine and lady Anne.
“For my part,” said miss Broadhurst,
“my mother would labour that point
of secresy in vain for me; for I am willing

to tell my age—even if my face did
not tell it for me—to all, whom it may
concern—I am past three and twenty
—shall be four and twenty the 5th of
next July.”
“Three and twenty!—Bless me!— 
I thought you were not twenty!” cried
lady Anne— 
“Four and twenty, next July!—impossible!” 
cried lady Catharine.
“Very possible”—said miss Broadhurst,
quite unconcerned.
“Now, lord Colambre, would you believe
it?—Can you believe it?”—asked
lady Catharine.
“Yes, he can,” said miss Broadhurst.
“Don't you see, that he believes it, as
firmly as you and I do?—Why should
you force his lordship to pay a compliment
contrary to his better judgment, or
to extort a smile from him under false
pretences?—I am sure he sees that you,
ladies, and I trust he perceives that I do
not think the worse of him, for this.”
Lord Colambre smiled now without

any false pretence; and, relieved at once
from all apprehension of her joining in
his mother's views, or of her expecting
particular attention from him, he became
at ease with miss Broadhurst, showed a
desire to converse with her, and listened
eagerly to what she said. He recollected,
that Grace Nugent had told him,
that this young lady had no common
character; and, neglecting his move at
chess, he looked up at Grace, as much as
to say—“Draw her out, pray.”
But Grace was too good a friend to
comply with that request; she left miss
Broadhurst to unfold her own character.
“It is your move, my lord,” said
lady Catharine.
“I beg your ladyship's pardon—” 
“Are not these rooms beautiful, miss
Broadhurst?” said lady Catharine, determined,
if possible, to turn the conversation
into a commonplace, safe, channel; 
for she had just felt, what most of miss
Broadhurst's acquaintance had in their

turn felt, that she had an odd way of
startling people, by setting their own secret
little motives suddenly before them.
“Are not these rooms beautiful?—” 
“Beautiful!—Certainly.”
The beauty of the rooms would have
answered lady Catharine's purpose for
some time, had not lady Anne imprudently
brought the conversation back
again to miss Broadhurst.
“Do you know, miss Broadhurst,” said
she, “that if I had fifty sore throats, I
could not have refrained from my diamonds
on this GALA night—and such
diamonds as you have!—Now, really, I
could not believe you to be the same person
we saw blazing at the opera the
other night!”
“Really! could not you, lady Anne?
That is the very thing, that entertains
me—I only wish, that I could lay aside
my fortune, sometimes, as well as my diamonds,
and see how few people would
know me then. Might not I, Grace, by

the golden rule, which, next to practice,
is the best rule in the world, calculate and
answer that question?”
“I am persuaded,” said lord Colambre,
“that miss Broadhurst has friends, on
whom the experiment would make no
difference—” 
“I am convinced of it,” said miss
Broadhurst; “and that is what makes me
tolerably happy, though I have the misfortune
to be an heiress.”
“That is the oddest speech,” said lady
Anne—“Now I should so like to be
a great heiress, and to have, like you,
such thousands and thousands at command.”
“And what can the thousands upon
thousands do for me?—Hearts, you
know, lady Anne, are to be won only by
radiant eyes—Bought hearts your ladyship
certainly would not recommend— 
They're such poor things—no wear at
all—Turn them which way you will,
you can make nothing of them.”

“You've tried, then, have you?” said
lady Catharine.
“To my cost—Very nearly taken in
by them half a dozen times—for they
are brought to me by dozens—and they
are so made up for sale, and the people
do so swear to you, that it's real, real
love, and it looks so like it—and, if you
stoop to examine it, you hear it pressed
upon you by such elegant oaths—By
all that's lovely!—By all my hopes of happiness!
—By your own charming self!— 
Why what can one do, but look like a fool,
and believe; for these men, at the time,
all look so like gentlemen, that one cannot
bring oneself flatly to tell them, that
they are cheats and swindlers, that they
are perjuring their precious souls—Besides,
to call a lover a perjured creature,
is to encourage him—He would have a
right to complain, if you went back after
that—” 
“O dear! what a move was there!” 
cried lady Catharine—“Miss Broadhurst

is so entertaining to night, notwithstanding
her sore throat, that one can positively
attend to nothing else—And she
talks of love and lovers too, with such
connoissance de fait—counts her lovers by
dozens, tied up in true-lovers' knots!”
“Lovers!—no, no!—Did I say lovers?
—suitors, I should have said—There's
nothing less like a lover, a true lover,
than a suitor, as all the world knows, ever
since the days of Penelope—Dozens!
—never had a lover in my life!—And
fear, with much reason, I never shall have
one to my mind.”
“My lord, you've given up the game,” 
cried lady Catharine—“but you make
no battle.”
“It would be so vain to combat against
your ladyship,” said lord Colambre, rising,
and bowing politely to lady Catharine,
but turning the next instant to converse
with miss Broadhurst.
“But when I talked of liking to be an
heiress,” said lady Anne, “I was not
thinking of lovers.”

“Certainly—One is not always thinking
of lovers, you know,” added lady
Catharine.
“Not always,” replied miss Broadhurst.
“Well, lovers out of the question
on all sides, what would your ladyship
buy with the thousands upon thousands?”
“O, every thing, if I were you,” said
lady Anne.
“Rank, to begin with,” said lady Catharine.
“Still my old objection, bought rank
is but a shabby thing.”
“But there is so little difference made
between bought and hereditary rank in
these days,” said lady Catharine.
“I see a great deal still,” said miss
Broadhurst; “so much, that I would
never buy a title.”
“A title without birth, to be sure,” 
said lady Anne, “would not be so well
worth buying; and as birth certainly is
not to be bought—” 
“And even birth, were it to be bought,
I would not buy,” said miss Broadhurst,

“unless I could be sure to have with it
all the politeness, all the noble sentiments,
all the magnanimity, in short, all
that should grace and dignify high birth.”
“Admirable!” said lord Colambre— 
Grace Nugent smiled.
“Lord Colambre, will you have the
goodness to put my mother in mind, I
must go away?”
“I am bound to obey, but I am very
sorry for it,” said his lordship.
“Are we to have any dancing to night,
I wonder,” said lady Catharine. “Miss
Nugent, I am afraid we have made miss
Broadhurst talk so much, in spite of her
hoarseness, that lady Clonbrony will be
quite angry with us—And here she
comes!”
My lady Clonbrony came to hope, to
beg, that miss Broadhurst would not
think of running away; but miss Broadhurst
could not be prevailed upon to stay
—Lady Clonbrony was delighted to see,
that her son assisted Grace Nugent most
carefully in shawling miss Broadhurst—

his lordship conducted her to her carriage; 
and his mother drew many happy
auguries from the gallantry of his manner,
and from the young lady's having
stayed three quarters, instead of half an
hour—a circumstance, which lady Catharine
did not fail to remark.
The dancing, which, under various
pretences, lady Clonbrony had delayed,
till lord Colambre was at liberty, began
immediately after miss Broadhurst's departure; 
and the chalked mosaic pavement
of the Alhambra was, in a few
minutes, effaced by the dancers' feet.
How transient are all human joys, especially
those of vanity! Even on this long
meditated, this long desired, this gala
night, lady Clonbrony found her triumph
incomplete—inadequate to her expectations.
For the first hour, all had been
compliment, success, and smiles; presently
came the buts, and the hesitated
objections, and the “damning with faint
praise”—All that could be borne—Every
body has his taste—and one person's

taste is as good as another's; and, while
she had Mr. Soho to cite, lady Clonbrony
thought she might be well satisfied— 
But she could not be satisfied with colonel
Heathcock, who, dressed in black,
had stretched his “fashionable length of
limb” under the statira canopy, upon the
snow-white swandown couch—When,
after having monopolised attention, and
been the subject of much bad wit, about
black swans and rare birds, and swans
being geese and geese being swans, the
colonel condescended to rise, and, as
Mrs. Dareville said, to vacate his couch,
that couch was no longer white—the
black impression of the colonel remained
on the sullied snow.
“Eh now! really didn't recollect I
was in black”—was all the apology he
made. Lady Clonbrony was particularly
vexed, that the appearance of the statira
canopy should be spoiled before the effect
had been seen by lady Pococke, and lady
Chatterton, and lady G&wblank;, lady P—,
and the duke of V&wblank;, and a party

of superlative fashionables, who had promised
to look in upon her, but who, late
as it was, had not yet arrived. They
came in at last. But lady Clonbrony had
no reason to regret, for their sake, the
statira couch—It would have been lost
upon them, as was every thing else, which
she had prepared with so much pains and
cost to excite their admiration—They
came resolute not to admire. Skilled in
the art of making others unhappy, they
just looked round with an air of apathy.
—“Ah! you've had Soho!—Soho has
done wonders for you here!—Vastly
well!—Vastly well!—Soho's very clever
in his way!”
Others, of great importance, came in,
full of some slight accident, that had
happened to themselves, or their horses,
or their carriages; and, with privileged
selfishness, engrossed the attention of all
within their sphere of conversation. Well,
lady Clonbrony got over all this, and got
over the history of a letter about a chimney,
that was on fire, a week ago, at the

duke of V&wblank;'s old house, in Brecknockshire.
In gratitude for the smiling patience,
with which she listened to him,
his grace of V&wblank;fixed his glass to look
at the Alhambra, and had just pronounced
it to be “Well!—Very well!” when
the dowager lady Chatterton made a terrible
discovery—a discovery that filled
lady Clonbrony with astonishment and
indignation—Mr. Soho had played her
false! What was her mortification, when
the dowager assured her, that these identical
Alhambra hangings had not only
been shown, by Mr. Soho, to the duchess
of Torcaster, but that her grace had had
the refusal of them, and had actually rejected
them, in consequence of sir Horace
Grant the great traveller's objecting to
some of the proportions of the pillars— 
Soho had engaged to make a new set,
vastly improved, by sir Horace's suggestions,
for her grace of Torcaster.
Now lady Chatterton was the greatest
talker extant; and she went about the
rooms telling every body of her acquaintance

—and she was acquainted with every
body—how shamefully Soho had imposed
upon poor lady Clonbrony, protesting
she could not forgive the man. “For,” 
said she, “though the duchess of Torcaster
has been his constant customer for
ages, and his patroness, and all that, yet
this does not excuse him—and lady Clonbrony's
being a stranger, and from Ireland,
makes the thing worse.” From
Ireland!—That was the unkindest cut of
all—But there was no remedy.
In vain poor lady Clonbrony followed
the dowager about the rooms, to correct
this mistake, and to represent, in justice
to Mr. Soho, though he had used her so
ill, that he knew she was an Englishwoman.
The dowager was deaf, and no
whisper could reach her ear. And when
lady Clonbrony was obliged to bawl an
explanation in her ear, the dowager only
repeated— 
“In justice to Mr. Soho!—No, no; he
has not done you justice, my dear lady
Clonbrony! and I'll expose him to every

body—Englishwoman!—no, no, no!— 
Soho could not take you for an Englishwoman!”— 
All, who secretly envied or ridiculed
lady Clonbrony, enjoyed this scene. The
Alhambra hangings, which had been, in
one short hour before, the admiration of
the world, were now regarded by every
eye with contempt, as cast hangings, and
every tongue was busy, declaiming against
Mr. Soho; every body declared, that,
from the first, the want of proportion had
struck “them, but that they would not
mention it, till others found it out.”
People usually revenge themselves, for
having admired too much, by afterwards
despising and depreciating without mercy
—In all great assemblies, the perception
of ridicule is quickly caught, and quickly,
too, revealed. Lady Clonbrony, even in
her own house, on her gala night, became
an object of ridicule, decently masked, indeed,
under the appearance of condolence
with her ladyship, and of indignation
against “that abominable Mr. Soho!”

Lady Langdale, who was now, for reasons
of her own, upon her good behaviour,
did penance, as she said, for her
former imprudence, by abstaining even
from whispered sarcasms. She looked
on with penitential gravity, said nothing
herself, and endeavoured to keep Mrs.
Dareville in order; but that was no easy
task. Mrs. Dareville had no daughters,
had nothing to gain from the acquaintance
of my lady Clonbrony; and, conscious
that her ladyship would bear a vast
deal from her presence, rather than forego
the honour of her sanction, Mrs. Dareville,
without any motives of interest, or
good nature of sufficient power to restrain
her talent and habit of ridicule, free from
hope or fear, gave full scope to all the
malice of mockery, and all the insolence
of fashion. Her slings and arrows, numerous
as they were and outrageous,
were directed against such petty objects,
and the mischief was so quick, in it's aim
and it's operation, that, felt but not seen,
it is scarcely possible to register tho

hits, or to describe the nature of the
wounds.
Some hits, sufficiently palpable, however,
were recorded for the advantage of
posterity. When lady Clonbrony led her
to look at the Chinese pagoda, the lady
paused, with her foot on the threshold,
as if afraid to enter this porcelain Elysium,
as she called it—Fool's Paradise,
she would have said; and, by her hesitation,
and by the half pronounced word,
suggested the idea—“None but belles
without petticoats can enter here,” said
she, drawing her clothes tight round her
—“fortunately, I have but two, and lady
Langdale has but one.” Prevailed upon
to venture in, she walked on with prodigious
care and trepidation, affecting to be
alarmed at the crowd of strange forms
and monsters, by which she was surrounded.
“Not a creature here, that I ever saw
before, in nature!—Well, now I may
boast I've been in a real Chinese pagoda!”

“Why yes, every thing is appropriate
here, I flatter myself,” said lady Clonbrony.
“And how good of you, my dear lady
Clonbrony, in defiance of bulls and blunders,
to allow us a comfortable English
fireplace, and plenty of Newcastle coal,
in China!—And a white marble—no!
white velvet hearth-rug, painted with
beautiful flowers—O! the delicate, the
useful thing!”
Vexed by the emphasis on the word
useful, lady Clonbrony endeavoured to
turn off the attention of the company.
“Lady Langdale, your ladyship's a judge
of china—This vase is an unique, I am
told—” 
“I am told,” interrupted Mrs. Dareville,
“this is the very vase, in which
B—, the nabob's father, who was, you
know, a China captain, smuggled his
dear litte Chinese wife and all her fortune
out of Canton—positively, actually put
the lid on, packed her up, and sent her
off on shipboard!—True! true! upon

my veracity!—I'll tell you my authority!—”
With this story, Mrs. Dareville drew
all attention from the jar, to lady Clonbrony's
infinite mortification.
Lady Langdale at length turned to
look at a vast range of china jars.
“Ali Baba and the forty thieves!” exclaimed
Mrs. Dareville—“I hope you
have boiling oil ready!”
Lady Clonbrony was obliged to laugh,
and to vow, that Mrs. Dareville was uncommon
pleasant to night—“But
now,” said her ladyship, “let me take
you on to the Turkish tent.”
Having, with great difficulty, got the
malicious wit out of the pagoda and into
the Turkish tent, lady Clonbrony began
to breathe more freely; for here she
thought she was upon safe ground— 
“Every thing, I flatter myself,” said she,
“is correct, and appropriate, and quite picturesque” 
—The company, dispersed in
happy groups, or reposing on seraglio
ottomans, drinking lemonade and sherbet

—beautiful Fatimas admiring, or being
admired—“Every thing here quite correct,
appropriate, and picturesque,” repeated
Mrs. Dareville.
This lady's powers as a mimic were
extraordinary, and she found them irresistible.
Hitherto, she had imitated lady
Clonbrony's air and accent only behind
her back; but, bolder grown, she now
ventured, in spite of lady Langdale's
warning pinches, to mimic her kind hostess
before her face, and to her face— 
Now, whenever lady Clonbrony saw any
thing, that struck her fancy, in the dress
of her fashionable friends, she had a way
of hanging her head aside, and saying,
with a peculiar sentimental drawl— 
“How pretty!—How elegant!—Now
that quite suits my teeste!”—This
phrase, precisely in the same accent, and
with the head set to the same angle of
affectation, Mrs. Dareville had the assurance
to address to her ladyship, apropos
to something, which she pretended to
admire in lady Clonbrony's costume—a

costume, which, excessively fashionable
in each of it's parts, was, all together,
so extraordinarily unbecoming, as to be
fit for a print-shop. The perception of
this, added to the effect of Mrs. Dareville's
mimicry, was almost too much
for lady Langdale; she could not possibly
have stood it, but for the appearance
of miss Nugent at this instant behind
lady Clonbrony—Grace gave one glance
of indignation, which seemed suddenly
to strike Mrs. Dareville—Silence for a
moment ensued, and afterwards the tone
of the conversation was changed.
“Salisbury!—explain this to me,” 
said a lady, drawing Mr. Salisbury aside.
“If you are in the secret, do explain this
to me; for unless I had seen it, I could
not have believed it—Nay, though I
have seen it, I do not believe it—How
was that daring spirit laid?—By what
spell?”
“By the spell, which superior minds
always cast on inferior spirits.”
“Very fine,” said the lady, laughing
“but as old as the days of Leonora de

Galigai, quoted a million times—Now
tell me something new, and to the purpose,
and better suited to modern days.”
“Well, then, since you will not allow
me to talk of superior minds, in the present
days, let me ask you, if you have
never observed, that a wit, once conquered
in company by a wit of a higher
order, is thenceforward in complete subjection
to the conqueror, whenever and
wherever they meet.”
“You would not persuade me that
yonder gentle looking girl could ever
be a match for the veteran Mrs. Dareville?
—She may have the wit, but has she
the courage?”
“Yes; no one has more courage, more
civil courage, where her own dignity, or
the interests of her friends are concerned
—I will tell you an instance or two to
morrow.”
“To morrow!—To night!—tell it me
now.”
“Not a safe place—” 
“The safest in the world, in such a
crowd as this—Follow my example.

Take a glass of orgeat—sip from time to
time, thus—speak low, looking innocent
all the while straightforward, or now and
then up at the lamps—keep on in an
even tone—use no names—and you may
tell any thing.”
“Well, then, when miss Nugent first
came to London, lady Langdale—” 
“Two names already—did not I warn
ye?—” 
“But how can I make myself intelligible?”
“Initials—can't you use—or genealogy?
—What stops you?—It is only
lord Colambre, a very safe person, I have
a notion, when the eulogium is of Grace
Nugent.”
Lord Colambre, who had now performed
his arduous duties as a dancer,
and had disembarrassed himself of all his
partners, came into the Turkish tent just
at this moment to refresh himself, and
just in time to hear Mr. Salisbury's anecdotes.
“Now go on.”

“Lady Langdale, you know, sets an
inordinate value upon her curtsies in
public, and she used to treat miss Nugent,
as her ladyship treats many other
people, sometimes noticing, and sometimes
pretending not to know her, according
to the company she happened to
be with. One day they met in some fine
company—Lady Langdale looked as if
she was afraid of committing herself by
a curtsy—Miss Nugent waited for a good
opportunity; and, when all the world
was silent, leant forward, and called to
lady Langdale, as if she had something
to communicate of the greatest consequence,
skreening her whisper with her
hand, as in an aside on the stage— 
“Lady Langdale, you may curtsy to me
now—nobody is looking.”
“The retort courteous!” said lord Colambre
—“the only retort for a woman.”
“And her ladyship deserved it so well
—But Mrs. Dareville, what happened
about her?”
“Mrs. Dareville, you remember, some

years ago, went to Ireland, with some
lady lieutenant, to whom she was related
—There she was most hospitably received
by lord and lady Clonbrony—went to
their country house—was as intimate
with lady Clonbrony and with miss Nugent
as possible—stayed at Clonbrony
castle for a month; and yet, when lady
Clonbrony came to London, never took
the least notice of her—At last, meeting
at the house of a common friend, Mrs.
Dareville could not avoid recognising her
ladyship; but, even then, did it in the
least civil manner and most cursory style
possible—“Ho! lady Clonbrony!— 
didn't know you were in England!— 
When did you come?—How long shall
you stay in town?—Hope, before you
leave England, your ladyship and miss
Nugent will give us a day?”—A day!
—Lady Clonbrony was so astonished by
this impudence of ingratitude, that she
hesitated how to take it; but miss Nugent,
quite coolly, and with a smile, answered

—“A day!—Certainly—to you,
who gave us a month!”
“Admirable!—Now I comprehend
perfectly why Mrs. Dareville declines insulting
miss Nugent's friends in her presence.”
Lord Colambre said nothing, but
thought much.—“How I wish my mother,” 
thought he, “had some of Grace
Nugent's proper pride!—She would not
then waste her fortune, spirits, health,
and life, in courting such people as
these.”
He had not seen—he could not have
borne to have beheld—the manner, in
which his mother had been treated by
some of her guests; but he observed,
that she now looked harassed and vexed; 
and he was provoked and mortified, by
hearing her begging and beseeching some
of these saucy leaders of the ton, to oblige
her, to do her the favour, to do her the honour
to stay to supper—It was just
ready—actually announced. “No, they

would not—they could not—they were
obliged to run away—engaged to the
duchess of Torcaster—” 
“Lord Colambre, what is the matter?” 
said miss Nugent, going up to him, as he
stood aloof and indignant—“Don't look
so like a chafed lion; others may perhaps
read your countenance, as well as I
do—” 
“None can read my mind so well,” 
replied he. “Oh! my dear Grace!—” 
“Supper!—Supper!”—cried she— 
“Your duty to your neighbour, your
hand to your partner—” 
Lady Catharine, as they went down
stairs to supper, observed, that miss Nugent
had not been dancing, that she had
kept quite in the back ground all night
—quite in the shade.”
“Those,” said lord Colambre, “who
are contented in the shade, are the best
able to bear the light; and I am not surprised,
that one, so interesting in the
back ground, should not desire to be the
foremost figure in a piece—”

The supper room, fitted up, at great
expense, with scenery to imitate Vauxhall,
opened into a superb greenhouse,
lighted with coloured lamps, a band of
music at a distance—every delicacy,
every luxury, that could gratify the senses,
appeared in profusion. The company
ate and drank—enjoyed themselves— 
went away—and laughed at their hostess.
Some, indeed, who thought they
had been neglected, were in too bad humour
to laugh, but abused her in sober
earnest; for lady Clonbrony had offended
half, nay, three quarters of her guests,
by what they termed her exclusive attention
to those very leaders of the ton, from
whom she had suffered so much, and who
had made it obvious to all, that they
thought they did her too much honour
in appearing at her gala.—So ended
the gala, for which she had lavished such
sums; for which she had laboured so indefatigably; 
and from which she had expected
such triumph.
“Colambre, bid the musicians stop—

they are playing to empty benches,” said
lady Clonbrony.—“Grace, my dear, will
you see that these lamps are safely put
out?—I am so tired, so worn out, I must
go to bed—And I am sure I have caught
cold, too!—What a nervous business it
is to manage these things!—I wonder
how one gets through it, or why one
does it!”