

The tide did not permit the packet
to reach the Pigeon-house, and the impatient
lord Colambre stepped into a
boat, and was rowed across the bay of
Dublin. It was a fine summer morning.
The sun shone bright on the Wicklow
mountains. He admired, he exulted in
the beauty of the prospect; and all the
early associations of his childhood,
and the patriotic hopes of his riper
years swelled his heart as he approached
the shores of his native land. But
scarcely had he touched his mother
earth, when the whole course of his
ideas was changed; and if his heart

swelled, it swelled no more with pleasurable
sensations, for instantly he
found himself surrounded and attacked
by a swarm of beggars and harpies,
with strange figures and stranger tones; 
some craving his charity, some snatching
away his luggage, and at the same
time bidding him “never trouble himself,” 
and “never fear.”—A scramble
in the boat and on shore for bags and
parcels began, and an amphibious fight
betwixt men, who had one foot on sea
and one on land, was seen; and long
and loud the battle of trunks and
portmanteaus raged! The vanquished
departed, clinching their empty hands
at their opponents, and swearing inextinguishable
hatred; while the smiling
victors stood at ease, each grasping his
booty; bag, basket, parcel, or portmanteau.
—“And your honour, where
will these go? Where will we carry
'em all to, for your honour,”—was now
the question. Without waiting for an
answer, most of the goods were carried at

the discretion of the porter to the custom-house,
where to his lordship's astonishment,
after this scene of confusion, he
found that he had lost nothing but his
patience; all his goods were safe, and
a few tinpennies made his officious
porters happy men and boys; blessings
were showered upon his honour, and
he was left in peace at an excellent
hotel, in&wblank;street, Dublin. He rested,
refreshed himself, recovered his good
humour, and walked into the coffee-house,
where he found several officers,
English, Irish, and Scotch. One English
officer, a very gentlemanlike, sensible
looking man, of middle age, was sitting
reading a little pamphlet, when lord
Colambre entered; he looked up from
time to time, and in a few minutes rose,
and joined the conversation; it turned
upon the beauties and defects of the
city of Dublin. Sir James Brooke, for
that was the name of the gentleman,
showed one of his brother officers the
book which he had been reading, observing,

that in his opinion it contained
one of the best views of Dublin, which
he had ever seen, evidently drawn by
the hand of a master, though in a slight,
playful, and ironical style. It was
“An intercepted Letter from China.” 
The conversation extended from Dublin
to various parts of Ireland, with all
which sir James Brooke showed that
he was well acquainted. Observing, that
this conversation was particularly interesting
to lord Colambre; and quickly
perceiving, that he was speaking to one
not ignorant of books; sir James spoke
of different representations and misrepresentations
of Ireland. In answer
to lord Colambre's inquiries, he named
the works which had afforded him most
satisfaction; and with discriminative,
not superficial celerity, touched on all
ancient and modern authors, from
Spenser and Davies, to Young and
Beaufort. Lord Colambre became anxious
to cultivate the acquaintance of a
gentleman, who appeared so able and

willing to afford him information. Sir
James Brooke, on his part, was flattered
by this eagerness of attention, and
pleased by our hero's manners and
conversation; so that to their mutual
satisfaction they spent much of their
time together, whilst they were at
this hotel; and meeting frequently
in society in Dublin, their acquaintance
every day increased and grew into
intimacy; an intimacy which was highly
advantageous to lord Colambre's views
of obtaining a just idea of the state of
manners in Ireland. Sir James Brooke
had, at different periods, been quartered
in various parts of the country—had
resided long enough in each to become
familiar with the people, and had varied
his residence sufficiently to form
comparisons between different counties,
their habits, and characteristics. Hence
he had it in his power to direct the
attention of our young observer at
once to the points most worthy of his
examination, and to save him from the

common errour of travellers; the deducing
general conclusions from a few particular
cases, or arguing from exceptions as if
they were rules.—Lord Colambre, from
his family connexions, had of course
immediate introduction into the best
society in Dublin, or rather into all
the good society of Dublin.—In Dublin
there is positively good company,
and positively bad; but not, as in London,
many degrees of comparison: not
innumerable luminaries of the polite
world, moving in different orbits of
fashion, but all the bright planets of
note and name move and revolve in
the same narrow limits. Lord Colambre
did not find that either his father's, or
his mother's representations of society
in Dublin resembled the reality, which
he now beheld. Lady Clonbrony had,
in terms of detestation, described Dublin
such as it appeared to her soon
after the Union; Lord Clonbrony had
painted it with convivial enthusiasm,
such as he saw it long and long before

the Union, when first he drank claret at
the fashionable clubs. This picture, unchanged
in his memory, and unchangeable
by his imagination, had remained
and ever would remain the same.— 
The hospitality of which the father
boasted, the son found in all its warmth,
but meliorated and refined; less convivial,
more social; the fashion of hospitality
had improved. To make the
stranger eat or drink to excess, to set
before him old wine and old plate, was
no longer the sum of good breeding.
The guest now escaped the pomp of
grand entertainments; was allowed to
enjoy ease and conversation, and to
taste some of that feast of reason, and
that flow of soul, so often talked of,
and so seldom enjoyed. Lord Colambre
found a spirit of improvement, a desire
for knowledge, and a taste for science
and literature in most companies, particularly
among gentlemen belonging to
the Irish bar: nor did he in Dublin
society see any of that confusion of

ranks or predominance of vulgarity, of
which his mother had complained.— 
Lady Clonbrony had assured him, that
the last time she had been at the drawing-room
at the castle, a lady, whom
she afterwards found to be a grocer's
wife, had turned angrily when her
ladyship had accidently trodden on her
train, and had exclaimed with a strong
brogue, “I'll thank you ma'am for
the rest of my tail.”
Sir James Brooke, to whom lord
Colambre, without giving up his authority,
mentioned the fact, declared,
that he had no doubt the thing had
happened precisely as it was stated; 
but that this was one of the extraordinary
cases, which ought not to pass
into a general rule, that it was a slight
instance of that influence of temporary
causes, from which no conclusions, as
to national manners, should be drawn.
“I happened,” continued sir James,
“to be quartered in Dublin soon after
the Union took place; and I remember

the great, but transient change, that
appeared. From the removal of both
houses of parliament, most of the nobility,
and many of the principal families
among the Irish commoners, either hurried
in high hopes to London, or retired
disgusted and in despair to their
houses in the country. Immediately,
in Dublin, commerce rose into the vacated
seats of rank; wealth rose into
the place of birth. New faces and new
equipages appeared: people, who had
never been heard of before, started into
notice, pushed themselves forward,
not scrupling to elbow their way even
at the castle; and they were presented
to my lord-lieutenant and to my lady-lieutenant; 
for their excellencies, for
the time being, might have played their
vice-regal parts to empty benches, had
they not admitted such persons for the
moment to fill their court. Those of
former times, of hereditary pretensions
and high-bred minds and manners,
were scandalized at all this; and they

complained with justice, that the whole
tone of society was altered; that the
decorum, elegance, polish, and charm
of society was gone: and I among the
rest, (said sir James) felt and deplored
their change—But, now it is all over,
we may acknowledge, that, perhaps,
even those things which we felt most
disagreeable at the time, were productive
of eventual benefit.
“Formerly, a few families had set
the fashion. From time immemorial
every thing had, in Dublin, been submitted
to their hereditary authority; 
and conversation, though it had been
rendered polite by their example, was,
at the same time, limited within narrow
bounds. Young people, educated
upon a more enlarged plan, in time
grew up; and, no authority or fashion forbidding
it, necessarily rose to their just
place, and enjoyed their due influence in
society. The want of manners, joined
to the want of knowledge in the new
set, created universal disgust: they

were compelled, some by ridicule,
some by bankruptcies, to fall back into
their former places, from which they
could never more emerge. In the
mean time, some of the Irish nobility
and gentry, who had been living at an
unusual expense in London,—an expense
beyond their incomes, were glad
to return home to refit; and they
brought with them a new stock of ideas,
and some taste for science and literature,
which, within these latter years, have
become fashionable, indeed indispensable,
in London. That part of the
Irish aristocracy, who, immediately
upon the first incursions of the vulgarians,
had fled in despair to their fastnesses
in the country, hearing of the
improvements which had gradually
taken place in society, and assured of
the final expulsion of the barbarians,
ventured from their retreats, and returned
to their posts in town. So
that, now” (concluded sir James) “you
find a society in Dublin, composed of

a most agreeable and salutary mixture
of birth and education, gentility and
knowledge, manner and matter; and
you see pervading the whole new life
and energy, new talent, new ambition,
a desire and a determination to improve
and be improved—a perception, that
higher distinction can now be obtained
in almost all company, by genius and
merit, than by airs and dress. ... So
much for the higher order.—Now,
among the class of tradesmen and shopkeepers,
you may amuse yourself, my
lord, with marking the difference between
them and persons of the same
rank in London.”
Lord Colambre had several commissions
to execute for his English
friends, and he made it his amusement
in every shop to observe the manners
and habits of the people. He remarked,
that there are in Dublin two classes of
trades-people; one, who go into business
with intent to make it their occupation
for life, and as a slow, but sure

means of providing for themselves and
their families: another class, who take
up trade merely as a temporary resource,
to which they condescend for a few
years; trusting that they shall, in that
time, make a fortune, retire, and commence,
or recommence gentlemen. The
Irish regular men of business are like
all other men of business—punctual,
frugal, careful, and so forth; with the
addition of more intelligence, invention,
and enterprise, than are usually found
in Englishmen of the same rank. But
the Dublin tradesmen pro tempore are
a class by themselves: they begin
without capital, buy stock upon credit,
in hopes of making large profits, and,
in the same hopes, sell upon credit.
Now, if the credit they can obtain is
longer than that which they are forced
to give, they go on and prosper; if not,
they break, turn bankrupts, and sometimes,
as bankrupts, thrive. By such
men, of course, every short cut to fortune
is followed; whilst every habit,

which requires time to prove its advantage,
is disregarded: nor with such
views call a character for punctuality
have its just value. In the head of a
man who intends to be a tradesman to
day, and a gentleman to morrow, the
ideas of the honesty and the duties of a
tradesman, and of the honour and the
accomplishments of a gentleman, are
oddly jumbled together, and the characteristics
of both are lost in the compound.
He will oblige you, but he will
not obey you; he will do you a favour,
but he will not do you justice; he will
do any thing to serve you, but the particular
thing you order, he neglects; 
—he asks your pardon, for he would
not for all the goods in his warehouse,
disoblige you; not for the sake of your
custom, but he has a particular regard
for your family.—Economy, in the
eyes of such a tradesman, is, if not a
mean vice, at least a shabby virtue,
which he is too polite to suspect his

customers of, and particularly proud to
prove himself superior to. Many London
tradesmen, after making their thousands
and their tens of thousands, feel
pride in still continuing to live like
plain men of business; but from the
moment a Dublin tradesman of this style
has made a few hundreds, he sets up
his gig, and then his head is in his carriage,
and not in his business; and
when he has made a few thousands,
he buys or builds a country-house— 
and then, and thenceforward, his head,
heart, and soul are in his country-house,
and only his body in the shop with his
customers.
Whilst he is making money, his
wife, or rather his lady, is spending
twice as much out of town as he makes
in it. At the word country-house,
let no one figure to himself a snug little
box, like that in which a warm London
citizen, after long years of toil, indulges
himself, one day out of seven,
in repose—enjoying from his gazabo,

the smell of the dust, and the view of
passing coaches on the London road.
No: these Hibernian villas are on a
much more magnificent scale; some of
them formerly belonged to Irish members
of parliament, who are at a distance
from their country-seats. After
the Union these were bought by citizens
and tradesmen, who spoiled, by the
mixture of their own fancies, what had
originally been designed by men of
good taste.
Some time after lord Colambre's arrival
in Dublin, he had an opportunity
of seeing one of these villas, which belonged
to Mrs. Raffarty, a grocer's lady,
and sister to one of lord Clonbrony's
agents, Mr. Nicholas Garraghty. Lord
Colambre was surprised to find, that his
father's agent resided in Dublin: he had
been used to see agents, or stewards, as
they are called in England, live in the
country, and usually on the estate of
which they have the management. Mr.
Nicholas Garraghty, however, had a

handsome house, in a fashionable part
of Dublin. Lord Colambre called several
times to see him, but he was out
of town, receiving rents for some other
gentleman, as he was agent for more
than one property.
Though our hero had not the honour
of seeing Mr. Garraghty, he had the
pleasure of finding Mrs. Raffarty one
day at her brother's house. Just as
his lordship came to the door, she was
going on her jaunting car, to her villa,
called Tusculum, situate near Bray. She
spoke much of the beauties of the vicinity
of Dublin; found his lordship
was going with sir James Brooke, and
a party of gentlemen, to see the county
of Wicklow, and his lordship and party
were entreated to do her the honour of
taking in his way a little collation at
Tusculum.
Our hero was glad to have an opportunity
of seeing more of a species of
fine lady, with which he was unacquainted.

The invitation was verbally made, and
verbally accepted, but the lady afterwards
thought it necessary to send a
written invitation in due form, and the
note she sent directed to the most right
honourable the lord viscount Colambre.
On opening it he perceived, that it could
not have been intended for him. It ran
as follows:
“My dear Juliana O'Leary,
“I have got a promise from Colambre,
that he will be with us at Tusculum
on Friday the 20th, in his way
from the county of Wicklow, for the
collation I mentioned; and expect a
large party of officers, so pray come
early, with your house, or as many as
the jaunting-car can bring. And pray
my dear be elegant. You need not
let it transpire to Mrs. O'G&wblank;, but
make my apologies to Miss O'G&wblank;,
if she says any thing, and tell her
I'm quite concerned I can't ask her
for that day; because, tell her, I'm

so crowded, and am to have none
that day but real quality.
Yours ever and ever,
Anastasia Raffarty.”
“P.S. And I hope to make the gentlemen
stop the night with me; so
will not have beds. Excuse haste,
and compliments, &c.
Tusculum, Sunday 15.”
After a charming tour in the county
of Wicklow, where the beauty of the
natural scenery, and the taste with
which those natural beauties had been
cultivated, far surpassed the sanguine
expectations lord Colambre had formed,
his lordship and his companions arrived
at Tusculum, where he found Mrs.
Raffarty, and Miss Juliana O'Leary,
very elegant, with a large party of the
ladies and gentlemen of Bray assembled
in a drawing-room, fine with bad pictures
and gaudy gilding; the windows
were all shut, and the company were
playing cards with all their might.

This was the fashion of the neighbourhood.
In compliment to lord Colambre
and the officers, the ladies left
the card-tables; and Mrs. Raffarty, observing
that his lordship seemed partial
to walking, took him out, as she said,
“to do the honours of nature and art.”
His lordship was much amused by
the mixture, which was now exhibited
to him, of taste and incongruity, ingenuity
and absurdity, genius and
blunder; by the contrast between the
finery and vulgarity, the affectation and
ignorance of the lady of the villa. We
should be obliged to stop too long at
Tusculum, were we to attempt to detail
all the odd circumstances of this
visit; but we may record an example
or two, which may give a sufficient idea
of the whole.
In the first place, before they left the
drawing-room, miss Juliana O'Leary
pointed out to his lordship's attention
a picture over the drawing-room chimney-piece.
“Is not it a fine piece,

my lord?” said she, naming the price
Mrs. Raffarty had lately paid for it at
an auction.—“It has a right to be a
fine piece, indeed; for it cost a fine
price!” Nevertheless, this fine piece
was a vile daub; and our hero could
only avoid the sin of flattery, or the
danger of offending the lady, by protesting
that he had no judgment in
pictures.
“Indeed! I don't pretend to be a
connoisseur or conoscenti myself; but
I'm told the style is undeniably modern.
—And was not I lucky, Juliana, not
to let that Medona be knocked down to
me? I was just going to bid, when I
heard such smart bidding; but, fortunately,
the auctioneer let out that it
was done by a very old master—a
hundred years old. Oh! your most
obedient, thinks I!—if that's the case,
it's not for my money: so I bought
this, in lieu of the smoke-dried thing,
and had it a bargain.”

In architecture Mrs. Raffarty had as
good a taste and as much skill as in
painting. There had been a handsome
portico in front of the house: but this,
interfering with the lady's desire to
have a veranda, which she said could
not be dispensed with, she had raised
the whole portico to the second story,
where it stood, or seemed to stand, upon
a tarpaulin roof. But Mrs. Raffarty
explained that the pillars, though they
looked so properly substantial, were really
hollow and as light as feathers, and
were supported with cramps, without
disobliging the front wall of the house
at all to signify.
“Before she showed the company
any father,” she said, “she must premise
to his lordship, that she had been
originally stinted in room for her improvements,
so that she could not
follow her genius liberally; she had
been reduced to have some things on
a confined scale, and occasionally to

consult her pocket-compass; but she
prided herself upon having put as
much into a light pattern as could
well be; that had been her whole
ambition, study, and problem, for she
was determined to have at least the
honour of having a little taste of every
thing at Tusculum.”
So she led the way to a little conservatory,
and a little pinery, and a
little grapery, and a little aviary, and
a little pheasantry, and a little dairy for
show, and a little cottage for ditto,
with a grotto full of shells, and a little
hermitage full of earwigs, and a little
ruin full of looking-glass, “to enlarge
and multiply the effect of the gothic.” 
—“But you could only put your
head in, because it was just fresh
painted, and though there had been a
fire ordered in the ruin all night, it had
only smoked.”
In all Mrs. Raffarty's buildings, whether
ancient or modern, there was a
studied crookedness.

“Yes,” she said, “she hated every
thing straight, it was so formal and
unpioturesque. Uniformity and conformity,
she observed, had their day; 
but now, thank the stars of the present
day, irregularity and difformity
hear the bell, and have the majority.”—
As they proceeded and walked through
the grounds from which Mrs. Raffarty,
though she had done her best, could not
take that which nature had given,
she pointed out to my lord “a happy
moving termination,” consisting of a
Chinese bridge, with a fisherman leaning
over the rails. On a sudden, the
fisherman was seen to tumble over the
bridge into the water. The gentlemen
ran to extricate the poor fellow, while
they heard Mrs. Raffarty bawling to
his lordship to beg he would never
mind, and not trouble himself.
When they arrived at the bridge,
they saw the man hanging from part of
the bridge, and apparently struggling in

the water; but when they attempted
to pull him up, they found it was only
a stuffed figure which had been pulled
into the stream by a real fish, which
had seized hold of the bait.
Mrs. Raffarty, vexed by the fisherman's
fall, and by the laughter it
occasioned, did not recover herself
sufficiently to be happily ridiculous
during the remainder of the walk,
nor till dinner was announced, when
she apologised for “having changed
the collation, at first intended, into a
dinner, which she hoped would be
found no bad substitute, and which
she flattered herself might prevail on
my lord and the gentlemen to sleep, as
there was no moon.”
The dinner had two great faults— 
profusion and pretension. There was,
in fact, ten times more on the table
than was necessary; and the entertainment
was far above the circumstances
of the person by whom it was given:

for instance, the dish of fish at the
head of the table had been brought
across the island from Sligo, and had
cost five guineas; as the lady of the
house failed not to make known. But
after all, things were not of a piece; 
there was a disparity between the entertainment
and the attendants; there
was no proportion or fitness of things.
A painful endeavour at what could not
be attained, and a toiling in vain to
conceal and repair deficiencies and
blunders. Had the mistress of the
house been quiet; had she, as Mrs.
Broadhurst would say, but let things
alone, let things take their course; all
would have passed off with well-bred
people: but she was incessantly apologizing,
and fussing and fretting inwardly
and outwardly, and directing
and calling to her servants,—striving
to make a butler, who was deaf,
a boy who was hair-brained, do
the business of five accomplished
footmen of parts and figure. The

mistress of the house called for “plates,
clean plates!—hot plates!”—
“But none did come, when she did
call for them.”
Mrs. Raffarty called “Larry! Larry!
My lord's plate, there!—James! bread,
to captain Bowles!—James! port wine,
to the major.—James! James Kenny!
James!”
‘And panting James toiled after her
in vain.’
At length one course was fairly got
through, and after a torturing half-hour,
the second course appeared, and James
Kenny was intent upon one thing, and
Larry upon another, so that the winesauce
for the hare was spilt by their
collision; but what was worse, there
seemed little chance that the whole of
this second course should ever be
placed altogether rightly upon the table.
Mrs. Raffarty cleared her throat, and
nodded, and pointed, and sighed, and
set Larry after Kenny, and Kenny
after Larry; for what one did, the other

undid; and at last, the lady's anger
kindled, and she spoke.
“Kenny! James Kenny, set the
sea-cale at this corner, and put down
the grass cross-corners; and match your
macaroni yonder with them puddens,
set—Ogh! James! the pyramid in the
middle can't ye.”
The pyramid in changing places was
overturned. Then it was, that the
mistress of the feast, falling back in
her seat, and lifting up her hands and
eyes in despair, ejaculated; “Oh,
James! James!”—
The pyramid was raised by the assistance
of the military engineers, and
stood trembling again on its base; but
the lady's temper could not be so
easily restored to it's equilibrium.
The comedy of errours, which this
day's visit exhibited, amused all the
spectators. But lord Colambre, after
he had smiled, sometimes sighed.— 
Similar foibles and follies in persons of

different rank, fortune, and manner,
appear to common observers so unlike,
that they laugh without scruples of
conscience in one case, at what in
another ought to touch themselves most
nearly. It was the same desire to
appear what they were not; the same
vain ambition to vie with superior
rank and fortune or fashion, which
actuated lady Clonbrony, and Mrs.
Raffarty; and, whilst this ridiculous
grocer's wife made herself the sport of
some of her guests, Lord Colambre
sighed, from the reflection that what
she was to them, his mother was to
persons in a higher rank of fashion:— 
He sighed still more deeply, when he
considered, that in whatever station,
or with whatever fortune, extravagance,
that is the living beyond our
income, must lead to distress and
meaness, and end in shame and ruin.
In the morning, as they were riding
away from Tusculum and talking over
their visit, the officers laughed heartily,

and, rallying lord Colambre upon his
seriousness, accused him of having
fallen in love with Mrs. Raffarty, or
with the elegant miss Juliana. Our
hero, who wished never to be nice overmuch,
or serious out of season, laughed
with those that laughed, and endeavoured
to catch the spirit of the jest.
But sir James Brooke, who now was
well acquainted with his countenance,
and who knew something of the history
of his family, understood his real feelings,
and, sympathising in them, endeavoured
to give the conversation a
new turn.
“Look there, Bowles,” said he, as
they were just riding into the town
of Bray; “Look at the barouche, standing
at that green door, at the farthest
end of the town. Is not that lady
Dashfort's barouche?”
“It looks like what she sported in
Dublin last year,” said Bowles; “but
you don't think she'd give us the same
two seasons? Besides, she is not in

Ireland, is she? I did not hear of her
intending to come over again.”
“I beg your pardon,” said another
officer, “she will come again to so
good a market, to marry her other
daughter. I hear she said, or swore,
that she will marry the young widow,
lady Isabel, to an Irish nobleman.”
“Whatever she says, she swears, and
whatever she swears, she'll do,” replied
Bowles. “Have a care, my lord Colambre,
if she sets her heart upon you
for lady Isabel, she has you. Nothing
can save you. Heart, she has none,
so there you're safe, my lord,” said the
other officer; “but if lady Isabel sets
her eye upon you, no basilisk's is surer.”
“But, if lady Dashfort had landed,
I am sure we should have heard of it,
for she makes noise enough wherever
she goes; especially in Dublin, where
all she said and did was echoed and
magnified, till one could hear of nothing
else. I don't think she has
landed.”

“I hope to Heaven, they may never
land again in Ireland!” cried sir James
Brooke: “one worthless woman, especially
one worthless English woman of
rank, does incalculable mischief in a
country like this, which looks up to
the sister country for fashion. For my
own part, as a warm friend to Ireland,
I would rather see all the toads and
serpents, and venomous reptiles, that
St. Patrick carried off in his bag, come
back to this island, than these two
dashers. Why, they would bite half
the women and girls in the kingdom,
with the rage for mischief, before half
the husbands and fathers could turn
their heads about. And, once bit,
there's no cure in nature or art.”
“No horses to this barouche!” cried
captain Bowles.—“Pray sir, whose
carriage is this?” said the captain to a
servant, who was standing beside it.
“My lady Dashfort, sir,—it belongs
to”—answered the servant, in rather
a surly English tone—and turning to a

boy, who was lounging at the door— 
“Pat, bid them bring out the horses,
for my ladies is in a hurry to get home.”
Captain Bowles stopped to make his
servant alter the girths of his horse,
and to satisfy his curiosity; and the
whole party halted. Captain Bowles
beckoned to the landlord of the inn,
who was standing at his door.
“So, lady Dashfort is here again?— 
This is her barouche, is not it?” “Yes,
sir, she is—it is.”
“And, has she sold her fine horses?”
“Oh, no, sir,—this is not her carriage
at all—she is not here.—That
is, she is here, in Ireland; but down
in the county of Wicklow, on a visit!
And this is not her own carriage at all; 
—that is to say, not that which she has
with herself, driving; but only just the
cast barouche like, as she keeps for the
lady's maids.”
“For the lady's maids! that is good!
that is new, faith—Sir James, do you
hear that?”

“Indeed, then, and it's true, and
not a word of a lie!” said the honest
landlord.—“And this minute, we've
got a directory of five of them abigails,
sitting within in our house; as fine
ladies, as great dashers, too, every bit
as their principals; and kicking up as
much dust on the road, every grain!— 
Think of them, now! The likes of
them, that must have four horses, and
would not stir a foot with one less!
—As the gentleman's gentleman there,
was telling and boasting to me about
now, when the barouche was ordered
for them, there at the lady's house,
where lady Dashfort is on a visit—they
said they would not get in till they'd
get four horses; and their ladies backed
them: and so the four horses was got; 
and they just drove out here, to see the
points of view for fashion's sake, like
their betters; and up with their glasses,
like their ladies; and then, out with
their watches, and “Is'nt it time to
lunch?” So there they have been

lunching within on what they brought
with them; for nothing in our house
could they touch, of course! They
brought themselves a picknick lunch,
with Madeira and Champagne to wash
it down. Why, gentlemen! what do
you think, but a set of them, as they
were bragging to me, turned out of a
boarding-house at Cheltenham, last
year, because they had not peach-pies
to their lunch!—But, here they come!
shawls, and veils, and all!—streamers
flying! But mum is my cue!—Captain,
are these girths to your fancy,
now?” said the landlord, aloud: then,
as he stooped to alter a buckle, he said,
in a voice meant to be heard only by
captain Bowles, “If there's a tongue,
male or female, in the three kingdoms,
it's in that foremost woman, Mrs. Petito.”
“Mrs. Petito!” repeated Lord Colambre,
as the name caught his ear; 
and approaching the barouche in which
the five abigails were now seated, he

saw the identical Mrs. Petito, who,
when he left London, had been in his
mother's service.
She recognized his lordship with very
gracious intimacy; and, before he had
time to ask any questions, she answered
all she conceived he was going to ask,
and with a volubility which justified the
landlord's eulogium of her tongue.
“Yes, my lord! I left my lady
Clonbrony, some time back—the day
after you left town; and both her ladyship
and miss Nugent was charmingly,
and would have sent their loves to your
lordship, I'm sure, if they'd any notion
I should have met you, my lord, so
soon. And I was very sorry to part
with them; but the fact was, my lord,” 
said Mrs. Petito, laying a detaining
hand upon Lord Colambre's whip,
one end of which he unwittingly trusted
within her reach;—“I and my lady
had a little difference, which the best
friends, you know, sometimes have:
so my lady Clonbrony was so condescending

to give me up to my lady
Dashfort,—and I knew no more than
the child unborn, that her ladyship had
it in contemplation to cross the seas.
But, to oblige my lady, and as colonel
Heathcock, with his regiment of militia,
was coming for purtection in the packet
at the same time, and we to have the
government-yatch, I waived my objections
to Ireland. And, indeed, though
I was greatly frighted at first, having
heard all we've heard, you know, my
lord, from lady Clonbrony, of there
being no living in Ireland, and expecting
to see no trees nor accommodation, nor
any thing but bogs all along; yet, I
declare, I was very agreeably surprised; 
for, as far as I've seen at Dublin and in
the vicinity, the accommodations, and
every thing of that nature, now is vastly
put-up-able with!”—“My lord,” said
sir James Brooke, “we shall be late.” 
Lord Colambre, shortly withdrawing
his whip from Mrs. Petito, turned his
horse away. She, stretching over the

back of the barouche as he rode off,
bawled to him,
“My Lord, we're at Stephen's Green,
when we're at Dublin.” But, as he
did not choose to hear, she raised her
voice to its highest pitch, adding,
“And where are you, my lord, to
be found?—as I have a parcel of miss
Nugent's for you.”
Lord Colambre instantly turned back,
and gave his direction.
“Cleverly done, faith!” said the
major.—“I did not hear her say when
lady Dashfort is to be in town,” said
captain Bowles.
“What, Bowles! have you a mind to
lose more of your guineas to lady Dashfort,
and to be jockied out of another
horse by lady Isabel?”
“Oh! confound it—no! I'll keep
out of the way of that—I have had
enough,” said captain Bowles; “it is my
lord Colambre's turn now; you hear,
that lady Dashfort would be very proud
to see him. His lordship is in for it,

and with such an auxiliary as Mrs.
Petito, lady Dashfort has him for lady
Isabel, as sure as he has a heart or hand.”
“My compliments to the ladies, but my
heart is engaged,” said lord Colambre,
“and my hand shall go with my heart or
not at all.
“Engaged! engaged to a very amiable,
charming woman, no doubt,” said sir
James Brooke,” I have an excellent opinion
of your taste; and if you can return
the compliment to my judgment, take
my advice. Don't trust to your heart's
being engaged, much less plead that engagement; 
for it would be lady Dashfort's
sport, and lady Isabel's joy, to
make you break your engagement, and
break your mistress's heart; the fairer,
the more amiable, the more beloved, the
greater the triumph, the greater the delight,
in giving pain. All the time love
would be out of the question; neither
mother nor daughter would care if you
were hanged, or, as lady Dashfort would
herself have express'd it if you were d&wblank;d.

“With such women, I should think a
man's heart could be in no great danger,
said lord Colambre.
“There you might be mistaken, my
lord; there's a way to every man's heart,
which no man in his own case is aware
of, but which every woman knows
right well, and none better than these
ladies, by his vanity.”
“True,”—said captain Bowles.
“I am not so vain as to think myself
without vanity,” said lord Colambre; 
“but love, I should imagine, is a stronger
passion than vanity.”
“You should imagine! Stay till
you are tried, my lord. Excuse me,” 
said captain Bowles, laughing.
Lord Colambre felt the good sense
of this, and determined to have nothing
to do with these dangerous ladies; indeed,
though he had talked, he had
scarcely yet thought of them, for his
imagination was intent upon that packet
from Miss Nugent, which Mrs. Petito
said she had for him.—He heard nothing

of it, or of her, for some days.
He sent his servant every day to Stephen's-green,
to inquire if lady Dashfort
had returned to town. Her ladyship
at last returned; but Mrs. Petito
could not deliver the parcel to any hand
but lord Colambre's own, and she would
not stir out, because her lady was indisposed.
No longer able to restrain
his impatience, lord Colambre went
himself—knocked at lady Dashfort's
door—inquired for Mrs. Petito—was
shown into her parlour. The parcel
was delivered to him; but to his utter
disappointment, it was a parcel for, not
from Miss Nugent. It contained merely
an odd volume of some book of Miss
Nugent's, which Mrs. Petito said she
had put up along with her things in a
mistake, and she thought it her duty to
return it by the first opportunity of a
safe conveyance.
Whilst lord Colambre, to comfort
himself for his disappointment, was fixing
his eyes upon Miss Nugent's name,

written by her own hand, in the first
leaf of the book, the door opened, and
the figure of an interesting looking woman,
in deep mourning, appeared—appeared
for one moment, and retired.
“Only my lord Colambre, about a
parcel I was bringing for him from
England, my lady—my lady Isabel,
my lord, said Mrs. Petito. Whilst
Mrs. Petito was saying this, the entrance
and retreat had been made, and
made with such dignity, grace, and modesty; 
with such innocence, dovelike
eyes had been raised upon him, fixed
and withdrawn; with such a gracious
bend the lady Isabel had bowed to him
as she retired; with such a smile, and
with so soft a voice, had repeated “lord
Colambre!” that his lordship, though
well aware that all this was mere acting,
could not help saying to himself as
he left the house:
“It is a pity it is only acting.
There is certainly something very engaging
in this woman. It is a pity she is

an actress. And so young! A much
younger woman than I expected. A
widow before most women are wives.
So young, surely she cannot be such a
fiend as they described her to be!” A
few nights afterwards lord Colambre
was, with some of his acquaintance, at
the theatre, when lady Isabel and her
mother came into the box, where seats
had been reserved for them, and where
their appearance instantly made that sensation
which is usually created by the
entrance of persons of the first notoriety
in the fashionable world. Lord
Colambre was not a man to be dazzled
by fashion, or to mistake notoriety for
deference paid to merit, and for the admiration
commanded by beauty or talents.
Lady Dashfort's coarse person,
loud voice, daring manners, and indelicate
wit, disgusted him almost past endurance.
He saw sir James Brooke in
the box opposite to him; and twice
determined to go round to him. His
lordship had crossed the benches, and

once his hand was upon the lock of the
door; but attracted as much by the
daughter as repelled by the mother, he
could move no farther. The mother's
masculine boldness heightened, by contrast,
the charms of the daughter's soft
sentimentality. The lady Isabel seemed
to shrink from the indelicacy of her mother's
manners, and seemed peculiarly
distressed by the strange efforts lady
Dashfort made, from time to time, to
drag her forward, and to fix upon her
the attention of gentlemen. Colonel
Heathcock, who, as Mrs. Petito had informed
lord Colambre, had come over
with his regiment to Ireland, was beckoned
into their box by lady Dashfort,
by her squeezed into a seat next to
lady Isabel; but lady Isabel seemed to
feel sovereign contempt, properly repressed
by politeness, for what, in a low
whisper to a female friend on the other
side of her, she called, “the self-sufficient
inanity of this sad coxcomb.” 
Other coxcombs, of a more vivacious

style, who stationed themselves round
her mother, or to whom her mother
stretched from box to box to talk,
seemed to engage no more of lady Isabel's
attention, than just what she was
compelled to give by lady Dashfort's repeated
calls of,
“Isabel! Isabel! Colonel G&wblank;,
Isabel! lord D&wblank;bowing to you,
Belle! Belle! sir Harry B&wblank;.Isabel,
child, with your eyes on the stage!
Did you never see a play before? Novice!
major P&wblank;waiting to catch
your eye, this quarter of an hour; and
now her eyes gone down to her playbill!
Sir Harry, do take it from her.
‘Were eyes so radiant only made to read?’”
Lady Isabel appeared to suffer so exquisitely
and so naturally from this persecution,
that lord Colambre said to
himself,
‘If this be acting, it is the best acting
I ever saw. If this be art, it deserves to
be nature.’

And with this sentiment he did himself
the honour of handing lady Isabel
to her carriage this night, and with this
sentiment he awoke next morning; and
by the time he had dressed and breakfasted,
he determined that it was impossible
all that he had seen could be acting.
“No woman, no young woman,
could have such art.” Sir James Brooke
had been unwarrantably severe; he
would go and tell him so.
But sir James Brooke this day received
orders for his regiment to march
to quarters in a distant part of Ireland.
His head was full of arms and ammunition,
and knapsacks, and billets, and
routes, and there was no possibility,
even in the present chivalrous disposition
of our hero, to enter upon the defence
of the lady Isabel. Indeed, in the
regret he felt for the approaching and
unexpected departure of his friend, lord
Colambre forgot the fair lady. But just
when sir James had his foot in the stirrup
he stopped.

“By the by, my dear lord, I saw you
at the play last night. You seemed to
be much interested. Don't think me
impertinent, if I remind you of our conversation
when we were riding home
from Tusculum; and if I warn you,” 
said he, mounting his horse, “to beware
of counterfeits,—for such are
abroad.” Reining in his impatient
steed, sir James turned again and added,
“Deeds not words, is my motto. Remember
we can judge better by the conduct
of people towards others than by
their manner towards ourselves.”