

When lady Delacour repeated to
miss Portman the message about “simplicity
of mind, and dignity of character,” 
she frankly said—
“Belinda, notwithstanding all this,
observe, I'm determined to retain Clarence
Hervey among the number of my
public worshippers during my life—which
you know cannot last long.—After I am
gone, my dear, he'll be all your own, and
of that I give you joy.—Posthumous fame
is a silly thing, but posthumous jealousy is
detestable.”

There was one part of the conversation
between Mr. Hervey and her ladyship,
which she, in her great discretion, did not
immediately repeat to miss Portman—that
part which related to the horses.—In this
transaction Belinda had no farther share,
than having once, when her ladyship had
the handsome horses brought for her to
look at, assented to the opinion, that they
were the handsomest horses she ever beheld.
—Mr. Hervey, however gallantly he
replied to her ladyship, was secretly
vexed to find that Belinda had so little
delicacy, as to permit her name to be employed
in such a manner. He repented
having used the improper expression of
dignity of mind, and he relapsed into his
former opinion of Mrs. Stanhope's niece.
—A relapse is always more dangerous
than the first disease.—He sent home the
horses to lady Delacour, the next day, and
addressed Belinda, when he met her, with
the air of a man of gallantry, who
thought that his peace had been cheaply
made.—But in proportion as his manners

became more familiar, hers grew more
reserved.—Lady Delacour rallied her upon
her prudery, but in vain.—Clarence Hervey
seemed to think, that her ladyship had
not fulfilled her part of the bargain.—“Is
not smiling,” said he, “the epithet always
applied to peace—yet I have not been
able to obtain one smile from miss Portman
since I have been promised peace.” 
—Embarrassed by Mr. Hervey's reproaches,
and provoked to find that Belinda
was proof against all her raillery, lady
Delacour grew quite ill-humoured towards
her. Belinda, unconscious of having
given any just cause of offence, was unmoved; 
and her ladyship's embarrassment
increased.—At last, resuming all her former
appearance of friendship and confidence,
she suddenly exclaimed, one night
after she had flattered Belinda into high
spirits—
“Do you know, my dear, that I have
been so ashamed of myself for this week
past, that I have hardly dared to look you
in the face.—I am sensible I was downright

rude and cross to you one day—and
ever since I have been penitent; and as all
penitents are, very stupid and disagreeable,
I am sure—but tell me you forgive my
caprice, and lady Delacour will be herself
again.”
It was not difficult to obtain Belinda's
forgiveness.
“Indeed,” continued lady Delacour,
“you are too good—but then, in my own
justification I must say, that I have more
things to make me ill-humoured than most
people have.—Now, my dear, that most
obstinate of human beings, lord Delacour,
has reduced me to the most terrible
situation—I have made Clarence Hervey
buy a pair of horses for me, and I cannot
make my lord Delacour pay for them— 
but I forgot to tell you, that I took your
name—not in vain indeed—in this business.
—I told Clarence, that upon condition
he would do this job for me, you
would forgive him for all his sins, and
—nay, my dear, why do you look as if I

had stabbed you to the heart—after all,
I only drew upon your pretty mouth for a
few smiles—Pray let me see whether it
has actually forgotten how to smile.”
Belinda was too much vexed at this instant
to understand raillery.—She was inspired
by anger with unwonted courage,
and losing all fear of lady Delacour's wit,
she very seriously expostulated with her
ladyship upon having thus used her name,
without her consent or knowledge. Belinda
felt she was now in danger of being
led into a situation, which might be fatal to
her reputation and her happiness; and
she was the more surprised at her ladyship,
when she recollected the history she
had so lately heard of Harriot Freke and
colonel Lawless.
“You cannot but be sensible, lady
Delacour,” said Belinda, “that after the
contempt I have heard Mr. Hervey express
for match-making Mrs. Stanhope's
nieces, I should degrade myself by any
attempts to attract his attention.—No wit,
no eloquence, can change my opinion

upon this subject—I cannot endure contempt.”
“Very likely—no doubt”—interrupted
lady Delacour, “but if you would
only open your eyes, which heroines make
it a principle never to do—or else there
would be an end of the novel—if you
would only open your eyes, you would
see that this man is in love with you; and
whilst you are afraid of his contempt, he
is a hundred times more afraid of yours; 
and as long as you are each of you in such
fear of you know not what—you must
excuse me if I indulge myself in a little
wholesome raillery.”—Belinda smiled— 
“There now, one such smile as that for
Clarence Hervey, and I am out of debt
and danger,” said lady Delacour.
“O, lady Delacour, why, why will
you try your power over me, in this manner?” 
said Belinda—“You know that I
ought not to be persuaded to do what I am
conscious is wrong.—But a few days ago
you told me yourself, that Mr. Hervey

is—is not a marrying man; and a woman
of your penetration must see that— 
that he only means to flirt with me.—I am
not a match for Mr. Hervey in any respect.
—He is a man of wit and gallantry—I
am unpractised in the ways of the world.
—I was not educated by my aunt Stanhope
—I have only been with her a few
years—I wish I had never been with her
in my life.”
“I'll take care Mr. Hervey shall know
that,” said lady Delacour, “but in the
mean time, I do think any fair appraiser
of delicate distresses would decide, that I
am, all the circumstances considered,
more to be pitied at this present moment
than you are.—For the catastrophe of the
business evidently is, that I must pay two
hundred guineas for the horses some how
or other.”
“I can pay for them,” exclaimed Belinda,
“and will with the greatest pleasure.
—I will not go to the birthnight—my dress
is not bespoke.—Will two hundred guineas

pay for the horses?—O, take the
money—pay Mr. Hervey, dear lady Delacour,
and it will all be right.”
“You are a charming girl,” said lady
Delacour, embracing her, “but how can
I answer for it to my conscience, or to
your aunt Stanhope, if you don't appear
on the birthnight.—That cannot be, my
dear; besides, you know Mrs. Franks
will send home your drawing-room dress
to-day, and it would be so foolish to be
presented for nothing—not to go to the
birthnight afterwards.—If you say a you
must say b.”
“Then,” said Belinda, “I will not go to
the drawing-room.”—“Not go, my dear!
What, throw away fifty guineas for nothing!
Really I never saw any one so
lavish of her money, and so economic of
her smiles.”
“Surely,” said miss Portman, “it is
better for me to throw away fifty guineas,
poor as I am, than to hazard the happiness
of my life.—Your ladyship knows that
if I say a to Mr. Hervey, I must say b—

No, no, my dear lady Delacour—here is
the draft for two hundred guineas—pay
Mr. Hervey, for Heaven's sake, and there
is an end of the business.”
“What a positive child it is!—Well,
then it shall not be forced to say the a, b,
c, of Cupid's alphabet, to that terrible
pedagogue Clarence Hervey, till it pleases
—but seriously, miss Portman, I'm concerned
that you will make me take this
draft.—It is absolutely robbing you.— 
But lord Delacour's the person you must
blame—it is all his obstinacy—having once
said he would not pay for the horses, he
would see them and me and the whole
human race expire, before he would
change his silly mind.—Next month I
shall have it in my power, my dear, to repay
you with a thousand thanks—and in
a few months more we shall have another
birthday, and a new star shall appear
in the firmament of fashion, and it
shall be called Belinda.—In the mean
time, my dear, upon second thoughts, perhaps
we can get Mrs. Franks to dispose

of your drawing-room dress to some
person of taste, and you may keep your
fifty guineas for the next occasion.— 
I'll see what can be done—adieu—a thousand
thanks, silly child as you are.”
Mrs. Franks at first declared, that it
would be an impossibility to dispose of
miss Portman's dress, though she would
do any thing upon earth to oblige lady
Delacour—however, ten guineas made
every thing possible. Belinda rejoiced, at
having, as she thought, extricated herself
at so cheap a rate; and well pleased with
her own conduct, she wrote to her aunt
Stanhope, to inform her of as much of the
transaction as she could disclose, without
betraying lady Delacour. “Her ladyship,” 
she said, “had immediate occasion for
two hundred guineas, and to accommodate
her with this sum, she had given
up the idea of going to court.”
The tenour of miss Portman's letter will
be sufficiently apparent from Mrs. Stanhope's
answer.

MRS. STANHOPE TO MISS PORTMAN.
Bath, June ed.
“I cannot but feel some astonishment,
Belinda, at your very extraordinary
conduct, and more extraordinary letter.— 
What you can mean by principles and
delicacy, I own I don't pretend to understand,
when I see you not only forget the
respect that is due to the opinions and advice
of the aunt, to whom you owe every
thing; but you take upon yourself to
lavish her money, without common honesty.
—I send you 200 guineas, and desire
you to go to court—you lend my 200
guineas to lady Delacour, and inform me
that as you think yourself bound in honour
to her ladyship, you cannot explain all the
particulars to me, otherwise, you are sure
I should approve of the reasons which
have influenced you.—Mighty satisfactory,
truly!—And then to mend the matter,
you tell me that you do not think,
that in your situation in life it is necessary

that you should go to court. Your
opinions and mine, you add, differ in many
points.—Then I must say that you are
as ungrateful, as you are presumptuous— 
for I am not such a novice in the affairs
of this world, as to be ignorant that when
a young lady professes to be of a different
opinion from her friends, it is only a prelude
to something worse.—She begins by
saying, that she is determined to think
for herself; and she is determined to act
for herself—and then it is all over with
her—and all the money, &c. that has
been spent upon her education, is so much
dead loss to her friends.
“Now I look upon it, that a young girl
who has been brought up, and brought
forward in the world as you have been
by connexions, is bound to be guided implicitly
by them in all her conduct.— 
What should you think of a man, who,
after he had been brought into parliament
by a friend, would go and vote against
that friend's opinions.—You do not want
sense, Belinda—you perfectly understand

me—and consequently, your errours I must
impute to the defect of your heart, and
not of your judgment.—I see, that on account
of the illness of the princess—the
king's birthday is put off for a fortnight.
If you manage properly, and if (unknown
to lady&wblank;, who certainly has not
used you well in this business, and to
whom therefore you owe no peculiar delicacy)
you make lord&wblank;sensible
how much your aunt Stanhope is disappointed
and displeased (as I most truly
am) at your intention of missing this opportunity
of appearing at court; it is ten
to one but his lordship, who has not made
it a point to refuse your request, I suppose,
will pay you your two hundred guineas.
—You of course will make proper acknowledgments; 
but at the same time,
entreat that his lordship will not commit
you with his lady, as she might be offended
at your application to him.—I understand
from an intimate acquaintance of his, that
you are a great favourite of his lordship's,
and though an obstinate, he is a good-natured

man, and can have no fear of
being governed by you; consequently he
will do just as you would have him.
“Then you have an opportunity of representing
the thing, in the prettiest manner
imaginable, to lady&wblank;as an instance
of her lord's consideration for her.
—So you will oblige all parties (a very desirable
thing) without costing yourself one
penny, and go to the birthnight after all.— 
And this only by using a little address— 
without which nothing is to be done in
this world.
“Yours affectionately, (if you follow my
advice,)
Selina Stanhope.”
Belinda, though she could not, consistently
with what she thought right, follow
the advice so artfully given to her in this
epistle, was yet extremely concerned to
find, that she had incurred the displeasure
of an aunt to whom she thought herself
under obligations. She resolved to lay by

as much as she possibly could, from the
interest of her fortune, and to repay the
two hundred guineas to Mrs. Stanhope:
she was conscious that she had no right to
lend this money to lady Delacour, if her
aunt had expressly desired that she should
spend it only on her court dress; but this
had not distinctly been expressed, when
Mrs. Stanhope sent her niece the draughts.
That lady was in the habit of speaking and
writing ambiguously, so that even those
who knew her best, were frequently in
doubt how to interpret her words.—Yet
she was extremely displeased when her
hints, and her half expressed wishes were
not understood.—Beside the concern she
felt from the thoughts of having displeased
her aunt, Belinda was both vexed and
mortified, to perceive that in Clarence
Hervey's manner towards her there was
not the change, which she had expected
that her conduct would naturally produce.
One day she was surprised by his reproaching
her for caprice in having given

up her intentions of going to court. Lady
Delacour's embarrassment whilst Mr.
Hervey spoke, Belinda atributed to her
ladyship's desire that Clarence should not
know, that she had been obliged to borrow
the money to pay him for the horses.
Belinda thought that this was a species
of mean pride; but she made it a point
to keep her ladyship's secret: she therefore
slightly answered Mr. Hervey, “that
she wondered that a man, who is so well
acquainted with the female sex, should
be surprised at any instance of caprice
from a woman.”—The conversation then
took another turn, and whilst they were
talking on indifferent subjects, in came
lord Delacour's man, Champfort, with
Mrs. Stanhope's draught for two hundred
guineas, which the coach-maker's man had
just brought back, because miss Portman
had forgotten to endorse it.—Belinda's
astonishment was almost as great at this
instant, as lady Delacour's confusion.— 
“Come this way, my dear, and we'll
find you a pen and ink—you need not

wait, Champfort—but tell the man to
wait for the draught—miss Portman will
endorse it immediately.”—And she took
Belinda into another room.
“Good Heavens! Has not this money
been paid to Mr. Hervey?” exclaimed
Belinda.
“No, my dear, but I will take all the
blame upon myself; or, which will do just
as well for you, throw it all upon my
better half—my lord Delacour would not
pay for my new carriage.—The coach-maker,
insolent animal, would not let it
out of his yard without a hundred guineas
in ready money.—Now you know I had
the horses, and what could I do with the
horses without the carriage. Clarence
Hervey, I knew, could wait for his money
better than a poor devil of a coach-maker,
so I paid the coach-maker, and a few
months sooner or later can make no difference
to Clarence, who rolls in gold, my
dear—if that will be any comfort to you,
as I hope it will.”

“O, what will he think of me!” said
Belinda.
“Nay, what will he think of me,
child?”
—“Lady Delacour,” said Belinda, in a
firmer tone than she had ever before spoken
—“I must insist upon this draught's
being given to Mr. Hervey.”
“Absolutely impossible, my dear.—I
cannot take it from the coach-maker—he
has sent home the carriage—the thing's
done, and cannot be undone.—But come,
since I know nothing else will make you
easy, I will take this mighty favour from
Mr. Hervey entirely upon my own conscience.
—You cannot object to that, for
you are not the keeper of my conscience
—I will tell Clarence the whole business,
and do you honour due, my dear—so endorse
the note, whilst I go and sound both
the praises of your dignity of mind, and
simplicity of character, &c. &c. &c. &c.
&c.”—And her ladyship broke away from
Belinda, returned to Clarence Hervey,
and told the whole affair with that peculiar

grace with which she knew how to
make a good story of a bad one.—Clarence
was as favourable an auditor at
this time as she could possibly have found,
for no human being could value money
less than he did, and all sense of her
ladyship's meanness was lost in his joy at
discovering that Belinda was worthy of
his esteem.—Now he felt in its fullest extent
all the power she had over his heart,
and he was upon the point of declaring
his attachment to her, when—“malheureusement,” 
—sir Philip Baddely and Mr.
Rochfort announced themselves by the
noise they made on the staircase. These
were the young men who had spoken in such
a contemptuous manner at lady Singleton's
of the match-making Mrs. Stanhope and
her nieces.—Mr. Hervey was anxious
that they should not penetrate into the
state of his heart, and he concealed his
emotion by instantly assuming that kind
of rattling gayety, which always delighted
his companions, who were ever in want
of some one to set their stagnant ideas in

motion. At last they insisted upon carrying
Clarence away with them to taste
some wines for sir Philip Baddely.