

Ormond was received with much
kindness in Dr. Cambray's family, in
which he felt himself at ease, and soon
forgot that he was a stranger; his mind,
however, was anxious about his situation,
as he longed to get into active life.
Every morning, when the post came in,
he hoped there would be a letter for him
with his commission; and he was every
morning regularly surprised and disappointed
on finding that there was none.
In the course of each ensuing day, however,
he forgot his disappointment, and
said he believed he was happier where
he was, than he could be any where else.
The regular morning question of “Any

letters for me?” was at last answered
by “Yes; one franked by Sir Ulick
O'Shane.” “Ah! no commission, I feel
no enclosure—single letter, no! double.” 
Double or single, it was as follows:—
“Dear Harry,—At last I have seen
the executrix and son-in-law, whom that
great genius deceased, my well-beloved
cousin in folly, king Corny, chose for himself.
As to that thing, half mud, half
tinsel, half Irish, half French, Miss, or
Mademoiselle, O'Faley, that jointed doll
is—all but the eyes, which move of
themselves in a very extraordinary way— 
a mere puppet, pulled by wires in the
hands of another. The master-showman,
fully as extraordinary in his own way as
his puppet, kept, while I was by, as much
as possible behind the scenes. The hand
and ruffle of the French petit-maitre and
the prompter's voice, however, were visible
and audible enough for me. In plain
English, I suppose it is no news to you
to hear, that Mademoiselle O'Faley is a

fool, and Monsieur de Connal, captain
O'Connal, Black Connal, or by whatever
other alias he is to be called, is properly
a puppy. I am sorry, my dear boy, to
tell you, that the fool has let the rogue
get hold of the £500 lodged in bank, so no
hopes of your commission for three months,
or at the least two months, to come.
My dear boy, your much-lamented friend
and benefactor (is not that the style?)
king Corny, who began, I think, by being,
years ago, to your admiration, his
own tailor, has ended, I fear, to your
loss, by being his own lawyer; he has
drawn his will so that any attorney could
drive a coach and six through it—so ends
’every man his own lawyer.’ Forgive
me this laugh, Harry. By the bye, you,
my dear ward, will be of age in December,
I think—then all my legal power of
interference ceases.
“Meantime, as I know you will be
out of spirits when you read this, I have
some comfort for you and myself, which

I kept for a bonne-bouche—you will
never more see Lady O'Shane, nor I
neither. Articles of separation, and I
didn't trust myself to be my own lawyer,
have been signed between us, so I shall
see her ladyship sail for England this
night—won't let any one have the pleasure
of putting her on board but myself— 
I will see her safe off, and feel well assured
nothing can tempt her to return— 
even to haunt me—or scold you—This
was the business which detained me in
Dublin—well worth while to give up a
summer to secure for the rest of one's
days liberty to lead a batchelor's merry
life, which I mean to do at Castle Hermitage
or elsewhere, now and from
henceforth—Miss Black in no ways, notwithstanding.
Miss Black, it is but justice
to tell you, is now convinced of my
conjugal virtues, and admires my patience
as much as she used to admire Lady
O'Shane's. She has been very useful to
me in arranging my affairs in this separation

—In consequence, I have procured a
commission of the peace for a certain
Mr. M'Crule, a man whom you may remember
to have seen or heard at the
bottom or corner of the table at Castle
Hermitage, one of the Cromnellians, a
fellow with the true draw-down of the
mouth, and who speaks, or snorts, through
his nose. I have caused him, not without
some difficulty, to ask Miss Black to be
his helpmate—(Lord help him and forgive
me!)—And Miss Black, preferring
rather to stay in Ireland and become
Mrs. M‘Crule, than to return to England
and continue companion to Lady
O'Shane, hath consented (who can blame
her?) to marry on the spur of the occasion— 
to-morrow—I giving her away, you
may imagine with what satisfaction.
What with marriages and separations,
the business of the nation, my bank, my
canal, and my coal mines, you may guess
my hands have been full of business— 
now, all for pleasure! Next week hope

to be down enjoying my liberty at Castle
Hermitage, where I shall be heartily glad
to have my dear Harry again—Marcus
in England still—the poor Annalys in
great distress about the son, with whom,
I fear, it is all over—no time for more— 
Measure my affection by the length of
this, the longest epistle extant in my
hand-writing.
“My dear boy, your's ever,
“Ulick O'Shane.”
The mixed and crossing emotions,
which this letter was calculated to excite,
having crossed, and mixed, and
subsided a little, the predominating feeling
was expressed by our young hero
with a sigh and this reflexion—
“Two months at the least! I must
wait before I can have my commission— 
two months more in idleness the fates
have decreed.”
“That last is a part of the decree that
depends on yourself, not on the fates.
Two months you must wait, but why in
idleness?” said Dr. Cambray.

The kind and prudent doctor did not
press the question, he was content with
its being heard, knowing that it would
sink into the mind and produce its effect
in due season. Accordingly, after some
time, after Ormond had exhaled impatience,
and exhausted invective, and submitted
to necessity, he returned to reason
with the doctor. One evening, when the
doctor and his family had come in from
walking, and as the tea-urn was just
coming bubbling and steaming, Ormond
set to work at a corner of the table, at
the doctor's elbow.
“My dear doctor, suppose I was now
to read over to you my list of books.”
“Suppose you were, and suppose I
was to fall asleep,” said the doctor.
“Not the least likely, Sir, when you
are to do any thing kind for a friend— 
may I say friend?”
“You may. Come, read on, I am not
proof against flattery, even at my age— 
well, read away.”
Ormond began, but at that moment—

whirl—there drove past the windows a
travelling chariot and four.
“Sir Ulick O'Shane! as I live,” cried
Ormond, starting up. “I saw him—he
nodded to me. Oh no, impossible—he
said he would not come till next week— 
Where's his letter?—What's the date?— 
Could it mean this week?—No; he
says next week quite plainly—What can
be the reason?”
A note for Mr. Ormond was brought
in, which had been left by one of Sir
Ulick O'Shane's servants as they went
by.
“My commission after all,” cried
Harry—“I always knew, I always said,
that Sir Ulick was a good friend.”
“Has he purchased the commission?” 
said Dr. Cambray.
“He does not actually say so, but that
must be what his note means,” said Ormond.
“Means! but what does it say—May
I see it?”

“It is written in such a hurry, and in
pencil, you'll not be able to make it out.”
The doctor, however, read aloud—
“If Mr. Harry Ormond will inquire
at Castle Hermitage, he will hear of something
to his advantage.
“U. O'SHANE.”
“Go off this minute,” said Mrs. Cambray,
“and inquire at Castle Hermitage
what Mr. Harry Ormond may hear to his
advantage, and let us learn it as soon as
possible.”
“Thank you, ma'am,” said Harry; 
and ere the words were well uttered a
hundred steps were lost.
With more than his usual cordiality,
Sir Ulick O'Shane received him, came
out into the hall to meet his dear Harry,
his own dear boy, to welcome him again
to Castle Hermitage.
“We did not expect you, Sir, till next
week—this is a most agreeable surprise— 
Did not you say—”
“No matter what I said, you see what

I have done,” interrupted Sir Ulick; 
“and now I must introduce you to a
niece of mine, whom you have never yet
seen.”
“Oh! then there was a bonnet in the
carriage.”
“A bonnet—yes; but don't be alarmed— 
as unlike the last bonnet that presided
here as possible. In two words,
that you may know your ground, this
niece of mine, Lady Norton, is a charming,
well-bred, pleasant, little widow,
whose husband died, luckily for her and
me, just when they had run out all their
large fortune. She is delighted to come
to me, and is just the thing to do the
honours of Castle Hermitage—used to
the style; but observe, though she is to
rule my roast and my boiled, she is not to
rule me or my friends—that is a preliminary,
and a special clause for Harry Ormond's
being a privileged ami de la
maison. Now, my dear fellow, you understand
how the land lies, and depend

upon it, you'll like her, and find her every
way of great advantage to you.”
So, thought Harry, is this all the advantage
I am to hear of.
Sir Ulick led on to the drawing-room,
presented him to a fashionable looking
lady, neither young nor old, nothing in
any respect remarkable.
“Lady Norton, Harry Ormond— 
Harry Ormond, my niece, Lady Norton,
who will make this house as pleasant to
you, and to me, and to all my friends, as
it has been unpleasant ever since—in
short, ever since you were out of it,
Harry.”
Lady Norton, with gracious smile and
well-bred courtesy, received Harry in a
manner that promised the performance
of all for which Sir Ulick had engaged.
Tea and coffee came; and the conversation
went on chiefly between Sir Ulick
and Lady Norton on their own affairs,
about invitations and engagements they
had made, before they left Dublin, with

various persons who were coming down
to Castle Hermitage. Sir Ulick asked,
“When are the Brudenells to come to
us, my dear?—Did you settle with the
Lascelles?—and Lady Louisa, she must
be here with the vice-regal party—arrange
that, my dear.”
Lady Norton had settled everything; 
she took out an elegant memorandum-book,
and read the arrangements to Sir
Ulick:—“Monday, the Brudenells; 
Wednesday, the Lascelles; week afterwards,
Lady Louisa L&wblank;and the vice-regal
party;” with more titled personages
and names of fashionable notoriety, than
Harry Ormond had ever before heard, or
conceived to exist. Between times, Sir
Ulick turned to him and noted the claims
of these persons to distinction, and as several
ladies were named, exclaimed—
“Charming woman!—Delightful little
creature!—The Darrells; Harry, you'll
like the Darrells too!—The Lardners, all
clever, pleasant, and odd, will entertain
you amazingly, Harry!—But Lady Millicent

is the woman—nothing at all has
been seen in this country like her—most
fascinating!—Harry, take care of your
heart.”
Then, as to the men—this man was
clever—and the other was quite a hero— 
and the next the pleasantest fellow—and
the best sportsman—and there were men
of political eminence—men who had distinguished
themselves on different occasions
by celebrated speeches—and particularly
promising rising young men,
with whom he must make Ormond intimately
acquainted. The whole of this
conversation was calculated to impress
him with the idea, that the most celebrated,
charming, delightful people of
both sexes in the universe had agreed to
rendezvous, in the course of the ensuing
month, at Castle Hermitage—a scene of
never-ending pleasure and festivity seemed
opening to his view. Now Sir Ulick
closed Lady Norton's book, and taking it
from her hand, said—
“I am tiring you, my dear—that's

enough for to-night—we'll settle all the
rest to-morrow—you must be tired after
your journey—I whirled you down without
mercy—you look fatigued and sleepy.”
Lady Norton said, “Indeed, she believed
she was a little tired, and rather
sleepy.”
Her uncle begged she would not sit up
longer from compliment; accordingly,
apologizing to Mr. Ormond, and “really
much fatigued,” she retired. Sir Ulick
walked up and down the room, meditating
for some moments, while Harry
renewed his intimacy with an old dog,
who, at every pause in the conversation,
jumping up upon him, squeeling with
delight, had claimed his notice.
“Well, my boy,” exclaimed Sir
Ulick, stopping short, “aren't you a most
extraordinary fellow? Pray did you get
my note?”
“Certainly, Sir, and came instantly
in consequence.”
“And yet you have never inquired what
it is that you might hear to your advantage.”

“I—I thought I had heard it, Sir.”
“Heard it, Sir!” repeated Sir Ulick— 
“What can you mean?”
“Simply, Sir, that I thought the advantage
you alluded to was the introduction
you did me just now the favour to
give me to Lady Norton;—you said, her
being here would be a great advantage to
me, and that led me to conclude—”
“Well, well! you were always a simple
good fellow—confiding in my friendship— 
continue the same—you will, I
am confident. But had you no other
thought?”
“I had,” said Harry, “when first I
read your note, I had, I own, another
thought.”
“And what might it be?”
“I thought of my commission, Sir.”
“What of your commission?”
“That you had procured it for me,
Sir.”
“Since you ask me, I tell you honestly— 
and honestly I tell you, that if it

had been for your interest, I would have
purchased that commission long ago; but
there is a little secret, a political secret,
which I could not tell you before—those
who are behind the scenes cannot always
speak—I may tell it to you now confidentially,
but you must not repeat it,
especially from me—that peace is likely
to continue; so the army is out of the
question.”
“Well, Sir, if that be the case—you
know best.”
“I do,—it is, trust me; and as things
have turned out,—though I could not possibly
foresee what has happened,—every
thing is for the best; I have come express
from town to tell you news, that will surprise
you beyond measure.”
“What can you mean, Sir?”
“Simply, Sir, that you are possessed,
or soon will be possessed of—but come,
sit down quietly, and in good earnest
let me explain to you.—You know your
father's second wife, the Indian woman,

the governor's mahogany coloured daughter
—she had a prodigious fortune, which
my poor friend, your father, chose, when
dying, to settle upon her, and her Indian
son; leaving you nothing but what he
could not take from you—the little paternal
estate of £300 a year. Well, it has
pleased Heaven to take your mahogany
coloured step-mother and your Indian
brother out of this world; both carried
off within a few days of each other by a
fever of the country—much regretted I
dare say, in the Bombay Gazette, by all
who knew them.
“But as neither you nor I had that
honour, we are not, upon this occasion,
called upon for any hypocrisy, further than
a black coat, which I have ordered for
you at my tailor's. Have also noted and
answered, in conformity, the agent's letter
of 26th July, received yesterday,
containing the melancholy intelligence:— 
further, replied to that part of his last,
which requested to know how and where

to transmit the property, or eighty thousand
pounds sterling, which, on the Indian
mother and brother's demise, falls,
by the will of the late Capt. Ormond, to
his European son, Harry Ormond, Esq.
now under the guardianship of Sir Ulick
O'Shane, Castle Hermitage, Ireland.”
As he spoke, Sir Ulick produced the
agent's letter, and put it into his ward's
hand, pointing to the “useful passages.” 
—Harry, glancing his eye over them,
understood just enough to be convinced,
that Sir Ulick was in earnest, and that
he was really heir to a very considerable
property.
“Well! Harry Ormond, Esq.” pursued
Sir Ulick, “was I wrong when I
told you, that if you would inquire at Castle
Hermitage you would hear of something
to your advantage?”
“I hope in Heaven,” said Ormond,
“and pray to Heaven, that it may be to my
advantage!—I hope neither my head nor
my heart may be turned by sudden prosperity.”

“Your heart—Oh! I'll answer for
your heart, my noble fellow;” said Sir
Ulick—“but I own you surprise me by
the coolness of head you shew.”
“If you'll excuse me,” said Ormond,
“I must run this minute to tell Dr. Cambray
and all my friends at Vicar's Vale.”
“Certainly—quite right,” said Sir
Ulick, “I won't detain you a moment,” 
said he—but he still held him fast. “I let
you go to-night, but you must come to me
to-morrow.”
“Oh! Sir, certainly.”
“And you will bid adieu to Vicar's
Vale, and take up your quarters at Castle
Hermitage, with your old guardian.”
“Thank you, Sir—delightful! But
I need not bid adieu to Vicar's Vale— 
they are so near, I shall see them every
day.”
“Of course,” said Sir Ulick, biting
his lip—“but I was thinking of something.
“Pray,” continued Sir Ulick, “do
you like a gig, a curricle, or a phaeton

best, or what carriage will you have; 
there is Tom Darrell's in London now,
who can bring it over for you. Well,
we can settle that to-morrow.”
“If you please—thank you, kind Sir
Ulick—how can you think so quickly of
every thing?”
“Horses too—let me see,” said Sir
Ulick, drawing Harry back to the fire
place—“Aye, George Beine is a judge
of horses, he can chuse for you, unless
you like to chuse for yourself. What
colour—black or bay?”
“I declare, Sir, I don't know yet— 
my poor head is in such a state—and the
horses happen not to be uppermost.”
“I protest, Harry, you perfectly astonish
me, by the sedateness of your mind
and manner. You are certainly wonderfully
formed and improved since I saw
you last—but, how! in the name of wonder,
in the Black Islands, how I cannot
conceive,” said Sir Ulick.
“As to sedateness, you know, Sir,

since I saw you last, I may well be sobered a little, for I have suffered—not a
little,” said Harry.
“Suffered! how?” said Sir Ulick,
leaning his arm on the mantle-piece opposite
to him, and listening with an
air of sympathy—“suffered! I was not
aware—”
“You know, Sir, I have lost an excellent
friend.”
“Poor Corny—aye, my poor cousin,
as far as he could, I am sure he wished to
be a friend to you.”
“He wished to be, and was,” said
Ormond.
“It would have been better for him
and his daughter too,” resumed Sir
Ulick, “if he had chosen you for his son-in-law,
instead of the coxcomb to whom
Dora is going to be married—yet I own,
as your guardian—I am well pleased
that Dora, though a very pretty girl, is
out of your way—you must look higher— 
she was no match for you.”

“I am perfectly sensible, Sir, that we
should never have been happy together.”
“You are a very sensible young man,
Ormond—you make me admire you, seriously— 
I always foresaw what you
would be:—Ah! if Marcus—but we'll
not talk of that now.—Terribly dissipated— 
has spent an immensity of money
already—but still, when he speaks in
Parliament, he will make a figure.— 
But good bye, good night, I see you
are in a hurry to get away from me.”
“From you—Oh, no, Sir, you cannot
think me so ungrateful—I have not expressed— 
because I have not words;— 
when I feel much, I never can say any
thing;—yet believe me, Sir, I do feel
your kindness, and all the warm, fatherly
interest you have this night shewn that
you have for me:—but I am in a hurry
to tell my good friends the Cambrays,
who I know are impatient for my return,
and I fear I am keeping them up
beyond their usual hour.”

“Not at all—besides—good heavens!
can't they set up a quarter of an hour,
if they are so much interested?—stay,
you really hurry my slow wits—one thing
more I had to say—pray may I ask, to
which of the Miss Cambrays is it that
you are so impatient to impart your good
fortune?”
“To both, Sir,” said Ormond— 
“equally.”
“Both!—you unconscionable dog, polygamy
is not permitted in these countries.— 
Both—no—try again for a better
answer, though that was no bad one at
the first blush.”
“I have no other answer to give than the
plain truth, Sir.—I am thinking neither of
polygamy, nor even of marriage at present,
Sir.—These young ladies are both very
amiable, very handsome, and very agreeable; 
but, in short, we are not thinking
of one another—indeed I believe they
are engaged.”
“Engaged!—Oh!—Then you have

thought about these young ladies enough
to find that out.—Well, this saves your
gallantry—good night.”
Sir Ulick had this evening taken a
vast deal of superfluous pains to sound
a mind, which lay open before him, clear
to the very bottom; but because it was so
clear, he could not believe that he saw
the bottom.—He did not much like Dr.
Cambray—father Jos was right there.— 
Dr. Cambray was one of those simple
characters, which puzzled Sir Ulick— 
the idea of these Miss Cambrays, of the
possibility of his ward's having formed
an attachment that might interfere with
his views—disturbed Sir Ulick's rest this
night. His first operation in the morning
was, to walk down unexpectedly
early to Vicar's Vale. He found Ormond
with Dr. Cambray, very busy, examining
a plan which the doctor had sketched
for a new cottage for Moriarty, a mason
was standing by, talking of sand,
lime, and stones.—“But the young

ladies, where are they?” Sir Ulick
asked.
Ormond did not know.—Mrs. Cambray,
who was quietly reading, said, she
supposed they were in their gardens; 
and not in the least suspecting Sir Ulick's
suspicions, she was glad to see him, and
gave credit to his neighbourly good-will
for the earliness of this visit, without
waiting even for the doctor to pay his
respects first, as he intended to do at
Castle Hermitage.
“Oh! as to that,” Sir Ulick said, “he
did not intend to live on terms of ceremony
with Dr. Cambray—he was impatient
to take the first opportunity of thanking
the doctor for his attentions to his ward.”
Sir Ulick's quick eye saw on the table
in Harry's handwriting the list of
books to be read. He took it up, looked
it over, and with a smile asked—
“Any thoughts of the church, Harry?”
“No, Sir—it would be rather late

for me to think of the church, I should
never prepare myself properly.”
“Besides,” said Sir Ulick, “I have
no living in my gift—but if,” continued
he, in a tone of irony, “if, as I should
opine from the list I hold in my hand,
you look to a college living my boy, if
you are bent upon reading for a fellowship,
I don't doubt but with Dr. Cambray's
assistance, and with some grinder
and crammer, we might get you cleverly
through all the college examinations— 
and doctor, if he did not, in going
through some of the college courses, die
of a logical indigestion, or a classical
fever, or a metaphysical lethargy, he
might shine in the dignity of Trin. Coll.
Dub. and, mad Mathesis inspiring,
might teach eternally how the line A B
is equal to the line C D&wblank;or why poor
X Y Z are unknown quantities.—Ah!
my dear boy, think of the pleasure, the
glory of lecturing classes of ignoramuses,
and dunces yet unborn.”

Harry, no way disconcerted, laughed
good humouredly with his guardian, and
replied.—“At present, Sir, my ambition
reaches no farther than to escape myself
from the class of dunces and ignoramuses.
I am conscious, that at present I am very
deficient.”
“In what, my dear boy?—To make
your complaint English, you must say deficient
in some thing or other—'tis an Iricism
to say in general, that you are very
deficient.”
“There is one of my particular deficiencies
then you see, Sir—I am deficient
in English.”
“You are not deficient in temper, I
am sure,” said Sir Ulick: “come, come,
you may be tolerably well contented
with yourself.”
“Ignorant as I am!—No,” said Ormond,
“I will never sit down content in
ignorance.—Now that I have the fortune
of a gentleman, it would be so
much the more conspicuous, more scandalous

—now that I have every way the
means, I will, by the blessing of Heaven,
and with the help of kind friends, make
myself something more, and something
better than I am now.”
“Gad! you are a fine fellow, Harry
Ormond,” cried Sir Ulick: “I remember
having once, at your age, such feelings
and notions myself!”
“Very unlike the first thoughts and
feelings many young men would have
on coming into unexpected possession of
a fortune,” said Dr. Cambray.
“True,” said Sir Ulick, “and we
must keep his counsel, that he may not
be dubbed a quiz—not a word of this
sort Harry for the Darrells, the Lardners,
or the Dartfords.”
“I don't care whether they dub me a
quiz or not,” said Harry, hastily, “what
are Darrells, Lardners, or Dartfords to
me?”
“They are something to me,” said Sir
Ulick.

“Oh I beg pardon, Sir, I didn't know
that—that makes it quite another affair.”
“And Harry, as you are to meet these
young men, I thought it well to try how
you could bear to be laughed at—I have
tried you in this very conversation, and
found you to my infinite satisfaction ridicule
proof—better than even bullet proof
—much better.—No danger that a young
man of spirit should be bullied out of his
own opinion and principles, but great
danger that he might be laughed out
of them—and I rejoice, my dear ward,
to see that you are safe from this
peril.”
Benevolent pleasure shone in Dr. Cambray's
countenance, when he heard Sir
Ulick speak in this manner.
“You will dine with us, Dr. Cambray,” 
said Sir Ulick. “Harry, you will
not forget Castle Hermitage?”
“Forget Castle Hermitage! as if I
could, where I spent my happy childhood

—that Paradise as it seemed to me
the first time—when, a poor little orphan
boy, I was brought from my smoky
cabin—I remember the day as well as
if it was this moment—when you took
me by the hand, and led me in, and I
clung to you.”
“Cling to me still! cling to me ever,”— 
interrupted Sir Ulick, “and I will never
fail you—no, never,” repeated he, grasping
Harry's hand, and looking upon
him with an emotion of affection, strongly
felt, and therefore strongly expressed.
“To be sure I will,” said Harry.
“And I hope,” added Sir Ulick, recovering
the gaiety of his tone, “that at
Castle Hermitage a Paradise will open
for your youth, as it opened for your
childhood.”
Mrs. Cambray put in a word of hope
and fear about Vicar's Vale. To which
Ormond answered—
“Never fear Mrs. Cambray—trust me
—I know my own interest too well.”

Sir Ulick turning again as he was
leaving the room, said with an air of
frank liberality—
“We'll settle that at once—we'll divide
Harry between us—or we'll divide
his day thus—the mornings I leave you
to your friends and studies for an hour
or two, Harry, in this Eden's Vale, the
rest of the day we must have you— 
men and books best mixed—see Bacon,
and see every clever man, that ever
wrote or spoke—So here,” added Sir
Ulick, pointing to a map of history,
which lay on the table, “you will have
The Stream of Time, and with us Le
Courant du Jour.”
Sir Ulick departed.—During the whole
of this conversation, and of that of the
preceding night, while he seemed to be
talking at random of indifferent things,
unconnected and of opposite sorts, he
had carefully attended to one object.
Going round the whole circle of human
motives—love, ambition, interest, ease,

pleasure, he had made accurate observations
on his ward's mind; and reversing
the order, he went round another
way, and repeated and corrected his
observations. The points he had strongly
noted for practical use were, that for retaining
influence over his ward, he must
depend not upon interested motives of
any kind, nor upon the force of authority,
or precedent, nor yet on the power of
ridicule, but principally upon feelings
of honour, gratitude, and generosity.— 
Harry now no longer crossed any of his
projects, but was become himself the
means of carrying many into execution.— 
The plan of a match for Marcus with Miss
Annaly was entirely at an end.—That
young lady had given a decided refusal,
and some circumstances, which we cannot
here stop to explain, rendered Marcus
and his father easy under that disappointment.
—No jealousy or competition existing,
therefore, any longer between his
son and ward, Sir Ulick's affection for

Ormond returned in full tide—nor did
he reproach himself for having banished
Harry from Castle Hermitage, or for
having formerly neglected, and almost
forgotten him for two or three years.— 
Sir Ulick took the matter up just as
easily as he had laid it down—he now
looked on Harry not as the youth whom
he had deserted, but as the orphan boy
whom he had cherished in adversity,
and whom he had a consequent right to
produce and patronise in prosperity.— 
Beyond, or beneath all this there was
another reason, why Sir Ulick took so
much pains, and felt so much anxiety to
establish his influence over his ward.— 
This reason cannot yet be mentioned— 
he had hardly revealed it to himself—it
was deep down in his soul—to be or not
to be—as circumstances, time, and the
hour should decide.