

In his way to St. James's street, where
the wine merchant lived, sir Philip Baddely
picked up several young men of his
acquaintance, who were all eager to see
a trial of taste, of epicurean taste—between
the baronet and Clarence Hervey.
Amongst his other accomplishments our
hero piqued himself upon the exquisite
accuracy of his organs of taste. He
neither loved wine, nor was he fond of
eating; but at fine dinners, with young
men who were real epicures, Hervey
gave himself the airs of a connoisseur, and

asserted superiority even in judging of wine
and sauces.—Having gained immortal honour
at an entertainment, by gravely protesting
that some turtle would have been excellent
if it had not been done a bubble too
much, he presumed, elate as he was with
the applauses of the company, to assert,
that no man in England had a more correct
taste than himself.—Sir Philip Baddely
could not passively submit to this arrogance; 
he loudly proclaimed, that though
he would not dispute Mr. Hervey's judgment
as far as eating was concerned, yet he
would defy him as a connoisseur in wines,
and he offered to submit the competition
to any eminent wine-merchant in London,
and to some common friend of acknowledged
taste and experience.—Mr. Rochfort
was chosen as the common friend of
acknowledged taste and experience; and
a fashionable wine-merchant was pitched
upon, to decide with him the merits of
these candidates for bacchanalian fame.
Sir Philip, who was just going to furnish
his cellars, was a person of importance to

the wine-merchant, who produced accordingly
his choicest treasures.—Sir
Philip and Clarence tasted of all in their
turns; sir Philip with real, and Clarence
with affected gravity; and they delivered
their opinions of the positive and comparative
merits of each. The wine-merchant
evidently, as Mr. Hervey thought,
leaned towards sir Philip.—“Upon my
word, sir Philip, you are right—that
wine is the best I have—you certainly
have a most discriminating taste,” said the
complaisant wine-merchant.—“I'll tell
you what,” cried sir Philip, “the thing is
this—by G&wblank;now there's no possibility
now—no possibility now by G&wblank;of imposing
upon me.”—“Then,” said Clarence
Hervey, “would you engage to tell
the difference between these two wines
ten times running, blindfold?”—“Ten
times, that's nothing,” replied sir Philip; 
“yes, fifty times, I would, by G&wblank;.”
But when it came to the trial, sir Philip
had nothing left but oaths in his own
favour. Clarence Hervey was victorious,

and his sense of the importance of this
victory was much increased by the fumes
of the wine, which began to operate upon
his brain.—His triumph was, as he said
it ought to be, bacchanalian—he laughed
and sang with Anacreontic spirit, and
finished by declaring, that he deserved
to be crowned with vine-leaves.—“Dine
with me, Clarence,” said Rochfort,
“and we'll crown you with three times
three—and,” whispered he to sir Philip— 
“we'll have another trial after dinner.”
“But as it's not near dinner time yet— 
only half past six by me—what shall we
do with ourselves till dinner time?” said
sir Philip, yawning pathetically.
Clarence, not being used to drink in a
morning, though all his companions were,
was much affected by the wine, and Rochfort
proposed that they should take a turn
in the park to cool Hervey's head.—To
Hyde-park they repaired; sir Philip
boasting all the way they walked, of the
superiour strength of his head.
Clarence protested that his own was

stronger than any man's in England, and
observed, that at this instant he walked
better than any person in company, sir
Philip Baddely not excepted. Now, sir Philip
Baddely was a noted pedestrian, and he
immediately challenged our hero to walk
with him for any money he pleased.— 
“Done,” said Clarence, “for ten guineas
—for any money you please”—and instantly
they set out to walk, as Rochfort cried
“one, two, three, and away; keep the
path, and whichever reaches that elm tree
first has it.”
They were exactly even for some yards,
then Clarence got ahead of sir Philip,
and he reached the elm tree first; but as
he waved his hat, exclaiming, “Clarence
has won the day,” sir Philip came up
with his companions, and coolly informed
him that he had lost his wager—“lost!
lost! lost! Clarence; fairly lost.”
“Didn't I reach the tree first,” said
Clarence.
“Yes,” answered his companions, “but
you didn't keep the path.—You turned

out of the way when you met that crowd
of children, yonder.—Now I, said sir
Philip, dashed fairly through them—kept
the path, and won my bet.”
“But,” said Hervey, “would you have
had me run over that little child, who was
stooping down just in my way?”
“I, not I,” said sir Philip, “but I would
have you go through with your civility— 
If a man will be polite, he must pay for
his politeness sometimes.—You said you'd
lay me any money I pleased, recollect— 
now I'm very moderate—and as you are a
particular friend, Clarence, I'll only take
your ten guineas.”
A loud laugh from his companions provoked
Clarence; they were glad “to
have a laugh against him,” because he
excited universal envy, by the real superiority
of his talents, and by his perpetually
taking the lead in those trifles which
were beneath his ambition, and exactly
suited to engage the attention of his
associates.
“Be it so—and welcome—I'll pay ten

guineas for having better manners than
any of you,” cried Hervey, laughing; 
“but remember, though I've lost this bet,
I don't give up my pedestrain fame.—Sir
Philip, there are no women to throw golden
apples in my way now, and no children
for me to stumble over; I dare you
to another trial—double or quit.”
“I'm off by G&wblank;,” said sir Philip—“I'm
too hot, damme, to walk with you any
more—but I'm your man if you've a mind
for a swim—damme, here's the Serpentine
river, Clarence.—Hey? damn it!— 
Hey?”
Sir Philip and all his companions knew
that Clarence had never learned to swim.
“You may wink at one another, as
wisely as you please,” said Clarence,
“but come on my boys—I am your man
for a swim—a hundred guineas upon it”— 
&wblank;‘Darest thou, Rochfort, now,
Leap in with me into this weedy flood,
And swim to yonder point.’
and instantly Hervey, who had in his confused

head some recollection of an essay
of Dr. Franklin's on swimming, by which
he fancied that he could ensure at once his
safety and his fame, threw off his coat
and jumped into the river—luckily he was
not in boots—Rochfort began coolly to
undress himself under the trees, and all
the other young men stood laughing by
the river side.—“Who the devil are these
two that seem to be making up to us,” 
said sir Philip, looking at two gentlemen
who were coming towards them.—“Sir
George, hey, you who know every body?
—The foremost is Percival of Oakly
Park, I think, 'pon my honour,” replied
Mr. St. George—and he then began to
settle how many thousands a year Mr.
Percival was worth; this point was not
decided, when the gentlemen came up to
the spot where sir Philip was standing.
The child for whose sake Clarence
Hervey had lost his bet was Mr. Percival's,
and he came to thank him for his
civility.—The gentleman who accompanied
Mr. Percival was an old friend of

Clarence Hervey's, he had met him abroad,
but had not seen him for some years.
“Pray gentlemen,” said he to sir Philip
and his party—“is Mr. Clarence Hervey
amongst you? I think I saw him pass by
me just now.”
“Damn it, yes, where is Clary though?” 
exclaimed sir Philip, suddenly recollecting
himself.—Clarence Hervey at this instant
was drowning, he had got out of his
depth, and had struggled in vain to recover
himself.
“Curse me, if it's not all over with
Clary,” continued sir Philip.—“Do any
of you see his head any where? Damn
you, Rochfort, yonder it is.”
“Damme, so it is,” said Rochfort— 
“but he's so heavy in his clothes, he'd
pull me down along with him to Davy's
Locker—damme if I'll go after him.”
“Damn it, though, can't some of ye
swim?—Can't some of ye jump in?” cried
sir Philip, turning to his companion— 
“Damn it, Clarence will go to the bottom.”

And so he inevitably would have done,
had not Mr. Percival at this instant leaped
into the river, and seized hold of the
drowning Clarence. It was with great
difficulty that he dragged him to shore.— 
Sir Philip's party, as soon as the danger was
over, officiously offered their assistance.
Clarence Hervey was absolutely senseless.
—“Damn it, what shall we do with him
now,” said sir Philip—“Damn it, we
must call some of the people from the
boat-house, he's as heavy as lead—damn
me if I know what to do with him.”
Whilst sir Philip was damning himself,
Mr. Percival ran to the boat-house for
assistance, and they carried the body into
the house: the elderly gentleman who had
accompanied Mr. Percival now made
his way through the midst of the noisy
crowd, and directed what should be done
to restore Mr. Hervey's suspended animation.
Whilst he was employed in this
benevolent manner, Clarence's worthy
friends were sneering at him, and whispering

to one another—“Ecod he talks
as if he was a doctor,” said Rochfort.”
“'Pon honour I do believe,” said St.
George, “he is the famous Dr. X&wblank;I
met him at a circulating library t'other
day.”
“Dr. X&wblank;the writer, do you mean,” 
said sir Philip—“then damn me we'd
better get out of his way as fast as we can,
or he'll have some of us down in black
and white, and curse me if I should choose
to meet with myself in a book.”—“No
danger of that,” said Rochfort, “for how
can one meet with oneself in a book, sir
Philip, if one never opens one.—By
G&wblank;that's the true way!”
“But pon my honour,” said St. George,
“I should like of all things to see myself
in print; 'twould make one famously famous.”
“Damn me if I don't flatter myself,
though, one can make oneself famous
enough to all intents and purposes, without
having any thing to say to these author

geniusses.—You're a famous fellow, faith,
to want to see yourself in print—I'll publish
this in Bond street—damn it, in point
of famousness, I'd sport my Random
against all the books that ever were read
or written, damn me—but what are we
doing here?” “Hervey's in good hands,” 
said sir Philip—“and this here's a cursed
stupid lounge for us—besides, it's getting
towards dinner time, so my voice is, let's
be off, and we can leave St. George (who
has such a famous mind to be in the doctor's
books) to bring Clary after us, when
he's ready for dinner and good company
again, you know, ha! ha! ha!”
Away the faithful friends went to the
important business of their day.
When Clarence Hervey came to his
senses, he started up, rubbed his eyes,
and looked about, exclaiming—“What's
all this?—Where am I?—Where's Baddely?
—Where's Rochfort?—Where are
they all?”
“Gone home to dinner,” answered Mr.

St. George, “who was a hanger on of
sir Philip's.—But they left me to bring you
after them.—Faith, Clary, you've had a
squeak for your life—'pon my honour, we
thought at one time it was all over with
you—but you're a tough one—We shan't
have to ‘pour over your grave a full bottle
of red,’ as yet my boy—you'll do as
well as ever.—So I'll step and call a coach
for you Clary, and we shall be at dinner
as soon as the best of 'em after all, by
jingo.—I leave you in good hands with
the doctor here, that brought you to life,
and the gentleman that dragged you out
of the water.”—“Here's a note for you,” 
whispered Mr. St. George, as he leaned
over Clarence Hervey—“Here's a note
for you from sir Philip and Rochfort—read
it, do you mind, to yourself.”
“If I can,” said Clarence—“but sir
Philip writes a bloody bad hand.”
“O, he's a baronet,” said St. George,
“ha! ha! ha!”—and charmed with his
own wit, he left the room.

Clarence with some difficulty deciphered
the note, which contained these
words:
“Quiz the doctor, Clary, as soon as
you are up to it—he's an author—so fair
game—quiz the doctor, and we'll drink
your health with three times three in
Rochfort's Burgundy.
Yours, &c.
Phil. Baddely.
“P. S. Burn this when read.”
With the request contained in the postcript
Clarence immediately complied; he
threw the note into the fire with indignation,
the moment that he had read it, and
turning towards the gentleman to whom
it alluded, he began to express in the
strongest terms his gratitude for their benevolence.
—But he stopped short in the
midst of his acknowledgments, when he
discovered to whom he was speaking.

“Dr. X&wblank;!” cried he, “is it possible?
—how rejoiced I am to see you—and
how rejoiced I am to be obliged to you— 
there is not a man in England to whom I
would rather be obliged.”
“You are not acquainted with Mr.
Percival, I believe,” said Dr. X&wblank;,
“give me leave, Mr. Percival, to introduce
to you the young gentleman whose
life you have saved, and whose life—though
by the company in which you found him,
you might not think so—is worth saving.— 
This sir, is no less a man than Mr. Clarence
Hervey—of whose universal genius
you have just had a specimen; for which
he was crowned, as he well deserved, by
the God of the Serpentine river with sedges.
—Do not be so unjust as to imagine,
that he has any of the presumption which
is sometimes the chief characteristic of a
man of universal genius.—Mr. Clarence
Hervey is, without exception, the most
humble man of my acquaintance, for
whilst all good judges would think him
fit company for Mr. Percival, he has the

humility to think himself upon a level with
Mr. Rochfort, and sir Philip Baddely.”
“You have lost as little of your satirical
wit, Dr. X&wblank;, as of your active benevolence,
I perceive,” said Clarence Hervey,
“since I met you abroad.—But as I cannot
submit to your unjust charge of humility,
will you tell me where you are to be
found in town, and to morrow”—“to morrow
—and to morrow—and to morrow,” 
said Dr. X&wblank;“why not to day?”—“I
am engaged,” said Clarence, hesitating
and laughing—“I am unfortunately engaged
to day to dine with Mr. Rochfort,
and sir Philip Baddely—and in the evening
I am to be at lady Delacour's.”
“Lady Delacour!—not the same lady
Delacour whom four years ago, when we
met at Florence, you compared to the
Venus de Medicis—no, no, it cannot be
the same, a goddess of four years standing!
incredible!”
“Incredible as it seems,” said Clarence,
“it is true—I admire her ladyship more
than ever I did.”

“Like a true connoisseur,” said Dr.
X&wblank;, “you admire a fine picture, the
older it grows—I hear that her ladyship's
face is really one of the finest pieces of
painting extant, with the advantage of
“Every grace which time alone can grant.”
“Come, come, Doctor X&wblank;,” cried
Mr. Percival, “no more wit at lady Delacour's
expense—I have a fellow feeling
for Mr. Hervey.”
“Why you are not in love with her
ladyship, are you?” said Dr. X&wblank;. “I
am not in love with lady Delacour's picture
of herself,” replied Mr. Percival,
“but I was once in love with the original.”
“How?—When?—Where?” cried
Clarence Hervey, in a tone totally different
from that in which he had first addressed
Mr. Percival.
“To morrow you shall know the how,
the when, and the where,” said Mr.
Percival, “here's your friend, Mr. St.
George, and his coach.”—“The deuce

take him,” said Clarence—“but tell me,
is it possible that you are not in love with
her still?—and why?”—“Why!” said Mr.
Percival—“why—come to morrow, as
you have promised, to Upper Grosvenor
street, and let me introduce you to lady
Ann Percival—she can answer your question
better than I can—if not entirely to
your satisfaction, at least entirely to mine,
which is more surprising, as the lady is my
wife.”
By this time, Clarence Hervey was
equipped in a dry suit of clothes—and by
the strength of an excellent constitution,
which he had never injured, even amongst
his dissipated associates, he had recovered
from the effects of his late imprudence.— 
“Clary, let's away, here's the coach,” 
said Mr. St. George—“Why my boy!
that's a famous fellow, faith! Why you
look the better for being drowned—'pon
honour, if I was you, I would jump into
the Serpentine river once a day.”—“If I
could always be sure of such good friends to
pull me out,” said Hervey.—“Pray St.

George, by the by, what where you, and
Rochfort, and sir Philip, and all the rest
of my friends doing, whilst I was drowning?”
“I can't say particularly, upon my soul,” 
replied Mr. St. George, “for my own
part, I was in boots, so you know I was
out of the question.—But what signifies
all that now?—Come, come, we had best
think of looking after our dinners.”
Clarence Hervey, who had very quick
feelings, was extremely hurt by the indifference
which his dear friends had shown,
when his life was in danger; he was apt
to believe that he was really an object of
affection and admiration amongst his companions,
and that though they were neither
very wise, nor very witty, they were
certainly very good natured. When they
had forfeited by their late conduct these
claims to his regard, his partiality for them
was changed into contempt.
“You had better come home and dine
with me, Mr. Hervey,” said Mr. Percival,
“if you be not absolutely engaged, for

here is your physician, who tells me that
temperance is necessary for a man just recovered
from drowning, and Mr. Rochfort
keeps too good a table, I am told, for one
in your condition.”
Clarence accepted of this invitation with
a degree of pleasure which perfectly
astonished Mr. St. George.
“Every man knows his own affairs
best,” said he to Clarence, as he stepped
into his hackney coach—“out for my
share, I will do my friend Rochfort the
justice to say, that no one lives as well as
he does.”— 
“If to live well mean nothing but to eat,”
said Clarence.
“Now,” said Dr. X&wblank;, looking at
his watch, “it will be eight o'clock by
the time we get to Upper Grovesnor street,
and lady Ann will have probably waited
dinner for us about two hours, which I
apprehend is sufficient to try the patience
of any woman but Griselda.—Do not,” 
continued he, turning to Clarence Hervey,

“expect to see an old fashioned,
spiritless, patient Griselda, in lady Ann
Percival—I can assure you that she is— 
but I will neither tell you what she is, nor
what she is not.—Every man, who has
any abilities, likes to have the pleasure and
honour of finding out a character by his
own penetration, instead of having it
forced upon him at full length in capital
letters of gold, finely emblazoned and illuminated
by the hand of some injudicious
friend.—Every child thinks the violet of
his own finding the sweetest.—I spare
you any farther allusions and illustrations,” 
concluded Dr. X&wblank;, “for here we are,
thank God, in Upper Grovesnor street.”