

The surgeon who was to attend lady
Delacour was prevented from going to
her on the day appointed; he was one of
the surgeons of the queen's household,
and his attendance was required at the
palace. This delay was extremely irksome
to lady Delacour, who had worked
up her courage to the highest point, but
who had not prepared herself to endure
suspense. She spent nearly a week at
Twickenham in this anxious state, and
Belinda observed that she every day became
more and more thoughtful and reserved.

She seemed as if she had some
secret subject of meditation, from which
she could not bear to be distracted.
When Helena was present, she exerted
herself to converse in her usual sprightly
strain; but as soon as she could escape, as
she thought, unobserved, she would shut
herself up in her own apartment, and remain
there for hours.
“I wish to Heaven, miss Portman!” 
said Marriott, coming one morning into
her room with a portentous face—“I wish
to Heaven, ma'am, that you could any
way persuade my lady not to spend so
many hours of the day and night as she
does in reading those methodistical books
that she keeps to herself!—I'm sure that
they do her no good, but a great deal of
harm, especially now when her spirits
should be kept up as much as possible.
I am sensible, ma'am, that 'tis those books
that have made my lady melancholy of a
sudden. Ma'am, my lady has let drop
very odd hints within these two or three
days, and she speaks in a strange disconnected

sort of style, and at times I do not
think she is quite right in her head.”
When Belinda questioned Marriott
more particularly about the strange hints
which her lady had let fall, she with looks
of embarrassment and horrour declined repeating
the words that had been said to
her; yet persisted in asserting that lady
Delacour had been very strange for these
two or three days. “And I'm sure,
ma'am, you'd be shocked if you were
to see my lady in a morning when she
wakens, or rather when I first go into the
room—for, as to wakening, that's out of the
question. I am certain she does not sleep
during the whole night. You'll find,
ma'am, it is as I tell you, those books
will quite turn her poor head, and I wish
they were burnt. I know the mischief
that the same sort of things did to a poor
cousin of my own, who was driven melancholy
mad by a methodist preacher,
and came to an untimely end. Oh,
ma'am! if you knew as much as I do,

you'd be as much alarmed for my lady
as I am.”
It was impossible to prevail upon Marriott
to explain herself more distinctly.
The only circumstances that could be
drawn from her, seemed to Belinda so
trifling as to be scarcely worth mentioning.
For instance, that lady Delacour,
contrary to Marriott's advice, had insisted
on sleeping in a bed-chamber upon
the ground floor, and had refused to let a
curtain be put up before a glass-door that
was at the foot of her bed. “When I
offered to put up the curtain, ma'am,” 
said Marriott, “my lady said she liked
the moonlight, and that she would not
have it put up till the fine nights were
over. Now, miss Portman, to hear my
lady talk of the moon, and moonlights,
and liking the moon, is rather extraordinary
and unaccountable; for I never heard
her say any thing of the sort in my life
before; I question whether she ever knew
there was a moon or not from one year's
end to another. But they say the moon

has a great deal to do with mad people; 
and, from my own experience, I'm perfectly
sensible, ma'am, it had in my
own cousin's case; for, before he came
to the worst, he took a prodigious fancy
to the moon, and was always for walking
by moonlight, and taking to one of the
beauty of the moon, and such melancholy
nonsense, ma'am.”
Belinda could not forbear smiling at
this melancholy nonsense; though she
was inclined to be of Marriott's opinion
about the methodistical books, and she
determined to talk to lady Delacour on
the subject. The moment that she made
the attempt, her ladyship, commanding her
countenance, with her usual ability replied
only by cautious, cold monosyllables,
and changed the conversation as
soon as she could.
At night, when they were retiring to
rest, Marriott, as she lighted them to
their rooms, observed that she was afraid
her lady would suffer from sleeping in so,

cold a bed-chamber, and Belinda pressed
her friend to change her apartment.
“No, my dear,” replied lady Delacour
calmly. “I have chosen this for my bed-chamber,
because it is at a distance from
the servants' rooms; and when the operation,
which I have to go through, shall be
performed, my cries, if I should utter any,
will not be overheard. The surgeon will
be here in a few days, and it is not worth
while to make any change.”
The next day, towards evening, the
surgeon and doctor X&wblank;arrived. Belinda's
blood ran cold at the sight of
them.
“Will you be so kind, miss Portman,” 
said Marriott, “as to let my lady know
that they are come? for I am not well
able to go, and you can speak more composed
to her than I can.”
Miss Portman went to lady Delacour's
bed chamber. The door was bolted. As
she opened it, she fixed her eyes upon
Belinda, and said to her with a mild
voice, “You are come to tell me that

the surgeon is arrived. I knew that by
the manner in which you knocked at the
door. I will see him this moment,” 
continued she in a firm tone; and she
deliberately put a mark in the book in
which she had been reading, walked
leisurely to the other end of the room,
and locked it up in her book-case. There
was an air of determined dignity in all
her motions. “Shall we go? I am
ready,” said she, holding out her hand to
Belinda, who had sunk upon a chair.
“One would think that you were the person
that was going to suffer. But drink
this water, my dear, and do not tremble for
me; you see that I do not tremble for
myself. Listen to me, dearest Belinda!
I owe it to your friendship not to torment
you with unnecessary apprehensions.
Your humanity shall be spared
this dreadful scene.”
“No,” said Belinda, “Marriott is incapable
of attending you. I must—I will
—I am ready now. Forgive me one
moment's weakness. I admire, and will

imitate, your courage. I will keep my
promise.”
“Your promise was to be with me in
my dying moments, and to let me breathe
my last in your arms.”
“I hope that I shall never be called
upon to perform that promise.”
Lady Delacour made no answer, but
walked on before her with steady steps
into the room where doctor X&wblank;and the
surgeon were waiting. Without adverting
in the least to the object of their visit,
she paid her compliments to them, as if
they came on a visit of mere civility.
Without seeming to notice the serious
countenances of her companions, she
talked of indifferent subjects with the
most perfect ease, occupying herself all
the time with cleaning a seal, which she
unhooked from her watch-chain. “This
seal,” said she, turning to doctor X&wblank;,
“is a fine ony x&wblank;it is a head of Esculapius.
I have a great value for it. It
was given to me by your friend, Clarence
Hervey; and I have left it in my will,

doctor,” continued she smiling, “to you,
as no slight token of my regard. He is
an excellent young man; and I request,” 
said she, drawing doctor X&wblank;to a window,
and lowering her voice, “I request,
when you see him again, and when I
am out of the way, that you will tell him
such were my sentiments to the hour of
my death. Here is a letter which you
will have the goodness to put into his
hands, sealed with my favourite seal.
You need have no scruple to take charge
of it; it relates not to myself. It expresses
only my opinion concerning a lady
who stands almost as high in your esteem,
I believe, as she does in mine. My
affection and my gratitude have not
biassed my judgment in the advice
which I have ventured to give to Mr.
Hervey.”
“But he will soon be here,” interrupted
doctor X&wblank;, “and then&wblank;”
“And then I shall be gone,” said lady
Delacour coolly,

“To the undiscovered country,
From whose bourn no traveller returns.”
Doctor X&wblank;was going to interrupt her,
but she continued rapidly,
“And now, my dear doctor! tell me
candidly, have you seen any symptoms
of cowardice in my manner this evening?”
“None,” replied he. “On the contrary,
I have admired your calm self-possession.”
“Then do not suspect me of want of
fortitude, when I request that this operation
may not be performed to day. I
have changed my mind within these few
hours. I have determined, for a reason
which I am sure that you would feel to
be sufficient, to postpone this affair till
to morrow. Believe me, I do not act
from caprice.”
She saw that doctor X&wblank;did not yield
assent to her last assertion, and that he
looked displeased.
“I will tell you my reason,” said she,
“and then you will have no right to be

displeased if I persist, as I shall inflexibly,
in my determination. It is my belief
that I shall die this night. To submit to
a painful operation to day would be only
to sacrifice the last moments of my existence
to no purpose. If I survive this
night, manage me as you please. But I
am the best judge of my own feelings. I
shall die to night.”
Dr. X&wblank;looked at her with a mixture
of astonishment and compassion. Her
pulse was high, she was extremely feverish,
and he thought that the best thing
which he could do was to stay with her
till the next day, and to endeavour to
divert her mind from this fancy, which
he considered as an insane idea. He
prevailed upon the surgeon to stay with
her till the next morning; and he communicated
his intentions to Belinda, who
joined with him in doing all that was
possible to entertain and interest lady
Delacour by conversation during the
remainder of the day. She had sufficient
penetration to perceive, that they gave

not the least faith to her prognostics,
and she never said one word more upon
the subject; but appeared willing to be
amused by their attempts to divert her,
and resolute to support her courage till
the last moment. She did not affect
trifling gayety: on the contrary, there
was in all she said more strength and
less point than usual.
The evening passed away, and lady Delacour
seemed totally to have forgotten her
own prophecy respecting the event of the
ensuing night; so much so, that she
spoke of several things that she intended
to do the next day. Helena knew nothing
of what had passed, and Belinda
imagined that her friend put this constraint
upon herself to avoid alarming
her daughter. Yet, after Helena retired,
her mother's manner continued to be so
much the same, that doctor X&wblank;began to
believe that her ladyship was actuated
merely by caprice. In this opinion she
confirmed him by bursting out a laughing

when he proposed that some one should
sit up with her during the night
“My sage sir,” said she, “have you
lived to this time without ever having
been duped by a woman before? I
wanted a day's reprieve, and I have
gained it—gained a day, spent in most
agreeable conversation, for which I
thank you. To morrow,” said she, turning
to the surgeon, “I must invent
some new excuse for my cowardice; and
though I give you notice of it beforehand,
as Barrington did when he picked the man's
pocket, yet, nevertheless, I shall succeed.
Good night!”
She hurried to her own apartment,
leaving them all in astonishment and
perplexity. Belinda was persuaded that
she only affected this gayety to prevent
doctor X&wblank;from insisting upon sitting
up in her room, as he had proposed.
DoctorX&wblank;, judging, as he said, from her
ladyship's general character, attributed
the whole to caprice; and the surgeon,
judging, as he said, from human nature

in general, was decided in his belief that
she had been influenced, as she herself
declared, by cowardice. After having
all expressed their opinions, without
making any impression upon one another,
they retired to rest.
Belinda's bed-chamber was next to
Helena's; and after she had been in bed
about an hour, she fancied that she
heard some one walking softly in the
next room. She rose, and found lady
Delacour standing beside her daughter's
bed. She started at the sight of Belinda,
but only said in a low voice, as she
pointed to her child, “Don't waken
her.” She then looked at her for some
moments in silence. The moon shone
full upon her face. She stooped over
Helena, parted the ringlets of hair upon
her forehead, and kissed her gently.
“You will be good to this poor girl
when I am gone, Belinda!” said she,
turning away from her as she spoke: “I
only came to look at her for the last
time.”

“Are you then serious, my dear lady
Delacour?”
“Hush! Don't waken her,” said lady
Delacour, putting her finger on her lips; 
and, walking slowly out of the room,
she forbade Belinda to follow.
“If my fears be vain,” said she, “why
should I disturb you with them? If they
be just, you will hear my bell ring, and
then come to me.”
For some time afterward all was perfectly
silent in the house. Belinda did
not go to bed, but sat waiting and listening
anxiously. The clock struck two; 
and as she heard no other sound, she
began to hope that she had suffered herself
to be falsely alarmed by a foolish
imagination, and she lay down upon her
bed, resolving to compose herself to rest.
She was just sinking to sleep, when she
thought she heard the faint sound of a
bell. She was not sure whether she was
dreaming or awake. She started up and
listened. All was silent. But in a few
minutes lady Delacour's bell rang violently.

Belinda flew to her room. The
surgeon was already there; he had been
sitting up in the next room to write
letters, and he had heard the first sound
of the bell. Lady Delacour was senseless,
supported in the surgeon's arms.
Belinda, by his directions, ran immediately
for doctor X&wblank;, who was at the
other end of the house. Before she
returned lady Delacour had recovered
her senses. She begged that the surgeon
would leave the room, and that
neither doctor X&wblank;nor Marriott might
yet be admitted, as she had something of
importance to communicate to miss Portman.
The surgeon withdrew, and she
beckoned to Belinda, who sat down upon
the side of her bed. Lady Delacour held
out her hand to her; it was covered with
a cold dew.
“My dear friend,” said she, “my
prophecy is accomplishing—I know I
must die.”
“The surgeon said that you were not
in the least danger, my dear lady Delacour!

that it was merely a fainting fit.
Do not suffer a vain imagination thus to
overpower your reason.”
“It is no vain imagination—I must
die,” said lady Delacour.
“I hear a voice you cannot hear,
Which says I must not stay:
I see a hand you cannot see,
Which beckons me away.”
“You perceive that I am in my perfect
senses, my dear! or I could not quote
poetry.—I am not insane—I am not delirious.”
She paused.—“I am ashamed to tell
you what I know will expose me to
your ridicule.”
“Ridicule!” cried Belinda: “can you
think me so cruel as to consider your
sufferings as a subject for ridicule?”
Lady Delacour was overcome by the
tenderness with which Belinda spoke.
“I will then speak to you,” said she,
“without reserve. Inconsistent as it is
with the strength of mind which you

might expect from me, I cannot resist
the impression which has been made on
my mind by—a vision.”
“A vision!”
“Three times,” continued lady Delacour,
“it has appeared to me about this
hour. The first night after we came here
I saw it; last night it returned; and to-night
I have beheld it for the third time.
I consider it as a warning to prepare for
death.—You are surprised—You are incredulous.
I know that this must appear
to you extravagant; but, depend
upon it that what I tell you is true. It
is scarcely a quarter of an hour since I
beheld the figure of&wblank;, that man for
whose untimely death I am answerable.
Whenever I close my eyes the same form
appears before me.”
“These visions,” said Belinda, “are
certainly the effects of opium.”
“The forms that flit before my eyes
when I am between sleeping and waking,” 
said lady Delacour, “I am willing
to believe, are the effects of opium; but,

Belinda, it is impossible I should be convinced
that my senses have deceived me
with respect to what I have beheld when
I have been as broad awake, and in as
perfect possession of my understanding,
as I am at this instant. The habits of
my life, and the natural gayety, not to
say levity, of my temper, have always inclined
me rather to incredulity than to
superstition. But there are things which
no strength of mind, no temerity, can
resist. I repeat it,—This is a warning
to me to prepare for death. No human
means, no human power, can save me!”
Here they were interrupted by Marriott,
who could no longer be restrained
from bursting into the room. Dr. X&wblank; 
followed, and, going calmly to the side of
lady Delacour's bed, took her hand to
feel her pulse.
“Mrs. Marriott, you need not alarm
yourself in this manner,” said he: “your
lady is at this instant in as little danger
as I am.”

“You think she'll live! O, my lady!
why did you terrify us in this manner?”
Lady Delacour smiled, and calmly
said, as Dr. X&wblank;still continued to
count her pulse,
“The pulse may deceive you, doctor,
but I do not.—Marriott, you may&wblank;”
Belinda heard no more; for at this instant,
as she was standing alone, near
the glass door that was opposite to the
bed, she saw at a distance in the garden
the figure which lady Delacour had described.
Lady Delacour was now so intent
upon speaking to Dr. X&wblank;, that
she saw nothing but him. Belinda had
the presence of mind to be perfectly silent.
The figure stood still for some
moments. She advanced a few steps
nearer to the window, and the figure vanished.
She kept her eye steadily fixed
upon the spot where it had disappeared,
and she saw it rise again and glide
quickly behind some bushes. Belinda
beckoned to Dr. X&wblank;, who perceived,
by the eagerness of her manner, that she

wished to speak to him immediately.
He resigned his patient to Marriott, and
followed miss Portman out of the room.
She told him what she had just seen,
said that it was of the utmost consequence
to lady Delacour to have the
truth ascertained, requested that Dr.
X&wblank;would go with some of the men
servants and search the garden, to discover
whether any one was there concealed,
or whether any footsteps could
be traced. The doctor did not search
long before he perceived footsteps in the
borders opposite to the glass door of lady
Delacour's bed-chamber; he was carefully
following their track, when he
heard a loud cry, which seemed to come
from the other side of the garden wall.
There was a breach in the wall, over
which he scrambled with some difficulty.
The screams continued with redoubled
violence. As he was making his way
to the spot from which they proceeded,
he was met by the old gardener, who was

crossing one of the walks with a lantern
in his hand.
“Ho! ho!” cried the gardener,
“I take it that we have the thief at last.
I fancy that the fellow whose footsteps
I traced, and who has been at my morello
cherry-tree every night, has been
caught in the trap. I hope his leg is not
broke, though!—This way, sir!—This
way!”
The gardener led the doctor to
the place, and there they found a man,
whose leg had actually been caught in
the spring trap which had been set for
the defence of the cherry-tree. The man
had by this time fallen into a swoon; 
they extricated him as fast as possible,
and Dr. X&wblank;had him brought to lady
Delacour's, in order that the surgeon,
who was there, might see his leg.
As they were carrying him across the
hall, Belinda met them. She poured out
a glass of water for the man, who was
just recovering from his swoon; but, as
she went nearer to give it to him, she

was struck with his wonderful resemblance
to Harriot Freke.
“It must be Mrs. Freke herself!” 
whispered she to Marriott, whose wide
opening eyes, at this instant, fixed themselves
upon her.
“It must be Mrs. Freke herself,
ma'am!”—repeated Marriott.
And so in fact it was.
There is a certain class of people, who
are incapable of generous confidence in
their equals, but who are disposed to
yield implicit credit to the underhand
information of mean emissaries. Through
the medium of Champfort and the stupid
maid, Mrs. Freke had learned a confused
story of a man's footsteps having been
heard in lady Delacour's boudoir, of his
being let in by Marriott secretly; of his
having remained locked up there for
several hours, and of the maid's having
been turned away, merely, because she
innocently went to open the door whilst
the gentleman was in concealment.
Mrs. Freke was further informed, by

the same unquestionable authority, that
lady Delacour had taken a house at
Twickenham, for the express purpose of
meeting her lover; that miss Portman
and Marriott were the only persons who
were to be of this party of pleasure.
Upon the faith of this intelligence,
Mrs. Freke, who had accompanied Mrs.
Luttridge to town, immediately repaired
to Twickenham, to pay a visit to a third
cousin, that she might have an opportunity
of detecting the intrigues, and
afterward of publishing the disgrace, of
her former friend. The desire of revenging
herself upon miss Portman, for having
declined her civilities at Harrowgate,
had also a powerful influence in stimulating
her malicious activity. She knew,
that if it were proved that Belinda was
the confidante of lady Delacour's intrigues,
her reputation must be materially
injured, and that the Percivals
would then be as desirous to break off,
as they now were anxious to promote,
the match with Mr. Vincent. Charmed

with this hope of a double triumph, the
vindictive lady commenced her operations; 
nor was she ashamed to descend
to the character of a spy. The general
and convenient name of frolic, she
thought, would cover every species of
meanness. She swore that “it was
charming fun to equip herself at night
in man's clothes, and to sally forth to
reconnoitre the motions of the enemy.”
By an unfrequented path, she used to
gain the window that looked into lady
Delacour's bed-chamber. This was the
figure, which appeared at night at a certain
hour, and which, to her ladyship's
disturbed imagination, seemed to be the
form of colonel Lawless. There was,
indeed, a resemblance in their size and
persons, which favoured the delusion.
For several nights Mrs. Freke paid these
visits without obtaining any satisfaction; 
but this night she thought herself overpaid
for her exertions, by the charming
discovery which she fancied she had
made. She mistook the surgeon for a

lover of lady Delacour's; and she was
hurrying home with the joyful intelligence,
when she was caught in the gardener's
trap. The agony that she suffered
was at first intense; but in a
few hours the pain, somewhat subsided; 
and in this interval of rest she
turned to Belinda, and with a malicious
smile said,—“Miss Portman, 'tis fair I
should pay for my peeping; but I shall
not pay quite so dear for it as some of my
friends.”
Miss Portman did not in the least
comprehend her, till she added, “I'm
sure you'll allow that 'tis better for a lady
to lose her leg, than her reputation—and
for my part, I'd rather be caught in a
man trap, than have a man caught in my
bed-chamber. My service to your friend
lady Delacour, and tell her so.”
“And do you know who the gentleman
was that you saw in her ladyship's
room?”
“Not I—Not yet, but I'll make it my
business to find out. I give you fair

notice: I'm a very devil when provoked.
Why didn't you make me your friend
when you could?—You'll not baffle me.
I have seen all I wanted, and I am
capable of painting all I saw. As to
who the man might be, that's no matter.
One Lothario is as good as another for
my purpose.”
Longer had Mrs. Freke spoken with
malignant triumph, had she not been interrupted
by a burst of laughter from the
surgeon. Her vexation was indescribable
when he informed her, that he was the
man whom she had seen in lady Delacour's
bed-chamber, and whom she had
mistaken for a favoured lover.
“Like the surgeon in Gil Blas,” said
doctor X&wblank;, “who was challenged
for having had the honour of a surgical
tête-à-tête with dame Sephora.”
Mrs. Freke's leg was much cut
and bruised; and now that she was no
longer supported by the hopes of revenge,
she began to lament loudly and incessantly
the injury that she had sustained.

She impatiently inquired how long it was
probable, that she should be confined by
this accident; and she grew quite outrageous
when it was hinted, that the
beauty of her legs would be spoiled, and
that she would never more be able to appear
to advantage in man's apparel. The
dread of being seen by lady Delacour
in the deplorable yet ludicrous situation,
to which she had reduced herself, operated
next upon her mind, and every time the
door of her apartment opened, she looked
with terrour towards it, expecting to see
her ladyship appear. But though lady
Delacour heard from Marriott immediately
the news of Mrs. Freke's disaster,
she never disturbed the lady by her presence.
She was too generous to insult a
fallen foe.
Early in the morning, Mrs. Freke was
by her own desire conveyed to her
cousin's house, where without regret we
shall leave her to enjoy the consequences
of her frolic.
“A false prophetess!—Notwithstanding

all my visions I have outlived the
night, you see,” said lady Delacour to
miss Portman when they met in the morning.
“I have heard, my dear Belinda,
and I believe, that the passion of love,
which can endure caprice, vice, wrinkles,
deformity, poverty, nay disease itself,
is notwithstanding so squeamish as
to be instantaneously disgusted by the
perception of folly in the object beloved.
I hope friendship, though akin to love,
is of a more robust constitution, else
what would become of me? My folly,
and my visions, and my spectre—O
that I had not exposed myself to you in
this manner!—Harriet Freke herself is
scarcely more contemptible. Spies and
cowards are upon an equal footing.
Her malice and her frolic are consistent
with her character, but my fears and my
superstition are totally inconsistent with
mine. Forget the nonsense I talked to
you last night, my dear, or fancy that I
was then under the dominion of laudanum.
This morning you shall see lady

Delacour herself again. Is doctor X&wblank;, is
the surgeon ready? Where are they? I am
prepared. My fortitude shall redeem me
in your opinion, Belinda, and in my own.”
Doctor X&wblank;and the surgeon immediately
obeyed her summons.
Helena heard them go into lady Delacour's
room, and she saw by Marriott's
countenance, who followed, that her
mother was going to submit to the operation.
She sat down trembling on the
steps which led to her mother's room, and
waited there a long time, as she thought,
in the most painful suspense. At last she
heard some one call Helena. She looked
up, and saw her father close to her.
“Helena,” said he, “how is your
mother?”
“I don't know,—O papa, you cannot
go in there now,” said Helena, stopping
him as he was pressing forwards.
“Why did not you or miss Portman
write to me yesterday, as you promised?” 
said lord Delacour in a voice that showed
he was scarcely able to ask the question.

“Because, papa, we had nothing to tell
you. Nothing was done yesterday. But
the surgeon is now there,” said Helena,
pointing towards her mother's room.
Lord Delacour stood motionless for an
instant; then suddenly seizing his daughter's
hand, “Let us go,” said he: “if we
stay here we shall hear her screams;” 
and he was hurrying her away, when the
door of lady Delacour's apartment opened,
and Belinda appeared, her countenance
radiant with joy.
“Good news, dear Helena!—O, my
lord! you are come in a happy moment— 
I give you joy.
“Joy! Joy! Joy!” cried Marriott,
following.
“Is it all over?” said lord Delacour.
“And without a single shriek!” said
Helena. “What courage!”
“There's no need of shrieks, or courage
either, thank God!” said Marriott.
Doctor X&wblank;says so, and the surgeon
is not wanted. Doctor X&wblank;says so,

and he is the best man in the world, and
the cleverest. And I was right from
the first; I said it was impossible my lady
should have such a shocking complaint
as she thought she had. There's no such
thing at all in the case, my lord! I said
so always till I was persuaded out of my
senses by that villanous quack, who contradicted
me for his own 'molument. And
doctor X&wblank;says, if my lady will leave off
the terrible quantities of laudanum she
takes, he'll engage for her recovery. Now
I'm morally certain Mr. Champfort would
die with vexation, if he could see the
joy that's painted in my lord's face this
minute. And we may thank miss Portman
for this, for 'twas she made every
thing go right, and I never expected to
live to see so happy a day.”
Whilst Marriott ran on in this manner,
with all the volubility of joy, lord Delacour
passed her with some difficulty,
and Helena was in her mother's arms in
an instant.
Lady Delacour, struck to the heart

by their affectionate looks and words,
burst into tears. “How little have I deserved
this kindness from you, my lord!
or from you, my child! But my feelings,” 
added she, wiping away her tears,
“shall not waste themselves in tears,
nor in vain thanks. My actions, the
whole course of my future life, shall
show that I am not quite a brute. Even
brutes are won by kindness. Observe,
my lord,” continued she smiling, “I said
won, not tamed!—A tame lady Delacour
would be a sorry animal, not worth
looking at. Were she even to become
domesticated, she would fare the worse.”
“How so?—How so, my dear?” said
lord Delacour and Belinda almost in
the same breath.
“How so!—Why, if lady Delacour
were to wash off her rouge, and lay aside
her airs, and be as gentle, good, and kind
as Belinda Portman, for instance, her
lord would certainly say to her,
“So altered are your face and mind,
Twere perjury to love you now.”