

Full of what he had heard, and impatient
to obtain farther information respecting
the state of his father's affairs,
lord Colambre hastened home; but his
father was out, and his mother was engaged
with Mr. Soho, directing, or rather
being directed, how her apartments
should be fitted up for her gala. As
lord Colambre entered the room, he saw
his mother, miss Nugent, and Mr. Soho,
standing at a large table, which was covered
with rolls of paper, patterns, and
drawings of furniture: Mr. Soho was
speaking in a conceited, dictatorial tone,
asserting, that there was no “colour in
nature for that room equal to the belly-o'-the fawn;” 
which belly-o'-the fawn he
so pronounced, that lady Clonbrony understood
it to be la belle uniforme, and,

under this mistake, repeated and assented
to the assertion, till it was set to rights,
with condescending superiority, by the
upholsterer.—This first architectural upholsterer
of the age, as he styled himself,
and was universally admitted to be
by all the world of fashion, then, with
full powers given to him, spoke en maître.
—The whole face of things must be
changed—There must be new hangings,
new draperies, new cornices, new candelabras,
new every thing!— 
“The upholsterer's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Glances from ceiling to floor, from floor to ceiling;
And, as imagination bodies forth
The form of things unknown, th' upholsterer's
pencil
Turns to shape and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a NAME.”
Of the value of a NAME no one could
be more sensible than Mr. Soho.
“Your la'ship sees—this is merely a
scratch of my pencil—Your la'ship's sensible
—just to give you an idea of the

shape, the form of the thing—You fill
up your angles here with encoinières— 
round your walls with the Turkish tent
drapery—a fancy of my own—in apricot
cloth, or crimson velvet, suppose,
or, en flute, in crimson satin draperies,
fanned and riched with gold fringes, en
suite—intermediate spaces, Apollo's
heads with gold rays—and here,
ma'am, you place four chancelières, with
chimeras at the corners, covered with
blue silk and silver fringe, elegantly fanciful
—with my STATIRA CANOPY here
—light blue silk draperies—aerial tint,
with silver balls—and for seats here,
the SERAGLIO OTTOMANS, superfine scarlet
—your paws—griffin—golden—and
golden tripods, here, with antique cranes
—and oriental alabaster tables here and
there—quite appropriate, your la'ship
feels— 
“And, let me reflect—For the next
apartment, it strikes me—as your la'ship
don't value expense—the Alhambra
hangings—my own thought entirely—

Now, before I unrol them, lady Clonbrony,
I must beg you'll not mention I've
shown them—I give you my sacred honour,
not a soul has set eye upon the
Alhambra hangings, except Mrs. Dareville,
who stole a peep—I refused, absolutely
refused, the duchess of Torcaster
—But I can't refuse your la'ship— 
So see, ma'am—(unrolling them)—scagliola
porphyry columns supporting the
grand dome—entablature, silvered and
decorated with imitative bronze ornaments
—under the entablature, a valance
in pelmets, of puffed scarlet silk, would
have an unparallelled grand effect, seen
through the arches—with the TREBISOND
TRELLICE PAPER, would make a tout ensemble,
novel beyond example—On
that Trebisond trellice paper, I confess,
ladies, I do pique myself— 
“Then, for the little room, I recommend
turning it temporarily into a Chinese
pagoda, with this Chinese pagoda
paper, with the porcelain border, and
josses, and jars, and beakers, to match;

and I can venture to promise one vase of
preeminent size and beauty.—O, indubitably!
if your la'ship prefers it, you
can have the Egyptian hieroglyphic paper,
with the ibis border, to match!— 
The only objection is, one sees it everywhere
—quite antediluvian—gone to the
hotels even—But, to be sure, if your
la'ship has a fancy—At all events, I
humbly recommend, what her grace of
Torcaster longs to patronise, my MOON
CURTAINS, with candlelight draperies— 
A demisaison elegance this—I hit off
yesterday—and—True, your la'ship's
quite correct—out of the common, completely
—And, of course, you'd have the
sphynx candelabras, and the Phœnix argands
—O! nothing else lights now,
ma'am!—Expense!—Expense of the
whole!—Impossible to calculate here on
the spot!—But nothing at all worth your
ladyship's consideration!—”
At another moment, lord Colambre
might have been amused with all this
rhodomontade, and with the airs and voluble

conceit of the orator; but, after
what he had heard at Mr. Mordica's,
this whole scene struck him more with
melancholy than with mirth. He was
alarmed, by the prospect of new and unbounded
expense; provoked, almost past
enduring, by the jargon and impertinence
of this upholsterer; mortified
and vexed to the heart, to see his mother
the dupe, the sport of such a coxcomb— 
“Prince of puppies!—Insufferable!— 
My own mother!” lord Colambre repeated
to himself, as he walked hastily
up and down the room— 
“Colambre, won't you let us have
your judgment—your teeste?” said his
mother— 
“Excuse me, ma'am—I have no taste,
no judgment, in these things.”
He sometimes paused, and looked at
Mr. Soho with a strong inclination
to—. But knowing that he should
say too much, if he said any thing, he
was silent—never dared to approach the

council table—but continued walking
up and down the room, till he heard a
voice, which at once arrested his attention,
and soothed his ire—He approached
the table instantly, and listened,
whilst Grace Nugent said every thing he
wished to have said, and with all the
propriety and delicacy, with which he
thought he could not have spoken. He
leaned on the table, and fixed his eyes
upon her—years ago, he had seen his
cousin—last night, he had thought her
handsome, pleasing, graceful—but now,
he saw a new person, or he saw her in a
new light—He marked the superior intelligence,
the animation, the eloquence of
her countenance, it's variety, whilst alternately,
with arch raillery or grave humour,
she played off Mr. Soho, and made
him magnify the ridicule, till it was
apparent even to lady Clonbrony. He
observed the anxiety, lest his mother
should expose her own foibles—he was
touched by the respectful, earnest kindness
—the soft tones of persuasion, with

which she addressd his mother—the
care not to presume upon her own influence
—the good sense, the taste, she
showed, yet not displaying her superiority
—the address, temper, and patience,
with which she at last accomplished her
purpose, and prevented lady Clonbrony
from doing any thing preposterously absurd,
or exorbitantly extravagant.
Lord Colambre was actually sorry
when the business was ended—when
Mr. Soho departed—for Grace Nugent
was then silent; and it was necessary to
remove his eyes from that countenance,
on which he had gazed unobserved.
Beautiful and graceful, yet so unconscious
was she of her charms, that the
eye of admiration could rest upon her
without her perceiving it—she seemed
so intent upon others as totally to forget
herself. The whole train of lord Colambre's
thoughts was so completely deranged,
that, although he was sensible there was
something of importance he had to say
to his mother, yet, when Mr. Soho's departure

left him opportunity to speak, he
stood silent, unable to recollect any thing
but—Grace Nugent—.
When Grace Nugent left the room,
after some minutes' silence, and some effort,
lord Colambre said to his mother— 
“Pray, madam, do you know any thing
of sir Terence O'Fay?”
“I!” said lady Clonbrony, drawing
up her head proudly—“I know he is a
person I cannot endure—He is no friend
of mine, I can assure you—nor any such
sort of person.”
“I thought it was impossible!” cried
lord Colambre, with exultation.
“I only wish your father, Colambre,
could say as much,” added lady Clonbrony.
Lord Colambre's countenance fell again
—and again he was silent, for some
time.
“Does my father dine at home,
ma'am?”
“I suppose not—he seldom dines at
home.”

“Perhaps, ma'am, my father may have
some cause to be uneasy about?—” 
“About?”—said lady Clonbrony, in
a tone, and with a look of curiosity,
which convinced her son, that she knew
nothing of his debts or distresses, if he
had any—“About what?” repeated
her ladyship.
Here was no receding, and lord Colambre
never had recourse to artifice.
“About his affairs, I was going to say,
madam—But, since you know nothing
of any difficulties or embarrassments, I
am persuaded that none exist.”
“Nay—I cawnt tell you that, Colambre
—There are difficulties for ready money,
I confess, when I ask for it, which
surprise me often. I know nothing of
affairs—Ladies of a certain rank seldom
do, you know—But, considering your
father's estate, and the fortune I brought
him,” added her ladyship, proudly, “I
cawnt conceive it at all.—Grace Nugent,
indeed, often talks to me of embarrassments
and economy; but that, poor

thing, is very natural for her, because her
fortune is not particularly large, and she
has left it all, or almost all, in her uncle
and guardian's hands—I know she's
often distressed for odd money to lend
me, and that makes her anxious.”
“Is not miss Nugent very much admired,
ma'am, in London?”
“Of course—in the company she is
in, you know, she has every advantage— 
And she has a natural family air of
fashion—Not but what she would have
got on much better, if, when she first appeared
in Lon'on, she had taken my advice,
and wrote herself on her cards miss
de Nogent, which would have taken off
the prejudice against the Iricism of Nugent,
you know; and there is a count de
Nogent.”
“I did not know there was any such
prejudice, ma'am—There may be among
a certain set; but, I should think, not
among well informed, well bred people.”
“I big your pawdon, Colambre; surely

I, that was born in England, an Henglishwoman
bawn! must be well infawmed on
this pint, any way.”
Lord Colambre was respectfully silent.
“Mother,” resumed he, “I wonder,
that miss Nugent is not married!”
“That is her own fau't, entirely; she
has refused very good offers—establishments,
that, I own, I think, as lady
Langdale says, I was to blame to allow
her to let pass; but young ledies, till they
are twenty, always think they can do
better. Mr. Martingale, of Martingale,
proposed for her, but she objected to him,
on account of he'es being on the turf; 
and Mr. St. Albans' 7000l. a year—because
—I reelly forget what—I believe
only because she did not like him—and
something about principles. Now there
is colonel Heathcock, one of the most
fashionable young men you see, always
with the duchess of Torcaster and that
set—Heathcock takes a vast deal of notice
of her, for him; and yet, I'm persuaded,

she would not have him to morrow,
if he came to the pint, and for no
reason, reelly now, that she can give me,
but because she says he's a coxcomb.
Grace has a tincture of Irish pride. But,
for my part, I rejoice, that she is so difficult; 
for I don't know what I should do
without her—”
“Miss Nugent is indeed—very
much attached to you, mother, I am convinced” 
—said lord Colambre, beginning
his sentence with great enthusiasm, and
ending it with great sobriety.
“Indeed then, she's a sweet girl, and
I am very partial to her, there's the truth” 
—cried lady Clonbrony, in an undisguised,
Irish accent, and with her natural
warm manner. But a moment afterwards,
her features and whole form resumed
their constrained stillness and
stiffness, and, in her English accent, she
continued— 
“Before you put my ideas out of my
head, Colambre, I had something to say
to you—O! I know what it was—we

were talking of embarrassments—and I
wished to do your father the justice to
mention to you, that he has been uncommon
liberal to me about this gala, and
has reelly given me carte blanche; and
I've a notion—indeed I know—that it is
you, Colambre, I am to thank for this.”
“Me!—ma'am!—” 
“Yes!—Did not your father give
you any hint?—” 
“No, ma'am; I have seen my father
but for half an hour since I came to
town, and in that time he said nothing
to me—of his affairs.”
“But what I allude to is more your
affair.”
“He did not speak to me of any
affairs, ma'am—he spoke only of my
horses.”
“Then I suppose my lord leaves it to
me to open the matter to you. I have
the pleasure to tell you, that we have in
view for you—and I think I may say
with more than the approbation of all her
family—an alliance—”

“O! my dear mother! you cannot be
serious,” cried lord Colambre—“You
know I am not of years of discretion yet
—I shall not think of marrying these ten
years, at least.”
“Why not?—Nay, my dear Colambre,
don't go, I beg—I am serious, I assure
you—and, to convince you of it, I
shall tell you candidly, at once, all your
father told me—That now you've done
with Cambridge, and are come to Lon'on,
he agrees with me, in wishing, that you
should make the figure you ought to
make, Colambre, as sole heir apparent to
the Clonbrony estate, and all that sort of
thing—But, on the other hand, living in
Lon'on, and making you the handsome
allowance you ought to have, are, both together,
more than your father can afford,
without inconvenience, he tells me.”
“I assure you, mother, I shall be
content—” 
“No, no; you must not be content,
child, and you must hear me—You must
live in a becoming style, and make a proper

appearance—I could not present you
to my friends here, nor be happy, if you
did not, Colambre. Now the way is
clear before you—You have birth and
title, here is fortune ready made—you
will have a noble estate of your own
when old Quin dies, and you will not
be any incumbrance or inconvenience
to your father or any body. Marrying
an heiress accomplishes all this
at once—And the young lady is every
thing we could wish, besides—You
will meet again at the gala—Indeed,
between ourselves, she is the grand object
of the gala—All her friends will come
en masse, and one should wish, that they
should see things in proper style. You
have seen the young lady in question,
Colambre—Miss Broadhurst—Don't
you recollect the young lady I introduced
you to last night, after the opera?”
“The little, plain girl, covered with
diamonds, who was standing beside miss
Nugent?”
“In di'monds, yes—But you won't

think her plain, when you see more of
her—that wears off—I thought her
plain, at first—I hope—”
“I hope,” said lord Colambre, “that
you will not take it unkindly of me, my
dear mother, if I tell you, at once, that I
have no thoughts of marrying at present
—and that I never will marry for money
—Marrying an heiress is not even a new
way of paying old debts—at all events,
it is one, to which no distress could persuade
me to have recourse; and as I
must, if I outlive old Mr. Quin, have an
independent fortune, there is no occasion
to purchase one by marriage.”
“There is no distress, that I know of,
in the case,” cried lady Clonbrony— 
“Where is your imagination running, Colambre?
—But merely for your establishment,
your independance.”
“Establishment, I want none—independance
I do desire, and will preserve
—Assure my father, my dear mother,
that I will not be an expense to him—I
will live within the allowance he made

me at Cambridge—I will give up half of
it—I will do any thing for his convenience
—but marry for money, that I cannot
do—”
“Then, Colambre, you are very disobliging” 
—said lady Clonbrony, with an
expression of disappointment and displeasure; 
“for your father says, if you
don't marry miss Broadhurst, we can't
live in Lon'on another winter.”
This said—which, had she been at the
moment mistress of herself, she would
not have let out—lady Clonbrony abruptly
quitted the room. Her son stood motionless,
saying to himself— 
“Is this my mother?—How altered!—” 
The next morning, he seized an opportunity
of speaking to his father, whom he
caught, with difficulty, just when he was
going out, as usual, for the day. Lord Colambre,
with all the respect due to his
father, and with that affectionate manner,
by which he always knew how to
soften the strength of his expressions,

made nearly the same declarations of his
resolution, by which his mother had
been so much surprised and offended.
Lord Clonbrony seemed more embarrassed,
but not so much displeased.— 
When lord Colambre adverted, as delicately
as he could, to the selfishness of
desiring from him the sacrifice of liberty
for life, to say nothing of his affections,
merely to enable his family to make a
splendid figure in London; lord Clonbrony
exclaimed—“That's all nonsense!
—cursed nonsense!—that's the way we
are obliged to state the thing to your
mother, my dear boy, because I might
talk her deaf, before she would understand
or listen to any thing else—But,
for my own share, I don't care a rush, if
London was sunk in the salt sea—Little
Dublin, for my money, as sir Terence
O'Fay says.”
“Who is sir Terence O'Fay?—May I
ask, sir?”
“Why, don't you know Terry?—Ay,

you've been so long at Cambridge—I
forgot. And did you never see Terry?”
“I have seen him, sir—I met him
yesterday, at Mr. Mordicai's, the coachmaker's.”
“Mordicai's!”—exclaimed lord Clonbrony,
with a sudden blush, which he
endeavoured to hide, by taking snuff.
“He is a damned rascal, that Mordicai!
—I hope you didn't believe a word he
said—Nobody does, that knows him.”
“I am glad, sir, that you seem to know
him so well, and to be upon your guard
against him,” replied lord Colambre; 
“for, from what I heard of his conversation,
when he was not aware who I was,
I am convinced he would do you any injury
in his power—” 
“He shall never have me in his power,
I promise him—We shall take care of
that—But what did he say?—” 
Lord Colambre repeated the substance
of what Mordicai had said, and lord
Clonbrony reiterated—“Damned rascal!

—damned rascal!—I'll get out of his
hands—I'll have no more to do with
him.” But, as he spoke, he exhibited
evident symptoms of uneasiness, moving
continually, and shifting from leg to leg,
like a foundered horse.
He could not bring himself positively
to deny, that he had debts and difficulties; 
but he would by no means open the
state of his affairs to his son—“No father
is called upon to do that,” said he to
himself—“None but a fool would do it.”
Lord Colambre, perceiving his father's
embarrassment, withdrew his eyes, respectfully
refrained from all farther inquiries,
and simply repeated the assurance he
had made to his mother, that he would
put his family to no additional expense; 
and that, if it was necessary, he would
willingly give up half his allowance.
“Not at all, not at all, my dear boy,” 
said his father—“I would rather cramp
myself, than that you should be cramped
a thousand times over—But it is all my
lady Clonbrony's nonsense.—If people

would but, as they ought, stay in their
own country, live on their own estates,
and kill their own mutton, money need
never be wanting—”
For killing their own mutton, lord Colambre
did not see the indispensable necessity; 
but he rejoiced to hear his father
assert, that people should reside in their
own country.
“Ay,” cried lord Clonbrony, to
strengthen his assertion, as he always
thought it necessary to do, by quoting
some other person's opinion. “So
sir Terence O'Fay always says, and that's
the reason your mother can't endure
poor Terry—You don't know Terry?— 
No, you have only seen him; but, indeed,
to see him is to know him; for he is
the most off-hand, good fellow, in Europe.”
“I don't pretend to know him, yet,” 
said lord Colambre—“I am not so presumptuous,
as to form my opinion at first
sight.”
“O, curse your modesty!” interrupted

lord Clonbrony, “you mean, you don't
pretend to like him yet—but Terry will
make you like him—I defy you not— 
I'll introduce you to him—him to you
I mean—most warm hearted, generous
dog upon Earth—convivial—jovial— 
with wit and humour enough, in his own
way, to split you—split me if he has
not—You need not cast down your eyes,
Colambre—What's your objection?”
“I have made none, sir—but, if you
urge me, I can only say, that, if he has
all these good qualities, it is to be regretted,
that he does not look and speak
a little more like a gentleman.”
“A gentleman!—he is as much a
gentleman as any of your formal prigs— 
Not the exact Cambridge cut, may-be
—Curse your English education!— 
'Twas none of my advice—I suppose
you mean to take after your mother in
the notion, that nothing can be good, or
genteel, but what's English—” 
“Far from it, sir; I assure you, I am
as warm a friend to Ireland as your heart

could wish—You will have no reason,
in that respect at least, nor, I hope, in
any other, to curse my English education
—and, if my gratitude and affection
can avail, you shall never regret the
kindness and liberality, with which you
have, I fear, distressed yourself to afford
me the means of becoming all, that a
British nobleman ought to be.”
“Gad! you distress me now!” said
lord Clonbrony—“and I didn't expect
it, or I wouldn't make a fool of myself
this way,” added he, ashamed of his
emotion, and whiffling it off—“You
have an Irish heart, that I see, which no
education can spoil—But you must like
Terry—I'll give you time, as he said to
me, when first he taught me to like usquebaugh
—Good morning to you!”
Whilst lady Clonbrony, in consequence
of her residence in London, had
become more of a fine lady, lord Clonbrony,
since he left Ireland, had become
less of a gentleman. Lady Clonbrony,
born an Englishwoman, disclaiming and

disincumbering herself of all the Irish in
town, had, by giving splendid entertainments,
at an enormous expense, made her
way into a certain set of fashionable company.
But lord Clonbrony, who was
somebody in Ireland, who was a great
person in Dublin, found himself nobody
in England, a mere cipher in London.
Looked down upon by the fine people,
with whom his lady associated, and
heartily weary of them, he retreated from
them altogether, and sought entertainment
and self complacency in society,
beneath him, indeed, both in rank and
education, but in which he had the satisfaction
of feeling himself the first person
in company. Of these associates, the
first in talents, and in jovial profligacy,
was sir Terence O'Fay—a man of low
extraction, who had been knighted, by
an Irish lord lieutenant, in some convivial
frolic. No one could tell a good
story, or sing a good song, better than sir
Terence; he exaggerated his native brogue,
and his natural propensity to blunder,

caring little whether the company
laughed at him or with him, provided
they laughed—“Live and laugh—laugh
and live,” was his motto; and certainly
he lived on laughing, as well as many
better men can contrive to live on a
thousand a year.
Lord Clonbrony brought sir Terence
home with him next day, to introduce
him to lord Colambre; and it happened,
that, on this occasion, Terence appeared
to peculiar disadvantage, because, like
many other people, “Il gâtoit l'esprit
qu'il avoit en voulant avoir celui qu'il
n'avoit pas.”
Having been apprised, that lord Colambre
was a fine scholar, fresh from
Cambridge; and being conscious of his
own deficiencies of literature, instead of
trusting to his natural talents, he summoned
to his aid, with no small effort,
all the scraps of learning he had acquired
in early days, and even brought before
the company all the gods and goddesses,
with whom he had formed an acquaintance

at school. Though embarrassed by
this unusual incumbrance of learning, he
endeavoured to make all subservient to
his immediate design, of paying his court
to lady Clonbrony, by forwarding the
object she had most anxiously in view— 
the match between her son and miss
Broadhurst.
“And so, miss Nugent,” said he—not
daring, with all his assurance, to address
himself directly to lady Clonbrony— 
“And so, miss Nugent, you are going
to have great doings, I'm told, and a
wonderful grand gala—There's nothing
in the wide world, equal to being in a
good, handsome crowd—No later now
than the last ball at the Castle, that was
before I left Dublin, miss Nugent, the
apartments, owing to the popularity of
my lady lieutenant, was so throng—so
throng—that I remember very well, in
the door way, a lady—and a very genteel
woman she was too—though a stranger
to me, saying to me, ‘Sir, your finger's
in my car’—‘I know it, madam,’ says I,

‘but I can't take it out, till the crowd give
me elbow room.’
“But it's gala I'm thinking of now— 
I hear you are to have the golden Venus,
my lady Clonbrony, won't you?—” 
“Sir!—” 
This freezing monosyllable notwithstanding,
sir Terence pursued his course
fluently. “The golden Venus!—sure,
miss Nugent, you, that are so quick, can't
but know I would apostrophise miss
Broadhurst that is—but that won't be
long so I hope. My lord Colambre,
have you seen much yet of that young
lady?—” 
“No, sir—” 
“Then I hope you won't be long so— 
I hear great talk now of the Venus of
Medicis, and the Venus of this and that,
with the Florence Venus, and the sable
Venus, and that other Venus, that's washing
of her hair, and a hundred other
Venuses, some good, some bad—But,
be that as it will, my lord, trust a fool— 
ye may, when he tells you truth—the

golden Venus is the only one on Earth,
that can stand, or that will stand,
through all ages and temperatures;— 
for gold rules the court, gold rules the
camp, and men below, and Heaven
above—”
“Heaven above!—Take care, Terry!
—Do you know what you're saying?” interrupted
lord Clonbrony.
“Do I?—Dont I?”—replied Terry.
“Deny, if you please, my lord, that it
was for a golden pippin that the three
goddesses fit—and that the Hippomenes
was about golden apples—and did not
Hercules rob a garden for golden apples?
—and did not the pious Eneas himself
take a golden branch with him, to make
himself welcome to his father in Hell?” 
said sir Terence, winking at lord Colambre.
“Why Terry, you know more about
books, than I should have suspected,” 
said lord Clonbrony.
“Nor you would not have suspected
me to have such a great acquaintance

among the goddesses neither, would you,
my lord? But, apropos, before we quit,
of what material, think ye, was that same
Venus's famous girdle, now, that made
roses and lilies so quickly appear?— 
Why, what was it, but a girdle of sterling
gold, I'll engage?—for gold is the
only true thing for a young man to look
after, in a wife—”
Sir Terence paused, but no applause
ensued.
“Let them talk of Cupids and darts,
and the mother of the Loves and Graces
—Minerva may sing odes and dythambrics,
or whatsoever her wisdomship
pleases—Let her sing, or let her say,
she'll never get a husband, in this world
or the other, without she had a good
thumping fortin, and then she'd go off
like wildfire—” 
“No, no, Terry, there you're out; 
Minerva has too bad a character for
learning, to be a favourite with gentlemen,” 
said lord Clonbrony.
“Tut—Don't tell me!—I'd get her

off, before you could say, Jack Robinson,
and thank you too, if she had fifty
thousand down, or a thousand a year in
land. Would you have a man so d—d
nice, as to balk, when house and land is
a going—a going—a going!—because
of the incumbrance of a little learning
—I never heard, that miss Broadhurst
was any thing of a learned lady.”
“Miss Broadhurst!” said Grace Nugent
—“How did you get round to miss
Broadhurst?”
“O! by the way of Tipperary,” said
lord Colambre.
“I beg your pardon, my lord, it was
apropos to a good fortune, which, I hope,
will not be out of your way, even if you
went by Tipperary—She has, besides
100,000l. in the funds, a clear landed
property of 10,000l. per annum—Well!
some people talk of morality, and some of
religion, but give me a little snug PROPERTY
—But, my lord, I've a little
business to transact this morning, and

must not be idling and indulging myself
here”—So, bowing to the ladies, he departed— 
“Really, I am glad that man is gone,” 
said lady Clonbrony—“What a relief
to one's ears! I am sure I wonder, my
lord, how you can bear to carry that
strange creature always about with you— 
so vulgar as he is—” 
“He diverts me,” said lord Clonbrony,
“while many of your correct-mannered
fine ladies or gentlemen put me to sleep.
What signifies what accent people speak
in, that have nothing to say?—Hey!
Colambre?”
Lord Colambre, from respect to his
father, did not express his opinion, but
his aversion to sir Terence O'Fay was
stronger even than his mother's; though
lady Clonbrony's detestation of him was
much increased, by perceiving, that his
coarse hints, about miss Broadhurst, had
operated against her favourite scheme.
The next morning, at breakfast, lord

Clonbrony talked of bringing sir Terence
with him, that night, to her gala—She
absolutely grew pale with horrour.
“Good Heavens!—Lady Langdale,
Mrs. Derville; lady Pococke, lady Chatterton,
lady D—, lady G&wblank;, his
grace of V&wblank; what would they think
of him!—And miss Broadhurst, to see
him going about with my lord Clonbrony!” 
—It could not be. No—her
ladyship made the most solemn and desperate
protestation, that she would sooner
give up her gala altogether—tie up the
knocker—say she was sick—rather be
sick, or be dead, than be obliged to have
such a creature, as sir Terence O'Fay, at
her gala— 
“Have it your own way, my dear, as
you have every thing else,” cried lord
Clonbrony, taking up his hat, and preparing
to decamp; “but, take notice, if
you won't receive him, you need not expect
me—So a good morning to you,
my lady Clonbrony—You may find a

worse friend in need, yet, than that same
sir Terence O'Fay.”
“I trust I shall never be in need, my
lord,” replied her ladyship—“It would
be strange, indeed, if I were, with the
fortune I brought—” 
“O! that fortune of hers!”—cried lord
Clonbrony, stopping both his ears, as he
ran out of the room—“Shall I never
hear the end of that fortune, when I've
seen the end of it long ago?—” 
During this matrimonial dialogue,
Grace Nugent and lord Colambre never
once looked at each other. Grace was
very diligently trying the changes, that
could be made in the positions of a china
mouse, a cat, a dog, a cup, and a
brahmin, on the mantle-piece; lord Colambre
as diligently reading the newspaper.
“Now, my dear Colambre,” said lady
Clonbrony, “put down the paper, and
listen to me. Let me entreat you not to
neglect miss Broadhurst to night, as I

know that the family come here chiefly
on your account.”
“My dear mother, I never can neglect
any deserving young lady, and particularly
one of your guests; but I shall
be careful not to do more, than not to
neglect; for I never will pretend what I
do not feel—” 
“But, my dear Colambre, miss Broadhurst
is every thing you could wish, except
being a beauty.”
“Perhaps, madam,” said lord Colambre,
fixing his eyes on Grace Nugent,
“you think, that I can see no farther
than a handsome face?”
The unconscious Grace Nugent now
made a warm enlogium of miss Broadhurst's
sense, and wit, and independance
of character.
“I did not know, that miss Broadhurst
was a friend of yours, miss Nugent?”
“She is, I assure you, a friend of
mine; and, as a proof, I will not praise

her at this moment—I will go farther
still, I will promise, that I never will
praise her to you, till you begin to praise
her to me.”
Lord Colambre smiled, and now listened,
as if he wished that Grace should
go on speaking, even of miss Broadhurst.
“That's my sweet Grace!”—cried
lady Clonbrony—“O! she knows how
to manage these men—not one of them
can resist her!”
Lord Colambre, for his part, did not
deny the truth of this assertion.
“Grace,” added lady Clonbrony,
“make him promise to do as we would
have him.”
“No—Promises are dangerous things
to ask or to give,” said Grace—“Men and
naughty children never make promises,
especially promises to be good, without
longing to break them the next minute.”
“Well, at least, child, persuade him,

I charge you, to make my gala go off
well—That's the first thing we ought to
think of now—Ring the bell!—And
all heads and hands I put in requisition
for the gala—”