

Soon after the death of poor Kate, the
attention of the Percy family was taken
up by a succession of different visits; 
some from their old neighbors, and really
affectionate friends; some from among
the band of reproaching condolers. The
first we shall mention, who partook of
the nature of both these classes, was Lady
Jane Granville. She was a sincere
and warm friend, but a tormenting family
adviser and director.
Her Ladyship was nearly related to
Mr. Percy, which gave her, on this occasion,
rights of which she knew how to
avail herself.
To do her justice, she was better qualified
to be an adviser and protector, than
many who assume a similar tone and
character.

Lady Jane Granville was of high birth
and fortune, had always lived in good
company, had seen a great deal of the
world, both abroad and at home; she had
a complete knowledge of all that makes
people well received in society, had generalised
her observations, and had formed
them into maxims of prudence and
politeness, which redounded the more to
her credit in conversation, as they were
never committed to writing, and could,
therefore, never be brought to the dangerous
test of being printed and published.
Her Ladyship valued her own traditional
wisdom, and oral instruction, beyond any
thing that can be learned from books. She
had acquired a tact, which, disclaiming
and disdaining every regular process of
reasoning, led her with admirable certainty
to right conclusions in her own
concerns, and thus in some degree justified
the peremptory tone she assumed in
advising others.
Though by no means pleased with
Mr. and Mrs. Percy's answers to several

of her letters of advice, yet she thought
it her duty, as a friend and relation, to
persevere. She invited herself to the
Hills, where, with great difficulty,
through scarcely practicable cross roads,
she arrived. She was so much fatigued and
exhausted, in body and mind, that during
the first evening she could talk of nothing
but her hair-breadth escapes. The
next morning after breakfast, she began
with, “My dear Mr. Percy, now I have
a moment's ease, I have a thousand
things to say to you. I am very much
surprised, that you have thought fit to
settle here quite out of the world.—Will
you give me leave to speak my mind
freely to you on the subject?”—
“As freely as you please, my dear
Lady Jane, upon any subject, if you will
only promise not to be offended, if we
should not coincide in opinion.”
“Certainly, certainly; I am sure I
never expect or wish any body to submit
to my opinion, though ... I have had
opportunities of seeing something of the

world.—But I assure you, that nothing
but very particular regard would induce
me to offer my advice. It is a maxim of
mine, that family interference begins in
ill breeding, and ends in impertinence,
and accordingly it is a thing I have ever
peculiarly avoided. But with a particular
friend and near relation like you, my
dear Mr. Percy, I think there ought to
be an exception.—Now, my dear Sir, the
young people have just left the room,— 
I can take this opportunity of speaking
freely,—Your daughters—what will you
do with them?”
“Do with them! I beg pardon for
repeating your Ladyship's words, but I
don't precisely understand your question.”—
“Well, precise Sir, then, in other
words, how do you mean to dispose of
them?”—
“I don't mean to dispose of them at
all,” said Mr. Percy.—
“Then let me tell you, my good
friend,” said Lady Jane, with a most
prophetic tone,—“let me tell you, that

you will live to repent that.—You know
I have seen something of the world, you
ought to bring them forward, and make
the most of their birth, family, and connexions,
put them in a way of showing
their accomplishments, make proper acquaintance,
and obtain for your girls
what I call the patronage of fashion.”
“Patronage;” repeated Mr. Percy,
“it seems to be my doom to hear of nothing
but patronage, whichever way I
turn.—What! patronage for my daughters,
as well as for my sons!”
“Yes,” said Lady Jane, “and look
to it,—for your daughters will never go
on without it.—Upon their first coming
out, you should ...” Here her
Ladyship stopped short, for Caroline and
Rosamond returned—“Oh! go on, go
on, let me beg of your Ladyship”—said
Mr. Percy—“why should not my daughters
have the advantage of hearing what
you are saying.”—
“Well then, I will tell them candidly,
that upon their first coming out it will be
an inconceivable advantage, whatever

you may think of it ... to have the patronage
of fashion.—Every day, we see
many an ugly face, many a mere simpleton,
many a girl who had nothing upon
Earth but her dress, become quite charming,
when the radiance of fashion is upon
them. And there are some people who can
throw this radiance where and on whom
they please;—just as easily,” said Lady
Jane; playing with a spoon she held in
her hand, “just as easily, as I throw the
sunshine, now upon this object, and now
upon that, now upon Caroline, and now
upon Rosamond.—And observe, no eye
turns upon the beauteous Caroline now,
because she is left in the shade.”—
It was Mr. Percy's policy to allow
Lady Jane full liberty to finish all she
wished to say, without interruption, for
when people are interrupted, they imagine
they have much more to add. Let
them go on, and they come to the end of
their sense, and even of their words, sooner
than they, or you, could probably expect.—
“Now,” continued her Ladyship, “to

apply to living examples—You know
Mrs. Paul Cotterel?”—“No”—“Well!— 
Lady Peppercorn?” “No”—“Nor the
Miss Blissets?”—“NO”—“That is the
misfortune of living so much out of the
world!—But there are the Falconers, we
all know them at least—now look at the
Miss Falconers.”
“Alas! we have not the honor of knowing
even the Miss Falconers,” said Mr.
Percy, “though they are our cousins.”—
“Is it possible, that you don't know the
Miss Falconers?”
“Very possible,” replied Mr. Percy,
“they live always in town, and we have
never seen them since they were children,
—except a visit or two which passed
between us just after Mrs. Falconer's
marriage, we know nothing even of her,
though we are all acquainted with the
Commissioner, who comes from time to
time to this part of the country.”—
“A very clever man the Commissioner
is, in his way,” said Lady Jane, “but
nothing to his wife.—I can assure you,
Mrs. Falconer is particularly well worth

your cultivating,—for unless maternal rivalship
should interfere, I know few people
in the world, who could be more useful
to your girls, when you bring them
out. She has a vast deal of address,— 
And for a proof, as I was going to point
out to you, there are the Miss Falconers
in the first circles,—asked every where— 
yet without fortunes, and with no pretensions
beyond, or equal to, what your
daughters have,—not with half Rosamond's
wit and information—nothing
comparable in point of beauty and accomplishments
to Caroline; yet how
they have got on!—See what fashion can
do ... Come, come, we must court her
patronage—Leave that to me ... I assure
you I understand the ways and
means.”—
“I have no doubt of that,” said Mr.
Percy, “All that your Ladyship has said
is excellent sense, and incontrovertible as
far as ...”
“Oh! I knew you would think so, I

knew we should understand one another
as soon as you had heard all I had to
say.”—
“Excellent sense, and incontrovertible,
as far as it relates to the means, but
perhaps we may not agree as to the ends; 
and if these are different, you know your
means, though the best adapted for gaining
your objects, may be quite useless or
unfit for the attainment of mine.”
“At once, then, we can't differ as to
our objects, for it is my object to see
your daughters happily married; now tell
me,” said Lady Jane, appealing alternately
to Mr. and Mrs. Percy ... “Honestly
tell me, is not this your object— 
and yours?”—
“Honestly, it is”—said Mr. and Mrs.
Percy.
“That's right—I knew we must
agree there.”
“But,” said Mrs. Percy, “allow me to
ask, what you mean by happily married?”
“What do I mean? Just what you

mean ... what every body means at the
bottom of their hearts—in the first place,
married to men who have some fortune.”
“What does your Ladyship mean by
some fortune?”
“Why ... you have such a strange
way of not understanding.—We who live
in the world must speak as the world
speaks—we cannot recur continually to
a philosophical dictionary, and if we had
recourse to it we should only be sent from
a to z, and from z back again to a; see
affluence, see competence, see luxury, see
philosophy, and see at last that you see
nothing, and that you knew as much before
you opened the book as when you
shut it,—which indeed is what I find to
be the case with most books I read.”
Triumphant from the consciousness of
having hitherto had all the wit on her
side, Lady Jane looked round, and continued.—
“Though I don't pretend to draw my
maxims from books, yet this much I do
know, that in matrimony, let people have

ever so much sense, and merit, and love,
and all that, they must have bread and
butter into the bargain, or it won't do.”
“Certainly,” said Mrs. Percy, “under
that head I suppose you include all
the necessaries of life.”
“And some of the luxuries, if you
please, for in these days luxuries are become
necessaries.”
“A barouche and four, for instance?” 
said Mrs. Percy.
“Oh! no, no—my dear madam, I
speak within bounds; you can not expect
a barouche and four for girls, who have
nothing.”
“I expect it, as little as I wish it for
them,” said Mrs. Percy, smiling—“and as
little as my daughters, I believe, desire it.”
“But if such a thing should offer, I
presume you would not wish, that Rosamond
or Caroline should refuse.”—
“That depends upon who offers it,” 
said Mrs. Percy,—“But whatever my
wishes might be, I should, as I believe
I safely may, leave my daughters entirely

at liberty to judge, and decide for
themselves.”—
“Yes, I believe you safely may,” said
Lady Jane, “as long as you keep them
here.—You might as well talk of leaving
them at liberty in the deserts of Arabia.
You don't expect that knights and squires
should come hither in quest of your damsels?”—
“Then you would have the damsels
sally forth in quest of the knights and
squires?” said Mr. Percy.
“Let them sally forth at any rate,” 
said Lady Jane, laughing, “nobody has
a right to ask in quest of what. We are
not now in the times of ancient romance,
when young ladies were to sit straightlaced
at their looms, or never to stir farther
than to their bower windows.”
“Young ladies must now go a great
deal farther,” said Mr. Percy, “before
the discourteous knights will deign to
take any notice of them.”
“Ay, indeed, it is shameful!” said
Lady Jane, sighing. “I declare it is

shameful,” repeated she, indignantly.
“Do you know, that last winter at Bath
the ladies were forced to ask the gentlemen
to dance?”
“Forced?” said Mr. Percy.
“Yes, forced,” said Lady Jane, “or
else they must have sat still all night like
so many simpletons.”
“Sad alternative,” said Mr. Percy; 
“and what is worse, I understand that
partners for life are scarcely to be had on
easier terms, at least so I am informed by
one of your excellent modern mothers,
Mrs. Chatterton, who has been leading
her three gawky graces about from one
watering place to another these six years,
fishing, and hunting, and hawking for
husbands. ‘There now! I have carried
my girls to Bath, and to London, and to
Tunbridge, and to Weymouth, and to
Cheltenham, and every where; I am
sure I can do no more for them.’—I assure
you,” continued Mr. Percy, “I
have heard Mrs. Chatterton say these very
words in a room full of company.”—
“In a room full of company! Shocking!”

said Lady Jane. “But then poor
Mrs. Chatterton is a fool you know, and
what is worse, not well mannered—how
should she? But I flatter myself, if you
will trust me with your daughter Caroline,
we should manage matters rather better.— 
Now let me tell you my plan—My plan is
to take Caroline with me immediately to
Tunbridge, previous to her London campaign.
Nothing can be a greater mistake
than to keep a young lady up, and prevent
her being seen till the moment when she
is to be brought out; it is of incalculable advantage,
that previous to her appearance
in the great world, she should have been
seen by certain fashionable prôneurs. It is
essential, that certain reports respecting her
accomplishments and connexions should
have had time to circulate properly.”
All this Mr. and Mrs. Percy acknowledged,
in as unqualified a manner as
Lady Jane could desire, was fit and necessary
to secure what is called a young
lady's success in the fashionable world; 
but they said, that it was not their object

to dispose of their daughters, as it is called,
to the best advantage; the arts which are
commonly practised for this purpose they
thought not only indelicate, but ultimately
impolitic and absurd: for men in
general are now so well aware of them,
that they avoid the snares and ridicule,
and detest those by whom they are contrived.
If, now and then, a dupe be
found, still the chance is, that the match
so made turns out unhappily; at best attachments
formed in public places, and
in the hurry of a town life, can seldom be
founded on any real knowledge of character,
or suitableness of taste and temper.
“It is much more probable,” added
Mrs. Percy, “that happy marriages
should be made, where people have leisure,
and opportunities of becoming
really and intimately acquainted with
each other's dispositions.”
“Vastly well”—said Lady Jane—“so
you mean to bury your daughters in the
country—to shut them up at least, all
the days of their unfortunate lives.”

Mr. and Mrs. Percy, both at the same
moment eagerly declared, that they had
no such absurd or cruel intention towards
their daughters. “On the contrary,” 
said Mr. Percy, “we shall take
every proper occasion, that our present
fortune and situation will allow, of letting
them see agreeable and sensible persons.”
“Are they to spring out of the ground,
these agreeable, and sensible persons?” 
said Lady Jane; “Whom do you see in
this desert, or expect to see?
“We see your Ladyship in the first
place,” said Mr. Percy, “you cannot,
therefore, wonder if we are proud enough,
to expect to see sometimes good company,
persons of merit, and even of
fashion, though we have lost our station
and fortune.”—
“That is very politely turned by you,
Mr. Percy.—Much more polite than my
desert.—But I could not bear the thoughts
of your sweet pretty Caroline's blushing
unseen.”

“Nor could we,” said Mr. Percy,
“bear the thoughts of her ceasing to blush
from being too much seen.—We could
not bear the thoughts of fitting our daughters
out, and sending them to the London
market, with the portionless class of matrimonial
adventurers, of whom even
the few that succeed are often doomed
but to splendid misery in marriage; and
the numbers who fail in their venture
are, after a certain time, consigned to
neglect and contempt in single wretchedness.
—Here, on the contrary, in the
bosom of their own families, without seeking
to entice or entrap, they can at all
events never be disappointed, or degraded,
and, whether married or single, will
be respected and respectable, in youth
and age; secure of friends, and of a
happy home.”
“Happy nonsense! begging your pardon,
my dear Coz.—Shall I tell you
what the end of all this living in the
bosom of their own families will be?— 
that they will die old maids. For mercy's

sake, my dear Mrs. Percy, do not let
Mr. Percy be philosophical for your
daughters, whatever he may be for himself.
—You, I am sure, cannot wish your
poor daughters to be old maids,” said
her Ladyship, with a tremendous accent
upon the word.—
“No, I should wish them to marry,
if I could ensure for them good husbands,
not merely good fortunes. The warmest
wish of my heart,” cried Mrs. Percy,
“is to see my daughters as happy as I
am myself, married to men of their own
choice, whom they can entirely esteem,
and fondly love.—But I would rather see
my daughters in their graves, than see
them throw themselves away upon men
unworthy of them, or sell themselves to
husbands unsuited to them, merely for
the sake of being established, for the vulgar
notion of getting married, or to avoid the
imaginary and unjust ridicule of being
old maids.”
The warmth and energy with which
these last words were spoken, by so

gentle a person as Mrs. Percy, surprised
Lady Jane so much, that she was silent; 
all her ideas being suddenly at a stand,
and her sagacity at a fault.—Mr. Percy
proposed a walk to show her the Hills; 
as her Ladyship rose to accompany him,
she said to herself,
“Who could have guessed, that Mrs.
Percy was so romantic?—but she has
caught it from her husband.—What a
strange father and mother!—But for the
sake of the poor girls, I will not give up
the point.—I will have Caroline with me
to Tunbridge, and to town, in spite of
their wise heads.”
She renewed her attack in the evening
after tea.—Rising, and walking towards
the window.
“A word with you, Mr. Percy, if you
please. The young people are going to
walk, and now we can talk the matter
over by ourselves.”
“Why should not we talk it over before
the young people?” said Mr. Percy.
“We always speak of every thing openly

in this family,” continued he, turning to
Lady Jane, “and I think, that is one
reason why we live so happily together.
I let my children know all my views for
them, all my affairs, and my opinions, I
may say all my thoughts, or how could
I expect them to trust me with theirs?”
“As to that, children are bound by
gratitude to treat their parents with perfect
openness,” said Lady Jane, “and
it is the duty of children, you know, to
make their parents their confidants upon
all occasions.”
“Duty and gratitude are excellent
things,” said Mr. Percy, “but somewhat
more is necessary between parent
and child, to produce friendship. Recollect
the Duc d' Epernon's reply to his
king, who reproached him with want of
affection. ‘Sire, you may command
my services, my life, but your Majesty
knows, friendship is to be won only by
friendship.’”
“Very true,”—said Lady Jane, “but
friendship is not, properly speaking, the

connexion that subsists between parents
and children.”
“I am sorry you think so,” said Mr
Percy, smiling—“pray do not teach my
children that doctrine.”
“Nay,” said Lady Jane, “no matter
whether we call it friendship or not; 
I will answer for it, that without any
refined notions about perfect openness
and confidence, your children will be
fond of you, if you are indulgent to them
in certain points. Caroline, my dear,” 
said she, turning to Caroline, who was
at the farthest end of the room—“Don't
look so unconscious, for you are a party
concerned; so come, and kneel at the
feet of this perverse father of yours, to
plead your cause and mine, I must take
you with me to Tunbridge. Come, you
must let me have her a summer and
winter, and I will answer for Caroline's
success.”
“What does your Ladyship mean by
my success?” said Caroline.
“Why child, ... now don't play

your father's philosophic airs upon me; 
we people who live in the world, and not
with philosophers, are not prepared for
such entrapping interrogatories. But
come, I mean in plain English, my dear,
though I am afraid it will shock your
ears, that you will be (speaking loud)
pretty well admired, pretty well abused,
and oh shocking! ... pretty well married!”
“Pretty well married!” repeated Mrs.
Percy, in a scornful tone, “but neither
Caroline nor I should be satisfied, unless
she be very well married.”
“Hey day! There is no knowing
where to have you lady philosophers.— 
This morning you did not desire a coach
and four for your daughters, not you; 
now you quarrel with me on the other
side of the question. Really for a lady
of moderation you are a little exorbitant.
Pretty well married you know implies
£2,000. a year, and very well married,
nothing under £10,000.”
“Is that the language of the market?

I did not understand the exact meaning of
very well married ... did you Caroline?
I own I expect something more than
£10,000. a year.”
“More!—you unconscionable wretch!
how much more?” said Lady Jane.
“Infinitely more,” said Mr. Percy— 
“I expect a man of sense, temper, and
virtue, who would love my daughter as
she deserves to be loved.”
“Let me advise you,” said Lady
Jane, in her very gravest tone, “not to
puff up Caroline's imagination with a
parcel of romantic notions.—I never yet
knew any good done by it. Depend on
it you will be disappointed, if you expect
a genius to descend from the clouds express
for your daughters. Let them do as
other people do, and they may have a
chance of meeting with some good sort
of men, who will make them as happy
as ... as happy as their neighbors.”
“And how happy is that?” said Caroline
—“as happy as we are now?”
“As you are now!” said Lady Jane

—“a vastly pretty maidenly speech:
but young ladies, nevertheless, usually
think, that the saffron robe of Hymen
would not be the most unbecoming dress
in the world, and whether it be in compliance
with their daughters' taste, or
their own convenience, most parents are
in a hurry to purchase it.”
“Sometimes at the expense of their
daughters' happiness for life,” said Mrs.
Percy.
“Well, lest we should go over the
same ground, and get into the same labyrinth,
where we lost ourselves this
morning, let me come to the point at
once.—May I hope, Mr. and Mrs. Percy,
to have the pleasure of Caroline's company
at Tunbridge next week, and in
Town next winter, or not?—That is the
question.”—
“That is a question which your
Ladyship will be so good as to ask Caroline,
if you please,” said Mr. Percy; 
“both her mother and I wish, that she
should decide for herself.”

“Indeed!”—cried Lady Jane—“Then,
my dear Caroline, if you please, come
with me this minute to my dressing-room,
and we'll settle it all at my toilette
de nuit. I have a notion,” added her
Ladyship, “as she drew Caroline's arm
within hers, and led her out of the room,
I have a notion, that I shall not find you
quite so impracticable as your father
has shown himself.”
“You may leave us, Keppel,”—said
Lady Jane, “to her maid, as she went
into her dressing-room, I will ring when
I want you.—My love,” said she to Caroline,
who stood beside her dressing-table,
“why did not you let Keppel
dress your hair to day?—But no matter,
when I once get you to town, we'll
manage it all our own way.—I have a
notion, that you are not of a positive
temper.”
Caroline colored at this speech.
“I see what you are thinking of,” 
said Lady Jane—mistaking her countenance— 
“and to tell you the truth, I

also am sadly afraid, by what I see, that
we shall hardly gain our point—I know
your father.—Some difficulty will be
started, and ten to one he will not allow
me to have you at last.—Unless you try
and persuade him yourself.”
“I never try to persuade my father to
do any thing.”
“What then, he is not a man to be
persuaded?”
“No,”—said Caroline, smiling, “but
what is much better, he is a man to be
convinced.”
“Better!” exclaimed Lady Jane—
“Why surely you had not rather live
with a man you were to convince, than
one you could persuade?”
“Would it not be safer?” said Caroline,
“the arts of persuasion might be
turned against us by others, but the power
of conviction never could.”
“Now, my dear, you are too deep
for me,” replied Lady Jane.—“You
said very little in our long debate this
morning, and I'm afraid I said too

much; but I own I could not help
speaking candidly.—Between ourselves
your father has some notions, which, you
know, are a little odd.”—
“My father!” exclaimed Caroline.
“Yes, my dear, though he is your
father, and my relation too, you know
one cannot be quite blinded by partiality— 
and I never would give up my
judgment.”
“Nor would I,” said Caroline. “Nor
I am sure would my father ever desire
it. You see how freely he permits, he
encourages us all to converse with him.
He is never displeased with any of us
for being of a different opinion from
his.”
“He may not show displeasure,” said
Lady Jane.—
“Oh! he does not feel it, ma'am—I
assure you,”—said Caroline, with emotion.— 
“You do not know my father,
indeed you do not.”
“My dear,” said Lady Jane, retracting,
“I know he is an excellent father,

and I am sure I would have you think
so.—It is your duty.—But at the same
time you know he is not infallible, and
you must not insist,” added she sharply,
“upon all the world's being of one way
of thinking.—My dear, you are his
favorite, and it is no wonder you defend
him.”
“Indeed, ma'am,” said Caroline, “if
I am his favorite, I do not know it.”
“My dear, don't mistake me.—It is
no wonder that you are. You must be
a favorite with every body—and yet,” 
said Lady Jane—and she paused.—“As
you hinted, perhaps I am mistaken ...
I think Rosamond seems ... Hey? ...
Now tell me candidly—which is the favorite?”
“I would if I knew,”—said Caroline.
“Oh! but there must be some favorite
in a family.—I know there must.— 
And since you will not speak, I guess
how it is. Perhaps, if I had asked your
sister Rosamond to go to town with me

next winter, your father would have been
better pleased, and would have consented
more readily.”
“To lose her company if she were his
favorite?” said Caroline, smiling.
“But you know, my dear,” continued
Lady Jane, without hearing or attending
to this.—“You know, my dear, that
Rosamond, though a very good girl and
very sensible, I am sure, yet she has
not your personal advantages, and I
could do nothing for her in town,
except, perhaps, introduce her at Mrs.
Cator's, and Lady Spilsbury's, or Lady
Angelica Headingham's conversazione— 
Rosamond has a mixture of naiveté and
sprightliness that is new, and might take.
—If she had more courage, and would
hazard more in conversation, if she had
in short, l' art de se faire valoir, one could
hand her verses about, and get her forward
in the bel-esprit line.—But she
must stay till we have brought you into
fashion, my dear, and another winter,
perhaps ... Well, my love, I will not

keep you up longer.—On Monday, if
you please, we shall go—since you say
you are sure your father is in earnest, in
giving you leave to decide for yourself.”
What was Lady Jane Granville's
astonishment, when she heard Caroline
decline, with polite thanks, her kind
invitation.
Her Ladyship stood silent with suspended
indignation.
“This cannot be your own determination,
child?”
“I beg your Ladyship's pardon—It is
entirely my own. When a person is
convinced by good reasons, those reasons
surely become their own. But independently
of all the arguments which I have
heard from my father and mother, my
own feelings must prevent me from leaving
home in our present circumstances.
—I cannot quit my parents and my sister,
now they are, comparatively speaking,
in distress. Neither in prosperity
nor adversity do I wish to leave my family,
but certainly not in adversity.”—

“High-flown notions!—your family
is not in any great distress, that I see— 
there is a change to be sure in the style
of life ... But a daughter more, you
know, only increases the ... the difficulties.”
“I believe my father and mother do
not think so,” said Caroline, “and till
they do, I wish to stay with them, and
share their fortune, whatever it may
be.”
“I have done—as you please—you
are to decide for yourself, Miss Caroline
Percy—This is your final determination?”
“It is,” said Caroline—“but permit
me,” added she, taking Lady Jane's
hand, and endeavoring by the kindest
tone of gratitude, to avert the displeasure
which she saw gathering—“Permit me
to assure you, that I am truly grateful for
your kindness, and I hope ... I am
sure, that I never shall forget it.”
Lady Jane drew away her hand
haughtily—“Permit me to assure you,

Miss Caroline Percy, that there are few,
very few young ladies indeed, even
among my own nearest relations, to whom
I would have undertaken to be chaperon.
I do not know another young lady in
England, to whom I would have made
the offer I have made to you—nor would
that offer ever have been made, could I
reasonably have foreseen the possibility
of it's being refused.—Let us say no more,
Ma'am, if you please, we understand
one another now—and I wish you a good
night.”
Caroline retired, sorry to have displeased
one who had shown so much
friendly eagerness to serve her, yet not
in the least disposed to change her determination.
The next day Lady Jane's
morning-face boded no good—Mr. and
Mrs. Percy in vain endeavored by all the
kind attentions in their power to assuage
her feelings, but nothing restored her to
that sweet temper, in which she had
begun the chapter of advice—She soon
announced, that she had received letters

which called her immediately to Tunbridge,
and her Ladyship quitted the
Hills, resolving never more to visit relations,
who would not be guided by her
opinion.
The next persons who came to visit
the Percy family in their retirement,
were Mrs. Hungerford, and her daughter
Mrs. Mortimer, who had been friends
and near neighbors whilst they resided
at Percy-Hall, and whose society they
had particularly regretted. The distance
at which they now lived from Hungerford
Castle was such, that they had little
hope that any intercourse could be kept
up with it's inhabitants, especially as
Mrs. Hungerford had arrived at that
time of life, when she was exempted from
the ceremony of visiting, and she seldom
stirred from home, except when she went
to town annually, to see her daughter
Mortimer.
“So,”—said Mrs. Hungerford, as Mr.
Percy helped her out of her carriage— 
“my good friend, you are surprised at

seeing me, are you?—Ah! you thought
I was too old, or too lazy to come,—but
I am happy to be able to convince you,
that you are mistaken. See what motive
will do!—You know Mr. Percy says,
that people can do any thing they please,
and it is certain that it pleased me to do
this.”
When she was seated, and Mrs. Percy
spoke of the distance from which she
had kindly come to see them, she answered—
“I hear people talk of a visiting distance,
and I understand perfectly well what it
means when acquaintance are in question,
but for friends there is no visiting
distance. Remove to the Land's End,
and, old as I am, I will pursue and overtake
you too, tortoise as I seem.—And
don't depend upon dark nights, for every
night is full moon to me, when I am bent
upon a visit to a friend—And don't depend
upon Hills—There are no Pyrenees
between us.”—
These sound, perhaps, like mere civil

speeches, but they came from one who
always spoke sincerely, and who was no
common person. Mrs. Hungerford was,
by those who did not know her, thought
proud; those who did, knew that she
had reason to be proud. She was of
noble descent, dignified appearance,
polite manners, strong understanding,
and high character. Her fortune, connexions,
various knowledge, and extraordinary
merit, had, during a long life, given
her means of becoming acquainted with
most of the persons of any celebrity or
worth in her own and in foreign countries.
No new candidate for fame appeared
in any line of life, without desiring
to be noticed by Mrs. Hungerford; 
no traveller of distinction or of literature
visited England, without providing himself
with letters of introduction to Mrs.
Hungerford, and to her accomplished
daughter.
The wife of Admiral Mortimer—in
her early youth she had passed some
years abroad, and had the vivacity, ease,

polish, tact, and esprit de société of a
Frenchwoman, with the solidity of understanding,
amiable qualities, domestic
tastes, and virtues of an English woman.
The mutual affection of this mother and
daughter, not only secured their own
happiness but diffused an additional
charm over their manners, and increased
the interest which they otherwise inspired.
They had a delightful society
both in town and in the country. Mrs.
Mortimer's house in London was the
resort of the best company in the best
sense of the word. It was not that dull,
dismal, unnatural thing, an English conversazione,
where people are set, against
their will and their nature, to talk wit; 
or reduced, against their pride and their
conscience, to worship idols.—This society
partook of the nature of the best
English and the best French society,
judiciously combined. The French mixture
of persons of talents and of rank,
men of literature and of the world—the
French habit of mingling feminine and

masculine subjects of conversation, instead
of separating the sexes, far as the
confines of their prison-room will allow,
into hostile parties, dooming one sex to
politics, argument, and eternal sense,
the other to scandal, dress, and eternal
nonsense.—Yet with these French manners,
there were English morals—with
this French ease, gayety, and politeness; 
English sincerity, confidence, and safety.
—No simagrée, no espionage, no intrigue
political or gallant; none of that profligacy,
which not only disgraced, but
destroyed the reality of pleasure in Parisian
society, at it's most brilliant æra.
The persons of whom Mrs. Mortimer's
society was formed were, in their habits
and good sense, so thoroughly English,
that, even had it been possible for
them to put morality and religion out of
the question, they would still have
though it quite as convenient and agreeable
to love their own husbands and
wives, as to play at cross-purposes in
gallanting their neighbors. In short their

pleasure in general society was in addition,
not in contradistinction or destruction
of their domestic happiness. Of
consequence, Mrs. Mortimer, in the
bloom of youth and height of fashion,
instead of being a coquet, hunting after
men with her eyes, was beloved, almost
to adoration, as a daughter, a wife, a
mother, a friend.—Mrs. Hungerford, at
an advanced age, was not a wretched,
selfish Madame du Deffand, exacting
homage and attentions, yet disbelieving
in the existence of friendship: complaining
in the midst of all the luxuries of life,
mental and corporeal, of being oppressed
by ennui, unable to find any one to love
and esteem, or incapable of loving and
esteeming any one.—Mrs. Hungerford,
surrounded “with all that should
accompany old age,” 
“As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,”
was, as she often declared, with gratitude
to Providence, happier in age than

she had been even in youth. With warm
affections, and benevolence guided and
governed in it's objects by reason and religion.— 
Indulgent to human nature in
general, and loving it, but not with
German cosmopolitism; first and best,
loving her daughter, her family, comprising
a wide and happy extent of relations
and connexions, sons and nephews
in the army and navy, or in different
employments in the state.—Many of
these young men already distinguished,
others wanting only opportunity to do
equal honor to their name. All these
objects of her affection kept up a continual,
strong, and lively interest in the
affairs of the world, connected her with
different professions, and extended her
views to distant countries, so that her
affections enlarged perpetually her sphere
of knowledge, and supplied that freshness
of motive for mental activity, the
want of which so many complain of as
they advance in years.
During the summer, Mrs. Mortimer

usually spent some months at Hungerford
Castle, and generally took with her
from town some friends, whose company
she thought would peculiarly suit her
mother's taste. Mrs. Hungerford had
always been in the habit of inviting the
Percy family, whenever she had any
body with her, whom she thought they
would wish to see or hear; and thus the
young people, though living retired in
the country, had enjoyed the advantages
of becoming early acquainted with
many celebrated literary and public
characters, and of living in the best society.
These were advantages, which
they obtained from their education and
their merit, for assuredly Mrs. Hungerford
would never have troubled herself
with them, merely because they were
her neighbors, possessing so many thousand
pounds a year, and representatives
of the Percy interest in the County.—A
proof of which, if any were wanting, is,
that she never took the least notice of
those who now held their place at Percy-Hall;

and the first visit she paid when
she came to the country, the first visit
she had been known to pay for years,
was to her friends the Percys, after they
had lost their thousands per annum. So
completely was it themselves and not
their fortune, which she had always considered,
that she never condoled with
them, and scarcely seemed to advert to
any change in their circumstances. She
perceived, to be sure, that she was not
at Percy-Hall; she discovered, probably,
that she was in a small instead of a large
room, the change of prospect from the
windows struck her eye, and she remarked,
that this part of the country was more
beautiful than that to which she had
been accustomed.—As to the more or
less of show, of dress, or equipage, these
things did not merely make no difference
in Mrs. Hungerford's estimation of persons,
but in fact scarcely made any impression
upon her senses or attention.
She had been so much accustomed to
magnificence upon a large scale, that

the different subordinate degrees were
lost upon her, and she had seen so many
changes of fashion and of fortune, that
she attached little importance to these,
but, regardless of the drapery of objects,
saw at once what was substantial
and essential. It might, she thought,
be one man's taste to visit her in a barouche
and four, with half a dozen servants,
and another person's pleasure to
come without parade or attendants—this
was indifferent to her. It was their conversation,
their characters, their merit
she looked to; and many a lord and
lady of showy dress and equipage, and
vast importance in their own opinions,
shrunk into insignificance in the company
of Mrs. Hungerford, and, though in the
room with her, passed before her eyes
without making a sufficient sensation
upon her organs, to attract her notice,
or to change the course of her thoughts.
All these peculiarities in this lady's
character rendered her particularly
agreeable to the Percy family in their

present circumstances. She pressed
them to pay her a long visit.
“You see,” said Mrs. Hungerford,
“that I had the grace to forbear asking
this favor, till I had possession of my
daughter Mortimer, and could bring her
with me, to entice you.—And my dear
young friends, you shall find young
friends too, as well as old ones, at my
house.—My nieces, the Lady Pembrokes,
are to be with me; and Lady
Angelica Headingham, who will entertain
you, though, perhaps, you will
sometimes be tired for her, she works so
hard aux galères de bel-esprit. I acknowledge
she has a little too much affectation.— 
But we must have charity for
affectation and it's multitude of foibles,
for, you know, Locke says, that it is
only a mistaken desire to please.—Angelica
will find out her mistakes in time,
and after trying all manners, will hold
fast by the best—that is, the most natural— 
in the mean time, do you, my
dear girls, come and admire her as an

inimitable actress.—Then, Mr. Percy,
I have for you three temptations, a man
of letters—a man of science—and a man
of sense.—And, for the climax of my
eloquence, I have reserved,” continued
she, turning to Mrs. Percy, “my appeal
to the mother's feelings.—Know,
then, that my son, my eldest hope, my
Colonel, has arrived from the continent
—landed last night—I expect him home
in a few days, and you must come and
flatter me, that he is prodigiously improved
by the service he has seen, and
the wounds which he can show, and
assure me, that, next to your own Godfrey,
you would name my Gustavus, of
all the officers in the army, as most deserving
to be our Commander in Chief.”
An invitation, which there were so
many good and kind reasons for accepting,
could not be refused.—But before
we go to Hungerford-Castle, and before
we see Colonel Hungerford—upon whom,
doubtless, many a one at this instant, as
well as Rosamond Percy, has formed

designs or prognostics in favor of Caroline
 ... we must read the following
letter, aud bring up the affairs of Alfred
and Erasmus.