

One morning lady Dashfort had formed
an ingenious scheme for leaving lady
Isabel and lord Colambre, tête â tête; 
but the sudden entrance of Heathcock
disconcerted her intentions. He came
to beg lady Dashfort's interest with
count O'Halloran, for permission to
hunt and shoot on his grounds.—“Not
for myself, 'pon honour, but for two
officers, who are quartered at the next
town, here, who will indubitably hang
or drown themselves, if they are debarred
from sporting.”
“Who is this count O'Halloran?” 
said lord Colambre.—Miss White,
lady Killpatrick's companion, said “he
was a great oddity.”—Lady Dashfort,
“that he was singular:” and the clergyman
of the parish, who was at breakfast,

declared, “that he was a man of uncommon
knowledge, merit, and politeness.”
“All I know of him,” said Heathcock,
“is that he is a great sportsman,
with a long queue, a gold
laced hat, and long skirts to a laced
waistcoat.” Lord Colambre expressed
a wish to see this extraordinary personage; 
and lady Dashfort, to cover
her former design, and, perhaps, thinking
absence might be as effectual as
too much propinquity, immediately
offered to call upon the officers in
their way, and carry them with Heathcock
and lord Colambre, to Halloran
castle.
Lady Isabel retired with much
mortification, but with becoming grace; 
and captain Benson and captain Williamson
were taken to the count's.
Captain Benson, who was a famous
whip, took his seat on the box of the
barouche, and the rest of the party had
the pleasure of her ladyship's conversation,
for three or four miles.

Of her ladyship's conversation,—for
lord Colambre's thoughts were far distant; 
captain Williamson had not any
thing to say; and Heathcock nothing,
but, “Eh! re'lly now!—'pon honour!”
They arrived at Halloran castle,—a
fine old building, part of it in ruins, and
part repaired with great judgment and
taste. When the carriage stopped, a
respectable looking man-servant appeared
on the steps, at the open halldoor.
Count O'Halloran was out a hunting; 
but his servant said, “that he would be
at home immediately, if lady Dashfort
and the gentlemen would be pleased to
walk in.”
On one side of the lofty and spacious
hall stood the skeleton of an elk; on
the other side, the perfect skeleton of a
moose-deer, which, as the servant
said, his master had made out, with
great care, from the different bones of
many of this curious species of deer,

found in the lakes in the neighbourhood.
The brace of officers witnessed
their wonder with sundry strange oaths
and exclamations.—“Eh! 'pon honour,
—re'lly now!” said Heathcock; and,
too genteel to wonder at, or admire
any thing in the creation, dragged out
his watch with some difficulty, saying,
“I wonder, now, whether they are
likely to think of giving us any thing
to eat in this place?”—And, turning his
back upon the moose-deer, he straight
walked out again upon the steps, called
to his groom, and began to make some
inquiry about his led horse. Lord Colambre
surveyed the prodigious skeletons
with rational curiosity, and with
that sense of awe and admiration, by
which a superiour mind is always struck
on beholding any of the great works of
Providence.
“Come, my dear lord!” said lady
Dashfort; “with our sublime sensations,
we are keeping my old friend,
Mr. Alick Brady, this venerable person,

waiting, to show us into the reception-room.”
The servant bowed respectfully— 
more respectfully than servants of modern
date.
“My lady, the reception-room has
been lately painted; the smell of paint
may be disagreeable: with your leave,
I will take the liberty of showing you
into my master's study.”
He opened the door, went in before
her, and stood holding up his finger,
as if making a signal of silence to some
one within. Her ladyship entered, and
found herself in the midst of an odd
assembly: an eagle, a goat, a dog,
an otter, several gold and silver fish in
a glass globe, and a white mouse in a
cage. The eagle, quick of eye, but
quiet of demeanour, was perched upon
his stand; the otter lay under the table
perfectly harmless; the Angola goat,
a beautiful and remarkably little creature
of its kind, with long, curling, silky
hair, was walking about the room with

the air of a beauty and a favourite; 
the dog, a tall Irish greyhound, one
of the few of that fine race, which is
now almost extinct—had been given to
count O'Halloran by an Irish nobleman,
a relation of lady Dashfort's. This dog,
who had formerly known her ladyship,
looked at her with ears erect, recognized
her, and went to meet her, the moment
she entered. The servant answered for
the peaceable behaviour of all the rest
of the company of animals, and retired.
Lady Dashfort began to feed the eagle
from a silver plate on his stand; lord
Colambre examined the inscription on
his collar; the other men stood in
amaze. Heathcock, who came in last,
astonished out of his constant “Eh! re'lly
now!” the moment he put himself in
at the door, exclaimed, “Zounds!
what's all this live lumber?”—and he
stumbled over the goat, who was at that
moment crossing the way. The colonel's
spur caught in the goat's curly beard; 
the colonel shook his foot, and entangled

the spur worse and worse; the
goat struggled and butted; the colonel
skated forward on the polished oak floor,
balancing himself with outstretched
arms.
The indignant eagle screamed, and,
passing by, perched on Heathcock's
shoulders. Too well bred to have recourse
to the terrours of his beak, he
scrupled not to scream, and flap his
wings about the colonel's ears. Lady
Dashfort, the while, threw herself back
in her chair, laughing, and begging
Heathcock's pardon.—“O! take care
of the dog, my dear colonel!” cried
she; “for this kind of dog seizes his
enemy by the back, and shakes him
to death.” The officers, holding their
sides, laughed, and begged—no pardon:
while lord Colambre, the only
person who was not absolutely incapacitated,
tried to disentangle the spur,
and to liberate the colonel from the
goat, and the goat from the colonel; 
an attempt in which he at last succeeded,

at the expense of a considerable
portion of the goat's beard. The
eagle, however, still kept his place; 
and, yet mindful of the wrongs of his
insulted friend, the goat, had stretched
his wings to give another buffet. Count
O'Halloran entered; and the bird,
quitting his prey, flew down to greet
his master. The count was a fine old,
military-looking gentleman, fresh from
the chace: his hunting accoutrements
hanging carelessly about him, he advanced,
unembarrassed, to the lady; 
and received his other guests with a
mixture of military ease and gentleman-like
dignity.
Without adverting to the awkward
and ridiculous situation in which he
had found poor Heathcock, he apologized
in general for his troublesome
favourites.—“For one of them,” said
he, patting the head of the dog, which
lay quiet at lady Dashfort's feet, “I
see I have no need to apologise; he
is where he ought to be. Poor fellow!

he has never lost his taste for the good
company to which he was early accustomed.
—As to the rest, (said he, turning
to lady Dashfort) a mouse, a bird,
and a fish, are, you know, tribute from
earth, air, and water, for my conqueror.”—
“But from no barbarous Scythian!” 
said lord Colambre, smiling. The
count looked at lord Colambre, as at a
person worthy his attention; but his
first care was to keep the peace between
his loving subjects and his foreign
visitors. It was difficult to dislodge
the old settlers, to make room for
the new comers; but he adjusted
these things with admirable facility; 
and, with a master's hand and master's
eye, compelled each favourite to retreat
into the back settlements. With becoming
attention, he stroked and kept
quiet old Victory, his eagle, who eyed
colonel Heathcock still, as if he did
not like him; and whom the colonel
eyed, as if he wished his neck fairly

wrung off. The little goat had nestled
himself close up to his liberator, lord
Colambre, and lay perfectly quiet, with
his eyes closed, going very wisely to
sleep, and submitting philosophically
to the loss of one half of his beard.
Conversation now commenced, and
was carried on by count O'Halloran
with much ability and spirit, and with
such quickness of discrimination and
delicacy of taste, as quite surprised and
delighted our hero. To the lady, the
count's attention was first directed: he
listened to her as she spoke, bending
with an air of deference and devotion.
She made her request for permission for
major Benson and captain Williamson
to hunt and shoot in his grounds: this
was instantly granted.
“Her ladyship's requests were to
him commands,” the count said.— 
“His game-keeper should be instructed
to give the gentlemen, her friends,
every liberty, and all possible assistance.”

Then turning to the officers, he said,
he had just heard that several regiments
of English militia had lately landed in
Ireland; that one regiment was arrived
at Killpatrickstown. He rejoiced in
the advantages Ireland, and he hoped he
might be permitted to add England,
would probably derive from the exchange
of the militia of both countries; 
habits would be improved, ideas enlarged.
The two countries have the
same interest; and from the inhabitants
discovering more of each other's good
qualities, and interchanging little good
offices in common life, their esteem
and affection for each other would increase,
and rest upon the firm basis of
mutual utility.”
To all this major Benson and captain
Williamson made no reply.
“The major looks so like a stuffed
man of straw,” whispered lady Dashfort
to lord Colambre; “and the captain so
like the knave of clubs, putting forth
one manly leg.”

Count O'Halloran now turned the
conversation to field sports, and then the
captain and major opened at once.
“Pray now, sir?” said the major,
“you fox-hunt in this country, I suppose; 
and now do you manage the thing
here as we do? Over night, you know,
before the hunt, when the fox is out,
stopping up the earths of the cover we
mean to draw, and all the rest for four
miles round. Next morning we assemble
at the cover's side, and the huntsman
throws in the hounds. The gossip here
is no small part of the entertainment:
but as soon as we hear the hounds give
tongue—”
“The favourite hounds,” interposed
Williamson.
“The favourite hounds, to be sure,” 
continued Benson; “there is a dead silence,
till pug is well out of cover, and
the whole pack well in: then cheer the
hounds with tally ho! till your lungs
crack. Away he goes in gallant style,
and the whole field is hard up, till pug

takes a stiff country: then they who
haven't pluck lag, see no more of him,
and, with a fine blazing scent, there are
but few of us in at the death.”
“Well, we are fairly in at the death, I
hope,” said lady Dashfort: “I was thrown
out sadly at one time in the chace.”
Lord Colambre, with the count's permission,
took up a book in which the
count's pencil lay, “Pasley on the
Military Policy of Great Britain;” it
was marked with many notes of admiration,
and with hands pointing to remarkable
passages.
“That is a book that leaves a strong
impression on the mind,” said the
count.
Lord Colambre read one of the marked
passages, beginning with, “All that
distinguishes a soldier in outward appearance
from a citizen is so trifling,”— 
but at this instant our hero's attention
was distracted by seeing in a black-letter
book this title of a chapter:
“Burial-place of the Nugents.”

“Pray now, sir,” said captain Williamson,
“if I don't interrupt you, as
you are such a famous fox-hunter, may
be, you may be a fisherman too; and
now in Ireland do you Mr.”— 
A smart pinch on his elbow from his
major, who stood behind him, stopped
the captain short as he pronounced the
word Mr. Like all awkward people,
be turned directly to ask, by his looks,
what was the matter?
The major took advantage of his discomfiture,
and stepping before him determined
to have the fishing to himself,
and went on with,
“Count O'Halloran, I presume you
understand fishing too, as well as hunting?”
The count bowed, “I do not presume
to say that, sir.”
“But pray, count, in this country do
you arm your hook this ways. Give me
leave;” taking the whip from Williamson's
reluctant hand, “this ways, laying
the outermost part of your feather this

fashion, next to your hook, and the point
next to your shank, this wise, and that
wise; and then sir,—count, you take the
hackle of a cock's neck—” 
“A plover's topping's better,” said
Williamson.
“And work your gold and silver
thread,” pursued Benson, “up to your
wings, and when your head's made you
fasten all.”
“But you never showed how your
head's made,” interrupted Williamson.
“The gentleman knows how a head's
made, any man can make a head I suppose; 
so, sir, you fasten all.”
“You'll never get your head fast on
that way, while the world stands,” cried
Williamson.
“Fast enough for all purposes; I'll
bet you a rump and dozen, captain; and
then, sir,—count, you divide your wings
with a needle.”
“A pin's point will do,” said Williamson.
The count, to reconcile matters, produced

from an Indian cabinet, which he
had opened for the lady's inspection, a
little basket, containing a variety of artificial
flies of curious construction,
which, as he spread them on the table,
made Williamson and Benson's eyes almost
sparkle with delight. There was
the dun-fly, for the month of March; 
and the stone-fly, much in vogue for
April; and the ruddy-fly, of red wool'
black silk, and red capon's feathers.
Lord Colambre, whose head was in
the burial-place of the Nugents, wished
them all at the bottom of the sea.
“And the green-fly,
and the moorish-fly!” 
cried Benson, snatching them up
with transport; “and chief the sad-yellow-fly,
in which the fish delight in
June; the sad-yellow-fly, made with the
buzzard's wings, bound with black
braked hemp; and the shell-fly, for the
middle of July, made of greenish wool,
wrapped about with the herle of a peacock's
tail, famous for creating excellent
sport.” All these and more were spread

upon the table before the sportsmen's
wondering eyes.
“Capital flies! capital, faith!” cried
Williamson.
“Treasures, faith! real treasures, by
G&wblank;,” cried Benson.
“Eh! 'pon honour! re'lly now,” 
were the first words which Heathcock
had uttered since his battle with the
goat.
“My dear Heathcock, are you alive
still,” said lady Dashfort; “I had really
forgotten your existence.”
So had count O'Halloran, but he did
not say so.
“Your ladyship has the advantage of
me there,” said Heathcock, stretching
himself; “I wish I could forget my existence,
for in my mind existence is a
horrible bore.”
“I thought you was a sportsman,” 
said Williamson.
“Well sir?”
“And a fisherman?”
“Well sir?”

“Why look you there, sir,” pointing
to the flies, “and tell a body life's a
bore.”
“One can't always fish or shoot, I
apprehend sir,” said Heathcock.
“Not always—but sometimes,” said
Williamson, laughing; “for I suspect
shrewdly you've forgot some of your
sporting in Bond-street.”
“Eh! 'pon honour! re'lly now!” said
the colonel, retreating again to his safe
entrenchment of affectation, from which
he never could venture without imminent
danger.
“'Pon honour,” cried lady Dashfort,
I can swear for Heathcock, that I
have eaten excellent hares and ducks of
his shooting, which, to my knowledge,” 
added she, in a loud whisper, “he
bought in the market.”
“Emptum aprum!” said Lord Colambre
to the count, without danger of
being understood by those whom it concerned.
The count smiled a second time; but

politely turning the attention of the
company from the unfortunate colonel
by addressing himself to the laughing
sportsmen, “Gentlemen, you seem to
value these,” said he, sweeping the artificial
flies from the table into the little
basket from which they had been taken; 
“would you do me the honour to accept
of them? They are all of my own
making, and consequently of Irish manufacture.” 
Then ringing the bell, he
asked lady Dashfort's permission to have
the basket put into her carriage.
Benson and Williamson followed the
servant to prevent them from being
tossed into the boot. Heathcock stood
still in the middle of the room taking
snuff.
Count O'Halloran turned from him
to Lord Colambre, who had just go
happily to the burial-place of the Nugents,
when lady Dashfort, coming
between them, and spying the title of
the chapter, exclaimed— 
“What have you there?—Antiquities!

my delight!—but I never
look at engravings, when I can see
realities.”
Lord Colambre was then compelled
to follow, as she led the way into the
hall, where the count took down golden
ornaments, and brass-headed spears,
and jointed horns of curious workmanship,
that had been found on his estate; 
and he told of spermaceti wrapped in
carpets, and he showed small urns,
enclosing ashes; and from among these
urns he selected one, which he put
into the hands of lord Colambre, telling
him that it had been lately found in an
old abbey-ground in his neighbourhood,
which had been the burial-place of some
of the Nugent family.
“I was just looking at the account
of it, in the book which you saw open
on my table.—And as you seem to take
an interest in that family, my lord,
perhaps,” said the count, “you may
think this urn worth your acceptance.”

Lord Colambre said, “It would be
highly valuable to him—as the Nugents
were his near relations.”
Lady Dashfort little expected this
blow; she, however, carried him off to
the moosedeer, and from moosedeer to
round towers, to various architectural
antiquities, and to the real and fabulous
history of Ireland, on all which the
count spoke with learning and enthusiasm.
But now to colonel Heathcock's
great joy and relief, a handsome
collation appeared in the dining-room,
of which Ulick opened the folding-doors.
“Count, you have made an excellent
house of your castle,” said Lady Dashfort.
“It will be, when it is finished,” 
said the count. “I am afraid,” added
he, smiling, “I live like many other
Irish gentlemen, who never are, but
always to be blest with a good house.
I began on too large a scale, and can
never hope to live to finish it.”
“'Pon honour! here's a good thing,

which I hope we shall live to finish,” 
said Heathcock, sitting down before the
collation; and heartily did he eat of
grouse pie, and of Irish ortolans, which,
as Lady Dashfort observed, “afforded
him indemnity for the past, and security
for the future.”
“Eh! re'lly now! your Irish ortolans
are famous good eating,” said
Heathcock.
“Worth being quartered in Ireland,
faith! to taste 'em,” said Benson.
The count recommended to lady
Dashfort some of “that delicate sweetmeat,
the Irish plum.”
“Bless me, sir, count!” cried
Williamson, “it's by far the best thing
of the kind I ever tasted in all my
life: where could you get this?”
“In Dublin—at my dear Mrs. Godey's; 
where only, in his majesty's
dominions, it is to be had,” said the
count. The whole dish vanished in a
few seconds.—“'Pon honour! I do

believe this is the thing the queen's so
fond of,” said Heathcock.
Then heartily did he drink of the
count's excellent Hungarian wines; 
and, by the common bond of sympathy
between those who have no other tastes
but eating and drinking, the colonel,
the major, and the captain were now
all the best companions possible for
one another.
Whilst “they prolonged the rich
repast,” lady Dashfort and lord Colambre
went to the window to admire
the prospect: lady Dashfort asked the
count the name of some distant hill.—
“Ah!” said the count, “that hill
was once covered with fine wood; but
it was all cut down two years ago.”
“Who could have been so cruel?” 
said her ladyship.
“I forget the present proprietor's
name,” said the count; “but he is
one of those who, according to the
clause of distress in their leases, lead,

drive, and carry away, but never enter
their lands; one of those enemies to
Ireland—these cruel absentees!” Lady
Dashfort looked through her glass at
the mountain:—lord Colambre sighed,
and, endeavouring to pass it off with a
smile, said frankly to the count,
“You are not aware, I am sure,
count, that you are speaking to the
son of an Irish absentee family.—Nay,
do not be shocked, my dear sir; I tell
you only, because I thought it fair to
do so: but let me assure you, that nothing
you could say on that subject
could hurt me personally, because I
feel that I am not, that I never can be,
an enemy to Ireland. An absentee,
voluntarily, I never yet have been; and
as to the future, I declare—” 
“I declare you know nothing of the
future:” interrupted lady Dashfort, in
a half peremptory, half playful tone.— 
“You know nothing—make no rash
vows, and you will break none.”
The undaunted assurance of lady

Dashfort's genius for intrigue gave her
an air of frank imprudence, which prevented
lord Colambre from suspecting
that more was meant than met the ear.
The count and he took leave of one
another with mutual regard; and lady
Dashfort rejoiced to have got our hero
out of Halloran castle.