

Our young hero, hero like, took a solitary
walk to indulge his feelings, and
as he rambled, he railed to his heart's
content against Dora.
“Here all my plans of happiness and
improvement are again overturned. Dora
cannot improve me, can give me no motive
for making myself any thing better
than what I am—Polish my manners!
no; when she has such rude, odious
manners herself—much changed for the
worse—a hundred times more agreeable
when she was a child—Lost to me she is
every way—no longer my playfellow— 
no chance of her being my friend—Her
good father hoped she would be a sister

to me—very sorry I should be to have
such a sister—Then I am to consider her
as a married woman—Pretty wife she
will make! I am convinced she cares no
more for that man she is going to marry
than I do—Marrying merely to be married,
to manage her own affairs, and have
her own way—so childish!—or marrying
merely to get an establishment— 
so base!—to secure a husband, so indelicate!— 
How women, and such young
creatures, can bring themselves to make
these venal matches—I protest Peggy
Sheridan's worth a hundred of such.
Moriarty may think himself a happy
fellow—Suzy—Jenny, any body—only
with dress and manner a little different— 
is full as good in reality. I question
whether they'd give themselves, without
liking, to any White Connal in their
own rank, at the first offer, for a few
sheep, or a cow, or to have their own
way?”
Such was the summing up of the topics

of invective, which, during a two hours'
walk, ramble we should say, had come
round and round continually in Ormond's
indignant fancy. He went plucking off
the hawthorn blossoms in his path, till at
one desperate tug, that he gave to a branch
that crossed his way, he opened to a bank
which sloped down to the lake. At a
little distance below him he saw old
Sheelah sitting under a tree, rocking herself
backwards and forwards, while Dora
stood motionless opposite to her, with her
hand covering her eyes, and her head
drooping. They neither of them saw
Ormond, and he walked on pursuing his
own path; it led close behind the hedge
to the place where they were, so close
that the sounds “Willastrew! Willastrew!” 
from old Sheelah, in her funereal
tone, reached his ear, and then the words,
“Oh, my heart's darling! So young to
be a sacrifice—but what next did he
say?”
Ormond's curiosity was strongly excited;

but he was too honourable to
listen, or to equivocate with conscience; 
so to warn them that some one was within
hearing, he began to whistle clear and
strong. Both the old woman and the
young lady started.
“Murder!” cried Sheelah, “it's Harry
Ormond!—Oh! did he overhear any thing— 
or all, think ye?”
“Not I,” answered Ormond, leaping
over the hedge directly, and standing
firm before them; “I overheard nothing— 
I heard only your last words Sheelah— 
you spoke so loud I could not help it— 
They are as safe with me as with yourself— 
but don't speak so loud another time
if you are talking secrets, and whatever
you do, never suspect me of listening—I
am incapable of that, or any other baseness.”
So saying, he turned his back, and was
preparing to vault over the hedge again,
when he heard Dora, in a soft low voice,
say—

“I never suspected you, Harry, of
that, or any other baseness.”
“Thank you, Dora,” said he, turning
with some emotion—“thank you, Dora,
for this first, this only kind word you've
said to me since you came home.”
Looking at her earnestly, as he approached
nearer, he saw the traces of
tears, and an air of dejection in her countenance,
which turned all his anger to
pity and tenderness in an instant. With
a soothing tone he said, “Forgive my
unseasonable reproach—I was wrong— 
I see you are not as much to blame as I
thought you were.”
“To blame!” cried Dora. “And
pray how—and why—and for what did
you think me to blame, Sir.”
Suddenly the impossibility of explanation,
the impropriety of what he had said,
flashed on his mind, and in a few moments
a rapid succession of ideas followed.
“Was Dora to blame for obeying
her father, for being ready to marry the

man to whom her father had destined— 
promised her hand—and was he, Harry
Ormond!—the adopted child, the trusted
friend of the family, to suggest to the
daughter the idea of rebelling against
her father's will, or disputing the propriety
of his choice?”
Ormond's imagination took a rapid
flight on Dora's side of the question, and
he finished with the conviction that she
was “a sacrifice, a martyr, and a miracle
of perfection!”
“Blame you, Dora!” cried he, “blame
you! No—I admire, I esteem, I respect
you. Did I say that I blamed you? I
did not know what I said or what I
meant.”
“And are you sure you know any better
what you say or what you mean,
now?” said Dora.
The altered look and tone of tartness
in which this question was asked, produced
as sudden a change in Harry's conviction.
He hesitatingly answered—
“I am—”

“He is,” said Sheelah, confidently.
“I did not ask your opinion, Sheelah. I
can judge for myself,” said Dora.—“Your
words tell me one thing, Sir, and your
looks another,” said she, turning to Ormond,
“which am I to believe, pray?”
“Oh! believe the young man any way,
sure,” said Sheelah, “silence speaks best
for him.”
“Best against him, in my opinion,” 
said Dora.
“Dora, will you hear me,” Ormond
began.
“No, Sir, I will not,” interrupted
Dora—“What's the use of hearing or
listening to a man, who does not, by the
confession of his own eyes, and his own
tongue, know two minutes together what
he means, or mean two minutes together
the same thing. A woman might as well
listen to a fool or a madman!”
“Too harsh, too severe, Dora,” said he.
“Too true, too sincere, perhaps, you
mean.”

“Since I am allowed, Dora, to speak
to you as a brother—”
“Who allowed you, Sir?” interrupted
Dora.
“Your father, Dora.”
“My father can not, shall not. Nobody
but nature can make any man my brother— 
nobody but myself shall allow any
man to call himself my brother.”
“I am sorry I presumed so far, Miss
O'Shane, I was only going to offer one
word of advice.”
“I want no advice—I will take none
from you, Sir.”
“You shall have none, madam, hence-forward,
ever, from Harry Ormond.”
“'Tis well, Sir, come away, Sheelah!”
“Oh! wait, dear—Och! I am too
old,” said Sheelah, groaning as she rose
slowly. “I'm too slow entirely for these
quick passions!”
“Passions!” cried Dora, growing
scarlet and pale in an instant—“What
do you mean by passions, Sheelah.”

“I mean changes”—said Sheelah,— 
“changes, dear.—I am ready now— 
where's my stick.—Thank you, Master
Harry.—Only I say I can't change my
quarters and march so quick as you, dear.”
“Well, well, lean on me,” said Dora,
impatiently.
“Don't hurry, poor Sheelah—no necessity
to hurry away from me,” said Ormond,
who had stood for a few moments
like one transfixed. “'Tis for me to go— 
and I will go as fast and as far as you
please, Dora, away from you and for
ever.”
“For ever!” said Dora—“what do
you mean?”
“Away from the Black Islands! he
can't mean that,” said Sheelah.
“Why not—Did not I leave Castle
Hermitage at a moment's warning?”
“Warning!—nonsense,” cried Dora,
“lean on him, Sheelah—he has frightened
you; lean on him, can't you—sure
he's better than your stick. Warning—

where did you find that pretty word?
Warning! are you a footman? I thought
you were a gentleman—born and bred.
But when you talk of going off at a moment's
warning from this place and that,
what can I think but that Harry Ormond
is turned serving man.”
“Harry Ormond!—And a minute ago
she would not let me—Miss O'Shane, I
shall not forget myself again,—be as capricious,
amuse yourself with being as
capricious as you please, but not at my
expense;—little as you think of me, I am
not to be made your butt or your dupe,
therefore, I must seriously beg, at once,
that I may know whether you wish me
to stay or to go.”
“To stay, to be sure, when my father
invites you. Would you expose me to
his displeasure,—you know he can't bear
to be contradicted; and you know that
he asked you to stay and live here.”
“But without exposing you to any displeasure,
I can,” replied Ormond, “contrive—”

“Contrive nothing at all—do leave me
to contrive for myself. I don't mean to
say leave me—you take up one's words so
quickly, and are so passionate, Mr. Ormond.”
“If you would make me understand
you, Dora, let me understand how you
wish me to live with you.”
“Lord bless me, what a fuss the man
makes about living with one—one would
think it was the most difficult thing in the
world. Can't you live on like any body
else. There's my aunt in the hedge-row
walk, all alone, I must go and take care
of her—I leave you to take care of Sheelah— 
you know you were always very
good natured when we were children.”
Dora went off quick as lightening, and
what to make of her Ormond did not
well know. Was it mere childishness,
or affectation, or coquetry? No, the real
tears and real expression of look and word
forbade each of these suppositions. One
other cause for her conduct might have

been suggested by a vain man. Harry
Ormond was not a vain man; but a little
fluttering delight was just beginning to
play round his head, when Sheelah, leaning
heavily on his arm as they ascended
the bank, reminding him of her existence—
“My poor old Sheelah!” said he, “are
not you tired?”
“Not now, thanks to your arm, Master
Harry, dear, that was always good
to me. Not now, I am not a whit tired; 
now I see all right again between my
childer—and happy I was, these five minutes
past, watching you smiling to yourself; 
and I don't doubt but all the world
will smile on ye yet. If it was my
world it should. But I can only wish
you my best wish, which I did long ago— 
may you live to wonder at your own good
luck.”
Ormond looked as if he was going to
ask some question, that interested him
much, but it ended by wondering what

o'clock it was. Sheelah wondered at
him for thinking what the hour was, when
she was talking of Miss Dora. After a
silence, which brought them to the
chicken-yard gate, where Sheelah was
“to quit his arm”—she leaned heavily
again.
“The marriage—that they are all
talking of in the kitchen, and every
where through the country—Miss Dora's
marriage with White Connal, is reprieved
for the season. She axed time till
she'd be seventeen—very rasonable. So
it's to be in October—if we all live till
those days—in the same mind. Lord,
he knows—I know nothing at all about
it; but I thank you kindly, Master
Harry, and wish you well any way. Did
you ever happen to see the bridegroom
that is to be?”
“Never.”
Harry longed to hear what she longed
to say; but he did not deem it prudent,
he did not think it honourable, to let her

enter on this topic. The prudential consideration
might have been conquered by
curiosity; but the honourable repugnance
to obtaining second-hand information, and
encouraging improper confidence, prevailed.
He deposited Sheelah safe on
her stone bench in the chicken yard gate,
and much against her will, he left her
before she had told, or hinted to him all
she knew—and all she did not know.
The flattering delight that played
about our young hero's head had increased,
was increasing, and ought to be
diminished. Of this he was sensible. It
should never come near his heart, of that
he was determined; he would exactly
follow the letter and spirit of his benefactor's
commands—or he would always
consider Dora as a married woman—but
the prospect of there being some temptation,
and some struggle, was, however,
infinitely agreeable to our young hero— 
it would give him something to do, something
to think of, something to feel.

It was much in favour of his resolution,
that Dora really was not at all the
kind of woman he had pictured to himself
either as amiable or charming; she
was not in the least like his last patterns
of heroines, or any of his approved imaginations
of the beau ideal. But she was
an exceedingly pretty girl; she was the
only very pretty and tolerably accomplished
girl immediately near him. A
dangerous propinquity!