

Aware that her remaining in town
at such an unusual season of the year
would appear unaccountable to her
fashionable acquaintance, lady Delacour
contrived for herself a characteristic excuse; 
she declared that there was no
possibility of finding pleasure in any
thing but novelty, and that the greatest
novelty to her would be to remain a
whole summer in town. Most of her
friends, amongst whom she had successfully
established a character for caprice,

were satisfied that this was merely some
new whim, practised to signalize herself
by singularity. The real reason that detained
her was her dependence upon
the quack, who had repeatedly visited
and constantly prescribed for her. Convinced
however, by the dreadful situation
to which his prescriptions had lately reduced
her, that he was unworthy of
her confidence, she determined to dismiss
him; but she could not do this, as she
had a considerable sum to pay him, till
Marriott's return, because she could not
trust any one but Marriott to let him up
the private staircase into the boudoir.
During Marriott's absence, her ladyship
suffered no one to attend her but a
maid who was remarkable for her stupidity.
She thought that she could have
nothing to fear from this girl's spirit of
inquiry, for never was any human being
so destitute of curiosity. It was about
noon when Belinda and Marriott arrived.
Lady Delacour, who had passed a restless
night, was asleep. When she awoke,

she found Marriott standing beside her
bed—
“Then it is all in vain, I see?” cried her
ladyship: “miss Portman is not with you?
—Give me my laudanum.”
“Miss Portman is come, my lady,” 
said Marriott: “she is in the dressing-room:
she would not come in here with
me, lest she should startle you.”
“Belinda is come! do you say? Admirable
Belinda!” cried lady Delacour,
and she clasped her hands with ecstasy.
“Shall I tell her, my lady, that you are
awake?”
“Yes—No—Stay—lord Delacour is at
home.—I will get up immediately. Let
my lord be told that I wish to speak with
him—that I beg he will breakfast with me
in my dressing-room half an hour hence.
I will dress immediately.”
Marriott in vain represented that she
ought not to hurry herself in her present
weak state. Intent upon her own
thoughts, she listened to nothing that was
said, but frequently urged Marriott to be

expeditious. She put on an unusual quantity
of rouge; then looking at herself in the
glass, she said with a forced smile—
“Marriott, I look so charmingly, that
miss Portman, perhaps, will be of lord
Delacour's opinion, and think that nothing
is the matter with me.—Ah, no!— 
She has been behind the scenes, she
knows the truth too well!—Marriott, pray
did she ask you many questions about
me?—Was not she very sorry to leave
Oakly-park?—Were not they all extremely
concerned to part with her?— 
Did she ask after Helena?—Did you tell
her that I insisted upon my lord's parting
with Champfort?”
At the word Champfort, Marriott's
mouth opened eagerly, and she began to
answer with her usual volubility. Lady
Delacour waited not for any reply to the
various questions which in the hurry of
her mind she had asked; but, passing
swiftly by Marriott, she threw open the
door of her dressing-room. At the sight
of Belinda she stopped short; and, totally

overpowered, she would have sunk upon
the floor, had not miss Portman caught
her in her arms, and supported her to a
sofa. When she came to herself, and
heard the soothing tone of Belinda's voice,
she looked up timidly in her face for a
few moments without being able to
speak.
“And are you really here once more,
my dear Belinda?” cried she at last— 
“And may I still call you my friend?— 
And do you forgive me?—Yes, I see you
do—and from you I can endure the humiliation
of being forgiven. Enjoy the
noble sense of your own superiority.”
“My dear lady Delacour,” said Belinda,
“you see all this in too strong a
light—you have done me no injury—I
have nothing to forgive.”
“I cannot see it in too strong a light— 
Nothing to forgive!—Yes, you have; that
which it is the most difficult to forgive— 
injustice.—O! how you must have despised
me for the folly, the meanness of
my suspicions! Of all tempers, that which

appears to me, and I am sure to you, the
most despicable, the most intolerable, is
a suspicious temper. Mine was once
open, generous as your own—You see
how the best dispositions may be depraved!
—What am I now?—Fit only
‘To point a moral, or adorn a tale’—
A mismatched, misplaced, miserable perverted
being.”
“And now you have abused yourself
till you are breathless, I may have some
chance,” said Belinda, “of being heard
in your defence. I perfectly agree with
you in thinking, that a suspicious temper
is despicable and intolerable, but there is
a vast difference between an acute fit of
jealousy, as our friend doctor X&wblank;would
say, and a chronic habit of suspicion.
The noblest natures may be worked up
to suspicion by designing villany; and
then a handkerchief, or a hammercloth,
—'trifles light as air—”
“O my dear! you are too good. But
my folly admits of no excuse, no palliation,”

interrupted lady Delacour; “mine
was jealousy without love.”
“That indeed would admit of no excuse,” 
said Belinda: “therefore you will
pardon me if I think it incredible—especially
as I have detected you in feeling
something like affection for your little
daughter, after you had done your best, I
mean your worst, to make me believe
that you were a monster of a mother.”
“That was quite another affair, my
dear. I did not know Helena was worth
loving. I did not imagine my little daughter
could love me. When I found my
mistake I changed my tone. But there
is no hope of mistake with my poor husband.
Your own sense must show you,
that lord Delacour is not a man to be
loved.”
“That could not always have been
your ladyship's opinion,” said Belinda
with an arch smile.
“Lord, my dear!” said lady Delacour,
a little embarrassed, “in the highest paroxysm
of my madness, I never suspected

that you could love lord Delacour. I surely
only hinted that you were in love with his
coronet. That was absurd enough in all
conscience. Don't make me more absurd
than I am.”
“Is it then the height of absurdity to
love a husband?”
“Love! Nonsense!—Impossible!— 
Hush!—Here he comes with his odious
creaking shoes. What man can ever expect
to be loved who wears creaking
shoes?”—pursued her ladyship as lord
Delacour entered the room, his shoes
creaking at every step; and assuming an
air of levity she welcomed him as a
stranger to her dressing-room. “No
speeches, my lord! no speeches, I beseech
you,” cried she, as he was beginning to
speak to miss Portman. “Believe me
that explanations always make bad worse.
Miss Portman is here, thank Heaven, and
her!—And Champfort is gone—Thank
you—or your boots. And now let us sit
down to breakfast, and forget as soon as
possible every thing that is disagreeable.”

When lady Delacour had a mind to banish
painful recollections, it was scarcely
possible to resist the magical influence of
her conversation and manners; yet her
lord's features never relaxed to a smile
during this breakfast. He maintained an
obstinate silence, and a profound solemnity
—till at last, rising from table, he turned
to miss Portman, and said,
“Of all the caprices of fine ladies, that
which surprises me the most is the whim
of keeping their beds without being sick.
Now, miss Portman, you would hardly
suppose that my lady Delacour, who has
been so lively this morning, has kept her
bed, as I am informed, a fortnight—Is
not this astonishing?”
“Prodigiously astonishing, that my lord
Delacour, like all the rest of the world,
should be liable to be deceived by appearances,” 
cried her ladyship. “Honour
me with your attention for a few minutes,
my lord, and perhaps I may increase
your astonishment.”
His lordship, struck by the sudden

change of her voice from gayety to gravity,
fixed his eyes upon her, and returned to
his seat. She paused—then addressing
herself to Belinda:—“My incomparable
“friend,” said she, “I will now give you
a convincing proof of the unlimited power
you have over my mind. My lord, miss
Portman has persuaded me to the step,
which I am now going to take. She has
prevailed upon me to make a decisive
trial of your prudence and kindness. She
has determined me to throw myself on
your mercy.”
“Mercy!” repeated lord Delacour,
and a confused idea, that she was now
about to make a confession of the justice
of some of his former suspicions, took
possession of his mind: he looked aghast.
“I am going, my lord, to confide to
you a secret of the utmost importance— 
a secret which is known to but three people
in the world, miss Portman, Marriott,
and a man whose name I cannot reveal to
you.”
“Stop, lady Delacour!” cried his lordship

with a degree of emotion and energy,
which he had never shown till now. “Stop,
I conjure, I command you, madam—I am
not sufficiently master of myself—I once
loved you too well to bear such a stroke.
Trust me with no such secret—say no
more—you have said enough, too much.
I forgive you, that is all I can do; but we
must part, lady Delacour!” said he, breaking
from her with agony expressed in his
countenance.
“The man has a heart, a soul, I protest!
—You knew him better than I did,
miss Portman. Nay, you are not gone
yet, my lord! You really love me, I find.”
“No, no, no,” cried he vehemently.
“Weak as you take me to be, lady Delacour,
I am incapable of loving a woman
who has disgraced me, disgraced herself,
her family, her station, her high endowments,
her—”
His utterance failed—“O, lady Delacour!” 
cried Belinda, “how can you
trifle in this manner?”
“I meant not,” said her ladyship, “to

trifle. I am satisfied. My lord, it is time
that you should be satisfied. I can give
you the most irrefragable proof that, whatever
may have been the apparent levity
of my conduct, you have had no serious
cause for jealousy. But the proof will
shock—disgust you.—Have you courage
to know more?—Then follow me.”
He followed her.—Belinda heard the
boudoir door unlock.—In a few minutes
they returned.—Grief, and horrour, and
pity, were painted in lord Delacour's
countenance as he passed hastily through
the room.
“My dearest friend, I have taken
your advice; would to Heaven I had
taken it sooner!” said lady Delacour to
miss Portman. “I have revealed to lord
Delacour my real situation. Poor man!
he was shocked beyond expression. He
behaved incomparably well. I am convinced
that he would, as he said, let his
hand be cut off to save my life. The
moment his foolish jealousy was extinguished,
his love for me revived in full

force. Would you believe it? he has
promised me to break with odious Mrs.
Luttridge. Upon my charging him to
keep my secret from her, he instantly, in
the handsomest manner in the world,
declared he would never see her more,
rather than give me a moment's uneasiness.
How I reproach myself for having
been for years the torment of this man's
life!”
“You may do better than reproach
yourself, my dear lady Delacour!” said
Belinda: “you may yet live for years to
be the blessing and pride of his life. I
am persuaded, that nothing but your
despair of obtaining domestic happiness
has so long enslaved you to dissipation; 
and now that you find a friend in your
husband, now that you know the affectionate
temper of your little Helena, you
will have fresh views and fresh hopes; 
you will have the courage to live for
yourself, and not for what is called the
world.”
“The world!” cried lady Delacour

with a tone of disdain; “how long has
that word enslaved a soul formed for
higher purposes!” She paused, and
looked up towards Heaven with an expression
of fervent devotion, which Belinda
had once, and but once before, seen
in her countenance. Then, as if forgetful
even that Belinda was present, she
threw herself upon a sofa, and fell, or
seemed to fall, into a profound reverie.
She was roused by the entrance of Marriott,
who came into the room to ask whether
she would now take her laudanum.
“I thought I had taken it,” said she in
a feeble voice; and as she raised her
eyes and saw Belinda, she added, with a
faint smile, “Miss Portman, I believe,
has been laudanum to me this morning:
but even that will not do long, you see; 
nothing will do for me now but this,” 
and she stretched out her hand for the
laudanum. “Is not it shocking to think,” 
continued she, after she had swallowed
it, “that in laudanum alone. I find the
means of supporting existence?”

She put her hand to her head, as if
partly conscious of the confusion of her
own ideas; and ashamed that Belinda
should witness it, she desired Marriott to
assist her to rise, and to support her to
her bed-chamber. She made a sign to
miss Portman not to follow her. “Do
not take it unkindly, but I am quite
exhausted, and wish to be alone; for I
am grown fond of being alone some
hours in the day, and perhaps I shall
sleep.”
Marriott came out of her lady's room
about a quarter of an hour afterward,
and said that her lady seemed disposed
to sleep, but that she desired to have her
book left by her bed-side. Marriott
searched amongst several which lay upon
the table, for one in which a mark was
put. Belinda looked over them along
with Marriott, and she was surprised to
find that they had almost all methodistical
titles. Lady Delacour's mark was in the
middle of “Wesley's Admonitions.” Several
pages in other books of the same

description miss Portman found marked
with a pencil, with reiterated lines,
which she knew to be her ladyship's
customary mode of distinguishing passages
that she particularly liked. Some
were highly oratorical, but most of them
were of a mystical cast, and appeared to
Belinda scarcely intelligible. She had
reason to be astonished at meeting with
such books in the dressing-room of a
woman of lady Delacour's character.
During the solitude of her illness, her
ladyship had first begun to think seriously
on religious subjects, and the early impressions
that had been made on her
mind in her childhood, by a methodistical
mother, recurred. Her understanding,
weakened perhaps by disease, and never
accustomed to reason, was incapable of
distinguishing between truth and errour; 
and her temper, naturally enthusiastic,
hurried her from one extreme to the other
—from thoughtless scepticism to visionary
credulity. Her devotion was by no
means steady or permanent; it came on

by fits usually at the time when the
effect of laudanum was exhausted, or
before a fresh dose began to operate. In
these intervals she was low-spirited— 
bitter reflections on the manner in which
she had thrown away her talents and her
life obtruded themselves; the idea of the
untimely death of colonel Lawless, of
which she reproached herself as the
cause, returned; and her mind, from
being a prey to remorse, began to sink
in these desponding moments under the
most dreadful superstitious terrours—terrours
the more powerful, as they were
secret. Whilst the stimulus of laudanum
lasted, the train of her ideas always
changed, and she was amazed at the
weak fears and strange notions by which
she had been disturbed; yet it was not
in her power entirely to chase away these
visions of the night, and they gained
gradually a dominion over her, of which
she was heartily ashamed. She resolved
to conceal this weakness, as in her gayer
moments she thought it, from Belinda,

from whose superiour strength of understanding
she dreaded ridicule or contempt.
Her experience of miss Portman's
gentleness and friendship might
reasonably have prevented or dispelled
such apprehensions; but lady Delacour
was governed by pride, by sentiment, by
whim, by enthusiasm, by passion—by
any thing but reason.
When she began to revive after her fit
of languor, and had been refreshed by
opium and sleep, she rang for Marriott,
and inquired for Belinda. She was much
provoked when Marriott, by way of
proving to her that miss Portman could
not have been tired of being left alone,
told her, that she had been in the dressing
room rummaging over the books.
“What books?” cried lady Delacour.
“I forgot that they were left there. Miss
Portman is not reading them still, I suppose?
Go for them, and let them be locked
up in my own book-case, and bring
me the key.”
Her ladyship appeared in good spirits

when she saw Belinda again. She rallied
her upon the serious studies she had
chosen for her morning's amusement.
“Those methodistical books, with their
strange quaint titles,” said she, “are,
however, diverting enough to those who,
like myself, can find diversion in the height
of human absurdity.”
Deceived by the levity of her manner,
Belinda concluded that the marks of approbation
in these books were ironical,
and she thought no more of the matter; 
for lady Delacour suddenly gave a new
turn to the conversation by exclaiming,
“Now we talk of the height of human
absurdity, what are we to think of Clarence
Hervey?”
“Why should we think of him at all?” 
said Belinda.
“For two excellent reasons, my dear!
because we cannot help it, and because
he deserves it. Yes, he deserves it,
believe me, if it were only for having
written me these charming letters,” said
lady Delacour, opening a cabinet, and

taking out a small packet of letters, which
she put into Belinda's hands. “Pray
read them, you will find them amazingly
edifying, as well as entertaining. I protest
I am only puzzled to know, whether I
shall bind them up with Sterne's Sentimental
Journey, or Fordyce's Sermons for
Young Women. Here, my love, if you
like description,” continued her ladyship,
opening one of the letters, “here is a
Radcliffean tour along the picturesque
coasts of Dorset and Devonshire. Why
he went this tour, unless for the pleasure
and glory of describing it, Heaven
knows! Clouds and darkness rest over
the tourist's private history; but this, of
course, renders his letters more piquantes
and interesting. All who have a just
taste either for literature or for gallantry,
know how much we are indebted to the
obscure for the sublime, and orators and
lovers feel what felicity there is in the
use of the fine figure of suspension.”
“Very good description indeed!” said
Belinda, without raising her eyes from

the letter, or seeming to pay any attention
to the latter part of lady Delacour's
speech, “very good description,
certainly!”
“Well, my dear! But here is something
better than pure description; here
is sense for you: and pray mark the
politeness of addressing sense to a woman
—to a woman of sense, I mean—and
which of us is not? Then here is sentiment
for you,” continued her ladyship,
spreading another letter before Belinda; 
“a story of a Dorsetshire lady, who had
the misfortune to be married to a man as
unlike Mr. Percival, and as like lord
Delacour, as possible; and yet, O, wonderful!
they make as happy a couple as
one's heart could wish. Now, I am truly
candid and good natured to admire this
letter; for every word of it is a lesson to
me, and evidently was so intended. But
I take it all in good part, because, to do
Clarence justice, he describes the joys of
domestic Paradise in such elegant language,
that he does not make me sick.

In short, my dear Belinda, to finish my
panegyric, as it has been said of some
other epistles, if ever there were letters
calculated to make you fall in love with
the writer of them, these are they.”
“Then,” said miss Portman, folding
up the letter which she was just going to
read, “I will not run the hazard of reading
them.”
“Why, my dear!” said lady Delacour
with a look of mingled concern, reproach,
and raillery, “have you actually given
up my poor Clarence, merely on account
of this mistress in the wood, this Virginia
St. Pierre? Nonsense! Begging
your pardon, my dear, the man loves
you. Some entanglement, some punctilio,
some doubt, some delicacy, some
folly, prevents him from being just at
this moment where, I confess, he ought
to be—at your feet—and you, out of
patience, which a young lady ought
never to be, if she can help it, will go
and marry—I know you will—some stick
of a rival purely to provoke him.”

“If ever I marry,” said Belinda with
a look of proud humility, “I shall certainly
marry to please myself, and not to
provoke any body else—and at all
events I hope I shall never marry a
stick.”
“Pardon me that word,” said lady
Delacour, “I am convinced you never
will—but one is apt to judge of others by
one's self. I am willing to believe that
Mr. Vincent—”
“Mr. Vincent! How did you know—” 
exclaimed Belinda.
“How did I know? Why, my dear,
do you think I am so little interested
about you, that I have not found out
some of your secrets? And do you
think that Marriott could refrain from
telling me, in her most triumphant tone,
that ‘miss Portman has not gone to Oakly-park
for nothing; that she has made a
conquest of a Mr. Vincent, a West Indian,
a ward, or lately a ward, of Mr.
Percival's, the handsomest man that ever
was seen, and the richest, &c. &c. &c.?’

Now, simple I rejoiced at the news; 
for I took it for granted, you would
never seriously think of marrying the
man.”
“Then why did your ladyship rejoice?”
“Why? O, you novice at Cupid's
chess-board! do not you see the next
move? Check with your new knight,
and the game is your own. Now, if
your aunt Stanhope saw your look at
this instant, she would give you up for
ever—if she have not done that already.
In plain, unmetaphorical prose, then,
cannot you comprehend, my straightforward
Belinda, that if you make Clarence
Hervey heartily jealous, let the
impediments to your union be what they
may, he will acknowledge himself to be
heartily in love with you? I should
make no scruple of frightening him within
an inch of his life, for his good. Sir
Philip Baddely was not the man to
frighten him; but this Mr. Vincent, by
all accounts, is just the thing.”

“And do you imagine that I could
use Mr. Vincent so ill?—And can you
think me capable of such double dealing?”
“O! in love and war, you know, all
stratagems are allowable.—But you take
the matter so seriously, and you redden
with such virtuous indignation, that I
dare not say a word more—Only—may
I ask—are you absolutely engaged to
Mr. Vincent?”
“No. We have had the prudence to
avoid all promises, all engagements.”
“There's my good girl!” cried lady
Delacour, kissing her: “all may yet turn
out well—Read those letters—Take
them to your room, read them, read
them; and depend upon it, my dearest
Belinda! you are not the sort of woman
that will, that can be happy, if you make
a mere match of convenience.—Forgive
me, I love you too well not to speak the
truth, though it may offend for a moment.”
“You do not offend, but you misunderstand

me,” said Belinda. “Have
patience with me, and you shall find that
I am incapable of making a mere match
of convenience.”
Then miss Portman gave lady Delacour
a simple but full account of all that
had passed at Oakly park relative to
Mr. Vincent. She repeated the arguments
by which lady Anne Percival had
first prevailed upon her to admit of Mr.
Vincent's addresses. She said, that she
had been convinced by Mr. Percival,
that the omnipotence of a first love was
an idea founded in folly, and realized
only in romance; and that to believe that
none could be happy in marriage, except
with the first object of their fancy
or their affections, would be an errour
pernicious to individuals and to society.
When she detailed the arguments used
by Mr. Percival on this subject, lady
Delacour sighed, and observed that Mr.
Percival was certainly right, judging
from his own experience, to declaim
against the folly of first loves; “and for

the same reason,” added she, “perhaps I
may be pardoned if I retain some prejudice
in their favour.” She turned aside
her head to hide a starting tear, and here
the conversation dropped. Belinda, recollecting
the circumstances of her ladyship's
early history, reproached herself
for having touched on this tender subject,
yet at the same time she felt with
increased force, at this moment, the justice
of Mr. Percival's observations; for,
evidently, the hold which this prejudice
had kept in lady Delacour's mind had
materially injured her happiness, by
making her neglect, after her marriage,
all the means of content that were in her
reach. Her incessant comparisons between
her first love and her husband excited
perpetual contempt and disgust in
her mind for her wedded lord, and for
many years precluded all perception of
his good qualities, all desire to live with
him upon good terms, and all idea of securing
that share of domestic happiness
that was actually in her power. Belinda

resolved at some future moment,
whenever she could with propriety and
with effect, to suggest these reflections
to lady Delacour, and in the mean time
she was determined to turn them to her
own advantage. She perceived that she
should have need of all her steadiness to
preserve her judgment unbiassed by her
ladyship's wit and persuasive eloquence
on the one hand, and on the other by
her own high opinion of lady Anne Percival's
judgment, and the anxious desire
she felt to secure her approbation. The
letters from Clarence Hervey she read at
night when she retired to her own room; 
and they certainly raised not only Belinda's
opinion of his talents, but her
esteem for his character. She saw that
he had, with great address, made use of
the influence he possessed over lady Delacour,
to turn her mind to every thing
that could make her amiable, estimable,
and happy—she saw that Clarence, so
far from attempting, for the sake of his
own vanity, to retain his preeminence

in her ladyship's imagination, used, on
the contrary, “his utmost skill” to turn
the tide of her affections toward her husband
and her daughter. In one of his
letters, and but in one, he mentioned
Belinda. He expressed great regret at
hearing from lady Delacour, that her
friend miss Portman was no longer
with her. He expatiated on the inestimable
advantages and happiness of having
such a friend—but this referred to lady
Delacour, not to himself. There was an
air of much respect and some embarrassment
in all he said of Belinda, but nothing
like love. A few words at the end
of this paragraph were cautiously obliterated,
however; and, without any obvious
link of connexion, the writer began
a new sentence with a general reflection
upon the folly and imprudence of forming
romantic projects. Then he enumerated
some of the various schemes he had
formed in his early youth, and humourously
recounted how they had failed, or
how they had been abandoned. Afterward,

changing his tone from playful
wit to serious philosophy, he observed
the changes which these experiments
had made in his own character.
“My friend Dr. X&wblank;,” said he,
“divides mankind into three classes.— 
Those, who learn from the experience of
others—They are happy men.—Those
who learn from their own experience— 
They are wise men.—And, lastly, those
who learn neither from their own nor
from other people's experience—They
are fools.—This class is by far the
largest. I am content,” continued Clarence,
“to be in the middle class—perhaps
you will say, because I cannot be
in the first. However, were it in my
power to choose my own character, I
should, forgive me the seeming vanity
of the speech, still be content to remain
in my present station upon this
principle—The characters of those who
are taught by their own experience
must be progressive in knowledge and
virtue. Those who learn from the experience

of others may become stationary,
because they must depend for their
progress on the experiments that we
brave volunteers, at whose expense they
are to live and learn, are pleased to try.
There may be much safety in thus snugly
fighting, or rather seeing the battle of life,
behind the broad shield of a stouter warrior.
Yet it seems to me, to be rather an
ignominious than an enviable situation.
But I should not mingle the notions of
military glory with my philosophy, or
talk of broad shields and battles, to look
grand in the eyes of a fair lady. Instead
of an allusion, your ladyship then shall
have—a theory. It is my theory, that
vigorous, quick-shooting intellects, during
the periods of their growth, are sometimes
awkwardly and ridiculously out of
all moral proportion. Injudicious attempts
to reduce and rectify them only
dwarf or deform the character.
“Our friend Dr. X&wblank;would laugh
at my theory, and still more at my insisting
upon being amongst the class of

learners by their own experience, He
would ask me, whether it be the ultimate
end of my philosophy to try experiments,
or to be happy. And what answer
should I make? I have none ready.
Common sense stares me in the face, and
my feelings even at this instant, alas!
confute my system. I shall pay too dear
yet for some of my experiments. ‘Sois
grand homme, et sois malheureux,’ is,
I am afraid, the law of nature, or rather
the decree of the world. Your ladyship
will not read this without a smile; for
you will immediately infer, that I think
myself a great man; and as I detest hypocrisy
yet more than vanity, I shall not
deny the charge. At all events, I feel
that I am at present—however gayly I
talk of it—in as fair a way to be unhappy
for life, as if I were, in good
earnest, the greatest man in Europe.
Your ladyship's
most respectful admirer,
and sincere friend,
Clarence Hervey.

“P.S. Is there any hope that your
friend miss Portman may spend the
winter in town?”
Though lady Delacour had been much
fatigued by the exertion of her spirits
during the day, she sat up at night to
write to Mr. Hervey. Her love and gratitude
to miss Portman interested her
most warmly for her happiness, and she
was persuaded that the most effectual
way to secure it would be to promote
her union with her first love. Lady Delacour,
who had also the best opinion of
Clarence Hervey, and the most sincere
friendship for him, thought she was likewise
acting highly for his interest; and
she felt that she had some merit in at
once parting with him from the train of
her admirers, and urging him to become
a dull married man. Beside these generous
motives, she was, perhaps, a little
influenced by jealousy of the superiour
power, which lady Anne Percival had in
so short a time acquired over Belinda's
mind. “Strange,” thought she, “if love

and I be not a match for lady Anne Percival
and reason!” To do lady Delacour
justice, it must be observed, that
she took the utmost care in her letter
not to commit her friend; she wrote with
all the delicate address of which she was
mistress. She began by rallying her correspondent
on his indulging himself so
charmingly in the melancholy of genius; 
and she prescribed as a cure to her malheureux
imaginaire, as she called him,
those joys of domestic life which he so
well knew how to paint.
“Precepte commence, exemple acheve,” 
said her ladyship. “You will never see
me la femme comme il y en a peu,-till I
see you le bon mari. Belinda Portman
has this day returned to me from Oaklypark,
fresh, blooming, wise, and gay, as
country air, flattery, philosophy, and love,
can make her. It seems that she has
had full employment for her head and
heart. Mr. Percival and lady Anne, by
right of science and reason, have taken

possession of the head, and a Mr. Vincent,
their ci-devant ward and declared
favourite, has laid close siege to the
heart, of which he is in a fair way, I
think, to take possession by the right of
conquest. As far as I can understand— 
for I have not yet seen le futur—he deserves
my Belinda: for, beside being as
handsome as any hero of romance, ancient
or modern, he has a soul in which
neither spot nor blemish can be found,
except the amiable weakness of being
desperately in love—a weakness which
we ladies are apt to prefer to the most
philosophic stoicism.—a propos to philosophy
—We may presume, that notwithstanding
Mr. V&wblank;is a creole, he has
been bred up by his guardian in the class
of men who learn by the experience of
others. As such, according to your
system, he has a right to expect to be a
happy man, has not he? According to
Mrs. Stanhope's system, I am sure that
he has; for his thousands and tens of

thousands, as I am credibly informed,
pass the comprehension of the numeration
table.
“But these will weigh not a grain in
the estimation of her truly disinterested
and noble-minded niece. Mrs. Stanhope
knows nothing of Vincent's proposal; 
and it is well for him she does not,
for her worldly good word would mar
the whole.—Not so as to lady Anne and
Mr. Percival's approbation—Their opinion
is all in all with my friend. How
they have contrived it I know not, but
they have gained over Belinda's mind a
degree of power almost equal to parental
authority. So you may guess that
the doubtful beam will not much longer
nod from side to side. Indeed, it seems
to me scarcely necessary to throw in the
sword of authority to turn the scale.
“If you can persuade yourself to finish
your picturesque tour before the ides of
the charming month of November, do,
my dear Clarence! make haste and come

back to us in time for Belinda's wedding
—and do not forget my commission
about the Dorsetshire angel; bring me
one in your right hand with a gold ring
upon her taper finger—So help you Cupid!
—or never more expect a smile
From your sincere friend
and admirer,
T. C. H. Delacour.
“P. S. Observe, my good sir! that I
am not in such a desperate hurry to congratulate
you on your marriage, that I
should be satisfied with an ordinary Mrs.
Hervey. So do not, under pretence of
obliging me, or for any other consideration,
yoke yourself to some damsel that
you will be ashamed to produce. For
one woman worthy to be Clarence Hervey's
wife, I have seen, at a moderate
computation, a hundred fit to be his mistress.
If he should, on this subject,
mistake the fitness of things or of persons,
he would, indeed, be in a fair way to be
unhappy for life.
“The substance of a lady's letter, it

has been said, always is comprised in the
postscript.”
After lady Delacour had finished this
letter, which she had no doubt would
bring Clarence immediately to town, she
left it with Marriott, with orders to have
it sent by the next post. Much fatigued,
she then retired to rest, and was not visible
the next day till near dinner-time.
When miss Portman returned the packet
of Mr. Hervey's letters, her ladyship was
dissatisfied with the measured terms of
Belinda's approbation, and she said with
a sarcastic smile,
“So, they have made a complete philosopher
of you at Oakly-park!—You are
perfect in the first lesson—not to admire.
And is the torch of Cupid to be extinguished
on the altar of Reason?”
“Rather to be lighted there, if possible,” 
said Belinda; and she endeavoured
to turn the conversation to what she
thought must be more immediately interesting
to lady Delacour—her own
health. She assured her, with perfect

truth, that she was at present more intent
upon her situation than upon Cupid or
his torch.
“I believe you, my generous Belinda!” 
said lady Delacour; “and for that very
reason I am interested in your affairs, I
am afraid, even to the verge of impertinence.
May I ask why this preux chevalier
of yours did not attend you, or
follow you, to town?”
“Mr. Vincent?—He knew that I
came to attend your ladyship. I told him
that you had been confined by a nervous
fever, and that it would be impossible
for me to see him at present; but I promised,
when you could spare me, to return
to Oakly-park.”
Lady Delacour sighed, and opened
Clarence Hervey's letters one after another,
looking over them without speaking,
and without seeming well to know
what she was about. Lord Delacour
came into the room whilst these letters
were still in her hand. He had been
absent since the preceding morning, and

he now seemed as if he was just come
home much fatigued. He began in a
tone of great anxiety to inquire after
lady Delacour's health. She was piqued
at his having left home at such a time,
and, merely bowing her head to him, she
went on reading. His eyes glanced upon
the letters which she held in her hand; 
and when he saw the well-known writing
of Clarence Hervey, his manner immediately
altered, and, stammering out
some common-place phrases, he threw
himself into an arm-chair by the fireside,
protesting that he was tired to death— 
that he was half dead—that he had been
in a postchaise for three hours, which
he hated—had ridden fifty miles since
yesterday—and he muttered, that he was
a fool for his pains:—an observation,
which, though it reached her ladyship's
ears, she did not think proper to contradict.
His lordship then had recourse to his
watch, his never-failing friend in need,

which he always pulled out with a particular
jerk when he was vexed.
“It is time for me to be gone—I shall
be late at Studley's.”
“You dine with his lordship, then?” 
said lady Delacour in a careless tone.
“Yes; and his good Burgundy, I
hope, will wind me up again,” said he,
stretching himself, “for I am quite
down.”
“Quite down?—Then we may conclude
that my friend Mrs. Luttridge is
not yet come to Rantipole?—Rantipole,
my dear,” continued lady Delacour,
turning to miss Portman, “is the name
of Harriet Freke's villa in Kent. However
strange it may sound to your ears
and mine, I can assure you the name has
made fortune amongst a certain description
of wits. And candour must allow,
that, if not elegant, it is appropriate; it
gives a just idea of the manners and way
of life of the place, for every thing at
Rantipole is rantipole. But I am really

concerned, my lord, you should have ridden
yourself down in this way for nothing.
Why did not you get better intelligence
before you set out? I am afraid
you feel the loss of Champfort. Why
did not you contrive to learn for certain,
my dear good lord, whether the Luttridge
was at Rantipole before you set out on
this wild goose chace?”
“My dear good lady,” replied lord
Delacour, assuming a degree of spirit
which startled her as much as it became
him, “why do not you get better intelligence
before you suspect me of being
a brute and a liar! Did not I promise
you yesterday, that I would break with
the Luttridge, as you call her? and how
could you imagine that the instant afterward,
just at the time I was wrung to
the soul, as you knew I was—how could
you imagine I would leave you to go to
Rantipole, or to any woman upon earth?”
“O, my lord! I beg your pardon, I
beg your pardon a thousand times,” cried
lady Delacour, rising with much emotion;

and, going towards him with a sudden
impulse, she kissed his forehead.
“And so you ought to beg my pardon,” 
said lord Delacour in a faltering
voice, but without moving his posture.
“You will acknowledge you left me,
however, my lord? That is clear.”
“Left you! Yes, so I did; to ride all
over the country in search of a house that
would suit you. For what else did you
think I could leave you at such a time as
this?”
Lady Delacour again stooped, and
leaned her arm upon his shoulder.
“I wish to Heaven, my dear,” said
his lordship, shrinking as he put away
her hand, which still held Clarence Hervey's
letters—“I wish to Heaven, my
dear, you would not hold those abominable
perfumed papers just under my very
nose. You know I cannot stand perfumes.”
“Are they perfumed? Ay; so every
thing is that I keep in that cabinet of
curiosities. Thank you, my dear miss

Portman,” said her ladyship, as Belinda
rose to take the letters from her hand.
“Will you have the goodness to put
them back into their cabinet, if you can
endure to touch them, if the perfume have
not overcome you, as well as my lord.
After all, it is only attar of roses, to which
few people's olfactory nerves have an
antipathy.”
“I have the honour to be one of the
few,” said his lordship, rising from his
seat with so sudden a motion as to displace
lady Delacour's arm which leaned
upon him. “For my part,” continued
he, taking down one of the Argand's
lamps from the chimney piece, and trimming
it, “I would rather a hundred to
one snuff up the oil of this cursed lamp.”
Whilst his lordship applied himself to
trimming the lamp with great earnestness,
lady Delacour negligently walked
away to the farthest end of the room,
where stood the cabinet, which Belinda
was trying to unlock.

“Stay, my love, it has a secret lock,
which I alone can manage.”
“O, my dear lady Delacour!” whispered
Belinda, holding her hand as she
gave her the key, “I never can love or
esteem you, if you use lord Delacour ill
now.”
“Ill now? Ill how? This lock is
spoilt, I do believe,” said she aloud.
“Nay, you understand me, lady Delacour!
You see what is passing in his
mind.”
“To be sure. I am not a fool, though
he is. I see he is jealous, though he has
had such damning proof—that—all's right
—The man's a fool, that's all. Are you
sure this is the key I gave you, my dear?”
“And can you think him a fool,” pursued
Belinda in a still more earnest
whisper, “for being more jealous of your
mind than of your person? Fools have
seldom so much penetration, or so much
delicacy.”
“But, Lord! what would you have

me do? what would you have me say?
That lord Delacour writes better letters
than these?”
“O no!—But show him these letters,
and you will do justice to him, to
yourself, to Cla&wblank;,to every body.”
“I am sure I should be happy to do
justice to every body.”
“Then pray do this very instant, my
dearest lady Delacour! and I shall love
you for it all my life.”
“Done!—for who can withstand that
offer? Done!” said her ladyship; then
turning to lord Delacour, “My lord, will
you come here and tell us what can be
the matter with this lock?”
“If the lock be spoiled, lady Delacour,
you had better send for a locksmith,” 
replied his lordship, who was
still employed about the wick of the Argand.
“I am no locksmith—I do not
pretend to understand locks—especially
secret locks.”
“But you will not desert us at our utmost
need, I am sure, my lord,” said

Belinda, approaching him with a conciliatory
smile.
“You want the light, I believe, more
than I do,” said his lordship, advancing
with the lamp to meet her. “Well!
what is the matter with this confounded
lock of yours, lady Delacour? I know
I should be at Studley's by this time— 
But how in the devil's name can you expect
me to open a secret lock when I
do not know the secret, lady Delacour?”
“Then I will tell you the secret, lord
Delacour—that there is no secret at all
in the lock, or in the letters. Here, if
you can stand the odious smell of attar of
roses, take these letters and read them,
foolish man! and keep them till the
shocking perfume is gone off.”
Lord Delacour could scarcely believe
his senses: he looked in lady Delacour's
eyes to see whether he had understood
her rightly.
“But I am afraid,” said she, smiling,
“that you will find the perfume too
overcoming.”

“Not half so overcoming,” cried he,
seizing her hand, and kissing it often
with eager tenderness—“not half so
overcoming as this confidence, this kindness,
this condescension from you.”
“Miss Portman will think us both a
couple of old fools,” said her ladyship,
making a slight effort to withdraw her
hand. “But she is almost as great a
simpleton herself, I think,” continued
she, observing that the tears stood in
Belinda's eyes.
“My lord,” said a footman who
came in at this instant, “do you dress?
The carriage is at the door, as you ordered,
to go to lord Studley's.”
“I'd see lord Studley at the devil, sir,
and his burgundy along with him, before
I'd go to him to day; and you may tell
him so, if you please,” cried lord Delacour.
“Very well, my lord!” said the footman.
“My lord dines at home. They may
put up the carriage. That's all,” said

lady Delacour. “Only let us have dinner
directly,” added she as the servant shut
the door. “Miss Portman will be famished
amongst us. There is no living
upon sentiment.”
“And there is no living with such belles,
without being something more of a beau,” 
said lord Delacour, looking at his splashed
boots, “I will be ready for dinner before
dinner is ready for me.” And with
activity very unusual to him, he hurried
out of the room to change his
dress.
“O day of wonders!” exclaimed
lady Delacour. “And O night of wonders!
if we can get him through the
evening without the help of lord Studley's
wine. You must give us some
music, my good Belinda, and make him
accompany you with his flute. I can
tell you he has really a very pretty taste
for music, and knows fifty times more of
the matter than half the dilettanti, who
squeeze the human face divine into all
manner of ridiculous shapes, by way of

persuading you that they are in ecstasy!
And, my dear, do not forget to show us
the charming little portfolio of drawings
that you have brought from Oakly-park.
Lord Delacour was with me at Harrowgate
in the days of his courtship; he
knows all those charming views that
you have been taking about Knares-borough
and Fountain's Abbey, and all
those places. I will answer for it, he
remembers them all a hundred times
better than I do. And, my love, I assure
you he is a better judge of drawing than
many whom we saw ogling Venus rising
from the sea, in the Orleans' gallery.
Lord Delacour has let his talents go to
sleep in a shameless manner; but really
he has talents, if they could be wakened.
By the by, pray make him tell you the
story of lord Studley's original Titian: he
tells that story with real humour. Perhaps
you have not found it out, but lord
Delacour has a vast deal of drollery in his
own way, and—”
“Dinner's ready, my lady!”

“That is a pity!” whispered lady Delacour; 
“for, if they had let me go on,
in my present humour, I should have
found out that my lord has every accomplishment
under the sun, and every
requisite under the moon, to make the
marriage state happy.”
With the assistance of Belinda's portfolio
and her harp, and the good humour
and sprightliness of lady Delacour's wit,
his lordship got through the evening
much to his own satisfaction. He played
on the flute, he told the story of Studley's
original Titian, and he detected a fault
that had escaped Mr. Percival in the
perspective of miss Portman's sketch of
Fountain's Abbey. The perception that
his talents were called out, and that he appeared
to unusual advantage, made him
excellent company: he found that the
spirits can be raised by self-complacency
even more agreeably than by
burgundy.