

Mr. Percy, released from prison, was
welcomed with kindness and exultation
at the house of Lady Jane Granville,
where his family, assembled once more
in happiness, were again surrounded by
all the friends who had been present at
Caroline's wedding, and again congratutions
were heard in all parts of the hospitable
mansion. In the midst of this
tumult of joy Mr. Percy wrote two letters.
One was to his faithful old steward,
John Nelson, who deserved from his master
this mark of regard; the other was
to Commissioner Falconer, to make him
some friendly offers of assistance in his
own affairs, and to beg that through him
his daughter, the unhappy and deserted
lady of Sir Robert Percy, might be assured,
that neither Mr. Percy, nor any

of his family, wished to put her to inconvenience,
and that far from being in
haste to return to Percy-Hall, they
wished to wait in town for the arrival
of Godfrey and of Count Altenberg,
therefore they requested that she would
not hasten her removal from any false
idea of their impatience.
We said the deserted lady of Sir Robert
Percy, for Sir Robert had fled from the
country. On quitting the court after
the trial, he took all the ready money he
had previously collected from his tenants,
and set out for the Continent, leaving
only a note for his wife, apprising her,
that “she should never see him more,
and ordering her to return to her father
and mother, as he had no means left to
support her extravagance.”
Of the words of this brutal farewel,
and of the circumstances of Sir Robert's
flight, Mr. Percy was informed by Lady
Jane Granville, who had heard them
from her maid Keppel, to whom Lydia
Sharpe had paid a visit, on purpose to

talk over “this total disruption of Lady
Percy's affairs, and the ruin in one way
or other of all the Falconers, which, now
it had happened, there was, she hoped,
no sin in saying she had long foreseen.”
Commissioner Falconer was at this
time at Falconer-Court, where he had
been obliged to go to settle some business
with his tenantry, previous to the
sale of his land for the redemption of
Cunningham. The Commissioner's answer
to Mr. Percy's letter was as follows:

“I cannot tell you, my dear Sir, how
much I was touched by the kindness of
your letter and conduct—So different
from what I have met with from others.
—-I will not cloud your happiness, in
which believe me I heartily rejoice—by
the melancholy detail of all my own sorrows
and disappointments—but only answer
briefly to your friendly inquiries respecting
my affairs.
“And first, for my unfortunate married
daughter, who has been in this terrible

manner returned upon our hands.
She thanks you for your indulgence, on
which she will not encroach. Before you
receive this she will have left Percy-Hall.
She is going to live with a Miss
Clapham, a great heiress, who wants a
fashionable companion and chaperon.
Mrs. Falconer became acquainted with
her at Tunbridge, and has devised this
plan for Arabella. I fear Bell's disposition
will not suit such a situation, but
she has no other resource.
“Mrs. Falconer and Georgiana have
so overmanaged matters with respect to
Petcalf, that it has ended, as I long
since feared it would, in his breaking off.
If Mrs. Falconer had taken my advice,
Georgiana might now be completely settled.
Instead of which she is fitting out
for India. She is going to be sure in
good company; but in my opinion the
expense, (which Heaven knows I can ill
afford), will be thrown away like all the
rest, for Georgiana has been much worn
by late hours, and though still young,

has, I fear, lost her bloom, and looks
rather old for India.
“I am truly obliged to you, my dear
Sir, for your friendly offer with respect
to Falconer-Court, and have in consequence
stopped the sale of the furniture.
I shall rejoice to have such a good tenant
as Mr. Temple. It is indeed much more
agreeable to me to let, than to sell. The
fining down the rent, as you propose,
will put it in my power to release Cunningham,
which is my most pressing
difficulty.
“As you are the only person in the
world now, who takes an interest in my
affairs, or to whom I can safely unburden
my mind, I must, though I know
complaint to be useless, relieve my heart
by it for a moment. I can safely say,
that for the last ten years of my life I
have never spent a day for myself. I
have been continually planning and toiling
to advance my family, not an opportunity
has been neglected, and yet from
this very family springs all my unhappiness.

Even Mrs. Falconer blames me as
the cause of that sad business, which has
disgraced us for ever, and deprived us of
all our friends—and has afforded an excuse
for breaking all promises. There
are many, whom I will not name, but
they are persons now high in office, who
have ... to you I may venture to say
it, used me shamefully ill.
“Many an honest tradesman and
manufacturer, to say nothing of men of
talents in the liberal professions, I have
seen in the course of the last forty years
make their own fortunes, and large fortunes,
while I have ended worse than I
began—have literally been working all
my life for others, not only without reward,
but without thanks. If I were
to begin life again, I certainly should
follow your principles, my dear Sir, and
depend more upon myself, and less upon
others, than I have done—But now all is
over.—-Let me assure you, that in the
midst of my own misfortunes, I rejoice
in your prosperity, (and in the esteem

and respect with which I hear you and
yours spoken of by all.
“Present my affectionate regards and
congratulations to Mrs. Percy, and to all
your amiable and happy circle. Propriety
and feeling for my poor daughter,
Lady Percy, must prevent my paying at
present my personal congratulations to
you at Percy-Hall—But I trust you will
not the less believe in the sincerity of
my attachment.
“I am, my dear Sir,
Your obliged and faithful
Friend and servant,
T. Falconer.”
“P.S. I have just learnt, that the little
place I mentioned to Mr. Alfred Percy,
when we last met, is not disposed of.—Lord
Oldborough's influence, as Mr.
Temple well knows, is still all powerful,
and your interest with his Lordship, you
must be sensible, is greater than that of
any other person living without exception.—A
word from you would do the
business for me. It is but a trifle, which

I should once have been ashamed to ask:
but it is now a matter of necessity.”
The event of the trial, and the restoration
of the Percy family to their property,
were heard with transports of joy
by the old tenantry. They had not
needed the effect of contrast, to make
them love and feel the value of their good
landlord; but certainly Sir Robert Percy's
tyranny, and all that he had made them
suffer for their obstinate fidelity to the
old branch, had heightened and fortified
their attachment. It was now their turn
to glory in that honest obstinacy, and with
the strong English sense of justice they
triumphed in having the rightful owners
restored to their estate, and to the seat
of their ancestors.
As the Percy family crossed the well-known
bridge at the end of the village,
those bells, which had sounded so mournfully,
which had been muffled when they
quitted their home, now rang out a
merry triumphant peal—And it was rung
by the hands of the very same persons

who had formerly given that proof of attachment
to him in his adversity, and
which had so touched Mr. Percy.—Emotion
as strong now seized his heart.
—At the same spot he jumped out of the
carriage, and by the same path along
which he had hastened to stop the bellringers,
lest they should ruin themselves
with Sir Robert, he now hastened to see
and thank these honest, courageous people.—-In
passing through the village,
which had been freshly swept and garnished,
all the people whom he remembered
to have seen in tears following the
carriage at their departure were now
crowding to their doors with faces bright
with smiles—Hats that had never stirred,
and backs that had never bent for the
usurper, were now eager with low bows
to mark their proud respect to the true
man. There was no noisy acclamations,
for all were touched. The voices of the
young children, however, were heard,
who, as their mothers held them up in
their arms, to see the landlord, of whom

they had heard so much, offered their
little nosegays as the open carriage
passed, and repeated blessings on those
on whom from their cradless they had
heard blessings bestowed by their parents.
The old steward stood ready at the
park-gate to open it for his master.
His master and the ladies put their hands
out of the carriage to shake hands with
him, but he could not stand it.—He just
touched his master's hand. Tears
streamed down his face, and turning
away without being able to say one
word, he hid himself in the porter's
lodge.
As they drove up to the house they
saw standing on the steps, waiting—and
long had he been waiting there, for the
first sound of the carriage, Johnson, the
butler, who had followed the family to
the hills, and had served them in their
fallen fortunes—Johnson was now himself.
Before the hall-door, wide open to
receive them, he stood, with the livery
servants in due order.

Mrs. Harte, the good old housekeeper,
had been sent down to prepare for the
reception of the family, and a world of
trouble she had had; but all was now
right and proper, and she was as active
and alert as the youngest of her maidens
could have been, in conducting the
ladies to their well-known apartments, in
showing all the old places, and doing
what she called the honors of the reinstallation.
—She could have wished to
have vented a little of her indignation,
and to have told how some things had
been left; but her better taste and judgment,
and her sense of what would be
pleasing to her master and mistress, repressed
all recrimination.—By the help
of frequent recurrence to her snuff-box in
difficulties great, together with much
rubbing of her hands, and some bridling
of her head, she got through it, without
naming those, who should not be
thought of, as she observed, on this joyful
day.
The happiness of the Percy family
was completed by the return of Count

Altenberg, and of Godfrey. Godfrey
arrived just as his family were settled at
Percy-Hall. After his long absence from
his home and his country, he doubly enjoyed
this scene of domestic prosperity.
—He had scarcely told and heard all
that had passed while he had been away,
had scarcely seen Mr. Temple, or expressed
his ardent desire to meet Count
Altenberg, when his wish was gratified—and
more than gratified.
Count Altenberg, having settled his
affairs abroad, came to England, determined
to reside on his English estate.
He brought a considerable sum of money,
the produce of the sale of part of
his German possessions, which he had
destined for the assistance of Mr. Percy,
if the trial had been decided against him.
The Count was most agreeably surprised
on his arrival in England, by hearing
that his father-in-law was reinstated in
his property.—His prayer at parting with
Caroline was granted, and the whole family,
whom he had left in grief, met him

in perfect happiness.—Caroline, his
bride, his wife, radiant with joy and
love, he, at last, pressed to his heart,
now, and for ever, his own Caroline.
Mrs. Hungerford had the delight of
seeing and sympathising in their felicity.
With all the enthusiastic warmth of affection,
supposed to be peculiar to youth,
this excellent lady enjoyed, in the decline
of life, the happiness of her friends.
On purpose to be with the Percys on
their return home, and to honor, by her
presence, the marriage of Rosamond,
she had made, with much expedition, a
long journey from Pembroke to Percy-Hall.—She
was recompensed, as she
said, beyond her utmost hopes, by arriving
just in time to see the reunion of
Caroline and her husband.
Beloved as Rosamond was by rich
and poor in the neighborhood, and the
general favorite of her family, her approaching
marriage spread new and universal
joy.—It is impossible to give a
just idea of the congratulations, and of

the bustle of the various preparations,
which were going on at this time at
Percy-Hall, especially in the lower regions.
Even Mrs. Harte's all regulating
genius was insufficient for the exigencies
of the times. Indeed, her head and her
heart were now at perpetual variance,
continually counteracting and contradicting
each other.—One moment delighted
with the joy and affection of the
world below, she would come up to
boast of it to her mistress and her young
ladies; the next moment she would scold
all the people for being out of their wits,
and for not minding or knowing a single
thing they were doing, or ordered to do,
“no more than the babes in the wood;” 
then proving the next minute, and acknowledging,
that she was “really quite
as bad as themselves.—And no wonder,
for the thoughts of Miss Rosamond's
marriage had turned her head entirely
upside down—for she had been at Miss
Rosamond's christening, held her by
proxy, and considered her always as her

particular own child, and well she might,
for a better, except, perhaps, Miss Caroline,
never breathed.”
The making a desert island for Miss
Rosamond's wedding dinner was the object,
which had taken such forcible possession
of Mrs. Harte's imagination, that,
till it was accomplished, it was in vain
to hope, that any other could, in her
eyes, appear in any kind of proportion.
In the midst of all the sentimental joy
above stairs, and in the midst of all the
important business of settlements and
lawyers, Mrs. Harte was pursuing the
settled purpose of her soul, constructing
with infinite care, as directed by her
“Complete English Housekeeper,” a desert
island for a wedding, in a deep
china dish, with a mount in the middle,
two figures upon the mount, with crowns
on their heads, a knot of rock candy at
their feet, and gravel walks of shot comfits
judiciously intersecting in every direction
their dominions.