

“How the wind is rising!” said Rosamond.—“God help the poor people at
sea to night!”
Her brother Godfrey smiled.—“One
would think,” said he, “that she had
an argosy of lovers at sea, uninsured.”
“You, gentlemen,” replied Rosamond,
“imagine that ladies are always
thinking of lovers.”
“Not always,” said Godfrey, “only
when they show themselves particularly
disposed to humanity.”
“My humanity, on the present occasion,
cannot even be suspected,” said

Rosamond, “for you know, alas! that
I have no lover at sea or land.”
“But a shipwreck might bless the
lucky shore with some rich waif,” said
Godfrey.
“Waifs and strays belong to the lady
of the manor,” said Rosamond, “and I
have no claim to them.”
“My mother would, I dare say, make
over her right to you,” said Godfrey.
“But that would do me no good,” 
said Rosamond, “for here is Caroline,
with superior claims of every sort, and
with that most undisputed of all the
rights of woman—beauty.”
“True—but Caroline would never
accept of stray hearts,” said Godfrey.
“See how her lip curls with pride at the
bare imagination!”
“Pride never curled Caroline's lip,” 
cried Rosamond—“Besides, pride is very
becoming to a woman. No woman can
be good for much without it, can she,
mother?”
“Before you fly off, Rosamond, to

my mother, as to an ally, whom you
are sure I cannot resist,” said Godfrey,
“settle first, whether you mean to defend
Caroline upon the ground of her
having or not having pride.”
A fresh gust of wind rose at this moment,
and Rosamond listened to it
anxiously.
“Seriously, Godfrey,” said she, “do
you recollect how very dangerous our
coast is? Do you remember the shipwrecks
last winter?”
As she spoke Rosamond went to one
of the windows, opened the shutter, and
threw up the sash.—Her sister, Caroline,
followed, and they looked out in silence.
“I see a light to the left of the beacon,” 
said Caroline.—“I never saw a
light there before.—What can it mean?”
“Only some fishermen”—said Godfrey.— 
“But, brother, it is quite a storm,” 
—persisted Rosamond.
“Only equinoctial gales, my dear.”
“Only equinoctial gales! But to

drowning people it would be no comfort
that they were shipwrecked only by
equinoctial gales. There! there! What
do you think of that blast?” cried Rosamond,
“is not there some danger
now?”
“Godfrey will not allow it,” said Mrs.
Percy—“He is a soldier, and it is his
trade not to know fear.”
“Show him a certain danger,” cried
Mr. Percy, looking up from a letter he
was writing—“Show him a certain danger,
and he will feel fear as much as the
greatest coward of you all.&wblank;Ha! upon
my word, it is an ugly night,” continued
he, going to the window.
“Oh, my dear father!” cried Rosamond— 
did you see that light?—out at
sea?—There! there!—to the left.” 
“To the east—I see it”—
“Hark! did you hear?”—
“Minute guns”—said Caroline.
There was a dead silence instantly.— 
Every body listened.—Guns were heard
again.—The signal of some vessel in distress.

The sound seemed near the shore.
—Mr. Percy and Godfrey hastened immediately
to the coast.—Their servants
and some people from the neighbouring
village, whom they summoned, quickly
followed. They found that a vessel had
struck upon a rock, and from the redoubled
signals, it appeared that the
danger must be imminent.
The boatmen, who were just wakened,
were surly, and swore that they
would not stir, that “whoever she was,
she might weather out the night, for
that, till day-break, they couldn't get
along side of her.”—Godfrey instantly
jumped into a boat, declaring he would
go out directly at all hazards.—Mr.
Percy, with as much intrepidity, but,
as became his age, with more prudence,
provided whatever assistance was necessary
from the villagers, who declared
they would go any where with him; the
boatmen then ashamed, or afraid, of
losing the offered reward, pushed aside
the land-lubbers, and were ready to go.

Out they rowed—and they were soon so
near the vessel, that they could hear the
cries and voices of the crew. The boats
hailed her, and she answered that she
was Dutch, homeward bound—had mistaken
the lights upon the coast—had
struck on a rock—was filling with water— 
and must go down in half an
hour.
The moment the boats came along side
of her, the crew crowded into them so
fast, and with such disorder and precipitation,
that they were in great danger of
being overset, which Mr. Percy seeing,
called out in a loud and commanding
voice to stop several who were in the act
of coming down the ship's side, and promised
to return for them if they would
wait. But just as he gave the order for
his boatmen to push off, a French voice
called out—
“Monsieur!—Monsieur l'Anglois!— 
one moment.”
Mr. Percy looked back and saw, as

the moon shone full upon the wreck, a
figure standing at the poop, leaning over
with outstretched arms.
“I am Monsieur de Tourville, Monsieur— 
a chargé d' affaires—with papers
of the greatest importance—dispatches.”
“I will return for you, Sir—It is impossible
for me to take you now, our
boat is loaded as much as it can bear”— 
cried Mr. Percy—and he repeated his
order to the boatman to push off.
Whilst Godfrey and Mr. Percy were
trimming the boat, M. de Tourville
made an effort to jump into it.
“Oh don't do it, Sir!” cried a
woman with a child in her arms, “The
gentleman will come back for us—for
God's sake don't jump into it.”
“Don't attempt it, Sir,” cried Mr.
Percy, looking up—“or you'll sink us
all.”
M. de Tourville threw down the poor
woman who tried to stop him, and he
leaped from the side of the ship. At the

same moment Mr. Percy seizing an oar
pushed the boat off, and saved it from
being overset, as it must have been if M.
de Tourville had scrambled into it. He
fell into the water. Mr. Percy without
waiting to see the event, went off as fast
as possible, justly considering that the
lives of the number he had under his protection,
including his son's and his own,
were not to be sacrificed for one man,
whatever his name or office might be,
especially when that man had persisted
against all warning in his rash selfishness.— 
At imminent danger to themselves,
Mr. Percy and Godfrey, after
landing those in the boat, returned once
more to the wreck, and though they both
declared that their consciences would be
at ease even if they found that M. de
Tourville was drowned, yet it was evident
that they rejoiced to see him safe
on board.—This time the boat held him,
and all the rest of his fellow sufferers,
and Mr. Percy and his son had the satisfaction

of bringing every soul safely to
shore.—M. de Tourville, as soon as he
found himself on terra-firma, joined with
all around him in warm thanks to Mr.
Percy and his son, by whom their lives
had been saved.—Godfrey undertook to
find lodgings for some of the passengers
and for the ship's crew in the village,
and Mr. Percy invited the captain,
M. de Tourville, and the rest of the passengers
to Percy Hall, where Mrs. Percy
and her daughters had prepared every
thing for their hospitable reception.
When they had warmed, dried, and refreshed
themselves, they were left to enjoy
what they wanted most, repose. The
Percy family, nearly as much fatigued
as their guests, were also glad to rest— 
all but Rosamond, who was wide awake,
and so much excited by what had happened,
that she continued talking to her
sister, who slept in the same room with
her, of every circumstance, and telling
her imaginations of all that might come
to pass from the adventures of the night,

whilst Caroline, too sleepy to be able to
answer judiciously, or even plausibly,
said, “yes”—“no”—and “very true”— 
in the wrong place, and at length, incapable
of uttering even a monosyllable,
was reduced to inarticulate sounds in sign
of attention. These grew fainter and
fainter, and after long intervals absolutely
failing, Rosamond with some surprise
and indignation exclaimed—
“I do believe, Caroline, you are
asleep!”—
And in despair, Rosamond, for want
of an auditor, was compelled to compose
herself to rest.
In the course of a few hours the storm
abated, and in the morning, when the
family and their shipwrecked guests assembled
at breakfast, all was calm and
serene. Much to Rosamond's dissatisfaction,
M. de Tourville did not make
his appearance. Of the other strangers
she had seen only a glimpse the preceding
night, and had not settled her curiosity
concerning what sort of beings

they were. On a clear view by day-light
of the personages who now sat at the
breakfast table, there did not appear
much to interest her romantic imagination,
or to excite her benevolent sympathy.
They had the appearance of
careful money-making men, thick, square-built
Dutch merchants, who said little
and eat much—butter especially.—With
one accord, as soon as they had breakfasted,
they rose and begged permission
to go down to the wreck to look after
their property. Mr. Percy and Godfrey
offered immediately to accompany them
to the coast.
Mr. Percy had taken the precaution
to set guards to watch all night, from
the time he left the vessel, that no depredations
might be committed. They
found that some of the cargo had been
damaged by the sea-water, but excepting
this loss there was no other of any
consequence; the best part of the goods
was perfectly safe. As it was found that
it would take some time to repair the

wreck, the Prussian and Hamburgh passengers
determined to go on board a vessel,
which was to sail from a neighbouring
port with the first fair wind. They came
previously to their departure to thank
the Percy family, and to assure them
that their hospitality would never be forgotten.
—Mr. Percy pressed them to stay
at Percy-Hall till the vessel should sail,
and till the captain should send notice
of the first change of wind.—This
offer, however, was declined, and the
Dutch merchants, with due acknowledgments,
said, by their speaking partner,
that “they considered it safest and
best to go with the goods, and so wished
Mr. Percy a good morning, and that
he might prosper in all his dealings; 
and—Sir,” concluded he, “in any of the
changes of fortune, which happen to men
by land as well as by sea, please to remember
the names of Grinderweld,
Groensvelt, and Slidderchild of Amsterdam,
or our correspondents, Panton and
Co. London.”

So having said, they walked away
keeping an eye upon the goods.—
When Mr. Percy returned home it was
near dinner time, yet M. de Tourville
had not made his appearance. He was
all this while indulging in a comfortable
sleep. He had no goods on board the
wreck, except his clothes, and as these
were in certain trunks and portmanteaus,
in which Comtois, his valet, had a joint
concern, M. de Tourville securely trusted,
that they would be obtained without
his taking any trouble.
Comtois and the trunks again appeared,
and a few minutes before dinner M.
de Tourville made his entrance into the
drawing room, no longer in the plight
of a ship-wrecked mariner, but in gallant
trim, wafting gales of momentary
bliss, as he went round the room paying
his compliments to the ladies, bowing,
smiling, apologizing,—the very pink of
courtesy!—The gentlemen of the family,
who had seen him the preceding night
in his frightened, angry, drenched, and

miserable state, could scarcely believe
him to be the same person.
A Frenchman, it will be allowed, can
contrive to say more, and to tell more of
his private history in a given time, than
could be accomplished by a person of
any other nation. In the few minutes
before dinner he found means to inform
the company, that he was private secretary,
and favorite of the minister of a
certain German court. To account for
his having taken his passage in a Dutch
merchant vessel, and for his appearing
without a suitable suite, he whispered
that “he had been instructed to preserve
a strict incognito, from which, indeed,
nothing but the horrors of the preceding
night could have drawn him.”
Dinner was served, and at dinner M.
de Tourville was seen, according to the
polished forms of society, humbling himself
in all the hypocrisy of politeness.
With ascetic good-breeding, preferring
every creature's ease and convenience to
his own, practising a continual system

of self-denial, such as almost implied a
total annihilation of self-interest and self-love.
All this was strikingly contrasted
with the selfishness which he had recently
betrayed, when he was in personal
danger. Yet, notwithstanding
these recollections were against him, the
influence of polite manners prevailed so
far as to make his former conduct be forgotten
by most of the family.
After dinner when the ladies retired,
in the female privy council held to discuss
the merits of the absent gentlemen,
Rosamond spoke first, and during the
course of five minutes pronounced as
many contradictory opinions of M. de
Tourville, as could well be enunciated in
the same space of time.—At last she
paused, and her mother smiled.
“I understand your smile, mother,” 
said Rosamond, “but the reason I appear
a little to contradict myself sometimes
in my judgment of character is,
because I speak my thoughts just as they
rise in my mind, while persons, who

have a character for judgment to support,
always keep the changes of their
opinion snug to themselves, never showing
the items of the account on either
side, and let you see nothing but their balance.
—This is very grand, and if their
balance be right, very glorious.—But
ignominious as my mode of proceeding
may seem, exposing me to the rebukes,
derision, uplifted hands and eyes of my
auditors, yet exactly because I am checked
at every little mistake I make in my
accounts, the chance is in my favour,
that my totals should at last be right,
and my balance perfectly accurate.”
“Very true, my dear—as long as you
choose for your auditors only your
friends, you are wise; but you sometimes
lay your accounts open to strangers,
and as they see only your errors
without ever coming to your conclusion,
they form no favorable opinion of your
accuracy.”
“I don't mind what strangers think
of me—much,”—said Rosamond.—“At

least you will allow, Mamma, that I have
reason to be satisfied, if only those who
do not know me could form an unfavorable
opinion of my judgment—and,
after all, ma'am, of the two classes of
people, those who ‘Never said a foolish
thing, and never did a wise one,’ and
those who never did a foolish thing, and
never said a wise one, would not you
rather that I should belong to the latter
class?”
“Certainly, if I were reduced to the
cruel alternative: but is there an unavoidable
necessity for your belonging
to either class?”
“I will consider of it, ma'am,” said
Rosamond, “in the meantime, Caroline,
you will allow, that M. de Tourville is
very agreeable?”
“Agreeable!” repeated Caroline— 
such a selfish being!—Have you forgot
his attempting to jump into the
boat, at the hazard of oversetting it, and
of drowning my father and Godfrey who
went out to save him—and when my father

warned him—and promised to return
for him—selfish cowardly creature!”
“Oh! poor man, he was so frightened,
that he did not know what he was
doing—he was not himself.”
“You mean he was himself”—said
Caroline.
“You are very ungrateful, Caroline,” 
cried Rosamond, “for I am sure M. de
Tourville admires you extremely—yes,
in spite of that provoking incredulous
smile, I say he does admire you exceedingly.”
“And if he did,” replied Caroline,
“that would make no difference in my
opinion of him.”
“I doubt that,” said Rosamond, “I
know a person's admiring me would
make a great difference in my opinion
of his taste and judgment—and how
much more if he had sense enough to
admire you!”
Rosamond paused, and stood for some
minutes silent in reverie.
“It will never do, my dear,” said

Mrs. Percy, looking up at her—“Trust
me, it will never do—turn him which
way you will in your imagination, you
will never make a hero of him—nor yet
a brother-in-law.”
“My dear mother, how could you
guess what I was thinking of,” said Rosamond,
coloring a little, and laughing,— 
“but I assure you—now let me explain
to you, ma'am, in one word, what I
think of M. de Tourville.”
“Hush! my dear, he is here”—
The gentlemen came into the room
to tea.—M. de Tourville walked to the
table at which Mrs. Percy was sitting,
and, after various compliments on the
beauty of the views from the windows,
on the richness of the foliage in the
park, and the superiority of English verdure,
he next turned to look at the pictures
in the saloon, distinguished a portrait
by Sir Joshua Reynolds, then
passing to a table on which lay several
books,—“Is it permitted?” said

he, taking up one of them—the Life of
Lord Nelson.
M. de Tourville did not miss the opportunity
of paying a just, and what to
English ears he knew must be a delightful
tribute of praise to our naval hero.
Then opening several other books, he
made a rash attempt to pronounce in
English their titles, and with the happy
facility of a Frenchman, M. de Tourville
touched upon various subjects, dwelt
upon none, but found means on all to
say something to raise himself and his
country in the opinion of the company,
and at the same time to make all his
auditors pleased with themselves. Presently,
taking a seat between Rosamond
and Caroline, he applied himself to draw
out their talents for conversation. Nor
did he labor in vain. They did not shut
themselves up in stupid and provoking
silence, nor did they make any ostentatious
display of their knowledge or abilities.
—M. de Tourville, as Rosamond had

justly observed, seemed to be particularly
struck with Miss Caroline Percy.
—She was beautiful, and of an uncommon
style of beauty. Ingenuous, unaffected,
and with all the simplicity of youth,
there was a certain dignity and graceful
self-possession in her manner, which gave
the idea of a superior character. She
had, perhaps, less of what the French
call esprit, than M. de Tourville had
been accustomed to meet with in young
persons on the Continent, but he was
the more surprised by the strength and
justness of thought which appeared in
her plain replies to the finesse of some of
his questions.
The morning of the second day that
he was at Percy Hall, M. de Tourville
was admiring the Miss Percys' drawings,
especially some miniatures of Caroline's,
and he produced his snuff-box, to show
Mr. Percy a beautiful miniature on it's lid.
It was exquisitely painted. M. de
Tourville offered it to Caroline to copy,

and Mrs. Percy urged her to make the
attempt.
“It is the celebrated Euphrosine,” 
said he, “who, from the stage, was very
near mounting a throne.”
M. de Tourville left the miniature in
the hands of the ladies to be admired,
and, addressing himself to Mr. Percy,
began to tell with much mystery the
story of Euphrosine. She was an actress
of whom the Prince, heir apparent at
the German court where he resided, had
become violently enamoured. One of
the Prince's young confidants had assisted
his Royal Highness in carrying on a
secret correspondence with Euphrosine,
which she managed so artfully, that the
Prince was on the point of giving her a
written promise of marriage, when the
intrigue was discovered, and prevented
from proceeding farther, by a certain
Count Albert Altenberg, a young nobleman
who had, till that moment, been
one of the Prince's favorites, but who by

thus opposing his passion lost entirely
his Prince's favor. The story was a common
story of an intrigue, such as happens
every day in every country where
there is a young Prince; but there was
something uncommon in the conduct of
Count Altenberg. Mr. Percy expressed
his admiration of it; but M. de Tourville,
though he acknowledged, as in morality
bound, that the Count's conduct “had
been admirable, just what it ought to be
upon this occasion, yet spoke of him
altogether as une tete exaltée, a young
man of a romantic Quixotic enthusiasm,
to which he had sacrificed the interests
of his family and his own hopes of advancement
at court. In support of this
opinion, M. de Tourville related several
anecdotes, and on each of these anecdotes
Mr. Percy and M. de Tourville
differed in opinion. All that was produced
to prove, that the young count had no
judgment or discretion, appeared to Mr.
Percy proofs of his independence of character,
and greatness of soul. Mr. Percy,

repeated the anecdotes to Mrs. Percy
and his daughters; and M. de Tourville,
as soon as he saw that the ladies, and
especially Caroline, differed from him,
immediately endeavoured to slide round
to their opinion, and assured Caroline,
with many asseverations, and with his
hand upon his heart, that he had merely
been speaking of the light in which these
things appeared to the generality of men
of the world, that for his own particular
feelings they were all in favour of the
frankness and generosity of character,
evinced by these imprudences—he only
lamented that certain qualities should
expose their possessor to the censure
and ridicule of those, who were, like half
the world, incapable of being moved by
any motive but interest, and unable to
reach to the idea of the moral sublime.”
The more M. de Tourville said upon
the subject, and the more gesture and
emphasis he used to impress the belief in
his truth, the less Caroline believed him,
and the more dislike and contempt she

felt, for the duplicity and pitiful meanness
of a character, which was always
endeavouring to seem, instead of to be.— 
He understood and felt the expression of
her countenance, and mortified by that
dignified silence, which said more than
words could express, he turned away, and
never afterwards addressed to her any of
his confidential conversation.
From this moment Rosamond's opinion
of M. de Tourville changed. She
gave him up altogether, and denied, or
at least gave him grudgingly, that praise,
which he eminently deserved for agreeable
manners and conversational talents.
Not a foible of his now escaped her
quick observation, and her lively perception
of ridicule.
Whether from accident, or from some
suspicion, that he had lost ground with
the ladies, M. de Tourville the next day
directed the principal part of his conversation
to the gentlemen of the family:
comforting himself with the improtance
of his political and official character, he

talked grandly of politics and diplomacy.
Rosamond, who listened with
an air of arch attention, from time to
time with a tone of ironical simplicity,
asked explanations on certain points relative
to the diplomatic code of morality,
and professed herself much edified and
enlightened by the answers she received.
She wished, as she told Caroline, that
some one would write “Advice to Diplomatists,” 
in the manner of Swift's Advice
to Servants; and she observed that
M. de Tourville, chargèd' affaires, &c.,
might supply anecdotes illustrative, and
might embellish the work with a portrait
of a finished diplomatist. Unfortunately
for the public, on the third morning of
the diplomatist's visit, a circumstance
occurred, which prevented the further
development of his character, stopped
his flow of anecdote, and snatched him
from the company of his hospitable
hosts. In looking over his papers in
order to show Mr. Percy a complimentary
letter from some crowned head,

M. de Tourville discovered, that an important
packet of papers, belonging to
his dispatches, was missing. He had
in the moment of danger and terror
stuffed all his dispatches into his great
coat pocket, in getting out of the boat
he had given his coat to Comtois to
carry, and strange to tell, this chargè 
d' affaires had taken it upon trust, from
the assertion of his valet, that all his
papers were safe. He once, indeed,
had looked them over, but so carelessly
that he never had missed the packet.
His dismay was great, when he discovered
his loss. He repeated at least a
thousand times, that he was an undone
man, unless the packet could be found.
—Search was made for it, in the boat,
on the shore, in every probable, and
improbable place.—But all in vain— 
and in the midst of the search a messenger
came to announce, that the wind
was fair, that the ship would sail in one
hour, and that the captain could wait
for no man. M. de Tourville was obliged

to take his departure without this precious
packet.
Mrs. Percy was the only person in
the family, who had the humanity to
pity him. He was too little of a soldier
for Godfrey's taste, too much of a courtier
for Mr. Percy—too frivolous for
Caroline, and too little romantic for Rosamond.
“So,”—said Rosamond, “here was
a fine beginning of a romance with a
shipwreck, that ends only in five square
merchants, who do not lose even a
guilder of their property, and a diplomatist,
with whom we are sure of nothing
but that he has lost a bundle of
papers for which nobody cares.”
In a few days the remembrance of
the whole adventure began to fade from
her fancy. M. de Tourville, and his
snuff-box, and his essences, and his
flattery, and his diplomacy, and his
lost packet, and all the circumstances
of the shipwreck, would have appeared
as a dream, if they had not been maintained

in the rank of realities, by the
daily sight of the wreck, and by the actual
presence of the Dutch sailors, who
were repairing the vessel.