

Belinda and Mr. Vincent could
never agree in their definition of the word
flattery; so that there were continual
complaints on the one hand of a breach
of treaty, and, on the other, solemn protestations
of the most scrupulous adherence
to his compact. However this
might be, it is certain that the gentleman
gained so much either by truth or
fiction, that, in the course of some
weeks, he got the lady as far as—“gratitude
and esteem.”

One evening, Belinda was playing
with little Charles Percival at jackstraws.
Mr. Vincent, who found pleasure
in every thing which amused Belinda,
and Mr. Percival, who took an interest
in every thing which entertained
his children, were looking on at this
simple game.
“Mr. Percival,” said Belinda, “condescending
to look at a game of jackstraws!”
“Yes,” said lady Anne; “for he is of
Dryden's opinion, that, if a straw can be
made the instrument of happiness, he is
a wise man who does not despise it.”
“Ah! miss Portman, take care!” 
cried Charles, who was anxious that she
should win, though he was playing
against her. “Take care! don't touch
that knave!”
“I would lay a hundred guineas upon
the steadiness of miss Portman's hand,” 
cried Mr. Vincent.
“I'll lay you sixpence though,” cried

Charles eagerly, “that she'll stir the king,
if she touches that knave—I'll lay you a
shilling.”
“Done! done!” cried Mr. Vincent.
“Done! done!” cried the boy,
stretching out his hand, but his father
caught it.
“Softly! softly, Charles!—No betting,
if you please, my dear.—Done! and
done!—sometimes ends in—Undone.”
“It was my fault—it was I who was
in the wrong,” cried Vincent immediately,
with that candour which he showed
in trifles as well as in matters of consequence.
“I am sure you are in the right now,” 
said Mr. Percival; “and, what is better
than my saying so, miss Portman thinks
so, as her smile tells me.”
“You moved, miss Portman!” cried
Charles, “Oh, indeed! the king's head
stirred the very instant papa spoke. I
knew it was impossible that you could
get that knave clear off without shaking

the king. Now, papa, only look how
they were balanced.”
“I grant you,” said Mr. Vincent, “I
should have made an imprudent bet.
So it is well I made none; for now I see
the chances were ten to one, twenty to
one, a hundred to one against me.”
“It does not appear to me to be a
matter of chance,” said Mr. Percival.
“This is a game of address, not chance,
and that is the reason I like it.”
“O papa! O miss Portman! look
how nicely these are balanced. There!
my breath has set them in motion.— 
Look! they shake, shake, shake, like
the great rocking stones at Brimham
Craggs.”
“That is comparing small things to
great, indeed!” said Mr. Percival.
“By the by,” cried Mr. Vincent,
“miss Portman has never seen those
wonderful rocking stones—Suppose we
were to ride to see them to morrow?”
The proposal was warmly seconded by

the children, and agreed to by every one.
It was settled, that after they had seen
Brimham Craggs they should spend the
remainder of the day at lord&wblank;'s, a
beautiful place in the neighbourhood.
The next morning was neither too hot
nor too cold, and they set out on their
little party of pleasure: the children
went with their mother, to their great
delight, in the sociable; and Mr. Vincent,
to his great delight, rode with Belinda.
When they came within sight of the
Craggs, Mr. Percival, who was riding
with them, exclaimed—“What is that
yonder on the top of one of the great
rocking stones?”
“It looks like a statue,” said Vincent.
“It has been put up since we were here
last.”
“I fancy it has got up of itself,” said
Belinda, “for it seems to be getting
down of itself. I think I saw it stoop.
—O! I see now, it is a man who has
got up there, and he seems to have a gun
in his hand, has not he? He is going

through his manual exercise for his diversion— 
For the diversion of the spectators
below, I perceive—There is a party of
people looking at him.”
“Him!” said Mr. Percival.
“I protest it is a woman!” said Vincent.
“No, surely,” said Belinda:“It cannot
be a woman!”
“Not unless it be Mrs. Freke,” replied
Mr. Percival.
In fact, it was Mrs. Freke, who had
been out shooting with a party of gentlemen,
and who had scrambled up on
this rocking stone, on the summit of
which she went through the manual exercise
at the word of command from her
officer. As they rode nearer to the
scene of action, Belinda heard the shrill
screams of a female voice, and they descried
amongst the gentlemen a slight
figure in a riding-habit.
“Miss Moreton I suppose?” said
Mr. Vincent.

“Poor girl! what are they doing with
her?” cried Belinda. “They seem to be
forcing her up to the top of that place,
where she has no mind to go.—Look
how Mrs. Freke drags her up by the
arm!”
As they drew nearer, they heard Mrs.
Freke laughing loud as she rocked this
frightened girl upon the top of the stone.
“We had better keep out of the way,
I think,” said Belinda; “for perhaps, as
she has vowed vengeance against me,
she might take a fancy to setting me
upon that pinnacle of glory.”
“She dare not,” cried Vincent, his
eyes flashing with anger: “you may
trust to us to defend you.”
“Certainly!—But I will not run into
danger on purpose to give you the pleasure
of defending me,” said Belinda; and
as she spoke, she turned her horse another
way.
“You won't turn back, miss Portman?” 
cried Vincent eagerly, laying his
hand on her bridle.—“Good God,

ma'am! we can't run away!—We came
here to look at these rocking stones!— 
We have not half seen them. Lady
Anne and the children will be here immediately.
You would not deprive them
of the pleasure of seeing these things!”
“I doubt whether they would have
much pleasure in seeing some of these
things; and, as to the rest, if I disappoint
the children now, Mr. Percival
will, perhaps, have the goodness to bring
them some other day.”
“Certainly,” said Mr. Percival: “miss
Portman shows her usual prudence.”
“The children are so good tempered,
that I am sure they will forgive me,” 
continued Belinda; “and Mr. Vincent
will be ashamed not to follow their example,
though he seems to be rather angry
with me at present for obliging him
to turn back—out of the path of danger.”
“You must not be surprised at that,” 
said Mr. Percival, laughing; “for Mr.
Vincent is a lover and a hero. You
know it is a ruled case, in all romances,

that, when a lover and his mistress go
out riding together, some adventure must
befal them. The horse must run away
with the lady, and the gentleman must
catch her in his arms just as her neck is
about to be broken. If the horse have
been too ill trained for the heroine's purpose,
‘some footpad, bandit fierce, or
mountaineer,’ some jealous rival must
make his appearance quite unexpectedly
at the turn of a road, and the lady must
be carried off, robes flying! hair streaming!
like Buerger's Leonora. Then her
lover must come to her rescue just in
the proper moment.—But, if the damsel
cannot conveniently be run away with,
she must, as the last resource, tumble
into a river to make herself interesting,
and the hero must be at least half drowned
in dragging her out, that she may be
under eternal obligations to him, and
at last be forced to marry him out of
pure gratitude.”
“Gratitude!” interrupted Mr. Vincent:
“He is no hero to my mind, who

would be content with gratitude, instead
of love.”
“You need not alarm yourself: miss
Portman does not seem inclined to put
you to the trial, you see,” said Mr. Percival,
smiling. “Now it is really to be
regretted, that she deprived you of an
opportunity of fighting some of the gentlemen
in Mrs. Freke's train, or of delivering
her from the perilous height of
one of those rocking stones.—It would
have been a new incident in a novel.”
“How that poor girl screamed!” said
Belinda. “Was her terrour real or affected?”
“Partly real, partly affected, I fancy,” 
said Mr. Percival.
“I pity her,” said Mr. Vincent; “for
Mrs. Freke leads her a weary life.”
“She is certainly to be pitied, but
also to be blamed,” said Mr. Percival.
“You do not know her history. Miss
Moreton ran away from her friends to
live with this Mrs. Freke, who has led
her into all kinds of mischief and absurdity.

The girl is weak and vain, and
believes that every thing becomes her,
which Mrs. Freke assures her is becoming.
At one time she was persuaded to
go to a public ball with her arms as bare
as Juno's, and her feet as naked as madame
Tallien's. At another time miss
Moreton (who unfortunately had never
heard the Greek proverb, that half is
better than the whole) was persuaded by
Mrs. Freke to lay aside her half boots,
and to equip herself in men's whole
boots; and thus she rode about the country,
to the amazement of all the world.— 
These are trifles: but women who love to
set the world at defiance in trifles, seldom
respect it's opinion in matters of consequence.
Miss Moreton's whole boots in
the morning, and her bare feet in the
evening, were talked of by every body,
till she gave them more to talk of about
her attachment to a young officer. Mrs.
Freke, whose philosophy is professedly
latitudinarian in morals, laughed at the
girl's prejudice in favour of the ceremony

of marriage. So did the officer; for miss
Moreton had no fortune. It is suspected,
that the young lady did not feel the
difficulty, which philosophers are sometimes
said to find in suiting their practice
to their theory. The unenlightened
world reprobated the theory much, and
the practice more. I am inclined, in
spite of scandal, to think the poor girl
was only imprudent: at all events, she
repents her folly too late. She has now
no friend upon earth but Mrs. Freke,
who is, in fact, her worst enemy, and
who tyrannizes over her without mercy.
Imagine what it is to be the butt of a
buffoon!”
“What a lesson to young ladies in the
choice of female friends!” said Belinda.
“But had miss Moreton no relations,
who could interfere to get her out of
Mrs. Freke's hands?”
“Her father and mother were old, and,
what is more contemptible, old-fashioned:
she would not listen to their advice,
she ran away from them. Some her

relations were, I believe, willing that she
should stay with Mrs. Freke, because
she was a dashing fashionable woman,
and they thought it might be what is
called an advantage to her. She had one
relation, indeed, who was quite of a different
opinion, who saw the danger of
her situation, and remonstrated in the
strongest manner—but to no purpose.
This was a cousin of miss Moreton's, a
respectable clergyman. Mrs. Freke was
so much incensed by his insolent interference,
as she was pleased to call it, that
she made an effigy of Mr. Moreton
dressed in his canonicals, and hung the
figure up as a scarecrow in a garden
close by the high road. He was so
much beloved and respected for his benevolence
and unaffected piety, that
Mrs. Freke totally failed in her design of
making him ridiculous; her scarecrow
was torn to pieces by his parishioners; 
and though, in the true spirit of charity,
he did all he could to moderate their indignation
against his enemy, the lady became

such an object of detestation, that
she was followed with hisses and groans
whenever she appeared, and she dared
not venture within ten miles of the village.
“Mrs. Freke now changed the mode of
her persecution; she was acquainted
with a nobleman from whom our clergyman
expected a living, and she worked
upon his lordship so successfully, that he
insisted upon having an apology made to
the lady. Mr. Moreton had as much
dignity of mind as gentleness of character; 
his forbearance was that of principle,
and so was his firmness: he refused
to make the concessions that were
required. His noble patron bullied.
Though he had a large family to provide
for, this clergyman would not degrade
himself by any improper submission.
The incumbent died, and the living
was given to a more compliant
friend.—So ends the history of one of
Mrs. Freke's numerous frolics.”
“This was the story,” said Mr. Vincent,

“which effectually changed my
opinion of her. Till I heard it, I always
looked upon her as one of those thoughtless,
good natured people, who, as the
common saying is, do nobody any harm
but themselves.”
“It is difficult in society,” said Mr.
Percival, “especially for women, to
do harm to themselves, without doing
harm to others. They may begin in frolic,
but they must end in malice. They
defy the world—the world in return excommunicates
them—the female outlaws
become desperate, and make it the
business and pride of their lives to disturb
the peace of their sober neighbours.
Women who have lowered themselves in
the public opinion cannot rest without attempting
to bring others to their own
level.”
“Mrs. Freke, notwithstanding the
blustering merriment that she affects, is
obviously unhappy,” said Belinda; “and
since we cannot do her any good, either

by our blame or our pity, we had better
think of something else.”
“Scandal,” said Mr. Vincent, “does
not seem to give you much pleasure,
miss Portman. You will be glad to hear,
that Mrs. Freke's malice against poor
Mr. Moreton has not ruined him. Do
you know, Mr. Percival, that he has just
been presented to a good living by a
generous young man, who heard of his
excellent conduct.”
“I am extremely glad of it,” said Mr.
Percival. “Who is this generous young
man? I should like to be acquainted with
him.”
“So should I,” said Mr. Vincent; 
“he is a Mr. Hervey.”
“Clarence Hervey, perhaps?”
“Yes, Clarence was his name.”
“No man more likely to do a generous
action than Clarence Hervey,” said
Mr. Percival.
“Nobody more likely to do a generous
action than Mr. Hervey,” repeated

Belinda in rather a lower tone. She
could now praise Clarence Hervey without
blushing, and she could think even
of his generosity without enthusiasm,
though not without pleasure. By
strength of mind, and timely exertion,
she had prevented her prepossession from
growing into a passion that might have
made her miserable. Proud of this conquest
over herself, she was now disposed
to treat Mr. Vincent with more favour
than usual. Self-complacency generally
puts us in good humour with our friends.
After spending some pleasant hours in
lord C&wblank;'s beautiful grounds, where
the children explored to their satisfaction
every dingle and bushy dell, they returned
home in the cool of the evening.— 
Mr. Vincent thought it the most delightful
evening he had ever felt.
“What! as charming as a West Indian
evening?” said Mr. Percival. “This
is more than I expected ever to hear you
acknowledge in favour of England. Do

you remember how you used to rave
of the climate and of the prospects of
Jamaica?”
“Yes, but my taste has quite changed.”
“I remember the time,” said Mr. Percival,
“when you thought it impossible
that your taste should ever change; when
you told me that taste, whether for the
beauties of animate or inanimate nature,
was immutable.”
“You and miss Portman have taught
me better sense. First loves are generally
silly things,” added he, colouring a
little. Belinda coloured also.
“First loves,” continued Mr. Percival,
“are not necessarily more foolish than
others; but the chances are certainly
against them. Proximity of time or place,
a variety of accidental circumstances more
than the essential merits of the object,
often produce what is called first love.
From poetry or romance young people
usually form their early ideas of love, before
they have actually felt the passion; 
and the image which they have in their

own minds of the beau ideal is cast upon
the first objects they afterward behold.
This, if I may be allowed the expression,
is Cupid's Fata Morgana. Deluded mortals
are in ecstasy whilst the illusion lasts,
and in despair when it vanishes.”
Mr. Percival appeared to be unconscious,
that what he was saying was any
way applicable to Belinda. He addressed
himself to Mr. Vincent solely, and she
listened at her ease.
“But,” said she, “do not you think
that this prejudice, as I am willing to
allow it to be, in favour of first loves, may
in our sex be advantageous? Even when a
woman may be convinced that she ought
not to indulga first I ove, should she
not be prevented by delicacy from thinking
of a second?”
“Delicacy, my dear miss Portman, is
a charming word, and a still more charming
thing, and Mrs. Freke has probably
increased our affection for it; but even
delicacy, like all other virtues, must be
judged by the test of utility. We should

run into romance, and errour, and misery,
if we did not constantly refer to this
standard. Our reasonings as to the conduct
of life, as far as moral prudence is
concerned, must depend ultimately upon
facts. Now, of the numbers of people in
this world how many do you think have
married their first loves? Probably not one
out of ten.—Then, would you have nine
out of ten pine all their lives in celibacy,
or fret in matrimony, because they cannot
have the persons who first struck their
fancy?”
“I acknowledge this would not add
to the happiness of society,” said Belinda.
“Nor to it's virtue,” said Mr. Percival.
“I scarcely know an idea more
dangerous to domestic happiness, than
this belief in the unextinguishable nature
of a first flame. There are people who
would persuade us, that, though it may be
smothered for years, it must break out at
last, and blaze with destructive fury.— 
Pernicious doctrine! false as it is

pernicious!— 
The struggles between duty
and passion may be the charm of romance,
but must be the misery of real
life. The woman who marries one man,
and loves another, who, in spite of all
that an amiable and estimable husband
can do to win her confidence and affection,
nourishes in secret a fatal prepossession
for her first love, may perhaps, by
the eloquence of a fine writer, be made
an interesting heronie; but would any
man of sense or feeling choose to be troubled
with such a wife?—Would not even
the idea that women admired such conduct
necessarily tend to diminish our
confidence, if not in their virtue, at
least in their sincerity? And would not
this suspicion destroy our happiness?
Husbands may sometimes have delicate
feelings as well as their wives, though
they are seldom allowed to have any
by these unjust novel writers.—Now
could a husband who has any delicacy
be content, to possess the person
without the mind?—the duty without the

love?—Could he be perfectly happy, if,
in the fondest moments, he might doubt
whether he were an object of disgust or
affection? whether the smiles of apparent
joy were only the efforts of a suffering
martyr?—Thank Heaven! I am not married
to one of these charming martyrs.
Let those live with them who admire
them. For my part, I admire and love
the wife, who not only seems but is
happy—as I,” added Mr. Percival smiling,
“have the fond credulity to believe. If I
have spoken too long or too warmly upon
the chapter of first loves, I have at least
been a perfectly disinterested declaimer; 
for I can assure you, miss Portman, that
I do not suspect lady Anne Percival of
sighing in secret for some vision of perfection,
any more than she suspects me
of pining for the charming lady Delacour,
who,perhaps, you may have heard was my
first love. In these days, however, so few
people marry with even the pretence to
love of any sort, that you will think I
might have spared this tirade.—No; there

are ingenuous minds which will never be
enslaved by fashion or interest, though
they may be exposed to be deceived by
romance, or by the delicacy of their own
imaginations.”
“I hear,” said Belinda smiling, “I hear
and understand the emphasis, with which
you pronounce that word delicacy. I see
you have not forgotten, that I used it improperly
half an hour ago, as you have
convinced me.”
“Happy they,” said Mr. Percival,
“who can be convinced in half an hour!
There are some people who cannot be convinced
in a whole life, and who end
where they began, with saying—'This
is my opinion—I always thought so, and
always shall.”
Mr. Vincent at all times loved Mr.
Percival; but he never felt so much affection
for him as he did this evening,
and his arguments appeared to him unanswerable.— 
Though Belinda had never
mentioned to Mr. Vincent the name of
Clarence Hervey till this day; and though

he did not in the least suspect from her
manner, that this gentleman ever possessed
any interest in her heart; yet with her accustomed
sincerity she had confessed to
him, that an impression had been made
upon her mind before she came to Oakly-park.
After this conversation with Mr. Percival,
Mr. Vincent perceived that he
gained ground more rapidly in her favour; 
she became accustomed to consider
him as a lover, and his company
grew every day more agreeable to her
taste; he was convinced that, as he possessed
her esteem, he should in time secure
her affections.
“In time,” repeated lady Anne Percival:
“you must allow her time, or you
will spoil all.”
It was with some difficulty that Mr.
Vincent restrained his impatience, even
though he was persuaded of the prudence
of his friend's advice. Things
went on in this happy, but as he thought

slow, state of progression, till towards
the latter end of September.
One fine morning lady Anne Percival
came into Belinda's room with a bridal
favour in her hand—“Do you know,” 
said she, “that we are to have a wedding
to day. This favour has just been sent to
my maid. Lucy, the pretty girl whom
you may remember to have seen some
time ago in a necklace of Angola pease,
is the bride, and Juba is the bridegroom.
Mr. Vincent has let them a very
pretty little farm in the neighbourhood,
and—hark! there's the sound of music.”
They looked out of the window, and
they saw a troop of villagers gayly dressed,
going to the wedding. Lady Anne, who
was always eager to promote innocent
festivity, sent immediately to have a tent
pitched in the park, and all the rural company
were invited to a dance in the evening:
it was a very cheerful spectacle.— 
Belinda heard from all sides praises of
Mr. Vincent's generosity; and she could

not be insensible to the simple but enthusiastic
testimony, which Juba bore to
his master's goodness. Juda had composed,
in his broken dialect, a little song
in honour of his benefactor, which he
sang to his banjore with the most touching
expression of joyful gratitude. In some
of the stanzas, Belinda could distinguish
that her own name was frequently repeated.
Lady Anne called him, and desired
to have the words of this song. They
were a mixture of English and of his native
language; they described in the strongest
manner what had been his feelings, whilst
he was under the terrour of Mrs. Freke's
fiery obeah woman, then his joy on being
relieved from these horrours, with
the delightful sensations of returning
health;—and thence he suddenly passed to
his gratitude to Belinda, the person to
whom he owed his recovery. He concluded
with wishing her all sorts of happiness,
and, above all, that she might be
fortunate in her love; which Juba thought
the highest degree of felicity. He had

no sooner finished his song, which particularly
touched and pleased miss Portman,
than he begged his master to offer to her
the little instrument, which he had made
with much pains and ingenuity. She accepted
the banjore with a smile that enchanted
Mr. Vincent; but at this instant
they were startled by the sound of a carriage
driving rapidly into the park. Belinda
looked up, and between the heads
of the dancers she just caught a glimpse of
a well-known livery.—“Good heavens!” 
she exclaimed, “lady Delacour's carriage!
—Can it be lady Delacour?”
The carriage stopped, and Marriott
hastily jumped out of it. Belinda pressed
forward to meet her; poor Marriott was
in great agitation:—“Oh, miss Portman!
my poor lady is very ill—very ill indeed.
She has sent me for you—here's her
letter. Dear miss Portman, I hope you
won't refuse to come?—She has been
very ill, and is very ill; but she would
be better, if she could see you again.
But I'll tell every thing, ma'am, when we

are by ourselves, and when you have read
your letter.”
Miss Portman immediately accompanied
Marriott towards the house; and as
they walked thither, she learned that
lady Delacour had applied to the quack
in whom she had such implicit faith, and
had in vain endeavoured to engage him
to perform for her the operation, to which
she had determined to submit. He was
afraid to hazard it, and he prevailed upon
her to give up the scheme, and to try
some new external remedy from which
he promised wonders. No one knew
what his medicines were, but they affected
her head in the most alarming manner.
In her delirium she called frequently
upon miss Portman, sometimes accusing
her of the basest treachery, sometimes
addressing her as if she were present,
and pouring forth the warmest expressions
of friendship. “In her lucid intervals,
ma'am,” continued Marriott,
“she for some weeks scarcely ever mentioned
your name, nor could bear to hear

me mention it. One day, when I was
saying how much I wished that you
were with her again, she darted at me
the most terrible look that ever I
beheld.
“When I am in my grave, Marriott,” 
cried my lady, ‘it will be time enough
for miss Portman again to visit this house,
and you may then express your attachment
to her with more propriety than at
present.’ These were my lady's own
words—I shall never forget them—They
struck and astonished me, ma'am, so much,
I stood like one stupified, and then left
the room to think them over again
by myself, and make sense of them if I
could.—Well, ma'am, to be sure, it then
struck me like a flash of lightning, that
my lady was jealous—and, begging your
pardon, ma'am, of you. This seemed to
me the most unnatural thing in the world,
considering how easy my lady had always
seemed to be about my lord; but it was
now clear to me, that this was the cause
of your leaving us so suddenly, ma'am.—

Well, I was confident that Mr. Champfort
was at the bottom of the business from
the first; and now that I knew what
scent to go upon, I went to work with
fresh spirit to find him out; which was a
thing I was determined upon, and what
I'm determined upon I generally do,
ma'am. So I put together things about
miss Portman and my lord, that had
dropped at odd times from sir Philip Baddely's
gentleman; and I, partly serious
and partly flirting, which in a good cause
is no sin, drew from him (for he pretends
to be a little an admirer of mine, ma'am,
though I never gave him the smallest
encouragement) all he knew or suspected,
or had heard reported, or whispered:
—and out it came, ma'am, that
Mr. Champfort was the original of
all; and that he had told a heap of lies
about some bank-notes that my lord had
given you, and that you and my lord
were to be married as soon as my lady
was dead; and I don't know what, which
he maliciously circulated through sir Philip's

gentleman to sir Philip himself,
and so round again to my lady. Now,
sir Philip's man behaved like a gentleman
upon the occasion, which I shall ever
be free to acknowledge and remember:
and when I represented things properly,
and made him sensible of the mischief,
which he assured me was done purely
with an eye to serve sir Philip his master,
he very candidly offered to assist me to
unmask that villain Champfort, which
he could easily do with the assistance of
a few bottles of claret, and a few fair
words; which, though I can't abide hypocrisy,
I thought quite allowable upon
such an occasion. So, ma'am, when Mr.
Champfort was thrown off his guard by
the claret, sir Philip's gentleman began
to talk of my lord and my lady, and
miss Portman; and he observed that my
lord and my lady were coming together
more than they used to be since miss
Portman left the house. To which
Champfort replied with an oath, like an
unmannered reprobate as he is, and in

his gibberish, French and English, which
I can't speak; but the sense of it was
this:—‘My lord and lady shall never
come together if I can help it. It was
to hinder this I got miss Portman banished; 
for my lord was quite another man after
she got miss Helena into the house; and
I don't doubt but he might have been
brought to leave off his Burgundy, and
set up for a sober regular man; which
would not suit me at all. If my lady once
was to get power over him again, I might
go whistle—so (with another reprobate
oath) my lord and my lady shall never
come together again whilst I live.’
“Well, ma'am,” continued Marriott,
“as soon as I was in possession of this
precious speech, I carried it, and a letter
of sir Philip Baddely's gentleman vouching
it, to my lady. My lady was thunderstruck,
and so vexed, to have been,
as she said, a dupe, that she sent for my
lord directly, and insisted upon his giving
up Mr. Champfort.—My lord demurred,
because my lady spoke so high,

and said insist. He would have done it,
I'm satisfied, of his own accord, with the
greatest pleasure, if my lady had not as
it were commanded it. But he answered
at last, ‘My lady Delacour, I'm not
a man to be governed by a wife—I shall
keep or part with my own servants, in
my own house, according to my own
pleasure;’ and saying so he left the room.
I never saw my lady so angry as she was
at this refusal of my lord's to part with
him. The house was quite in a state of
distraction for some days. I never would
sit down to the same table, ma'am, with
Mr. Champfort, nor speak to him, nor
look at him, and parties ran high above
and below stairs.—And at last my lady,
who had been getting better, took to her
bed again with a nervous fever, which
brought her almost to death's door; she
having been so much weakened before
by the quack medicines, and convulsions,
and all her sufferings in secret.
She would not see my lord on no account,
and Champfort persuaded him her illness

was pretence, to bring him to her purpose; 
which was the more readily believed,
because nobody was ever let into
my lady's bedchamber but myself. All
this time she never mentioned your name,
ma'am; but once, when I was sitting by
her bedside, as she was asleep, she started
suddenly, and cried out,—‘O, my
dearest Belinda! are you come back to
me?’—She wakened herself with the
start; and raising herself quite up in her
bed, she pulled back the curtains, and
looked all round the room. I'm sure she
expected to see you; and when she found
it was a dream, she gave a heavy sigh,
and sunk down upon her pillow. I then
could not forbear to speak, and this time
my lady was greatly touched when I
mentioned your name:—she shed tears,
ma'am, and you know it is not a little
thing that can draw tears from my lady.
But when I said something about sending
for you, she answered, she was sure
you would not return to her, and that
she would never condescend to ask a

favour in vain, even from you. Then I
replied, that I was sure you loved her
still, and as well as ever; and that the
proof of that was, that Mrs. Luttridge
and Mrs. Freke together, by all their
wiles, could not draw you over to their
party at Harrowgate, and that you had
affronted Mrs. Freke by defending her
ladyship. My lady was all surprise at
this, and eagerly asked how I came to
know it.—Now, ma'am, I had it all by a
post letter from Mrs. Luttridge's maid,
who is my cousin, and knows every thing
that's going on. My lady from this moment
forward could scarce rest an instant
without wishing for you, and fretting
for you, as I knew by her manner. One
day my lord met me on the stairs as I was
coming down from my poor lady's room,
and he asked me how she was, and why
she did not send for a physician. ‘The
best physician, my lord, she could send
for,’ said I, ‘would be miss Portman; 
for she'll never be well till that good

young lady comes back again, in my humble
opinion.’
“And what should prevent that good
young lady from coming back again? Not
I, surely?” rejoined my lord, ‘for I wish
she was here with all my heart.’
“It is not easy to suppose, my lord, said
I, after all that has passed, that the
young lady would choose to return, or
that my lady could ask her whilst Mr.
Champfort remains paramount in the
house.—‘If that's all,’ cried my lord,
‘tell your lady I'll part with Champfort
upon the spot; for the rascal has just had
the insolence to insist upon it, that a
pair of new boots are not too tight for
me, when I said they were. I'll show
him I can be master, and will, in my own
house.’—Ma'am, my heart leaped for
joy within me at hearing these words,
and I ran up to my lady with them. I
easily concluded in my own mind, that
my lord was glad of the pretence of the
boots, to give up handsomely after his

standing out so long. To be sure, my
lord's mightily jealous of being master,
and mighty fond of his own way; but I
forgive him every thing for doing as I
would have him at last, and dismissing
that prince of mischiefmakers Mr.
Champfort. My lady called for her
writing-desk directly, and sat up in her
bed, and with her trembling hand, as you
see by the writing, ma'am, wrote a letter
to you as fast as ever she could, and the
chariot was ordered. I don't know what
fancy seized her—but, if you remember,
ma'am, the hammercloth to her new carriage
had orange and black fringe at first.
She would not use it, till this had been
changed to blue and white. Well ma'am,
she recollected this on a sudden, as I was
getting ready to come for you; and she
set the servants at work directly to take
off the blue and white, and put on the
black and orange fringe again, which
she said must be done before your coming.
But, ma'am, I won't keep you any
longer from reading your letter, only

to say that I hope to Heaven you will not
refuse to return to my poor lady, if it be
only to put her mind at ease before she
dies. She cannot have long to live.”
As Marriott finished these words they
reached the house, and Belinda went to
her own room to read lady Delacour's
letter. It contained none of her customary
‘éloquence du billet,’ no sprightly
wit, no real, no affected gayety; her
mind seemed to be exhausted by bodily
suffering, and her high spirit subdued.
She expressed the most poignant anguish
for having indulged such unjust suspicions
and intemperate passions. She lamented
having forfeited the esteem and affection
of the only real friend she had ever possessed
—a friend of whose forbearance,
tenderness, and fidelity, she had received
such indisputable proofs. She concluded
by saying, “I feel my end fast approaching; 
and perhaps, Belinda, your humanity
will induce you to grant my last request,
and to let me see you once more before
I die.”

Belinda immediately decided to return
to lady Delacour—though it was with
real regret that she thought of leaving
lady Anne Percival, and the amiable
and happy family to whom she had become
so much attached. The children
crowded round her when they heard that
she was going, and Mr. Vincent stood
in silent sorrow—but we spare our readers
this parting scene. Miss Portman promised
to return to Oakly-park as soon as
she possibly could. Mr. Vincent anxiously
requested permission to follow her
to town: but this she positively refused; 
and he submitted with as good a grace as
a lover can submit to any thing that
crosses his passion.