

Lady Clonbrony was taken ill the
day after her gala; she had caught cold
by standing, when much overheated, in a
violent draught of wind, paying her parting
compliments to the duke of V&wblank;,
who thought her a bore, and wished her
in Heaven all the time, for keeping his
horses standing. Her ladyship's illness
was severe and long; she was confined
to her room for some weeks by a rheumatic
fever, and an inflammation in her
eyes. Every day, when lord Colambre
went to see his mother, he found miss
Nugent in her apartment, and every hour
he found fresh reason to admire this
charming girl. The affectionate tenderness,
the indefatigable patience, the
strong attachment she showed for her
aunt, actually raised lady Clonbrony in

her son's opinion. He was persuaded
she must surely have some good or great
qualities, or she could not have excited
such strong affection. A few foibles out
of the question, such as her love of fine
people, her affectation of being English,
and other affectations too tedious to mention,
lady Clonbrony was really a good
woman, had good principles, moral and
religious, and, selfishness not immediately
interfering, she was good natured; 
and, though her soul and attention were
so completely absorbed in the duties of
acquaintanceship, that she did not know
it, she really had affections—they were
concentrated upon a few near relations.
She was extremely fond, and extremely
proud, of her son. Next to her son, she
was fonder of her niece, than of any other
creature. She had received Grace Nugent
into her family when she was left an
orphan, and deserted by some of her
other relations. She had bred her up, and
had treated her with constant kindness.
This kindness and these obligations had

raised the warmest gratitude in miss Nugent's
heart; and it was the strong principle
of gratitude, which rendered her capable
of endurance and exertions seemingly
far above her strength. This
young lady was not of a robust appearance,
though she now underwent extraordinary
fatigue. Her aunt could
scarcely bear, that she should leave her
for a moment: she could not close her
eyes, unless Grace sat up with her many
hours every night. Night after night,
she bore this fatigue; and yet, with little
sleep or rest, she preserved her health, at
least supported her spirits; and every
morning, when lord Colambre came into
his mother's room, he saw miss Nugent
look as blooming, as if she had enjoyed
the most refreshing sleep. The bloom
was, as he observed, not permanent; it
came and went, with every emotion of
her feeling heart; and he soon learned to
fancy her almost as handsome, when she
was pale, as when she had a colour. He
had thought her beautiful, when he beheld

her in all the radiance of light, and
with all the advantages of dress at the
gala, but he found her infinitely more
lovely and interesting now, when he saw
her in a sick room—a half-darkened
chamber—where often he could but just
discern her form, or distinguish her, except
by her graceful motion as she passed,
or when, but for a moment, a window
curtain drawn aside let the sun shine
upon her face, or on the unadorned ringlets
of her hair.
Much must be allowed for an inflammation
in the eyes, and something for a
rheumatic fever; yet it may seem strange,
that lady Clonbrony should be so blind
and deaf, as neither to see nor hear all
this time; that, having lived so long in
the world, it should never occur to her,
that it was rather imprudent to have a
young lady, not eighteen, nursing her— 
and such a young lady!—when her son,
not one and twenty—and such a son!— 
came to visit her daily. But, so it was.
Lady Clonbrony knew nothing of love—

She had read of it, indeed, in novels,
which sometimes, for fashion's sake, she
had looked at, and over which she had
been obliged to doze; but this was only
love in books—love in real life she had
never met with—in the life she led, how
should she? She had heard of it's making
young people, and old people even,
do foolish things; but those were foolish
people; and, if they were worse than
foolish, why it was shocking, and nobody
visited them. But lady Clonbrony
had not, for her own part, the slightest
notion, how people could be brought to
this pass, nor how any body out of Bedlam
could prefer, to a good house, a decent
equipage, and a proper establishment,
what is called love in a cottage. As to
Colambre, she had too good an opinion
of his understanding—to say nothing of
his duty to his family, his pride, his
rank, and his being her son—to let such
an idea cross her imagination. As to her
niece; in the first place, she was her
niece, and first cousins should never

marry, because they form no new connexions
to strengthen the family interest,
or raise it's consequence. This doctrine
her ladyship had repeated, for years, so
often and so dogmatically, that she conceived
it to be incontrovertible, and of
as full force as any law of the land, or
as any moral or religious obligation. She
would as soon have suspected her niece
of an intention of stealing her diamond
necklace, as of purloining Colambre's
heart, or marrying this heir of the house
of Clonbrony.
Miss Nugent was so well apprised,
and so thoroughly convinced of all this,
that she never, for one moment, allowed
herself to think of lord Colambre as a
lover. Duty, honour, and gratitude— 
gratitude, the strong feeling and principle
of her mind—forbade it; she had
so prepared and habituated herself to
consider him as a person, with whom she
could not possibly be united, that, with
perfect ease and simplicity, she behaved
towards him exactly as if he was her

brother—Not in the equivocating sentimental
romance style, in which ladies
talk of treating men as their brothers,
whom they are all the time secretly thinking
of and endeavouring to please as
lovers—Not using this phrase as a convenient
pretence, a safe mode of securing
herself from suspicion or scandal, and of
enjoying the advantages of confidence
and the intimacy of friendship, till the
propitious moment, when it should be
time to declare or avow the secret of the
heart. No!—This young lady was quite
above all double dealing; she had no
mental reservation—no metaphysical
subtleties—but, with plain, unsophisticated
morality, in good faith, and simple
truth, acted as she professed, thought
what she said, and was that which she
seemed to be.
As soon as lady Clonbrony was able
to see any body, her niece sent to Mrs.
Broadhurst, who was very intimate with
the family; she used to come frequently,
almost every evening, to sit with the invalide.

Miss Broadhurst accompanied her
mother, for she did not like to go out
with any other chaperon—it was disagreeable
to spend her time alone at
home, and most agreeable to spend it
with her friend miss Nugent. In this
she had no design, no coquetry; miss
Broadhurst had too lofty and independent
a spirit to stoop to coquetry: she
thought, that, in their interview at the
gala, she understood lord Colambre, and
that he understood her—that he was
not inclined to court her for her fortune
—that she would not be content with
any suitor, who was not a lover. She
was two or three years older than lord
Colambre, perfectly aware of her want
of beauty, yet with a just sense of her
own merit, and of what was becoming
and due to the dignity of her sex. This,
she trusted, was visible in her manners,
and established in lord Colambre's mind:
so that she ran no risk of being misunderstood
by him; and as to what the
rest of the world thought, she was so

well used to hear weekly and daily reports
of her going to be married to fifty
different people, that she cared little for
what was said on this subject. Indeed,
conscious of rectitude, and with an utter
contempt for mean and common- 
place gossiping, she was, for a woman,
and a young woman, rather too disdainful
of the opinion of the world. Mrs.
Broadhurst, though her daughter had
fully explained herself respecting lord
Colambre, before she began this course
of visiting, yet rejoiced, that, even on
this footing, there should be constant intercourse
between them. It was Mrs.
Broadhurst's warmest wish, that her
daughter should obtain rank, and connect
herself with an ancient family: she
was sensible, that the young lady's being
older than the gentleman might be an
obstacle; and very sorry she was to find,
that her daughter had so imprudently, so
unnecessarily, declared her age: but still
this little obstacle might be overcome; 
much greater difficulties, in the marriage

of inferior heiresses, were every day got
over, and thought nothing of. Then, as
to the young lady's own sentiments, her
mother knew them better than she did
herself: she understood her daughter's
pride, that she dreaded to be made an
object of bargain and sale; but Mrs.
Broadhurst, who, with all her coarseness
of mind, had rather a better notion
of love matters than lady Clonbrony,
perceived, through her daughter's horrour
of being offered to lord Colambre,
through her anxiety, that nothing approaching
to an advance on the part of
her family should be made, that, if lord
Colambre should himself advance, he
would stand a better chance of being accepted,
than any other of the numerous
persons, who had yet aspired to the favour
of this heiress. The very circumstance
of his having paid no court to her
at first, operated in his favour; for it
proved that he was not mercenary, and
that, whatever attention he might afterwards

show, she must be sure would be
sincere and disinterested.
“And now, let them but see one another
in this easy, intimate kind of way; 
and you will find, my dear lady Clonbrony,
things will go on of their own
accord, all the better for our—minding
our cards—and never minding any thing
else.—I remember, when I was young
—but let that pass—let the young people
see one another, and manage their
own affairs their own way—let them be
together—that's all I say. Ask half the
men you are acquainted with why they
married, and their answer, if they speak
truth, will be—‘Because I met miss
such-a-one at such a place, and we were
continually together’—Propinquity!— 
Propinquity!—as my father used to say
—And he was married five times, and
twice to heiresses”— 
In consequence of this plan of leaving
things to themselves, every evening lady
Clonbrony made out her own little cardtable

with Mrs. Broadhurst, and a Mr.
and miss Pratt, a brother and sister, who
were the most obliging, convenient
neighbours imaginable. From time to
time, as lady Clonbrony gathered up her
cards, she would direct an inquiring
glance to the group of young people at
the other table; whilst the more prudent
Mrs. Broadhurst sat plump with her back
to them, pursing up her lips, and contracting
her brows, in token of deep calculation,
looking down impenetrable at
her cards, never even noticing lady Clonbrony's
glances, but inquiring, from her
partner, “How many they were by honours?”
The young party generally consisted
of miss Broadhurst, lord Colambre, miss
Nugent, and her admirer, Mr. Salisbury.
Mr. Salisbury was a middle-aged gentleman,
very agreeable, and well informed; 
he had travelled; had seen a great deal
of the world; had lived in the best company; 
had acquired what is called good
tact; was full of anecdote, not mere gossiping

anecdotes, that lead to nothing,
but anecdotes characteristic of national
manners, of human nature in general,
or of those illustrious individuals, who
excite public curiosity and interest. Miss
Nugent had seen him always in large
companies, where he was admired for
his sçavoir-vivre, and for his entertaining
anecdotes, but where he had no opportunity
of producing any of the higher
powers of his understanding, or showing
character. She found, that Mr. Salisbury
appeared to her quite a different
person, when conversing with lord Colambre.
Lord Colambre, with that ardent
thirst for knowledge, which it is always
agreeable to gratify, had an air of
openness and generosity, a frankness, a
warmth of manner, which, with good
breeding, but with something beyond it
and superior to it's established forms, irresistibly
won the confidence and attracted
the affection of those, with whom he
conversed. His manners were peculiarly
agreeable to a person like Mr. Salisbury,

tired of the sameness and egotism of men
of the world.
Miss Nugent had seldom, till now,
had the advantage of hearing much conversation
on literary subjects. In the
life she had been compelled to lead, she
had acquired accomplishments, had exercised
her understanding upon every
thing, that passed before her, and, from
circumstances, had formed her judgment
and her taste by observations on real life; 
but the ample page of knowledge had
never been unrolled to her eyes. She
had never had opportunities of acquiring
literature herself, but she admired it in
others, particularly in her friend, miss
Broadhurst. Miss Broadhurst had received
all the advantages of education,
which money could procure, and had
profited by them in a manner uncommon
among those, for whom they are purchased
in such abundance: she not only
had had many masters, and read many
books, but had thought of what she
read, and had supplied, by the strength

and energy of her own mind, what cannot
be acquired by the assistance of masters.
Miss Nugent, perhaps, overvaluing the
information, that she did not possess, and
free from all idea of envy, looked up to
her friend, as to a superior being, with a
sort of enthusiastic admiration; and now,
with “charmed attention,” listened, by
turns, to her, to Mr. Salisbury, and to
lord Colambre, whilst they conversed on
literary subjects—listened, with a countenance
so full of intelligence, of animation
so expressive of every good and kind
affection, that the gentlemen did not always
know what they were saying.
“Pray go on,” said she, once to Mr.
Salisbury—“You stop, perhaps, from
politeness to me—from compassion to
my ignorance; but, though I am ignorant,
you do not tire me, I assure you.
Did you ever condescend to read the
Arabian tales?—Like him, whose eyes
were touched by the magical application
from the dervise, I am enabled at once to
see the riches of a new world—O! how

unlike, how superior to that, in which I
have lived!—the GREAT world, as it is
called.”
Lord Colambre brought down a beautiful
edition of the Arabian tales, looked
for the story, to which miss Nugent had
alluded, and showed it to miss Broadhurst,
who was also searching for it in
another volume.
Lady Clonbrony, from her card table,
saw the young people thus engaged— 
“I profess not to understand these things
so well as you say you do, my dear Mrs.
Broadhurst,” whispered she, “But look
there now; they are at their books!— 
What do you expect can come of that
sort of thing?—So ill bred, and downright
rude of Colambre, I must give him
a hint.”
“No, no, for mercy's sake! my dear
lady Clonbrony, no hints, no hints, no
remarks!—What would you have?—she
reading, and my lord at the back of her
chair, leaning over—and allowed, mind,
to lean over to read the same thing—

Can't be better!—Never saw any man
yet allowed to come so near her!— 
Now, lady Clonbrony, not a word, not a
look, I beseech—” 
“Well, well!—But if they had a little
music—” 
“My daughter's tired of music. How
much do I owe your ladyship now?— 
three rubbers, I think.—Now, though
you would not believe it, of a young
girl,” continued Mrs. Broadhurst, “I can
assure your ladyship, my daughter would
often rather go to a book than a ball.”
“Well now, that's very extraordinary,
in the style in which she has been brought
up; yet books, and all that, are so fashionable
now, that it's very natural,” 
said lady Clonbrony.
About this time, Mr. Berryl, lord Colambre's
Cambridge friend, for whom his
lordship had fought the battle of the curricle
with Mordicai, came to town. Lord
Colambre introduced him to his mother,
by whom he was graciously received; for
Mr. Berryl was a young gentleman of

good figure, good address, good family,
heir to a good fortune, and in every respect
a fit match for miss Nugent. Lady
Clonbrony thought, that it would be wise
to secure him for her niece before he should
make his appearance in the London world,
where mothers and daughters would soon
make him feel his own consequence. Mr.
Berryl, as lord Colambre's intimate friend,
was admitted to the private evening parties
at lady Clonbrony's, and he contributed
to render them still more agreeable.
His information, his habits of thinking,
and his views, were all totally different
from Mr. Salisbury's; and their collision
continually struck out that sparkling novelty,
which pleases peculiarly in conversation.
Mr. Berryl's education, disposition,
and tastes, fitted him exactly for the
station, which he was destined to fill in society
—that of a country gentleman; not
meaning, by that expression, a mere eating,
drinking, hunting, shooting, ignorant,
country squire, of the old race, which
is now nearly extinct; but a cultivated,

enlightened, independent English country
gentleman—the happiest, perhaps, of human
beings. On the comparative felicity
of the town and country life; on the dignity,
utility, elegance, and interesting
nature of their different occupations, and
general scheme of passing their time; 
Mr. Berryl and Mr. Salisbury had, one
evening, a playful, entertaining, and, perhaps,
instructive conversation; each
party, at the end, remaining, as frequently
happens, of their own opinion. It was
observed, that miss Broadhurst ably and
warmly defended Mr. Berryl's side of the
question; and, in their views, plans, and
estimates of life, there appeared a remarkable,
and, as lord Colambre thought, a
happy coincidence. When she was at
last called upon to give her decisive judgment
between a town and a country life,
she declared, that “if she were condemned
to the extremes of either, she should prefer
a country life, as much as she should
prefer Robinson Crusoe's diary to the
journal of the idle man in the Spectator.”

“Lord bless me!—Mrs. Broadhurst,
do you hear what your daughter is saying?” 
—cried lady Clonbrony, who, from
the card table, lent an attentive ear to all
that was going forward—“Is it possible,
that miss Broadhurst, with her fortune,
and pretensions, and sense, can really be
serious in saying she would be content to
live in the country?”
“What's that you say, child, about
living in the country?” said Mrs. Broadhurst.
Miss Broadhurst repeated what she
had said.
“Girls always think so, who have
lived in town,” said Mrs. Broadhurst— 
“They are always dreaming of sheep
and sheephooks; but the first winter
the country cures them; a shepherdess,
in winter, is a sad and sorry sort
of personage, except at a masquerade.”
“Colambre,” said lady Clonbrony, “I
am sure miss Broadhurst's sentiments
about town life, and all that, must delight

you—For do you know, ma'am,
he is always trying to persuade me to give
up living in town?—Colambre and miss
Broadhurst perfectly agree.”
“Mind your cards, my dear lady
Clonbrony,” interrupted Mrs. Broadhurst,
“in pity to your partner—Mr. Pratt
has certainly the patience of Job—Your
ladyship has revoked twice this hand.”
Lady Clonbrony begged a thousand
pardons, fixed her eyes, and endeavoured
to fix her mind, on the cards; but there
was something said at the other end of
the room, about an estate in Cambridgeshire,
which soon distracted her attention
again. Mr. Pratt certainly had the patience
of Job. She revoked, and lost the
game, though they had four by honours.
As soon as she rose from the card
table, and could speak to Mrs. Broadhurst
apart, she communicated her apprehensions— 
“Seriously, my dear madam,” said she,
“I believe I have done very wrong to

admit Mr. Berryl just now, though it
was on Grace's account I did it—But,
ma'am, I did not know miss Broadhurst
had an estate in Cambridgeshire; their
two estates just close to one another, I
heard them say—Lord bless me, ma'am!
there's the danger of propinquity indeed.
“No danger, no danger,” persisted
Mrs. Broadhurst. “I know my girl
better than you do, begging your ladyship's
pardon—No one thinks less of
estates than she does.”
“Well, I only know I heard her talking
of them, and earnestly, too.”
“Yes, very likely—But don't you
know, that girls never think of what they
are talking about, or rather never talk of
what they are thinking about? And
they have always ten times more to say
to the man they don't care for, than to
him they do.”
“Very extraordinary!” said lady Clonbrony
—“I only hope you are right.”
“I am sure of it,” said Mrs. Broadhurst
—“Only let things go on, and

mind your cards, I beseech you, to morrow
night, better than you did to night; 
and you will see, that things will turn out
just as I prophesied. Lord Colambre
will come to a point-blank proposal before
the end of the week, and will be accepted,
or my name's not Broadhurst.
Why, in plain English, I am clear my
girl likes him; and, when that's the case,
you know, can you doubt how the thing
will end?”
Mrs. Broadhurst was perfectly right in
every point of her reasoning but one.
From long habit of seeing and considering,
that such an heiress as her daughter
might marry whom she pleased; from
constantly seeing, that she was the person
to decide and to reject; Mrs. Broadhurst
had literally taken it for granted,
that every thing was to depend upon her
daughter's inclinations: she was not mistaken,
in the present case, in opining,
that the young lady would not be averse
to lord Colambre, if he came to what
she called a point-blank proposal. It

really never occurred to Mrs. Broadhurst,
that any man, whom her daughter
was the least inclined to favour, could
think of any body else. Quick-sighted
in these affairs, as the matron thought
herself, she saw but one side of the question; 
blind and dull of comprehension
as she thought lady Clonbrony on this
subject, she was herself so completely
blinded by her own prejudice, as to be
incapable of discerning the plain thing,
that was before her eyes; videlicet, that
lord Colambre preferred Grace Nugent.
Lord Colambre made no proposal before
the end of the week; but this Mrs.
Broadhurst attributed to an unexpected
occurrence, which prevented things from
going on in the train, in which they had
been proceeding so smoothly. Sir John
Berryl, Mr. Berryl's father, was suddenly
seized with a dangerous illness. The
news was brought to Mr. Berryl one
evening, whilst he was at lady Clonbrony's.
The circumstances of domestic
distress, which afterwards occurred in the

family of his friend, entirely occupied
lord Colambre's time and attention. All
thoughts of love were suspended, and his
whole mind was given up to the active
services of friendship. The sudden illness
of sir John Berryl spread an alarm
among his creditors, which brought to
light, at once, the disorder of his affairs,
of which his son had no knowledge or
suspicion. Lady Berryl had been a very
expensive woman, especially in equipages; 
and Mordicai, the coachmaker,
appeared at this time the foremost and
the most inexorable of their creditors.
Conscious, that the charges in his account
were exorbitant, and that they
would not be allowed, if examined by
a court of justice; that it was a debt,
which only ignorance and extravagance
could have in the first instance incurred,
swelled afterwards to an amazing amount
by interest, and interest upon interest; 
Mordicai was impatient to obtain payment
whilst sir John yet lived, or at least
to obtain legal security for the whole

sum from the heir. Mr. Berryl offered
his bond for the amount of the reasonable
charges in his account; but this
Mordicai absolutely refused, declaring,
that, now he had the power in his own
hands, he would use it to obtain the utmost
penny of his debt; that he would
not let the thing slip through his fingers; 
that a debtor never yet escaped him, and
never should; that a man's lying upon
his death-bed was no excuse to a creditor; 
that he was not a whiffler, to stand upon
ceremony about disturbing a gentleman
in his last moments; that he was not to
be cheated out of his due by such niceties; 
that he was prepared to go all
lengths the law would allow; for that, as
to what people said of him, he did not
care a doit—“Cover your face with
your hands, if you like it, Mr. Berryl; 
you may be ashamed for me, but I feel
no shame for myself—I am not so
weak.” Mordecai's countenance said
more than his words; livid with malice,
and with atrocious determination in his

eyes, he stood—“Yes, sir,” said he,
“you may look at me as you please—it
is possible—I am in earnest. Consult
what you'll do now, behind my back or
before my face, it comes to the same
thing;—for nothing will do but my
money or your bond, Mr. Berryl—The
arrest is made on the person of your father,
luckily made while the breath is
still in the body—Yes—start forward
to strike me, if you dare—Your
father, sir John Berryl, sick or well, is
my prisoner.”
Lady Berryl and Mr. Berryl's sisters,
in an agony of grief, rushed into the
room.
“It's all useless,” cried Mordicai,
turning his back upon the ladies—“These
tricks upon creditors won't do with me; 
I'm used to these scenes; I'm not made
of such stuff as you think—Leave a
gentleman in peace in his last moments
—No! he ought not, nor shan't die in
peace, if he don't pay his debts; and, if
you are all so mighty sorry, ladies, there's

the gentleman you may kneel to; if tenderness
is the order of the day, it's for
the son to show it, not me. Ay, now,
Mr. Berryl,” cried he, as Mr. Berryl
took up the bond to sign it—“you're
beginning to know I'm not a fool, to be
trifled with. Stop your hand, if you
choose it, sir; it's all the same to me; 
the person, or the money, I'll carry with
me out of this house.”
Mr. Berryl signed the bond, and threw
it to him.
“There, monster!—quit the house!”
“Monster is not actionable—I wish
you had called me rascal,” said Mordicai,
grinning a horrible smile; and, taking
up the bond deliberately, returned it
to Mr. Berryl—“This paper is worth
nothing to me, sir—it is not witnessed.”
Mr. Berryl hastily left the room, and
returned with lord Colambre. Mordicai
changed countenance and grew pale, for
a moment, at sight of lord Colambre.
“Well, my lord, since it so happens,

I am not sorry, that you should be witness
to this paper,” said he; “and indeed
not sorry, that you should witness
the whole proceeding; for I trust I shall
be able to explain to you my conduct.”
“I do not come here, sir,” interrupted
lord Colambre, “to listen to any explanations
of your conduct, which I perfectly
understand;—I come to witness a
bond for my friend Mr. Berryl, if you
think proper to extort from him such a
bond.”
“I extort nothing, my lord. Mr.
Berryl, it is quite a voluntary act, take
notice, on your part; sign or not, witness
or not, as you please, gentlemen,” 
said Mordicai, sticking his hands in his
pockets, and recovering his look of black
and fixed determination.
“Witness it, witness it, my dear lord,” 
said Mr. Berryl, looking at his mother
and weeping sisters—“Witness it,
quick!”
“Mr. Berryl must just run over his
name again in your presence, my lord,

with a dry pen,” said Mordicai, putting
the pen into Mr. Berryl's hand.
“No, sir,” said lord Colambre—“my
friend shall never sign it.”
“As you please, my lord—The bond
or the body, before I quit this house,” 
said Mordicai.
“Neither, sir, shall you have; and you
quit this house directly.”
“How! how!—my lord, how's this?”
“Sir, the arrest you have made is as
illegal as it is inhuman.”
“Illegal, my lord!” said Mordicai,
startled.
“Illegal, sir. I came into this house
at the moment when your bailiff asked,
and was refused admittance. Afterwards,
in the confusion of the family
above stairs, he forced open the house
door with an iron bar—I saw him—I
am ready to give evidence of the fact.
Now proceed at your peril—” 
Mordicai, without reply, snatched up
his hat, and walked towards the door; 
but lord Colambre held the door open—

the door was immediately at the head of
the stairs—and Mordicai, seeing his
indignant look and proud form, hesitated
to pass; for he had always heard,
that Irishmen are “quick in the executive
part of justice.”
“Pass on, sir,” repeated lord Colambre,
with an air of ineffable contempt:
“I am a gentleman—you have
nothing to fear.”
Mordicai ran down stairs; lord Colambre,
before he went back into the
room, waited to see Mordicai and his
bailiff out of the house. When Mordicai
was fairly at the bottom of the
stairs, he turned, and, white with rage,
looked up at lord Colambre.
“Charity begins at home, my lord,” 
said he. “Look at home—You shall
pay for this,” added he, standing half- 
shielded by the house door; for lord
Colambre moved forward as he spoke the
last words—“And I give you this warning,
because I know it will be of no use
to you—Your most obedient, my lord.”

The house door closed after Mordicai.
“Thank Heaven!” thought lord Colambre,
“that I did not horsewhip that
mean wretch!—This warning shall be
of use to me—But it is not time to think
of that yet.”
Lord Colambre turned from his own
affairs to those of his friend, to offer all
the assistance and consolation in his
power.—Sir John Berryl died that night.
His daughters, who had lived in the
highest style in London, were left totally
unprovided for. His widow had
mortgaged her jointure. Mr. Berryl had
an estate now left to him, but without
any income. He could not be so dishonest,
as to refuse to pay his father's just
debts; he could not let his mother and
sisters starve. The scene of distress, to
which lord Colambre was witness in this
family, made a still greater impression
upon him, than had been made by the
warning or the threats of Mordicai. The
similarity between the circumstances of

his friend's family and of his own struck
him forcibly.
All this evil had arisen from lady Berryl's
passion for living in London, and at
watering places. She had made her husband
an ABSENTEE—an absentee from
his home, his affairs, his duties, and his
estate. The sea, the Irish channel, did
not, indeed, flow between him and his
estate; but it was of little importance
whether the separation was effected by
land or water—the consequences, the
negligence, the extravagance, were the
same.
Of the few people of his age, who
are capable of profiting by the experience
of others, lord Colambre was one— 
“Experience,” as an elegant writer has
observed, “is an article, that may be
borrowed with safety, and is often dearly
bought.”