

Letter from Alfred to his Father.
“My Dear Father,
“I send you two pamphlets
on the causes of the late changes in
the ministry, one by a friend, the other by
an enemy of Lord Oldborough's. Temple
I should have thought the author of
the first, but that I know he has not
time to write, and that there does not
appear any of that behind the scene knowledge,
which his situation affords.—All
the pamphleteers and newspaper politicians
write as if they knew the whole—some
confident that ministry split on one
question—some on another; long declamations
and abuse follow as usual on
each side, but WISE people, and of

course myself among that number, suspect,
“that all that we know is, that we
know nothing.”—That there was some
private intrigue in the cabinet, which
has not yet transpired, I opine from
Temple's reserve, whenever I have mentioned
the subject. This morning, when
I asked him to frank these pamphlets,
he laughed, and said, that I was sending
coals to Newcastle—what this meant he
refused to explain, or rather he attempted
to explain it away by observing, that
people of good understanding often
could judge better at a distance of what
was passing in the political world, than
those who were close to the scene of action,
and subject to hear the contradictory
reports of the day—therefore, he
conceived that I might be sending materials
for thinking to one, who could
judge better than I can.—I tormented
Temple for a quarter of an hour with a
cross-examination so able, that it was
really a pity to waste it out of the courts,
but I could get nothing more from him.

Is it possible, my dear father, that you
are at the bottom of all this?
“Lord Oldborough certainly told me
the other day, and, in a very significant
manner, and, as I now recollect, fixing
his inquiring eye upon me, as he said
the words—‘that he not only felt esteem
and regard for Mr. Percy, but gratitude—gratitude
for tried friendship.’—I
took it at the time as a general expression
of kindness, now I recollect the
look, and the pause after the word gratitude,
I put this with Temple's coals to
Newcastle.—But, if it is a secret, I
must not inquire, and if it is not, you
will tell it to me.—So I shall go on to
my own affairs.—
“The other day I was surprised by a
visit at my chambers from an East-India
director.—Lord Oldborough, I find,
recommended it to him to employ me in
a very important cause, long pending,
for a vast sum of money. The whole,
with all it's accumulated and accumulating
interest, depending on a point of

law.—Heaven send me special sense, or
special nonsense sufficient to avoid a
nonsuit.—Of which there have been already
no less than three in this cause.
“What do you think of Lord Oldborough's
kindness? This is only one of
many instances, in which I have traced
his desire to serve me. It is not common
with politicians, thus to recollect those,
who have no means of serving them, and
who have never reminded them even of
their existence by attendance at levees,
or by paying court in any way actively
or passively.—
“The Falconers are all discontented
with his Lordship at this moment, because
he has disposed of a sinecure place,
on which the Commissioner had long had
his eye.—His Lordship has given it to
an old disabled sea-captain, whom he
knew only by reputation.—
The accounts you have heard of Buckhurst's
marriage are, alas! too true; and
what you have been told of the lady's age
and ugliness is not exaggerated.—As to

her temper and her avarice, I am afraid
that what you have heard of them is also
true; for a brother lawyer of mine, who
was employed to draw the settlements,
says, she has taken care to keep every
penny she could in her own power; 
and that in the whole course of his practice
he never saw so hard a battle between
love and parsimony.—Poor Buckhurst!
who could have foreseen that this
would be his fate! I met him in the
street yesterday with his bride, and he
looked as if he would rather be hanged,
than receive my congratulations; I
passed without seeming to have seen
them.
“I have just received Mr. Barclay's
letter, and am going to work upon his
settlements.—So Caroline's wishes for Lady
Mary Pembroke will be accomplished.—I
asked Temple, whether Lord Oldborough
had heard any thing of Count Altenberg
since his return to his own country.—Yes,—one
private letter to Lord
Oldborough—from which nothing had

transpired but one line of general thanks
for civilities received in England.—Temple,
who seems to have formed the same
notion, and the same wishes, that we had,
told me yesterday, without my questioning
him, that Lord Oldborough had written
with his own hand an answer to the
Count, which none of the secretaries
have seen. Temple, in sealing up the
packet, ventured to ask, whether there
was any chance of seeing Count Altenberg
again in England,— “None that he
knew”—Lord Oldborough answered.—Temple,
who of all men is least like
Commissioner Falconer in circumlocutory
address, at once blurted out, “Is
Count Altenberg going to be married?”—Lord
Oldborough turned and looked
upon him with surprise, ... whether
surprise at his curiosity, or at the improbability
of the Count's making his Lordship
the confident of his love affairs,
Temple declares he was in too much confusion
to be able to decide.—Lord Oldborough
made no reply, but took up an

answer to a memorial, which he had ordered
Temple to draw, pointed out some
unlucky mistakes in it, and finished
by saying to him, ‘Mr. Temple, your
thoughts are not in your business. Sir,
I do believe you are in love,’ which sentence
Temple declares his Lordship pronounced
with a look and accent, that
would have suited—
“Sir, I do believe you have the plague.—And
if so, do me the justice to let me
employ Mr. Shaw to do your business, till
you are married.'
“Temple says, that Lord Oldborough
is proud of showing himself a foe to love,
which he considers as the bane of ambition,
and as one of the weaknesses of
human nature, to which a great man
ought to be superior.
“Whether the secretary be right or
wrong in this opinion of his Lordship, I
have not seen enough to be able to determine; 
and I suspect, that Temple is
not at present a perfectly calm observer.

—Ever since his visit to the country, he
seems not to be entirely master of himself:
his heart is still hovering round
about some absent object. What object
I do not know, for though he does not
deny my charge, he will not tell me the
name of his fair one. I suspect Lady
Frances Arlington of having stolen his
heart. I am very sorry for it—for I am
clear she is only coquetting with him.
Temple says, that he is too poor to
marry. He is so amiable, that I am
sure he will make any woman he marries
happy, if it be not her own fault,
and if they have but enough to live
upon. It grieves me to hear his unavailing
daily regrets for having quitted
the bar. Had he continued in his original
profession, he might, and in all probability
would have been at this moment
as his competitor, a man much his inferior
in talent, actually is, in the receipt of
£4000 good pounds per annum, independent
of all men—and might have
married any woman in any rank.—Besides

even with such a patron as Lord
Oldborough, what would he do with any
other? Temple feels dependance grievous
to his spirit.—He is of a very good
family, and was not early used to a subservient
situation. His health too will
be hurt by his close confinement to the
business of office—and he has no time
for indulging his literary tastes—no play
for his genius—That was his original
grievance at the bar, but his present
occupations are less congenial to his
taste than law ever was.—His brother
secretary, Mr. Shaw, is a mere matter of
fact man, who is particularly unsuited
to him,—an objector to every thing new,
a curtailer and contemner of all eloquence—poor
Temple is uneasy and discontented,
he would give up his situation
to morrow, but that he cannot quit Lord
Oldborough—He says, that he has a
hundred times resolved to resign, that he
has had his letter written, and the words
on his lips, but he never could, when it
came to the point, present the letter, or

pronounce the words to Lord Oldborough.
Wonderful the ascendency this man has
over the mind!—Extraordinary his power
of attaching, with manners so little conciliatory!—Adieu,
my dear Father, I
have indulged myself too long in writing
to you—But I will work double tides for
it the rest of the morning. I have to
read over the late Mr. Panton's will, and
to give our friend Mr. Gresham, an
opinion upon it—Notwithstanding Rosamond's
cruelty to him, he is as much
our friend, and her friend, as ever—Panton's
will is on ten skins of parchment; 
and then I have a plea in rejoinder to
draw for Lady Jane Granville, and, worse
than all, to read and answer four of her
Ladyship's notes now on my table—By
the by, I would rather carry on a
suit for any four men, than for one such
woman of business as poor Lady Jane—She
is never at rest one moment; never
can believe, that either lawyer or solicitor
knows what he is about—Always
thinks her letters and notes can do more

than bills in chancery, or than the Lord
Chancellor himself. She frets incessantly.
I must request Erasmus to medicine
her to repose; she has absolutely a
law fever—Erasmus is at Richmond—sent
for by some grandee—He is in high
practice—he told me he began last week
to write to Rosamond, from the bedside
of some sleeping patient, a full and true
answer to all her questions about Miss
Panton—Constance I should say—But
the sleeper awakened, and the Doctor
had never time to finish his story—
Adieu—for I must finish—Love to all.
Dear Father, Yours affectionately,
ALFRED PERCY.”—
“Just as I began the second skin of
Panton's will, a note was brought to me
from ... whom do you think? Lord
Oldborough, requesting to see me at four
o'clock.—What can his Lordship want
with me?—I must send this frank before
I can satisfy my own curiosity on this
point—or yours, Rosamond.”—

After finishing the perusal of Mr.
Panton's long-winded will, writing an
opinion upon it for Mr. Gresham, and
penning a quieting note for poor Lady
Jane Granville, Alfred, eager to be punctual
to the appointed hour, went to the
minister. He need not have looked at
his watch so often, or have walked so
fast, for when he arrived, it wanted five
minutes of the time appointed, and his
Lordship had not returned from a visit to
the Duke of Greenwich. Alfred was told
however, that orders had been given for
his admittance; and he was shown into
an apartment, where he had leisure during
a full quarter of an hour to admire
his own punctuality. At last he heard
a noise of loud huzzas in the street, and
looking out of the window, he saw a
crowd at the farthest end of the street,
and as it moved nearer, perceived that
the populace had taken the horses from
Lord Oldborough's carriage, and were
drawing him to his own door, with loud
acclamations.—His Lordship bowed to

the multitude as he got out of his carriage
rather proudly and coldly, yet still
the crowd threw up their hats and huzzaed.
He apologized to Alfred, as he
entered the room, for having been later
than his appointment. Commissioner
Falconer and Mr. Temple were with
him, and the Commissioner immediately
began to tell how they had been delayed
by the zeal of the people. Lord Old-borough
took a paper from his pocket,
and walked to the window to read it,
without seeming to hear one word that
the Commissioner was saying, and without
paying any attention to the acclamations
of the multitude below, which were
again repeated on their seeing him at the
window. When his Lordship had finished
looking over the paper, he called upon
Alfred to witness it, and then presenting
it to Mr. Falconer, he said, in his haughtiest
manner— “An equivalent, Sir,
for that sinecure place which you asked
for, and which it was out of my power
to obtain for you. That was given as

the just reward of merit, and of public
services. My private debts”...
Alfred Percy observed, that his Lordship
did not use the word, obligation.
“My private debts to your family,
Mr. Falconer, could not be paid from
the public fund with which I am intrusted; 
but you will not, I hope, find me
the less desirous, that they should be properly
acknowledged. The annuity,” 
continued he, putting his finger on the
amount, which the Commissioner longed
to see, but at which he had not dared yet
to look— “the annuity is to the full
amount of that place, which, I think you
assured me, would satisfy your and Mrs.
Falconer's expectations.”
“Oh, my Lord, more than satisfy ...
but from your Lordship's private fortune,
from your Lordship's own emoluments
of office, I cannot possibly think ...
Mrs. Falconer would, I am sure, be excessively
distressed...”
“Do me the favor, Sir, to let no more

be said upon this subject,”—interrupted
Lord Oldborough.— “As you return
home, will you speak to those poor people,
whom I still hear in the street, and
advise them now to return peaceably
to their homes. My man Rodney, I am
afraid, has thought it for my honor, to be
too liberal to these good people—But
you will speak to them, Commissioner.”
The Commissioner, who never completely
felt Lord Oldborough's character,
imagined that at this moment his Lordship
secretly enjoyed the clamor of popular
applause, and that this cold indifference
was affected—Mr. Falconer
therefore protested with a smile, “that
he would do his best to calm the enthusiasm
of the people, but that it was
a hard, if not impossible task, to stem
the tide of Lord Oldborough's popularity—Enjoy
your popularity, my Lord!” 
concluded Mr. Falconer— “Enjoy it!—No
minister in my memory ever was so
popular!”—
As soon as the Commissioner, after

saying these words, had left the room,
Lord Oldborough, in a tone of sovereign
contempt, repeated the word,
“Popularity!—There goes a man
now, who thinks me fit to be a fool to
popularity!”—
“Popularity,” said Mr. Temple, “is
a bad master, but a good servant. A
great man will,” as Burke says, “disdain
to veer like the weathercook on the
temple of fashion with every breath of
popularity—But may he not, my Lord,
... say, for you know? ... May he
not wisely take advantage of the gale,
and direct this great power, so as to
work the state machinery to good purpose?”
“A dangerous power,”—replied Lord
Oldborough, turning from his secretary
to Alfred, as if he was impatient to
speak of business—Temple, who had
more the habits of a man of letters, than
of a man of business, or of a courtier,
was apt unseasonably to pursue a discussion,
and to pique himself upon showing

sincerity by declaring a difference of
opinion from his patron. Utterly repugnant
as this was to the minister's habits
and temper, yet in admiration of the
boldness of the man, and in consideration
for his true attachment, Lord Oldborough
bore it with magnanimous patience—when
he had time—and, when he had
not, would cut it short at once.
“In a mixed government, popularity,
philosophically speaking, if I may presume
to differ from your Lordship,” ...
Temple began,
“Permit me, Sir, first,” interrupted
Lord Oldborough, “to settle my business
with Mr. Alfred Percy, who being
a professional man, and in high practice,
probably sets a just value upon his
time.”
Mr. Temple, who was a man of quick
feelings, felt a word or glance of reproof
from Lord Oldborough with keen sensibility.
Alfred could not fix his attention
upon what his Lordship was now beginning
to say. Lord Oldborough saw reflected

in Alfred's countenance the disturbance
in his friend's: and immediately
returning, and putting a key into
his hand,
“You will do me a serivce, Sir,” said
he, “by looking over my father's papers
marked private in red letters.—They may
be necessary in this business—They are
papers, which I could trust only to one
who has my interests at heart.”
Temple's face brightened instantly,
and bowing much lower than usual, he
received the key with great respect, and
hurried away to search for the papers.
“For a similar reason, Mr. Alfred
Percy,” said Lord Oldborough, “they
shall, if you please, be put into your
hands.”—His Lordship moved a chair
towards Alfred, and seated himself. “My
law agent has not satisfied me of late.
A suit, into which I have been plunged
by those who had the direction of my
business, has not been carried on with
ability or vigour. I had not leisure to
look into any affairs that merely concerned

myself. Circumstances have just
wakened me to the subject, and to the
perception, that my private fortune has
suffered, and will suffer yet more materially,
unless I am fortunate enough to
find united in the same person a lawyer
and a friend. I have looked round, and
see many older barristers than Mr. Alfred
Percy, but none so likely to be interested
in my affairs as the son of my
earliest friend, and few more capable of
conducting them with diligence and ability.
May I hope, Sir, for hereditary
kindness from you, as well as for professional
services?”
No one knew better than Lord Oldborough
how to seem receiving, whilst he
conferred a favor; and if ever he appeared
harsh, it was only where he knew,
that the people to whom he spoke had
not feelings worthy of his consideration.—His
Lordship was as much pleased by
the manner in which this trust was accepted,
as our young lawyer could be
by the manner in which it was offered.

“My papers then shall be sent to
you directly,” said Lord Oldborough.— “Look
over them, and if you are of
opinion, that my case is a bad one, I will
stop where I am.—If, on the contrary,
you find that justice and law are on my
side, proceed, persist.—I shall trust the
whole to you, Sir, without a further
question.”
Lord Oldborough next spoke of a
steward of his at Clermont-Park, who,
as he had reason to suspect, was leagued
with a certain attorney, Sharpe, in fraudulent
designs; his Lordship hoped, that
Mr. Alfred Percy, during his vacations,
when spent in that neighbourhood,
might, consistently with his professional
duties, find time to see into these affairs,
and, in his Lordship's absence, might
supply the want of the master's eye.
Alfred assured his Lordship, that no
effort or care should be wanting on his
part, to justify the high confidence with
which he was honored.
“Since you are going to take charge

of my business, Sir,” pursued Lord Oldborough,
“it is fit you should know my
views relative to my affairs.—In my present
situation, with the favor I enjoy,
and the opportunities I command, it
would be easy to make my fortune
whatever I pleased. Avarice is not my
passion.—It is my pride not to increase
the burdens of my country.—Mine is a
generous country, ever ready to reward
her public servants, living or dying.—But,
whilst I live, never will I speculate
upon her generosity, and, when I die,
never shall my heirs appeal to her compassion,
My power at it's zenith, and
my character being known, I can afford
to lay aside much of that adventitious
splendor, which adds nothing to true
dignity. Economy and dignity are compatible—essential
to each other. To
preserve independence, and, consequently,
integrity, economy is necessary in
all stations. Therefore, Sir, I determine
... for I am not stringing sentences together,
that are to end in nothing, I determine,

at this moment, to begin to
make retrenchments in my expenditure.
The establishment at Clermont-Park,
whither I have no thoughts of returning,
may be reduced. I commit that, Sir,
to your discretion.”
Mr. Temple returned with the papers,
on which Lord Oldborough put his seal,
and said his solicitor should, with all
others that were necessary, deliver them
the next morning to Mr. Percy.—Alfred,
careful never to intrude a moment on
the time of the minister, rose, and, without
repeating his thanks, made his bow.
“I consider this law-suit as a fortunate
circumstance,” said Lord Oldborough,
“since it affords me means at
last of engaging Mr. Alfred Percy in
my service, in a mode which cannot,” 
added his Lordship, smiling, “interfere
with his family horror of ministerial patronage.”
Alfred said something respectfully expressive
of his sense of the professional
advantage he must derive from being

employed by Lord Oldborough—a species
of patronage, by which he felt himself
most highly honored, and for which
he was sure his whole family would feel
properly grateful.
“Sir,” said Lord Oldborough, following
him to the door, “if I had ever
doubted it, you would convince me that
perfect propriety of manner is consistent
with independence of mind.—As to the
rest, we all know the difference between
a client and a patron.”—
Bows—and not a word more.—
The management of Lord Oldborough's
business necessarily led to an
increase of intercourse between his Lordship
and Alfred, which was peculiarly
agreeable to our young barrister, not
only as it gave him opportunities of seeing
more of the character of this minister,
but as it put it into his power to be
of service occasionally to his friend Mr.
Temple. Chained to a desk, his genius
confined to the forms of office, and with
a master too high, and an associate too

low, to afford him any of the pleasures
of society, he had languished for want of
a companion.—A few minutes at a time
of Alfred's conversation was a delightful
cordial to him, and restored the vivacity
and energy of his mind. Alfred encouraged
him by example to submit to the
drudgery of business, showed him, that a
man of letters may become a man of
business, and that the habits of both may
be rendered compatible. When Temple
recurred to his regret for having abandoned
the certain resource of a profession,
and envied Alfred his independence,
Alfred still pointed out to him, that
his literary talents might yet ransom
him from slavery, and ensure him fame
and fortune. Temple now performed
the duties of his office with all that regularity,
which is supposed to be peculiar
to dullness. In the intervals of business,
in that leisure which order afforded
him, he employed and concentrated his
powers on a political question of considerable
importance, and when he was

completely master of the subject, he rose
in the House of Commons, and made a
speech, which, from all parties, obtained
deserved applause. The speech was
published.—A few days afterwards, Mr.
Temple happened to be earlier than the
usual hour of levee, and, on entering
Lord Oldborough's cabinet, he found his
Lordship reading, and reading with so
much attention, that he did not observe
him—he heard his Lordship's quick and
decided pencil mark page after page.
At length, rising and turning to throw
the book on the table, Lord Oldborough
saw Mr. Temple copying a letter.
“An excellent speech to the purpose,
Sir,”—said Lord Oldborough.— “It had
it's effect on the house, I understand,
and I thank your friend, Mr. Alfred
Percy, for putting it into my hands at
a moment when I could read it.”—
Lord Oldborough thought for some
moments, then looked over some official
papers, which he had ordered Mr. Temple
to draw up.—

“Very well, Sir—Very well.—A man
of genius, I see, can become a man of
business.”—
His Lordship signed the papers, and,
when that was finished, turned again to
Mr. Temple.
“Sir, some time ago a place was vacant,
which, I know, you had reason to
expect.—It was given to Mr. Shaw, because
it was better suited to him than
to you.—The manner in which you took
your disappointment showed a confidence
in my justice.—Have you any
objection, Mr. Temple, to the diplomatic
line?”
“I fear ... or I should say, I hope, my
Lord, that I have not the habits of dissimulation,
which, as I have always understood,
are necessary to success in the
diplomatic line.”
“You have understood wrongly, Sir,”—replied
Lord Oldborough.— “I, who
have seen something of courts, and know
something of diplomacy, am of opinion,
that a man of sense, who knows what he

is about, who says the thing that is, who
will tell at once what he can do, and
what he cannot, would succeed better
as a negociator in the present state of
Europe, than could any diplomatist with
all the simulation and dissimulation of
Chesterfield, or with the tact of Mazarin.”
“Indeed! my Lord!”—said Mr. Temple,
looking up with an air of surprise
that almost expressed,
“Then, why did you choose Cunningham
Falconer for an Envoy?”
“Pray!” said Lord Oldborough, taking
a long inspiration with a pinch of
snuff, “pray! with that despatch this
morning from Mr. Cunningham Falconer
were there any private letters?”
“One for Commissioner Falconer,
my Lord.”
“None from Count Altenberg to
me?”
“None, my Lord.”
The minister took a walk up and
down the room, and then returning to

Mr. Temple, said— “His Majesty
thinks proper, Sir, to appoint you Envoy
in the place of Mr. Cunningham
Falconer, who is recalled.”
“I thank you, my Lord—his Majesty
does me great honor,” cried Mr.
Temple, with sudden gratitude—then, his
countenance and tone instantly changing
from joy to sorrow, he added, “His
Majesty does me great honor, my Lord,
but. ...”
“But not great pleasure it seems,
Sir,” said Lord Oldborough.— “I
thought, Mr. Temple, you had trusted
to me the advancement of your fortune.”
“My fortune!—My Lord, I am
struck with surprise and gratitude by
your Lordship's goodness in taking
thought for the advancement of my fortune.—But
I have other feelings ...”
“And may I ask, what is the nature
of your other feelings, Sir?”
“My Lord—excuse me ... I cannot
tell them to you.”

“One word more, Sir.—Do you hesitate,
from any motives of delicacy, with
respect to the present Envoy?”
“No, my Lord, you look too high
for my motive ... and the higher I am
sensible that I stand in your Lordship's
opinion, the greater is my fear of falling.—I
beg you will excuse me, the offer
that your Lordship has had the goodness
to make would be the height of my ambition—but
when opposing motives draw
the will in contrary directions. ...”
“Sir, if you are going into the bottomless
pit of metaphysics, excuse me,” 
said Lord Oldborough.— “there I must
leave you.—I protest, Sir, you are
past my comprehension.”
“And past my own,” cried Mr. Temple,
“for,” with effort and emphasis, he
uttered the words, “I am ... in love.”
“I think,” said Lord Oldborough,
coolly, “I told you so, Sir, more than
a month ago.”
“I have said it! and said it to Lord
Oldborough!”—exclaimed Mr Temple,

looking, as one uncertain whether he
were dreaming, or awake.
“It is undoubtedly uncommon to select
a minister of state for the confident
of a love affair,” said Lord Oldborough,
with an air of some repressed humor.
“I knew I should expose myself to
your Lordship's derision,” exclaimed
Mr. Temple.—
He was too much engrossed by his
own feelings, as he pronounced these
words, to observe in his Lordship's countenance,
an extraordinary emotion.—It
was visible but for one instant.
With a look more placid, and a tone
somewhat below his usual voice, Lord
Oldborough said, “You have misjudged
me much, Mr. Temple, if you have conceived,
that your feelings, that such feelings,
would be matter of derision to me.
But since you have touched upon this
subject, let me give you one hint—Ambition
wears better than Love.”
Lord Oldborough sat down to write,
and added, “one fortnight, during this

recess, I can spare you, Mr. Temple—Mr.
Shaw will undertake your part of
the business of office. At the end of the
ensuing fortnight, I trust you will let
me have your answer.”
Full of gratitude, Mr. Temple could
express it only by a bow—and retired—The
antichamber was now filling
fast for the levee—there was no possibility,
the secretary saw, of making his
way through it, no possibility of his
thoughts escaping, for a moment, to his
own affairs.
One person after another stopped him; 
all had some pressing business, or some
business which they thought of consequence,
either to the nation or themselves.
“Mr. Temple, I must trouble you to
look over these heads of a bill.”
“Mr. Temple! ... My memorial ...
just give me your advice ...”
“Sir ... I wrote a letter, three weeks
ago, to Lord Oldborough, on the herring

fishery, to which I have not had
the honor of an answer.”
“Mr. Temple ... the address from
Nottingham ... Where's the reply?”
“Mr. Temple, may I know whether
his Lordship means to see us gentlemen
from the City about the loan?”
“Sir—Pray, Sir! ... My new invention
for rifling cannon—Ordnance department!—Sir,
I did apply—War Office
too, Sir!—It's very hard I can't get
an answer—bandied about!—Sir, I can't
think myself well used ... Government
shall hear more.”
“One word, Mr. Temple, if you
please, about tithes ... I've an idea ...”
“Temple, don't forget the Littleford
turnpike bill—”
“Mr. Temple, who is to second the
motion on Indian affairs?”
“Temple, my good friend, did you
speak to Lord Oldborough about my
little affair for Tom?”
“Mr. Temple, a word in your ear—the

member for the borough, you know,
is dead; letters must be written directly
to the corporation.”
“Temple, my dear friend, before you
go, give me a frank.”
“A very full levee, Mr. Temple!—I'll
just make my bow and retire”—said
an idle gentleman.
Mr. Temple wished that he could do
the same. Levee over at last—and never
did levee appear so long. Mr. Temple
got away from memorialists, petitioners,
grievances, men of business,
idle men, newsmen, and dear friends,
then hastened to Alfred to unburden his
mind—and to rest his exhausted spirits.