


DEAR KNIGHT,
ONCE more I tread upon English ground,
which I like not the worse for the six week's ramble
I have made among the woods and mountains
of Caledonia; no offence to the land of cakes,
where bannocks grow upon straw. I never saw my
uncle in such health and spirits and he now enjoys. 
Liddy is perfectly recovered; and Mrs. Tabitha
has no reason to complain. Nevertheless, I believe,
she was, till yesterday, inclined to give the
whole Scotch nation to the devil, as a pack of insensible
brutes, upon whom her accomplishments
had been displayed in vain. —At every place where
we halted, did she mount the stage, and flourished
her rusty arms, without being able to make one
conquest. One of her last essays was against the
heart of sir George Calquhoun, with whom she
fought all the weapons more than twice over.  — 
She was grave and gay by turns—she moralized
and methodized—she laughed, and romped, and
danced, and sung, and sighed, and ogled, and
lisped, and stuttered, and flattered—but all was
preaching to the desart —The baronet, being a
well-bred man, carried his civilities as far as she
could in conscience expect, and, if evil tongues
are to be believed, some degrees farther; but he was
too much a veteran in gallantry, as well as in war,
to fall into any ambuscade that she could lay for 

his affection. —While we were absent in the Highlands,
she practised also upon the laird of Ladrishmore,
and even gave him the rendezvous in the
wood of Drumscailloch; but the laird had such a
reverend care of his own reputation, that he came
attended with the parson of the parish, and nothing
passed but spiritual communication. —After
all these miscarriages, our aunt suddenly recollected
lieutenant Lismahago. whom, ever since our
first arrival at Edinburgh, she seemed to have utterly
forgot; but now she expressed her hopes of
seeing him at Dumfries, according to his promise. 
We set out from Glasgow by the way of Lanerk,
the country-town of Clydesdale, in the neighbourhood
of which, the whole river Clyde, rushing
down a steep rock, forms a very noble and stupendous
cascade. Next day we were obliged to halt
in a small borough, until the carriage, which had
received some damage, should be repaired; and
here we met with an incident which warmly interested
the benevolent spirit of Mr. Bramble. — 
As we stood at the window of an inn that fronted
the public prison, a person arrived on horseback,
genteely, tho' plainly, dressed in a blue frock,
with his own hair cut short, and a gold-laced hat
upon his head. —Alighting, and giving his horse
to the landlord, he advanced to an old man who
was at work in paving the street, and accosted him
in these words: “This is hard work for such an
old man as you.” —So saying, he took the instrument
out of his hand, and began to thump
the pavement. —After a few strokes, “Have you
never a son (said he) to ease you of this labour?” 
“Yes, an please your honour, (replied the senior)
I have three hopeful lads, but, at present,
they are out of the way.” “Honour
not me (cried the stranger); it more becomes
me to honour your grey hair. —Where are 

those sons you talk of?” The ancient paviour
said, his eldest son was a captain in the East-Indies; 
and the youngest had lately inlisted as a soldier; 
in hopes of prospering like his brother. The
gentleman desiring to know what was become of
the second, he wiped his eyes, and owned, he had
taken upon him his old father's debts, for which
he was now in the prison hard by. 
The traveller made three quick steps towards the
gaol, then turning short, “Tell me, (said he) has
that unnatural captain sent you nothing to relive
your distresses?” “Call him not unnatural
(replied the the other); God's blessing be upon
him! he sent me a great deal of money; 
but I made a bad use of it; I lost it by being
security for a gentleman that was my landlord,
and was stript of all I had in the world besides.” 
At that instant a young man, thrusting
out his head and neck between two iron bars in
the prison window, exclaimed, “Father! father!
if my brother William is in life, that's he!” 
I am!—I am!—(cried the stranger, clasping the
old man in his arms, and shedding a flood of
tears)—I am your son Willy, sure enough! 
Before the father, who was quite confounded,
could make any return to this tenderness, a decent
old woman bolting out from the door of a
poor habitation, cried, “Where is my bairn?
where is my dear Willy?” —The captain no
sooner beheld her, than he quitted his father, and
ran into her embrace. 
I can assure you, my uncle, who saw and heard
every thing that passed, was as much moved as
any one of the parties concerned in this pathetic
recognition. —He sobbed, and wept, and clapped
his hands, and hollowed, and finally ran down
into the street. By this time, the captain had retired
with his parents, and all the inhabitants of 

the place were assembled at the door. —Mr. Bramble,
nevertheless, pressed thro' the crowd, and entering
the house, “Captain (said he) I beg the
favour of your acquaintance —I would have
travelled a hundred miles to see this affecting
scene; and I shall think myself happy, if you
and your parents will dine with me at the public
house.” The captain thanked him for his
kind invitation, which, he said, he would accept
with pleasure; but, in the mean time, he could
not think of eating or drinking, while his poor
brother was in trouble. —He forthwith deposited
a sum equal to the debt in the hands of the magistrate,
who ventured to set his brother at liberty
without farther process; and then the whole
family repaired to the inn with my uncle, attended
by the crowd, the individuals of which shook
their townsman by the hand, while he returned
their caresses without the least sign of pride or affectation. 
This honest favourite of fortune, whose name
was Brown, told my uncle, that he had been bred
a weaver, and, about eighteen years ago, had
from a spirit of idleness and dissipation, enlisted
as a soldier in the service of the East-India company; 
that, in the course of duty, he had the
good fortune to attract the notice and approbation
of lord Clive, who preferred him from one step to
another, till he attained the rank of captain and
pay-master to the regiment, in which capacities
he had honestly amassed above twelve thousand
pounds, and, at the peace, resigned his commission. 
—He had sent several remittances to his father,
who received the first only, consisting of one
hundred pounds; the second had fallen into the
hands of a bankrupt; and the third had been consigned
to a gentleman of Scotland, who died before
it arrived; so that it still remained to be accounted 

for by his executors. He now presented the old
man with fifty pounds for his present occasions,
over and above bank notes for one hundred, which
he had deposited for his brother's release. —He
brought along with him a deed ready executed,
by which he settled a perpetuity of four-score
pounds upon his parents, to be inherited by their
other two sons after their decease. —He promised
to purchase a commission for his youngest brother; 
to take the other as his own partner in a
manufacture which he intended to set up, to give
employment and bread to the industrious; and to
give five hundred pounds, by way of dower, to
his sister, who had married a farmer in low circumstances. 
—Finally, he gave fifty pounds to the
poor of the town where he was born, and feasted
all the inhabitants without exception. 
My uncle was so charmed with the character
of captain Brown, that he drank his health three
times successively at dinner. —He said, he was
proud of his acquaintance; that he was an honour
to his country, and had in some measure redeemed
human nature from the reproach of pride,
selfishness, and ingratitude. —For my part, I was
as much pleased with the modesty as with the
filial virtue of this honest soldier, who assumed no
merit from his success, and said very little of his
own transactions, though the answers he made to
our inquiries were equally sensible and laconic. 
Mrs. Tabitha behaved very graciously to him untill
she understood that he was going to make a
tender of his hand to a person of low estate, who
had been his sweet-heart while he worked as a
journeyman weaver. —Our aunt was no sooner
made acquainted with this design, than she starched
up her behaviour with a double proportion of
reserve; and when the company broke up, she
observed, with a toss of her nose, that Brown was 

a civil fellow enough, considering the lowness of
his origin; but that Fortune, though she had
mended his circumstances, was incapable to raise
his ideas, which were still humble and plebeian. 
On the day that succeeded this adventure, we
went some miles out of our road to see Drumlanrig,
a seat belonging to the duke of Queensbury,
which appears like a magnificent palace erected
by magic, in the midst of a wilderness. —It is indeed
a princely mansion, with suitable parks and
plantations, rendered still more striking by the
nakedness of the surrounding country, which is one
of the wildest tracts in all Scotland. —This wildness,
however, is different from that of the Highlands; 
for here the mountains, instead of heath, are
covered with a fine green sward, affording pasture
to innumerable flocks of sheep. But the fleeces of
this country, called Nithsdale, are not comparable
to the wool of Galloway, which is said to equal
that of Salisbury plain. Having passed the night at
the castle of Drumlanrig, by invitation from the
duke himself, who is one of the best men that
ever breathed, we prosecuted our journey to Dumfries,
a very elegant trading town near the borders
of England, where we found plenty of good provision
and excellent wine, at very reasonable prices,
and the accommodation as good in all respects as
in any part of South-Britain. —If I was confined
to Scotland for life, I would choose Dumfries as
the place of my residence. Here we made enquiries
about captain Lismahago, of whom hearing
no tidings, we proceeded, by the Solway Frith,
to Carlisle. You must know, that the Solway
sands, upon which travellers pass at low water, are
exceedingly dangerous, because, as the tide makes,
they become quick in different places, and the 

flood rushes in so impetuously, that passengers are
often overtaken by the sea, and perish. 
In crossing these treacherous Syrtes with a guide
we perceived a drowned horse, which Humphry
Clinker, after due inspection, declared to be the
very identical beast which Mr. Lismahago rode
when he parted with us at Felton-bridge in Northumberland. 
This information, which seemed
to intimate that our friend the lieutenant had
shared the fate of his horse, affected us all, and
above all our aunt Tabitha, who shed salt tears,
and obliged Clinker to pull a few hairs out of the
dead horse's tail, to be worn in a ring as a remembrance
of his master: but her grief and ours was not
of long duration; for one of the first persons we saw
in Carlisle, was the lieutenant in propria persona,
bargaining with a horse-dealer for another steed, in
the yard of the inn where we alighted. —Mrs.
Bramble was the first that perceived him, and
screamed as if she had seen a ghost; and truly, at
a proper time and place, he might very well have
passed for an inhabitant of another world; for he
was more meagre and grim than before. —We
received him the more cordially for having supposed
he hath been drowned; and he was not deficient
in expressions of satisfaction at this meeting. — 
He told us, he had enquired for us at Dumfries,
and been informed by a travelling merchant from
Glascow, that we had resolved to return by the
way of Coldstream. —He said, that, in passing the
sands without a guide, his horse had knocked up; 
and he himself must have perished, if he had not
been providentially relieved by a returned post-chaise. —He moreover gave us to understand, that
his scheme of settling in his own country having
miscarried, he was so far on his way to London,
with a view to embark for North-America; where
he intended to pass the rest of his days among his 

old friends the Miamis, and amuse himself in
finishing the education of the son he had by his
beloved Squinkinacoosta. 
This project was by no means agreeable to our
good aunt, who expatiated upon the fatigues and
dangers that would attend such a long voyage by
sea, and afterwards such a tedious journey by land 
—She enlarged particularly on the risque he would
run with respect to the concerns of his precious
soul, among savages who had not yet received the
glad tidings of salvation; and she hinted that his
abandoning Great-Britain might, perhaps, prove
fatal to the inclinations of some deserving person,
whom he was qualified to make happy for life. 
My uncle, who is really a Don Quixote in generosity,
understanding that Lismahago's real reason
for leaving Scotland was the impossibility of subsisting
in it with any decency upon the wretched
provision of a subaltern's half-pay, began to be
warmly interested on the side of compassion —He
thought it very hard, that a gentleman, who had
served his country with honour, should be driven
by necessity to spend his old age, among the refuse
of mankind, in such a remote part of the
world. He discoursed with me upon the subject; 
observing, that he would willingly offer the lieutenant
an asylum at brambleton-hall, if he did not
foresee that his singularities and humour of contradiction
would render him an intolerable housemate,
though his conversation at some time
might be both instructive and entertaining: but
as there seemed to be something particular in his
attention to Mrs. Thabitha, he and I agreed in
opinion, that this intercourse should be encouraged,
and improved, if possible, into a matrimonial
union; in which case there would be a comfortable
provision for both; and they might be
settled in a house of their own, so that Mrs. 

Bramble should have no more of their company
than he desired. 
In pursuance of this design, Lismahago has
been invited to pass the winter at Brambleton-hall,
as it will be time enough to execute his American
project in the spring. —He has taken time to
consider of this proposal; mean while, he will
keep us company as far as we travel in the road
to Bristol, where he has hopes of getting a passage
for America. I make no doubt but that he will
postpone his voyage, and prosecute his addresses
to a happy consummation; and sure, if it produces
any fruit, it must be of a very peculiar
flavour. As the weather continues favourable,
I believe, we shall take the Peak of Derbyshire
and Buxton Wells in our way. —At any rate,
from the first place where we make any stay, you
shall hear again from 
Yours always,
J. Melford. 
Carlisle, Sept. 12. 