


Mrs. Pickle assumes the reins of government in her
own family; her sister-in-law undertakes an
enterprize of great moment; but is for some time
diverted from her purpose, by a very interesting
consideration. 
Whatever deference, not to say submission,
she had paid to Mrs. Grizzle before
she was so nearly allied to her family, she no
sooner became Mrs. Pickle, than she thought it
incumbent upon her to act up to the dignity of
the character; and the very day after the marriage,
ventured to dispute with her sister in-law
on the subject of her own pedigree, which she
affirmed to be more honourable in all respects than
that of her husband; observing that several
younger brothers of her house had arrived at the
station of lord mayor of London, which was the
highest pitch of greatness that any of Mr. Pickle's
predecessors had ever attained. 
This presumption was like a thunderbolt to
Mrs. Grizzle, who began to perceive that she
had not succeeded quite so well as she imagined,
in selecting for her brother a gentle and obedient
yoke-fellow, who would always treat her with
that profound respect which she thought due to
her superior genius, and be entirely regulated by
her advice and direction: however, she still continued 

to manage the reins of government in the
house, reprehending the servants as usual; an office
she performed with great capacity, and in
which she seemed to take singular delight, until
Mrs. Pickle, on pretence of consulting her ease,
told her one day she would take that trouble upon
herself, and for the future assume the management
of her own family. Nothing could be more
mortifying to Mrs. Grizzle than such a declaration,
to which, after a considerable pause, and
strange distortion of look, she replied, “I shall
never refuse or repine at any trouble that may
conduce to my brother's advantage.” “Dear
madam,” answered the sister, “I am infinitely
obliged to your kind concern for Mr. Pickle's
interest, which I consider as my own, but I cannot
bear to see you a sufferer by your friendship; 
and therefore, insist upon exempting you from
the fatigue you have borne so long.” 
In vain did the other protest that she took
pleasure in the task; Mrs. Pickle ascribed the assurance
to her excess of complaisance, and expressed
such tenderness of zeal for her dear sister's
health and tranquillity, that the reluctant maiden
found herself obliged to resign her authority,
without enjoying the least pretext for complaining
of her being deposed. 
This disgrace was attended by a fit of peevish
devotion that lasted three or four weeks; during
which period, she had the additional chagreen of
seeing the young lady gain an absolute ascendency
over the mind of her brother, who was persuaded
to set up a gay equipage, and improve his housekeeping,
by an augmentation in his expence, to
the amount of a thousand a year at least: tho'
this alteration in the oeconomy of his houshold, 

effected no change in his own disposition, or manner
of life; for, soon as the painful ceremony of
receiving and returning visits was performed, he
had recourse again to the company of his sea-friends,
with whom he spent the best part of his
time. But, if he was satisfied with his condition,
the case was otherwise with Mrs. Grizzle, who
finding her importance in the family greatly diminished,
her attractions neglected by all the
male-sex in the neighbourhood, and the withering
hand of time hang threatning over her head, began
to feel the horror of eternal virginity, and in
a sort of desperation, resolved at any rate to
rescue herself from that reproachful and uncomfortable
situation. Thus determined, she formed
a plan, the execution of which, to a spirit less
enterprizing and sufficient than her's, would have
appeared altogether impracticable; this was no
other than to make a conquest of the commodore's
heart, which the reader will easily believe
was not very susceptible of tender impressions; 
but, on the contrary, fortified with insensibility
and prejudice against the charms of the whole
sex, and particularly prepossessed to the prejudice
of that class distinguished by the appellation of
old maids, in which Mrs. Grizzle was, by this
time, unhappily ranked. She nevertheless took
the field, and having invested this seemingly impregnable
fortress, began to break ground one
day, when Trunnion dined at her brother's, by
springing certain ensnaring commendations on
the honesty and sincerity of sea-faring people,
paying a particular attention to his plate, and affecting
a simper of approbation at every thing he
said which by any means she could construe into
a joke, or with modesty be supposed to hear: 

nay, even when he left decency on the left hand,
(which was often the case) she ventured to reprimand
his freedom of speech with a gracious
grin, saying, “Sure you gentlemen belonging
to the sea have such an odd way with you.” 
But, all this complacency was so ineffectual, that,
far from suspecting the true cause of it, the commodore,
that very evening, at the club, in presence
of her brother, with whom, by this time,
he could take any manner of freedom, did not
scruple to damn her for a squinting, block-faced,
chattering piss-kitchen; and immediately after
drank despair to all old maids; a toast which
Mr. Pickle pledged without the least hesitation,
and next day intimated to his sister, who bore
the indignity with surprising resignation, and did
not therefore desist from her scheme, unpromising
as it seemed to be, until her attention was called
off, and engaged in another care, which, for
some time, interrupted the progress of this design. 
Her sister had not been married many
months, when she exhibited evident symptoms
of pregnancy, to the general satisfaction of all
concerned, and the inexpressible joy of Mrs.
Grizzle, who (as we have already hinted) was
more interested in the preservation of the family-name,
than in any other consideration whatever. 
She therefore no sooner discovered appearances
to justify and confirm her hopes, than postponing
her own purpose, and laying aside that
pique and resentment she had conceived from the
behaviour of Mrs. Pickle, when she superseded
her authority; or perhaps, considering her in no
other light than that of the vehicle which contained,
and was destined to convey her brother's
heir to light, she determined to exert her uttermost 

most in nursing, tending, and cherishing her,
during the term of her important charge. With
this view she purchased Culpepper's midwifery,
which, with that sagacious performance dignified
with Aristotle's name, she studied with indefatigable
care, and diligently perused the Compleat
House-wife, together with Quincy's dispensatory,
culling every jelly, marmalade and conserve
which these authors recommend as either salutary
or toothsome, for the benefit and comfort of her
sister-in-law, during her gestation. She restricted
her from eating roots, pot-herbs, fruit, and all
sort of vegetables; and one day when Mrs. Pickle
had plucked a peach with her own hand, and
was in the very act of putting it between her
teeth, Mrs. Grizzle perceived the rash attempt,
and running up to her, fell upon her knees in
the garden, intreating her, with tears in her
eyes, to resist such a pernicious appetite. Her
request was no sooner complied with, than recollecting
that if her sister's longing was baulked,
the child might be affected with some disagreeable
mark, or deplorable disease, she begged as earnestly
that she would swallow the fruit, and in
the mean time ran for some cordial water of her
own composing, which she forced upon her sister,
as an antidote to the poison she had received. 
This excessive zeal and tenderness did not fail
to be very troublesome to Mrs. Pickle, who
having revolved divers plans for the recovery of
her own ease, at length determined to engage
Mrs. Grizzle in such employment as would interrupt
that close attendance which she found so
teizing and disagreeable. Neither did she wait
long for an opportunity of putting her resolution
in practice. The very next day, a gentleman 

happening to dine with Mr. Pickle, unfortunately
mentioned a pine-apple, part of which he
had eaten a week before at the house of a nobleman
who lived in another part of the country,
at the distance of an hundred miles at least. 
The name of this fatal fruit was no sooner
pronounced, than Mrs. Grizzle, who incessantly
watched her sister's looks, took the alarm, because
she thought they gave certain indications
of curiosity and desire; and after having observed
that she herself never could eat pine-apples,
which were altogether unnatural productions, extorted
by the force of artificial fire, out of filthy
manure, asked with a faultering voice, if Mrs.
Pickle was not of her way of thinking? This
young lady, who wanted neither slyness nor penetration,
at once divined her meaning, and replied
with seeming unconcern, that for her own
part she should never repine, if there was not a
pine-apple in the universe, provided she could
indulge herself with the fruits of her own country. 
This answer, which was calculated for the benefit
of the stranger, who would certainly have
suffered for his imprudence by the resentment of
Mrs. Grizzle, had her sister expressed the least
relish for the fruit in question: I say, this answer
had the desired effect, and re-established the
peace of the company, which was not a little
endangered by the gentleman's want of consideration. 
Next morning, however, after breakfast,
the pregnant lady, in pursuance of her plan,
yawned (as it were by accident) full in the face
of her maiden sister, who being infinitely disturbed
by this convulsion, affirmed it was a symptom
of longing; and insisted upon knowing the 

object in desire, when Mrs. Pickle affecting an
affected smile, told her she had eaten a most delicious
pine-apple in her sleep. This declaration
was attended with an immediate scream uttered
by Mrs. Grizzle, who instantly perceiving
her sister surprized at the exclamation, clasped
her in her arms, and assured her, with a sort of
hysterical laugh, importing horror rather than delight,
that she could not help screaming with joy,
because she had it in her power to gratify her
dear sister's wish; a lady in the neighbourhood
having promised to send her, in a present, a couple
of fine pine-apples, which she would that very
day go in quest of. 
Mrs. Pickle would by no means consent to
this proposal, on pretence of sparing the other
unnecessary fatigue; and assured her, that, if she
had any desire to eat a pine-apple, it was so faint,
that the disappointment could produce no bad
consequence. But this assurance was conveyed
in a manner (which she knew very well how to
adopt) that instead of dissuading, rather stimulated
Mrs. Grizzle to set out immediately, not
on a visit to that lady, whose promise she herself
had feigned with a view of consulting her sister's
tranquillity, but on a random search thro' the
whole county for this unlucky fruit, which was
like to produce so much vexation and prejudice to
her and her father's house. 
During three whole days and nights, did she,
attended by a valet, ride from place to place
without success, unmindful of her health, and
careless of her reputation, that began to suffer
from the nature of her inquiry, which was pursued
with such peculiar eagerness and distraction,
that every body with whom she conversed, looked 

upon her as an unhappy person, whose intellects
were not a little disordered. 
Baffled in all her researches within the county,
she at length resolved to visit that very nobleman,
at whose house the officious stranger had been
(for her) so unfortunately regaled, and actually
arrived in a post-chaise at the place of his habitation,
where she introduced her business as an affair
on which the happiness of a whole family
depended. But, alas! she had come too late; 
his lordship lamented, in very polite and pathetic
terms, that he was disabled from exerting his humanity,
and enjoying the pleasure he should feel
in contributing to the happiness of his fellow-creatures,
at such an easy rate; telling her, that
he had unluckily, the very day before, sent the
two last pine-apples his garden had produced, in
a present to a certain lady in the neighbourhood. 
Mrs. Grizzle was so affected with this explanation,
that she fainted away, and was immediately
carried to the public house, where she had left
her horses, and where she remained inconsolable
for the disappointment, which in all likelihood
would have proved more fatal to her than to the
person for whom she was so piously concerned,
had not she in the evening, by the medium of
her own servant, received a hint from the nobleman's
gardener, that for five pieces she should
be furnished with a couple of as fine apples as
ever were seen in England. The terms (I scarce
need say) were greedily embraced, the fruit secured
in her possession; and she departed that
very night on her return to her brother's house,
where she safely arrived with her acquisition, and
was most cordially received by her sister, who
had been under some apprehensions on her account. 

Neither was his lordship forgotten in
Mrs. Grizzle's benediction, when she understood
from the valet who accompanied her, that he
had, with his own eyes, seen above an hundred
pine-apples ripe for cutting in his garden the
evening of that very day on which he had assured
her that there was not one left. 