


Dear Lewis,
THE deceitful calm was of short duration. I
am plunged again in a sea of vexation, and the
complaints in my stomach and bowels are returned; 
so that I suppose I shall be disabled from prosecuting
the excursion I had planned—What the
devil had I to do, to come a plague hunting with a
leash of females in my train? Yesterday my precious
sister (who by the bye, has been for some
time a professed Methodist) came into my apartment,
attended by Mr. Barton, and desired an audience
with a very stately air—“Brother (said she)
this gentleman has something to propose, which
I flatter my self, will be the more acceptable, as
it will rid you of a troublesome companion.” 

Then Mr. Barton proceeded to this effect—“I am,
indeed, extremely ambitious of being allied to
your family, Mr. Bramble, and I hope you will
see no cause to interpose your authority.” “As
for authority (said Tabby, interrupting him with
some warmth) I know of none that he has a
right to use on this occasion—If I pay him the
compliment of making him acquainted with the
step I intend to take, it is all he can expect in
reason—This is as much as I believe he would
do by me, if he intended to change his own situation
in life—In a word, brother, I am so sensible
of Mr. Barton's extraordinary merit, that I have
been prevailed upon to alter my resolution of
living a single life, and to put my happiness in
his hands, by vesting him with a legal title to
my person and fortune, such as they are. The
business at present, is to have the writings drawn; 
and I shall be obliged to you, if you will recommend
a lawyer to me for that purpose.—” 
You may guess what an effect this overture had
upon me, who, from the information of my nephew,
expected that Barton was to make a formal
declaration of his passion for Liddy; I could not
help gazing in silent astonishment, alternately at
Tabby and her supposed admirer, which last hung
his head in the most aukward confusion for a few
minutes, and then retired, on pretence of being
suddenly seized with a vertigo. —Mrs. Tabitha affected
much concern, and would have had him
make use of a bed in the house; but he insisted
upon going home, that he might have recourse to
some drops, which he kept for such emergencies,
and his inamorata acquiesced,—In the mean time
I was exceedingly puzzled at this adventure (tho'
I suspected the truth) and did not know in what
manner to demean myself towards Mrs. Tabitha,
when Jery came in and told me, he had just seen 

Mr. Barton alight from his chariot at lady Griskin's
door. —The incident seemed, to threaten a visit
from her ladyship, with which we were honoured
accordingly in less than half an hour—“I find
(said she) there has been a match of cross purposes
among you, good folks; and I'm come to
set you to rights.” —So saying, she presented me
with the folowling billet: 

“Dear Sir,
I no sooner recollected myself from the extreme
confusion I was thrown into, by that unlucky
mistake of your sister, than I thought it
my duty to assure you, that my devoirs to Mrs.
Bramble never exceeded the bounds of ordinary
civility, and that my heart is unalterably fixed
upon Miss Liddy Melford, as I had the honour
to declare to her brother, when he questioned
me upon that subject. —Lady Griskin has been
so good as to charge herself, not only with the
delivery of this note, but also with the task of
undeceiving Mrs. Bramdle, for whom I have
the most profound respect and veneration, tho'
my affection being otherwise engaged, is no
longer in the power of, Sir, 
“Your very humble Servant,
Ralph Barton.” 
Having cast my eyes over this billet, I told her
ladyship that I would no longer retard the friendly
office she had undertaken; and I and Jery forthwith
retired into another room. There we soon
perceived the conversation grow very warm betwixt
the two ladies; and, at length, could distinctly
hear certain terms of altercation, which we
could no longer delay interrupting, with any regard
to decorum. When we entered the scene of contention,
we found Liddy had joined the disputants, 

and stood trembling betwixt them, as is if she had
been afraid they would have proceeded to something
more practicable than words—Lady Griskin's face
was like the full moon in a storm of wind, glaring,
fiery, and portentous; while Tabby looked grim
and ghastly, with an aspect breathing discord and
dismay. —Our appearance put a stop to their mutual
revilings; but her ladyship turning to me,
“Cousin (said she) I can't help saying I have met
with a very ungrateful return from this lady,
for the pains I have taken to serve her family.—” 
My family is much obliged to your ladyship,
(cried Tabby, with a kind of hysterical giggle)
but we have no right to the good offices of such
an honourable go-between.” “But, for all
that, good Mrs. Tabitha Bramble, (resumed the
other) I shall be content with the reflection, that
virtue is its own reward; and it shall not be my
fault if you continue to make yourself ridiculous
—Mr. Bramble, who has no little interest
of his own to serve, will no doubt, contribute
all in his power to promote a match betwixt Mr.
Barton and his niece, which will be equally honourable
and advantageous; and, I dare say,
Miss Liddy herself will have no objection to a
measure so well calculated to make her happy in
life.” —“I beg your Ladyship's pardon, (exclaimed
Liddy, with great vivacity) I have nothing
but misery to expect from such a measure; 
and I hope my guardians will have too much
compassion, to barter my peace of mind for any
consideration of interest or fortune.” —“Upon
my word, Miss Liddy! (said she) you have
profited by the example of your good aunt—I
comprehend your meaning, and will explain it
when I have a proper opportunity—In the mean
time, I shall take my leave—Madam, your most
obedient, and devoted humble servant,” said she, 

advancing close up to my sister, and curtsying so
low, that I thought she intended to squat herself
down on the floor—This salutation Tabby returned
with equal solemnity; and the expression of the
two faces, while they continued in this attitude,
would be no bad subject for a pencil like that of
the incomparable Hogarth, if any such should ever
appear again, in these times of dullness and degeneracy. 
Jery accompanied her ladyship to her house,
that he might have an opportunity to restore the
etuis to Barton, and advise him to give up his suit,
which was so disagreeable to his sister, against
whom, however, he returned much irritated. — 
Lady Griskn had assured him, that Liddy's heart
was pre-occupied; and immediately the idea of
Wilson recurring to his imagination, his family-pride,
took the alarm—He denounced vengeance
against that adventurer, and was disposed to be very
peremptory with his sister; but I desired he would
suppress his resentment, until I should have talked
with her in private. 
The poor girl, when I earnestly pressed her on
this head, owned, with a flood of tears, that Wilson
had actually come to the Hot Well at Bristol,
and even introduced himself into our lodgings as a
Jew pedler; but that nothing had passed betwixt
them, further than her begging him to withdraw
immediately, if he had any regard for her peace of
mind: that he had disappeared accordingly, after
having attempted to prevail upon my sister's maid
to deliver a letter; which, however, she refused
to receive, though she had consented to carry a
message, importing that he was a gentleman of a
good family, and that in a very little time, he
would avow his passion in that character—She confessed,
that although he had not kept his word in
this particular, he was not yet altogether indifferent 

to her affection; but solemnly promised, she
would never carry on any correspondence with him,
or any other admirer, for the future, without the
privity and approbation of her brother and me. 
By this declaration, she made her own peace with
Jery; but the hot-headed boy is more than ever
incensed against Wilson, whom he now considers
as an impostor, that harbours some infamous design
upon the honour of his family—As for Barton, he
was not a little mortified to find his present returned,
and his addresses so unfavourably received; but
he is not a man to be deeply affected by such disappointments; 
and I know not whether he is not as
well pleased at being discarded by Liddy, as he
would have been with a permission to prosecute his
pretensions, at the risque of being every day exposed
to the revenge or machinations of Tabby,
who is not to be slighted with impunity. —I had
not much time to moralize on these occurrences; 
for the house was visited by a constable and his
gang with a warrant from justice Buzzard, to
search the box of Humphry Clinker, my footman,
who was just apprehended as a highwayman—This
incident threw the whole family into confusion. 
My sister scolded the constable for presuming to
enter the lodgings of a gentleman on such an errand,
without having first asked and obtained permission; 
her maid was frightened into sits, and
Liddy shed tears of compassion for the unfortunate
Clinker, in whose box, however, nothing was
found to confirm the suspicion of robbery 
For my own part, I made no doubt of the fellow's
being mistaken for some other person, and I
went directly to the justice, in order to procure his
discharge; but there I found the matter much more
serious than I expected—Poor Clinker stood
trembling at the bar, surrounded by thief-takers; 
and, at a little distance, a thick, squat fellow, a 

postillion, his accuser, who had seized him in the
street, and swore positively to his person, that the
said Clinker had, on the 15th day of March last,
on Blackheath, robbed a gentleman in a postchaise,
which he (the postillion drove)—This deposition
was sufficient to justify his commitment; and
he was sent accordingly to Clerkenwell prison,
whither Jery accompanied him in the coach, in
order to recommend him properly to the keeper,
that he may want for no convenience which the
place affords. 
The spectators, who assembled to see this highwayman,
were sagacious enough to discern something
very villanous in his aspect, which (begging
their pardon) is the very picture of simplicity; and
the justice himself put a very unfavourable construction
upon some of his answers which, he said,
favoured of the ambiguity and equivocation of an
old offender; but, in my opinion, it would have
been more just and humane to impute them to the
confusion into which we may suppose a poor country
lad to be thrown on such an occasion. I am still
persuaded he is innocent; and in this persuasion,
I can do no less than use my utmost endeavours
that he may not be oppressed—I shall, to-morrow,
send my nephew to wait on the gentleman
who was robbed, and beg he will have the humanity
to go and see the prisoner; that in case he
should find him quite different from the person of
the highwayman, he may bear testimony in his behalf
—Howsoever it may fare with Clinker, this
cursed affair will be to me productive of intolerable
chagrin—I have already caught a dreadful cold,
by rushing into the open air from the justice's parlour,
where I had been stewing in the crowd; and
tho' I should not be laid up with the gout, as I
believe I shall, I must stay at London for some
weeks, till this poor devil comes to his trial at Rochester; 

so that, in all probability, my Northern
expedition is blown up. 
If you can find any thing in your philosophical
budget, to console me in the midst of these distresses
and apprehensions, pray let it be communicated to 
Your unfortunate friend,
Matt. Bramble. 
London, June 12. 