


In which Capt. Crowe is sublimed into
the Regions of Astrology. 
Three whole days had our adventurer
prosecuted his inquiry
about the amiable Aurelia, whom he
sought in every place of public and of
private entertainment, or resort, without
obtaining the least satisfactory intelligence,
when he received one evening,
from the hands of a porter, who
instantly vanished, the following billet: 
“If you would learn the particulars
of Miss Darnel's fate, fail not
to be in the fields by the Foundling
Hospital, precisely at seven o'clock this
evening, when you shall be met by
a person who will give you the satisfaction
you desire, together with his
reason for addressing you in this mysterious
manner.—” Had this intimation
concerned any other subject, perhaps
the knight would have deliberated
with himself in what manner he
should take a hint so darkly communicated: 

but his eagerness to retrieve
the jewel he had lost, divested him of
all his caution; the time of assignation
was already at hand, and neither
the captain nor his nephew could be
found to accompany him, had he
been disposed to make use of their attendance. 
He therefore, after a moment's
hesitation, repaired to the place
appointed, in the utmost agitation and
anxiety, lest the hour should be elapsed
before his arrival. 
Crowe was one of those defective
spirits, who cannot subsist for any
length of time on their own bottoms. 
He wanted a familiar prop, upon
which he could disburthen his cares,
his doubts, and his humours: an
humble friend who would endure his
caprices, and with whom he could
communicate, free of all reserve and
restraint. Though he loved his nephew's
person, and admired his parts,
he considered him often as a little petulant
jackanapes, who presumed upon
his superior understanding; and as
for Sir Launcelot, there was something 

in his character that overawed
the seaman, and kept him at a disagreeable
distance. He had, in this
dilemma, cast his eyes upon Timothy
Crabshaw, and admitted him to a
considerable share of familiarity and
fellowship. These companions had
been emyloyed in smoaking a social
pipe at an alehouse in the neighbourhood,
when the knight made his excursion; 
and returning to the house
about supper-time, found Mr. Clarke
in waiting. The young lawyer was
alarmed when he heard the hour of
ten, without seeing our adventurer,
who had been used to be extremely
regular in his œconomy; and the
captain and he supped in profound
silence. Finding, upon enquiry among
the servants, that the knight went out
abruptly, in consequence of having
received a billet, Tom began to be
visited with the apprehension of a
duel, and sat the best part of the night
by his uncle, sweating with the expectation
of seeing our hero brought
home a breathless corse: but no tidings 

of him arriving, he, about two
in the morning, repaired to his own
lodging, resolved to publish a description
of Sir Launcelot in the news-papers,
if he should not appear next
day. Crowe did not pass the time
without uneasiness. He was extremely
concerned at the thought of some
mischief having befallen his friend and
patron; and he was terrified with the
apprehension, that in case Sir Launcelot
was murdered, his spirit might
come and give him notice of his fate. 
Now he had an insuperable aversion
to all correspondence with the dead; 
and taking it for granted, that the spirit
of his departed friend could not appear
to him except when he should be
alone, and a-bed in the dark, he determined
to pass the remainder of the
night without going to bed. For this
purpose his first care was to visit the
garret, in which Timothy Crabshaw
lay fast asleep, snoring with his mouth
wide open. Him the captain with
difficulty roused, by dint of promising
to regale him with a bowl of rum 

punch in the kitchen, where the fire,
which had been extinguished, was
soon rekindled. The ingredients were
fetched from a public-house in the
neighbourhood; for the captain was too
proud to use his interest in the knight's
family, especially at these hours when
all the rest of the servants had retired
to their repose; and he and Timothy
drank together until day-break,
the conversation turning upon hobgoblins,
and God's revenge against
murder. The cookmaid lay in a little
apartment contiguous to the kitchen; 
and whether disturbed by these horrible
tales of apparitions, or titillated
by the savoury steams that issued from
the punch-bowl, she made a virtue of
necessity, or appetite, and dressing herself
in the dark, suddenly appeared before
them, to the no small perturbation
of both. Timothy, in particular,
was so startled, that in his endeavours
to make an hasty retreat towards the
chimney corner, he overturned the
table; the liquor was spilt, but the
bowl was saved by falling on a heap 

of ashes. Mrs. Cook having reprimanded
him for his foolish fear, declared
she had got up betimes, in order
to scour her saucepans; and the
captain proposed to have the bowl replenished,
if materials could be procured. 
This difficulty was overcome
by Crabshaw; and they sat down with
their new associate to discuss the second
edition. The knight's sudden
disappearing being brought upon the
carpet, their female companion gave
it as her opinion, that nothing would
be so likely to bring this affair to light,
as going to a cunning man, whom she
had lately consulted about a silver
spoon that was mislaid, and who told
her all the things that she ever did,
and ever would happen to her through
the whole course of her life. 
Her two companions pricked up
their ears at this intelligence; and
Crowe asked if the spoon had been
found? She answered in the affirmative,
and said, the cunning man described
to a hair the person that should
be her true love, and her wedded husband: 

that he was a sea-faring man; 
that he was pretty well stricken in
years; a little passionate or so; and
that he went with his fingers clinched
like, as it were. The captain began
to sweat at this description, and
mechanically thrust his hands into his
pockets, while Crabshaw, pointing to
him, told her he believed she had got
the right sow by the ear. Crowe
grumbled, that may hap for all that
he should not be brought up by such
a grappling neither. Then he asked
if this cunning man dealt with the
devil, declaring, in that case he would
keep clear of him: for why? because
he must have sold himself to old
scratch; and being a servant of the
devil, how could he be a good subject
to his majesty? Mrs. Cook assured
him, the conjurer was a good
christian; and that he gained all his
knowledge by conversing with the
stars and planets. Thus satisfied, the
two friends resolved to consult him as
soon as it should be light; and being
directed to the place of his habitation, 

set out for it by seven in the morning. 
They found the house forsaken, and
had already reached the end of the
lane in their return, when they were
accosted by an old woman, who gave
them to understand, that if they had
occasion for the advice of a fortune-teller,
as she did suppose they had,
from their stopping at the house where
Dr. Grubble lived, she would conduct
them to a person of much more eminence
in that profession; at the same
time she informed them, that the said
Grubble had been lately sent to Bride-well; 
a circumstance which, with all
his art, he had not been able to foresee. 
The captain, without any scruple,
put himself and his companion
under convoy of this beldame, who,
through many windings and turnings,
brought them to the door of a ruinous
house, standing in a blind alley; 
which door having opened with a key
drawn from her pocket, she introduced
them into a parlour, where
they saw no other furniture than a
naked bench, and some frightful figures 

on the bare walls, drawn, or
rather scrawled with charcoal. Here
she left them locked in, until she
should give the doctor notice of their
arrival; and they amused themselves
with decyphering these characters and
hieroglyphics. The first figure that
engaged their attention, was that of a
man hanging upon a gibbet, which
both considered as an unfavourable
omen, and each endeavoured to avert
from his own person. Crabshaw observed,
that the figure so suspended
was cloathed in a sailor's jacket and
trowsers; a truth which the captain
could not deny; but on the other
hand he affirmed, that the said figure
exhibited the very nose and chin of
Timothy, together with the hump on
one shoulder. A warm dispute ensued; 
and being maintained with
much acrimonious altercation, might
have dissolved the new-cemented
friendship of these two originals, had
it not been interrupted by the old sybil,
who, coming into the parlour,
intimated that the doctor waited for 

them above. She likewise told them
that he never admitted more than one
at a time. This hint occasioned a
fresh contest: the captain insisted upon
Crabshaw's making sail a-head, in
order to look out afore; but Timothy
persisted in refusing this honour, declaring
he did not pretend to lead, but
he would follow, as in duty bound. 
The old gentlewoman abridged the
ceremony, by leading out Crabshaw
with one hand, and locking up Crowe
with the other. The former was
dragged up stairs like a bear to the
stake, not without reluctance and terror,
which did not at all abate at sight
of the conjurer, with whom he was
immediately shut up by his conductress; 
after she had told him in a
whisper, that he must deposit a shilling
in a little black coffin, supported
by a human skull and thigh bones
crossed, on a stool covered with black
bays, that stood in one corner of the
apartment. The squire having made
this offering with fear and trembling,
ventured to survey the objects around 

him, which were very well calculated
to augment his confusion. He saw divers
skeletons hung by the head; the
stuffed skin of a young alligator, a
calf with two heads, and several
snakes suspended from the cieling,
with the jaws of a shark, and a starved
weasle. On another funereal table he
beheld two spheres, between which
lay a book open, exhibiting outlandish
characters, and mathematical diagrams. 
On one side stood an ink-standish
with paper, and behind this
desk appeared the conjurer himself in
sable vestments, his head so overshadowed
with hair, that, far from contemplating
his features, Timothy could
distinguish nothing but a long white
beard, which, for ought he knew,
might have belonged to a four-legged
goat, as well as to a two-legged astrologer. 
This apparition, which the squire
did not eye without manifest discomposure,
extending a white wand, made
certain evolutions over the head of Timothy,
and having muttered an ejaculation, 

commanded him, in a hollow
tone, to come forward and declare
his name. Crabshaw thus adjured advanced
to the altar; and whether
from design, or (which is more probable)
from confusion, answered “Samuel
Crowe.” The conjurer taking
up the pen, and making a few
scratches on the paper, exclaimed in
a terrific accent; “How! miscreant!
attempt to impose upon the stars? — 
you look more like a crab than a
crow, and was born under the sign of
Cancer.” The squire, almost annihilated
by this exclamation, fell upon
his knees, crying, “I pray yaw, my
lord conjurer's worship, pardon my
ignorance, and down't go to baind me
cover to the Red Sea like—I'se a
poor Yorkshire tyke, and wou'd no
more cheat the stars than I'd cheat
my own vather, as the saying is— 
a must be a good hand at trapping,
that catches the starns a napping— 
but as your honour's worship observed,
my name is Tim Crabshaw, of the
East Raiding, groom and squair to Sir 

Launcelot Greaves, baron knaight, and
arrant knaight, who ran mad for a
wench, as your worship's conjuration
well knoweth:—the person below is
captain Crowe; and we coom by Margery
Cook's recommendation to seek
after my master, who is gone away,
or made away, the Lord he knows
how and where.” 
Here he was interrupted by the
conjurer, who exhorted him to sit
down and compose himself until he
should cast a figure: then he scrawled
the paper, and waving his wand, repeated
abundance of gibberish concerning
the number, the names, the
houses, and revolutions of the planets,
with their conjunctions, oppositions,
signs, circles, cycles, trines, and trigons. 
When he perceived that this
artifice had its proper effect in disturbing
the brain of Crabshaw, he proceeded
to tell him from the stars, that
his name was Crabshaw, or Crabsclaw; 
that he was born in the Eastriding
of Yorkshire, of poor, yet honest
parents, and had some skill in 

horses; that he served a gentleman,
whose name began with the letter G
—, which gentleman had run mad
for love, and left his family; but
whether he would return alive or dead
the stars had not yet determined. Poor
Timothy was thunderstruck to find
the conjurer acquainted with all these
circumstances, and begged to know if
he mought be so bauld as to ax a question
or two about his own fortune. 
The astrologer pointing to the little
coffin, our squire understood the hint,
and deposited another shilling. The
sage had recourse to his book, erected
another scheme, performed once more
his airy evolutions with the wand, and
having recited another mystical preamble,
expounded the book of fate
in these words: “You shall neither
die by war nor water, by hunger or
by thirst, nor be brought to the grave
by old age or distemper; but, let me
see—ay, the stars will have it so— 
you shall be—exalted—hah!—ay,
that is—hanged for horse-stealing” 
—“O, good my lord conjurer! 

(roared the squire) I'd as lief give forty
shillings as be hanged.” —“Peace,
sirrah! (cried the other) would you
contradict or reverse the immutable
decrees of fate. Hanging is your destiny; 
and hanged you shall be—and
comfort yourself with the reflection,
that as you are not the first, so neither
will you be the last to swing on
Tyburn-tree.” This comfortable assurance
composed the mind of Timothy,
and in a great measure reconciled
him to the prediction. He now proceeded
in a whining tone, to ask whether
he should suffer for the first fact?
whether it would be for a horse or a
mare? and of what colour? that he
might know when his hour was
come.” —The conjurer gravely answered,
that he would steal a dappled
gelding on a Wednesday; be cast at
the Old Baily on Thursday, and suffer
on a Friday; and he strenuously recommended
it to him, to appear in
the cart with a nosegay in one hand,
and the Whole Duty of Man in the
other.” “But if in case it should be 

in the winter (said the squire) when a
nosegay can't be had”—Why then
(replied the conjurer) an orange will
do as well.” These material points
being adjusted to the entire satisfaction
of Timothy, he declared he would
bestow another shilling to know the
fortune of an old companion, who
truly did not deserve so much at his
hands; but he could not help loving
him better than e'er a friend he had in
the world. So saying, he dropped a
third offering in the coffin, and desired
to know the fate of his horse Gilbert. 
The astrologer having again
consulted his art, pronounced, that
Gilbert would die of the staggers, and
his carcase be given to the hounds; a
sentence, which made a much deeper
impression upon Crabshaw's mind,
than did the prediction of his own untimely
and disgraceful fate. He shed a
plenteous shower of tears, and his grief
broke forth in some passionate expressions
of tenderness:—at length he told
the astrologer he would go and send up
the captain, who wanted to consult 

him about Margery Cook, because as
how she had informed him that Dr.
Grubble had described just such another
man as the captain for her true
love; and he had no great stomach
to the match, if so be as the stars
were not bent upon their coming together. 
Accordingly the squire being
dismissed by the conjurer, descended
to the parlour with a rueful length of
face; which being perceived by the
captain, he demanded “What cheer,
ho?” with some signs of apprehension. 
Crabshaw making no return to
this salute, he asked if the conjurer
had taken an observation, and told
him any thing? Then the other replied,
he had told him more than he
desired to know. “Why, an that be
the case, (said the seaman) I have no
occasion to go aloft this trip, brother.” 
This evasion would not serve his turn:
old Tisiphone was at hand, and led
him up growling into the hall of audience,
which he did not examine
without trepidation. Having been directed
to the coffin, where he presented 

half a crown, in hope of rendering
the fates more propitious, the usual
ceremony was performed; and the
doctor addressed him in these words: 
“Approach, Raven.” The captain
advancing, “You an't much mistaken,
brother, (said he) heave your eye into
the binnacle, and box your compass; 
you'll find I'm a Crowe, not a
Raven, tho'f indeed they be both fowls
of a feather, as the saying is.” —“I
know it; (cried the conjurer) thou art
a northern crow,—a sea crow; not a
crow of prey, but a crow to be preyed
upon:—a crow to be plucked,—to be
flayed,—to be basted,—to be broiled
by Margery upon the gridiron of matrimony
—” The novice changing
colour at this denunciation, “I do
understand your signals, brother, (said
he) and if it be set down in the log-book
of fate, that we must grapple,
why then, 'ware timbers. But as I
know how the land lies, d'ye see, and
the current of my inclination sets me
off, I shall haul up close to the wind,
and mayhap we shall clear Cape Margery. 

But, howsomever, we shall
leave that reef in the foretopsail: — 
I was bound upon another voyage,
d'ye see—to look and to see, and to
know, if so be as how I could pick up
any intelligence along shore, concerning
my friend Sir Launcelot, who slipped
his cable last night, and has lost
company, d'ye see.” “What! (exclaimed
the cunning man) art thou a
crow, and can'st not smell carrion? 
If thou wouldst grieve for Greaves,
behold his naked carcase lies unburied
to feed the kites, the crows, the
gulls, the rooks, and ravens. — 
“What, broach'd to?” “Dead! as a
boil'd lobster.” “Odd's heart! friend,
these are the heaviest tidings I have
heard these seven long years—there
must have been deadly odds when he
lowered his topsails—Smite my eyes! 
I had rather the Mufti had foundered
at sea, with myself and all my generation
on board—well fare thy soul,
flower of the world! had honest Sam
Crowe been within hail—but what
signifies palavering.” Here the tears 

of unaffected sorrow flowed plentifully
down the furrows of the seaman's
cheeks:—then his grief giving way to
his indignation, “Hark ye, brother
conjurer, (said he) you that can spy
foul weather before it comes, damn
your eyes! why did not you give us
warning of this here squall? Blast my
limbs! I'll make you give an account
of this here damned, horrid, confounded
murder, d'ye see—mayhap
you yourself was concerned, d'ye see. 
—For my own part, brother, I put
my trust in God, and steer by the
compass; and I value not your pawwawing,
and your conjuration, of a
rope's end, d'ye see.” —The conjurer
was by no means pleased, either with
the matter, or the manner of this
address. He therefore began to soothe
the captain's choler, by representing
that he did not pretend to omniscience,
which was the attribute of God
alone; that human art was fallible
and imperfect; and all that it could
perform, was to discover certain partial
circumstances of any particular object 

to which its enquiries were directed:
that being questioned by the
other man, concerning the cause of
his master's disappearing, he had exercised
his skill upon the subject, and
found reason to believe that Sir Launcelot
was assassinated; that he should
think himself happy in being the instrument
of bringing the murderers to
justice, though he foresaw they would
of themselves save him that trouble; 
for they would quarrel about dividing
the spoil, and one would give information
against the other. 
The prospect of this satisfaction appeased
the resentment, and, in some
measure, mitigated the grief of captain
Crowe, who took his leave without
much ceremony; and being joined
by Crabshaw, proceeded with a
heavy heart to the house of Sir Launcelot,
where they found the domestics
at breakfast, without exhibiting the
least symptom of concern for their
absent master. Crowe had been wise
enough to conceal from Crabshaw
what he had learned of the knight's 

fate. This fatal intelligence he reserved
for the ear of his nephew, Mr.
Clarke, who did not fail to attend
him in the forenoon. 
As for the squire, he did nothing
but ruminate in rueful silence upon
the dappled gelding, the nosegay, and
the predicted fate of Gilbert. Him
he forthwith visited in the stable, and
saluted with the kiss of peace. Then
he bemoaned his fortune with tears,
and by the sound of his own lamentation,
was lulled asleep among the
litter. 