


I acquire the friendship of the surgeon, who
procures a warrant for me, and makes me
a present of cloaths—a battle between a
midshipman and me—the surgeon leaves
the ship—the captain comes on board
with another surgeon—a dialogue between
the captain and Morgan—the
sick are ordered to be brought upon the
quarter-deck and examined—the consequences
of that order—a madman accuses
Morgan, and is set at liberty by command
of the captain, whom he instantly attacks
and pummels without mercy. 
While I was busied with my friend in
this practice, the doctor chanced to pass
by the place where we were, and stopping to observe
me, appeared very well satisfied with my
method of application; and afterwards sent for
me to his cabbin, where, having examined me
touching my skill in surgery, and the particulars of
my fortune, interested himself so far in my behalf,
as to promise his assistance in procuring a
warrant for me, seeing I had been already found
qualified at Surgeon's hall, for the station I now
filled on board; and this he the more cordially
engaged in, when he understood I was nephew
to lieutenant Bowling, for whom he expressed a 

particular regard. —In the mean time, I could
learn from his discourse, that he did not intend
to go to sea again with captain Oakhum, having,
as he thought, been indifferently used by
him during the last voyage. 
While I lived tollerably easy, in expectation of
preferment, I was not altogether without mortifications,
which I not only suffered from the rude
insults of the sailors, and petty officers, among
whom I was known by the name of Loblolly Boy; 
but also from the disposition of Morgan, who,
though friendly in the main, was often very
troublesome with his pride, which expected a good
deal of submission from me, and delighted in recapitulating
the favours I had received at his
hands. 
About six weeks after my arrival on board, the
surgeon bidding me follow him into his cabbin,
presented a warrant to me, by which I was appointed
surgeon's third mate on board the Thunder. 
—This he had procured by his interest at the
Navy-office; as also another for himself, by virtue
of which he was removed into a second rate. 
I acknowledged his kindness in the strongest
terms my gratitude could suggest, and professed
my sorrow at the prospect of losing such a valuable
friend, to whom I hoped to have recommended
myself still further, by my respectful and
diligent behaviour. —But his generosity rested not
here;—for, before he left the ship, he made me
a present, of a chest and some cloaths, that enabled
me to support the rank to which he had
raised me. —I found my spirit revive with my
good fortune; and now I was an officer, resolved
to maintain the dignity of my station, against all
opposition or affronts; nor was it long before I 

had occasion to exert my resolution; my old enemy
the midshipman (whose name was Crampley)
entertaining an implacable animosity against me,
for the disgrace he had suffered on my account,
had since that time taken all opportunities of reviling
and ridiculing me, when I was not intitled
to retort his bad usage. —And even after I had
been rated on the books, and mustered as surgeon's
mate, did not think fit to restrain his insolence. 
—In particular, being one day present, while I
dressed a wound in a sailor's leg, he began to sing
a song, which I thought highly injurious to the
honour of my country, and therefore signified
my resentment, by observing, that the Scots always
laid their account in finding enemies among
the ignorant, insignificant and malicious. —This
unexpected piece of assurance enraged him to such
a degree, that he lent me a blow on the face,
which I verily thought had demolished my cheek-bone; 
I was not slow in returning the obligation,
and the affair began to be very serious, when by accident
Mr. Morgan, and one of the master's mates,
coming that way, interposed, and inquiring into the
cause, endeavoured to promote a reconciliation; 
but finding us both exasperated to the uttermost,
and bent against accommodation, they advised
us, either to leave our difference undecided till
we should have an opportunity of terminating it
on shore, like gentlemen, or else chuse a proper
place on board, and bring it to an issue by boxing. 
This last expedient was greedily embraced; and
being forthwith conducted to the ground proposed,
we stript in a moment, and began a very furious
contest, in which I soon found myself inferior to
my antagonist, not so much in strength and agility,
as in skill, which he had acquired in the 

school at Hockley in the Hole and Tottenham-Court. 
—Many cross-buttocks did I sustain, and
pegs on the stomach without number, till at last,
my breath being quite gone, as well as my vigour
wafted, I grew desperate, and collecting all my
spirits in one effort, threw in at once head,
hands, and feet with such violence, that I drove
my antagonist three paces backward into the main
hatch-way, down which he fell, and pitching upon
his head and right shoulder, remained without sense
and motion. —Morgan looking down, and seeing
him lie in that condition, cried, “Upon my
conscience, as I am a Christian sinner (look
you) I believe his pattles are all ofer; but I
take you all to witness that there was no
treachery in the case, and that he has suffered
by the chance of war.”——So saying, he descended
to the deck below, to examine into the
situation of my adversary; and left me very little
pleased with my victory, as I found myself not
only terribly bruised, but likewise in danger of
being called to account for the death of Crampley: 
But this fear vanished when my fellow-mate,
having by bleeding him in the juglar, brought
him to himself, and assured himself of the state of
his body, called up to me, to be under no concern,
for the midshipman had received no other
damage than as pretty a luxation of the os humeri,
as one would desire to see on a summer's day. — 
Upon this information, I crawled down to the
cockpit, and acquainted Thomson with the affair,
who, providing himself with bandages, &c. necessary
for the occasion, went up to assist Mr.
Morgan in the reduction of the dislocation. — 
When this was successfully performed, they wished
me joy of the event of the combat; and the 

Welchman, after observing, that in all likelihood,
the ancient Scots and Britons were the same people,
bid me “Praise Cot for putting mettle in my
pelly, and strength in my limbs to support it.” 
—I acquired such reputation by this recounter
(which lasted twenty minutes) that every body
became more cautious of his behaviour towards
me; though Crampley with his arm in a sling,
talked very high, and threatened to seize the first
opportunity of retrieving on shore, the honour he
had lost by an accident, from which I could
justly claim no merit. 
About this time, captain Oakhum, having received
sailing orders, came on board, and brought
along with him a surgeon of his own country,
who soon made us sensible of the loss we suffered
in the departure of doctor Atkins; being grossly
ignorant, and intolerably assuming, false, vindictive,
and unforgiving; a merciless tyrant to his
inferiors, an abject sycophant to those above him. 
In the morning after the captain came on board,
our first mate, according to custom, went to wait
on him with a sick list, which when this grim
commander had perused; he cried with a stern
countenance, “Blood and oons! sixty-one sick
people on board of my ship! —Harkee you,
sir, I'll have no sick in my ship, by G&sblank;d.” 
The Welchman replied, he should be very glad
to find no sick people on board; but while it
was otherwise, he did no more than his duty in
presenting him with a list. —“You and your list
may be d&wblank;n'd, (said the captain, throwing it
at him) I say, there shall be no sick in this
ship while I have the command of her.” — 
Mr. Morgan being nettled at this treatment,
told him, his indignation ought to be directed 

to Got Almighty, who visited his people with
distempers, and not to him, who contributed all
in his power towards their cure. The Bashaw
not being used to such behaviour in any of his
officers, was enraged to fury at this satirical insinuation,
and stamping with his foot, called him
insolent scoundrel, threatning to have him pinioned
to the deck, if he should presume to utter
another syllable. But the blood of Caractacus
being thoroughly heated, disdained to be restricted
by such a command, and began to manifest itself
in, “Captain Oakoum, I am a shentleman of
birth and parentage (look you) and peradventure,
I am moreover—.” Here his harrangue
was broke off by the captain's steward,
who being Morgan's countryman, hurried him
out of the cabbin before he had time to
exasperate his master to a greater degree, which
would certainly have been the case; for the indignant
Welchman, could hardly be hindered by
his friend's arguments and intreaties, from re-entering
the presence chamber, and defying captain
Oakhum to his teeth. —He was, however, appeased
at length, and came down to the birth,
where finding Thomson and me at work preparing
medicines, he bid us leave off our lapour
and go to play, for the captain, by his sole word
and power and command, had driven sickness
a pegging to the tevil, and there was no more malady
on poard. So saying, he drank off a gill of
brandy, sighed grievously three times, poured forth
an ejaculation of “Got pless my heart, liver, and
lungs!” and then began to sing a Welch song
with great earnestness of visage, voice and gesture. 
—I could not conceive the meaning of this singular
phænomenon, and saw by the looks of Thomson,
who at the same time, shook his head, that he 

suspected poor Cadwallader's brains were unsettled. 
He perceiving our amazement, told us, he would
explain the mystery; but at the same time, bid
us take notice, that he had lived poy, patchelor,
married man and widower, almost forty years,
and in all that time, there was no man nor mother's
son in the whole world, who durst use him
so ill as captain Oakhum had done. Then he
acquainted us with the dialogue that passed between
them, as I have already related it; and
had no sooner finished this narration, than he received
a message from the surgeon, to bring the
sick-list to the quarter-deck, for the captain had
ordered all the patients thither to be reviewed. 
—This inhuman order shocked us extremely,
as we knew it would be impossible to
carry some of them on the deck, without imminent
danger of their lives; but as we likewise
knew it would be to no purpose for us to remonstrate
against it, we repaired to the quarter-deck
in a body, to see this extraordinary muster; 
Morgan observing by the way, that the captain
was going to send to the other world, a great many
evidences to testify against himself. —When we
appeared upon deck, the captain bid the doctor,
who stood bowing at his right hand, look at these
lazy, lubberly sons of bitches, who were good
for nothing on board, but to eat the king's provision,
and encourage idleness in the skulkers. 
—The surgeon grinned approbation, and taking
the list, began to examine the complaints of each
as they could crawl to the place appointed. —The
first who came under his cognizance, was a poor
fellow just freed of a fever, which had weakened
him so much, that he could hardly stand. —Mr.
Mackshane (for that was the doctor's name) 

having felt his pulse, protested he was as well as
any man in the world; and the captain delivered
him over to the boatswain's mate, with orders
that he should receive a round dozen at the gang-way
immediately, for counterfeiting himself sick
when he was not;—but before the discipline
could be executed, the man dropt down on the
deck, and had well nigh perished under the hands
of the executioner. —The next patient to be
considered, laboured under a quartan ague, and
being then, in his interval of health, discovered
no other symptoms of distemper, than a pale
meagre countenance, and emaciated body; upon
which, he was declared fit for duty, and turned
over to the boatswain;—but being resolved to disgrace
the doctor, died upon the forecastle next
day, during his cold fit. —The third complained
of a pleuretic stitch, and spitting of blood, for
which doctor Mackshane prescribed exercise at
the pump to promote expectoration; but whether
this was improper for one in his situation, or
that it was used to excess, I know not, but in less
than half an hour, he was suffocated with a deluge
of blood that issued from his lungs. —A
fourth, with much difficulty climbed to the quarter-deck,
being loaded with a monstrous ascites
or dropsy, that invaded his chest so much, he
could scarce fetch his breath; but his disease being
interpreted into fat, occasioned by idleness and
excess of eating, he was ordered, with a view to
promote perspiration and enlarge his chest, to go
aloft immediately: It was in vain for this unwieldy
wretch, to alledge his utter incapacity, the
boatswain's driver was commanded to whip him
up with a cat and nine tails: The smart of this
application made him exert himself so much, that 

he actually arrived at the foot-hook-shrouds, but
when the enormous weight of his body had nothing
else to support it than his weakened arms,
either out of spite or necessity, he quitted his
hold, and plumped into the sea, where he must
have been drowned, had not a sailor who was in a
boat along-side, saved his life, by keeping him afloat,
till he was hoisted on board by a tackle— 
It would be tedious and disagreeable to describe
the fate of every miserable object that suffered
by the inhumanity and ignorance of the captain
and surgeon, who so wantonly sacrificed the lives
of their fellow-creatures. Many were brought
up in the height of fevers, and rendered delirious
by the injuries they suffered in the way. —Some
gave up the ghost in the presence of their inspectors; 
and others, who were ordered to their duty,
languished a few days at work, among their
fellows, and then departed without any ceremony. 
—On the whole, the number of sick was reduced
to less than a dozen; and the authors of this reduction
were applauding themselves for the service
they had done to their king and country,
when the boatswain's mate informed his honour,
that there was a man below lashed to his hammock
by the direction of the doctor's mate,
and that he begged hard to be released; affirming,
he had been so maltreated only for a grudge
Mr. Morgan bore to him, and that he was as
much in his senses as any man aboard. —The
captain hearing this, darted a severe look at the
Welchman, and ordered the man to be brought
up immediately: Upon which, Morgan protested
with great fervency, that the person in question
was as mad as a March-hare; and begged for the
the love of Got, they would at least keep his 

arms pinioned during his examination, to prevent
him from doing mischief. —This request the commander
granted for his own sake, and the patient
was produced, who insisted upon his being in his
right wits with such calmness and strength of argument,
that every body present was inclined to
believe him, except Morgan, who affirmed there
was no trusting to appearances; for he himself
had been so much imposed upon by his behaviour
two days before, that he had actually unbound
him with his own hands, and had well nigh been
murdered for his pains: this was confirmed by
the evidence of one of the waiters, who declared,
he had pulled this patient from the doctor's mate,
whom he had gotten down and almost strangled. 
—To this the man answered, that the witness
was a creature of Morgan's, and was suborned
to give his testimony against him by the malice
of the mate, whom the defendant had affronted,
by discovering to the people on board, that Mr.
Morgan's wife kept a gin-shop in Rag-Fair. — 
This anecdote produced a laugh at the expence
of the Welchman, who shaking his head with
some emotion, said, “Ay, ay, 'tis no matter. — 
Got knows, 'tis an arrant falshood.” —Captain
Oakhum, without any further hesitation, ordered
the fellow to be unfettered; at the same time,
threatening to make Morgan exchange situations
with him for his spite; but the Briton no sooner
heard the decision in favour of the madman, than
he got up the mizzen-shrouds, crying to Thomson
and me to get out of his reach, for we should
see him play the tevil with a vengeance. We did
not think fit to disregard this caution, and accordingly
got up on the poop, whence we beheld the
maniac (as soon as he was released) fly at the 

captain like a fury, crying, “I'll let you know,
you scoundrel, that I am commander of this
vessel”—and pummel him without mercy. 
The surgeon, who went to the assistance of his
patron, shared the same fate; and it was with
the utmost difficulty, that he was mastered at
last, after having done great execution among
those who opposed him. 