


DEAR DICK,
AT what time of life may a man think himself
exempted from the necessity of sacrificing his repose
to the punctilios of a contemptible world? I
have been engaged in a ridiculous adventure, which
I shall recount at meeting; and this, I hope, will 

not be much longer delayed, as we have now performed
almost all our visits, and seen every thing
that I think has any right to retard us in our journey
homewards —A few days ago, understanding
by accident, that my old friend Baynard was in
the country, I would not pass so near his habitation
without paying him a visit, though our correspondence
had been interrupted for a long course of
years. 
I felt myself very sensibly affected by the ideas
of our past intimacy, as we approached the place
where we had spent so many happy days together; 
but when we arrived at the house, I could not recognize
any one of those objects, which had been
so deeply impressed upon my remembrance —The
tall oaks that shaded the avenue, had been cut
down, and the iron gates at the end of it removed,
together with the high wall that surrounded the
court yard. The house itself, which was formerly
a convent of Cistercian monks, had a venerable
appearance; and along the front that looked into
the garden, was a stone gallery, which afforded
me many an agreeable walk, when I was disposed
to be contemplative —Now the old front is covered
with a screen of modern architecture; so that
all without is Grecian, and all within Gothic — 
As for the garden, which was well stocked with
the best fruit which England could produce, there
is not now the least vestige remaining of trees,
walls, or hedges —Nothing appears but a naked
circus of loose sand, with a dry bason and a leaden
Triton in the middle. 
You must know, that Baynard, at his father's
death, had a clear estate of fifteen hundred pounds
a-year, and was in other respects extremely well
qualified to make a respectable figure in the commonwealth; 
but, what with some excesses of
youth, and the expence of a contested election, he 

in a few years found himself encumbered with a
debt of ten thousand pounds, which he resolved
to discharge by means of a prudent marriage — 
He accordingly married a miss Thompson, whose
fortune amounted to double the sum that he owed 
—She was the daughter of a citizen, who had failed
in trade; but her fortune came by an uncle, who
died in the East-Indies —Her own parents being
dead, she lived with a maiden aunt, who had superintended
her education; and, in all appearance,
was well enough qualified for the usual porposes of
the married state —Her virtues, however, stood rather
upon a negative; than a positive foundation — 
She was neither proud, insolent, nor capricious,
nor given to scandal, nor addicted to gaming,
nor inclined to gallantry —She could read, and
write, and dance, and sing, and play upon the
harpsichord, and smatter French, and take a
hand at whist and ombre; but even these accomplishments
she possessed by halves — 
She excelled in nothing. Her conversation was
flat, her stile mean, and her expression embarrassed 
—In a word, her character was totally insipid. 
Her person was not disagreeable; but there was
nothing graceful in her address, nor engaging in
her manners; and she was so ill qualified to do the
honours of the house, that when she sat at the
head of the table, one was always looking for the
mistress of the family in some other place. 
Baynard had flattered himself that it would be
no difficult matter to mould such a subject after his
own fashion, and that she would chearfully enter
into his views, which were wholly turned to domestic
happiness. He proposed to reside always in
the country, of which he was fond to a degree of
enthusiasm, to cultivate his estate, which was very
improvable; to enjoy the exercise of rural diversions; 
to maintain an intimacy of correspondence 

with some friends that were settled in his neighbourhood; 
to keep a comfortable house, without
suffering his expence to exceed the limits of his income:
and to find pleasure and employment for
his wife in the management and avocations of her
own family. —This, however, was a visionary
scheme, which he never was able to realize. His
wife was as ignorant as a new-born babe of every
thing that related to the conduct of a family; and
she had no idea of a country life —Her understanding
did not reach so far as to comprehend
the first principles of discretion; and, indeed, if
her capacity had been better than it was, her natural
indolence would not have permitted her to
abandon a certain routine, to which she had been
habituated. she had not taste enough to relish
any national enjoyment; but her ruiling passion
was vanity, not that species which arises from
self-conceit of superior accomplishments, but that
which is of a bastard and idiot nature, excited by
shew and ostentation, which implies not even the
least consciousness of any personal merit. 
The nuptial peale of noise and nonsense being
rung out in all the usual changes, Mr. Baynard
thought it high time to make her acquainted with
the particulars of the plan which he had projected 
—He told her that his fortune, though sufficient
to afford all the comforts of life, was not ample
enough to command all the superfluities of pomp
and pageantry, which, indeed, were equally absurd
and intolerable —He therefore hoped she would
have no objection to their leaving London in the
spring, when he would take the opportunity to
dismiss some unnecessary domestics, whom he had
hired for the occasion of their marriage —She
heard him in silence, and after some pause, “So
(said she) I am to be buried in the country!” 
He was so confounded at this reply, that he could 

not speak for some minutes: at length he told
her he was much mortified to find he had proposed
any thing that was disagreeable to her ideas — 
“I am sure (added he) I mean nothing more
than to lay down a comfortable plan of living
within the bounds of our fortune, which is but
moderate.” “Sir, (said she) you are the best
judge of your own affairs —My fortune, I
know, does not exceed twenty thousand pounds 
—Yet, even with that pittance, I might have
had a husband who would not have begrudged
me a house in London—” “Good God!
my dear, (cried poor Baynard, in the utmost
agitation) you don't think me so sordid —I only
hinted what I thought —But, I don't pretend
to impose” —“Yes, sir, (resumed the lady)
it is your prerogative to command, and my
duty to obey—” 
So saying, she burst into tears and retired to her
chamber, where she was joined by her aunt — 
He endeavoured to recollect himself, and act with
vigour of mind on this occasion; but was betrayed
by the tenderness of his nature, which was the
greatest defect of his constitution. He found the
aunt in tears, and the niece in a fit, which held
her the best part of eight hours, at the expiration
of which she began to talk incoherently about
death and her dear husband, who had sat by her all
this time, and now pressed her hand to his lips,
in a transport of grief and penitance for the offence
he had given —From thence forward, he carefully
avoided mentioning the country; and they continued
to be sucked deeper and deeper into the
vortex of extravagance and dissipation, leading
what is called a fashionable life in town —About
the latter end of July, however, Mrs. Baynard, in
order to exhibit a proof of conjugal obedience, 

desired of her own accord, that they might pay a
visit to his country house, as there was no company
left in London. He would have excused himself
from this excursion, which was no part of the
œconomical plan he had proposed; but she insisted
upon making this sacrifice to his taste and prejudices,
and away they went with such an equipage
as astonished the whole country —All that remained
of the season was engrossed by receiving and
returning visits in the neighbourhood; and, in
this intercourse, it was discovered that sir John
Chickwell had a house-steward and one footman
in livery more than the complement of Mr. Baynard's
household. This remark was made by the
aunt at table, and assented to by the husband,
who observed that sir John Chickwell might very
well afford to keep more servants than were found
in the family of a man who had not half his fortune. 
Mrs. Baynard eat no supper that evening; 
but was seized with a violent fit which completed
her triumph over the spirit of her consort. The
two supernumerary servants were added —The family
plate was sold for old silver, and a new service
procured; fashionable furniture was provided,
and the whole house turned topsy turvy. 
At their return to London, in the beginning of
winter, he, with a heavy heart, communicated
these particulars to me in confidence. Before his
marriage, he had introduced me to the lady as
his particular friend; and I now offered in that
character, to lay before her the necessity of reforming
her œconomy, if she had any regard to the
interest of her own family, or complaisance for the
inclinations of her husband. —But Baynard declined
my offer, on the supposition that his wife's
nerves were to delicate to bear expostulation; and
that it would only serve to overwhelm her with
such distress as would make himself miserable. 

Baynard is a man of spirit, and had she proved
a termagant, he would have known how to deal
with her; but either by accident or instinct, she
fastened upon the weak side of his soul, and held
it so fast, that he has been in subjection ever since 
—I afterwards advised him to carry her abroad
to France or Italy, where he might gratify her
vanity for half the expence it cost him in England; 
and this advice he followed accordingly —She was
agreeably flattered with the idea of seeing and
knowing foreign parts, and foreign fashions; of
being presented to sovereigns, and living familiarly
with princes. She forthwith seized the hint
which I had thrown out on purpose, and even
pressed Mr. Baynard to hasten his departure; so
that in a few weeks they crossed the sea to France,
with a moderate train, still including the aunt; 
who was her bosom counsellor, and abetted her
in all her opposition to her husband's will — 
Since that period, I have had little or no opportunity
to renew our former correspondence —All
that I knew of his transactions, amounted to no
more than that after an absence of two years, they
returned so little improved in œconomy, that they
launched out into a new ocean of extravagance,
which, at length, obliged him to mortgage his
estate —By this time she had bore him three
children, of which the last only survives, a puny
boy of twelve or thirteen, who will be ruined
in his education by the indulgence of his mother. 
As for Baynard, neither his own good sense,
nor the dread of indigence, nor the consideration
of his children, has been of force sufficient to
stimulate him into the resolution of breaking at
once the shameful spell by which he seems enchanted 
—With a taste capable of the most refined
enjoyment, a heart glowing with all the 

warmth of friendship and humanity, and a disposition
strongly turned to the more rational pleasures
of a retired and country life, he is hurried
about in a perpetual tumult, amidst a mob of beings
pleased with rattles, baubles, and gew-gaws,
so void of sense and distinction, that even the most
acute philosophy would find it a very hard task to
discover for what wise purpose of providence they
were created —Friendship is not to be found; nor
can the amusements for which he sighs be enjoyed
within the rotation of absurdity, to which he is
doomed for life. He has long resigned all views
of improving his fortune by management and attention
to the exercise of husbandry, in which
he delighted; and as to domestic happiness, not
the least glimpse of hope remains to amuse his
imagination. Thus blasted in all his prospects,
he could not fail to be overwhelmed with melancholy
and chagrin, which have preyed upon his
health and spirits in such a manner, that he is now
threatened with a consumption. 
I have given you a sketch of the man, whom
the other day I went to visit —At the gate we
found a great number of powdered lacquies, but
no civility —After we had sat a considerable time
in the coach, we were told, that Mr. Baynard
had rode out, and that his lady was dressing; but
we were introduced to a parlour, so very fine and
delicate, that in all appearance it was designed to
be seen only, not inhabited. The chairs and
couches were carved, gilt, and covered with rich
damask, so smooth and sleek, that they looked as
if they had never been sat upon. There was no
carpet on the floor; but the boards were rubbed and
waxed in such a manner, that we could not walk,
but were obliged to slide along them; and as for
the stove, it was too bright and polished to be polluted 

with sea-coal, or stained by the smoke of
any gross material fire —When we had remained
above half an hour sacrificing to the inhospitable
powers in this temple of cold reception, my friend
Baynard arrived, and understanding we were in the
house, made his appearance, so meagre, yellow,
and dejected that I really should not have known
him, had I met with him in any other place — 
Running up to me, with great eagerness, he strained
me in his embrace, and his heart was so full,
that for some minutes he could not speak —Having
saluted us all round, he perceived our uncomfortable
situation, and conducting us into another
apartment, which had fire in the chimney, called
for chocolate —Then, withdrawing, he returned
with a compliment from his wife, and, in the
mean time, presented his son Harry, a shambling,
blear-eyed boy, in the habit of a hussar; very
rude, forward, and impertinent —His father would
have sent him to a boarding-school, but his mamma
and aunt would not hear of his lying out of
the house; so that there was a clergyman engaged
as his tutor in the family. 
As it was but just turned of twelve, and the
whole house was in commotion to prepare a formal
entertainment, I forsaw it would be late before
we dined, and propsed a walk to Mr. Baynard,
that we might converse together freely. In
the course of the perambulation, when I expressed
some surprise that he had returned so soon from
Italy, he gave me to understand, that his going
abroad had not at all answered the purpose for
which he left England; that although the expence
of living was not so great in Italy as at home, respect
being had to the same rank of life in both countries,
it had been found necessary for him to lift himself
above his usual stile, that he might be on some 

footing with the counts, marquises, and cavalieres,
with whom he kept company —He was obliged to
hire a great number of servants, to take off a great
variety of rich cloaths, and to keep a sumptuous
table for the fashionable scorocconi of the country; 
who, without a consideration of this kind, would
not have payed any attention to an untitled foreigner,
let his family or fortune be ever so respectable 
—Besides, Mrs. Baynard was continually
surrounded by a train of expensive loungers, under
the denominations of language-masters, musicians,
painters, and ciceroni; and had actually fallen
into the disease of buying pictures and antiques
upon her own judgment, which was far from being
infallible —At length she met with an affront,
which gave her a disgust to Italy, and drove her
back to England with some precipitation. By
means of frequenting the dutchess of B&wblank;'s
conversazione, while her grace was at Rome
Mrs. Baynard became acquainted with all the fashionable
people of that city, and was admitted to
their assemblies without scruple —Thus favoured,
she conceived too great an idea of her own importance,
and when the dutchess left Rome, resolved
to have a conversazione that should leave the Romans
no room to regret her grace's departure. 
She provided hands for a musical entertainment,
and sent bighetti of invitation to every person of
distinction; but not one Roman of the female sex
appeared at her assembly —She was that night seized
with a violent fit, and kept her bed three days,
at the expiration of which she declared that the
air of Italy would be the ruin of her constitution. 
In order to prevent this catastrophe, she was speedily
removed to Geneva, from whence they returned
to England by the way of Lyons and Paris. By 

the time they arrived at Calais, she had purchased
such a quantity of silks, stuffs, and laces, that
it was necessary to hire a vessel to smuggle them
over, and this vessel was taken by a custom-house
cutter; so that they lost the whole cargo, which
had cost them above eight hundred pounds. 
It now appeared, that her travels had produced
no effect upon her, but that of making her more
expensive and fantastic than ever: —She affected
to lead the fashion, not only in point of female
dress, but in every article of taste and connoisseurship. 
She made a drawing of the new facade to
the house in the country; she pulled up the trees,
and pulled down the walls of the garden, so as
to let in the easterly wind, which Mr. Baynard's
ancestors had been at great pains to exclude. To
shew her taste in laying out ground, she seized in-into
her own hand a farm of two hundred acres,
about a mile from the house, which she parcelled
out into walks and shrubberies, having a great
bason in the middle, into which she poured a
whole stream that turned two mills, and afforded
the best trout in the country. The bottom of the
bason, however, was so ill secured, that it would
not hold the water which strained through the
earth, and made a bog of the whole plantation:
in a word, the ground, which formerly payed him
one hundred and fifty pounds a year, now cost him
two hundred pounds a year to keep in it tolerable
order, over and above the first expence of trees,
shrubs, flowers, turf, and gravel. There was not
an inch of garden ground left about the house, nor
a tree that produced fruit of any kind; nor did he
raise a truss of hay, or a bushel of oats for his
horses, nor had he a single cow to afford him milk
for his tea; far less did he ever dream of feeding his
own mutton, pigs, and poultry: every article of 

house-keeping, even the most inconsiderable, was
brought from the next market town, at the distance
of five miles, and thither they sent a courier
every morning to fetch hot rolls for breakfast. In
short, Baynard fairly owned that he spent double
his income, and that in a few years he should be
obliged to sell his estate for the payment of his creditors. 
He said his wife had such delicate nerves,
and such imbecility of spirit, that she could neither
bear remonstrance, be it ever so gentle, nor practise
any scheme of retrenchment, even if she perceived
the necessity of such a measure. He had
therefore ceased struggling against the stream, and
endeavoured to reconcile himself to ruin, by reflecting
that his child, at least, would inherit his
mother's fortune, which was secured to him by
the contract of marriage. 
The detail which he gave me of his affairs, filled
me at once with grief and indignation. I inveighed
bitterly against the indiscretion of his wife,
and reproached him with his unmanly acquiescence
under the absurd tyranny which she exerted. I
exhorted him to recollect his resolution, and make
one effectual effort to disengage himself from a
thraldom, equally shameful and pernicious. I offered
him all the assistance in my power. I undertook
to regulate his affairs, and even to bring
about a reformation in his family, if he would only
authorise me to execute the plan I should form
for his advantage. I was so effected by the subject,
that I could not help mingling tears with my
remonstrances, and Baynard was so penetrated
with these marks of my affection, that he lost all
power of utterance. He pressed me to his breast
with great emotion. and wept in silence. At
length he exclaimed, “Friendship is undoubtedly
the most precious balm of life! Your words, 

dear Bramble, have in a great measure recalled
me from an abyss of despondence, in which I
have been long overwhelmed —I will, upon
honour, make you acquainted with a distinct
state of my affairs, and, as far as I am able to go
will follow the course you prescribe. But there
are certain lengths which my nature —The
truth is, there are tender connexions, of which
a batchelor has no idea —Shall I own my weakness? 
I cannot bear the thoughts of making
that woman uneasy—” “And yet, (cried I)
she has seen you unhappy for a series of years— 
unhappy from her misconduct, without ever
shewing the least inclination to alleviate your
distress—” “Nevertheless (said he) I am persuaded
she loves me with the most warm affection; 
but these are incongruities in the composition
of the human mind which I hold to be
inexplicable.” 
I was shocked at his infatuation, and changed
the subject, after we had agreed to maintain a close
correspondence for the future —He then gave me
to understand, that he had two neighbours, who,
like himself, were driven by their wives at full
speed, in the high road to bankruptcy and ruin. 
All the three husbands were of dispositions very
different from each other, and, according to this
variation, their consorts were admirably suited to
the purpose of keeping them all three in subjection. 
The views of the ladies were exactly the
same. They vied in grandeur, that is, in ostentation,
with the wife of Sir Charles Chickwell,
who had four times their fortune; and she again
piqued herself upon making an equal figure with
a neighbouring peeress, whose revenue trebled her
own. Here then was the fable of the frog and the
ox, realized in four different instances within the 

same county: one large fortune, and three moderate
estates, in a fair way of being burst by the inflamation
of female vanity; and in three of these
instances, three different forms of female tyranny
were exercised. Mr. Baynard was subjugated by
practising upon the tenderness of his nature. Mr.
Milksan, being of a timorous disposition, truckled
to the insolence of a termagant. Mr. Sowerby,
who was of a temper neither to be moved by fits,
nor driven by menaces, had the fortune to be fitted
with a helpmate, who assailed him with the
weapons of irony and satire; sometimes sneering
in the way of compliment; sometimes throwing
out sarcastic comparisons, implying reproaches upon
his want of taste, spirit, and generosity: by
which means she stimulated his passions from one
act of extravagance to another, just as the circumstances
of her vanity required. 
All these three ladies have at this time the same
number of horses, carriages, and servants in and
out of livery; the same variety of dress; the same
quantity of plate and china; the like ornaments in
furniture; and in their entertainments they endeavour
to exceed one another in the variety, delicacy,
and expence of their dishes. I believe it
will be found upon enquiry, that nineteen out of
twenty, who are ruined by extravagance, fall a sacrifice
to the ridiculous pride and vanity of silly
women, whose parts are held in contempt by the
very men whom they pillage and enslave. Thank
heaven, Dick, that among all the follies, and
weaknesses of human nature, I have not yet fallen
into that of matrimony. 
After Baynard and I had discussed all these matters
at leisure, we returned towards the house, and
met Jery with our two women, who had come
forth to take the air, as the lady of the mansion 

had not yet made her appearance. In short, Mrs.
Baynard did not produce herself, till about a quarter
of an hour before dinner was upon the table. 
Then her husband brought her into the parlour,
accompanied by her aunt and son, and she received
us with a coldness of reserve sufficient to freeze
the very soul of hospitality. Though she knew I
had been the intimate friend of her husband, and
had often seen me with him in London, she shewed
no marks of recognition or regard, when I addressed
myself to her in the most friendly terms of
salutation. She did not even express the common
complement of, I am glad to see you: or, I hope
you have enjoyed your health since we had the pleasure
of seeing you; or some such words of course: nor
did she once open her mouth in the way of welcome
to my sister and my niece: but sat in silence
like a statue, with an aspect of insensibility. Her
aunt, the model upon which she had been formed,
was indeed the very essence of insipid formality:
but the boy was very pert and impudent, and
prated without ceasing. 
At dinner, the lady maintained the same ungracious
indifference, never speaking but in whispers
to her aunt? and as to the repast, it was
made up of a parcel of kickshaws, contrived by
a Frence cook, without one substantial article
adapted to the satisfaction of an English appetite. 
The pottage was little better than bread soaked in
dish-washing, lukewarm. The ragouts looked as
if they had been once eaten and half digested: the
fricassees were involved in a nasty yellow poultice; 
and the rotis were scorched and stinking, for the
honour of the fumet. The desert consisted of
faded fruit and iced froth, a good emblem of our
landlady's character; the table-beer was sour, the
water foul, and the wine vapid; but there was a 

parade of plate and china, and a powdered lacquey
stood behind every chair, except those of the master
and mistress of the house, who were served by
two valets dressed like gentleman. We dined in a
large old Gothic parlour, which was formerly the
hall. It was now paved with marble, and, notwithstanding
the fire, which had been kindled about
an hour, struck me with such a chill sensation, that
when I entered it the teeth chattered in my jaws 
—In short, every thing was cold, comfortless
and disgusting, except the looks of my friend Baynard,
which declared the warmth of his affection
and humanity. 
After dinner we withdrew into another apartment,
where the boy began to be impertinently
troublesome to my niece Liddy. He wanted a
play-fellow, forsooth; and would have romped
with her, had she encouraged his advances —He
was even so impudent as to snatch a kiss, at which
she changed countenance, and seemed uneasy; and
though his father checked him for the rudeness of
his behaviour, he became so outrageous as to thrust
his hand in her bosom: an insult to which she did
not tamely submit, though one of the mildest
creatures upon earth. Her eyes sparkling with resentment,
she started up, and lent him such a box
in the ear, as sent him staggering to the other side
of the room. 
“Miss Melford, (cried his father) you have
treated him with the utmost propriety — 
I am only sorry that the impertinence of any
child of mine should have occasioned this exertion
of your spirit, which I cannot but applaud
and admire.” His wife was so far from assenting
to the candour of his apology, that she rose
from table, and, taking her son by the hand,
“Come, child, (said she) your father cannot 

abide you.” So saying, she retired with this
hopeful youth, and was followed by her gouvernante:
but neither the one nor the other deigned
to take the least notice of the company. 
Baynard was exceedingly disconcerted; but I
perceived his uneasiness was tinctured with resentment,
and derived a good omen from this discovery. 
I ordered the horses to be put to the carriage,
and, though he made some efforts to detain
us all night, I insisted upon leaving the house immediately; 
but, before I went away, I took an
opportunity of speaking to him again in private. 
I said every thing I could recollect, to animate his
endeavours in shaking off those shameful trammels. 
I made no scruple to declare, that his wife
was unworthy of that tender complaisance which
he had shewn for her foibles: that she was dead to
all the genuine sentiments of conjugal affection; 
insensible of her own honour and interest, and
seemingly destitute of common sense and reflection,
I conjured him to remember what he owed to his
father's house, to his own reputation, and to his
family, including even this unreasonable woman
herself, who was driving on blindly to her own
destruction. I advised him to form a plan for retrenching
superfluous expence, and try to convince
the aunt of the necessity for such a reformation,
that she might gradually prepare her niece for its
execution; and I exhorted him to turn that disagreeable
piece of formality out of the house, if he
should find her averse to his proposal. 
Here he interrupted me with a sigh, observing
that such a step would undoubtedly be fatal to Mrs.
Baynard —“I shall lose all patience (cried I) to
hear you talk so weakly —Mrs. Baynard's fits
will never hurt her constitution. I believe in
my conscience they are all affected: I am sure 

she has no feeling for your distresses; and,
when you are ruined, she will appear to have
no feeling for her own.” Finally, I took his
word and honour, that he would make an effort,
such as I had advised; that he would form a plan
of œconomy, and, if he found it impracticable
without my assistance, he would come to Bath in
the winter, where I promised to give him the meeting,
and contribute all in my power to the retrieval
of his affairs —With this mutual engagement we
parted; and I shall think myself supremely happy,
if, by my means, a worthy man, whom I love
and esteem, can be saved from misery, disgrace
and despair. 
I have only one friend more to visit in this part
of the country, but he is of a complexion very
different from that of Baynard. You have heard
memention Sir Thomas Bullford, whom I knew
in Italy. He is now become a country gentleman; 
but, being disabled by the gout from enjoying any
amusement abroad, he entertains himself within
doors, by keeping open house for all comers, and
playing upon the oddities and humours of his company:
but he himself is generally the greatest original
at his table. He is very good-humoured,
talks much, and laughs without ceasing. I am
told that all the use he makes of his understanding
at present, is to excite mirth, by exhibiting his
guests in ludicrous attitudes. I know not how far
we may furnish him with entertainment of this
kind, but I am resolved to beat up his quarters,
partly with a view to laugh with the knight himself,
and partly to pay my respects to his lady, a
good-natured sensible woman, with whom he lives
upon very easy terms, although she has not had
the good fortune to bring him an heir to his estate. 

And now, dear Dick, I must tell you for your
comfort, that you are the only man upon earth to
whom I would presume to send such a long-winded
epistle, which I could not find in my heart to
curtail, because the subject interested the warmest
passions of my heart; neither will I make any
other apology to a corespondent who has been so
long accustomed to the impertinence of 
Matt. Bramble. 
Sept. 30. 