


DEAR DICK,
I SHALL to-morrow set out for London, where
I have bespoke lodgings, at Mr. Norton's Golden-square. 
Although I am no admirer of Bath, I
shall leave it with regret; because I must part with
some old friends, whom, in all probability, I shall
never see again. In the course of coffee-house
conversation, I had often heard very extraordinary
encomiums passed on the performances of Mr. T&wblank; 
a gentleman residing in this place, who paints landscapes
for his amusement. As I have no great confidence
in the taste and judgment of coffee-house
connoisseurs, and never received much pleasure from
this branch of the art, those general praises made
no impression at all on my curiosity; but at the request
of a particular friend, I went yesterday to see
the pieces, which had been so warmly commended
—I must own I am no judge of painting, though
very fond of pictures. I don't imagine that my
senses would play me so false, as to betray me into
admiration of any thing that was very bad; but,
true it is, I have often overlooked capital beauties,
in pieces of extraordinary merit—If I am not totally
devoid of taste, however, this young gentleman
of Bath is the best landscape painter now living: 
I was struck with his performances in such a
manner, as I had never been by painting before. 

His trees not only have a richness of foilage and
warmth of colouring, which delights the view; but
also a certain magnificence in the disposition, and
spirit in the expression, which I cannot describe. 
His management of the chiaro obscuro, or light and
shadow, especially gleams of sun-shine, is altogether
wonderful, both in the contrivance and execution; 
and he is so happy in his perspective, and
marking his distances at sea, by a progressive series
of ships, vessels, capes, and promontories, that I
could not help thinking, I had a distant view of
thirty leagues upon the back-ground of the picture. 
If there is any taste for ingenuity left in degenerate
age, fast thinking into barbarism, this artist,
I apprehend, will make a capital figure, as soon as
his works are known— 
Two days ago, I was favoured with a visit by
Mr. Fitz-owen; who, with great formality, solicited
my vote and interest at the general election. 
I ought not to have been shocked at the confidence
of this man; though it was remarkable, considering
what had passed between him and me on a former
occasion—These visits are mere matter of
form, which a candidate makes to every elector; 
even to those who, he knows, are engaged in the
interest of his competitor, lest he should expose
himself to the imputation of pride, at a time when
it is expected he should appear humble. Indeed, I
know nothing so object as the behaviour of a man
canvassing for a seat in a parliament—This mean
prostration, (to borough-electors, especially) has,
I imagine, contributed in a great measure to raise
that spirit of insolence among the vulgar; which,
like the devil, will be found very difficult to lay. 
Be that as it may, I was in some confusion at the
effrontery of Fitz-owen; but I soon recollected
myself, and told him, I had not yet determined for
when I should give my vote, not whether I should 

give it for any. —The truth, is I look upon both
candidates in the same light; and should think myself
a traitor to the constitution of my country, if
I voted for either. If every elector would bring the
same consideration home to his conscience, we
should not have such reason to exclaim against the
venality of p&wblank;ts. But we are all a pack of venal
and corrupted rascals; so lost to all sense of honestly,
and all tenderness of character, that, in a
little time, I am fully persuaded, nothing will be
infamous but virtue and public-spirit. 
G. H&wblank;, who is really an enthusiast in patriotism,
and represented the capital in several successive
parliaments, declared to me t'other day, with
the tears in his eyes, that he had lived above thirty
years in the city of London, and dealt in the way
of commerce with all the citizens of note in their
turns; but that, as he should answer to God, he
had never, in the whole course of his life, found
above three or four whom he could call thoroughly
honest: a declaration, which was rather mortifying
than surprizing to me; who have sourd so few men
of worth in the course of my acquaintance, that
they serve only as exceptions; which, in the grammarian's
phrase, confirm and prove a general canon
—I know you will say, G. H&wblank; saw imperfectly
through the mist of prejudice, and I am rankled
by the spleen—Perhaps, you are partly in the right; 
for I have perceived that my opinion of mankind,
like mercury in the thermometor, rises and falls
according to the variations of the weather. 
Pray settle accounts with Barnes; take what
money of mine is in his hands, and give him acquittance. 
If you think Davis has stock or credit
enough to do justice to the farm, give him a discharge
for the rent that is due: this will animate his
industry; for I know that nothing is so discouraging
to a farmer, as the thoughts of being in arreats 

with his landlord. He becomes dispirited, and neglects
his labour; and so the farm goes to wreck. 
Tabby has been clamouring for some days about
the lamb's skin, which Williams, the hind, begged
of me, when he was last at Bath. Pr'ythee
take it back, paying the fellow the full value of it,
that I may have some peace in my own house; and
let him keep his own counsel, if he means to keep
his place—O! I shall never presume to despite or
censure any poor man, for suffering himself to be
henpecked; conscious how I myself am obliged to
truckle to a domestic dæmon; even though (blessed
be God) she is not yoked with me for life, in the
matrimonial waggon—She has quarrelled with
the servants of the house about vails; and such intolerable
scolding ensued on both sides, that I have
been fain to appease the cook and chamber-maid
by stealth. Can't you find some poor gentleman
of Wales, to take this precious commodity off the
hands of 
yours,
M. Bramble. 
Bath, May 19. 