


MY DEAR, DEAR LETTY,
NEVER did I sit down to write in such agitation
as I now feel —In the course of a few days,
we have met with a number of incidents so wonderful
and interesting, that all my ideas are thrown
into confusion and perplexity —You must not expect
either method or coherence in what I am
going to relate—my dearest Willis. Since my last,
the aspect of affairs is totally changed!—and so
changed!—but, I would fain give you a regular
detal —In passing a river, about eight days ago,
our coach was overturned, and some of us narrowly
escaped with life —My uncle had well nigh perished 
—O Heaven, I cannot reflect upon that circumstance
without horror —I should have lost my best
friend, my father and protector, but for the resolution
and activity of his servant Humphry Clinker,
whom Providence really seems to have placed near
him for the necessity of this occasion. —I would
not be thought superstitious; but surely he acted
from a stronger impulse than common fidelity — 
Was it not the voice of nature that loudly called
upon him to save the life of his own father? for,
O Letty, it was discovered that Humphry Clinker
was my uncle's natural son. 
Almost at the same instant, a gentleman, who
came to offer us his assistance, and invite us to his
house, turned out to be a very old friend of Mr.
Bramble —His name is Mr. Dennison, one of the
worthiest men living; and his lady is a perfect
saint upon earth. They have an only son—who do
you think is this only son? —O Lety!—O gracious
heaven! how my heart palpitates, when I 

tell you that this only son of Mr. Dennison, is that
very identical youth who, under the name of Wilson,
has made such ravage in my heart! —Yes, my
dear friend! Wilson and I are now lodged in the
same house, and converse together freely —His
father approves of his sentiments in my favour; 
his father loves me with all the tenderness of a
parent, my uncle, my aunt, and my brother, no
longer oppose my inclinations —On the contrary,
they have agreed to make us happy without delay; 
and in three weeks or a month, if no unforeseen
accident intervenes, your friend Lydia Melford,
will have changed her name and condition —I say,
if no accident intervenes, because such a torrent of
success makes me tremble! —I wish there may not
be something treacherous in this sudden reconciliation
of fortune —I have no merit —I have no title
to such felicity? Far from enjoying the prospect
that lies before me, my mind is harassed with a
continued tumult, made up of hopes and wishes,
doubts and apprehensions —I can neither eat nor
sleep, and my spirits are in perpetual flutter. —I
more than ever feel that vacancy in my heart,
which your presence alone can fill. —The mind, in
every disquit, seeks to repose itself on the bosom
of a friend; and this is such trial as I really know
not how to support without your company and
counsel —I must therefore, dear Letty, put your
friendship to the test —I must beg you will come
and do the last offices of maidenhood to your companion
Lydia Melford. 
This letter goes enclosed in one to our worthy
governess, from Mrs. Dennison, entreating her to
interpose, with your mamma, that you may be allowed
to favour us with your company on this
occasion; and I flatter myself that no material
objection can be made to our request —The distance
from hence to Gloucester, does not exceed one 

hundred miles, and the roads are good. —Mr.
Clinker, alias Loyd, shall be sent over to attend
your motions—if you step into the post-chaise,
with your maid Betty Barker, at seven in the
morning, you will arrive by four in the afternoon
at the half-way house, where there is good accommodation. 
There you shall be met by my brother
and myself, who will next day conduct you to this
place, where, I am sure, you will find yourself perfectly
at your ease in the midst of an agreeable society. 
—Dear Letty, I will take no refusal—if you have
any friendship—any humanity—you will come. 
—I desire that immediate application may be made
to your mamma; and that the moment her permission
is obtained, you will apprise 
Your ever faithful,
Lydia Melford. 
Oct. 14. 