


After sundry unsuccessful efforts, he finds means to
come to an explanation with his mistress; and a
reconciliation ensues. 
Peregrine, disconcerted at their sudden disappearance,
stood for some minutes gapping
in the street, before he could get the better
of his surprize; and then deliberated with himself
whether he should demand immediate admittance
to his mistress, or choose some other method of
application. Piqued at her abrupt behaviour,
though pleased with her spirit, he set his invention
to work, in order to contrive some means of
seeing her; and in a fit of musing arrived at the
inn, where he found his companions whom he
had left at the Castle-gate. They had already
made inquiry about the ladies, in consequence of
which, he learnt that Miss Sophy was daughter
of a gentleman in town to whom his mistress
was related; that an intimate friendship subsisted
between the two young ladies; that Emilia had
lived about a month with her cousin, and appeared
at the last assembly, where she was universally
admired; and that several young gentlemen of
fortune had since that time teized her with addresses. 
Our hero's ambition was flattered, and his
passion inflamed with this intelligence; and he
swore within himself that he would not quit the
spot until he should have obtained an indisputed
victory over all his rivals. 
That same evening he composed a most eloquent
epistle, in which he earnestly intreated that 

she would favour him with an opportunity of vindicating
his conduct; but she would neither receive
his billet nor see his messenger. Baulked in
this effort, he inclosed it in a new cover directed
by another hand, and ordered Pipes to ride next
morning to London, on purpose to deliver it at
the post-office; that coming by such conveyance,
she might have no suspicion of the author, and
open it before she should be aware of the deceit. 
Three days he waited patiently for the effect
of this stratagem, and in the afternoon of the
fourth, ventured to hazard a formal visit, in quality
of an old acquaintance. But here too he
failed in his attempt; she was indisposed and could
not see company. These obstacles served only
to increase his eagerness; he still adhered to his
former resolution; and his companions understanding
his determination, left him next day to
his own inventions. Thus relinquished to his
own ideas, he doubled his assiduity, and practised
every method his imagination could suggest, in
order to promote his plan. 
Pipes was stationed all day long within sight of
her door, that he might be able to give his master
an account of her motions; but she never went
abroad except to visit in the neighbourhood, and
was always housed before Peregrine could be apprized
of her appearance. He went to church
with a view of attracting her notice, and humbled
his deportment before her; but she was so mischievously
devout as to look at nothing but her
book, so that he was not favoured with one
glance of regard. He frequented the coffee-house,
and attempted to contract an acquaintance
with Miss Sophy's father, who, he hoped, would
invite him to his house; this expectation was 

also defeated. The prudent gentleman looked
upon him as one of those forward fortune-hunters
who go about the country seeking whom they
may devour, and warily discouraged all his advances. 
Chagrined by so many unsuccessful endeavours,
he began to despair of accomplishing
his aim, and as the last suggestion of his art, paid
off his lodging, took horse at noon, and departed,
in all appearance, for the place from whence he
had come. He rode, however, but a few miles,
and in the dusk of the evening returned unseen,
alighted at another inn, ordered Pipes to stay
within doors, and keeping himself incognito, employed
another person as a centinel upon Emilia. 
It was not long before he reaped the fruits of
his ingenuity. Next day in the afternoon he was
informed by his spy, that the two young ladies
were gone to walk in the park, whither he followed
them on the instant, fully determined to
come to an explanation with his mistress, even
in presence of her friend, who might possibly be
prevailed upon to interest herself in his behalf. 
When he saw them at such a distance that they
could not return to town before he should have
an opportunity of putting his resolution in practice,
he mended his pace, and found means to appear
before them so suddenly, that Emilia could
not help expressing her surprize in a scream. Our
lover putting on a mein of humility and mortification,
begged to know if her resentment was
implacable; and asked why she had so cruelly refused
to grant him the common privilege that
every criminal enjoyed. “Dear Miss Sophy,
said he, addressing himself to her companion, give
me leave to implore your intercession with your
cousin; I am sure you have humanity enough to 

espouse my cause, did you but know the justice of
it; and I flatter myself, that by your kind interposition,
I may be able to rectify that fatal misunderstanding
which hath made me wretched.” 
“Sir, said Sophy, you appear like a gentleman,
and I doubt not but your behaviour has been always
suitable to your appearance; but you must
excuse me from undertaking any such office in
behalf of a person whom I have not the honour
to know.” “Madam, answered Peregrine, I
hope Miss Emy will justify my pretensions to that
character, notwithstanding the mystery of her
displeasure, which upon my honour I cannot for
my soul explain.” “Lord! Mr. Pickle, said
Emilia, (who had by this time recollected herself)
I never questioned your gallantry and taste, but I
am resolved that you shall never have cause to
exercise your talents at my expence; so that you
teize yourself and me to no purpose: come, Sophy,
let us walk home again.” “Good God!
madam, (cried the lover with great emotion)
why will you distract me with such barbarous indifference? 
Stay, dear Emilia! I conjure you on
my knees to stay and hear me: by all that is sacred! 
I was not to blame, you must have been
imposed upon by some villain who envied my good
fortune, and took some treacherous method to
ruin my love.” 
Miss Sophy, who possessed a large stock of
good nature, and to whom her cousin had communicated
the cause of her reserve, seeing the
young gentleman so much affected with that disdain
which she knew to be feigned, laid hold on
Emilia's sleeve, saying with a smile, “Not quite
so fast, Emily; I begin to perceive that this is a
love-quarrel, and therefore there may be hopes 

of a reconciliation; for I suppose both parties are
open to conviction.” “For my own part, (cried
Peregrine with great eagerness) I appeal to Miss
Sophy's decision. But why do I say appeal? Tho'
I am conscious of having committed no offence,
I am ready to submit to any penance, let it be
never so rigorous, that my fair enslaver herself
shall impose, provided it will intitle me to her
favour and forgiveness at last.” Emily well nigh
overcome by this declaration, told him that as
she taxed him with no guilt, she expected no attonement; 
and pressed her companion to return
into town. But Sophy, who was too indulgent
to her friend's real inclination to comply with her
request, observed that the gentleman seemed so
reasonable in his concessions, she began to think
her cousin was in the wrong, and felt herself disposed
to act as umpire in the dispute. 
Overjoyed at this condescension, Mr. Pickle
thanked her in the most rapturous terms, and in
the transport of his expectation, kissed the hand
of his kind mediatrix; a circumstance which had
a remarkable effect on the countenance of Emilia,
who did not seem to relish the warmth of his
acknowledgement. 
After many supplications on one hand, and
pressing remonstrances on the other, she yielded
at length, and turning to her lover, while her
face was overspread with blushes, “Well, Sir,
(said she) supposing I were to put the difference
on that issue, how could you excuse the ridiculous
letter which you sent to me from Winchester.” 
This expostulation introduced a discussion of the
whole affair, in which all the circumstances were
canvassed; and Emilia still affirmed with great
heat, that the letter must have been calculated to 

affront her; for she could not suppose the author
was so weak as to design it for any other purpose. 
Peregrine, who still retained in his memory
the substance of this unlucky epistle, as well as
the verses which were inclosed, could recollect
no particular expression which could have justly
given the least umbrage; and therefore in the
agonies of perplexity, begged that the whole
might be submitted to the judgment of Miss Sophy; 
and faithfully promised to stand to her award. 
In short, this proposal was with seeming reluctance
embraced by Emilia, and an appointment
made to meet next day in the same place, whither
both parties were desired to come provided
with their credentials, according to which definitive
sentence would be pronounced. 
Our lover having succeeded thus far, overwhelmed
Sophy with acknowledgments on account
of her generous mediation, and in the course of
their walk, which Emilia was now in no hurry
to conclude, whispered a great many tender protestations
in the ear of his mistress, who, nevertheless,
continued to act upon the reserve, until
her doubts should be more fully resolved. 
Mr. Pickle having found means to amuse them
in the fields till the twilight, was obliged to wish
them good even, after having obtained a solemn
repetition of their promise to meet him at the
appointed time and place; and then retreated to
his apartment, where he spent the whole night in
various conjectures on the subject of this letter,
the gordian knot of which he could by no means
untie. 
One while he imagined that some wag had
played a trick upon his messenger, in consequence
of which Emilia had received a supposititious letter; 

but upon further reflection, he could not conceive
the practicability of any such deceit. Then he
began to doubt the sincerity of his mistress, who,
perhaps, had only made that an handle for discarding
him, at the request of some favoured rival; 
but his own integrity forbad him to harbour this
mean suspicion; and therefore he was again involved
in the labyrinth of perplexity. Next day
he waited on the rack of impatience for the hour
of five in the afternoon, which no sooner struck,
than he ordered Pipes to attend him, in case there
should be occasion for his evidence; and repaired
to the place of rendezvous, where he had not
tarried five minutes before the ladies appeared. 
Mutual compliments being passed, and the attendant
stationed at a convenient distance, Peregrine
persuaded them to sit down upon the grass,
under the shade of a spreading oak, that they
might be more at their ease; while he stretched
himself at their feet, and desired that the paper
on which his doom depended might be examined. 
It was accordingly put into the hand of his fair
arbitress, who read it immediately with an audible
voice. The first two words of it were no
sooner pronounced, than he started with great
emotion, and raised himself upon his hand and
knee, in which posture he listened to the rest of
the sentence; and then sprung upon his feet in
the utmost astonishment, and glowing with resentment
at the same time, exclaimed “Hell and
the devil! what's all that? Sure you make a jest
of me, madam.” “Pray, Sir, (said Sophy) give
me the hearing for a few moments, and then urge
what you shall think proper in your own defence.” 
Having thus cautioned him, she proceeded; but
before she had finished one half of the performance, 

her gravity forsook her, and she was seized with
a violent fit of laughter, in which neither of the
lovers could help joining, notwithstanding the
resentment which at that instant prevailed in the
breasts of both. The judge, however, in a little
time, resumed her solemnity, and having read
the remaining part of this curious epistle, all three
continued staring at each other alternately for the
space of half a minute, and then broke forth at
the same instant in another paroxism of mirth. 
From this unanimous convulsion, one would have
thought that both parties were extremely well
pleased with the joke; yet this was by no means
the case. 
Emilia imagined that notwithstanding his affected
surprize, her lover in spite of himself had
renewed the laugh at her expence, and in so doing,
applauded his own unmannerly ridicule. This
supposition could not not fail of raising and reviving
her indignation, while Peregrine highly resented
the indignity with which he supposed himself
treated, in their attempting to make him the
dupe of such a gross and ludicrous artifice. This
being the situation of their thoughts, their mirth
was succeeded by a mutual gloominess of aspect,
and the judge addressing herself to Mr. Pickle,
asked if he had any thing to offer why sentence
should not be pronounced. “Madam, answered
the culprit, I am sorry to find myself so low in
the opinion of your cousin, as to be thought capable
of being deceived by such a shallow contrivance.” 
“Nay, Sir, said Emily, the contrivance
is your own, and I cannot help admiring
your confidence in imputing it to me.” “Upon
my honour, Miss Emily, resumed our hero, you
wrong my understanding as well as my love, in 

accusing me of having written such a silly impertinent
performance: the very appearance and address
of it is so unlike the letter which I did myself
the honour to write, that I dare say my man,
even at this distance of time, will remember the
difference.” So saying, he extended his voice,
and beckoned to Pipes, who immediately drew
near. His mistress seemed to object to the evidence,
by observing that to be sure Mr. Pipes
had his cue; when Peregrine begging she would
spare him the mortification of considering him in
such a dishonourable light, desired his valet to
examine the outside of the letter, and recollect
if it was the same which he had delivered to Miss
Gauntlet about two years ago. Pipes having
taken a superficial view of it, pulled up his
breeches, saying, “Mayhap it is, but we have
made so many trips, and been in so many creeks
and corners since that time, that I can't pretend
to be certain; for I neither keep journal nor logbook
of our proceedings.” Emilia commended
him for his candour, at the same darting a sarcastic
look at his master, as if she thought he had tampered
with his servant's integrity in vain; and Peregrine
began to rave and curse his fate for having
subjected him to such mean suspicion, attesting
heaven and earth in the most earnest manner,
that far from having composed and conveyed that
stupid production, he had never seen it before,
nor been privy to the least circumstance of the
plan. 
Pipes, now for the first time, perceived the
mischief which he had occasioned, and moved
with the transports of his master, for whom he
had a most inviolable attachment, frankly declared
he was ready to make oath that Mr. Pickle 

had no hand in the letter which he delivered. 
All three were amazed at this confession, the
meaning of which they could not comprehend; 
and Peregrine after some pause, leaped upon Pipes,
and seizing him by the throat, exclaimed in an
extasy of rage, “Rascal! tell me this instant
what became of the letter I intrusted to your
care.” The patient valet, half strangled as he
was, squirted a collection of tobacco juice out of
one corner of his mouth, and with great deliberation
replied, “Why burnt it, you wouldn't
have me give the young woman a thing that
shook all in the wind in tatters, would you?” 
The ladies interposed in behalf of the distressed
squire, from whom, by dint of questions which
he had neither art nor inclination to evade, they
extorted an explanation of the whole affair. 
Such ridiculous simplicity and innocence of intention
appeared in the composition of his expedient,
that even the remembrance of all the chagrin
which it had produced, could not rouse their
indignation, or enable them to resist a third eruption
of laughter which they forthwith underwent. 
Pipes was dismissed with many menacing injunctions,
to beware of such conduct for the future; 
Emilia stood with a confusion of joy and
tenderness in her countenance; Peregrine's eyes
kindled into rapture, and when Miss Sophy pronounced
the sentence of reconciliation, advanced
to his mistress, saying, “Truth is mighty, and
will prevail;” then clasping her in his arms, very
impudently ravished a kiss, which she had not
power to refuse. Nay, such was the impulse of
his joy, that he took the same freedom with the
lips of Sophy, calling her his kind mediatrix and
guardian angel, and behaved with such extravagance 

of transport, as plainly evinced the fervour
and sincerity of his love. 
I shall not pretend to repeat the tender protestations
that were uttered on one side, or describe
the bewitching glances of approbation with which
they were received on the other; suffice it to
say, that the endearing intimacy of their former
connexion was instantly renewed, and Sophy,
who congratulated them upon the happy termination
of their quarrel, favoured with their mutual
confidence. In consequence of this happy
pacification, they deliberated upon the means of
seeing each other often; and as he could not
without some previous introduction visit her
openly at the house of her relation, they agreed
to meet every afternoon in the park till the next
assembly, at which he would solicit her as a partner,
and she be unengaged, in expectation of
his request. By this connexion he would be intitled
to visit her next day, and thus an avowed
correspondence would of course commence. This
plan was actually put in execution, and attended
with a circumstance which had well nigh produced
some mischievous consequence, had not Peregrine's
good fortune been superior to his discretion. 