


DEAR MARY JONES,
LADY Griskin's botler, Mr. Crumb, having
got 'squire Barton to frank me a kiver, I would
not neglect to let you know how it is with me,
and the rest of the family. 
I could not rite by John Thomas, for because
he went away in a huff, at a minute's warning. 
He and Chowder could not agree, and so they fitt
upon the road, and Chowder bitt his thumb, and
he swore he would do him a mischief, and he spoke
saucy to mistress, whereby the 'squire turn'd him off
in gudgeon; and by God's providence we picked 

up another footman called Umphry Klinker; a
good sole as ever broke bread; which shews that
a scalded cat may prove a good mouser, and a
hound be staunch, thof he has got narro hare on
his buttocks; but the proudest nose may be bro't
to the grine-stone, by sickness and misfortunes. 
O Molly! what shall I say of London? All the
towns that ever I beheld in my born-days, are no
more than Welsh barrows and crumblecks to this
wonderful sitty! Even Bath itself is put a fillitch,
in the naam of God—One would think there's no
end of the streets, but the land's end, Then there's
such a power of people, going hurry skurry! Such
a racket of coxes! Such a noise, and hali-balloo! 
So many strangers sites to be seen! O gracious! my
poor Welsh brain has been spinning like a top
ever since I came hither! And I have seen the
Park, and the paleass of Saint Gimses, and the
king's and the queen's magisterial pursing, and the
sweet young princes, and the hillyfents, and pyebald
ass, and all the rest of the royal family. 
Last week I went with mistress to the Tower,
to see the crowns and wild beastis; and there was
a monstracious lion, which teeth half a quarter
long; and a gentleman bid me not to go near him,
if I wasn't a maid; being as how he would roar,
and tear, and play the dickens—Now I had no
mind to go near him; for I cannot abide such dangerous
honeymils, not I—but, mistress would go; 
and the beast kept such a roaring and bouncing,
that I tho't he would have broke his cage and devoured
us all; and the gentleman titered forsooth; 
but I'll go to death upon it, I will, that my lady
is as good, a sirchin, as the child unborn; and,
therefore, either the gentleman told a sib, or the
lion oft to be set in the stocks for bearing false witness
again his neighbour; for the commandment
sayeth, Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy
neighbour. 

I was afterwards of a party at Sadler's wells,
where I saw such tumbling and dancing upon ropes
and wires, that I was frightened, and ready to go
into a fit—I tho't it was all inchantment; and, believing
myself bewitched, began for to cry—You
knows as how the witches in Wales fly upon
broom-sticks, but here was flying without any
broom-stick, or thing in the varsal world, and
firing of pistols in the air, and blowing of trumpets,
and swinging, and rolling of wheel barrows
upon a wire, (God bless us!) no thicker than a
sewing-thread; that, to be sure, they must deal
with the devil! —A fine gentleman, with a pig's-tail,
and a golden ford by his side, came to com-fit
me, and offered for to treat me with a pint of
wind; but I would not stay; and so, in going
through the dark passage, he began to shew his
cloven futt, and went for to be rude; my fellow-sarvant,
Umphry Klinker, bid him be sivil, and
he gave the young man a dowse in the chops; 
but, I sackens, Mr. Klinker wa'n't long in his
debt—With a good oaken sapling he dusted his
doublet, for all his golden cheese-toaster; and,
sipping me under his arm, carried me huom, I
nose not how, being I was in such a dustration— 
But, thank God! I'm now vaned from all such
vanities; for what are all those rarities and vagaries
to the glory that shall be revealed hereafter? 
O Molly! let not your poor heart be puffed up
with vanity. 
I had almost forgot to tell you, that I have had
my hair cut and pippered, and singed, and bolstered,
and buckled, in the newest fashion, by a French
freezer,—Parley vow Francey—Vee Madmanseil—I
now carries my head higher than arrow private
gentlewoman of Vales. Last night, coming huom
from the meeting, I was taken by lamp-light for
an imminent poukerer's daughter, a great beauty 

—But as I was saying, this is all vanity and vexation
of spirit—The pleasures of London are no
better than sower whey and stale cyder, when
compared to the joys of the new Gerusalem. 
Dear Mary Jones! An please God when I return,
I'll bring you a new cap, with a turkey-shell
coom, and a pye-house sermon, that was
preached in the Tabernacle; and I pray of all
love, you will mind your writing and your spilling; 
for, craving your pardon, Molly, it made
me suet to disseyffer your last scrabble, which was
delivered by the hind at Bath—O, voman! voman!
if thou had'st but the least consumption of
what pleasure we scullers have, when we can cunster
the crabbidst buck off hand, and spell the
etchnitch vords without lucking at the primmer. 
As for Mr. Klinker, he is qualified to be clerk
to a parish—But I'll say no more—Remember me
to Saul—poor fole! it goes to my hart to think
she don't yet know her letters—But all in God's
good time—It shall go had, but I will bring her
the A B C in gingerbread; and that, you nose,
will be learning to her taste. 
Mistress says, we are going a long gurney to
the North; but go where we will, I shall ever be, 
Dear Mary Jones,
yours with true infection,
Win. Jenkins. 
London, June 3. 