


I SHOULD be very ungrateful, dear Lewis,
if I did not find myself disposed to think and speak
favourably of this people, among whom I have met
with more kindness, hospitality, and rational entertainment,
in a few weeks, than ever I received in
any other country during the whole course of my
life. —Perhaps, the gratitude excited by these benefits
may interfere with the impartiality of my
remarks; for a man is as apt to be prepossessed by
particular favours as to be prejudiced by private motives
of disgust. If I am partial, there is, at least,
some merit in my conversion from illiberal prejudices
which had grown up with my constitution. 
The first impressions which an Englishman receives
in this country, will not contribute to the
removal of his prejudices; because he refers every
thing he sees to a comparison with the same articles
in his own country; and this comparison is unfavourable
to Scotland in all its exteriors, such as the face
of the country in respect to cultivation, the appearance
of the bulk of the people, and the language of
conversation in general. —I am not so far convinced
by Mr. Lismahago's arguments, buttl at I think the
Scots would do well, for their own sakes, to adopt
the English idioms and pronunciation; those of
them especially, who are resolved to push their fortunes
in South-Britain. —I know, by experience,
how easily an Englishman is influenced by the ear,
and how apt he is to laugh, when he hears his own 

language spoken with a foreign or provincial accent 
—I have known a member of the house of
commons speak with great energy and precision,
without being able to engage attention, because his
observations were made in the Scotch dialect,
which (no offence to lieutenant Lismahago) certainly
gives a clownish air even to sentiments of the
greatest dignity and decorum. —I have declared
my opinion on this head to some of the most sensible
men of this country, observing, at the same
time, that if they would employ a few natives of
England to teach the pronunciation of our vernacular
tongue, in twenty years there would be no
difference, in point of dialect, between the youth
of Edinburgh and of London. 
The civil regulations of this kingdom and metropolis
are taken from very different models from
those of England, except in a few particular establishments,
the necessary consequences of the union. 
—Their college of justice is a bench of great dignity,
filled with judges of character and ability. — 
I have heard some causes tried before this venerable
tribunal; and was very much pleased with the
pleadings of their advocates, who are by no means
deficient either in argument or elocution. The
Scottish legislation is founded, in a great measure,
on the civil law; consequently, their proceedings
vary from those of the English tribunals; but, I
think, they have the advantage of us in their method
of examining witnesses apart, and in the constitution
of their jury, by which they certainly
avoid the evil which I mentioned in my last from
Lismahago's observation. 
The university of Edinburgh is supplied with
excellent professors in all the sciences; and the
medical school, in particular, is famous all over
Europe. —The students of this art have the best
opportunity of learning it to perfection, in all its 

branches, as there are different courses for the
theory of medicine, and the practice of medicine; for
anatomy, chemistry, botany, and the materia medica,
over and above those of mathematics and experimental
philosophy; and all these are given by men
of distinguished talents. What renders this part of
education still more complete, is the advantage of
attending the infirmary, which is the best instituted
charitable foundation that I ever knew. Now
we are talking of charities, here are several hospitals,
exceedingly well endowed, and maintained
under admirable regulations; and these are not
only useful, but ornamental to the city. Among
these, I shall only mention the general work-house,
in which all the poor, not otherwise provided
for, are employed, according to their different
abilities, with such judgment and effect, that
they nearly maintain themselves by their labour, and
there is not a beggar to be seen within the precincts
of this metropolis. It was Glasgow that set the
example of this establishment, abour thirty years
ago. —Even the kirk of Scotland, so long reproached
with fanaticism and canting, abounds at
present with ministers celebrated for their learning,
and respectable for their moderation. —I have
heard their sermons with equal astonishment and
pleasure. —The good people of Edinburgh no longer
think dirt and cob-webs essential to the house
of god. —Some of their churches have admitted
such ornaments as would have excited sedition,
even in England, a little more than a century ago; 
and psalmody is here practised and taught by a
professor from the cathedral of Durham: —I should
not be surprised, in a few years, to hear it accompanied
with an organ. 
Edinburgh is a hot-bed of genius. —I have had
the good fortune to be made acquainted with many
authors of the first distinction; such as the two 

Humes, Robertson, Smith, Wallace, Blair, Ferguson,
Wilkie, &c. and I have found them all as agreeable
in conversation as they are instructive and entertaining
in their writings. These acquaintances I
owe to the friendship of Dr. Carlyle, who wants nothing
but inclination to figure with the rest upon
paper. The magistracy of Edinburgh is changed
every year by election, and seems to be very well
adapted both for state and authority. —The lord
provost is equal in dignity to the lord mayor of London; 
and the four bailies are equivalent to the rank of
aldermen. —There is a dean of guild, who takes cognizance
of mercantile affairs; a treasurer; a town-clerk; 
and the council is composed of deacons, one
of whom is returned every year, in rotation, as representative
of every company of artificers or handicraftsmen. 
though this city, from the nature of
its situation, can never be made either very convenient
or very cleanly, it has nevertheless, an air of
magnificence that commands respect. —The castle
is an instance of the sublime in scite and architecture. 
—Its fortifications are kept in good order, and
there is always in it a garrison of regular soldiers,
which is relieved every year; but it is incapable of
sustaining a siege carried on according to the modern
operations of war. —The castle hill, which extends
from the outward gate to the upper end of the
high-street, is used as a public walk for the citizens,
and commands a prospect, equally extensive
and delightful, over the county of Fife, on the
other side of the Frith, and all along the sea-coast,
which is covered with a succession of towns that
would seem to indicate a considerable share of commerce; 
but, if the truth must be told, these towns
have been falling to decay ever since the union,
by which the Scots were in a great measure deprived
of their trade with France. —The palace of
Holy-rood-house is a jewel in architecture, thrust 

into a hollow where it cannot be seen; a situation
which was certainly not chosen by the ingenious
architect, who must have been confined to the
scite of the old palace, which was a convent. 
Edinburgh is considerably extended on the south
side, where there are divers little elegant squares
built in the English manner; and the citizens have
planned some improvements on the north, which,
when put in execution, will add greatly to the
beauty and convenience of this capital. 
The sea-port is Leith, a flourishing town, about
a mile from the city in the harbour of which I have
seen above one hundred ships lying all together. 
You must know, I had the curiosity to cross the
Frith in a passage-boat, and stayed two days in
Fife, which is remarkably fruitful in corn, and exhibits
a surprising number of fine seats, elegantly
built, and magnificently furnished. There is an incredible
number of noble houses in every part of
Scotland that I have seen. —Dalkeith, Pinkie, Yester
and lord Hopton's, all of them within four or
five miles of Edinburgh, are princely palaces, in every
one of which a sovereign might reside at his
ease. —I suppose the Scots affect these monuments
of grandeur. —If I may be allowed to mingle censure
with my remarks upon a people I revere, I
must observe, that their weak side seems to be vanity. 
—I am afraid that even their hospitality is not
quite free of ostentation. —I think I have discovered
among them uncommon pains taken to display
their fine linen, of which, indeed, they have great
plenty, their furniture, plate, house keeping and
variety of wines, in which article, it must be owned,
they are profuse, if not prodigal. —A burgher of
Edinburgh, not content to vie with a citizen of
London, who has ten times his fortune, must excel
him in the expence as well as elegance of the
entertainments. 

Though the villas of the Scotch nobility and gentry
have generally an air of grandeur and state, I
think their gardens and parks are not comparable
to those of England; a circumstance the more remarkable,
as I was told by the ingenious Mr. Phillip
Miller of Chelsea, that almost all the gardeners
of Souht-Britain were natives of Scotland. The
verdure of this country is not equal to that of England. 
—The pleasure grounds are, in my opinion,
not so well laid out according to the genius loci; 
nor are the lawns, and walks, and hedges kept in
such delicate order. —The trees are planted in prudish
rows, which have not such an agreeable natural
effect, as when they are thrown into irregular
groupes, with intervening glades; and the firs,
which they generally raise around their houses,
look dull and funeral in the summer season. —I
must confess, indeed, that they yield serviceable
timber, and good shelter against the northern blasts; 
that they grow and thrive in the most barren soil,
and continually perspire a fine balsam of turpentine,
which must render the air very salutary and sanative
to the lungs of a tender texture. 
Tabby and I have been both frightned in our
return by sea from the coast of Fife. —She was
afraid of drowning, and I of catching cold, in consequence
of being drenched with sea-water; but
my fears, as well as her's, have been happily disappointed. 
—She is now in perfect health; I wish
I could say the same of Liddy. —Something uncommon
is the matter with that poor child; her colour
fades her appetite fails, and her spirits flag. 
—She is become moping and melancholy, and is
often found in tears. —Her brother suspects internal
uneasiness on account of Wilson, and denounces
vengeance against that adventurer. —She was,
it seems, strongly affected at the ball by the sudden
appearance of one Mr. Gordon, who strongly 

resembles the said Wilson; but I am rather suspicious
that she caught cold by being overheated
with dancing. —I have consulted Dr. Gregory, an
eminent physician of an amiable character, who advises
the hiland air, and the use of goat-milk
whey, which, surely, cannot have a bad effect upon
a patient who was born and bred among the mountains
of Wales. —The doctor's opinion is the more
agreeable, as we shall find those remedies in the
very place which I proposed as the utmost extent of
our expedition —I mean the borders of Argyle. 
Mr. Smollet, one of the judges of the commissary
court, which is now sitting, has very kindly
insisted upon our lodging at his country house, on
the banks of Lough-Lomond, about fourteen miles
beyond Glasgow. For this last city we shall set out
in two days, and take Stirling in our way, well
provided with recommendations from our friends
at Edinburgh, whom, I protest, I shall leave with
much regret. I am so far from thinking it any
hardship to live in this country, that, if I was
obliged to lead a town life, Edinburgh would certainly
be the head quarters of 
Yours always,
Matt. Bramble. 
Edr. August 8. 