


We descry the waggon—get into it— 
arrive at an inn—our fellow travellers
described—a mistake is committed by
Strap, which produces strange things. 
We travelled half a mile without exchanging
one word; my thoughts being engrossed
by the knavery of the world, to which I must be
daily exposed; and the contemplation of my
finances,
which began sensibly to diminish. —At
length Strap, who could hold no longer, addressed
me thus: —“Well, fools and their money are
soon parted. —If my advice had been taken,
that old skin-flint should have been damn'd
before he had got more than the third of
his demand. —'Tis a sure sign you came easily
by your money, when you squander it away
in this manner. —Ah! God help you, how
many brisly beards must I have mowed before
I earned 4 shillings and three pence halfpenny,
which is all thrown to the dogs? —How many
days have I sat weaving hair, till my toes
were numbed by the cold, my fingers cramp'd,
and my nose as blue as the sign of the periwig
that hung over the door? —What the
devil was you afraid of? I would have engaged
to box with any one of those fellows
who came in, for a guinea. —I'm sure I have
beat stouter men than either of them.” — 
And indeed, my companion would have fought 

any body, when his life was in no danger; but
he had a mortal aversion to fire arms and all instruments
of death. In order to appease him,
I assured him, no part of this extraordinary expence
should fall upon his shoulders; at which he
was affronted, and told me, he would have me to
know, that although he was a poor barber's boy,
he had a soul to spend his money with the best
'squire of the land. —Having walked all day at a
great pace, without halting for a refreshment,
we descried towards the evening, to our inexpressible
joy, the waggon about a quarter of a mile
before us; and by that time we came up with it,
were both of us so weary, that I verily believe
it would have been impracticable for us to have
walked one mile further. —We therefore bargained
with the driver, whose name was Joey, to
give us a cast to the next stage for a shilling; 
at which place we would meet the master of the
waggon, with whom we might agree for the rest
of the journey. 
Accordingly the convenience stopt, and Joey
having placed the ladder, Strap (being loaded with
our baggage) mounted first; but just as he was
getting in, a tremendous voice assailed his ears
in these words: “God's fury! there shall no
passengers come here.” —The poor shaver was
so disconcerted at this exclamation, which both he
and I imagined proceeded from the mouth of a
giant, that he descended with great velocity, and
a countenance as white as paper. —Joey perceiving
our astonishment, called with an arch
sneer, “Waunds, captain! whay woan't yau
sooffer the poor waggoneer to meake a penny? 
—Coom, coom, young man, get oop,
get oop,—never moind the coptain,—I'se not 

afear'd of the coptain.” —This was not encouragement
sufficient to Strap, who could not be
prevailed upon to venture up again; upon which
I attempted, though not without a quaking heart,
when I heard the same voice muttering like distant
thunder: “By G&sblank;d I won't be used so,
d&wblank;n&wblank;n seize me if I am!” —However I
crept in, and by accident got an empty place in
the straw, which I immediately took possession
of, without being able to discern the faces of my
fellow-travellers in the dark. Strap following
with the knapsack on his back, chanced to take
the other side, and by a jolt of the carriage,
pitched directly upon the stomach of the captain,
who bellowed out in a most dreadful manner: 
“Blood and thunder! where's my sword?” —At
these words, my frighted comrade started up,
and at one spring, bounced against me with such
force, that I thought the supposed son of Anak
intended to smother me. —In the mean time a
female voice cried out, “Bless me! what is the
matter, my dear?” “The matter, replied
the captain, damn my blood! my guts are almost
squeezed out by that Scotchman's hump.” 
Strap trembling all the while at my back, asked
him pardon, and laid the blame of what had happened
upon the jolting of the waggon. —The
woman who spoke before, went on: “Ay, ay,
my dear, it is our own fault—we may thank ourselves
for all the inconveniencies we meet with. 
—I thank God, I never travelled so before,— 
I'm sure if my lady or Sir John was to know
where we are, they would not sleep this night for
vexation. —I wish to God we had writ for the
chariot,—I know we shall never be forgiven.” 
“Come, come, my dear (replied the captain) 

it don't signify fretting now,—we shall laugh
it over as a frolick. —I hope you will not suffer
in your health. —I shall make my lord very
merry with our adventures in the Diligence.” 
—This discourse gave me such a high
notion of the captain and his lady, that I durst
not venture to join in the conversation; but immediately
after, another female voice begins: 
“Some people give themselves a great many
needless airs—better folks than any here
have travelled in waggons before now. — 
—Some of us have rode in coaches and
chariots with three footmen behind them,
without making so much fuss about it. —What
then? we are now all upon a footing, therefore
let us be sociable and merry. —What do
you say, Isaac? Is'n't this a good motion, you
doting rogue? —Speak, you old cent. per cent.
fornicator. —What desperate debt are you
thinking of? What mortgage are you planning? 
Well, Isaac, positively you shall never gain my
favour till you turn over a new leaf; grow
honest, and live like a gentleman. —In the
mean time, give me a kiss, you old fumbler.” 
—These words, accompanied with a hearty smack,
enlivened the person to whom they were addressed,
to such a degree, that he cried in transport, tho'
with a quavering voice, “Ah! you wanton
baggage—upon my credit, you are a waggish
girl, he, he, he.” —This laugh introduced a
fit of coughing, which almost suffocated the poor
usurer (such, we afterwards sound, was the profession
of this our fellow-traveller.) —About this
time, I fell asleep, and enjoyed a comfortable nap
till such time as we arrived at the inn where we
put up. —Here, having got out of the waggon 

first, I had an opportunity of viewing the passengers
in order as they entered. —The first who appeared
was a brisk airy girl, about twenty years
old, with a silver-laced hat on her head, instead
of a cap, a blue stuff riding suit trimmed with
silver, very much tarnished, and a whip in her
hand. —After her, came limping, an old man with
a worsted night-cap, buttoned under his chin,
and a broad brimmed hat slouched over it, an old
rusty blue cloak tied about his neck, under which
appeared a brown surtout, that covered a threadbare
coat and waste-coat, and, as we afterward,
discerned, a dirty flannel jacket. —His eyes were
hollow, bleared and gummy; his face was shrivelled
into a thousand wrinkles, his gums were
destitute of teeth, his nose sharp and drooping,
his chin peeked and prominent, so that when
he mumped or spoke, they approached one another
like a pair of nut-crackers; he supported himself
on an ivory-headed cane, and his whole figure
was a just emblem of winter, famine and avarice. 
—But how was I surprized, when I beheld
the formidable captain leading in his wife; in the
shape of a little, thin creature, about the age of
forty, with a long, withered visage, very much
resembling that of a baboon, through the upper
part of which, two little grey eyes peeped: He
wore his own hair in a queue that reached to his
rump, which immoderate length, I suppose, was
the occasion of a baldness that appeared on the
crown of his head, when he deigned to take off
his hat, which was very much of the size and
cock of Pistol's. —Having laid aside his great
coat, I could not help admiring the extraordinary
make of this man of war: He was about five
foot and three inches high, sixteen inches of 

which went to his face and long scraggy neck; 
his thighs were about six inches in length, his
legs resembling spindles or drum-sticks, two feet
and an half, and his body, which put me in mind
of extension without substance, engrossed the remainder; 
—so that on the whole, he appeared
like a spider or grashopper erect,—and was almost
a vox & preterea nihil. —His dress consisted in a
frock of what is called bear-skin, the skirts of
which were about half a foot long, an Hussar
waistcoat, scarlet breeches reaching half way
down his thigh, worsted stockings rolled up almost
to his groin, and shoes with wooden heels
at least two inches high; he carried a sword very
near as long as himself in one hand, and in the
other conducted his lady, who seemed to be a
woman of his own age, and still retained some
remains of an agreeable person; but so ridiculously
affected, that had I then known as much
of the world as I do now, I might have easily
perceived in her, the deplorable vanity and second-hand
airs of a lady's woman. —We were
all assembled in the kitchen, when captain
Weazel (for that was his name) desired a room
with a fire for himself and spouse; and told the
landlord, they would sup by themselves. —The
inn-keeper replied, that he could not afford them
a room by themselves; and as for supping, he had
prepared victuals for the passengers in the waggon
without respect of persons, but if he could prevail
on the rest to let him have his choice in a
separate manner, with all his heart: This was no
sooner said, than all of us declared against the
proposal, and miss Jenny (our other female passenger)
observed, that if captain Weazel and his
lady had a mind to sup by themselves, they might 

wait until we should have done. —At this,
the captain put on a martial frown and looked
very big, without speaking; while his yoke-fellow,
with a disdainful toss of her nose, muttered
something about “Creature;”—which miss Jenny
over-hearing, stept up to her, saying, “None
of your names, good Mrs. Abigail;—creature
quotha,—I'll assure you,—No such creature
as you neither—no ten pound sneaker— 
no quality coupler.” —Here the captain interposed
with a “Damme, madam, what d'ye mean
by that?” —“Damn you, sir, who are
you? (replied miss Jenny) who made you a
captain, you pitiful, trencher-scraping, pimping
curler? —'Sdeath! the army is come to
a fine pass, when such fellows as you get commissions. 
—What, I suppose you think I don't
know you? —By G&sblank;d, you and your help-mate
are well met,—a cast-off mistress, and a
bald valet de chambre are well yoked together. 
Blood and wounds! (cried Weazel) d'ye question
the honour of my wife, madam? —Hell and damnation! 
No man in England durst say so much,
—I would flea him, carbonado him! Fury
and destruction! I would have his liver for
my supper.” —So saying, he drew his sword,
and flourished with it, to the great terror of
Strap: while miss Jenny snapping her fingers,
told him, she did not value his resentment a f&wblank;t. 
—In the midst of this quarrel, the master of the
waggon alighted, who understanding the cause
of it, and fearing the captain and his lady
would take so much umbrage, as to leave his
carriage, was at great pains to have every thing
made up, which he at last accomplished, and
we sat down to supper all together. At bedtime 

time we were shewn to our apartments. The
old usurer, Strap and I, were conducted to
one room; the captain, his wife, and miss
Jenny to another. —About midnight, my
companion's bowels being disordered, he got up,
in order to go backward; in his return, mistaking
one door for another, he entered Weazel's chamber,
and without any hesitation went to bed to
his wife, who was fast asleep; the captain being
at another end of the room, groping for some
empty vessel, his own chamber-pot being leaky: 
As he did not perceive Strap coming in, he went
toward his own bed, after having found a convenience; 
but no sooner did he feel a rough head
with a cotton night-cap on it, than it came into
his mind, that he was got to miss Jenny's bed
instead of his own, and that the head he felt, was
that of some gallant, with whom she had made
an assignation. —Full of this conjecture, and scandalized
at the prostitution of his apartment, he
snatched up the vessel he had just before filled,
and emptied it at once on the astonished barber
and his own wife, who waking at that instant,
broke forth into lamentable cries, which not only
alarmed the husband beyond measure, but
frightened poor Strap almost out of his senses; 
for he verily believed himself bewitched; especially
when the incensed captain seized him by
the throat, with a volley of oaths, asking him
how he durst have the presumption to attempt
the chastity of his wife. —Poor Strap was so amazed
and confounded, that he could say nothing,
but,—“I take God to witness she's a virgin for
me.” —Mrs. Weazel enraged to find herself
in such a pickle, through the precipitation of her
husband, got up in her shift, and with the heel 

of her shoe, which she found at the bed-side,
belaboured the captain's bald pate, till he cried
“Murder.” “I'll teach you to empty your
stink-pots on me, (cried she) you pitiful, hop
o' my thumb coxcomb. —What? I warrant
you're jealous, you man of lath. —Was
it for this I condescended to take you to my
bed, you poor, withered, sapless twig?” — 
The noise occasioned by this adventure, had
brought the master of the waggon and me to
the door, where we overheard all that passed,
with great satisfaction. In the mean time we
were alarmed with the cry of “Rape! Murder!
Rape!” which miss Jenny pronounced with
great vociferation. —“O! you vile, abominable
old villain, (said she) would you rob me of my
virtue? —But I'll be revenged of you, you
old goat! I will!—help! for heaven's
sake! help!— I shall be ravished! ruined!
help!” —Some servants of the inn
hearing this cry, came running up stairs with
lights, and such weapons as chance afforded; 
when we beheld a very diverting scene. —In one
corner stood the poor captain shivering in his shirt,
which was all torn to rags; with a woful visage,
scratched all over by his wife, who had by this
time wrapt the covering about her, and sat crying
on the side of her bed. —In the other end, lay
the old usurer sprawling on miss Jenny's bed,
with nothing on him but his flannel jacket over
his shirt, and his tawny meagre limbs exposed
to the air; while she held him fast by the two
ears, and loaded him with execrations. — 
When we asked what was the matter, she affected
to weep, and told us, she was afraid that
wicked rogue had ruined her in her sleep, and 

bid us take notice of what we saw, for she intended
to make use of our evidence against him. — 
The poor wretch looked like one more dead than
alive, and begged for Christ's sake to be released; 
which was no sooner done, than he protested she
was no woman, but a devil incarnate—that she
had first seduced his flesh to rebel, and then betrayed
him. —“Yes, cockatrice (continued he,
with a faultering voice) thou knowest thou
did'st spread this snare for me—but thou shalt
not succeed—for I will hang myself before
thou shalt get a farthing of me.” —So saying,
he crawled to his own bed, groaning all the
way. —We then advanced to the captain, who
told us, “Gentlemen, here has been a damn'd
mistake; but I'll be revenged on him who
was the occasion of it. —That Scotchman
who carries the knapsack shall not breathe
this vital air another day, if my name be
Weazel. —My dear, I ask you ten thousand
pardons; you are sensible I could mean no
harm to you.” —“I know not what you
meant (replied she, sobbing) but I know I
have got enough to send me to my grave.” — 
At length they were reconciled. —The wife was
complimented with a share of miss Jenny's bed
(her own being overflowed) and the master of
the waggon invited Weazel to sleep the remaining
part of the night with him. I retired to mine,
where I found Strap mortally afraid, he having
got away in the dark, while the captain and his
lady were at logger-heads. 