


Which sheweth that he who plays at
bowls, will sometimes meet with rubbers. 
Sir Launcelot, boiling with indignation
at the venality and faction
of the electors, whom he had
harangued to so little purpose, retired
with the most deliberate disdain towards
one of the gates of the town,
on the outside of which his curiosity
was attracted by a concourse of people,
in the midst of whom stood Mr.
Ferret, mounted upon a stool, with a 

kind of satchel hanging round his
neck, and a vial displayed in his right
hand, while he held forth to the audience
in a very vehement strain of
elocution. 
Crabshaw thought himself happily
delivered, when he reached the
suburbs, and proceeded without halting; 
but his master mingled with the
crowd, and heard the orator express
himself to this effect: “Very likely,
you may undervalue me and my medicine,
because I don't appear upon a
stage of rotten boards, in a shabby
velvet coat and tye-periwig, with a
foolish fellow in motley, to make
you laugh by making wry faces: but
I scorn to use these dirty arts for engaging
your attention. These paultry
tricks, ad captandum vulgus, can
have no effect but on ideots, and if
you are ideots, I don't desire you
should be my customers. Take notice,
I don't address you in the stile of
a mountebank, or a high German
doctor; and yet the kingdom is full
of mountebanks, empirics, and quacks. 

We have quacks in religion, quacks
in physic, quacks in law, quacks in
politics, quacks in patriotism, quacks
in government; high German quacks
that have blistered, sweated, bled, and
purged the nation into an atrophy. 
But this is not all: they have not only
evacuated her into a consumption, but
they have intoxicated her brain, until
she is become delirious: she can no
longer pursue her own interest; or,
indeed, rightly distinguish it: like the
people of Nineveh, she can hardly
tell her right hand from her left; but,
as a changeling, is dazzled and delighted
by an ignis fatuus, a Will o'
the Wisp, an exhalation from the vilest
materials in nature, that leads her
astray through Westphalian bogs and
deserts, and will one day break her
neck over some barren rocks, or leave
her sticking in some H&wblank;n pit or quagmire. 
For my part, if you have a
mind to betray your country, I have
no objection. In selling yourselves
and your fellow-citizens, you only
dispose of a pack of rascals who deserve 

to be sold—If you sell one another,
why should not I sell this here
Elixir of Long Life, which if properly
used, will protract your days till you
shall have seen your country ruined? 
I shall not pretend to disturb your understandings,
which are none of the
strongest, with a hotch-potch of unintelligible
terms, such as Aristotle's
four principles of generation, unformed
matter, privation, efficient and final
causes. Aristotle was a pedantic
blockhead, and still more knave than
fool. The same censure we may safely
put on that wise-acre Dioscorides,
with his faculties of simples, his seminal,
specific, and principal virtues; 
and that crazy commentator Galen,
with his four elements, elementary
qualities, his eight complexions, his
harmonies, and discords. Nor shall
I expatiate on the alkahest of that
mad scoundrel Paracelsus, with which
he pretended to reduce flints into salt; 
nor the archæus or spiritus rector of
that visionary Van Helmont, his simple, 

elementary water, his gas, ferments,
and transmutations; nor shall I enlarge
upon the salt, sulphur, and oil,
the acidum vagum, the mercury of metals,
and the volatilized vitriol of other
modern chymists, a pack of ignorant,
conceited, knavish rascals, that puzzle
your weak heads with such jargon,
just as a Germanized m&wblank;r throws
dust in your eyes, by lugging in and
ringing the changes on the balance of
power, the protestant religion, and your
allies on the continent; acting like the
juggler, who picks your pockets while
he dazzles your eyes and amuses your
fancy with twirling his fingers, and
reciting the gibberish of hocus pocus; 
for, in fact, the balance of power is
a mere chimera; as for the protestant
rellgion, nobody gives himself any
trouble about it; and allies on the
continent we have none; or at least,
none that would raise an hundred men
to save us from perdition, unless we
paid an extravagant price for their
assistance. But, to return to this here 

Elixir of Long Life, I might embellish
it with a great many high-sounding
epithets; but I disdain to follow
the example of every illiterate vagabond,
that from idleness turns quack,
and advertises his nostrum in the public
papers. I am neither a felonious
dry-salter returned from exile, an
hospital stump-turner, a decayed stay-maker,
a bankrupt-printer, or insolvent
debtor, released by act of parliament. 
I did not pretend to administer
medicines, without the least tincture
of letters, or suborn wretches to
perjure themselves in false affidavits of
cures that were never performed; nor
employ a set of led-captains to harangue
in my praise, at all public places. 
I was bred regularly to the profession
of chymistry, and have tried all
the processes of alchemy, and I may
venture to say, that this here Elixir
is, in fact, the chruseon pepuromenon ek
puros, the visible, glorious, spiritual
body, from whence all other beings
derive their existence, as proceeding
from their father the sun, and their 

mother the moon; from the sun, as
from a living and spiritual gold, which
is mere fire; consequently, the common
and universal first created mover,
from whence all moveable things have
their distinct and particular motions; 
and also from the moon, as from the
wife of the sun, and the common
mother of all sublunary things: and
for as much as man is, and must be
the comprehensive end of all creatures,
and the microcosm, he is counselled
in the Revelations to buy gold
that is thoroughly fired, or rather pure
fire, that he may become rich and
like the sun; as, on the contrary, he
becomes poor, when he abuses the
arsenical poison; so that his silver, by
the fire, must be calcined to a caput
mortuum, which happens, when he
will hold and retain the menstruum
out of which he partly exists, for his
own property, and doth not daily offer
up the same in the fire of the sun,
that the woman may be cloathed with
the sun, and become a sun, and thereby
rule over the moon; that is to say, 

that he may get the moon under his
feet. —Now this here Elixir, sold for
no more than six-pence a vial, contains
the essence of the alkahest, the
archæus, the catholicon, the menstruum,
the sun, moon, and to sum
up all in one word, is the true, genuine,
unadulterated, unchangeable,
immaculate and specific chruseon pepuromenon
ek puros.” 
The audience were variously affected
by this learned oration: some of
those who favoured the pretensions of
the whig candidate, were of opinion
that he ought to be punished for his
presumption in reflecting so scurrilously
on ministers and measures. Of
this sentiment was our adventurer,
though he could not help admiring
the courage of the orator, and owning
within himself, that he had mixed
some melancholy truths with his scurrility. 
Mr. Ferret would not have
stood so long in his rostrum unmolested,
had not he cunningly chosen
his station immediately without the
jurisdiction of the town, whose magistrates 

therefore could not take cognizance
of his conduct; but application
was made to the constable of
the other parish, while our nostrum-monger
proceeded in his speech, the
conclusion of which produced such
an effect upon his hearers, that his
whole cargo was immediately exhausted. 
He had just stepped down
from his stool, when the constable,
with his staff, arrived, and took him
under his guidance. Mr. Ferret, on
this occasion, attempted to interest the
people in his behalf, by exhorting them
to vindicate the liberty of the subject,
against such an act of oppression; but
finding them deaf to the tropes and
figures of his elocution, he addressed
himself to our knight, reminding him
of his duty to protect the helpless and
the injured, and earnestly soliciting his
interposition. 
Sir Launcelot, without making the
least reply to his entreaties, resolved to
see the end of this adventure; and being
joined by his squire, followed the
prisoner at a distance, measuring back 

the ground he had travelled the day
before, until he reached another small
borough, where Ferret was housed in
the common prison. While he sat a-horseback,
deliberating on the next
step he should take, he was accosted
by the voice of Tom Clarke, who
called in a whimpering tone, through
a window grated with iron, “For
the love of God! Sir Launcelot, do,
dear Sir, be so good as to take the
trouble to alight and come up stairs
—I have something to communicate
of consequence to the community in
general, and you in particular—Pray,
do, dear Sir Knight. I beg a boon
in the name of St. Michael and St.
George for England.” 
Our adventurer, not a little surprized
at this address, dismounted
without hesitation, and being admitted
to the common jail, there found
not only his old friend Tom, but also
the uncle, sitting on a bench with a
woollen night-cap on his head, and a
pair of spectacles on his nose, reading
very earnestly in a book, which he 

afterwards understood was intituled,
“The Life and Adventures of Valentine
and Orson.” The captain no
sooner saw his great pattern enter,
than he rose and received him with
the salutation of “What cheer, brother?” 
and before the knight could
answer, added these words: “You
see how the land lies—here have Tom
and I been fast a-shore these four and
twenty hours; and this berth we have
got by attempting to tow your galley,
brother, from the enemy's harbour. — 
Adds bobs! if we had this here fellow
whoreson for a consort, with all
our tackle in order, brother, we'd soon
shew 'em the topsail, slip our cable,
and down with their barricadoes. But,
howsomever, it don't signify talking,
—patience is a good stream-anchor,
and will hold, as the saying is,
—but, damn my—as for the matter
of my boltsprit. —Hearkye, hearkye,
brother, damn'd hard to engage
with three at a time, one upon my
bow, one upon my quarter, and one
right a-head, rubbing, and drubbing, 

lying athwart hawse, raking fore and
aft, battering and grappling, and lashing
and clashing—adds heart, brother; 
crash went the boltsprit—down came
the round-top—up with the dead lights
—I saw nothing but the stars at noon,
lost the helm of my seven senses, and
down I broached upon my broadside.”— 
As Mr. Clarke rightly conceived
that his uncle would need an interpreter,
he began to explain these hints
by giving a circumstantial detail of his
own and the captain's disaster. He
told Sir Launcelot, that notwithstanding
all his persuasion and remonstrances,
captain Crowe insisted upon appearing
in the character of a knight-errant; 
and with that view had set
out from the public-house on the
morning that succeeded his vigil in
the church: that upon the high-way
they had met with a coach, containing
two ladies, one of whom seemed
to be under great agitation; for,
as they passed, she struggled with the
other, thrust out her head at the
window, and said something which 

he could not distinctly hear; that captain
Crowe was struck with admiration
of her unequalled beauty; and he,
(Tom) no sooner informed him who
she was, than he resolved to set her
at liberty, on the supposition that she
was under restraint and in distress: that
he accordingly unsheathed his cutlass,
and riding back after the coach, commanded
the driver to bring to, on pain
of death: that one of the servants
believing the captain to be an highwayman,
presented a blunderbuss, and
in all probability would have shot him
on the spot, had not he (the nephew)
rode up and assured them the gentleman
was non compos: that notwithstanding
his intimation, all the three
attacked him with the butt ends of
their horse-whips, while the coach
drove on, and although he laid about
him with great fury, at last brought
him to the ground by a stroke on the
temple: that Mr. Clarke himself then
interposed in defence of his kinsman,
and was also severely beaten: that two
of the servants, upon application to 

a justice of the peace, residing near
the field of battle, had granted a
warrant against the captain and his
nephew, and without examination,
committed them as idle vagrants, after
having seized their horses and their
money, on pretence of their being
suspected for highwaymen. “But,
as there was no just cause of suspicion,
(added he) I am of opinion, the justice
is guilty of a trespass, and may
be sued for falsum imprisonamentum,
and considerable damages obtained; 
for you will please to observe, Sir,
no justice has a right to commit any
person 'till after due examination; besides,
we were not committed for an
assault and battery, auditâ querela, nor
as wandering lunatics by the statute,
who, to be sure, may be apprehended
by a justice's warrant, and locked
up and chained, if necessary, or to
be sent to their last legal settlement:
but we were committed as vagrants
and suspected highwaymen. Now
we do not fall under the description
of vagrants; nor did any circumstance 

appear to support the suspicion
of robbery; for to constitute robbery,
there must be something taken; but
here nothing was taken but blows,
and they were upon compulsion: even
an attempt to rob, without any taking,
is not felony, but a misdemeanor. 
To be sure there is a taking in deed,
and a taking in law: but still the robber
must be in possession of a thing
stolen; and we attempted to steal
ourselves away—My uncle indeed
would have released the young lady
vi et armis, had his strength been equal
to his inclination; and in so doing,
I would have willingly lent my
assistance, both from a desire to serve
such a beautiful young creature, and
also in regard to your honour, for I
thought I heard her call upon your
name.”— 
“Ha! how! what! whose name?
say, speak—heaven and earth!” (cried
the Knight, with marks of the most
violent emotion.) Clarke terried at
his looks, replied, “I beg your pardon
a thousand times; I did not say 

positively she did speak those words:
but I apprehended she did speak
them. Words, which may be taken
or interpreted by a law in general,
or common sense, ought not to receive
a strained, or unusual construction; 
and ambiguous words”— 
“Speak, or be dumb for ever! (exclaimed
Sir Launcelot in a terrific
tone, laying, his hand on his sword)
what young lady, ha! What name
did she call upon?” Clarke falling on
his knees, answered, not without stammering,
“Miss Aurelia Darnel; to
the best of my recollection, she called
upon Sir Launcelot Greaves.” 
“Sacred powers! (cried our adventurer)
which way did the carriage proceed?” 
When Tom told him that the coach
quitted the post-road, and struck away
to the right at full speed, Sir
Launcelot was seized with a pensive
fit; his head sunk upon his breast,
and he mused in silence for several
minutes, with the most melancholy
expression on his countenance: then 

recollecting himself, he assumed a
more composed and chearful air, and
asked several questions with respect
to the arms on the coach, and the liveries
worn by the servants. It was
in the course of this interrogation, that
he discovered he had actually conversed
with one of the foot-men,
who had brought back Crabshaw's
horse: a circumstance that filled him
with anxiety and chagrin, as he had
omitted to inquire the name of his
master, and the place to which the
coach was travelling; though, in all
probability, had he made these inquiries,
he would have received very
little satisfaction, there being reason
to think the servants were enjoined
secrecy. The knight, in order to
meditate on this unexpected adventure,
sat down by his old friend, and
entered into a reverie, which lasted
about a quarter of an hour, and might
have continued longer, had it not
been interrupted by the voice of Crabshaw,
who bawled aloud, “Look
to it, my masters—as you brew you 

must drink—this shall be a dear day's
work to some of you, for my part I
say nothing—the braying ass eats a
little grass—one barber shaves not so
close, but another finds a few stubble
—you wanted to catch a capon,
and you've stole a cat. He that takes
up his lodgings in a stable, must be
contented to lie upon litter.—” 
The knight, desirous of knowing
the cause that prompted Timothy to
apothegmatize in this manner, looked
through the grate, and perceived the
squire fairly set in the stocks, surrounded
by a mob of people. When
he called to him, and asked the reason
of this disgraceful restraint, Crabshaw
replied, “There's no cake, but
there's another of the same make— 
who never climbed never fell—after
clouds comes clear weather. 'Tis all
long of your honour I've met with
this preferment; no deservings of my
own, but the interest of my master. 
Sir knight, if you will slay the justice,
hang the constable, release your squire,
and burn the town, your name will 

be famous in story: but, if you are
content, I am thankful. Two hours
are soon spent in such good company; 
in the mean time look to'un jailor,
there's a frog in the stocks.” 
Sir Launcelot, incensed at this affront
offered to his servant, advanced
to the prison-door, but found it fast
locked, and when he called to the
turnkey, he was given to understand
that he himself was prisoner. Enraged
at this intimation, he demanded
at whose suit; and was answered
through the wicket, “At the suit of
the king, in whose name I will hold
you fast, with God's assistance.” 
The knight's looks now began to
lighten, he rolled his eyes around,
and snatching up an oaken bench,
which three ordinary men could scarce
have lifted from the ground, he, in
all likelihood, would have shattered
the door in pieces, had not he been
restrained by the interposition of Mr.
Clarke, who intreated him to have a
little patience, assuring him he would
suggest a plan that would avenge him 

amply on the justice, without any
breach of the peace. “I say, the
justice (added Tom) because it must
be his doing. —He is a little petulant
sort of a fellow, ignorant of the law,
guilty of numberless irregularities; 
and, if properly managed, may for
this here act of arbitrary power, be
not only cast in a swinging sum, but
even turned out of the commission
with disgrace.—” 
This was a very seasonable hint,
in consequence of which the bench
was softly replaced, and captain Crowe
deposited the poker, with which he
had armed himself to second the efforts
of Sir Launcelot. They now,
for the first time, perceived that Ferret
had disappeared; and, upon inquiry,
found that he was in fact the
occasion of the knight's detention and
the squire's disgrace. 