


DEAR DOCTOR,
LONDON is literally new to me; new in its
streets, houses, and even in its situation; as the
Irishman said, “London is now gone out of town.” 
What I left open fields, producing hay and corn,
I now find covered with streets, and squares, and
palaces, and churches. I am credibly informed
that in the space of seven years, eleven thousand
new houses have been built in one quarter of Westminster,
exclusive of what is daily added to other
parts of this unweildy metropolis. Pimlico and
Knightsbridge are now almost joined to Chelsea
and Kensington; and if this infatuation continues
for half a century, I suppose the whole county of
Middlesex will be covered with brick. 
It must be allowed, indeed for the credit of the
present age, that London and Westminster are 

much better paved and lighted than they were formerly. 
The new streets are spacious, regular and
airy; and the houses generally convenient. The
bridge at Blackfriars is a noble monument of taste
and public spirit—I wonder how they stumbled upon
a work of such magnificence and utility. But,
notwithstanding these improvements, the capital is
become an overgrown monster; which, like a
dropsical head, will in time leave the body and extremities
without nourishment and support. The
absurdity will appear in its full force, when we
consider, that one sixth part of the natives of this
whole extensive kingdom, is crowded within the
bills of Mortality. What wonder that our villages
are depopulated, and our farms in want of
day-labourers? The abolition of small farms, is
but one cause of the decrease of population. Indeed
the incredible increase of horses and black
cattle, to answer the purposes of luxury, requires
a prodigious quantity of hay and grass, which are
raised and managed without much labour; but a
number of hands will always be wanted for the
different branches of agriculture, whether the
farms be large or small. The tide of luxury has
swept all the inhabitants from the open country— 
The poorest 'squire, as well as the richest peer,
must have his house in town, and make a figure
with an extraordinary number of domestics. The
plough-boys, cow-herds, and lower hinds, are debauched
and seduced by the appearance and discourse
of those coxcombs in livery, when they
make their summer excursions. They desert their
dirt and drudgery, and swarm up to London, in
hopes of getting into service, where they can live
luxuriously and wear fine clothes, without being
obliged to work; for idleness is natural to man— 
Great numbers of these, being disappointed in their
expectation, become thieves and sharpers; and 

London being an immense wilderness, in which
there is neither watch nor ward of any signification,
nor any order or police, affords them lurking-places
as well as prey. 
There are many causes that contribute to the
daily increase of this enormous mass; but they
may be all resolved into the grand source of luxury
and corruption—About five and twenty years ago,
very few, even of the most opulent citizens of
London, kept any equipage, or even any servants
in livery. Their tables produced nothing but plain
boiled and roasted, with a bottle of port and a
tankard of beer. At present, every trader in any
degree of credit, every broker and attorney, maintains
a couple of footmen, a coachman and postillion. 
He has his town-house, and his country-house,
his coach, and his postchaise. His wife and
daughters appear in the richest stuffs, bespangled
with diamonds. They frequent the court, the
opera, the theatre, and the masquerade. They
hold assemblies at their own houses: they make
sumptuous entertainments, and treat with the richest
wines of Bourdeaux, Burgundy, and Champagne. 
The substantial tradesman, who wont to
pass his evenings at the ale-house for four-pence
half penny, now spends three shillings at the tavern,
while his wife keeps card-tables at home; 
she must likewise have fine clothes, her chaise, or
pad, with country lodgings, and go three times a
week to public diversions. Every clerk, apprentice,
and even waiter of tavern or Coffee-house,
maintains a gelding by himself, or in partnership,
and assumes the air and apparel of a petit maitre— 
The gayest places of public entertainment are filled
with fashionable figures; which, upon enquiry,
will be found to be journeymen taylors, servingmen,
and abigails, disguised like their betters. 
In short, there is no distinction or subordination
lest—The different departments of life are jumbled 

together—The hod-carrier, the low mechanic,
the tapster, the publican, the shop-keeper, the pettisogger,
the citizen, and courtier, all tread upon the
kibes of one another: actuated by the demons of
profligacy and licentiousness, they are seen every
where, rambling, riding, rolling, rushing, justling,
mixing, bouncing, cracking, and crashing in one
vile ferment of stupidity and corruption—All is tumult
and hurry; one would imagine they were impelled
by some disorder of the brain, that will not
suffer them to be at rest. The foot-passengers run
along as if they were pursued by bailiffs. The porters
and chairmen trot with their burdens. People,
who keep their own equipages, drive through the
streets at full speed. Even citizens, physicians, and
apothecaries, glide in their chariots like lightning. 
The hackney-coachmen make their horses smoke,
and the pavement shakes under them; and I have
actually seen a waggon pass through Piccadilly at
the hand-gallop. In a word, the whole nation
seems to be running out of their wits. 
The diversions of the times are not ill-suited to
the genius of this incongrous monster, called the
public. Give it noise, confusion, glare, and glitter; 
it has no idea of elegance and propriety— 
What are the amusements at Ranclagh? One half
of the company are following one another's tails,
in an eternal circle; like so many blind asses in an
olive-mill; where they can neither discourse, distinguish,
nor be distinguished; while the other half
are drinking hot water, under the denomination of
tea, till nine or ten o'clock at night, to keep them
awake for the rest of the evening. As for the orchestra,
the vocal musick especially, it is well for
the performers that they cannot be heard distinctly. 
Vauxhall is a composition of baubles, overcharged
with paltry ornaments, ill-conceived, and poorly
executed; without any unity of design, or propriety 

of disposition. It is an unnatural assembly
of objects, fantastically illuminated in broken masses; 
seemingly contrived to dazzle the eyes and divert
the imagination of the vulgar—Here a wooden
lion, there a stone statue; in one place, a
range of things like coffee-house boxes, covered
atop; in another, a parcel of ale-house benches; 
in a third, a puppet shew representation of a tin
cascade; in a fourth, a gloomy cave of a circular
form, like a sepulchral vault half-lighted; in a
fifth, a scanty slip of grass-plat, that would not
afford pasture sufficient for an ass's colt. The
walks, which nature seems to have intended for
solitude, shade, and silence, are filled with crowds
of noisy people, sucking up the nocturnal rheums
of an aguish climate; and through these gay scenes,
a few lamps glimmer like so many farthing candles. 
When I see a number of well-dressed people, of
both sexes, sitting on the covered benches, exposed
to the eyes of the mob; and, which is worse,
to the cold, raw, night-air, devouring sliced beef,
and swilling port, and punch, and cider, I can't
help compassionating their temerity, while I despise
their want of taste and decorum; but, when
they course along those damp and gloomy walks, or
crowd together upon the wet gravel, without any
other cover than the cope of Heaven, listening to
a song, which one half of them cannot possibly
hear, how can I help supposing they are actually
possessed by a spirit more absurd and pernicious
than any thing we meet with in the precincts of
Bedlam? In all probability, the proprietors of
this, and other public gardens of inferior note,
in the skirts of the metropolis, are, in some shape,
connected with the faculty of physic, and the company
of undertakers; for, considering that eagerness
in the pursuit of what is called pleasure,
which now predominates through every rank and
denomination of life, I am persuaded, that more 

gouts, rheumatisms, catarrhs, and consumptions
are caught in these nocturnal pastimes, sub die,
than from all the risques and accidents to which a
life of toil and danger is exposed. 
These and other observations, which I have
made in this excursion, will shorten my stay at
London, and send me back with a double relish to
my solitude and mountains; but I shall return by
a different route from that which brought me to
town. I have seen some old friends, who constantly
resided in this virtuous metropolis, but they
are so changed in manners, and disposition, that
we hardly know or care for one another—In our
journey from Bath, my sister Tabby provoked me
into a transport of passion; during which, like a
man who has drank himself pot valiant, I talked
to her in such a stile of authority and resolution, as
produced a most blessed effect. She and her dog
have been remarkably quiet and orderly, ever since
this expostulation. How long this agreeable calm
will last, Heaven above knows—I flatter myself
the exercise of travelling has been of service to my
health; a circumstance, which encourages me to
proceed in my projected expedition to the North. 
But I must, in the mean time, for the benefit and
amusement of my pupils, explore the depths of
this chaos; this mishapen and monstrous capital,
without head or tail, members or proportion. 
Thomas was so insolent to my sister on the road,
that I was obliged to turn him off abruptly, betwixt
Chippenham and Marlborough, where our coach
was overturned. The fellow was always sullen and
selfish; but, if he should return to the country,
you may give him a character for honestly and sobriety; 
and, provided he behaves with proper respect
to the family, let him have a couple of
guineas in the name 
yours always,
Matt. Bramble. 
London, May 29. 