


Containing further Anecdotes relating
to the Children of Wretchedness. 
Dinner being chearfully discussed,
and our adventurer expressing
an eager desire to know the
history of the male and female who
had acted as 'squires or seconds to the
champions of the King's-bench, Felton
gratified his curiosity to this effect: 

“All that I know of Captain Clewlin,
previous to his commitment, is,
that he was commander of a sloop of
war, and bore the reputation of a
gallant officer; that he married the
daughter of a rich merchant in the
city of London against the inclination,
and without the knowledge of
her father, who renounced her for
this act of disobedience: that the captain
consoled himself for the rigour
of the parent with the possession of
the lady, who was not only remarkably
beautiful in person, but highly
accomplished in her mind, and amiable
in her disposition. Such, a few
months ago, were those two persons
whom you saw acting in such a vulgar
capacity. When they first entered
the prison they were undoubtedly the
handsomest couple mine eyes ever beheld,
and their appearance won universal
respect even from the most brutal
inhabitants of the jail. The captain
having unwarily involved himself
as security for a man to whom he
had lain under obligations, became 

liable for a considerable sum; and
his own father-in-law being the sole
creditor of the bankrupt, took this
opportunity of wreaking vengeance
upon him for having espoused his
daughter. He watched an opportunity
until the captain had actually stept
into the post-chaise with his lady for
Portsmouth, where his ship lay, and
caused him to be arrested in the most
public and shameful manner. Mrs.
Clewlin had like to have sunk under
the first transports of her grief and
mortification; but these subsiding, she
had recourse to personal sollicitation. 
She went with her only child in her
arms (a lovely boy) to her father's
door, and being denied admittance,
kneeled down in the street, imploring
his compassion in the most pathetic
strain; but this hard-hearted citizen,
instead of recognizing his child, and
taking the poor mourner to his bosom,
insulted her from the window with
the most bitter reproach, saying, among
other shocking expressions,
“Strumpet, take yourself away, with 

your brat, otherwise I shall send for
the beadle, and have you to Bridewell.” 
The unfortunate lady was cut to
the heart by this usage, and fainted
in the street; from whence she was
conveyed to a public house by the
charity of some passengers. She afterwards
attempted to soften the barbarity
of her father, by repeated letters,
and by interesting some of his
friends to intercede with him in her
behalf; but all her endeavours proving
ineffectual, she accompanied her
husband to the prison of the King's-bench,
where she must have felt, in
the severest manner, the fatal reverse
of circumstance to which she was exposed. 
The captain being disabled
from going to sea, was superseded,
and he saw all his hopes blasted in the
midst of an active war, at a time
when he had the fairest prospects of
fame and fortune. He saw himself
reduced to extreme poverty, cooped
up with the tender partner of his heart
in a wretched hovel, amidst the refuse 

of mankind, and on the brink of
wanting the common necessaries of
life. The mind of man is ever ingenious
in finding resources. He comforted
his lady with vain hopes of
having friends who would effect his
deliverance, and repeated assurances of
this kind so long, that he at length
began to think they were not altogether
void of foundation. 
Mrs. Clewlin, from a principle of
duty, recollected all her fortitude,
that she might not only bear her fate
with patience, but even contributed
to alleviate the woes of her husband,
whom her affection had ruined. She
affected to believe the suggestions of
his pretended hope; she interchanged
with him assurances of better fortune; 
her appearance exhibited a calm,
while her heart was torn with anguish. 
She assisted him in writing letters to
former friends, the last consolation of
the wretched prisoner; she delivered
these letters with her own hand, and
underwent a thousand mortifying repulses,
the most shocking circumstances 

of which she concealed from her
husband. She performed all the menial
offices in her own little family,
which was maintained by pawning
her apparel; and both the husband
and wife, in some measure, sweetened
their cares, by prattling and toying
with their charming little boy, on
whom they doated with an enthusiasm
of fondness. —Yet even this pleasure
was mingled with the most tender
and melancholy regret. I have
seen the mother hang over him, with
the most affecting expression of this
kind in her aspect, the tears contending
with the smiles upon her countenance,
while she exclaimed: Alas!
my poor prisoner, little did your mother
once think she should be obliged
to nurse you in a jail.” The captain's
paternal love was dashed with impatience
—He would snatch up the boy
in a transport of grief, press him to
his breast, devour him as it were with
kisses, throw up his eyes to heaven in
the most emphatic silence; then convey
the child hastily to his mother's 

arms, pull his hat over his eyes, stalk
out into the common walk, and finding
himself alone, break out into tears and
lamentation. 
Ah! little did this unhappy couple
know what further griefs awaited
them! The small-pox broke out in
the prison, and poor Tommy Clewlin
was infected. As the eruption appeared
unfavourable, you may conceive
the consternation with which
they were overwhelmed. Their distress
was rendered inconceiveable by
indigence; for, by this time, they
were so destitute that they could neither
pay for common attendance, nor
procure proper advice. I did on that
occasion, what I thought my duty towards
my fellow-creatures. —I wrote
to a physician of my acquaintance,
who was humane enough to visit the
poor little patient: I engaged a careful
woman-prisoner as a nurse, and
Mr. Norton supplied them with money
and necessaries. These helps
were barely sufficient to preserve them
from the horrors of despair, when they 

saw their little darling panting under
the rage of a loathsome pestilential
malady, during the excessive heat of
the dog-days, and struggling for breath
in the noxious atmosphere of a confined
cabin, where they scarce had
room to turn, on the most necessary
occasions. The eager curiosity with
which the mother eyed the doctor's
looks as often as he visited the boy; 
the terror and trepidation of the father,
while he desired to know his
opinion; in a word, the whole tenour
of their distress baffled all description. 
At length, the physician, for the
sake of his own character, was obliged
to be explicit; and returning with the
captain to the common walk, told
him, in my hearing, that the child
could not possibly recover. —This sentence
seemed to have petrified the unfortunate
parent, who stood motionless,
and seemingly bereft of sense. I
led him to my apartment, where he
sat a full hour in that state of stupefaction; 
then he began to groan 

hideously; a shower of tears burst
from his eyes; he threw himself on
the floor, and uttered the most piteous
lamentation that ever was heard. 
Mean while, Mrs. Norton being made
aquainted with the doctor's prognostic,
visited Mrs. Clewlin, and invited
her to the lodge. Her prophetic fears
immediately took the alarm. “What!
(cried she, starting up with a frantic
wildness in her looks) then our case is
desperate—I shall lose my dear Tommy!
—the poor prisoner will be released
by the hand of heaven! —Death
will convey him to the cold grave!” — 
The dying innocent hearing this exclamation,
pronounced these words:
“Tommy won't leave you, my dear
mamma—if death comes to take
Tommy, papa shall drive him away
with his sword.” This address deprived
the wretched mother of all resignation
to the will of Providence. 
She tore her hair, dashed herself on
the pavement, shrieked aloud, and was
carried off in a deplorable state of distraction. 

That same evening the lovely babe
expired, and the father grew frantic. 
He made an attempt on his own life; 
and being with difficulty restrained,
his agitation sunk into a kind of sudden
insensibility, which seemed to absorb
all sentiment, and gradually vulgarized
his faculty of thinking. In
order to dissipate the violence of his
sorrow, he continually shifted the
scene from one company to another,
contracted abundance of low connexions,
and drowned his cares in repeated
intoxication. The unhappy lady
underwent a long series of hysterical
fits and other complaints, which seemed
to have a fatal effect on her brain
as well as constitution. Cordials were
administred to keep up her spirits; and
she found it necessary to protract the
use of them to blunt the edge of grief,
by overwhelming reflexion, and remove
the sense of uneasiness arising
from a disorder in her stomach. In
a word, she became an habitual dram-drinker; 
and this practice exposed her
to such communication as debauched 

her reason, and perverted her sense of
decorum and propriety. She and her
husband gave a loose to vulgar excess,
in which they were enabled to indulge
by the charity and interest of some
friends, who obtained half-pay for the
captain. They are now metamorphosed
into the shocking creatures you
have seen; he into a riotous plebeian,
and she into a ragged trull. They are
both drunk every day, quarrel and
fight one with another, and often insult
their fellow-prisoners. Yet they
are not wholly abandoned by virtue
and humanity. The captain is scrupulously
honest in all his dealings,
and pays off his debts punctually every
quarter, as soon as he receives his
half-pay. Every prisoner in distress
is welcome to share his money while
it lasts; and his wife never fails,
while it is in her power, to relieve
the wretched; so that their generosity,
even in this miserable disguise, is
universally respected by their neighbours. 
Sometimes the recollection of
their former rank comes over them 

like a qualm, which they dispel with
brandy, and then humorously rally
one another on their mutual degeneracy. 
She often stops me in the walk,
and, pointing to the captain, says,
“My husband, tho' he is become a
black-guard jail-bird, must be allowed
to be an handsome fellow still.” — 
On the other hand, he will frequently
desire me to take notice of his rib,
as she chances to pass. —“Mind that
draggle-tail'd drunken drab—(he will
say) what an antidote it is—yet, for
all that, Felton, she was a fine woman
when I married her—Poor Bess, I
have been the ruin of her, that is
certain, and deserve to be damned for
bringing her to this pass.” 
Thus they accommodate themselves
to each other's infirmities, and
pass their time not without some taste
of plebeian enjoyment—but, name
their child, they never fail to burst
into tears, and still feel a return of the
most poignant sorrow.” 
Sir Launcelot Greaves did not hear
this story unmoved. Tom Clark's 

cheeks were bedewed with the drops
of sympathy, while with much sobbing,
he declared his opinion, that an
action would lie against the lady's father. 
—Captain Crowe having listened
to the story, with uncommon attention,
expressed his concern that an
honest seaman should be so taken in
stays: but he imputed all his calamities
to the wife: “For why? (said he)
a sea-faring man may have a sweetheart
in every port; but he should
steer clear of a wife, as he would
avoid a quick-sand. —You see, brother,
how this here Clewlin lags astern in
the wake of a sniveling b&wblank;; otherwise
he would never make a weft in
his ensign for the loss of a child— 
odds heart! he could have done no
more if he had sprung a top-mast, or
started a timber.—” 
The knight declaring that he would
take another view of the prison in the
afternoon, Mr. Felton insisted upon
his doing him the honour to drink a
dish of tea in his apartment, and Sir
Launcelot accepted his invitation. 

Thither they accordingly repaired, after
having made another circuit of the
jail, and the tea-things were produced
by Mrs. Felton, when she was summoned
to the door, and in a few minutes
returning, communicated something
in a whisper to her husband. 
He changed colour, and repaired to
the stair-case, where he was heard to
talk aloud in an angry tone. When
he came back he told the company he
had been teazed by a very importunate
beggar. Addressing himself to our
adventurer, “You took notice (says
he) of a fine lady flaunting about our
walk in all the frippery of the fashion. 
—She was lately a gay young widow
that made a great figure at the court
end of the town; she distinguished
herself by her splendid equipage, her
rich liveries, her brilliant assemblies,
her numerous routs, and her elegant
taste in dress and furniture. She is
nearly related to some of the best families
in England, and, it must be owned,
mistress of many fine accomplishments. 

But being deficient in true
delicacy, she endeavoured to hide that
defect by affectation. She pretended
to a thousand antipathies which did
not belong to her nature. A breast of
veal threw her into mortal agonies. If
she saw a spider she screamed; and at
sight of a mouse she fainted away. 
She could not without horror behold
an entire joint of meat; and nothing
but fricassees and other made-dishes
were seen upon her table. She caused
all her floors to be lined with green
bays, that she might trip along them
with more ease and pleasure. Her
footmen wore clogs, which were deposited
in the hall, and both they and
her chairmen were laid under the
strongest injunctions to avoid porter
and tobacco. Her jointure amounted
to eight hundred pounds per annum,
and she made shift to spend four times
that sum: at lenght it was mortgaged
for nearly the entire value; but, far
from retrenching, she seemed to increase
in extravagance until her effects
were taken in execution, and her person 

here deposited in safe custody. 
When one considers the abrupt transition
she underwent from her spacious
apartments to an hovel scarce eight
feet square; from sumptuous furniture
to bare benches; from magnificence
to meanness; from affluence to
extreme poverty; one would imagine
she must have been totally overwhelmed
by such a sudden gush of
misery. But this was not the case:
she has, in fact, no delicate feelings. 
She forthwith accommodated herself
to the exigency of her fortune; yet
she still affects to keep state amidst the
miseries of a goal; and this affectation
is truly ridiculous. —She lies a-bed
till two o'clock in the afternoon: she
maintains a female attendant for the
sole purpose of dressing her person. 
Her cabin is the least cleanly in the
whole prison; she has learned to eat
bread and cheese, and drink porter; 
but she always appears once a day
dressed in the pink of the fashion. She
has found means to run in debt at the
chandler's shop, the baker's, and the 

tap-house, tho' there is nothing got
in this place but with ready money:
she has even borrowed small sums
from divers prisoners, who were themselves
on the brink of starving. She
takes pleasure in being surrounded
with duns, observing, that by such people
a person of fashion is to be distinguished. 
She writes circular letters
to her former friends and acquaintance,
and by this method has raised
pretty considerable contributions; for
she writes in a most elegant and irresistible
stile. About a fortnight ago
she received a supply of twenty guineas; 
when, instead of paying her
little goal-debts, or withdrawing any
part of her apparel from pawn, she
laid out the whole sum in a fashionable
suit and laces; and next day
borrowed of me a shilling to purchase
a neck of mutton for her dinner— 
She seems to think her rank in life intitles
her to this kind of assistance. 
She talks very pompously of her family
and connexions, by whom, however,
she has been long renounced. 

She has no sympathy nor compassion
for the distresses of her fellow-creatures; 
but she is perfectly well bred; 
she bears a repulse the best of any
woman I ever knew; and her temper
has never been once ruffled since her
arrival at the King's-bench—She now
intreated me to lend her half a guinea,
for which she said she had the most
pressing occasion, and promised upon
her honour it should be repaid tomorrow; 
but I lent a deaf ear to her
request, and told her in plain terms
that her honour was already bankrupt.—” 
Sir Launcelot thrusting his hand
mechanically into his pocket, pulled
out a couple of guineas, and desired
Felton to accommodate her with that
trifle in his own name; but he declined
the proposal, and refused to
touch the money. “God forbid,
(said he) that I should attempt to
thwart your charitable intention: but
this, my good sir, is no object—she
has many resources. Neither should
we number the clamorous beggar 

among those who really feel distress. 
He is generally gorged with bounty
misapplied. The liberal hand of charity
should be extended to modest want
that pines in silence, encountering
cold, and nakedness, and hunger, and
every species of distress. Here you
may find the wretch of keen sensations,
blasted by accident in the blossom
of his fortune, shivering in the
solitary recess of indigence, disdaining
to beg, and even ashamed to let his
misery be known. Here you may
see the parent who has known happier
times, surrounded by his tender offspring,
naked and forlorn, demanding
food, which his circumstances cannot
afford. —That man of decent appearance
and melancholy aspect, who
lifted his hat as you passed him in the
yard, is a person of unblemished character. 
He was a reputable tradesman
in the city, and failed through inevitable
losses. A commission of bankruptcy
was taken out against him by
his sole creditor, a quaker, who refused
to sign his certificate. He has 

lived these three years in prison, with
a wife and five small children. In a
little time after his commitment, he
had friends who offered to pay ten
shillings in the pound of what he owed,
and to give security for paying the
remainder in three years, by installments. 
The honest quaker did not
charge the bankrupt with any dishonest
practices; but he rejected the
proposal with the most mortifying indifference,
declaring that he did not
want his money. The mother repaired
to his house, and kneeled before
him with her five lovely children,
imploring mercy with tears and exclamations. 
He stood this scene unmoved,
and even seemed to enjoy the
prospect, wearing the looks of complacency
while his heart was steeled
with rancour. “Woman, (said he)
these be hopeful babes, if they were
duly nurtured. Go thy ways in peace; 
I have taken my resolution.” Her
friends maintained the family for some
time; but it is not in human charity
to persevere: some of them died; 

some of them grew unfortunate; some
of them fell off; and now the poor
man is reduced to the extremity of indigence,
from whence he has no prospect
of being retrieved. The fourth
part of what you would have bestowed
upon the lady would make this poor
man and his family sing with joy.” 
He had scarce pronounced these
words when our hero desired the man
might be called, and in a few minutes
he entered the apartment with a low
obeisance. “Mr. Coleby, (said the
knight) I have heard how cruelly you
have been used by your creditor, and
beg you will accept this trifling present,
if it can be of any service to you
in your distress.” So saying, he put
five guineas into his hand. The poor
man was so confounded at such an
unlooked-for acquisition, that he stood
motionless and silent, unable to thank
the donor; and Mr. Felton conveyed
him to the door, observing that his
heart was too full for utterance. But,
in a little time, his wife bursting into
the room with her five children, 

looked around, and going up to Sir
Launcelot, without any direction, exclaimed: 
“This is the angel sent by
Providence to succour me and my
poor innocents.” Then falling at his
feet, she pressed his hand and bathed
it with her tears—He raised her up
with that complacency which was natural
to his disposition. He kissed all
her children, who were remarkably
handsome and neatly kept, though in
homely apparel; and, giving her his
direction, assured her she might always
apply to him in her distress. 
After her departure, he produced a
bank-note for twenty pounds, and
would have deposited it in the hands
of Mr. Felton, to be distributed in
charities among the objects of the
place; but he desired it might be left
with Mr. Norton, who was the proper
person for managing his benevolence; 
and he promised to assist the
deputy with his advice in laying it
out. 