


He atchieves an adventure at the assembly, and
quarrels with his governor. 
At the assembly, were no fewer than three
gentlemen of fortune, who rivalled our
lover in his passion for Emilia, and who had severally
begged the honour of dancing with her 

upon that occasion. She had excused herself to
each, on pretence of a slight indisposition that she
foresaw would detain her from the ball, and desired
they would provide themselves with other
partners. Obliged to admit her excuse, they accordingly
followed her advice; and after they
had engaged themselves beyond the power of retracting,
had the mortification to see her there
unclaimed. 
They in their turns made up to her, and expressed
their surprize and concern at finding her
in the assembly unprovided, after she had declined
their invitation; but she told them that her cold
had forsaken her since she had the pleasure of seeing
them, and that she would rely upon accident
for a partner. Just as she pronounced these words
to the last of the three, Peregrine advanced as an
utter stranger, bowed with great respect, told her
he understood she was disengaged, and would
think himself highly honoured in being accepted
as her partner for the night; and had the good
fortune to succeed in his application. 
As they were by far the handsomest and best
accomplished couple in the room, they could not
fail of attracting the notice and admiration of the
spectators, which inflamed the jealousy of his
three competitors, who immediately entered into
a conspiracy against this gaudy stranger, whom
as their rival, they resolved to affront in publick. 
Pursuant to the plan which they projected for this
purpose, the first country-dance was no sooner
concluded, than one of them with his partner
took place of Peregrine and his mistress, contrary
to the regulations of the ball. Our lover imputing
this behaviour to inadvertency, informed the
gentleman of his mistake, and civilly desired he 

would rectify his error. The other told him, in
an imperious tone, that he wanted none of his
advice, and bad him mind his own affairs. Peregrine
answered with some warmth, and insisted
upon his right; a dispute commenced, high words
ensued, in the course of which, our impetuous
youth hearing himself reviled with the appellation
of scoundrel, pulled off his antagonist's periwig,
and flung it in his face. The ladies immediately
shriek'd, the gentlemen interposed, Emilia was
seized with a fit of trembling, and conducted to
her seat by her youthful admirer, who begged
pardon for having discomposed her, and vindicated
what he had done, by representing the necessity
he was under to resent the provocation he
had received. 
Though she could not help owning the justice
of his plea, she was not the less concerned at the
dangerous situation in which he had involved
himself, and in the utmost consternation and
anxiety, insisted upon going directly home: he
could not resist her importunities, and her cousin
being determined to accompany her, he escorted
them to their lodgings, where he wished them
good night, after having, in order to quiet their
apprehensions, protested that if his opponent was
satisfied, he should never take any step towards
the prosecution of the quarrel. Mean while the
assembly-room became a scene of tumult and uproar; 
the person who conceived himself injured,
seeing Peregrine retire, struggled with his companions
who with-held him, in order to pursue and
take satisfaction of our hero, whom he loaded
with terms of abuse, and challenged to single
combat. 

The director of the ball held a consultation
with all the subscribers who were present, and it
was determined by a majority of votes, that the
two gentlemen who had occasioned the disturbance,
should be desired to withdraw. This resolution
being signified to one of the parties then
present, he made some difficulty of complying,
but was persuaded to submit by his two confederates,
who accompanied him to the street-door,
where he was met by Peregrine on his return to
the assembly. 
This choleric gentleman, who was a country
squire, no sooner saw his rival, than he began to
brandish his cudgel in a menacing posture, when
our adventurous youth stepping back with one foot,
laid his hand upon the hilt of his sword, which he
drew half way out of the scabbard. This attitude,
and the sight of the blade which glittened by
moonlight in his face, checked in some sort, the
ardour of his assailant, who desired he would lay
aside his toaster, and take a bout with him at
equal arms. Peregrine, who was an expert
cudgel-player, accepted the invitation, and exchanging
weapons with Pipes who stood behind
him, put himself in a posture of defence, and
received the attack of his adversary, who struck
at random without either skill or œconomy. Pickle
could have beaten the cudgel out of his hand
at the first blow, but as in that case he would
have been obliged in honour to give immediate
quarter, he resolved to discipline his antagonist
without endeavouring to disable him until
he should be heartily satisfied with the vengeance
he had taken. With this view he returned the
salute, and raised such a clatter about the squire's
pate, that one who had heard without seeing the 

application, would have mistaken the sound for
that of a salt-box, in the hand of a dext'rous
Merry Andrew, belonging to one of the booths at
Bartholomew Fair. Neither was this salutation
confined to his head; his shoulders, arms, thighs,
ancles and ribs, were visited with amazing rapidity,
while Tom Pipes founded the charge through
his fist. Peregrine tired-with this exercise, which
had almost bereft his enemy of sensation, at last
struck the decisive blow, in consequence of which,
the squire's weapon flew out of his grasp, and he
allowed our hero to be the better man. Satisfied
with this acknowledgment, the victor walked up
stairs with such elevation of spirits and insolence
of mein, that no body chose to intimate the resolution
which had been taken in his absence, and
having amused himself for some time in beholding
the country dances, he retreated to his lodging,
where he indulged himself all night in the contemplation
of his own success. 
Next day in the forenoon he went to visit his
partner, and the gentleman at whose house she
lived, having been informed of his family and
condition, received him with great courtesy, as
the acquaintance of his cousin Gauntlet, and invited
him to dinner that same day. 
Emilia was remarkably well pleased, when she
understood the issue of his adventure, which began
to make some noise in town, even though it
deprived her of a wealthy admirer; for the squire
having consulted an attorney about the nature of
the dispute, in hopes of being able to prosecute
Peregrine for an assault, and finding little encouragement
to go to law, resolved to pocket the
insult and injury he had undergone, and to discontinue 

his addresses to her who was the cause
of both. 
Our lover being told by his mistress that she
proposed to stay a fortnight longer at Windsor,
determined to enjoy her company all that time,
and then to give her a convoy to the house of her
mother, whom he longed to see. In consequence
of this plan, he every day contrived some fresh
party of pleasure for the ladies, to whom he had
by this time free access; and intangled himself so
much in the snares of love, that he seemed quite
enchanted by Emilia's charms, which were now
indeed almost irresistible. While he thus heedlessly
roved in the flowery paths of pleasure, his
governor at Oxford alarmed at the unusual duration
of his absence, went to the young gentlemen
who had accompanied him in his excursion, and
very earnestly intreated them to tell him what
they knew concerning his pupil; they accordingly
gave him an account of the rencounter that happened
between Peregrine and Miss Emily Gauntlet
in the castle, and mentioned circumstances
sufficient to convince him that his charge was very
dangerously engaged. 
Far from having an authority over Peregrine,
Mr. Jolter durst not even disoblige him, and
therefore, instead of writing to the commodore,
he took horse immediately, and that same night
reached Windsor, where he found his stray sheep
very much surprised at his unexpected arrival. 
The governor desiring to have some serious
conversation with him, they shut themselves up
in an apartment, when Jolter with great solemnity,
communicated the cause of his journey,
which was no other than his concern for his pupil's
welfare; and very gravely undertook to 

prove by mathematical demonstration, that this
intrigue, if further pursued, would tend to the
young gentleman's ruin and disgrace. This singular
proposition raised the curiosity of Peregrine,
who promised to yield all manner of attention,
and desired him to begin without further preamble. 
The governor, encouraged by this appearance
of candour, expressed his satisfaction in finding
him so open to conviction, and told him he
would proceed upon geometrical principles. Then
hemming thrice, observed, that no mathematical
inquiries could be carried on, except upon certain
data, or concessions to truths, that were self-evident; 
and therefore he must crave his assent
to a few axioms, which he was sure Mr. Pickle
would see no reason to dispute. “In the first
place then (said he) you will grant, I hope, that
youth and discretion are with respect to each
other as two parallel lines, which though infinitely
produced, remain still equi-distant, and
will never coincide: then you must allow that
passion acts upon the human mind, in a ratio
compounded of the acuteness of sense, and constitutional
heat: and thirdly, you will not deny
that the angle of remorse is equal to that of precipitation. 
These postulata being admitted,
(added he, taking paper, pen and ink, and drawing
a parallelogram) let youth be represented by
the right line a, b, and discretion by another right
line c, d, parallel to the former. Compleat the
parallelogram a, b, c, d, and let the point of intersection,
b, represent perdition. Let passion,
represented under the letter c, have a motion in
the direction c, a. At the same time, let another
motion be communicated to it, in the direction 

c, d, it will proceed in the diagonal c, b, and
describe it in the same time that it would have
described the side c, a, by the first motion, or
the side c, d, by the second. To understand
the demonstration of this corollary, we must
premise this obvious principle, that when a body
is acted upon by a motion or power parallel to a
right line given in position, this power, or motion,
has no effect to cause the body to approach
towards that line, or recede from it, but to
move in a line parallel to a right line only; as
appears from the second law of motion: therefore
c, a, being parallel to d, b,”— 
His pupil having listened to him thus far,
could contain himself no longer, but interrupted
the investigation with a loud laugh, and told him
that his postulata put him in mind of a certain
learned and ingenious gentleman, who undertook
to disprove the existence of natural evil,
and asked no other datum on which to found his
demonstration, but an acknowledgment that every
thing that is, is right. “You may therefore
(said he, in a peremptory tone) spare yourself
the trouble of torturing your invention; for,
after all, I am pretty certain that I shall want
capacity to comprehend the discussion of your
lemma, and consequently be obliged to refuse
my assent to your deduction. 
Mr. Jolter was disconcerted at this declaration,
and so much offended at Peregrine's disrespect,
that he could not help expressing his displeasure,
by telling him flatly, that he was too violent and
headstrong to be reclaimed by reason and gentle
means; that he (the tutor) must be obliged in
the discharge of his duty and conscience, to inform
the commodore of his nephew's imprudence; 

that if the laws of this realm were effectual, they
would take cognizance of the gipsy who had led
him astray; and observed, by way of contrast,
that if such a preposterous intrigue had happened
in France, she would have been clapt up in a
convent two years ago. 
Our lover's eyes kindled with indignation,
when he heard his mistress treated with such irreverence; 
he could scarce refrain from inflicting
manual chastisement on the blasphemer,
whom he reproached in his wrath as an arrogant
pedant, without either delicacy or sense, and cautioned
him against using any such impertinent
freedoms with his affairs for the future, on pain
of incurring more severe effects of his resentment. 
Mr. Jolter, who entertained very high notions
of that veneration to which he thought
himself intitled by his character and qualifications,
had not bore without repining, his want of
influence and authority over his pupil, against
whom he cherished a particular grudge, ever
since the adventure of the painted eye; and
therefore, on this occasion, his politic forbearance
had been overcome by the accumulated motives
of his disgust. Indeed he would have resigned
his charge with disdain, had not he been
encouraged to persevere, by the hopes of a good
living which Trunnion had in his gift, or known
how to dispose of himself for the present to better
advantage. 