


He is also by their device engaged in an adventure
with the exciseman, who does not find his account
in his own drollery. 
Howsoever preposterous and unaccountable
that passion may be, which prompts persons,
otherwise generous and sympathising, to 

afflict and perplex their fellow-creatures, certain
it is our confederates entertained such a large
proportion of it, that not satisfied with the
pranks they had already played, they still persecuted
the commodore without ceasing. In the
course of his own history, the particulars of
which he delighted to recount, he had often rehearsed
an adventure of deer-stealing, in which
(during the unthinking impetuosity of his youth)
he had been unfortunately concerned. Far from
succeeding in that atchievement, he and his associates
had (it seems) been made prisoners, after an
obstinate engagement with the keepers, and carried
before a neighbouring justice of the peace,
who used Trunnion with great indignity, and
with his companions committed him to jail. 
His own relations, and in particular an uncle
on whom he chiefly depended, treated him during
his confinement with great rigour and inhumanity,
and absolutely refused to interpose his influence
in his behalf, unless he would sign a
writing, obliging himself to go to sea within thirty
days after his release, under the penalty of being
proceeded against as a felon. The alternative
was either to undergo this voluntary exile, or
remain in prison disowned and deserted by every
body, and after all suffer an ignominious trial,
that might end in a sentence of transportation
for life. He therefore, without much hesitation,
embraced the proposal of his kinsman, and (as
he observed) was in less than a month after his
discharge turned adrift to the mercy of the wind
and waves. 
Since that period he had never maintained any
correspondence with his relations, all of whom
had concurred in sending him off; nor would he 

ever pay the least regard to the humiliations and
supplications of some among them, who had
prostrated themselves before him, on the advancement
of his fortune: but he retained a most inveterate
resentment for his uncle, who was still
in being, tho' extremely old and infirm, and frequently
mentioned his name with all the bitterness
of revenge. 
Perry being perfectly well acquainted with the
particulars of this story, which he had heard so
often repeated, proposed to Hatchway, that a
person should be hired to introduce himself to the
commodore, with a supposititious letter of recommendation
from this detested kinsman; an imposition
that, in all likelihood, would afford
abundance of diversion. 
The lieutenant relished the scheme, and young
Pickle having composed an epistle for the occasion,
the exciseman of the parish, a fellow of
great impudence and some humour, in whom
Hatchway could confide, undertook to transcribe
and deliver it with his own hand, and also
personate the man in whose favour it was feigned
to be writ. He, accordingly, one morning arrived
on horseback at the garrison, two hours at
least before Trunnion used to get up, and gave
Pipes, who admitted him, to understand, that he
had a letter for his master, which he was ordered
to deliver to none but the commodore himself. 
This message was no sooner communicated, than
the indignant chief (who had been waked for the
purpose) began to curse the messenger for breaking
his rest, and swore he would not budge till
his usual time of turning out. This resolution
being conveyed to the stranger, he desired the
carrier to go back and tell him, he had such joyful 

tidings to impart, that he was sure the commodore
would think himself amply rewarded for
his trouble, even if he had been raised from the
grave to receive them. 
This assurance, flattering as it was, would not
have been powerful enough to persuade him, had
it not been assisted with the exhortations of his
spouse, which never failed to influence his conduct. 
He therefore crept out of bed, tho' not
without great repugnance, and wrapping himself
in his morning-gown, was supported down stairs,
rubbing his eye, yawning fearfully, and grumbling
all the way. As soon as he popt his head into
the parlour, the supposed stranger made divers
awkward bows, and with a grinning aspect accosted
him in these words: “Your most humble
servant, most noble commodore! I hope you are
in good health; you look pure and hearty; and
if it was not for that misfortune of your eye,
one would not desire to see a more pleasant countenance
in a summer's day. Sure as I am a living
soul, one would take you to be on this side of three-score. 
Laud help us! I should have known you
to be a Trunnion if I had met with you in
the midst of Salisbury-plain, as the saying is.” 
The commodore, who was not at all in the humour
of relishing such an impertinent preamble,
interrupted him in this place, saying with a
peevish accent, “Pshaw! pshaw! brother, there's
no occasion to bowss out so much unnecessary
gum; if you can't bring your discourse to bear
on the right subject, you had much better clap
a stopper on your tongue, and bring yourself up,
d'ye see: I was told you had something to deliver.” 
“Deliver! (cried the waggish impostor)
odds heart! I have got something for you that 

will make your very intrails rejoice within your
body. Here's a letter from a dear and worthy friend
of yours. Take, read it and be happy. Blessings
on his old heart! one would think he had renewed
his age, like the eagles.” Trunnion's
expectation being thus raised, he called for his
spectacles, adjusted them to his eye, took the
letter, and being curious to know the subscription,
no sooner perceived his uncle's name, than
he started back, his lip quivered, and he began
to shake in every limb with resentment and surprize:
nevertheless, eager to know the subject
of an epistle from a person who had never before
troubled him with any sort of address, he endeavoured
to recollect himself, and perused the contents,
which were these: 

“Loving Nephew,
I doubt not but you will be rejoiced to hear of
my welfare; and well you may, considering
what a kind uncle I have been to you in the
days of your youth, and how little you deserved
any such thing; for you was always a graceless
young man, given to wicked courses and bad
company, whereby you would have come to a
shameful end, had it not been for my care in
sending you out of mischief's way. But this is
not the cause of my present writing. The
bearer, Mr. Timothy Trickle, is a distant relation
of yours, being the son of the cousin of
your aunt Margery, and is not over and above
well as to worldly matters. He thinks of going
to London, to see for some post in the excise or
customs, if so be that you will recommend him
to some great man of your acquaintance, and
give him a small matter to keep him till he is
provided. I doubt not, nephew, but you will 

be glad to serve him, if it was no more but for
the respect you bear to me, who am, 
Loving Nephew,
Your affectionate Uncle,
and Servant to command,
Tobiah Trunnion.” 
It would be a difficult task for the inimitable
Hogarth himself to exhibit the ludicrous expression
of the commodore's countenance, while
he read this letter. It was not a stare of astonishment,
a convulsion of rage, or a ghastly grin of
revenge, but an association of all three, that took
possession of his features. At length he hawked
up, with incredible straining, the interjection
ah! that seemed to have stuck some time in his
windpipe, and thus gave vent to his indignation: 
“Have I come along side of you at last, you
old stinking curmudgeon! you lie, you lousy
hulk, ye lie! you did all in your power to
founder me when I was a stripling; and as for
being graceless, and wicked, and keeping bad
company, you tell a damned lie again, you
thief; there was not a more peaceable lad in the
county, and I kept no bad company but your
own, d'ye see. Therefore, you Trickle, or
what's your name, tell the old rascal that sent
you hither, that I spit in his face, and call him
Horse; that I tear his letter into rags, so; and
that I trample upon it as I would upon his own
villainous carcase, d'ye see.” So saying, he
danced in a sort of frenzy upon the fragments of
the paper which he had scattered about the room,
to the inexpressible satisfaction of the triumvirate,
who beheld the scene. 

The exciseman having got between him and
the door, which was left open for his escape, in
case of necessity, affected great confusion and
surprize at this behaviour, saying, with an air of
mortification, “Lord, be merciful unto me!
is this the way you treat your own relations,
and the recommendation of your best friend? 
Surely all gratitude and virtue has left this sinful
world! What will cousin Tim, and Dick, and
Tom, and good mother Pipkin, and her daughters,
cousin Sue, and Prue, and Peg, with all
the rest of our kinsfolks say, when they hear of
this unconscionable reception that I have met
with. Consider, Sir, that ingratitude is worse
than the sin of witchcraft, as the apostle wisely
observes; and do not send me away with such
unchristian usage, which will lay a heavy load of
guilt upon your poor miserable soul.” “What
you are on the cruize for a post, brother Trickle,
an't ye? (said Trunnion, interrupting him) we
shall find a post for you in a trice, my boy. 
Here, Pipes, take this saucy son of a bitch,
belay him to the whipping post in the yard. I'll
teach you to rowce me in a morning with such
impertinent messages.” Pipes, who wanted to
carry the joke farther than the exciseman dreamt
of, laid hold on him in a twinkling, and executed
the orders of his commander, notwithstanding
all his nods, winking, and significant
gestures, which the boatswain's mate would by
no means understand: so that he began to repent
of the part he acted in this performance, which
was like to end so tragically, and stood fastened
to the stake, in a very disagreeable state of suspence; 
casting many a rueful look over his left
shoulder, (while Pipes was absent in quest of a 

cat and nine tails) in expectation of being relieved
by the interposition of the lieutenant, who
did not, however, appear; and Tom returning
with the instrument of correction, undressed the
delinquent in a trice, and whispering in his ear,
that he was very sorry for being employed in such
an office, but durst not for his soul disobey the
orders of his commander, flourished the scourge
about his head, and with admirable dexterity
made such a smarting application to the offenders
back and shoulders, that the distracted gauger
performed sundry new cuts with his feet, and
bellowed hideously with pain, to the infinite satisfaction
of the spectators. At length, when he
was almost flead from his rump to the nape of
his neck, Hatchway, who had purposely absented
himself hitherto, appeared in the yard, and interposing
in his behalf, prevailed upon Trunnion
to call off the executioner, and order the malefactor
to be released. 
The exciseman, mad with the catastrophe he
had undergone, threatened to be revenged upon
his employers, by making a candid confession of
the whole plot; but the lieutenant giving him to
understand, that in so doing he would bring upon
himself a prosecution for fraud, forgery and
imposture, he was fain to put up with his loss,
and sneaked out of the garrison, attended with a
volley of curses discharged upon him by the commodore,
who was exceedingly irritated by the
disturbance and disappointment he had undergone. 