


MY DEAR LETTY,
THERE is something on my spirits, which I
should not venture to communicate by the post,
but having the opportunity of Mrs. Brentwood's
return, I seize it eagerly, to disburden my poor
heart, which is oppressed with fear and vexation. 
—O Letty! what a miserable situation it is, to
be without a friend to whom one can apply for
counsel and consolation in distress! I hinted in my
last, that one Mr. Barton had been very particular
in his civilities: I can no longer mistake his
meaning—he has formally professed himself my
admirer; and, after a thousand assiduities, perceiving
I made but a cold return to his addresses, 

he had recourse to the mediation of lady Griskin,
who has acted the part of a very warm advocate
in his behalf:—but, my dear Willis, her ladyship
overacts her part—she not only expatiates on the
ample fortune, the great connexions, and the unblemished
character of Mr. Barton, but she takes
the trouble to catechise me; and, two days ago,
peremptorily told me, that a girl of my age could
not possibly resist so many considerations, if her
heart was not pre-engaged. 
This insinuation threw me into such a flutter,
that she could not but observe my disorder; and,
presuming upon the discovery, insisted upon my
making her the confidante of my passion. But,
although I had not such command of myself as to
conceal the emotion of my heart, I am not such
a child as to disclose its secrets to a person who
would certainly use them to its prejudice. I told
her, it was no wonder if I was out of countenance,
at her introducing a subject of conversation
so unsuitable to my years and inexperience; that
I believed Mr. Barton was a very worthy gentleman,
and I was much obliged to him for his good
opinion; but the affections were involuntary, and
mine, in particular, had as yet made no concessions
in his favour. She shook her head with an air of
distrust that made me tremble; and observed, that
if my affections were free, they would submit to
the decision of prudence, especially when enforced
by the authority of those who had a right to direct
my conduct. This remark implied a design to
interest my uncle or my aunt, perhaps my brother,
in behalf of Mr. Barton's passion; and I am sadly
afraid that my aunt is already gained over. Yesterday
in the afternoon, he had been walking with us
in the Park, and stopping in our return at a toyshop,
he presented her with a very fine snuff-box,
and me with a gold etuis, which I resolutely refused, 

till she commanded me to accept it on pain
of her displeasure: nevertheless, being still unsatisfied
with respect to the propriety of receiving
this toy, I signified my doubts to my brother, who
said he would consult my uncle on the subject, and
seemed to think Mr. Barton had been rather premature
in his presents. 
What will be the result of this consultation,
Heaven knows; but I am afraid it will produce an
explanation with Mr. Barton, who will, no doubt,
avow his passion, and solicit their consent to a connexion
which my soul abhors; for, my dearest Letty,
it is not in my power to love Mr. Barton,
even if my heart was untouched by any other tenderness. 
Not that there is any thing disagreeable
about his person, but there is a total want of that
nameless charm whice captivates and controls the
inchanted spirit—at least, he appears to me to
have this defect; but if he had all the engaging
qualifications which a man can possess, they would
be excited in vain against that constancy, which, I
flatter myself, is the characteristic of my nature. 
No, my dear Willis, I may be involved in fresh
troubles, and I believe I shall, from the importunities of this gentleman and the violence of my relations; 
but my heart is incapable of change. 
You know, I put no faith in dreams; and yet I
have been much disturbed by one that visited me
last night. —I thought I was in a church, where a
certain person, whom you know, was on the point
of being married to my aunt; that the clergyman
was Mr. Barton, and that poor forlorn I stood
weeping in a corner, half naked, and without shoes
or stockings. —Now, I know there is nothing so
childish as to be moved by those vain illusions; 
but, nevertheless, in spite of all my reason, this
hath made a strong impression upon my mind, 

which begins to be very gloomy. Indeed, I have
another more substantial cause of affliction—I
have some religious scruples, my dear friend, which
lie heavy on my conscience. —I was persuaded to
go to the Tabernacle, where I heard a discourse
that affected me deeply. —I have prayed fervently
to be enlightened, but as yet I am not sensible
of these inward motions, those operations of grace,
which are the signs of a regenerated spirit; and
therefore I begin to be in terrible apprehensions
about the state of my poor soul. Some of our family
have had very uncommon accessions, particularly
my aunt and Mrs. Jenkins, who sometimes
speak as if they were really inspired; so that I am
not like to want for either exhortation or example,
to purify my thoughts, and recall them from the
vanities of this world, which, indeed, I would
willingly resign, if it was in my power; but to
make this sacrifice, I must be enabled by such assistance
from above as hath not yet been indulged
to. 
your unfortunate friend,
Lydia Melford. 
June 10. 