


Sees his sister happily married. Visits Emilia, who
receives him according to his deserts. 
Her brother being of opinion, that Mr.
Clover's proposal was not to be neglected,
especially as Julia's heart was engaged in his favour,
communicated the affair to his uncle, who,
with the approbation of Mrs. Trunnion, declared
himself well satisfied with the young man's addresses,
and desired that they might be buckled
with all expedition, without the knowledge or
concurrence of her parents, to whom (on account
of their unnatural barbarity) she was not
bound to pay the least regard. Though our adventurer
entertained the same sentiments of the
matter, and the lover dreading some obstruction,
earnestly begg'd the immediate condescension of
his mistress, she could not be prevailed upon to
take such a material step, without having first
solicited the permission of her father, resolved,
nevertheless, to comply with the dictates of her
own heart, should his objections be frivolous or
unjust. 
Urged by this determination, her admirer
waited upon Mr. Gamaliel at the public house,
and with the appearance of great deference and
respect, made him acquainted with his affection
for his daughter, communicated the particulars
of his fortune, with the terms of settlement he
was ready to make; and in conclusion told him,
that he would marry her without a portion. 
This last offer seemed to have some weight with
the father, who received it with civility, and 

promised, in a day or two, to favour him with
a final answer to his demand. He, accordingly,
that same evening consulted his wife, who being
exasperated at the prospect of her daughter's independency,
argued with the most virulent expostulation
against the match, as an impudent
scheme of her own planning, with a view of insulting
her parents, towards whom she had already
been guilty of the most vicious disobedience. 
In short, she used such remonstrances, as not
only averted this weak husband's inclination from
the proposal which he had relished before, but
even instigated him to apply for a warrant to apprehend
his daughter, on the supposition that she
was about to bestow herself in marriage, without
his privity or consent. 
The justice of peace to whom this application
was made, though he could not refuse the order,
yet, being no stranger to the malevolence of the
mother, which, together with Gamaliel's simplicity,
was notorious in the county, he sent an
intimation of what had happened to the garison; 
upon which, a couple of centinels were placed
on the gate, and at the pressing solicitation of
the lover, as well as the desire of the commodore,
her brother and aunt, Julia was wedded without
further delay; the ceremony being performed by
Mr. Jolter, because the parish-priest prudently
declined any occasion of giving offence, and the
curate was too much in the interest of their enemies,
to be employed in that office. 
This domestic concern being settled to the satisfaction
of our hero, he escorted her next day
to the house of her husband, who immediately
wrote a letter to her father, declaring his reasons 

for having thus superseded his authority; and
Mrs. Pickle's mortification was unspeakable. 
That the new-married couple might be guarded
against all insult, our young gentleman and
his friend Hatchway, with their adherents, lodged
in Mr. Clover's house for some weeks; during
which, they visited their acquaintance in the
neighbourhood, according to custom; and when
the tranquillity of their family was perfectly established,
and the contract of marriage executed
in the presence of the old commodore and his
lady, who gave her niece five hundred pounds to
purchase jewels and cloaths, Mr. Peregrine could
no longer restrain his impatience to see his dear
Emily; and told his uncle, that next day he proposed
to ride across the country, in order to visit
his friend Gauntlet, from whom he had not heard
of a long time. 
The old gentleman, looking steadfastly in his
face, “Ah! damn your cunning! (said he) I
find the anchor holds fast: I did suppose as how
you would have slipt your cable, and changed
your birth; but, I see, when a young fellow is
once brought up by a pretty wench, he may man
his capstans and viol-block, if he wool; but he'll
as soon heave up the Pike of Teneriff, as bring
his anchor aweigh! Odds heartlikins! had I
known the young woman was Ned Gauntlet's
daughter, I shoul'dn't have thrown out signal for
leaving off chace.” 
Our adventurer was not a little surprized to
hear the commodore talk in this stile; and immediately
conjectured, that his friend Godfrey
had informed him of the whole affair. Instead
of listening to this approbation of his flame, with
those transports of joy which he would have felt, 

had he retained his former sentiments, he was
chagrined at Trunnion's declaration, and offended
ar the presumption of the young soldier, in pretending
to disclose the secret with which he had
intrusted him. Reddening with these reflections,
he assured the commodore, that he never had serious
thoughts of matrimony: so that, if any person
had told him he was under any engagement
of that kind, he had abused his ear; for, he protested,
that he would never contract such attachments,
without his knowledge and express
permission. 
Trunnion commended him for his prudent resolution,
and observed, that though no person
mentioned to him what promises had passed betwixt
him and his sweetheart, it was very plain
that he had made love to her; and therefore, it
was to be supposed, that his intentions were honourable:
for, he could not believe he was such a
rogue in his heart, as to endeavour to debauch
the daughter of a brave officer, who had served
his country with credit and reputation. Notwithstanding
this remonstrance, which Pickle
imputed to the commodore's ignorance of the
world, he set out for the habitation of Mrs.
Gauntlet, with the unjustifiable sentiments of a
man of pleasure, who sacrifices every consideration
to the desire of his ruling appetite; and as
Winchester lay in his way, resolved to visit some
of his friends who lived in that place. It was in
the house of one of these, that he was informed
of Emilia's being then in town with her mother; 
upon which, he excused himself from staying to
drink tea, and immediately repaired to their
lodgings, according to the direction he had received. 

When he arrived at the door, instead of undergoing
that perturbation of spirits, which a
lover, in his interesting situation, might be supposed
to feel, he suffered no emotion but that of
vanity and pride, favoured with an opportunity
of self-gratification, and entered his Emilia's
apartment with the air of a conceited petit maitre,
rather than that of the respectful admirer, when
he visits the object of his passion, after an absence
of seventeen months. 
The young lady having been very much disobliged
at his mortifying neglect of her brother's
letter, had summoned all her own pride and resolution
to her aid; and by means of a happy disposition,
so far overcame her chagrin at his indifference,
that she was able to behave in his presence
with apparent tranquillity and ease. She
was even pleased to find, he had by accident
chosen a time for his visit, when she was surrounded
by two or three young gentlemen, who
professed themselves her admirers. Our gallant
was no sooner anounced, than she collected all
her coquettry, put on the gayest air she could assume,
and contrived to giggle just as he appeared
at the room-door. The compliments of salutation
being performed, she welcomed him to England
in a careless manner, asked the news of
Paris, and, before he could make any reply, desired
one of the other gentlemen to proceed with
the sequel of that comical adventure, in the relation
of which he had been interrupted. 
Peregrine smiled within himself at this behaviour,
which (without all doubt he believed) she
had affected to punish him for his unkind silence,
while he was abroad; being fully persuaded, that
her heart was absolutely at his devotion. On 

this supposition, he practised his Parisian improvements
on the art of conversation, and uttered a
thousand prettinesses in the way of compliment,
with such incredible rotation of tongue, that his
rivals were struck dumb with astonishment; and
Emilia fretted out of all temper, at seeing herself
deprived of the prerogative of the sex. He
persisted, however, in this surprising loquacity,
until the rest of the company thought proper to
withdraw, and then contracted his discourse into
the focus of love, which now put on a very different
appearance from that which it had formerly
worn. Instead of that awful veneration
which her presence used to inspire, that chastity
of sentiment and delicacy of expression, he now
gazed upon her with the eyes of a libertine, he
glowed with the impatience of desire, talked in
a strain that barely kept within the bounds of
decency, and attempted to snatch such favours as
she, in the tenderness of mutual acknowledgement,
had once vouchsafed to bestow. 
Grieved and offended as she was, at this palpable
alteration in his carriage, she disdained to
remind him of his former deportment, and with
dissembled good humour, rallied him on the
progress he had made in gallantry and address:
but, far from submitting to the liberties he would
have taken, she kept her person sacred from his
touch, and would not even suffer him to ravish
a kiss of her fair hand: so that he reaped no other
advantage from the exercise of his talents, during
this interview, which lasted a whole hour,
than that of knowing he had over-rated his own
importance; and that Emily's heart was not a
garison likely to surrender at discretion. 

At length, his addresses were interrupted by
the arrival of the mother, who had gone abroad
to visit by herself; and the conversation becoming
more general, he understood, that Godfrey
was at London, soliciting for a lieutenancy
that had fallen vacant in the regiment to which
he belonged; and that Miss Sophy was at home
with her father. 
Though our adventurer had not met with all
the success he expected in his first visit, he did
not despair of reducing the fortress, believing that
in time there would be a mutiny in his favour; 
and accordingly, carried on the siege for several
days, without profiting by his perseverance; till
at length, having attended the ladies to their
own house in the country, he began to look
upon this adventure as time mispent, and resolved
to discontinue his attack, in hopes of meeting
with a more favourable occasion; being, in
the mean time, ambitious of displaying, in an
higher sphere, those qualifications which his vanity
told him, were at present misapplied. 