


Peregrine makes himself merry at the expence of the
painter, who curses his landlady, and breaks with
the doctor. 
As he could easily conceive the situation of
his companion in adversity, he was unwilling
to leave the place, until he had reaped some
diversion from his distress, and with that view repaired
to the dungeon of the afflicted painter, to
which he had by this time free access. When he
entered, the first object that presented itself to his
eye, was so uncommonly ridiculous, that he could
scarce preserve that gravity of countenance which
he had affected in order to execute the joke he 

had planned. The forlorn Pallet sat upright in
his bed in a dishabille that was altogether extraordinary. 
He had laid aside his monstrous hoop,
together with his stays, gown and petticoat,
wrapped his lappets about his head by way of
night-cap, and wore his domino as a loose morning
dress; his grizzled locks hung down about
his lack-lustre eyes and tawny neck, in all the
disorder of negligence; his grey beard bristled
about half an inch, through the remains of the
paint with which his visage had been bedaubed,
and every feature of his face was lengthened to
the most ridiculous expression of grief and dismay. 
Seeing Peregrine come in, he started up in a sort
of frantic extasy, and running towards him with
open arms, no sooner perceived the woeful appearance
into which our hero had modelled his
physiognomy, than he stopped short all of a sudden,
and the joy which had begun to take possession
of his heart, was in a moment dispelled by
the most rueful presages; so that he stood in a
most ludicrous posture of dejection, like a malefactor
at the Old Baily, when sentence is about to
be pronounced. Pickle taking him by the hand,
heaved a profound sigh, and after having protested
that he was extremely mortified at being pitched
upon as the messenger of bad news, told him
with an air of sympathy and infinite concern,
that the French court having discovered his sex,
had resolved, in consideration of the outrageous
indignity he offered in public to a prince of the
blood, to detain him in the Bastile a prisoner for
life; and that this sentence was a mitigation obtained
by the importunities of the British Embassador; 
the punishment ordained by law being no
other than breaking alive upon the wheel. These 

tidings aggravated the horrors of the painter to
such a degree, that he roared aloud, and skipped
about the room, in all the extravagance of distraction; 
taking God and man to witness that he
would rather suffer immediate death, than endure
one year's imprisonment in such a hideous place; 
and cursing the hour of his birth, and the moment
on which he departed from his own country. 
“For my own part, (said his tormenter in an hypocritical
tone) I was obliged to swallow the bitter
pill of making submissions to the prince, who,
as I had not presumed to strike him, received acknowledgments,
in consequence of which I shall
be this day set at liberty; and there is even one
expedient left for the recovery of your freedom. 
It is, I own, a disagreeable remedy, but one had
better undergo a little mortification, than be for
ever wretched. Besides, upon second thoughts,
I begin to imagine that you will not for such a
trifle sacrifice yourself to the unceasing horrors of
a solitary dungeon; especially as your condescension
will in all probability be attended with advantages
which you could not otherwise enjoy.” 
Pallet interrupting him with great eagerness, begged
for the love of God that he would no longer
keep him in the torture of suspence, but mention
that same remedy, which he was resolved to swallow,
let it be never so unpalatable. 
Peregrine having thus played upon his passions of
fear and hope, answered, that as the offence was
committed in the habit of a woman, which was
a disguise unworthy of the other sex; the French
court was of opinion that the delinquent should
for ever forfeit the privileges and characteristic
of a man, which he had so shamefully deposited,
or in other words, be deprived of his virility; so 

that there was an alternative at his own option,
by which he had it in his power to regain immediate
freedom.” “What! cried the painter in
despair, part with my manhood, and become a
singer? Gadzooks! and the devil and all that,
I'll rather lie still where I am, and let myself be
devoured by vermin.” Then thrusting out his
throat, “Here is my wind-pipe, (said he) be so
good, my dear friend, as to give it a slice or
two; if you don't, I shall one of these days be
found dangling in my garters. What an unfortunate
rascal I am! What a blockhead, and a
beast, and a fool was I to trust myself among
such a barbarous ruffian race! Lord forgive you,
Mr. Pickle, for having been the immediate cause
of my disaster; if you had stood by me from the
beginning, according to your promise, and directed
me to a proper place, where I could have
made water without being exposed, I should not
have been teized by that coxcomb who has
brought me to this pass. And why did I put on
this damn'd unlucky dress? Lard curse that
chattering Jezabel of a landlady, who advised
such a preposterous disguise! a disguise which hath
not only brought me to this pass, but also rendered
me abominable to myself, and frightful to
others; for, when I this morning signified to
the turnkey, that I wanted to be shaved, he
looked at my beard with astonishment, and crossing
himself, muttered his pater-noster, believing
me (I suppose) to be a witch, or something
worse. And heaven confound that loathsome
banquet of the ancients, which provoked me to
drink too freely, that I might wash away the
taste of that accursed sillikicaby.” 

Our young gentleman, having heard his lamentation
to an end, excused himself for his
conduct, by representing, that he could not possibly
foresee the disagreeable consequences that
attended it; and in the mean time, strenuously
counselled him to submit to the terms of his enlargement. 
He observed, that he was now arrived
at that time of life, when the lusts of the
flesh should be entirely mortified within him,
and his greatest concern ought to be the health
of his soul, to which nothing could more effectually
contribute than the amputation which was
proposed: that his body, as well as his mind,
would profit by the change, because he would
have no dangerous appetite to gratify, and no
carnal thoughts to divert him from the duties of
his profession; and his voice, which was naturally
sweet, would improve to such a degree,
that he would captivate the ears of all the people
of fashion and taste, and in a little time be celebrated
under the appellation of the English Senesino. 
These arguments did not fail to make impression
upon the painter, who, nevertheless, started
three objections to his compliance; namely, the
disgrace of the punishment, the pain of the operation,
and the dread of his wife. Pickle undertook
to obviate these difficulties, by assuring him,
that the sentence would be executed so privately,
as never to transpire; that the excision (as he
had learnt from Motecelli) was not so painful as
the drawing of a tooth, and that his wife could
not be so unconscionable, after so many years of
cohabitation, as to take exceptions to an expedient,
by which she would not only enjoy the
conversation of her husband, but even the fruits 

of those talents which the knife would so remarkably
refine. 
Pallet shook his head at this last remonstrance,
as if he thought it would not be altogether convincing
to his spouse; but yielded to the proposal,
provided her consent could be obtained. Just as
he signified this condescension, the goaler entered,
and addressing himself to the supposed lady,
expressed his satisfaction in having the honour to
tell her, that she was no longer a prisoner. As
the painter did not understand one word of what
he said, Peregrine undertook the office of interpreter,
and made his friend believe, the goaler's
speech was no other than an intimation, that the
ministry had sent a surgeon to execute what was
proposed, and that the instruments and dressings
were prepared in the next room. Alarmed and
terrified at this sudden appointment, he flew to
the other end of the room, and snatching up an
earthen chamber-pot, which was the only offensive
weapon in the place, put himself in a
posture of defiance, and with many oaths threatened
to try the temper of the barber's skull, if he
should presume to set his nose within the apartment. 
The goaler, who little expected such a reception,
concluded that the poor gentlewoman had
actually lost her wits, and retreated with precipitation,
leaving the door open as he went out. 
Upon which Pickle, gathering up the particulars
of his dress with great dispatch, crammed them
into Pallet's arms, and taking notice that now
the coast was clear, exhorted him to follow his
footsteps to the gate, where a hackney-coach
flood for his reception. There being no time
for hesitation, the painter took his advice, and 

without quitting the utensil, which in his hurry
he forgot to lay down, sallied out in the rear of
our hero, with all that wildness of terror and
impatience which may be reasonably supposed to
take possession of a man who flies from castration
or perpetual imprisonment. Such was the tumult
of his agitation, that his faculty of thinking was for
the present utterly overwhelmed, and he saw no
object but his conductor, whom he followed by a
sort of instinctive impulse, without regarding the
keepers and centinels, who, as he passed with
his cloaths under one arm, and his chamber-pot
brandished above his head, were confounded, and
even dismayed at the strange apparition. 
During the whole course of this irruption, he
ceased not to cry with great vociferation, “Drive,
coachman, drive in the name of God!” And the
carriage had proceeded the length of a whole
street, before he manifested the least sign of reflection,
but stared like the Gorgon's head, with
his mouth wide open, and each particular hair
crawling and twining like an animated serpent. 
At length, however, he began to recover the
use of his senses, and asked if Peregrine thought
him now out of all danger of being retaken. 
This unrelenting wag, not yet satisfied with the
affliction he had imposed upon the sufferer, answered
with an air of doubt and concern, that
he hoped they would not be overtaken, and
prayed to God they might not be retarded by
an Embaras. Pallet fervently joined in this supplication,
and they advanced a few yards further,
when the noise of a coach at full speed behind
them, invaded their ears; and Pickle having
looked out at the window, withdrew his head in
seeming confusion, and exclaimed, “Lord have 

mercy upon us! I wish that may not be a guard
sent after us. Methinks I saw the muzzle of a
fusil sticking out of the coach.” The painter
hearing these tidings, that instant thrust himself
half out at the window, with his helmet still in
his hand, bellowing to the coachman as loud as
he could roar, “Drive, damn ye drive! to the
gates of Jericho and ends of the earth! Drive,
you raggamuffin, you rapscallion, you hell-hound!
drive us to the pit of hell, rather than we should
be taken, and lose the treasures of virility.” 
Such a phantom could not pass, without attracting
the curiosity of the people, who ran to
their doors and windows, in order to behold this
object of admiration. With the same view that
coach, which was supposed to be in pursuit of
him, stopt just as the windows of each happened
to be opposite; and Pallet looking behind, and
seeing three men standing upon the foot-board
armed with canes, which his fear converted into
fusils, never doubted that his friend's suspicion
was just; but, shaking his jordan at the imaginary
guard, swore he would sooner die than part
with his precious ware. The owner of the
coach, who was a nobleman of the first quality,
mistook him for some unhappy woman deprived
of her senses; and ordering his coachman to
proceed, convinced the fugitive, to his infinite
joy, that this was no more than a false alarm. 
He was not, for all that, freed from anxiety and
trepidation; but our young gentleman, fearing
his brain would not bear a repetition of the same
joke, permitted him to gain his own lodgings,
without further molestation. 
His landlady meeting him on the stair, was so
affected at his appearance, that she screamed 

aloud, and betook herself to flight; while he,
cursing her with great bitterness, rushed into the
apartment of the doctor, who, instead of receiving
him with cordial embraces, and congratulating
him upon his deliverance, gave evident
tokens of umbrage and discontent; and even
plainly told him, he hoped to have heard that he
and Mr. Pickle had acted the glorious part of
Cato; an event which would have laid the foundation
of such noble struggles, as could not fail
to end in happiness and freedom; and that he
had already made some progress in an ode that
would have immortalized their names, and inspired
the flame of liberty in every honest breast. 
“There (said he) I would have proved, that
great talents, and high sentiments of liberty, do
reciprocally produce and assist each other; and illustrated
my assertions with such notes and quotations
from the Greek writers, as would have
opened the eyes of the most blind and unthinking,
and touched the most callous and obdurate
heart. O fool! to think the man, whose ample
mind must grasp whatever yonder stars survey— 
Pray, Mr. Pallet, what is your opinion of that
image of the mind's grasping the whole universe? 
For my own part, I can't help thinking it the
most happy conception that ever entered my imagination. 
The painter, who was not such a flaming enthusiast
in the cause of liberty, could not brook
the doctor's reflexions, which he thought savoured
a little too much of indifference and deficiency
in point of private friendship; and therefore
seized the present opportunity of mortifying
his pride, by observing, that the image was,
without all doubt, very grand and magnificent; 

but that he had been obliged for the idea to Mr.
Bayes in The Rehearsal, who values himself upon
the same figure, conveyed in these words, But
all these clouds, when by the eye of reason grasp'd,
&c. Upon any other occasion, the painter
would have triumphed greatly in this detection; 
but such was the flutter and confusion of his spirits,
under the apprehension of being retaken,
that without further communication, he retreated
to his own room, in order to resume his own
dress, which he hoped would alter his appearance
in such a manner, as to baffle all search and examination; 
while the physician remained ashamed
and abashed, to find himself convicted of plagiarism
by a person of such contemptible talents. 
He was offended at this proof of his memory,
and so much enraged at his presumption in exhibiting
it, that he could never forgive his want
of reverence, and took every opportunity of exposing
his ignorance and folly in the sequel. Indeed,
the ties of private affection were too weak
to engage the heart of this republican, whose
zeal for the community had entirely swallowed
up his concern for individuals. He looked upon
particular friendship as a passion unworthy of his
ample soul, and was a professed admirer of L.
Manlius, Junius Brutus, and those later patriots
of the same name, who shut their ears against
the cries of nature, and resisted all the dictates of
gratitude and humanity. 