


Bath, April 26. 
MY DEAREST COMPANION,
THE pleasure I received from yours, which
came to hand yesterday, is not to be expressed. 
Love and friendship are, without doubt, charming
passions; which absence serve only to heighten and
improve. Your kind present of the garnet bracelet,
I shall keep as carefully as I preserve my own life; 
and I beg you will accept, in return, of my heart-housewife,
with the tortoise-shell memorandum-book,
as a trifling pledge of my unalterable affection. 
Bath is to me a new world—All is gayety,
good-humour, and diversion. The eye is continually
entertained with the splendor of dress and equipage; 
and the ear with the sound of coaches,
chaies, chairs, and other carriages. The merry
bells ring round, from morning till night. Then we
are welcomed by the city waifs in our own lodging:
we have musick in the pump-room every morning,
cotillons every fore-noon in the rooms, balls twice a
week, and concerts every other night, besides private
assemblies and parties without number—As
soon as we were settled in lodgings, we were visited
by the master of the Ceremonies; pretty little
gentleman, so sweet, so fine, so civil, and polite,
that in our country he might pass for the prince of
Wales, then he talks so charmingly, both in verse
and prose, that you would be delighted to hear him
discourse; for you must know he is a great writer,
and has got five tragedies ready for the stage. He
did us the favour to dine with us, by my uncle's invitation,
and next day 'squired my aunt and me 

to every parth of Bath; which to be sure is an earthly
paradise. The Square, the Circus, and the
Parades put you in mind of the sumptuous palaces
represented in prints and pictures; and the new
buildings, such as Princes-row, Harlequin's-row,
Bladud's-row, and twenty other rows, look like so
many enchanted castles, raised on hanging terraces. 
At eight in the morning, we go in dishabille to
the Pump-room; which is crowded like a Welsh
fair; and there you see the highest quality, and the
lowest trades folks, jostling each other, without ceremony,
hail fellow well met. The noise of the
musick playing in the gallery, the heat and flavour
of such a crowd, and the hum and buz of their conversation,
gave me the head-ach and virtigo the
first day; but afterwards, all these things became
familiar, and even agreeable. —Right under the
Pump room windows is the King's Bath; a huge
cistern, where you see the patients up to their necks
in hot water. The ladies wair jackets and petticoats
of brown linen, with chip hats, in which they fix
their handkerchiefs to wipe the sweat from their
faces; but, truly, whether it is owing to the steam
that surrounds them, or the heat of the water, or
the nature of the dress, or to all these causes together,
they look so flushed, and so frightful,that I always
turn my eyes another way—My aunt, who says
every person of fashion should make her appearance
in the bath, as well as in the abby church, contrived
a cap with cherry-coloured ribands to suit
her complection, and obliged Win to attend her
yesterday morning in the water. But really, her
eyes were so red, that they made mine water as I
viewed her from the Pump-room; and as for poor
Win, who wore a hat trimmed with blue, what
betwixt her wan complection and her fear, she looked
like the ghost of some pale maiden, who had
drowned herself for love. When she came out of 

the bath, she took assafœtida drops, and was fluttered
all day; so that we could hardly keep her from
going into hysterics: but her mistress says it will do
her good; and poor Win curtsies, with the tears in
her eyes. For my part, I content myself with drinking
about half a pint of the water every morning. 
The pumper, with his wife and servant, attend
within a bar; and the glasses, of different sizes,
stand ranged in order before them, so that you have
nothing to do but to point at that which you choose,
and it is filled immediately, hot and sparkling from
the pump. It is the only hot water I could ever
drink, without being sick—Far from having that
effect, it is rather agreable to the taste, grateful to
the stomach, and reviving to the spirits. You
cannot imagine what wonderful cures it performs— 
My uncle began with it the other day; but he made
wry faces in drinking, and I'm afraid he will leave
it off—The first day we came to Bath, he fell into
a violent passion; beat two black-a-moors, and I
was afraid he would have fought with their master; 
but the stranger proved a peaceable man. To be
sure, the gout had got into his head, as my aunt
observed: but, I believe, his passion drove it away; 
for he has been remarkably well ever since. it is a
thousand pities he should ever be troubled with that
ugly distemper; for, when he is free from pain, he
is the best tempered man upon earth; so gentle, so
generous, so charitable, that every body loves him; 
and so good to me, in particular, that I shall never
be able to shew the deep sense I have of his tenderness
and affection. 
Hard by the pump room, is a coffee house for
the ladies; but my aunt says, young girls are not
admitted, inasmuch as the conversation turns upon
politics, scandal, philosophy, and other subjects
above our capacity; but we are allowed to accompany
them to the booksellers shops, which are 

charming places of resort; where we read novels,
plays, pamphlets, and news papers, for so small a
subscription as a crown a quarter; and in these
offices of intelligence, (as my brother calls them)
all the reports of the day, and all the private transactions
of the Bath, are first entered and discussed. 
From the bookseller's shop, we make a tour through
the milliners and toy-men; and commonly stop at
Mr. Gill's, the pastry-cook, to take a jelly, a tart,
or a small bason of vermicelli. There is, moreover,
another place of entertainment on the other
side of the water, opposite to the Grove; to which
the company cross over in a boat—It is called
Spring Garden; a sweet retreat, laid out in walks
and ponds, and parterres of flowers; and there is a
long room for breakfasting and dancing. As the
situation is low and damp, and the season has been
remarkably wet, my uncle won't suffer me to go
thither, lest I should catch cold: but my aunt says
it is all a vulgar prejudice; and, to be sure, a great
many gentlemen and ladies of Ireland frequent the
place, without seeming to be the worse for it. 
They say, dancing at Spring Gardens, when the
air is moist, is recommended to them as an excellent
cure for the rheumatism. I have been twice at the
play; where, notwithstanding the excellence of
the performers, the gaiety of the company, and the
decorations of the theatre, which are very fine, I
could not help reflecting, with a sigh, upon our
poor homely representations at Gloucester—But
this, in confidence to my dear Willis—You know
my heart and will excuse its weakness.— 
After all, the great scenes of entertainment at
Bath, are the two public rooms; where the company
meet alternately every evening—They are spacious,
lofty, and when lighted up, appear very striking. 
They are generally crowded with well-dressed
people, who drink tea in seperate parties, play at 

cards, walk, or sit and chat together, just as they
are disposed. Twice a week there is a ball; the
expence of which is defrayed by a voluntary subscription
among the gentlemen; and every subscriber
has three tickets. I was there Friday last
with my aunt, under the care of my brother, who
is a subscriber; and Sir Ulic Mackilligut recommended
his nephew, captain O Donaghan, to me
as a partner; but Jery excused himself, by saying
I had got the head-ach; and, indeed, it was really
so, though I can't imagine how he knew it. The
place was so hot, and the smell so different from
what we are used to in the country, that I was quite
feverish when we came away. Aunt says it is the
effect of a vulgar constitution, reared among woods
and mountains; and, that as I become accustomed
to genteel company, it will wear off—Sir Ulic
was very complaisant, made her a great many high-flown
compliments; and when we retired, handed
her with great ceremony to her chair. The captain,
I believe, would have done me the same favour; 
but my brother, seeing him advance, took
me under his arm, and wished him good-night. 
The captain is a pretty man, to be sure; tall and
strait, and well made; with light-grey eyes, and a
Roman nose; but there is a certain boldness in his
look and manner, that puts one out of countenance
—But I am afraid I have put you out of all
patience with this long unconnected scrawl; which
I shall therefore conclude, with assuring you, that
neither Bath nor London, nor all the diversions of
life shall ever be able to efface the idea of my dear
Letty, from the heart of her ever affectionate 
Lydia Melford. 