


Tortured with jealousy, I go home and abuse
Strap—receive a message from Narcissa,
in consequence of which, I hasten to
her apartment, where her endearing assurances
banish all my doubts and apprehensions
—in my retreat I discover somebody
in the dark, whom, suspecting to be
a spy, I resolve to kill: but, to my great
surprize, am convinced of his being no other
than Strap—Melinda slanders me— 
I become acquainted with Lord Quiverwit,
who endeavours to sound me, with regard to
Narcissa—the Squire is introduced to
his lordship, and grows cold towards me
—I learn from my confidante, that this
nobleman professes honourable love to my
mistress, who continues faithful to me, notwithstanding
the scandalous reports she has
heard to my prejudice—I am mortified
with an assurance that her whole fortune
depends upon the pleasure of her brother
—Mr. Freeman condoles me on the decline
of my character, which I vindicate
so much to his satisfaction, that he undertakes
to combat same in my behalf. 
Having uttered this exclamation, at which
she sighed, I went home in the condition 

of a frantic Bedlamite; and finding the fire in
my apartment almost extinguished, vented my
fury upon poor Strap, whose ear I pinched with
such violence, that he roared hideously with pain,
and when I quitted my hold looked so foolishly
aghast, that no unconcerned spectator could have
seen him, without been seized with an immoderate
fit of laughter. —It it true, I was soon sensible
of the injury I had done, and asked pardon
for the outrage I had committed; upon which my
faithful valet, shaking his head, said, “I forgive
you, and may God forgive you.” —But he
could not help shedding some tears at my unkindness. 
I felt unspeakable remorse for what I had
done, cursed my own ingratitude, and considered
his tears as a reproach that my soul, in her present
disturbance, could not bear. —It set all my
passions into a new ferment, I swore horrible oaths
without meaning or application, I foamed at the
mouth, kicked the chairs about the room, and
play'd abundance of mad pranks that frightened
my friend almost out of his senses. —At length
my transport subsided, I became melancholy, and
wept insensibly. 
During this state of dejection, I was surprized
with the appearance of Miss Williams, whom
Strap, blubbering all the while, had conducted into
the chamber without giving me previous notice
of her approach: —She was extremely affected
with my condition, which she had learned
from him, begged me to moderate my passion,
suspend my conjectures, and follow her to Narcissa,
who desired to see me forthwith. —That dear
name operated upon me like a charm! I started
up, and without opening my lips, was conducted
into her apartment through the garden, which 

we entered by a private door. —I found the adorable
creature in tears! I was melted at the fight— 
we continued silent for some time—my heart was
too full to speak—her snowy bosom heaved with
fond resentment; at last she sobbing cried, “What
have I done to disoblige you?” —My heart
was pierced with the tender question! I drew near
with the utmost reverence of affection! I fell
upon my knees before her, and kissing her hand,
exclaimed, “O! thou art all goodness and perfection! 
I am undone by my want of merit! 
I am unworthy to possess thy charms, which
heaven hath destined for the arms of some
more favoured being.” —She guessed the cause
of my disquiet, upbraided me gently for my suspicion,
and gave me such flattering assurances of
her eternal fidelity, that all my doubts and fears
forsook me, and peace and satisfaction reigned
within my breast. 
At midnight I left the kind nymph to her repose,
and being let out by Miss Williams, at the
garden gate by which I entered, began to explore
my way homeward in the dark, when I
heard at my back a noise like that of a baboon
when he mows and chatters. I turned instantly,
and perceiving something black, concluded I
was discovered by some spy, employed to
watch for that purpose: Arroused at this
conjecture, by which the reputation of the virtuous
Narcissa appeared in jeopardy, I drew my
sword, and would have sacrificed him to her fame,
had not the voice of Strap restrained my arm: 
It was with great difficulty he could pronounce,
“D—d—d—do! mum—um—um—murder
me, if you please!” Such an effect had the
cold upon his jaws, that his teeth rattled like a 

pair of castanets—Pleased to be thus undeceived,
I laughed at his consternation, and asked what
brought him thither? Upon which he gave me
to understand, that his concern for me had induced
him to dodge me to that place, where
the same reason had detained him till now; and
he frankly owned, that in spite of the esteem he
had for Miss Williams, he began to be very uneasy
about me, considering the disposition in
which I went abroad; and if I had staid much
longer, would have certainly alarmed the neighbourhood
in my behalf. —The knowledge of this
his intention confounded me! I represented to him
the mischievous consequences that would have attended
such a rash action, and cautioning him
severely against any such design for the future,
concluded my admonition with an assurance, that
in case he should ever act so madly, I would,
without hesitation put him to death. —“Have a
little patience (cried he, in a lamentable tone)
your displeasure will do the business, without
your committing murder.” —I was
touched with this reproach; and as soon as we
got home, made it my business to appease him,
by explaining the cause of that transport, during
which I had used him so unworthily. 
Next day when I went into the long room, I
observed several whispers circulate all of a sudden; 
and did not doubt that Melinda had been busy
with my character; but I consoled myself with
the love of Narcissa, upon which I rested with
the most perfect confidence, and going up to
the rowly-powly table, won a few pieces from
my suspected rival, who with an easy politeness,
entered into conversation with me, and desiring
my company to the coffee-house, treated me with 

tea and chocolate. —I remembered Strutwell, and
guarded against his insinuating behaviour; nor was
my suspicion wrong placed; he artfully turned
the discourse upon Narcissa, and endeavoured, by
hinting at an intrigue he pretended to be engaged
in elsewhere, to learn what connexion there was
between her and me. —But all his finesse was ineffectual; 
I was convinced of his dissimulation,
and gave such general answers to his inquiries,
that he was forced to drop the subject and talk of
something else. 
While we conversed in this manner, the savage
came in, with another gentleman, who introduced
him to his lordship; and he was received
with such peculiar marks of distinction, that
I was persuaded the courtier intended to use him
in some shape or another; and thence I conceived
an unlucky omen. —But I had more cause
to be dismayed the following day, when I saw
the Squire in company with Melinda and her mother,
who honoured me with several disdainful
glances; and when I afterwards threw myself in
his way, instead of the cordial shake of the hand,
returned my salute with a cold repetition of
“Servant, servant,” which he pronounced with
such indifference, or rather contempt, that if
he had not been Narcissa's brother I should have
affronted him in publick. 
These occurrences disturbed me not a little,
I foresaw the brooding storm, and armed myself
with resolution for the occasion; but Narcissa being
at stake, I was far from being resigned. 
—I could have renounced every other comfort
of life with some degree of fortitude; but the
prospect of losing her, disabled all my philosophy,
and tortured my soul into madness. 

Miss Williams found me, next morning, full
of anxious tumult, which did not abate, when
she told me, that my Lord Quiverwit, having
professed honourable intentions, had been introduced
to my lovely Mistress by her brother, who
had at the same time, from the information of
Melinda, spoke of me as an Irish fortune-hunter,
without either birth or estate to recommend me; 
who supported myself in the appearance of a
gentleman by sharping, and other infamous practices; 
and who was of such an obscure origin, that
I did not even know my own extraction. — 
Though I expected all this, I could not hear it
with temper, especially as truth was so blended
with falshood in the assertion, that it would be
almost impossible to separate the one from the other
in my vindication. —But I said nothing on
this head, being impatient to know how Narcissa
had been affected with the discovery. —That generous
creature, far from believing these imputations,
was no sooner withdrawn with her confidante,
than she inveighed with great warmth
against the malevolence of the world, to which
only she ascribed the whole of what had been
said to my disadvantage; and calling every circumstance
of my behaviour to her, into review
before her, found every thing so polite, honourable
and disinterested, that she could not harbour
the least doubt of my being the gentleman I appeared
to be. —“I have indeed (said she) purposely
forbore to ask the particulars of his life,
lest the recapitulation of some misfortunes,
which he has undergone, should give him pain: 
And as to the article of his fortune, I own
myself equally afraid of inquiring into it, and 

of discovering the situation of my own, lest
we should find ourselves both unhappy in the
explanation; for alas! my provision is conditional,
and depends entirely on my marrying
with my brother's consent.” 
Thunderstruck with this intelligence, the light
forsook my eyes, the colour vanished from my
cheeks, and I remained in a state of universal
trepidation! —My female friend perceiving my
disorder, encouraged me with assurances of Narcissa's
constancy, and the hope of some accident
favourable to our love; and as a further consolation
let me know, that she had acquainted my
mistress with the out-lines of my life; and that
although she was no stranger to the present low
state of my finances, her love and esteem were
rather encreased than diminished by the knowledge
of my circumstances. —I was greatly comforted
by this assurance, which saved me a world
of confusion and anxiety: For I must have imparted
my situation one day to Narcissa; and
this I could not have done without shame and
disorder. 
As I did not doubt that by this time, the
scandalous aspersions of Melinda were diffused
all over the town, I resolved to collect my whole
strength of assurance, to brow-beat the efforts of
her malice, and to publish her adventure with
the Frenchified barber, by way of reprisal. — 
In the mean time, having promised to be at the
garden gate about midnight, Miss Williams
took her leave, bidding me repose myself entirely
on the affection of my dear Narcissa,
which was as perfect as inviolable. —Before I
went abroad I was visited by Freeman, who 

came on purpose to acquaint me with the infamous
stories, that were raised at my expence; 
I heard them with great temper, and in my
turn informed him of every thing that had happened
between Melinda and me; and among other
things entertained him with the story of the
barber, letting him know what share his friend
Banter had in that affair: He was convinced of
the injury my reputation had suffered, and no
longer doubting the source from whence this deluge
of slander had flowed upon me, undertook
to undeceive the town in my behalf, and roll the
stream back upon its origin; but in the mean
time cautioned me from appearing in publick
while the prepossession was strong against me,
lest I should meet with some affront that might
have bad consequences. 