

He overlooks the advances of his friends, and
smarts severely for his neglect. 
Steeled with this cautious maxim he guarded
himself from their united endeavours,
in sundry subsequent attacks, by which his first
conjecture was confirmed, and still came off
conqueror, by virtue of his unparallelled finesse
and discretion: till at length they seemed to
despair of making him their prey, and the
count to drop some hints, importing a desire
of seeing him more closely united to the views
and interest of their triumvirate. But Ferdinand,
who was altogether selfish, and quite solitary
in his prospects, discouraged all those
advances; being resolved to trade upon his own
bottom only, and to avoid all such connexions
with any person or society whatever; much 

more, with a set of raw adventurers whose talents
he despised. With these sentiments, he
still maintained the dignity and reserve of his
first appearance among them, and rather inhanced
than diminished that idea of importance
which he had inspired at the beginning; because,
besides his other qualifications, they gave him
credit for the address with which he kept himself
superior to their united designs. 
While he thus enjoyed his pre-heminence,
together with the fruits of his success at play,
which he managed so discreetly, as never to
incur the reputation of an adventurer; he one
day chanced to be at the ordinary, when the
company was surprised by the entrance of such
a figure as had never appeared before in that
place. This was no other than a person habited
in the exact uniform of an English jockey. 
His leathern cap, cut bob, fustian frock, flannel
waistcoat, buff breeches, hunting boots
and whip, were sufficient of themselves to furnish
out a phænomenon for the admiration
of all Paris: but these peculiarities were rendered
still more conspicuous by the behaviour
of the man who owned them. When he
crossed the threshold of the outward door, he
produced such a sound from the smack of his
whip, as equalled the explosion of an ordinary
cohorn; and then broke forth into the
hollow of a fox-hunter, which he uttered with
all its variations, in a strain of vociferation,
that seemed to astonish and confound the
whole assembly, to whom he introduced himself
and his spaniel, by exclaiming in a tone
something less melodious than the cry of mackarel
or live cod. “By your leave, Gentlevoks, 

I hope there's no offence, in an honest
plain Englishman's coming with money in his
pocket, to taste a bit of your Vrench frigasee
and ragooze.” 
This declaration was made in such a wild,
fantastical manner, that the greatest part of
the company mistook him for some savage
monster or maniac, and consulted their safety
by starting up from table, and drawing their
swords. The Englishman seeing such a martial
apparatus produced against him, recoiled
two or three steps, saying, “Waunds, a believe
the people are all bewitched: what do
they take me for a beast of prey; is there no
body here that knows Sir Stentor Stile, or
can speak to me in my own lingo?” He had
no sooner pronounced these words, than the
baronet, with marks of infinite surprise, ran
towards him, crying, “Good Heaven! Sir
Stentor, who expected to meet with you in
Paris?” Upon which, the other eyeing him
very earnestly, “Odds heartlikens, cried he,
my neighbour Sir Giles Squirrel, as I am a living
soul!” With these words, he flew upon
him like a tyger, kissed him from ear to ear,
demolished his periwig, and disordered the
whole œconomy of his dress, to the no small
entertainment of the company. 
Having well nigh stifled his countryman with
embraces, and besmeared himself with pulville
from head to foot, he proceeded in this
manner; “Mercy upon thee, knight, thou
art so transmographied and bedaubed, and bedizened,
that thou mought rob thy own mother
without fear of information. Look ye
here now, I will be trussed, if the very bitch 

that was brought up in thy own bosom, knows
thee again. Hey, sweetlips, here hussy, damn
thee tuoad, do'st n't know thy old measter. 
Ey, ey, thou may'st smell till Christmas. I'll
be bound to be hanged, knight, if the creature's
nose an't foundered by the damned stinking
perfumes you have got among you.” 
These compliments being past, the two
knights sat down by one another, and Sir
Stentor being asked by his neighbour, upon
what errand he had crossed the sea, gave him
to understand, that he had come to France,
in consequence of a wager with squire Snaffle,
who had laid a thousand pounds, that he,
Sir Stentor, would not travel to Paris by himself,
and for a whole month, appear every day
at a certain hour, in the public walks, without
wearing any other dress, than that in which
he saw him. “The fellor has got no more
stuff in his pate, continued this polite stranger,
than a jack-ass, to think I could not find my
way hither, thof I could not jabber your
French lingo. Ecod! the people of this country,
are sharp enough to find out your meaning,
when you want to spend any thing among
them: and as for the matter of dress, bodikins!
for a thousand pounds, I would engage
to live in the midst of them, and shew myself
without any cloaths at all. Odd's heart! a
true-born Englishman need not be afraid to
shew his face, nor his back-side neither, with
the best Frenchman, that ever trod the ground. 
Thof we Englishmen don't beplaister our doublets
with gold and silver, I believe as how we
have our pockets better lined than most of our
neighbours; and for all my bit of a fustain 

frock, that cost me in all but forty shillings, I
believe, between you and me, knight, I have
more dust in my fob, than all these powdered
sparks put together. But the worst of the
matter is this; here is no solid belly timber in
this country: one can't have a slice of a delicate
sirloin, or nice buttock of beef, for love nor
money. Apize upon them! I could get no
eatables upon the ruoad, but what they call
Bully, which looks like the flesh of Pharaoh's
lean kine stewed into rags and tatters; and
then their peajohn, peajohn, rabbet them! one
one would think every old woman of this
kingdom hatched pidgeons from her own
body. 
It is not to be supposed, that such an original
sat unobserved. The French and other foreigners,
who had never been in England, were
struck dumb with amazement, at the knight's
appearance and deportment; while the English
guests were over-whelmed with shame and confusion,
and kept a most wary silence, for fear
of being recognized by their countryman. As
for our adventurer, he was inwardly transported
with joy at sight of this curiosity. He considered
him as a genuine, rich country booby,
of the right English growth, fresh as imported; 
and his heart throbbed with rapture, when he
heard Sir Stentor value himself upon the lining
of his pockets: he foresaw, indeed, that
the other knight would endeavour to reserve
him for his own game; but he was too conscious
of his own accomplishments, to think he
should find great difficulty in superseding the
influence of Sir Giles. 
Mean while, the new comer was by his friend, 

helped to some ragout, which pleased his palate
so well, that he declared he should now
make a hearty meal, for the first time, since he
had crossed the water; and while his good humour
prevailed, he drank to every individual
around the table. Ferdinand seized this opportunity
of insinuating himself into his favour,
by saying in English, he was glad to find there
was any thing in France, that was agreeable to
Sir Stentor: To this compliment the knight replied
with an air of surprize. “Waunds! I
find here's another countryman of mine, in
this here company! Sir I am proud to see you
with all my heart.” So speaking, he thurst out
his right hand across the table, and shook our
hero by the fist, with such violence of civility,
as proved very grievous to a French marquis,
who, in helping himself to soup, was jostled in
such a manner, as to overturn the dividing
spoon in his own bosom. The Englishman
seeing the mischief he had produced, cried,
“No offence, I hope,” in a tone of vociferation,
which the marquis in all probability misconstrued:
for he began to model his features into
a very sublime and peremptory look, when Fathom
interpreted the apology, and at the same
time, informed Sir Stentor, that although he
himself had not the honour of being an Englishman,
he had always entertained a most
particular veneration for the country, and
learned the language in consequence of that esteem. 
“Blood!” answered the knight, “I think
myself the more obliged to you for your kind
opinion, than if you was my countryman in
good earnest: for there be abundance of we 

English, no offence Sir Giles, that seem to be ashamed
of their own nation, and leave their
homes to come and spend their fortunes abroad,
among a parcel of&wblank;you understand me,
Sir—a word to the wise, as the saying is—” 
Here he was interrupted by an article of the
second course, that seemed to give him great
disturbance: this was a roasted leveret very
strong of the fumet, which happened to be
placed directly under his nose. His sense of
smelling was no sooner encountered by the effluvia
of this delicious fare, than he started up
from table, exclaiming. “Odd's my liver!
here's a piece of carrion, that I would not offer
to e'er a hound in my kennel; 'tis enough to
make any christian vomit both gut and gall;” 
and indeed, by the wry faces he made while he
ran to the door, his stomach seemed ready to
justify this last assertion. 
The abbé, who concluded from these symptoms
of disgust, that the leveret was not sufficiently
stale, began to exhibit marks of discontent,
and desired that it might be brought to
the other end of the table, for his examination. 
He accordingly hung over it with the
most greedy appetite, feasting his nostrils with
the steams of animal putrefaction; and at
length declared that the marçeau was passable,
though he owned it would have been highly
perfect, had it been kept another week. Nevertheless,
mouths were not wanting to discuss
it, insipid as it was: for in three minutes there
was not a vestige to be seen of that which had
offended the organs of Sir Stentor, who now
resumed his place, and did justice to the desert. 
But what he seemed to relish better than any 

other part of the entertainment, was the conversation
of our adventurer, whom, after dinner,
he begged to have the honour of treating
with a dish of coffee; to the seeming mortification
of his brother knight, over which Fathom
exulted in his own heart. 
In short, our hero, by his affability and engaging
deportment, immediately gained possession
of Sir Stentor's good graces: insomuch,
that he desired to crack a bottle with him in
the evening, and they repaired to an auberge,
whither his fellow knight accompanied them,
not without manifest signs of reluctance. 
There the stranger gave a loose to jollity; 
though at first he damned the Burgundy as a
poor thin liquor, that ran through him in a
twinkling, and instead of warming, cooled his
heart and bowels: however, it insensibly seemed
to give the lie to his imputation; for his
spirits rose to a more elevated pitch of mirth
and good fellowship; he sung, or rather roared,
the Early Horn, so as to alarm the whole
neighbourhood, and began to slabber his companions,
with a most bearlike affection. Yet,
whatever haste he made to the goal of ebriety,
he was distanced by his brother baronet, who,
from the beginning of the party, had made
little other use of his mouth, than to receive
the glass, and now sunk down upon the floor,
in a state of temporary annihilation. 
He was immediately carried to bed by the
direction of Ferdinand, who now saw himself
in a manner possessor of that mine, to which
he had made such eager and artful advances. 
That he might, therefore, carry on the approaches
in the same cautious manner, he 

gradually shook off the trammels of sobriety,
gave a loose to that spirit of freedom, which
good liquor commonly inspires, and in the familiarity
of drunkenness, owned himself head
of a noble family of Poland, from which he
had been obliged to absent himself on account
of an affair of honour, not yet compromised. 
Having made this confession, and laid strong
injunctions of secresy upon Sir Stentor, his
countenance seemed to acquire from every succeeding
glass, a new symptom of intoxication:
they renewed their embraces, swore eternal
friendship from that day, and swallowed fresh
bumpers, till both being, in all appearance,
quite over powered, they began to yawn in
concert, and even nod in their chairs. The
knight seemed to resent the attacks of slumber,
as so many impertinent attempts to interrupt
their entertainment; he cursed his own propensity
to sleep, imputing it to the damned
French climate, and proposed to engage in
some pastime that would keep them awake. 
“Odd's flesh!” cried the Briton, “when I'm
at home, I defy all the devils in hell to fasten
my eye-lids together, if so be as I am otherwise
inclined. For there's mother and sister Nan,
and brother Numps, and I, continue to divert
ourselves at all fours, brag, cribbidge, tetotum,
hussle-cap, and chuck-varthing; and tho'f I
say it, that should n't say it, I won't turn my
back to e'er a he in England, at any of these
pastimes: and so, count, if you are so disposed,
I am your man, that is, in the way of
friendship, at which of these you shall please
to pitch upon.” 
To this proposal Fathom replied, he was 

quite ignorant of all the games he had mentioned; 
but, in order to amuse Sir Stentor, he
would play with him at lansquenet, for a trifle,
as he had laid it down for a maxim, to risk nothing
considerable at play, “Waunds, answered
the knight, I hope you don't think I come
here in quest of money. Thank God! I
have a good landed estate worth five thousand
a-year, and owe no man a halfpenny; and I
question whether there be many counts in your
nation, no offence, I hope, that can say a bolder
word. As for your lambskin net, I know
nothing of the matter: but I will toss up with
you for a guinea, cross or pile as the saying is,
or if there's such a thing in this country as a
box and dice, I love to hear the bones rattle
sometimes.” 
Fathom found some difficulty in concealing
his joy, at the mention of this last amusement,
which had been one of his chief studies, and
in which he had made such progress, that he
could calculate all the chances with the utmost
exactness and certainty. However, he made
shift to contain himself, within due bounds,
and with seeming indifference, consented to
pass away an hour at hazard, provided the
implements could be procured. Accordingly,
the landlord was consulted, and their desire
gratified; the dice were produced, and the table
resounded with the effects of their mutual
eagerness. Fortune, at first, declared for the
Englishman, who was permitted by our adventurer
to win twenty broad pieces; and he was
so elated with his success, as to accompany
every lucky throw with a loud burst of laughter,
and other savage and simple manifestations 

of excessive joy, exclaiming in a tone
something less sweet than the bellowing of a
bull; “Now for the main, count,—odd!
here they come—here are the seven black stars,
i'faith. Come along my yellow boys—odd's
heart! I never liked the face of Lewis before.” 
Fathom drew happy presages from these
boyish raptures, and after having indulged
them for some time, began to avail himself of
his arithmetic, in consequence of which the
knight was obliged to refund the greatest part
of his winning: then he altered his note,
and became as intemperate in his chagrin, as
he had been before immoderate in his mirth. 
He cursed himself and his whole generation,
damned his bad luck, stamped with his feet
opon the floor, and challenged Ferdinand to
double stakes. This was a very welcome proposal
to our hero, who found Sir Stenton, just
such a subject as he had long desired to encounter
with; the more the Englishman laid, the
more he lost, and Fathom took care to inflame
his passions, by certain well-timed sarcasms
upon his want of judgment, 'till at length he
became quite outrageous, swore the dice were
false, and threw them out at the window; 
pulled off his perriwig, and committed it to the
flames, spoke with the most rancorous contempt
off his adversary's skill, insisting upon
his having stripped many a better man, for all
he was a count, and threatening that before
they parted, he should not only look like a
Pole, but also smell like a Pole cat. 
This was a spirit which our adventurer industriously
kept up, observing that the English 

were dupes to all the world; and that in point
of genius and address, they were no more than
noisy braggadocios. In short, another pair of
dice was procured; the stakes were again raise'd,
and after several vicissitudes, fortune declared
so much in favour of the knight, that
Fathom lost all the money in his pocket, amounting
to a pretty considerable sum. By
this time, he was warmed into uncommon
eagerness and impatience; being equally piqued
at the success and provoking exultations
of his antagonist, whom he now invited to his
lodgings, in order to decide the contest: Sir
Stentor complied with his request; the dispute
was renewed with various success, till towards
day-light, Ferdinand saw this noisy, raw, unexperienced
simpleton, carry off all his ready
cash, together with his jewels, and almost every
thing that was valuable about his person; and
to crown the whole, the victor, at parting, told
him with a most intolerable sneer, that so soon
as the count should receive another remittance
from Poland, he would give him his revenge. 