


In which the reader will perceive that
in some cases madness is catching. 
Mr. Clarke having made an end
of his narrative, the surgeon
thanked him for the entertainment he
had received; and Mr. Ferret shrugged
up his shoulders in silent disapprobation. 
As for captain Crowe,
who used at such pauses to pour in a
broadside of dismembered remarks,
linked together like chain-shot, he
spoke not a syllable for some time; 
but, lighting a fresh pipe at the candle,
began to roll such voluminous
clouds of smoke as in an instant filled
the whole apartment, and rendered
himself invisible to the whole company. 
Though he thus shrouded
himself from their view, he did not
long remain concealed from their
hearing. They first heard a strange 

dissonant cackle, which the doctor
knew to be a sea-laugh, and this was
followed by an eager exclamation of
“Rare pastime, strike my yards and
top-mast! —I've a good mind—why
shouldn't—many a losing voyage I've
—smite my taffrel but I wool—” By
this time, he had relaxed so much
in his fumigation, that the tip of
his nose and one eye reappeared; 
and as he had drawn his wig forwards
so as to cover his whole forehead,
the figure that now saluted
their eyes was much more ferocious
and terrible than the fire-breathing
chimæra of the antients. Notwithstanding
this dreadful appearance,
there was no indignation in his heart; 
but, on the contrary, an agreeable
curiosity, which he was determined to
gratify. Addressing himself to Mr.
Fillet, “Prithee, doctor (said he)
can'st tell, whether a man, without
being rated a lord or a baron, or what
d'ye call um, d'ye see, mayn't take
to the highway in the way of a frolick,
d'ye see?—adad! for my own 

part, brother, I'm resolved as how
to cruise a bit in the way of an arrant
—if so be as I can't at once be
commander, mayhap I may be bore
upon the books as a petty officer or
the like, d'ye see.” 
“Now, the Lord forbid! (cried
Clarke with tears in his eyes) I'd
rather see you dead than brought
to such a dilemma.” “Mayhap
thou would'st (answered the uncle); 
for then, my lad, there would be
some picking—aha! do'st thou
tip me the traveller, my boy”— 
Tom assured him he scorned any
such mercenary views. “I am only
concerned (said he) that you should
take any step that might tend to the
disgrace of yourself or your family; 
and I say again I had rather die
than live to see you reckoned any
otherwise than compos”—“Die
and be damned! you shambling, half-timber'd
son of a&wblank; (cried the
choleric Crowe) do'st talk to me of
keeping a reckoning and compass!— 
I could keep a reckoning, and box 

my compass, long enough before thy
keelstone was laid—Sam Crowe is
not come here to ask thy counsel how
to steer his course”—“Lord, sir, (resumed
the nephew) consider what
people will say—all the world will
think you mad”—“Set thy heart at
ease, Tom, (cried the seaman) I'll
have a trip to and again in this here
channel. Mad! what then? I think
for my part one half of the nation is
mad—and the other not very found— 
I don't see why I han't as good a
right to be mad as another man— 
but, doctor, as I was saying, I'd be
bound to you, if you would direct
me where I can buy that same tackle
that an arrant must wear. As for the
matter of the long pole headed with
iron, I'd never desire a better than a
good boat-hook; and I could make a
special good target of that there tin
sconce that holds the candle—mayhap
any blacksmith will hammer me a
scull-cap, d'ye see, out of an old brass
kettle: and I can call my horse by the
name of my ship, which was Musti. 

The surgeon was one of those
wags who can laugh inwardly, without
exhibiting the least outward mark
of mirth or satisfaction. He at once
perceived the amusement which might
be drawn from this strange disposition
of the sailor, together with the most
likely means which could be used to
divert him from such an extravagant
pursuit. He therefore tipped Clarke
the wink with one side of his face,
while the other was very gravely turned
to the captain, whom he addressed
to this effect: “It is not far from
hence to Sheffield, where you might
be fitted compleatly in half-a-day— 
then you must wake your armour
in church or chappel, and be dubbed. 
As for this last ceremony, it may be
performed by any person whatsoever. 
Don Quixote was dubbed by
his landlord; and there are many
instances on record, of errants obliging
and compelling the next person
they met to cross their shoulders, and
dub them knights. I myself would
undertake to be your godfather; and 

I have interest enough to procure the
keys of the parish church that stands
hard by; besides, this is the eve of
St. Martin, who was himself a knight-errant,
and therefore a proper patron
to a noviciate. I wish we could borrow
Sir Launcelot's armour for the
occasion.” 
Crowe, being struck with this hint,
started up, and laying his fingres on his
lips to enjoin silence, walked off softly
on his tiptoes, to listen at the door of
our knight's apartment, and judge
whether or not he was asleep. Mr.
Fillet took this opportunity to tell his
nephew, that it would be in vain for
him to combat this humour with reason
and argument: but the most effectual
way of diverting him from the
plan of knight-errantry would be, to
frighten him heartily while he should
keep his vigil in the church. Towards
the accomplishment of which
purpose he craved the assistance of the
misanthrope as well as the nephew. 
Clarke seemed to relish the scheme; 
and observed that his uncle, though 

endued with courage enough to face
any human danger, had at bottom a
strong fund of superstition, which he
had acquired, or at least improved, in
the course of a sea-life. Ferret, who
perhaps would not have gone ten paces
out of his road to save Crowe from the
gallows, nevertheless, engaged as an
auxiliary, merely in hope of seeing a
fellow-creature miserable; and even
undertook to be the principal agent in
this adventure. For this office, indeed,
he was better qualified than they
could have imagined: in the bundle
which he kept under his great coat,
there was, together with divers nostrums,
a small vial of liquid phosphorus,
sufficient, as he had already observed,
to frighten a whole neighbourhood
out of their senses. In order
to concert the previous measures, without
being overheard, these confederates
retired with a candle and lanthorn
into the stable; and their backs
were scarce turned, when captain
Crowe came in loaded with pieces of
the knight's armour, which he had 

conveyed from the apartment of Sir
Launcelot, whom he had left fast
asleep. 
Understanding that the rest of the
company were gone out for a moment,
he could not resist the inclination he
felt of communicating his intention to
the landlady, who, with her daughter,
had been too much engaged in
preparing Crabshaw's supper, to know
the purport of their conversation. The
good woman, being informed of the
captain's design to remain alone all
night in the church, began to oppose
it with all her rhetorick. She said it
was setting his Maker at defiance, and
a wilful running into temptation. She
assured him all the country knew that
the church was haunted by spirits and
hobgoblins: that lights had been seen
in every corner of it; and a tall woman
in white had one night appeared
upon the top of the tower: that dreadful
shrieks were often heard to come
from the south aile, where a murdered
man had been buried: that she
herself had seen the cross on the steeple 

all a-fire; and one evening as she
passed a horse-back close by the stile
at the entrance into the church-yard,
the horse stood still, sweating and
trembling, and had no power to proceed
until she had repeated the Lord's
Prayer. 
These remarks made a strong impression
on the imagination of Crowe,
who asked, in some confusion, if she
had got that same prayer in print. She
made no answer; but reaching the
prayer-book from a shelf, and turning
up the leaf, put it into his hand: then
the captain, having adjusted his spectacles,
began to read or rather spell
aloud with equal eagerness and solemnity. 
He had refreshed his memory
so well as to remember the whole; 
when the doctor, returning with his
companions, gave him to understand
that he had procured the key of the
chancel, where he might watch his
armour as well as in the body of the
church; and that he was ready to
conduct him to the spot. Crowe was
not now quite so forward as he had 

appeared before to atchieve this adventure. 
He began to start objections
with respect to the borrowed armour:
he wanted to stipulate the comforts of
a can of flip, and a candle's end, during
his vigil; and hinted something
of the damage he might sustain from
your malicious imps of darkness. 
The doctor told him, the constitutions
of chivalry absolutely required
that he should be left in the dark
alone, and fasting, to spend the night
in pious meditations; but if he had
any fears which disturbed his conscience,
he had much better desist,
and give up all thoughts of knight-errantry,
which could not consist with
the least shadow of apprehension. The
captain, stung by this remark, replied
not a word; but gathering up
the armour into a bundle, threw it on
his back, and set out for the place of
probation, preceded by Clarke with
the lanthorn. When they arrived at
the church, Fillet, who had procured
the key from the sexton, who was his
patient, opened the door, and conducted 

our novice into the middle of
the chancel, where the armour was
deposited. Then bidding Crowe draw
his hanger, committed him to the
protection of heaven, assuring him he
would come back, and find him either
dead or alive by day-break, and
perform the remaining part of the ceremony. 
So saying, he and the other
associates shook him by the hand and
took their leave, after the surgeon had
tilted up the lanthorn, in order to take
a view of his visage, which was pale
and haggard. 
Before the door was locked upon
him, he called aloud, “Hilloa! doctor,
hip—another word, d'ye see—” 
They forthwith returned, to know
what he wanted, and found him already
in a sweat. “Heark ye, brother
(said he, wiping his face) I do
suppose as how one may pass away the
time in whistling the black joke, or
singing black-ey'd Susan, or some such
sorrowful ditty.” “By no means,
(cried the doctor) such pastimes are
neither suitable to the place, nor the 

occasion, which is altogether a religious
exercise. If you have got any
psalms by heart, you may sing a stave
or two, or repeat the doxology.” 
“Would I had Tom Laverick here,
(replied our novitiate) he would sing
you anthems like a sea-mew—a had
been a clerk a-shore—many's the time
and often I've given him a rope's end
for singing psalms in the larboard
watch—would I had hired the son of
a bitch to have taught me a cast of
his office—but it cannot be holp, brother
—if we can't go large, we must
haul upon a wind, as the saying is— 
if we can't sing, we must pray.” 
The company again left him to his
devotion, and returned to the public
house, in order to execute the essential
part of their project. 