


He is involved in an adventure at Paris, and taken
prisoner by the city-guard. Becomes acquainted
with a French nobleman, who introduces him
into the beau monde. 
They were no sooner settled in these lodgings,
than our hero wrote to his uncle an
account of their safe arrival, and sent another
letter to his friend Gauntlet, with a very tender
billet inclosed for his dear Emilia, to whom he
repeated all his former vows of constancy and love. 

The next care that ingrossed him was that of
bespeaking several suits of cloaths suitable to the
French mode, and in the mean time he never appeared
abroad, except in the English coffee-house,
where he soon became acquainted with some of
his own countrymen, who were at Paris on the
same footing with himself. The third evening
after his journey, he was engaged in a party of
those young sparks, at the house of a noted Traiteur,
whose wife was remarkably handsome, and
otherwise extremely well qualified for alluring
customers to her house. To this lady our young
gentleman was introduced as a stranger fresh
from England; and he was charmed with her
personal accomplishments, as well as with the
freedom and gaiety of her conversation: having
sat with them about an hour, she got up in order
to retire, but being earnestly intreated to favour
them with her company at supper, she promised
to gratify their desire, and told them, without any
ceremony or circumlocution, that she would
only step into the next room to make water, and
return in an instant. This frank declaration
sounded so oddly in the ears of Peregrine, that he
concluded he might, without offence, take any
sort of liberty with a woman who could thus behave
so wide of decency and decorum; and on
this supposition, he followed her cavalierly to her
closet, where he addressed her in such palpable
terms, as he thought her character intitled him
to use. She was surprised at his confidence, which
she began to rally as a specimen of English plain
dealing, while she very deliberately executed in
his presence the intent of her withdrawing; and
he still more encouraged by this deportment,
urged his suit with such impetuosity, that the fair 

Burgeoise was compelled to cry aloud in defence
of her own virtue. Her husband ran immediately
to her assistance, and finding her in a very alarming
situation, flew upon her ravisher with such
fury, that he was fain to quit his prey, and turn
against the exasperated Traiteur, whom he punished
without mercy for his impudent intrusion. 
The lady seeing her yokefellow treated with so
little respect, espoused his cause, and fixing her
nails in his antagonist's face, scarified all one side
of his nose. The noise of this encounter brought
all the servants of the house to the rescue of their
master, and Peregrine's company arriving at the
same time, a general battle ensued, in which the
French were totally routed, the wife being insulted,
and the husband kicked down stairs. 
The publican enraged at the indignity which
had been offered to him and his family, went out
into the street, and implored the protection of
the guet or city-guard, which having heard his
complaint, fixed their bayonets and surrounded
the door, to the number of twelve or fourteen. 
The young gentlemen flushed with their success,
and considering the soldiers as so many London
watchmen, whom they had often put to flight,
drew their swords, and sallied out, with Peregrine
at their head. Whether the guard respected them
as foreigners, or inexperienced youths intoxicated
with liquor, they opened to right and left, and
gave them room to pass, without opposition. This
complaisance, which was the effect of compassion,
being misinterpreted by the English leader, he
out of meer wantonness attempted to trip up the
heels of the soldier that stood next him, but
failed in the execution, and received a blow on
his breast with the butt end of a fusil, that made 

him stagger several paces backward. Incensed at
this audacious application, the whole company
charged the detachment sword in hand, and after
an obstinate engagement, in which divers wounds
were given and received, every soul of them was
taken, and conveyed to the main-guard, where
the commanding officer being made acquainted
with the circumstances of the quarrel, in consideration
of their youth and national ferocity, for
which the French make large allowances, set them
all at liberty, after having gently rebuked them
for the irregularity and insolence of their conduct:
so that all our hero acquired by his gallantry and
courage, was a number of scandalous marks upon
his visage, that confined him a whole week to his
chamber. It was impossible to conceal this disaster
from Mr. Jolter, who having got intelligence of
the particulars, did not fail to remonstrate against
the rashness of the adventure, which, he observed,
must have been fatal to them, had their
enemies been other than Frenchmen, who of all
nations under the sun, most rigorously observe
the laws of hospitality. 
As the governor's acquaintance lay chiefly
among Irish and English priests, and a set of low
people, who live by making themselves necessary
to strangers, either in teaching the French language,
or executing small commissions with which
they are intrusted, he was not the most proper
person in the world for regulating the taste of a
young gentleman who travelled for improvement,
in expectation of making a figure one day in his
own country; and being conscious of his own
incapacity, he contented himself with the office
of a steward, and kept a faithful account of all
the money that was disbursed in the course of 

their family expence: not but that he was acquainted
with all the places which are visited by
strangers on their first arrival at Paris; and knew
to a liard what was commonly given to the Swiss
of each remarkable hotel; though, with respect
to the curious painting and statuary that every
where abound in that metropolis, he was more
ignorant than the domestic that attends for a livre
a day. 
In short, Mr. Jolter could give a very good
account of the stages on the road, and save the
expence of Antonini's detail of the curiosities in
Paris; he was a connoisseur in ordinaries, from
twelve to five and thirty livres, knew all the rates
of a Fiacre and Remise, could dispute with a Tailleur
or Traiteur upon the articles of his bill, and
scold the servants in tolerable French. But the
laws, customs and genius of the people, the characters
of individuals, and scenes of polished life,
were subjects which he had neither opportunities
to observe, inclination to consider, or discernment
to distinguish. All his maxims were the suggestions
of pedantry and prejudice; so that his perception
was obscured, his judgment biassed, his
address aukward, and his conversation absurd and
unentertaining: yet such as I have represented this
tutor, is the greatest part of those animals who
lead raw boys about the world, under the denomination
of travelling governors. Peregrine,
therefore, being perfectly well acquainted with
the extent of Mr. Jolter's abilities, never dreamt
of consulting him in the disposition of his conduct,
but parcelled out his time according to the dictates
of his own reflection, and the information
and direction of his companions, who had lived 

longer in France, and consequently were better
acquainted with the pleasures of the place. 
As soon as he was in a condition to appear a la
Françoise, he hired a genteel chariot by the
month, made the tour of the Luxembourg gallery,
Palais Royal, all the remarkable hotels,
churches and celebrated places in Paris; visited
St. Cloud, Marli, Versailles, Trianon, St. Germain,
and Fountainbleau; enjoyed the opera,
masquerades, Italian and French comedy; and
seldom failed of appearing in the public walks,
in hopes of meeting with Mrs. Hornbeck, or
some adventure suited to his romantic disposition. 
He never doubted that his person would attract
the notice of some distinguished inamorata, and
was vain enough to believe that few female hearts
were able to resist the artillery of his accomplishments,
if once he had an opportunity of planting
it to advantage. He presented himself, however,
at all the Spectacles for many weeks, without
reaping the fruits of his expectation; and began
to entertain a very indifferent idea of the
French discernment, which had overlooked him so
long, when one day in his way to the opera, his
chariot was stopped by an embarras in the street,
occasioned by two peasants, who having driven
their carts against each other, quarrelled, and
went to loggerheads on the spot. Such a rencounter
is so uncommon in France, that the people
shut up their shops, and from their windows
threw cold water upon the combatants, with a
view of putting an end to the battle, which was
maintained with great fury and very little skill,
until one of them receiving an accidental fall,
the other took the advantage of this misfortune,
and fastening upon him as he lay, began to thump 

the pavement with his head. Our hero's equipage
being detained close by the field of this contention,
Pipes could not bear to see the laws of boxing so
scandalously transgressed, and leaping from his
station, pulled the offender from his antagonist,
whom he raised up, and in the English language,
encouraged to a second essay, instructing him at
the same time, by clenching his fists according to
art, and putting himself in a proper attitude. 
Thus confirmed, the enraged carman sprung upon
his foe, and in all appearance would have effectually
revenged the injury he had sustained, if he
had not been prevented by the interposition of a
lacquey belonging to a nobleman, whose coach
was obliged to halt in consequence of the dispute. 
This footman, who was distinguished by a cane,
descending from his post, without the least ceremony
or expostulation, began to employ his weapon
upon the head and shoulders of the peasant
who had been patronized by Pipes; upon which
Thomas resenting such ungenerous behaviour,
bestowed such a stomacher upon the officious intermeddler,
as discomposed the whole œconomy
of his entrails, and obliged him to discharge the
interjection ah! with demonstrations of great anguish
and amazement. The other two footmen
who stood behind the coach, seeing their fellow-servant
so insolently assaulted, flew to his assistance,
and rained a most disagreeable shower
upon the head of his aggressor, who had no
means of diversion or defence. Peregrine, though
he did not approve of Tom's conduct, could not
bear to see him so roughly handled, especially as
he thought his own honour concerned in the fray,
and therefore quitting his machine, came to the
rescue of his attendant, and charged his adversaries 

sword in hand. Two of them no sooner
perceived this reinforcement, than they betook
themselves to flight; and Pipes having twisted the
cane out of the hands of the third, belaboured
him so unmercifully, that our hero thought proper
to interpose his authority in his behalf. The
common people stood aghast at this unprecedented
boldness of Pickle, who understanding that the
person whose servants he had disciplined, was a
general and prince of the blood, went up to the
coach, and asked pardon for what he had done,
imputing his own behaviour to his ignorance of
the other's quality. The old nobleman accepted
of his apology with great politeness, thanking
him for the trouble he had taken to reform the
manners of his domesticks; and guessing from
our youth's appearance that he was some stranger
of condition, very courteously invited him into
the coach, on the supposition that they were both
bound for the opera. Pickle gladly embraced this
opportunity of becoming acquainted with a person
of such rank, and ordering his own chariot to
follow, accompanied the count to his loge, where
he conversed with him during the whole entertainment. 
He soon perceived that Peregrine was not deficient
in spirit or sense, and seemed particularly
pleased with his engaging manner and easy deportment,
qualifications for which the English
nation is by no means remarkable in France, and
therefore the more conspicuous and agreeable in
the character of our hero, whom the nobleman
carried home that same evening, and introduced
to his lady, and several persons of fashion who
supped at his house. Peregrine was quite captivated
by their affable behaviour and the vivacity 

of their discourse; and after having been honoured
with particular marks of consideration, took his
leave, fully determined to cultivate such a valuable
acquaintance. 
His vanity suggested, that now the time was
come when he should profit by his talents among
the fair sex, on whom he resolved to employ his
utmost art and address. With this view he assiduously
engaged in all parties to which he had access,
by means of his noble friend, who let slip
no opportunity of gratifying his ambition. He
for some time shared in all his amusements, and
was entertained in many of the best families of
France; but he did not long enjoy that elevation
of hope which had flattered his imagination. He
soon perceived that it would be impossible to
maintain the honourable connexions he had made,
without engaging every day at quadrille, or in
other words, losing his money; for every person
of rank, whether male or female, was a professed
gamester, who knew and practised all the
finesse of the art, of which he was intirely ignorant. 
Besides, he began to find himself a meer
novice in French gallantry, which is supported by
an amazing volubility of tongue, an obsequious
and incredible attention to trifles, a surprising faculty
of laughing out of pure complaisance, and a
nothingness of conversation, which he could never
attain. In short, our hero, who among his own
countrymen would have passed for a sprightly entertaining
fellow, was considered in the brilliant
assemblies of France as a youth of a very phlegmatic
disposition. No wonder then that his pride
was mortified at his own want of importance,
which he did not fail to ascribe to their defect in
point of judgment and taste: he conceived a 

disgust at the mercenary conduct, as well as the
shallow intellects of the ladies; and after he had
spent some months, and a round sum of money,
in fruitless attendance and addresses, he fairly
quitted the pursuit, and consoled himself with
the conversation of a merry Fille de joye, whose
good graces he acquired by an allowance of twenty
Louis per month; and that he might the more
easily afford this expence, dismissed his chariot and
French lacquey at the same time. 
He then entered himself in a noted academy,
in order to finish his exercises, and contracted an
acquaintance with a few sensible people, whom
he distinguished at the coffee-house and ordinary
to which he resorted, and who contributed not a
little to the improvement of his knowledge and
taste; for, prejudice apart, it must be owned
that France abounds with men of consummate
honour, profound sagacity, and the most liberal
education. From the conversation of such, he
obtained a distinct idea of their government and
constitution; and though he could not help admiring
the excellent order and œconomy of their
police, the result of all his inquiries was self-congratulation
on his title to the privileges of a British
subject. Indeed this invaluable birthright
was rendered conspicuous by such flagrant occurrences,
which fell every day almost under his observation,
that nothing but the grossest prejudice
could dispute its existence. 