


A treaty is concluded betwixt Cadwallader and our
hero; in consequence of which divers pleasant adventures
occur, until the young gentleman is summoned
to the garison on a very interesting occasion. 
Here the Misanthrope left off speaking, desirous
to know the sentiments of our hero,
who embraced the proffered alliance, in a
transport of joy and surprize; and the treaty was
no sooner concluded than Mr. Crabtree began to
perform articles, by imparting to him a thousand
delicious secrets, from the possession of which he
promised himself innumerable scenes of mirth and
enjoyment. By means of this associate, whom
he considered as the ring of Gyges, he foresaw
that he should be enabled to penetrate not only
into the chambers but even to the inmost thoughts 

of the female sex; and, in order to ward off suspicion,
they agreed to revile each other in public,
and meet at a certain private rendezvous, to
communicate their mutual discoveries, and concert
their future operations. So precious did Peregrine
esteem this treasure, that he would not
even make his friend Godfrey acquainted with
his good fortune, tho' the first use he made of it,
was in behalf of that young gentleman, whom
he undeceived in two very interesting particulars. 
The soldier's addresses were, at that time,
shared betwixt two ladies, who received them
in a very different manner. By one of them he
was caress'd with marks of particular regard, and
by small favours flattered with the expectation of
supreme success; while the other treated him
with such severity and shyness, that he could
never find an opportunity or resolution to make
an unrestricted declaration of his flame. As every
woman has a confidant, to whom she pours forth
her heart on these occasions, Mr. Crabtree happened
to be present when each of them disburthened
herself of her sentiments with regard to
her lover; and learned from their own confessions,
that the frank lady cajoled him for the
sake of the money which he suffered himself to
lose at cards, though she had not the least intention
to extend her complaisance beyond the
limits of exterior civilities; while the prude was
actually enamoured of his person, and through a
remnant of modesty avoided him for no other
reason, but because she knew herself incapable
of resisting his sollicitations. 
Mr. Gauntlet profited by this discovery, which
was communicated to him through the canal of 

his friend, relinquished the mercenary coquet,
and found means to vanquish the reserve of the
other. Peregrine himself was, in like manner,
set to rights, in certain opinions he had conceived
of his own influence with particular ladies; and
as no person ever offended him with impunity,
he projected a scheme of vengeance against a remarkable
inamorato, who to his assiduities preferred
those of a brawny fellow, that, from the
place of a private trooper in the horse-guards, had
been preferred to the rank of a lieutenant, by
the interest of a dowager lately deceased. With
this favourite did the lady make an assignation,
in the hearing of Cadwallader, who gave our
hero to understand, that he was to be received
by her woman, in the dark, at a parlour-door
that opened into a small garden, the wall of
which he could easily overleap, after the servants
should be retired to rest. 
Peregrine, fraught with this intelligence, resolved
to anticipate his rival; and accordingly,
by the ministration of his companion, engaged a
couple of stout chairmen, who being posted on
the spot, seized the lover in his endeavours to
surmount the wall, and conveyed him to a place
of confinement, on pretence of supposing his design
was to rob the house. He was no sooner
secured in this manner, than Pickle, being determined
to prosecute the adventure, transported
himself into the garden, and personating the lieutenant,
went to the door, made the signal
which had been agreed upon, was admitted by
the attendant, conducted to her lady's apartment,
that was darkened for her reception; and having
enjoyed his revenge, with every circumstance of 

satisfaction, made his retreat before day, without
being discovered, after having been gratified
with a valuable ring, as a testimony of her ladyship's
affection. 
Mean while the disappointed captive finding
himself involved in a troublesome affair, that must
end either in his own disgrace, or in that of his
mistress, whom he could not with honour expose,
employed all his art in tampering with his detainers,
who pretended to have detected him as
they passed that way by accident, and who would
not listen to the terms he proposed for his release
until it was almost day; and then, by the permission
of their employers, they set him at liberty,
in consideration of five guineas, which he divided
between them. From the time of his discharge
he waited with the utmost impatience for
the hour of breakfast, and when it approached
hied him to the house of his Dulcinea, with a
view of excusing himself for the breach of punctuality
he was obliged to commit. 
He was confounded at the air of satisfaction and
complacency that manifested itself in the lady's
appearance; but believing it was no other than
affectation, to conceal her inward disquiet and
chagrin, he assumed a most dejected look, and
with many expressions of mortification recounted
the cursed accident which had disabled him from
reaping the delicious fruits of his expectation. 
The nymph, who was not all subject to the vulgar
symptoms of confusion, hearing this circumstantial
detail, fixed her eyes upon the soldier's
countenance, and regarding him attentively for
some minutes; “If this declaration (said she) be
an effort of your delicacy, you may spare such 

ridiculous reserve for the future. When things
are come to a certain pass, such ceremony is superfluous
and disagreeable. But perhaps you remember
your good fortune with regret, and actually
wish you had met with that adventure you
have been at such pains to feign, rather than
have enjoyed so cheap a conquest. Indeed you
was so impatient to be gone before morning, that
you seemed rather tired of your stay, than sollicitous
about my reputation.” 
The trooper, amazed and alarmed at this unexpected
address, swore with many vulgar execrations,
that he could prove he was in custody
from twelve till six o'clock in the morning; and
that he began to perceive he had been finely flung
by some rascal, who had visited her in his place. 
He even hinted a suspicion, that the whole affair
had been transacted by her connivance; and became
extremely rough and unmannerly in his expostulations:
so that the lady, who had more of
the tygress than of the lamb in her disposition,
being exasperated at the freedom of his behaviour,
ordered him down stairs, and (to use the common
phrase) forbad him her house. He accordingly
retired, not without many invectives and
threats, which he bawled aloud in his march; 
while his incensed patroness, by this time sensible
that she had been the dupe of some stratagem, remained
in a state of unspeakable anxiety and
mortification. Being blessed, however, with a
great share of penetration, she forthwith set it at
work; and, after some recollection, concluded
that the substitute could be no other than Peregrine,
who had either learned the circumstance
of the assignation from her maid, or extracted 

them from the vanity and indiscretion of the gallant
himself. 
Now that she had an opportunity of being acquainted
with all our young gentleman's qualifications,
she did not repine at the qui pro quo
which had been played upon her, and resolved to
transfer her good graces to Peregrine, without
reserve. With this view she favoured him
with the most palpable advances and allusions,
which he would not understand, but on the
contrary, conveyed the ring to her in a letter,
written in a counterfeited character, with a feigned
name, importing, that as he had reason to believe
the token was intended for another, he could
not in conscience reserve it for his own use: and
to crown her vexation, by his contrivance, every
circumstance of the story was divulged, except
the name of the person who had represented the
lover. 
While our adventurer thus enjoyed his disposition,
he was summoned to the castle by an express
from his friend Hatchway, representing that
the commodore lay at the point of death; and in
less than an hour after the receipt of this melancholy
piece of news, he set out post for his uncle's
habitation, having previously taken leave of his
associate Crabtree, who promised to meet him in
two months at London, and settled a correspondence
with Gauntlet, who proposed to remain at
Bath during the remaining part of the season. 