


He makes another effort towards the accomplishment
of his wish, which is postponed by a strange accident. 
He directed his valet de chambre, who was
a thorough-paced pimp, to kindle some
straw in the yard, and then pass by the door of
her apartment, crying with a loud voice that the
house was on fire. This alarm brought both ladies
out of their chamber in a moment, and Peregrine
taking the advantage of their running to
the street door, entered the room and concealed
himself under a large table that stood in an unobserved
corner. The nymphs, as soon as they
understood the cause of his Mercury's supposed
affright, returned to their apartment, and having
said their prayers, undressed themselves and went
to bed. This scene, which fell under the observation
of Pickle, did not at all contribute to the
cooling of his concupiscence, but on the contrary,
inflamed him to such a degree, that he could
scarce restrain his impatience, until by her snoring,
he concluded the fellow-lodger of his Amanda
was asleep. This welcome note no sooner saluted
his ears, than he crept to his charmer's bedside,
and placing himself on his knees, gently laid
hold on her white hand, and pressed it to his lips. 
She had just begun to close her eyes, and enjoy
the agreeable oppression of slumber, when she
was roused by this rape, at which she started, 

pronouncing in a tone of surprize and dismay,
“My God! who's that?” The lover, with the
most insinuating humility, besought her to hear
him; vowing that his intention in approaching
her thus, was not to violate the laws of decency,
or that indelible esteem which she had engraven
on his heart; but to manifest his sorrow and
contrition for the umbrage he had given, to pour
forth the overflowings of his soul, and tell her
that he neither could nor would survive her displeasure. 
These and many more pathetic protestations,
accompanied with sighs and tears, and
other expressions of genuine grief, which our
hero had at command, could not fail to melt the
tender heart of the amiable Fleming, already prepossessed
in favour of his qualifications. She sympathized
so much with his affliction, as to weep
in her turn, when she represented the impossibility
of her rewarding his passion; and he seizing
the favourable moment, reinforced his sollicitations
with such irresistible transports, that her resolution
gave way, she began to breathe quick and
deep, expressed her fear of being overheard by
the other lady, and with an ejaculation of “O
heavens! I'm undone:” suffered herself, after a
faint struggle, to be overpowered by her admirer,
who made a lodgment upon the covered way of
her bed, under the curtain of the counterscarp; 
and in all probability, would have in a few moments
made himself master of the place; when
her honour was secured for the present, by a
strange sort of knocking upon the wainscot, at
the other end of the room, hard by the bed in
which the female adventurer lay. Surprised at
this circumstance which interrupted our assailant's
operations, the lady begged him for heaven's sake to 

retreat, else her reputation would be ruined for
ever: but when he represented to her, that her
character would run a much greater risk, if he
should be detected in withdrawing, she consented
with great trepidation to his stay, and they listened
in silence to the sequel of the noise that alarmed
them. This was no other than an expedient of
the painter, to awaken his Dulcinea, with whom
he had made an assignation, or at least interchanged
such signals as he thought amounted to a
firm appointment. His nymph being disturbed
in her first fleep, immediately understood the
sound, and true to the agreement, rose, and unbolting
the door as softly as possible, gave him
admittance, leaving it open for his more commodious
retreat. 
While this happy gallant was employed in disengaging
himself from the dishabille in which he
had entered, the Capuchin suspecting that Peregrine
would make another attempt upon his
charge, had crept silently to the apartment, in
order to reconnoitre, lest the adventure should be
atchieved without his knowledge; a circumstance
that would deprive him of the profits he might
expect from his privity and concurrence. Finding
the door unlatched, his suspicion was confirmed,
and he made no scruple of creeping into the
chamber on all-four; so that the painter having
stript himself to the shirt, in groping about for
his Dulcinea's bed, chanced to lay his hand upon
the shaven crown of the father's head, which by
a circular motion, the priest began to turn round
in his grasp, like a ball in a socket, to the surprize
and consternation of poor Pallet, who having
neither penetration to comprehend the case,
nor resolution to withdraw his fingers from this 

strange object of his touch, stood sweating in the
dark, and vented ejaculations with great devotion,
till the friar tired with this exercise, and the painful
posture in which he stooped, raised himself
gradually upon his feet, heaving up at the same
time the hand of the painter, whose terror and
amazement increased to such a degree at this unaccountable
elevation, that his faculties began to
fail; and his palm in the confusion of his fright
sliding over the priest's forehead, one of his fingers
happened to slip into his mouth, and was
immediately secured between the Capuchin's teeth,
with as firm a fixure, as if it had been screwed in
a blacksmith's vice. The painter was so much
disordered by this sudden snap, which tortured him
to the bone, that forgetting all other considerations,
he roared aloud, “Murder! fire! a trap,
a trap! help, christians, for the love of God help!” 
Our hero confounded by these exclamations,
which he knew would soon fill the room with
spectators, and incensed at his own mortifying
disappointment, was obliged to quit the untasted
banquet, and approaching the cause of his misfortune,
just as his tormentor had thought proper
to release his finger, discharged such a hearty slap
between his shoulders, as brought him to the
ground with hideous bellowing, then retiring unperceived,
to his own chamber, was one of the
first who returned with a light, on pretence of
having been alarmed with his cries. The Capuchin
had taken the same precaution, and followed
Peregrine into the room, pronouncing Benedicite,
and crossing himself with many marks
of astonishment; and the physician and Jolter
appearing at the same time, the unfortunate
painter was found lying naked on the floor, in 

all the agony of horror and dismay, blowing upon
his left hand, that hung dangling from the elbow,
like a boy who had burnt his fingers, in
attempting to snatch roasted chesnuts from the
fire. The circumstance of his being found in
that apartment, and the attitude of his affliction,
which was extremely ridiculous, provoked the
doctor to a smile, and produced a small relaxation
in the severity of the governor's countenance; 
while Pickle, testifying surprize and concern,
lifted him from the ground, and enquired
into the cause of his present situation. Having,
after some recollection, and fruitless endeavours
to speak, recovered the use of his tongue, he
told them that the house was certainly haunted
by evil spirits, by which he had been conveyed
(he knew not how) into that apartment, and
afflicted with all the tortures of hell; that one
of them had made itself sensible to his feeling, in
the shape of a round ball of smooth flesh, that
turned round under his hand, like an astronomer's
globe, and then rising up to a surprising
height, was converted into a machine that laid
hold on his finger, by a snap, and having pinned
him to the spot, he continued for some moments
in unspeakable agony, till at last the engine seemed
to melt away from his finger, and he received
a sudden thwack upon his shoulders, as if discharged
by the arm of a giant, which overthrew
him in an instant upon the floor. The priest
hearing this strange account, pulled out of one
of his pouches a piece of consecrated candle,
which he lighted immediately, and muttered certain
mysterious conjurations. Jolter, imagining
that Pallet was drunk, shook his head, saying,
he believed the spirit was no where but in his 

own brain. The physician, for once, condescended
to be a wag, and looking towards one of
the beds, observed, that in his opinion, the
painter had been misled by the flesh, and not by
the spirit. The fair Fleming lay in silent astonishment
and affright; and her fellow-lodger, in
order to acquit herself of all suspicion, exclaimed
with incredible volubility, against the author of
this uproar, who (she did not doubt) had concealed
himself in the apartment, with a view of
perpetrating some wicked attempt upon her precious
virtue, and was punished and prevented by
the immediate interposition of heaven. At her desire,
therefore, and the earnest sollicitation of the
other lady, he was conducted to his own bed,
and the chamber being evacuated, they locked
their door, fully resolved to admit no more visitants
for that night: while Peregrine, mad with
seeing the delicious morsel, snatched (as it were)
from his very lip, stalked through the passage,
like a ghost, in hopes of finding some opportunity
of re-entering, till the day beginning to
break, he was obliged to retire, cursing the ideotical
conduct of the painter, which had so unluckily
interfered with his delight. 