


Trunnion is enraged at the conduct of Pickle.
Peregrine resents the injustice of his mother, to
whom he explains his sentiments in a letter. Is
entered at the University of Oxford, where he
signalizes himself as a youth of an enterprising
genius. 
Unspeakable were the transports of rage to
which Trunnion was incensed by this absurd
renunciation: he tore the letter with his
gums, (teeth he had none) spit with furious grimaces,
in token of the contempt he entertained
for the author, whom he not only damned as a
lousy, scabby, nasty, scurvy, sculking, lubberly
noodle, but resolved to challenge to single combat
with fire and sword; but he was dissuaded
from this violent measure, and appeased by the
intervention and advice of the lieutenant and
Mr. Jolter, who represented the message as the
effect of the poor man's infirmity, for which he
was rather an object of pity than of resentment; 
and turned the stream of his indignation against
the wife, whom he reviled accordingly. Nor did
Peregrine himself bear with patience this injurious
declaration, the nature of which he no sooner
understood from Hatchway, than equally shocked
and exasperated, he retired to his apartment, and
in the first emotions of his ire, produced the
following epistle, which was immediately conveyed
to his mother. 


Madam,
Had nature formed me a bugbear to the
fight, and inspired me with a soul as vicious
as my body was detestable, perhaps I might
have enjoyed particular marks of your affection
and applause; seeing you have persecuted me with
such unnatural aversion, for no other visible reason
than that of my differing so widely in shape
as well as disposition, from that deformed urchin
who is the object of your tenderness and care. If
those be the terms on which alone I can obtain
your favour, I pray God you may never cease to
hate, 
Madam,
Your most injured son
Peregrine Pickle. 
This letter, which nothing but his passion and
inexperience could excuse, had such an effect
upon his mother, as may be easily conceived. She
was enraged to a degree of frenzy against the
writer; though at the same time she considered
the whole as the production of Mrs. Trunnion's
particular pique, and represented it to her husband
as an insult, that he was bound in honour to resent,
by breaking off all correspondence with the
commodore and his family. This was a bitter
pill to Gamaliel, who, through a long course of
years, was so habituated to Trunnion's company,
that he could as easily have parted with a limb,
as have relinquished the club all at once. He
therefore ventured to represent his own incapacity
to follow her advice, and begged that he might
at least be allowed to drop the connexion gradually; 

protesting that he would do his endeavour
to give her all manner of satisfaction. 
Mean while preparations were made for Peregrine's
departure to the university, and in a few
weeks he set out in the seventeenth year of his
age, accompanied by the same attendants who
lived with him at Winchester, after his uncle
had laid strong injunctions upon him to avoid the
company of modest women, to mind his learning,
to let him hear of his welfare as often as he
could spare time to write, and had settled his appointments
at the rate of five hundred a year, including
his governor's salary, which was one fifth
part of the sum. The heart of our young gentleman
dilated at the prospect of the figure he should make
with such an handsome annuity, the management
of which was left to his own discretion; and he
amused his imagination with the most agreeable
reveries during his journey to Oxford, which he
performed in two days. Here being introduced
to the head of the college, to whom he had been
recommended, accommodated with genteel apartments,
entered as gentleman commoner in
the books, and provided with a judicious tutor,
instead of returning to the study of Greek and
Latin, in which he thought himself already sufficiently
instructed; he renewed his acquaintance
with some of his old school-fellows, whom he
found in the same situation, and was by them initiated
in all the fashionable diversions of the place. 
It was not long before he made himself remarkable
for his spirit and humour, which were so
acceptable to the bucks of the university, that
he was admitted as a member of their corporation,
and in a very little time became the most 

conspicuous personage of the whole fraternity; 
not that he valued himself upon his ability in
smoaking the greatest number of pipes, and drinking
the largest quantity of ale; these were qualifications
of too gross a nature to captivate his refined
ambition. He piqued himself on his talent
for raillery, his genius and taste, his personal accomplishments,
and his success at intrigue; nor
were his excursions confined to the small villages
in the neighbourhood, which are commonly visited
once a week by the students for the sake of
carnal recreation. He kept his own horses, traversed
the whole country in parties of pleasure,
attended all the races within fifty miles of Oxford,
and made frequent jaunts to London, where he
used to lie incognito during the best part of many
a term. 
The rules of the university were too severe
to be observed by a youth of his vivacity; 
and therefore he became acquainted with the
proctor, by times. But all the checks he received
were insufficient to moderate his career; 
he frequented taverns and coffee-houses, committed
midnight frolics in the streets, insulted all
the sober and pacific class of his fellow-students; 
the tutors themselves were not sacred from his
ridicule; he laughed at the magistrate, and neglected
every particular of college-discipline. 
In vain did they attempt to restrain his irregularities
by the imposition of fines; he was liberal
to profusion, and therefore paid without
reluctance. Thrice did he scale the windows of
a tradesman, with whose daughter he had an affair
of gallantry, as often was he obliged to seek his
safety by a precipitate leap; and one night would,
in all probability, have fallen a sacrifice to an 

ambuscade that was laid by the father, had not
his trusty squire Pipes interposed in his behalf,
and manfully rescued him from the clubs of his
enemies. 
In the midst of these excesses, Mr. Jolter finding
his admonitions neglected, and his influence
utterly destroyed, attempted to wean his pupil
from his extravagant courses, by engaging his attention
in some more laudable pursuit. With
this view he introduced him into a club of politicians,
who received him with great demonstrations
of regard, accommodated themselves
more than he could have expected to his jovial
disposition, and while they revolved schemes for
the reformation of the state, drank with such devotion
to the accomplishment of their plans, that
before parting the cares of their patriotism were
quite overwhelmed. 
Peregrine, though he could not approve of
their doctrine, resolved to attach himself for some
time to their company; because he perceived
ample subject for his ridicule, in the characters of
these wrong-headed enthusiasts. It was a constant
practice with them, in their midnight consistories,
to swallow such plentiful draughts of
inspiration, that their mysteries commonly ended
like those of the Bacchanalian Orgia; and they
were seldom capable of maintaining that solemnity
of decorum which by the nature of their
functions most of them were obliged to profess. 
Now as Peregrine's satirical disposition was never
more gratified than when he had an opportunity
of exposing grave characters in ridiculous attitudes,
he laid a mischievous snare for his new
confederates, which took effect in this manner. 
In one of their nocturnal deliberations, he promoted 

such a spirit of good fellowship, by the
agreeable sallies of his wit, which were purposely
levelled against their political adversaries, that by
ten o'clock they were all ready to join in the
most extravagant proposal that could be made. 
They had already broke their glasses in consequence
of his suggestion, drank healths out of
their shoes, caps, and the bottoms of the candlesticks
that stood before them, sometimes standing
with one foot on a chair, and the knee bent on
the edge of the table; and when they could no
longer stand in that posture, setting their bare
posteriors on the cold floor, they huzza'd, hollowed,
danced and sung, and in short were elevated
to such a pitch of intoxication, that when
Peregrine proposed that they should burn their
perriwigs, the hint was immediately approved,
and they executed the frolick as one man; their
shoes and caps underwent the same fate by the
same instigation, and in this trim he led them
forth into the street, where they resolved to compel
every body they should find to subscribe to
their political creed, and pronounce the Shiboleth
of their party. In the atchievement of this
enterprize, they met with more opposition than
they expected; they were encountered with arguments
which they could not well withstand; 
the noses of some, and eyes of others, in a very
little time bore the marks of obstinate disputation; 
and their conductor having at length engaged
the whole body in a fray with another
squadron which was pretty much in the same
condition, he very fairly gave them the slip, and
slyly retreated to his apartment, foreseeing that
his companions would soon be favoured with the
notice of their superiors. Nor was he deceived 

in his prognostic; the proctor going his round,
chanced to fall in with this tumultuous uproar,
and interposing his authority, found means to
quiet the disturbance, and, after having taken
cognizance of their names, dismissed the rioters
to their respective chambers, not a little scandalized
at the behaviour of some among them,
whose business and duty it was to set far other
examples to the youth under their care and direction. 
About midnight Pipes, who had orders to attend
at a distance, and keep an eye upon Jolter,
brought home that unfortunate governor upon his
back (Peregrine having beforehand secured his
admittance into the college) and among other
bruises, he was found to have received a couple
of contusions on his face, which next morning
appeared in a black circle that surrounded each
eye. This was a mortifying circumstance to a
man of his character and deportment, especially
as he had received a message from the proctor,
who desired to see him forthwith. With great
humility and contrition he begged the advice of
his pupil, who being used to amuse himself with
painting, assured Mr. Jolter, that he would cover
those signs of disgrace with a slight coat of
flesh-colour, so dextrously, that it would be almost
impossible to distinguish the artificial from
the natural skin. The rueful governor, rather
than expose such opprobrious tokens to the observation
and censure of the magistrate, submitted
to the expedient; and although his counsellor
had over-rated his own skill, was persuaded to
confide in the disguise, and actually attended the
proctor, with such a staring addition to the natural
ghastliness of his features, that his visage 

bore a very apt resemblance to some of those ferocious
countenances that hang over the doors of
certain taverns and alehouses, under the denomination
of the Saracen's head. 
Such a remarkable alteration of phisiognomy
could not escape the notice of the most undiscerning
beholder, much less the penetrating
eye of this severe judge, already whetted with
what he had seen over-night. He was therefore
upbraided with his ridiculous and shallow artifice,
and, together with the companions of his debauch,
underwent such a cutting reprimand for
the scandalous irregularity of his conduct, that
all of them remained crest-fallen, and were
ashamed, for many weeks, to appear in the publick
execution of their duty. 
Peregrine was too vain of his finesse, to conceal
the part he acted in this comedy, with the
particulars of which he regaled his companions,
and thereby intailed upon himself the hate and
resentment of the community, whose maxims
and practices he had disclosed; for he was considered
as a spy, who had intruded himself into
their society with a view of betraying it; or, at
best, an apostate and renegado from the faith
and principles which he had professed. 