


Hot Well, April 21. 
MY DEAR LETTY,
I DID not intend to trouble you again, till we
should be settled at Bath; but having the occasion
of Jarvis, I could not let it slip, especially as I have
something extraordinary to communicate—O, my
dear companion! what shall I tell you? for several
days past there was a Jew-looking man, that plied
at the Wells with a box of spectacles; and he always
eyed me so earnestly, that I began to be very uneasy. 
At last, he came to our lodgings at Clifton, and lingered
about the door, as if he wanted to speak to
somebody—I was seized with an odd kind of fluttering,
and begged Win to throw herself in his way:
but the poor girl has weak nerves, and was afraid of
his beard. My uncle, having occasion for new
glasses, called him up stairs, and was trying a pair
of spectacles, when the man, advancing to me said,
in a whisper—O gracious! what d'ye think he said? 
—“I am Wilson!” His features struck me that very
moment—it was Wilson, sure enough! but so
disguised, that it would have been impossible to know
him, if my heart had not assisted in the discovery. 
I was so surprised, and so frightened, that I fainted
away; but soon recovered; and found myself supported
by him on the chair, while my uncle was running
about the room, with the spectacles on his nose
calling for help. I had no opportunity to speak to
him; but our looks were sufficiently expressive. He
was payed for his glasses, and went away. Then I
told Win who he was, and sent her after him to the
Pump-room; where she spoke to him, and begged 

him in my name to withdraw from the place, that
he might not incur the suspicion of my uncle or my
brother, if he did not want to see me die of terror
and vexation. The poor youth declared, with
tears in his eyes, that he had something extraordinary
to communicate; and asked, if she would
deliver a letter to me: but this she absolutely refused,
by my order. —Finding her obstinate in her
refusal, he desired she would tell me, that he was
no longer a player, but a gentleman; in which
character he would very soon avow his passion for
me, without fear of censure or reproach—Nay, he
even discovered his name and family; which, to
my great grief, the simple girl forgot, in the confusion
occasioned by her being seen talking to him
by my brother; who stopt her on the road, and
asked what business she had with that rascally Jew
—She pretended she was cheapening a stay-hook; 
but was thrown into such a quandary, that she
forgot the most material part of the information; 
and when she came home, went into an hysteric fit
of laughing. This transaction happened three days
ago, during which he has not appeared; so that I
suppose he is gone. Dear Letty! you see how
Fortune takes pleasure in persecuting your poor
friend. If you should see him at Gloucester—or if
you have seen him, and know his real name and
family, pray keep me no longer in suspence—And
yet, if he is under no obligation to keep himself
longer concealed, and has a real affection for me, I
should hope he will, in a little time, declare himself
to my relations. Sure, if there is nothing unsuitable
in the match, they won't be so cruel as to
thwart my inclinations—O, what happiness would
then be my portion! I can't help indulging the
thought, and pleasing my fancy with such agreeable
ideas; which, after all, perhaps, will never be
realised—But, why should I despair? who knows 

what will happen? —We set out for Bath to-morrow,
and I am almost sorry for it; as I begin to be
in love with solitude, and this is a charming romantic
place. The air is so pure; the Downs are so
agreeable; the furze in full blossom; the ground
enamelled with daisies, and primroses, and cowslips; 
all the trees bursting into leaves, and the
hedges already cloathed with their vernal livery; 
the mountains covered with flocks of sheep, and
tender bleating wanton lambkins playing, frisking
and skipping from side to side; the groves resound
with the notes of black-bird, thrush, and linnet; 
and all night long sweet Philomel pours forth her
ravishingly-delightful song. Then, for variety,
we go down to the nymph of Bristol spring, where
the company is assembled before dinner; so good-natured,
so free, so easy; and there we drink the
water so clear, so pure, so mild, so charmingly
maukish. There the sun is so chearful and reviving; 
the weather so soft; the walk so agreeable; 
the prospect so amusing: and the ships and boats
going up and down the river, close under the windows
of the Pump-room, afford such an enchanting
variety of moveing pictures, as require a much abler
pen than mine to describe. To make this place a
perfect paradise to me, nothing is wanting but an
agreeable companion and sincere friend; such as
my dear miss Willis hath been, and I hope still will
be, to her ever faithful 
Lydia Melford. 
Direct for me, still under cover,
to Win; and Jarvis
will take care to convey it
safe. Adieu. 