


DEAR PHILLIPS,
IF I stay much longer at Edinburgh, I shall
be changed into a downright Caledonian —My
uncle observes, that I have alredy acquired something
of the country accent. The people here are
so social and attentive in their civilities to strangers,
that I am insensibly sucked into the channel of their
manners and customs, although they are in fact
much more different from ours than you can imagine 
—That difference, however, which struck me
very much at my first arrival, I now hardly perceive,
and my ear is perfectly reconciled to the
Scotch accent, which I find even agreeable in the
mouth of a pretty woman —It is a sort of Doric
dialect, which gives an idea of amiable simplicity 
—You cannot imagine how we have been caressed
and feasted in the good town of Edinburgh, of
which we are become free denizens and guild brothers,
by the special favour of the magistracy. 
I had a whimsical commission from Bath, to a
citizen of this metropolis —Quin understanding
our intention to visit Edinburgh, pulled out a guinea,
and desired the favour I would drink it at a
tavern, with a particular friend and bottle-companion
of his, one Mr. R&wblank; C&wblank;, a lawyer of this
city —I charged myself with the commission, and,
taking the guinea, “You see (said I) I have pocketed
your bounty.” “Yes (replied Quin,
laughing); and a head-ake into the bargain, if
you drink fair,” I made use of this introduction
to Mr. C&wblank;, who received me with open arms,
and gave me the rendezvous. according to the 

cartel. He had provided a company of jolly fellows,
among whom I found myself extremely happy; 
and did Mr. C&wblank; and Quin all the justice in
my power; but, alas, I was no more than a tiro among
a troop of veterans, who had compassion upon
my youth, and conveyed me home in the morning,
by what means I know not —Quin was mistaken,
however, as to the head-ake; the claret was
too good to treat me so roughly. 
While Mr. Bramble holds conferences with the
graver literati of the place, and our females are
entertained at visits by the Scotch ladies, who are
the best and kindest creatures upon earth, I pass
my time among the bucks of Edinburgh; who,
with a great share of spirit and vivacity, have a certain
shrewdness and self-command that is not often
found among their neighbours, in the high-day of
youth and exultation —Not a hint escapes a
Scotchman that can be be interpreted into offence by
any individual in the company; and national reflections
are never heard —In this particular, I
must own, we are both unjust and ungrateful to the
Scots; for, as far as I am able to judge, the have
a real esteem for, the natives of South-Britain: and
never mention our country, but with expressions of
regard —Nevertheless, they are far from being servile
imitators of our modes and fashionable vices. 
All their customs and regulations of public and private
œconomy, of business and diversion, are in
their own stile. This remarkably predominates in
their looks, their dress, and manner, their music,
and even their cookery. Our 'squire declares, that
he knows not another people upon earth, so strongly
marked with a national character —Now we are
upon the article of cookery, I must own, some of
their dishes are savoury, and even delicate; but I
am not yet Scotchman enough to relish their singed
sheep's-head and haggice, which were provided at 

our request, one day at Mr. Mitchelson's, where
we dined —The first put me in mind of the history
of Congo, in which I had read of negro's heads
sold publickly in the markets; the last, being a
mess of minced lights, livers, suet, oat-meal, onions,
and pepper, inclosed in a sheep's stomach,
had a very sudden effect upon mine, and the delicate
Mrs. Tabby changed colour; when the cause
of our disgust was instantaneously removed at the
nod of our entertainer. The Scots in general, are
attached to this composition, with a sort of national
fondness, as well as to their oat-meal bread; 
which is presented at every table, in thin triangular
cakes, baked upon a plate of iron, called a gridle; 
and these, many of the natives, even in the
higher ranks of like, prefer to wheaten-bread, which
they have here in perfection —You know we used
to vex poor Murray of Baliol-college, by asking, if
there was really no fruit but turnips in Scotland? — 
Sure enough, I have seen turnips make their appearance,
not as a desert, but by way of hors d'
oeuvres, or whets, as radishes are served up betwixt
more substantial dishes in France and Italy; 
but it must be observed, that the turnips of this
country are as much superior in sweetness, delicacy,
and flavour, to those of England, as a musk-melon
is to the stock of a common cabbage. They are small
and conical, of a yellowish colour, with a very
thin skin; and, over and above their agreeable
taste, are valuable for their antiscorbutic quality — 
As to the fruit now in season, such as cherries,
gooseberries, and currants, there is no want of
them at Edinburgh; and in the gardens of some
gentlemen, who live in this neighbourhood, there
is now a very favourable appearance of apricots,
peaches, nectarines, and even grapes: nay, I have
seen a very fine shew of pine-apples within a few
miles of this metropolis. Indeed, we have no 

reason to be surprised at these particulars, when we
consider how little difference there is, in fact,
betwixt this climate and that of London. 
All the remarkable places in the city and its avenues,
for ten miles around, we have visited,
much to our satisfaction. In the Castle are some
royal apartments, where the sovereign occasionally
resided; and here are carefully preserved the regalia
of the kingdom, consisting of a crown, said
to be of great value, a sceptre, and a sword of state,
adorned with jewels —Of these symbols of sovereignty,
the people are exceedingly jealous —A
report being spread, during the sitting of the union-parliament,
that they were removed to London,
such a tumult arose, that the lord commissioner
would have been torn in pieces, if he had not produced
them for the satisfaction of the populace. 
The palace of Holyrood-house is an elegant
piece of architecture, but sunk in an obscure, and
as I take it, unwholesome bottom, where one
would imagine it had been placed on purpose to
be concealed. The apartments are lofty, but unfurnished; 
and as for the pictures of the Scottish
kings, from Fergus I, to king William, they are
paultry daubings, mostly by the same hand, painted
either from the imagination, or porters hired to sit
for the purpose. All the diversions of London we
enjoyed at Edinburgh, in a small compass. Here is
a well-conducted concert, in which several gentlemen
performed on different instruments —The Scots
are all musicians —Every man you meet plays on
the flute, the violin, or violoncello; and there is
one nobleman, whose compositions are universally
admired —Our company of actors is very tolerable; 
and a subscription is now on foot for building
a new theatre; but their assemblies please me
above all other publick exhibitions. 

We have been at the hunters ball, where I was
really astonished to see such a number of fine women 
—The English, who have never crossed the
Tweed, imagine erroneously, that the Scotch ladies
are not remarkable for personal attractions; 
but, I can declare with a safe conscience, I never
saw so many handsome females together, as were
assembled on this occasion. At the Leith races, the
best company comes hither from the remoter provinces; 
so that, I suppose, we had all the beauty
of the kingdom concentrated as it were into one
focus; which was, indeed, so vehement, that my
heart could hardly resist its power —Between friends,
it has sustained some damage from the bright eyes
of the charming miss R&wblank;n, whom I had the honour
to dance with at the ball —The countess of
Melvile attracted all eyes, and the admiration of
all present —She was accompanied by the agreeable
miss Grieve, who made many conquests; nor
did my sister Liddy pass unnoticed in the assembly 
—She is become a toast at Edinburgh, by the name
of the Fair Cambrian, and has already been the
occasion of much wine-shed; but the poor girl
met with an accident at the ball, which has given
us great disturbance. 
A young gentleman, the express image of that
rascal Wilson, went up to ask her to dance a minuet; 
and his sudden appearance shocked her so
much, that she fainted away —I call Wilson a rascal,
because, if he had been really a gentleman,
with honourable intentions, he would have, ere
now, appeared in his own character —I must own,
my blood boil's with indignation when I think of
that fellow's presumption; and Heaven confound
me if I don't —But I won't be so womanish as to
rail —Time will, perhaps, furnish occasion — 
Thank God, the cause of Liddy's disorder remains
a secret. The lady directress of the ball, thinking 

she was overcome by the heat of the place, and
her conveyed to another room, where she soon recovered
so well, as to return and join in the country-dances,
in which the Scotch lasses acquit themselves
with such spirit and agility, as put their partners
to the height of their mettle —I believe our
aunt, Mrs. Tabitha, had entertained hopes of being
able to do some execution among the cavaliers
at this assembly —She had been several days in
consultation with milliners and mantuamakers, preparing
for the occasion, at which she made her appearance
in a full suit of damask, so thick and heavy,
that the sight of it alone, at this season of the
year, was sufficient to draw drops of sweat from
any man of ordinary imagination —She danced one
minuet with our friend, Mr. Mitchelson, who favoured
her so far, in the spirit of hospitality and
politeness; and she was called out a second time
by the young laird of Ballymawhawple, who, coming
in by accident, could not readily find any other
partner; but as the first was a married man, and
the second payed no particular homage to her
charms, which were also over-looked by the rest
of the company, she became dissatisfied and censorious 
—At supper, she observed that the Scotch
gentlemen made a very good figure, when they
were a little improved by travelling; and therefore
it was pity they did not all take the benefit of going
abroad —She said the women were aukward,
masculine creatures; that, in dancing, they lifted
their legs like so many colts; that they had no idea
of graceful motion, and put on their clothes in a
frightful manner; but if the truth must be told,
Tabby herself was the most ridiculous figure, and
the worst dressed of the whole assembly —The
neglect of the male sex rendered her malcontent
and peevish; she now found fault with every thing
at Edinburgh, and teized her brother to leave the 

place, when she was suddenly reconciled to it on a
religous consideration —There is a sect of fanaticks,
who have separated themselves from the established
kirk, under the name of Seceders — 
They acknowledge no earthly head of the church,
reject lay-patronage, and maintain the methodist
doctrines of the new birth, the new light, the efficacy
of grace, the insufficiency of works, and the
operations of the spirit. Mrs. Tabitha, attended
by Humpry Clinker, was introduced to one of
their conventicles, where they both received much
edification; and she has had the good fortune to
come acquainted with a pious Christian, called
Mr. Moffat, who is very powerful in prayer, and
often assists her in private exercises of devotion. 
I never saw such a concourse of genteel company
at any races in England, as appeared on the course
of Leith —Hard by, in the fields called the Links,
the citizens of Edinburgh divert themselves at a
game called golf, in which they use a curious kind
of bats, tipt with horn, and small elastic balls of
leather, stuffed with feathers, rather less than tennis
balls, but of a much harder consistence —This
they strike with such force and dexterity from one
hole to another, that they will fly to an incredible
distance. Of this diversion the Scots are so fond,
that when the weather will permit, you may see a
multitude of all ranks, from the senator of justice
to the lowest tradesmen, mingled together in their
shirts, and following the balls with the utmost eagerness 
—Among others, I was shewn one particular
set of golfers, the youngest of whom was turned
of fourscore —They were all gentlemen of independent
fortunes, who had amused themselves with
this pastime for the best part of a century, without
having ever felt the least alarm from sickness or
disgust; and they never went to bed, without having
each the best part of a gallon of claret in his 

belly. Such uninterrupted exercise, cooperating
with the keen air from the sea, must, without all
doubt, keep the appetite always on edge, and steel
the constitution against all the common attacks of
distemper. 
The Leith races gave occasion to another entertainment
of a very singular nature —There is at
Edinburgh a society or corporation of errand-boys,
called cawdies, who ply in the streets at night with
paper lanthorns, and are very serviceable in carrying
messages —These fellows, though shabby in
their appearance, and rudely familiar in their address,
are wonderfully acute, and so noted for fidelity,
that there is no instance of a cawdy's having
betrayed his trust —Such is their intelligence, that
they know, not only every individual of the place,
but also every stranger, by that time he has been
four and twenty hours in Edinburgh; and no transaction,
even the most private, can escape their
notice —They are particularly famous for their
dexterity in executing one of the functions of Mercury; 
though, for my own part, I never employed
them in this department of business —Had I
occasion for any service of this nature, my own man
Archy M'Alpine, is as well qualified as e'er a
cawdie in Edinburgh; and I am much mistaken,
if he has not been heretofore of their fraternity. 
Be that as it may, they resolved to give a dinner
and a ball at Leith, to which they formally invited
all the young noblemen and gentlemen that were
at the races; and this invitation was reinforced by
an assurance that all the celebrated ladies of pleasure
would grace the entertainment with their company. 
—I received a card on this occasion, and
went thither with half a dozen of my acquaintance. 
—In a large half the cloth was laid on a long range
of tables joined together, and here the company
seated themselves, to the number of about fourscore, 

lords, and lairds, and other gentlemen, courtezans
and cawdies mingled together, as the slaves and
their masters were in the time of the Saturnalia in
ancient Rome. —The toastmaster, who sat at the
upper end, was one Cawdie Fraser, a veteran pimp,
distinguished for his humour and sagacity, well
known and much respected in his profession by all
the guests, male and female, that were here assembled 
—He had bespoke the dinner and the wine
he had taken care that all his brethren should appear
in decent apparel and clean linen; and he himself
wore a periwig with three tails, in honour of
the festival. —I assure you the banquet was both
elegant and plentiful, and seasoned with a thousand
sallies, that promoted a general spirit of mirth and
good humour. —After the desert, Mr. Fraser proposed
the following toasts, which I don't pretend to
explain. —“The best in Christendom.” —“Gibb's
contract.” —“The beggar's bennison.” — 
“King and kirk.” —“Great-Britain and Ireland.” 
—Then, filling a bumper, and turning to me,
“Mester Malford, (said he) may a' unkindness
cease betwixt John Bull and his sister Moggy.” 
—The next person he singled out, was a nobleman
who had been long abroad. —“Ma lord, (cried
Fraser) here is a bumper to a' those noblemen
who have virtue enough to spend their rents in
their ain countray.” —He afterwards addressed
himself to a member of parliament in these words: 
—“Mester—I'm sure ye'll ha' nae objection to
my drinking, Disgrace and dule to ilka Scot,
that sells his conscience and his vote.” —He discharged a third sarcasm at a person very gaily
dressed, who had risen from small beginnings, and
made a considerabls fortune at play. —Filling his
glass, and calling him by name, “Lang life (said
he) to the wylie loon that gangs a-field with a
toom poke at his lunzie, and comes hame with 

a sackful of siller.” —All these toasts being received
with loud bursts of applause, Mr. Fraser
called for pint glasses, and filled his own to the
brim: then standing up, and all his brethen following
his example, “Ma lords and gentlemen
(cried he), here is a cup of thanks for the great
and undeserved honour you have done your poor
errand-boys this day.” —So saying, he and they
drank off their glasses in a trice, and, quitting their
seat, took their station each behind one of the
other guests;—exclaiming, “Noo we're your
honours cawdies again.” 
The nobleman who had bore the first brunt of
Mr. Fraser's satire, objected to his abdication. 
He said, as the company was assembled by invitation
from the cawdies, he expected they were to be
entertained at their expence. “By no means, my
lords, (cried Fraser) I wad na be guilty of sic
presumption for the wide warld —I never affronted
a gentleman since I was born; and sure
at his age, I wonnot offer an indignity to sic an
honourable convention.” “Well, (said his
Lordship) as you have expended some wit, you
have a right to save your money. You have
given me good counsel, and I take it in good
part. As you have voluntarily quitted your seat,
I will take your place with the leave of the good
company, ahd think myself happy to be hailed,
Father of the Feast.” He was forthwith elected
into the chair, and complimented in a bumper in
his new character. 
The claret continued to circulate without interruption,
till the glasses seemed to dance upon the
table, and this, perhaps, was a hint to the ladies
to call for music —At eight in the evening the ball
began in another apartment: at midnight we went
to supper; but it was broad day before I found the
way to my lodgings; and, no doubt, his Lordship
had a swinging bill to discharge. 

In short; I have lived so riotously for some weeks,
that my uncle begins to be alarmed on the score of
my constitution, and very seriously observes, that
all his own infirmities are owing to such excesses indulged
in his youth —Mrs. Tabitha says it would
be more for the advantage of my soul as well as
body, if, instead of frequenting these scenes of debauchery,
I would accompany Mr. Moffat and her
to hear a sermon of the reverend Mr. M'Corkindale. 
—Clinker often exhorts me, with a groan, to
take care of my precious health; and even Archy
M'Alpine, when he happens to be overtaken,
(which is oftener the case than I could wish) reads
me a long lecture upon temperance and sobriety; 
and is so very wise and sententious, that, if I could
provide him with a professor's chair, I would willingly
give up the benefit of his admonitions and service
together; for I was tutorsick at alma mater. 
I am not, however, so much engrossed by the
gaieties of Edinburgh, but that I find time to make
parties in the family way. —We have not only seen
all the villas and villages within ten miles of the capital,
but we have also crossed the Firth, which is
an arm of the sea seven miles broad, that divides
Lothian from the shire, or, as the Scots call it, the
kingdom of Fife. There is a number of large open
sea-boats that ply on this passage from Leith to
Kinghorn, which is a borough on the other side. 
In one of these our whole family embarked three
days ago, excepting my sister, who, being exceedingly
fearful of the water, was left to the care of
Mrs. Mitchelson. We had an easy and quick passage
into Fife, where we visited a number of poor
towns on the sea-side, including St. Andrew's,
which is the skeleton of a venerable city; but we
were much better pleased with some noble and elegant
seats and castles, of which there is a great
number in that part of Scotland. Yesterday we 

took boat again on our return to Leith with fair
wind and agreeable weather; but we had not advanced
half-way when the sky was suddenly overcast,
and the wind changing. blew directly in our
teeth; so that we were obliged to turn, or tack
the rest, of the way. In a word, the gale increased
to a storm of wind and rain, attended with such
a fog, that we could not see the town of Leith, to
which we were bound, nor even the castle of Edinburgh,
notwithstanding its high situation. It is not
to be doubted but that we were all alarmed on this
occasion. And at the same time, most of the passengers
were seized with a nausea that produced
violent retchings. My aunt desired her brother to
order the boatmen to put back to Kinghorn, and
this expedient he actually proposed; but they assured
him there was no danger. Mrs. Tabitha
finding them obstinate, began to scold, and insisted
upon my uncle's exerting his authority as a justice
of the peace. Sick and peevish as he was, he
could not help laughing at this wise proposal, telling
her, that his commission did not extend so far,
and, if it did, he should let the people take their
own way; for he thought it would be great presumption
in him to direct them in the exercise of
their own profession. Mrs. Winifred Jenklns
made a general clearance with the assistance of Mr.
Humphry Clinker, who joined her both in prayer
and ejaculation. —As he took it for granted that
we should not be long in this world, he offered some
spiritual consolation to Mrs. Tabitha, who rejected
it with great disgust, bidding him keep his sermons
for those who had leisure to hear such nonsense. 
—My uncle sat, recollected in himself,
without speaking; my man Archy had recourse to
a brandy-bottle, with which he made so free, that
I imagined he had sworn to die of drinking any
thing rather than sea-water: but the brandy had 

no more effect upon him in the way of intoxication,
than if it had been sea water in good earnest. 
—As for myself, I was too much engrossed by the
sickness at my stomach, to think of any thing else. 
—Meanwhile the sea swelled mountains high, the
boat pitched with such violence, as if it had been
going to pieces; the cordage rattled, the wind
roared; the lightning flashed, the thunder bellowed,
and the rain descended in a deluge —Every time
the vessel was put about, we ship'd a sea that
drenched us all to the skin. —When by dint of turning,
we thought to have cleared the pier head, we
were driven to leeward, and then the boatmen
themselves began to fear that the tide would fail before
we should fetch up our lee-way: the next trip,
however, brought us into smooth water, and we
were safely landed on the quay, about one o'clook
in the afternoon. —“To be sure (cried Tabby,
when she found herself on terra firma,) we must
all have perished, if we had not been the particular
care of Providence. —Yes, (replied my
uncle) but I am much of the honest highlander's
mind—after he had made such a passage as this:
his friend told him he was much indebted to Providence; 
—Certainly, (said Donald) but, by
my saul, mon, I'se ne'er trouble Providence
again, so long as the brig of Stirling stands.” — 
You must know the brig, or bridge of Stirling,
stands above twenty miles up the river Forth, of
which this is the outlet —I don't find that our 'squire
has suffered in his health from this adventure; but
poor Liddy is in a peaking way —I'm afraid this
unfortunate girl is uneasy in her mind; and this
apprehension distracts me, for she is really an amiable
creature. 
We shall set out to-morrow or next day for Stirling
and Glasgow; and we propose to penetrate a
little way into the Highlands, before we turn our 

course to the southward —In the mean time, commend
me to all our friends round Carfax, and believe
me to be, 
ever yours,
J. Melford. 
Edinb. Aug. 8. 