


YOU are in the right, dear Phillips; I don't
expect regular answers to every letter—I know a
college-life is too circumscribed to afford materials
for such quick returns of communication. For my
part, I am continually shifting the scene, and surrounded
with new objects, some of which are
striking enough. I shall therefore conclude my
journal for your amusement; and though, in all
appearance, it will not treat of very important or
interesting particulars, it may prove, perhaps, not
altogether uninstructive and unentertaining. 
The musick, and entertainment of Bath are over
for this season; and all our gay birds of passage
have taken their flight to Bristol-well, Tunbridge, 

Brighthelmstone, Scarborough, Horrowgate, &c
Not a soul is seen in this place, but a few broken-winded
parsons, waddling like so many crows long
the North Parade. There is always a great shew
of the clergy at Bath; none of your thin, puny,
yellow hectic figures, exhausted with abstinence
and hard study, labouring under the morbi cruditorum; 
but great over-grown dignitaries and rectors,
with rubicund noses and gouty ancles, or
broad bloated faces, dragging along great swag bellies; 
the emblems of sloth and indigestion— 
Now we are upon the subject of parsons, I must
tell you a ludicrous adventure, which was atchieved
the other day by Tom Fastgate, whom you may
remember on the foundation of Queen's. He had
been very assiduous to pin himself upon George
Prankley, who was a gentleman-commoner of
Christ-church, knowing the said Prankley was heir
to a considerable estate, and would have the advowson
of a good living, the incumbent of which was
very old and infirm. He studied his passions and
flattered them so efectually, as to become his companion
and counsellor; and at last, obtained of him
a promise of the presentation, when the living
should fall. Prankley, on his uncle's death, quitted
Oxford, and made his first appearance in the
fashionable world at London; from whence he
came lately to Bath, where he has been exhibiting
himself among the bucks and gamesters of the place. 
Eastgate followed him hither; but he should not
have quitted him for a moment, at his first emerging
into life. He ought to have known he was a
fantastic, foolish, fickle fellow, who would forget
his college-attachments the moment, they ceased appealing
to his senses. Tom met with a cold reception
from his old friend; and was, moreover, informed,
that he had promised the living to another
man, who had a vote in the county, where be proposed 

to offer himself a candidate at the next general
election. He now remembered nothing of Eastgate,
but the freedoms he had used to take with
him, while Tom had quietly stood his butt, with
an eye to the benefice; and those freedoms he began
to repeat in common place sarcasms on his person
and his cloth, which he uttered in the public
coffee-house, for the entertainment of the company. 
But he was egregiously mistaken in giving his own
wit credit for that tameness of Eastgate, which had
been entirely owing to prudential considerations. 
These being now removed, he retorted his repartee
with interest, and found no great difficulty in turning
the laugh upon the aggressor; who, losing his
temper, called him names, and asked, If he knew
whom he talked to? After much altercation, Prankley
shaking his cane, bid him hold his tongue,
otherwise he would dust his cassock for him. 
“I have no pretensions to such a valet (said
Tom); but if you should do me that office, and
overheat yourself, I have here a good oaken
towel at your service.” 
Prankley was equally incensed and confounded
at this reply. After moment's pause, he took him
aside towards the window; and, pointing to the
clump of firs on Clerken-down, asked in a whisper,
if he had spirit enough to meet him there, with a
case of pistols, at six o'clock to-morrow morning. 
Eastgate answered in the affirmative; and, with a
steady countenance, assured him, he would not fail
to give him the rendezvous at the hour he mentioned. 
So saying, he retired; and the challenger
stayed some time in manifest agitation. In the
morning Eastgate, who knew his man, and had
taken his resolution, went to Prankley's lodgings,
and roused him by five o'clock— 
The 'squire, in all probability, cursed his punctuality
in his heart, but he affected to talk big; 

and having prepared his artillery over-night, they
crossed the water at the end of the South Parade. 
In their progress up the hill, Prankley often eyed
the parson, in hopes of perceiving some reluctance
in his countenance; but as no such marks appeared
he attempted to intimidate him by word of mouth,
“If these flints do their office (said he), I'll do thy
business in a few minutes.” “I desire you will
do your best (replied the other); for my part,
I come not here to trifle. Our lives are in the
hands of God; and one of us already totters on
the brink of eternity—” This remark seemed
to make some impression upon the 'squire, who
changed countenance, and with a faultering accent
observed, “That it ill became a clergyman to be
concerned in quarrels and blood-shed—” “Your
insolence to me (said Eastgate) I should have
bore with patience, had not you cast the most
infamous reflection upon my order, the honour
of which I think myself in duty bound to maintain,
even at the expence of my heart's blood; 
and surely it can be no crime to put out of the
world a profligate wretch, without any sense of
principle, morality, or religion—” “Thou
may'st take away my life, (cried Prankley, in
great perturbation) but don't go to murder my
character. —What! has't got no conscience?” 
“My conscience is perfectly quiet (replied the
other); and now, sir, we are upon the spot— 
Take your ground as near as you please; prime
your pistol; and the Lord, of his infinite mercy,
have compassion upon your miserable soul!” 
This ejaculation he pronounced in a loud solemn
tone, with his hat off and his eyes lifted up; then
drawing a large horse-pistol, he presented, and put
himself in a posture of action. Prankley took his
distance, and endeavoured to prime, but his hand
shook with such violence, that he found this operation 

impracticable—His antagonist, seeing how it
was with him, offered his assistance, and advanced
for the purpose; when the poor 'squire, exceedingly
alarmed at what he had heard and seen, desired
the action might be deferred till next day, as he
had not settled his affairs. “I ha'nt made my
will (said he); my sisters are not provided for; 
and I just now recollect and old promise, which
my conscience tells me I ought to perform—I'll
first convince thee, that I'm not a wretch without
principle, and then thou shalt have an opportunity
to take my life, which thou seem'st to
thirst after so eagerly—” 
Eastgate understood the hint; and told him, that
one day should break no squares; adding, “God
forbid that I should be the means of hindering
you from acting the part of an honest man, and
a dutiful brother—” By virtue of this cessation
they returned peaceably together. Prankley forthwith
made out the presentation of the living, and
delivered it to Eastgate, telling him, at the same
time, he had now settled his affairs, and was ready
to attend him to the Firgrove; but Tom declared
he could not think of lifting his hand against the
life of so great a benefactor—He did more: when
they next met at the coffee-house, he asked pardon
of Mr. Prankley, if in his passion he had said any
thing to give him offence; and the 'squire was so
gracious as to forgive him with a cordial shake of
the hand, declaring that he did not like to be a variance
with an old college-companion—Next day,
however, he left Bath abruptly; and then Eastgate
told me all these particulars, not a little pleased with
the effects of his own sagacity, by which he has
secured a living worth 160l. per annum. 
Of my uncle, I have nothing at present to say; 
but that we set out to-morrow for London en famille. 
He and the ladies, with the maid and Chowder 

in a coach; I and the man-servant a-horseback. 
The particulars of our journey you shall
have in my next, provided no accident happens to
prevent, 
yours ever,
J. Melford. 
Bath, May 17. 