


Containing adventures of chivalry,
equally new and surprising. 
The knight Sir Launcelot, and
the novice Crowe, retreated with
equal order and expedition to the distance
of half a league from the field
of battle, where the former, halting,
proposed to make a lodgment in a
very decent house of entertainment,
distinguished by the sign of St. George
of Cappadocia encountering the dragon,
an atchievement in which temporal
and spiritual chivalry were happily
reconciled. Two such figures
alighting at the inn-gate, did not pass
through the yard unnoticed and unadmired
by the guests and attendants; 
some of whom fairly took to
their heels, on the supposition that
these outlandish creatures were the
avant couriers, or haralds of a French
invasion. The fears and doubts,
however, of those who ventured to
stay were soon dispelled, when our 

hero accosted them in the English
tongue, and with the most courteous
demeanour desired to be shewn
into an apartment. Had captain
Crowe been the spokesman, perhaps
their suspicions would not have so
quickly subsided; for he was, in
reality, a very extraordinary novice,
not only in chivalry, but also in his
external appearance, and particularly
in those dialects of the English
language which are used by the terrestrial
animals of this kingdom. He
desired the hostler to take his horse
in tow, and bring him to his moorings
in a safe riding. He ordered the
waiter, who shewed them into a parlour,
to bear-a hand, ship his oars,
mind his helm, and bring along-side
a short allowance of brandy or grog,
that he might cant a slug into his
bread-room; for there was such a
heaving and pitching, that he believed
he should shift his ballast. 
The fellow understood no part of
this address but the word brandy, at
mention of which he disappeared. 

Then Crowe, throwing himself into
an elbow-chair, “Stop my hawse-holes,
(cried he) I can't think what's
the matter, brother; but, agad, my
head sings and simmers like a pot of
chowder. —My eye-sight yaws to
and again, d'ye see:—then there's
such a walloping and whushing in my
hold—smite my—Lord have mercy
upon us. —Here you swab, ne'er mind
a glass—hand me the noggin.” 
The latter part of this address
was directed to the waiter, who had
returned with a quartern of brandy,
which Crowe, snatching eagerly,
started into his bread-room at one
cant. Indeed there was no time to
be lost, inasmuch as he seemed to
be on the verge of fainting away
when he swallowed this cordial, by
which he was instantaneously revived. 
He then desired the servant
to unbuckle the straps of his helmet; 
but this was a task which the drawer
could not perform, even though assisted
with the good offices of Sir Launcelot:
for the head and jaws were 

so much swelled with the discipline
they had undergone, that the straps
and buckles lay buried, as it were,
in pits formed by the tumefaction of
the adjacent parts. Fortunately for
the novice, a neighbouring surgeon
passed by the door on horseback; a
circumstance which the waiter, who
saw him from the window, no sooner
disclosed, than the knight had recourse
to his assistance. This practitioner
having viewed the whole figure, and
more particularly the head of Crowe,
in silent wonder, proceeded to feel
his pulse; and then declared, that as
the inflammation was very great,
and going on with violence to its
akme, it would be necessary to begin
with copious phlebotomy, and
then to empty the intestinal canal. 
So saying, he began to strip the arm
of the captain, who perceiving his
aim, “Avast, brother, (cried he)
you go the wrong way to work—you
may as well rummage the afterhold,
when the damage is in the forecastle. 
—I shall right again, when my jaws
are unhooped.” 

With these words he drew a clasp-knife
from his pocket, and, advancing
to a glass, applied it so vigorously
to the leather straps of his
headpiece, that the Gordian-knot
was cut, without any other damage
to his face than a moderate scarification,
which, added to the tumefaction
of features, naturally strong,
and a whole week's growth of a very
bushy beard, produced, on the whole,
a most hideous caricatura. After all,
there was a necessity for the administration
of the surgeon, who found
divers contusions on different parts of
the skull, which even the tin-cap
had not been able to protect from the
weapons of the rusticks. 
These being shaved, and dressed
secundum artem, and the operator dismissed
with a proper acknowledgment,
our knight detached one of
the post-boys to the field of action
for intelligence, concerning Mr.
Clarke and squire Timothy; and,
in the interim, desired to know the
particulars of Crowe's adventures 

since he parted from him at the
White Hart. A connected relation,
in plain English, was what he had
little reason to expect from the novice,
who, nevertheless, exerted his
faculties to the uttermost for his
satisfaction: he gave him to understand,
that in steering his course to
Birmingham, where he thought of
fitting himself with tackle, he had
fallen in, by accident, at a public
house, with an itinerant tinker, in
the very act of mending a kettle:
that, seeing him do his business like
an able workman, he had applied to
him for advice; and the tinker, after
having considered the subject, had
undertaken to make him such a suit
of armour as neither sword nor lance
should penetrate: that they adjourned
to the next town, where the leather
coat, the plates of tinned iron,
the lance, and the broad sword, were
purchased, together with a copper
sauce pan, which the artist was now
at work upon, in converting it to a
shield: but, in the mean time, the 

captain, being impatient to begin his
career of chivalry, had accommodated
himself with a pot-lid, and taken
to the highway, notwithstanding all
the intreaties, tears, and remonstrances
of his nephew Tom Clarke, who
could not however be prevailed upon
to leave him in the dangerous voyage
he had undertaken: that this being
but the second day of his journal, he
descried five or six men on horseback,
bearing up full in his teeth; upon
which he threw his sails a-back, and
prepared for action: that he hailed
them at a considerable distance, and
bad them bring-to: when they came
along-side, notwithstanding his hail,
he ordered them to clew up their
corses, and furl their topsails, otherwise
he would be foul of their quarters:
that, hearing this salute, they
luffed all at once, till their cloth
shook in the wind: then he hollowed
in a loud voice, that his sweetheart
Besselia Mizzen wore the broad pendant
of beauty, to which they must
strike their topsails, on pain of being 

sent to the bottom: that, after having
eyed him for some time with astonishment,
they clapped on all their
sails, some of them running under
his stern, and others athwart his fore-foot,
and got clear off: that, not
satisfied with running a-head, they
all of a sudden tacked about, and
one of them boarding him on the
lee-quarter, gave him such a drubbing
about his upper works, that the
lights danced in his lanthorns: that
he returned the salute with his hop-pole
so effectually, that his aggressor
broached-to in the twinkling of an
hand-spike; and then he was engaged
with all the rest of the enemy,
except one who sheered off, and soon
returned with a mosqueto fleet of
small craft, who had done him considerable
damage, and, in all probability,
would have made prize of
him, hadn't he been brought off by
the knight's gallantry. He said, that
in the beginning of the conflict Tom
Clarke rode up to the foremost of the
enemy, as he did suppose, in order 

to prevent hostilities; but before he
got up to him, near enough to hold
discourse, he was pooped with a sea
that almost sent him to the bottom,
and then towed off he knew not whither. 
Crowe had scarce finished his narration,
which consisted of broken
hints, and unconnected explosions of
sea-terms, when a gentleman of the
neighbourhood, who acted in the
commission of the peace, arrived at
the gate, attended by a constable,
who had in custody the bodies of
Thomas Clarke and Timothy Crabshaw,
surrounded by five men on
horseback, and an innumerable posse
of men, women, and children, on
foot. The captain, who always kept
a good look out, no sooner descried
this cavalcade and procession than he
gave notice to Sir Launcelot, and advised
that they should crowd away
with all the cloth they could carry. 
Our adventurer was of another opinion,
and determined at any rate to
procure the enlargement of the prisoners. 

The justice, ordering his attendants
to stay without the gate, sent his
compliments to Sir Launcelot Greaves,
and desired to speak with him for a
few minutes. He was immediately
admitted, and could not help starting
at sight of Crowe, who, by this time,
had no remains of the human physiognomy,
so much was the swelling
increased and the skin discoloured. 
The gentleman, whose name was
Mr. Elmy, having made a polite apology
for the liberty he had taken,
proceeded to unfold his business. He
said, information had been lodged
with him, as a justice of the peace,
against two armed men on horseback,
who had stopped five farmers on the
king's highway, put them in fear
and danger of their lives, and even
assaulted, maimed, and wounded divers
persons, contrary to the king's
peace; and in violation of the statute:
that, by the description, he supposed
the knight and his companion to be
the persons against whom the complaint
had been lodged; and understanding 

his quality from Mr. Clarke,
whom he had known in London, he
was come to wait on him, and, if
possible, effect an accommodation. 
Our adventurer, having thanked
him for the polite and obliging manner
in which he proceeded, frankly
told him the whole story, as it had
been just related by the captain; and
Mr. Elmy had no reason to doubt
the truth of the narrative, as it confirmed
every circumstance which
Clarke had before reported. Indeed,
Tom had been very communicative
to this gentleman, and made him acquainted
with the whole history of
Sir Launcelot Greaves, as well as with
the whimsical resolution of his uncle,
capt. Crowe. Mr. Elmy now told the
knight, that the persons whom the
captain had stopped were farmers, returning
from a neighbouring market,
a set of people naturally boorish, and
at that time elevated with ale to an
uncommon pitch of insolence: that
one of them, in particular, called
Prickle, was the most quarrelsome 

fellow in the whole county; and so
litigious, that he had maintained
above thirty law-suits, in eight and
twenty of which he had been condemned
in costs. He said the others
might be easily influenced in the way
of admonition; but there was no
way of dealing with Prickle, except
by the form and authority of the
law: he therefore proposed to hear
evidence in a judicial capacity, and,
his clerk being in attendance, the
court was immediately opened in the
knight's apartment. 
By this time Mr. Clarke had made
such good use of his time in explaining
the law to his audience, and displaying
the great wealth and unbounded
liberality of Sir Launcelot
Greaves, that he had actually brought
over to his sentiments the constable
and the commonalty, tag, rag, and
bob-tail, and even staggered the majority
of the farmers, who, at first,
had breathed nothing but defiance
and revenge. Farmer Stake, being
first called to the bar, and sworn, 

touching the identity of Sir Launcelot
Greaves and captain Crowe, declared,
that the said Crowe had stopped
him on the king's highway, and
put him in bodily fear: that he afterwards
saw the said Crowe with a
pole or weapon, value three pence,
breaking the king's peace, by committing
assault and battery against the
heads and shoulders of his majesty's
liege subjects, Geoffrey Prickle, Hodge
Dolt, Richard Bumpkin, Mary Fang,
Catherine Rubble, and Margery Litter; 
and that he saw Sir Launcelot
Greaves, baronet, aiding, assisting, and
comforting the said Crowe, contrary
to the king's peace, and against the
form of the statute. 
Being asked if the defendant, when
he stopped them, demanded their
money, or threatened violence, he
answered, he could not say, inasmuch
as the defendant spoke in an unknown
language. Being interrogated if the
defendant did not allow them to pass
without using any violence, and if
they did not pass unmolested, the deponent 

replied in the affirmative:
being required to tell for what reason
they returned, and if the defendant
Crowe was not assaulted before he began
to use his weapon, the deponent
made no answer. The depositions of
farmer Bumpkin and Muggins, as well
as of Madge Litter and Mary Fang,
were taken much to the same purpose; 
and his worship earnestly exhorted
them to an accommodation,
observing, that they themselves were
in fact the aggressors, and that captain
Crowe had done no more than exerted
himself in his own defence. 
They were all pretty well disposed
to follow his advice, except farmer
Prickle, who, entering the court with
a bloody handkerchief about his head,
declared, that the law should determine
it at next 'size; and in the mean
time insisted, that the defendants
should find immediate bail, or go to
prison, or be set in the stocks. He
affirmed, that they had been guilty
of an affray, in appearing with armour
and weapons not usually worn, 

to the terror of others, which is in
itself a breach of the peace: but that
they had, moreover, with force of
arms, that is to say, with swords,
staves, and other warlike instruments,
by turns, made an assault and affray,
to the terror and disturbance of him
and divers subjects of our lord the
king then and there being, and to
the evil and pernicious example of the
liege people of the said lord the king,
and against the peace of our said lord
the king, his crown and dignity. 
This peasant had purchased a few
law-terms at a considerable expence,
and he thought he had a right to turn
his knowledge to the annoyance of
all his neighbours. Mr. Elmy, finding
him obstinately deaf to all proposals
of accommodation, held the
defendants to very moderate bail,
the landlord and the curate of the parish
freely offering themselves as sureties. 
Mr. Clarke, with Timothy
Crabshaw, against whom nothing appeared,
were now set at liberty; 
when the former, advancing to his 

worship, gave information against
Geoffrey Prickle, and declared upon
oath, that he had seen him assault
captain Crowe, without any provocation; 
and when he, the deponent,
interposed to prevent further mischief,
the said Prickle had likewise assaulted
and wounded him the deponent, and
detained him for some time in false
imprisonment, without warrant or
authority. 
In consequence of this information,
which was corroborated by divers evidences,
selected from the mob at the
gate, the tables were turned upon
farmer Prickle, who was given to
understand, that he must either find
bail, or be forthwith imprisoned. 
This honest boor, who was in opulent
circumstances, had made such popular
use of the benefits he possessed, that
there was not an housekeeper in the
parish who would not have rejoiced to
see him hanged. His dealings and
connections however were such, that
none of the other four would have
refused to bail him, had not Clarke 

given them to understand, that, if
they did, he would make them all
principals and parties, and have two
separate actions against each. Prickle
happened to be at variance with the
inn-keeper, and the curate durst not
disoblige the vicar, who at that very
time was suing the farmer for the
small tythes. He offered to deposit a
sum equal to the recognizance of the
knight's bail; but this was rejected as
an expedient contrary to the practice
of the courts. He sent for the attorney
of the village, to whom he had
been a good customer; but the lawyer
was hunting evidence in another county. 
The exciteman presented himself
as a surety; but he not being
an housekeeper, was not accepted. 
Divers cottagers, who depended on
farmer Prickle, were successively refused,
because they could not prove
that they had payed scot and lot, and
parish taxes. 
The farmer, finding himself thus
forlorn, and in imminent danger of
visiting the inside of a prison, was 

seized with paroxysm of rage; during
which he inveighed against the bench,
reviled the two adventurers errant,
declared that he believed, and would
lay a wager of twenty guineas, that
he had more money in his pocket than
e'er a man in the company; and in
the space of a quarter of an hour
swore forty oaths, which the justice
did not fail to number. “Before we
proceed to other matters, (said Mr.
Elmy) I order you to pay forty shillings
for the oaths you have swore; 
otherwise I will cause you to be set in
the stocks, without further ceremony.” 
Prickle, throwing down a couple
of guineas, with two execrations more
to make up the sum, declared, that
he could afford to pay for swearing as
well as e'er a justice in the county; 
and repeated his challenge of the
wager, which our adventurer now
accepted, protesting, at the same time
that it was not a step taken from
any motive of pride, but intirely with
a view to punish an insolent plebeian, 

who could not otherwise be chastised
without a breach of the peace. 
Twenty guineas being deposited on
each side in the hands of Mr. Elmy,
Prickle, with equal confidence and
dispatch, produced a canvas bag, containing
two hundred and seventy
pounds, which, being spread upon
the table, made a very formidable
shew, that dazzled the eyes of the
beholders, and induced many of
them to believe he had ensured his
conquest. 
Our adventurer, asking if he had
any thing further to offer, and being answered
in the negative, drew forth, with
great deliberation, a pocket-book, in
which there was a considerable parcel
of bank-notes, from which he selected
three of one hundred pounds each,
and exhibited them upon the table,
to the astonishment of all present. 
Prickle, mad with his overthrow and
loss, said it might be necessary to
make him prove the notes were honestly
come by; and Sir Launcelot
started up, in order to take vengeance 

upon him for this insult; but was withheld
by the arms and remonstrances
of Mr. Elmy, who assured him that
Prickle desired nothing so much as
another broken head, to lay the foundation
of a new prosecution. 
The knight, calmed by this interposition,
turned to the audience, saying,
with the most affable deportment,
“Good people, do not imagine that I
intend to pocket the spoils of such a
contemptible rascal. I shall beg the
favour of this worthy gentleman to
take up these twenty guineas, and distribute
them as he shall think proper,
among the poor of the parish: but,
by this benefaction, I do not hold myself
acquitted for the share I had in
the bruises some of you have received
in this unlucky fray; and therefore
I give the other twenty guineas
to be divided among the sufferers, to
each according to the damage he or
she shall appear to have sustained; 
and I shall consider it as an additional
obligation, if Mr. Elmy will likewise
superintend this retribution.” 

At the close of this address, the
whole yard and gate-way rung with
acclamation: while honest Crowe,
whose generosity was not inferior even
to that of the accomplished Greaves,
pulled out his purse, and declared, that
as he had begun the engagement, he
would at least go share and share alike
in new caulking their seams and repairing
their timbers. The knight, rather
than enter into a dispute with his
novice, told him, he considered the
twenty guineas as given by them both
in conjunction, and that they would
confer together on that subject hereafter. 
This point being adjusted, Mr. Elmy
assumed all the solemnity of the
magistrate, and addressed himself to
Prickle in these words: “Farmer
Prickle, I am both sorry and ashamed
to see a man of your years and circumstances
so little respected, that you
cannot find sufficient bail for forty
pounds; a sure testimony that you
have neither cultivated the friendship,
nor deserved the good will of your 

neighbours. I have heard of your
quarrels and your riots, your insolence,
and litigious disposition; and
often wished for an opportunity of
giving you a proper taste of the law's
correction. That opportunity now
offers—You have in the hearing of
all these people poured forth a torrent
of abuse against me, both in the character
of a gentleman and of a magistrate:
your abusing me personally,
perhaps I should have overlooked with
the contempt it deserves; but I should
ill vindicate the dignity of my office
as magistrate, by suffering you to insult
the bench with impunity. I shall
therefore imprison you for contempt; 
and you shall remain in jail, until you
can find bail on the other prosecutions.” 
Prickle, the first transports of his
anger having subsided, began to be
pricked with the thorns of compunction. 
He was indeed exceedingly mortified
at the prospect of being sent to
jail so disgracefully. His countenance
fell, and, after a hard internal struggle, 

while the clerk was employed in writing
the mittimus, he said he hoped his worship
would not send him to prison. 
He begged pardon of him and our adventurers,
for having abused them in
his passion; and observed, that as he
had received a broken head, and payed
two and twenty guineas for his folly,
he could not be said to have escaped
altogether without punishment, even if
the plaintiff should agree to exchange
releases. 
Sir Launcelot, seeing this stubborn
rustic effectually humbled, became an
advocate in his favour with Mr. Elmy
and Tom Clarke, who forgave him at
his request; and a mutual release being
executed, the farmer was permitted
to depart. The populace were
regaled at our adventurer's expence; 
and the men, women, and children,
who had been wounded or bruised in
the battle, to the number of ten or a
dozen, were desired to wait upon Mr.
Elmy in the morning, to receive the
knight's bounty. The justice was
prevailed upon to spend the evening 

with Sir Launcelot and his two companions,
for whom supper was bespoke; 
but the first thing the cook
prepared was a poultice for Crowe's
head, which was now enlarged to a
monstrous exhibition. Our knight,
who was all kindness and complacency,
shook Mr. Clarke by the hand,
expressing his satisfaction at meeting
with his old friends again, and told
him softly that he had compliments
for him from Mrs. Dolly Cowslip,
who now lived with his Aurelia. 
Clarke was confounded at this intelligence,
and after some hesitation,
“Lord bless my soul! (cried he) I'll
be shot then if the pretended Miss
Meadows wa'n't the same as Miss
Darnel!” He then declared himself
extremely glad that poor Dolly had
got into such an agreeable situation,
passed many warm encomiums on her
goodness of heart and virtuous inclinations,
and concluded with appealing
to the knight whether she did not
look very pretty in her green Joseph. 
In the mean time, he procured a 

plaister for his own head, and helped
to apply the poultice to that of his uncle,
who was sent to bed betimes with
a moderate dose of sack-whey, to promote
perspiration. The other three
passed the evening to their mutual satisfaction; 
and the justice in particular
grew enamoured of the knight's
character, dashed as it was with extravagance. 
Let us now leave them to the enjoyment
of a sober and rational conversation,
and give some account of
other guests who arrived late in the
evening, and here fixed their night-quarters
—But as we have already
trespassed on the reader's patience we
shall give him a short respite until the
next chapter makes its appearance. 