


DEAR DOCTOR,
THE peasantry of Scotland are certainly on a
poor footing all over the kingdom; and yet they
look better, and are better cloathed than those of
the same rank in Burgundy, and many other places
of France and Italy; nay, I will venture to say they
are better fed notwithstanding the boasted wine
of these foreign countries. The country people
of North-Britain live chiefly on oat-meal, and
milk, cheese, butter, and some garden-stuff, with
now and then a pickled-herring, by way of delicacy; 
but flesh-meat they seldom or never taste; 

nor any kind of strong liquor, except two-penny,
at times of uncommon festivity —Their breakfast
is a kind of hasty pudding, of oat-meal or pease-meal,
eaten with milk. They have commonly
pottage to dinner, composed of cale or cole, leeks,
barley or big, and butter; and this is reinforced
with bread and cheese, made of skimmed-milk — 
At night they sup on sowens or flummery of oatmeal 
—In a scarcity of oats, they use the meal of
barley and pease, which is both nourishing and
palatable. Some of them have potatoes; and you
find parsnips in every peasant's garden —They are
cloathed with a coarse kind of russet of their own
making, which is both decent and warm —They
dwell in poor huts, built of loose stones and turf,
without any mortar, having a fire place or hearth
in the middle, generally made of an old mill-stone,
and a hole at top to let out the smoke. 
These people, however, are content, and wonderfully
sagacious —All of them read the Bible,
and are even qualified to dispute upon the articles
of their faith; which, in those parts I have seen,
is entirely Presbyterian. I am told, that the inhabitants
of Aberdeenshire are still more acute. 
I once knew a Scotch gentleman at London, who
had declared war against this part of his countrymen; 
and swore that the impudence and knavery
of the Scots, in that quarter, had brought a reproach
upon the whole nation. 
The river Clyde, above Glasgow, is quite pastoral; 
and the banks of it are every where adorned
with fine villas. From the sea to its source,
we may reckon the seats of many families of the
first rank, such as the duke of Argyle at Roseneath,
the earl of Bute in the isle of that name, the earl
of Glencairn at Finlayston; lord Blantyre at Areskine,
the dutchess of Douglas at Bothwell, duke
Hamilton at Hamilton, the duke of Douglas at 

Douglas, and the earl of Hyndford at Carmichael-Hamilton
is a noble palace, magnificently furnished; 
and hard by is the village of that name,
one of the neatest little towns I have seen in any
country. The old castle of Douglas being burned
to the ground by accident, the late duke resolved,
as head of the first family in Scotland, to
have the largest house in the kingdom, and ordered
a plan for this purpose; but there was only one
wing of it finished when he died. It is to be
hoped that his nephew, who is now in possession
of his great fortune, will complete the design of
his predecessor —Clydesdale is in general populous
and rich, containing a great number of gentlemen,
who were independent in their fortune; 
but it produces more cattle than corn —This is
also the case with Tweedale, through part of which
we passed, and Nisdale, which is generally rough,
wild, and mountainous —These hills are covered
with sheep; and this is the small delicious mutton,
so much preferable to that of the London-market. 
As their feeding costs so little, the sheep
are not killed till five years old, when their flesh,
juices, and flavour, are in perfection; but their
fleeces are much damaged by the tar, with which
they are smeared to preserve them from the rot in
winter, during which they run wild night and day,
and thousands are lost under huge wreaths of snow 
—'Tis pity the farmers cannot contrive some
means to shelter this useful animal from the inclemencies
of a rigorous climate, especially from the
perpetual rains, which are more prejudicial than
the greatest extremity of cold weather. 
On the little river Nid, is situated the castle of
Drumlanrig, one of the noblest seats in Great-Britain,
belonging to the duke of Queensberry; 
one of those few noblemen whose goodness of heart
does honour to human-nature —I shall not pretend 

to enter into a description of this palace,
which is really an instance of the sublime in magnificence,
as well as in situation, and puts one in
mind of the beautiful city of Palmyra rising like
a vision in the midst of the wilderness. His grace
keeps open house, and lives with great splendour 
—He did us the honour to receive us with great
courtesy, and detain us all night, together with
above twenty other guests, with all their servants
and horses, to a very considerable number —The
dutchess was equally gracious, and took our ladies
under her immediate protection. The longer
I live, I see more reason to believe that prejudices
of education are never wholly eradicated, even
when they are discovered to be erroneous and absurd. 
Such habits of thinking as interest the grand
passions, cleave to the human heart in such a manner,
that though an effort of reason may force
them from their hold for a moment, this violence
no sooner ceases, than they resume their grasp
with an encreased elasticity and adhesion. 
I am led into this reflection, by what passed at
the duke's table after supper. The conversation
turned upon the vulgar notions of spirits and
omens, that prevail among the commonalty of
North-Britain, and, all the company agreed, that
nothing could be more ridiculous. One gentleman
however told a remarkable story of himself,
by way of speculation —“Being on a party of
hunting in the North, (said he) I resolved to
visit an old friend, whom I had not seen for
twenty years So long he had been retired and
sequestered from all his acquaintance, and lived
in a moping melancholy way, much afflicted
with lowness of spirits, occasioned by the death
of his wife, whom he had loved with uncommon
affection. As he resided in a remote part
of the country, and we were five gentlemen with 

as many servants, we carried some provision
with us from the next market town, lest we
should find him unprepared for our reception: 
The roads being bad, we did not arrive at the
house till two o'clock in the afternoon; and
were agreeably surprised to find a very good dinner
ready in the kitchen, and the cloth laid with
six covers. My friend himself appeared in his
best apparel at the gate, and received us with open
arms, telling me he had been expecting us
these two hours —Astonished at this declaration,
I asked who had given him intelligence of our
coming? and he smiled without making any
other reply —However, presuming upon our
former intimacy, I afterwards insisted upon
knowing; and he told me, very gravely, he had
seen me in a vision of the second sight —Nay,
he called in the evidence of his steward, who
solemnly declared, that his master had the day
before apprised him of my coming, with four
other strangers, and ordered him to provide
accordingly; in consequence of which intimatition,
he had prepared the dinner which we
were then eating; and laid the covers according
to the number foretold.” The incident we all
owned to be remarkable, and I endeavoured to
account for it by natural means. I observed, that
as the gentleman was of a visionary turn, the casual
idea, or remembrance of his old friend, might
suggest those circumstances, which accident had
for once realized; but that in all probability he
had seen many visions of the same kind, which
were never verified. None of the company directly dissented from my opinion; but from the
objections that were hinted, I could plainly perceive,
that the majority were persuaded there was
something more extraordinary in the case. 

Another gentleman of the company addressing
himself to me, “Without all doubt, (said he) a
deceased imagination is very apt to produce visions; 
but we must find some other method to account
for something of this kind, that happened
within these eight days in my neighbourhood 
—A gentleman of a good family, who cannot
be deemed a visionary in any sense of the
word, was near his own gate, in the twilight,
visited by his grandfather, who has been dead
these fifteen years —The spectre was mounted
seemingly on the very horse he used to ride,
with an angry and terrible countenance, and
said something, which his grandson, in the confusion
of his fear, could not understand. But
this was not all —He lifted up a huge horsewhip,
and applied it with great violence to his
back and shoulders, on which I saw the impression
with my own eyes. The apparition was
afterwards seen by the sexton of the parish, hovering
about the tomb where his body lies interred; 
as the man declared to several persons
in the village, before he knew what had happened
to the gentleman —Nay, he actually came
to me as a justice of the peace, in order to make
oath of these particulars, which, however, I
declined administering. As for the grandson of
the defunct, he is a sober, sensible, worldly-minded
fellow, too intent upon schemes of interest
to give into reveries. He should have
willingly concealed the affair; but he bawled out
in the first transport of his fear, and running into
the house, exposed his back and his sconce to
the whole family; so that there was no denying it
in the sequel. It is now the common discourse
of the country, that this appearance and behaviour
of the old man's spirit, portends some
great calamity to the family, and the good-woman 

has actually taken to her bed in this apprehension.” 
Though I did not pretend to explain this mystery
I said, I did not at all doubt, but it would
one day appear to be a deception; and, in all
probability, a scheme executed by some enemy of
h person who had sustained the assault; but still
the gentleman insisted upon the clearness of the
evidence, and the concurrence of testimony, by
which two creditable witnesses, without any communication
one with another, affirmed the appearance
of the same man, with whose person they
were both well acquainted —From Drumlanrig
we pursued the course of the Nid to Dumfries,
which stands several miles above the place where
the river falls into the sea; and is, after Glasgow,
the handsomest town I have seen in Scotland —The
inhabitants, indeed, seem to have proposed that
city as their model; not only in beautifying their
town and regulating its police, but also in prosecuting
their schemes of commerce and manufacture,
by which they are grown rich and opulent. 
We re-entered England, by the way of Carlisle,
where we accidently met with our friend Lismahago,
whom we had in vain enquired after at
Dumfries and other places —It would seem that
the captain, like the prophets of old, is but little
honoured in his own country, which he has now
renounced for ever —He gave me the following particulars
of his visit to his native soil —In his way to
the place of his nativity, he learned that his nephew
had married the daughter of a burgeois, who
directed a weaving manufacture, and had gone
into partnership with his father in-law: chagrined
with this information, he had arrived at the gate
in the twilight, where he heard the sound of treddles
in the great hall, which had exasperated him
to such a degree, that he had like to have lost his 

senses: while he was thus transported with indignation,
his nephew chanced to come forth, when,
being no longer master of his passion, he cried,
“Degenerate rascal! you have made my father's
house a den of thieves;” and at the same time
chastised him with his horse-whip; then, riding
round the adjoining village, he had visited the burying-ground
of his ancestors by moon-light; and,
having paid his respects to their manes, travelled
all night to another part of the country —Finding
the head of his family in such a disgraceful
situation, all his own friends dead or removed from
the places of their former residence, and the expence
of living encreased to double of what it had
been, when he first left his native country, he had
bid it an eternal adieu, and was determined to
seek for repose among the forests of America. 
I was no longer at a loss to account for the apparition,
which had been described at Drumlanrig; 
and when I repeated the story to the lieutenant,
he was much pleased to think his resentment
had been so much more effectual than he intended; 
and he owned, he might at such an hour, and in
such an equipage, very well pass for the ghost of
his father, whom he was said greatly to resemble 
—Between friends, I fancy Lismahago will find
a retreat without going so far as the wigwams of the
Miamis. My sister Tabby is making continual
advances to him, in the way of affection; and, if
I may trust to appearances, the captain is disposed
to take opportunity by the forelock. For my part,
I intend to encourage this correspondence, and
shall be glad to see them united —In that case, we
shall find a way to settle them comfortably in our
own neighbourhood. I, and my servants, will
get rid of a very troublesome and tyrannic gouvernante; 
and I shall have the benefit of Lismahago's
conversation, without being obliged to take more 

of his company than I desire; for though an olla
is a high-flavoured dish, I could not bear to dine
upon it every day of my life. 
I am much pleased with Manchester, which is
one of the most agreeable and flourishing towns in
Great-Britain; and I perceive that this is the
place which hath animated the spirit, and suggested
the chief manufactures of Glasgow. We propose
to visit Chatsworth, the Peak, and Buxton, from
which last place we shall proceed directly homewards,
though by easy journies. If the season has
been as favourable in Wales as in the North, your
harvest is happily finished; and we have nothing
left to think of but our October, of which let Barns
be properly reminded. You will find me much
better in flesh than I was at our parting; and this
short separation has given a new edge to those sentiments
of friendships with which I always have
been, and ever shall be, 
yours,
Matt. Bramble. 
Manchester,
Sept. 15. 