

He renews the rites of sorrow, and is entranced. 
While they amused themselves with
this sort of conversation, the physician
returned with the coach, and accompanied
them back to their inn, where he left them to
their repose, after having promised to call again
at noon, and conduct Renaldo to the
house of madame Clement, the benefactress
of Monimia, to whom he eagerly desired to be
introduced. 
The appointment was observed with all imaginable
punctuality on both sides. Melvile had
arrayed himself in a suit of deep mourning, and
he found the good lady in the like habit, assumed
upon the same occasion: the goodness
of her heart was manifest in her countenance; 
the sensibility of the youth discovered itself in
a flood of tears, which he shed at her appearance. 
His sensations were too full for utterance; 
nor was she, for some time, able to give
him welcome: while she led him by the hand 

to a seat, the drops of sympathy rushed into
either eye; and at length she broke silence,
saying, “Count, we must acquiesce in the dispensations
of providence; and quiet the transports
of our grief, with a full assurance that
Monimia is happy.” 
This name was the key that unlocked the
faculty of his speech. I must strive, said he,
to ease the anguish of my heart with that consolation. 
But say, humane, benevolent lady,
to whose compassion and generosity that hapless
orphan was indebted for the last peacefull
moment she enjoyed upon earth; say, in all
your acquaintance with human nature, in all
your intercourse with the daughters of men,
in all the exercise of your charity and beneficence,
did you ever observe such sweetness, purity,
and truth; such beauty, sense, and
perfection, as that which was the inheritance
of her whose fate I shall for ever deplore? 
“She was indeed, replied the lady, the best
and fairest of our sex.” 
This was the beginning of a conversation
touching that lovely victim, in the course of
which, he explained those wicked arts which
Fathom practised to alienate his affections from
the adorable Monimia; and she described the
cunning hints and false insinuations by which
that traitor had aspersed the unsuspecting lover,
and soiled his character in the opinion of
the virtuous orphan. The intelligence he obtained,
on this occasion, added indignation to
his grief: the whole mystery of Monimia's behaviour,
which he could not before explain,
now stood disclosed before him: he saw the
gradual progress of that infernal plan, which
had been laid for their mutual ruin; and his 

soul was inflamed with such desire of vengeance,
that he would have taken his leave abruptly,
in order to set on foot an immediate
enquiry about the perfidious author of his
wrongs, that he might exterminate such a monster
of iniquity from the face of the earth; but
he was restrained by Madam Clement, who
gave him to understand, that Fathom was already
overtaken by the vengeance of heaven:
for she had traced him in all the course of his
fortune, from his first appearance in the medical
sphere to his total eclipse. She represented
the villain as a wretch altogether unworthy of
his attention; she said, he was so covered with
infamy, that no person could enter the lists against
him, without bearing away some stain of
dishonour; that he was, at present, peculiarly
protected by the law, and sheltered from the
resentmennt of Renaldo, in the cavern of his
disgrace. 
Melvile, glowing with rage, replied, that he
was a venomous serpent, which it was incumbent
on every foot to crush; that it was the
duty of every man to contribute his whole
power in freeing society from such a pernicious
hypocrite; and that if such instances of
perfidy and ingratitude were suffered to pass
with impunity, virtue and plain-dealing would
soon be expelled from the habitations of men. 
“Over and above these motives, said he, I own
myself so vitiated with the allay of human passion
and infirmity, that I desire, I eagerly pant
for an occasion of meeting him hand to hand,
where I may upbraid him with his treachery,
and shower down vengeance and destruction
on his perfidious head.” 
Then he recounted the anecdotes of our adventurer, 

which he had learned in Germany
and Flanders, and concluded with declaring his
unalterable resolution of releasing him from
jail, that he might have an opportunity of sacrificing
him, with his own hand, to the manes
of Monimia. The discreet lady, perceiving the
perturbation of his mind, would not further
combat the impetuosity of his passion; contenting
herself with exacting a promise, that he
would not execute his purpose, until he should
have deliberated three days upon the consequences
by which a step of that kind might be attended:
before the expiration of that term, she
thought measures might be taken to prevent
the young gentleman from exposing his life or
reputation to unnecessary hazard. 
Having complied with her request in this
particular, he took his leave, after he had, by
repeated entreaties, prevailed upon her to accept
a jewel, in token of his veneration for the
kind benefactress of his deceased Monimia:
nor could his generous heart be satisfied, until
he had forced a considerable present on the humane
physician, who had attended her in her
last moments, and now discovered a particular
sympathy and concern for her desponding lover. 
This gentleman attended him to the house
of the benevolent Joshua, where they dined,
and where Don Diego was recommended, in
the most fervid terms of friendship, to the good
offices of their host. Not that this duty was
performed in presence of the stranger, Renaldo's
delicacy would not expose his friend to such
a situation: while the physician, before dinner,
entertained that stranger in one apartment,
Melvile withdrew into another, with the Jew,
to whom he disclosed the affair of the Castilian, 

with certain circumstances, which shall, in due
time, be revealed. 
Joshua's curiosity being whetted by this information,
he could not help eying the Spaniard
at table, with such a particular stare, that
Don Diego perceived his attention, and took
umbrage at the freedom of his regard. Being
unable to conceal his displeasure, he addressed
himself to the Hebrew, with great solemnity,
in the Spanish tongue, saying, “Signior, is
there any singularity in my appearance? or, do
you recollect the features of Don Diego de Zelos?” 
“Signior Don Diego, replied the other in
pure Castilian, I crave your pardon for the
rudeness of my curiosity, which prompted me
to survey a nobleman, whose character I revere,
and to whose misfortunes I am no stranger:
indeed, were curiosity alone concerned, I should
be without excuse; but as I am heartily inclined
to serve you, as far as my weak abilities extend,
I hope your generosity will not impute any little
involuntary trespass of punctilio to my want
of cordiality or esteem.” 
The Spaniard was not only appeased by this
apology, but also affected with the compliment
and the language in which it was conveyed. He
thanked the Jew for his kind declaration, intreated
him to bear with the peevishness of a
disposition, sore with the galling hand of affliction; 
and turning up his eyes to heaven,
“Were it possible, cried he, for fate to reconcile
contradictions, and recal the irremeable
current of events, I would now believe, that
there was happiness still in reserve for the forlorn
Zelos: now that I tread the land of freedom
and humanity; now that I find myself befriended 

by the most generous of men. Alas!
I ask not happiness! if by the kind endeavours
of the gallant count de Melvile, to whom I am
already indebted for my life; and by the efforts
of his friends, the honour of my name
shall be purified and cleared from the poisonous
stains of malice, by which it is at present
spotted; I shall then enjoy all that satisfaction,
which destiny can bestow upon a wretch whose
woes are incurable.” 
Renaldo comforted him with the assurance
of his being on the eve of triumphing over his
adversaries: and Joshua confirmed the consolation,
by giving him to understand, that he
had correspondents in Spain, of some influence
in the state; that he had already written to
them on the subject of Don Diego, in consequence
of a letter which he had received from
Melvile, while he tarried at Mons, and that he,
every post, expected a favourable answer on
that subject. 
After dinner, the physician took his leave,
though not before he had promised to meet
Renaldo at night, and accompany him in the
repetition of his midnight visit to Monimia's
tomb: for this pilgrimage the unfortunate
youth resolved nightly to perform, during the
whole time of his residence in England: it
was, indeed, a sort of pleasure, the prospect of
which enabled him to bear the toil of living
through the day; though his patience was almost
quite exhausted before the hour of assignation
arrived. 
When the doctor appeared with the coach,
he leaped into it with great eagerness, after he
had, with much difficulty, prevailed with Don
Diego to stay at home, on account of his health, 

which was not yet perfectly established. The
Castilian, however, would not comply with his
request, untill he had obtained the Count's promise,
that he should be permitted to accompany
him next night, and take that duty alternately
with the physician. 
About midnight they reached the place,
where they found the sexton in waiting, according
to the orders he had received: the door
was opened, the mourner conducted to the
tomb, and left, as before, to the gloom of his
own meditations. Again he laid himself on
the cold ground; again he renewed his lamentable
strain; his imagination began to be heated
into an extacy of enthusiasm, during which
he again fervently invoked the spirit of his deceased
Monimia. 
In the midst of these invocations, his ear was
suddenly invaded with the sound of some few
solemn notes, issuing from the organ, which
seemed to feel the impulse of an invisible hand. 
At this awful salutation, Melvile was roused
to the keenest sense of surprize and attention:
reason shrunk before the thronging ideas of
his fancy, which represented this music as the
prelude to something strange and supernatural; 
and while he waited for the sequel, the place
was suddenly illuminated, and each surrounding
object brought under the cognizance of his
eye. 
What passed within his mind on this occasion,
is not easy to describe; his faculties were
swallowed up by those of seeing and hearing:
he had mechanically raised himself upon one
knee, with his body advancing forwards; and
in this attitude he gazed with a look, through
which his soul seemed eager to escape. To 

his view, thus strained upon vacant space, in a
few minues appeared the figure of a woman
arrayed in white, with a veil that covered her
face, and flowed down upon her back and
shoulders: The phantome approached him
with an easy step, and lifting up her veil discovered
(believe it, O reader!) the individual
countenance of Monimia. 
At sight of these well known features, seemingly
improved with new celestial graces, the
youth became a statue, expressing amazement,
love, and awful adoration. He saw the apparition
smile with meek benevolence, divine
compassion, warmed and intendered by that
fond, pure flame, which death could not extinguish:
he heard the voice of his Monimia
call Renaldo! Thrice he essayed to answer; as
oft his tongue denied its office: his hair stood
upright, and a cold vapour seemed to thrill
through every nerve. This was not fear, but
the infirmity of human nature, oppressed by
the presence of a superior being. 
At length his agony was overcome; he recollected
all his resolution, and in a strain of
awe-struck rapture, thus addressed the heavenly
visitant. “Hast thou then heard, pure spirit!
the wailings of my grief? hast thou descended
from the realms of bliss, in pity to my
woe? and art thou come to speak the words of
peace to my desponding soul? To bid the wretched
smile; to lift the load of misery and care from
the afflicted breast; to fill thy lover's heart
with joy and pleasing hope, was still the darling
task of my Monimia, e're yet refined to
that perfection, which mortality can never attain:
no wonder then, blest shade, that now,
when reunited to thy native heaven, thou art 

still kind, propitious, and beneficent to us, who
groan in this inhospitable vale of sorrow thou
hast left: tell me, ah! tell me, dost thou still
remember those fond hours we passed together? 
Doth that enlightened bosom feel a pang of
soft regret, when thou recallest our fatal separation? 
Sure that meekened glance bespeaks
thy sympathy! Ah! how that tender look
o'erpowers me! Sacred heaven! the pearly
drops of pity trickle down thy cheeks! Such
are the tears that angels shed o'er man's distress! 
Turn not away: thou beckonest me to
follow: yes, I will follow thee, ætherial spirit,
as far as these weak limbs, encumbered with
mortality, will bear my weight; and, would
to heaven! I could, with ease, put off these
vile, corporeal shackles, and attend thy
flight.” 
So saying, he started from the ground, and
in a transport of eager expectation, at awful
distance, traced the footsteps of the apparition,
which entering a detached apartment,
sunk down upon a chair, and with a sigh exclaimed,
“Indeed, this is too much!” What
was the disorder of Renaldo's mind, when he
perceived this phænomenon! Before reflection
could perform its office, moved by a sudden
impulse, he sprung forwards, crying, “If
it be death to touch thee, let me die!” and
caught in his arms, not the shadow, but the
warm substance of the all-accomplished Monimia. 
“Mysterious powers of providence!
this is no phantome! this is no shade! this is
the life! the panting bosom of her whom I
have so long, so bitterly deplored! I fold her
in my arms! I press her glowing breast to
mine! I see her blush with virtuous pleasure 

and ingenuous love! she smiles upon me with
inchanting tenderness! O let me gaze on that
transcendent beauty, which the more I view
it, ravishes the more! These charms are too
intense; I sicken while I gaze! Merciful
heaven! is not this a mere illusion of the
brain! Was she not fled for ever? Had not
the cold hand of death divorced her from my
hope? This must be some flattering vision
of my distempered fancy! perhaps some soothing
dream: if such it be, grant, O ye heavenly
powers! that I may never wake.” 
O gentle youth! (replied the beauteous orphan,
still clasped in his embrace) what joy now
fills the bosom of Monimia, at this triumph of
thy virtue and thy love? When I see these transports
of thy affection, when I find thee restored
to that place in my esteem and admiration,
which thou hadst lost by the arts of calumny
and malice! this is a meeting which my most
sanguine hopes durst not presage!” 
So entirely were the faculties of Renaldo engrossed
in the contemplation of his restored
Monimia, that he saw not the rest of the company,
who wept with transport over this affecting
scene: he was therefore amazed at the interposition
of madame Clement, who, while the
shower of sympathetic pleasure bedewed her
cheeks, congratulated the lovers upon this happy
event, crying, “These are the joys which
virtue calls her own.” They also received the
compliments of a reverend clergyman, who told
Monimia, she had reaped, at last, the fruits of
that pious resignation to the will of heaven,
which she had so devoutly practised during the
term of her affliction: and, lastly, they were
accosted by the physician, who was not quite so 

hackneyed in the ways of death, or so callous
to the finer sensations of the soul, but that he
blubbered plentifully, while he petitioned heaven
in behalf of such an accomplished and deserving
pair. 
Monimia taking madame Clement by the
hand, “Whatever joy, said she, Renaldo derives
from this occasion, is owing to the bounty,
the compassion, and maternal care of this incomparable
lady, together with the kind admonitions
and humanity of these two worthy gentlemen.” 
Melvile, whose passions were still in agitation,
and whose mind could not yet digest the incidents
that occurred, embraced them all by turns,
but, like the faithful needle, which, tho' shaken,
for an instant, from its poize, immediately regains
its true direction and points invariably to
the pole, he soon returned to his Monimia; 
again he held her in his arms; again he drank
inchantment from her eyes, and thus poured
forth the effusions of his soul. “Can I then
trust the evidence of sense? And art thou
really to my wish restored! Never, O never
did thy beauty shine with such bewitching grace,
as that which now confounds and captivates my
view! sure there is something more than mortal
in thy looks! where hast thou lived? where
borrowed this perfection! whence art thou
now descended? Oh! I am all amazement,
joy and fear! thou wilt not leave me! no! we
must not part again: by this warm kiss! a
thousand times more sweet than all the fragrance
of the east! we never more will part. 
O this is rapture, extasy, and what no language
can explain!” 
In the midst of these ejaculations, he ravished 

a banquet from her glowing lips, that kindled
in his heart a flame, which rushed through
every vein, and glided to his marrow: this was
a privilege he had never claimed before, and
now permitted as a recompence for all the penance
he had suffered; nevertheless, the
cheeks of Monimia, who was altogether unaccustomed
to such familiarities, underwent a
total suffusion; and madame Clement discreetly
relieved her from the anxiety of her situation,
by interfering in the discourse, and rallying
the count, upon his endeavours to monopolize
such a branch of happiness. 
“O my dear lady! (replied Renaldo, who
by this time had, in some measure, recovered
his recollection) forgive the wild transports of
a fond lover, who hath so unexpectedly retrieved
the jewel of his soul! yet, far from
wishing to hoard up his treasure, he means to
communicate and diffuse his happiness to all
his friends. O my Monimia! how will the
pleasure of this hour be propagated! As yet
thou knowest not all the bliss that is reserved
for thy enjoyment: mean while, I long to
learn, by what contrivance this happy interview
hath been effected: still am I ignorant,
how I was transported into this apartment,
from the lonely vault, in which I mourned
over my supposed misfortune! 