


He is surprised with the appearance of Hatchway
and Pipes, who take up their habitation in his
neighbourhood, contrary to his inclination and express
desire. 
Being now regularly initiated in the mysteries
of the Fleet, and reconciled in some
measure to the customs of the place, he began
to bear the edge of reflection without wincing; 
and thinking it would be highly imprudent in him
to defer, any longer, the purposes by which only
he could enjoy any ease and satisfaction in his
confinement, he resolved to resume his task of
translating, and every week compose an occasional
paper, by way of revenge upon the minister,
against whom he had denounced eternal
war. With this view he locked himself up in
his chamber, and went to work with great eagerness
and application; when he was interrupted by
a ticket-porter, who, putting a letter in his hand,
vanished in a moment, before he had time to
peruse the contents. 
Our hero, opening the billet, was not a little
surprised to find a bank-note for fifty pounds,
inclosed in a blank sheet of paper; and having
exercised his memory and penetration on the subject
of this unexpected windfall, had just concluded,
that it could come from no other than
the lady who had so kindly visited him a few days
before, when his ears were suddenly invaded by
the well-known sound of that whistle which always
hung about the neck of Pipes, as a memorial
of his former occupation; and this tune 

being performed, he heard the noise of a wooden
leg ascending the stair; upon which he opened
his door, and beheld his friend Hatchway, with
his old ship-mate at his back. 
After a cordial shake of the hand, with the
usual salutation of “What cheer, cousin Pickle?” 
honest Jack seated himself without ceremony; 
and casting his eyes around the apartment, “Split
my topstay-sail! (said he, with an arch sneer)
you have got into a snug birth, cousin. Here
you may sit all weathers, without being turned
out to take your watch, and no fear of the ship's
dragging her anchor. You ha'n't much room
to spare, 'tis true: an' I had known as how you
stowed so close, Tom should have slung my own
hammock for you, and then you mought have
knocked down this great lubberly hurricane house. 
But, mayhap, you turn in double, and so you
don't chuse to trust yourself and your doxy to a
clue and canvas.” 
Pickle bore his jokes with great good-humour,
rallied him in his turn about the dairy-maid at
the garrison, enquired about his friends in the
country, asked if he had been to visit his niece,
and, finally, expressed a desire of knowing the
cause of his journey to London. The lieutenant
satisfied his curiosity in all these particulars; and,
in answer to the last question, observed, that
understanding, from the information of Pipes,
that he was land-locked, he had come from the
country in order to tow him into the offing. “I
know not how the wind sits (said he); but if so
be, as three thousand pounds will bring you clear
of the cape, say the word, and you shan't lie
wind-bound another glass, for want of the
money.” 

This was an offer which few people, in our
hero's situation, would have altogether refused; 
especially as he had all the reason in the world to
believe, that, far from being a vain, unmeaning
compliment, it was the genuine tribute of friendship,
which the lieutenant would have willingly,
ay and with pleasure, paid. Nevertheless, Peregrine
peremptorily refused his assistance, tho' not
without expressing himself in terms of acknowledgment
suitable to the occasion; and told him,
it would be time enough to make use of his generosity,
when he should find himself destitute of
all other resource. Jack employed all his rhetorick,
with a view of persuading him to take this
opportunity to procure his own enlargement; 
and, finding his arguments ineffectual, insisted
upon his accepting an immediate supply for his
necessary occasions; swearing, with great vehemence,
that he would never return to the garison,
unless he would put him upon the footing of
any other tenant, and receive his rent accordingly. 
Our young gentleman as positively swore, that
he never would consider him in that light; remonstrating,
that he had long ago settled the
house upon him for life, as a pledge of his own
esteem, as well as in conformity with the commodore's
desire; and beseeching him to return to
his usual avocations, protested that, if ever his
situation should subject him to the necessity of
borrowing from his friends, Mr. Hatchway should
be the first man to whom he would apply himself
for succour. To convince him that this was not
the case at present, he produced the bank-note,
which he had received in the letter, together
with his own ready money; and mentioned some 

other funds, which he invented extempore, in
order to amuse the lieutenant's concern. In the
close of this expostulation, he desired Pipes to
conduct Mr. Hatchway to the coffee-house,
where he might entertain himself with the newspapers
for half an hour; during which he would
put on his cloaths, and bespeak something for
dinner, that they might enjoy each other's company,
as long as his occasions would permit him
to stay in that place. 
The two sailors were no sooner gone, than he
took up the pen, and wrote the following letter,
in which he inclosed the bank-note, to his generous
benefactress: 

Madam,
Your humanity is not more ingenious than
my suspicion. In vain you attempt to impose
upon me by an act of generosity, which no
person upon earth, but your ladyship, is capable
of committing. Tho' your name was not subscribed
on the paper, your sentiments were fully
displayed in the contents, which I must beg leave
to restore, with the same sense of gratitude, and
for the same reasons I expressed, when last I had
the honour to converse with you upon this subject. 
Tho' I am deprived of my liberty, by the
villainy and ingratitude of mankind, I am not
yet destitute of the other conveniencies of life; 
and, therefore, beg to be excused from incurring
an unnecessary addition to that load of obligation
you have already laid upon, 
Madam,
Your ladyship's most devoted,
Humble servant,
Peregrine Pickle. 

Having dressed himself, and repaired to the
place of appointment, he dispatched this epistle
by the hands of Pipes, who was ordered to leave
it at her ladyship's house, without staying for an
answer; and in the mean time gave directions
for dinner, which he and his friend Hatchway
ate very chearfully in his own apartment, after
he had entertained him with a sight of all the
curiosities in the place. During their repast,
Jack repeated his kind offers to our adventurer,
who declined them with his former obstinacy,
and begged he might be no more importuned on
that subject: but, if he insisted upon giving some
fresh proofs of his friendship, he might have an
opportunity of exhibiting it in taking Pipes under
his care and protection; for nothing affected
him so much as his inability to provide for such
a faithful adherent. 
The lieutenant desired he would give himself
no trouble upon that score; he being, of his own
accord, perfectly well disposed to befriend his
old ship-mate, who should never want, while he
had a shilling to spare. But he began to drop
some hints of an intention to fix his quarters in
the Fleet, observing, that the air seemed to be
very good in that place, and that he was tired of
living in the country. What he said did not
amount to a plain declaration, and therefore Peregrine
did not answer it as such, tho' he perceived
his drift; and took an opportunity of describing
the inconveniences of the place, in such
a manner, as he hoped would deter him from
putting such an extravagant plan in execution. 
This expedient, however, far from answering
the end proposed, had a quite contrary effect,
and furnished Hatchway with an argument against 

his own unwillingness to quit such a disagreeable
place. And, in all probability, Jack would have
been more explicit, with regard to the scheme he
had proposed, if the conversation had not been
interrupted by the arrival of Cadwallader, who
never failed in the performance of his diurnal
visit. Hatchway, conjecturing that this stranger
might have some private business with his friend,
quitted the apartment, on pretence of taking a
turn: and meeting Pipes at the door, desired his
company to the Bear, by which name the open
space is distinguished; where, during a course of
perambulation, these two companions held a
council upon Pickle: in consequence of which it
was determined, since he obstinately persisted to
refuse their assistance, that they should take lodgings
in his neighbourhood, with a view of being
at hand to minister unto his occasions, in spite of
his false delicacy, according to the emergency of
his affairs. 
This resolution being taken, they consulted the
bar-keeper of the coffee-house about lodging,
and she directed them to the warden; to whom
the lieutenant, in his great wisdom, represented
himself as a kinsman to Peregrine, who, rather
than leave that young gentleman by himself to
the unavoidable discomforts of a prison, was inclined
to keep him company, 'till such time as
his affairs could be put in order. This measure
he the more anxiously desired to take, because
the prisoner was sometimes subject to a disordered
imagination, upon which occasion he stood in
need of extraordinary attendance; and therefore
he (the lieutenant) intreated the warden to accommodate
him with a lodging for himself and
his servant, for which he was ready to make any 

reasonable acknowledgment. The warden, who
was a sensible and humane man, could not help
applauding his resolution; and several rooms
being at that time unoccupied, he put him immediately
in possession of a couple, which were
forthwith prepared for his reception. 
This affair being settled to his satisfaction, he
dispatched Pipes for his portmanteau; and returning
to the coffee-house, sound Peregrine,
with whom he spent the remaining part of the
evening. Our hero, taking it for granted that
he proposed to set out for the garison next day,
wrote a memorandum of some books which he
had left in that habitation, and which he now
desired Jack to send up to town by the waggon,
directed for Mr. Crabtree; and cautioned him
against giving the least hint of his misfortune in
the neighbourhood, that it might remain, as long
as possible, concealed from the knowledge of his
sister, (who, he knew, would afflict herself immoderately
at the news) nor reach the ears of
the rest of his family, who would exult and
triumph over his distress. 
Hatchway listened to his injunctions with great
attention, and promised to demean himself accordingly:
then the discourse shifted to an agreeable
recapitulation of the merry scenes they had
formerly acted together; and the evening being
pretty far advanced, Peregrine, with seeming reluctance,
told him that the gates of the Fleet
would in a few minutes be shut for the night,
and that there was an absolute necessity for his
withdrawing to his lodging. Jack replied, that
he could not think of parting with him so soon,
after such a long separation; and that he was determined
to stay with him an hour or two longer, 

if he should be obliged to take up his lodging in
the streets. Pickle, rather than disoblige his
guest, indulged him in his desire, and resolved to
give him a share of his own bed. A pair of
chickens and 'sparagus were bespoken for supper,
at which Pipes attended with an air of internal
satisfaction; and the bottle was bandied about in
a jovial manner 'till midnight, when the lieutenant
rose up to take his leave, observing, that
being fatigued with riding, he was inclined to
turn-in. Pipes, upon this intimation, produced
a lanthorn ready lighted; and Jack, shaking his
entertainer by the hand, wished him good-night,
and promised to visit him again betimes in the
morning. 
Peregrine, imagining that this behaviour proceeded
from the wine, which he had plentifully
drank, told him, that if he was disposed to sleep,
his bed was ready prepared in the room, and ordered
his attendant to undress his master; upon
which Mr. Hatchway gave him to understand,
that he had no occasion to incommode his friend,
having already provided a lodging for himself:
and the young gentleman demanding an explanation,
he frankly owned what he had done, saying,
“You gave me such a dismal account of
the place, that I could not think of leaving you
in it without company.” Our young gentleman,
who was naturally impatient of benefits,
and foresaw that this uncommon instance of
Hatchway's friendship would encroach upon the
plan which he had formed for his own subsistence,
by engrossing his time and attention, so as that
he should not be able to prosecute his labours; 
closeted the lieutenant next day, and demonstrated
to him the folly and ill consequences of 

the step he had taken. He observed, that the
world in general would look upon it as the effect
of mere madness; and, if his relations were so
disposed, they might make it the foundation of a
statute of lunacy against him; that his absence
from the garison must be a very great detriment
to his private affairs; and, lastly, that his presence
in the Fleet would be a very great hindrance to
Pickle himself, whose hope of regaining his liberty
altogether depended upon his being detached
from all company and interruption. 
To these remonstrances Jack replied, that, as
to the opinion of the world, it was no more to
him than a rotten net-line; and if his relations
had a mind to have his upper works condemned,
he did not doubt but he should be able to stand
the survey, without being declared unfit for service; 
that he had no affairs at the garison, but
such as would keep cold; and with regard to
Pickle's being interrupted by his presence, he gave
him his word, that he would never come along-side
of him, except when he should give him the
signal for holding discourse. In conclusion, he
signified his resolution to stay where he was, at
all events, without making himself accountable
to any person whatsoever. 
Peregrine seeing him determined, desisted from
any further importunity; resolving, however, to
tire him out of his plan by reserve and supercilious
neglect; for he could not bear the thought
of being so notoriously obliged by any person upon
earth. With this view he quitted the lieutenant,
upon some slight pretence; after having
told him, that he could not have the pleasure of
his company at dinner, because he was engaged
with a particular club of his fellow-prisoners. 

Jack was a stranger to the punctilios of behaviour,
and therefore did not take this declaration
amiss; but had immediate recourse to the advice
of his counsellor Mr. Pipes, who proposed that
he should go to the coffee-house and kitchen,
and give the people to understand that he would
pay for all such liquor and provisions as Mr.
Pickle should order to be sent to his own lodging. 
This expedient was immediately practised; and,
as there was no credit in the place, Hatchway
deposited a sum of money, by way of security,
to the cook and the vintner, intimating, that
there was a necessity for taking that method of
befriending his cousin Peregrine, who was subject
to strange whims, that rendered it impossible to
serve him any other way. 
In consequence of these insinuations, it was
that same day rumoured about the Fleet, that
Mr. Pickle was an unhappy gentleman disordered
in his understanding, and that the lieutenant was
his near relation, who had subjected himself to
the inconvenience of living in a jail, with the
sole view of keeping a strict eye over his conduct. 
This report, however, did not reach the ears of
our hero till next day, when he sent one of the
runners of the Fleet, who attended him, to bespeak
and pay for a couple of pullets, and something
else, for dinner, to which he had already
invited his friend Hatchway, in hope of being
able to persuade him to retire into the country,
after he had undergone a whole day's mortification
in the place. The messenger returned with
an assurance, that the dinner should be made ready
according to his directions, and restored the money,
observing that his kinsman had paid for what
was bespoke. 

Peregrine was equally surprized and disgusted
at this information, and resolved to chide the
lieutenant severely, for his unseasonable treat,
which he considered as a thing repugnant to his
reputation. Mean while, he dispatched his attendant
for wine to the coffee-house, and finding
his credit bolstered up in that place by the same
means, was enraged at the presumption of Jack's
friendship, and questioned the valet about it, with
such manifestation of displeasure, that the fellow,
afraid of disobliging such a good master, frankly
communicated the story which was circulated at
his expence. The young gentleman was so much
incensed at this piece of intelligence, that he
wrote a bitter expostulation to the lieutenant,
wherein he not only retracted his invitation, but
declared that he would never converse with him,
while he should remain within the place. 
Having thus obeyed the dictates of his anger,
he gave notice to the cook, that he should not
have occasion for what was ordered; and repairing
to the coffee-house, told the landlord, that
whereas he understood the stranger with the
wooden leg had prepossessed him and others with
ridiculous notions, tending to bring the sanity of
his intellects in question; and, to confirm this
imputation, had, under the pretence of consanguinity,
undertaken to defray his expences; he
could not help (in justice to himself) declaring,
that the lame person was, in reality, the madman,
who had given his keepers the slip; that, therefore,
he (the landlord) would not find his account
in complying with his orders, and encouraging
him to frequent his house; and that, for
his own part, he would never enter the door, or
favour him with the least trifle of his custom, if 

ever he should, for the future, find himself anticipated
in this payments by that unhappy lunatic. 
The vintner was confounded at this retorted
charge; and, after much perplexity and deliberation,
concluded, that both parties were distracted; 
the stranger, in paying a man's debts against
his will, and Pickle, in being offended at such
forwardness of friendship. 