


DEAR MOLLY JONES,
HEAVING got a frank, I now return your
fever, which I received by Mr. Higgins, at the
Hot Well, together with the stockings, which his
wife footed for me; but now they are of no survice. 
No body wears such things in this place—O Molly!
you that live in the country have no deception of
our doings at Bath. Here is such dressing, and fidling,
and dancing, and gadding, and courting, and
plotting—O gracious! if God had not given me a
good stock of discretion, what a power of things
might not I reveal, consarning old mistress and
young mistress; Jews with beards, that were no
Jews; but handsome Christians, without a hair
upon their sin, strolling with spectacles, to get
speech of Miss Liddy. But she's a dear sweet soul,
as innocent as the child unborn. She has tould me
all her inward thoughts, and disclosed her passion
for Mr. Wilson; and that's not his name neither; 
and thof he acted among the player-men, he is meat
for their masters; and she has gi'en me her yallow
trollopea; which Mrs. Drab, the manty-maker,
says will look very well when it is scowred and
smoaked with silfur—You knows as how, yallow
fitts my fizzogmony. God he knows what havock
I shall make among the mail-sex, when I make my
first appearance in this killing collar, with a full
soot of gaze, as good as new, that I bought last
Friday of madam Friponeau, the French mullaner
—Dear girl, I have seen all the fine shews of Bath; 
the Prades, the Squires, and the Circlis, the Crashit,
the Hottogon, and bloody Buildings, and Harry
King's row; and I have been twice in the Bath 

with mistress, and na'r a smoak upon our backs,
hussy—The first time I was mortally afraid, and
flustered all day; and afterwards made believe that
I had got the heddick; but mistress said, if I did'nt
go, I should take a dose of bum-taffy; and so remembring
how it worked Mrs. Gwyllim a pennorth,
I chose rather to go again with her into the
Bath, and then I met with an axident. I dropt my
petticoat, and could not get it up from the bottom
—But what did that signify? they mought laff,
but they could see nothing; for I was up to the sin
in water. To be sure, it threw me into such a
gumbustion, that I know not what I said, nor what
I did, nor how they got me out, and rapt me in a
blanket—Mrs. Tabitha scoulded a little when we
got home; but she knows as I know what's what— 
Ah Laud help you! —There is Sir Yury Micligut,
of Balnaclinch, in the cunty of Kalloway—I took
down the name from his gentleman, Mr. O Frizzle,
and he has got an estate of fifteen hundred a year
—I am sure he is both rich and generous—But
you nose, Molly, I was always famous for keeping
secrets; and so he was very safe in trusting me with
his flegm for mistress; which, to be sure, is very
honourable; for Mr. O Frizzle assures me, he
values not her portion a brass varthing—And, indeed,
what's poor ten thousand pounds to a Baron
Knight of his fortune? and, truly, I told Mr.
O Frizzle, that was all she had to trust to—As for
John Thomas, he's a morass fellor—I vow, I
thought he would a fit with Mr. O Frizzle, because
he axed me to dance with him at Spring
Garden—But God he knows I have no thoughts
eyther of wan or t'other. 
As for house news, the worst is, Chowder has
fallen off greatly from his stomick—He eats nothing
but white meats, and not much of that; and
wheezes, and seems to be much bloated. The 

doctors think he is threatened with a dropsy— 
Parson Marrowfat, who has got the same disorder,
finds great benefit from the waters; but Chowder
seems to like them no better than the 'squire; and
mistress says, if his case don't take a favourable
turn, she will sartainly carry him to Aberga'nny,
to drink goats's-whey—To be sure, the poor dear
honymil is lost for want of axercise; for which
reason, she intends to give him an airing once
a-day upon the Downs, in a post-chaise—I have
already made very creditable correxions in this
here place; where, to be sure, we have the very
squintasense of satiety—Mrs. Patcher, my lady
Kilmacullock's woman,and I are sworn sisters. 
She has shewn me all her secrets, and learned me
to wash gaze, and refrash rusty silks and bumbeseens,
by boiling them with vinegar, chamberlye,
and stale beer. My short sack and apron luck as
good as new from the shop, and my pumpydoor as
fresh as a rose, by the help of turtle-water—But
this is all Greek and Latten to you, Molly—If we
should come to Aberga'nny, you'll be within a
day's ride of us; and then we shall see wan another,
please God—If not, remember me in your prayers,
as I shall do by you in mine; and take care of my
kitten, and give my kind sarvice to Saul; and this
is all at present, from your beloved friend and
sarvent, 
Winifred Jenkins. 
Bath, April 26. 