


In which certain personages of this delightful
history are introduced to the
reader's acquaintance. 
It was on the great northern road
from York to London, about the
beginning of the month October, and
the hour of eight in the evening, that
four travellers were by a violent shower
of rain driven for shelter into a little
public house on the side of the highway,
distinguished by a sign which
was said to exhibit the figure of a black
lion. The kitchen, in which they
assembled, was the only room for entertainment
in the house, paved with
red bricks, remarkably clean, furnished 

with three or four Windsor chairs,
adorned with shining plates of pewter,
and copper sauce-pans nicely scoured,
that even dazzled the eyes of the beholder; 
while a chearful fire of sea-coal
blazed in the chimney. Three
of the travellers, who arrived on
horseback, having seen their cattle
properly accommodated in the stable,
agreed to pass the time, until the weather
should clear up, over a bowl of
rumbo, which was accordingly prepared:
but the fourth, refusing to
join their company, took his station
at the opposite side of the chimney,
and called for a pint of two-penny,
with which he indulged himself apart. 
At a little distance, on his left hand,
there was another groupe, consisting
of the landlady a decent widow, her
two daughters, the elder of whom
seemed to be about the age of fifteen,
and a country lad, who served both as
waiter and ostler. 
The social triumvirate was composed
of Mr. Fillet, a country practitioner
in surgery and midwifery, Capt. 

Crowe, and his nephew Mr. Thomas
Clarke, an attorney. Fillet was a
man of some education, and a great
deal of experience, shrewd, sly, and
sensible. Capt. Crowe had commanded
a merchant-ship in the Mediterranean-trade
for many years, and
saved some money by dint of frugality
and traffick. He was an excellent
seaman, brave, active, friendly
in his way, and scrupulously honest; 
but as little acquainted with the world
as a sucking child; whimsical, impatient,
and so impetuous that he could
not help breaking in upon the conversation,
whatever it might be, with
repeated interruptions, that seemed to
burst from him by involuntary impulse:
when he himself attempted to
speak, he never finished his period; 
but made such a number of abrupt
transitions, that his discourse seemed
to be an unconnected series of unfinished
sentences, the meaning of which
it was not easy to decypher. His nephew,
Tom Clarke, was a young fellow,
whose goodness of heart even 

the exercise of his profession had not
been able to corrupt. Before strangers
he never owned himself an attorney,
without blushing, though he
had no reason to blush for his own
practice; for he constantly refused to
engage in the cause of any client
whose character was equivocal, and
was never known to act with such industry
as when concerned for the widow
and orphan, or any other object
that sued in forma pauperis. Indeed
he was so replete with human kindness,
that as often as an affecting story
or circumstance was told in his hearing,
it overflowed at his eyes. Being
of a warm complexion, he was very
susceptible of passion, and somewhat
libertine in his amours. In other respects,
he piqued himself on understanding
the practice of the courts,
and in private company he took pleasure
in laying down the law; but he
was an indifferent orator, and tediously
circumstantial in his explanations: his
stature was rather diminutive; but,
upon the whole, he had some title to 

the character of a pretty, dapper, little
fellow. The solitary guest had
something very forbidding in his aspect,
which was contracted by an habitual
frown. His eyes were small and red,
and so deep set in the sockets, that each
appeared like the undistinguished snuff
of a farthing-candle, gleaming through
the horn of a dark lanthorn. His nostrils
were elevated in scorn, as if his
sense of smelling had been perpetually
offended by some unsavory odour; 
and he looked as if he wanted to shrink
within himself, from the impertinence
of society. He wore a black
periwig as straight as the pinions of
a raven, and this was covered with
an hat flapped, and fastened to his
head by a speckled handkerchief tied
under his chin. He was wrapped in
a great coat of brown frize, under
which he seemed to conceal a small
bundle. His name was Ferret, and
his character distinguished by three
peculiarities. He was never seen to
smile: he was never heard to speak
in praise of any person whatsoever; 

and he was never known to give a direct
answer to any question that was
asked: but seemed, on all occasions,
to be actuated by the most perverse
spirit of contradiction. 
Capt. Crowe, having remarked that
it was squally weather, asked how far
it was to the next market-town; and
understanding that the distance was
not less than six miles, said he had a
good mind to come to an anchor for
the night, if so be as he could have a
tolerable berth in this here harbour. 
Mr. Fillet, perceiving by his stile that
he was a sea-faring gentleman, observed
that their landlady was not used
to lodge such company; and expressed
some surprize, that he who had no
doubt endured so many storms and
hardships at sea, should think much
of travelling five or six miles a horseback
by moon-light. “For my part,
said he, I ride in all weathers, and at
all hours, without minding cold, wet,
wind, or darkness. My constitution
is so case-hardened, that I believe I
could live all the year at Spitzbergen. 

With respect to this road, I know
every foot of it so exactly, that I'll
engage to travel forty miles upon it
blindfold, without making one false
step; and if you have faith enough
to put yourselves under my auspices,
I will conduct you safe to an elegant
inn, where you will meet with the
best accommodation.” “Thank you,
brother, (replied the Captain:) we
are much beholden to you for your
courteous offer; but, howsomever,
you must not think I mind foul weather
more than my neighbours. I
have worked hard aloft and allow in
many a taught gale––––but this here
is the case, d'ye see; we have run
down a long day's reckoning: our
beasts have had a hard spell; and as
for my own hap, brother, I doubt
my bottom-planks have lost some of
their sheathing, being as how I a'n't
used to that kind of scrubbing.” 
The doctor, who had practised on
board a man of war in his youth,
and was perfectly well acquainted
with the Captain's dialect, assured him, 

that if his bottom was damaged, he
would new-pay it with an excellent
salve, which he always carried about
him, to guard against such accidents
on the road: but Tom Clarke, who
seemed to have cast the eyes of affection
upon the landlady's eldest daughter,
Dolly, objected to their proceeding
farther without rest and refreshment,
as they had already travelled fifty miles
since morning; and he was sure his
uncle must be fatigued both in mind
and body, from vexation as well as
from a hard exercise, to which he
had not been accustomed. Fillet then
desisted, saying, he was sorry to find
the Captain had any cause for vexation; 
but he hoped it was not an incurable
evil. This expression was accompanied
with a look of curiosity,
which Mr. Clarke was glad of an occasion
to gratify; for, as we have
hinted above, he was a very communicative
gentleman, and the affair
which now lay upon his stomach interested
him nearly. “I'll assure you,
Sir, (said he) this here gentleman, 

captain Crowe, who is my mother's
own brother, has been cruelly used by
some of his relations. He bears as
good a character as any captain of a
ship on the Royal Exchange, and
has undergone a variety of hardships
at sea. What d'ye think, now, of
his bursting all his sinews, and making
his eyes start out of his head, in pulling
his ship off a rock, whereby he
saved to his owners.” ––––Here he was
interrupted by the Captain, who exclaimed,
“Belay, Tom Belay:–––– 
prithee, don't veer out such a deal of
jaw. Clap a stopper on thy cable,
and bring thyself up, my lad. ––––– 
What a deal of stuff thou hast pumped
up concerning bursting, and starting,
and pulling ships, Laud have
mercy upon us! ––––Look ye here
brother––––look ye here––––mind these
poor crippled joints: two fingers on
the starboard, and three on the larboard
hand: crooked, d'ye see, like
the knees of a bilander. –––I'll tell you
what, brother, you seem to be a–––– 
ship deep laden––––rich cargoe–––current 

setting into the bay––––hard gale
–––lee shore–––all hands in the boat––– 
tow round the headland–––self pulling
for dear blood, against the whole crew. 
–––Snap go the finger- braces–––crack
went the eye-blocks. –––Bounce daylight
–––flash starlight–––down I foundered,
dark as hell–––whizz went my
ears, and my head spun like a whirligig. 
–––That don't signify–––I'm a
Yorkshire boy, as the saying is––– 
all my life at sea, brother, by reason
of an old grandmother and maiden
aunt, a couple of old stinking–––kept
me these forty years out of my grandfather's
estate. –––Hearing as how they
had taken their departure, came ashore,
hired horses, and clapped on all my
canvas, steering to the northward, to
take possession of my–––But it don't
signify talking–––these two old piratical
–––had held a palaver with a lawyer
–––an attorney, Tom, d'ye mind me,
an attorney––––and by his assistance
hove me out of my inheritance:––– 
that is all, brother–––hove me out of
five hundred pounds a year––––that's 

all–––what signifies–––but such windfalls
we don't every day pick up along
shore. –––Fill about, brother–––yes, by
the Lord! those two smuggling harridans,
with the assistance of an attorney
–––an attorney, Tom–––hove me
out of five hundred a year.” “Yes,
indeed, Sir, (added Mr. Clarke,) those
two malicious old women docked the
intail, and left the estate to an alien.” 
Here Mr. Ferret thought proper to
intermingle in the conversation with a
“Pish, what, do'st talk of docking
the intail? Do'st not know that by
the Statute Westm. 2. 13 Ed. the will
and intention of the donor must be
fulfilled, and the tenant in tail shall
not alien after issue had, or before.” 
“Give me leave, Sir, (replied Tom)
I presume you are a practitioner in the
law. Now you know, that in the case
of a contingent remainder, the intail
may be destroyed by levying a fine,
and suffering a recovery; or otherwise
destroying the particular estate,
before the contingency happens. If
feoffees, who possess an estate only during 

the life of a son, where divers
remainders are limited over, make a
feoffment in fee to him, by the feoffment
all the future remainders are destroyed. 
Indeed, a person in remainder
may have a writ of Intrusion, if
any do intrude after the death of a
tenant for life; and the writ ex gravi
querela lies to execute a devise in remainder,
after the death of tenant in
tail without issue.” –––“Spoke like a
true disciple of Geber,” cries Ferrett. 
“No, Sir, (replied Mr. Clarke) counsellor
Caper is in the conveyancing-way
–––I was clerk to serjeant Croaker.” 
“Ay, now you may set up for yourself; 
(resumed the other) for you
can prate as unintelligibly as the best
of them.” 
“Perhaps (said Tom) I do not
make myself understood: if so be as
how that is the case, let us change the
position; and suppose that this here
case is a tail after a possibility of issue
extinct. If a tenant in tail, after a
possibility, make a feoffment of his
land, he in reversion may enter for 

the forfeiture. Then we must make
a distinction between general tail and
special tail. It is the word body that
makes the intail:––––there must be
body in the tail, devised to heirs male
or female, otherwise it is a fee-simple,
because it is not limited of what body. 
Thus a corporation cannot be seized in
tail. For example: here is a young
woman––––What is your name, my
dear? “Dolly,” answered the daughter,
with a curtsy. “Here's Dolly— 
I seize Dolly in tail––––Dolly I seize
you in tail”–––“Sha't then,” cried
Dolly, pouting. “I am seized of land
in fee–––I settle on Dolly in tail.” ––– 
Dolly, who did not comprehend the
nature of the illustration, understood
him in a literal sense, and in a whimpering
tone exclaimed, “Sha't then,
I tell thee, cursed tuoad!” Tom,
however, was so transported with his
subject, that he took no notice of poor
Dolly's mistake; but proceeded in his
harangue upon the different kinds of
tails, remainders, and seisins, when
he was interrupted by a noise that alarmed 

the whole company. The
rain had been succeeded by a storm
of wind, that howled around the
house with the most savage impetuosity; 
and the heavens were overcast
in such a manner, that not one star
appeared, so that all without was
darkness and uproar. This aggravated
the horror of divers loud screams,
which even the noise of the blast could
not exclude from the astonished ears
of our travellers. Capt. Crowe called
out, “Avast, avast:” Tom Clarke
sat silent, staring wildly, with his
mouth still open: the surgeon himself
seemed startled, and Ferret's countenance
betrayed evident marks of confusion. 
The ostler moved nearer the
chimney, and the good woman of
the house, with her two daughters,
crept close to the company. 
After some pause, the Captain starting
up, “These (said he) be signals
of distress. Some poor souls in danger
of foundering. –––Let us bear up
a-head, and see if we can give them
any assistance.” The landlady begged 

him, for Christis sake, not to think of
going out; for it was a spirit that
would lead him astray into fens and
rivers, and certainly do him a mischief. 
Crowe seemed to be staggered by this
remonstrance, which his nephew reinforced,
observing, that it might be
a stratagem of rogues to decoy them
into the fields, that they might rob
them under cloud of night. Thus
exhorted, he resumed his seat; and
Mr. Ferret began to make very severe
strictures upon the folly and fear of
those who believed and trembled at
the visitation of spirits, ghosts, and
goblins. He said, he would engage
with twelve penny-worth of phosphorus
to frighten a whole parish out of
their senses: then he expatiated on the
pusillanimity of the nation in general; 
ridiculed the militia, censured the government; 
and dropped some hints
about a change of hands, which
the Captain could not, and the Doctor
would not comprehend. Tom
Clarke, from the freedom of his discourse,
concluded he was a ministerial 

spy, and communicated his opinion
to his uncle in a whisper, while
this misanthrope continued to pour
forth his invectives with a fluency peculiar
to himself. The truth is, Mr.
Ferret had been a party-writer, not
from principle, but employment, and
had felt the rod of power; in order
to avoid a second exertion of which,
he now found it convenient to sculk
about in the country: for he had received
intimation of a warrant from
the secretary of state, who wanted to
be better acquainted with his person. 
Notwithstanding the ticklish nature of
his situation, it was become so habitual
to him to think and speak in a
certain manner, that even before strangers,
whose principles and connexions
he could not possibly know,
he hardly ever opened his mouth,
without uttering some direct or implied
sarcasm against the government. 
He had already proceeded a
considerable way in demonstrating,
that the nation was bankrupt and beggared,
and that those who stood at 

the helm were steering full into the
gulph of inevitable destruction; when
his lecture was suddenly suspended by
a violent knocking at the door, which
threatened the whole house with immediate
demolition. Capt. Crowe,
believing they should be instantly
boarded, unsheathed his hanger, and
stood in a posture of defence. Mr.
Fillet armed himself with the poker,
which happened to be red-hot: the
ostler pulled down a rusty firelock,
that hung by the roof, over a flitch
of bacon. Tom Clarke, perceiving
the landlady and her children distracted
with terror, conducted them, out
of meer compassion, below stairs into
the cellar; and as for Mr. Ferret,
he prudently withdrew into an adjoining
pantry. But as a personage of
great importance in this entertaining
history was forced to remain some
time at the door, before he could gain
admittance, so must the reader wait
with patience for the next chapter, in
which he will see the cause of this disturbance 

explained much to his comfort
and edification. 