


He writes against the minister, by whose instigation
he is arrested, and moves himself by Habeas
Corpus into the Fleet. 
My lady having prolonged her stay beyond
the period of a common visit, and repeated
her protestations in the most frank and
obliging manner, took her leave of our adventurer,
who promised to pay his respects to her in
a few days, at her own house. Mean while, he
resumed his task; and having finished a most severe
remonstrance against Sir Steady, not only
with regard to his private ingratitude, but also
to his male-administration of public affairs, he
sent it to the author of a weekly paper, who had
been long a professed reformer in politics; and it
appeared in a very few days, with a note of the
publisher, desiring the favour of a further correspondence
with the author. 

The animadversions contained in this small essay
were so spirited and judicious, and a great
many new lights thrown upon the subject with
such perspicuity, as attracted the notice of the
public in an extraordinary manner, and helped
to raise the character of the paper in which it
was inserted. The minister was not the last who
examined the performance, which, in spite of
all his boasted temper, provoked him to such a
degree, that he set his emissaries at work, and
by dint of corruption, procured a sight of the
manuscript in Peregrine's own hand-writing,
which he immediately recognized; and, for further
confirmation of his opinion, compared with
the two letters which he had received from our
adventurer. Had he known the young gentleman's
talents for declamation were so acute, perhaps
he would never have given him cause to
complain, but employed him in the vindication of
his own measures; nay, he might still have treated
him like some other authors whom he had brought
over from the opposition, had not the keenness of
this first assault incensed him to a desire of revenge. 
He, therefore, no sooner made this discovery,
than he conveyed his directions to his
dependant, the receiver general, who was possessed
of Pickle's notes; and next day, while our author
stood within a circle of his acquaintance, at
a certain coffee-house, holding forth with great
eloquence upon the diseases of the state, he was
accosted by a bailiff, who entering the room with
five or six followers, told him aloud, that he had
a writ against him for twelve hundred pounds, at
the suit of Mr. Ravage Gleanum. 
The whole company were astonished at this
address, which did not fail to discompose the 

defendant himself, who (as it were instinctively)
in the midst of his confusion, saluted the officer
across the head with his cane; in consequence of
which application, he was surrounded and disarmed
in an instant by the gang, who carried him
off to the next tavern in the most opprobrious
manner. Nor did one of the spectators interpose
in his behalf, or visit him in his confinement
with the least tender of advice or assistance; such
is the zeal of a coffee-house friendship. 
This stroke was the more severe upon our
hero, as it was altogether unexpected; for he
had utterly forgot the debt for which he was arrested. 
His present indignation was, however,
chiefly kindled against the bailiff, who had done
his office in such a disrespectful manner: and the
first use he made of his recollection in the house
to which they conducted him, was to chastise
him for the insolence and indecency of his behaviour. 
This task he performed with his bare fists,
every other weapon being previously conveyed
out of his reach; and the delinquent underwent
his discipline with surprising patience and
resignation, asking pardon with great humility,
and protesting before God, that he had never
willingly and wittingly used any gentleman with
ill manners, but had been commanded to arrest
our adventurer according to the express direction
of the creditor, on pain of forfeiting his place. 
By this declaration Peregrine was appeased,
and out of a delirium of passion, waked to all
the horrors of reflection. All the glory of his
youth was now eclipsed, all the blossoms of his
hope were blasted, and he saw himself doomed
to the miseries of a jail, without the least prospect
of enlargement, except in the issue of his 

law-suit, of which he had, for some time past,
grown less and less confident every day. What
would become of the unfortunate, if the constitution
of the mind did not permit them to
bring one passion into the field against another?
passions that operate in the human breast, like
poisons of a different nature, extinguishing each
other's effect. Our hero's grief reigned in full
despotism, until it was deposed by revenge; 
during the predominancy of which, he considered
every thing which had happened as a circumstance
conducive to its gratification: “If I
must be prisoner for life, (said he to himself) if I
must relinquish all my gay expectations, let me at
least have the satisfaction of clanking my chains
so as to interrupt the repose of my adversary; 
and let me search in my own breast for that
peace and contentment, which I have not been
able to find in all the scenes of my success. In
being detached from the world, I shall be delivered
from folly and ingratitude, as well as exempted
from an expence, which I should have
found it very difficult, if not impracticable, to
support; I shall have little or no temptation to
mispend my time, and more undisturbed opportunity
to earn my subsistence, and prosecute my
revenge. After all, a jail is the best tub to
which a cynic philosopher can retire.” 
In consequence of these comfortable reflections,
he sent a letter to Mr. Crabtree, with an
account of his misfortune, signifying his resolution
to move himself immediately into the Fleet,
and desiring that he would send him some understanding
attorney of his acquaintance, who
would direct him in the steps necessary to be
taken for that purpose. The Misanthrope, upon 

the receit of this intimation, went in person to
a lawyer, whom he accompanied to the spunging-house,
whither the prisoner had by this time retired; 
and Peregrine was, under the auspices of
this director, conducted to the judge's chamber,
where he was left in the custody of a tipstaff; 
and after having paid for a warrant of Habeas
Corpus, by him conveyed to the Fleet, and delivered
to the care of the warden. 
Here he was introduced to the lodge, in which
he was obliged to expose himself a full half hour
to the eyes of all the turnkeys and door-keepers,
who took an accuracy survey of his person, that
they might know him again at first sight; and
then he was turned loose into the place called the
master's side, having given a valuable consideration
for that privilege. This is a large range of
building, containing some hundreds of lodging-rooms
for the convenience of the prisoners, who
pay so much per week for that accommodation. 
In short, this community is like a city detached
from all communication with the neighbouring
parts, regulated by its own laws, and furnished
with peculiar conveniences, for the use of the
inhabitants. There is a coffee-house for the resort
of gentlemen, in which all sorts of liquors
are kept, and a public kitchen, where any quantity
of meat is sold at a very reasonable rate, or
any kind of provision boiled and roasted gratis,
for the poor prisoners: nay, there are certain
servants of the public, who are obliged to go to
market, at the pleasure of individuals, without
see or reward from those who employ them: nor
are they cooped up, so as to be excluded from
the benefit of fresh air, there being an open area
of a considerable extent adjacent to the building, 

on which they may exercise themselves in walking,
skittles, bowls, and variety of other diversions,
according to the inclination of each. 
Our adventurer being admitted a denizen of
this community, found himself bewildered in the
midst of strangers, who, by their appearance,
did not at all prepossess him in their favour; and
after having strolled about the place with his
friend Cadwallader, repaired to the coffee-house,
in order to be further informed of the peculiar
customs which it was necessary for him to know. 
There, while he endeavoured to pick up intelligence
from the bar-keeper, he was accosted
by a person in canonicals, who very civilly asking
if he was a new-comer, and being answered
in the affirmative, gave him the salutation of
welcome to the society, and, with great hospitality,
undertook to initiate him in the constitutions
of the brotherhood. This humane clergyman
gave him to understand, that his first care
ought to be that of securing a lodging; telling
him, there was a certain number of apartments
in the prison let at the same price, though some
were more commodious than others; and that
when the better sort became vacant, by the removal
of their possessors, those who succeeded in
point of seniority, had the privilege of occupying
the empty tenements, preferable to the rest of
the inhabitants, howsoever respectable they might
otherwise be: that when the jail was very
much crowded, there was but one chamber allotted
for two lodgers; but this was not considered
as any great hardship on the prisoners,
because, in that case, there was always a sufficient
number of males, who willingly admitted
the females to a share of their apartments and beds: 

not but the time had been, when this expedient
would not answer the occasion, because, after a
couple had been quartered in every room, there
was a considerable residue still unprovided with
lodging; so that for the time being, the last
comers were obliged to take up their habitation
in Mount Scoundrel, an apartment most miserably
furnished, in which they lay promiscuously
amidst filth and vermin, until they could be better
accommodated in due course of rotation. 
Peregrine hearing the description of this place,
began to be very impatient about his night's lodging; 
and the parson perceiving his anxiety, conducted
him, without loss of time, to the warden,
who forthwith put him in possession of a paultry
chamber, for which he agreed to pay half a crown
a week. This point being settled, his director
gave him an account of the different methods of
eating, either singly, in a mess, or at an ordinary; 
and advised him to chuse the last, as the
most reputable, offering to introduce him next
day to the best company in the Fleet, who always
dined together in public. 
Pickle having thanked this gentleman for his
civilities, and promised to be governed by his advice,
invited him to pass the evening at his apartment; 
and in the mean time, shut himself up
with Crabtree, in order to deliberate upon the
wreck of his affairs. Of all his ample fortune,
nothing now remained but his wardrobe, which
was not very sumptuous, about thirty guineas in
cash, and the garison, which the Misanthrope
counselled him to convert into ready money, for
his present subsistence. This advice, however,
he absolutely rejected, not only on account of
his having already bestowed it upon Hatchway, 

during the term of his natural life, but also with
a view of retaining some memorial of the commodore's
generosity. He proposed, therefore,
to finish in this retreat the translation which he
had undertaken, and earn his future subsistence
by labour of the same kind. He desired Cadwallader
to take charge of his moveables, and
send to him such linen and cloaths as he should
have occasion for in his confinement. But,
among all his difficulties, nothing embarassed him
so much as his faithful Pipes, whom he could no
longer entertain in his service. He knew Tom
had made shift to pick up a competency in the
course of his ministration; but that reflection,
though it in some measure alleviated, could not
wholly prevent the mortification he must suffer in
parting with an affectionate adherent, who was
by this time become as necessary to him as one
of his own members, and who was so accustomed
to live under his command and protection, that
he did not believe the fellow could reconcile himself
to any other way of life. 
Crabtree, in order to make himself easy on
that score, offered to adopt him in the room of
his own valet, whom he would dismiss; though
he observed, that Pipes had been quite spoiled in
our hero's service. But Peregrine did not chuse
to lay his friend under that inconvenience, knowing
that his present lacquey understood and complied
with all the peculiarities of his humour,
which Pipes would never be able to study or regard; 
and therefore determined to send him back
to his ship-mate Hatchway, with whom he had
spent the fore-part of his life. 
These points being adjusted, the two friends
adjourned to the coffee-house, with a view of inquiring 

into the character of the clergyman, to
whose beneficence our adventurer was so much
indebted; and they learned he was a person who
had incurred the displeasure of the bishop in whose
diocese he was settled, and, being unequal in
power to his antagonist, had been driven to the
Fleet, in consequence of his obstinate opposition; 
tho' he still found means to enjoy a pretty considerable
income, by certain irregular practices in
the way of his function, which income was chiefly
consumed in acts of humanity to his fellow-creatures
in distress. 
His eulogium was scarce finished, when he entered
the room, according to appointment with
Peregrine, who ordering wine and something for
supper to be carried to his apartment, the triumvirate
went thither; and Cadwallader taking his
leave for the night, the two fellow-prisoners
passed the evening very sociably, our hero being
entertained by his new companion with the private
history of the place, some particulars of
which were extremely curious. He told him,
that the person who attended them at supper,
bowing with the most abject servility, and worshipping
them, every time he opened his mouth,
with the epithets of your Lordship and your Honour,
had, a few years before, been actually a captain
in the guards; who, after having run his career
in the great world, had threaded every station in
their community, from that of a buck of the
first order, who swaggers about the Fleet in a
laced coat, with a footman and whore, to the
degree of a tapster, in which he was now happily
settled. “If you will take the trouble of
going into the cook's kitchen (said he), you will
perceive a beau metamorphosed into a turn-spit; 

and there are some hewers of wood and drawers
of water in this microcosm, who have had forests
and fish-ponds of their own: yet, notwithstanding
such a miserable reverse of fortune, they are
neither objects of regard or compassion, because
their misfortunes are the fruits of the most vicious
extravagance, and they are absolutely insensible
of the misery which is their lot. Those of
our fellow-sufferers, who have been reduced by
undeserved losses, or the precipitation of unexperienced
youth, never fail to meet with the most
brotherly assistance, provided they behave with
decorum, and a due sense of their unhappy circumstances. 
Nor are we destitute of power to
chastise the licentious, who refuse to comply with
the regulations of the place, and disturb the peace
of the community, with riot and disorder. 
Justice is here impartially administered, by a
court of equity, consisting of a select number of
the most respectable inhabitants, who punish all
offenders with equal judgment, and resolution,
after they have been fairly convicted of the
crimes laid to their charge.” 
The clergyman having thus explained the
œconomy of the place, as well as the cause of
his own confinement, began to discover signs of
curiosity, touching our hero's situation; and
Pickle, thinking he could do no less for the satisfaction
of a man, who had treated him in such an
hospitable manner, favoured him with a detail of
the circumstances which produced his imprisonment:
at the same time, gratifying his resentment
against the minister, which delighted in
recapitulating the injuries he had received. The
parson, who had been prepossessed in favour of
our youth at first sight, understanding what a 

considerable part he had acted on the stage of
life, felt his veneration increase; and, pleased
with the opportunity of introducing a stranger of
his consequence to the club, left him to his repose,
or rather to ruminate on an event which
he had not as yet seriously considered. 
I might here, in imitation of some celebrated
writers, furnish out a page or two, with the reflections
he made upon the instability of human
affairs, the treachery of the world, and the temerity
of youth; and endeavour to decoy the
reader into a smile, by some quaint observation
of my own, touching the sagacious moralizer:
but, besides that I look upon this practice as an
impertinent anticipation of the peruser's thoughts,
I have too much matter of importance upon my
hands, to give the reader the least reason to
believe that I am driven to such paultry shifts, in
order to eke out the volume. Suffice it then, to
say, our adventurer passed a very uneasy night,
not only from the thorny suggestions of his mind,
but likewise from the anguish of his body, which
suffered from the hardness of his couch, as well
as from the natural inhabitants thereof, which
did not tamely suffer his intrusion. 
In the morning he was waked by Pipes, who
brought upon his shoulder a portmanteau filled
with necessaries, according to the direction of
Cadwallader; and tossing it down upon the floor,
regaled himself with a quid, without the least
manifestation of concern. After some pause,
“You see, Pipes, (said his master) to what I
have brought myself.” “Ey, ey, (answered
the valet) once the vessel is ashore, what signifies
talking? We must bear a hand to tow her off,
if we can: if she won't budge for all the anchors 

and capstans aboard, after we have lightened her,
by cutting away her masts, and heaving our guns
and cargo overboard, why then, mayhap, a brisk
gale of wind, a tide, or current setting from
shore, may float her again in the blast of a
whistle. Here is two hundred and ten guineas
by the tale, in this here canvas-bag; and upon
this scrap of paper—no, avast—that's my discharge
from the parish for Moll Trundle—ey,
here it is—an order for thirty pounds upon the
what-d'ye-call-'em in the city; and two tickets
for twenty-five and eighteen, which I lent, d'ye
see, to Sam Studding to buy a cargo of rum,
when he hoisted the sign of the Commodore at
St. Catherine's.” So saying, he spread his whole
stock upon the table, for the acceptance of Peregrine; 
who, being very much affected with this
fresh instance of his attachment, expressed his
satisfaction at seeing he had been such a good
œconomist, paid his wages up to that very day,
thanked him for his faithful services, and, observing
that he himself was no longer in a condition
to maintain a domestick, advised him to retire
to the garison, where he would be kindly
received by his friend Hatchway, to whom he
would recommend him in the strongest terms. 
Pipes looked blank at this unexpected intimation,
to which he replied, that he wanted neither
pay nor provision, but only to be employed as a
tender; and that he would not steer his course for
the garison, unless his master would first take
his lumber aboard. Pickle, however, peremptorily
refused to touch a farthing of the money,
which he commanded him to put up; and Pipes
was so mortified at his refusal, that, twisting the
notes together, he threw them into the fire without 

hesitation, crying, “Damn the money!” 
and the canvas-bag, with its contents, would
have shared the same fate, had not Peregrine
started up, and snatching the paper from the
flames, ordered his valet to forbear, on pain of
being banished for ever from his sight. He told
him, that, for the present, there was a necessity
for his being dismissed, and he discharged him
accordingly; but if he would go and live quietly
with the lieutenant, he promised, on the first
favourable turn of his fortune, to take him again
into his service. In the mean time he gave him
to understand, that he neither wanted, nor would
make any use of his money, which he insisted
upon his pocketing immediately, on pain of forfeiting
all title to his favour. 
Pipes was very much chagrined at these injunctions,
to which he made no reply; but
sweeping the money into his bag, stalked off, in
silence, with a look of grief and mortification,
which his countenance had never exhibited before. 
Nor was the proud heart of Pickle unmoved
upon this occasion: he could scarce suppress his
sorrow in the presence of Pipes, and, soon as he
was gone, it vented itself in tears. 
Having no great pleasure in conversing with his
own thoughts, he dressed himself with all convenient
dispatch, being attended by one of the occasional
valets of the place, who had formerly
been a rich mercer in the city; and this operation
being performed, he went to breakfast at the
coffee-house, where he happened to meet with
his friend the clergyman, and several persons of
genteel appearance, to whom the doctor introduced
him as a new mess-mate. By these gentlemen
he was conducted to a place, where they 

spent the forenoon in playing at fives, an exercise
in which our hero took singular delight; and
about one o'clock a court was held, for the trial
of two delinquents, who had transgressed the
laws of honesty and good order. 
The first who appeared at the bar was an attorney,
accused of having picked a gentleman's
pocket of his handkerchief; and the fact being
proved by incontestible evidence, he received
sentence: in consequence of which he was immediately
carried to the public pump, and subjected
to a severe cascade of cold water. This
cause being discussed, they proceeded to the trial
of the other offender, who was a lieutenant of a
man of war, indicted for a riot, which he had
committed in company with a female not yet
taken, against the laws of the place, and the
peace of his fellow-prisoners. The culprit had
been very obstreperous, and absolutely refused to
obey the summons, with many expressions of
contempt and defiance against the authority of
the court; upon which the constables were ordered
to bring him to the bar,vi & armis; and
he was accordingly brought before the judge,
after having made a most desperate resistance with
a hanger, by which one of the officers was dangerously
wounded. This outrage was such an
aggravation of his crime, that the court would
not venture to decide upon it, but remitted him
to the sentence of the warden; who, by virtue
of his dictatorial power, ordered the rioter to be
loaded with irons, and confined in the strong-room,
which is a dismal dungeon, situated upon
the side of the ditch, infested with toads and
vermin, surcharged with noisome damps, and
impervious to the least ray of light. 

Justice being done upon the criminals, our
adventurer and his company adjourned to the
ordinary, which was kept at the coffee-house; 
and he found, upon enquiry, that his mess-mates
consisted of one officer, two under-writers, three
projectors, an alchymist, an attorney, a parson, a
brace of poets, a baronet, and a knight of the bath. 
The dinner, tho' not sumptuous, nor very elegantly
served up, was nevertheless substantial, and pretty
well dressed: the wine was tolerable, and all
the guests as chearful as if they had been utter
strangers to calamity; so that our adventurer
began to relish the company, and mix in the conversation,
with that sprightliness and ease which
were peculiar to his disposition. The repast
being ended, the reckoning paid, and part of the
gentlemen withdrawn to cards, or other avocations,
those who remained, among whom Peregrine
made one, agreed to spend the afternoon in
conversation over a bowl of punch; and the
liquor being produced, they passed the time very
socially in various topicks of discourse, including
many curious anecdotes relating to their own
affairs. No man scrupled to own the nature of
the debt for which he was confined, unless it
happened to be some piddling affair; but, on the
contrary, boasted of the importance of the sum,
as a circumstance that implied his having been a
person of consequence in life; and he who had
made the most remarkable escapes from bailiffs,
was looked upon as a man of superior genius and
address. 
Among other extraordinary adventures of this
kind, none was more romantic than the last
elopement atchieved by the officer; who told
them, he had been arrested for a debt of two 

hundred pounds, at a time when he could not
command as many pence, and conveyed to the
bailiff's house, in which he continued a whole
fortnight, moving his lodgings higher and higher,
from time to time, in proportion to the decay
of his credit; until, from the parlour, he had
made a regular ascent to the garret. There
while he ruminated on his next step, which would
have been to the Marshalsea, and saw the night
come on, attended with hunger and cold, the
wind began to blow, and the tiles of the house
rattled with the storm: his imagination was immediately
struck with the idea of escaping unperceived,
amidst the darkness and noise of the tempest,
by creeping out at the window of his apartment,
and making his way over the tops of the
adjoining houses. Glowing with this prospect,
he examined the passage, which, to his infinite
mortification, he found grated with iron-bars on
the outside; but even this difficulty did not divert
him from his purpose. Conscious of his own
strength, he believed himself able to make an
hole thro' the roof, which seemed to be slender
and crazy; and, on this supposition, he barricadoed
the door with the whole furniture of the
room: then, setting himself to work with a poker,
he in a few minutes effected a passage for his
hand, with which he gradually stript off the
boards and tiling, so as to open a sally-port for
his whole body, thro' which he fairly set himself
free, groping his way towards the next tenement. 
Here, however, he met with an unlucky accident:
his hat, being blown off his head, chanced
to tumble into the court, just as one of the bailiff's
followers was knocking at the door; and
this myrmidon recognizing it immediately, gave 

the alarm to his chief, who, running up stairs to
the garret, forced open the door in a twinkling,
notwithstanding the precautions which the prisoner
had taken, and, with his attendant, pursued
the fugitive thro' his own track. “After this
chace had continued some time, (said the officer)
to the imminent danger of all three, I found my
progress suddenly stopt by a sky-light, through
which I perceived seven taylors, sitting at work
upon a board. Without the least hesitation or
previous notice, I plunged among them, with my
backside foremost; and, before they could recollect
themselves from the consternation occasioned
by such a strange visit, told them my situation,
and gave them to understand that there was no
time to be lost. One of the number, taking the
hint, led me instantly down stairs, and dismissed
me at the street-door; while the bailiff and his
follower, arriving at the breach, were deterred
from entering by the brethren of my deliverer,
who presenting their shears, like a range of
chevaux de frise, commanded them to retire, on
pain of immediate death: and the catchpole, rather
than risque his carcase, consented to discharge
the debt, comforting himself with the
hope of making me prisoner again. There,
however, he was disappointed: I kept snug, and
laughed at his escape-warrant, until I was ordered
abroad with the regiment, when I convey'd
myself in a hearse to Gravesend, where I embarked
for Flanders; but, being obliged to come
over again on the recruiting service, I was nabb'd
on another score: and all the satisfaction my first
captor has been able to obtain, is a writ of detainer; 
which, I believe, will fix me in this
place, until the parliament, in its great goodness, 

shall think proper to discharge my debts, by a
new act of insolvency.” 
Every body owned, that the captain's success
was equal to the hardiness of his enterprize,
which was altogether in the stile of a soldier: but
one of the merchants observed, that he must
have been a bailiff of small experience, who
would trust a prisoner of that consequence in
such an unguarded place. “If the captain (said
he) had fallen into the hands of such a cunning
rascal as the fellow that arrested me, he would
not have found it such an easy matter to escape; 
for the manner in which I was caught, is perhaps
the most extraordinary that ever was practised in
these realms. You must know, gentlemen, I
suffered such losses by insuring vessels, during the
war, that I was obliged to stop payment, tho' my
expectations were such as encouraged me to manage
one branch of business, without coming to
any immediate composition with my creditors. 
In short, I received consignments from abroad
as usual; and that I might not be subject to the
visits of those catchpoles, I never stirred abroad,
but, turning my first floor into a warehouse, ordered
all my goods to be hoisted up by a crane,
fixed to the upper story of my house. Divers
were the stratagems practised by those ingenious
ferrets, with a view of decoying me from the
walls of my fortification. I received innumerable
messages from people, who wanted to see me at
certain taverns, upon particular business: I was
summoned into the country, to see my own mother,
who was said to be at the point of death. 
A gentlewoman, one night, was taken in labour
on my threshold: at another time, I was disturbed
with the cry of murder in the street; and 

once I was alarmed by a false fire. But, being
still upon my guard, I baffled all their attempts,
and thought myself quite secure from their invention; 
when one of those blood-hounds, inspired,
I believe, by the devil himself, contrived a snare
by which I was at last entrapped. He made it
his business to enquire into the particulars of my
traffick; and understanding that, among other
things, there were several chests of Florence entered
at the custom-house on my behalf, he ordered
himself to be inclosed in a box of the same
dimensions, with air-holes in the bottom, for the
benefit of breathing, and No. III. marked
upon the cover; and being conveyed to my door
in a cart, among other goods, was, in his turn,
hoisted up to my warehouse, where I stood with
a hammer, in order to open the chests, that I
might compare the contents with the invoice. 
You may guess my surprize and consternation,
when, upon uncovering the box, I saw a bailiff
rearing up his head, like Lazarus from the grave,
and heard him declare that he had a writ against
me for a thousand pounds. Indeed, I aimed the
hammer at his head; but, in the hurry of my
confusion, missed my mark: and before I could
repeat the blow, he started up with great agility,
and executed his office in sight of several evidences,
whom he had assembled in the street for
that purpose; so that I could not possibly disentangle
myself from the toil, without incurring an
escape-warrant, from which I had no protection. 
But, had I known the contents of the chest, by
all that's good! I would have ordered my porter
to raise it up, as high as the crane would permit,
and then have cut the rope by accident.” 

“That expedient, (said the knight with the
red ribbon) would have discouraged him from
such hazardous adventures for the future, and
would have been an example in terrorem of all
his brethren. The story puts me in mind of a
deliverance achieved by Tom Hackabout, a very
stout honest fellow, an old acquaintance of mine,
who had been so famous for maiming bailiffs,
that another gentleman having been ill used at a
sponging house, no sooner obtained his liberty
than, with a view of being revenged upon the
landlord, he, for five shillings, bought one of
Tom's notes, which sold at a very large discount,
and taking out a writ upon it, put it into the
hands of the bailiff who had used him ill. The
catchpole, after a diligent search, had an opportunity
of executing the writ upon the defendant,
who, without ceremony, broke one of his arms,
fractured his skull, and belaboured him in such a
manner, that he lay without sense and motion on
the spot. By such exploits, this hero became
so formidable, that no single bailiff would undertake
to arrest him; so that he appeared in all
public places, untouched. At length, however,
several officers of the Marshalsea-court entered
into a confederacy against him; and two of the
number, attended by three desperate followers,
ventured to arrest him one day in the Strand,
near Hungerford-market: he found it impossible
to make resistance, because the whole gang sprung
upon him at once, like so many tygers, and pinioned
his arms so fast, that he could not wag a
finger. Perceiving himself fairly overpowered,
he desired to be conducted forthwith to jail, and
was stowed in a boat accordingly: by that time
they had reached the middle of the river, he 

found means to overset the wherry by accident,
and every man disregarding the prisoner, consulted
his own safety. As for Hackabout, to
whom that element was quite familiar, he mounted
astride upon the keel of the boat, which was
uppermost, and exhorted the bailiffs to swim for
their lives; protesting, before God, that they had
no other chance to be saved. 
The watermen were immediately taken up by
some of their own friends, who, far from yielding
any assistance to the catch-poles, kept aloof,
and exulted in their calamity. In short, two of
the five went to the bottom, and never saw the
light of God's sun, and the other three, with
great difficulty, saved themselves by laying hold
on the rudder of a dung-barge, to which they
were carried by the stream, while Tom, with
great deliberation, swam across to the Surry shore. 
After this atchievement, he was so much dreaded
by the whole fraternity, that they shivered at the
very mention of his name; and this character,
which some people would think an advantage to
a man in debt, was the greatest misfortune that
could possibly happen to him; because no tradesman
would give him credit for the least trifle, on
this supposition, that he could not indemnify himself
in the common course of law.” 
The parson did not approve of Mr. Hackabout's
method of escaping, which he considered
as a very unchristian attempt upon the lives of
his fellow-subjects: “It is enough (said he) that
we elude the laws of our country, without murthering
the officers of justice: for my own part,
I can lay my hand upon my heart, and safely say,
that I forgive from my soul the fellow by whom
I was made prisoner, although the circumstances 

of his behaviour were treacherous, wicked and
profane. You must know, Mr. Pickle, I was
one day called into my chapel, in order to join a
couple in the holy bands of matrimony: and my
affairs being at that time so situated, as to lay
me under apprehensions of an arrest, I cautiously
surveyed the man through a lettice which was
made for that purpose, before I would venture
to come within his reach. He was cloathed in
a seaman's jacket and troussers, and had such an
air of simplicity in his countenance, as divested
me of all suspicion: I, therefore, without further
scruple, trusted myself in his presence, began
to exercise the duty of my function, and had
actually performed one half of the ceremony,
when the supposed woman, pulling out a paper
from her bosom, exclaimed with a masculine
voice, “Sir, you are my prisoner, I have got a
writ against you for five hundred pounds.” I
was thunderstruck at this declaration, not so
much on account of my own misfortune, which
(thank heaven!) I can bear with patience and
resignation, as at the impiety of the wretch,
firstly, in disguising such a worldly aim, under
the cloak of religion; and, secondly, in prostituting
the service, when there was no occasion
for so doing, his design having previously taken
effect. Yet I forgive him, poor soul! because
he knew not what he did; and I hope you, Sir
Sipple, will exert the same christian virtue towards
the man by whom you was likewise over-reached.” 
“O! damn the rascal, (cried the knight)
were I his judge, he should be condemned to
flames everlasting. A villain! to disgrace me
in such a manner, before almost all the fashionable 

company in town.” Our hero expressing a
curiosity to know the particulars of this adventure,
the knight gratified his desire, by telling
him, that one evening, while he was engaged in
a partie of cards, at a drum in the house of a certain
lady of quality, he was given to understand by
one of the servants, that a stranger, very richly
dressed, was just arrived in a chair, preceded by
five footmen with flambeaus, and that he refused
to come up stairs, until he should be introduced
by Sir Sipple. “Upon this notice (continued
the knight) I judged it was some of my
quality-friends; and having obtained her ladyship's
permission to bring him up, went down to the hall,
and perceived a person, whom, to the best of my
recollection, I had never seen before. However,
his appearance was so magnificent, that I could
not harbour the least suspicion of his true quality; 
and seeing me advance, he saluted me with
a very genteel bow, observing, that though he
had not the honour of my acquaintance, he
could not dispense with waiting upon me, even
on that occasion, in consequence of a letter which
he had received from a particular friend. So saying,
he put a paper into my hand, intimating,
that he had got a writ against me for ten thousand
pounds, and that it would be my interest to
submit without resistance; for he was provided
with a guard of twenty men, who surrounded
the door in different disguises, determined to secure
me against all opposition. Enraged at the
scoundrel's finesse, and trusting to the assistance
of the real footmen assembled in the hall, “So,
you are a rascally bailiff, (said I) who have assumed
the garb of a gentleman, in order to disturb
her ladyship's company. Take this fellow, 

my lads, and roll him in the kennel: here
are ten guineas for your trouble.” These words
were no sooner pronounced, than I was seized,
lifted up, placed in a chair, and carried off in the
twinkling of an eye: not but that the servants of
the house, and some other footmen, made a motion
towards my rescue, and alarmed all the
company above: but the bailiff affirming with
undaunted effrontery, that I was taken up upon
an affair of state, and so many people appearing
in his behalf, the countess would not suffer the
supposed messenger to be insulted; and he carried
me to the county-jail, without further lett or molestation.” 