


Peregrine, almost distracted with his disappointments,
conjures the fair Fleming to permit his
visits at Brussels. She withdraws from his
pursuit. 
Things being thus adjusted, and all the
company dressed, they went to breakfast
about five in the morning, and in less than an
hour after were seated in the Diligence, where
a profound silence prevailed. Peregrine, who
used to be the life of the society, being extremely
pensive and melancholy on account of his mishap,
the Israelite and his Dulcinea dejected in consequence
of their disgrace, the poet absorpt in lofty
meditation, the painter in schemes of revenge,
while Jolter, rocked by the motion of the carriage,
made himself amends for the want of rest
he had sustained, and the Mendicant, with his
fair charge, were infested by the cloudy aspect of
our youth, in whose disappointment each of them,
for different reasons, bore no inconsiderable share. 
This general languor and recess from all bodily
exercise, disposed them all to receive the gentle
yoke of slumber, and in half an hour after they
had embarked, there was not one of them
awake, except our hero and his mistress, unless
the Capuchin was pleased to counterfeit sleep, in
order to indulge our young gentleman with an opportunity
of enjoying some private conversation
with his beauteous ward. 
Peregrine did not neglect the occasion; but,
on the contrary, seized the first minute, and in
gentle murmurs lamented his hard hap in being 

thus the sport of fortune. He assured her (and
that with great sincerity) that all the cross accidents
of his life had not cost him one half of the
vexation and keenness of chagrin which he had
suffered last night; and that now he was on the
brink of parting from her, he should be overwhelmed
with the blackest despair, if she would
not extend her compassion so far as to give him
an opportunity of sighing at her feet in Brussels,
during the few days his affairs would permit him
to spend in that city. 
This young lady, with an air of mortification,
expressed her sorrow for being the innocent cause
of his anxiety; said, she hoped last night's adventure
would be a salutary warning to both
their souls; for she was persuaded, that her virtue
was protected by the intervention of heaven; that
whatever impression it might have made upon
him, she was enabled by it to adhere to that duty
from which her passion had begun to swerve, and
beseeching him to forget her for his own peace,
gave him to understand, that neither the plan she
had laid down for her own conduct, nor the
dictates of her honour, would allow her to receive
his visits, or carry on any other correspondence
with him, while she was restricted by the
articles of her marriage-vow. 
This explanation produced such a violent effect
upon her admirer, that he was for some minutes
deprived of the faculty of speech, which
he no sooner recovered, than he gave vent to
the most unbridled transports of passion. He
taxed her with barbarity and indifference; told
her that she had robbed him of his reason and internal
peace; that he would follow her to the
ends of the earth, and cease to live sooner than 

cease to love her; that he would sacrifice the innocent
fool who had been the occasion of all this
disquiet, and murder every man whom he considered
as an obstruction to his views. In a
word, his passions, which had continued so long
in a state of the highest fermentation, together
with the want of that repose which calms and
quiets the perturbation of the spirits, had wrought
him up to a pitch of real distraction: and while
he uttered these delirious expressions, the tears
ran down his cheeks, and he underwent such
agitation, that the tender heart of the fair Fleming
was affected with his condition; and, while
her own face was bedewed with the streams of
sympathy, she begged him for heaven's sake to
be composed, and promised, for his satisfaction,
to abate somewhat of the rigor of her purpose. 
Consoled by this kind declaration, he recollected
himself, and taking out his pencil, gave her his
address, when she had assured him, that he should
hear from her in four and twenty hours at farthest,
after their separation. 
Thus soothed, he regained the empire of himself,
and by degrees recovered his serenity. But
this was not the case with his Amanda, who, from
this sample of his disposition, dreaded the impetuosity
of his youth, and was effectually deterred
from entering into any engagements that might
subject her peace and reputation to the rash effects
of such a violent spirit. Though she was
captivated by his person and accomplishments,
she had reflection enough to foresee, that the
longer she countenanced his passion, her own
heart would be more and more irretrievably engaged,
and the quiet of her life the more exposed
to continual interruption. She therefore 

profited by these considerations, and a sense of religious
honour, which helped her to withstand the
suggestions of inclination; and resolved to amuse
her lover with false hopes, until she should have
it in her power to relinquish his conversation,
without running any risk of suffering by the inconsiderate
sallies of his love. It was with this
view, that she desired he would not insist upon
attending her to her mother's house, when the
Diligence arrived at Brussels; and he, cajoled by
her artifice, took a formal leave of her, together
with the other strangers, fixing his habitation at
the inn to which he and his fellow-travellers had
been directed, in the impatient expectation of receiving
a kind summons from her, within the limited
time. 
Mean while, in order to divert his imagination,
he went to see the stadthouse, park and
arsenal, took a superficial view of the famous
bookseller's cabinet of curiosities, and spent the
evening at the Italian opera, which was at that
time exhibited for the entertainment of Prince
Charles of Lorrain, then governor of the Low
Countries. In short, the stated period was almost
elapsed, when Peregrine was favoured with
a letter to this purpose: 

“SIR,
If you knew what violence I do my own heart,
in declaring that I have withdrawn myself for
ever from your addresses, you would surely applaud
the sacrifice I make to virtue, and strive to
imitate this example of self-denial. Yes, Sir,
heaven hath lent me grace to struggle with my
guilty passion, and henceforth to avoid the dangerous
sight of him who inspired it. I therefore 

conjure you, by the regard you ought to have for
the eternal welfare of us both, as well as by the
esteem and affection you profess, to war with
your unruly inclination, and desist from all attempts
of frustrating the laudable resolution I have
made. Seek not to invade the peace of one
who loves you, to disturb the quiet of a family
that never did you wrong, and alienate the
thoughts of a weak woman from a deserving
man, who, by the most sacred claim, is vested
  with the full possession of her heart.” 
This billet, without either date or subscription,
banished all remains of discretion from the mind
of our hero, who ran instantly to the landlord,
in all the extasy of madness, and demanded to
see the messenger who brought the letter, on
pain of putting his whole family to the sword. 
The innkeeper, terrified by his looks and menaces,
fell upon his knees, protesting in the face
of heaven, that he was utterly ignorant and innocent
of any thing that could give him offence, and
that the billet was brought by a person whom he
did not know, and who retired immediately, saying,
it required no answer. He then gave utterance
to his fury, in a thousand imprecations and invectives
against the writer, whom he dishonoured
with the appellations of a coquette, a jilt, an
adventurer, who, by means of a pimping priest,
had defrauded him of his money. He denounced
vengeance against the Mendicant, whom he swore
he would castrate, if ever he should set eyes on
him again: and the painter unluckily appearing
during this paroxysm of rage, he seized him by
the throat, saying he was ruined by his accursed
folly; and in all likelihood poor Pallet would 

have been strangled, had not Jolter interposed in
his behalf, beseeching his pupil to have mercy
upon the sufferer, and with infinite anxiety desiring
to know the cause of this violent assault. He
received no answer, but a string of incoherent
curses, and when the painter, with unspeakable
astonishment, took God to witness, that he had
done nothing to disoblige him, the governor began
to think in sad earnest, that Peregrine's vivacity
had at length risen to the transports of
actual madness, and was himself almost distracted
with this supposition. That he might the better
judge what remedy ought to be applied, he used
his whole influence, and practised all his eloquence
upon the youth, in order to learn the immediate
cause of his delirium. He employed the most
pathetic intreaties, and even shed tears in the
course of his supplication; so that Pickle (the
first violence of the hurricane being blown over)
was ashamed of his own imprudence, and retired
to his chamber, in order to recollect his dissipated
thoughts: there he shut himself up, and, for
the second time, perusing the fatal epistle, began
to waver in his opinion of the author's character
and intention. He sometimes considered her as
one of those nymphs who, under the mask of innocence
and simplicity, practise upon the hearts
and purses of unwary and unexperienced youths:
this was the suggestion of his wrath, inflamed
by disappointment; but, when he reflected upon
the circumstances of her behaviour, and recalled
her particular charms to his imagination, the severity
of his censure gave way, and his heart
declared in favour of her sincerity. Yet even
this consideration aggravated the sense of his loss,
and he was in danger of relapsing into his former 

distraction, when his passion was a little becalmed
by the hope of seeing her again, either by accident,
or in the course of a diligent and minute inquiry,
which he forthwith resolved to set on foot. 
He had reason to believe, that her own heart
would espouse his cause, in spite of her virtue's
determination, and did not despair of meeting
with the Capuchin, whose good offices he knew
he could at any time command. Comforted
with these reflexions, the tempest of his soul
subsided, and in less than two hours he joined
his company with an air of composure, and asked
the painter's forgiveness for the freedom he had
taken, the cause of which he promised hereafter
to explain. Pallet was glad of being reconciled
on any terms to one whose countenance supported
him in æquilibrio with his antagonist the doctor; 
and Mr. Jolter was rejoiced beyond measure at
his pupil's recovery. 