


In which the hero of these adventures
makes his first appearance on the stage
of action. 
The outward door of the Black
Lion had already sustained two
dreadful shocks; but at the third it
flew open, and in stalked an apparition,
that smote the hearts of our travellers
with fear and trepidation. It
was the figure of a man armed cap-a-pie,
bearing on his shoulder a bundle
dropping with water, which afterwards
appeared to be the body of
a man that seemed to have been
drowned, and fished up from the bottom
of the neighbouring river. Having
deposited his burthen carefully on
the floor, he addressed himself to the
company in these words: “Be not
surprised, good people, at this unusual
appearance, which I shall take
an opportunity to explain; and forgive 

the rude and boisterous manner
in which I have demanded, and indeed
forced admittance. The violence
of my intrusion was the effect of necessity. 
In crossing the river, my
squire and his horse were swept away
by the stream; and with some difficulty
I have been able to drag him
ashore, though I am afraid my assistance
reached him too late: for, since
I brought him to land, he has given
no signs of life.” Here he was interrupted
by a groan, which issued from
the chest of the squire, and terrified
the spectators as much as it comforted
the master. After some recollection,
Mr. Fillet began to undress the body,
which was laid in a blanket on the
floor, and rolled from side to side by
his direction. A considerable quantity
of water being discharged from
the mouth of this unfortunate squire,
he uttered a hideous roar, and, opening
his eyes, stared wildly around:
then the surgeon undertook for his recovery; 
and his master went forth
with the ostler in quest of the horses, 

which he had left by the side of the
river. His back was no sooner turned
than Ferret, who had been peeping
from behind the pantry-door, ventured
to rejoin the company; pronouncing
with a smile, or rather grin
of contempt, “Hey day! what precious
mummery is this? What, are
we to have the farce of Hamlet's
ghost?” “Adzooks, (cried the Captain)
my kinsman Tom has dropped
a-stern–––hope in God a-has not bulged
to, and gone to bottom.” “Pish,
(exclaimed the misanthrope) there's
no danger: the young lawyer is only
seizing Dolly in tail.” 
Certain it is, Dolly squeaked at that
instant in the cellar; and Clarke appearing
soon after in some confusion,
declared she had been frightened by
a flash of lightning: but this assertion
was not confirmed by the young lady
herself, who eyed him with a sullen
regard, indicating displeasure, though
not indifference; and when questioned
by her mother, replied, “A-doan't 

maind what a-says, so a-doan't, vor
all his goalden jacket, then.” 
In the mean time the surgeon had
performed the operation of phlebotomy
on the squire, who was lifted
into a chair, and supported by the
landlady for that purpose; but he
had not as yet given any sign of having
retrieved the use of his senses. And
here Mr. Fillet could not help contemplating,
with surprize, the strange
figure and accoutrements of his patient,
who seemed in age to be turned of
fifty. His stature was below the middle
size: he was thick, squat, and
brawny, with a small protuberance
on one shoulder, and a prominent belly,
which, in consequence of the water
he had swallowed, now strutted
beyond its usual dimensions. His
forehead was remarkably convex, and
so very low, that his black bushy hair
descended within an inch of his nose:
but this did not conceal the wrinkles
of his front, which were manifold. 
His small glimmering eyes resembled
those of the Hampshire porker, that 

turns up the soil with his projecting
snout. His cheeks were shrivelled
and puckered at the corners, like the
seams of a regimental coat as it comes
from the hands of the contracter: his
nose bore a strong analogy in shape to
a tennis-ball, and in colour to a mulberry; 
for all the water of the river
had not been able to quench the natural
fire of that feature. His upper
jaw was furnished with two long white
sharp pointed teeth or fangs, such as
the reader may have observed in the
chaps of a wolf, or full-grown mastiff,
and an anatomist would describe
as a preternatural elongation of the
dentes canini. His chin was so long,
so peaked, and incurvated, as to form
in profile with his impending forehead
the exact resemblance of a moon in
the first quarter. With respect to his
equipage, he had a leathern cap upon
his head, faced like those worn by
marines, and exhibiting in embroidery
the figure of a crescent. His coat was
of white cloth faced with black, and
cut in a very antique fashion; and, in 

lieu of a waistcoat, he wore a buff
jerkin. His feet were cased with loose
buskins, which, though they rose
almost to his knee, could not hide
that curvature known by the appellation
of bandy legs. A large string of
bandaliers garnished a broad belt that
graced his shoulders, from whence
depended an instrument of war, which
was something between a back-sword
and a cutlass; and a case of pistols
were stuck in his girdle. Such was
the figure which the whole company
now surveyed with admiration. After
some pause, he seemed to recover his
recollection. He rolled about his eyes
around, and, attentively surveying
every individual, exclaimed, in a
strange tone, “Bodikins! where's
Gilbert?” This interrogation did
not savour much of sanity, especially
when accompanied with a wild stare,
which is generally interpreted as a
sure sign of a disturbed understanding:
nevertheless, the surgeon endeavoured
to assist his recollection. 
“Come, (said he) have a good-heart. 

—How do'st do, friend?” “Do!
(replied the squire) do as well as I
can:—that's a lie too: I might have
done better. I had no business to be
here.” “You ought to thank God
and your master (resumed the surgeon)
for the providential escape you have
had.” “Thank my master! (cried
the squire) thank the devil! Go and
teach your grannum to crack filberds. 
I know who I'm bound to pray for,
and who I ought to curse the longest
day I have to live.” 
Here the Captain interposing,
“Nay, brother, (said he) you are
bound to pray for this here gentleman
as your sheet-anchor: for, if so be
as he had not cleared your stowage of
the water you had taken in at your
upper works, and lightened your veins,
d'ye see, by taking away some of your
blood, adad! you had driven before
the gale, and never been brought up
in this world again, d'ye see.” “What,
then you would persuade me (replied
the patient) that the only way to save
my life was to shed my precious blood? 

Look ye, friend, it shall not be lost
blood to me. —I take you all to witness,
that there surgeon, or apothecary,
or farrier, or dog-doctor, or
whatsoever he may be, has robbed
me of the balsam of life:—he has
not left so much blood in my body
as would fatten a starved flea. —O!
that there was a lawyer here to serve
him with a siserari.” Then fixing his
eyes upon Ferret, he proceeded: 
“An't you a limb of the law, friend? 
—No, I cry you mercy, you look
more like a shew-man or a conjurer.” 
—Ferret, nettled at this address, answered,
“It would be well for you
that I could conjure a little common
sense into that numbscull of yours.” 
“If I want that commodity, (rejoined
the squire) I must go to another
market, I trow. —You legerdemain
men be more like to conjure the
money from our pockets, than sense
into our sculls. —Vor my own part, I
was once cheated of vorty good shillings
by one of your broother cups
and balls.” In all probability he 

would have descended to particulars,
had not he been seized with a return
of his nausea, which obliged him to
call for a bumper of brandy. This
remedy being swallowed, the tumult
in his stomach subsided. He desired
he might be put to-bed without delay,
and that half a dozen eggs and a
pound of bacon might, in a couple of
hours, be dressed for his supper. 
He was accordingly led off the
scene by the landlady and her daughter; 
and Mr. Ferret had just time
to observe the fellow was a composition,
in which he did not know whether
knave or fool most predominated,
when the master returned from the
stable. He had taken off his helmet,
and now displayed a very engaging
countenance. His age did not seem
to exceed thirty: he was tall, and
seemingly robust; his face long and
oval, his nose aquiline, his mouth
furnished with a set of elegant teeth
white as the drifted snow; his complexion
clear, and his aspect noble. 
His chesnut hair loosely flowed in 

short natural curls; and his grey eyes
shone with such vivacity, as plainly
shewed that his reason was a little discomposed. 
Such an appearance prepossessed
the greater part of the company
in his favour: he bowed round
with the most polite and affable address; 
enquired about his squire, and,
being informed of the pains Mr. Fillet
had taken for his recovery, insisted
upon that gentleman's accepting an
handsome gratuity: then, in consideration
of the cold bath he had undergone,
he was prevailed upon to
take the post of honour; namely,
the great chair fronting the fire,
which
was reinforced with a billet of wood
for his comfort and convenience. 
Perceiving his fellow-travellers either
over-awed into silence by his presence,
or struck dumb with admiration
at his equipage, he accosted them
in these words, while an agreeable
smile dimpled on his cheek. 
“The good company wonders,
no doubt, to see a man cased in armour,
such as hath been for above 

a whole century disused in this and
every other country of Europe; and
perhaps they will be still more surprised,
when they hear that man profess
himself a noviciate of that military
order, which hath of old been
distinguished in Great-Britain, as well
as through all Christendom, by the
name of Knights Errant. Yes, gentlemen,
in that painful and thorny
path of toil and danger I have begun
my career, a candidate for honest
fame; determined, as far as in me
lies, to honour and assert the efforts
of virtue; to combat vice in all her
forms, redress injuries, chastise oppression,
protect the helpless and forlorn,
relieve the indigent, exert
my best endeavours in the cause of
innocence and beauty, and dedicate
my talents, such as they are, to the
service of my country.” “What!
(said Ferret) you set up for a modern
Don Quixote? —The scheme is rather
too stale and extravagant. —What was
an humorous romance, and well-timed
satire in Spain, near two hundred 

years ago, will make but a sorry
jest, and appear equally insipid and
absurd, when really acted from affectation,
at this time a-day, in a country
like England.” 
The Knight, eying this censor with
a look of disdain, replied, in a solemn
lofty tone: “He that from affectation
imitates the extravagancies recorded
of Don Quixote, is an impostor equally
wicked and contemptible. He that
counterfeits madness, unless he dissembles
like the elder Brutus, for
some virtuous purpose, not only debases
his own soul, but acts as a traitor
to heaven, by denying the divinity
that is within him—I am neither an
affected imitator of Don Quixote,
nor, as I trust in heaven, visited by
that spirit of lunacy so admirably displayed
in the fictitious character exhibited
by the inimitable Cervantes. I
have not yet encountered a windmill
for a giant; nor mistaken this public
house for a magnificent castle: neither
do I believe this gentleman to
be the constable; nor that worthy 

practitioner to be master Elizabat,
the surgeon recorded in Amadis de
Gaul; nor you to be the enchanter
Alquife, nor any other sage of history
or romance. —I see and distinguish
objects as they are discerned
and described by other men. I reason
without prejudice, can endure
contradiction, and, as the company
perceives, even bear impertinent censure
without passion or resentment. 
I quarrel with none but the foes of
virtue and decorum, against whom I
have declared perpetual war, and
them I will every where attack as the
natural enemies of mankind.” “But
that war (said the cynic) may soon be
brought to a conclusion, and your
adventures close in Bridewell, provided
you meet with some determined
constable, who will seize your worship
as a vagrant, according to the
statute.” “Heaven and earth! (cried
the stranger, starting up and laying
his hand to his sword) do I live to
hear myself insulted with such an opprobrious
epithet, and refrain from 

trampling into dust the insolent calumniator!” 
The tone in which these words
were pronounced, and the indignation
that flashed from the eyes of
the speaker, intimidated every individual
of the society, and reduced Ferret
to a temporary privation of all his
faculties. His eyes retired within
their sockets: his complexion, which
was naturally of a copper hue, now
shifted to a leaden colour; his teeth
began to chatter; and all his limbs
were agitated by a sudden palsy. The
Knight observed his condition, and
resumed his seat, saying, “I was to
blame: my vengeance must be reserved
for very different objects. — 
Friend, you have nothing to fear—the
sudden gust of passion is now blown
over. Recollect yourself, and I will
reason calmly on the observation you
have made.” 
This was a very seasonable declaration
to Mr. Ferret, who opened his
eyes, and wiped his forehead, while
the other proceeded in these terms. 

“You say I am in danger of being
apprehended as a vagrant: I am not
so ignorant of the laws of my country,
but that I know the description
of those who fall within the legal
meaning of this odious term. You
must give me leave to inform you,
friend, that I am neither bearward,
fencer, stroller, gipsey, mountebank,
nor mendicant; nor do I practise subtle
craft to deceive and impose upon
the King's lieges; nor can I be held
as an idle disorderly person, travelling
from place to place, collecting monies
by virtue of counterfeited passes, briefs,
and other false pretences—In what
respect therefore am I to be deemed
a vagrant? Answer boldly, without
fear or scruple.” To this interrogation
the misanthrope replied, with
a faultering accent, “If not a vagrant,
you incur the penalty for riding
armed in affray of the peace.” 
“But, instead of riding armed in
affray of the peace, (resumed the
other) I ride in preservation of the
peace; and gentlemen are allowed 

by the law to wear armour for their
defence. Some ride with blunder-busses,
some with pistols, some with
swords, according to their various inclinations. 
Mine is to wear the armour
of my forefathers: perhaps I
use them for exercise, in order to accustom
myself to fatigue, and strengthen
my constitution: perhaps I assume
them for a frolick.” 
“But if you swagger armed and
in disguise, assault me on the highway,
or put me in bodily fear, for
the sake of the jest, the law will punish
you in earnest,” (cried the other.) 
“But my intention (answered the
Knight) is carefully to avoid all those
occasions of offences.” “Then (said
Ferret) you may go unarmed, like
other sober people.” “Not so, (answered
the Knight) as I propose to
travel all times, and in all places, mine
armour may guard me against the attempts
of treachery: it may defend
me in combat against odds, should I be
assaulted by a multitude of plebeians,
or have occasion to bring malefactors 

to justice.” “What, then (exclaimed
the philosopher) you intend to cooperate
with the honourable fraternity
of thief-takers?” “I do purpose
(said the youth, eying him with
a look of ineffable contempt) to act
as a coadjutor to the law, and even to
remedy evils which the law cannot
reach; to detect fraud and treason,
abase insolence, mortify pride, discourage
slander, disgrace immodesty,
and stigmatize ingratitude: but the
infamous part of a thief-catcher's character
I disclaim. I neither associate
with robbers and pickpockets, knowing
them to be such, that, in being
intrusted with their secrets, I may the
more effectually betray them; nor
shall I ever pocket the reward granted
by the legislature to those by whom
robbers are brought to conviction:
but I shall always think it my duty
to rid my country of that pernicious
vermin, which preys upon the bowels
of the commonwealth—not but that
an incorporated company of licensed
thieves might, under proper regulations, 

be of service to the community.” 
Ferret, emboldened by the passive
tameness with which the stranger
bore his last reflection, began to think
he had nothing of Hector but his
outside, and gave a loose to all the acrimony
of his party-rancour. Hearing
the Knight mention a company of
licensed thieves, “What else (cried
he) is the majority of the nation? 
What is your standing army at home,
that eat up their fellow subjects? 
What are your mercenaries abroad,
whom you hire to fight their own
quarrels? What is your militia, that
wise measures of this sagacious m&wblank;ry,
but a larger gang of petty thieves,
who steal sheep and poultry through
mere idleness; and were they confronted
with an enemy, would steal
themselves away? What is your.....
but a knot of thieves, who pillage
the nation under colour of law, and
enrich themselves with the wreck of
their country? When you consider
the enormous debt of an hundred 

millions, the intolerable load of taxes
and impositions under which we groan,
and the manner in which that burthen
is yearly accumulating, to support two
German electorates, without our receiving
any thing in return but the
shews of triumph and shadows of
conquest: I say, when you reflect on
these circumstances, and at the same
time behold our cities filled with bankrupts,
and our country with beggars; 
can you be so infatuated as to deny
that our m&wblank;y is mad, or worse than
mad; our wealth exhausted, our people
miserable, our credit blasted, and
our state on the brink of perdition? 
This prospect, indeed, will make the
fainter impression, if we recollect that
we ourselves are a pack of such profligate,
corrupted, pusillanimous rascals,
as deserve no salvation.” 
The stranger, raising his voice to
a loud tone, replied, “Such, indeed,
are the insinuations, equally false and
insidious, with which the desperate
emissaries of a party endeavour to
poison the minds of his Majesty's 

subjects, in defiance of common honesty
and common sense. But he
must be blind to all perception, and
dead to candour, who does not see
and own that we are involved in a
just and necessary war, which has been
maintained on truly British principles,
prosecuted with vigour, and crowned
with success; that our taxes are easy,
in proportion to our wealth; that our
conquests are equally glorious and
important; that our commerce flourishes,
our people are happy, and
our enemies reduced to despair. —Is
there a man who boasts a British heart,
that repines at the success and prosperity
of his country? Such there are,
O shame to patriotism, and reproach
to Great-Britain! who act as the emissaries
of France both in word and
writing; who exaggerate our necessary
burthens, magnify our dangers,
extol the power of our enemies, deride
our victories, extenuate our conquests,
condemn the measures of our
government, and scatter the seeds of
dissatisfaction through the land. Such 

domestic traitors are doubly the objects
of detestation; first, in perverting
truth; and secondly, in propagating
falsehood, to the prejudice of that
community of which they have professed
themselves members. One of
these is well known by the name of
Ferret, an old, rancorous, incorrigible
instrument of sedition: happy
it is for him, that he has never fallen
in my way; for, notwithstanding the
maxims of forbearance which I have
adopted, the indignation which the
character of that caitiff inspires, would
probably impel me to some act of violence,
and I should crush him like an
ungrateful viper, that gnawed the
bosom which warmed it into life!” 
These last words were pronounced
with a wildness of look, that even
bordered upon frenzy. The misanthrope
once more retired to the pantry
for shelter, and the rest of the
guests were evidently disconcerted. 
Mr. Fillet, in order to change the
conversation, which was likely to
produce serious consequences, expressed 

uncommon satisfaction at the remarks
which the Knight had made,
signified his approbation of the honourable
office he had undertaken; 
declared himself happy in having
seen such an accomplished cavalier; 
and observed, that nothing was wanting
to render him a complete knight-errant,
but some celebrated beauty,
the mistress of his heart, whose idea
might animate his breast, and strengthen
his arm to the utmost exertion of
valour: he added, that love was the
soul of chivalry. The stranger started
at this discourse. He turned his
eyes on the surgeon with a fixed regard:
his countenance changed: a
torrent of tears gushed down his
cheeks: his head sunk upon his bosom:
he heaved a profound sigh; and
remained in silence with all the external
marks of unutterable sorrow. 
The company were in some measure
infected by his despondence; concerning
the cause of which, however,
they would not venture to inquire. 

By this time the landlady, having
disposed of the squire, desired to
know, with many curtsies, if his honour
would not chuse to put off his wet
garments; assuring him, that she had
a very good feather-bed at his service,
upon which many gentlevolks of the
virst quality had lain; that the sheets
were well aired; and that Dolly should
warm them for his worship with a pan
of coals. This hospitable offer being
repeated, he seemed to wake from
a trance of grief; arose from his seat,
and, bowing courteously to the company,
withdrew. 
Captain Crowe, whose faculty of
speech had been all this time absorbed
in amazement, now broke into the
conversation with a volley of interjections: 
“Split my snatchblock!—Odd's firkin!—Splice my old shoes! 
—I have sailed the salt seas, brother,
since I was no higher than the Triton's
taffril—east, west, north, and
south, as the saying is—Blacks, Indians,
Moors, Morattos, and Seapoys; 
—but, smite my timbers! such a man 

of war—” Here he was interrupted
by his nephew Tom Clarke, who
had disappeared at the Knight's first
entrance, and now produced himself
with an eagerness in his look, while
the tears started in his eyes. —“Lord
bless my soul! (cried he) I know that
gentleman,and his servant, as well
as I know my own father. —I am his
own godson, uncle: he stood for me
when he was a boy—yes, indeed, Sir,
my father was steward to the estate— 
I may say I was bred up in the family
of Sir Everhard Greaves, who has
been dead these two years—this is the
only son, Sir Launcelot; the best-natured,
worthy, generous gentleman
—I care not who knows it: I love
him as well as if he was my own flesh
and blood—” 
At this period Tom, whose heart
was of the melting mood, began to
sob and weep plenteously, from pure
affection. Crowe, who was not very
subject to these tendernesses, damned
him for a chicken-hearted lubber; repeating,
with much peevishness, “What 

do'st cry for? What do'st cry for, noddy?” 
The surgeon, impatient to know
the story of Sir Launcelot, which he
had heard imperfectly recounted, begged
that Mr. Clarke would compose
himself, and relate it as circumstantially
as his memory could retain the particulars; 
and Tom, wiping his eyes, promised
to give him that satisfaction; 
which the reader, if he be so minded,
may partake in the next chapter. 