


In which our Hero descends into the
Mansions of the Damned. 
The first step which Sir Launcelot
took in the morning that
succeeded his arrival in London, was
to settle Mrs. Dolly Cowslip in lodgings
at the house where John Clump
had promised to visit her; as he did
not doubt, that tho' the visit was delayed,
it would some time or other
be performed; and in that case, he
might obtain some intelligence of Aurelia. 
Mr. Thomas Clarke was permitted
to take up his habitation in the
same house, on his earnestly desiring
he might be intrusted with the office
of conveying information and instruction
between Dolly and our adventurer. 
The knight himself resolved
to live retired until he should receive
some tidings relating to Miss Darnel,
that would influence his conduct; but
he proposed to frequent places of public
resort incognito, that he might 

have some chance of meeting by accident
with the mistress of his heart. 
Taking it for granted that the oddities
of Crowe would help to amuse him
in his hours of solitude and disappointment,
he invited that original to be
his guest at a small house which he
determined to hire ready furnished in
the neighbourhood of Golden-square. 
The captain thanked him for his courtesy,
and frankly embraced his offer; 
tho' he did not much approve of the
knight's choice, in point of situation. 
He said he would recommend him to
a special good upper deck hard by St.
Catherine's in Wapping, where he
would be delighted with the prospect
of the street forwards, well frequented
by passengers, carts, drays, and other
carriages; and having backwards, an
agreeable view of alderman Parsons'
great brewhouse, with two hundred
hogs feeding almost under the window. 
As a further inducement, he
mentioned the vicinity of the Tower
guns, which would regale his hearing
on days of salutation; nor did he forget 

get the sweet sound of mooring and
unmooring ships in the river, and the
pleasing objects on the other side of
the Thames, displayed in the oozy
docks and cabbage-gardens of Rotherhithe. 
Sir Launcelot was not insensible
to the beauties of this landscape; 
but, his pursuit lying another
way, he contented himself with a
less enchanting situation, and Crowe
accompanied him out of pure friendship. 
At night Mr. Clarke arrived
at our hero's house with tidings that
were by no means agreeable. He
told him that Clump had left a letter
for Dolly, informing her that his master
'squire Darnel was to set out early
in the morning for Yorkshire; but he
could give no account of her lady,
who had, the day before, been conveyed,
he knew not whither, in a
hackney-coach, attended by his uncle
and an ill-looking fellow, who had
much the appearance of a bailiff or
turnkey; so that he feared she was
in trouble. 

Sir Launcelot was deeply affected
by this intimation. His apprehension
was even roused by a suspicion that a
man of Darnel's violent temper, and
unprincipled heart, might have practised
upon the life of his lovely niece:
but, upon recollection, he could not
suppose that he had recourse to such
infamous expedients, knowing, as he
did, that an account of her would
be demanded at his hands, and that
it would be easily proved he had conveyed
her from the lodging in which
she resided. His first fears now gave
way to another suggestion, that Anthony,
in order to intimidate her into
a compliance with his proposals, had
trumped up a spurious claim against
her, and by virtue of a writ confined
her in some prison or spunging-house. 
Possessed with this idea, he desired
Mr. Clarke to search the sheriff's office
in the morning, that he might know
whether any such writ had been
granted; and he himself resolved to
make a tour of the great prisons belonging
to the metropolis, to enquire 

if perchance she might not be confined
under a borrowed name. Finally,
he determined, if possible, to
apprise her of his place of abode by
a paragraph in all the daily papers,
signifying that Sir Launcelot Greaves
had arrived at his house by Golden-square. 
All these resolutions were punctually
executed. No such writ had been
taken out in the sheriff's office; and
therefore, our hero set out on his
jail expedition, accompanied by Mr.
Clarke, who had contracted some acquaintance
with the commanding officers
in these garrisons, in the course
of his clerkship, and practice as an
attorney. The first day they spent in
prosecuting their inquiry through the
Gate-house, Fleet, and Marshalsea; 
the next they allotted to the King's-bench,
where they understood there
was a great variety of prisoners. 
There they proposed to make a minute
scrutiny, by the help of Mr.
Norton the deputy-marshal, who was
Mr. Clarke's intimate friend, and had 

nothing at all of jailor either in his
appearance or in his disposition, which
was remarkably humane and benevolent
towards all his fellow-creatures. 
The knight having bespoke dinner
at a tavern in the Borough, was, together
with captain Crowe, conducted
to the prison of the King's-bench,
which is situated in St. George's-fields,
about a mile from the end of
Westminster-bridge, and appears like
a neat little regular town, consisting
of one street, surrounded by a very
high wall, including an open piece of
ground which may be termed a garden,
where the prisoners take the air,
and amuse themselves with a variety
of diversions. Except the entrance,
where the turnkeys keep watch and
ward, there is nothing in the place
that looks like a jail, or bears the least
colour of restraint. The street is
crowded with passengers. Tradesmen
of all kinds here exercise their different
professions. Hawkers of all
sorts are admitted to call and vend 

their wares as in any open street of
London. Here are butchers-stands,
chandlers-shops, a surgery, a tap-house
well frequented, and a public
kitchen in which provisions are dressed
for all the prisoners gratis, at the expence
of the publican. Here the
voice of misery never complains, and,
indeed, little else is to be heard but
the sounds of mirth and jollity. At
the farther end of the street, on the
right hand, is a little paved court leading
to a separate building, consisting
of twelve large apartments, called
state-rooms, well furnished, and fitted
up for the reception of the better
sort of crown-prisoners; and on the
other side of the street, facing a separate
division of ground, called the
common side, is a range of rooms
occupied by prisoners of the lowest
order, who share the profits of a begging-box,
and are maintained by this
practice, and some established funds
of charity. We ought also to observe,
that the jail is provided with a
neat chapel, in which a clergyman, 

in consideration of a certain salary,
performs divine service every Sunday. 
Our adventurer having searched the
books, and perused the description of
all the female prisoners who had been
for some weeks admitted into the jail,
obtained not the least intelligence of
his concealed charmer, but resolved
to alleviate his disappointment by the
gratification of his curiosity. Under
the auspices of Mr. Norton, he made
a tour of the prison, and in particular
visited the kitchen, where he saw a
number of spits loaded with a variety
of provision, consisting of butcher's
meat, poultry, and game: he could
not help expressing his astonishment
with up-lifted hands, and congratulating
himself in secret, upon his being
a member of that community
which had provided such a comfortable
asylum for the unfortunate. His
ejaculation was interrupted by a tumultuous
noise in the street; and Mr.
Norton declaring he was sent for to
the lodge, consigned our hero to the 

care of one Mr. Felton, a prisoner of
a very decent appearance, who paid
his compliments with a good grace,
and invited the company to repose
themselves in his apartment, which
was large, commodious, and well
furnished. When Sir Launcelot asked
the cause of that uproar, he told
him that it was the prelude to a boxing-match
between two of the prisoners,
to be decided in the ground,
or garden of the place. 
Capt. Crowe expressing an eager
curiosity to see the battle, Mr. Felton
assured him there would be no
sport, as the combatants were both
reckoned dunghills: “But, in half
an hour (said he) there will be a battle
of some consequence between two
of the demagogues of the place, Dr.
Crabclaw and Mr. Tapley, the first
a physician, and the other a brewer. 
You must know, Gentlemen, that
this microcosm or republic in miniature,
is like the great world, split into
sactions. Crabclaw is the leader of
one party; and the other is headed 

by Tapley: both are men of warm
and impetuous tempers; and their
intrigues have embroiled the whole
place, insomuch that it was dangerous
to walk the street, on account
of the continual skirmishes of their
partizans. At length, some of the
more sedate inhabitants having met
and deliberated upon some remedy
for these growing disorders, proposed
that the dispute should be at once decided
by single combat between the
two chiefs, who readily agreed to the
proposal. The match was accordingly
made for five guineas, and this very
day and hour appointed for the trial,
on which considerable sums of money
are depending. As for Mr. Norton,
it is not proper that he should be present,
or seem to countenance such violent
proceedings, which, however, it
is necessary to connive at, as convenient
vents for the evaporation of
those humours, which being confined,
might accumulate and break out with
greater fury, in conspiracy and rebellion.” 

The knight owned he could not
conceive by what means such a number
of licentious people, amounting,
with their dependants, to above five
hundred, were restrained within the
bounds of any tolerable discipline, or
prevented from making their escape; 
which they might at any time accomplish,
either by stealth or open violence,
as it could not be supposed
that one or two turnkeys, continually
employed in opening and shutting the
door, could resist the efforts of a
whole multitude. “Your wonder,
good Sir, (said Mr. Felton) will vanish,
when you consider it is hardly
possible that the multitude should cooperate
in the execution of such a
scheme; and that the keeper perfectly
well understands the maxim divide et
impera. Many prisoners are restrained
by the dictates of gratitude towards
the deputy-marshal, whose friendship
and good offices they have experienced:
some, no doubt, are actuated
by motives of discretion. One party
is an effectual check upon the other; 

and I am firmly persuaded that there
are not ten prisoners within the place
that would make their escape, if the
doors were laid open. This is a step
which no man would take, unless
his fortune was altogether desperate; 
because it would oblige him to leave
his country for life, and expose him
to the most imminent risque of being
retaken and treated with the utmost
severity. The majority of the prisoners
live in the most lively hope of
being released by the assistance of
their friends, the compassion of their
creditors, or the favour of the legislature. 
Some who are cut off from all
these proposals, are become naturalized
to the place, knowing they cannot
subsist in any other situation. I, myself,
am one of these. After having
resigned all my effects for the benefit
of my creditors, I have been detained
these nine years in prison, because
one person refuses to sign my certificate. 
I have long outlived all my
friends from whom I could expect the
least countenance or favour: I am 

grown old in confinement; and lay
my account with ending my days in
jail, as the mercy of the legislature in
favour of insolvent debtors, is never
extended to uncertified bankrupts
taken in execution. By dint of industry,
and the most rigid oeconomy,
I make shift to live independant in
this retreat. To this scene my faculty
of subsisting, as well as my body,
is peculiarly confined. Had I an opportunity
to escape, where should I
go? All my views of fortune have
been long blasted. I have no friends
nor connexions in the world. I must,
therefore, starve in some sequestered
corner, or be recaptivated and confined
for ever to close prison, deprived
of the indulgences which I now enjoy.” 
Here the conversation was broke
off by another uproar, which was the
signal to battle between the doctor and
his antagonist. The company immediately
adjourned to the field, where
the combatants were already undressed
and the stakes deposited. The doctor 

seemed of the middle age and middle
stature, active and alert, with an
atrabilarious aspect, and a mixture
of rage and disdain expressed in his
countenance. The brewer was large,
raw-boned, and round as a but of
beer, but very fat, unwieldy, short-winded
and phlegmatic. Our adventurer
was not a little surprised when
he beheld in the character of seconds,
a male and a female stripped naked
from the waist upwards, the latter
ranging on the side of the physician:
but the commencement of the battle
prevented his demanding of his
guide an explanation of this phœnomenon. 
The doctor, retiring some
paces backwards, threw himself into
the attitude of a battering ram, and
rushed upon his antagonist with great
impetuosity, foreseeing that should he
have the good fortune to over-turn
him in the first assault, it would not
be an easy task to raise him up again
and put him in a capacity of offence. 
But the momentum of Crabclaw's
head, and the concomitant efforts of 

his knuckles, had no effect upon the
ribs of Tapley, who stood firm as
the Acroceraunian promontory: and
stepping forward with his projected
fist, something smaller and softer than
a sledge-hammer, struck the physician
to the ground. In a trice, however,
by the assistance of his female second,
he was on his legs again, and grappling
with his antagonist, endeavoured
to tip him a fall; but, instead of
accomplishing his purpose, he received
a cross-buttock, and the brewer
throwing himself upon him as he fell,
had well-nigh smothered him on the
spot. The amazon flew to his assistance,
and Tapley shewing no inclination
to get up, she smote him on
the temple 'till he roared. The male
second hastening to the relief of his
principal, made application to the
eyes of the female, which were
immediately surrounded with black
circles; and she returned the salute
with a blow which brought a double
stream of blood from his nostrils,
greeting him at the same time with 

the opprobrious appellation of a lousy
son of a b&wblank;h. A combat more furious
than the first would now have
ensued, had not Felton interposed
with an air of authority, and insisted
on the man's leaving the field; 
an injunction which he forthwith
obeyed, saying, “Well, damme,
Felton, you're my friend and commander: 
I'll obey your order—but
the b&wblank;h will be foul of me before
we sleep—.” Then Felton, advancing
to his opponent, “Madam, (said
he) I'm very sorry to see a lady of
your rank and qualifications expose
yourself in this manner. —For God's
sake, behave with a little more decorum; 
if not for the sake of your
own family, at least for the credit of
your sex in general.” “Hark ye,
Felton, (said she) decorum is founded
upon a delicacy of sentiment and deportment,
which cannot consist with
the disgraces of a jail, and the miseries
of indigence. —But I see the dispute
is now terminated, and the money
is to be drank: if you'll dine 

with us you shall be welcome: if not,
you may die in your sobriety, and be
damned.” 
By this time the doctor had given
out, and allowed the brewer to be the
better man; yet he would not honour
the festival with his presence, but retired
to his chamber, exceedingly
mortified at his defeat. Our hero
was reconducted to Mr. Felton's
apartment, where he sat some time
without opening his mouth, so astonished
he was at what he had seen
and heard. “I perceive, Sir, (said
the prisoner) you are surprised at the
manner in which I accosted that unhappy
woman; and perhaps you
will be more surprised when you
hear, that within these eighteen
months, she was actually a person of
fashion, and her opponent (who by
the bye) is her husband, universally
respected as a man of honour, and a
brave officer.” “I am, indeed, (cried
our hero) overwhelmed with amazement
and concern, as well as stimulated
by an eager curiosity to know 

the fatal causes which have produced
such a deplorable reverse of character
and fortune. But I will rein my
curiosity till the afternoon, if you
will favour me with your company at
a tavern in the neighbourhood, where
I have bespoke dinner; a favour which
I hope Mr. Norton will have no objection
to your granting, as he himself
is to be of the party.” —The
prisoner thanked him for his kind invitation,
and they adjourned immediately
to the place, taking up the deputy-marshal
in their passage through
the lodge or entrance of the prison. 