


Crabtree sounds the duchess, and undeceives Pickle,
who, by an extraordinary accident, becomes acquainted
with another lady of quality. 
Crabtree having rehearsed this adventure, in
such a peculiarity of manner, as added infinite
ridicule to every circumstance, and repeated
every scandalous report which had circulated
at the Bath, after Peregrine's departure,
was informed by the youth, that he harboured a
design upon the person of such a duchess, and
in all appearance had no reason to complain of
his reception; but, that he would not venture
to declare himself, until he should be more ascertained
of her sentiments: and therefore, he
begg'd leave to depend upon the intelligence of
his friend Cadwallader, who, he knew, was admitted
to her parties. 
The Misanthrope, before he would promise his
assistance, asked if his prospect verged towards
matrimony? and our adventurer (who guessed
the meaning of his question) replying in the negative,
he undertook the office of reconnoitring
her inclination, protesting at the same time, that
he would never concern himself in any scheme,
that did not tend to the disgrace and deception of
all the sex. On these conditions, he espoused
the interest of our hero, and a plan was immediately
concerted, in consequence of which they
met by accident at her grace's table; and Pickle 

having stayed all the fore-part of the evening,
and sat out all the company, except the Misanthrope
and a certain widow-lady, who was said
to be in the secrets of my lady duchess, went
away, on pretence of an indispensible engagement,
that Crabtree might have a proper opportunity
of making him the subject of conversation. 
Accordingly, he had scarce quitted the apartment,
when this Cynic attending him to the
door, with a look of morose disdain, “Were I
an absolute prince, (said he) and that fellow one
of my subjects, I would order him to be cloath'd
in sack-cloth, and he should drive my asses to
water, that his lofty spirit might be lowered to
the level of his deserts. The pride of a peacock
is downright self-denial, when compared with
the vanity of that coxcomb, which was naturally
arrogant, but is now rendered altogether intolerable,
by the reputation he acquired at Bath,
or kicking a bully, outwitting a club of raw
harpers, and divers other pranks, in the execution
of which he was more lucky than wise. But
nothing has contributed so much to the increase
of his insolence and self-conceit, as the favour he
found among the ladies. Ay, the ladies, Madam,
I care not who knows it: the ladies, who (to
their honour be it spoken) never fail to patronize
foppery and folly, provided they solicit their encouragement. 
And yet, this dog was not on the
footing of those hermaphroditical animals, who
may be reckoned among the number of waiting-women,
who air your shifts, comb your lap-dogs,
examine your noses with magnifying glasses,
in order to squeeze out the worms, clean your
teeth-brushes, sweeten your handkerchiefs, 

and soften waste paper for your occasions. This
fellow Pickle was entertained for more important
purposes; his turn of duty never came till all
those lapwings were gone to roost; then he
scaled windows, leaped over garden-walls, and
was let in by Mrs. Betty, in the dark. Nay,
the magistrates of Bath complimented him with
the freedom of the corporation, merely because,
through his means, the waters had gained extraordinary
credit; for every female of a tolerable
appearance, that went thither on account of her
sterility, got the better of her complaint, during
his residence at the Bath: and now, the fellow
thinks no woman can withstand his addresses. 
He had not been here three minutes, when I
could perceive with half an eye, that he had
marked out your grace for a conquest; I mean
in an honourable way; though the rascal has impudence
enough to attempt any thing.” So
saying, he fixed his eyes upon the duchess, who
(while her face glowed with indignation) turning
to her confidant, expressed herself in these words. 
“Upon my life! I believe there is actually some
truth in what this old ruffian says; I have myself
observed that young fellow eying me with a very
particular stare.” “It is not to be at all wondered
at, (said her friend) that a youth of his
complexion should be sensible to the charms of
your grace; but I dare say, he would not presume
to entertain any, but the most honourable
and respectful sentiments.” “Respectful sentiments!
(cried my lady, with a look of ineffable
disdain) if I thought the fellow had assurance
enough to think of me in any shape, I protest I
would forbid him my house. Upon my honour,
such instances of audacity should induce persons 

of quality to keep your small gentry at a greater
distance; for they are very apt to grow impudent,
upon the least countenance or encouragement.” 
Cadwallader, satisfied with this declaration,
changed the subject of discourse, and next day
communicated his discovery to his friend Pickle,
who, upon this occasion, felt the most stinging
sensations of mortifying pride, and resolved to
quit his prospect with a good grace. Nor did the
execution of this self-denying scheme cost him
one moment's uneasiness; for his heart had never
been interested in the pursuit, and his vanity triumphed
in the thoughts of manifesting his indifference. 
Accordingly, the very next time he
visited her grace, his behaviour was remarkably
frank, sprightly, and disengaged; and the subject
of love being artfully introduced by the widow,
who had been directed to sound his inclinations,
he rallied the passion with great ease and severity,
and made no scruple of declaring himself heartwhole. 
Though the duchess had resented his supposed
affection, she was now offended at his insensibility,
and even signified her disgust, by observing,
that perhaps his attention to his own
qualifications screened him from the impression
of all other objects. 
While he enjoyed this sarcasm, the meaning
of which he could plainly discern, the company
was joined by a certain virtuoso, who had gained
free access to all the great families of the land,
by his notable talent of gossiping and buffoonery. 
He was now in the seventy-fifth year of his age; 
his birth was so obscure, that he scarce knew his
father's name, his education suitable to the dignity 

of his descent, his character publickly branded
with homicide, profligacy, and breach of trust; 
yet this man, by the happy inheritance of impregnable
effrontery, and a lucky prostitution of
all principle, in rendering himself subservient to
the appetites of the great, had attained to an independency
of fortune, as well as to such a particular
share of favour among the quality, that
although he was well known to have pimped for
three generations of the nobility, there was not a
lady of fashion in the kingdom, who scrupled to
admit him to her toilette, or even to be squired
by him, in any public place of entertainment. 
Not but that this sage was occasionally useful to
his fellow-creatures, by these connexions with
people of fortune; for, he often undertook to
solicite charity in behalf of distressed objects, with
a view of embezzling one half of the benefactions. 
It was an errand of this kind that now
brought him to the house of her grace. 
After having sat a few minutes, he told the
company, that he would favour them with a very
proper opportunity to extend their benevolence,
for the relief of a poor gentlewoman, who was
reduced to the most abject misery, by the death
of her husband, and just delivered of a couple
of fine boys. They, moreover, understood from
his information, that this object was daughter of
a good family, who had renounced her, in consequence
of her marrying an ensign without a
fortune; and even obstructed his promotion with
all their influence and power; a circumstance of
barbarity, which had made such an impression
upon his mind, as disordered his brain, and drove
him to despair, in a fit of which he had made 

away with himself, leaving his wife then big with
child, to all the horrors of indigence and grief. 
Various were the criticisms on this pathetic
picture, which the old man drew with great expression. 
My lady duchess concluded, that she
must be a creature void of all feeling and reflection,
who could survive such aggravated misery; 
therefore, did not deserve to be relieved,
except in the character of a common beggar; 
and was generous enough to offer a recommendation,
by which she would be admitted into an
infirmary, to which her grace was a subscriber; 
at the same time, advising the sollicitor to send
the twins to the Foundling-hospital, where they
would be carefully nursed and brought up, so as
to become useful members of the commonwealth. 
Another lady, with all due deference to the opinion
of the duchess, was free enough to blame
the generosity of her grace, which would only
serve to encourage children in their disobedience
to their parents, and might be the means not only
of prolonging the distress of the wretched creature,
but also of ruining the constitution of some
young heir, perhaps the hope of a great family; 
for, she did suppose that madam, when her month
should be up, and her brats disposed of, would
spread her attractions to the public, (provided
she could profit by her person) and, in the usual
way, make a regular progress from St. James's
to Drury-lane. She apprehended, for these reasons,
that their compassion would be most effectually
shewn, in leaving her to perish in her present
necessity; and that the old gentleman would
be unpardonable, should he persist in his endeavours
to relieve her. A third member of this
tender-hearted society, after having asked if the 

young woman was handsome? and been answered
in the negative, allowed, that there was
a great deal of reason in what had been said
by the honourable person who had spoke last
nevertheless, she humbly conceived, her sentence
would admit of some mitigation. “Let the
bantlings (said she) be sent to the hospital, according
to the advice of her grace, and a small
collection be made for the present support of the
mother; and when her health is recovered, I
will take her into my family, in quality of an
upper-servant, or medium between me and my
woman; for, upon my life! I can't endure to
chide, or give directions to a creature, who is
in point of birth and education, but one degree
above the vulgar.” 
This proposal met with universal approbation. 
The duchess (to her immortal honour) began
the contribution with a crown; so that the rest
of the company were obliged to restrict their liberality
to half the sum, that her grace might not
be affronted; and the proposer demanding the
poor woman's name and place of abode, the old
mediator could not help giving her ladyship
verbal direction, though he was extremely mortified
(on more accounts than one) to find such
an issue to his solicitation. 
Peregrine, who, though humorous as winter
had a tear for pity, and an hand open as day
for melting charity, was shocked at the nature and
result of this ungenerous consultation. He contributed
his half-crown, however; and retiring
from the company, betook himself to the lodging
of the forlorn lady in the straw, according to the
direction he had heard. Upon inquiry, he understood,
that she was then visited by some charitable 

gentlewoman, who had sent for a nurse,
and waited the return of the messenger; and he
sent up his respects, desiring he might be permitted
to see her, on pretence of having been intimate
with her late husband. 
Though the poor woman had never heard of
his name, she did not think proper to deny his
request; and he was conducted to a paultry
chamber in the third story, where he found this
unhappy widow sitting up in a truckle-bed, and
suckling one of her infants, with the most piteous
expression of anguish in her features, which
were naturally regular and sweet, while the
other was fondled on the knee of a person, whose
attention was so much ingrossed by her little
charge, that for the present she could mind nothing
else: and it was not till after the first compliments
passed betwixt the hapless mother and
our adventurer, that he perceived the stranger's
countenance, which inspired him with the highest
esteem and admiration. He beheld all the graces
of elegance and beauty, breathing sentiment and
beneficence, and softened into the most inchanting
tenderness of weeping sympathy: and when
he declared the cause of his visit, which was no
other than the desire of befriending the distressed
lady, to whom he presented a bank-note for
twenty pounds, he was favoured with such a
look of complacency by this amiable phantom,
who might have been justly taken for an angel
ministering to the necessities of mortals, that his
whole soul was transported with love and veneration. 
Nor was this prepossession diminished by
the information of the widow, who, after having
manifested her gratitude in a flood of tears, told
him, that the unknown object of his esteem was 

a person of honour, who having heard by accident
of her deplorable situation, had immediately
obeyed the dictates of her humanity, and come
in person to relieve her distress; that she had not
only generously supplied her with money for present
sustenance, but also undertaken to provide a
nurse for her babes, and even promised to favour her
with protection, should she survive her present melancholy
situation. To these articles of intelligence
she added, that the name of her benefactress
was the celebrated lady—, to whose character
the youth was no stranger, though he had never
seen her person before. The killing edge of her
charms was a little blunted by the accidents of
time and fortune; but no man of taste and imagination,
whose nerves were not quite chilled
with the frost of age, could, even at that time
look upon her with impunity: and as Peregrine
saw her attractions heightened by the tender office
in which she was engaged, he was smitten
with her beauty, and so ravished with her compassion,
that he could not suppress his emotions,
but applauded her benevolence with all the warmth
of enthusiasm. 
Her ladyship received his compliments with
great politeness and affability; and the occasion
on which they met being equally interesting to
both, and acquaintance commenced between them
and they concerted measures for the benefit of
the widow and her two children, one of whom
our hero bespoke for his own godson; for Pickle
was not so obscure in the beau monde, but that his
fame had reached the ears of this lady, who
therefore, did not discourage his advances toward
her friendship and esteem. 

All the particulars relating to their charge being
adjusted, he attended her ladyship to her own
house; and, by her conversation, had the pleasure
of finding her understanding suitable to her
other accomplishments. Nor had she any reason
to think, that our hero's qualifications had been
exaggerated by common report. 
One of their adopted children died before it was
baptized; so that their care concentered in the
other, for whom they stood sponsors; and understanding
that the old agent was become troublesome
in his visits to the mother, to whom he
now began to administer such counsel as shocked
the delicacy of her virtue, they removed her into
another lodging, where she would not be exposed
to his machinations; and in less than a
month, our hero learn'd from a nobleman of his
acquaintance, that the hoary pandar had actually
engaged to procure for him, this poor afflicted
gentlewoman; and being frustrated in his intention,
substituted in her room a nymph from the
purlieus of Covent-garden, that made his lordship
smart severely for the favours she bestowed. 
Mean while, Peregrine cultivated his new acquaintance
with all his art and assiduity, presuming,
from the circumstance of her reputation
and fate, as well as on the strength of his own
merit, that, in time, he should be able to indulge
that passion which had begun to glow within his
breast. 
As her ladyship had undergone a vast variety of
fortune and adventure, which he had heard instinctly
related, with numberless errors and mispresentations,
he was no sooner intitled, by
the familiarity of communication, to ask such a
favour, than he earnestly intreated her to entertain 

him with the particulars of her story; and,
by dint of importunity, she was at length prevailed
upon (in a select partie) to gratify his curiosity
in these words. 