


He is engaged in a very extraordinary correspondence,
which is interrupted by a very unexpected
event. 
While this affair was in agitation, the
captain told him, in the course of conversation,
that Emilia was arrived in town, and
had enquired about Mr. Pickle with such an
eagerness of concern, as seemed to proclaim that
she was in some measure informed of his misfortune:
he, therefore, desired to know if he might
be allowed to make her acquainted with his situation,
provided he should be again importuned by
her on that subject, which he had at first industriously
waved. 
This proof, or rather presumption of her sympathising
regard, did not fail to operate powerfully
upon the bosom of Peregrine, which was
immediately filled with those tumults which love,
ill stifled, frequently excites. He observed, that
his disgrace was such as could not be effectually
concealed; therefore he saw no reason for depriving
himself of Emilia's compassion, since he
was for ever excluded from her affection; and
desired Godfrey to present to his sister the lowly
respects of a despairing lover. 
But, notwithstanding his declaration of despondence
on this head, his imagination involuntarily
teemed with more agreeable ideas: the proposal
of Crabtree had taken root in his reflection, and 

he could not help forming plans of pastoral felicity,
in the arms of the lovely Emilia, remote
from those pompous scenes, which he now detested
and despised. He amused his fancy with
the prospect of being able to support her in a
state of independency, by means of the slender
annuity which it was in his power to purchase,
together with the fruits of those endeavours,
which would profitably employ his vacant hours; 
and foresaw provision for his growing family in
the friendship of the lieutenant, who had already
constituted him his heir. He even parcelled out
his hours, among the necessary cares of the world,
the pleasures of domestic bliss, and the enjoyments
of a country life; and spent the night
in ideal parties with his charming bride, sometimes
walking by the sedgy bank of some transparent
stream, sometimes pruning the luxuriant
vine, and sometimes sitting in social converse with
her, in a shady grove of his own planting. 
These, however, were no more than the
shadowy phantoms of imagination, which, he
well knew, would never be realized: not that
he believed such happiness unattainable by a person
in his circumstances; but because he would
not stoop to propose a scheme, which might, in
any shape, seem to interfere with the interest of
Emilia, or subject himself to a repulse from that
young lady, who had rejected his addresses in the
zenith of his fortune. 
While he diverted himself with these agreeable
reveries, an unexpected event intervened, in which
she and her brother were deeply interested. The
uncle was tapped for the dropsy, and died in a
few days after the operation; having bequeathed,
in his will, five thousand pounds to his nephew, 

and twice that sum to his niece, who had always
enjoyed the greatest share of his favour. 
If our adventurer, before this occurrence,
looked upon his love for Emilia as a passion which
it was necessary, at any rate, to conquer or suppress; 
he now considered her accession of fortune
as a circumstance which confirmed that necessity,
and resolved to discourage every thought
on that subject, which should tend to the propagation
of hope: when one day, in the midst of a
conversation calculated for the purpose, Godfrey
put into his hand a letter directed to Mr. Pickle,
in the hand-writing of Emilia; which the youth
no sooner recognized, than his cheeks were convered
with a crimson dye, and he began to
tremble with violent agitation: for he, at once,
guessed the import of the billet, which he kissed
with great reverence and devotion, and was not
at all surprised when he read the following words. 

SIR,
I have performed a sufficient sacrifice to my
reputation, in retaining hitherto the appearance
of that resentment, which I had long ago
dismissed; and as the late favourable change in
my situation, impowers me to avow my genuine
sentiments, without fear of censure, or suspicion
of mercenary design, I take this opportunity to
assure you, that if I still maintain that place in
your heart, which I was vain enough to think I
once possessed, I am willing to make the first advances
to an accommodation; and have actually
furnished my brother with full powers to conclude
it, in the name of your appeased 
Emilia. 

Pickle, having kissed the subscription with great
ardour, fell upon his knees, and lifting up his
eyes, “Thank heaven! (cried he, with an air
of transport) I have not been mistaken in my
opinion of that generous maid. I believed her
inspired with the most dignified and heroic sentiments,
and now she gives me a convincing proof
of her magnanimity: it is now my business to
approve myself worthy of her regard. May
heaven inflict upon me the keenest arrows of its
vengeance, if I do not, at this instant, contemplate
the character of Emilia with the most perfect
love and adoration; yet, amiable and inchanting
as she is, I am, more than ever, determined
to sacrifice the interest of my passion to
my glory, tho' my life should fail in the contest; 
and even to refuse an offer, which, otherwise,
the whole universe should not bribe me to
forego.” 
This declaration was not so unexpected as unwelcome
to his friend Gauntlet, who represented
that his glory was not at all interested in the
affair; because he had already vindicated his generosity,
in repeated proffers to lay his whole
fortune at Emilia's feet, when it was impossible
that any thing selfish could enter into the proposal:
but that, in rejecting her present purpose,
he would give the world an opportunity to say
that his pride was capricious, his obstinacy invincible,
and his sister undeniable reason to believe,
that either his passion for her was dissembled, or
the ardour of it considerably abated. 
In answer to these remonstrances, Pickle observed,
that he had long set the world at defiance; 
and as to the opinion of Emilia, he did
not doubt that she would applaud, in her heart, 

the resolution he had taken, and do justice to the
purity of his intention. 
It was not an easy task to divert our hero from
his designs, at any time of life; but, since his
confinement, his inflexibility was become almost
insurmountable. The captain, therefore, after
having discharged his conscience, in assuring him
that his sister's happiness was at stake, that his
mother had approved of the step she had taken,
and that he himself should be extremely mortified
at his refusal, forbore to press him with further
argument, which served only to rivet him the
more strongly in his own opinion; and undertook
to deliver this answer to Emilia's letter. 

Madam,
That I revere the dignity of your virtue
with the utmost veneration, and love you
infinitely more than life, I am at all times ready
to demonstrate: but the sacrifice to honour, it is
now my turn to pay, and such is the rigour of
my destiny, that, in order to justify your generosity,
I must refuse to profit by your condescension. 
Madam, I am doomed to be for ever
wretched; and to sigh, without ceasing, for the
possession of that jewel, which, tho' now in my
offer, I dare not enjoy. I shall not pretend to
express the anguish that tears my heart, whilst I
communicate this fatal renunciation; but appeal
to the delicacy of your own sentiments, which
can judge of my sufferings, and will, doubtless,
do justice to the self-denial of your forlorn 
P. Pickle. 

Emilia, who knew the nicety of our hero's
pride, had foreseen the purport of this epistle,
before it came to her hands: she did not, therefore,
despair of success, nor desist from the prosecution
of her plan; which was no other than
that of securing her own happiness, in espousing
the man upon whom she had fixed her unalterable
affection. Confident of his honour, and
fully satisfied of the mutual passion with which
they were inspired, she gradually decoyed him
into a literary correspondence, wherein she attempted
to refute the arguments on which he
grounded his refusal; and, without doubt, the
young gentleman was not a little pleased with
the enjoyment of such delightful commerce, in
the course of which he had (more than ever) an
opportunity of admiring the poignancy of her
wit, and the elegance of her understanding. 
The contemplation of such excellency, while
it strengthened the chains with which she held
him enslaved, added emulation to the other motives
that induced him to maintain the dispute; 
and much subtlety of reasoning was expended
upon both sides of this very particular question,
without any prospect of conviction on either
part: 'till, at last, she began to despair of making
him a proselyte to her opinion by dint of argument; 
and resolved, for the future, to apply herself
chiefly to the irresistible prepossessions of his
love, which were not at all diminished or impaired
by the essays of her pen. With this view
she proposed a conference, pretending that it was
impossible to convey all her reflections, upon this
subject, in a series of short letters; and Godfrey
undertook to bail him for the day: but, conscious
of her power, he would not trust himself in her 

presence, tho' his heart throbbed with all the
eagerness of desire to see her fair eyes disrobed
of that resentment which they had wore so long,
and to enjoy the ravishing sweets of a fond reconciliation. 
Nature could not have held out against such
powerful attacks, had not the pride and caprice
of his disposition been gratified to the full in the
triumph of his resistance: he looked upon the
contest as altogether original, and persevered
with obstinacy, because he thought himself sure
of favourable terms, whenever he should be disposed
to capitulate. Perhaps he might have overshot
himself, in the course of his perseverance:
a young lady of Emilia's fortune and attractions,
could not fail to find herself surrounded by temptations,
which few women can resist. She might
have misinterpreted the meaning of some paragraph,
or taken umbrage at an unguarded expression
in one of Peregrine's letters: she might
have been tired out by his obstinate peculiarity,
or, at the long run, construed it into madness,
flight, or indifference; or, rather than waste her
prime in fruitless endeavours to subdue the pride
of an headstrong humorist, listen to the voice of
some admirer, fraught with qualifications sufficient
to engage her esteem and affection. But
all these possibilities were providentially prevented
by an accident, attended with more important
consequences than any we have hitherto recounted. 
Early one morning, Pipes was disturbed by
the arrival of a messenger, who had been sent
express from the country by Mr. Clover, with a
packet for the lieutenant, and arrived in town
overnight; but as he was obliged to have recourse 

to the information of Jack's correspondent
in the city, touching the place of his abode, before
he demanded entrance at the Fleet, the gate
was shut; nor would the turnkeys admit him,
altho' he told them, that he was charged with a
message of the utmost consequence; so that he
was fain to tarry 'till day-break, when he, at his
earnest solicitation, was allowed to enter. 
Hatchway, opening the packet, found a letter
inclosed for Peregrine, with an earnest request,
that he would forward it to the hands of that
young gentleman with all possible dispatch. Jack,
who could not dive into the meaning of this extraordinary
injunction, began to imagine that
Mrs. Clover lay at the point of death, and
wanted to take her last farewel of her brother; 
and this conceit worked so strongly upon his
imagination, that, while he huddled on his
cloaths, and made the best of his way to the
apartment of our hero, he could not help cursing,
within himself, the folly of the husband in sending
such disagreeable messages to a man of Peregrine's
impatient temper, already soured by his
own uneasy situation. 
This reflection would have induced him to
suppress the letter, had not he been afraid to
tamper with the ticklish disposition of his friend,
to whom, while he delivered it, “As for my
own part, (said he) mayhap I may have as much
natural affection as another; but, when my spouse
parted, I bore my misfortune like a British man
and a Christian: for, why? he's no better than
a fresh-water sailor, who knows not how to stem
the current of mischance.” 
Pickle being waked from a pleasant dream,
in which the fair Emilia was principally concerned, 

and, hearing this strange preamble, sat
up in his bed, and unsealed the letter, in a state
of mortification and disgust: but what were the
emotions of his soul, when he read the following
intimation! 

Dear brother,
It hath pleased God to take your father suddenly
off, by a fit of the apoplexy; and as he
has died intestate, I give you this notice, that
you may, with all speed, come down and take
possession of your right, in despite of master Gam
and his mother, who, you may be sure, do not
sit easy under this unexpected dispensation of providence. 
I have, by virtue of being a justice of
the peace, taken such precautions as I thought
necessary for your advantage; and the funeral
shall be deferred until your pleasure be known. 
Your sister, tho' sincerely afflicted with her father's
fate, submits to the will of heaven with
laudable resignation, and begs you will set out
for this place without delay; in which request
she is joined by, Sir, 
Your affectionate brother, and
Humble servant,
Charles Clover. 
Peregrine, at first, looked upon this epistle as
a meer illusion of the brain, and a continuation
of the reverie in which he had been engaged. He
read it ten times over, without being persuaded
that he was actually awake: he rubbed his eyes,
and shook his head, in order to shake off the
drowsy vapours that surrounded him: he hemm'd
thrice with great vociferation, snapp'd his fingers, 

tweak'd his nose, started up from his bed, and,
opening the casement, took a survey of the well-known
objects that appeared on each side of his
habitation. Every thing seemed congr'ous and
connected, and he said, within himself, “Sure
this is the most distinct dream that ever sleep
produced. Then he had recourse again to the
paper, which he carefully perused, without finding
any variation from his first notion of the
contents. 
Hatchway, seeing all this extravagance of action,
accompanied with a wild stare of distraction,
began to believe that his head was at length
fairly turned, and was really meditating means
for securing his person; when Pickle, in a tone
of surprize, exclaimed, “Good God! am I,
or am I not awake?” “Why, look ye, cousin
Pickle, (replied the lieutenant) that is a question
which the deep sea-line of my understanding is
not long enough to sound: but, howsomever,
tho'f I can't trust to the observation I have taken,
it shall go hard but I will fall upon a way to guess
whereabouts we are.” So saying, he lifted up a
pitcher full of cold water, that stood behind the
outward door, and discharged it in the face of
Peregrine, without ceremony or hesitation. 
This remedy produced the desired effect: unpalatable
as it was, the young gentleman no
sooner recovered his breath, which was endangered
by such a sudden application, than he thank'd
his friend Jack for the seasonable operation he had
performed; and having no longer any just reason
to doubt the reality of what appealed so convincingly
to his senses, he shifted himself on the
instant, not without hurry and trepidation; and
putting on his morning-dress, sallied forth to the 

bear, in order to deliberate with himself on the
important intelligence he had received. 
Hatchway, not yet fully convinced of his sanity,
and curious to know the purport of the letter,
which had affected him in such an extraordinary
manner, carefully attended his footsteps in this
excursion, in hope of being favoured with his
confidence, in the course of their perambulation. 
Our hero no sooner appeared at the street-door,
than he was saluted by the messenger, who
having posted himself in the way for that purpose,
“God bless your noble honour, squire
Pickle, (cried he) and give you joy of succeeding
to your father's estate.” These words had
scarce proceeded from his mouth, when the lieutenant
hopping eagerly towards the countryman,
squeezed his hand with great affection, and asked
if the old gentleman had actually taken his departure: 
“Ay, master Hatchway, (replied the
other) in such a woundy haste, that he forgot to
make a will.” “Body of me! (exclaimed the
seaman) these are the best tidings I have heard
since I first went to sea. Here, my lad, take my
purse, and stow thyself chocque-full of the best
liquor in the land.” So saying, he tipped the
peasant with ten pieces, and immediately the
whole place ecchoed with the sound of Tom's
instrument; while Peregrine, repairing to the
walk, communicated the billet to his honest
friend, who, at his desire, went forthwith to the
lodgings of captain Gauntlet, and returned in
less than half an hour with that gentleman, who
(I need not say) was heartily rejoiced at the occasion. 