


Hot Well, April 20. 
DEAR KNIGHT,
I NOW sit down to execute the threat in the
tail of my last. The truth is, I am big with the
secret, and long to be delivered. It relates to my
guardian, who, you know, is at present our principal
object in view. 
T'other day, I thought I had detected him in
such a state of frailty, as would but ill become his
years and character. There is a decent sort of a
woman, not disagreeable in her person, that comes
to the Well, with a poor emaciated child, far gone
in a consumption. I had caught my uncle's eyes
several times directed to this person, with a very
suspicious expression in them, and every time he
saw himself observed, he hastily withdrew them,
with evident marks of confusion—I resolved to
watch him more narrowly, and saw him speaking
to her privately in a corner of the walk. At length,
going down to the Well one day, I met her half
way up the hill to Clifton, and could not help suspecting
she was going to our lodgings by appointment,
as it was about one o'clock, the hour when
my sister and I are generally at the Pump-room. — 
This notion exciting my curiosity, I returned by a
back way, and got unperceived into my own chamber,
which is contiguous to my uncle's apartment. 
Sure enough, the woman was introduced, but not
into his bed-chamber; he gave her audience, in a
parlour; so that I was obliged to shift my station
to another room, where, however, there was a
small chink in the partition, through which I could
perceive what passed—My uncle though a little 

lame, rose up when she came in, and setting a chair
for her, desired she would sit down: then he asked
if she would take a dish of chocolate, which she
declined, with much acknowledgment. After a
short pause, he said, in a croaking tone of voice
which confounded me not a little, “Madam, I am
truly concerned for your misfortunes; and if this
trifle can be of any service to you, I beg you will
accept it without ceremony,” So saying, he
put a bit of paper into her hand, which she opening
with great trepidation, exclaimed in an ecstasy,
“Twenty pounds! O, sir!” and sinking down
upon a settee, fainted away—Frightned at this fit,
and, I suppose, afraid of calling for assistance, lest
her situation should give rise to unfavourable conjectures,
he ran about the room in distraction,
making frightful grimaces; and, at length, had
recollection enough to throw a little water in her
face; by which application she was brought to
herself: but, then her feeling took another turn. 
She shed a flood of tears, and cried aloud, “I know
not who you are: but, sure—worthy sir!— 
generous sir!—the distress of me and my poor
dying child—Oh! if the widow's prayers—if
the orphan's tears of gratitude can ought avail— 
gracious Providence! —Blessings! shower down
eternal blessings—” Here she was interrupted
by my uncle, who muttered in a voice still more and
more discordant, “For Heaven's sake be quiet,
madam—consider—the people of the house— 
'sdeath! can't you—” All this time she was
struggling to throw herself on her knees, while he,
seizing her by the wrists, endeavoured to seat her
upon the settee saying, “Pr'ythee—good now— 
hold your tongue—” At that instant, who
should burst into the room but our aunt Tabby! of
all antiquated maidens the most diabolically capricious
—Ever prying into other people's affairs, she 

had seen the woman enter, and followed her to the
door, where she stood listening, but probably could
hear nothing distinctly, except my uncle's last exclamation; 
at which she bounced into the parlour
in a violent rage, that dyed the tip of her nose of a
purple hue,—“Fy upon you, Matt! (cried she)
what doings are these, to disgrace your own character,
and disparage your family?—” Then
snatched the bank-note out of the stranger's hand,
she went on—“How now, twenty pounds!—here
is temptation with a witness! —Good woman,
go about your business—Brother, brother, I
know not which most to admire; your concupissins,
or your extravagance!—” “Good God,
(exclaimed the poor woman) shall a worthy gentleman's
character suffer for an action, that does
honour to humanity?” By this time, uncle's
indignation was effectually rouzed. His face grew
pale, his teeth chattered, and his eyes flashed— 
“Sister, (cried he, in a voice like thunder) I vow
to God, your impertinence is exceedingly provoking.” 
With these words, he took her by
the hand, and, opening the door of communication,
thrust her into the chamber where I stood, so affected
by the scene, that the tears ran down my
cheeks. Observing these marks of emotion, “I
don't wonder (said she) to see you concerned at
the back-slidings of so near a relation; a man of
his years and infirmities: These are fine doings,
truly—This is a rare example, set by a guardian
for the benefit of his pupils—Monstrous! incongrous!
sophistical!” —I thought it was but
an act of justice to set her to rights; and therefore
explained the mystery—But she would not be undeceived. 
“What! (said she) would you go for
to offer, for to arguesy me out of my senses? 
Did'n't I hear him whispering to her to hold her
tongue? Did'n't I see her in tears? Did'n't I 

see him struggling to throw her upon the couch? 
O filthy! hideous! abominable! Child, child,
talk not to me of charity. —Who gives twenty
pounds in charity?— But you are a stripling— 
You know nothing of the world—Besides charity
begins at home—Twenty pounds would buy
me a complete suit of flowered silk, trimmings
and all—” In short, I quitted the room, my
contempt for her, and my respect for her brother,
being increased in the same proportion. I have
since been informed, that the person, whom my
uncle so generously relieved, is the widow of an
ensign, who has nothing to depend upon but the
pension of fifteen pounds a year. The people of
the Well-house give her an excellent character. 
She lodges in a garret, and works very hard at
plain-work, to support her daughter, who is dying
of a consumption. I must own, to my shame, I
feel a strong inclination to follow my uncle's example,
in relieving this poor widow; but, betwixt
friends, I am afraid of being detected in a weakness
that might entail the ridicule of the company upon, 
Dear Phillips,
Your always,
J. Melford. 
Direct your next to me at
Bath; and remember
me to all our fellow-jesuits. 