


Chap. I. Of my birth and parentage. page 1
CHAP. II. I grow up—am hated by my relations
—sent to school—neglected by my
grandfather—maltreated by my master—seasoned
to adversity—form cabals against the
pedant—debarred access to my grandfather
—hunted by his heir—demolish the teeth of
his tutor. p. 7
CHAP. III. My mother's brother arrives— 
relieves me—a description of him—goes
along with me to the house of my grandfather
—is encountered by his dogs—defeats them
after a bloody engagement—is admitted to
the old gentleman—a dialogue between them. p. 12

CHAP. IV. My grandfather makes his will
—our second visit—he dies—his will is read
in presence of all his living descendants—the
disappointment of my female cousins—my
uncle's behaviour. p. 18
CHAP. V. The schoolmaster uses me barbarously
—I form a project of revenge, in which
I am assisted by my uncle—I leave the village
—am settled at the university by his generosity. p. 23
CHAP. VI. I make great progress in my
studies—am caressed by every body—my female
cousins take notice of me—I reject their
invitation—they are incensed and conspire
against me—I am left destitute by a misfortune
that befals my uncle—Gawky's treachery
—my revenge. p. 30
CHAP. VII. I am entertained by Mr. Crab— 
a description of him—I acquire the art of surgery
—consult Crab's disposition—become necessary
to him—an accident happens—he advises
me to launch out into the world—assists me
with money—I set out for London. p. 39
CHAP. VIII. I arrive at Newcastle—meet
with my old school-fellow Strap—we determine
to walk in company to London—set out on
our journey—put up at a solitary ale-house
—are disturbed by a strange adventure in the
night. p. 48

CHAP. IX. We proceed on our journey— 
are overtaken by an highwayman who fires at
Strap, is prevented from shooting me by a
company of horsemen, who ride in pursuit of
him—Strap is put to bed at an inn—Adventures
at that inn. p. 58
CHAP. X. The highwayman, is taken— 
we are detained as evidences against him— 
proceed to the next village—he escapes—we
arrive at another inn, where we go to bed— 
in the night we are awaked by a dreadful
adventure—next night we lodge at the house
of a school-master—our treatment there. p. 65
CHAP. XI. We descry the waggon—get
into it—arrive at an inn—our fellow-travellers
described—a mistake is committed by Strap,
which produces strange things. p. 73
CHAP. XII. Captain Weazel challenges
Strap, who declines the combat—an affair between
the captain and me—the usurer is fain
to give miss Jenny five guineas for a release— 
we are in danger of losing a meal—the behaviour
of Weazel, Jenny, and Joey on that
occasion—an account of captain Weazel and
his lady—the captain's courage tried—Isaac's
mirth at the captain's expence. p. 83
CHAP. XIII. Strap and I am terrified by an
apparition—Strap's conjecture—the mystery
explained by Joey, we arrive at London—our
dress and appearance described—we are insulted
in the street—an adventure in the ale-house— 

—we are imposed upon by a waggish footman
—set to rights by a tobacconist—take lodgings
—dive for a dinner—an accident at our ordinary. p. 94
CHAP. XIV. We visit Strap's friend—a
description of him—his advice—we go to
Mr. Cringer's house—are denied admittance
—an accident befals Strap—his behaviour
thereupon—an extraordinary adventure occurs,
in the course of which I lose all my
money. p. 104
CHAP. XV. Strap moralizes—presents his
purse to me—we inform our landlord of my
misfortune, who unravels the mystery—I present
myself to Cringer—he recommends and
turns me over to Mr. Staytape—I become acquainted
with a fellow dependant, who explains
the characters of Cringer and Staytape—and
informs me of the method to be pursued at the
Navy-office, and Surgeon's-hall—Strap is employed. p. 113
CHAP. XVI. My new acquaintance breaks
an appointment—I proceed by myself to the
Navy-office—address myself to a person there,
who assists me with his advice—I write to
the board—they grant me a letter to the Surgeons
at the hall—I am informed of the beau's
name and character—I find him—he makes
me his confident in an amour—desires me to
pawn my linen, for his occasions—I recover
what I lent him—some curious observations
of Strap on that occasion—his vanity. p. 122

CHAP. XVII. I go to Surgeon's hall, where
I meet with Mr. Jackson—I am examined
—a fierce dispute arises between two of the
examiners—Jackson disguises himself to attract
respect—is detected—in hazard of being sent
to Bridewell—he treats us at a tavern— 
carries us to a night-house, a troublesome adventure
there—we are committed to the
Round-house—carried before a justice—his
behaviour. p. 134
CHAP. XVIII. I carry my qualifications to
the Navy-office—the nature of it—the behaviour
of the s&wblank;t&wblank;y—Strap's concern
for my absence—a battle between him and a
blacksmith—the troublesome consequences of
it—his harrangue to me—his friend the
school-master recommends me to a French apothecary,
who entertains me as a journeyman. p. 146
CHAP. XIX. The characters of Mr. Lavement,
his wife and daughter—some anecdotes
of the family—the mother and daughter
rivals—I am guilty of a mistake that gives
me present satisfaction, but is attended with
troublesome consequences. p. 155
CHAP. XX. I am assaulted and dangerously
wounded—I suspect Odonnel, and am confirmed
in my opinion—I concert a scheme of
revenge, and put it in execution—Odonnel
robs his own servant, and disappears—I make
my addresses to a lady, and am miraculously delivered
from her snare. p. 164

CHAP. XXI. Squire Gawky comes to lodge
with my master—is involved in a troublesome
affair, out of which he is extricated by me— 
he marries my master's daughter—they conspire
against me—I am found guilty of theft
—discharged—deserted by my friends—I hire
a room in St. Giles's—where, by accident, I
find the lady to whom I made my addresses,
in a miserable condition—I relieve her. p. 172
CHAP. XXII. The history of Miss Williams. p. 185
CHAP. XXIII. She is interrupted by a bailif,
who arrests, and carries her to the marshal-sea
—I accompany her—bring witnesses to
prove she is not the same person named in the
writ—the bailif is fain to give her a present,
and discharge her—we shift our lodging— 
she resumes her story and ends it—my reflections
thereupon—she makes me acquainted
with the progress of a common woman of the
town—resolves to quit that way of life. p. 201
CHAP. XXIV. I am reduced to great misery
—assaulted on Tower-hill by a press-gang,
who put me on board a tender—my usage
there—my arrival on board of the Thunder
man of war, where I am put in irons, and afterwards
released by the good offices of Mr.
Thomson, who recommends me as assistant
to the surgeon—he relates his own story, and
makes me acquainted with the characters of
the captain, surgeon, and first mate. p. 218

CHAP. XXV. The behaviour of Mr. Morgan
—his pride, displeasure and generosity— 
the œconomy of our mess described—Thomson's
further friendship—the nature of my
duty explained—the situation of the sick. p. 229
CHAP. XXVI. A disagreeable accident happens
to me in the discharge of my office— 
Morgan's nose is offended—a dialogue between
him and the ship's steward—upon examination,
I find more causes of complaint than
one—my hair is cut off—Morgan's cookery
—The manner of sleeping on board—I am
waked in the night by a dreadful noise. p. 236
CHAP. XXVII. I acquire the friendship of
the surgeon, who procures a warrant for me,
and makes me a present of cloaths—a battle
between a midshipman and me—the surgeon
leaves the ship—the captain comes on board
with another surgeon—a dialogue between
the captain and Morgan—the sick are ordered
to be brought upon the quarter-deck and examined
—the consequences of that order—a
madman accuses Morgan, and is set at liberty
by command of the captain, whom he
instantly attacks and pummels without mercy. p. 242
CHAP. XXVIII. The captain enraged,
threatens to put the madman to death with his
own hand—is diverted from that resolution
by the arguments and persuasion of the first
lieutenant and surgeon—we set sail for St.
Helens, join the fleet under the command of

Sir C&wblank;n&wblank;r O&wblank;le, and proceed for the West-Indies
—are overtaken by a terrible tempest— 
my friend Jack Rattlin has his leg broke by a
fall from the main-yard—the behaviour of
doctor Mackshane—Jack opposes the amputation
of his limb, in which he is seconded by
Morgan and me, who undertake the cure, and
perform it successfully. p. 252
CHAP. XXIX. Mackshane's malice—I am
taken up and imprisoned for a spy—Morgan
meets with the same fate—Thomson is tampered
with to turn evidence against us— 
disdains the proposal, and is maltreated for his
integrity—Morgan is released to assist the surgeon
during an engagement with some French
ships of war—I remain fettered on the poop,
exposed to the enemy's shot, and grow delirious
with fear—am comforted after the battle
by Morgan, who speaks freely of the captain; 
is over-heard by the centinel, who informs
against him, and again imprisoned— 
Thomson grows desperate, and notwithstanding
the remonstrances of Morgan and me,
goes over-board in the night. p. 259
CHAP. XXX. We lament over the fate of
our companion—the captain offers Morgan
his liberty, which he refuses to accept—we
are brought before him and examined—Morgan
is sent back to custody, whither also I am
remanded after a curious trial. p. 266
CHAP. XXXI. I discover a subornation against
me, by means of a quarrel between
two of the evidences; in consequence of which,

Iam set at liberty, and prevail upon Morgan
to accept of his freedom on the same terms— 
Mackshane's malice—we arrive at Jamaica,
from whence in a short time we beat up to
Hispaniola, in conjunction with the West-Indian
squadron—we take in water, sail again,
and arrive at Carthagena—reflections on our
conduct there. p. 277
CHAP. XXXII. Our land forces being disembarked,
erect a faschine battery—our ship
is ordered with four more, to batter the fort of
Bocca Chica—Mackshane's cowardice— 
the chaplain's phrenzy—honest Rattlin loses
one hand—his heroism, and reflections on the
battle—Crampley's behaviour to me during
the heat of the fight. p. 282
CHAP. XXXIII. A breach being made in the
walls, our soldiers give the assault, take the place
without opposition—our sailors at the same
time become masters of all the other strengths
near Bocca Chica, and take possession of the
harbour—the good consequences of this success
—we move nearer the town—find two
forts deserted, and the channel blocked up
with sunk vessels; which however, we find
means to clear—land our soldiers at La Quinta
—repulse a body of militia—attack the
castle of St. Lazar, and are forced to retreat
with great loss—the remains of our army are
re-embarked—an effort of the admiral to take
the town—the œconomy of our expedition
described. p. 289

CHAP. XXXIV. An epidemic fever rages
among us—we abandon our conquests—I
am seized with the distemper; write a petition
to the captain, which is rejected—I am in
danger of suffocation through the malice of
Crampley; and relieved by a serjeant—my fever
encreases—the chaplain wants to confess
me—I obtain a favourable crisis—Morgan's
affection for me proved—the behaviour of
Mackshane and Crampley towards me—Captain
Oakhum is removed into another ship with
his beloved doctor—our new captain described
—an adventure of Morgan. p. 297
CHAP. XXXV. Captain Whiffle sends for
me—his situation described—his surgeon arrives,
prescribes for him, and puts him to bed
—a bed is put up for Mr. Simper contiguous
to the state-room, which, with other parts of
the captain's behaviour, gives the ship's company
a very unfavourable idea of their commander
—I am detained in the West-Indies,
by the admiral, and go on board the Lizard
sloop of war, in quality of surgeon's mate,
where I make myself known to the surgeon,
who treats me very kindly—I go on shore,
sell my ticket, purchase necessaries, and at my
return on board, am surprized at the sight of
Crampley, who is appointed lieutenant of the
sloop—we sail on a cruize—take a prize, in
which I arrive at port Morant, under the command
of my mess-mate, with whom I live in
great harmony. p. 309

CHAP. XXXVI. A strange adventure—in
consequence of which I am extremely happy
—Crampley does me ill offices with the captain:
but his malice is defeated by the good-nature
and friendship of the surgeon—we return
to Port Royal—our captain gets the command
of a larger ship, and is succeeded by an
old man—Brayl is provided for—we receive
orders to sail for England. p. 316