

The Biter is bite. 
Yet, he had no sooner committed his effects
to the care of this triumvirate, than
his fancy was visited with direful warnings,
which produced cold sweats and palpitations,
and threw him into such agonies of apprehension
as he had never known before. He remembered
the former desertion of the Tyroleze,
the recent villainy of the solicitor, and recollected
the remarks he had made upon the
disposition and character of his valet, which
evinced him a fit companion for the other two. 
Alarmed at these reflections, he intreated
the bailiff to indulge him with a visit to his own
lodgings, and even offered one hundred guineas
as a gratification for his compliance. But
the officer, who had formerly lost a considerable
sum by the escape of a prisoner, would not
run any risque in an affair of such consequence; 
and our hero was obliged to submit to the tortures
of his own presaging fears. After he
had waited five hours in the most racking impatience,
he saw the attorney enter with all the 

marks of hurry, fatigue and consternation, and
heard him exclaim, “Good God, have you
seen the gentleman?” 
Fathom found his fears realized in this interrogation,
to which he answered in a tone of
horror and dismay, “What gentleman? I suppose
I am robbed; speak and keep me no longer
in suspence.” “Robbed! cried the attorney,
the Lord forbid! I hope you can depend
upon the person you impowered to receive
your jewels and cash. I must own his proceedings
are a little extraordinary: for after
he had rummaged your scrutore, from which,
in presence of me and your servant, he took
one hundred and fifty guineas, a parcel of
diamond rings, and buckles according to this
here inventory, which I wrote with my own
hand, and East-India bonds to the tune of five
hundred more, we adjourned to Garraway's,
where he left me alone, under pretence of
going to a broker of his acquaintance who
lived in the neighbourhood, while the valet, as
I imagined, waited for us in the alley. Well,
Sir, he staid so long, that I began to be uneasy,
and at length resolved to send the servant in
quest of him, but when I went out for that purpose,
deuce a servant was to be found. Tho'
I in person inquired for him at every alehouse
within half a mile of the place. I then dispatched
no less than five ticket porters upon
the scent after them, and I myself, by a direction
from the bar-keeper, went to signor Ratchkali's
lodgings, where, at they told me, he had not
been seen since nine o'clock in the morning. 
Upon this intimation, I came directly hither, to
give you timely notice, that you may without 

delay, take measures for your own security. The
best thing you can do, is to take out writs for
apprehending him, in the counties of Middlesex,
Surry, Kent and Essex, and I shall put
them in the hands of trusty and dilligent officers,
who will soon ferret him out of his lurking-place,
provided he sculks within ten miles
of the bills of mortality: to be sure the job
will be expensive; and all these runners must
be paid before-hand. But what then? the defendant
is worth powder, and if we can once secure
him, I'll warrant the prosecution will quit
cost.” 
Fathom was almost choaked with concern
and resentment, at the news of this mischance,
so that he could not utter one word until this
narrative was finished. Nor was his suspicion
confined to the Tyroleze and his own lacquey; 
he considered the solicitor as their accomplice
and director, and was so much provoked at the
latter part of his harangue, that his discretion
seemed to vanish, and collaring the attorney,
“Villain! said he, you yourself have been a
principal actor in this robery;” Then turning to
the bystanders, “and I desire, in the king's name,
that he may be secured, untill I can make oath
before a magistrate, in support of the charge. 
If you refuse your assistance in detaining him, I
will make immediate application to one of the
secretaries of state who is my particular friend,
and he will see justice done to all parties.” 
At mention of this formidable name, the
bailiff and his whole family were in commotion,
to obstruct the retreat of the lawyer, who stood
aghast, and trembled under the grasp of our
adventure: but, soon as he found himself delivered
from this embrace, by the interposition 

of the spectators, and collected his spirits,
which had been suddenly dissipated by Fathom's
unexpected assault, he began to display one art
of his occupation, which he always reserved for
extraordinary occasions: this was the talent of
abuse, which he poured forth with such fluency
of opprobrious language, that our hero, smarting
as he was, and almost desperate with his
loss, deviated from that temperance of behaviour
which he had hitherto preserved, and
snatching up the poker, with one stroke opened
a deep trench upon the attorney's skull, that
extended from the hind head, almost to the
upper part of the nose, upon each side of which
it discharged a sanguine stream. Notwithstanding
the pain of this application, the sollicitor was
transported with joy at the sense of the smart,
and inwardly congratulated himself upon the
appearance of his own blood, which he no sooner
perceived, than he exclaimed, “I'm a dead
man,” and fell upon the floor at full length. 
Immediate recourse was had to a surgeon in
the neighbourhood, who having examined the
wound, declared there was a dangerous depression
of the first table of the skull, and that
if he could save the patient's life, without the
application of the trepan, it would be one of
the greatest cures that ever were performed. 
By this time, Fathom's first transport being
over blown, he summoned up his whole resolution,
and reflected upon his own ruin,
with that fortitude which had never failed him
in the emergencies of his fate: little disturbed
at the prognostic of the surgeon, which he considered
in the right point of view: “Sir,” said
he, “I am not so unacquainted with the resistance 

of an attorney's skull, at to believe the chastisment
I have bestowed on him, will at all endanger
his life, which is in much greater jeopardy
from the hands of the common executioner; 
for, notwithstanding this accident, I am determined
to prosecute the rascal for robbery,
with the utmost severity of the law; and that
I may have a sufficient fund left for that prosecution,
I shall not at present throw away one
farthing in unnecessary expences, but insist
upon being conveyed to prison without farther
delay.” 
This declaration was equally unwelcome to
the bailiff, surgeon and sollicitor, who upon the
supposition that the count was a person of fortune,
and would rather part with an immense
sum, than incur the ignominy of a goal, or involve
himself in another disgraceful law suit,
had resolved to fleece him to the utmost of
their power. But, now the attorney finding
him determined to set his fate at defiance, and
to retort upon him a prosecution which he had
no mind to undergo, began to repent heartily
of the provocation he had given, and to think
seriously on some method to overcome the
obstinacy of the incensed foreigner. With
this view, while the bailiff conducted him to
bed, in another apartment, he desired the
catchpole to act the part of mediator between
him and the count, and furnished him with
proper instructions for that purpose. Accordingly,
the landlord on his return, told Fathom
that he was sure the sollicitor was not a
man for this world; for that he had left him
deprived of his senses, and praying to God
with great devotion, for mercy to his murderer: 

he then exhorted him, with many protestations
of friendship, to compromise the unhappy affair,
by exchanging releases with the attorney
before his delirium should be known, otherwise
he would bring himself into a most dangerous
premunire, whither the plaintiff should die of
his wound, or live to prosecute him for the assault:
“and with regard to your charge of robbery
against him, said he, as it is no more than
a bare suspicion, unsupported by the least shadow
of evidence, the bill would be thrown out,
and then he might sue you for damages. I
therefore, out of pure friendship and good nature,
advise you to compromise the affair, and if
you think proper, will endeavour to bring about
a mutual release.” 
Our hero, whose passion was by this time
pretty well cooled, saw reason for assenting to
the proposal; upon which the deed was immediately
executed, the mediator's bill was discharged; 
and Ferdinand conveyed in an hackney
coach to prison, after he had impowered
his own landlord to discharge his servants, and
convert his effects into ready money. Thus,
he saw himself, in the course of a few hours,
deprived of his reputation, rank, liberty and
friends; and his fortune reduced from two
thousand pounds, to something less than two
hundred, fifty of which he had carried to goal
in his pocket. 