


DEAR WATKIN,
I YESTERDAY met with an incident which
I believe you will own to be very surprising —As I
stood with Liddy at the window of the inn where
we had lodged, who should pass by but Wilson
a-horseback: —I could not be mistaken in the person,
for I had a full view of him as he advanced; 
I plainly perceived by my sister's confusion that
she recognized him at the same time. I was
equally astonished and incensed at his appearance,
which I could not but interpret into an insult, or
something worse. I ran out at the gate, and, seeing
him turn the corner of the street, I dispatched
my servant to observe his motions, but the fellow
was too late to bring me that satisfaction. He told
me, however, that there was an inn, called the
Red Lion, at that end of the town, where he supposed
the horseman had alighted, but that the 

would not enquire without further orders. I sent
him back immediately to know what strangers
were in the house, and he returned with a report
that there was one Mr. Wilson lately arrived. In
consequence of this information I charged him
with a note directed to that gentleman, desiring
him to meet me in half an hour in a certain field
at the town's end, with a case of pistols, in order
to decide the difference which could not be determined
at our last rencounter: but I did not think
proper to subscribe the billet. My man assured
me he had delivered it into his own hand; and,
that having read it, he declared he would wait upon
the gentleman at the place and time appointed. 
M'Alpine being an old soldier, and luckily sober
at the time, I entrusted him with my secret. I
ordered him to be within call, and, having given
him a letter to be delivered to my uncle in case of
accident, I repaired to the rendezvous, which was
an inclosed field at a little distance from the highway. 
I found my antagonist had already taken his
ground, wrapped in a dark horseman's coat, with
a laced hat flapped over his eyes; but what was my
astonishment, when, throwing off this wrapper,
he appeared to be a person whom I had never seen
before! He had one pistol stuck in a leather belt,
and another in his hand ready for action, and,
advancing a few steps, called to know if I was ready 
—I answered, “No,” and desired a parley:
upon which he turned the muzzle of his piece towards
the earth; then replaced it in his belt, and
met me half way —When I assured him he was not
the man I expected to meet, he said, it might be so:
that he had received a slip of paper directed to Mr.
Wilson, requesting him to come hither; and that
as there was no other in the place of that name,
he naturally concluded the note was intended for 

him, and him only —I then gave him to understand,
that I had been injured by a person who
assumed that name, which person I had actually
seen within the hour, passing through the street on
horseback; that hearing there was a Mr. Wilson
at the Red Lion, I took it for granted he was the
man, and in that belief had writ the billet; and I
expressed my surprize, that he, who was a stranger
to me and my concerns, should give me such a
rendezvous, without taking the trouble to demand
a previous explanation —He replied, that there was
no other of his name in the whole county; that
no such horseman had alighted at the Red Lion
since nine o'clock, when he arrived—that having
had the honour to serve his majesty, he thought
he could not decently decline any invitation of this
kind, from what quarter soever it might come; 
and that if any explanation was necessary, it did
not belong to him to demand it, but to the gentleman
who summoned him into the field —Vexed as
I was at this adventure, I could not help admiring
the coolness of this officer, whose open countenance
prepossessed me in his favour. —He seemed
to be turned of forty; wore his own short black
hair, which curled naturally about his ears, and
was very plain in his apparel —When I begged
pardon for the trouble I had given him, he received
my apology with great good humour. —He told
me that he lived about ten miles off, at a small
farm-house, which would afford me tolerable lodging,
if I would come and take the diversion of
hunting with him for a few weeks; in which case
we might, perhaps, find out the man who had given
me offence —I thanked him very sincerely for
his courteous offer, which, I told him, I was not
at liberty to accept at present, on account of my
being engaged in a family partie; and so we parted,
with mutual professions of good will and esteem. 

Now tell me, dear knight, what am I to make
of this singular adventure? —Am I to suppose that
the horseman I saw was really a thing of flesh and
blood, or a bubble that vanished into air?—or
must I imagine Liddy knows more of the matter
than she choose to disclose? —If I thought her capable
of carrying on any clandestine correspondence
with such a fellow, I should at once discard
all tenderness, and forget that she was connected
with me by the ties of blood —But how is it possible
that a girl of her simplicity and inexperience,
should maintain such an intercouse, surrounded,
as she is, with so many eyes, destitute of all opportunity,
and shifting quarters every day of her life! 
—Besides, she has solemnly promised—No—I
can't think the girl so base—so insensible to the honour
of her family. —What disturbs me chiefly, is
the impression which these occurrences seem to
make upon her spirits —These are the symptoms
from which I conclude that the rascal has still a
hold on her affection—surely I have a right to call
him a rascal, and to conclude that his designs are
infamous —But it shall be my fault if he does not
one day repent his presumption —I confess I cannot
think, much less write on this subject, with any
degree of temper or patience; I shall therefore conclude
with telling you, that we hope to be in
Wales by the latter end of the month: but before
that period you will probably hear again from 
your affectionate
J. Melford. 
Oct. 4. 