


My father intends to revisit the place of his
nativity—we propose to accompany him— 
my uncle renews his will in my favour, determining
to go to sea again—we set out
for Scotland—arrive at Edinburgh— 
purchase our paternal estate—proceed to
to it—halt at the town where I was
educated—take up my bond to Crab— 
the behaviour of Potion and his wife, and
one of my female cousins—our reception
at the estate—Strap marries Miss Williams,
and is settled by my father to his own
satisfaction—I am more and more
happy. 
My father intending to revisit his native country,
and pay the tribute of a few tears at
my mother's grave, Narcissa and I resolved to
accompany him in the execution of this pious
office, and accordingly prepared for the journey; 
in which, however, my uncle would not engage,
being resolved to try his fortune once more at
sea. In the mean time, he renewed his will in
favour of my wife and me, and deposited it in
the hands of his brother-in-law: While I (that
I might not be wanting to my own interest)
summoned the Squire to produce his father's will 

at Doctor's Commons, and employed a proctor
to manage the affair in my absence. 
Every thing being thus settled, we took
leave of all our friends in London, and set out
for Scotland, Don Rodriguez, Narcissa, Miss
Williams, and I in the coach, and Strap with
two men in livery on horse-back: As we made
easy stages, my charmer held it out very well,
till we arrived at Edinburgh, where we proposed
to rest ourselves some weeks. People of our figure
could not fail of attracting the notice of such
a small place, where, as soon as our family was
known, we were loaded with caresses, and Narcissa
was so much pleased with the civilities she
received, that she protested she would never desire
to live in any other part of the world. 
Here Don Rodriguez having intelligence that
his nephew the fox-hunter had spent his estate,
which was to be exposed to sale by publick auction,
he determined to make a purchase of the
spot where he was born, and actually bought the
whole of his father's lands. 
In a few days after this bargain was made, we
left Edinburgh, in order to go and take possession; 
and by the way, halted one night in that town
where I was educated. —Upon inquiry, I found
that Mr. Crab was dead; whereupon I sent for his
executor, paid the sum I owed, with interest, and
took up my bond. Mr. Potion and his wife
hearing of our arrival, had the assurance to come
to the inn where we lodged, and send up their
names, with a desire of being permitted to pay
their respects to my father and me: But
their sordid behaviour towards me, when I was
an orphan, had made too deep an impression on 

my mind, to be effaced by this mean mercenary
piece of condescension; I therefore rejected
their message with disdain, and bid Strap tell them,
that my father and I desired to have no communication
with such low-minded wretches as they
were. 
They had not been gone half an hour, when
a woman without any ceremony, opened the door
of the room where we sat, and making towards
my father, accosted him with, “Uncle, your
servant—I am glad to see you.” —This was
no other than one of my female cousins, mentioned
in the first part of my memoirs, to whom
Don Rodriguez replied, “Pray, who are you,
madam?” —“O! (cried she) my cousin
Rory there, knows me very well—Don't
you remember me, Rory?” —“Yes,
madam, (said I) for my own part, I shall never
forget you. —Sir, this is one of the young
ladies, who (as I have formerly told you)
treated me so humanely in my childhood!” 
When I pronounced these words, my father's resentment
glowed in his visage, and he ordered
her to be gone, with such a commanding aspect,
that she retired in a fright, muttering curses as
she went down stairs: We afterwards learned
that she was married to an ensign, who had already
spent all her fortune; and that her sister
had bore a child to her mother's footman, who is
now her husband, and keeps a petty ale-house in
the country. 
The fame of our flourishing condition having
arrived at this place before us, we got notice
that the magistrates intended next day to compliment
us with the freedom of their town; 

upon which my father, considering their complaisance
in the right point of view, ordered the
horses to the coach early in the morning, when
we proceeded to our estate, which lay about a
dozen miles from this place. 
When we came within half a league of the
house, we were met by a prodigious number of
poor tenants, men, women and children, who
testified their joy by loud acclamations, and accompanied
our coach to the gate. —As there is
no part of the world, in which the peasants are
more attached to their Lords, than in Scotland,
we were almost devoured by their affection, in
getting out of the coach: My father had always
been their favourite, and now that he appeared
their master, after being thought dead so
long, their joy broke out into a thousand extravagancies: 
When we got into the court-yard, we
were surrounded by a vast number, who crowded
together so closely to see us, that several were
in danger of being squeezed to death; those who
were near Don Rodriguez sell upon their knees,
and kissed his hand, or the hem of his garment,
praying aloud for long life and prosperity to him; 
others approached Narcissa and me in the same
manner; while the rest clapped their hands at a
distance, and invoked heaven to shower its
choicest blessings on our heads! —In short,
the whole scene, though rude, was so affecting,
that the gentle partner of my heart wept over
it, and my father himself could not refrain from
dropping a tear. 
Having welcomed his daughter and me to his
house, he ordered some bullocks to be killed,
and some hogsheads of ale to be brought from 

the neighbouring village, to regale those honest
people, who had not enjoyed such a holiday for
many years before. 
Next day we were visited by the gentlemen in
the neighbourhood, most of them our relations,
one of whom brought along with him my
cousin, the fox-hunter, who had staid at his
house, since he was obliged to leave his own: 
My father was generous enough to receive him
kindly, and even promise to purchase for him
a commission in the army, at which he expressed
great thankfulness and joy. 
My charming Narcissa was universally admired
and loved for her beauty, affability and good
sense; and so well pleased with the situation of
the place, and the company around, that she
has not, as yet, discovered the least desire of
changing her habitation. 
We had not been many days settled, when I
prevailed upon my father to pay a visit to the
village where I had been at school. Here we
were received by the principal inhabitants, who
entertained us in the church, where Mr. Syntax
the schoolmaster (my tyrant being dead) pronounced
a Latin speech in honour of our family: 
And none exerted themselves more than Strap's
father and relations, who looked upon the honest
valet as the first gentleman of their race, and honoured
his benefactors accordingly. —Having received
the homage of this place, we retired, leaving
forty pounds for the benefit of the poor
of the parish; and that very night, Strap being
a little elevated with the regard that had been
shewn to him, and to me on his account, ventured
to tell me, that he had a sneaking kindness 

for Miss Williams, and that if his lady
and I would use our interest in his behalf, he
did not doubt that she would listen to his addresses. 
Surprized at this proposal, I asked if he knew
the story of that unfortunate young gentlewoman: 
Upon which, he replied, “Yes, yes, I know what
you mean—she has been unhappy, I grant
you—but what of that? I am convinced of
her reformation; or else you and my good
lady would not treat her with such respect. 
—As for the censure of the world, I value it
not a fig's end—besides, the world knows
nothing of the matter.” I commended
his philosophy, and interested Narcissa in his
cause; who interceded so effectually, that in a
little time, Miss Williams, yielded her consent,
and they were married with the approbation of
Don Rodriguez, who gave him five hundred pounds
to stock a farm, and made him overseer of his
estate. My generous bedfellow gave her maid
the same sum; so that they live in great peace
and plenty within half a mile of us, and daily
put up prayers for our preservation. 
If there be such a thing as true happiness on
earth, I enjoy it. —The impetuous transports of
my passion are now settled and mellowed into
endearing fondness and tranquillity of love,
rooted by that intimate connexion and interchange
of hearts, which nought but virtuous
wedlock can produce. —Fortune seems determined
to make ample amends for her former
cruelty; for my proctor writes, that notwithstanding
the clause in my father-in-law's
will, on which the Squire founds his claim, I shall
certainly recover my wife's fortune, in consequence 

of a codicil annexed, which explains that
clause, and limits her restriction to the age of
nineteen, after which she was at her own disposal. 
—I would have set out for London immediately
after receiving this piece of intelligence,
but my dear angel has been qualmish of late, and
begins to grow remarkably round in the waist; 
so that I cannot leave her in such an interesting
situation, which I hope will produce something
to crown my felicity. 