


Peregrine is overtaken by Mr. Gauntlet, with
whom he fights a duel, and contracts an intimate
friendship. He arrives at the garison, and
finds his mother as implacable as ever. He is
insulted by his brother Gam, whose preceptor he
disciplines with a horse-whip. 
In order to expel the melancholy images that
took possession of his fancy, at parting from
his mistress, he called in the flattering ideas of
those pleasures he expected to enjoy in France; 

and before he had rode ten miles, his imagination
was effectually amused. 
While he thus prosecuted his travels by anticipation,
and indulged himself in all the insolence
of hope, at the turning of a lane he was all of
a sudden overtaken by Emilia's brother on horseback,
who told him he was riding the same way,
and should be glad of his company. 
This young gentleman, whether prompted by
personal pique, or actuated with zeal for the
honour of his family, had followed our hero,
with a view of obliging him to explain the nature
of his attachment to his sister. Peregrine
returned his compliment with such disdainful civility,
as gave him room to believe that he suspected
his errand; and therefore, without further
preamble, he declared his business in these
words: “Mr. Pickle, you have carried on a
correspondence with my sister for some time,
and I should be glad to know the nature of it?” 
To this question our lover replied, “Sir, I
should be glad to know what title you have to
demand that satisfaction?” “Sir, (answered
the other) I demand it in the capacity of a brother,
jealous of his own honour, as well as of
his sister's reputation; and if your intentions are
honourable, you will not refuse it.” “Sir, (said
Peregrine) I am not at present disposed to appeal
to your opinion for the rectitude of my intentions; 
and I think you assume a little too much
importance, in pretending to judge my conduct.” 
“Sir, (replied the soldier) I pretend to judge
the conduct of every man who interferes with
my concerns, and even to chastise him, if I
think he acts amiss.” “Chastise! (cried the
youth, with indignation in his looks) sure you 

dare not apply that term to me?” “You are
mistaken (said Godfrey) I dare do any thing that
becomes the character of a gentleman.” “Gentleman,
God wot! (replied the other, looking
contemptuously at his equipage, which was none
of the most superb) a very pretty gentleman,
truly!” The soldier's wrath was inflamed by
this ironical repetition, the contempt of which
his conscious poverty made him feel; and he
called his antagonist presumptuous boy, insolent
upstart, with other epithets, which Perry retorted
with great bitterness: and a formal challenge
having passed between them, they alighted
at the first inn, and walked into the next field,
in order to decide their quarrel by the sword. 
Having pitched upon the spot, helped to pull off
each other's boots, and laid aside their coats and
waistcoats, Mr. Gauntlet told his opponent, that
he himself was looked upon in the army as an
expert swordsman, and that if Mr. Pickle had
not made that science his particular study, they
should be upon a more equal footing in using pistols. 
Peregrine was too much incensed to thank
him for his plain dealing, and too confident of
his own skill to relish the other's proposal, which
he accordingly rejected; and drawing his sword,
observed, that were he to treat Mr. Gauntlet according
to his deserts, he would order his man to
punish his audacity with an horse-whip. Exasperated
at this expression, which he considered
as an indelible affront, he made no reply, but
attacked his adversary with equal ferocity and address. 
The youth parried his first and second
thrust, but received the third in the outside of
his sword-arm. Though the wound was superficial,
he was transported with rage at sight of 

his own blood, and returned the assault with
such fury and precipitation, that Gauntlet, loath
to take advantage of his unguarded heat, stood
upon the defensive; and in the second longe,
Peregrine's weapon entering a kind of net work
in the shell of Godfrey's sword, the blade
snapped in two, and left him at the mercy of the
soldier, who, far from making an insolent use
of the victory he had gained, put up his Toledo
with great deliberation, like a man who had
been used to that kind of rencounters, observed
that such a blade as Peregrine's was not to be
trusted with a man's life, and advising the owner
to treat a gentleman in distress with more respect
for the future, slipped on his boots, and with
sullen dignity of demeanour stalked back to the
inn. 
Though Pickle was extremely mortified at his
miscarriage in this adventure, he was also struck
with the behaviour of his antagonist, which affected
him the more, as he understood that Godfrey's
fiertè had proceeded from the jealous sensibility
of a gentleman declined into the vale of
misfortune. Gauntlet's valour and moderation
induced him to put a favourable construction on
all those circumstances of that young soldier's
conduct, which before had given him disgust; 
and though in any other case he would have industriously
avoided the least appearance of submission,
he followed his conqueror to the inn,
with a view of thanking him for his generous forbearance,
and of solliciting his friendship and
correspondence. 
Godfrey had his foot in the stirrup to mount,
when Peregrine coming up to him, desired he
would defer his departure for a quarter of an 

hour, and favour him with a little private conversation. 
The soldier, who mistook the meaning
of the request, immediately quitted his horse,
and followed Pickle into a chamber, where he
expected to find a brace of pistols loaded on the
table; but he was very agreeably deceived, when
our hero, in the most respectful terms, acknowledged
his noble deportment in the field, owned
that till then he had misunderstood his character,
and begged that he would honour him with his
intimacy and correspondence. 
Gauntlet, who had seen undoubted proofs of
Peregrine's courage, which had considerably raised
him in his esteem, and had sense enough to perceive
that this concession was not owing to any
sordid or sinister motive, embraced his offer with
demonstrations of infinite satisfaction; and when
he understood the terms on which Mr. Pickle
was with his sister, proffered his service in his
turn, either as agent, mediator, or confidant:
nay, to give this new friend a convincing proof
of his sincerity, he disclosed to him a passion
which he had for some time entertained for his
cousin Miss Sophy, though he durst not reveal
his sentiments to her father, lest he should be offended
at his presumption, and withdraw his protection
from the family. 
Peregrine's generous heart was wrung with
anguish, when he understood that this young
gentleman, who was the only son of a distinguished
officer, had carried arms for the space
of five years, without being able to obtain a subaltern's
commission, though he had always behaved
with remarkable regularity and spirit, and
acquired the friendship and esteem of all the officers
under whom he had served. 

He would, at that time, with the utmost pleasure,
have shared his finances with him; but as
he would not run the risk of offending the young
soldier's delicacy of honour, by a premature exertion
of his liberality, he resolved to insinuate
himself into an intimacy with him, before he
would venture to take such freedoms; and with
that view pressed Mr. Gauntlet to accompany him
to the garison, where he did not doubt of having
influence enough to make him a welcome
guest. Godfrey thanked him very courteously for
his invitation, which he said he could not immediately
accept, but promised if he would favour
him with a letter, and fix the time at which he
proposed to set out for France, he would endeavour
to visit him at the commodore's habitation,
and from thence give him a convoy to Dover. 
This new treaty being settled, and a dossil of lint
with a snip of plaister applied to our adventurer's
wound, he parted from the brother of his dear
Emilia, to whom and his friend Sophy he sent
his kindest wishes; and having lodged one night
upon the road, arrived next day in the afternoon
at the garison, where he found all his friends in
good health, and overjoyed at his return. 
The commodore, who was by this time turned
of seventy, and altogether crippled by the gout,
seldom went abroad; and as his conversation was
not very entertaining, had but little company
within doors; so that his spirits must have quite
stagnated, had not they been kept in motion by
the conversation of Hatchway, and received at
different times an wholesome fillip from the discipline
of his spouse, who, by the force of pride,
religion and Coniac, had erected a most terrible
tyranny in the house. There was such a quick 

circulation of domesticks in the family, that every
suit of livery had been worn by figures of all dimensions: 
Trunnion himself had long before
this time yielded to the torrent of her arbitrary
sway; though not without divers obstinate efforts
to maintain his liberty; and now, that he
was disabled by his iufirmities, when he used to
hear his empress singing the loud Orthyan song
among the servants below, he would often in
whispers communicate to the lieutenant, hints of
what he would do if so be he was not deprived of
the use of his precious limbs. Hatchway was the
only person whom the temper of Mrs. Trunnion
respected, either because she dreaded his ridicule,
or looked upon his person with the eyes of affection. 
This being the situation of things in the
garison, it is not to be doubted that the old gentleman
highly enjoyed the presence of Peregrine,
who found means to ingratiate himself so effectually
with his aunt, that while he remained at
home, she seemed to have exchanged the disposition
of a tygress, for that of a gentle kid; but he
found his own mother as implacable, and his father
as much hen-pecked as ever. 
Gamaliel, who now very seldom enjoyed the
conversation of his old friend the commodore,
had some time ago entered into an amicable society,
consisting of the barber, apothecary, attorney
and exciseman of the parish, among whom
he used to spend the evening at Tunley's, and
listen to their disputes upon philosophy and politicks,
with great comfort and edification, while
his sovereign lady domineered at home as usual,
visited with great pomp in the neighbourhood,
and employed her chief care in the education of
her darling son Gam, who was now in the fifteenth 

year of his age, and so remarkable for his
perverse disposition, that in spite of his mother's
influence and authority, he was not only hated,
but also despised both at home and abroad. She
had put him under the tuition of the curate who
lived in the family, and was obliged to attend him
in all his exercises and excursions. This governor
was a low bred fellow, who had neither experience
nor ingenuity, but possessed a large fund of
adulation and servile complaisance, by which he
had gained the good graces of Mrs. Pickle, and
presided over all her deliberations in the same
manner as his superior managed those of Mrs.
Trunnion. 
He had one day rode out to take the air with
his pupil, who, as I have already observed, was
odious to the poor people, for having killed their
dogs and broken their inclosures, and on account
of his hump, distinguished by the title of my
lord; when in a narrow lane they chanced to
meet Peregrine on horseback. 
The young squire no sooner perceived his elder
brother, for whom he had been instructed to entertain
the most inveterate grudge, than he resolved
to insult him en passant, and actually rode
against him full gallop. Our hero guessing his aim,
fixed himself in his stirrups, and by a dexterous
management of the reins, avoided the shock in
such a manner, as that their legs only should encounter,
by which means my lord was tilted out
of his saddle, and in a twinkling laid sprawling in
the dirt. The governor enraged at the disgrace
of his charge, advanced with great insolence and
fury, and struck at Peregrine with his whip. Nothing
could be more agreeable to our young gentleman
than this assault, which furnished him 

with an opportunity of chastising an officious
wretch, whose petulance and malice he had longed
to punish. He therefore, spurring up his horse
towards his antagonist, overthrew him in the
middle of a hedge; and before he had time to
recollect himself from the confusion of the fall,
alighted in a trice, and exercised his horse-whip
with such agility about the curate's face and ears,
that he was fain to prostrate himself before his
enraged conqueror, and implore his forbearance
in the most abject terms. While Peregrine was
thus employed, his brother Gam had made shift
to rise, and attack him in the rear; for which
reason, when the tutor was quelled, the victor
faced about, snatched the weapon out of his
hand, and having broken it to pieces, remounted
his horse, and rode off, without deigning to honour
him with any other notice. 
The condition in which they returned produced
infinite clamour against the conqueror, who
was represented as a ruffian who had lain in ambush
to make away with his brother, in whose
defence the curate was said to have received those
cruel stripes, that hindered him from appearing
for three whole weeks in the performance of his
duty at church. 
Complaints were made to the commodore, who
having inquired into the circumstances of the affair,
approved of what his nephew had done; 
adding, with many oaths, that, provided Peregrine
had been out of the scrape, he wished Crookback
had broke his neck in the fall. 