


'Squire Gawky comes to lodge with my master
—is involved in a troublesome affair, out
of which he is extricated by me—he
marries my master's daughter—they conspire
against me—I am found guilty of
theft—discharged—deserted by my
friends—I hire a room in St. Giles's— 
where, by accident, I find the lady to whom
I made my addresses, in a miserable condition
—I relieve her. 
While I enjoyed myself at large in this
temper of mind, Mr. Lavement let his
first floor to my countryman and acquaintance
'Squire Gawky, who by this time had got a lieutenancy
in the army, and such a martial ferocity
in his appearance, that I was afraid he would remember
what had happened between us in Scotland,
and atone for his breach of appointment
then, by his punctuality now; but whether he
had actually forgot me, or was willing to make
me believe so, he betrayed not the least symptom
of recognition at sight of me, and I remained quite
cured of my apprehension; though I had occasion
not long after to be convinced, that howsoever
his externals might be altered, he was at 

bottom the same individual Gawky whom I have
already described. —For coming home late one
night from the house of a patient, I heard a noise
in the street, and as I approached, perceived two
gentlemen in custody of three watchmen. The prisoners,
who seemed to be miserably disfigured with
dirt, complained bitterly of the loss of their hats
and wigs; and one of them, whom by his tongue
I knew to be a Scotchman, lamented most piteously,
offering a guinea for his liberty, which
the watchman refused, alledging that one of his
companions was wounded grievously, and that
he must stand to the consequence. —My prejudice
in favour of my native country was so strong,
that I could not bear to see any body belonging
to it in distress, and therefore, with one blow of
my faithful cudgel, knocked down the watchman
who had hold of the person for whom I was
chiefly concerned. —He no sooner found himself
disengaged, than he betook himself to his heels,
and left me to maintain the dispute as I should
think proper; and indeed I came off but scurvily,
for before I could avail myself of my speed, I
received a blow on the eye, from one of the
other two, that had well nigh deprived me of
the use of that organ; however, I made shift to
get home, where I was informed of captain
Gawky's being robb'd and abused by a company
of foot-pads; and was ordered by my master to
prepare an emollient glyster and paregorick draught,
in order to allay and compose the ferment of his
spirits, occasioned by the barbarous treatment he
had undergone, while he took twelve ounces of
blood from him immediately. —When I enquired
into the particulars of this adventure, and understood
by the servant, that he came in just before 

me, without hat and wig, I made no scruple of
believing him to be the person I had released,
and was confirmed in that belief upon hearing
his voice, to which (before that event) I had
been so long a stranger. My eye being considerably
swelled and inflamed, I could not reflect
upon my enterprise without cursing my own folly,
and even resolving to declare the truth of the
whole story, in order to be revenged on the
cowardly wretch, for whom I had suffered: Accordingly,
next day, after he had told, in presence
of my master, his wife and daughter, who
came to visit him, a thousand lies concerning the
prowess he had shewn in making his escape, I
ventured to explain the mystery, and calling in the
evidence of my contused eye, upbraided him with
cowardice and ingratitude. —Gawky was so astonished
at this discourse, that he could not answer
one word; and the rest of the company stared
at one another; till at length my mistress repremanded
me for my insolent behaviour, and threatened
to turn me away for my presumption. — 
Upon which, Gawky (having recollected himself)
observed, as the young man might have mistaken
another person for him, he could forgive his insinuations,
more especially as he seemed to have
suffered for his civility; but advised me to be
more certain in my conjectures for the future,
before I ventured to publish them to the prejudice
of any man. —Miss applauded the captain's generosity
in pardoning one who had so villainously
aspersed him, and I began to imagine her praise
was not at all disinterested. —But the apothecary,
who perhaps had more penetration, or less partiality
than his wife and daughter, differed from
them in his sentiments of the matter, and expressed 

himself to me in the shop in this manner: 
“Ah mon pauvre Roderique! you ave more of
de veracité dan of de prudence—bot mine vife
and dater be diablement sage, and Mons.
le capitaine un fanfaron, pardieu!” —This
elogium on his wife and daughter, though meant
ironically by him, was nevertheless literally just; 
for by espousing the cause of Gawky, the one obliged
a valuable lodger, and the other acquired
a husband at a juncture, when one was
absolutely necessary; for the young lady finding
the effects of her correspondence with Odonnel
becoming plainer and plainer every day, insinuated
herself so artfully into the affection of this
new lodger, that in less than a fortnight, on pretence
of going to a play, they drove away together to the
Fleet, where they were coupled; from thence removed
to a bagnio, where the marriage was consummated; 
and in the morning came home,
where they asked her father's and mother's blessing. 
—The prudent parent, notwithstanding the
precipitation with which it was carried on, did
not think fit to refuse their approbation; for the
apothecary was not ill pleased to find his daughter
married to a young man of a good prospect, who
had not mentioned to him one syllable on the article
of her dowry; and his wife was rejoiced at
being rid of a rival in her gallants, and a spy
upon her pleasures. —Nor was I without self-enjoyment,
at this event, when I reflected upon
the revenge I had unwittingly taken upon my
enemy, in making him a cuckold by anticipation. 
—But I little dream'd what a storm of mischief was
brewing against me, whilst I thus indulged myself. 
—Whatever face Gawkey put on the matter,
my discovery of the adventure before related, 

and the reproaches I vented against him, had
stung him to the soul, and cherished the seeds of
emnity so strongly in his breast, that he (it seems)
imparted his indignation to his wife, who being
as desirous as he to compass the ruin of one that
not only slighted her caresses, but was able on any
occasion to discover particulars not at all advantageous
to her character, readily joined in a conspiracy
against me, which (had it taken effect as
they expected) would infallibly have brought me
to an ignominious death. 
My master having several times missed large
quantities of medicines of which I could give no
account, at last lost all patience, and in plain
terms taxed me with having embezzled them for
my own use. As I could only oppose my single asseveration
to this suspicion, he told me one day,
“By gar, your vord not be give me de satisfaction
—me find necessaire to chercher for my
medicine, pardonnez moy—il faut chercher— 
me demand le clef of your coffre a cette heure.” 
—Then raising his voice to conceal the fright he
was in, lest I should make any opposition, he
went on, “Oui, foutre, I charge you rendrer le
clef of your coffre—moi—fi, moi qui vous
parle.” —I was fired with so much resentment
and disdain at this accusation, that I burst into
tears, which he took for a sign of guilt; and
pulling out my key, told him he might satisfy
himself immediately, though he would not
find it so easy so satisfy me for the injury my reputation
had suffered from his unjust suspicion. — 
He took the key and mounted up to my chamber,
attended by the whole family; saying, “He bien,
nous verrons—nous verrons.” —But what was
my horror and amazement, when opening my 

chest, I saw them pull out an handful of the very
things that were missing, and heard him pronounce,
“Ah ha! vous etes bien venues—mardie, Mons.
Roderique, you be fort innocent!” —I had
not power to utter one word in my own vindication,
but stood motionless and silent, while every
body present made their respective remarks on
what appeared against me. —The servants said,
they were sorry for my misfortune, and went away
repeating, “Who would have thought it!” 
My mistress took occasion from this to rail against
the practice of employing strangers in general; 
and Mrs. Gawky, after having observed that she
never had a good opinion of my fidelity, proposed
to have me carried before the justice and committed
to Newgate immediately. Her husband was
actually upon the stairs in his way for a constable,
when Mr. Lavement, knowing the cost and trouble
of a prosecution to which he must bind himself, and at
the same time dreading lest some particulars of my
confession might affect his practice, called out,
“Restez mon fils! restez, it be veritablement
one grand crime wich dis pauvre diable have
committed—bot peutetre de good God give
him de penitence, and me vil not have upon
mine head de blood of one sinner.” —The
captain and his lady used all the christian arguments
their zeal could suggest, to prevail on the
apothecary to pursue me to destruction, and represented
the injustice he did to the community
of which he was a member, in letting a villain
escape, who would not fail of doing more mischief
in the world, when he should reflect on his
coming off so easily now;—but their eloquence
made no impression on my master, who turning
to me, said, “Go, miserable, go from mine 

house, quick, quick—and make reparation for
your mauvaise actions.” —By this time my indignation
had roused me from the stupefaction in
which I had hitherto remained, and I began in
this manner: “Sir, appearances, I own, condemn
me; but you are imposed upon as much
as I am abused—I have fallen a sacrifice to
the rancour of that scoundrel (pointing to
Gawky) who has found means to convey your
goods hither, that the detection of them
might blast my reputation, and accomplish my
destruction. —His hatred of me is owing to
a consciousness of having wronged me in my
own country; for which he in a cowardly
manner refused me the satisfaction of a gentleman; 
—he knows moreover, that I am no
stranger to his dastardly behaviour in this
town, which I have recounted before;—and
he is unwilling that such a testimony of his ingratitude
and pusilanimity should live upon the
earth; for this reason he is guilty of the most
infernal malice to bring about my ruin. —And
I am afraid, madam, (turning to Mrs. Gawky)
you have too easily entered into the sentiments
of your husband—I have often found you
my enemy; and am well acquainted with the
occasion of your being so, which I don't at
present think proper to declare;—but I would
not advise you, for your own sake, to drive
me to extremity.” This address enraged her
so much, that with a face as red as scarlet, and
the eyes of a fury, she strutted up to me, and
putting her hands in her sides, spit in my face,
saying, I was a scandalous villain, but she defied
my malice; and that unless her papa would prosecute
me like a thief as I was, she would not 

stay another night under his roof. —At the same
time, Gawky assuming in a big look, told me, he
scorned what lies I could invent against him; 
but that if I pretended to asperse his wife, he
would put me to death, by G&sblank;d. —To this I
answered, “I wish to God I could meet with
thee in a desart, that I might have an opportunity
of revenging thy perfidy towards me,
and rid the world of such a rascal—What
hinders me this moment (said I, seizing an old
bottle that stood by) from doing myself that
justice?” I had no sooner armed myself in
this manner, than Gawky and his father-in law
retired in such a hurry, that the one overturned
the other, and rolled together down stairs; while
my mistress swooned away with fear; and her
daughter asked if I intended to murder her. — 
I gave her to understand that nothing was farther
from my intention; that I would leave her to
the stings of her own conscience; but was firmly
resolved to slit her husband's nose, whenever
fortune should offer a convenient opportunity. — 
Then going down stairs, I met Lavement coming
up trembling with the pestle in his hand, and
Gawky behind armed with his sword pushing
him forward. —I demanded a parley, and having
assured them of my pacific disposition; Gawky
exclaimed, “Ah! villain! you have killed my
dear wife.” —And the apothecary cried, “Ah!
coquin! vere is my child?” —“The lady
(said I) is above stairs, unhurt by me, and
will a few months hence (I believe) reward
your concern.” —Here she called to them
herself, and desired they would let the wretch go,
and trouble themselves no farther about him. — 
To which her father consented, observing nevertheless, 

that my conversation was fort mysterieux. 
—Finding it impossible to vindicate my innocence,
I left the house immediately, and went to the
schoolmaster, with an intention of clearing myself
to him, and asking his advice with regard to
my future conduct; but to my inexpressible vexation,
was told he was gone to the country, where
he would stay two or three days. —I returned
with a design of consulting some acquaintance I
had acquired in my master's neighbourhood; but
my story had taken air, through the officiousness
of the servants, and not one of my friends would
vouchsafe me a hearing. —Thus I found myself,
by the iniquity of mankind, in a much more deplorable
condition than ever: for though I had
been formerly as poor, my reputation was without
blemish, and my health unimpaired till now; 
—but at present my good name was lost, my
money gone, my friends were alienated, my
body infected by a distemper contracted in the
course of an amour; and my faithful Strap, who
alone could yield me pity and assistance, absent I
knew not where. 
The first resolution I could take in this melancholy
conjuncture, was to remove my cloaths to the
house of the person with whom I had formerly lodg'd; 
there I remained two days, in hopes of getting another
place, by the interest of Mr. Concordance,
to whom I made no doubt of being able to vindicate
my character;—but in this I reckoned without
my host, for Lavement took care to be beforehand
with me, and when I attempted to explain
the whole affair to the schoolmaster, I found him
so prepossessed against me, that he would scarce
hear me to an end; but when I had finished my
justification, shook his head, and beginning with his 

usual exclamation, “O Ch&wblank;st! said, that won't go
down with me. —I am very sorry I should have
the misfortune of being concerned in the affair,
but however shall be more cautious for the future
—I will trust no man from henceforward
—no, not my father who begat me—nor
the brother who lay with me in my mother's
womb—should the genius of truth appear
I would question its veracity; and if Daniel
would rise from the dead I should think him
an impostor.” —I told him, that one day, it
was possible, he might be convinced of the injury
I had suffered, and repent of his premature determination. 
—To which he answered the proof
of my innocence would make his bowels vibrate
with joy; “but till that shall happen (continued
he) I must beg to have no manner of connection
with you—my reputation is at stake
—O my good God! I shall be looked upon
as your accomplice and abettor—people will
say Jonathan Wild was but a type of me— 
boys will hoot at me as I pass along; and the
cinder wenches belch forth reproaches wafted
in a gale impregnated with gin—I shall be
notorious—the very butt of slander, and
cloaca of infamy.” —I was not in an humour
to relish the climax of expressions upon which this
gentleman valued himself in all his discourses; but
without any ceremony took my leave, cursed
with every sentiment of horror, which my situation
could suggest. —I considered, however,
in the intervals of my despondence, that I must
in some shape suit my expence to my calamitous
circumstances; and with that view hired an apartment
in a garret near St. Giles's, at the rate
of nine-pence per week. —In this place I resolved 

to perform my own cure, having first pawned
three shirts to purchase medicines and support for
the occasion. 
One day when I sat in this solitary retreat,
musing upon the unhappiness of my fate, I was
alarmed by a groan that issued from a chamber
contiguous to mine, into which I immediately
run, and found a woman stretched on a miserable
truckle bed, without any visible signs of life. 
Having applied a smelling bottle to her nose, the
blood began to revisit her cheeks, and she opened
her eyes; but, good heaven! what were the emotions
of my soul, when I discovered her to be
the same individual lady, who had triumphed over
my heart, and to whose fate I had almost been
inseparably joined! Her deplorable situation filled
my breast with compassion, and every tender
idea reviving in my imagination, I flew into her
embrace; she knew me immediately, and straining
me gently in her arms, shed a torrent of tears,
which I could not help encreasing: At length,
casting a languishing look at me, she pronounced
with a feeble voice, “Dear Mr. Random, I do
not deserve this concern at your hands— 
I am a vile creature, who had a base design
upon your person—suffer me to expiate
that and all my other crimes by a miserable
death, which will not fail to overtake me in
a few hours.” —I encouraged her as much as I
could, told her I forgave all the injury she had
designed for me; and that although my circumstances
were extremely low, I would share my last
farthing with her. —In the mean time, begged to
know the immediate cause of that fit from which
she had just recovered, and I would endeavour
by my skill to prevent any more such attacks. — 

She seemed very much affected with what I said,
took my hand and pressed it to her lips, saying,
“You are too generous! I wish I could live to
express my gratitude—but alas! I perish for
want.” —Then shutting her eyes, relapsed into
another swoon. —Such extremity of distress must
have waked the most obdurate heart to sympathy
and compassion: What effect then must it have
on mine, that was naturally prone to every tender
passion? I ran down stairs and sent my landlady
to a chymist's shop for some cinnamon-water,
while I returning to this unfortunate creature's
chamber, used all the means in my power to
bring her to herself, which with much difficulty
I accomplished, and made her drink a glass of
the cordial to recruit her spirits; then I prepared
a little mulled red wine and a toast, which having
taken, she found herself thoroughly revived,
and informed me, that she had not tasted food for
eight and forty hours before. —As I was impatient
to know the occasion and nature of her calamity,
she gave me to understand that she was a woman
of the town by profession—that in the course of
her adventures, she found herself dangerously infected
with a distemper to which all of her class are
particularly subject;—that her malady gaining
ground every day, she was become loathsome to
herself as well as to every one else, when she resolved
to retire to some obscure corner, where
she might be cured with as little noise and expence
as possible;—that she had accordingly chosen
this place of retreat, and put herself into the
hands of an advertising doctor, who having fleeced
her of all the money she had, or could procure,
left her three days ago in a worse condition than
that in which he found her;—that except the 

cloaths on her back, she had pawned or sold every
thing that belonged to her, to satisfy that rapacious
quack, and quiet the clamour of her
landlady, who still persisted in her threats to turn
her out into the street. —After having moralized
upon these particulars, I proposed that she should
lodge in the same room with me, which would
save some money; and assured her I would myself
undertake her cure as well as my own, during
which she should partake of all the conveniencies
I could afford to myself. —She embraced my offer
with unfeigned acknowledgment, and I began
to put it in practice immediately. —I found
to my great satisfaction, in her, not only an agreeable
companion, whose conversation greatly
alleviated my chagrin, but also a careful nurse,
who served me with the utmost fidelity and affection. 
One day, while I testified my surprise
that a woman of her beauty, good sense, and
education (for she had a large portion of each)
could be reduced to such an infamous and miserable
way of life as that of a prostitute; she answered
with a sigh, “These very advantages
were the cause of my undoing.” —This remarkable
reply inflamed my curiosity to such a
degree, that I begged she would favour me with
the particulars of her story, and she complied in
these words. 