


My mother's brother arrives—relieves me— 
a description of him—goes along with me
to the house of my grandfather—is encountered
by his dogs—defeats them after a
bloody engagement—is admitted to the old
gentleman—a dialogue between them. 
About this time, my mother's only brother,
who had been long abroad, lieutenant
of a man of war, arrived in his own country; 
where being informed of my condition, he came
to see me, and out of his slender finances, not
only supplied me with what necessaries I wanted
for the present, but resolved not to leave the 

country, until he had prevailed on my grandfather
to settle something handsome for the future. 
This was a task to which he was by no means
equal, being entirely ignorant not only of the
judge's disposition, but also unacquainted with
the ways of men in general, to which his education
on board had kept him an utter stranger. 
—He was a strong built man, somewhat bandy-legged,
with a neck like that of a bull, and a
face which (you might easily perceive) had withstood
the most obstinate assaults of the weather. 
—His dress consisted of a soldier's coat altered for
him by the ship's taylor, a stripped flannel jacket,
a pair of red breeches japanned with pitch,
clean grey worsted stockings, large silver buckles
that covered three-fourths of his shoes, a silver-laced
hat whose crown over-looked the brims about
an inch and a half, a black bob wig in the
buckle, a check shirt, a silk handkerchief, an
hanger with a brass handle girded to his thigh
by a tarnished laced belt, and a good cak plant
under his arm. —Thus equipt, he set out with
me (who by his bounty made a very decent appearance)
for my grandfather's house, where we
were saluted by Jowler and Cæsar, whom my
cousin, young master, had let loose at our approach. 
Being well acquainted with the inveteracy of
these curs, I was about to betake myself to my
heels, when my uncle seizing me with one hand,
brandished his cudgel with the other, and at one
blow laid Cæsar sprawling on the ground: but
finding himself attacked at the same time in the
rear by Jowler, and fearing Cæsar might recover,
he drew his hanger, wheel'd about, and by a
lucky stroke, severed Jowler's head from his body. 
—By this time, the young fox-hunter and 

three servants armed with pitch-forks and flails
were come to the assistance of the dogs, whom
they found breathless upon the field. My cousin
was so provoked at the death of his favourites,
that he ordered his attendants to advance, and
take vengeance on their executioner, whom he
loaded with all the curses and reproaches his anger
could suggest. —Upon which my uncle stepped
forwards with an undaunted air, at the sight of
whose bloody weapon, his antagonists fell back
with precipitation; when he accosted their leader
thus: —“Lookée, brother, your dogs having
boarded me without provocation, what I did
was in my own defence. —So you had best be
civil, and let us shoot a-head, clear of you.” 
Whether the young 'squire misinterpreted my
uncle's desire of peace, or was enraged at the
fate of his hounds beyond his usual pitch of resolution,
I know not; but he snatched a flail from
one of his followers, and came up with a shew
of assaulting the lieutenant, who putting himself
into a posture of defence, proceeded thus: — 
“Lookée, you lubberly son of a w&wblank;e, if you
come athwart me, 'ware your gingerbread-work. 
—I'll be foul of your quarter, d&wblank;n
me.” This declaration followed by a flourish
of his hanger, seemed to check the progress of
the young gentleman's choler, who, upon turning
about, perceived his attendants had slunk, into
the house, shut the gate, and left him to decide
the contention by himself. —Here a parley
ensued, which was introduced by my cousin's
asking, “Who the d&wblank;l are you? —What do
you want? —Some scoundrel of a seaman (I suppose)
who has deserted and turned thief. —But
don't think you shall escape, sirrah,—I'll have 

you hanged, you dog,—I will. —Your blood
shall pay for that of my two hounds, you ragamuffin. 
—I would not have parted with them
to save your whole generation from the gallows,
you ruffian, you.” —“None of your
jaw, you swab,—none of your jaw (replied
my uncle) else I shall trim your laced jacket
for you—I shall rub you down with an oaken
towel, my boy—I shall.” —So saying, he
sheathed his hanger and grasped his cudgel. 
Mean-while the people of the house being alarm'd,
one of my female cousins opened a window, and
asked what was the matter? —“The matter!
(answered the lieutenant) no great matter, young
woman. —I have business with the old gentleman,
and this spark, belike, won't allow me
to come along side of him, that's all.” — 
After a few minutes pause, we were admitted,
and conducted to my grandfather's chamber,
through a lane of my relations, who honoured
me with very significant looks, as I passed along. 
—When we came into the judge's presence, my
uncle, after two or three sea-bows, expressed
himself in this manner: —“Your servant, your
servant. —What chear, father? what chear? 
—I suppose you don't know me—may hap
you don't. —My name is Tom Bowling,—and
this here boy, you look as if you did not
know him neither,—'tis like you mayn't. — 
He's new-rigged, i' faith;—his cloth don't
shake in the wind so much as it wont to do. — 
'Tis my nephew, d'ye see, Roderick Random,
—our own flesh and blood, old gentleman,
don't lag a stern, you dog, don't (pulling me
forward).” My grandfather (who was laid
up with the gout) received this relation, after his 

long absence, with that civility and coldness which
was peculiar to him; told him he was glad to
see him, and desired him to sit down. —“Thank
ye, thank ye, sir, I had as lief stand, (said
my uncle) for my own part, I desire nothing
of you; but if you have any conscience at
all, do something for this poor boy, who has
been used at a very unchristian rate. —Unchristian
do I call it? —I am sure the Moors
in Barbary, have more humanity than to leave
their little ones to misery and want. —I would
fain know, why my sister's son is more neglected
than that there Fair-weather Jack,
(pointing to the young 'squire, who with the
rest of my cousins, had followed us into the room.) 
Is he not as near a-kin to you as the other? — 
Is not he much handsomer and better built than
that great chucklehead? —Come, come, consider,
old gentleman, you are going in a short
time, to give an account of your evil actions. 
—Remember the wrongs you did his father; 
and make all the satisfaction in your power,
before it be too late. —The least thing you can
do, is to settle his father's portion on him.” — 
The young ladies, who thought themselves too
much concerned, to contain themselves any longer,
set up their throats altogether against my
protector, who stopped his ears with his fingers,
and cried out, that all the devils in hell
had broke loose upon him. —“Scurvy companion,
—sawcy tarpawlin,—rude, impertinent fellow,
did he think to prescribe to grandpapa. —His
sister's brat had been too well taken care of,— 
Grandpapa was too just not to make a difference
between an unnatural rebellious son, and
his dutiful loving children who took his advice 

in all things;” and such expressions, were levelled
against him with great violence; until the
judge at length commanded silence. —He calmly
rebuked my uncle for his unmannerly behaviour,
which he said he would excuse on account of
his education: he told him he had been very
kind to the boy, whom he had kept at school
seven or eight years, although he was informed
he made no progress in his learning; but was addicted
to all manner of vice, which he the rather
believed, because he himself was witness to a
barbarous piece of mischief he had committed
on the jaws of his chaplain. —But however, he
would see what the lad was fit for, and bind him
apprentice to some honest tradesman or other,
provided he would mend his manners, and behave
for the future, as became him. —The honest
tar (whose pride and indignation boiled within
him) answered my grandfather; that it was
true he had sent him to school, but it had cost
him nothing, for he had never been at one shilling
expence, to furnish him with food, raiment,
books, or other necessaries; so, that it was not
to be much wondered at, if the boy made small
progress; and yet, whoever told him so, was
guilty of a damn'd lie, for he was allowed by
those who understood those matters, to be the best
scholar of his age, in all the country; the truth
of which he would maintain, by laying a wager
of his whole half year's pay on the boy's head;— 
(with these words he pulled out his purse, and
challenged the company.) —Neither is he addicted
to vice, as you affirm, but very much exposed to
ill usage, by your neglect, on which occasions,
d'ye see, he never fails to shew his spirit, which
has been misrepresented to you. —As for what 

happened to your chaplain, I am only sorry,
that he did not knock out the scoundrel's brains,
instead of his teeth. —By the Lord, if ever I
come up with him, he had better be in Greenland,
—that's all. —Thank you for your courteous
offer, of binding the lad apprentice to a tradesman,
I suppose you would make a taylor of him—would
you? —I had rather see him hang'd, d'ye see. — 
Come along, Rory, I perceive how the land lies,
my boy,—let's tack about, i' faith,—while I
have a shilling thou shan't want a tester. —B'wye,
old gentleman, you're bound for the other world,
but I believe damnably ill provided for the voyage. 
—Thus ended our visit, and we returned to the
village, my uncle muttering curses all the way
against the old shark and the young fry that
surrounded him. 