


MY DEAR LETTY,
I WROTE you at great length by the post,
the twenty-sixth of last month, to which I refer
you for an account of our proceedings at Bath; 
and I expect your answer with impatience. But,
having this opportunity of a private hand, I send
you two dozen of Bath-rings; six of the best of
which I desire you will keep for yourself, and distribute
the rest among the young ladies, our common
friends, as you shall think proper. —I don't
know how you will approve of the mottoes; some
of them are not much to my own liking; but I was
obliged to take such as I could find ready manufactured
—I am vexed, that neither you nor I have
received any further information of a certain person
—Sure it can't be wilful neglect! —O my dear
Willis! I begin to be visited by strange fancies,
and to have some melancholy doubts; which, however,
it would be ungenerous to harbour without 

further inquiry—My uncle, who has made me a
present of a very fine set of garnets, talks of treating
us with a jaunt to London; which, you may
imagine, will be highly agreeable: but I like Bath
so well, that I hope he won't think of leaving it
till the season is quite over; and yet, betwixt
friends, something has happened to my aunt, which
will probably shorten our stay in this place. 
Yesterday, in the forenoon, she went by herself
to a breakfasting in one of the rooms; and, in half
an hour, returned in great agitation, having Chowder
along with her in the chair. I believe some
accident must have happened to that unlucky animal,
which is the great source of all her troubles. 
Dear Letty! what a pity it is, that a woman of
her years and discretion, should place her affection
upon such an ugly, ill-conditioned cur, that snarls
and snaps at every body. I asked John Thomas,
the footman who attended her, what was the
matter? and he did nothing but grin! A famous
dog-doctor was sent for, and undertook to cure the
patient, provided he might carry him home to his
own house; but his mistress would not part with
him out of her own sight—She ordered the cook
to warm cloths, which she applied to his bowels,
with her own hand. She gave up all thoughts of
going to the ball in the evening; and when Sir
Ulic came to drink tea, refused to be seen; so that
he went away to look for another partner. My
brother Jery whistles and dances. My uncle sometimes
shrugs up his shoulders, and sometimes bursts
out a-laughing. My aunt sobs and scolds by turns; 
and her woman, Win. Jenkins, Hatch and wonders
with a foolish face of curiosity; and, for my part. 
I am as curious as she, but ashamed to ask questions. 
Perhaps time will discover the mystery; for if
it was any thing that happened in the Rooms, it 

can't be long concealed—All I know is, that last
night at supper, miss Bramble spoke very disdainfully
of Sir Ulic Mackilligut, and asked her brother
if he intended to keep us sweltering all the
summer at Bath? “No, sister Tabitha, (said he,
with an arch smile) we shall retreat before the
Dog days begin; though I make no doubt, that
with a little temperance and discretion, our constitutions
might be kept cool enough all the
year, even at Bath.” As I don't know the
meaning of this insinuation, I won't pretend to
make any remarks upon it at present: hereafter,
perhaps, I may be able to explain it more to your
satsifaction—In the mean time, I beg you will
be punctual in your correspondence, and continue
to love your ever faithful 
Lydia Melford. 
Bath, May 6. 