


In which the Rays of Chivalry shine
with renovated Lustre. 
Our hero little dreamed that he
had a formidable rival in the
person of the knight who arrived 

about eleven at the sign of the St.
George, and, by the noise he made,
gave intimation of his importance. 
This was no other than squire Sycamore,
who, having received advice
that Miss Aurelia Darnel had eloped
from the place of her retreat, immediately
took the field, in quest of that
lovely fugitive; hoping that, should
he have the good fortune to find her
in her present distress, his good offices
would not be rejected. He had followed
the chace so close, that, immediately
after our adventurer's departure,
he alighted at the inn from
whence Aurelia had been conveyed; 
and there he learned the particulars
which we have related above. Mr.
Sycamore had a great deal of the
childish romantic in his disposition,
and, in the course of his amours, is
said to have always taken more pleasure
in the pursuit than in the final
possession. He had heard of Sir Launcelot's
extravagance, by which he was
in some measure infected; and he
dropped an insinuation, that he could 

eclipse his rival even in his own lunatic
spere. This hint was not lost upon
his companion, counsellor, and
buffoon, the facetious Davy Dawdle,
who had some humour and a great
deal of mischief in his composition. 
He looked upon his patron as a fool,
and his patron knew him to be both
knave and fool: yet the two characters
suited each other so well, that they
could hardly exist asunder. Davy was
an artful sycophant, but he did not
flatter in the usual way; on the contrary,
he behaved en cavalier, and
treated Sycamore, on whose bounty
he subsisted, with the most sarcastic
familiarity. Nevertheless, he seasoned
his freedom with certain qualifying
ingredients that subdued the bitterness
of it, and was now become so necessary
to the squire, that he had no
idea of enjoyment with which Dawdle
was not some how or other connected. 
There had been a warm dispute
betwixt them about the scheme
of contesting the prize with Sir Launcelot
in the lists of chivalry. Sycamore 

more had insinuated, that if he had
a mind to play the fool, he could
wear armour, wield a launce, and
manage a charger, as well as Sir
Launcelot Greaves. Dawdle snatching
the hint, “I had some time ago,
(said he) contrived a scheme for you,
which I was afraid you had not address
enough to execute—It would
be no difficult matter, in imitation of
the batchelor Sampson Carrasco, to go
in quest of Greaves as a knight errant,
defy him as a rival, and establish a
compact, by which the vanquished
should obey the injunctions of the
victor.” —“That is my very idea.” 
cried Sycamore) “Your idea, (replied
the other) had you ever an idea of
your own conception?” —Thus the
dispute began, and was maintained
with great vehemence; until other arguments
failing, the squire offered to
lay a wager of twenty guineas. To
this proposal Dawdle answered by the
interjection Pish! which inflamed Sycamore
to a repetition of the defiance.” 
—“You are in the right (said 

Dawdle) to use such an argument, as
you know is by me unanswerable. A
wager of twenty guineas will at any
time overthrow and confute all the
logick of the most able syllogist, who
has not got a shilling in his pocket.” 
Sycamore looked very grave at this
declaration, and, after a short pause,
said, “I wonder, Dawdle, what you
do with all your money!” “I am
surprised you should give yourself that
trouble—I never ask what you do
with yours.” —“You have no occasion
to ask: you know pretty well how
it goes.” What! do you upbraid me
with your favours?—'tis mighty well,
Sycamore.” —“Nay, Dawdle, I did
not intend to affront.” —“Z&wblank;s! affront!
what d'ye mean?” —“I'll assure
you, Davy, you don't know me,
if you think I could be so ungenerous
as to—a—to—” “I always thought,
whatever faults or foibles you might
have, Sycamore, that you was not deficient
in generosity,—tho' to be sure it
is often very absurdly displayed.” “Ay,
that's one of my greatest foibles: I 

can't refuse even a scoundrel, when I
think he is in want. —Here, Dawdle,
take that note.” —“Not I, sir,—what
d'ye mean?—what right have I to
your notes.” “Nay, but Dawdle,— 
come.” —“By no means,—It looks
like the abuse of good nature,—all the
world knows you're good-natured to
a fault.” —“Come, dear Davy, you
shall—you must oblige me.” —Thus
urged, Dawdle accepted the bank note
with great reluctance, and restored the
idea to the right owner. 
A suit of armour being brought
from the garret or armoury of his ancestors,
he gave orders for having the
pieces scoured and furbished up; and
his heart dilated with joy, when he
reflected upon the superb figure he
should make when cased in complete
steel, and armed at all points for the
combat. 
When he was fitted with the other
parts, Dawdle insisted on buckling on
his helmet, which weighed fifteen
pounds, and the head-piece being adjusted,
made such a clatter about his 

ears with a cudgel, that his eyes had
almost started from their sockets. His
voice was lost within the vizor, and
his friend affected not to understand
his meaning when he made signs with
his gauntlets, and endeavoured to close
with him, that he might wrest the
cudgel from his hand. At length he
desisted, saying, “I'll warrant the helmet
sound, by its ringing;” and taking
it off, found the squire in a cold
sweat. He would have atchieved
his first exploit on the spot, had his
strength permitted him to assault
Dawdle; but, what with want of air,
and the discipline he had undergone,
he had well nigh swooned away; and
before he retrieved the use of his members,
he was appeased by the apologies
of his companion, who protested he
meant nothing more than to try if the
helmet was free of cracks, and whether
or not it would prove a good protection
for the head it covered. His
excuses were accepted: the armour
was packed up, and next morning
Mr. Sycamore set out from his own 

house, accompanied by Dawdle, who
undertook to perform the part of his
squire at the approaching combat. He
was also attended by a servant on
horseback, who had charge of the armour,
and another who blowed the
trumpet. They no sooner understood
that our hero was housed at the
George, than the trumpeter sounded
a charge, which alarmed Sir Launcelot
and his company, and disturbed
honest captain Crowe in the middle of
his first sleep. Their next step was
to pen a challenge, which, when the
stranger departed, was by the trumpeter
delivered with great ceremony
into the hands of Sir Launcelot, who
read it in these words: “To the
knight of the Crescent, greeting. 
Whereas I am informed you have the
presumption to lay claim to the heart
of the peerless Aurelia Darnel, I give
you notice that I can admit no rivalship
in the affection of that paragon of
beauty; and I expect that you will
either resign your pretensions, or make
it appear in single combat, according 

to the law of arms, and the institutions
of chivalry, that you are worthy
to dispute her favour with him of the
Griffin. Polydore.” 
Our adventurer was not a little surprised
at this address, which, however,
he pocketed in silence; and began
to reflect, not without mortification,
that he was treated as a lunatic
by some person who wanted to amuse
himself with the infirmities of his fellow
creatures. Mr. Thomas Clarke,
who saw the ceremony with which
the letter was delivered, and the emotions
with which it was read, hied
him to the kitchen for intelligence,
and there learned that the stranger
was squire Sycamore. He forthwith
comprehended the nature of the billet,
and, in the apprehension that
bloodshed would ensue, resolved to
alarm his uncle, that he might assist
in keeping the peace. He accordingly
entered the apartment of the captain,
who had been waked by the trumpet,
and now peevishly asked the
meaning of that damned piping, as 

if all hands were called upon deck. 
Clarke having imparted what he knew
of the transaction, together with his
own conjectures, the captain said, he
did not suppose as how they would
engage by candle-light; and that for
his own part he should turn out in
the larboard watch, long enough before
any signals could be hove out for
forming the line. With this assurance
the lawyer retired to his nest, where
he did not fail to dream of Mrs. Dolly
Cowslip; while Sir Launcelot passed
the night awake, in ruminating on
the strange challenge he had received. 
He had got notice that the sender was
Mr. Sycamore, and hesitated with
himself whether he should not punish
him for his impertinence: but when
he reflected on the nature of the dispute,
and the serious consequences it
might produce, he resolved to decline
the combat, as a trial of right and merit,
founded upon absurdity. Even
in his maddest hours, he never adopted
those maxims of knight-errantry
which related to challenges. He 

always perceived the folly and wickedness
of defying a man to mortal fight,
because he did not like the colour of
his beard, or the complexion of his
mistress; or of deciding by homicide,
whether he or his rival deserved the
preference, when it was the lady's
prerogative to determine which should
be the happy lover. It was his opinion
that chivalry was an useful institution
while confined to its original
purposes of protecting the innocent,
assisting the friendless, and bringing
the guilty to condign punishment:
but he could not conceive how these
laws should be answered by violating
every suggestion of reason, and every
precept of humanity. Captain Crowe
did not examine the matter so philosophically. 
He took it for granted
that in the morning the two knights
would come to action, and slept sound
on that supposition. But he rose before
it was day, resolved to be some
how concerned in the fray; and understanding
that the stranger had a
companion, set him down immediately 

for his own antagonist. So impatient
was he to establish this secondary
contest, that by day-break he entered
the chamber of Dawdle, to which he
was directed by the waiter, and roused
him with a hilloah, that might have
been heard at the distance of half a
league. Dawdle, startled by this terrific
sound, sprung out of bed, and
stood upright on the floor, before he
opened his eyes upon the object by
which he had been so dreadfully
alarmed. But when he beheld the
head of Crowe, so swelled and swathed,
so livid, hideous, and griefly,
with a broad sword by his side, and a
case of pistols in his girdle, he believed
it was the apparition of some murthered
man; his hair bristled up, his
teeth chattered, and his knees knocked; 
he would have prayed, but his
tongue denied its office. Crowe seeing
his perturbation, “May-hap,
friend, said he, you take me for a
buccaneer: but I am no such person. 
—My name it is captain Crowe. 
—I come not for your silver nor your 

gold; your rigging nor your stowage; 
but hearing as how your friend intends
to bring my friend Sir Launcelot
Greaves to action, d'ye see; I desire
in the way of friendship, that,
while they are engaged, you and I, as
their seconds, may lie board and board
for a few glasses, to divert one another,
d'ye see.” Dawdle hearing this
request, began to retrieve his faculties,
and throwing himself into the
attitude of Hamlet, when the ghost
appears, exclaimed in theatrical accent,
“Angels and ministers of grace
defend us! —Art thou a spirit of
grace, or goblin damn'd?” —As he
seemed to bend his eye on vacancy,
the captain began to think that he
really saw something preternatural,
and stared wildly around. Then addressing
himself to the terrified Dawdle,
“Damn'd, (said he) for what
should I be damn'd? If you are afeard
of goblins, brother, put your trust in
the Lord, and he'll prove a sheet-anchor
to you.” The other having by
this time recollected himself perfectly, 

continued, notwithstanding, to
spout tragedy, and in the words of
Macbeth pronounced, 
“What man dare, I dare:
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
The armed rhinoceros, or Hyrcanian tyger;
Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble.”—
“'Ware names, Jack, (cried the impatient
mariner) if so be as how you'll
bear a hand and rig yourself, and take
a short trip with me into the offing,
we'll overhaul this here affair in the
turning of a capstan.” 
At this juncture they were joined
by Mr. Sycamore in his night-gown
and slippers. Disturbed by Crowe's
first salute he had sprung up, and now
expressed no small astonishment at
first sight of the novice's countenance. 
After having gazed alternately at him
and Dawdle, “Who have we got
here, said he, raw head and bloody 

bones?” when his friend, slipping on
his cloaths, gave him to understand
that this was a friend of Sir Launcelot
Greaves, and explained the purport
of his errant, he treated him with
more civility. He assured him that
he should have the pleasure to break
a spear with Mr. Dawdle; and signified
his surprize that Sir Launcelot had
made no answer to his letter. It being
by this time clear day-light, and
Crowe extremely interested in this affair,
he broke without ceremony into
the knight's chamber, and told him
abruptly that the enemy had brought
to, and waited for his coming up, in
order to begin the action. “I've
hailed his consort, said he, a shambling
chattering fellow: he took me
first for a hobgoblin, then called me
names, a tyger, a wrynose o'ross, and
a Persian bear; but egad, if I come
athwart him, I'll make him look like
the bear and ragged staff before we
part. —I wool.—” 
This intimation was not received
with that alacrity which the captain 

expected to find in our adventurer,
who told him in a peremptory tone,
that he had no design to come to action,
and desired to be left to his repose. 
Crowe forthwith retired crest-fallen,
and muttered something which
was never distinctly heard. 
About eight in the morning Mr.
Dawdle brought him a formal message
from the knight of the Griffin,
desiring he would appoint the lists,
and give security of the field. To
which request he made answer in a
very composed and solemn accent,
“If the person who sent you thinks
I have injured him, let him without
disguise, or any such ridiculous ceremony,
explain the nature of the
wrong; and then I shall give such
satisfaction as may suit my conscience
and my character. If he hath bestowed
his affection upon any particular
object, and looks upon me as a
favoured rival, I shall not wrong the
lady so much as to take any step that
may prejudice her choice, especially
a step that contradicts my own reason 

as much as it would outrage the laws
of my country. If he who calls himself
knight of the Griffin is really desirous
of treading in the paths of true
chivalry, he will not want opportunities
of signalizing his valour in the
cause of virtue. —Should he, notwithstanding
this declaration, offer violence
to me in the course of my occasions,
he will always find me in a
posture of defence: or, should he
persist in repeating his importunities,
I shall without ceremony chastise the
messenger.” His declining the combat
was interpreted into fear by Mr.
Sycamore, who now became more insolent
and ferocious, on the supposition
of our knight's timidity. Sir
Launcelot mean while went to breakfast
with his friends, and having put
on his armour, ordered the horses to
be brought forth. Then he payed
the bill, and walking deliberately to
the gate, in presence of squire Sycamore
and his attendants, vaulted at
one spring into the saddle of Bronzomarte, 

whose neighing and curvetting
proclaimed the joy he felt in
being mounted by his accomplished
master. 
Though the knight of the Griffin
did not think proper to insult his
rival personally, his friend Dawdle
did not fail to crack some jokes on
the figure and horsemanship of Crowe,
who again declared he should be glad
to fall in with him upon the voyage:
nor did Mr. Clarke's black patch and
rueful countenance pass unnoticed and
unridiculed. As for Timothy Crabshaw,
he beheld his brother squire
with the contempt of a veteran: and
Gilbert payed him his compliments
with his heels at parting: but when
our adventurer and his retinue were
clear of the inn, Mr. Sycamore ordered
his trumpeter to sound a retreat,
by way of triumph over his antagonist. 
Perhaps he would have
contented himself with this kind of
victory, had not Dawdle further inflamed
his envy and ambition, by
launching out in praise of Sir Launcelot. 

He observed that his countenance
was open and manly; his joints
strong knit, and his form unexceptionable; 
that he trod like Hercules, and
vaulted into the saddle like a winged
Mercury: nay, he even hinted it was
lucky for Sycamore that the knight
of the Crescent happened to be so
pacifically disposed. His patron sickened
at these praises, and took fire at
the last observation. He affected to
undervalue personal beauty, though
the opinion of the world had been
favourable to himself in that particular:
he said he was at least two
inches taller than Greaves; and as
to shape and air, he would make
no comparisons; but with respect to
riding, he was sure he had a better
seat than Sir Launcelot, and would
wager five hundred to fifty guineas,
that he would unhorse him at the first
encounter. “There is no occasion
for laying wagers, replied Mr. Dawdle,
the doubt may be determined in
half an hour—Sir Launcelot is not a
man to avoid you at full gallop.” 

Sycamore, after some hesitation, declared
he would follow and provoke
him to battle, on condition that
Dawdle would engage Crowe; and
this condition was accepted: for,
though Davy had no stomach to the
tryal, he could not readily find an
excuse for declining it: besides, he
had discovered the captain to be a
very bad horseman, and resolved to
eke out his own scanty valour with a
border of ingenuity. The servants
were immediately ordered to unpack
the armour, and, in a little time,
Mr. Sycamore made a very formidable
appearance. But the scene
that followed is too important to be
huddled in at the end of a chapter; 
and therefore we shall reserve it for
a more conspicuous place in these
memoirs. 