


Strap and I are terrified by an apparition— 
Strap's conjecture—the mystery explained
by Joey—we arrive at London—our
dress and appearance described—we are insulted
in the street—an adventure in the
ale-house—we are imposed upon by a waggish
footman—set to rights by a tobacconist
—take lodgings—dive for a dinner—an accident
at our ordinary. 
We arrived at our inn, supped and went to
bed; but Strap's distemper continuing,
he was obliged to get up in the middle of the
night, and taking the candle in his hand, which
he had left burning for the purpose, he went
down to the house of office; whence in a short
time he returned in a great hurry, with his hair
standing on end, and a look betokening horror
and astonishment. Without speaking a word,
he set down the light, and jumped into bed behind
me, where he lay and trembled with great
violence. —When I asked him what was the matter?
he replied, with a broken accent, “God
have mercy on us! I have seen the devil.” — 
Though my prejudice was not quite so strong as
his, I was not a little alarmed at this exclamation,
and much more so, when I heard the sound
of bells approaching our chamber, and felt my
bedfellow cling close to me, uttering these words, 

“Christ have mercy upon us! there he comes.” 
—At that instant, a monstrous overgrown raven
entered our chamber, with bells at its feet, and
made directly towards our bed. —As this creature
is reckoned in our country, a common vehicle for
the devil and witches to play their pranks in, I
verily believed we were haunted; and in a violent
fright, shrunk my head under the bed-cloaths. 
—This terrible apparition leapt upon the bed, and
after giving us several severe dabbs with its beak
through the blankets, hopped away, and vanished. 
Strap and I recommended ourselves to the protection
of heaven with great devotion, and when
we no longer heard the noise, ventured to peep
up and take breath. —But we had not been long
freed from this phantom, when another appeared,
that had well nigh deprived us both of our senses. 
We perceived an old man enter the room, with
a long white beard that reached to his middle; 
there was a certain wild peculiarity in his eyes
and countenance, that did not favour of this
world: and his dress consisted of a brown stuff
coat, buttoned behind, and at the wrists, and an
odd-fashioned cap of the same stuff upon his
head. —I was so amazed that I had not power to
move my eyes from such a ghastly object, but
lay motionless, and saw him come streight up to
me: when he got to the bed, he wrung his hands,
and cried with a voice that did not seem to belong
to a human creature, “Where is Ralph?” 
I made no reply; upon which, he repeated in an
accent still more preternatural; “Where is
Ralpho?” —He had no sooner pronounced
these words, than I heard the sound of the bells
at a distance; which the apparition having listened
to, tript away, and left me almost petrified with 

fear. It was a good while before I could recover
myself so far as to speak: and when at length I
turned about to Strap, I found him in a fit,
which, however, did not last long. —When he
came to himself, I asked his opinion of what had
happened; and he assured me, that the first must
certainly be the soul of some person damned, which
appeared by the chains about its legs (for his
fears had magnified the creature to the bigness of
a horse, and the sound of small morris bells to
the clanking of massy chains)—As for the old
man, he took it to be the spirit of somebody
murdered long ago in this place, which had power
granted it to torment the assassin in the shape of
a raven, and that Rapho was the name of the
said murderer. —Although I had not much faith
in his interpretation, I was too much troubled to
enjoy any sleep; and in all my future adventures,
never passed a night so ill. —In the morning,
Strap imparted the whole affair to Joey, who after
an immoderate fit of laughter, explained the
matter, by telling him that the old man was the
landlord's father, who had turned idiot some
years ago, and diverted himself with a tame raven,
which, it seems, had hopped away from
his apartment in the night, and induced him to
follow it to our chamber, where he had inquired
after it, under the name of Ralpho. 
Nothing remarkable happened during the remaining
part of our journey, which continued
six or seven days longer: At length we entered the
great city, and lodged all night at the inn, where
the waggon halted. —Next morning, all the
passengers parted different ways; while my companion
and I sallied out to enquire for the member
of parliament to whom I had a letter of recommendation 

from Mr. Crab. As we had discharged
our lodging at the inn, Strap took up
our baggage, and marched behind me in the
street with the knapsack on his back, as usual,
so that we made a very whimsical appearance. — 
I had dressed myself to the greatest advantage; 
that is, put on a clean ruffled shirt, my best
thread stockings, my hair (which was of the
deepest red) hung down upon my shoulders, as
lank and streight as a pound of candles; and the
skirts of my coat reached to the middle of my
leg; my waistcoat and breeches were of the same
piece, and cut in the same taste; my hat very
much resembled a Barber's bason in the shallowness
of the crown and narrowness of the brims. 
Strap was habited in a much less aukward manner
than me; but a short crop-eared wig that
very much resembled Scrub's in the play, and
the knapsack on his back, added to what is called
a queer phiz, occasioned by a long chin, an hook
nose, and high cheek bones, rendered him on
the whole a very fit subject of mirth and pleasantry. 
As we walked along, Strap, at my desire,
enquired of a carman whom we met, whereabouts
Mr. Cringer lived;—and was answered
by a stare accompanied with the word, “Anan!” 
Upon which I came up in order to explain the
question, but had the misfortune to be unintelligible
likewise, the carman damning us for a
lousy Scotch guard, and whipping up his horses
with a “Gee ho!” which nettled me to the quick,
and roused the indignation of Strap so far, that after
the fellow was gone a good way, he told me he
would fight him for a farthing. —While we were
deliberating what was next to be done, an hackney
coachman driving softly along, and perceiving 

us standing by the kennel, came up close to us,
and calling, “A coach, master!” by a dexterous
management of the reins, made his horses
stumble in the wet, and bedaub us all over with
mud. —After which, he drove on, applauding
himself with a hearty laugh, in which several people
joined, to my great mortification; but one more
compassionate than the rest seeing us strangers,
advised me to go into an ale-house, and dry myself. 
I thanked him for his advice, which I immediately
complied with; and going into the
house he pointed out, called for a pot of beer, and
sat down by the fire in a public room, where we
cleaned ourselves as well as we could—In the mean
time, a wag who sat in a box, smoaking his pipe,
understanding by our dialect who we were, came
up to me, and, with a very grave countenance,
asked me, how long I had been caught? As I
did not know the meaning of his question, I
made no answer; and he went on, saying, it
could not be a great while, for my tail was not
yet cut; at the same time taking hold of my
hair, and tipping the wink to the rest of the
company, which seemed highly entertained with
his wit. —I was incensed at this usage, but afraid
of resenting it, because I happened to be in a
strange place, and perceived the person who
spoke to me, was a brawny fellow, for whom I
was by no means a match. However, Strap having
either more courage or less caution, could
not put up with the insults that I suffered; but
told him with a peremptory tone, “He was an
uncivil fellow, for making so free with his betters.” 
—Whereupon, the wit going toward
him, asked, “What he had got in his knapsack?” 
Is it oat-meal or brimstone, Sawney? 

(said he) seizing him by the chin, which he shook
to the inexpressible diversion of all present. —My
companion feeling himself assaulted in such an opprobrious
manner, disengaged himself in a trice,
and lent his antagonist such a box on the ear, as
made him stagger to the other side of the room; 
and in a moment, a ring was formed for the
combatants. —Seeing Strap beginning to strip, and
my blood being heated with indignation, which
banished all other thoughts, I undressed myself
to the skin in an instant, and declared, that as the
affront that occasioned the quarrel was offered to
me, I would fight it out myself; upon which
one or two cried out, “That's a brave Scotch
boy; you shall have fair play, by G&sblank;d.” This
gave me fresh spirits, and going up to my adversary,
who by his pale countenance, did not seem
much inclined to the battle, I struck him so
hard on the stomach that he reeled over a bench,
and fell to the ground. Here I attempted to get
a-top of him in order to improve my success, according
to the manner of my own country; but
was restrained by the spectators, one of whom
endeavoured to raise up my opponent, but in vain; 
for he protested he would not fight, not being
quite recovered of a late illness. —I was very well
pleased with this excuse, and immediately dressed
myself, having acquired the good opinion of the
company for my bravery, as did also my comrade
Strap, who shook me by the hand and wished
me joy of the victory. —After having drank our
pot, and dried our cloaths, we enquired of the
landlord if he knew Mr. Cringer the member
of parliament, and were amazed at his replying
in the negative; for we imagined, he must be 

every bit as conspicuous here, as in the borough
he represented; but he told us we might possibly
hear of him as we passed along. —Whereupon
we betook ourselves to the street, where, seeing
a footman standing at a door, we made up to him,
and asked if he knew where our patron lived. — 
This member of the party-coloured fraternity,
surveying us both very minutely, said he knew
Mr. Cringer very well, and bid us turn down
the first street on our left, then turn to the right,
and then to the left again, after which we would
observe a lane, through which we must pass, and
at the other end we should find an alley that
leads to another street, where we should see the
sign of the thistle and three pedlars, and there
he lodged. —We thanked him for his information,
and went forwards, Strap telling me, that he
knew this person to be an honest friendly man by
his countenance, before he opened his mouth; in
which opinion I acquiesced, ascribing his good
manners to the company he daily saw in the
house where he served. —We followed his directions
punctually, in turning to the left and
to the right, and to the left again; but instead
of seeing a lane before us, we found ourselves
at the side of the river, which perplexed us not a
little; and my fellow-traveller ventured to pronounce,
that we had certainly missed our way. — 
By this time we were pretty much fatigued with
our walk, and not knowing how to proceed, I
went into a small snuff-shop hard by, encouraged
by the sign of the highlander, where I found, to my
inexpressible satisfaction, the shop-keeper my
countryman. —He was no sooner informed of
our peregrination, and the directions we had received 

from the footman, than he informed us we
had been imposed upon, telling us, that Mr.
Cringer lived in the other end of the town; and
that it would be to no purpose for us to go thither
to-day, for by that time he was gone to the
House. —I then asked him if he could recommend
us to a lodging, which he readily did, by giving
us a line to one of his acquaintance who kept a
chandler's shop not far from St. Martin's Lane; 
here we hired a bed-room, up two pair of stairs,
at the rate of 2s. per week, so very small, that
when the bed was let down, we were obliged to
carry out every other piece of furniture that belonged
to the apartment, and use the bedstead by
way of chairs. —About dinner-time, our landlord
asked us how we proposed to live, to which
we answered, that we would be directed by him. 
—“Well then (says he) there are two ways of
eating in this town, for people of your condition; 
the one more creditable and expensive
than the other: the first, is to dine at an eating-house
frequented by well dressed people
only, and the other is called-diving, practised
by those who are either obliged or inclined to
live frugally.” —I gave him to understand that
provided the last was not infamous, it would suit
much better with our circumstances than the other. 
—“Infamous (cried he) God forbid, there
are many creditable people, and rich people, ay
and fine people, that dive every day. —I have
seen many a pretty gentleman bedaubed all over
with lace, dine in that manner, very comfortably
for three pence half-penny, and go afterwards
to the coffee-house, where he made a
figure with the best lord in the land;—but 

your own eyes shall bear witness. —I will go
along with you to-day and introduce you.” — 
He accordingly carried us to a certain lane,
where stopping, he bid us observe him, and do
as he did, and walking a few paces, dived into a
cellar and disappeared in an instant. —I followed
his example, and descended very successfully, where
I found myself in the middle of a cook's shop,
almost suffocated with the steams of boil'd beef,
and surrounded by a company consisting chiefly
of hackney-coachmen, chairmen, draymen, and
a few footmen out of place or on board wages; 
who sat eating shin of beef, tripe, cow-heel or
sausages, at separate boards, covered with cloths,
which turned my stomach. —While I stood in amaze,
undetermined whether to sit down or
walk upwards again, Strap, in his descent missing
one of the steps, tumbled headlong into this infernal
ordinary, and overturned the cook as she
was carrying a porringer of soup to one of the
guests: In her fall, she dashed the whole mess
against the legs of a drummer belonging to the
foot guards, who happened to be in her way, and
scalded him so miserably, that he started up, and
danced up and down, uttering a volley of execrations
that made my hair stand on end. While
he entertained the company in this manner, with
an eloquence peculiar to himself, the cook got up,
and after a hearty curse on the poor author of this
mischance, who lay under the table scratching his
rump with a woful countenance, emptied a salt-seller
in her hand, and stripping down the patient's
stocking which brought the skin along with
it, applied the contents to the sore. —This poultice
was scarce laid on, when the drummer, who had 

begun to abate of his exclamation, broke forth
into such a hideous yell, as made the whole company
tremble; then seizing a pewter pint-pot
that stood by him, squeezed the sides of it together,
as if it had been made of pliant leather, grinding
his teeth at the same time with a most horrible grin. 
Guessing the cause of this violent transport, I
bid the woman wash off the salt, and bathe the
part with oil, which she did, and procured him
immediate ease. But here another difficulty occurred,
which was no other than the landlady's
insisting on his paying for the pot he had rendered
useless; he swore he would pay for nothing
but what he had eat, and bid her be thankful for
his moderation, or else he would prosecute her
for damages. —Strap foreseeing it would all land
at him, promised to satisfy the cook, and called
for a dram of gin to treat the drummer with,
which entirely appeased him, and composed all
animosities. After this our landlord and we sat
down at a board, and dined upon shin of beef
most deliciously; our reckoning amounting to
two pence halfpenny each, bread and small beer
included. 