


A melancholy Stroke, and a very unexpected
present Relief to David and his Family. 
The agreeable Scenes attempted to be
described in our last Chapter, in this
Part of David Simple's Life, was but too
often interrupted by Distresses, ill Usage,
Sickness, and Losses. 
For now little Fanny, just opening to
her Parents a Disposition to their Hearts
Desire, was taken from them by a violent
Fever, occasioned by her over heating herself
in Play. She struggled with the Distemper
but six Days, and then escaped from
her Portion of Sorrow in this World. 
How sensibly were the Hearts of the
young Companions of poor little Fanny
affected by her Loss! They again in her
renewed their Grief for their engaging little
Cousin Cynthia; nor was it easy to say
which most tenderly affected the Heart of
Camilla, the Loss of her Fanny, or the Tears 

of her other Children; yet she grieved
without raging, and David bore it like a
Man. 
On the first View Camilla imagined that
her Child's being so suddenly snatched from
her, was an Addition to her Loss. But
David kindly convinced her, that had she
beheld her Infant long lingering in the
Pains of Sickness, while she found her own
Incapacity to give her the least Assistance,
she would have thought the losing her in a
Fever, and being but a few Days a sorrowful
Witness of her Sufferings, was a Blessing
in the Comparison. 
David's Understanding did not follow
the Example of his Friends, by abandoning
him on his most pressing Occasions; but,
on the contrary, was always ready to assist
him, when he most wanted Assistance: and
now, even by the Loss of his Child, he
derived a Gleam of Comfort (and communicated
it to his Camilla) from the extreme
Poverty of his Circumstances, and the Indigence
of his yet remaining Family. 
David now wrote a Letter to Valentine,
which contained only a plain Narrative of
his present Circumstances, with no Exaggeration 

of their Badness, no deploring of
his own Misfortunes; and requesting him,
if he went on prosperously, immediately to
remit him a Bill for as much Money as he
could spare. 
As Valentine wrote in the Plural Number
when the Prospect of Success attended him,
and in the very Letter giving an Account
of this Success; so also did David dare
to write, even when he was enumerating
his own Difficulties. 
A strange and unexpected change of Fortune
had, indeed, befallen our Society since
their first Acquaintance; but in themselves
there was no Alteration. A Letter wrote
by either, at whatever Period of Time, or in
whatever Situation, had always a distinguishing
Mark by which the Writer might
be known, without reading the Name at the
Bottom: and as Valentine's Letter contained
no Professions of Friendship, no unnecessary
Assurances of his own steady Affection; 
so neither did David's contain one
Hint of Flattery, or one Expression that
had even the Appearance of Solicitation. 
But in the mean Time, before any Answer
could come from Valentine, David's 

Distress was, indeed, very great; he dared
not apply to Mr. Ratcliff, for fear of hurting
his Son's Interest; and he knew that
Mr. Orgueil's Rule of Rectitude had now
strictly, I may say rigidly, commanded
him not to be moved by any Compassion
towards a Man, who had so imprudently
neglected his Advice, although to follow
that Advice was utterly impossible. 
But in the midst of their Distress they
received some Relief from almost the last
Person in the World from whom they could
have any Expectation: for Mrs. Orgueil,
notwithstanding her Certainty of Cynthia's
Art and Cunning, had yet conceived so
horrible a Dread, lest Camilla's first Relief
should come from her Hand, that rather
than such a dreadful Event should come to
pass, she was resolved to be before-hand
with Cynthia in an Act of Kindness. 
Mrs. Orgueil therefore paid Camilla a
friendly Visit, made her a Present in the
handsomest Manner, and behaved with so
apparent a Desire of comforting her for the
Loss of her little Fanny, that could she have
restrained herself from throwing forth some
few Hints of Wits imagining they could
impose on all the World, Camilla might 

have been perplexed to find the Cause of
this sudden Metamorphosis. 
It has been before observed, that Mrs.
Orgueil had the Power of being very amiable
when she pleased, and when she had really an
Inclination to oblige; for she had all the
Advantages arising from Beauty and Address
to set off her Actions in the brightest
Colours. Nay, she had a lively turn to
Humour, and Capacity enough to be
very entertaining, whenever that Capacity
was not smothered by Envy, and blunted
by fixing her Mind on bringing about some
Purpose she imagined necessary to her own
Peace: such as that Cynthia should be disesteemed,
or distressed and afflicted in such
a Manner, as to disable her from exerting
her Understanding. But her Capacity,
poor Woman, never reached so far as the
Discovery of that one simple Truth, namely,
that the only Means by which she could
possibly obtain her own Peace, was to conquer
the Desire of bringing about any such
Purpose. 
All the Comfort Mrs. Orgueil now had,
to make her any the least Amends for hearing
of Cynthia's Success, was the entertaining
and cherishing some Hopes that Cynthia 

in Prosperity, would, by her own Behaviour,
lose the Esteem of her Friends. But
the Foundation of these Hopes was so very
weak, that she supported them with great
Difficulty. She now therefore so behaved
to Camilla, as to prepare her, on the very
first Opportunity, to open her Eyes all at
once, and be convinced how much she had
always proved her Judgment in Relation
to Cynthia, and how greatly she was her
Superior, as well in Goodness as Understanding. 
Happy Camilla! Mrs. Orgueil
stood ready to take Cynthia's Place in her
Esteem. 
Mrs. Orgueil had always pretended, nay,
she herself fancied, that she had a little
Love for Camilla: for so intricate is the
human Mind, that, if not carefully watched,
we often impose on ourselves as much
as we endeavour to impose on others. 
Mrs. Orgueil, indeed, felt in her Heart a
different Sensation towards Camilla, from
that which she felt towards Cynthia; and
to this she chose to give the Name of
Friendship: but, in reality, she had not
one Grain of Affection towards Camilla; 
only, as she envied her less, she endeavoured
to set up her Understanding in Opposition
to Cynthia's, for she often insisted on Camilla's
Superiority in that Point. 

I am well aware, that in the Course of this
History, Mrs. Orgueil has declared it as her
Opinion, that poor Camilla was very silly; 
and went so far as to compassionate her on
that Account: but I believe this apparent
Contradiction may be easily reconciled, by
considering, that at the Time Mrs. Orgueil
found Camilla's Folly, she was admiring
her own Understanding in the Comparison; 
whereas whenever she found Camilla's Understanding,
she was opposing her to the
hated Cynthia. 
Vain were all Endeavours to seduce any
of this Society from the Friendship of the
rest, by the flattering Pretence of giving
them the Preference. Camilla always saw
Mrs. Orgueil's insidious Design, and had
laughed over it with Cynthia, who had often
expressed the greatest Desire, that Mrs.
Orgueil would exert the utmost of her Hatred
towards her, in Love and Kindness to
her Camilla. And her present Kindness to
Camilla (although her Motive was not hid)
was so seasonable, so useful to the promoting
the great and only Comfort of her
Life, the Support of her dear Husband and
Children, that the Pleasure Camilla shewed
in it, and the Thanks she expressed for it, 

undesignedly deceived Mrs. Orgueil, and
made her imagine, or at least hope, that
she had, for once, carried that grand Point
of her Life, the gaining a Preference before
Cynthia, in the Esteem of any one
Person whatsoever. 