


In which is an Event, that the compassionate
Reader would rather delay than anticipate. 
But now one Stroke pursued the other
so fast, that it appeared as if David and
his Camilla had already enjoyed to the full,
the Share of Blessings that was allotted them
in this Life, and were now receiving their
Portion of Sorrow: for an unforeseen Accident
now happened, at which Mr. Orgueil,
on his first hearing it, felt some small Concern; 
and Mrs. Orgueil shrugged up her
Shoulders, and said, she was very sorry; 
but, indeed, she was never better pleased in
her Life; and this was no other than David's
receiving the following Letter. 

“My dear Friends,
“IT is grievous to me, that it falls to
my Lot to write the Words that must
pierce your Hearts. My present Portion, 

as it is an Affliction of the deepest
kind, I would wish to confine within my
own Bosom; but it is impossible to conceal
it—your Brother, my dearest Husband,
died last Saturday, of a raging Fever,
frequent in this Country, and has
left me—but I will say nothing of myself. 
God comfort and preserve you to
each other.” 
“Ever yours sincerely,
Cynthia.” 
David and Camilla stood, for the Space
of a Minute, looking at each other in silent
Astonishment. The Power of Speech was
lost. The Blow was unexpected, and consequently
could not find them much guarded
against its Stroke. Their Horror was
too great to find a Vent in Tears. At last
they both, in one Instant, uttered the
Words, “Poor Cynthia! what must be her
“present Situation!” even in that Moment
considering that all Feeling was not
confined to themselves. But lest this should
be thought impossible by the Discoverers of
the utmost Boundaries the human Mind can
reach, it is confessed, that it was very legible
in the very Looks of both David and 

Camilla, that the Image of their own deplorable
Fate, should they lose each other,
was not banished from their Thoughts. 
But though their Grief was too big to find
a Passage, yet there was a Consideration,
which, when it could find Room for Entrance
into the gentle Mind of Camilla,
brought Tears into her Eyes: for it was
attended with soft Compunction. It was
one of Camilla's strongest Characteristics,
that she was ready to blame herself, and not
prepared with an Eagerness to justify Errors
because they were her own. 
And now her Folly strongly glared before
her Eyes, and she condemned herself in that
she had dared to imagine that she knew better
than Providence, what was most for her
good; when on the least Prospect of worldly
Success, she added a Sting to her Father's
Loss: for at the present Instant
the very Image of his being again alive,
was most dreadful to her Imagination. 
From this Compunction Tears stole
trickling from her Eyes in soft Drops; and
it is impossible for any Words so strongly to
represent the Picture of David and his Camilla
at that Time, as these of Milton: 

“She silently a gentle Tear let fall
“From either Eye—
“Two other precious Drops that ready stood
“Each in their chrystal Sluice, he, e'er they fell,
“Kiss'd—”
Camilla, though ready to blame herself,
yet let her Forgiveness reach Home as well
as to all the rest of the World. Mr. Orgueil,
indeed, if he acted strictly up to his Character,
would never have forgiven himself,
had he been guilty of any Crime against his
Rule of Rectitude; because that was offending
the most rigid and inexorable of all the
Deities or Idols that ever Man, in his heated
Imagination, worshipped; namely, human
Reason. But Camilla's Mind was modestly
fearful of offending, at the same time
that she placed her whole Confidence in the
Mercies of that great Being, whose Laws
she feared to transgress; and as soon as any
Gleam of Comfort arose in her Mind, she
turned her Eyes on her beloved Husband, who
was her Guide and Protector, and acknowledged
his kind Indulgence of not upbraiding,
but endeavouring to remove her Weakness,
not by studied flattering Speeches, but 

by chearful Looks and soft Compliance with
his friendly Instructions. 
The Death of Valentine was lamented
throughout the Family. All the Children
loved and reverenced their Uncle, and expressed
their Grief in Terms suitable to
their several Ages. But young Camilla
was old enough to have conversed with
Cynthia, who had assisted to instruct her,
and ever loved and delighted in her; and
therefore, her tender Mind, not yet hardened
to Misfortunes, on her Aunt's as well as
her Uncle's Account, felt this Stroke, if
possible, more strongly than did her Parents. 
And as soon as she heard the fatal News,
she retired by herself, and gave Way to the
flowing of her Tears, till those Tears had
in some Measure softened her Grief. 
Mrs. Orgueil, when first she heard this
News, felt something within, which she had
a great Inclination to call Compassion; for,
as Death was in the Case, her Mind had received
some disagreeable Impressions, which
she expressed in a kind of Lamentation for
Valentine: but as to Cynthia, she was filled
with a secret Joy, that her air built Dreams
of Wealth (Mrs. Orgueil's own Words)
were vanished. But when she had read 

Cynthia's Letter, all the highest Expressions
of Contempt seemed to contend for the Passage
through her Lips. She was weary,
she said, of living in so ill-judging a World,
as could find out any Understanding in so
unfeeling a Creature: for her part, she
should not have wrote such a cold insensible
Letter, even if she had lost her Monkey— 
It was plain now, that Cynthia's Love for
her Husband was all Pretence, otherwise
she could not have been so unconcerned at
his Death. 
Mrs. Orgueil had taken it into her Head
to be ashamed of shewing any Signs of
Pleasure, or of suffering her Friends to give
her any: but if the least cross Accident befel
her, or if she was afflicted with the most
trifling Disorder in her Body, she immediately
sent for all her Friends, and, in Clamour
and Complaints, was resolved to bestow
on them their full Share even of imaginary
Griefs, whilst she retained for herself
nothing but the Appearance of them. 
Mrs. Orgueil, indeed, on such an Occasion,
could have filled a Quire of Paper
with reiterated Complaints and pitiful
Bemoanings of her own Misfortunes; and
would have been glad if she could have sent 

her Friends her very Tears, that she might
keep back nothing from them. 
But now Mrs. Orgueil had the Pleasure
of being more strongly convinced than ever,
that she had always been in the right in
the Judgment she had formed, and that
Cynthia was capable of no Affection or Love
for any other Person but herself. If she
was insensible to Valentine's Goodness, it was
impossible for any thing to touch her Heart; 
for no Man living could possibly stand so
high in Mrs. Orgueil's Esteem, or be possessed
of so many Virtues, as the dead Valentine; 
though she unfortunately never
made the Discovery before she heard of his
Death: for the kind Husband of Cynthia
was before rather the Object of her Aversion. 
It must be confessed, that Mrs. Orgueil
argued very rightly, in saying, that if Cynthia
was insensible to Valentine's Goodness,
she must have a very impenetrable Heart:
but there was one Circumstance, which, in
the Height of her Contempt she forgot,
namely, that this Assertion or Insinuation
of hers was only attended with this Misfortune,
that it was positively wanting in
any kind of Proof whatever. 

Mrs. Orgueil also drew a very true and
very natural Picture in every Word she uttered
of Cynthia: she was only again mistaken
in one trifling Circumstance, for if
she had but left out the Name of Cynthia,
and placed her own in its Stead, it would
have been an exact Copy from the Original. 
Mr. Orgueil, in his Comments on Cynthia's
Letter, was of Opinion, that it was,
indeed, pardonable in a Woman, to talk of
piercing of Hearts, and such romantic Stuff; 
but that he should think very meanly of a
Man, who so little understood the Beauty
of human Reason, as to let any outward
Accident baffle its Force, and disable him
from following the Rule of Rectitude: for
he was immoveable fixed in his Opinion,
that any Man who depends on this infallible
Rule for his Guide and Support, might
stand securely, and defy every outward
Event, every Distress or Misfortune to which
human Nature is liable. 