




The Birth, Parentage, and Education
of Mr. David Simple. 
Mr. David Simple was the
eldest Son of Mr. Daniel
Simple, who kept a Mercer's
Shop on Ludgate-hill. His
Mother was a downright Country Woman,
who originally got her Living by
Plain-Work; but being handsome, was
liked by Mr. Simple. When, or where 

they met, or what happened to them during
their Courtship, is foreign to my
present Purpose, nor do I really know. 
But they were married, and lived many
Years together, a very honest and industrious
Life; to which it was owing,
that they were able to provide very
well for their Children. They had only
two Sons, David and Daniel, who, as
soon as they were capable of learning
were sent to a publick School, and
kept there in such a manner as put
them upon a footing to be respected and
used as well, as if they had been born in
a much higher Station: and their Behaviour
really demanded it; for there never
appeared any thing mean in their Actions,
and Nature had given them Parts
enough to converse with the most ingenious
of their School-fellows. The strict
Friendship they kept up was remarked
by the whole School; whoever affronted
the one, made an Enemy of the other; 
and while there was any Money in either
of their Pockets, the other was sure never
to want it: the Notion of whose Property
it was, being the last thing that ever
entered into their Heads. The eldest,
who was of a sober prudent Disposition,
had always enough to supply his Brother, 

who was much more profuse in his manner
of spending; and I have often heard
him say, (for this History is all taken
from his own Mouth) that one of the
greatest Pleasures he ever had in his Life,
was in the Reflections he used to make at
that time, that he was able to supply and
assist his dear Brother; and whenever he
saw him but look as if he wanted any
thing, he would immediately bring out all
the Money he had, and desire him to
take whatever he had occasion for. On
the other hand, Daniel was in some respects
useful to him, for altho' he had
not half the real Understanding, or Parts,
yet he was what the World calls a much
sharper Boy; that is, he had more Cunning,
and consequently being more suspicious,
would often keep his Brother
from being imposed on; who, as he was
too young to have had much Experience,
and never had any ill Designs on others,
never thought of their having any upon
him. He paid a perfect Deference to his
Brother's Wisdom, from finding, that
whenever he marked out a Boy as one
that would behave ill, it always proved
so in the end. He was sometimes indeed
quite amazed how Daniel came by
so much Knowledge; but then his great 

Love and Partiality to him easily made
him impute it to his uncommon Sagacity; 
and he often pleased himself with the
Thoughts of having such a Brother. 
Thus these two Brothers lived together
at School in the most perfect Unity
and Friendship, till the eldest was Seventeen; 
at which time, their Father being
taken violently ill of a Fever, occasioned
their being sent for from School. He recovered
of that Distemper, but it weakened
him so much, that he fell into a
Consumption, in which he lingered a
Twelvemonth, and then died. The Loss
of so good a Father was sensibly felt by
the tender-hearted David; he was in the
utmost Affliction, till by Philosophical
Considerations, assisted by a natural Calmness
he had in his own Temper, he was
enabled to overcome his Grief, and began
again to enjoy his former Serenity
of Mind. His Brother, who was much
more gay, soon recovered his Spirits; 
and the two Brothers seemed to be getting
into their former State of Happiness,
when it was interrupted by the Discovery
of something in Daniel's Mind,
which to his fond Brother had never appeared
there before; and which, whoever 

thinks proper to read the next Chapter,
may know. 



In which is seen the terrible Consequences
that attend Envy and
Selfishness. 
It will perhaps surprize the Reader as
much as it did his Brother, to find
that Daniel, notwithstanding the Appearance
of Friendship he had all along
kept up to David, was in reality one of
those Wretches, whose only Happiness
centers in themselves; and that his Conversation
with his Companions had never
any other View, but in some shape or
other to promote his own Interest. To
this it was owing, he endeavoured to keep
his Brother from being imposed on, lest
his Generosity should lead him to let others
share his Money as well as himself: 
From this alone arose his Character of
Wisdom; for he could easily find out an
ill-disposed Mind in another, by comparing
it with what passed in his own 

Bosom. While he found it for his Benefit
to pretend to the same delicate Way of
Thinking, and sincere Love which David
had for him, he did not want Art enough
to affect it; but as soon as he thought it
would be better for him to break with
him, he threw off the Mask, and took no
pains to conceal the Baseness of his
Heart. 
From the time they came from School,
during the old Gentleman's Illness, Daniel's
only Study was, how he should
throw his Brother out of his Share of his
Father's Patrimony, and engross it wholly
to himself. The anxious Thoughts he appeared
continually in, on this account,
was imputed by his good-natured Friend,
to a tender Concern for a Parent's Suffering,
and that still encreased his Love
for him. His Mother had a Maid,
whom Mr. Daniel had a great fancy for; 
but she being a virtuous Woman, (and
besides, having a Sweet-heart in her Fellow-servant,
whom she liked much better)
resisted all his Sollicitations, and would
have nothing to say to him. But yet he
found she could not refuse any little Presents
he made her; which convinced him
she was very mercenary, and made him 

think of a Scheme to make her serve his
Designs of another kind, since she would
not be subservient to his Pleasures. He
knew his Father had given a sealed Paper
to his Brother, which he told him was
his Will, with strict Orders not to open
it till after his Death; and, as he was not
ignorant where David had put it, he formed
a Scheme to steal away the real Will,
and to put a forged one in its place. But
then he was greatly puzzled what he
should do for Witnesses, for he was very
fearful of any Forms being left out; because,
as his Father's Estate was personal,
they were Joint-Heirs, and any Flaw
would have overthrown all his Designs. 
He therefore thought, if he could bribe
this Girl and her Sweet-heart to be Witnesses,
he should easily accomplish all he
desired. This young Woman was one of
those sort of People who had been bred
up to get her Living by hard Work; 
she had been taught never to keep company
with any Man, but him she intended
to marry; nor to get drunk, or steal:
for if she gave way to those things, (besides
that they were great Sins) she would
certainly come to be hanged; which, as
she had an utter Aversion to, she went 

on in an honest way, and never intended
to depart from it. 
Our Spark, when first he thought of
making use of her, was very much afraid,
lest she should refuse, and betray him. 
But when he reflected, how impossible it
would be for him to refuse any thing he
thought valuable, tho' he was to be guilty
of ever so much Treachery to obtain it,
he resolved boldly to venture on the Trial. 
When he first spoke to her about it, he
offered her fifty Pounds; but she was so
frighten'd at the Thoughts of being accessary
to the forging of a Will, that she
declared, “she would not do it for the
whole World; for that she had more
Value for her precious Soul, than for
any thing he could give her: That as
to him, he was a Schollard, and might
think of some way of saving himself; 
but as she could neither write nor read,
she must surely be d&wblank;'d.” This way
of talking so thoroughly convinced Daniel
of her Folly, that he made no doubt
of soon gaining her to his Purpose. He
therefore made use of all the most persuasive
Arguments he could think of: And
amongst the rest, he told her, that by
this means she might marry the Man she 

liked, and live with him in a very comfortable
manner. He immediately perceived
this staggered all her Resolutions; 
and as soon as he saw she could be moved,
did not fear succeeding. He pulled out
of his Pocket a Purse with a hundred
Guineas, and told them out before her,
(for the Sight of Money is much more
prevalent than the Idea of it) and assured
her, that he would be better than he had
promised her; for if she would comply
with his Request, the whole Sum she had
seen should be her's, and that she and her
Lover by this means would be enabled to
live in a manner much above all the Maids
she used to converse with. The Thoughts
of being set above her Acquaintance quite
overcame her; and, as she had never
been Mistress of above forty Shillings at a
time, a hundred Guineas appeared such
an immense Sum, that she easily conceived
she could live very well, without being
obliged to work any more. This Prospect
so charmed her, that she promised
to do whatever he would have
her: She did not doubt but she could
make her Sweet-heart comply, for he
had never refused her any thing since
their Acquaintance began. This made
Daniel quite happy, for every thing else 

was plain before him. He had no Scruple
on the Fellow's account; for once get the
Consent of a Woman, and that of a
Man (who is vulgarly called, in love with
her) consequently follows. For though a
Man's Disposition is not naturally bad,
yet it is not quite certain he will have
Resolution enough to resist a Woman's
continual Importunities. 
DANIEL took the first Opportunity
(which quickly offered, every thing
being common between him and his
Brother) of stealing the Will. As it was
in his Father's Hand, he could easily forge
it, for he wrote very like him; when
he had done this, he had it witnessed
in Form, placed it in the room of the
other, and then went away quite satisfied
in the Success of his Scheme. 
The real Affliction of David, on the
old Gentleman's Death, prevented his
immediate thinking of the Will. And
Daniel was forced to counterfeit what he
did not feel, not daring to be eager
for the opening it, lest when the Contents
were known, the Truth should be
suspected. But as soon as the first Grief
was a little abated, and the Family began
to be calmed, David desired his Mother 

and Brother to walk up stairs; then went
to his Bureau, and took out the Will, and
read it before them. The Contents were
as follows: Daniel was left sole Heir and
Executor; that out of 11000l. which
was the Sum left, he should pay his Mother
60l. per Annum, and that David
should have 500l. for his Fortune. 
They all stood speechless for some time,
staring at each other. At last David
broke silence, and embracing Daniel,
said, I hope my dear Brother will not
impute my Amazement to any Concern
I have, that he has so much the largest
Share of my Father's Fortune. No, I
do assure you, the only Cause of my Uneasiness
is fearing I have done any thing
to disoblige my Father, who always behaved
with so much Good-nature to me,
and made us both so equal in his Care and
Love, that I think he must have had
some Reason for this last Action, of leaving
me so small a matter, especially as I
am the eldest. 
Here Daniel interrupted him, and
fell a blustring and swearing, somebody
must have told his Father some Lyes of
his Brother, and he was resolved to find
out the vile Incendiary. But David 

begged him to be pacified, and assured
him he thought it quite equal; for he
knew him too well, to suspect any Alteration
in his Behaviour, and did not doubt
but every thing would be in common
amongst them as usual: nay, so tenderly
and affectionately did he love Daniel, that
he reflected with pleasure how extremely
happy his Life must be in continually
sharing with his best Friend the Fortune
his Father had left him. Thus would he
have thought, and he had no Notion but
his Brother's Mind was like his own. 
Daniel answered him with Asseverations,
of his always commanding every thing
equally with himself. The good old Woman
blessed herself for having two such
Sons, and they all went down stairs in
very good Humour. 
DANIEL had two Reasons for allotting
his Mother something; one was,
that nothing but being left a Jointure, could
have barr'd her coming in for Thirds; the
other was, that if no notice had been taken
of her in the Will, it might have been a
strong Motive for Suspicion: Not that he
had any great Reason for Caution, as nothing
less than seeing him do it could have
made David (such a Confidence he had in 

him) even suspect he could be guilty of
such an Action. 
The Man and Maid were soon married; 
and as they had lived some time
in the Family, David gave them something
to set up with, which was thought
very lucky by the Brother, that it might
create no Suspicions how they came by
Money. Thus every thing succeeded to
his Mind, and he had compassed all his
Designs without any Fear of a Discovery. 
The two Brothers agreed on leaving
off their Father's Business, as they had
enough to keep them; and as their Acquaintance
lay chiefly in that Neighbourhood,
they took a little House there. 
The old Gentlewoman, whose ill Health
would not suffer her to live in London,
retired into the Country, and lived with
her Sister. 
DAVID was very happy in the
Proofs he thought he had of his Brother's
Love; and as it was his Nature to be
easily contented, he was very little Trouble
or Expence in the Family. Daniel hugg'd
himself in his Ingenuity, and in the
Thoughts how impossible it would have 

been for him to have been so imposed on. 
His Pride (of which he had no small
Share) was greatly gratified in thinking
his Brother was a Dependant on him; but
then he was resolved it should not be
long before he felt that Dependance, for
otherwise the greatest part of his Pleasure
had been lost. One thing quite stung him
to the quick, viz. That David's amiable
Behaviour, joined to a very good Understanding,
with a great Knowledge, which
he had attained by Books, made all their
Acquaintance give him the preference:
and as Envy was very predominant in
Daniel's Mind, this made him take an
utter Aversion to his Brother, which all
his Goodness could not get the better of:
for as his Actions were such as he could
not but approve, they were still greater
Food for his Hatred; and the Reflection
that others approved them also, was what
he could not bear. The first thing in
which David discovered an Alteration in
his Brother, was in the Behaviour of the
Servants; for as they are always very inquisitive,
they soon found out by some Means
or other, that Daniel was in possession of
all the Money, and was not obliged to
let his Brother share it with him. They
watched their Master's Motions, and as 

soon as they found out, slackening in their
Respect to David would not be displeasing
to the other; it may easily be believed,
they were not long in doubt whether
they should follow their own Interest:
so that at last, when David called them,
they were always going to do something
for their Master; “truly, while he wanted
them, they could not wait on any body
else.” Daniel took notice of their Behaviour,
and was inwardly pleased at it. 
David knew not what to make of it, he
would not mention it to his Brother, till
it grew to such a height he could bear it
no longer: and when he spoke of it to Daniel,
it was only by way of consulting with
him how to turn them away. But how great
was his Surprize, when Daniel, instead of
talking in his usual Style, said, that for his
part he saw no Fault in any of his Servants; 
that they did their Duty very
well, and that he should not part with his
own Conveniences for any body's Whims; 
if he accused either of them of any Fault,
he would call them up, and try if they
could not justify themselves. David was
at first struck dumb with Amazement; he
thought he was not awake, that it was
impossible it could be his Brother's Voice
that uttered those Words: but at last he 

recollected himself enough to say, What
is it come to this? Am I to come to a
Trial with your Servants, (as you are
pleased to call them?) I thought we had
lived on a different footing. Oh! recall
those Words, and don't provoke me to
say what perhaps I shall afterwards repent. 
Daniel knew, that although his Brother
was far from being passionate for Trifles,
yet that his whole Frame would be so
shaken by any ill Usage from him, he
would not be able to command himself: 
And resolved therefore to take this Opportunity
of aggravating his Passion, till
it was raised to such a height, as to the
unthinking World would make him
appear in the wrong, he therefore very
calmly answered, You may do as you
please, Brother; but what you utter, appears
to me to be quite Madness, I don't
perceive but you are used in my House
as well as I am myself, and cannot think
what you complain of. If you are not
contented, you best know how to find a
Remedy; many a Brother in your Case,
I believe, would think themselves very
happy, to meet with the Usage you have,
without wanting to make mischief in Families. 
This had the desired Effect, and
threw David into that inconsistent Behaviour,
which must always be produced 

in a Mind torn at once by Tenderness
and Rage. That sincere Love and Friendship
he had always felt for his Brother,
made his Resentment the higher, and he
alternately broke into Reproaches, and
melted into Softness; till at last, he swore
he would go out of the House, and never
more set his foot into any Place,
which was in the possession of so unnatural
a Wretch. 
DANIEL had now all he wanted; 
from the Moment the other's Passion
grew loud, he had set open the Door,
that the Servants might hear how he used
him, and be Witnesses he was not in
fault. He behaved with the utmost
Calmness, which was very easy for
him to do, as he felt nothing. He
said, his Brother should be always
welcome to live in his House, provided
he could be quiet, and contented with
what was reasonable; and not be so mad as
to think, if he insisted on the Management
of his own Family, it was going from
that romantic Love he so often talked of. 
Indeed, so far was true, that if David
would have been satisfied to have lived
in his Brother's House, in a State of Dependency,
walked about in a rusty Coat, 

and an old Tye-Wig, like a decayed Gentleman,
thinking it a Favour to have
Bread, while every body that came to the
House, should be extolling the Goodness
of his Brother for keeping him: I say,
could he have been contented with this
sort of Behaviour, he might have stayed
as long as he pleased. But Daniel was
resolved he should not be on an equal
footing with him, who had taken so
much pains to get a superiour Fortune:
he therefore behaved in this manner,
either to get rid of him, or make him
submit to his Terms, which it was impossible
ever to accomplish: For David's
Pride would not have prevented his taking
that Usage from a Stranger, but his
Love could by no means suffer him to
bear it from his Brother. Therefore, as
soon as the Variety of Passions he struggled
with, would give him leave, he
told him, That since he was so very different
from what he had always thought
him, and capable of what he esteemed
the greatest Villainy, he would sooner
starve than have any thing more to say to
him. On which he left him, and went
up to his own Chamber with a fixed Resolution
to leave the House that very
Day, and never return to it any more. 

It would be impossible to describe what
he felt when he was alone; all the Scenes
of Pleasure he had ever enjoyed in his
Brother's Company rushed at once into his
Memory; and when he reflected on what
had just happened, he could not account
for such a Difference in one Man's Conduct. 
He was sometimes ready to blame
himself, and thought he must have been
guilty of something in his Passion, (for he
hardly remembered what he had said)
to provoke his Brother to such a Behaviour; 
he was then going to seek him, to
be reconciled to him. But when he considered
the Beginning of the Quarrel,
and what Daniel had said to him concerning
the Servants, he concluded he
must be tired of his Company, and from
some Motive or other had altered his
Affection. Then several little Slights came
into his head, which he had overlooked
at the time of their happening; and from
all these Reflections, he concluded he
could have no farther Hopes from his
Brother. However, he resolved to stay
in his Room till the Evening, to see
if there yet remained Tenderness enough
in Daniel to induce him to endeavour to
remove his present Torment. What he felt
during that Interval, is not to be expressed 

or understood, but by the few who are
capable of real Tenderness; every Moment
seemed an Age. Sometimes in
the Confusion of his Thoughts, the Joy
of being again well with his Brother,
appeared so strong to his Imagination,
he could hardly refrain going to him; 
but when he found it grew late, and no
Notice was taken of him, not so much
as being called to Dinner, he was then
certain any Condescension on his side
would only expose him to be again insulted; 
he therefore resolved to stay there
no longer. 
When he went down stairs, he
asked where his Brother was, and was
told, he went out to Dinner with
Mr. &wblank; and had not been at home
since. He was so struck with the
Thought that Daniel could have so little
Concern for him, as to go into Company
and leave him in such Misery, he
had hardly Strength enough left to go any
farther; however, he got out of the
House as fast as he was able, without
considering where he was going, or what
he should do, (for his Mind was so taken
up, and tortured with his Brother's
Brutality, that all other Thoughts quite 

forsook him.) He wandered up and down
till he was quite weary and faint, not
knowing where to direct his Steps. 
When he first set out, he had but half a
Crown in his Pocket, a Shilling of which
he gave away in his Walk to a Beggar,
who told him a Story of having been
turned out of doors by an unnatural
Brother; so that now he had but one
Shilling and Sixpence left, with which he
went into a publick House, and got
something to recruit his worn-out Spirits. 
In his Situation, any thing that would
barely support Nature, was equal to the
greatest Dainties; for his Mind was
in so much anxiety, it was impossible for
him to spend one Thought on any thing
but the Cause of his Grief. So true is
that Observation of Shakespear's, “When
the Mind is free, the Body is delicate;” 
that those People know very little of
real Misery (however the Sorrow for
their own Sufferings may make them
imagine no one ever endured the like)
who can be very sollicitous of what becomes
of them. But this was far
from being our Hero's Case, for when
he found himself so weak he could go
no farther, he was obliged to go into a
publick House; for being far from
home, and an utter Stranger, no private 

House would have admitted him. As
soon as he got into a Room, he threw
himself into a Chair, and could scarce
speak. The Landlord asked him, what
he would please to drink; but he not
knowing what he said, made answer, he
did not chuse any thing. Upon which
he was answered in a surly manner, “if
he did not care for drinking, he
could have no great Business there,” and
would be very welcome to walk out
again. This Treatment just rouzed him
enough, to make him recollect where he
was, and that he must call for something; 
therefore he ordered a Pint of
Beer to be brought, which he immediately
drank off, for he was very dry,
tho' his Griefs were so fixed in his Mind,
he could not feel even Hunger or
Thirst. But Nature must be refreshed
by proper Nourishment, and he found
himself now not so faint, and seemed inclined
to sleep; he therefore inquired
for a Bed, he did not care how coarse it
was; and only wanted some Place to lie
down upon. Which his kind Landlord
(on his producing Money enough to pay
for it) immediately procured for him; 
and being perfectly overcome with Fatigue
and Trouble, he insensibly sunk to
Rest. 

In the Morning when he waked, all
that passed the Day before came fresh
into his Mind; he knew not which way
to turn himself, but lay in the greatest
Perplexity for some time: At last, it
came into his head he had an Uncle,
who when he was a Boy used to be very
kind to him; he therefore had some
hopes he would receive and take care
of him. He got up, and walked as well
as he was able to his Uncle's House. The
good old Man was quite frighten'd at
the sight of him; for the one Day's extreme
Misery he had suffered, had altered
him, as much as if he had been ill
a Twelvemonth. His Uncle begged to
know what was the matter with him; 
but he would give him no other Answer,
but that his Brother and he had had a
few Words, for he would not complain; 
and he desired he would be so kind to let
him stay with him a little while, till
Matters could be brought about again. 
His Uncle told him, he should be very
welcome. And there for some time I
will leave him to his own private Sufferings,
lest it should be thought I am so ignorant
of the World, as not to know the
proper Time of forsaking People. 




In which is seen the Possibility of a
married Couple's leading an uneasy
Life. 
The two Servants, who were the
Cause of all poor David's Misfortunes,
and the Engines of Daniels's
Treachery, tho' their mutual Fondness,
and the great Desire they had to come
together, prevailed on them to consent
to an Action, which they themselves
thought they must be d&wblank;'d for, had
not long lived in the State of Matrimony,
before John found out, that Peggy had
not all those Perfections he once imagined
her possessed of; and her Merit decreased
every day more and more in his
Eyes. However, while the Money lasted,
(which was not very long, for they were
not at all scrupulous of using it, thinking
such great Riches were in no danger
of being brought to an end) between
Upbraidings, Quarrels, Reconciliations,
kissing and falling out, they made a 

shift to jumble on together, without
coming to an open Rupture. But the
Money was no sooner gone, than they
grew out of all Patience. When John
began to feel Poverty coming upon
him, and found all he had got by his
Villainy was a Wife, whom he now was
heartily weary of, his Conscience flew in
his face, and would not let him rest. 
All the Comfort he had left was in abusing
Peggy: He said she had betrayed
him, and he should have been always honest,
had it not been for her wheedling. 
She, on the other hand, justified herself,
by alledging, nothing but her Love for
him could have drawn her into it: And
if he thought it so great a Crime, as he
was a Man, and knew better than her,
he should not have consented, or suffered
her to do it. For tho' I dare say this Girl
had never read Milton, yet she could act
the Part of throwing the blame on her
Husband, as well as if she had learned it
by heart. In short, from Morning till
Night, they did nothing but quarrel; 
and there passed many curious Dialogues
between them, which I shall not here
repeat: for, as I hope to be read by the
polite World, I would avoid every 

thing, of which they can have no Idea. 
I shall therefore only say in general, that
between the Stings of their Consciences,
the Distresses from Poverty, John's
Coldness and Neglect; nay, his liking
other Women better than his Wife,
which no virtuous Woman can possibly bear; 
and Peggy's Uneasiness and Jealousy; this
Couple led a Life above their Quality
in all respects. But this could not last
long, for when they found it was impossible
for them to subsist any longer without
working, they resolved to go into separate
Services: for they were now as
eager to part, as they had formerly been
to come together. 
They were forming this Resolution,
when they heard Mr. David was gone
from his Brother's House on a violent
Quarrel. This Separation had made a
general Discourse, and People said, it
was no wonder, for it was impossible any
body could live in the House with him; 
for he was of such a Temper, he fell out
with his Brother, for no other reason than
because he would not turn away all his
Servants to please his Maggots. For altho'
Mr. Daniel had all the Money, yet he 

was so good to keep him; and sure,
when People are kept upon Charity, they
need not be so proud, but be glad to be
contented, without setting a Gentleman
against his Servants. The old Gentleman
his Father knew what he was, or
he would have left him more. 
When John heard all this, he was
struck with Amazement, and the Wickedness
he had been guilty of appeared in
so horrible a light, that he was almost
mad. At first he thought he would find
Mr. David out, and confess the whole
Truth: He had lived in the House with
him a great while, and knew him to be
so mild and gentle, that he flattered himself
he might possibly forgive him; but
then the fear of Shame had such an Effect
on him, that he thought he could
never go through the telling of the Story. 
The Struggle in his Mind was so great,
he could not fix on what to determine; 
but the same Person who had drawn him
into this piece of Villainy, occasioned at
last the Discovery: For his Wife intreated
him, with all the Arguments she
could think of, not to be hanged voluntarily,
when there was no necessity for 

it; for altho' the Action they had done
was not right, yet, thank God, they had
not been guilty of Murder. Indeed if that
had been the case, there would have been a
reason for confessing it; because it could not
have been concealed, for Murder will out; 
the very Birds of the Air will tell of that:
but as they were in no danger of being
found out, it would be madness to run
their Necks into a Halter. 
JOHN, who was ruined by his Compliance
with this Woman while he liked
her, since he was weary of, and hated
her, took hold of every Opportunity
to contradict her. Therefore her Eagerness
to keep their Crime a Secret,
join'd to his own Remorse, determined
him to let Mr. David know it. However,
he dissembled with her for the present,
lest she should take any steps to obstruct
his Designs. 
He immediately began to enquire
where Mr. David was gone; and when
he was informed he was at his Uncle's,
he went thither, and asked for him:
but the Servant told him he was indeed
there, but so ill he could not be spoke with; 

if he had any Business of consequence to
impart to him, he would call his Master,
and telling him would be the same thing. 
But John said, what he had to say could be
communicated to nobody but himself. He
was so very importunate to see him, that
at last, by the Uncle's Consent, he was
admitted into his Chamber. When the
Fellow came near him, and observed his
wan and meagre Countenance, which the
great Agitation of his Mind (together
with a Fever, which he had been in ever
since he came to his Uncle's) had caused,
he was so shock'd for some time, that
he could not speak. At last, he fell on
his knees, and imploring his Pardon,
told him the whole Story of his forging
the Will, not omitting any one Circumstance. 
The great Weakness of poor David's
Body, with this fresh Astonishment
and strong Conviction of his Brother's
Villainy, quite overcame him, and he
fainted away; but as soon as his Spirits
were a little revived, he sent for his
Uncle, and told him what John had just
related. He asked him what he should
do, and in what manner he could proceed; 
for that he would on no account
bring publick Infamy on his Brother. His
Uncle told him, he could do nothing in 

his present Condition; but desired him to
compose himself, and have a regard to his
Health, and that he would take care of
the whole Affair, adding a promise to manage
every thing in the quietest manner
possible. 
Then the good-natured Man took
John into another Room, examined him
closely; and assured him, if he would act
as he would have him, he would make
Interest that he should be forgiven; but
that he must prevail with his Wife to join
her Evidence with his. John said, “if
he pleased to go with him, he thought
the best method to deal with her, was
to frighten her to it.” On which the
old Gentleman sent for an Attorney, and
carried one of his own Servants for a
Constable, in order to make her comply
with as little noise as such an Affair could
admit of. They then set out for John's
House, when David's Uncle told the Woman,
“if she would confess the truth, she
should be forgiven; but if she resolved
to persist, he had brought a Constable
to take her up, and she would surely be
hanged on her Husband's Evidence.” 
The Wench was so terrified, she fell a crying,
and told all she knew of the matter. 

The Attorney then took both their Depositions
in Form; after which, John and
his Wife went home with Mr. David's
Uncle, and were to stay there till the Affair
was finished. 
The poor young Man, with this fresh
Disturbance of his Mind, was grown
worse, and thought to be in danger of
losing his Life; but by the great Care of
the old Gentleman he soon recovered. The
Uncle's next Design was to go to Daniel,
and endeavour by all means to bring him
to reasonable Terms, and to prevail on
him to submit himself to his Brother's
Discretion. Daniel, at first, blustered and
swore, it was a Calumny, and that he
would prosecute the Fellow and Wench
for Perjury: And then left the Room,
with a Haughtiness which generally attends
that High-mindedness, which is
capable of being detected in Guilt. He
tried all methods possible to get John
and his Wife out of his Uncle's House,
in order to bribe them a second time; 
but that Scheme could not succeed. 
He then went about to Attorneys, to
procure him false Evidence; but when
the time of Trial approached, his Uncle
went once more to him, and talked 

seriously to him, on the Consequences of
being convicted in a Court of Justice of
Forgery, especially of that heinous sort: 
Assuring him he had the strongest Evidence,
join'd to the greatest Probability of
the Falseness of his Father's Will. After
he had discoursed with him some time,
and he began to find the Impossibility of
defending himself, he fell from one Extreme
to another, (for a Mind capable of
Treachery, is most times very pusillanimous)
and his Pride now thought fit to
condescend to the most abject Submissions; 
he begged he might see his Brother, and
ask his pardon; said, he would live with
him as a Servant for the future, if he
would but forgive him. His Uncle told
him, he could by no means admit of his
seeing David as yet, for he was still too
weak to be disturbed; but if he would
resign all that was left of his Father's
Fortune, and leave himself at his Brother's
mercy, he would answer for him
that he would not prosecute him. Daniel
was very unwilling to part with his Money,
but finding there was no Remedy,
he at last consented. 
His Uncle would not leave him till
he had got every thing out of his 

hands, lest he should embezzle any of
it; there was not above eight thousand
Pounds out of the eleven left by his Father,
for he had rioted away the rest
with Women and Sots. 
When every thing was secured,
the old Gentleman told David what he
had done, who highly approved every
Step he had taken, and was full of Gratitude
for his Goodness to him. And
now in appearance all David's Troubles
were over, and indeed he had nothing
to make him uneasy, but the reflecting
on his Brother's Actions; these were
continually before his Eyes, and tormented
him in such a manner, it was
some time before he could recover his
Strength. However, he resolved to settle
on Daniel an Annuity for Life to keep
him from Want, and if he should ever
by his Extravagance fall into Distress, to
relieve him, tho' he should not know
who it came from; but he thought it
better not to see him again, for he dared
not venture that Trial. 
DAVID desired his Uncle would let
him live with him, that he might take 

care of him in his old Age; and make
as much Return as possible for his generous,
good-natured Treatment of him,
in his Distress. This Request was easily
granted; his Company being the greatest
Pleasure the old Man could enjoy. 
DAVID now resolved to live an
easy Life, without entering into any Engagements
of Friendship or Love with
any one; but to spend his time in reading
and calm Amusements, not flattering
himself with any great Pleasures, and
consequently, not being liable to any
great Disappointments. This manner of
Life was soon interrupted again by his
Uncle's being taken violently ill of a
Fever, which carried him off in ten
Day's time. This was a fresh Disturbance
to the Ease he had proposed; for
David had so much Tenderness, he
could not possibly part with so good a
Friend, without being moved: tho' he
abated his Concern as fast as possible,
with the Consideration that he was arrived
to an Age, wherein to breathe
was all could be expected, and that
Diseases and Pains must have filled up
the rest of his Life. At last, he began
to reflect, even with pleasure, 

that the Man whom he had so much
reason to esteem and value, had escaped
the most miserable part of a human
Life: For hitherto, the old Man had
enjoyed good Health; and he was one of
those sort of Men who had good Principles,
designed well, and did all the good
in his power: but at the same time, was
void of those Delicacies, and strong Sensations
of the Mind, which make both
the Happiness and Misery of whoever is
possessed of them. He left no Children; 
for tho' he was married young, his Wife
died within half a Year of the Small Pox. 
She brought him a very good Fortune; 
and by his Frugality and Care, he died
worth seven thousand Pounds, which he
gave to his Nephew David, some few
Legacies to old Servants excepted. 
When David saw himself in the
possession of a very easy comfortable
Fortune, instead of being over-joyed, as
is usual on such occasions, he was at first
the more unhappy; the Consideration of
the Pleasure he should have had to share
this Fortune with his Brother, continually
brought to his Remembrance his
cruel Usage, which made him feel all his
old Troubles over again. He had no Ambition, 

nor any Delight in Grandeur. The
only Use he had for Money, was to serve
his Friends; but when he reflected how
difficult it was to meet with any one who
deserved that Name, and how hard it
would be for him ever to believe any
one sincere, having been so much deceived,
he thought nothing in Life could
be any great Good to him again. He
spent whole Days in thinking on this
Subject, wishing he could meet with a
Friend that he could live with, who
could throw off all separate Interests; for
where Selfishness reigns in any of the
Community, there can be no Happiness. 
After he had revolved these things several
times in his Mind, he took the oddest,
most unaccountable Resolution that ever
was heard of, viz. To travel through
the whole World, rather than not meet
with a real Friend. 
From the time he lived with his
Brother, he had led so recluse a Life, that
he in a manner had shut himself up
from the World; but yet when he reflected
that what is called the Customs and
Manners of Nations, relate chiefly to
Ceremonies, and had nothing to do
with the Hearts of Men; he concluded, 

he could sooner enter into the Characters
of Men in the great Metropolis where
he lived, than if he went into foreign
Countries; where, not understanding the
Languages so readily, it would be more
difficult to find out the Sentiments of
others, which was all he wanted to
know. He resolved therefore to take a
Journey through London; not as some
Travellers do, to see the Buildings, the
Streets, to know the Distances from one
Place to another, with many more Sights
of equal Use and Improvement; but his
design was to seek out one capable of
being a real Friend, and to assist all
those, who had been thrown into Misfortunes
by the ill Usage of others. 
He had good Sense enough to know,
that Mankind in their Natures are much
the same every where; and that if he
could go through one great Town, and
not meet with a generous Mind, it would
be in vain to seek farther. In this Project,
he intended not to spend a Farthing
more than was necessary; designing to
keep all his Money to share with his
Friend, if he should be so fortunate to
find any Man worthy to be called by
that Name. 




The first setting out of Mr. David
Simple on his Journey; with some
very remarkable and uncommon Accidents. 
The first Thought that naturally
occurs to a Man, who is going
in search of any thing, is, which is the
most likely Method of finding it. Our
Hero, therefore, began to think seriously
amongst all the Classes and Degrees of
Men, where he might most probably
meet with a real Friend. But when he
considered Mankind from the highest to
the lowest, he was convinced, to Experience
alone he must owe his Knowledge; 
for that no Circumstance of Time,
Place, or Station, made a Man either
good or bad, but the Disposition of his
own Mind; and that Good-nature and
Generosity were always the same, tho'
the Power to exert those Qualities are
more or less, according to the Variation
of outward Circumstances. He resolved 

therefore, to go into all publick Assemblies,
and to be intimate in as many private
Families as possible, to observe their
Manner of living with each other; by
which means, he thought he should
judge of their Principles and Inclinations. 
As there required but small preparation
for his Journey, a Staff, and a little
Money in his Pocket, being all that was
necessary, he set out without any farther
Consideration. The first place he went
into, was the Royal-Exchange; he had
been there before, to see the Building and
hear the Jargon at the time of high
Change. But now his Curiosity was quite
of a different kind; he could not have
gone any where to have seen a more melancholy
Prospect, or more likelihood of
being disappointed of his Design, than
where Men of all Ages and all Nations
were assembled, with no other View than
to barter for Interest. The Countenances
of most of the People, showed they were
filled with Anxiety: Some indeed appeared
pleased; but yet it was with a
mixture of Fear. While he was musing,
and making Observations to himself, he
was accosted by a well-looking Man,
who asked him, if he would buy into a 

particular Stock. He said no, he did not
intend to deal. Nay, says the other, I
advise you as a Friend, for now is your
time, if you have any Money to lay out; 
as you seem a Stranger, I am willing to
inform you in what manner to proceed,
lest you should be imposed on by any of
the Brokers. He gave him a great many
thanks for his kindness; but could not
be prevailed on to buy any Stock, as he
understood so little of the matter. About
half an Hour afterwards, there was a piece
of News published, which sunk this Stock
a great deal below Par. He then told
the Gentleman, it was very lucky he had
not bought. Ay, and so it is, replied
the Gentleman; but when I spoke, I
thought it would be otherwise. I am
sure, I have lost a great deal by this cursed
News. Immediately David was pulled
by the Sleeve by a Man, who had stood
by, and overheard what they had been
saying; who whispered him in the Ear,
to take care what he did, otherwise the
Man, who he had been talking with,
would draw him into some Snare. Upon
which he told his new Friend, what had
passed with the other, and how he had
advised him to buy Stock. Did he, said
this Gentleman? I will assure you, I saw 

that very Man sell off as much of that
Stock as he could, just before you spoke
to him; but he having a great deal,
wanted to draw you in, to buy, in order
to avoid losing; for he was acquainted
with the News, before it was made
publick. 
DAVID was amazed at such Treachery,
and began to suspect every thing
about him, of some ill Design. But he
could not imagine, what Interest this Man
could have in warning him, of trusting
the other, till by conversing with a third
Person, he found out, that he was his
most inveterate Enemy, from Envy; because
they had both set out in the World
together, with the same Views of sacrificing
every thing to the raising of a Fortune; 
and that either by cunning or accident,
the other was got rich before
him. This was the Motive, said he, of
his forewarning you of the other's Designs: 
For that Gentleman who spoke
to you first, is one of the sharpest Men
I know; he is one of the Long-heads,
and much too wise to let any one impose
on him: And to let you into a Secret,
he is what we call a good Man. 

DAVID seemed surprized at that
Epithet; and asked, how it was possible,
a Fellow whom he had just catched in
such a piece of Villainy, could be called a
good Man? At which Words, the other,
with a Sneer at his Folly, told him he meant
that he was worth a Plumb. Perhaps he
might not understand that neither; (for
he began to take him for a Fool) but he
meant by a Plumb 100,000l. 
DAVID was now quite in a Rage; 
and resolved to stay no longer in a Place,
where Riches were esteemed Goodness, and
Deceit, Low-Cunning; and giving up all
things to the love of Gain, thought
Wisdom. 
As he was going out of the Change,
he met a Jeweller, who knew him by
sight, having seen him at his Uncle's,
where he used often to visit. He asked
him several Questions; and after a short
Conversation, desired he would favour
him with his Company at Dinner, for his
House was just by. 
DAVID readily accepted his Offer,
being willing to be acquainted with as 

great a variety of People as he possibly
could. The Jeweller's Name was Johnson; 
he had two Daughters, who dined
with them. They were both young, and
pretty: Especially the youngest, who had
something so soft and engaging in her
Countenance, that David was quite
charmed with her. Mr. Johnson, who
had been an extravagant Rake in his
Youth, though he was now become a
Miser, and a rigid Censurer of others
Pleasures, immediately perceived the young
Man was greatly taken with his Daughter; 
which he resolved to improve, knowing
that his Uncle had made him his
Heir, and that it was worth while to endeavour
to encrease his liking for her. 
He well remembered, that in his days of
Gallantry, he had often from a transient
View of Women liked them; but for want
of Opportunities of frequently conversing
with them, his Passion had grown cool
again. He therefore thought, the wisest
way would be, to engage David to stay
some time with him, as the surest Method
to fix his Affection. It was no hard matter
to persuade the young Man, to what
his Inclination so strongly prompted him
to comply with. Though this Inclination
was so newly born, he hardly knew himself 

from what Motive his desire of staying
there arose. But this Ignorance did not
continue long; for a short time's conversing
with his Mistress, convinced him,
how much he liked her: He thought to
watch her very narrowly, to see, if her
Mind was equal to her Person, which was
indeed very agreeable. But from the moment
he took a Fancy to her, he imagined
her Beauty exceeded that of all other Women
in the World. For which Reason he
was strongly possessed, she was in all respects
what he wished her to be. 
The Girl was commanded by her Father,
if Mr. David made any Addresses
to her, to receive them in such a manner,
as to fix him hers. He said, he
had conversed with Women enough in
his time, to know they did not want
Arts to manage the Men, they had
formed any Designs on; and therefore
desired she would comply with him, in
a Case which would be so greatly to her
advantage. She did not want many Arguments,
to persuade her to endeavour to
promote her own Interest, which she had
as much at heart, as he could have. Her
only Answer was, she should obey him:
on which he left her, highly pleased at her 

Dutifulness; which he imputed to his
own Wisdom, in educating her in a strict
manner. 
DAVID passed his time very happily; 
for the Master of the Family omitted nothing
in his power to oblige him, and he
was always received by his Mistress with
cheerful Smiles, and Good Humour. 
He lived on in this agreeable manner for
three Months, without ever wishing to
go in search of new Adventures, thinking
he had now found the greatest Happiness
to be attained in this World, in a
Woman he could both love and esteem. 
Her Behaviour was in all respects engaging; 
her Duty to her Father, Complaisance
and Affection to her Sister, and
Humanity to the Servants, made him
conclude, his travelling was at an end; 
for that in her he had met with every
thing he wanted. He was not long before
he asked her Father's Consent, which
was easily obtained; and now he had not
a Wish beyond what he imagined satisfied. 
Hitherto he had observed nothing
in her, but what increased his good Opinion. 
He was one day a little startled, 

by her telling him, he should not seem too
anxious, whether he had her, or no; for
she was certain her Father designed, if he
found he loved her enough to take her
on any Terms, to save some of her Fortune
to add to her Sister's: but when she
told him, she had too much Generosity
and Love for him, to let him be imposed
on by his Affection to her; this Discourse
encreased his good Opinion of her; and
the Thought that she loved him, gave
him the greatest Pleasure. He then told
her, he did not care whether her Father
would or could give her any thing; 
her Affection was all he coveted in this
World. He spent his time in Raptures,
in the reflection, what a charming Life
he should lead with such a Woman. But
this lasted not long, before all his fancied
Scenes of Joy fell to the ground, by an
Accident so very uncommon, I must
pause a while before I can relate it. 




In which is contained, a most curious
Dialogue between a young Woman,
and her Confidant. 
Just as Mr. David and his Mistress
were on the point of being married,
there came one day a rich Jew to Mr.
Johnson's House, in order to deal with
him for some Jewels. As he had been a
long time an Acquaintance of his, he invited
him to Dinner. It happened the
Jew was as much taken with the eldest
Daughter, as Mr. David was with the
youngest; which occasioned his making
frequent Visits. The Father soon perceived
the Reason of it, and was greatly
rejoiced at it; on which account he delayed
the other's Match for a little while,
hoping to see them both well disposed of
at the same time. But the Jew did not presently
declare himself, on the consideration
that she was a Christian. He considered,
whether it might not be possible, to obtain
her on any other Terms than Matrimony. 

He knew her Father was very covetous; 
which gave him hopes, that for a Sum
of Money, he himself would sell her. He
resolved therefore to try that Method
first; but if that did not succeed, as he
found he liked her so much, that he was
uneasy without the possession of her, he
could but marry her afterwards. He
was charmed with her Person, and thought
Women's Souls were of no great consequence,
nor did it signify much what
they profess. He took the first Opportunity
of making his proposal to the Father,
and offered him such a Sum of
Money as his Heart leaped at the mention
of; but he endeavoured to conceal
the Effect it had on him as much as possible,
and only said, he would consider
of it till the next Morning, and then he
should have an Answer. 
As soon as Mr. Johnson was alone, he
sat down to think seriously on what he
should determine. He was sure by the
Sum the Jew had offered for his Daughter,
that if he did not comply with his Scheme,
he would marry her, rather than go without
her. But then he was dubious which
he should get most by. He was a good
while deliberating, which way his Interest 

would be best promoted. At last he concluded,
if he could get rid of his Daughter,
without giving her any Fortune, and
make an Alliance with so rich a Man, it
would in the end prove more conducive
to his Interest than taking the Money. 
When the Jew therefore came at the
appointed time to know his Determination,
he began by telling him, “He was
very sorry after so long an Acquaintance,
in all which time he had dealt
fairly with him,” (as indeed he had
never attempted to impose on the Jew,
knowing it to be impossible) “that he
should form a Scheme to dishonour his
Family, and have so ill an Opinion of
him, to think he would be an Instrument
in it; but as it might be owing
to the great Passion he had for his
Daughter, he was very unwilling to
fall out with him: If his Love was
great enough to marry her, he would
give her to him with all his heart. 
Perhaps he might object to her being
a Christian; but he had always used
her implicitly to obey him; and therefore
he need not fear her conforming
to whatever he pleased.” This Stumbling-block
once got over, every thing 

else was soon agreed between them; for
the Jew consented to take her on her Father's
own Terms: And there remained
nothing now to do, but to acquaint Miss
Johnson with it. 
She was at first startled at the thoughts
of changing her Religion; but as she had
no more Understanding, than was just
necessary to set off her own Charms, by
knowing which Dress, and which Posture
became her best; and had never been
taught any thing more than to go to
Church of a Sunday, when she was not
wanted to stay at home to overlook the
Dinner, without knowing any other Reason
for it than Custom: The rich Presents
the Jew made her, and his Promises
of keeping her great, soon overcame all her
Scruples, and she consented to have him. 
He now took the privilege of a Son-in-Law,
being so soon to be married, and
had always one Dish dressed his own way. 
He one day brought Mr. Nokes, an
Acquaintance of his, to Dinner with him; 
and though he was immensely rich, he
was not afraid he would steal away his
Mistress, he being too old and ugly to
admit of a Suspicion of any Woman's 

liking him. But unluckily this old Fellow
cast his Eye upon David's Mistress,
and took so great a fancy to her, that
he was resolved to have her: He
was not afraid of being refused, for he
had Money enough to have bought a
Woman of a much higher Rank; nor
did he give himself any trouble about
gaining a Woman's Affections, not thinking
them worth having; but took it for
granted, every virtuous Woman, when she
was married, must love her Husband well
enough to make a good Wife, and comply
with his Humour. He went therefore
directly to the Father, and offered to
make any Settlement he should think
proper, if he would give him his Daughter; 
who was overjoyed at the Proposal,
and made no scruple of promising her to
him, without ever reflecting on the base
trick he was playing David. 
As soon as Mr. Nokes was gone,
Johnson sent for his Daughter, and told
her what had passed: He said, as she had
hitherto been a very obedient Girl, he
hoped she would still continue so. Indeed
he had ordered her to encourage
Mr. Simple's Addresses, because at that
time he appeared to be a very advantageous 

Match for her; but now a better
offered, she would certainly be in the
right to take the Man she could get most
by; otherwise she must walk on foot, while
her Sister rode in her Coach. He allowed
her a Week's time to consider of it; 
well knowing, Women are most apt to
pursue their Interests, when they have
had time enough to paint to their own
Imaginations, how much Riches will conduce
to the satisfaction of their Vanity. 
She made him no Answer, but went immediately
to her Chamber, where she had
left a young Woman, her chief Confidant,
and from whom she concealed nothing. 
As soon as she entered the Room, she
threw herself on the Bed, and fell into a
violent passion of Crying. Her Companion
was amazed, and thought some
dreadful Accident had happened to her. 
She begged to know what was the matter. 
Miss Johnson then told her, what her Father
had been saying, with all the Agonies of
a Person in the highest Distress. Upon
which ensued the following Dialogue; 
which I shall set down word for word; 
every body's own Words giving the most
lively Representations of their Meaning. 

A Dialogue between Miss Nanny Johnson,
and Miss Betty Trusty.
Miss Betty. “Well! and I see
nothing in all this,
to make you so miserable. You are
very sure your Lover will take you
without a Farthing, and will think
himself happy to have such a Proof of
your Affection: And for my part, if
it was my Case, I should think it no
manner of Sin to disobey a Father,
who imposed such unreasonable Commands
on me.” 
Miss Nanny. “Oh! my Dear, you
quite mistake my Case; I am not
troubling my head, either about the
Sin, or my Father; but the height of
my Distress lies in not knowing my
own Mind: if I could once find that
out, I should be easy enough. I am
so divided, by the Desire of Riches on
the one hand; and by my Honour,
and the Man I like on the other, that
there is such a struggle in my Mind,
I am almost distracted.” 

Miss Betty. *  “O fie, Child, I thought
you had been more constant in your
Nature; and that when you had given
your Affection to a Man, it had not
been in the power of Money to have
altered you. I am sure if it was my
Case, I should make no question of
preferring a young Man I liked, to an
old decrepid ugly Monster, though he
was ever so rich. I cannot help laughing
at the Idea of his Figure whenever
it comes in my Head: In him
Nature seems perfectly reversed; the
Calves of his Legs are placed before,
and his Feet turn inward as it were, in
spight of Nature: One side of his Back
is high enough to carry the load of
Riches he possesses; and the other is
shrunk in such a manner, that one
would imagine his two Sides were
made only to form that ridiculous
Contrast, which is always the Foundation
of Laughter. Undoubtedly you 

will be much envied the Possession of
so lovely a Creature.” 
Miss Nanny. “At what a rate you
run on: 'Tis easy to talk; but if you
was in my place, you can't tell what
you would feel. Oh that this good
Offer had but come before I knew the
other; or at my first Acquaintance
with him; for then I only received
him, because my Father bid me, and
I thought to gain by such a Match: 
But now I have conversed long enough
with him, to find it is in his power to
give me pleasure; I must either forsake
him, or abandon all Thoughts of being
a great Woman. 'Tis true, my
Lover can indeed keep me very well,
I shall not want for any thing he can
procure me; for I am sure he loves
me sincerely, and will do all in his
power to oblige me; and I like him
very well, and shall have no Reason to
envy any other Woman the possession of
any Man whatever: But then, he can't
afford to buy me fine Jewels, to keep me
an Equipage; and I must see my Sister
ride in her Coach and Six, while I take
up with a Hack, or at best with a
Coach and Pair. Oh! I can never 

bear that Thought, that is certain; 
my Heart is ready to burst. Sure never
Woman's Misfortune equalled mine.” 
Here she fell into such a violent Passion
of Crying, it was some time before she
could speak; but when she was a little
recovered, she went on in the following
Words: “Pray, my dear Friend, advise
me; don't be silent while I am thus
perplexed, but tell me which will give
me the greatest Pleasure, the Satisfaction
of my Love, or my Vanity.” 
Miss Betty. “Was ever Woman so
unreasonable? How is it possible for
me to tell which will give you most
Pleasure? You certainly must know
that best yourself. I have already told
you, if it was my Case, I should not
hesitate a Moment, but take the young
Fellow, and let the old Wretch be
nursed by whoever his Money could
buy; he may meet with Women enough
who have no Engagements, and there is
no fear any such would refuse him.” 
Miss Nanny. “You say true; I wish
that had been my Situation, but if I
should neglect this Opportunity of
making my Fortune, every Woman 

I see supported in Grandeur, will
make me mad, to think I had it
once in my Power to have been as
great as her. Well, I find it is impossible
I should ever come to any Determination; 
I shall never find out
what I have most mind to do, so I
must even leave it to Chance. I will
go tell Mr. David what has happened,
and if he presses me very much to run
away with him, I shall never be able
to resist him; but perhaps he may be
afraid to make me unhappy, and then
I may marry the other without any
Obstruction: but then no doubt he will
marry somebody else, and I can't bear
that neither. I find it is in vain for me
to think; I am in a Labyrinth, and
the farther I go, the more I am puzzled:
if I could but contrive some way
to have my Lover, and yet not give
up the Money, I should be happy; but
as that is impossible, I must be miserable,
for I shall always regret the
Loss of either. I will do the best I can,
I will have the Riches, that is positive; 
if I can possibly command myself
enough to resist my Lover's Importunities,
in case he should persist in
my going away with him.” 

Thus ended this Dialogue; in which
is proved the Possibility of Love and Vanity,
contending strongly in a Woman's
Mind: and I hope to be excused by those
Gentlemen, who are quite sure they have
found one Woman, who is a perfect
Angel, and that all the rest are perfect
Devils, for drawing the Character of a
Woman who was neither: for Miss
Nanny Johnson, was very good-humour'd,
had a great deal of Softness, and had no
Alloy to these good Qualities, but a
great Share of Vanity, with some small
Spices of Envy, which must always accompany
it. And I make no manner of
doubt, but if she had not met with this
Temptation, she would have made a very
affectionate Wife, to the Man who loved
her: he would have thought himself extremely
happy, with a perfect Assurance
that nothing could have tempted her to
abandon him. And when she had had the
Experience, what it was to be constantly
beloved by a Man of Mr. Simple's Goodness
of Heart, she would have exulted in
her own Happiness, and been the first
to have blamed any other Woman, for
giving up the Pleasure of having the
Man she loved, for any Advantage of 

Fortune; and would have thought it utterly
impossible for her ever to have been
tempted to such an Action; which would
then have appeared in the most dishonourable
Light: For to talk of a
Temptation at a distance, and to feel it
present, are two such very different things,
that every body can resist the one, and
very few People the other. But it is now
Time to think of poor David, who has
been all this time in a great deal of Misery; 
the Reason of which the next
Chapter will disclose. 




Which treats of Variety of Things,
just as they fell out to the Hero of
our History. 
David was going up to his Mistress's
Chamber, to desire her Company
to walk; when he came near the
Door, he fancied he heard the Voice of a
Woman who was crying, which made him
run in haste to know what was the matter:
but as he was entering the Room,
being no longer in doubt whose Voice it
was, he stopped short, to consider whether
he should break in so abruptly or no. 
In this Interim, he heard the Beginning of
the foregoing Dialogue; this raised such
a Curiosity in him, that he was resolved
to hear the End of it. But what was his
Amazement, when he found the Woman
he so tenderly loved, and who he thought
returned that Love, was in the highest
Perplexity to determine, whether she
should take him with a Competency, or
the Monster they had described with great 

Riches. He could hardly persuade himself
but that he was in a Dream. He
was going to burst open the Door, and
tell her he had been witness to the Delicacy
of her Sentiments; but his Tenderness
for her, even in the midst of his
Passion, restrained him, and he could
not bring himself to do any thing to put
her into Confusion. 
He went back to his own Room,
where Love, Rage, Despair and Contempt
alternately took possession of his
Mind: He walked about, and raved like
a Madman; repeated all the Satires he
could remember on Women, all suitable
to his present Thoughts, (which
is no great wonder, as most probably
they were writ by Men, in Circumstances
not very different from his.) In short,
the first Sallies of his Passion, his Behaviour
and Thoughts were so much like
what is common on such Occasions, that
to dwell long upon them, would be only
a Repetition of what has been said a thousand
times. The only Difference between
him, and the generality of Men in the
same Case, was, that instead of resolving
to be her Enemy, he could not help
wishing her well: For as Tenderness was 

always predominant in his Mind, no Anger,
nor even a just Cause of Hatred,
could ever make him inveterate, or revengeful: 
It cost him very little to be a
Christian in that Point; for it would
have been more difficult for him to have
kept up a Resentment, than it was to forgive
the highest Injury, provided that
Injury was only to himself, and his
Friends were no Sufferers by it. As soon
therefore as his Rage was somewhat abated,
and his Passion a little subsided,
he concluded to leave his Mistress to the
Enjoyment of her beloved Grandeur,
with the Wretch already described, without
saying or doing any thing that might
expose, or any way hurt her. 
When he had taken this Resolution,
he went down stairs into a little Parlour,
where he accidentally met Miss Nanny
alone. She, with her Eyes swelled out
of her Head with crying, with Fear and
Trembling, told him her Father's Proposals. 
Her manner of Speaking, and
her Looks, would have been to him the
strongest Proofs of her Love, and given
him the greatest Joy, if he had not before
known the Secrets of her Heart from
her own Mouth. The only Revenge he 

took, or ever thought of taking, was endeavouring
to pique that Vanity, which
was so greatly his Enemy. He therefore
put on a cold Indifference, and said, he
was very glad to hear she was likely to
make so great a Fortune; for his part,
he was very easy about it: he thought
indeed to have been happy with her as a
Wife; but, since her Father had otherwise
disposed of her, he should advise her
to be dutiful, and obey him. 
He was very bad at acting any Part
that was not quite sincere; but the present
Confusion of her Mind was so great,
she could not distinguish very clearly; 
and not knowing he was acquainted with
what had passed between her and her
Confidant, his Behaviour threw her into
a great Consternation, and had so much
the desired Effect of piquing her Vanity,
that I verily believe, had his Design been
to have gained her, and could he have
taken the pains to have turned about,
and made a sudden Transition in her
Mind, from the Uneasiness his Coldness
gave her Pride, to a Triumph in a certain
Conquest of him, joined to the Love
which she really had for him, notwithstanding
it was not her predominant Passion, 

he might have carried her wherever
he pleased. But as that was not his Design,
he durst not stay long with her; 
for he was several times tempted by her
Behaviour to think he was not in his
Senses, when he fancied he over-heard
her say any thing that could be construed
to her Disadvantage. And certainly, if
the longest experienced Friend had told
him what he heard himself, he would
have suspected him of Falshood; and if,
on being taxed with it, she had denied it, he
would have believed her against the whole
World. But as he was witness himself to
what she had said, and was convinced that
she could think of such a Fellow as his Rival,
for the sake of Money, he had just Resolution
enough to leave her, tho' he had a
great Struggle in his Mind before he
could compass it; and he has often said
since, that if he had staid five Minutes
longer his Love would have vanquished
his Reason, and he should have turned
the fond Lover again. Before he went, he
took leave of her Father and Sister, with
great Civility, for he was resolved to
avoid any bustle. He sent for a Coach,
put his Clothes into it, and drove from
the Door. 

Mr. Johnson asked no Questions, for
he was heartily glad to get rid of him,
and thought it was owing to his Daughter's
discharging him; he therefore again
exulted in his own Wisdom, in making her
always obey him. He then went to look
for her, in order to applaud her Obedience; 
but how great was his Surprize,
when he found her, instead of being rejoiced
at having done her Duty, and being
rid of a troublesome Lover, walking
about the Room like a mad Woman,
crying and tearing her Hair; calling out
she was undone for ever; she had no Refuge
now; her Misery must last as long
as her Life. 
Her Father had been in the Room
some time before she perceived him, and
then she took no notice of him; but continued
walking about in the same manner. 
As soon as he could recollect himself,
he began to talk to her, and asked
her what could be the Cause of all this Tragedy; 
said her Lover was just gone from
the Door in a Coach, and he was come
to praise her dutiful Behaviour. When
she heard David was quite gone, it increased
her Agony, and she could hardly 

forbear reproaching her Father, for being
the Cause of her losing such a Man. For
now, that she thought him irretrievable,
she fancied, in him, she had lost every
thing that was valuable: And tho' that
very Day all her Grief had been how to
get rid of him; yet, now he was gone,
she would have sacrificed (for the present)
even her darling Vanity, if she could
have brought him back again. And
when Mr. Johnson would have comforted
her, by telling her of the rich Husband
she was to have, she flew into the greatest
Rage imaginable, and swore, if she could
not see Mr. Simple again, she would lock
herself up, and never see any living Creature
more; for, without him, she was
undone and ruined. 
Her Father, who had no Idea of a
Woman's being ruin'd any way but one,
began to be startled at her repeating that
Word so often, and to fear that the Girl
had been drawn in by her Passion to sacrifice
her Honour; he was terrified,
lest he should prove the Dupe instead of
Mr. Simple. He stood considering some
time, and at last was going to burst into
a Rage with his Daughter, resolving,
if she was not virtuous, he would turn 

her out of doors: But, before he said any
thing in Anger to her, a sudden Thought
came into his mind, which turned him
into a milder Temper. He considered,
that as the thing was not publick, and
Mr. Nokes was ignorant of it; it might
be all hushed up. He wisely thought,
that as she was not in that desperate
Condition, in which some Women, who
have been guilty of Indiscretions of that
kind, are, he might justify himself in
forgiving her. If indeed her Reputation
had been lost, and she had conversed
long enough with a Man to have
worn out her Youth and Beauty, and
had been left in Poverty, and all kinds
of Distress, without any hopes of Relief,
her Folly would then have been so
glaring, he could by no means have own'd
her for his Child. But, as he did not
at all doubt, when the first Sallies of
her Grief were over, she would consent
to follow her Interest, and marry the
old Man; and then he should still have
the Pleasure of seeing her a fine Lady,
with her own Equipage attending her: 
He condescended to speak to her in
as kind a manner as if he had been
sure Lucretia herself (whose Chastity nothing
but the fear of losing her Reputation 

could possibly have conquered) had
not excelled her in Virtue. He desired
her to be comforted; for if she had been
led astray by the Arts of a Man she liked,
if she would be a good Girl, and follow
his Advice in concealing it from, and
marrying the Man who liked her, he
would not only forgive it, but never upbraid,
or mention it to her more. 
She was quite amazed at this Speech; 
and the Consideration, that even her own
Father could suspect her Virtue, which
was dearer to her than her Life, did but
aggravate her Sorrows. At first she could
not help frowning, and reproaching her
Father for such a Suspicion, with some
Hints of her great wonder how it was
possible there could be such Creatures in
the World; but, in a little time, her
Thoughts were all taken up again with
Mr. Simple's leaving her. She told her
Father, nothing but his returning could
make her happy, and she could not think
how she had lost him; for she never told
him she would prefer the other to him: tho'
indeed she was very wavering in her own
Mind, yet she had not expressed it to him,
and his Indifference was what she could not
bear. If he had but sigh'd, and been miserable 

for the loss of her, she could have
married her old Man without any great
Reluctance: But the Thought that he
had left her first was insupportable. At
this rate did she run on for some time. 
Mr. Johnson, who in his Youth had
been very well acquainted with Women's
ways, and knew the Ebbs and Flows of
their Passions, was very well satisfied,
that as there was a great mixture of Vanity
in the Sorrow she expressed for the
Loss of her Lover, the greater Vanity
would in the end conquer the less, and
he should bring her to act for her own,
and his Interest: He therefore left her,
to go and follow his own Affairs, and
made no doubt of every thing succeeding
according to his Wish. She spent some
time in the deepest Melancholy, and felt
all the Misery which attends a Woman
who has many things to wish, but knows
not positively which she wishes most. 
Sometimes her Imagination would represent
Mr. Simple with all the Softness of a
Lover, and then the Love she had had
for him would melt her into Tenderness; 
then in a Moment his Indifference and
Neglect came into her head, her Pride
was piqued, and she was all Rage and Indignation; 

then succeeded in her Thoughts
the old Man and his Money: So that Love,
Rage and Vanity were in the greatest
Contention which should possess the largest
share of her Inclinations. It cannot be
determined how long this Agitation of
Mind would have lasted, had not her
Sister's Marriage with the rich Jew put
an end to it; which being celebrated with
great Pomp and Splendor, made Miss
Nanny resolve she would not be outdone
in Grandeur: She therefore consented to
give her Hand to Mr. Nokes, and as he
was ready to take her, it was soon concluded; 
and she now no longer made any
difficulty of preferring Gaiety and Show
to every thing in the World. She thought
herself ill used by Mr. Simple, (not knowing
the true Cause of his leaving her in
that abrupt manner;) so that her Pride
helped her to overcome any Remains of
Passion, and she fancied herself in the
Possession of every thing that could give
Happiness, in splendid Equipages and
glittering Pomp. But she soon found herself
greatly mistaken; her fine House, by
constantly living in it, became as insipid
as if it had been a Cottage: A short
time took away all the giddy Pleasure 

which attends the first Satisfaction of Vanity. 
Her Husband, who was old, soon
became full of Diseases and Infirmities,
which turned his Temper (naturally not
very good) into Moroseness and Ill-nature: 
And as he had married a Woman
whom he thought very much obliged to
him, on account of his Superiority of Fortune,
he was convinced it was but reasonable
she should comply with his peevish
Humours; so that she had not lived long
with him, before the only Comfort she
had, was in the hopes of out-living him. 
She certainly would soon have broke
her Heart, had she known that all this
Misery, and the loss of the greatest Happiness,
in being tenderly used by a Man
of Sense, who loved her, was her own
Fault; but as she thought it his Inconstancy,
to his Generosity, in not telling
her the Truth, she owed the avoiding
that painful Reflection. The uneasy
State of her Mind made her peevish,
and cross to all around her; and she never
had the Pleasure of enjoying that
Fortune, which she had been so desirous
of obtaining: Her Husband, notwithstanding 

his old Age, died of a spotted
Fever; she caught the Infection of him,
and survived him but three Days. But
I think it now full time to look after my
Hero. 



Containing a remarkable Contention
between three Sisters. 
Poor David's Heart was ready to
burst. He ordered his Coach to
drive into Fleetstreet, that he might be
out of the Neighbourhood, and hearing
of the Cause of his Torment; he took a
Lodging in that Street; and the Moment
he was at liberty to reflect on what
had passed, found it was much harder to
conquer a Passion than to raise it; for
notwithstanding the great Contempt he
had for his Mistress's Conduct, and his
Aversion to the very Thought of a
mercenary Woman, yet would his Fancy
set before him, all those Scenes of
Pleasure, he once imagined he should 

enjoy with the Object of his Love. With
those Thoughts returned all his Fondness: 
Then came his Reason spitefully to
awake him from the pleasing Dream,
and shew him, he ought to forget it was
ever in the power of a Person who
so highly deserved to be despised, to
contribute to his Pleasure. But all the
Pains he could take to overcome his Inclination
for her, could not make him
perfectly easy: sometimes he would weep,
to think that Vanity should prevent such
a Creature from being perfect; then
would he reflect on the Opinion he once
had of her, and from thence conclude,
if she could have such Faults, no Woman
was ever truly good; and that Nature had
certainly thrown in some Vices to Women's
Minds, lest Men should have
more Happiness than they are able to
bear. On this Consideration, he thought
it would be in vain to search the World
round, for he was sure he could meet with
nothing better than what he had already
seen; and he fancied he might certainly justify
himself in going back to her, who had
no Faults, but what Nature, for some wise
Purpose, had given to all Creatures of
the same kind: He began to flatter himself,
that Time and Conversation with 

him, would get the better of those small
Frailties, (for such he soon began to
think them) which, perhaps, might be
only owing to Youth, and the want of
a good Education. With these Reflections,
he was ready to go back, throw
himself at her Feet, and ask ten thousand
Pardons for believing his own
Senses; confess himself highly to blame,
and unworthy her Favour, for having left
her. However, he had just Sense enough
left, to send a Spy first, to enquire into
her Conduct concerning the old Man,
who came just as she was married. This
News assisted him to get the better of
his Love; and he never enquired for
her more, tho' he was often thoughtful
on her Account. 
Now was David in the same Condition
as when he discovered his Brother's
Treachery. The World was to begin
again with him; for he could find no
Pleasure in it, unless he could meet with
a Companion who deserved his Esteem:
he had been used ill, by both the Man
and the Woman he had loved. This
gave him but a melancholy Prospect, and
sometimes he was in perfect Despair; 
but then his own Mind was a Proof to 

him, that Generosity, Good-nature, and
a Capacity for real Friendship, were to
be found in the World. Besides, he saw
the Shadow of those Virtues in so many
Minds, that he did not in the least doubt,
but the Substance must exist in some
place or other. He resolved, therefore,
to go on in his Search; for he was sure,
if ever he could find a valuable Friend,
in either Man or Woman, he should be
doubly paid for all the Pains and Difficulties
he could possibly go through. 
He took a new Lodging every Week,
and always the first thing he did, was to
enquire of his Landlady, the Reputation
of all the Neighbourhood; but he never
could hear one good Character, from any
of them, only every one separately gave
very broad Hints of their own Goodness,
and what pity it was, they should be
obliged to live amongst such a Set of
People. As he was not quite so credulous
to take their Words, he generally,
in two or three Days, had some reason
to believe they were not totally exempt
from Partiality to themselves. He went
from house to house, for some time,
without meeting with any Adventure
worth relating. He found all the Women 

tearing one another to pieces from
Envy, and the Men sacrificing each other
for every trifling Interest. Every Shop
he went into, he heard Men swear they
could not afford their Goods under such
a Price, one Minute, and take a great
deal less the next; which even his Charity
could not impute to the desire of
serving the Buyer. In short, the Generality
of Scenes he saw, he could never
mention without a Sigh, or think of
without a Tear. 
In one of the Houses where he lodged,
the Master of the Family died while he was
there. He had three Daughters, every one
of whom, attended him with the utmost
Duty and Care during his Illness, and
at the approach of his last Moments,
shewed such Agonies of Grief and tender
Sorrow, as gave our Hero great Pleasure. 
He reflected how much happier
the World would be, if all Parents
would sustain the helpless Infancy of their
Children, with that Tenderness and Care,
which would be thought natural by every
good Mind, unexperienced in the World,
for all Creatures to have towards every
thing immediately placed under their Protection; 
and as they grew older, form
their Minds, and instruct them, with that 

Gentleness and Affection, which would
plainly prove every thing they said or
did, was for their Good, and not command
them with an arbitrary Power. He
thought that Children thus educated, with
grateful Minds would return that Care
and Love to their Parents, when old Age
and Infirmities rendered them Objects
of Compassion, and made it necessary for
them to be attended with more Assiduity,
than is generally met with in those
People who only serve them for their
Money. 
The three Daughters above-mention'd
never ceased crying and lamenting, till
their Father was buried, in all which time
Mr. Simple did all he could to comfort
them; but, as soon as the Funeral was
over, they dried up their Tears, and
seem'd quite recover'd. The next Morning,
as David was musing by himself, he
was startled by a sudden Noise he knew
not what to make of. At first he fancied
it was the chattering of Magpyes; then
he recollected, that some young female
Neighbours of his, fearing lest there
should be too much Silence in their House,
kept two or three Parrots to entertain
themselves with. At last he thought he 

heard something like the Sound of human
Voices, but so confused and intermixed,
three or four together, that nothing
could be distinguished. He got up, and
went towards the Room the Noise seem'd
to come from: But how great was his
Amazement, when he threw open the
Door, and saw the three dutiful Daughters,
(whom he had so much applauded
in his own Mind) looking one pale as
Death, the other red as Scarlet, according
as their different Constitutions or
Complexions were worked on by violent
Passions; each of them holding a Corner
of a most beautiful Carpet in her Hand. 
The moment they saw David, they ran
to him, got hold of him, and began
to tell their story all at a time. They
were agitated by their Rage to such a
degree, that not one of them could speak
plain enough to be understood; so that
he stood as if he had been surrounded by
the three Furies, for a considerable time,
before he could have any Comprehension
what they would be at. At last, with
great Intreaties that one of them would
speak at a time, he so far prevailed, that
the eldest told him the Story, tho' it was
not without several Interruptions and
many Disputes. 

Their Father had left all he had to
be divided equally amongst them; and,
when they came to open his Things, they
found this Carpet, which was a Present
to him from a Merchant, and was one
of the finest that ever was seen. The
Moment they set eyes on it, they every
one resolved to have it for themselves, on
which arose a most violent Quarrel; and,
as none of them would give it up, the
most resolute of them took a pair of
Scissars, and cut it into three Parts. 
They were all vex'd to have it spoil'd,
yet each was better pleas'd, than if either
of their Sisters had had it whole. But still
the Difference was not decided, for in one
of the Pieces was a more remarkable fine
Flower than the rest, and that they had
every one fixed on as their own. When
David had heard all this, he could not
express his Astonishment, but stood staring
at them, like one who has seen, or
fancies he has seen, a Ghost. He desired
them to let go their Hold, for he
could not possibly be a Judge in a Dispute
of so nice a nature. On which they all
cry'd out, they would have the Flower
divided: for they had rather see it cut in 

a thousand pieces, than any body should
have it but themselves. 
As soon as David could free himself
from them, he ran down stairs, got as
far out of their hearing as he could, and
left the House that very Night. 
The Behaviour of these Sisters to each
other, and that lately shown to their Father,
may appear perhaps very inconsistent,
and difficult to be reconciled. 
But it must be considered, that as the old
Man had always preserved all the Power
in his own hands, they had been used implicitly
to obey his Commands, and wait
on him; and as to their Grief at his
Death, there is to most People a Terror
and Melancholy in Death itself, which
strikes them with Horror at the sight of
it: And it being usual for Families to
cry and mourn for their Relations, till
they are buried, there is such a Prevalency
in Custom, that it is not uncommon
to see a whole House in Tears, for
the Death of those very People they have
hated and abused while living, tho' their
Grief ceases with their Funerals. But
these three Sisters had an inveterate Hatred
to each other; for the eldest being 

much older than the others, had, during
their Childhood, usurped so unreasonable
an Authority over them, as they could
never forgive; and as they were handsomer
when they grew up than she was,
they were more liked by the rest of the
World, and consequently more disliked
and hated by her. The other two, as they
were nearer of an Age, in all appearance
agreed better; but they had met with
one of those fine Gentlemen, who make
Love to every Woman they chance to
be in company with. Each of these two
Sisters fancied he was in love with her; 
they therefore grew jealous Rivals, and
never after could endure one another; 
yet, notwithstanding all this, I make no
doubt, but on the Death of either, the
others could have perform'd the Ceremony
of crying, with as good a Grace as
if they had loved one another ever so well. 
Nay, and what is yet more surprizing,
this Grief might not have been altogether
Affectation: for when any Person
is in so low a State of Body, Mind, or
Fortune, as makes it impossible for them
to be the Objects of Envy, if there is the
least grain of Compassion or Good-nature
in the human Mind, it has full Power to
exert itself, and the Thought of being 

going for ever to lose any body we are
used to converse with, like a Charm,
suddenly banishes from our Thoughts all
the Bad, which former Piques and Quarrels
ever suggested to us that they had in
them, and immediately brings to our Remembrance
all the good Qualities they
possessed. 
Poor Mr. Simple began now utterly
to despair that he should ever meet with
any Persons who would give him leave to
have a good Opinion of them a Week
together; for he found such a Mixture
of bad in all those he had yet met with,
that as soon as he began to think well of
any one, they were sure to do something
to shock him, and overthrow his Esteem: 
He was in doubt in his own Mind, whether
he should not go to some remote
Corner of the Earth, lead the Life of a
Hermit, and never see a human Face
again; but, as he was naturally of a social
Temper, he could not bear the
Thoughts of such a Life. He therefore
concluded he would proceed in his Scheme,
till he had gone through all degrees of
People; and, if he continu'd still unsuccessful,
he could but retire at last. 




Wherein is to be seen the Infallibility
of Men's Judgments concerning the
Virtues of Vices of their own Wives. 
As David was one day walking along
the Strand, full of these Reflections,
he met a Man with so contented a
Countenance, he could not forbear having
a Curiosity to know who he was: he therefore
watched him home; and, on Enquiry,
found he was a Carpenter, who work'd
very hard, brought home all the Money
he could get to his Wife, and that they
led a very quiet peaceable Life together. 
He was resolv'd to take the first Opportunity
of sending for him, on pretence of
imploying him in his Trade, in order to
know, from his own mouth, what it was
caused those great Signs of Happiness,
which so visibly appear'd in his Countenance. 
The Man told him, “He was indeed
the happiest of all Mortals; for
he certainly had the best Wife in the
World; to which was owing that 

Chearfulness he was pleas'd to take notice
of.” This still raised his Curiosity
the more, and made him resolve to go
to the Man's House to observe his Manner
of living. He told him he had a
mind to see this good Woman, whose
Character pleased him so well, and that
he would go home to dinner with him. 
The Carpenter, who thought he never
had Witnesses enough of his Wife's Goodness,
said, “He should be very proud of
his Company.” And home they went
together. 
Mr. Simple expected to have found
every thing prepared in a neat, tho' plain
way, by this extraordinary Woman, for
the Reception and Comfort of her Husband,
after his Morning's Work: But
how greatly was he surprized, when he
heard by a Prentice Boy, (who was left at
home to wait on her, instead of assisting his
Master in his Business) that she was in Bed,
and desired her Husband would go and
buy the Dinner, which the Boy dress'd for
them, but very ill; and, when it was
ready, the Lady condescended to sit
down at Table with them, with the Boy
waiting behind her Chair; and what was
still the more amazing, was, that this 

Woman was ugly, to such a degree, that
it was a wonder any Man could think of
her at all. The whole Dinner pass'd in
the Man's Praises of her Good-Humour
and Virtue, and in Exultings in the
Happiness of possessing such a Creature. 
This Scene perplex'd David more
than any thing he had yet seen, and he
endeavour'd all he could to account for it. 
He therefore desir'd to board with them a
Week, in order to find out, if possible, what
could be the Cause of a Man's Fondness for
such a Woman. In all the time he was there,
he observed she indulged herself in drinking
Tea, Wine, and in such Expences
as a Man in his way could not possibly
supply, notwithstanding all his Industry; 
but he thought nothing too much for her. 
After all the Reflections that could be made
on this Subject, there could be no other
Reason assign'd for this poor Man's being
such a willing Slave, but her great Pride,
and high Spirit, which imposed on him, and
made him afraid to disoblige her; together
with a sufficient manner of talking, which
made him imagine her much more capable
than she really was, in all respects. 
I think it very likely, if she had
known her own Deserts, and been humble 

in her Behaviour, he would have paid
her no other Compliment, but confessing
she was in the right, in the mean
Thoughts she had of herself. He then
would have been Master in his own
House, and made a Drudge of her; an
Instance of which, David saw while he
was there, by a Man who came one day
to visit his Neighbour, and was what is
called by those sort of People, a jolly
Companion: The first thing he did, was
to abuse his Wife. He said, “he had
left her at home out of humour, and
would always deal with her after that
manner, when he found her inclined
to be ill tempered.” The Carpenter
cast a look on his Wife, which expressed
his Satisfaction, in having so much the
Advantage of his Acquaintance. The
other went on, in saying, “for his part,
he could never have any thing he liked
at home, therefore he would stay but
little there.” 
DAVID hearing all this, had a great
Desire to see if this Woman was as much
better than her Husband thought her, as
the other was worse; and told the Man,
if he would let him come and board with
him a Week, he would give him his
own Price. The other answered, “He 

should be very welcome, but his Wife
did things in such an aukward Way,
he was afraid he would not stay there a
Day.” But he, who was very indifferent
as to what he eat and drank, was
not frighten'd at this, and went home
with the Man. He found the Woman
hard at work, with two small Children,
the eldest not four Years old, playing
round her; they were dressed in coarse
things, much mended, but yet whole and
clean; every thing in the House was
neat, and plainly proved the Mistress of
that Family, having no Servant, could not
be idle. As soon as they came in, she
rose from her work, made an humble
Court'sy to the Stranger, and received her
Husband with a mixture of Love and
Fear. He, in a surly Tone, said, “Well
Moll, I hope you are in a better Humour
than when I left you, here is a
Gentleman wants to board with us for
a Week, you had best not be in your
Airs; none of your crying and whining,
for I won't stay an hour in the
House, if you don't behave yourself
as you ought.” The poor Woman,
who could hardly refrain from Tears,
said, “indeed, she was in very good
Humour, and would do all she could 

in her homely way, to give the Gentleman
Content.” She had been very
pretty, but her Eyes now had a Deadness
in them, and her Countenance was grown
pale, which seemed to be occasioned by
the Sorrow and hard Labour she had endured,
which produced the Effects of old
Age, even in Youth itself. 
The Husband never spoke for any
thing but it was done, as if by Inchantment; 
for she flew to obey him, the moment
he but intimated his Inclinations:
she watched his very Looks, to observe
what he would have, and if ever he expressed
himself mildly, it seemed to be
all her Pleasure. Every thing was ordered
in the House, in the most frugal
and best manner possible; yet it was seldom
she could get a good Word from
the Man she endeavoured to please. Her
modest Behaviour, Love to her Husband,
and Tenderness for her Children,
in short, every thing she did or said,
raised a great Compassion in David, and
a strong Desire to know her Story, which
he took the first Opportunity of desiring
her to relate. She for a great while excused
herself, saying, she could not tell
her Story without reflecting on the Man 

she was unwilling to blame. But on
David's assuring her, every thing should
be a Secret, and that he would exert the
utmost of his Power to serve her, she
was at last prevailed on to give the following
Account of her Life. 
“As you seem, Sir, so desirous of
knowing my Misfortunes, I cannot
refuse complying with your Request; 
tho' the Remembrance of most of the
past Scenes of my Life bring nothing
but melancholy Thoughts to my Mind,
which I endeavour, as much as possible,
to avoid. Indeed, I have so few
Comforts, that it's well my being continually
obliged to employ myself, for
the feeding and covering these my Little-ones,
prevents my having time to
think so much, as otherwise I should. 
“My Father was a great Distiller
in the City, and I was bred up with
the utmost Tenderness and Care, till
I was ten Years old, when he died and
left me to the Care of an elder Brother,
to depend on his pleasure for my
Support. He was a sort of Man, it
is impossible to draw any Character of,
for I never knew him do one Action 

in my Life, that was not too much in
the common Road to be remarked. 
He kept me in his House without
either abusing, or shewing the least
Affection towards me; by this sort of
Behaviour, he neither gained my Love,
nor my Hatred, but I lived a dull
Life with very few things to amuse
me: for as all the Companions I used
to play with in my Father's Time,
had plenty of Money, and I now
was kept without any, they soon shunned
me, and I was as willing to avoid
them, having too much Pride to be
beholden to them for paying my share
of the Expence. I had now nothing
to do but to fly to Books for Refuge: 
All the Pleasure I had, was in reading
Romances, so that by the time I was
Fifteen, my Head was full of nothing
but Love. While I was in this Disposition,
one Sunday, as I came out
of Church, an old Woman followed
me, and whispered in my Ear, if I
had a mind to save a pretty young
Fellow's Life, I should give a kind
Answer to a Note he had sent by her; 
which she put into my Hand, and presently
mixed amongst the Croud. I
made haste home with the utmost Impatience, 

to read my Letter; it contained
the strongest Expressions of
Love, and was writ so much in the
strain of some of my favourite Books,
that I was over-joyed at the Thoughts
of such an Adventure. However, I
would not answer it, thinking some
Years Service due to me, before such
a Favour should be granted; for I began
now to look on myself as the
Heroine of a Romance. The young
Man was Clerk to an Attorney in the
Neighbourhood, and was none of those
luke-warm Lovers, who require their
Mistresses to meet them half way,
but he followed me with the utmost
Assiduity. This exactly suited my
Taste, and I soon found a great Inclination
for him, yet was resolved to
make a long Courtship of it; but a
very few Meetings with him, got the
better of all my Resolutions, and he
made me engage myself to him. 
“If my Brother had treated me with
Good-nature, I certainly should have acquainted
him with this Affair; but he
took so little Notice of me, and whenever
I spoke to him, shewed such a
Contempt for talking with Girls, that 

he being twice my Age, I contracted
such an Awe of him, I really was
afraid to tell him of it. I take shame
to myself, for giving so easily into
an Affair of this nature; but I was
young, and had no body to advise or
instruct me, for my Mother died when
I was an Infant: which, I hope, may
be some excuse for me, but I won't tire
you with my foolish Remarks. 
“My Brother happened one day to
bring home a young Man to dinner
with him, who took such a fancy to
me, he would have married me. My
Person then, as I was told, was very
agreeable, tho' now, Sir, I am so altered,
nobody would know me to be
the same Woman. This young Man
was in very good Circumstances, which
you may be sure, made my Brother readily
agree to it. He therefore told me of
it, but was greatly surprized, to find me
utterly averse to the Match; he teazed
me so much about it, that at last I
told him the Truth, that I was already
engaged, both in Honour and Inclination,
to another. On hearing this, he
fell into the most violent Rage imaginable,
at my daring to engage myself to 

any one, without his Consent. He told
me, the Man I had pleased to take a
fancy to, was a pitiful Fellow. That
his Master often said, he would never
come to any Good, for he thought of
nothing but his Pleasures, and never
minded his Business. In short, he said,
if I would not give him up, he would
abandon me, and never see me more. 
This Roughness and Brutality made
me still fonder of my Lover, who was
all Complaisance and Eagerness to
please me. I took the first Opportunity
of informing him of what had happened. 
He was not at all concerned,
as he saw me so resolute, only he
pressed me to marry him immediately,
which my foolish Fondness soon made
me consent to. My Brother was as good
as his word, for he would never see
me more. And, indeed, it was not
long, before I found what he had told me
was too true, that my Husband would
not follow his Business; for as soon as
he was out of his Time, he swore he
would have no more to do with it. 
His Father was a very good Man, but,
unfortunately for me, died soon after
we were married; for he would have
been kind to me, if he had lived. He 

had more Children, and was not very
rich, so that he could not leave us a
great deal: However, he left me 30l.
per Annum, in an Annuity; and to his
Son 500l. which he soon spent, and
made me sell my Annuity: I have
never refus'd him any thing since we
have been marry'd. You see, Sir,
by the manner we live, Money is not
very plenty with us, tho' I do my
Houshold Affairs myself, take care of
my poor Children, and am glad to do
Plain-Work besides, when I can get it; 
that, by all means possible, I may help
to support the Man, whom yet I love
with the greatest Fondness, notwithstanding
you see he doth not treat me
with an equal Tenderness. 
“He has a Brother, who allows him
a small matter, so that we make shift
to rub on with Bread, and I could be
content with my Lot, if he behaved
to me as when we were first married; 
and what has occasioned this Alteration
I cannot imagine, for I don't find
he converses with any other Women,
and I have always been a very humble
Wife: I have humour'd him in every
thing he has desir'd: I have never 

upbraided him with the Misery I have
suffer'd for his sake, nor refus'd him
any of the little Money I get. I remember
once, when I had but just
enough to buy a Dinner for the Day,
and had been hard at work, he had a
mind to go out, where he thought he
should be merry: I let him have this
little, and conceal'd from him that I
had no more; thinking it impossible
for him to take it, if he had known the
Truth. I eat nothing but Bread that
Day. When he came home at night, I
receiv'd him with great good Humour; 
but had a Faintness upon me, which
prevented my being chearful, which
he immediately imputed to the Badness
of my Temper. He swore there was
no living with Women, for they had
such vile Humours no Mortal could
bear them. Thus even my Tenderness
for him is turn'd against me, and
I can do nothing that he does not dislike; 
yet my Fondness still continues
for him, and there are no pains I would
not take, if he would return it; but
he imputes it to a Warmth in my Inclination,
which Accident might as
well have given to another Man.” 

DAVID, who sat silent all this while,
and attended to her Discourse, was amazed
at her Story; he assured her he would do
all in his power to serve her, and would
leave her some Money, which she might
produce at times as she thought proper; 
and try if finding her always able and
willing to supply her Husband with what
he wanted, would not make him kinder
to her. He said he had great Compassion
for her, gave her five Guineas, being
all he had about him, and promised to
send her more, which he punctually perform'd. 
When David came to reflect, he was
perfectly amazed, how it was possible for
one Man to be continually rejoicing in his
own Happiness, and declaring he had the
best of Wives, altho' she spent all his
Substance, and threw the burden of every
thing upon him; while another was continually
complaining of his Wife, when
her whole Time and Labour was spent
to promote his Interest, and support
him and his Children. And, however
common it may be in the World, the
Goodness of David's Heart could not
conceive how it was possible for good 

Usage to make a Man despise his Wife,
instead of returning Gratitude and Good-humour
for her Fondness. 



Containing some Proofs, that all Men
are not exactly what they wish to
pass for in the World. 
The next Lodging our Hero took,
was near Covent-Garden; where he
met with a Gentleman, who accidentally
lodg'd in the same House, whose Conversation
Mr. Simple was mightily charmed
with: He had something in his Manner,
which seemed to declare that inward Serenity
of Mind, which arises from a Consciousness
of doing well, and every Trifle
appeared to give him pleasure, because
he had no Tumults within to disturb his
Happiness. His Sentiments were all so
refined, and his Thoughts so delicate,
that David imagined such a Companion,
if he was not again deceived in his Opinion,
would be the greatest Blessing this
World could afford. 

This Gentleman, whose Name was
Orgueil, being of French Extraction, was
equally pleased with Mr. Simple, and they
spent their whole time together: He had
a great deal of good Acquaintance, that
is, he conversed with all the People of
Sense he could meet with, without any
Consideration what their Fortunes were; 
for he did not rate Men at all by the
Riches they possessed, but by their own
Behaviour. In this Man therefore did
David think he had met with the Completion
of all his Wishes; for, on the
closest Observation, he could not find he
was guilty of any one Vice, nor that he
neglected any Opportunity in his power
of doing good; the only Fault he could
ever discern in him, was, a too severe
Condemnation of others Actions: for he
would never make any allowance for the
Frailties of Human Nature, but expected
every one to act up to the strictest Rules
of Reason and Goodness. But this was
overlooked by a Friend, and imputed to
his knowing, by himself, the Possibility of
avoiding those Frailties, if due Care was
taken. Wherever he went, he carried
David with him, and introduced him
into a perfect new Scene of Life: for hitherto 

his Conversation had been chiefly
amongst a lower Degree of Men. The
Company in which Mr. Orgueil delighted,
were People who were bred to genteel
Professions, and who were neither to be
reckoned in very high, nor in low Life. 
They went one Night to a Tavern, with
four other Gentlemen, who had every one a
great deal of that kind of Wit, which consists
in the Assemblage of those Ideas, which,
tho' not commonly join'd, have such a Resemblance
to each other, that there is nothing
preposterous, or monstrous in the
joining them; whereas I have known some
People, for the sake of saying a witty thing,
as it were by force, haul together such inconsistent
Ideas, as nothing but Vanity, and a
strong Resolution of being witty in spite of
Nature, could have made them think of. 
But this Conversation was quite of a different
kind; all the Wit was free and easy; 
every thing that was said seem'd to be
spoke with a desire of entertaining the
Company, without any Reflection on the
Applause that was to arise from it to
themselves. In short, nothing but Envy
and Anger, at not having been Author
of every thing that was said, could have
prevented any body's being pleased with
every Expression that was made use of. 

And, as David's Mind was entirely free
from those low, mean Qualities, his Entertainment
was pure and unmixed. 
The next Morning passed in Observations
on the Conversation of the foregoing
Night, and David thanked his
Friend for the Pleasure his Acquaintance
had given him. “Ay, says the other,
I do not in the least doubt but one of
your Taste must be highly satisfied
with every one of those Gentlemen you
were with last Night; but your Goodness
will make you sigh at what I am
going to relate. Each of those Men
you were so delighted with, have such
glaring Faults, as make them unfit to
be thought of, in any other light, than
just to be diverted with: They are not
to be trusted, nor depended on in any
point in Life; and altho' they have
such Parts and Sense, that I cannot
help liking their Company, I am forced,
when I reflect, to think of them just as
I do of a Buffoon, who diverts me,
without engaging either my Love or
Esteem. Perhaps you may blame me,
when I have told you their real Characters,
for having any thing to say
to them; but, as I consider I have 

not the power of Creation, I must take
Men as they are; and a Man must be
miserable, who cannot bring himself
to take all the Pleasures he can innocently
attain, without examining too
nicely into the Delicacy of them. That
Man who sat next you, and whom I
was not at all surprized to see you
hearken to with so much Attention,
notwithstanding all those beautiful
Thoughts of his on Covetousness,
and the Eloquence in which he display'd
its Contemptibleness, is so
great a Miser, that he would let the
greatest Friend he had suffer the height
of Misery, rather than part with any
thing to relieve him: And was it possible
to raise, by any means, Compassion
enough in him, to get but a trifle from
him; the Person, who once had a
Farthing of his Money, would be ever
afterwards hateful to him. For Men
of his Turn of Mind take as great an
Aversion to those People, whom they
think themselves, or, to speak more
properly, their Chests a penny the
poorer for, as Children do to the Surgeons
who have drawn away any of
their Blood. 

“That other Gentleman, who seem'd
to pitch on Extravagance as the properest
Subject to harangue against, is
himself the most extravagant of all
Mortals; he values not how he gets
Money, so that he can but spend it; 
and, notwithstanding his Lavishness, he
is full as much a Miser, to every body
but himself, as the other. Indeed he
is reputed by the mistaken World to
be generous; and, as he perfectly understands
the Art of flattering himself,
he believes he is so: but nothing can be
farther from it. For, tho' he would
not scruple to throw away the last
twenty Guineas he had in the world,
to satisfy any Fancy of his own, he
would at the same time grudge a Shilling
to do any thing that is right, or
to serve another. These two Men,
who appear so widely different, you
may suppose have a strong Contempt
for each other; but if they could think
of themselves with that Impartiality,
and judge of their own Actions with
that good Sense, with which they judge
of every thing else, they would find
that they are much more alike than
they at present imagine. The Motive 

of both their Actions is Selfishness,
which makes every thing center wholly
in themselves. It was Accident brought
them together last Night; for a covetous
Man as naturally shuns the Company
of a Prodigal, unless he has a great
Estate, and he can make a Prey of
him, as an envious ugly Woman does
that of a handsome one, unless she
can contrive to do her some mischief
by conversing with her. 
“That Gentleman who sat next me,
and inveighed against Treachery and
Ingratitude, with such a Strength of
Imagination, and delightful Variety of
Expressions, that a Pythagorean would
have thought the Soul of Cicero had
been transmigrated into him; I know
a Story of, that will at once raise your
Wonder and Detestation. 
“His Father was one of those sort of
Men, who, tho' he never designed any
Ill, yet from an indolent, careless Disposition,
and trusting his Affairs entirely
to others, ran out of a very good
Estate, and left his Son at the Age of
Fifteen, upon the wide World to shift
for himself. An old Gentleman in the 

Neighbourhood took a great fancy
to this Boy, from the Genius he saw
in him: He received him into his
House, and kept him, as if he had
been his own Son, and made use of
all his Interest to procure him a Commission
in the Army, which he accomplished; 
it being in time of Peace,
he easily obtained leave for him to
come often, and spend much of his
Time with him. The good old Man
had a Daughter, who was just Fifteen
when our Spark was Twenty; she was
handsome to a miracle, the Object of
her Father's most tender Love and
Affection, and the Admiration of every
body who knew her. She repaid her
Father's Tenderness with the utmost
Duty and Care to please him, and her
whole Happiness was placed in his
Kindness and good Opinion of her. 
She was naturally warm in her Passions,
and inclined to love every body,
who endeavoured to oblige her. This
young Gentleman soon fell in love
with her: That is, he found it was in
her power to give him Pleasure, and he
gave himself no trouble what Price she
paid for gratifying him. In short,
he made use of all the Arts he is 

master of, (and you see how agreeable
he can make himself) to get her Affections; 
which as soon as he found he
had obtained, he made no scruple of
making use of that very Love to him,
(which ought to have made him wish
to protect and guard her from every
Misfortune) to betray her into the
greatest Scene of Misery imaginable; 
and all the Return he made to the
Man, who had been a Father to him
from Choice, and Good-nature, was,
to destroy all the Comfort he proposed
in his old Age, of seeing his beloved,
only Child happy. 
“He was soon weary of her, and
then left her in a Condition the most
unable to bear Afflictions, to suffer
more than can be expressed. The being
forsaken by the Man she loved,
and the Horror of being discovered by
her Father, made her almost distracted; 
it was not that she was afraid of her
Father, but she loved him so well, that
her greatest Terror was the Thoughts
of making him uneasy. It was impossible
to conceal her Folly long, and
yet she could by no means bring herself
to disclose it. The alteration of 

her Behaviour, which from the most
lively Chearfulness, grew into a settled
Melancholy, with her pale and dejected
Countenance, made the poor
old Man fear she was going into a
Consumption. He was always enquiring
what was the matter with her; he
perceived whenever he spoke to her,
on that Subject, the Tears stood in
her Eyes, and she was hardly able to
give him an Answer. At last, by
continual Importunities, he got from
her the whole Truth. What Words
can describe his Distress when he heard
it! His Thoughts were so confused,
and his Amazement so great, it was
some time before he could utter his
Words. She stood pale and trembling
before him, without Power to speak,
till at last she fainted away. He then
catched her in his Arms, cried out for
Help, and the Moment she began to
recover, welcomed her to returning
Life, not in Passion and Reproaches,
but in all the most endearing Expressions
the most tender Love could suggest. 
He assured her, he never would
upbraid her; that all his Resentment
should fall on the proper Object, i. e.
the Villain who had imposed on her soft 

artless Temper, to both their Ruins. 
He wondered what could induce the
Wretch to so much Baseness, since if
he had asked her in Marriage, as she
was fond of him, there was nothing
he would not have done to have made
them happy. 
“This Excess of Goodness was
more fatal to the poor young Creature,
than if he had behaved as most Fathers
do in the like Case; who, when
they find their Vanity disappointed,
and despair of seeing their Daughters
married to advantage, fall into a
violent Rage, and turn them out of
doors: for this uncommon Behaviour
of his, quite overcame her, she fell
from one fainting Fit to another, and
lived but three Days. During all which
time, she would never let her Father
stir from her, and all she said, was to
beg him to be comforted, to forget
and drive out of his Memory, if possible,
that ever she had been the Cause
of so much Grief to him; for the
Thoughts of that was worse than ten
thousand Deaths to her; all the rest
she could have borne with Patience,
but the Consideration of what she had 

brought on him (the best of Fathers)
was more than Nature could support. 
“The poor Man stifled his Groans
while she could hear them, for fear of
hurting her; but the Moment she was
gone, he tore his Hair, beat his
Breast, and fell into such Agonies, as
is impossible to describe. So I shall follow
the Example of the Painter, who
drew a Veil before Agamemnon's Face,
when his Daughter was sacrificed, despairing
from the utmost Stretch of his
Art, to paint any Countenance that
could express all that Nature must feel
on such a dreadful Occasion: I shall
leave to your own Imagination to represent
what he suffered; and only tell
you, it was so much, that his Life
and Misery soon ended together.” 
Here Mr. Orgueil stopped, seeing
poor David could hear no more, not being
able to stifle his Sighs and Tears, at
the Idea of such a Scene; for he did not
think it beneath a Man to cry from Tenderness,
tho' he would have thought it
much too effeminate to be moved to
Tears by any Accident that concerned
himself only. 

As soon as he could recover enough to
speak, he cried out, “Good God! is
this a World for me to look for Happiness
in, when those very Men, who
seem to be such Favourites of Nature,
that she has taken particular Care to
give them every thing that is agreeable,
can be guilty of such Crimes as
make them a Disgrace to the Species
they are born of! What could incite
a Man to such monstrous Ingratitude!
there was no Circumstance to alleviate
his Villainy; for if his Passion was violent,
he might have married her.” 
Yes, (answered, Mr. Orgueil) but that
was not his Scheme, he was ambitious,
and thought marrying so young would
have spoiled his Fortune, he could not
expect with this poor Creature above
fifteen hundred Pounds at first: He
did not know how long the Father
might live, and he did not doubt,
but when he had been some time in the
World, he might meet with Women
equally agreeable, and much more to
his Advantage” “Well, (replied
David) and is this Man respected in
the World? Will Men converse with
him? Should he not be drove from Society, 

and a mark set upon him, that
he might be shunned and despised? 
He certainly is one of the agreeablest
Creatures I ever saw; but I had rather
spend my time with the greatest Fool
in Nature, provided he was an honest
Man, than with such a Wretch.” “Oh,
Sir, (says the other) by that time you
have conversed in the World as long
as I have, you will find, while a Man
can support himself like a Gentleman,
and has Parts enough to contribute to
the Entertainment of Mankind, his
Company will be courted, where Poverty
and Merit will not be admitted. 
Every one knows who can entertain
them best, but few People are Judges
of Merit. He has succeeded in his
Designs; for he has married a Woman
immensely rich.” At this, David was
more astonished than ever; and asked, if
his Wife knew the Story he had just told
him. “Yes, (says he) I knew a Gentleman,
who is her Friend, that told her
of it before she was married: And all
the Answer she made was, Truly, if
Women would be such Fools to put
themselves in Men's power, it was their
own Fault, and good enough for them; 
she was sure he would not use a virtuous 

Woman ill, and she did not doubt but
her Conduct would make him behave
well. In short, she was fond of him,
and would have him. He keeps an
Equipage, and is liked by all his Acquaintance. 
This Story is not known
to every body, and amongst those who
have heard it, they are so inclined to
love him, that while they are with
him, they can believe nothing against
him: No wonder he could impose on
a young unexperienced Creature, when
I have known him impose on Men of
the best Sense.” 
DAVID could not bear the Thoughts,
that any body's Wit and Parts should
have power enough to make the World
forget they were Villains; and lamented
to his Friend, that whoever was capable
of giving pleasure, should not also have
Goodness. “Why, really Sir, (says
Mr. Orgueil) in my Observations on the
World, I have remarked, that good
Heads and good Hearts generally go
together; but they are not inseparable
Companions, of which I have already
given you three Instances, and have
one more, in the other Gentleman, 

who was with us last Night, tho' it is
impossible to equal the last Story. 
“Perhaps, Sir, you would think it
very unnatural that a Person, with his
Understanding, should have all his
good Qualities swallowed up and overrun
with the most egregious Vanity; 
you see he is very handsome, and
to his Beauty is owing all his Faults. 
And I often think he manages the
Gifts in which Nature has been so
liberal to him, with just the same
Wisdom as a Farmer would do, who
should bestow all his Time and Labour
on a little Flower-Garden, placing
his whole Delight in the various
Colours, and fragrant Smells he
there enjoyed, and leave all the rich
Fields, which with a small Care would
produce real Benefits, uncultivated and
neglected. So this Gentleman's Mind,
if he thought it worth his Notice, is
capable of rendering him a useful Member
of Society; but his whole Pleasure
is in adorning his Person, and making
Conquests. You could observe nothing
of this, because there were no
Women amongst us; but if there had,
you would have seen him fall into such 

ridiculous Tosses of his Person, and
foolish Coquetries, as would be barely
excusable in a handsome Girl of Fifteen. 
He was thrown very young upon the
Town, where he met with such a Reception
wherever he went, and was so
much admired for his Beauty, even by
Ladies in the highest Stations, that his
Head was quite turned with it. You
will think, perhaps, these are such
trifling Frailties, after what I have already
told you of the others, they
hardly deserve to be mentioned; but
if you will consider a moment, you
will find, that this Man's Vanity produces
as many real Evils, as Ill-nature,
or the most cruel Dispositions could
do. For there are very few Families,
where he has ever been acquainted,
in which there is not at least one Person,
and sometimes more, unhappy on
his account. As the welfare and
happiness of most Families depend in
a great measure on Women, to go
about endeavouring to destroy their
Peace of Mind, and raise such Passions
in them, as render them incapable of
being either of Use or Comfort to
their Friends, is really taking a pleasure
in a general Destruction. And I 

myself know at this present time, several
young Ladies, who used to be
the Comfort and Joy of their Parents,
and the Delight of all who conversed
with them, that are become, from a
short Acquaintance with this Spark,
negligent of every thing; their Tempers
changed from Good-humour and
Liveliness, to Peevishness and Insipidity,
and each of them languishes away
her days in fruitless Hopes, and chimerical
Fancies, that her superiour
Merit will at last fix him hers. 
“In one House there are three Sisters
so much in love with him, that from
being very good Friends, and leading
the most amicable Life together, they
are become such inveterate Enemies,
that they cannot refrain, even in Company,
from throwing out sly Invectives
and spiteful Reproaches at one another. 
I know one Lady of Fashion, who has
no Fault but an unconquerable Passion
for him, and having too much Honour
to give her Person to one Man,
while another has her Affections, has
refused several good Matches, pines
herself away, and falls a perfect Sacrifice
to his Vanity. And yet this Man, 

in all his Dealings with Men, acts
with Honour and Good-nature. It appears
very strange to me, that any one
who would scruple a Murder, can
without regret take pains to rack
People's Minds. His Character is very
well known, yet he is not a bit the less,
nay, I think, he is the more liked, for
whether it arises from the Hopes of
gaining a Prize that is sighed for by all
the rest, or from thinking they stand
excused, for not resisting the Arts of
the Man who is generally allowed to
be irresistable, or what is the Reason I
cannot tell; but I have observed the
Man who is reported to have done
most mischief, is received with most
Kindness by the Women. I suppose,
I need not bid you remember in what
sprightly and polite Expressions, he
ridiculed that very sort of Vanity,
which, from what I have just now related,
it is plain he has a great share
of himself.” 
DAVID said, “That was what he
was just remarking to himself; and he
found, by all his Stories, every one of
the Company expressed the greatest Aversion
for the Vices they were more 

particularly guilty of.” Yes, says Mr.
Orgueil, “ever since I have known any
thing of the World, I have always observed
that to be the case; insomuch that
whenever I hear a Man express an uncommon
Detestation of any one criminal
Action, I always suspect he is guilty of
it himself. It is what I have often reflected
on; and I believe Men think,
by exclaiming against any particular
Vice, to blind the World, and make
them imagine it impossible they should
have a Fault, against which all their
Satire seems to be pointed: Or perhaps,
as most Men take a great deal of pains
to flatter themselves, they continually
endeavour, by giving things false
Names, to impose on their own Understandings; 
till at last they prevail
so far with their own Good-nature, as
to think they are entirely exempt from
those very Failings they are most addicted
to. But still there remains some
Suspicion, that other People, who are
not capable of distinguishing things so
nicely, will think they have those Faults,
of which their Actions give such strong
Indications. Therefore they resolve to
try, if a few Words, which do not
cost them much, will clear them in the 

Opinion of the World. People with
any Imagination, and a strong Resolution,
may almost persuade themselves
of any thing. 
“I remember a Man, who was
very fond of a Woman, whose Person
had no Fault to be found with it, but
a coarse red Hand: He at first chose
to compliment her on that Part which
was most defective, from a Knowledge
of Nature, that nothing pleases
so much, as to find Blemishes turn'd
into Beauties. He persisted in this so
long, that at last he really thought
she had the finest white Hand that
ever was seen; but still there remain'd
a Suspicion in his Mind, from a faint
Remembrance of what he had once
thought himself, that other People
might not think so. Therefore he was
continually averring to all People, he
never saw so beautiful a Hand in his
Life. The Woman, whose Understanding
would have been found light
in the Scale, if weighed against a Feather,
was foolish enough to be pleas'd
with it; and, instead of trying to hide
from Sight, as she used to do, what
really seemed too ugly to belong to the 

rest of her Person, forgot all her Beauties; 
and had no Pleasure, but in displaying,
as much as possible, before
every Company, what she was now
convinced was so deservedly the Object
of Admiration. They carried this to
such a ridiculous Height, that they
became a perfect Proverb; and she
was called, by way of derision; the
White-handed Queen.” 
Mr. Orgueil was now quite exhausted
with giving so many various Characters; 
and I think it full time to conclude this
long Chapter. 




Which teaches Mankind a true and
easy Method of serving their Friends. 
After Dinner, Mr. Orgueil proposed
going to the new Play, which he
heard had made a great Noise in the
Town. David said, he would accompany
him wherever he went, but it was what
he had hitherto avoided; from hearing
those who either approved or disapproved
the Performance, generally made such a
Noise, that it was impossible not to lose
great Part of the Play. “That is very
true, replied Mr. Orgueil, but I go on
purpose to make Observations on the
Humours of Mankind; for, as all the
Criticks commonly go from Taverns,
Nature breaks out, and shews herself,
without that Disguise which People put
on in their cooler Hours.” 
On these Considerations they agreed to
go, and at half an Hour past Four they
were placed in the Pit; the Uproar was
begun, and they were surrounded every 

way by such a variety of Noises, that it
seemed as if the whole Audience was met
by way of Emulation, to try who could
make the greatest. David asked his
Friend, what could be the Meaning of all
this; for he supposed they could be neither
condemning, nor applauding the Play,
before it was begun. Mr. Orgueil
told him, the Author's Friends and Enemies
were now shewing what Parties they
had gathered together, in order to intimidate
each other. 
DAVID could not forbear enquiring
what could induce so many People to
shew such an Eagerness against a Man or
his Performance, before they knew what
it was: And, on being told by Orgueil
it was chiefly owing to Envy and Anger
at another's Superiority of Parts; for that
every Man who is talked of in the World
for any Perfection, must have numberless
Enemies, whom he does not suspect: 
He could refrain no longer, but burst
into the most pathetick Lamentation on
the Miseries of Mankind, that People
could rise to that height of Malignity, as
to bring Spite and Envy with them into
their very Diversions. He thought when
Men were met together, to relax their 

Minds, and unbend their Cares; all
was calm within, and every one endeavour'd
to raise his Pleasures as high as
possible, by a benevolent Consideration,
that all that were with him were enjoying
the same Delights with himself. He
told his Friend, he now should have one
Enjoyment less than ever he had; for he
used to love publick Assemblies, because
there People generally put on their most
chearful Countenances, and seemed as if
they were free from every malicious and
uneasy Thought; but if what he had
told him was true, he could consider
them as nothing but painted Outsides,
while within they were full of rancorous
Poison. 
Mr. Orgueil said, “There were yet
another sort of People, who contributed
to the damning of Plays, which
were a Set of idle young Fellows, who
came there on purpose to make a
noise, without any Dislike to the Author,
for few of them knew him; and
as to his Play, they never hearkned to
it, but only out of wantonness they happened
to have said it should not be acted
a second Night; and, as Fools are generally
stubborn, they are resolved not to be 

overcome.” Just as he had spoke these
Words, the Curtain drew up, and the Play
began. 
The first Act went on very quietly; 
at which David expressed his Satisfaction,
hoping to hear it out without any Disturbance. 
But his Friend knew to the contrary,
and informed him, the more silent
the Damners were now, the more Noise
they would soon make; for that was only
their Cunning, that they might not appear
to have come there on purpose to
condemn the Play. The second Act
passed also with only a few Contentions
between Claps and Hisses; but in the
third Act the Tumult grew louder, and
the Noise increased; Whistles,—Cat-calls,
Groans,—Hollowing,—beating with Sticks,
—and clapping with Hands,—made such a
hideous Din,—and Confusion of Sounds,
as no one can have any Idea of, who has
not had the happiness to hear it. In
short, the third Act was with great difficulty
got through; but in the fourth the
Noise began again, and continued with
heroick Resolution, for some time, on
both sides: but, as Enemies generally
stick longer by People than Friends, the
latter were first worn out, and forced to 

yield to their Antagonists. The Words
Horrid Stuff—Was ever such Nonsense! 
—Bad Plot! &c.—were re-echoed
throughout the House, for a considerable
time: and thus the Play was condemned
to eternal Oblivion, without having ever
been heard; and the Author was forced
to go without his Benefit, which, it is
more than probable, would have been of
great use to him, as well as many others,
who had not failed in their Attendance on
him once a Week for a long time. 
As soon as the hurry was a little over,
a Gentleman who had sat near them the
whole Time, began to talk to them about
the Play: he said, “He was very sorry
that it was impossible for any body of
Common Sense to appear in the imposing
such horrid Nonsense on the
Town; for he was the Author's Friend,
and should have been glad if he could
have got any thing by it; as, at this
time, he knew it would have been very
acceptable to him.” David could not
forbear saying; “Indeed, Sir, I took
you rather for a great Enemy of his; 
for I observed you making use of all
the Methods possible that it might not
be heard.” “Yes, Sir,” answered the 

other, “that was, because, as I am his
Friend, and found it was very bad, I
was unwilling he should be exposed; 
besides, I hoped, by the Mortification
this would give him, to prevent his
ever attempting to appear again in this
manner; for he is a very good-natured
Fellow, a good Companion, and a
Friend of mine; but, between you and
I, he cannot write at all.” 
As soon as this friendly Creature left
them, Mr. Orgueil observed to David, how
strong a Proof this was, of the Truth of
what he had told him before; for he himself
had been a witness once, tho' he found he
had forgot him, of this Gentleman's attempting
to rally the Author before a Room
full of Company; but his getting the better
of him, and having always the Laugh on
his side, had made him envious of him
ever since. On this Subject Mr. Orgueil
and David discoursed all the way home,
where, when they arrived, they were so
worn out with Hurry and Noise, they retired
immediately to Bed; where I will
leave them to take their Repose. 




Which contains some strong Intimations,
that the Human Mind is not always
totally exempt from Pride. 
The next Day passed without any
Occurrence worth mentioning, when
in the Evening Mr. Orgueil perceiving his
Friend to be very melancholy, did all he
could to make him throw off the
Thoughts of what disturbed him; telling
him, it was in vain to sigh for what it
was impossible for him to remedy. That
it was much better to be the laughing
than weeping Philosopher. That
for his part, the Follies and Vices of
Mankind were his Amusements, and gave
him such ridiculous Ideas, as were a continual
Fund of Entertainment to him. — 
David replied, “He could never think
it a matter of Jest, to find himself
surrounded by Beasts of Prey; and
that it was no matter into which of their
voracious Jaws he fell, as they were all
equally desirous of pulling him to
pieces.” He went on remarking, if
Beauty, Wit, Goodness, or any thing 

which is justly the Object of Admiration
and Love, can subject the Possessors of
them to the Envy, and consequently
Hatred of Mankind, then nothing but
Knavery, Folly, and Deformity can be
beloved; or at least whoever is remarkable
for either of the last mentioned Qualities,
are the only People who can pass
thro' the World without any body's wishing
to hurt them, and that only because
they are thought low enough already. — 
What you told me yesterday, and the
Scenes I was witness to, has made such a
deep Impression on me, I shall not easily
recover it. I was very much surprized to
hear you tell that Story of the old Man and
his Daughter with dry Eyes, and quite unmoved. 
Mr. Orgueil smiled, and said, “I
look upon Compassion, Sir, to be a very
great Weakness; I have no Superstition
to fright me into my Duty, but I
do what I think just by all the World,
for the real Love of Rectitude is the
Motive of all my Actions. If I could
be moved by a Compassion in my Temper
to relieve another, the Merit of it
would be entirely lost, because it would
be done chiefly to please myself: But
when I do for any one, what they have
a Right to demand from me, by the 

Laws of Society and right Reason,
then it becomes real Virtue, and
sound Wisdom.” David was amazed
at this Doctrine, he knew not what to
answer; but it being late, took his leave,
and went to bed, with a Resolution to
consider and examine more narrowly into
it: for tho' it appeared to him very absurd,
yet, as it was a Subject he had never
thought of, he would not condemn
what he could not refute. 
His Head was so crouded with Ideas,
he could sleep but little; he began to be
frighten'd, lest he should have no more
reason to esteem Mr. Orgueil than the rest
of his Acquaintance, when he throughly
knew him. However, he got up the
next Morning, with a design of entering
into a Conversation, that might give him
more light into his Friend's Mind and
Disposition. He found him at Breakfast
with another Gentleman: The moment
Mr. Orgueil saw him, he said, “he was
very sorry an Affair had happened,
which must oblige them to be apart
that day; but he told him, that Gentleman,
whom he before had some
small Acquaintance with, had promised
not to leave him, and he was sure his 

Company would make Amends for
the loss of any other.” As soon as
Breakfast was over, Mr. Orgueil dressed,
and went out. 
DAVID's Mind was so full of what
had passed the Night before, he could
not forbear communicating his Thoughts
to his present Companion, and desired him
to tell him the meaning of what Mr. Orgueil
had said to him last Night, concerning
Rectitude and Compassion. On which the
other replied, “he had conversed for
many Years with Mr. Orgueil, and had
the greatest Veneration for him at first,
but by continually observing him, he had
at last got into his real Character, which
if he pleased to hear, he would inform
him of.” And on David's assuring
him he could not oblige him more, he
began in the following manner. 
“You are to know, Sir, there are a
Set of Men in the World, who pass
through Life with very good Reputations,
whose Actions are in the general
justly to be applauded, and yet
upon a near Examination their Principles
are all bad, and their Hearts hardened
to all tender Sensations. Mr. 

Orgueil is exactly one of those sort of
Men; the greatest Sufferings that can
happen to his Fellow-Creatures, have
no sort of Effect on him, and yet he
very often relieves them; that is, he goes
just as far in serving others, as will
give him new Opportunities of flattering
himself: for his whole Soul is filled
with Pride, he has made a God of
himself, and such Attributes as he
thinks necessary, for the Dignity of
such a Being, he endeavours to have. 
He calls all Religion Superstition, because
he will own no other Deity; he
thinks even Obedience to the Divine
Will, would be but a mean Motive to
his Actions; he must do Good, because
it is suitable to the Dignity of his
Nature; and shun Evil, because he
would not be debased as low as the
Wretches he every day sees. When
he knows any Man do a dishonourable
Action, then he enjoys the height of
Pleasure in the Comparison he makes
between his own Mind, and that of
such a mean Creature. He mentally
worships himself with Joy and Rapture; 
and I verily believe, if he lived
in a World, where to be without Virtue
was reckoned a Prodigy, the same 

Pride which now makes him take a
delight in doing what is right, (because
for that Reason he thinks himself above
most of the People he converses with,)
would then lead him to abandon himself
to all manner of Vice: for if by
taking pains to bridle his Passions, he
could gain no Superiority over his
Companions, all his Love of Rectitude,
as he calls it, would fall to the ground. 
So that his Goodness, like cold Fruits,
is produced by the Dung and Nastiness
that surrounds it. He has fixed in his
Mind, what he ought to do in all cases
in Life, and is not to be moved to go
beyond it. Nothing is more miserable
than to have any Dependance on him; 
for he makes no Allowance for any
Frailties, and the moment any Person
exceeds, in the least degree, the bounds
his Wisdom has set, he abandons them,
as he thinks they have no reasonable
claim to any thing farther from him. 
If he was walking with a Friend
on the side of a Precipice, and that
Friend was to go a step nearer than he
advised him, and by accident should
fall down, altho' he broke his Bones,
and lay in the utmost Misery, he would
coolly leave him, without the least 

thought of any thing for his Relief: 
Saying, if Men would be so mad, they
must take the Consequence of their own
Folly. Nay, I question, whether he
would not have a secret Satisfaction in
thinking, that from his Wisdom, he
could walk safely through the most
dangerous Places, while others fell into
them. As polite as you see he can be
when he has a mind to be so, yet
when he converses with any one he
thinks greatly beneath him, or who is
forced by Circumstances to be any
ways obliged to him, he thinks they
cannot expect good Breeding; and
therefore can be as rude, tho' in different
terms, as the most vulgar Wretch
in the World. In short, every Action
of his is center'd in Pride; and the
only Reason he is not perfectly ridiculous,
is, because he has Sense enough
to affect to be quite contrary to what
he is. And as you know he has
great Parts, and his Manner is very
engaging whenever he pleases; very
few People really know him.” 
“What then (says David) have I
been hugging myself all this time in
the thoughts, that I had met with a 

Man who really deserved my Esteem,
and is it all owing to my Ignorance of
his real Character?” “Yes, Sir,
(answered the Gentleman) I assure you,
what I have told you is all true, and if
you will give yourself the trouble to observe
him narrowly, you will soon be
convinced of it.” David, with a Sigh,
replied, “he wanted no stronger proof
of the Certainty of it; for what he
himself said last night, joined to what
he had just now heard, was full Conviction
enough.” “I never was so
startled (continued he) in my Life, as
at his saying, he looked upon Compassion
as a Weakness. Is it possible
that the most amiable Quality human
Nature can be possessed of, should be
treated with Contempt by a Man of
his Understanding! Or is it all delusion,
and am I as much deceived in
his Sense as in his Goodness! For surely
nothing but the greatest Folly could
make a Creature, who must every day,
nay, every hour in the day, be conscious
of a thousand Failings, and feel
a thousand Infirmities, fancy himself a
Deity, and contemplate his own Perfections.” 
“As to that (says the
Gentleman) when you have seen more 

of the World, you will find that what
is generally called Sense, has very little
to do with what a Man thinks; 
where Self is at all concerned, Inclination
steps in, and will not give the
Judgment fair play, but forces it to
wrest and torture the Meaning of every
thing to its own purposes. You must
know, there are two sorts of Men who
are the direct Opposites to each other; 
the one sort, like Mr. Orgueil, live in
a continual war with their Passions,
subdue their Appetites, and act up to
whatever they think right; they make
it their business in all Companies, to
exalt the Dignity of human Nature as
high as they can; that is, to prove
Men are capable, if it was not their
own fault, of arriving to a great degree
of Perfection, which they heartily
consent every one should believe they
themselves have done. The others give
way to every Temptation, make it
their whole business to indulge themselves,
without any Consideration who
are Sufferers by it, or what Consequences
attend it: and as they are resolved
to pull others down as low as
themselves, they fall to abusing the
whole Species without any distinction, 

assert in all their Conversations, that
human Nature is a Sink of Iniquity,
every good Action they hear of another,
they impute to some bad Motive; 
and the only difference they allow to
be in Men is, that some have Art and
Hypocrisy enough, to hide from undiscerning
Eyes, the Blackness that is
within. In short, they know they cannot
be esteemed, and therefore cannot
bear another should enjoy what they
either can't or won't take the pains to
attain. 
“Thus there is no end of their Arguments,
which may be all summed
up in a very few Words: For the one
sort only contend, that they themselves
may be allowed to be perfect, and
therefore that it is possible: And the
other, as they know themselves to be
good for nothing, modestly desire, that
for their sakes, you will be so kind as to
suffer all Mankind to appear in the
same light; that their Faults are owing
to Nature, they cannot help it. They
have, indeed, some little Pleasure in
reflecting, that they have this Superiority
over others, that while they
endeavour to deceive People, and impose 

on their Understandings, they
claim this Merit, that they own themselves
as bad as they are: that is, utterly
void of every Virtue, and possessed
of every Vice.” 
DAVID stood amazed at this Discourse,
and cried out, “I am come to
the utmost despair, if these are the
ways of Mankind, not to endeavour
to be what really deserves Esteem, but
only by Fallacy and Arts to impose on
others, and flatter themselves, where
shall I hope to find what I am in search
of?” “And pray, Sir, (said the
other) if it is not impertinent to ask,
What is it that you are seeking?” 
David answered, “It was a Person who
could be trusted, one who was capable
of being a real Friend; whose every
Action proceeded either from Obedience
to the Divine Will, or from the Delight
he took in doing good; who could
not see another's Sufferings without
Pain, nor his Pleasures without sharing
them. In short, one whose Agreeableness
sway'd his Inclination to love him, and
whose Mind was so good, he could never
blame himself for so doing.” The
Gentleman smiled, and said, “I don't 

doubt, Sir, but if you live any time,
you will find out the Philosopher's
Stone; for that certainly will be your
next Search, when you have found
what you are now seeking.” David
thought he was mad, to make a Jest of
what to him appeared so serious, and told
him, “notwithstanding his laughing,
if ever he did attain what he was in
pursuit of, he should be the happiest
Creature in the World. Indeed, he
must confess he had hitherto met with
no great Encouragement. However,
he was resolved to proceed; and if he
was disappointed at last, he could but
retire from the World, and live by himself: 
As he was mistaken in Mr. Orgueil,
he would not stay to converse
any longer with him, but remove that
very Day to another Lodging.” 
Mr. Spatter, (for that was this Gentleman's
Name,) seeing him so obstinate
in his purpose, thought it would
be no ill Scheme to accompany him, for
a little while, by way of Diversion. He
therefore said, “If it would be agreeable
to him, he might lodge in the same
House with him, in Pall-Mall.” David
readily agreed to it; and they only 

staid till Mr. Orgueil came home, that he
might take his leave of him: For it was
his Method, whenever he found out any
thing he thought despicable, in a Person
he had esteemed, quietly to avoid them
as much as possible for the future. He
therefore took his leave of Mr. Orgueil,
and set out with his new Acquaintance, to
view another Scene of Life; for the Manner
of living of the Inhabitants of every
different part of this great Metropolis,
varies as much as that of different Nations. 

The End of the First BOOK.