




An epistolary Correspondence. 
Lady Dellwyn was entirely
ignorant of the whole Transaction
mentioned in the last
Chapter of the foregoing Book. A
constant Correspondence had been kept
up between her and her Father from
the Time of her leaving London after
her Marriage; and Mr. Lucum's Letters
were always filled with strong Expressions
of parental fondness. The 

last Letter which Lady Dellwyn had
then received from him is here presented
to the Reader, as a Specimen of
the Style in which he wrote. 

My dearest Daughter,
Altho' every thing is welcome
that comes from your Hands to
your fond Father; yet I was somewhat
afflicted by your last Letter, because
you seemed to fail in that Spirit
of Vivacity which generally is so conspicuous
in whatever you write; for,
my Child, the Countess of Dellwyn is as
famous for her Wit as for her Beauty: 
But, by your languid Style, I fear that
your Health doth not continue in so
good a State as is answerable to my
most fervent Wishes. Pray take great
Care of yourself, and consider that my
Happiness depends on your Welfare. 
Write by the Return of the Post, and
let me know whether I have any Reason
for this melancholy Suggestion of
your being indisposed; for I shall suffer
great Uneasiness whilst I am under 

this disagreeable Suspence. Present my
best Respects to your most honoured
and revered Lord; and believe me
ever 
Your most affectionate Father,
C. Lucum. 
From the very kind and warm Expressions
of fatherly Fondness in this
Letter, a small Ray of Hope darted
into Lady Dellwyn's Mind; and she
began to flatter herself, that possibly
her Father might be prevailed on to
apply to Lord Dellwyn in her Favour,
and endeavour to dissuade him from
his Resolution of exposing her publicly. 
But she found an almost insurmountable
Difficulty in wording properly a
Request of this Nature to her Father; 
for she dared by no means let the
whole Truth appear, and yet was conscious
that she was very unequal to the
Task of being intelligible on such a
tender Point, whilst she was under a
Necessity of blending together in an
artful Proportion two Things so very 

unmixable in their Natures as Truth
and Falsehood. Innumerable were the
Instances, in which, if Lady Dellwyn
had been possessed of the whole World,
she would gladly have resigned it all,
in Exchange for the Power of boldly,
and without conscious Shame, speaking
freely, and throwing off the Practice
of every Degree of Deceit. 
Many Mornings successively she arose
with a fixed Resolution of writing to
her Father; often were Pen, Ink, and
Paper, vainly placed before her. The
Fear of discovering the Fact she laboured
to conceal, threw her each
Time into such a Perplexity, that, instead
of executing her Purpose, she
burst into a Flood of Tears, and despaired
of succeeding. But, after several
Repetitions of these vain Efforts,
she at last produced the following confused
Epistle: 


Honoured Sir,
I am greatly obliged to you for your
affectionate and kind Concern for
my Health. Indeed I am greatly indisposed; 
but I believe it is chiefly
owing to my present inward Affliction,
for my Lord is quite changed in his
Behaviour to me. I have certainly,
by some unhappy means or other,
ignorantly lost his Affection. One
Capt. Drumond, who hath been here
almost ever since we came, hath so insinuated
himself into my Lord's Favour,
that he never chuses to let him
be absent from his Presence: And I
am sure this Man imposes on my Lord
a great many Falsehoods; and, amongst
the rest, he has made him believe
something concerning an Intimacy between
me and Lord Clermont; that is,
Capt. Drumond says so. I can very
truly say, that when my Lord desired
me to avoid that young Nobleman, I
very chearfully complied with his
Commands; which makes this Story
of the Captain's highly improbable. 

However, my Lord talks frightfully
about Doctors Commons, and making a
public Affair of it; than which no
Grief could be more dreadful to me. 
I could not live to be publicly infamous. 
I therefore beg, I conjure you,
Sir, by all your Affection for me, to
intercede with my Lord to change his
Determination, and to have more
Kindness, even in his Anger, than to
expose me to such a terrible Misfortune. 
I almost sink even under the
very melancholy Apprehension. I
will submit to any Terms his Lordship
shall please to impose on me, if he
will but suffer our Separation to be
transacted in such a Manner as that no
public Reason may be given for it. I
have many Pleas to make in mitigation. 
I was married young, and
unexperienced in the Ways of the
World. But I pretend not to dictate
to you by what Means to try to mollify
my Lord. Urge what Arguments
you think best. But let me prevail 

upon you, Sir, to endeavour to use
your Interest; for I am at present, 
Honoured Sir,
Your ever dutiful, but very
unhappy Daughter,
C. Dellwyn. 
No doubt but the Reader will perceive
that some Parts of Lady Dellwyn's
Letter, and more particularly the
latter End, visibly confessed that her
Lord's Jealousy was not altogether
groundless. This was very apparent to
her own View from the Moment that it
was irrevocable. Those Softenings and
Mitigations of her erroneous Conduct
were ever uppermost in her Thoughts; 
and she suffered her Pen to write them,
in hopes of raising Compassion in her
Father's Mind, before she was aware of
any other Consequence; but as soon as
she recollected her Indiscretion, she
was almost driven to Despair. 
Capt. Drumond had acted safely in
his Solicitation for Lady Dellwyn's Favour, 

vour, it being impossible for her to run
so great a Venture as to reveal it either
to her Father or Lord Dellwyn; for if
she could even have obtained Credit
with them (which yet was very improbable),
a very disadvantageous Conclusion
would naturally have followed; 
and they must at the same time have
been thoroughly convinced, that she
had descended greatly from her Dignity,
and given him Encouragement by the
Levity of her Behaviour, before he
could have presumed to have affronted
her by such an Address. 
Mr. Lucum, in the same Morning
in which he was shocked by an Account
from a Friend that he was in
Danger of being superseded in his
Place, also received his Daughter's injudicious
Letter; insomuch that his
double Disappointment almost drove
him to Distraction. 
From the Time that Lady Dellwyn
was married, her Father had assured 

himself of the certain Continuance of
Lord Dellwyn's Favour during his Life; 
and his whole Mind was so filled with
ambitious Schemes, as to admit no
Thoughts or Fears concerning his Lordship's
Age or Infirmities: He therefore
had sold his own paternal Estate in the
Country, and made a Purchase near
the Metropolis, on which he had determined
to build something magnificent,
as a Monument that he had passed
through this Life. And there was yet
a farther Aggravation of his present
Afflictions; for a Lady of a considerable
Fortune had cast an Eye of Favour
on him; but she was past those
Years which are generally esteemed
the most thoughtless; and Mr. Lucum
well knew that his present apparent
prosperous Situation, was no small additional
Weight in the Balance of his
Merits: So that in one fatal Morning
all his Prospects seemed to be in a fair
way of being overturned; and he was
at once unwived, unhoused, and undone. 

In this Humour Lady Dellwyn had
very little Chance of finding Mercy
from her Father; nor did he ever once
reflect on any Cause for inward Reproach
on her Account. There lived, in
his Opinion, one faultless Person in the
World, who consequently never experienced
his Anger; namely, himself. He
perceived Lady Dellwyn's Guilt plainly
in her own Letter, which therefore he
never deigned to answer. But to Lord
Dellwyn, by Fits and Starts, in the Intervals
of raving at his Disappointments,
he wrote as follows. 

My Lord,
The Confusion of my present
Thoughts is so great, that I know
not how to express myself in a Manner
fit for the Honour of your Lordship's
Perusal. I fear the mean-spirited
Wretch, whom you have exalted so
highly above her Merit, as to confer
on her the inexpressible Honour of
your Alliance, has demeaned herself
unworthy of your Lordship's Notice. 

I will never acknowlege her as my
Daughter again, but consider her as an
Alien to my Blood and Family. Use
what Rigour you please, my Lord. I
shall think you cannot treat her with
too much Severity. But, my very good
Lord, let not that Resentment which
she has so justly incurred, fall also on
my innocent Head; for I am not conscious
of ever giving your Lordship
the least Offence even in Thought; 
but am filled with Love, Respect,
Gratitude, and Reverence, for your
Lordship's great Goodness to me; and
therefore hope your Lordship will confine
your Indignation to the only proper
Object of it, and continue to me
the infinite Happiness of your Lordship's
Favour and Friendship. I have
the Honour to be, 
My Lord,
Your Lordship's most obedient
and devoted humble Servant,
Charles Lucum. 




Bonds of our own Choice and Making,
the most effectual towards reducing us
to the most abject Slavery. 
Mr. Lucum had in his Letter
plainly indicated that he was
acquainted with Lord Dellwyn's unfavourable
Intention concerning himself; 
but he ventured not to mention any
Particulars, lest it should have the Appearance
of Reproach, and rather irritate
than appease his Lordship's Anger. 
He was thoroughly acquainted
with the Disposition of the Man with
whom he had connected himself, and
knew full well that Submission and
Resentment was the Part he must perform; 
and that it was perfectly necessary 

for him to keep up to the Character
he had assumed, and be a very
dutiful Father-in-Law. He had not
bent his whole Study to Politics, or, to
give a more adequate Idea, of his Practice
to Politics, almost his whole Lifetime,
so much in vain, as to imagine
that it cost him any thing to display all
the Arts of Flattery and Dissimulation. 
Lord Dellwyn deigned no more to
give an Answer to Mr. Lucum than he
did to his Daughter; but proceeded on
steadily in his Purpose, with no more
Consideration of him than if there had
been no such Man in the World; and
altho' his Lordship received repeated
Petitions (for so they might with Propriety
be called) for an Answer, yet he
never condescended to grant this Request. 
This Treatment from Lord Dellwyn
irritated and inflamed all the irascible
Passions in Mr. Lucum to such a
Height, that he had no Method to 

preserve himself from bursting with
Rage, but to find some Object on whom
he could safely vent his Indignation. 
It was vain and impotent, to attempt
the revenging himself on his Lordship,
the Superiority of whose Station placed
him out of Mr. Lucum's Reach: All
his Anger therefore fell with redoubled
Force on his Daughter; on whom, in
the most reproachful Terms he could
possibly think of, he vented his Passion; 
and, whilst Lady Dellwyn was
labouring under the most melancholy
Dejection, she received the following
outrageous Epistle. 

Thou abandoned Wretch, I
know not by what Name to
distinguish whom I mean; for I should
despise myself if I was ever more to
acknowlege you as a Daughter of
mine. I hope your Lord will treat you
with all the Rigour and Severity you
deserve, if that is possible; that you
will be an Out-cast to the World, and
that Sorrow and Grief will be your 

Portion for the Remainder of your
Days. Was it for this that I took such
Pleasure in your Education, and endeavoured
to instil and fix in your Memory
all the justly-dignified Pride that
attends on Virtue? Your abandoned
Conduct has this peculiar Aggravation
attending your atrocious Crimes, that
by them you have compleated the
Ruin of him that was your Father,
but will never more esteem himself as
such; but will ever continue inexorable
to all your Whining and Blubbering,
and never cease to be your enraged, as
well as highly injured, 
C. Lucum. 
In answer to this Letter, which was
such an Addition to her already-heavy
Affliction as drove her almost to absolute
Despondence, Lady Dellwyn expostulated
with her Father in the most
submissive Terms, designedly avoided
dropping the most distant Hint that
might have any Tendency towards reminding
him that he had ever been 

guilty of any Error in his own Conduct
towards her, and in the most pathetic
Language besought his Compassion. 
Undoubtedly Lady Dellwyn's Conduct
gave sufficient Reasons for her Father's
Anger; but yet, if his own Bosom
had not harboured so many disagreeable
Things, that it was painful to him to
turn his Eyes inward, he might there
have discovered somewhat in mitigation
of his Wrath, and reflected that
his own Ambition had been the first
Cause of his Daughter's Ruin; not
would he yet have been inexorable on
the Account of her Crime; for if she
could have prevailed on Lord Dellwyn
to have forgiven her, to have yet acknowleged
her as his Wife, and continued
his Favour to her Father, his
absolute Pardon would have immediately
followed, and the Countess of
Dellwyn would have had no Reason to
apprehend the being reprobated as Mr.
Lucum's Daughter; and yet an Infant 

would be capable of perceiving, that
her Crime would not have been in any
degree the less heinous; nay, such an
Instance of her Lord's Lenity and Affection
towards her would rather have
been an Aggravation of her Fault. 
Lady Dellwyn now felt herself bound
in the most whimsical Chain, made
only by her own Imagination, which
had imposed on her the Belief that she
was bereft of all Liberty of breaking off
her Acquaintance with Lord Clermont; 
to whom neither the Laws of Heaven
or Earth could teach her that she was
in any Subjection. This is a strange
Infatuation of the human Mind; and
Ladies often fancy themselves bound
in Chains to a Lover once favoured:
altho' they must be at a Loss to find a
Reason for being thus fettered; unless
they are apprehensive that such a Lover,
if enraged, will discover a Secret which
is generally very well known before; 
or that the Superabundance of their
Gratitude induces them to think themselves 

under an Obligation to the Man,
whose Pretence of Love is built on so
selfish a Basis, as to sacrifice the future
Peace of their Lives to his own present
Gratification. Surely the Professions
of Love must be highly esteemed where
such fallacious Coin can pass for sterling
Worth. But the Nets woven by
the human Imagination, altho' they
are composed of the smallest Materials,
are perhaps full as difficult to be broken
as the strongest real Bonds. Don
Quixote, when he was set at Liberty by
the Persons who had diverted themselves,
by fastening him at Length to
the Floor, in order to humour his
Phrenzy, continued a long Time in the
same Posture, and would not believe
that he had the Power of Motion; so
much easier was it to free his Limbs
from Thraldom, than to cure his Mind
of the Madness of thinking himself inchanted. 
Besides, altho' Lady Dellwyn's
present Trouble had mortified
her Vanity, yet it had taken too deep
Root to be so conquered. The Snake 

was scotched, but not killed; and she
was alarmed with the Fear, that, if she
avoided any farther Commerce with
Lord Clermont, Capt. Drumond would
imagine he had Power enough over
her to direct her Conduct. But to this
Perplexity Lord Clermont himself soon
put an End; for having found that his
Intercourse with Lady Dellwyn was
discovered, and prepared to be brought
into a public Court, he thought it most
prudent to withdraw. He had all that
Courage so properly ridiculed in that
most improper Character of Sir John
Brute, and could tell the injured Person
with as good an Air as any Man, “I
wear a Sword, Sir:” But to encounter
with a Suit in Doctors Commons
was out of his Practice. 
Had his Lordship been required by
way of Reparation for the Injury he
had already committed, to have taken
his Chance for shooting thro' the
Head, or stabbing to the Heart, the
Man he had injured, no one would 

have been more punctual to the Summons; 
for what he dared to do, he
dared to justify; and would have done
his utmost to deprive of Life the Man
whose Honour he had blasted: But a
Challenge to appear in Doctors Commons
was highly disagreeable to him. 
As Lord Clermont was in no respect
deficient in that Honour which bears
so little Affinity to Justice, the fashionable
Honour of a fine Gentleman, he
was sorry to leave the Lady when she
was going to suffer so much on his Account: 
But his Humanity rendered him
incapable of bearing the Sight of her
Distress, which made her an Object
fitter for Compassion than Love. 
To avoid therefore the Brawling of
Lawyers, and the Lamentations of his
Mistress, his Lordship determined that
he might absent himself with the best
Grace he could, to go a Volunteer in
the Army abroad; and perhaps his
Mind was never in a fitter State for 

War, than now that he was alarmed
with the Prospect of suffering very severely
for indulging the softer Passion. 
This Event made a great Struggle in
Lady Dellwyn's Mind; for she found
it very difficult to determine whether
she should rejoice over or lament his
Lordship's Departure. That he was
gone, she was pleased; but the Apprehension
lest it should be thought that
her Charms were not powerful enough
to hold him, was full Cause enough of
Sorrow. 
The Poets never gave more Eyes to
Argus, or more Hands to Briareus,
than Nature hath given Fears, and consequently
Desires, to Vanity, whose
Commands are as numerous as they
are contradictory. The poor Country-Girl,
who is just advanced to the Honour
of being admitted an Attendant
at the fine Lady's Toilette, when she
in one and the same Instant receives a
Multiplication of various and opposite 

Commands, is not more perplexed to
discover her Lady's Mind, than the
same fine Lady is to penetrate the Meaning
of all the arbitrary Laws imposed on
her by the Tyrant she chuses to serve,
whilst she is raving for Liberty and Freedom
from every reasonable Restraint. 
Lady Dellwyn now disliked appearing
abroad to as great a Degree as ever
she had delighted in it. She was so
changed, that she rejoiced in every
Instance of her Lord's Good-humour
or Complacency towards her; and
sometimes even hoped, that, by a constant
and assiduous Endeavour to please
him, she might in Time prevail on
him to alter his Resolution. But this
was impracticable, whilst Capt. Drumond
continued to be his Shadow. Besides,
altho' it was not impossible to
have induced Lord Dellwyn to have forgiven
her Intimacy with Lord Clermont; 
yet she had been guilty of another
Crime, which had made a stronger
Impression on his Memory, and appeared 

more heinous in his Sight; for
Lady Dellwyn, in her Fits of Vivacity,
whilst she talked at her Lord, had
sometimes treated him with a Contempt,
for which he was inexorable; 
and gladly embraced any Opportunity
of being separated from her for ever: 
So true is that Observation, that Contempt
is generally esteemed a more unpardonable
Crime than any real Injury
whatsoever. Reflexion shewed her the
Folly of her Conduct in this respect also
in the most glaring Light; but it was
too late to be of any Advantage to her
future Happiness; and Lady Dellwyn
was a memorable Instance of the great
Imprudence a Woman is guilty of,
when she fails in due Respect to her
Husband. If he deserves such a Treatment,
the Contempt justly returns redoubled
on her own Head for consenting
to be the Wife of a Man she despises. 
In this Sense the Folly of the
Husband reflects as much Dishonour
on the Wife, as her erroneous Conduct,
can possibly do on him; with this additional 

Aggravation, that the Scorn
which falls on her on that Account is
always deservedly; and she may, as
Mrs. Western says, Comfort herself that
it is her own Fault. Neither is there
the least Temptation to such a Practice,
unless there is any Woman whose Intellects
are so very much disordered,
that she can persuade herself of so glaring
an Absurdity, as to think her own
Understanding is placed in the most advantageous
Point of View, when that
of her Husband is despised and depreciated. 




The Story of Miss Cummyns. 
I have somewhere read a Definition
of Prudence in very near these
Words: 
“Prudence is that Faculty or Power
of the rational Mind, which is most
preparatory to the seeing and obtaining
your own true Happiness.” 
It must be confessed, that in our
Pursuits and Schemes, even when we
think ourselves most prudent, we are
apt to direct all our Aims in such a
Manner, as if we were convinced that
Prudence consisted in following imaginary,
instead of true Happiness. It
would be launching into a large Field, 

which is foreign to the present Purpose,
to endeavour to prove how much
Mankind use Means inadequate to their
Designs, and that the general Error lies
in fancying that real Good is to be
found where there is no such Thing. 
Persons who by every Revolution in
outward Circumstances are also totally
changed in their Minds and Desires,
seek different Sets of Acquaintance, according
to the varying of their Situation; 
and it is amazing with what Celerity
the human Eye penetrates the
Characters which are best adapted for
the present Pleasure. One Sort of Acquaintance
are necessary to them when
they roll aloft in the Sphere of Prosperity,
and another when they are cast
down into the lower State of Adversity. 
Indeed those who are only suited,
like Butterflies, to bask in the Sunshine
of the former State, are generally
so conscious of the Narrowness of their
own Talents, that from the very same
Persons, for whose Notice they have 

strove with Emulation, whilst they fancied
they could by that means obtain a
kind of second-hand Honour, they fly
precipitately at the Approach of the
least Calamity, knowing that Compassion
they have none to spare, their
whole Stock being confined at home; 
and what they abound most in, namely,
Flattery and Servility, they judge it unnecessary
to employ on the Wretched. 
Well says the Poet, 

Hope, thou pleasant, honest Flatterer; for none
Flatter the Unhappy, but thou alone.
On the other hand, those Persons whose
Delight in the Intercourse with Mankind
arises from the Communication of
Affections, find neither Employment or
Pleasure in the Conversation of their
old Friends, when by their outward
Form only they can possibly distinguish
them, and when they are turned so
giddy with some accidental Elevation,
that it might be properly said they have 

lost their Senses. The Followers of
Prosperity only have been so numerous,
and so conspicuous, that they have been
recorded by various Authors throughout
all Ages. They have found a Place
amidst historical Prose, and Poets have
celebrated them in harmonious Verse. 
The faithful Followers of Adversity too
have had their Memory preserved by
judicious Writers. Of which there are
many Instances. Virgil could no more
forget Achates than he could Æneas. 
The Station of the Hero preserved the
Memory of his Friend: But in common
Life the Followers of Adversity
only, generally pass through Life in too
great Obscurity to leave any Traces of
themselves behind them. And yet,
altho' not very common, there are Characters
who will submit to all the Infirmities
that can possibly attend on
Distress, and yet will not bear the least
Insolence from Grandeur and Exaltation; 
who would rejoice to see their
Friends in Possession of every Good,
provided they are endued with Strength 

of Mind enough to preserve their Steadiness; 
yet chuse rather to accompany
them in a State of Distress and Humiliation
in outward Circumstances, than
to see them meanly metamorphosed
into irrational Creatures by any accidental
Exaltation. 
Miss Cummyns, who made a small
Appearance in the former Part of this
History, as having incurred Lady Dellwyn's
Displeasure, and lost the Honour
of her Notice on her first Arrival at her
Lord's Castle, for want of a proper Proportion
of Servility to bestow on her
Ladyship's new Dignity, was now at
Bristol; and Lady Dellwyn's present
disconsolate Situation rendering Comfort
and Compassion more necessary to
her than fawning Flattery, she endeavoured
again to cultivate her old Acquaintance
with Miss Cummyns. There
is something in a proper Spirit, unmixed
with any Degree of Haughtiness, which
forcibly gains the Esteem, even whilst
it piques the Pride, of the Insolent. And 

Lady Dellwyn now, when Mortification
had restored to her the Power to
reflect, found how much more worthily
she thought of Miss Cummyns, than
of any abject Fatterer her high Station
had ever gained her. 
Miss Cummyns, altho' not unacquainted
with Lady Dellwyn's Crimes,
was so charitable as not to decline her
Advances, especially as she was now
separated from Lord Clermont; for she
would not have renewed Acquaintance
with her Ladyship whilst she continued
her Converse with that young Nobleman. 
Miss Cummyns was some few Years
older than Lady Dellwyn, and her
Character established on so exact a Behaviour
throughout Life, that she did
not burden herself with any unnecessary
Terrors, that her conversing with
Lady Dellwyn could cast any Blemish
on her spotless Reputation. She chose
not to draw on herself the Curse denounced 

by the Royal Psalmist on the
Unrighteous, of being afraid where no
Fear is. She was satisfied in the Consciousness
that her Design was good,
which was no other than, if possible,
to make Lady Dellwyn recollect herself,
and view the Errors of her Conduct,
from some better Principles than
such as were dictated by disappointed
Pride; which, tho' greatly mortifying,
never lead to any Amendment. 
Lady Dellwyn, who, from the Time
that she was thoroughly infected with
Vanity, had esteemed Grandeur as a
necessary Ingredient of Life, making a
nice Distinction between that and bare
Existence, was astonished to find that
Miss Cummyns (to whom she knew a
very small Share of worldly Goods had
fallen) yet preserved the Placidness of
her Countenance, and the Tranquillity
of her Mind; insomuch that she
could not help expressing a Curiosity
on that account. To which Miss Cummyns
replied, 

“I will willingly tell your Ladyship
all the Means I make use of to
preserve myself from sinking under
the Weight of any Misfortunes. I
have no Nostrum for that Purpose,
but what all Mankind may know
and practise if they please. I loved
Retirement and Solitude.” 
And now the Door opened, and admitted
Lady Fanny Chlegen. As soon
as the usual Compliments were passed,
and her Ladyship seated, a profound
Silence followed; which is usually the
Case when any particular Conversation
is interrupted by the Arrival of a third
Person. But Lady Fanny politely desiring
that her Coming might not put
a Stop to the Conversation which was
commenced before she entered, and
Lady Dellwyn having informed her on
what Subject they were conversing,
Miss Cummyns, by the united Desire of
both the Ladies, proceeded. 

“I do not mean that I had no Taste
for the Pleasures of Society; for, on
the contrary, I placed all human
Delight in a mutual Communication
of Affections; and all Conversation,
however diversified by Wit
and Humour, soon grew insipid to
me, unless the Heart also became
Partaker of the Enjoyment. Where-ever
I found the Love of Ridicule
was uppermost, I considered the
most extraordinary Talents but as so
many Instruments of Mischief; but
when I perceived that pernicious
Quality in great abundance shedding
forth its Venom from such Persons
as had only the Affectation of Wit
and Humour (which indeed is
much oftener the Case), it then became
loathsome and abominable.” 
Lady Fanny Chlegen sat in such a
Manner, that she had only a Side-Glance
of Miss Cummyns. Contempt
arose, and bustled in her Bosom at
every Word Miss Cummyns uttered; 

but it overflowed in such abundance at
her last Expression, that her Ladyship
suddenly turned fully towards her, and
displayed a broad Sneer on her Countenance. 
Lady Dellwyn, who had never
attained to any great Perfection this
way, was now so out of Humour with
all Jesting whatever, being apprehensive
that she herself might become the
Object of it, that she was half-inclined
to assent to Miss Cummyns's Sentiments; 
who, without the least Notice of Lady
Fanny's expressive Motions, thus proceeded: 
“In short, my whole Delight was
in Friendship; but then that must
be founded on the Goodness of the
Heart, and the Regulation of the
Mind of its Object; and not on
Flights of Fancy, or a Capacity to
throw forth a Variety of droll Whims
of the Imagination. 
“I was bred up with Two Cousins,
with whom my Disposition to Friendship 

was fully gratified. They were
ever chearfully merry, innocently
witty, and so calmly religious, without
mixing any Flights of Fancy
with their lively Expressions of Piety,
that in them I found a continual
Source of Entertainment. We had
but one Misfortune, and that was
Poverty,” [Here Lady Fanny's Upperlip
began to contract itself.]; “but that
we supported with Chearfulness. The
common Necessaries of Life constituted
the Height of our Desires; nor
did we want Arguments to convince
us how very inadequate every outward
Appearance, or gaudy Shew,
is for the obtaining any solid Satisfaction; 
for most of those Pursuits,
which are generally followed with
Earnestness and Anxiety, presented
themselves at first View in so very
trifling a Light, that we judged them
not worthy our Consideration. Nor
did we think it the least beneath us
to undertake any decent Employment
to support ourselves; but a 

Combination of odd Circumstances,
wavering Prospects, and want of
current Coin to give the first Motion
to any Scheme, prevented us. 
The Joy we took to lighten this Burden
to each other, and the Confidence
we placed in the Protection of
Providence, preserved us from repining. 
We were never grieved at
receiving an Obligation”—Receive
an Obligation! repeated both the Ladies
at one Instant, lifting up their
Hands, as in Astonishment;—“but; 
on the contrary, Gratitude was to
us a pleasing Sensation. Want of
Generosity only can render it painful. 
Such who have it, will not
envy to others the Power of obligeing; 
but will accept an Obligation
with Pleasure, knowing that those
who have conferred it enjoy still a
greater Delight; and feel the Blessedness
of giving so much beyond
that of receiving, that they are only
uneasy to think so far a happier Lot
should fall to their own Share.” 

“A truly generous Person esteems
the Gratitude of those who are obliged,
as a great Reward for what
they have done; not as the Price of
the Favour, but in knowing the
Person obliged is not unworthy their
Regard. On the other hand, the
truly grateful Heart doth not even
wish to quit 

“The Debt immense of endless Gratitude;
“but enjoys the inward Satisfaction of
knowing, 

—“that a grateful Mind,
“By owing, owes not; but still pays, at once
“Indebted and discharged.
Milton.
“I allow that many may give who
are not generous. A bountiful Hand
may sometimes belong to a Heart
which thinks itself so highly meritorious
in what it bestows, that the
Obligation can never be sufficiently 

acknowleged. I look upon such
Persons as no less mercenary than
those whose Merchandise is Slaves. 
The Services of the Body are not
necessary to these bountiful Benefactors; 
but the Obsequiousness of
the Soul is agreeable to their Pride; 
and they would purchase the Slavery
of all our Faculties at a less Price
than they must pay for an inanimate
Piece of Furniture. These Traffickers
with Obligations are, like
many other People in Trade, seldom
satisfied with their Gain, and demand
the Pay they expect with the most
rigid Exactness. But such Dispositions
are easily read, and consequently
it is not difficult to refuse
the Fetters they are so willing to
prepare for every one they can enslave. 
“Nor was it less our Care to avoid
the Acceptance of any thing which
a generous Mind would part with,
when their Circumstances would 

not allow of such Instances of Good-nature,
as they were incited to by the
Warmth of their friendly Hearts.” 
Here Miss Cummyns was interrupted
by a sudden Motion of Lady Fanny
Chlegen, which disturbed a little favourite
Lap-dog, which lay asleep in
her Ladyship's Lap, and was some time
before it could be persuaded to be
silent again; when she proceeded, as
shall be seen in the next Chapter. 




The Continuation of the History of
Miss Cummyns. 
“If rightly considered, every State,
every Situation in Life, hath
some Advantages: Nor is even Poverty
absolutely excluded from all
Share of Comfort. We cannot look
around us without beholding how
many Contrivances the Rich are reduced
to, in order to enhance the
imaginary Value of their own Possessions; 
whilst to the Poor a small
Scrap of Paper, which conveys a
Claim even to a little Sum only, becomes
a real Blessing, and is valuable
indeed. Every common Meal,
altho' come at with Difficulty, when
the Eyes of every Individual, in beholding 

the others, glitter with such
inexpressible Pleasure, as starts a
Tear to express that Joy which is
too big for Utterance, becomes a
high Gratification; and I have been
present at a Table covered only with
the plainest Food, when the Rich
and Mighty of the World might
have looked on, and secretly wished
they could find such Happiness in all
their plenteous Store. 

“What nought can give, or can destroy,
“The Soul's calm Sunshine, and the heartfelt Joy,
“Is Virtue's Prize,
“and cannot be bought by all the
Wealth of Peru. 
“We were often thankful, that altho'
we were poor with Poverty, yet
that the Disease was in outward Circumstances,
and not inherent in our
Minds, for that attacks the very Vitals
of all Happiness; and to be poor 

in the midst of Riches, is to be mad,
and perhaps the most wretched of all
Phrensies whatsoever. 
“In one fatal Year I lost both my
dear Friends. The Stroke was so
great, that it at first astonished me,
and then the most poignant Grief
followed: But here I will draw a
Veil, and not attempt describing
the piercing Anguish my whole
Heart endured at that Time. But
when the first Agonies were so far
alleviated as to give me Leave to reflect,
I began to consider myself in
the Light of an obstinate and perverse
Child, who is resisting its Father's
Will, and crying and sobbing
because it cannot be indulged in its
own perverse Humour. I perceived
a Selfishness in my Friendship which
I was not before aware of; for I had
always made myself believe, that the
Happiness of my Friends was the
principal Desire of my whole Heart; 
and yet, if that was truly the Fact, 

where could I find a Reason for all
this Grief, because they were delivered
from the Infirmities, Diseases,
and Distresses, of this Life, and I
was fully possessed of the most reasonable
Hope that they were entered
into a State of eternal Happiness? 
And indeed almost all the Incidents
which have befallen me since their
Loss, have brought with them one
only Consolation, that my dearest
Friends are escaped from the Possibility
of knowing any thing of the
Matter; and I find I can much better
support Misfortunes alone, than
with the additional Weight of seeing
them suffer. I have always had one
pleasing Reflexion, that during their
Illness, which, being lingering, required
many Supports, they were
supplied with every Convenience by
the Beneficence of a Mind, whose
Fortune, tho' abundant, is yet narrow,
in comparison of the enlarged
Benevolence of his Christian Heart; 
who, in the midst of Affluence, 

knows how to feel the Distresses of
his Fellow-Creatures, and never suffers
his own Opulence to dazle his
Eyes, and make him forget to dry
those of the Widow and the Fatherless; 
who has the uncommon
Happiness to enjoy the utmost this
World can really give, in such a
manner as to have no Reason to be
alarmed with the Fears of losing it,
and is wise enough to lay hold of
the Hope of a blessed Immortality,
as the superior and ultimate Crown
of his Blessedness. 
“One of the greatest Misfortunes that
attends on Poverty, is the Impossibility
of shewing Gratitude. Every
Expression of it in that State must
have a doubtful Appearance, and
may as well be used by Persons who
know not what it is, as by those
who are sensible of it in the highest
Degree. I have often wished that
my Heart was open to the View of
the Man to whom I feel myself under 

such indelible Obligations: But
when I consider that he could by no
means be benefited by it, and that
it is a Wish impossible to be indulged
in, I content myself with the Consciousness
how much I reverence
him, and silently enjoy the Pleasure
of Gratitude. 
“Altho' with all these Comforts,
and all the Reflexions I was capable
of, I felt so much for this unexpected
Stroke of the Loss of both
my Friends, that I believe nothing
but a future Hope could have kept
me perfectly in my Senses. Had I
been born amongst the Heathens,
where no Revelation had given me
a reasonable Cause for such a joyous
Expectation, I know not what had
become of me; for sometimes my
Imagination strove hard for the Victory,
and I seemed as one lost to
myself. My natural Constitution
was weak, and the Agonies I underwent
were almost too strong to 

be supported. I could by no means,
like the ancient Philosopher, consider
my departed Friends in the
same Light with broken Pitchers,
and then flatter my Pride, that by
that means I proved myself a rational
Creature. But when I considered
my Friends as immortal Beings,
who had got the Start of me
in the Race towards eternal Happiness,
I found in that a Foundation
of Comfort, which was solid and
steady; and whatever I felt, I endeavoured
to submit with Humility. 
I begged the Assistance of
God's Grace, and hope I attained
it; for I can now calmly say, The
Lord gave, and the Lord taketh
away; blessed be the Name of the
Lord. 
“We are all as little Children in
the Hands of God Almighty; and
when I look on myself as a Child
that has been corrected, I gain great
Comfort by the Consideration, that 

it is good for me to have been afflicted.” 
From the Moment Miss Cummyns
had uttered the Word Grace* , Lady
Fanny began to sneer; till at last she
was so filled with the Pleasantry of her
own Ideas, that she could not forbear
laughing so visibly, that Miss Cummyns
perceived it, and with a steady and calm
Aspect said, 
“I beg Leave, Lady Fanny, to relate
a short Story, which I met with
in a Book of Travels. There is a
Place behind a Ridge of Mountains,
which separate one Part of Piedmont
from the other, where all the Natives
have a Wen growing on one 

Side of their Cheeks; and if a Stranger
appears amongst them with
smooth Cheeks, where there is no
Swelling to be seen, the Inhabitants
set up a loud Laugh at him; esteeming
such a Deficiency full Cause
enough to mark a human Creature
as an Object of Scorn.” 
Lady Fanny's Mirth was now turned
into Indignation. She arose, dropped
a small Curtsey to Miss Cummyns, and
that with an Air as if she thought it
too great a Condescension; took her
Leave politely of Lady Dellwyn; and
muttered forth all the Way she went
the Words Methodist, Enthusiast, &c.
&c. But altho' her Ladyship chose
not to give Miss Cummyns any Answer,
yet in her Absence she enjoyed the full
Pleasure of entertaining her Acquaintance
with the Relation of what a ridiculous
Creature she had met with that
Morning. 

Lady Dellwyn wept at the Reflexion,
that Miss Cummyns could thus preserve
her Tranquility through such Scenes
of Distress and Grief, whilst she had
rendered herself so miserable. The essential
Difference was between Innocence
and Guilt; a Mind enjoying
the Fruits of good Principles, and a
Mind confounded with its own vain
Devices, and raving in the Search of
imaginary Happiness, which resembles
a Dream, wherein the Fancy is busily
employed, but can never bring about
its own Purposes. Miss Cummyns was
glad to see Lady Dellwyn weep; but
soon discovered that her Tears indicated
more of Passion for her own Disappointments
than of true Compunction. 
She was to go the next Day from
Bristol; but delayed her Journey one
Week, on purpose to endeavour to persuade
Lady Dellwyn into a right Reflection
on her own Conduct; but
finding it utterly impossible to calm her
Mind, she had the Mortification of leaving
her still the Shuttlecock of Vanity. 




Another Device of Capt. Drumond. 
Lord Dellwyn had now for some
time admitted Capt. Drumond to
such a Degree of Intimacy, that in
their frequent Conversations he became
Master of every Transaction of his
Lordship's Life; for as they were both
heartily engaged in the Scheme of the
Divorce, tho' for very different Reasons,
they were almost continually together. 
Lord Dellwyn could meet with no other
Person who would be confined to hear
a continual Repetition of what concerned
only himself. And the Captain
was always his ready Companion; and
strove as much as possible to keep all
other Company from him, lest he
should accidentally meet with any Person 

who might endeavour to employ
all the good Offices in their Power to
incline him to forgive his Lady, on
the Condition of her promising to live
retired at his Castle, and expect to
make no more Excursions into the
World. 
This was an unnecessary Care of the
Captain; for Lord Dellwyn was full as
earnestly determined on the Separation
from his Lady as he could possibly
wish: But it was his Nature, like
Macbeth, to 

make Assurance doubly sure.
And if he was at any time disappointed
in his Schemes, he could not accuse
himself of not having broke many
Hours Rest in revolving and considering
of every necessary Caution. His
busy Thoughts, and various Stratagems,
robbed him of his Sleep, or so perplexed
him in his Dreams, that he received
not half the Refreshment from 


The Death of each Day's Life, sore Labour's Bath,
Balm of hurt Minds, great Nature's Second Course,
Chief Nourisher in Life's Feast,
as other Men, who lead a Life of Simplicity; 
and this he called acting the
Part of a wise Man. Oh, Cunning!
thou real Weakness of the human Understanding!
thou Companion of Ideots
and Madmen! thou buffoon Mimic of
essential Wisdom! of what Avail are
all thy perplexed Devices? 
Amongst other Things with which
Lord Dellwyn had acquainted the Captain,
he also told him the Manner in
which he had engaged Miss Lucum to
marry him, by alarming her with the
Fear of Lady Fanny Fashion's being his
Countess. This was by small Hints
dropped out at different Times accidentally,
in such a manner that his
Lordship knew not himself that he had 

thoroughly informed him of the Pains
he had taken to obtain Miss Lucum's
Consent. But the Captain was well
versed in the Art of collecting from
such Hints the whole Story, and was
assiduous to send it to Lady Fanny's
Ears, who till that Time was never acquainted
with all the Particulars. 
Lady Fanny had always received
Lord Dellwyn's Notice with Politeness; 
and sometimes had flattered herself that
his Lordship might at length open his
Eyes, and distinguish her superior
Charms; which caused her to heighten
her Professions of Friendship to Miss
Lucum, that when it was his Lordship's
Humour to be most particular
in his Notice of her Friend, she might
not be excluded the Party. But as her
Ladyship had at the same time many
other Prospects of the same Kind,
many other Gentlemen, whose Fortune
and Rank would have been agreeable
to her, and whose Addresses, as far
as Gallantry goes, she had entertained, 

her Desires, like a divided Stream,
flowed less violently than if they had
been confined to one Channel; and
therefore could the more easily bear
her Friend's becoming Countess of
Dellwyn. 
But Lady Fanny never suspected the
Use she had been made of in that
Transaction; which no sooner came
to her Knowlege, than it piqued her
Pride, and roused her Indignation; 
the Two Passions of her Mind which
were ever most ready to advance into
the foremost Place of her Bosom. Yet
she was not in the least moved to Resentment
against Lord Dellwyn; but
all her Anger fell with redoubled Force
on his Lady. 
This was perfectly agreeable to Capt.
Drumond's Wishes. He knew the
Haughtiness of Lady Fanny's Temper
could contrive many Methods of mortifying
Lady Dellwyn in her present
disagreeable Situation. 

Tho' the Captain had no particular
View in irritating Lady Fanny against
Lady Dellwyn; yet it was one of the
principal Wheels in the great Machinery
of his Cunning, to contrive Methods of
depreciating every Person to whom he
had exposed his own real Character,
and to give all their Acquaintance such
an ill Opinion of them, as he imagined
might invalidate their Testimony,
should any ill Usage provoke them to
lay open the Baseness of his Heart. 
Besides, in this Case, his implacable
Revenge against Lady Dellwyn was in
some measure gratified by it; and he
had seen enough of Lady Fanny to perceive
very plainly that her Passions
were too violent, and too much accustomed
to be uncontrouled, to suffer
her to retain a tolerable Opinion of any
Person with whom she even imagined
that she had any Reason to be offended. 
To preserve Candour, and keep the
Mind unprejudiced, against even a
fancied Offender against Self, belongs
to such Minds as are quite otherwise 

regulated than was her Ladyship's: 
Neither was the Captain ignorant that
she was possessed of full Wit enough to
be satirical whenever it was her Inclination; 
and Lady Dellwyn had given
sufficient Foundation for the Mixture
of disadvantageous Fact with Satire, to
make it acceptable to the Ill-natured. 
Lady Fanny now contrived every
Method of making it more disagreeable
than ever to Lady Dellwyn to appear
in Public. Her very Looks and
Gestures indicated Contempt; which
she was also careful should be visible
to all that were present, mixed with
an uncommon Indignation; tho' for
the latter Lady Dellwyn was not conscious
of any fresh Cause; for the Captain
played his Part behind the Curtain,
and never appeared; which is the general
Practice of Underminers in Mischief. 
Her Ladyship was perfectly Mistress
of the Art of conveying her Ideas 

without Words, and perfectly agreed
with Volumnia in Shakespeare's Coriolanus,
that 

—in such Business
Action is Eloquence, and the Eyes of th' Ignorant
More learned than the Ears.
By these means Lady Dellwyn was perfectly
comfortless both abroad and at
home. However, she thought the
latter exposed her to the fewest Mortifications; 
for she was now permitted
to retire to her own Apartment as
much as she pleased, without the least
Danger of Interruptions from her Lord,
who no longer placed any Delight in
her Presence. 
When Lady Dellwyn had thus in a
manner voluntarily confined herself to
her own Apartment, she had sufficient
Leisure to reflect; and the more she
considered, the more Cause she perceived
to despair of any future Comfort. 

But amongst the various Perplexities
which laboured in her Mind,
at last a small Glimmering of Hope
began to flatter her that this manner of
Life might possibly be a Proof to her
Lord that she was weary of her Follies,
and induce him to relent, compassionate,
and forgive her. She several
times endeavoured to find him
unaccompanied by Capt. Drumond; 
but such Endeavours were fruitless. He
was as constant an Attendant as his
Shadow. She feared, that if she sent
a Message to his Lordship to desire the
Favour of speaking with him alone,
the Captain would employ all his Arts,
if he suffered him to come at all, that
it should be with a full Resolution
against complying with her Request. 
At last, after revolving many Methods
repeatedly in her Thoughts,
Lady Dellwyn determined to write to
her Lord; by which means she fancied
she could explain herself more
fully than in the Confusion of talking 

on such a Subject; especially to the
very Man she had injured by her
Crime in the tenderest Point, and consequently
in whose Presence she must
necessarily feel the greatest Shame. She
wrote the most submissive, pathetic
Letter she could pen, beseeching her
Lord's Forgiveness in the humblest
Terms; made the most solemn Promises
that she would retire to his
Castle, and pass the Remainder of her
Life in any manner his Lordship would
please to command; and concluded
with conjuring him to have Compassion
on her, in the most moving Expressions
she could possibly think on. 
And indeed her Heart was so much
set on the Success of this Letter, that
she was at no great Difficulty to find
Words which might (if any thing
could) conduce to that Purpose. 
This Letter she sent with the greatest
Anxiety. But herein her Ladyship laboured
under a small Mistake; for she
could not believe that a Man who had 

been once so fond of her as Lord Dellwyn
was, could so totally have obliterated
that Fondness, but that some little
Sparks of remaining Kindness might
still induce him to relent on such
humble Submissions. Whereas, however
Lord Dellwyn might have been
prevailed on, had she been right in her
Conjecture, he was so far from retaining
any Degree of his former Affection,
that he was greatly pleased at the
Discovery of her Amour with Lord
Clermont, as it gave him an Opportunity
of being separated from her for
ever: Therefore all her Intreaties met
with the strongest Opposition from his
Inclinations, and wanted not the Assistance
(which yet he had in abundance)
of Capt. Drumond's Devices to
render them fruitless. 
Indeed those strong Promises, which
Lady Dellwyn was so lavish in making,
seemed to be only with the View of
flying from Infamy, in the same manner
as King Lear says, 


—Thou'dst shun a Bear;
But if thy Flight lay toward the roaring Sea,
Thou'dst meet the Bear i' th' Mouth.
And in all Probability her Ladyship
would not have long endured Confinement
to her Lord's Castle, before she
would have been ready to have exchanged
it again for any other Misfortune. 
But Lord Dellwyn did not put
her to the Trial of her Steadiness in
that respect; and this was the last Effort
she attempted to regain her Lord,
but was forced to submit to his Determination; 
tho' it could not be said
with any Propriety that she did so with
Content; but, on the contrary, with
the utmost Reluctance and Impatience
of Spirit. 




A Divorce. 
Lord Dellwyn now, instead of
carrying his Lady to his own
Seat, which she had before so much
dreaded, carried her to London; the
Place in the World to which she would
have rejoiced to have gone, had her
Lord's Journey thither been for any
other Purpose than that of attending
the Event of his Cause for a public Separation. 
But such is the Vicissitude
of human Minds, as well as human
Affairs, that even the hateful Country
would now have been less terrible to
her Apprehension than the gay Metropolis; 
and she would have thought the
former much the most eligible Choice. 

A Fancy now came into Lord Dellwyn's
Mind, which was by no means
conformable to Capt. Drumond's Inclinations; 
for his Lordship had no Heir,
that is, no Child of his own, to inherit
his Title and Fortune. He had Two
Brothers indeed; but it was by no
means satisfactory to him to leave any
thing so valuable as worldly Goods
and Honours, to any other Person but
such as was so immediately derived
from him, that he could contrive to
flatter himself he was in a manner to
enjoy them in Futurity. He therefore
was not contented merely to be separated
from his Lady; but would be divorced
from her by the House of Lords,
that he might be enabled to marry
again; not in the least doubting but that
some other young Lady would gladly accept
the Honour of being his Countess. 
The famous Genius before mentioned,
who invented the Art of nursing
Estates, found not half the Difficulty
in managing them, that Capt. 

Drumond did in the directing his Nursery. 
Lord Dellwyn was something
more froward and self-willed than
the Land, and would not always be
controuled. 
Capt. Drumond was now seized with
such a violent Fit of Compassion for
the Lady, that altho' he had been very
earnest to have her name exposed, and
her Reputation blasted in one Court of
Justice; yet he chose it should be before
the fewest Witnesses; and displayed
all his Eloquence to prevent its coming
into the House of Lords. But it was
perfectly in vain; for in this Point my
Lord baffled his utmost Endeavours; 
and, after several Efforts to no manner
of Purpose, he was at last reduced to
the Necessity of submitting to his Lordship's
resolute Determination; tho' he
plainly perceived, that if Lord Dellwyn
should marry again, all his Schemes
were in much more Danger of being
frustrated, than if he had continued to
live on with his present Lady, against 

whom he was too full of Indignation
to suffer her to obtain any great Influence
over his Actions. 
It could not possibly afford any Entertainment,
but, on the contrary,
must be very tedious, to the Reader,
to dwell on the Particulars relating to
Lord Dellwyn's Divorce. It is sufficient
to inform him, that his Lordship obtained
it in the manner he desired, and
was at full Liberty to bestow himself
and Title on whomsoever best pleased
his Fancy. 
Now the gay Vision of dazling
Jewels, Grandeur, Magnificence, &c.
&c. which had danced before Lady
Dellwyn's Eyes at the Ceremony of her
being made a Countess, passed thro'
the Ivory Gate mentioned by Virgil,
and was for ever buried in Oblivion. 




Solitude chosen for her present Purpose
by Lady Dellwyn. 
Retirement seemed to offer
Lady Dellwyn little Peace; 
yet at first View it appeared almost the
only Situation to which she could fly,
and indeed to which she was almost
necessarily reduced. Covered with
Shame, and oppressed with Guilt, she
knew not how to appear in the World. 
Her Conduct was not equivocal; she
could not hope to impose Assurance
(even if she had been Mistress of the
largest Portion of it) on the least Suspicious,
for Innocence. Every Newspaper
contained an Advertisement of
the Process in which she had so large a 

Share; every Tongue repeated the
Evidence against her. 
But tho' depressed by Shame and
Infamy, her first and last Seducer, Vanity,
still kept her Throne. Tho' now
the Badges of her Royalty resembled
more those of the Furies; she was armed
with Whips and Stings; Serpents and
Scorpions seemed the Instruments with
which she inflicted the cruelest Pains
on Lady Dellwyn's Heart. To be
thrown from the highest Admiration
to the lowest Degree of Contempt, was
a Transition much more afflicting to
her than the Fall from Innocence to
Guilt. Repentance, from a just Sense
of the Crime committed, gives an Humility
which renders the Grief less
turbulent, and makes way for the Rise
of some comfortable Considerations,
even from suffering the Punishment
which naturally follows the Indulgence
of violent Passions; amongst which
Vanity must ever hold one of the uppermost
Seats, in the Eyes of every Person 

who hath ever reflected on Mankind
and their Manners. 

I do repent me, as it is an Evil,
And take the Shame with Joy;* 
are the expressive Words Shakespeare
puts into the Mouth of the penitent
Juliet. But Lady Dellwyn's Vanity
was too predominant to suffer her to
feel any thing but Rage and Despair. 
She revolved in her Mind various unsatisfactory
Schemes; till at last she
imagined that she had found one Method
by which she might flatter herself
that it was yet possible to regain
some degree of Reputation. 
She had heard, that, in a neighbouring
Nation, one sole and fixed Attachment,
when dignified with the Title of
une belle Passion, was acquitted by general
Consent from Infamy. Upon this
she formed her Plan. She hired a 

small Cottage; she decked it with
Symbols of Sorrow and Penitence. 
Had Lord Clermont been slain abroad,
it is probable she would have endeavoured
to obtain his Body, and lamented
over it with all the Pomp of
Calista in the Fair Penitent. 
Tho' Lady Dellwyn chose a small
Cottage as most proper for the Execution
of her present Plan; yet she was careful
that it should be in the Neighbourhood
of too many considerable Families
to suffer her Conduct to be unobserved; 
for she could not bear even the
Thoughts of total Obscurity. She
scarcely suffered the Light of the Sun
to enter her Apartment, and never
stirred out of her House but in the
Face of the all-conscious Moon. She
seemed ever bewailing the fatal Effects
of a too tender Passion, and declared
her Determination to pass all the Remainder
of her Days in Penitence and
Prayers for her great Offence. 

A Mind and Conscience so ill at Ease
could not but make Lady Dellwyn suffer
very greatly in the Execution of this
Plan: But as she could not endure
with any degree of Patience either Obscurity
or Infamy, she was enabled
to support herself, by believing that this
uncommon Conduct would obtain as
much Approbation, as the former Part
of her Behaviour had incurred Censure. 
It is amazing what painful Labours
Vanity will enable her Votaries to
struggle through, whilst the Imagination
is buoyed up by the Hopes of being
gratified in any favourite Pursuit; 
and when Lady Dellwyn was oppressed,
and near sunk, with the most melancholy
Reflexions, she had Recourse, as
to a Cordial, to the Opinions she
thought the World must now necessarily
express concerning her; she could
fancy them signing her Quietus in the
Words Calista supposes her Father to
use. Indeed her Penitence so nearly 

resembled that of Calista, that her Mind
was naturally filled with the same kind
of Meditations; only, to bring on the
tragic Catastrophe, the Poet was under
a Necessity to force Calista to think
and talk more of Death. 
Lady Dellwyn now supposed the
World wondering at her Love and Penitence,
and from them attributing to
her a great Share of Virtue; tho', by
Excess of une belle Passion, she had
a little deviated from the thorny Way. 
But she soon began to adopt the Expression
of Rosalind in as You like it,
and to think it much properer to say,
the lazy Foot of Time, than the swift
Foot of Time, according to the common
Method; for she grew very impatient
to know when the World would
think she had expiated her Crime, and
washed away her Shame, by Repentance; 
when, to her utmost Mortification,
she received a Letter from a Man
of considerable Fashion, who lived
much in the polite World, and supposing 

her sufficiently humbled to accept
of moderate Terms, he sent her
the Offer of a Settlement, plainly expressing
a Supposition that Poverty was
the Occasion of her Retirement. 
As Vanity was the only Vice that
had ever actuated Lady Dellwyn's Mind,
she felt something that bore a near Resemblance
to the Indignation of Virtue
itself at this insolent Proposal; but yet,
as is customary, was so partial to Self,
that she was blind to the just Cause she
had given to suspect her of being frail
enough to accept it. But what most
mortified her, was to perceive that she
had not imposed on the World a Belief
of either a belle Passion, or true Penitence. 
She answered the Gentleman's
Letter with the utmost Indignation; informing
him, that he was much deceived
in thinking her Fortune so low,
for it was sufficient to afford her every
Enjoyment of Life; and that she had
fled from a cruel World only to avoid
Insults; but her Solitude was now become 

odious, by his having convinced
her that they could reach her even
there. 
Lady Dellwyn's Answer administered
some Disappointment, but no Shame
or Concern, to the Gentleman. No
Man, I believe, is so insensible or void
of Humanity, as not to be shocked
when he finds he hath given Offence
to a Woman truly virtuous, by presuming
on her Distress of Circumstances; 
but when one of known Frailty assumes
the Language of Virtue, it only
renders her more despised. The Pride
of the Person is in some measure hurt,
by an Apprehension that he is intended
to be imposed on; and the Woman,
who perhaps he before thought only
frail, he now esteems impudent. 
Altho' to be careless of Reputation,
and despise the Censure of the World,
is an undoubted Error, and the Appearance,
as well as the Practice of Vice
to be earnestly avoided; yet happy is 

the Mind whose conscious Innocence
can bear up against the sharp Tooth of
Slander; and there was nothing that
Lady Dellwyn would not now have
exchanged to have been in such a Situation. 
She was now convinced she
had thrown away a great deal of Mortification
on an ungrateful World, who
made no account of all she had done,
and all she had suffered, to please it; 
in reality as much as would have answered
a much better Purpose; a Reflexion
which seems almost impossible
to escape her: But yet she so contrived
it, that this Disappointment had no
other Effect on her, than to make her
resolve no longer to punish herself, by
acting a Part so contrary to her Inclinations,
in which she was an aukward
Mimic of what she had no settled Notion. 
But when Lady Dellwyn had taken
this general Resolution, she was utterly
at a Loss what Course to take, in order
to get into the World, which might 

be rendered still more difficult by her
having left it; and if Repentance consisted
in being sorry for having done
whatever brings a worldly Inconvenience
with it, she was always in that
State; and now repented of her Solitude,
as it had involved her in yet more
Perplexities. One fixed Determination
seemed to be the only Result of her
considering on her present Situation,
which was to kill 

Those Foes to Beaux and Fair-ones, Time and Thought.
But out of the various Ways of murdering
them (which are more numerous
than ever Tyrant invented for his
wretched Subjects) which to make use
of, she was quite at a loss. She had
Modesty enough to be afraid to expose
herself to those who had known
her in her Days of Innocence, or when
Suspicion only hovered over her like a
Cloud, which gave Offence to very
few. 




A sudden Transition from Solitude to
the Love of Rambling. 
In this Dilemma, Lady Dellwyn
thought a Tour to Paris might
move the most advisable Step. Summer
was near approaching; London
would be a Solitude to her; all Persons
of Fashion would leave it; a retired
Place, now the Scheme was over
of imposing on the World by it, would
be a dreary Desert to her; and the
Whispers that instantly spread round a
Room at any of the Summer Places of
Resort, upon the Appearance of every
new Person, she was sensible would be
more dreadful to her, however gentle
its Murmur, than the loudest Clap of
Thunder. The delightful Sounds she 

had overheard spreading through a
Company the Moment she graced any
Assembly, such as, “The young and
charming Countess of Dellwyn, whom
her Lord married for her Beauty,” 
she was certain she should now hear no
more; but, in their Place, the Words
Divorce, Lord Clermont, and many
others equally displeasing to her Ears,
would most probably be the Result of
her Appearance; and all the Lenity the
Compassionate could shew might be
expressed in these Two Words, 'Tis
Pity. 
This sudden Thought was confirmed
by Consideration. She hoped to find
Amusement from Novelty, and at
least, by a Variety of Objects, to enjoy
the Pleasure of dear Dissipation; 
and that her Charms might at Paris be
spoken of without being accompanied
with any Insinuations of her past Misconduct. 
Besides, she could not doubt
but she should find a much better Reception
at her Return to England, for 

coming from a Place which, like Venus's
Cestus, gives a Charm to every
thing with which it is in any manner
connected. 
Lady Dellwyn was no sooner entirely
fixed in this Resolution, than she began
to prepare for the Execution of it with
great Speed. The World was all before
her, and she had no other Person's
Consent but her own to consult. A
Companion was necessary; and this in
her Situation seemed most difficult. She
found her own Infamy so great a Burden,
that she would not have that of
another to bear; and yet what Woman
of Character would become a sort
of Dependent on her Ladyship? All
her Vanity could not blind her so much,
but that she perceived this was not easy
to find; another of the happy Consequences
of her bewildered Infatuations! 
At last she recollected one, who
had indeed a tolerable Reputation, but
who held it on such precarious Terms, 

that she imagined she should not meet
with a Repulse from her. 
The Person to whom her Ladyship
intended the Honour of being her
Companion, was Miss Weare, a young
Girl well born, with a Person agreeable,
tho' not handsome, genteel in
her Behaviour, and with Sense enough
to render her Conversation pleasing, as
she had acquired Politeness and Ease of
Manners, by living a good deal in the
World. 
This young Person had been left at
her Parents Death (both of whom she
lost before she was Twenty-two Years
old) with too small a Fortune to support
her with any tolerable Convenience,
much less like a Gentlewoman: 
But she had taken too strong an
Attachment for genteel Life to endure
the Thoughts of quitting it for a servile
State; and therefore determined
to spend the little she possessed in the
same Rank she had hitherto held. She 

flattered herself she might marry well
before it was all expended; and if not,
thought she should not be much more
unhappy in Servitude without a few
Hundred Pounds than with them. 
As the World was pretty well acquainted
with Miss Weare's Circumstances,
her living so far above what
her Fortune could with any degree of
Prudence admit, inclined them to suspect,
that either she had some private
Assistance, or that she would not be
backward to accept any. Curiosity
found great Employment in the Neighbourhood
where she lived, in making
Inquiries concerning her; and several
Heads were often puzzled with deep
Consultations about her. Tho' nothing
was spoke out in plain Terms,
yet much was signified by Shrugs, Gestures,
and Innuendo's. 
Thus Miss Weare's Reputation was
equivocal; tho' her Conduct, as far as
the Public could judge, was perfectly 

decent. And indeed she was entirely
free from what she had given such apparent
Cause to imagine; as many
Gentlemen found, who had been encouraged
by all these favourable Circumstances
to propose Settlements to
her. But this was a Secret between
them and her. They did not chuse to
confess they had made Offers which
were not accepted; and she had too
much Sense to think such Refusals did
her Honour. Well she knew the
World would judge, 

He comes too far, who comes to be deny'd.
Most People would only have thought
the Gentlemen too early or too sudden
in their Application; for they would
have believed, that a Woman whose
Vanity could lead her into such sort of
Imprudence, would be induced by it
into others, when no other Alternative
should be left her than that and Servitude. 

This young Woman Lady Dellwyn
rightly judged would gladly accept her
Invitation to accompany her in so pleasurable
a Scheme; and accordingly her
Ladyship's Letter, which contained
such a Proposal, was received with great
Joy. Miss Weare was far gone in her
last Hundred Pounds, and no nearer being
married than when she began upon
the First. Her Conduct could not recommend
her to a worthy Man; and,
if any other liked her, they hoped to obtain
her on easier Terms: Therefore
she was never thought on in the Light
of a Wife. 
Miss Weare was sensible that her
Character would suffer by appearing
with Lady Dellwyn. She knew that
the Reputations of more Women have
suffered by keeping Company with the
infamous Part of their own Sex, than
from any real Guilt or Imprudence
with the other: But, in short, very
consistently with her first setting out in
the World, she chose rather the Venture 

of blasting her Character, than the
more disagreeable Alternative of relinquishing
her Rank. This offered her
a Prospect of living in Figure some
time longer; and she flattered herself
that France might possibly be more favourable
to her Views than England. 
Thus actuated, Miss Weare assured
Lady Dellwyn of her joyful and thankful
Acceptance of her Invitation; and
that she would punctually wait on her
Ladyship at the Time appointed. 
The Hearts of both Ladies were too
much engaged in this Scheme for either
of them to be guilty of any Delay. 
They proceeded on their Journey
together to Dover; and took their Farewel
of England, with as many Reproaches
to their poor Country, for Ingratitude
to their Merits, as Camillus, or
Coriolanus, or any other injured Hero,
could vent against those who had unjustly
banished him. The Weather favoured
their Passage, and with as much 

Joy they landed on the French Shore,
as ever Cæsar did when flushed with
the Prospect of Victory. They, as well
as the Roman Hero, were in search of
Conquests and Triumphs; and heartily
saluted the Land which they imagined
to be the Seat of Freedom, and
every other pleasing Delight. 
Our Ladies, who had no particular
Call at Paris, nor indeed any-where else,
but that of Pleasure, stopped where-ever
they saw any Prospect of Diversion,
and were not sorry to improve their
French before they arrived at the Metropolis. 
They both spoke it well; 
but Practice only can give that Facility
of Utterance which they wished to acquire,
and which is very requisite to
prevent the Loss of either real or imaginary
bright Thoughts, amongst a
People who themselves are never at a
loss for some Phrase by which they
can with great Quickness express their
Meaning. 

By this Method the Journey took up
a good deal of Time; which was not
regretted by either of them, as they
thought Time was a Commodity of no
Consequence; and that it was well
spent amongst the provincial Diversions; 
where Lady Dellwyn flattered
herself, not without Reason, that she
had spread the Fame of her Charms. 
Miss Weare indeed had not the same
Hopes of dazling her Beholders. Her
Victories were to be gained by slower
Degrees; but she thought her Chance
improved in proportion to the Numbers
she saw. She esteemed every Individual
as a possible Prize in her Lottery; 
and as she wished to prolong
their Jaunt, every Delay was agreeable. 
At last however they reached Paris,
which was the ultimate End of their
whole Undertaking; and brought with
them a Fluency of Speech sufficient to 

vent with Speed all that they could
possibly imagine would recommend
them to that gay Nation. 
Lady Dellwyn, during her Journey,
recovered her former Beauty, which
Vexation had in some measure impaired. 
The Admiration she read in
every Eye restored her to the Vivacity
which had always heightened her
Charms; and as it had never proceeded
from Thought, it is not strange
that Thought should not have suppressed
it. What her Complexion wanted
of its former Lustre, she supplied by
Art; which was so general a Custom
in that Country, that it is very dubious
whether or no she would have resisted
falling into the Practice of it, had she
been at Paris at the Time when the
Bloom of her Complexion could have
been but faintly imitated by any Art
whatever. 
Our fair Travellers were too industrious
in equipping themselves with 

every thing necessary for a splendid Appearance,
to be long before they exhibited
themselves in public. 
Lady Dellwyn had been in some
Doubt, whether to assume a feigned
Name, or continue to use the Title
which Courtesy gave her, after she had
ceased to have any real Claim to it. If
she took one of equal Dignity, she
feared Disgrace from the Discovery of
its Falsehood; if she wore that which
really belonged to her, and became
once more Miss Lucum, it was returning
to her plebeian State. O what
a falling-off was there! How few
could endure to sink into an original
Obscurity? It would be almost as bad
as Annihilation; for to annihilate
Rank, is almost as shocking to those
who have but newly acquired it, as to
annihilate their Existence; and Lady
Dellwyn had paid too great a Price to
intitle herself to be a Right Honourable,
to support the Thought of such
a short-lived Continuance. It is true, 

by bearing her maiden Name she might
avoid a great deal of the Danger of
having her Actions known; for Infamy
might follow Lady Dellwyn across wider
Seas than the English Channel. 
The Breath of Rumour reaches Lengths
that are astonishing. 
A serious Consultation on this most
important Subject was held between
the Two Ladies: But it was at last
agreed, that some Part of her Ladyship's
History might be drowned in the
Passage; and that a Countess, with
half a Reputation, would meet with a
more favourable Reception in the Metropolis
of many Kingdoms, as well
as in that of France, than a plain Gentlewoman,
of Virtue more unblemished
than Lucretia's. Nay, Diana herself,
if she appeared in the World without
being dignified by a Title, would run
a great Hazard of being stared out of
Countenance by some Demi-Rep of
Quality. 

This great Affair being decided, the
Title of Lady Dellwyn was used as lavishly
as most things are to which
People have no just Claim, to the equal
Satisfaction of both the Ladies; for
Miss Weare would have thought it
hard, if, while she was hazarding her
Reputation, she could not have enjoyed
the Pleasure of addressing herself in the
Words Your Ladyship, and of shewing
to others that she accompanied Dignity,
if she was not so fortunate as to have
any of her own. 
The Success proved the Decision was
founded on just Principles; for as
Lady Dellwyn's first Appearance excited
general Admiration, when her
Rank was published, all the Respect
that was due to it was shewn her; 
and very fortunately her Story had not
reached Paris. She had never appeared
as Lady Dellwyn but at her
Lord's solitary Castle, and at Bristol. 
Her Divorce followed her Marriage so
quickly, that there had not been Interval 

enough for her to be known out
of the Kingdom wherein she lived. 
She passed at Paris for a Widow; for
with Truth she gave out, that she had
lost her Lord; and his own Age and
Infirmities confined him within so narrow
a Sphere of Action, as rendered him
little talked of abroad. 
La belle Angloise, and la belle Veuve,
soon became Names as much appropriated
to her as that of Countess of
Dellwyn, and were the only ones she
could hear with Pleasure substituted in
its Place. 
Lady Dellwyn was entirely of the
same Opinion with Comus, that 

Beauty is Nature's Brag, and should be shewn
At Courts, at Feasts, and high Solemnities,
Where most may wonder at the Workmanship;

and therefore was very assiduous in doing
her Duty, by frequenting every Place
of public Amusement. But as Pleasure is
the universal Profession of the Young,
she and her Companion herein gave no
Offence, nor yet in their Behaviour. 
The allowed Gaiety of the Place was
all they desired; and they rather kept
within the general Bounds than exceeded
them; so that no Whisper was
uttered to their Disadvantage. 
Lady Dellwyn was the richer for the
Time she had passed in her Retirement; 
as, while she was mimicking
Grief and Penitence, she could not possibly
spend her Income without detecting
herself, unless she had given it
away, which happened never to occur
to her Thoughts: So that she appeared
in Equipage and Attendants equal to
her Rank; and few English who go
to Paris are qualified to be so agreeable
there, as these Ladies were rendered
by their natural Vivacity, and
their Knowlege in the Language. The 

Ignorance of which must certainly be
the Reason why so many of the English
go into France, and return again,
having only connected themselves there
with English, as if their only Curiosity
in going thither had been, to see whether
there is any Difference in their own
Countrymen in another Nation from
what they are when at home. 
These Advantages introduced the
fair Travellers into the best Company,
and made them acceptable even to the
Ladies: Tho' the Countess eclipsed
them all in Beauty; and, having the
additional Charm of Novelty, and being
a Stranger, occasioned many to
sigh after perfidious Lovers. 
Lady Dellwyn was soon followed by
a large Train of Admirers; nor was
Miss Weare entirely destitute; tho' she
appeared placed in the Rear, in order
to pick up the Stragglers, and be rather
the Receiver of Compliments, 

than the Person to whom they were
paid as her due. 
Lady Dellwyn's Beauty gave a gallant
Turn of Mind and Conversation
to all who were within Sight of her; 
and when they could not get near
enough to impart it to her Ladyship; 
the Benefit naturally fell on the next
Person. But hereby Miss Weare became
possessed of so large a Share of
Flattery, that, if she attributed but one
Quarter of it as due to her own Charms,
she had more than the utmost Ambition
of a voluntary humble Companion
could possibly hope for. I say
voluntary; because those Persons, who,
by any unfortunate Combination of
Circumstances, are forced into that
State, are generally too much oppressed
in Mind to have any other Ambition,
or even Wish, than to be delivered
from their Bondage. 
She shone by Reflexion; and tho'
the Moon is dim when compared with 

the Origin of its Light, the Sun; yet
if we consider it simply by itself, we
admire its benign Lustre. This was
the Case with Miss Weare; many were
attracted by her gentle Influence, who
had not Courage sufficient to address
Lady Dellwyn; and, rather than be
without any Flattery at all, she was
ready to receive it at second-hand, or
in any manner she could come at it. 




Lady Dellwyn prevails on herself to believe
that she is in Love. 
The greatest Number of Lady
Dellwyn's Admirers, were such
as followed her to shew, not to gratify,
their Taste; as happens in all fashionable
Pursuits. But one Gentleman,
Monsieur D'Orville by Name, a young
Man of considerable Rank, and amiable
in Person and Manner, was more seriously
attached. His greatest Fault
was an Impetuosity of Temper: His
Passions were strong; he had habituated
himself to indulge the Bent of
his own Disposition, and therefore never
attempted to controul himself in any
Wish of his Heart. 

Lady Dellwyn did not quarrel with
this Disposition in Monsieur D'Orville; 
for she attributed it all to his Love; 
and, for the first Time, began to entertain
some Suspicions that she had a
Heart to bestow; not that she was
actuated by that romantic Passion which
creates Indifference to every other Object,
and makes all Happiness to consist
in pleasing the beloved Person, only
overstraining Delicacy so much as to feel
it almost a Crime to charm any other. 
Monsieur D'Orville, by the Warmth
of his Addresses, shewed Lady Dellwyn,
as in a Glass, the great Power of
her own Charms to inspire the most
violent Passion, and this at a Time
when the great Mortifications she had
suffered rendered such a Cordial more
particularly pleasing. She might with
more Propriety be said to have a small
Degree of Partiality to Monsieur D'Orville,
than to love him. Like Miss
Biddy, she loved him the best of them
all; for, “like the Sun, she shone on 

all alike.” She loved as a Coquet
might love: Nothing gave her so
much Pleasure as Monsieur D'Orville's
Conversation, except general Admiration. 
Those who have affirmed that Love
will conquer all things, should have
considered that there is no Rule without
an Exception; for Vanity is not to be
so baffled, and still claims the Honour
of being unconquerable. 
Love hath taught an Hercules to spin,
hath made an ambitious Man resign the
Sweets of Empire, hath tamed the
Fierce, changed Wisdom into Folly,
Virtue into Vice, and sometimes Vice
into Virtue; but Vanity into Humility
is a Metamorphosis it never made. 
Monsieur D'Orville could have
wished Lady Dellwyn as violently enamoured
as himself: But, as that was
beyond his Hopes, he was as contented
as a Lover can be, with perceiving she 

preferred him to her whole Train of
Admirers; and his Vanity, or his Inclination
that it should be so, persuaded
him the Preference was still greater
than it appeared. He had lived in the
Land of Coquetry, and was ignorant
that any Lover could be so unreasonable
as to say to his Mistress, 

Be mine, and only mine; take care
Your very Thoughts and Looks to guide;
 Nor go so far
As liking any Youth beside.
This was an impertinent Request, ill-suited
to French Politeness. And so far
are we influenced by the Custom of
the Country we live in, that it not only
directs the Form of our Head-dresses,
and the Cut of our Clothes; but even
shapes our Passions, till they are as unlike
those of another Nation, as the Circumstances
which seem most subservient
to Fashion. The original Seeds
of the human Passions are indeed the
same; but they are as variously modified 

by different Climates and Customs,
as the Fruits of the Earth are. 
Thus Spanish Love differs more from
that Passion in France, than the Dress
of the one Kingdom doth from that of
the other; and true English Love varies
as much from what is so called in both
those Nations, as they do from one another. 
Monsieur D'Orville saw nothing in
Lady Dellwyn's Conduct to deter him
from seeking in Marriage that Happiness,
which his Passion was lavish in
promising him that he should find in
the Indulgence of it; but a Lady who
had been the Object of his Gallantry,
rather than of his Love, before the
Countess of Dellwyn had appeared in
Paris, made a more exact Scrutiny. 
And it is not strange, if Jealousy, which
can magnify the smallest Objects into a
giant-like Bulk, and even see what is
not visible, should find out Truths so
well known as Lady Dellwyn's former
Behaviour. This Lady having Friends 

in England, no sooner was piqued by
Monsieur D'Orville's Neglect, than she
wrote to them to inquire who this impertinent
Countess was. 
Such Curiosity could not fail of being
easily gratified. Lady Dellwyn
was not so fortunate as to have her
Name already buried in Oblivion. A
full Account of her was thus transmitted
into France, and put into such good
Hands, that it was in no Danger of being
hid. The first Person whom she
acquainted with it was Monsieur D'Orville
himself, flattering herself that she
should enjoy great Pleasure from his
Confusion: But, to her great Disappointment,
he treated it all as the Invention
of Malice and Envy. His good
Opinion of Lady Dellwyn was founded
on the great Amiableness of her Person
and Conversation; and he had not accustomed
himself constantly to give
way to every Passion and Imagination
that was uppermost to so very little Effect,
as to suffer a Legion of Evidence 

to convince him of any Fact against
the whole Force and Bent of his Inclinations. 
This ill Success did not discourage
the Lady. She could not fear finding
a Lover's Incredulity in most of her
Hearers, especially as she was resolved
to impart it chiefly to her own Sex,
who she was sure would listen with
willing Ears, many having received
the same Cause of Offence with herself; 
and the others, who sympathised with
Lady Dellwyn, in staking their Happiness
on the Breath of Flattery, thinking
themselves sufficiently injured by
any Woman who so entirely eclipsed
them. 
Such Ladies, as they had now obtained
the Knowlege of such Facts as
could depreciate Lady Dellwyn, were
lavish in the Praises of her Beauty, and
extolling her Charms: But when they
thought they had by this means sufficiently
baffled the Suspicion of Envy, 

the purposed End appeared. The
Words, But 'tis Pity, were ready for
Utterance; and many Shakings of the
Head, and Gestures of Sorrow, introduced
the whole History of her erroneous
Conduct. 
Thus, by Female Industry, Lady
Dellwyn's History soon became a general
Topic; and was implicitly believed
by every Woman who was not
so happy as to escape the painful Stings
of Envy. But amongst the Men it had
a different Effect. Some gave no Credit
to it; others looked upon it as a
Recommendation, and therefore received
it as a Truth, indulging Hopes
by that means which they had never
hitherto seen any Reason to cherish. 
It was difficult to trace from what
Hands the Story first came; for the
Lady who imported it chose to conceal
her having done so, lest the true Reason
should be suspected. The Authority
therefore was doubtful; and every 

one thought himself at liberty to believe
or disbelieve it, as best suited his
Inclinations. 
Monsieur D'Orville was most incredulous,
in proportion as he was most seriously
enamoured; and his Assiduities
rather increased than abated, as some
Reparation for a Scandal of which he
thought himself in a degree the Cause,
by his Infidelity to the Lady whom he
suspected to be its original Inventor. 
Lady Dellwyn was not ignorant of
the Reports to her Disadvantage; and
was sensible the Truth, when once
surmised, must in a short Time be confirmed. 
The Triumph of her Vanity
she plainly perceived must soon have
an End; and, from being the Object
of Admiration or Envy of all who beheld
her, she should become the Subject
of general Contempt. In this Situation
she was perplexed what Part
she should act. Sometimes she thought
it would be best to leave the Kingdom, 

before she received any of the Mortification
which seemed so imminently to
threaten her: But then, to what Place
could she go, where Shame would not
pursue her! 
In this Dilemma there was one Circumstance
which had great Weight towards
detaining her Ladyship in France. 
To leave Monsieur D'Orville, was to
quit the Man whom she thought more
amiable than any other had ever appeared
to her. She had no Doubt but
Marriage was his View; a Prospect
which flattered both her Love and her
Vanity. She hoped to bury all her
Misconduct in this Change of Name; 
and that the Faults of Lady Dellwyn
might be forgiven Madam D'Orville,
as she was resolved never again to give
the least Occasion for Censure. 
Lady Dellwyn had, it is true, a natural
Aversion to Deceit. But whatever
may be said of Misfortunes, it is
certain that Crimes seldom come alone; 

and there is scarcely any wrong Action
which doth not lead to a Deviation
from Truth in many Instances. 
Reduced as Lady Dellwyn was, it
would have been difficult for her not
to have caught at any Means that
seemed to offer her an Asylum from
Contempt, or at least from public
Neglect. And how was it probable,
that a Woman should relinquish so flattering
a Prospect, rather than be guilty
of Deceit, when she had before violated
both her Honour and the most
solemn Vows? She hoped Monsieur
D'Orville's Love would plead for her
Forgiveness, more effectually than any
Arguments she should have to urge in
her Defence, when he should come to
the certain Knowlege of her Character; 
and blinded herself with a vain Plea,
that Justice obliged no one to condemn
themselves; not considering, that
in this Case Generosity should weigh
more than the scanty Justice which is
the only Foundation of that Assertion. 

While the Lovers were so well disposed
to enter into a lasting Union, the
Lady whose Views had been so cruelly
frustrated by the Violence of Monsieur
D'Orville's Passion for the Lady of
whom he was enamoured, took a surer
Method of Success, by writing to his
Father, to inform him what Infamy
his Son was in danger of bringing on
himself. 
Monsieur D'Orville had acquainted
his Father with his Passion, and been
more circumstantial in describing the
Lady's Rank and Fortune than her
Beauty; knowing those were Particulars
to which he would be most sensible. 
The old Gentleman, with all the
Circumspection of one on whom Age
hath laid its frozen Hand, exhorted his
Son to be very cautious and certain of
her Estate, before he engaged too far
to retreat; and referred him to a Person
of Business, who was well able to
make the Inquiry; and if it answered 

his Expectations, and the Lady consented
to accept him, he would come
to Paris, and do a Father's Part. 
This Answer might have satisfied a
colder Lover: But Inquiries that might
be Months before they brought Satisfaction,
were but ill-suited to the Vehemence
of Monsieur D'Orville's Passions. 
He had not indeed expressed
all his Impatience to his Father, fearing
to excite in him Apprehensions of being
too strongly prepossessed in the Lady's
Favour, to be sufficiently cautious
in his Proceedings concerning what the
old Gentleman would think more essential
than all the Charms that ever
adorned the whole Sex. 
Another Circumstance rendered this
Advice still more unacceptable; for,
before Monsieur D'Orville received it,
he had perceived that the Rumours to
Lady Dellwyn's Disadvantage began to
spread; and he was sensible, that, if
they reached his Father's Ears, the 

old Gentleman, who had no Warmth
left in his Temper, but where the Honour
of his Family was concerned,
would put an absolute Negative on all
his most ardent Hopes. This threatening
Circumstance made him resolve to
compleat the Union without waiting the
Result of any farther Transactions with
his Father. It was not customary with
him to imagine it possible for him to
outlive the contradicting any earnest
Pursuit, on which he had fixed his Inclinations. 
He never suffered himself
to have any Experience on that Side of
the Question, having always used his
utmost Endeavours to indulge his utmost
Wishes; and therefore judged,
perhaps rightly, that it would be easier
to obtain his Father's Forgiveness for a
rash Action before, than after he should
have received his positive Commands
to the contrary. 
Tho' Monsieur D'Orville had, thro'
the Medium of his Inclinations, closely
shut up every Passage of his Mind from 

the Admittance of any evil Belief concerning
Lady Dellwyn; yet he would
have been glad to have heard what she
would say on the Subject. But that
Respect which always attends true
Love, deprived him of Courage to
signify such his Desire to her; and she
esteemed it more prudent not to mention
what she could so ill deny; and
chose therefore to appear entirely ignorant
that any Report concerning herself
was propagated; but the Fear of
its being confirmed, rendered her as
ready to comply, as he was earnest in
soliciting her Hand. 
Persons so well disposed, and actuated
by such mutual Sympathy, were not
likely to take much Time for adjusting
Preliminaries: Two Days were thought
sufficient for the necessary Preparations; 
and therefore the Completion of their
Wishes was not fixed at a great Distance. 




A Battle between Love and Honour. 
While the Lovers were flattering
themselves that now nothing
could prevent their Union, and
Lady Dellwyn was enjoying already in
Thought her returning again into the
World, without the Apprehensions she
now laboured under of Discovery,
Monsieur D'Orville's Father was far
advanced on his Road to Paris; whither
the Letter, which contained an
Account of Lady Dellwyn's Infamy,
brought him, with a Speed but ill-suited
to his Age, or usual Method of
Proceeding; and he arrived in Town
the Evening before his Son's intended
Nuptials. 

When he arrived at his House, he
was informed that his Son was at
Lady Dellwyn's. He immediately sent
to require his Presence;a Message
which threw the young Gentleman, as
well as Lady Dellwyn, into the greatest
Consternation, tho' she endeavoured to
the utmost of her Power to conceal her
Emotions. The same Thought struck
them both instantly: They imagined
that the Scandal so current about her
had reached his Ears; and Monsieur
D'Orville was scarcely able to obey the
Summons. 
Lady Dellwyn, not less shocked,
but thinking it necessary to appear
with all the Fearlessnes of Innocence,
endeavoured to encourage him. But
the little, which, in the Anxiety of her
Mind, she was capable of urging, had
no other Effect on him, than that, by
an unusual Tenderness in her Behaviour
to him, his Chain was rivetted
yet faster; and he took Leave of her
with the utmost Agony, and with repeated 

Vows on both Sides, that the
next Morning should put it out of the
Power of any one ever to divide them
from each other. 
Not all their Vows could suppress
Lady Dellwyn's tormenting Fears, nor
encourage Monsieur D'Orville to appear
before his Father with any Degree
of Composure. He went like a Criminal
before his Judge; tho' with this
Difference, that his greatest Grief arose
from the Consideration, that his Crime
was only intended, and not yet committed. 
The old Gentleman had composed
an Harangue upon the Road: The
Text was, The Honour of his Family. 
Tho' he plainly saw his Son's Distress
and Impatience to know what brought
him to Paris, yet he could not prevail
on himself to cut short his Composition. 
Elaborate and tedious as it
was, Monsieur D'Orville was obliged
to sit it all; for hear it he did not. 

As soon as he found the Drift of his
Father's Discourse, his Apprehensions
were thoroughly confirmed; and therefore,
till he came to the Conclusion, he
was sensible that he was not much
concerned; and whilst the good Gentleman
was expatiating on the inestimable
Value of Honour and Dignity
of Family, expressing almost more than
Cæsar-like Delicacy on the Subject, his
Son took the Liberty to substitute the
Word Love in its place; and, letting
his Imagination run on the Charms of
that Passion, heard not one Syllable of
all the intermediate Part of his Father's
Discourse; till he was indeed thoroughly
awakened by the Conclusion; it containing
a positive Prohibition ever to
see Lady Dellwyn more, on pain of his
Father's utmost Displeasure. 
Monsieur D'Orville declared the Impossibility
of his Obedience; that his
Life and Love were so interwoven, that
whoever cut the Thread of the one,
must put an End to the other; with a 

whole String of those ingenious Metaphors
and Bombast, with which
People have endeavoured to give an
unnatural Air to perhaps the most natural
Passion in all our Composition. 
Upon this the Conversation grew
rather too animated. These Champions
for Love and Honour did not argue
the Matter with the Gentleness
and Good-breeding of Prince Volscius. 
The Father forgot the Dignity of Age,
tho' as deserving of Regard as the
Dignity of Family; and the Son found
some Difficulty in remembering the
Respect due to his Father. Like most
Disputants, they talked much, and prevailed
little. 
Monsieur D'Orville had too much
Love to relinquish his Hopes; and
would by no means make his Father a
Promise which he did not so much as
intend to keep, as he was not only engaged
by the strictest Vows to Lady
Dellwyn, but also by that most prevailing 

Argument, the strongest Inclinations. 
Great Part of the Night passed in
this Contention. When Love and
Honour are engaged in a Contest, it
is often seen that the former obtains a
speedier Victory. They may hold out
pretty well in distant Skirmishes; but,
when they come to close Combat, Honour
is often sent halting off. But here
it had a stout Champion, who at least
made out in Perseverance what he
might want in Warmth of his younger
Adversary. 
As neither Side received much Satisfaction
in the Dispute, they were at
last willing to postpone a Conclusion,
which seemed as far off as when they
began. The old Gentleman proposed
the retiring to their Apartments for that
Night; to which the other consented,
tho' he had not so strong an Inducement
as his Father, who was fatigued 

with his Journey, and wanted Repose. 
Monsieur D'Orville retired indeed,
but not to rest. It was scarcely possible
for a Mind to be in greater Perturbation
than his. He grieved at the
Thought of so totally offending his Father
as to marry Lady Dellwyn, after
he had declared himself so absolutely
averse to it, and had protested he would
never after such a Marriage look on
him as his Son. It is true, the greatest
Part of his Estate was settled beyond
his Power to alter; but that rather
made Monsieur D'Orville the more unwilling
to disobey him. He saw himself
in this Case doubly ungenerous, at
least in Appearance. Had his Ruin
depended on his Disobedience, it would
have worn the Air of a noble Constancy,
very flattering to a romantic
Passion. 
Here again Love and Honour engaged,
but not on such equal Terms. 

One Heart was the Field of Battle; 
and there the weaker Combatant seldom
finds room to exert his Strength. 
Besides, Love contrived to draw off
some of Honour's Forces, by urging
that Honour was bound as much to
the Mistress as the Father. By this
means it obtained a compleat Victory; 
and Monsieur D'Orville, after a long
Debate, was at last derminined to marry
Lady Dellwyn, the next Morning. 
Tho' nothing is so painful as Irresolution; 
yet Monsieur D'Orville was
not quite easy in his Determination. 
From some things his Father had said,
he could not help entertaining some intruding
Fears, lest the Reports concerning
Lady Dellwyn should have any
Foundation in Truth; tho' he scarcely
durst utter these Suspicions to himself. 
He endeavoured to collect some Satisfaction,
by reflecting on her Behaviour
since she came to Paris. He could
discover nothing in it that was not entirely
proper; but it was impossible for 

even his Blindness to make this into
any certain Proof of the past. She had
not been long there; a designing Woman
might watch over her Conduct
for a longer Time. 
This Thought had a quite contrary
Effect from what a reasonable Person
who was in Love might have expected; 
for tho' he could allow that an
artful Woman might have done so; 
yet he could never acknowlege, even
in the softest inward Whispers, that
Lady Dellwyn was an artful Woman. 
He thought, amiable as she was, she
might be guilty of some Frailties, but
was greatly superior to all low Cunning.
Art and Design his Nature abhorred; 
and therefore he could not suppose
any one practised them whom he
esteemed. 
Having acquitted her one by one of
every Crime which he deemed to be
the Marks of a black Mind, his Apprehensions
abated. Some small Indiscretions 

were a sufficient Foundation
whereon Malice might build a great
Pile of Scandal; and yet those he could
readily forgive. Such Beauty, like the
fair Hesperian Fruit, required an Argus
to watch it, if every Foible was to be
swelled into a Crime. 
In these Thoughts Monsieur D'Orville
passed the Night, not attempting
to go to Bed, or take any Rest. But
when he thought the Hour approached
that he might wait on his intended
Bride, he rang for his Servant to assist
him in dressing fit for the Occasion; 
when, instead of his own, entered his
Father's Valet de Chambre, who, with
the utmost Politeness, informed him
he was a Prisoner; for that his Father
had in the Night sent for a Guard,
who were placed at the Door of his
Apartment, with strict Orders not even
to admit his Servants. 
Now was Monsieur D'Orville more
furious than Bajazet in his Cage. A 

more patient Man might indeed have
found it difficult to have borne such a
Disappointment with any tolerable Degree
of Composure. But we shall
leave him to vent his Rage alone,
while we take a View of Lady Dellwyn. 
Her Ladyship had passed as restless
a Night as her Lover; nor was Miss
Weare able to give her much Consolation
her Apprehensions being not in
any Degree less uneasy. She had considered
Lady Dellwyn's Establishment
in France as a fortunate Event for her. 
They were on very friendly Terms; 
and she hoped an agreeable Asylum at
her House at least for some time
longer; but could not fix with her in
London, without giving up every Pretension
to Character; which, as Friendship,
built on any other Foundation
than that of a well-grounded Esteem,
is not the most stable of any thing even
in this changeable World, was a very
hazardous Step. 

Thus was Miss Weare's Interest in
this Affair closely connected with Lady
Dellwyn's; and therefore her Uneasiness
was not much inferior to her Ladyship's,
who beheld so great a Proof of
Friendship with Gratitude, and expressed
herself much obliged for the
kind Concern she shewed for her. Miss
Weare was too prudent to lose the
Merit by explaining all the Cause of
her Sympathy with her: But, on the
contrary, she confirmed it by strong
Professions of her Attachment, which
was in some measure real. 




A Disappointment. 
In this Manner the Ladies passed the
best Part of their Night, and went
not to Bed till the Morning; where,
unable to sleep, they continued not
Two Hours; but met again, full of
Fears and Expectations what would be
the Result of that Day. They could
not calmly say, with Brutus, 

—O that a Man might know
The End of this Day's Business ere it come:
Yet their Minds were too much disturbed
by Anxiety to suffer them to say
with him in the Lines that follow: 


But it sufficeth, that the Day will end;
And then the End is known.
Lady Dellwyn imagined, that if
Monsieur D'Orville proved true to his
Promises, he would be in haste to dissipate
her Fears, and reward himself
for his own; and accordingly dressed
herself early with more than common
Care, hoping, if his Father had unsettled
his Resolution, to fix it again by
the conquering Lustre of her Charms. 
Her Ladyship had been dressed some
time, and waited with Impatience for
the Presence of the Person for whom
she had thus adorned herself, when a
Coach stopt at the Door. As she wished
to see Monsieur D'Orville, so likewise
she feared it, being greatly apprehensive
lest he might have his Eyes opened
by some Information produced by his
Father; and, instead of the Love of a
Bridegroom, should be full of Indignation,
and come only with an Intention 

to upbraid her for endeavouring to impose
on him a blasted Reputation. 
These different Sensations rendered her
unable, when she heard a Coach stop,
to go to the Window to satisfy her
Impatience. But Miss Weare, altho'
herself under great Apprehensions, did
that for her; and exclaimed with Surprise,
as well as Disappointment, that
it was not the expected Lover, but an
old Gentleman. 
Lady Dellwyn's Fears then told her
Truth. They immediately suggested
that it was Monsieur D'Orville's Father,
and that the Design of this Visit
was to break off her Match with his
Son; to which it occurred to her, that
he was also consenting, as he had not
prepared her for this unexpected Visit; 
and she naturally judged, that a younger
Man, and a Lover too, might have
been as early at her Door as his Father
could be. 

However oppressed by these alarming
Apprehensions, Lady Dellwyn was
sensible that all her Courage was necessary; 
and she recovered from her
Confusion as well as she could, assuming
her utmost Power over herself to
give the old Gentleman a proper Reception; 
wherein, however, she could
not acquit herself so well as she wished: 
But he was not himself so little moved,
as to be exactly observant of her Emotions. 
He came with an Intention of informing
her, in very plain Terms, of
the Reasons why he could not suffer
his Son to marry her; and did not design
to leave her, without some Reproaches
for having attempted to introduce
Infamy into his immaculate Family. 
But when he entered the Room,
Lady Dellwyn received him with such
Dignity of Air, and Politeness of Manner,
that it got so far the better of the
Prepossession with which the old Gentleman
came, that he could not refuse 

her a Respect which in his Heart he
did not think due to her Conduct. 
He was so much awed by her Appearance,
that, before he could address
her, she got Courage to express
a Desire of knowing his Name, that
she might not be ignorant to whom she
owed the Favour of a Visit; for that,
from a Person of his Age and Appearance,
she must always esteem it as a
Favour, tho' in general she was not
desirous of the Company of Strangers. 
The old Gentleman, who had been
long a Stranger to the having his Appearance
noticed, much less complimented,
by a fair Lady, felt his Anger
both against her and his Son greatly
disarmed. But his Intention nevertheless
continued stedfast; and having such
Assistance offered for his delivering of
a Business which he found it no easy
Matter to produce, would not lose the
Opportunity by longer Silence; but replied,
he feared she would scarcely 

esteem his Visit as deserving the Acknowlegements
she had so politely bestowed
on it, when she knew his Motive
for it; which, that she might in
part guess before he uttered it, he would
inform her that he was Father to Monsieur
D'Orville. 
As Lady Dellwyn hereby learned nothing
new, she baffled the Intention
with which it was spoken; for she received
it without Confusion. Encouraged
by seeing the sudden Effect her
Person and Manner had on the old
Gentleman, she assumed an Assurance,
which, till thus called forth, she
herself did not imagine she was Mistress
of; and said, 
“I am now doubly obliged; for I
cannot see the Parent of a Person
for whom I have so sincere a Regard,
without the utmost Respect,
and esteeming a Visit from him as
a great Honour, and the highest
Obligation.” 

‘That, Madam, (replied the old
Gentleman) must depend on my Intention
in making it; which, not to
leave you longer in Suspence, is no
other than—than—than—to put
a Stop to the Intercourse between my
Son and your Ladyship. But this is
a Loss, Madam, which should not
afflict you, as it may be so soon
supplied by the Power of your
Charms.’ 
Lady Dellwyn was not enough Mistress
of herself to hear unmoved even
what she expected, and especially after
she had entertained some small Degree
of Hopes that she could look the
old Gentleman out of the Power of declaring
any thing disobliging to her. 
She was not immediately able to return
an Answer. But he gave her time to
recover herself; being so rejoiced that
he had brought forth what her Elegance
and Dignity had made so mighty
a Burden, that he had no Desire to
pursue the Subject. 

At last, after a great Struggle with
herself, Lady Dellwyn replied, That indeed
the Design of his Visit was not
perfectly agreeable. As for the little
Charms which he was pleased to think
might repair the Loss, however true
that might be, if Monsieur D'Orville
had no Merit but what was common to
every Lover—“But, Sir, (continued
she) your Son is possessed of Qualities
which I have little Hopes of
finding again, however numerous
my Train of Admirers.” Then she
declared, that as her Rank and Fortune
were equal to any Man's, she could
not imagine why he should wish to
put such an Affront upon her. 
This last Sentence was not uttered
without great Hesitation; for she feared
the Answer which what she said seemed
to require; but thought it would appear
like Self-condemnation, if she offered
to urge nothing in her own Behalf; 
and was somewhat encouraged also by
the Complacency with which the Father 

received the Praises of his Son, and
hoped that he was thereby greatly
mollified. In some measure he was
lo; but the unfortunately naming her
Rank and Fortune connected with them
the Idea of her Infamy, the Dignity of
his own House, and again roused the
old Gentleman's Indignation. 
By this means he was enabled to
intimate, that her Character rendered
her improper to enter into his Family; 
and, to avoid Altercation, added, that
how far the Slander was just, was not
much to the Purpose, for the Belief of
it was sufficient to prevent him from
ever consenting to such an Union; and,
in more explicit Terms, was by a strong
Effort enabled to inform her, that he
had applied to the King upon the Affair; 
who had put his Son under Arrest,
from which he should not be
released till she had left the Kingdom,
and he so well restored to his Reason,
as to know the Obedience due to a
Father. 

Of all he had said, this last Assurance
was the most unpleasing. She
could still flatter herself with Hopes, if
she might see Monsieur D'Orville. She
knew the Violence of his Passion was
her Friend, and a prevailing Pleader
of her Cause. But this Resource was
denied her; and, by an Action of such
Eclat, her longer Abode in France
must be very disagreeable to her, as
well as prolong the Imprisonment of
the only Man she had ever even fancied
she had loved. 
Amongst all her Distresses, Lady
Dellwyn never felt a deeper than what
she now endured. Her Pride, her Vanity,
and her Affections, were all separately
wounded. Her Affliction was
insupportable, and heightened by the
Consideration of what Monsieur D'Orville
also suffered. Some Days passed
before she could resolve on any thing; 
but as soon as she was capable of Reflexion,
she determined to leave the
Place: And since Shame would follow 

her where-ever she went, she
thought it more advisable to return
where it would be no Novelty, and
therefore, cause none of those violent
Anxieties or Revolutions, than to feel
such Vicissitudes of Fortune, and be
rendered more sensible to the Pain
arising from Contempt, for having enjoyed
a Season of Respect and Admiration. 
But, convinced that Monsieur
D'Orville's Father would make such
strict Scrutiny into her Conduct, that
his Son would not be long left in Ignorance
of the Truth, she chose to make
her Vanity some Amends, by having
the Honour of a Confession. 
Accordingly, before her Departure,
Lady Dellwyn wrote a Letter to Monsieur
D'Orville; wherein she lamented
the Uneasiness she had caused him, as
the greatest Misfortune that could have
befallen her. She acknowleged some
Indiscretions which made her hateful
and contemptible to herself; and that
Vanity was her only Seducer. She attempted 

to palliate it by the Intoxication
of Flattery, which her Understanding
was too weak to bear unhurt; but that
her Heart had never been engaged before; 
and to her Love she applied for
her Apology for not having acquainted
him with the whole of her past Conduct. 
She informed him, that she should
leave Paris in Three Days Time, and
proceed with all possible Haste into
England, that she might not prolong
his Confinement; and concluded, by
intreating him to think of her Follies
with Compassion, and not to suffer
Contempt or Hatred to take the Place
of Affection in his Heart. She acknowleged,
that Indifference was the best she
could hope: In that, as her just Due,
she should acquiesce; tho' her Regard
for him no Time or Affliction could
efface. 
This Letter she gave to a Friend of
Monsieur D'Orville, to deliver to him
after her Departure; but, having got 

Liberty to see the Prisoner, he performed
his Commission before, and
brought her back an Answer, filled with
the most affectionate Lamentations, and
the tenderest Farewel, that a desponding
Lover could pen; a Lover whose
Despair arose from finding his Mistress
unworthy of his Affection; and yet
such was the Strength of his Passions,
that he could not immediately conquer
his Love. 
This Letter afforded Lady Dellwyn
some little Satisfaction; for she could
not bear the Thought of being placed
in no-body's Heart but her own; and
even that Self-love stood only on the
same tottering Foundation with Monsieur
D'Orville's good Opinion, and
had no other Support but Partiality. 
She left the Kingdom according to her
Word, and arrived safe in England. 
But it is impossible to express what Lady
Dellwyn suffered in her Passage from
Calais to Dover. She could indeed reproach
France with its Treatment of 

her, as she had done her own Country
when she left it; but she could not
congratulate herself on being set on
Shore on her native Land, nor have
the Pleasure of greeting it with Joy,
which is the general Lot of every common
Sailor. 
All Places were now become irksome
to her. She found it impossible to fly
from Infamy, unless she could at the
same time fly from herself; there was
no stopping the hundred Tongues of
Rumour, neither was there any Possibility
of forgetting the criminal Errors
of her Conduct. Her Passions were
in a continual Alarm; and she read,
or fancied she read, Contempt in every
Countenance. 
What yet added to Lady Dellwyn's
Misfortunes was, that she now found
Miss Weare intended to leave her; and
being sensible of the Value of an agreeable
Companion to one in her Circumstances,
with whom many might not 

chuse to keep Company, she offered
her a competent Stipend to tempt her
to continue with her. 
Miss Weare was in a Situation that
rendered her less scrupulous upon the
Point of Reputation; and therefore
her Poverty, and not her Will, contented; 
and Lady Dellwyn was as well
satisfied as Romeo, to pay her Poverty,
and not her Will. 
When they appeared in London, the
Elegance of their Dress, which was
entirely French, procured them at first,
as they apprehended it would, a better
Reception than could have been reasonably
expected. But this was only
during the very short Time they were
the Objects of Curiosity; and some
People liked to see what Difference
there was between Ladies going to,
and the same Ladies returning from,
Paris. And Lady Dellwyn found it
impossible to get into very good Company,
and very bad she could not endure; 

for, tho' infamous, she was not
impudent, nor could relish any Conversation
which exceeded the Limits of
Decency. She had at first been seduced
to give her Hand without her
Heart; to make solemn Vows at the
Altar, without any Regard to Truth; 
and afterwards betrayed to break those
Vows, thus solemnly given, by Vanity. 
And tho' no Day nor Hour passed, but
that she had sufficient Cause, either
from the Consequence of her Actions,
or from the painful Reflexions on them,
to lament the Dupe she had been to
that Passion; yet her Mind was too
much disturbed, and gone too far in an
erroneous Path, to suffer her to break
thro' the Chain that held her, and
abandon a Leader under whose Banner
she had never been led into any Transactions,
but what were attended with
Errors, Crimes, and Misfortunes. She
constantly wished to unravel what she
had done last; and yet, as if she was
infatuated, was as constant in persisting
to act on in a Manner that only 

gave her fresh Cause to wish she had
the Power 

To call back Yesterday;
which her Ignorance of herself alone
made her imagine she could employ to
any better Purpose. 




The Conclusion. 
Lady Dellwyn's future Life was
a continual Mortification; for altho'
she carefully avoided ever more
falling into any such Snares as that
wherein Lord Clermont had intangled
her, yet her Name was very seldom
mentioned without being strictly connected
with that Circumstance. Some
Persons indeed at first hesitated, and
seemed to be labouring under a great
Difficulty to call to Remembrance
what was before uppermost, and ready
for Utterance; but they never failed
recollecting enough to join the Names
of Lord Clermont and Lady Dellwyn,
before they quitted the Subject. That
Kind of Wisdom which deals in condemning 

others, and consequently hath
no Leisure to inspect the Errors at home,
was exercised very plentifully on Lady
Dellwyn's Conduct. A few Individuals,
it is true, who were acquainted
with her Story, and knew in what
Manner she was betrayed to marry
Lord Dellwyn, could not forbear looking
on her with some degree of Compassion: 
But it was observable, that
this Lenity was exerted only by those
Persons whose own Conduct had ever
been the most unblemished, and who,
by their exemplary Lives alone, had
proved their Abhorrence of every
vicious Practice. 
Charity covereth a Multitude of Sins,
saith the Apostle; but generally that
Part of Mankind who visibly have the
greatest Number of Crimes to veil
over, are apt to provide themselves with
the least Share of that necessary Covering. 
Perhaps this may be in some degree
owing to what is observed in The
Spectator, That to resist a Temptation, 

is the only Means by which we can
judge of its Force. 
Lady Dellwyn could not relish a retired
Life. Her Mind was not sufficiently
calm. True, sound, and religious
Principles her Father had never
instilled into her youthful Mind. It
was indeed a Task impossible for him
to execute, as he had never thought of
them himself. He had given his
Daughter some general Ideas of Virtue,
which was to be built on the sandy
Foundation of Pride; and when that
Pride, under whose Banner she was inlisted,
commanded her to deviate into
the Paths of Vice, she followed her
Leader implicitly, and, according to
the common Proverb, plunged thro'
thick and thin, without any Reflexion
on the mischievous Consequences that
must attend her erroneous Conduct. 
It is in fact as absurd to say, that Pride
can preserve Virtue, as it would be to
assert, that a Vessel sails the most steady
on the Ocean in the midst of a violent 

Storm; it being full as much the
Nature of Pride to throw the human
Mind into Confusion and Perturbation,
and to rob it of all its Steadiness, as it
is of roaring Waves and foaming Billows,
to toss about the Vessels that sail
on them when they are thus agitated
by the Winds. 
Some fluctuating Notions concerning
Repentance, Virtue, Honour, Morality,
&c. hovered around Lady Dellwyn's
Thoughts, but were too wavering
to bring her to any fixed Determination. 
She became a constant
Attendant from one public Place to another; 
where she met with many Mortifications: 
But yet even these were
not quite so dreadful to her, as to retire,
and be subjected to her own Company
alone. But as Lord Dellwyn supplied
her with Means of gaming within
a moderate Degree, to that she fled for
Refuge from herself, and for a Method
of banishing painful Reflexion. But
as the Love of Play was not natural to 

her, she could not reap thence any
great Pleasure; but often found herself
weary of this Life, and yet anxiously
avoided every Thought of
Death. She might very well have
applied to herself what Angelo, in Measure
for Measure, says, after he had
fallen from Virtue and Innocence, 

Alack! when once our Grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right; we would, and we would not. 
Miss Weare attended on Lady Dellwyn
as her Shadow; and as she had
before received a great deal of Flattery
at second-hand, so she now received a
great deal of Contempt in the same
Manner; with this material Difference,
that the Flattery which came to her
Share, when it could not reach Lady
Dellwyn, lost much of its respectful
Manner by the Way; whereas that
Contempt fell with redoubled Force 

on her, of which Lady Dellwyn's Beauty
and Quality somewhat abated the Violence; 
insomuch that Miss Weare often
repined, and secretly wished that
she had rather submitted to the meanest
Employment, on the Death of her Parents,
than taken up the Trade of being
an humble Companion, and especially
to a Lady, who, so far from being
able to protect others, could not cover
herself from the Shame of the Infamy
she had incurred. 
Lord Dellwyn disappointed all Captain
Drumond's Hopes, for he made
his House-keeper his Countess; whose
first Step towards engrossing her Lord
and his Fortunes wholly to herself, was
the Riddance of Captain Drumond out
of the Family; altho' no Endeavours
were wanting on his Part to avoid so
fatal a Misfortune. He was a true poetical
Proteus, turned and twisted himself
into various Forms, bullied and
cringed, boasted and flattered, threatned
Lord Dellwyn that he would 

break his Heart if he would not continue
to him his Friendship, and believe
him to be an honest Man; but
all in vain. The House-keeper no
sooner found herself to be a Countess,
than she claimed all her Privileges, and
would suffer no Person in her House
but whom she pleased. She obtained
such an Ascendant over her Lord, that
by degrees she governed him as absolutely
as if he had been a real Infant; 
and made him leave her every thing
in his Power, to the great Disadvantage
of his own Brother, and the Scandal
of his Name. 
The Captain proceeded on in the
Method he had begun, by puffing off
himself, and deceiving others; turning
every human Weakness to his own
Advantage, by directing his Flattery to
that Part, till many Families had great
Reason to lament the Day in which
they had first been unfortunately acquainted
with him; altho' he always
boasted the great Blessing he had been 

to them, and the many Favours he
had conferred on them; and at last
was so thoroughly discovered, that he
was publicly infamous, his own Conscience
bearing the painful Testimony
that he was deservedly so. By which
means he became so miserable, that if,
amongst all the People he had injured,
there was any one vindictive enough to
be half so much an Enemy to him as
he was to himself, could they have
seen his inward Sufferings, they must
have been very hard-hearted indeed, if
their Anger would not by that means
have been appeased, and have given
place to some Degree of human Pity. 
It hath been observed, that Mr.
Chlegen was first induced to marry
Lady Fanny Fashion by a real and sincere
Affection for her; and altho' he
perceived that she was too much elated
by public Diversions, and the Pleasures
of Vanity, yet that he had flattered
himself she would in Time grow weary
of a continual Repetition of the same 

trifling Scenes, and then would naturally
fall into the domestic Life he
loved. But when he found that all his
Hopes were built on a sandy Foundation,
and that Time rather increased
than diminished her Pursuit of vain
Pleasures, he resolved to separate himself
from her. He would not make any
public Noise; but took an easy and obvious
Method of enjoying her Absence,
which was no other than remaining at
his own home, which he found was
the last Place to which she would chuse
to resort. Lady Fanny's Life ended
conformably to its Beginning; and if
of the Space of Fifty Years, in which
she fluttered about, much should be
said, many Words might indeed be
used; but of the Matter therein contained
it might truly be said, it was
Much ado about Nothing. 
The Remainder of Mr. Lucum's Life
bore a nearer Resemblance to Phrenzy
or Distraction, than to any other thing
whatsoever. He had before exerted 

the utmost Skill to make himself believe
he was contented with a rural
Retirement, insomuch that he could
not now again avail himself of that
Fallacy. He saw no Path by which
he could possibly attain any new Connexion
for the promoting any future
Interest. He was become so much the
Contempt of all Parties, that he could
not flatter himself with any such alluring
Hope. His Mind was swelled
and puffed up with Ambition; but he
laboured under the painful Affliction
of finding no outward Object to gratify
that turbulent Passion. He poured
forth a small Part of his Indignation by
constantly writing, One at least every
Twelvemonth; the most enraged Letter
he could dictate to his Daughter. But
this was not sufficient to vent half the
Venom with which he was filled. He
therefore turned political Writer: He
dipped his Pen in Gall, and threw
forth his inward Spleen at every Man
in Power; Which Power was itself the
Mark at which he shot, without distinguishing 

who or what the Man was
at whom he levelled his Satire, more
properly called Ribaldry. 

He wrote about it, Goddess, and about it,
till he buried the plainest Matters of
Fact so deeply under a Redundancy of
Words, that they could no longer be
perceived even by the clearest Understanding. 
At the Expiration of the Time which
Miss Bilson's Father and Mother required
Sir Harry Cleveland to spend in
the Gaiety of the Metropolis, as a Trial
of his Steadiness, in the Pursuit of such
Pleasures as they thought becoming a
reasonable Man, he returned to Mr.
Bilson's in no way different from what
he was when he left them; except in
having his Passion for the young Lady,
and his Esteem for the rest of the Family,
still heightened, by the Comparisons
his Mind had continually drawn 

between them and every other Person
with whom he had conversed. 
It must be confessed, that the ardent
Love with which Sir Harry was inspired
for Miss Bilson, was the most
urgent Cause of his thinking the Time
long whilst he staid in London. But if
he had no other Motive but to have
returned again to the instructing as well
as entertaining Conversation of that
Family, he would have longed to have
quitted the Town, and all its Diversions,
to have enjoyed that Pleasure; 
for there innocent Mirth and real Wit
abounded, without their mimic Shadows,
barbarous Noise, or affected
Sneers. Their sprightly Humour displayed
itself in various pleasing Forms,
to enliven and amuse, but never to give
mental Pain, or expose any of the
Company to Derision. There Joy,
spreading Laughter, like all other Pleasure,
was shared in common; and they
laughed with, but never at, one another. 
There, lastly, Religion appeared 

in its own natural Shape, and had its
proper Influence; for, by softening the
natural Infirmities which attend human
Nature from the Time of its Entrance
into this World, and by laying the
most solid Foundation for rational Pleasure,
it shewed every Countenance
filled with such joyous Smiles, and benign
Lustre, as can only be the Result
of truly gladdened and happy Hearts. 
Sir Harry Cleveland had now a Claim
to urge, which neither Mr. nor Mrs.
Bilson wished to refuse him; but, on
the contrary, with general Joy confirmed
his Union with Miss Bilson. 
The young Clergyman, who owed
both a tender and excellent Wife to
Mrs. Bilson, begged leave to perform
the Ceremony, as the greatest Gratification
they could bestow; which, as
they knew this Request was made in
Sincerity of Heart, and not out of
Flattery, they readily complied with,
being ready to add to their own, by 

distributing Pleasure to all around them,
and Sir Harry found abundant Reason
to remember the Words of the wise
Man, that a good Wife is a Crown to
her Husband. 
There was no good House on Sir
Harry's Estate. He therefore compleated
the Happiness of himself, his
Bride, and all the Family, by hiring
one in Mr. Bilson's Neighbourhood; 
tho' he thought it so proper to spend
great Part of his Rents amongst those
from whom he received them, that he
followed Mrs. Bilson's Plan, fixing the
same Institutions in his Parishes; and
fitted up Apartments, where he and
Lady Cleveland often went, and passed
as much Time there as was requisite
for the Inspection of the Charities they
had established; over which the Clergyman's
Widow presided in their Absence,
receiving from them a handsome
and proper Stipend for that Purpose. 

This happy Family lived together in
the happiest Union, till Time required
its Sacrifice, and Death removed them
from this World to a better, before Age
had inflicted those Infirmities upon them
which render Life burdensome to the
Possessor, and a melancholy Object to
their Friends; tho' not so soon, but
that they went to the Grave full of
Years and Honour. 
Their Virtues lived in their Children. 
The Family changed its Persons,
but not its Manners; and they continued
a Blessing to the World from Generation
to Generation. 