


David again enjoys his favourite Pleasure of
relieving one of his Fellow Creatures in Distress,
with the Consequences that attended
it. 
One Evening, after David and Camilla
had separately performed even a hard
Day's Labour, they were sitting before
their little Gate, or rather Wicket; their
Children too enjoying themselves with chearful
Hearts, although with homely Fare, when
they were accosted by a wretched Beggar. 
Tattered Raggs were his Cloathing, and
pale Indigence peeped through his Eyes; 
he intreated them, for the Love of Christ,
to relieve him, and, with a faint Voice, told
the following Story. 
“How wretchedly have I been deceived
by Fortune! I was bred up in Affluence,
with a Prospect of a good Estate; but,
when I was very young, placed my Affections 

on a young Woman, in whom
Envy would have been puzzled to have
found a Fault. She returned my Affection,
and we were married; but my Father,
inexorable to all Intreaties, both
disinherited and banished us for ever from
his Sight. Yet I was far from being miserable; 
my Wife's Merit more than answered
my Expectation; we joined in
mutual Labours; reciprocal Love made
us Amends for the Want of Fortune: we
forgot our former Station, and were happy. 
“We had four beautiful Children, whom
we intended to preserve from Want, by
teaching them to earn their Bread by Labour. 
But about a Twelve-month ago,
an Uncle of my Wife's, who had acquired
a great Fortune in Scotland, sent
for us, with a Promise of making an
ample Provision for us and our Children. 
We immediately sold all the little we had,
to enable us to bear the Expences of the
Journey, and set forwards toward Scotland:
but before we reached thither, the
old Gentleman died. By all the Circumstances
we could gather, I believe he left
my Wife all he was worth, for he was 

very fond of her from an Infant. But a
profligate Nephew, whom he had not
admitted to his House for half a Year past,
produced a Will in his own Favour; and
although by all the Circumstances we
could put together, we had great Reason
to think this Will a vile Forgery; 
yet being destitute of both Money and
Friends, we had no Means of bringing
it to a legal Proof; and from him we met
with nothing but Insult. Therefore, as
soon as it was possible, we set out on our
Return: but, between Distress and Fatigue,
my Wife was over-powered, and
I lost her: all my Children too failed in
the Way; my last Support, my youngest
Girl, my dearest Peggy, the Image of her
Mother, the Darling of my Soul, perished
for Want, not ten Miles from this
Place. I am now helpless, destitute of
every Comfort, lost to every Hope, and
yet there still remains in me natural Appetite
enough to wish to be relieved from
this uneasy Pain of Hunger.” 
This poor Man's Language proved, that
he had not had a vulgar Education, and his
meagre Looks moved the Hearts of our little
Society to give him Credit. They were all 

at that Instant as much actuated by Compassion
as ever a Miser was by Avarice, or an
ambitious Man by his Pursuit of Grandeur. 
And, uncommon as is the Example, they
even forgot their own Distresses, or for the
present found them light in the Comparison. 
Scanty as their own Portion was, they could
not forbear letting this wretched Object of
Misery partake of it: and young Camilla,
who had just soaked some stale Bread in
skim'd Milk, for her own and her Brother's
Supper, forgot her Hunger, and gave her
own Portion to the Beggar; and little David,
who was but five Years old, on the
poor Man's Description of his youngest
Girl, was warmed with the Remembrance
of his chief Companion in innocent Play,
his dear little Sister Fanny, and cried out,
“Pray, poor Man, take my Mess too.” 
But even Hunger could not make the Father
(though now only so in Remembrance)
take the Food from the Infants Mouths; 
which so strongly convinced David of his
Honesty, and the Truth of his Story, that
his whole Heart was open towards him. 
The poor Man, refreshed with Food,
begged of David one Favour further, namely,
that, if he had any Barn or Out-house, 

he would suffer him there to rest his weary
Limbs. On which little David, holding
up both his Hands, again cried out, “Do,
pray, Papa, let the poor Man lay within
Doors, and be kept warm; I'll spare
him any thing, and lay more cold myself.” 
David, in the Warmth of his
Heart, was going to comply, but suddenly
recollecting, that, whilst he lived in this
World, some Caution in his Dealings with
his Fellow Creatures was absolutely necessary,
he put a Stop to the gratifying his
own Inclinations, and dared not so far trust
a Stranger; but could not refuse the poor
fatigued Creature the hospital Harbour of a
little thatched Place without Doors, where,
in warm Straw, he might shelter himself
from any Inclemencies of the Sky. 
A peculiar Chearfulness animated David
and his Camilla that Evening, from the
Consideration, that all their Distress and
Poverty had not utterly robbed them of
the Power of affording some friendly Protection
to one of their Species. And this
Accident awakened the Remembrance of
the many Pleasures of this kind they had
once enjoyed. 

The next Morning the poor Man intended
to return his Thanks, and take Leave of
his kind Benefactor; but by the Refreshment
he had received, and the quiet Night's Repose
he had enjoyed, he found himself revived
to such a Degree, that he was capable of
labouring with his Hands, and intreated
David, that he would, for that one Day at
least, give him Leave to exert the Strength
he had by his means acquired, in his Service; 
and he would shew him some Methods
of Gardening, which would hereafter
save both Expence and Trouble, and make
every Foot of his small Portion of Land
much more profitable. 
David, from strictly observing this poor
Man's every Word and Look, was convinced
that he was possessed of an honest and
a grateful Heart, and therefore made no
Scruple of granting his Request; and he
that Day, and the two following, joined
both in his Labour and homely Repast,
which he more than fully earned by the Assistance
and Instruction he gave David; and
in the Evening he again retired to his Straw
Habitation. 

But now that tall Lady with the hundred
Eyes and Ears, mentioned by Virgil, who
is well known to be the Publisher of the
Transactions of Kings and Heroes, condescended
to look into David's humble
Garden, and swiftly bore the Tale to Mr.
Orgueil and Mr. Nichols, that David had
hired a Servant: and I will not positively
affirm, but I verily believe, that the aforesaid
Lady, not clearly distinguishing the
Beggar's tattered Rags, said that David
had cloathed him in a Livery; nay, it
would not have been very unlike her usual
Custom, if she had added a good Quantity
of Lace to it. 
This Report had no other Effect on Mr.
Orgueil, but to make him shake his Head,
aad say, “There could be no End to David
Simple's imprudent Actions, whilst he
entertained his own romantic Notions,
and would take no Advice.” But Mr.
Nichols took a Step, on hearing this Report,
which affected David's Family more
sensibly than could Mr. Orgueil's bare Opinion. 
For on the third Day after this poor
Man had worked in David's Garden (and
had taken his Leave, in order the next
Morning to have pursued his Journey) as 

soon as it was dark Night, and David and
his Family were retiring to Bed, he heard a
gentle Tap at the Door, and David thinking
it was the poor Man, who might have
something farther to say, opened it, when
a strange Man pushed himself into the
House, and bid him not be alarmed, but
he had, from Mr. Nichols, an Execution
on his Goods; but as Mr. Nichols scorned
to do an ill-natured Action, he had ordered
him, if he could get a Bed there, on no
Account to turn them out of their House
that Night. 
Camilla was at this Time putting her
Children to bed; and David fearing her
Surprize from so rough a Visitant, begged
the Man to speak in a lower Voice; and
asked him, if there was any Thing within
his Power to give, that would bribe him
not to turn them that Night out of their
Bed; that he might, for some Hours, conceal
this cruel Stroke from his dear Wife. 
The Fellowed answered, that he was very
ready to fit all Night by the Kitchen Fire,
and would leave it to his own Generosity to
pay him as he deserved. David felt some
Comfort even in this Misfortune, to find
he had fallen into the Hands of a Fellow
who seemed to have more Civility and Humanity 

than, by Report, he expected to
have met with, in Men of his Office; and,
having expressed his Thanks for this Piece
of Kindness, he was hastening up Stairs to
his Camilla, when she came to the Kitchen
Door, and, seeing a strange Man, started
back with some Emotion. David was now
forced to inform her of the true Cause of
the Man's being there: but as they knew
Mr. Nichols's Power of over them, they
knew also the Possibility of his exerting that
Power, and had therefore before armed
themselves against such a Blow too much to
be overwhelmed with it; and stealing
gently by their Childrens Room, for fear
of waking them, retired to their own Chamber. 
The Reader must be very little acquainted
with the Disposition of David Simple and
his Wife, if he thinks it unnatural or impossible
that in their Situation they were
fallen into a sound Sleep. But so it really
was; and they had not been long in that
sweet Repose which Labour and Innocence
of Mind ever, in spite of outward Accidents,
will procure, when they were alarmed
by a Cry of Fire. As soon as the Sound
reached their Ears, did the Image of their
Childrens Danger touch their Hearts: they 

were flying to save them; but had no sooner
opened their own Door, than they saw the
Fire bursting from the very Door of the
Chamber where their Children lay. They
were just on the Brink of plunging into the
Flames to seek them (for their present
Agony gave them no Time for Reflection)
but running out of the House, they hastened
to the out-side of the Window, in order
to get in to their Assistance. What Words
can now describe the present Agonies of
their Minds, on seeing the Fire blazing
with the utmost Violence from the Window
of the Closet and Chamber where all their
Care was placed! This was too much for
the gentle Spirits of Camilla, and she fell
lifeless on the Ground. Her Husband
catched her in his Arms, and bore her out
of the Reach of the Flames, which were
so violent that he felt himself scorched by
their Heat. David found no returning Life
in his Camilla, and the Hurry and Desperation
of his Mind in a Situation so devoid
of Hope or Comfort, almost drove him to
rush back into the Flames, when he heard
a Voice cry out, “Where are you, Sir? 
O save yourself, your Children are all in
Safety.” This heavenly Sound reached
also the Ears of the fainting Camilla. She 

revived; she flew with her Husband after
the Guide, who was no other than the poor
old Man, and he conducted them safely to
Farmer Dunster's, where their Transport, on
the Sight of their Children, was as inexpressible
as was their Agony when they imagined
them destroyed by the merciless, devouring
Flames. 
This poor Man, who lay in the Out-house,
as soon as he heard the dismal Sound
of Fire, had flown to David's House, and
getting into the Window of a small Closet,
in which his little Friend David lay, had
caught him in his Arms, and awakened the
other two Children; but could not pass
from their Room to David's without going
through the Flames; he therefore raised his
Voice as loud as he could in the Cry of
Fire, and hurried the three Children out at
that very Window, through which he
got in to their Assistance. Young Camilla
hung back, to look after her Mother; 
on which the poor Man took her
by Force under his Arm, and, with the
other Girl running before, conveyed them
all to Farmer Dunster's: as soon as he
had delivered the Children into a Place of
Safety, he hastened back, to see after their 

Parents, and gave out that Sound which
revived Camilla, and made David for a Moment
blessed; namely, that their Children
were all in Safety. 
Having now lost their small House, and
every Thing in it, David Simple might be
said 
“To be steeped in Poverty even to the very Lips.”
And I am afraid I shall be thought to relate
a Thing incredible, when I say that Farmer
Dunster's House, at this Time, was a Scene
of the highest Joy imaginable. David and
his Camilla embraced each other, snatched
their Children by Turns to their Bosoms,
lifted up their Hands and Eyes in Thanksgivings
for their Deliverance; and were so
overwhelmed with Happiness in the general
Safety, that for the present their Hearts
were too full of Delight to admit the Entrance
of any Regret for their Loss. 
As David's House stood by itself, no
other Damage was done, but burning that
with all the Furniture, down to the Ground. 
And this Circumstance of the Fire, though
dreadfully shocking for the Time, was in 

some Degree a lucky one for David and his
Family. For the Report of such a Calamity
induced many People round the Country
to send them in various kinds of Necessaries; 
and they received at different Times
(even from unknown Hands) Cloaths of all
kinds. I say, this Fire was a lucky Circumstance,
as being a striking one: for, I fear,
had the same Distress arisen (which would
really have been the Case) from Mr. Nichols's
having seized on his legal Right, the
same Relief would not have followed; and
his Imprudence would have been more
talked of than his Misfortune. 
Neither the Cry of Fire nor the News of
it reached Mr. Orgueil's House till the next
Morning, when Mrs. Dunster hastened to
let him know the Disaster, and that David's
Family were all at her House. Mr. Orgueil
first enquired by what Means the Accident
happened; and being told that it was supposed
to arise from the poor Man's Pipe of
Tobacco firing the Straw where he lay, he
could not restrain his Indignation and Anger
within Bounds: he, in the severest and
harshest Terms, told Mrs. Dunster, that she
and her Husband should for ever lose his
Favour, if they did not immediately dismiss
from their House a Man who by his Pride 

and Obstinacy would ruin himself and all
who were connected with him. 
Now the Reason that Mrs. Dunster gave
this Account of the Fire, was that the poor
Man, from his not knowing any other
Cause, accused himself of being the innocent
Incendiary. For at the same time he
was waked by the Cry of Fire, he was almost
suffocated with the Smoke that filled
his own little resting Place, which joined to
the Back of the Kitchen Chimney. And
remembering that he carried in with him a
Pipe not quite smoaked out, he feared this,
by falling on the Straw, might have been
the unhappy Cause of the Accident. But
the Matter of Fact really was, that the Officer
Mr. Nichols had sent into the House,
drinking very plentifully of a Bottle of Surfeit
Water he had found in a Cupboard,
was so intoxicated with the Strength and
drowsy Quality of that Liquor, that he
fell fast asleep, and his Candle falling off
the Table, set fire to a Rush-bottomed
Chair, and from one thing to another the
Fire increased till the whole Kitchen was in
a Blaze, when the drunken Fellow ran out
of the House, crying Fire! which gave
the first Alarm; and, without staying to
give any Assistance, made the best of his 

Way to the first Alehouse, and troubled
not his Head any more about the Matter. 
David, in his Confusion over Night, and
his Anxiety for his Children's Safety, had
even forgot the Execution from Nichols; 
but in the Morning (whilst Mrs. Dunster
was gone to Mr. Orgueil's) he called up
the Farmer, told him the Fact, and expressed
great Concern on Account of the poor
Fellow that sat up in his Kitchen, and who
he feared (not seeing any thing of him)
might have perished in the Flames. 
The Farmer immediately went in search
of the Man, and returned with the Account
before-mentioned; and hearing privately
from Dame Dunster the Anger of Mr. Orgueil,
he went directly to his House, and
told him the Mistake of his Wife. 
Mr. Orgueil, on hearing the true State of
the Case (for he valued himself on his Candour
and hearkening to Reason) and being
convinced of the Falsehood of the Report
concerning David's keeping a Servant, ordered
the Farmer, at his Expence, to supply
David and his Family with what was just
necessary to support them. This, at such
a Time, filled the Mind of David with Gratitude, 

and he returned him such Acknowledgments
as must be dictated by a grateful
Heart. Yet could not Mr. Orgueil refrain
from loading David with Reproaches for
Pride, in his Situation to pretend to give to
Beggars, and support them for several Days. 
Although, when he heard the poor old Man
tell his own Story, he relieved him himself
much more plentifully in Proportion than
he had before relieved David; accompanying
his Benefaction with a strict Command
that he should immediately leave that
Country, and get Home to work. Nay,
he even sent one of his own Workmen to
shew him the Road, and commanded him
not to loiter away his Time in going back
to the Farmer's. 