




A Wedding. 
At that Period of the Year, when,
in poetic Language, 

Crown'd with the Sickle, and the Wheaten Sheaf,
While Autumn, nodding o'er the yellow Plain,
Comes jovial on;* 
And in plain Prose, At that Season 

when all Pleasure-hunters are following
their Pursuits from one public Assembly
to another, having almost wearied
themselves with rambling to and
fro, Lord Dellwyn arrived at his magnificent
Habitation in London. His
Lordship was in his grand Climacteric,
labouring under a Complication of
Diseases, the melancholy Effect of a
luxurious and intemperate Manner of
wasting the joyous Spring, the pleasant
Bloom, of Life. By the Assistance
of Attendants Lord Dellwyn was moved
from his Bed into a Chair, or rather a
Machine, so artfully contrived, that he
could vary his Postures, either lay himself
almost at length, or sit upright, as
his various Pains required: This very
Machine, invented for the Assistance of
Imbecility, by its Adornments sufficiently
indicating that the Grandeur of its
Owner was on no account to be forgot. 
My Lord was wheeled, by his Servants,
into another Apartment, for a
Purpose which, if Truth did not 

prompt me to reveal, its Improbability
would never suffer me to invent. 
My Lord's Purpose was to be married. 
A special Licence permitted him
to perform the Ceremony at his own
House, and such extraordinary Circumstances
prevailed on the Lady (as her
own Father was to give her to my Lord
in Marriage) to waive the Female Privilege
of being flattered, and attended,
in that one Hour of Matrimony. My
Lord therefore, in the Apartment which
he had appointed for the Solemnization
of his Nuptials, found assembled Mr.
Lucum, his Daughter the destined Bride,
the Clergyman, and all Things requisite
for his Purpose. 
A Contrast in Nature is said to afford
the Mind of Man much Entertainment. 
Imagination cannot form a greater than
that between the noble Bridegroom, and
the young Lady who stood ready to present
him her Hand, and devote herself to
him for Life, by the most solemn Vows. 

Miss Lucum had just entered her Seventeenth
Year. The warmest Lover,
with the most poetical Imagination,
ranging, like the Bee, through all the
various Flowers in Nature, extracting
Beauties to which he might compare
his Mistress, would fall short in the
Description of the natural Glow and
Freshness which adorned Miss Lucum's
Complexion. Her Eyes shone with
Lustre all their own, and required not
the borrowed Ornaments of Dress, or
Diamonds, to set them off to Advantage; 
her Person was perfect Symmetry
and Proportion; and her Neck was
the exact Model of that of the beautiful
Statue of History, placed on the
Duke of Argyle's Monument in Westminster-Abbey. 
His Lordship pronounced his Assent
to take to Wife his destined Prey (in
the Words, I will), with a Voice as
audible, as generally breaks forth from
a Mouth vacated by the Inhabitants,
its Teeth: The Voice, at that Season 

of Life, losing the sonorous, full, mellow
Sound, and resolving itself into a
kind of sharp Treble; a harsher, and at
the same time a less intelligible, Sound. 
When the Bridegroom was to place
the Ring on the Finger of his Bride,
the Spirit was indeed so willing, that
his Eyes made a Sort of Effort towards
expressing a Sense of Joy; yet was the
Flesh so truly weak, that thrice, oh!
fatal Number! Thrice 

The gilded Chain dropp'd from his trembling Hand;
And had his Lordship received no Assistance,
his purposed Marriage had
been absolutely baffled; but Mr. Lucum,
the Lady's Father, thrice eagerly
presented it to his Right Honourable
Son-in-law. 
The Number Three, even from ancient
Times, has been suspected by
the Superstitious, to involve in it some
fatal Mystery of ill boding Destiny. On 

this Occasion the learned Augurs would
have thought it unnecessary to consult
the Entrails of Birds or Beasts. A
Soothsayer less instructed than he was,
who warned Cæsar to “Beware the
Ides of March,” might have read a
Prophecy in the different Countenances
of the beauteous Bride, and the noble
Bridegroom. The very Gold seemed
endued with Sense, and as if it had
learned all the Knowlege of the moral
Philosopher Square, appeared to be
so fully acquainted with the Fitness of
Things, as with great Indignation to
decline being placed on the taper Finger
of the blooming Virgin, by that
withered Hand, so visibly inadequate
to its destined Purpose. 
All Difficulties were at length conquered; 
and every Obstacle being removed,
Lord Dellwyn obtained his Desire,
and made Miss Lucum his Bride. 
It was remarkable, that, during the
Performance of the whole Ceremony, 

Miss Lucum never once changed Countenance,
but preserved an unalterable
Steadiness, rather inclined to the gay,
than to that mixed Concern which generally
attends so young a Lady on
such Occasions. It is not improbable
but that her Thoughts were wandering
on some future Scenes of Grandeur; 
and that, in fact, neither the
noble Bridegroom, nor the solemn
Vows she was making at the Altar,
were even once in her Thoughts,
which were far otherwise employed. 
She also obtained her Desire, and became
a Countess. 
Whatever ludicrous Expressions may
have been made use of in this Chapter,
no Reader can, I think, so far
misconstrue them, as to suppose they
mean any Intimation, that old Age is,
in itself, a proper Object of Ridicule. 

None are, for being what they are, in fault;
But for not being what they would be thought.

Which two Lines can never be too
often quoted, as they are so strikingly
applicable to such various Characters
amongst Mankind* . Old Age, after
a well spent Life, if attended with tolerable 

Ease, hath in many Particulars
the Advantage even of Youth itself; 
inasmuch as calm, even-flowing animal
Spirits, are to be preferred to the
frantic Flights arising from the Intoxication
of sparkling Champagne. The
whimsical Sallies of Wit are the natural
Productions of the latter; but the
Fruits of the former are pleasing Comfort,
and settled Content. 
I know not a more amiable Sight
than a chearful old Gentleman, his
Family looking up to him for Lessons
of Wisdom, acquired by his Experience; 
and whose Authority is founded
on grateful Affection, and not on the
slavish Terror of a tyrannic Master; 
all Fear concerning him, in the Hearts
of those who are so happy as to be
placed under his Direction, being confined
to his own Welfare, and Safety. 
When Reflexion is attended with the
infinite Pleasure of approving his own
past Conduct, and the Power of Forethought
(which, in this World, seems 

confined to Man alone), becomes to
him the greatest of Blessings, by filling
him with pleasing Hopes, and joyful
Expectations. 

'Tis a Consummation devoutly to be wish'd.* 
And this is a Happiness which it is in
the Power of every young Man to
provide for himself, against the Time
of his old Age, with much more Certainty
than any of those Advantages
which Mankind labour under and
struggle for, with such unabated Anxiety. 




The Power of an Englishman of
Fortune. 
My Lord Dellwyn was in Possession
of his Title and Fortune
at the Age of Two-and-twenty; his
Father had carefully provided him a
Tutor, whose principal Charge consisted
in an absolute Prohibition of
contradicting his Pupil, even although
his Desires should be highly unreasonable. 
His Will was to be absolutely
his Law: He had 

Ten thousand Freaks that dy'd in thinking;
and ten thousand frantic Frolicks which
he put in Practice. 

From this hopeful Beginning, his
Lordship, at the proper Time, was
sent to make the Tour of Europe; 
from whence he return'd, full fraught
with all such Knowlege as 

Signifies roundly Nothing.
The Earl his Father, who had taken
such Care to give his Inclinations their
full Scope, was the first Person who
contradicted his Desires. For at One-and-twenty,
the young Man thought
it a Hardship on him to be kept from
the full Possession of his Fortune, and
was strongly fixed in his Opinion, that
the Season of Youth is the only Time
in which a Man can enjoy Life; and
that his Father, who was in his Fiftieth
Year, had reached the Extremity of
old Age. However, his Father did
not long continue this stubborn Contradiction; 
for, within a short Time,
he died of the Effects of a violent Surfeit,
and very complaisantly left the
World for his Son, as Shakespeare expresses 

it in Richard the Third, to
bustle in. 
The Power of an English Nobleman,
or Gentleman, of a large Fortune,
is of a very great Extent. He
may have a little Territory or Kingdom
of his own, where the Obedience of
all his Subjects would be voluntary; 
the Blessings of Thousands would attend
his Comings-in, and his Goings-out; 
he may gratify every innocent
Wish, preserving, by Temperance, the
best Health his natural Constitution will
admit of; he may (if he pleases) pass
through this Life with Peace and Pleasure,
and lay it down without a Sigh,
or trembling Terror; he may have the
inexpressible Pleasure of Self-Approbation,
and the joyous Hope that he is
acceptable even to God Himself. 
But no Englishman is so devoid of
Liberty, as to be constrained to accept
such Advantages. Free Choice is left
him to do as he pleases: he hath 

Power to destroy his Health by riotous
Living, and his Fortune by Gaming; 
he may half starve the Poor, who belong
to the Places where his Property
lies, by draining away all his Money
to waste either in public Places, or in
the Metropolis. No one has Authority
to prevent his destroying the Peace
of his own Mind, by all manner of Iniquities; 
he cannot be used like Children,
from whom wise Parents take Knives,
and all Instruments of Mischief. He
must be suffered to follow the Career
of his Inclinations, though it lead him
to live a wretched, painful, turbulent,
and unhappy Life; when 

Grief aids Disease, remember'd Folly stings* .
He may arrive at real and lasting Pain,
through the Road of imaginary and
momentary Pleasures; purchase Contempt,
by assiduous Search of Praise; 

reduce himself to Beggary, by grasping
at the Wealth of others; and die a
Death of Terror, unlamented by every
human Creature but himself. 
Of these two Sketches of human
Pictures, is it credible that any Man
should hesitate which to chuse? and
yet such is the Fact, that Lord Dellwyn
embraced the latter; and from
the Time of his coming into the Possession
of his Fortune, he gave a Loose
to every Gratification, that either his
Inclination or his Whims could suggest. 
He hunted himself out of Breath
in Pursuit of Happiness; but unfortunately
sought her only in every Corner
where she was not to be found. 
He eagerly pursued Pleasure, but constantly
ran beyond the Mark, and left
her far behind him. 
As the untamed and high-mettled
Steed, who scorns his Rider's Curb,
runs swiftly through Lawns and Vallies,
leaps over Hedges and Ditches, 

surmounting every Hill and Mountain; 
yet leaves the Race to be won by the
well-governed Courser, who obeys the
Rein, and, in the Track marked out
for his Progress, reaches the Goal: so
might Lord Dellwyn, by setting a
Curb on his whimsical Inclinations,
with a very small Degree of the Labour
he imposed on himself, in his
vain Pursuit of Pleasure, have attained
the Summit of human Happiness. 
He was sometimes seized with Astonishment,
to find himself unhappy in
the midst of such an unbounded Power,
when suddenly some new Idea of Pleasure
would strike his Imagination, and
drive before it all Power of Reflexion. 
The Life his Lordship chose, brought
him to that Condition in which we
have seen him enter the married State. 
In his grand Climacteric he discovered,
that to live soberly, with a virtuous
young Wife, might possibly render him
more solid Happiness, than he had ever 

hitherto enjoyed. Even this Piece of
Wisdom did not find its Way into his
Mind by Reflexion (that Passage for
its Entrance had long been too closely
barricadoed), but came in at his Eyes,
and engaged his constant Counsellors,
his Inclinations, on the Side of a fair
Object he had accidentally beheld, at
the House of a neighbouring Gentleman. 
One Circumstance unluckily
slipt his Memory, namely, the Impropriety
of his own Age for carrying into
Practice the Wisdom of his late Discovery; 
and tho' he formerly thought
Fifty was the Extremity of old Age,
yet was his Lordship now convinced
of the Errors of his Youth, and clearly
perceived, that a Man is not declined
much into the Vale of Years at the
Age of Sixty-three; and comforted
himself with reflecting, that the Judgment
strengthens, in proportion as the
Imagination decays. 
In the mean time, the destined
Bride was ignorant of her approaching 

Honour. My Lord had concluded the
Match in his own Mind, and was
fully satisfied, that such pecuniary Advantages
and such Dignities, as were to
be obtained by the Lady, in her Nuptials
with him, could not possibly be rejected
by her. 




Philosophy put to flight by Ambition,
without daring to hazard a Battle. 
Mr. Lucum, the young Lady's
Father, was from his Youth a
promising State-Genius. The whole
Multitude of Prophets, who make it
their Study to foretel future political
Events, were unanimously of Opinion,
that he was destined to great Power and
Honours. He was often the Subject of
Coffee-house Debates, and was generally
introduced to the Tea-table Conversations
of female Politicians. These
Prophecies were in part fulfilled; for
at Times he enjoyed both Power and
Honour. No Man had more Experience
of the Vicissitudes of human Life,
amongst all the great Variety of Parties 

which were formed from his first Appearance
on the political Theatre; 
there was not one to which he had
not at particular Seasons connected
himself, and, when he judged proper,
as surely forsaken. He had in
his Possession a certain Kind of political
Weather-glass, which he consulted
on all Occasions, and made the constant
Guide of his Actions; and so assiduously
he watched its Motions, that
the least Tendency towards rising or
falling was immediately perceptible to
his searching Eye. This Thermometer
was closely concealed, and some
plausible Reason ever ready to account
for his sudden Alteration of Opinion; 
for, like Hudibras's Disputant, he could
with exquisite Art, 

Change Sides, and still confute.
And, like Hudibras's Politician, he was 

So politic, as if one Eye
Upon the other were a Spy,

That to trapan the one to think
The other blind, both strove to blink:
And, 

By giving Aim from Side to Side,
He never fail'd to save his Tide;
But got the Start of ev'ry State,
And, at a Change, ne'er came too late.
Experience of his Conduct taught
others Knowlege, and he became a
second-hand Weather-glass to those,
who observed carefully with what
Dexterity he could veer about to all
Parts of the Compass. But to drop
the Metaphor. Mr. Lucum at length
became the Contempt of all Parties,
and experienced all the Affliction that
public Neglect can inflict on an ambitious
Mind. This political Star sat
in an obscure Corner, filled with the
restless Uneasiness which attends a
forced Retirement from the World. 
Surely Force alone hath the Power to 

extract from a rural Retreat its sweet,
calm Contentment. 
Mr. Lucum had a paternal Estate,
sufficient for the Enjoyment of the
Comforts and Conveniences of Life,
but not to admit of tinsel Show or
glittering Pomp; which, in his Imagination,
reduced him to as great
Want, as if a real State of wretched
Poverty had been his melancholy Fate. 
Ambition has the Property of the
strongest Poison, and envenoms every
thing with which it is surrounded. 
Time, the great Healer of the unfortunate
Mind, at length afforded him
a little Respite; he began to open his
Eyes on the natural Beauties of the
Country, and discovered that he could
enjoy the Light of the Sun, without
being Pilot to any political Vessel. 
Mr. Lucum had one only Daughter,
who had indeed hitherto been almost
unnoticed, and unthought of by 

her Father, the consulting his Weather-glass
having constituted his chief
Employment. The Voice of Ambition
had surmounted the Voice of Nature; 
and he was surprized to find
what Pleasure it was in the Power of
a Child's innocent Prattle to bestow. 
He had lost his Wife, whilst he was
in one of the frantic Dreams of Ambition,
when he had no Idea of the
Comfort of an amiable domestic Companion,
nor indeed of any other real
Enjoyment. 
Ambition, like a Conjurer's Wand,
had so confined his Mind within one
Circle, that he could no more give
his Thoughts free Liberty to range out
of that Boundary, than if he had really
been under the Power of Enchantment:
nor was the famous Knight of
La Mancha ever bound stronger in
all the imaginary Whims of his own
Invention. 

The Lady slipt out of the World and
her Husband's Remembrance at one
and the same Moment; the Day of
her Death being the Day of his Advancement
to some new Honour. 
Mr. Lucum had had the Advantage
of a liberal Education, was endued naturally
with a lively Capacity, and also
had acquired a large Share of Knowlege
in the dead Languages: at length
between the new-born Pleasure afforded
him by his little engaging Child,
and that Delight which Reading has
so great a Power to bestow, some Degree
of Tranquility found an Entrance
into his long worried Bosom. 
The great Disturbers of his present
Peace were those diurnal Histories,
commonly called News-papers. The
Days of their Arrival were black-lettered
Days in his Calendar. A Paragraph,
beginning with the Words,
We hear his Majesty has been pleased
to appoint, was sufficient to raise a 

Tumult in his Breast; he could bite
his nether Lip, and roll his Eye-balls
like Othello; for some Rival must be
preferred, because he was so unfortunate
as to make himself a Rival to all
Mankind. On those Days his Library
was neglected, his fatherly Affection
abated, and his only Refuge was fixing
his Thoughts very philosophically on
the short Duration of human Life. He
could fly to that Reflection as to an
Asylum from present Sorrow, and yet
stop there without any Consideration of
another World. 
Oh! thou squint-ey'd, half-sighted
Ambition, that canst shut in all thy
Views with such a bounded, narrow,
and contemptible Prospect! well might
one of thy most submissive Slaves, on
whom thou bestowed'st all the Honours
in thy Power to grant, weep, to
find of how little Value was all that his
Labour had obtained† . 

The Death of his chief Competitor,
in the Fifth Year of his Retirement,
contributed greatly to his Ease. It
abated the Edge of his Curiosity for
News-papers; and he then fixed himself
to read Philosophy and History, as
his most serious Study, and relaxed his
Mind at times with the Flights of Poetry. 
History afforded some Consolation,
in helping him to a Discovery, which,
strange as it may appear, was quite new
to him; namely, that he was not the first
ambitious Man who had been disappointed; 
and he began to consider,
that his Misfortunes were not singular; 
but that 

This wide and universal Theatre
Presents more woeful Pageants, than the Scene
Wherein we play* .
But, with all these Assistances, it
was Nine Years (One short of the 

Siege of Troy) before he could even
make himself believe, that his Mind
was truly calm. Then, indeed, he
strutted, and plumed himself in his
Philosophy, fancied he despised the
World, and resolved, that no Temptation
should ever allure him back
again into such a Scene of Confusion; 
but yet his Memory was faithful in retaining
the sharpest Satire he had read
against Mankind, which he delighted
to heighten; and this Practice he admitted
as a strong Proof of his being
filled with the greatest Contempt for
the World, and its Manners. In this
State was his Mind, when Lord Dellwyn,
with a splendid Retinue, arrived
at his Gate. His Lordship's Business
was to claim Mr. Lucum's Daughter in
Marriage. A sudden Proposal of this
Kind (for my Lord could not suppose
such an Offer required much Ceremony)
so astonished Mr. Lucum, that
it was some Moments before he could
return an Answer. That Ambition,
which Disappointment had lulled to 

sleep, roused itself, suddenly shook off
its Heaviness, and, in an Instant, was
restored again to its original Activity; 
and that Philosophy, which was so
lately admitted a Guest into Mr. Lucum's
Mind, shrunk, and hid its diminished
Head; not daring to advance to
the Combat against so potent an Adversary. 
Bargains are soon made, when both
Sides agree in the same Opinion* ; and,
as soon as Mr. Lucum could recover his
Astonishment, he acknowleged the
Honour conferred on his Family, in
Terms which fully satisfied his Lordship. 
Thus was the Match between
Two of the Parties concluded, almost
as soon as mentioned. Lord Dellwyn
gave Mr. Lucum some Hints of a lucrative
Employment, he imagined it
might be in his Power to procure for 

his Father-in-law; for they were already
Father and Son in their own Imaginations. 
Lord Dellwyn did not request the
Sight of his fair Mistress on the first
Visit, but left her Father to prepare her
for the intended Honour; chusing rather
to address her, when her Consent
was already obtained, than to undertake
the Trouble of what is called
Courtship; for his Lordship imagined
there must be some small Degree of
Speech-making from him to the Lady,
unless she was first acquainted with his
Design by her Father. 
Now Plato and Aristotle might
moulder on the Shelf, all their Precepts
forgotten. Mr. Lucum's Contempt of
the World, when he could no longer
make a Figure in it, was the last Refuge
his Pride could find to keep him
from sinking. Such a rotten Foundation
was naturally undermined by the
first alluring Prospect Ambition presented, 

and down fell the mighty Superstructure
into that Nothing from
which it was raised; and that Imagination,
which had been so long forcibly
confined within a narrow Boundary,
now made its Way through every Obstacle,
and in a Moment found itself
hovering around St. James's. 
Miss Lucum's Consent to be a Countess
was so entirely depended on by her
Father, that the least Doubt of it never
entered his Thoughts; but here, very
unexpectedly, he met with a steady Resistance
to his Will; for Miss Lucum
absolutely refused the Honour intended
her. Lord Dellwyn was highly disagreeable
in her Sight; and she chose
rather to submit to any State of Life,
than to shine in the highest Sphere on
such Terms; she called it Prostitution,
and heroically defied all such Temptations. 
Miss Lucum's Life had hitherto
passed in one continual Round of Tranquility; 

but now the whole Scene was
changed, and ruffling Storms succeeded
that pleasant Calmness. The Words
perverse, stubborn, disobedient, undutiful,
pitiful, paultry, were the Epithets
liberally bestowed on her by her
Father; and tho' the lively Capacity of
his Daughter had often gratified his
Vanity, yet was she now suddenly
transformed into the greatest of Fools. 
To refuse such an Honour, appeared so
unnatural and monstrous in his Sight,
that he declared he would turn such an
insipid mean-spirited Creature from under
his Roof, being perfectly convinced
that if his Daughter would not be a
a Countess, it was very reasonable that
she should be abandoned to any Misfortunes
or Miseries whatsoever. And
now his Ambition was again roused
from that Lethargy, wherein it had
been lately lulled, he saw no Medium
between Grandeur and Distress, and
determined with himself, that if his
Daughter would not shew her Obedience,
by accepting of the former, she 

should suffer enough of the latter to
satisfy his Anger. 
Mr. Lucum had not been long conveyed,
in Fancy, to St. James's, before
he determined to convey the heavier
Part, his Person, also thither. 
Miss Lucum received her Father's
Commands to prepare herself to wait
on him to London, without the least
Degree of Pleasure, being rather concerned
to quit a Place she had so long
enjoyed; but, without Hesitation, obey'd
him. He would have chose to have
seen her filled with Raptures she could
not contain; for he accounted himself
an unfortunate Father, because his
Daughter could be satisfied with a rural
retired Life. 
Nothing remarkable happened during
their Journey; except only that
Miss Lucum, at the Age of Seventeen,
regretted the pleasant Situation she had
left, and was totally indifferent to all 

the gay Scenes, of which her Father
told her she should be a Partaker; and
that Mr. Lucum, in the Decline of Life,
thought the Horses went too slow, and
rejoiced greatly in every Advance towards
the Metropolis. 




Miss Lucum's First Introduction into
the gay World. 
Mr. Lucum's Lady was of a very
good Family, and related to
many Persons of Fashion; but from
the time of her Death, and his Retirement,
his Intercourse with them
had been dropped. Miss Lucum's native
Elegance, and Dignity of Person,
recommended her greatly at first View; 
and she was now introduced to all her
Relations. Some of them, before they
had seen her, expected to find in their
Country Cousin an Object of Mirth and
Derision; but immediately perceived,
that she did not afford them many Opportunities
of displaying their darling
Talent of Ridicule: And her Beauty 

was so greatly admired by the Gentlemen,
that the Ladies too began to express
for her an uncommon Friendship; 
and, when it was known that
the Earl of Dellwyn had cast an Eye
of Favour on her, it is almost incredible
how much Respect she obtained, by
the Reflexion of that Honour, amongst
those, who, with a sharp darting Eye,
foresaw a future Countess. 
Rumour, indeed, with her hundred
babbling Tongues, had spread abroad
various Reports; but amongst the Number,
that which gained most Credit,
was, that Miss Lucum was endeavouring
to allure my Lord into the State of
Matrimony; but that his Lordship was
Proof against her Charms, and would
not be so drawn in; but her refusing
my Lord was esteemed to be so very
incredible, that it was utterly rejected,
as a ridiculous Invention, and most
People were too wise to be so duped. 

Miss Lucum, from her Infancy, was
so accustomed to early Hours, constant
Employment, and a regular Manner of
Life, that the turning Night into Day,
the flying from Place to Place, to Routs,
Drums, &c. &c. and the being Mistress
of no One Moment of her Time,
so wearied and fatigued her animal
Spirits, that she was always languid,
and felt something that bore a very near
Resemblance to being ill, yet she did
not give it that Name; and altho' the
most curious Observers could find nothing
in her elegant Form, to which
they could possibly give the Name of
Aukwardness or Rusticity, yet the Uneasiness
with which she went to public
Amusements, rendered her so lifeless
at them, that she soon obtained the
Appellation of being dull, which ran
like a Watch-word from one Person to
another; so that, where-ever she was
the Subject of Conversation, the just
Praises of her Beauty were generally
accompanied by the Words, But she is
very dull. 

Notwithstanding this Reluctance for
Gaiety, either the Fear of being rude,
or her Father's Commands to oblige
her Mother's Relations, kept her continually
present where she seemed to
have no Business, and exemplified in
her the Truth of The Spectator's
Observation, that “No Labour is so
insupportable as that of doing nothing.” 
She often slipt from her
Company as early as possible, and
came home to spend the Evening with
her Father. 
Mr. Lucum, since his Arrival in London,
had been tolerably good-humoured,
and seemed to have relinquished
all Thoughts of Lord Dellwyn. This
caused his Daughter to come home to
him with much Pleasure; but she was
greatly astonished, when she perceived,
that her leaving her Company so early
displeased her Father, and rendered
him peevish, morose, and churlish. 
Whenever she expressed a Satisfaction
at having left a Croud for the sake of 

his Conversation, instead of approving
her Conduct, he called her Fool, and
upbraided her with the total Want of
genteel Taste; and it might justly be
applied to him, what the Steward, in
King Lear, reports of his Master the
Duke of Albany: 

What most he should dislike, seems pleasant to him;
What like, offensive.




A Multitude of Wishes, attended with a
Multitude of Mortifications. 
Mr. Lucum now never mentioned
Lord Dellwyn, but by a perpetual
Ill-humour at his Daughter's Insensibility
to all polite Assemblies. He
at last drove her to seek for Shelter
from that almost insupportable Misfortune,
a disagreeable Home, by staying
more abroad; but the being thus in a
manner excluded, by the Fears of her
Father's Anger, from returning early
in the Evening to his Company, instead
of a Croud, was highly disagreeable to
her; till, by almost imperceptible Degrees,
the Force of Custom rendered
that Manner of Life tolerable, to which
at first she had been so averse; then, 

the first Step being surmounted, she
advanced another, and it became
pleasing: And, from thence, it was
not long before she was totally wrapped
up in it. Public Morning Diversions
were the last dissipating Habit she obtained; 
but when that was accomplished,
her Time was squandered
away, the Power of Reflection was lost,
her Ideas were all centered in Dress,
Drums, Routs, Operas, Masquerades,
and every kind of public Diversion. 
Visionary Schemes of Pleasure were
continually present to her Imagination,
and her Brain was whirled about by
such a Dizziness, that she might properly
be said to labour under the Distemper
called the Vertigo. The World
appeared, in her Eyes, in quite a different
Light; and she perceived herself
to be a fine gay Thing, that before,
as Nell says in the Farce, 

“She knew not.”

Mr. Lucum had supplied his Daughter
with what was necessary to make a
genteel Appearance; which, at her first
coming to Town, sufficiently satisfied
all her Wishes: But the new Revolution
in her Mind and Heart, was attended
with a new and large Train of
Desires. She was introduced amongst
a Set of Acquaintance, to whose Splendor
in Dress she could by no means
arrive, and consequently she often 

“Pined in Thought,”
Like Viola, in Shakespeare's Twelfth
Night; But it could not be said, with
Propriety, that, like Viola, 

She sat, like Patience, on a Monument,
Smiling at Grief.
For, however possible it may be to
support disappointed Love with Patience,
it is one of the characteristical
Marks of disappointed Vanity, to throw
the Mind into Perturbation and Impatience. 

Her Father seldom absolutely refused
her any thing tolerably reasonable; 
but taxed the Grant of her Request
with such a heavy Proportion of Ill-humour,
as rendered it very painful to
her to ask a Favour. It is a common
Practice of Persons, who are endowed
with the Power of either bestowing or
with-holding Benefits, to make all
Complaints of them apparently without
a Cause, by declaring they have never
refused any thing they were asked; 
but the Heart-aches that are endured
before the Request, break forth into
Utterance; and the Pain that is given
by a Compliance, which they make
more afflicting to a gentle Mind than
a mild Refusal, is a Part of the Story
they chuse to keep closely concealed
within themselves. 
Lady Fanny Fashion was a distant
Relation of Miss Lucum, and admitted
her to a great Degree of Intimacy; 
but, unfortunately, she was fond of
Dress (even in these our Days) to an 

uncommon Degree. Every Change of
Fashion, every expensive Ornament,
was continually purchased by Lady
Fanny; and every such Purchase was
Wormwood to Miss Lucum. It was
impossible for her to follow her Ladyship
through all her various Changes; 
and whenever she pleased herself with
the Imagination that she had obtained
something like Lady Fanny, by the
time she could get it made up, some
later Invention, some newer Whim,
appeared on her Ladyship, and renewed
her Mortification. Fungoso, in Ben
Johnson's Comedy of Every Man out of
his Humour, was not more unfortunate
in his Imitations of Fastidius Brisk, the
Courtier, nor oftener disappointed: 
Had the Poet known her, she might
have made a Character in that Play; 
for she was truly out of Humour; and so
totally changed, that it would have
puzzled any of the Philosophers, who
have written on the Subject of Identity,
to have discovered whether or no she
was the same Person. 

Public Assemblies, altho', in Appearance,
the Scenes of Gaiety and Delight,
are generally fatal to the inward Peace
of many of the Individuals of which
they are composed; and while the Feet
dance after, and attend the Harmony
of, the Music, the Heart often beats
out of Tune, and is at Discord within
itself. 
Miss Lucum had been presented at
Court, and was to accompany Lady
Fanny thither on a Birth-night. Many
Days were spent in anxious Preparation
for the Occasion, and our young Beauty
made there a most elegant Figure; 
but Lady Fanny that Evening unfortunately
appeared in a new Pair of brilliant
Ear-rings, of the finest Water,
with a very large Cross of the like
Diamonds on her Bosom: Their Lustre
so dazled Miss Lucum's Sight, that
she could behold no other Object; her
Eyes spontaneously rolled after Lady
Fanny, or rather after her Jewels, on
her every Motion, or Change of Posture: 

She was pierced to her Heart; 
and, by the turbulent Pangs raised
there, fully justified the common proverbial
Expression, and proved, that,
to cut like a Diamond, is to cut with
no small Degree of Sharpness; and
what is very remarkable, its Sharpness
reaches even at a great Distance, and,
while it gives Pleasure to the Wearer,
it often wounds its Beholder, who seems
too far off to be within its Reach. 
An Indisposition, perfectly unaffected,
alternately changed Miss Lucum's
Complexion into a languid Paleness,
and a flushing Vermilion; and, telling
Lady Fanny that a sudden Pain in her
Head would not permit her to remain
any longer in public, she left the Drawing-room,
and retired: But altho' her
Indisposition was by no means feigned,
yet was the Pain in her Head a Pretence
only to conceal that in her Heart. 
Mr. Lucum finding it was not Inclination,
but Illness, that brought his 

Daughter home so early, received her
with unusual Good-humour and Pleasure; 
but was not deeply concerned
with the Apprehension of Danger from
her Distemper. 
Miss Lucum, as soon as possible, retired
to the Apartment in which she
was accustomed to find Rest; but no
Rest was that Night to be found: Not
Macbeth, but 

Di'monds, had murthered Sleep:
Diamonds, as adequate to the Purpose
as any Ruffians whatsoever. The painful
Vision of Lady Fanny's Jewels was,
by Memory, faithfully presented to her
View, baffled every Attempt to close
her Eyes, and chased from her disturbed
Mind all Possibility of Slumber or
Repose. She could start with as much
Terror and Anguish, as if she had seen
all the Ghosts in Richard the Third; 
and her Mind, at that time, might be
likened to a Theatre, on which the 

Tragedy of a glittering Cross, and a
Pair of Diamond Ear-rings, was acting,
with much more Propriety than
the envious Critic called Othello The
Tragedy of the Handkerchief. 
Miss Lucum's Beauty was too conspicuous
to suffer her to appear in public,
without being the Object of Observation; 
and, as she was now pretty
well known in Town, her suddenly
leaving the Drawing-room so early,
occasioned many Surmises the next
Morning. 
A young Nobleman, who had distinguished
Miss Lucum by his Gallantry
at many public Assemblies, that
Night attached himself wholly to another
Lady; and to this was her sudden
Illness imputed by many; and poor
innocent Love (as is customary) was
accused and condemned, altho' totally
ignorant of the whole Matter. 

Many Reasons were traced, and
many Causes assigned; but the only
true one, which was indeed no-where
to be found but in Lady Fanny
Fashion's Ears, and on her Bosom,
was never once suspected, except by
Lady Fanny herself; who perceived,
from the Beginning, the Ray of Discomfort
her dazling Jewels had darted
into Miss Lucum's Bosom. 
Perhaps the friendly Sympathy between
these Two young Ladies, rendered
it easy for them to penetrate each
other's Thoughts; for Miss Lucum also
perceived, in Lady Fanny's Countenance,
a Triumph of Contempt over
her Weakness: But whatever Lady
Fanny knew, or conjectured, she never
discovered the Secret, but chose to impute
Miss Lucum's Disappointment to
Lord Dellwyn's Behaviour; who had
not that Evening honoured her with
any particular Notice. This was spread
abroad amongst all her Acquaintance; 

and Miss Lucum was not so entirely
friendless, but that the Report reached
her own Ears also. 
The first Rumour, or even Insinuation,
to her Disadvantage, that comes to
a young Lady's Knowlege, is always
attended with great Uneasiness; she
presently imagines, that her Story is
uppermost in the Thoughts of every
Company, and that Politeness alone
prevents her being treated with reproachful
Language: She imagines
every Whisper contains some Reflections
on her Conduct; and on every
Look she puts some Construction, which
tends to her own Disadvantage. 
Miss Lucum's Pride was greatly mortified
at the Report of her being desirous,
but in vain, to be Countess of
Dellwyn. She had treasured up a small
Portion of Comfort in the midst of her
Misfortunes, by preserving the Power
of reflecting, that she had had the Honour
of refusing Lord Dellwyn, and 

that, if she would have consented to so
preposterous a Union, she might have
appeared in greater Lustre than her
Friend. She praised her own Courage
for suffering all her Father's Anger on
that Account; and then to have all this
Honour clandestinely purloined from
her, if considered in all its aggravating
Circumstances, must be confessed to be
so heavy a Weight of Affliction, as no
young Woman, in Miss Lucum's Situation,
could possibly bear with any tolerable
Degree of Patience. 
The fatal Birth-night, which had
given the young Charlotte so much Uneasiness,
brought some flying Notions
into her Imagination concerning the
Gratification she might have given her
new-acquired Taste, had she complied
with her Father's Commands of marrying
Lord Dellwyn; and her Resolution
against being Countess was, in a
small Degree, staggered; but this was
not very perceptible to herself; for she
thought not on any one of her various 

Desires, except that of having Jewels
equal to Lady Fanny's, long enough to
be perfectly acquainted with what she
wished with most Ardency: But the first
time any Inclination to his Lordship became
at all predominant, was the Moment
in which she became acquainted
with the Rumour, that it was not in the
Power of her Charms to make so desireable
a Conquest. The Words, I
will not, were as pleasant to her as to
Cæsar; but the Expression, I cannot,
was as hard for her to assent to, as it
was to the Roman Hero to acknowlege
that he dared not. Her Confusion was
too great to suffer her to make any
positive Determination as to her future
Conduct; but, whatever was reported
or thought by others, she herself imagined,
that it was in her Power, whenever
she chose it, to recall my Lord
Dellwyn; and therefore her Aversion
to him was not entirely eradicated. 




An Exemplification of the Truth of
Montaigne's Observation, That we
laugh and cry for the same Thing. 
Whilst Miss Lucum's Mind
was fluctuating to and fro,
being greatly desirous at once of various
Things, which were in direct Opposition
to each other, her Father informed
her, that his Business in Town
was finished; and commanded her to
prepare to return into the Country at
an appointed Time, not exceeding
Three Days. 
Miss Lucum started at this Summons,
like the Ghost of Hamlet's Father at
the Crowing of the Cock, the Harbinger 

of Day. In vain she cry'd out,
with Hamlet, 

Rest, rest, perturbed Spirit;
for the Perturbation of her Spirit could
not be calmed. A resigned and well-regulated
Mind can patiently suffer
many Afflictions; but that which is
burthened with many Griefs, and at
the same time is turmoiling and bustling,
under the insupportable Labour
of determining exactly what those
Griefs are, is miserable enough to raise
some Degree of Compassion, even in
those prudent Persons, who, finding
their Stock of Pity but small, take great
Care lest they should spend it extravagantly; 
and therefore, 

Only wear it about on Holydays, or so.
Miss Lucum, when her Father left
her, could find no Language capable
of expressing the quick Motions and
Beatings of her labouring Heart; her 

Sighs were heavy, and she cry'd out,
Ah! oh! oh! Ah! the Exclamation
King Arthur, and Queen Dollalolla, in
the Tragedy of Tom Thumb, when they
were in a painful Suspense to discover,
whether their Distemper was Love, or
the Wind Cholic. 
Lord Dellwyn spent that Evening
with Mr. Lucum; who gave his Daughter
her free Liberty, either to remain
in her own Apartment, or do the Honours
of the Table. Her Choice was
immediately fixed; she had not Art
enough even to appear indifferent; 
but, without Hesitation, declared, that
she would attend him at Supper, with
such an Air of Pleasure, that her Father
could not forbear smiling. 
In the small intermediate Space before
the Arrival of Lord Dellwyn, Miss
Lucum found Employment by viewing
and reviewing herself before the Glass; 
her Form of Dress was several times
varied, and she perceived great Difficulty 

in giving herself any tolerable Satisfaction. 
During the Evening, Mr. Lucum
took frequent Opportunities of hinting
an intended Marriage between his
Lordship and Lady Fanny Fashion; 
and at last his Lordship explicitly declared
the Truth of this Conjecture,
and requested Mr. Lucum to defer his
Journey into the Country for another
Fortnight, that he might be present on
the joyful Occasion; and at the same
time desired the Favour of his Daughter's
Company, and that she would perform
the Part of a Bride-maid to Lady
Fanny. 
Both Lord Dellwyn and Mr. Lucum
looked with a fixed Attention on the
blushing Charlotte at that Instant; her
Eyes rolled quick on every Side, to
avoid their Observation; till at last, as
if tired of Motion, they bent down
steadily towards the Ground; and the
Swelling of her Passions became so uncontroulable, 

that she burst into a Flood
of Tears, to give some Vent to her inward
Sufferings. 
Miss Lucum had not been introduced
into the fashionable World yet quite
Three Months; and altho' she had improved
herself miraculously for that
Time, yet she had not acquired so
quick a Command of herself as to be
able, with the same Volubility of Speech
as if she had been really pleased, to
thank his Lordship for the Honour he
intended her, to be very much obliged
to him, and all that, as Mr. Bays expresses
himself; but was forced to leave
the Room, overcome with Shame at
her own Behaviour. 
When Lord Dellwyn took his Leave,
Mr. Lucum went to his Daughter's
Apartment, and entered, uttering the
comfortable Words, that he hoped now
his dear Charlotte would be happy; for
as she would herself be a Witness of
my Lord's Marriage, she could never 

fear any farther Persecution on that
Account. 
These aggravating Expressions deprived
her of all Power of Reflection; 
and, without any Consideration of what
she was saying, she replied: 
“For what Insults am I reserved!
Carry me, my Father, into the most
distant Country, where I may never
behold a human Face again; for
certainly I am the most wretched
and unfortunate of all Mortals.” 
“What! is the Girl mad?” replied
her Father. “You were courted and
importuned to accept of a Coronet; 
to roll almost in the highest Sphere
of Life; to command the most magnificent
Equipage your Fancy could
invent; a House in Town equal to a
Palace; your Person adorned with
the highest Splendor, by the Number
and Richness of your Jewels.” 

At every new Instance enumerated
by Mr. Lucum, of those great Advantages
his Daughter had refused, she
wept and sobbed louder and louder; 
and, at the last-mentioned Article, she
could no longer contain within any
Bounds, but broke forth so vehemently,
that her Father could not for some time
be heard; but when her Passion was
a little subsided, he thus continued his
Remonstrances: 
“All these Honours you rejected; 
you chose your Books, and a calm
rural Retirement. Against my own
Judgment, I complied with your
Humour; and now you are lamenting
and ranting, like a Queen in a
Tragedy, for no other Reason that I
can imagine, but because you have
been left at Liberty to follow your
own Inclinations. Cease weeping
for nothing; stay this Fortnight
chearfully in Town to oblige my
Friend, and then I will immediately
carry you to your beloved Retreat; 

where you shall freely range through
all the serene Pleasures the Country
can afford.” 
These Words would indeed have
sounded pleasantly in the Ears of Miss
Lucum, had her Father given them Utterance
at a more seasonable Time: For
some little Space after her Arrival in
London, they would have been highly
joyful; but now the Scene was quite
reversed, and they were as bitter in the
Digestion as Coloquintida; and her Father
left her in a State of Mind so miserable,
that Envy itself could not well
wish to make any Addition to the
Weight of her Affliction. 




A complete Metamorphosis, without the
Assistance of any supernatural Power. 
When such a Genius as Homer
seems to be entering the vast
wild Field of Romance, and bestows
on his Circe the Power of depriving
Men of their Senses, and stupefying
them into Stocks or Stones; or either
to extend their Arms into Wings, by
the Help of which they cut the yielding
Air, or, by another Kind of Transformation,
to make them proper Companions
for the four-footed Beasts of the
Field; doth not Homer, by giving Men
their Choice, whether or no they will
drink of the Circæan Cup, plainly indicate,
that he means nothing more than
that the natural Intoxication, which is 

the Consequence of vicious Pleasures,
has the Power of divesting Mankind of
Humanity, and of changing Men into
the Likeness of irrational Animals? 
Ovid, with his unbounded Imagination,
finds a Resemblance almost to
every Vice in some different Animal; 
into the Likeness of which he puts the
human Form. 
These ingenious Men undoubtedly
fell into this Method of displaying the
fatal Effects of unbridled Inclinations,
from the Difficulty they found of relating
common Occurrences with Elegance,
or of giving such an Energy to
their Moral as would gain the Attention
of any Number of Readers, without
adding the pleasing Arts of Fancy. The
bodily Changes they relate lead the few
into the Contemplation of the intricate
Labyrinths of the human Mind, and
the Multitude have a marvellous Story
for their Diversion. 

Miss Lucum was mentally transformed
into another Creature: From
that State of calm Tranquility, with
which she left the Country, her whole
Mind was now overwhelmed with
black Clouds and tempestuous Storms. 
An Amphisbena is said, by the Naturalists,
to be a Creature so unfortunate
as to be formed with Two Heads; the
one continually striving to lead it forward,
and the other as strenuously endeavouring
to drag it backward. It has
been remarked, that every Individual
amongst Mankind bears a Resemblance
to some Species of the animal Creation; 
and Physiognomists say, that the human
Mind hath the characteristical Disposition
of the animal Species to which its
Countenance bears a Similitude. As
no Amphisbena's are to be seen in this
Part of the World, it is impossible to
determine whether Miss Lucum's Face
was like either of those of the miserable
double-headed Creature; but it is certain
that her Inclinations were draging 

her into such different Paths, that
Ovid, with great Consistency with his
manner of Writing, might have clapped
her on a Pair of Heads, with the
utmost Facility. 
No Egyptian Task-master can in
Cruelty exceed the Tyrant Vanity; for
she delivers, at one and the same time,
Two opposite Commands; expects implicit
Obedience; flatters her Subjects
with some gay Reward of their Labours; 
and, in the End, all those Persons,
who have unhappily chosen such
a Leader, find, to their great Mortification,
that, like Macbeth's Dagger, 

There is no such Thing.
Alps rise o'er Alps, “and Cloud-capt
Mountains” are to be surmounted; 
and, when the Summit is gained, it is
as slippery as Ice; and there is no Method
to gain a resting Place, but to descend
again as fast as possible. 

The Tyrant had informed Miss Lucum,
that Equipage and Magnificence
of all kinds were necessary to her Well-being; 
and that all other Things were
beneath the Inclinations of a Woman
of Spirit. There was but One visible
Means by which she could obtain this
valuable Gratification; and the same
Vanity forbad her that Road. To condescend
to court the Man she had refused; 
to confirm the Truth of the
Rumour that was spread through the
Town, that she wished to allure my
Lord Dellwyn to be her Husband; this
was a Mortification too great to support
with any Degree of Patience. 
Sometimes a small Remembrance of a
Possibility of returning into the Country,
would appear for a Moment almost
an eligible Alternative; and if,
at that Instant, Lord Dellwyn had sollicited
her Favour, in all Probability
vain would have been his Sollicitation; 
but, on the other Hand, the Possibility
of its not being in her Power to regain
his Lordship, the dreadful Catastrophe 

of Lady Fanny Fashion's becoming his
Countess, the Fear that she herself
could not, together with that most
alarming of all Fears, that Lady Fanny
could, were Inducements too powerful
to be withstood. She lost the Consideration
of all the Consequences that must
unavoidably attend such a Marriage,
and determined to give her Hand to
Lord Dellwyn, as a less Evil than what
she otherwise apprehended. 
Miss Lucum's Determination on Marriage
by no means removed all her
Perplexity; for altho', during her short
Stay in London, she had so much profited,
that her Inclination for Grandeur
had totally extinguished all her Love
of Simplicity and Retirement; yet she
was not Proficient enough to be perfectly
versed in all the Arts of bringing
about her own Purposes; but was
greatly at a Loss in what manner to
begin the Courtship on her Side, which
was before begun on the proper Part,
that of her Lover. 

It must be confessed that her Circumstances
were aukward enough to
have puzzled a much greater Adept in
the Knowlege of the gay World; her
Refusal of Lord Dellwyn whilst her Father
was continually urging the Advantage
of such a Proposal, and she flattering
herself, that it was meritorious
steadily to resist that she termed Persecution,
had indeed been attended with
too much Scorn and Contempt; which
rendered the new Part she had now
undertaken the more difficult to perform. 
Lord Dellwyn now came frequently
to Mr. Lucum's; for which Cause Miss
Lucum went but little abroad; for she
was greatly apprehensive, lest, by that
means, she should miss some favourable
Opportunity of putting in Practice
her late-formed Resolution: Besides
Lord Dellwyn's formal Manner of treating
her, and his peculiar Attention to
Lady Fanny in public, was too mortifying
to her Pride, and she was too apt 

on such Occasions to expose herself: 
But a daily epistolary Correspondence,
expressing the highest Friendship; passed
between these Two young Ladies; tho'
Miss Lucum, still unknown to herself,
became much more formal, and Your
Ladyship dropped much oftener from
her Pen than had been her usual Custom; 
but Lady Fanny was profuse in
her Professions of Affection, which at
last became so high, that there were
very few Degrees left for Improvement,
if the Correspondence had continued to
the End of a long Life. 
When first Miss Lucum came to
London, Lady Fanny Fashion taking
more particular Notice of her than any
other of her Mother's Relations, these
Two young Ladies seldom passed a
Day without seeing each other, or
sending a Billet of Inquiry concerning
each other's Health. Their Style
then can in this Manner: 


I had many Things to say to dear
Miss Lucum last Night; but you disappointed
me by staying at home. I
hope you will not continue in the same
solitary Mood To-night. I shall be at
Madam De&wblank;'s till you come. 
Your affectionate
F. Fashion. 
The Answer.

I am obliged to dear Lady Fanny for
her kind Desire to see me, and will
certainly be at Madam De&wblank;'s this
Evening. I am 
Your Ladyship's
sincere humble Servant,
C. Lucum. 
But this was their present Style: 

I cannot imagine, dear Miss Lucum,
why you did not come to the Assembly
last Night. I had no Pleasure
there; for the insupportable Loss of
your Company made every thing 

around me insipid. I could not sleep
all Night for the alarming Fears which
oppressed me, lest you should be ill. 
Why, when you know how much my
Heart is wrapped up in your Safety,
will you ever absent yourself without
letting me know the Cause. Pray,
dear Miss Lucum, write me a Line, to
set my Heart at Ease, that you are
well: For I am 
Your most affectionate,
sincere, and faithful Friend,
F. Fashion. 
The Answer.

Your Ladyship's Notice does me
great Honour; but a little Cold and
Indisposition prevents me the Pleasure
of seeing your Ladyship often in public. 
Your Ladyship is not ignorant
how little I love going abroad when I
am indisposed; but I hope your Ladyship 

will not impute it to any Slight; 
for I am, Madam, 
Your Ladyship's
Most obedient humble Servant,
Charlotte Lucum. 
One Evening Mr. Lucum being called
abroad, on some Business of Importance,
when Lord Dellwyn was at his
House, he made an Apology to his
Lordship, and left him alone with his
Daughter. Now the much-desired
Opportunity seemed to be favourable; 
but instead of being able to give her
Thoughts Utterance, Miss Lucum
blushed, and hesitated, like Lady Charlotte,
in the Comedy of The Funeral. 
She was actuated with Love as much
as Lady Charlotte in the Play, altho'
the Object indeed was not her Lover; 
but the Grandeur and Triumph over
her Rival it was in his Power to bestow. 
Miss Lucum started several Subjects; 
but could not, with any Propriety, 

mention that which was uppermost
in her Thoughts; till Lord Dellwyn
expressed his Desire that she would
continue her Friendship to the Lady he
hoped shortly—Miss Lucum had
not Patience to suffer him to proceed
any farther; but, interrupting him, replied,
“Is it customary, my Lord,
amongst Men educated in the fashionable
World, to take the bashful
Reserve of a Country Girl for an
absolute Refusal?” 
These Words were not spoken by
Miss Lucum without the utmost Hesitation; 
nor could she have made such an
Advance to any Man of her Choice; and
would perhaps have even let this Opportunity
slip, without any further Attempts
to accomplish her Purpose, than
secretly wishing so to do, had not Lord
Dellwyn raised all her Fears concerning
Lady Fanny; and that so suddenly,
that she was ready to run into any
Danger, rather than suffer the Pain of
that Apprehension. 

This gave his Lordship a Key to her
Behaviour, which he had long wished
for: He only desired the Shadow of
some other Reason for her apparent
Contempt, than that which his Inclination
had strictly forbidden him to
behold; namely, his own Disagreeableness. 
She had now afforded him that
Gratification, and he gave Utterance to
these Words: 
“If, Madam, I could hope that
bashful Modesty was your only Motive
for rejecting my Offer, and that
the most earnest Sollicitation for
your Favour would not be in vain,
my Thoughts henceforward should
center in you alone.” 
Either Miss Lucum's Looks, or her
Answer, were so agreeable to his Lordship,
that he seized her Hand, and
kissed it, with an Imitation of youthful
Warmth. But here the Struggle between
Nature and Vanity was again renewed; 
the former being very unwilling, 

totally and irretrievably to yield
up so fair a Prize to her avowed and
constant Enemy; and the Lady's Hand,
like the sensitive Plant, spontaneously
shrunk back to avoid his Touch; and
at that Moment she almost despaired of
her own Power to keep her Resolution. 
Lady Macbeth's Reproach to her
Husband, when she perceived that he
wavered in his Purpose, and wanted
an additional Spur to induce him to
perpetrate his horrid Purpose, is applicable
to many Motions of the human
Mind. 

—Nor Time, nor Place,
Did there cohere, and yet you would make both.
They have made themselves; and that their Fitness now
Does unmake you.

So it was with Miss Lucum; but
then the Fear of Lady Fanny again
presented itself to her Thoughts, and
gave the complete Triumph to Vanity; 
and Lord Dellwyn was so reasonable
in his Demands of Marks of her Affection,
that he was perfectly satisfied
with her Behaviour. 
They made an Appointment to meet
the next Evening at a public Assembly,
where Miss Lucum knew Lady Fanny
was to be present. There her Eyes
sparkled with all the triumphant Lustre,
that having obtained a desirable
Victory over a Rival could inspire them
with. It is very doubtful, whether
the Conquest of the most agreeable
and truly valuable Lover, could have
thrown her Heart into a higher Flutter
of Rapture. Her Joy on that Occasion
was so complete, it could admit
of no Addition. 
Miss Lucum's Mind was too much
engrossed by Pleasure to make room 

for Reflexion, or she would have perceived,
that, if Lord Dellwyn was really
engaged to Lady Fanny Fashion, as
he had given her sufficient Reason to
conclude, he must necessarily now act
a most dishonourable Part; and that,
therefore, she had no Reason to place
any Confidence in him; but must be
certain, that his Conduct was solely regulated
by his own whimsical wavering
Inclinations. Perhaps indeed Vanity
had so entirely extinguished the Rectitude
of her Mind, that his Baseness to
others, and more particularly to her
Rival, whilst it gave her an Opportunity
of triumphing in her Success,
might not have appeared worthy her
Consideration. 
The Pangs this short-lived Triumph
must cost her, were also at that time
banished from her Thoughts. Our
Minds or Bodies are capable of going
but one Road, and that a narrow Path,
at one and the same time; and, when
our Imaginations are elated with any 

favourite Pursuit, we are generally so
indulgent to ourselves, as to suppress all
troublesome and conscious Admonitions,
till the Consequences of our Actions
forcibly intrude Consideration upon
us; and then we awake, as out of a
Dream, and wonder whence all those
Sufferings proceed. 
Miss Lucum was perfectly indifferent
as to my Lord's Virtues: She requested
but one Favour of his Lordship; namely,
that he would be an humble Instrument,
in the Hand of Fortune, to gratify
her Ambition, and serve her present
desireable Purpose of heaping up for herself
future Misery. 
From henceforward all Things agreeable
both to Lord Dellwyn's and Miss
Lucum's Wish succeeded: A new-born
but short-lived Sympathy; and even
that was caused by their seeing each
other but seldom: Miss Lucum was so
thoroughly employed in the essential 

Preparations for her Wedding, that she
forgot the Bridegroom. 
Mr. Lucum was lavish in adorning his
now again dear Child, even to Profuseness,
on this Occasion; for he also sympathised
with her and his future Son-in-law,
full as much as they did with
each other. A general Good-humour
reigned in all their Hearts, and was
visible in their Countenances. 
The Day was appointed for her Wedding. 
During the intermediate Space,
Miss Lucum was under the most perfect
Intoxication of Vanity: Cloaths were
bought, new Equipages were ordered,
new Schemes of Grandeur passed in
continual Succession in her Mind, even
Lord Dellwyn, for that small Portion of
Time, became agreeable; for he seldom
approached her, without securing
himself a favourable Reception by some
dazling Present. 

Visionary Schemes of Happiness,
built on magnificent State, gaudy Equipages,
glittering Shew, and glaring
Pomp, were ever swimming before her
Eyes, and dazled all her poor intoxicated
Senses. 
The Wedding was completed, as
described in the First Chapter of this
Book; and, from this visionary State
of the Bride's Mind, arose that vacant
Look, which indicated such a total Insensibility
at the Ceremony of her Marriage: 
For when she answered I will, she
never imagined that she had promised
more than that she would thenceforward
follow implicitly wheresoever Vanity
should lead; and add to the Liberty
of a free-born Briton, all the Privileges
of an English Woman of Quality. 




Human Happiness. 
Now, taking Leave of Miss Lucum,
it is time to acknowlege
her in her more exalted Station, and
consider her as Countess of Dellwyn. 
A Change of the utmost Importance
to herself, as her new-acquired Dignity
was ever present to her Memory, and
elated her Imagination. 
Mr. Lucum's Transformation was
full as visible as that of his Daughter; 
he was become, as the Clown in Shakespeare
expresses it, “A tall Man of his
Hands;” and the characteristical Description
Ulysses gives Achilles, in the
same Author's Troilus and Cressida, 

without straining the Sense, will bear
an Application to Mr. Lucum in his
State of “new-blown Honours.” 

He bastes his Arrogance with his own Seam,
And never suffers Matters of the World
Enter his Thoughts, save such as do revolve
And ruminate himself.
Lord Dellwyn, his new Bride, and
Mr. Lucum, all Three equally promised
themselves a full Gratification of all
their Desires. The Lady, indeed, when
the Time approached of her returning
home in the Evening, was not totally
divested of all Uneasiness; but the
many Schemes of Pleasure, that played
in her Fancy, assisted her to fix her
Thoughts on future Magnificence; and
yet more particularly was she elated
with the Prospect of a certain Triumph
over Lady Fanny Fashion: But that
young Lady somewhat disappointed her
Hopes; for she congratulated her on 

her Marriage, with a Politeness that indicated
no very deep Affliction on the
Occasion. 
Lady Dellwyn was truly sensible,
that, had Lady Fanny married her
Lord, she could by no means have been
thus calm in her Behaviour; and therefore
was somewhat surprised at her
Rival's Indifference. Whether that Indifference
was really in Lady Fanny's
Heart, or only the Effect of a superior
Education, which had taught her, with
great Facility, to disguise the inward
Movements of her Mind, cannot be
easily determined. 
Now each Day produced some new
Joy; receiving and returning Visits was
for some time a constant Employment; 
and Complaints of the great Fatigue of
doing that, which her Ladyship would
have thought a serious Misfortune to
have omitted, furnished sufficient Matter
for Conversation during the few
Minutes she remained in any one Place, 

without varying the Subject; and every
Company she left, found Entertainment
sufficient in criticising the Dress
and Behaviour of the new Countess: 
Many Ladies heartily sympathised with
Lady Dellwyn, in bemoaning her Fatigue,
and declared that they should
rejoice, for her Sake, when her insupportable
Labour of visiting was ended. 
No Day intervened till Lady Dellwyn
had appeared at every public Assembly; 
her glaring Equipage was known
by the whole Town, and she had the
Honour of becoming the general Subject
of Conversation, and filling up all
the Time which could possibly be spared
from Cards. 
It was very observable, that altho',
but a few Months before, the Incredibility
of Lord Dellwyn's marrying Miss
Lucum was so very apparent, that almost
every Person was ashamed of exposing
such a Mark of Weakness, as to be
duped into the Belief of so high an
Improbability; yet now it appeared 

plainly, that the Fact was as well
known before it happened, as afterwards; 
for every Lady declared it was
what she had always imagined, she had
foreseen it from the Beginning; nay,
Hints were dropped by some very extraordinary
Prophetesses, of their knowing
of the Marriage so long before its
being accomplished, that they unfortunately
fixed the Period of their
Forecast, even before Lord Dellwyn
was acquainted with his present Countess. 
It became a Matter of Debate,
whose Property this Prophecy was; 
and those Persons contended most
strongly for the Honour of having been
the first Authors of it, who had originally
the most vehemently insisted on
its Impossibility. 
By the time Lady Dellwyn had
shown herself in every Scene of Gaiety
and Diversion, the Season approached
for the Rising of the Parliament,
when the public Places, constituted by
the Discovery of various salutary Waters, 

began to divide the Company; 
which had flocked together in the
Winter to the Metropolis, as Bees to
their Hives, when the Flowers droop,
and afford them no longer an Opportunity
to extract the liquid Sweets to
make their Honey. 
At this Season of the Year some Families
retire to their Country Seats, and
are welcomed by the rejoicing Hearts
of their neighbouring Poor; who have
suffered dreary Want through a long
laborious Winter, having no other Employment,
by which they can support
themselves, but what they can obtain
from each other: A Welcome which
must expand and delight the beneficent
Mind beyond the Power of Expression. 
The Ease with which this
Pleasure is to be attained by every
Gentleman, who is endued with any
considerable Property in his Country
(for it requires neither Labour nor
Anxiety to purchase it) may perhaps be
one Reason why it is so often neglected; 

but it is very probable that many
Gentlemen would not be of Opinion
that Pleasure is every-where to be found
but in the midst of their own Possessions,
were they not unfortunately, by
the Prevalence of Fashion, too often
kept from their Youth in absolute Ignorance
of the joyful Scenes it is in the
Power of their own Home to bestow. 
But it is time to finish this Chapter; 
which, beginning with human Happiness,
must naturally come to a short
Conclusion. 




An old Castle fashioned to a modern Taste,
and made tolerably habitable. 
Lady Dellwyn most willingly
consented to accompany her
Lord to his Country Seat; for she now
apprehended, that there was no Probability
any Company would remain
in Town, whom she could have any
Desire to see; or, to speak with greater
Propriety, to whom she could have any
Inclination to shew herself. Her Father's
House, which had afforded her
a pleasant Retirement during his imaginary
Contempt of Grandeur, was at
so small a Distance from her Lord's
Castle, that there she might visit all her
old Acquaintance, the Companions and
Friends of her Youth; with whom her 

Hours of calm Serenity had glided on
through many revolving Years, without
one ruffling Storm to disturb or irritate
her gentle Bosom. 
I would not be misunderstood, as if
I intended to relate any thing so truly
unnatural, as it would be for the Countess
of Dellwyn, in her transformed
State, to have the least Inclination to
share the rural Pleasures of the former
Friends of Miss Lucum; but she imagined
she should receive more refined
Delight by displaying her Magnificence
to the Eyes of those Persons she
had once esteemed her Equals, than to
such new Acquaintance as were ignorant
of her former Situation. She promised
herself a double Joy by the Consideration
that it must be firmly fixed
in their Memory, that it was Miss Lucum
herself who was raised to so exalted
a Station. 
There is nothing so constantly disappoints
its own Purposes as Vanity; 

and here Lady Dellwyn met with a
very unexpected Mortification; her
former Friends did not look on her
with near so high an Admiration as she
did on herself: They had not breathed
in the Air of London, no Electricity had
inflamed them with the Love of Grandeur,
neither had they undergone any
Circæan Transformation; they paid
her as much Respect as they thought
her Due, but did not continually acknowlege
her Dignity; nay, her chief
Favourite, Miss Cummins, was even so
rusticated, that she attempted talking
to her Ladyship in the affectionate
Language with which she was accustomed
to express her Sentiments to
Miss Lucum. She was soon made sensible
that the Countess disliked her ill-bred
Familiarity; but, being too unpolite
to acknowlege her Error, she
avoided that Company which would
not condescend to her Peculiarity of
Disposition; and so much doth Vanity
throw us into the Power of every Individual
of the human Species, however 

contemptibly we may think proper
to treat them, that Lady Dellwyn
was inwardly hurt by this steady Behaviour
of her Friend; and Indignation,
which is ever accompanied by a
painful Sensation, crept into her Bosom,
and in a Moment drove thence all her
former fancied Friendship: I say fancied; 
for Friendship, which is real, and
built on right Principles, where just
Esteem is the strong Foundation, is
unalterable by Time or Accident,
whilst Life itself endures. 
Lady Dellwyn, however, met with
as much Flattery as she could desire
from great Part of her Neighbourhood; 
but yet, so greatly doth Difficulty
enhance the Pleasure, one flattering
Expression from Miss Cummins
would have been received by her with
more Joy, than all the creeping Servility
that others could treat her with; 
but this, unfortunately for her Ladyship's
Desires, was not to be purchased; 
for Miss Cummins could not possibly 

give what she had not to bestow, and
she had never cultivated any Degree of
Flattery in her Mind. This Behaviour
of Miss Cummins was the second Incident,
which lowered, in her own Eyes,
the Value of the Title so dearly purchased. 
Lady Dellwyn now employed herself
in reversing every thing in her
Lord's Castle, as totally as her own
Mind had been changed. She seemed
to have laid it down as her chief Rule,
to consider first what was most useful; 
and whatever she found so, she gave
immediate Orders for dismissing from
under her Roof, as being too vulgar
Furniture to have a Place there. Substantial
Pieces of Goods (which perhaps
were greatly valued by my Lord's
Ancestors) were also very offensive to
her Ladyship's Sight; they, for their
Clumsiness, were discarded, and in their
room were placed China Images, and
all manner of Chinese Figures; some
that stood still, and some that, by pulling 

a String, might be put into such
insignificant Shakings and Motions, as
made the Heads of the Beholders giddy,
when it happens that their Dizziness is
not too great before to admit of any
Addition from outward Objects. And
thus was this noble ancient Castle,
which, in its old Form, struck the Imagination
both with Dignity and Simplicity,
filled with such trifling Gew-gaws,
that it was dangerous to move,
lest some of the Clock-work Trumpery
should be thrown down and put
out of Joint; the constant Consequence
of which was a thorough Discomposure
of all the Lady's Features. In this
manner the Lady of the Mansion was
so happy as to rid herself of some small
Portion of Time with tolerable Self-satisfaction; 
whilst the exquisite Elegance
of her own Taste was the daily
Subject of her Admiration. 




Speaking Truth not only shames the D&wblank;l,
but prevents us a great deal of unnecessary
Trouble. 
When Lady Dellwyn finished
the new furnishing her Castle,
she began to be at a great Loss for Employment; 
she had now no Refuge
from a languid, wearisome Melancholy,
which is often called a Fever
upon the Spirits; she had no Food
from outward Objects, to employ her
animal Spirits, and they therefore prey'd
at home; and oppressed her own Mind. 
This being haunted with Ghosts,
dejected with an unaccountable Melancholy,
and afflicted with a Variety
of Distempers, tho' we are at a Loss to 

discover what Appellation to give them,
is very often the Result of nothing more
than a strong Imagination unimployed,
which could be all alive and merry if it
was not confined to some Scene of Dullness,
which curbs all its Pleasures; 
and then, rather than be motionless, it
chuses to be mischievous, bearing in
that respect a strong Resemblance to
the Activity of the Monkey, whose chief
Glory is to mimick Man, and who, as
far as that Mimickry goes, is a most
perfect Master of that Branch of Ridicule. 
Lady Dellwyn was now as totally incapable
of enjoying the Country, as
she was, at her first Arrival in London,
of tasting the Pleasures to which she
had then been wholly unaccustomed. 
Lord Dellwyn's distempered State of
Body was constantly attended with
Peevishness; but yet, to prove that he
had the Power of commanding himself
when he pleased, and only vented 

his Passions when, and on whom, he
thought proper, he confined the Impetuosity
of his Rage to his Servants
alone, and his Fondness for his young
Lady restrained him from bestowing
on her any Share of his Displeasure: 
But this was by no means an Alleviation
to her Melancholy; perhaps had it
been otherwise, and she had been also
a Partaker of his Wrath, an Opportunity
of Contention might have raised
her Spirits, and relieved her from her
Languidness. Her Lord's Fondness was
beyond Comparison more odious to her
than his Anger; and, if the Choice had
been given her, she would greatly have
preferred the latter; and have thought
she had made a very advantageous
Exchange, if by that means she might
have been freed from the former. 
Lady Dellwyn had now brought herself
into a State, in which she was in a
manner under an Obligation to live a
Lye; not only her Language, but every
Look, every Gesture, must indicate 

some Falsehood: She had not been
instructed young enough in this Sort
of Commerce, to have the Advantage
of Custom to lighten such an insupportable
Burthen; it was to her lively
Imagination more than an Herculean
Labour: She fainted under the heavy
Load, and consumed away almost to a
Skeleton. 
My Lord now, as an Aggravation
to his Lady's Misfortunes, began to express
a great Satisfaction in the Country; 
which he thought better suited to
his Time of Life than the Hurry and
Confusion of a Town. He was so perfectly
happy in his Countess, that it
was unnecessary to put himself to the
Trouble of long Journies in pursuit of
other Pleasures. 
Lady Dellwyn was too conscious of
the Conclusion which must naturally
follow an earnest Sollicitation on her
Part for public Places, to dare to undertake
importuning her Lord on that 

Account. The Pains she was obliged
to undergo to avoid the Appearance
of Truth, and to conceal her want of
Affection to her Husband, rendered it
almost impossible for her at the same
time to venture to declare she was miserable,
unless a Variety of Company
might, in some measure, ease her of
the Burthen of being continually confined
to her Lord's Conversation. 
At the Time that Lady Dellwyn
lived with her Father Mr. Lucum in
the Country, he imputed all his Mortifications
to the various treacherous
Parts he had acted, and therefore had
a kind of temporary Rage against that
Vice by which he had suffered so much; 
which Rage had as long a Continuance
as his imaginary Philosophy and Contempt
of the World; for which Reason
he pointed all his Endeavours to
breed up his Daughter with a peculiar
Hatred to all Manner of Falsehood: It
was, therefore, doubly barbarous to 

place her in a Station of Life, for which
she was absolutely unqualified. 
Ladies have sometimes thrown their
whole House into an Uproar, and themselves
into Fits, if their Husbands, by
any Accident, have been prevented
from returning home at the appointed
Time, for fear they should have been
swallowed up, like Tom Thumb, by a
red Cow; and the next Day renewed
the same Confusion, because it was not
convenient for them to shew themselves
that Season at London, Bath,
Bristol, or any other public Place,
which chanced at that Time to be uppermost
in their Inclinations; nay, and
what is still more wonderful, they have
expected their Husbands to be convinced,
that the Affliction in both Instances
was real, and without any Degree
of Affectation; and in fact sometimes
this contradictory Practice hath
succeeded, and they have been perfectly
credited. 

Lady Dellwyn was not adept enough
in the new Trade she had undertaken; 
and unfortunately penetrated so far,
that she was truly aukward at this kind
of Craftiness: Neither had she any
Prompter, who could give her Assistance
to perform her Part; for she
never thought of the Expedient of
making a whispering Party in her
Lord's House against him, or of placing
such a Confidence in her Servant,
as to reveal to her the inward State of
her Mind: Altho' she could not attain
an absolute Command over her Inclinations,
yet she guarded the Door of
her Lips so strictly, that she never suffered
herself to give Utterance to any
contemptuous Expressions of her Lord; 
and in this Particular, her Example
was then worthy of Imitation. 
And now the Lady was again metamorphosed
from the gay, fluttering,
admired young Woman of Quality
(the Form she had last appeared in at
London) into a lamenting Niobe; she 

wasted herself with weeping; not for
any Loss she had sustained, but for
the unfortunate Acquisition of the very
Husband she had sought with careful
Anxiety. 
There is perhaps no greater Difficulty,
than to enter into Conversation
under the Terror of betraying any hidden
Secret of the Heart; the Discovery
of which may probably be attended
with some dreaded Consequence: And
Lady Dellwyn was obliged to take
every Thought into serious Consideration
before she permitted to her Tongue
the Liberty of Utterance, lest her Indifference,
not to say Aversion, to her
Lord, should peep out and be discovered
unawares. 
In fact, whilst the Lady was eagerly
pursuing the Fortune and Rank to
which it was in Lord Dellwyn's Power
to exalt her, she had fixed her whole
Imagination on her own favourite Prospect; 
and overlooking every other Object, 

she had absolutely forgot the heavy
Tax she must pay for the Indulgence of
her fancied Scheme of Happiness; and
even that, by her own Act and Deed,
she was bringing herself under an Obligation
to spend her Life with her
Lord, was a Truth that found no room
for Entrance at that time into her
Consideration. 
This Discovery was reserved for the
Time of Leisure. And now in her Retirement
from those gay Pleasures,
which had dazled her Understanding
and turned her Head giddy, it became
so glaring in her Sight, that she could
no longer shut her Eyes close enough
to prevent its being full in her View. 
Repentance went hand-in-hand with
this Reflexion, and Lady Dellwyn would
joyfully have resigned all the Dignity of
her Person, to have been again transformed
to Miss Lucum in her pleasant
rural Retreat. 

When Lord Dellwyn was able to be
carried out for the Benefit of the Air,
his Lady, under some Pretence of Disorder
in her Head or Stomach (for every
Part bore its Portion of Falsehood) contrived
to be excused bearing him Company,
that she might gain some few
Hours to herself: Yet those Hours, instead
of being spent in her former
amusing Employments, were consumed
in fruitless Lamentations; but when
the loud Rap at the Gate proclaimed
the Approach of the Lord of the Castle,
then was her Terror again renewed. 
The rumbling of the Servants on the
Stairs, to convey his Lordship back to
his Apartment, was so dreadful in his
Lady's Ears, that it almost threw her
into a shivering Fit of an Ague; and
often on the melancholy Reflexion that
she was doomed for Life to endure the
Company, and even the Fondness, of a
Man utterly disagreeable to her, she
wanted Words to express herself, and
was ready to exclaim, with Hamlet, 


Oh! horrible, horrible, most horrible!
The more she considered, the more
Reason she perceived for Self-condemnation: 
She had no longer any Relish
for her once favourite Amusement of
Reading; and mostly she disliked those
Authors who have penetrated deeply
into the intricate Paths of Vanity in the
human Mind; for in them her own
Folly was continually brought to her
Remembrance, and presented to her
View, that, like the Clown in the Play,
whenever any Person was to be set
down an Ass, she could not help saying,
tho' perhaps only inwardly (That's
I); but such an Acknowlegement was
always accompanied by a very unpleasing
Sensation. 
Writings of Humour, by their Oddness
or Peculiarity of Characters, excite
Laughter; Histories of Wars and Politics,
with which th Generality of
Mankind have nothing to do, give an 

Entertainment of another Kind: But to peruse,
with Pleasure, true Pictures of Nature,
requires either a clear or a hardened
Conscience; which Shakespeare
has manifested to be his Opinion, by
Hamlet's Method of discovering whether
the Ghost of his Father had related
the Truth concerning being murthered
by his Uncle; making his Uncle's
Behaviour, at the Representation of a
Murder, the Test of that Truth. 
Lady Dellwyn could not persuade
herself that she was innocent, whilst she
found it necessary to lead a Life of Deceit,
altho' she had glossed over her
Actions with the Sanction of Matrimony; 
and Reading was like setting a
Glass before her, which represented her
to herself in so many deformed Lights,
that she could not bear the disagreeable
View; and if Lady Fanny Fashion
would now have condescended to have
accepted of her Lord, she would have
been heartily welcome to all that Grandeur 

and Magnificence, which Lady
Dellwyn was at length convinced she
had purchased at a Price greatly above
its Value. 




Not Venice preserved, but á Venus
betrayed, and a Plot discovered. 
Lady Dellwyn one Evening, having
had an Opportunity of relieving
the Oppression of her Spirits by
a Flood of Tears, entered into Conversation
with her Lord more unreservedly
than was customary; which so opened
his Lordship's Heart, that he freely
confessed her Father's carrying her to
London, his Pretence of marrying Lady
Fanny Fashion, and every Transaction
from the Time of her Arrival in London,
were nothing more than the Effects
of a Stratagem, concerted between
himself and Mr. Lucum, to prevail with
her to consent to be his Countess. 

Lady Dellwyn at first could not smother
her Indignation; but answered,
with an uncommon Warmth, It is an
Honour worthy of mighty Triumph,
my Lord, for Two great Men to conquer
One weak Woman* ; but then,
suddenly recollecting herself, and considering
the Appearance any Vehemence
from her on that Occasion must
have, she endeavoured to drag a Smile
into her Countenance; so aukwardly
indeed, that a Third Person would easily
have distinguished it from the joyous
Smile, which is the Result of an elated 

Heart: My Lord however graciously
accepted it, and was satisfied with her
good Intentions. 
Lady Dellwyn, since her Retirement,
had often reflected, with Astonishment,
on her Father's unaccountable Behaviour; 
which, during the Time that
her Spirits were in too great Agitation
for her to know her own Mind, had
passed unobserved: But now her Lord
had given her a Clue, whereby she could
naturally trace every Step by which she
had been duped into her own Misery. 
Mortifying as this was, yet Pride,
by a strange Turn, made it yield a
small Degree of necessary Comfort. 
Her Ladyship hitherto had pointed all
her Anger and Contempt at her own
Folly; but now other Objects started
up, on whom she could throw Part of
the Burthen; and she began to admit
many alleviating Arguments, and to
convince herself that she was not so
very culpable as she had before imagined: 

Youth, Inexperience, with a
great Number of plausible Excuses,
stood ready at hand to plead her Cause
before her own Tribunal, and were all
heard with the most lenient Candour. 
She had hitherto only felt a Disgust to
her Lord; but now she added Indignation
against the Man who was capable
of acting a treacherous Part. Many Epithets
of Abuse were annexed closely to
her Lord's Name; but this was all inwardly,
for she suffered none of them
to escape through the Door of her
Lips. 
Lord Dellwyn was not however,
even in Thought, accused by his Lady
of being any thing more than an humble
Instrument to execute her Father's Designs; 
for the last Accusation she would
have alleged against him, was that of
laying a Plot that required the least
Consideration. 
It belongs to the Avocation of a
great Politician, to know how to form 

and execute the lesser, as well as the
greater Schemes and Intrigues; and
Mr. Lucum exerted as much Art in the
bringing about this domestic Stratagem,
as if he had been managing some great
Wheel of State-policy; for whilst he
was betraying his Daughter to her own
Misery, he was also deceiving Lord
Dellwyn into an Opinion that Miss Lucum
had no other Reason for her Refusal
of such Honours, but an effeminate
Bashfulness concerning being married; 
which Assertion the young Lady's Behaviour,
when the Dread of Lady Fanny
Fashion's being his Countess had
alarmed her Vanity, confirmed perfectly
to my Lord's Satisfaction. 
On the Outside of Lord Dellwyn's
Castle, a Lover of Milton would naturally
be induced to remember his Description
of Paradise, when Satan was
first beholding the envied Happiness of
our First Parents: 

Beneath him, with new Wonder, now he views,
To all Delight of human Sense expos'd,
In narrow room, Nature's whole Wealth; yea more,
A Heaven on Earth.
Where the calm Mind undisturbed
with restless Passions, when the glowing
Morning Sun gilded the charming
Prospect, might enjoy that innocent
Pleasure which is to be felt alone; for
no Description can reach the Height
or Depth of its Joy, or convey an Idea
any thing adequate to its Excellence,
to those unfortunate Persons, who have
ever been accustomed to think all Pleasure
consists in a constant Attendance
on Crouds, and a gay Dissipation of the
Senses. 
In Lady Dellwyn's Apartment, on
the Consideration that she was Owner
of the Castle, the Lines of Milton,
which are placed immediately before
these Words, would be applicable: 


—So little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The Good before him; but perverts best Things
To worst Abuse, or to their meanest Use.
There were present many of the
Disorders which Virgil so finely and
poetically personifies, and places at the
Gates of the infernal Shades. There
revengeful Cares, inward Strifes, and
pale Diseases, had taken up their Habitations; 
but refreshing Sleep found no
Entrance. A small Voice issued from
a Bed placed in utter Darkness, where
no Ray of Light was admitted; complaining
of bad Nerves, low Spirits,
and terrible Dreams. The Servants,
with the utmost Care, could not approach
her Ladyship at the Summons
of her Bell, but her disordered Head
was disturbed; and several of her Women
were dismissed her Service, because
they were not possessed of the
Power ascribed to Ghosts, of creeping
through the Key-hole. Imaginary 

Distempers, which arise from the Perturbation
of the Mind, are, in the Language
of the Grave-digger in Hamlet,
as whoreson Decayers of the human
Body as Fevers, or any other Disorders
whatever. 
Lady Dellwyn, from restless Days and
sleepless Nights, at length looked so ill,
that her Lord was afraid she was falling
into a galloping Consumption. He
daily enquired what was the Cause of
her Disorder; but as she dared not for
the World let the Truth appear, she
was under some Difficulty to find a
proper Answer to his Question. In
fact, she was Husband-sick, in a Manner
the very reverse of what is generally
termed Mother-sick; for Girls are
so called, when they pine on being separated
from their Mothers: And, if
she had been admitted to have spoke
her Mind, she would have used an
Expression of this Import: “My Lord,
you are my Disease.” 

This melancholy Life reduced Lady
Dellwyn to such a languid State of
Health, that her Lord sent for Doctor
Small, a neighbouring Physician; who
had spent great Part of his Youth in
London, and was full-fraught with all
such Knowlege as generally passes under
the Denomination of, The Knowlege
of the World. Doctor Small immediately
discovered, that the Bristol
Water was so necessary for her Ladyship,
that nothing else could save her
Life. Lord Dellwyn was very averse
to so long a Journey; but yet was not
willing to omit taking any Method
which the Doctor pronounced would
be an absolute Restorative to his Lady; 
with whom the Doctor was become so
great a Favourite, that she was continually
sending for him, and seemed
always the better for his Presence, having
discovered that he was the best
Physician and the most sensible Man
in the World. 

Preparations were now made for
their Journey, and the Lady seemed
greatly revived, even before they put
their Purpose into Execution; insomuch
that my Lord once hinted as if there
was Reason to hope that she might
recover without the Trouble of travelling
so many Miles; but in that Moment,
a sudden Shivering and Pain in
the Head seizing her, my Lord gave
up all such Thoughts for the future: 
And as soon as possible they set forward
for Bristol. 




Contempt or Indignation against ourselves
of but a short Continuance, and very
easily mitigated, or totally appeased. 
It was that Year a very full Season
at Bristol; and Lord and Lady Dellwyn
were welcomed there with great
Respect by all the People of Fashion. 
My Lord himself appeared but little
abroad; but as he had taken this long
Journey entirely on the Account of his
Lady, he was pleased at her partaking
of the Diversions in a moderate Manner. 
The Variety of Objects continually
passing before her Eyes, together
with the Power of being in Company
whenever she pleased, somewhat
abated her Melancholy. His Lordship
was in hopes that this small 

Amendment was the Effect of the
Waters, and indicated a perfect Cure; 
but her Ladyship well knew that the
being less confined to her Lord's Company
was the only Source whence flowed
her apparent Revival; for their téte
à téte Conversations, where Hums and
Ha's, and Gapings, composed the
greatest Part of the Sounds, did not
seem calculated to incite any Degree of
Liveliness. 
There was then at the Hot-wells a
young Nobleman (Lord Clermont by
Name) who immediately singled Lady
Dellwyn out as a proper Object of
Admiration; and assiduously watched
every Opportunity to entertain her to
the utmost of his Power. This Accident
seemed to awake her as from a
Dream, and her Mind was roused as
from a Lethargy, by having discovered
a new Employment. Lord Clermont's
particular and continual Pursuit of her
was remarkable to the whole Company; 
but yet he could by no means 

raise in Lady Dellwyn the least Partiality
towards him. It is certain he employed
her Thoughts greatly; but in a
very different Manner from that which
would have been any Gratification to
his Wishes: He was considered by her
as a proper Object on which to exert
her Prudence, but had no Share in her
Affection. She was continually balancing
with herself whether she should
avoid or go to the Places where there
was most Probability of meeting with
him; and often resisted her Inclination
to hear his Flattery, from a Motive very
adequate to its Purpose; namely, that
of having a Claim to a little of her own
Approbation. 
From the Time that Lady Dellwyn
had thoroughly imbibed the Infection
of Vanity, and that Passion had got the
uppermost Seat in her Mind, she had
lost all Relish for every other Gratification,
but what in some measure contributed
to the satisfying this her insatiable
Tyrant. Lord Clermont's Addresses 

gave her abundant Opportunities
of enjoying this Pleasure. The
resisting the Addresses of an agreeable
Man, altho' it must be confessed that
she had not any particular Liking to
him, was yet a sufficient Foundation,
when she was her own Judge, whereon
to build a Self-admiration, and attribute
to herself a very estimable Virtue. 
No sooner had she got Possession of this
gay Feather, than she began to plume
herself on her own good Qualities. 
That humble Light, wherein she had
appeared to her own Reflexions, had
hitherto been an almost insupportable
Mortification, but was now put
to flight in a Moment; her Indignation
and Contempt were all plentifully
bestowed on Lord Dellwyn, and her
whole Stock of Esteem was confined at
home, and travelled no farther than
her own Bosom. 
Lord Dellwyn immediately perceived
the Alteration, and imputed it to
her being too much pleased with the 

Addresses of a young and amiable
Nobleman; whereas in reality the
Change of her Behaviour arose from a
new-acquired Liking to herself: Her
Lord however absolutely forbad her
having any farther Intercourse with
Lord Clermont; with which Injunction
she, without any Hesitation, and with
a Smile of Good-humour, instantly promised
an unreserved Compliance; only
desiring his Lordship would permit
her, whilst she was endeavouring to
avoid Lord Clermont, not to be so particular
as to render herself the Observation
of the whole Company by her uncommon
Behaviour; for Lord Clermont
was himself at that time so much
the Object of Attention, that he was
not accustomed to be treated with any
sort of Neglect. 
Hitherto when Reflexion intruded
itself forcibly on Lady Dellwyn, she
was dissatisfied with her own Conduct,
and saw a Reason for condemning herself; 
which was greatly and painfully 

alarming to her Pride: This rendered
her humble enough to endeavour to
conceal from Lord Dellwyn the inward
Dislike she harboured against him; and
the only Shadow of a Virtue she could
make herself hope she was possessed of,
was the patiently suffering, and making
the best of the Situation, in which
she had been pleased to place herself. 
She had indeed received some little Comfort,
by Lord Dellwyn's Confession of
the Stratagem contrived between himself
and her Father to allure her to her
Marriage; this assisted her to admit her
Lord into the Participation of a large
Share of her Anger; yet the Consideration
of the Manner by which she had
been made a Dupe to her own ungovernable
Vanity, and an Instrument in
the Hand of others to play upon at
Pleasure, till she even courted her own
Unhappiness, confined great Part of her
Contempt at home, and it fell in great
abundance on her own Head. 

The readily avoiding the Conversation
of Lord Clermont at her Lord's
Desire, was the first Transaction that
had passed from the Time of her accompanying
her Lord to his Seat in the
Country, which had given her any true
Pleasure, without the annexing of any
one Circumstance to alloy it by piquing
her Pride: For tho' in fact she had not
Inclination enough for Lord Clermont,
to boast any great Self-denial on this
Occasion; yet, as she searched not so
minutely, as to penetrate her real Motive,
her Compliance with her Husband
gave her great Consequence in her
own Eyes. 
One fancied Virtue is more dangerous
than many acknowleged Vices; 
for the former is cherished as the most
delightful of Friends; whilst the latter,
however tempting at first Sight, is always
attended with Shame on Reflection. 
Self-admiration, like Virgil's
Fame, from the smallest Beginnings
soon spreadeth and enlargeth itself, till 

it reacheth the Clouds; and the elated
Imagination can nourish a Thousand
gay pleasant Ideas in its extended
Branches. 
Lady Dellwyn now delighted her
Fancy with erecting a Pair of mental
Scales; in One Balance placing her
own newly-discovered Merits, and in
the other all such Virtue as she allowed
her Lord to be possessed of. Her Memory
was faithful to the minutest Circumstance
that could give Weight to
her own Side; and, when this last
Compliance with her Husband was
added to the other numerous Articles,
the Balance which contained the whole
Load of her Virtues struck the Ground
with its Force; whilst that in which
her Fancy had placed Lord Dellwyn's
Merit, flew upwards with its Lightness; 
and all the Trifles therein, like
Half the Prayer to Jupiter, in Homer,
were lost and scattered in the Air. 

This healing Balsam of Self-flattery
again transformed the weeping Niobe
into one of the gayest Figures in the
Creation. Nature adorns the Peacock
with various coloured Beauties; but
hath left the Choice in the Bird's own
Power, either to drop down its Feathers
in almost One undistinguishable
Lump, or to open and display their
Lustre in the Sun. 
Lady Dellwyn's Beauty had been
long veiled under the louring Cloud
of Discontent; but now, instead of a
reserved, melancholy, down-cast Look,
her Eyes sparkled with Vivacity, and
her whole Countenance became enlightened. 
A Stranger, and a Foreigner
to her Bosom (Self-applause) was joyfully
welcomed home, and embraced. 
Her Dress, tho' rich in itself, had hitherto
been greatly neglected in its
Form and Fashion; but now the utmost
Elegance of Taste was visible in
her Choice; her fine Hair, which
wanted no Art, was yet carefully dressed 

in the newest Mode, no envious Cap
presuming to cover any Part of it; 
nothing of less Value or Beauty than
Diamonds, being admitted to come
near its shining Lustre: Her well-turned
white Neck was covered with a
Veil so transparent, that, instead of concealing,
heightened all its Beauties: Her
long flowing Train alternately brushed
the Ground while she passed on with
Dignity, or was tucked under her left
Arm, with a Grace and Air altogether
inimitable: Dimpling Smiles play'd
around her Lips whenever she spoke,
and rendered her Conversation doubly
engaging. 
Lady Dellwyn kept her Word in
avoiding Lord Clermont; nor was she
particular in her Behaviour to any other
Man. Her Lord therefore was greatly
pleased, and imputed the Recovery of
his Lady's Health to the Benefit she had
received from the Waters. She was
was now so generally in Good-humour,
that a small Share of it shed its Influence 

on her Lord; altho' whenever her Temper
was any way ruffled, it unfortunately
happened when he was her only Companion; 
insomuch that it became very
visible to the whole Company, whenever
Lady Dellwyn appeared, whether
or no my Lord was in the same Party; 
for then the fixed Posture of her Eyes
proved they had nothing agreeable to
declare; and there seemed to have been
a Confederacy entered into between
her Eyes and Tongue, in which they
had mutually made a Vow of Silence. 
Her Charms were all so lowered for
want of Animation, that probably, had
she never been seen but in her Lord's
Company, her Beauty had passed almost
unregarded. 
There is no Person living, who, in
their Commerce with this World, doth
not shut their Eyes up very close, but
must have observed how much it is in a
Woman's Power to enliven and heighten
her Beauty to her Beholders, or to
command her Charms into a languid 

Dullness, whenever the Absence of
Pleasure, or the Presence of a disagreeable
Object, hath such an Effect on her
Humour as to take from her the customary
Desire of pleasing. Perhaps
we might hence derive one Reason
why it is so often said of a fine Woman,
That all the World is sensible of
her Beauty, except her Husband. 
Lady Dellwyn's slow Pace, whilst she
accompanied her Lord, was suddenly
changed, when she left him and joined
her young Companions, into a lively
and spirited Motion; and as she contrived
to be as little with her Lord as
possible, the greatest Part of her Time
rolled on with Pleasure, and gave her
an Opportunity of exerting all those
Charms, with which her elegant Form
was naturally endowed. 
One shocking, though unavoidable,
Consequence of Lady Dellwyn's visible
Amendment, on which she had hitherto 

never reflected, now disagreeably intruded
itself into her Remembrance; 
but the irksome Task of disturbing her
short-lived Tranquility shall be reserved
for another Chapter. 




One tragical Incident relieved by another; 
or, as is very natural, a Fit
of the Spleen relieved by a Fit of the
Gout. 
It hath been already observed, that
Lord Dellwyn had no other Inducement
to undertake so long a Journey
as that from his own Castle to Bristol,
but his Lady's being advised to go thither,
as the only apparent Means of recovering
her Health. This Purpose now
being visibly effected, his Lordship began
to turn his Thoughts on measuring
back again the Distance between the
Hot-wells and his own Seat. 
If Variety is capable of filling every
Hour of the married State with the 

highest Joy, then might it be said that
Lord and Lady Dellwyn were completely
blessed; for every Idea that had
the Power of raising Pleasure in the
Bosom of the one, depressed that of the
other with Sorrow and Affliction. The
Thought of returning home filled his
Lordship with Delight; but, on the
other Hand, raised in her Ladyship the
highest Terror. My Lord grew weary
of a public Place, which Want of
Health and Strength would not suffer
him to enjoy. My Lady dreaded the
Change from a Variety of Company,
which elated her Imagination, and at
once procured her both Pleasure and
Health, to a solitary Retirement with a
Companion disgustful to her Fancy,
and whose very Affection was displeasing
and tiresome: She had already
experienced what it was to languish
and suffer Life in that Situation. A
Renewal of the gaping, yawning Scene,
as she herself expressed it, was beheld
with Horror; and never was the old
Proverb, that “A burnt Child dreads 

the Fire,” more fully exemplified,
than in her present Fears of returning
from whence she came. 
Lady Dellwyn had now accustomed
herself to make a fair Riddance of that
Burthen, her Time, by a continual
Round of Amusement; which she contrived
so artfully, as to imagine she was
constantly employed in some necessary
Business; and she was always in as violent
a Hurry, as if some grand State
Affair had waited for her Dispatch. 
The late Laureat, in the Apology for
his Life, gives a very humorous Description
of his Brother Manager, Mr.
Wilks, and calls him The Bustle-master
General: A Term which gives no inadequate
Idea of several Personages on
the great Theatre of the World. 
The gay Disposition of Lady Dellwyn's
Mind banished all Power of Reflexion; 
by which Means the Thought
of this certain Stroke of returning
home, unless prevented by the more 

certain Stroke of “having lived,” found
no Room for Admittance; neither did
the daily dropping off of her Acquaintance
bring it to her Memory. 
This Expression of “having lived” 
was, it seems, a Form amongst the Romans,
by which they avoided the Mention
of the Word Death; and is used
by Cicero, in Ben Johnson's Tragedy of
Catiline, to inform the Senate of Catiline's
Execution. I do not say this
Flying the Idea of Death is quite so
proper in a Nation where Christianity
is professed; but I was led into it
by being Witness to the following
Story: 
A Lady who was at the Hot-wells,
apparently in the last Stage of her Life,
was so terrified by the Mention of
Death, that it was the Business of her
Attendants to caution all her Acquaintance
against using this Word; declaring
it was enough to throw their Lady
into immediate Convulsions: An Effect 

I should be very sorry to have on my
Readers. But to leave this Digression: 
I believe Music, Dancing, Cards,
and a mixed Company of a Variety of
People, who seem to have entered into
a Combination of appearing outwardly
pleased with one another (whatever
Heart-burnings there may be within)
are almost all the Ingredients which
constitute what is generally called a
public Place; and whilst that subsisted,
it was indifferent to Lady Dellwyn of
what Individuals it was composed: For
she could not, with any Colour of Justice,
be accused of much Partiality to
any Particulars. 
There is nothing perhaps presents
us with more exact, or more frequent
Pictures of human Life in general, than
these kind of public Meetings, which
periodically draw together a Concourse
of a great Variety of Persons of all
Kinds and Stations, and for all Manner
of Purposes: Here are Diseases and 

Health, gay Diversions and biting
Pains, kill-time Amusements, and languid
wearied Spirits, so blended and
intermixed that “Woman's Will” 
(even in the Judgment of Hamlet, when
his own Mother had forfeited his good
Opinion) could not with more Propriety
be called One “undistinguished
Space.” There also are Tales 

Told by an Ideot, full of Sound and Fury,
Signifying nothing!
There also are poor Players, 

That strut, and fret their Hour upon the Stage,
And then are heard no more!
Players who perform their Parts to deceive
themselves only: They differ indeed
widely, in some Circumstances,
from their Brother Comedians on the
Theatres of Covent-garden and Drury-lane; 
both exert themselves to excite
Laughter in their Spectators; but these 

are so generous as to bestow all their Labour
gratis; they act, like Gentlemen,
for their own Diversion: They defray
all the Expence themselves, unless it
happens that their Friends, or Posterity,
contribute towards it, without
their Consent; their Inclinations not
having been consulted. 
Pale Spectres crawl from the Card or
Billiard Tables one Moment, and vanish
the next, like Ghosts, and become
Lumps of Clay. This Consideration
pursued would naturally lead to Reflexions,
that might perhaps be thought
too grave: I will therefore imitate the
Politeness of Dame Quickly, who,
whilst there was the least remaining
Hope of the Life of her Friend Sir
John Falstaff, endeavoured to comfort
him with the Consideration, that “there
was no Need to think upon God as
yet.” 
The gayest, the most covetous, or
the most ambitions Disposition, in the 

midst of the most earnest Pursuit of
Pleasure, Money, or Honours, could
not possibly be more displeased at being
reminded that this World is not a lasting
Home, than Lady Dellwyn was at
her Lord's reminding her, that his
Castle was her proper Habitation: He
threw out some such broad Hints of an
intended Journey thither, as could not
be easily misunderstood; for he even
mentioned, that he now thought it
necessary to fix the Time for that Purpose. 
It is amazing with what Velocity all
Lady Dellwyn's Indispositions were returning; 
and there seemed to be a
great Probability of her growing much
worse than ever; when a violent Fit
of the Gout, seizing his Lordship's great
Toe, put an absolute Negative on his
intended Journey, and stopped the
Progress of his Lady's Relapse into all
the Distempers which she came to
Bristol to remove. 

Again was exemplified the Truth of
the foregoing Observation, on the total
Want of Sympathy between Lord Dellwyn
and his Lady; for the Pain he suffered
prevented the Approach of the
Evil she dreaded, and his Illness gave
her Health and Spirits. But here I
would not be understood as if I intended
to accuse Lady Dellwyn of an
ill-natured Delight in her Lord's Sufferings; 
her Spirits were revived by
the Gratification of her Love only; of
that Kind of Love, which is always to
be found in great Abundance in those
Bosoms which never harbour any
other; a Love of indulging her own
Humour, a Self-complaisance, which
gave her great Satisfaction from any
Incident which could be conducive to
her won desired Purpose. My Lord's
Gout appeared to her exactly in the
same Point of Light, as if the Overflowing
of the Water, or any other
Accident, had prevented her dreaded
Journey. 

When Lord Dellwyn was afflicted
with the Gout at home, and his Lady
was in her mortified State, lamenting
and repenting her own Folly, whilst
her Mind had contracted such a gloomy
Melancholy, as rendered her incapable
of any Delight; she was as willing to
be languid and uneasy in his Apartment,
as in any other Part of her hated
Home. She endeavoured to behave
as well as she possibly could, in a Situation
in which Truth was never on any
Account to appear; but now she might
say, with the Cobler's Wife transformed
into the fine Lady, in the Play, 

The Scene is chang'd, I'm alter'd quite:
For Engagement arose on Engagement; 
her Imagination was on the
Wing, flying daily after new Pleasures; 
and nothing but absolute Force could
have confined her to an Attendance on
Sickness and Complaint. 

When Lord Dellwyn determined to
make Miss Lucum his Countess, he had
not once suffered the Possibility of her
desiring any Pleasures separate from
his to approach his Thoughts; and
therefore the greater was his present
Disappointment. His Lordship was
naturally of an impatient Disposition; 
his Will from his Infancy was permitted
to range with an uncontrouled Licence: 
Pain now increased the Impetuosity
of his Temper, and any Disappointment
was too rugged and too unusual
to be endured by him with any
tolerable Degree of Patience. 
Now therefore Lord Dellwyn began
to apply a Receipt for his Lady's Delight
in going abroad, which has ever
been known experimentally to fail of
its intended Purpose; and yet in the
same Circumstance is, and, I believe,
without pretending to any great Share
of Foreknowlege, I may say, will be
always applied. 

Time, Fashion, later Discoveries,
with many other Accidents, may very
possibly throw out of Use the most ingenious
mortal Invention; but every
Receipt, which derives its Original
from nature herself, is always remembered,
and put in Practice, by all
her Sons in the same Situation: And
now my Lord Dellwyn, in order to engage
his Lady to loved his Company,
grew churlish, morose, and peevish; 
which had the usual Effect, and made
the Entrance under his Roof her absolute
Abhorence. 




Several Methods of conveying our Ideas,
by diversifying the Use of Language. 
There are Three Ways of
Communication of the human
Species by Speech: The First is that
of talking Face to Face; which seems
the best calculated for the Pleasure
of friendly Intercourse: The Second
deals in talking of one another
when absent; and this is much the
safest Way of venting Abuse; as a Man
may without Danger, by this Method,
murther as many Reputations as Bobadill
could Bodies: The Third is a Kind
of a middle Way between both; which,
according as it is managed, may be
turned to any Purpose. It is a Method
of talking at one another; that 

is, when we make Choice of some absent
Person, whose Character we describe,
intending thereby covertly to
convey our Thoughts of some of the
present Company; and by this means
we may either make a Compliment so
elegant, as to extract from it every gross
or fulsome Part, or dart the most malignant
Satire on any of our Companions; 
which, should they attempt seriously
to resent, it is easy to stare,
wonder what they mean, and thus
skulk behind the absent Person, whose
Name is borrowed on these Occasions,
like the ancient Heroes behind the
Shields formed by Vulcanian Hands. 
There is Reason to believe this Manner
of Conversation is of polite Invention; 
because it never arrived at Billingsgate,
Wapping, or any of the most
celebrated Seminaries of Abuse. Indeed
 is no Shield wanting, where no
Weapons but Fists are used; nor any
covert Method necessary, where Scolding
flows with vulgar Eloquence in its
own native Colours, and vulgar Ideas 

are naturally dressed in their own
brawling Phrases and coarse Language. 
There was at that time at Bristol a
Gentleman and his Lady, whose Names
were Saunders; who entered into the
State of Matrimony with a mutual Affection,
and who seemed to be much
more properly matched than is the general
Fate of Mankind: An uncommon
Share of Beauty adorned them
both, and a lively and strong Capacity
rendered them reciprocally agreeable
to each other: Their Friends were always
welcome; but the Addition of
more Company was never necessary to
their Happiness. Their Fortune was
full sufficient to support them in every
desirable Indulgence; and they were
so reasonable, as, with all these Advantages,
to be perfectly satisfied. The
Content of their Minds rendered their
Dispositions as excellent, as were either
their elegant Forms, or good Understandings. 
Mrs. Saunders was remarkable 

for an uncommon Vivacity when
her Husband was present, as Lady Dellwyn
was (her Lord being in Sight) for
the contrary. 
When Lord Dellwyn had an Inclination
to vent his Spleen on his Lady,
by the Method of Conversation above-mentioned,
and was talking at her, he
generally chose Mrs. Saunders, as the
Person whose Praises were continually
sounded to Lady Dellwyn's Reproach. 
Many times she passed this over without
returning any Answer; but rather
smiling to herself at the Thought of
Lord Dellwyn's forgetting the great
Difference there was between Mr.
Saunders and himself. 
Lady Dellwyn promised her Lord
one Day to stay at home, if he would
permit her to invite Company to Dinner. 
She selected her favourite Acquaintance; 
and particularly a young
Gentleman lately arrived, whom she
had marked in her Mind as worthy of 

exciting her Endeavours to gain his
Admiration: For she was pleased to
have a large Train of respectful Admirers; 
who expected nothing more
than now-and-then a gracious Smile
for their Attendance; altho' she was
not particular in her Behaviour to any
one of them. 
My Lord soon began to trumpet
forth the Praises of Mrs. Saunders,
more especially enumerating all those
Virtues in which he thought his Lady
most deficient; and exclaiming greatly
on the Happiness of Mr. Saunders, in
having a Wife with such excellent Qualifications. 
Honest Praise, under which
no lurking Satire is couched, is, I believe,
always attended with a placid
Countenance; but my Lord cast a Look
on his Lady, which sufficiently indicated
his Meaning. 
Whenever this kind of Conversation
happens between Man and Wife, all
those Persons present, who are endued 

with Modesty and Good-nature, are
confounded and ready to blush for the
Folly of those who have not Decency
enough to blush for themselves: But
where the true Love of Laughter
dwells, it gives a fine Opportunity for
the highest Ridicule; which is enjoyed
inwardly while present, and
vented in all Companies as soon as
absent. The whole Company sat looking
down on their Plates, not daring to
look up, and were in great Confusion; 
except Lady Dellwyn herself, whose
Indignation was then her uppermost
Passion; and she replied with an uncommon
Degree of Warmth: 
“My Lord, I have somewhere
read, or heard, a Story of an Army,
which, after having lost a Battle, either
by the Cowardice or Misconduct
of its Leader, declared, that
if it could change Generals, it
would willingly fight the Battle
over again; and should be under no
manner of Apprehension, but that, 

under such a Commander, it should
prove its Bravery, and come off Conqueror.” 
The proper Infant of Time being
chose for the Introduction of this
Story, and the significant Look that
Lady Dellwyn darted at her Lord, rendered
the Application of it too obvious
to be mistaken by an Infant. 
The Company was chiefly composed
of the Young and Gay; who naturally
enjoyed Lord Dellwyn's Confusion,
and his Lady's triumphant Countenance. 
The real Contrast Nature had,
made between his Lordship and Mr.
Saunders, could not be brought to his
View, without his being very uneasy
at the Comparison. He chose not to
behold it; but would have continued
for ever satirizing his Lady with the
Virtues of Mrs. Saunders; well satisfied,
that if she had been his Wife, her Behaviour
to him would have been the
same as it was to her present Husband 

had not Lady Dellwyn held up a Glass
before him, in which she forced him to
view himself in the same Piece with
Mr. Saunders; so artfully managing it,
that the whole Company could behold
the Two Figures at Length. Lord
Dellwyn's Eyes had been accustomed to
turn all the Objects of Nature into Profiles,
to look but on one Side, and on
that only which his Inclination prompted
him to behold; and a whole Face
was to him a Kind of Prodigy. 
The Dissimulation which Lady
Dellwyn had chose to bring herself
under a Necessity of putting on, had
been to her a Labour almost insupportable; 
for to no one Thought that
was uppermost in her Mind had she
dared to give Utterance. The Body,
by being stretched to its Height, and
properly exercised, grows and invigorates; 
but by continual Stooping, and
remaining in the Posture, we may cramp
ourselves, shrink our Sinews, and dwindle
into Dwarfs. So the Mind, by exerting 

its Faculties, may enlarge its Capacity,
and invigorate the Understanding; 
but when every Thought is confined,
and every Effort of the Imagination
damped, the Mind is cramped,
and shrinks into a dwarfish Nothing. 
This eligible Life had Lady Dellwyn
long led; nor did she dare to be totally
silent, lest through her Silence her
Contempt should appear: But now she
was growing by degrees into that Sort
of Character, which seems to be intended
by the Appellation of, A Woman
of Spirit, she scorned any longer
to give herself the Trouble of concealing
her Thoughts; and her Sentiments
of her Lord were generally very apparent
in her Conversation. 
Lord Dellwyn, with the Exception
only of her going abroad and leaving
him alone more than he chose, had
hitherto had no great Reason to be displeased
with her Behaviour; her Coquetry
with Lord Clermont, as she so
readily complied with her Lord's Desire 

on that Occasion, had rather given
her an Opportunity of making a Merit
for herself in her Lord's Eyes: But now
when he was peevish with Pain, and ready
to take fire at every the least Provocation,
this spirited Reply of his Lady's roused
him to Anger; and from that Moment
a certain Degree of Hatred towards
her took place in his Bosom, and
for the first time helped him to discover
that, which had never been a Secret
to any of his Acquaintance but
himself; namely, that he had not
done a very prudent Action in marrying
Miss Lucum. 
This Discovery had often been the
Subject of great Mirth and Ridicule to
others; but yet was entirely new to
his Lordship, and sensibly piqued his
Pride; disappointing all his reasonable
Hopes of Purchasing the Affections of
a young Beauty by his Pomp and Title. 
He was now full of Indignation; and
as he found, that notwithstanding all
his Expences, he was as far from having 

secured his Lady's Affections as
ever, he grew niggardly to her Pleasures; 
and by a repeated Refusal of
her Requests, opened her Eyes also
to behold a Matter of Fact, on which
she had never yet reflected: For
Experience shewed her, that she had
not, by marrying a Man of a large
Fortune, obtained any great Proportion
of Property which she could call
her own, or command at her Pleasure. 
The Soliloquy continually passing and
repassing in the Thoughts of Lord
Dellwyn, was in Substance as follows: 
Have I raised a young Woman of
plebeian Rank to almost the highest
Sphere in this Country? Have I, for
her Sake, connected myself with her
Father when he was despised and
abandoned by the rest of Mankind? 
Have I been so profuse to her Pleasures,
that she might have spent my 

Fortune at her Will? And for all these
great Advantages on her Side, I have
requested only her Love and Affection,
and that she should delight in my Company. 
Small Favours surely, in comparison
of those I have conferred on her: 
And do I now at last find myself utterly
displeasing in her Eyes? 

Oh! Ingratitude, Ingratitude! base Ingratitude!
Lady Dellwyn had her Soliloquy also; 
and I believe her Ideas will be
pretty exactly expressed in Words to
this Effect: 
Have I been basely betrayed to marry
a Man whose Person I detest, whose
Conversation I lothe, and whose Understanding
I despise? Have I, at his
Request, avoided Lord Clermont, whom
I could easily perceive was in Love with
me with the greatest Sincerity? Have
I facilitated my Bloom and Beauty,
which might have gained me Lovers 

of equal Rank with that of this proud
Lord, whom I have been foolishly perswaded
to gratify? And doth he now,
for all these invaluable Favours, grow
covetous to my Expences, and morosely
refuse me my very reasonable Requests? 

Oh! Ingratitude, Ingratitude base Ingratitude!
Thus, tho' Lord and Lady Dellwyn
differed so widely in their Sentiments,
yet, from various Premises, they each
drew the same Conclusion; and now,
in their new Manner of talking at each
other, the Ingratitude of Mankind was
their general Exclamation: And 

They talk'd about it, Goddess, and about it,
till they confused themselves, and all
others, whose unfortunate Lot it was
to converse with them both together. 

They were now truly become Two
unamiable Figures; for on the one
hand might be seen (to speak plainly)
a haughty, discontented, extravagant
Wife; and on the other, a morose, covetous,
and disappointed Husband. But
a little to soften the Harshness of these
Ideas, and to use Expressions which
sound more polite, it may be said, that
Lord Dellwyn was candid enough to
acknowlege his Error in marrying, and
prudently considerate of Futurity in
this World at the Age of Sixty-three; 
and that his Countess was become a
Lady of Spirit. 

The END of the First Book.