


In which is some very good News. 
And now a Gleam of Comfort opened
itself to the View of David Simple; for
he received a Letter from Valentine, that his
present Prospect of Success was much beyond
his warmest Expectations; and he
doubted not but that in a short Time they
should all be as happy as they could be made
by a plentiful Fortune. 
This Letter, though wrote very soon
after Valentine received the News of the
Death of his only and greatly beloved Child,
dwelt not on that melancholy Subject,
but was rather calculated to inspire the
Minds of those to whom it was sent, with
a chearful Hope of future Success. In it
there were no Professions of Friendship, no
Promises of lending or giving, but it was
all writ in the plural Number, “if WE succeed,” 
and “WE shall be happy,”— 
considering them all as one united Family. 
This, perhaps, would have been very marvellous 

in the Eyes of many Persons; but
when David and Camilla looked within it,
it did not in the least appear to them in the
Light of a Miracle. 
As extreme Poverty had been one of the
principal Comforts to Camilla on the Death of
her Father, since by that alone she could be
secured from the agonizing Grief or seeing
him want; so, on the least glimmering Ray
of good Fortune, the Thought that her Father
could not share it, was an additional Sting to
his Death: but her Husband, as usual, kindly
exerted his Understanding to comfort her,
by shewing her how absurd it was to imagine
that any Success or Prosperity in this
World could make her Father amends for
being again loaded with Age and Infirmities; 
and especially as she had Hopes in
another Life, and believed that he was now
in a State of Happiness. And as by this
Conversation it plainly appeared to Camilla,
it was not her Father's Loss, but that of her
own Pleasure, she was deploring, she had such
a Sense of her indulgent Husband's Kindness,
that her Mind yielded to the Strength
of his Reasoning, and she was comforted. 
It is, perhaps; not very common to meet
with Persons really desirous to perform that 

friendly Office of bestowing Comfort; but
to find Persons with Minds gentle enough
to receive it, is, perhaps, yet more uncommon. 
At first Sight there does not appear
any thing extraordinary in what Milton affirms
of Eve, 
So chear'd he his fair Spouse, and she was CHEAR'D.
And yet, with a very little Consideration,
built on Experience, I believe no very judicious
Person could imagine Milton would
have said so of our common Mother after
the Fall; undoubtedly he would rather
have said, 
So chear'd he his fair Spouse, and she was CLUMM.
Had Camilla's Grief been vented in Clamour,
or stamped with any visible Mark of
Affectation, David would not have attempted
the impossible Task of curing it; but as
he was satisfied of her Innocence and Simplicity,
and as he never despised any little
Weakness which had unguardedly crept into
her Mind, he consequently always generously
removed any such Weakness. 

But now as Mr. Orgueil, by his late Act
of Kindness, had again fixed David's Chains,
and as David's chief Pleasure was to communicate
good News, he shewed, to this
his new-revived Friend, Valentine's Letter; 
for as he considered Orgueil as the Means of
his Brother's good Fortune, he thought he
had a Right to the first Information of it; 
and he also asked his Opinion, whether it
was not possible for him to raise some Money
on this Prospect of Success. Orgueil
looked first exceeding pleased, as thinking
he was the Author of this Success—and
then exceeding thoughtful. Immediately he
began to consult his Rule of Rectitude, and
at last, as if he had just received an Answer
from his Oracle, delivered to David this
formal Opinion, That if by this Prospect
he could raise any little Money, great Interest
would certainly be extorted for it; and
therefore the Acceptance of it would be very
injudicious; and added his Advice, that he
should by no Means think of so indiscreet a
Proceeding. David was going to reply, by
putting him in Mind of a Circumstance,
which he seemed to have forgot, namely,
that his Family wanted Money, not for any
thing that would do as well half a Year afterwards,
but for the very Staff of Life, 

even Bread itself, daily Bread. But before
he could utter his Words, Mr. Orgueil recollecting
some Business of great Consequence,
which demanded his immediate
Attendance, begged David's Excuse, and
retired to his Study. 
Perhaps this Business of Consequence
might be a kind Pretence, in order to leave
his Advice the deeper impressed on David's
Mind; for Mr. Orgueil mistook his own
Meaning, when he called it Advice, for he
in Reality designed it as a Command; and,
whether or no his Commands were practicable,
yet he expected the strictest Obedience
to them. 
This Manner of Orgueil's was no small
Addition to David's other Burthens; for he
never proposed any one Scheme for his own
Advantage, without meeting with Orgueil's
Disapprobation: and yet, if, finding himself
thus in Chains, he pretended to exert
any Freedom, or take any one Step without
consulting Mr. Orgueil's inward Oracle,
that too was Matter of the highest Offence. 
Perhaps the essential Difference between
Mr. Orgueil and David did not so much arise 

from their differing in Judgments, as from
the Disagreement of their Inclinations; for
whenever David thought of worldly Affairs,
or talked to Mr. Orgueil of them, his
Childrens and his Camilla's Wants, were
present to his Mind; his Wishes were all
centered in their Relief, and his Thoughts
fixed on the most probable Method for that
Purpose: whilst, on the contrary, Mr. Orgueil's
Wishes were all centered in keeping
up to his Rule of Rectitude, in giving such
Advice as might preserve and increase his
Admiration of his own Wisdom, and still
retain the Man he called his Friend in Slavery
and Dependance. No Wonder, then,
that two Men, setting out with such opposite
Views, should never join in their Opinions. 
Such Conversations always left David in
the highest Perplexity; for he found all
Orgueil's Discourse led to something of
which he had no Image, and tended not in
the least to promote the strongest Wishes
of his Heart: yet he could not forget that
it was through Orgueil's Means his dear
Valentine had now that Prospect of Success,
which gave him the pleasing Hopes of once
more renewing their former happy Union. 
Orgueil also continually professed himself so 

much his Friend, that David found it very
difficult, whilst that Word (the utmost
Force of which he so well knew) was sounding
in his Ears, to believe, that whilst Orgueil's
Power to relieve him was unbounded,
nothing could well be further from his
Inclinations. 
Orgueil immediately informed his Wife
of Valentine's Letter. She smiled, or rather
sneered; for, indeed, the Image of Cynthia's
Success did not much incline her to a Smile
of Pleasure. Mr. Orgueil also told her the
Advice he had given David; and in relating
the Conversation that had passed between
them, he often let drop the Words
IF Valentine should have this Success, and
IF he should generously bestow some Part
of his Fortune on David; which Mrs. Orgueil
greedily catched at, and said, “Indeed,
Mr. Orgueil, you are in the right
to make that IF. I don't know how
David and Camilla may be imposed on; 
but I know the Art of Cynthia too well
to imagine she will suffer her Husband
to ruin himself on their Account. Hitherto
Cynthia was well pleased to live
with them as one common Family, because
it was for her own Interest, I don't
believe the World contains so cunning, 

so artful a Woman. I always had some
Compassion for poor Camilla, because I saw
she was so egregiously imposed on. Now
I doubt not but her own Prosperity and
her Friends Distress will unfold all the
Treachery of Cynthia's Heart, though
perhaps she will still find some Evasions
to impose on poor Camilla; for Camilla is
very harmless, but, poor Thing, she is
very silly. I thank my Stars, Cynthia
could never impose on me with all her
Art; and I doubt not but that is the
true Reason of the inveterate Hatred she
has taken to me, and all my Family. 
Heaven forbid! any thing belonging to
me should ever be in her Power! but I
despise her—I think Contempt is the
only Treatment she deserves.” 
Mrs. Orgueil ran on a great deal more to
the same Purpose, often endeavouring with
all her Might to force a Laugh against Nature,
and at last concluded with a Supposition,
that David was too wise in his own
Conceit, to follow the Advice of his
Friends. 
Mrs. Orgueil (as has been observed in the
Introduction) was the first Proposer of Mr.
Orgueil's providing, as it was thought, for 

Valentine and Cynthia; nay, she even pursued
it with a very remarkable Eagerness. 
She had, no doubt, her Reasons for it; 
but it would be an over-strained Complaisance
to impute it to Kindness: it is rather
more probable, that to separate Cynthia and
Camilla was one of her Motives: for she
knew, that though they might have Resolution
enough to bear such a Separation for
each other's Interest, yet nothing but absolute
Necessity could prevail on them to
consent to undergo so very irksome a Task. 
Then she imagined that; Cynthia being absent,
she could impose whatever she pleased
on Camilla. It is with Reluctance I must
relate her strongest Motive, but certain it
it is that her chief Eagerness for Valentine
and Cynthia's going to Jamaica displayed itself,
when a Gentleman, just come from
thence, had related that the Place was very
unhealthy, and that many of the English
had lately died there, from the extreme
Heat of the Climate. But this Motive lay
too deep in Mrs. Orgueil's Breast even for
her own Discovery of it; and she would
have started as strongly at the most distant
Step towards Murder, as the most tender-hearted
Creature upon Earth; yet had she
asked her own Heart the Question, she
could not deny but she really thought it not 

very probable that Cynthia should be able
to struggle against the violent Heat of that
Climate, as nothing was more apt to weaken
her Constitution. 
But Mrs. Orgueil always concealed from
her Husband her inveterate, inexorable Hatred
to Cynthia. She confessed a Dislike to
her; but he was to believe that Dislike proceeded
from Judgment, and not from Envy; 
and therefore, in his Presence, she only
vented sly Invectives against Cynthia; and
Mr. Orgueil being continually employed on
Subjects of a higher Nature than finding out
Women's Characters, implicitly assented
to her Opinion. But when Mr. Orgueil
left her, and she was at Liberty to enjoy, or
rather deplore, her own Thoughts, it would
be very difficult to find a much stronger
Picture of that Misery which constantly
attends an envious Mind. 
That Cynthia was in Prosperity, perhaps
at that very Instant rejoicing with her dear
Husband, on the Prospect of again seeing
David and his Family in Plenty, was an
Image but too fatal to Mrs. Orgueil's Peace; 
for notwithstanding what she had said to her
Husband, yet she very well knew that no
Pleasure on Earth could be equal, in Cynthia's 

Mind, to the Power of serving her
Friends: for so far, in Justice to Mrs. Orgueil,
must be confessed, that her private
Judgment came nearer the Truth than she
would confess even to her most intimate
Acquaintance. But there was one Circumstance
in her present Sorrow, or rather
Rage of Mind, which rendered it almost
insupportable, namely, that she herself had
been the principal Instrument in giving
Cynthia this Happiness; and, at the same
time, she had some Suspicion that Cynthia
(although she never dropt the least Hint of
it) was not totally ignorant of the true Motives
of this apparent Kindness. Poor Woman!
all her Purposes were disappointed!
all the pleasing Scenes her Imagination had
formed, were perfectly reversed! and in this
Affliction Mrs. Orgueil was peculiarly unfortunate; 
for she could not, as in others,
dispatch hasty Messengers to all her Friends
to partake it; neither could she vent it in
Clamour, and then flatter herself that she
had a more delicate Sensibility than all the
rest of Mankind: but, on the contrary,
however great the Pain might be, she was
absolutely under the Necessity of endeavouring
to conceal it within her own Bosom. 

If Mr. Orgueil, or Henrietta, at this time
had but been seized with some violent Distemper
in what Abundance would Mrs.
Orgueil's Tears (a lawful Plea being found)
have flowed, and surely nothing but the
Height of Ill-nature could have imputed
them to any other but the most visible
Cause. 