




The Continuation of the History of Camilla. 
The next Day, the first Opportunity
Camilla had of being
alone with David, on his Desire
she proceeded as follows. 
VALENTINE was now all the
Comfort I had left me; his Passions were 

either not so strong, or his Resolutions
stronger; for he bore up much better
than I did, altho' I found his Sentiments
were the same with mine. We were always
together, from which Livia possessed
my Father with an Opinion, that
we were making Parties in the House
against them. I was so altered with the
continual Uneasiness of my Mind, that
no one would have known me. This,
which was owing to my tender Regret for
the Loss of a Parent's Love, was imputed
to Rancour and Malice; thus my
very Grief was turned to my disadvantage. 
My Father, whose Nature was
open and generous, was as it were intoxicated
by his Passion for this Woman; 
and grew, like her, suspicious of every
thing around him. “And to the Jealous,
Trifles, light as Air, are Confirmations
strong as Proofs from Holy
Writ. * ” 
In short, was I to tell you
all the little Arts she made use of to make
us miserable, impose on the Man who
doated on her to Distraction, and in the
end to ruin herself, it would fill Volumes,
and tire your Patience. Whenever
she had laid any extravagant Scheme
to spend Money, she never directly proposed 

it, but only gave a hint, that it
would be agreeable to her: If it happened
to be a thing her Husband thought
very unreasonable, and he did not catch
immediately at the least Intimation of her
Pleasure, and speak of it as if it was his
own Desire, and in a manner force her
to comply with it, in appearance against
her Will; she then threw herself out of
humour, and contrived all manner of
ways to plague him; and when she saw
him in Agonies at her Frowns, she often
said things to him, I really would not
say to the greatest Enemy I had in the
World. But I must take shame to myself,
and own a Weakness which you
perhaps will condemn me for; but I
could not help being sometimes pleased
at seeing my Father teazed, by the Woman
he himself suffered to be so great a
Curse to me and Valentine. “Here David
sighed, and looked down, not answering
one Word; for he could not
approve, and he would not condemn
her. Camilla observed him, and hastened
to take him out of that Perplexity
she saw him in, by turning
again to the brighter Side of her own
Character; and went on as follows.” 
But then she carried this on to so great a 

degree, that the Misery I saw my once
fond Father in, raised all my Tenderness
for him; the Comparison between her
Behaviour, and that of my dear Mother's,
(who made it the Business of her
Life to please him) and my own, who
watched his very Looks, and carefully
obeyed their Motions, with various Scenes
which formerly had passed, rushed at once
into my Memory, and I often left the
Room with Tears in my Eyes. 
She knew so well the Bent of his
Temper, and how far she might venture,
that she would carry it exactly as far as he
could bear. But when she found he began
to grow warm, and retort her Ill-nature,
she could at once turn from a
Devil into an Angel. This sudden
Change of the Mind, from Pain to Pleasure,
had always such an Effect on him,
that he in a moment forgot all she had said
or done to hurt him, and thought of nothing
but her present Good-humour. 
The being reconciled, was so great a Heaven
to him, he condemned himself for
having offended such a charming Creature; 
and was in Raptures at her great
Goodness in forgiving him; would ask a
thousand Pardons, and be amazed at her 

Condescension in granting them. His Fondness
was greater than before; for all violent
Passions, put a stop to but for a moment,
increase on their return, as Rivers
flow faster after any Interruption in their
Course. People who really love, will
grant any thing in the moment of Reconciliation. 
My Father would then think
what he should do, to return all this Softness
and Tenderness; and ten to one but
he hit on the very thing which had been
the Cause of all her Ill-humour; he would
then intreat her to oblige him so much as
to do what he knew she had most mind
to; which, after Objections enough to
shew him the Obligations he owed her for
complying, she consented to. Thus every
thing fell into the right Channel again; 
my Father was the happiest Man in the
World, and had nothing to vex him,
but the Enmity he was made believe his
Children had to him. 
Poor Valentine and I walked about
the House forlorn and neglected; what
I felt, and I dare say the same thing for
him, at the Alteration in our Father's
Behaviour, I shall not attempt to describe,
as I am very certain no Words can
express it so strongly as your own Imagination 

will suggest it to you. But Livia
was not yet contented, altho' we were
made miserable; we were not utterly
abandoned, altho' she had contrived to
give my Father an ill Opinion of us. 
Yet, unless she could have proved us
guilty of some great Villainy, she could
not bring him to turn us out of doors. 
Nor did she dare to appear to wish it; 
for all her Power was owing to his Blindness; 
and had she done any thing to have
opened his Eyes, the Goodness of his
Heart would have made him detest, as
much as now he loved her. She was
obliged therefore to be cautious in what
she did; for the way to bring things
about with Men, who have no ill Designs
of their own, is to work underhand,
by pretending our Views are good. 
She had so long been our Enemy,
and endeavour'd to impose us, as her's,
on my Father, that I really believe at last
she imposed on herself, and thought we
were so. She watched us about the
House, as if she was afraid we would do
some mischief: She did not concern herself
much about Valentine; and thought,
as we were looked on to love one another,
in such a manner, as that what 

one did, was always approved by the
other, as I was the most passionate, and
had least Command of my Temper, I
was the properest Person to work on. 
She therefore continually did all she could
to provoke me into Passions, and work
me into Madness, that I might not know
what I said or did. 
“DAVID could not forbear sighing
at such a piece of Barbarity, but would
not interrupt Camilla's Narration; only
begged to know what could be the
End of all these Designs of her Mother's,
and how far her Father could
be blinded by his Passion.” 
Alas! Sir, answered Camilla, there
is no knowing how far Passions of that
kind will carry People; they go Lengths,
which they themselves at first would be
perfectly startled at, and are guilty of
Actions, which, were they to hear of
a third Person, they would condemn,
and think themselves utterly incapable
of. Perhaps you will wonder to
hear me say it, but I could never enough
get the better of the Opinion I
had fixed of my Father's Goodness, not
to think if his Mind had been less great, 

his Actions would have been better; for
that Tenderness and Good-nature, which
made him really love the Object that
gave him Pleasure, was the Cause of all
his Errors. A Man who looks upon a
Woman as a Creature formed for his
Diversion, and who has neither Compassion
nor Good-will towards her, can never
be worked on by her Arts to do himself
or another an Injury Women have it
in their power at once to please all the
Passions a Man can be possessed of; he is
flattered by her liking him, melted into
Tenderness (if he has any) by her Softness,
and easily drawn in to esteem her,
if she thinks it worth her while to gain
his Friendship; because he finds she
pleases him, and he would not willingly
think he can be thus pleased with a Creature
unworthy his Esteem. So that a
Man, in some measure, thinks it necessary,
in order to prove his own Judgment,
to justify the Woman he finds he
cannot help being fond of. This is a
Passion I have always observed People
of Merit to be most liable to. If it
happens to light on a Woman, who
really deserves it, the Man becomes a
greater Blessing to all his Acquaintance,
his Thoughts are more refined; and, by 

continually being influenced by a Person
who has no other View, but to promote
his Interest and Honour; all the little
Carelessnesses of his Temper are corrected,
and he is visibly both happier and
better than he was before. But if, on the
contrary, as in the Case of Livia and my
Father, the Woman looks on her Husband's
Love for her, in no other Light,
but as it gives her an Opportunity to make
a Prey of his Fortune, and to impose on
his Understanding; the latter will be destroyed
as fast as the former is spent, his
Friends will drop from him, he will find
a Fault somewhere, and from a Desire
not to impute it to the right Cause, not
know where to place it. He will awaken
that Suspicion which always sleeps at
Wisdom's Gate * , and find he has roused
a Fury, which neither †  “Poppies, nor
Mandragora, nor all the drowsy Syrups
of the World, can medicine to sweet
Sleep again.” 
But I ask pardon, I am led into a
Subject I could for ever expatiate on, and
forget, while I am indulging my self, you,
Sir, may be tired: I will therefore now 

bring myself back to the Thread of my
Story, as well as I am able. This was
the Life the whole Family led; my Father
was continually uneasy, at seeing a
Disagreement between us and his Wife. 
My Mother spent her whole Time, in
considering which way she should best
carry on her pernicious Schemes. Valentine
walked about silent and discontented, and
as for my part, I was worked by my
Passions in such a manner, that I hardly
knew one thing from another, nor can I
think I was perfectly in my Senses. 
I tell you, Sir, every thing without
Order, and hope you will be so good as
to forgive the Incoherence of my Style. 
I remember once, when my Mother's
Extravagance had drove her Husband to
great Distress, and he knew not which
way to turn himself, I asked no Questions,
but borrowed some Money of an
intimate Friend of mine, and brought it to
them. My Father, who, tho' he was cajoled
and deceived by his Wife's Cunning, yet
in his Heart was all Goodness, could not
help being pleased with this Instance of
my Love and Duty; and as he had no
Deceit in him, did not endeavour to conceal
it. I saw Livia had rather have suffered 

any thing than I should have acted
so generously; however, she carried it
off in such a manner, that her fond Lover
never perceived it. I declare, I did it
sincerely to serve them, and had no other
View in it. I had for some time had
such a despair in my Mind, of ever enjoying
my self again, that even that Despair
really gave me some sort of Ease; 
but this Action of mine, had revived my
Father's former Tenderness, just enough
to bring to my Remembrance all I had
lost. The little while this continued, I
was more miserable than when he quite
neglected me; for now the want of those
trifling Instances of his Affection I once
enjoyed, began to rise in my Mind
again, and I had all the Pain my Heart
had felt at the Loss of them, to suffer
afresh. I had spent a great deal of Time
in endeavouring to calm my Mind, and
inure it to bear ill Usage: but this little
View of Pleasure, this small Return of
Hope, quite got the better of all my Resolutions. 
For I am convinced, that to
live with any body we have once loved,
and fancy we have, by any Wisdom or
Philosophy of our own, put it out of
their power to hurt us, is feeding ourselves
with a vain Chimæra, and flattering 

our Pride, with being able to do
more than is in the Power of any
Mortal. 
LIVIA saw the Agitations of Mind I
suffered, and was resolved to make them
subservient to her Purposes. She, therefore,
one Morning, as I was sitting musing
and revolving in my Mind, the Difference
of my present Situation, from
what it had formerly been, came into my
Room with all the Appearance of Good-humour,
and sat and talked for some
time of indifferent things; at last, she
fell into a Discourse on our private Affairs,
in which, she took an Opportunity
of saying all the most shocking Things
she could think of, altho' she kept up to
the strictest Rules of Civility; for she
valued herself much upon her Politeness:
and I have observed several People value
themselves greatly on their own good
Breeding, whose Politeness consists in nothing
more, than an Art of hurting
others, without making Use of vulgar
Terms. 
When Livia had by these Means
worked me up to a Rage, then she had
her Ends. She knew my Father was 

reading in a Room very near us, she
therefore exalted her Voice to such a pitch,
that it was impossible for him not to hear
her; this immediately brought him to
know what was the matter: He found me
endeavouring to speak, and yet from the
Variety of Passions that worked in my
Mind, unable to utter my Words: for
from what we had been talking of, the
Idea of all the Torments I had suffered
from the Time I first observed a Decline
in my Father's Affections, rushed at
once upon my Thoughts, and quite overpower'd
me. Livia looked as pale as
Death; for thus provoked, I could not
help telling her what I thought of her Behaviour. 
Her Pride could not bear to
think I knew her, so that I believe she
was at last in as great a Passion as she
could be; but she never was carried so
far, as to forget her main View. My
Father looked wild, at seeing us in
this Condition, and desired Livia to
tell him, what could be the Cause of all
this Confusion; solemnly affirming, “that
no Nearness of Blood, or any Tye whatever,
should screen the Person from his
Anger, who could use her in such a
Way as to ruffle that Sweetness of
Temper, which he knew nothing but 

the highest Provocation could so much
get the better of, as to make her talk
so loud, and look so discomposed.” 
By this time she had enough recollected
herself to think of an Answer proper for
her Purpose, and told him, “It was
no matter now—it was over—she had
recovered herself again; but I had been
in a violent Passion, only because she
said,—” And then she repeated some
trifling thing, which however had two
Meanings, and the different Manner she
now spoke it in, from what she had done
before, gave it quite another Turn; and
you may be sure her Husband took it
in the most favourable Sense. But said
she, “I must have been a Stock or a
Stone, and have had no manner of
Feeling, if I had not been provoked
at the Answers she made.” On which
she chose to repeat the most virulent Expression
I had made use of. And, I confess,
I was quite unguarded, and said
whatever I was prompted to by my Rage. 
She concluded, by saying, “there should
be an end of it; for now she was calm
again.” During the Time she was
speaking, the poor unhappy deceived
Man stared with Fury, his Eye-Balls
rolled, and like Othello, he bit his nether 

Lip with Fury. At last, he suddenly
sprung forward, and struck me. 
While Camilla was relating this last
Transaction, her Voice faultered by degrees,
till she was able to speak no more. 
She trembled with the Agonies, the Remembrance
of past Afflictions threw her
into; and at last fainted away. David
catched her in his Arms, but knew not
what to do, to bring her to life again; 
for he was almost in the same Condition
himself. 
At this very Instant Valentine entered
the Room; he was amazed at
this Scene, and knew not to what Cause
to ascribe it. However, his present
Thoughts were all employed in Considerations
how he could help his Sister; he
ran for Water, and threw it in her Face,
which soon brought her to herself. The
Brother and David were both rejoiced to
hear her speak again, but particularly
David, for he really thought she had
been dead. The rest of the Evening
passed in Conversation on indifferent
things. Valentine seemed more thoughtful
than usual; Camilla observed it, and
could not help being uneasy: she was 

terrified lest he should have met with
some new Vexation. However, as he
did not mention any thing, she would
not ask him before a third Person. When
they retired to Rest, Valentine followed
her into her Room, and seemed as if he
had something to say to her, which he
was afraid to disclose, and yet was unable
to conceal; for his Love for Camilla was
quite of a different kind from that of
those Brothers, who, by their Fathers
having more Concern for the keeping up
the Grandeur of their Names, than for
the Welfare of their Posterity, having
got the Possession of all the Estate of
the Family, out of meer Kindness and
Good-Nature, allow their Sisters enough
out of it to keep them from starving in
some Hole in the Country; where their
small Subsistence just serves to keep them
the longer in their Misery, and prevents
them from appearing in the World to
disgrace their Brother, by their Poverty. 
VALENTINE was afraid to say
any thing that could any ways be shocking
to the Person he would never have been
ashamed of owning a Friendship for, notwithstanding
she was a Woman. Camilla
saw him in perplexity, and begged 

him to let her know what it was that
grieved him; and if it was in her power,
by any Labour or Pains, either to relieve
or comfort him, he might be sure of her
Assistance. Valentine then made the following
Reply: “My dear Camilla, I
am certain, wants no Proof of my sincere
Affection, and I must confess all
my present Uneasiness is on your account: 
The Condition I just now
found you in, with the Confusion in
Mr. Simple's Looks, raised Fears in
my Breast, lest you should be now going
to suffer, if possible, more than
you have already gone through; for in
Minds, as generous as I know yours to
be, the strongest Affections are those
which are first raised by Obligations. 
I am not naturally suspicious; but the
Experience I have already had of Mankind,
and the Beauty of your Form,
with the Anxiety I am always in for
your Welfare, inclines me to fear
the worst. You, of all Womankind,
should be most careful how you enter
into any Engagements of Love; for
that Softness of Disposition, and all
that Tenderness you are possessed of,
will expose you to the utmost Misery; 
and, unless you meet with a Man 

whose Temper is like your own, which
will be no easy matter for you to do; 
you will be as unwise to throw away
all the Goodness you are mistress of on
him, as a Man would be, who had a
great Stock in Trade, to join it with
another, who not only was worth nothing
of his own, but was a Spend-thrift,
and insensible of the great Good
he was doing him. I acknowledge
this Gentleman has behaved to us both
in a manner that demands the Return
of all our most grateful Sentiments; 
but if what he has done should be
owing to his liking of your Person,
and he should be plotting your Misery,
instead of your Welfare, I had rather
be in the Condition he found us in,
than be relieved by any one, who can
have so mean, so despicable a way of
thinking.” Camilla hearkened with
the utmost Attention, while Valentine was
speaking; and, when he had finished,
told him, she thought she could never
enough acknowledge his Kindness in his
Concern for her; but she assured him,
that by all she could observe in Mr. Simple's
Behaviour, and she had narrowly
examined all his Words and Actions,
she could not but think he had as much 

Honour as he made an outward Profession
of. That indeed she could not deny
but that she thought he had some Regard
for her; but he seemed rather afraid to
let her know it, than solicitous to make
an appearance of it; which she imputed
to his Delicacy, lest she should suspect he
took any advantage of her unhappy
Circumstances, or thought what he had
done for her, ought to lay any restraint
on her Affections. She desired her Brother
not to be uneasy; told him, that it
was the repetition of what she could never
remember without Horror, that had
thrown her into the way he found her
in; assured him, if David mentioned
any thing of Love to her, she would tell
him of it, and conduct herself by his Advice. 
After this Promise, he took his
leave of her, and went to bed. 
DAVID could get but little Sleep
that Night, for the various Reflections
which crouded into his Mind, on the
Story he had heard that Day. All the
good Qualities Camilla intimated her Father
was possessed of, and yet his being
capable of acting in such a manner, by
such a Daughter, were melancholy Indications
to him, that a perfect Character 

was no where to be found. When he
thought on Camilla's Sufferings, his Indignation
was raised against him: Then,
when he remembered that all his Faults
were owing to being deceived by a Woman
of Livia's Art, he could not help
having a Compassion for him. But from
this Scene, which he looked on with
Terror, there was a sudden Transition in
his Mind to the Idea of all Camilla's
Softness and Goodness. On this he dwelt
with the utmost Rapture, but was often
interrupted in this pleasing Dream, tho'
much against his Will, by the Remembrance
of her owning she had sometimes
been weak enough to triumph in her
Heart, at seeing Livia teaze her Father; 
but then so many Excuses immediately
presented themselves to plead in his Breast
for Camilla, that had her Frailties been
much greater, they would not have prevented
his thinking, that in her he had
met with all he wished. He longed for
an Opportunity of hearing the rest of her
Story; for he was now perfectly sure that
he should hear nothing in it but what was
to her advantage. And the next time Valentine
was gone out of the way, Camilla,
by his earnest Desire, went on with her
History in the following manner. 




A Continuation of the History of
Camilla. 
I ceased, Sir, at a Part, the Remembrance
of which always affects me in
such a manner, that my Resolution is not
strong enough to keep Life in me, at the
repetition of it. It was the first time my
Father had ever struck me, tho' I had
been bred up with him from my Infancy: 
I was stunned with the Blow, but my
Senses soon returned, and brought with
them that Train of horrible Thoughts,
which it is equally impossible for me ever
to root from my Memory, or to find
Words in any Language capable of expressing. 
When my Father saw me fall,
I believe he was at first frighten'd: He
took me up, and set me upon the Bed; 
but the moment Livia saw there was no
real Hurt done, fearing he should relent,
and make it up with me again, she hurried
him out of the Room, under the
pretence of being frighten'd at his Passion,
saying, “She would not have had 

him struck me on any account, especially
in her Quarrel, for she could
bear it all.” And then she put him in
mind again, of what she thought he
would be most displeased at my saying. 
I had not spoke one Word, nor was I
able. The Moment they were gone, I
threw myself back on the Bed, in greater
Agonies than the strongest Imagination
can paint, or than I can comprehend
how human Nature is able to survive. 
My Father's leaving me in this Condition,
without giving himself any farther
Trouble about what I suffered, or to find
out whether I really deserved this Treatment,
hurt me more than even his striking
me had done. 
In this miserable Condition I lay till
Valentine came in; it was his Custom
always to come up immediately to me,
after he had been abroad: The poor
Creature found me almost drowned in
Tears, and unable to tell him the Cause
of them. He guessed Livia was at the
bottom of whatever it was that made me
in this Situation. He at first swore, he
would go and know from her what she
had done to me. I caught hold of him,
and shewed him by my Looks, that nothing 

would hurt me so much; and by
that means prevailed with him to sit
down by me, till I could recover myself
enough to speak; when, with the Interruption
of Sighs and Tears, I told him
every thing that had happened. Valentine,
who is very far from being passionate,
(but the Passions of Men who are not subject
to be ruffled, are much more to be
dreaded, than those of a sort of People,
who can have their whole Frame shaken,
and torn to pieces, about every Grain of
Mustard-Seed or every Blast of Wind)
when he had heard me out, grew outrageous,
“insisted that I would let him go,
for he was resolved no Respect, even
for his Father, should prevent his telling
Livia, she should not use me in
that manner. Nay, and before her
Husband's face, he would display all
her Tricks, and shew him how she imposed
on him.” 
I was now frighten'd to death, for I
would not have had my Father and Brother
met, while he was in this Humour,
for the whole World. I still kept hold
of him, and begged him, with all the
most endearing Expressions I was mistress
of, not to increase my Misery; 

but to sit down till he was cool, that we
might consult together, what was best for
us to do. He was so good, in Consideration
for me, to comply with my Request,
and I did all I could to calm his
Passion; and when I found he was able
to hearken to me, I cried out, “Oh!
Valentine, in this House I can live no
longer; the Sight of my Father, now
I have such evident Proofs his Affection
is so entirely alienated from me, is
become as great a Torment to me as
ever it was a Blessing. I value not
what I shall go through in being a Vagabond,
and not knowing where to
go; for I am certain, no Poverty,—no
Misery,—can ever equal what I suffer
here. But then, how shall I leave you! 
Can I bear to be separated from the
only Comfort I have left in the World,
or can I be the Cause of your leaving
your Father's House, and subjecting
you to, perhaps, more Afflictions than
you already endure! —'Tis that
Thought distracts my Mind! for as
to myself, I am careless of every thing
future, and am sure nothing, when I am
absent from hence, can ever make me
feel what I do at this Moment; nor
would I have borne it so long, had it 

not been for fear of bringing greater
Mischiefs on your Head, than what
you now suffer.” 
VALENTINE swore he would never
forsake me, “that he would accompany
me wherever I pleased, and be my Support
and Guard to the utmost of his
power; for that he valued his Life no
longer than it conduced to that end; 
but he thought it adviseable we should
make one Effort, before we took such a
Step, to convince my Father of Livia's
Treachery, and lay before him how
she had used us; perhaps his Affection
might return for us, his Eyes might
be opened, and every thing be right
again.” 
I considered a moment, and then
replied; My dear Brother, I am very certain
my Father's Passion for this Woman
must be without all Bounds, or he could
never have been influenced by any Arts of
her's to strike me, and use me as he has
done. Were we to attempt to open his
Eyes on her Faults, he would not hearken
to us, and only hate us the more; and,
could we give him any Suspicion of her,
it would only make him unhappy, which, 

let him use me ever so cruelly, the World
could not bribe me to wish him; for, as
I take his Fondness for Livia to be unconquerable,
all the Ease he has he owes to
his Blindness: and I am sure, if a Man
was put in heavy Chains, which he had
no means of taking off, and was mad
enough to deceive himself, and fancy
they were Bracelets made of the finest
Jewels, and Strings of the softest Silk,
that Man would be very little his Friend,
who should take pains to convince him
they were made of Iron, till he felt all
their Weight, and was sensible of his own
unhappy Condition. Nay, if I loved him,
and was confined within his reach, and
he should carry his Madness so far as to
strike me with the Iron, fancying it was
so soft I could not feel it, while the Hurt
was not greater enough to throw me off my
Guard, I would not tell him of it. Indeed
I would get from him, if it was in my
power, as I will now from my Father,
lest I should be tempted to act a Part I
myself think wrong, and contrive some
Method of undeceiving him, to his own
Misery. 
VALENTINE was by this time
quite cool, and approved of what I had 

said. We therefore took a Resolution of
going from thence, tho' we knew not
where, nor who would receive us. We
at last recollected we had an old Aunt,
who used to be very kind to us, and appeared
to have taken a great fancy to Valentine:
to her, therefore we went, and
begged her, for some little time, till we
could settle what to do with ourselves, to
let us remain in her House. We told her
as much of what had happened, as we
thought just necessary to plead for us in
going from our Father's House; but with
the greatest Caution, that we might throw
as little Blame on him as possible. We
could not avoid letting her a little into
Livia's Behaviour, for we had no other
Justification for what we had done. “She
said, she was very much amazed at
what we told her, for Livia had a very
good Character; but she supposed this
was a passionate Quarrel, and she
would take care of us, till such time
as it could be made up again.” We
assured her that was impossible, that we
would on no account ever go back again
to a Place we had suffered so much in: 
And only entreated it, as the greatest Favour,
she would grant us some little
Corner of her House to be in, and let nobody 

know we were there. She took
little notice of what we said, but resolved
to act her own way. 
The next day she went out, and at
her return came into the Room where
we were, with the greatest Fury imaginable
in her Looks; and asked us, “What
it was we meant, by telling her a
Story of Livia's ill Usage, and God
knows what; and endeavouring to
impose on her, and make her accessary
to our wicked Conversation
with each other: Brother and Sister!
—it was unnatural, she did not think
the World had been arrived at such a
pitch of Wickedness.” She ran on
in this manner for a great while, without
giving us leave to answer her. 
VALENTINE and I stood staring
at one another, for we did not understand
one Word she said: At last, when she
had talked herself out of breath, I begged
her to explain herself, for I was really
at a loss to know what she meant; 
if she had any thing to lay to our Charge,
and would please to let us know what
it was, we were ready to justify ourselves. 
Then she began again; “Oh! 

undoubtedly you are very innocent
People—you don't know what I
mean.” 
Then she launch'd out into a long
Harangue on the crying and abominable
Sin of Incest,—wrung her Hands, and
seemed in the greatest Affliction, that
ever she should live to her a Nephew and
Niece of hers could be such odious Creatures. 
At last I guessed what she would
insinuate; but, as I knew myself perfectly
innocent, could not imagine how
such a Thought could come into her
head. I begged her for God's-sake to
let me know who could have filled her
Ears with such a horrid Story; and by
degrees I got it out of her. It seems
this good Woman had been at my Father's
that Afternoon, with a Design of
reconciling and bringing us together again:
when she came in, she found Livia and
her Husband sitting together; after the
usual Compliments of Civility were past,
she began to mention us, told them we
were at her House; and that she was
come with an Intention of making up
some little Disputes she understood there
had been between us. Livia now acted
a Part, which perhaps she had not long 

intended; but I am convinced, whoever
is capable unprovoked to do another an
Injury, will stop at nothing to carry their
Schemes through; and, if they find no
Villainy in the Person they thus undeservedly
prosecute, they will make no
scruple of inventing any thing, ever so
bad, for their own Justification. 
The Moment my Aunt mentioned us,
Livia fell into a violent Passion of crying,
and said, she was sure she was the most
unfortunate Woman alive: She did not
doubt but we had told her every thing
we could think of to vilify her; for we
were cunning enough to know, that Mothers-in-law
were easily believed by the
World to be in fault; tho' she was sure
she had always acted by us, as if we had
been her own Children: that her chief
Concern now was for us, for that she
was in the utmost Consternation, to
think what the World would say of us; a
young Man and Woman to run away together
from their Father's House, without
any reason, (and she was sure she
knew of none) had a very bad Appearance: 
And, as all our Acquaintance knew
we had always had a remarkable Fondness
for each other, that Circumstance would 

corroborate the Suspicion. Then she
mentioned several little Instances in which
Valentine and I had shewn our reciprocal
Love; adding, that altho' she had great
reason to believe we both hated her; yet,
as we were so nearly related to the Man
she loved, she could not help being concerned
for our Welfare. As she spoke
this, she look'd at her Husband with such
an Air of Softness and Tenderness, as
she knew would be the strongest Proof
imaginable to him of her Sincerity. My
Father stood for some little time in Amazement,
and was struck with the utmost
Horror at the Thought Livia had
suggested to him; and then swore he would
send for us home, and lock us up separately
from each other. This would utterly
have frustrated all Livia's Designs:
for she knew the Temper of the Man she
had to deal with well enough to be satisfied,
if once we came home again,
Time would bring about a Reconciliation
between my Father and us, which she
was resolved to prevent; and therefore,
as she had gone so far, she thought herself
now under a necessity to go through
with it. Few People stop in the midst of
Villainies, as the first Step is much the
hardest to get over. 

LIVIA therefore, with the appearance
of the greatest Perturbation of Mind,
as if it was the utmost Force to her in
this Case, even to speak the Truth, and,
with Tears in her Eyes, said, Things were
now come to such an Extremity, that, in
order to prevent her Husband's having
any Suspicion of her giving his Children
any Cause for their Hatred, she was forced
against her Will to confess she knew the
reason of our Aversion to her was, because
she had found out a Secret of our's,
which we feared she might one time or
other discover; therefore we used all the
Methods we could invent, to give our
Father an ill Opinion of her, that if she
told him of it he might disbelieve her. 
She then turned to him, and said, I
ought to ask your pardon, Sir, for so
long concealing from you a thing which
is of the utmost consequence to your Family; 
but it was the Fear of making you
unhappy, was the reason of it, and I could
never bring myself to give you the Pain
you must have felt at the knowledge of
it. It is now some time since I found out
there was a criminal Conversation between
your Son and Daughter; to this
was owing all that Love they talked of 

to each other; to this may be imputed
Valentine's Melancholy, and this was the
Foundation of all the Passions you have
seen Camilla in, which she feigned to be
owing to her Grief for our using her ill:
for on their Oaths and solemn Promises
of Amendment, I assured them you should
know nothing of it. I don't know whether
I am excusable for so doing, but I
had so great a Dread of disturbing your
Peace of Mind, that I could not prevail
with myself to act otherwise, and was in
hopes to have preserved your Quiet, and
by this Lenity have saved your Children
from Ruin. I have watched them all I
could, (thus she artfully gave a reason
for all her Actions) and it was on my
speaking to Camilla yesterday, because I
observed she still continued to contrive
Methods of being alone with Valentine,
she fell into that Passion in which you
found her. This, if they will come before
you, I will affirm to their faces,
and I think they cannot even dare to
deny it. 
Perhaps, Sir, you will wonder how
Livia could venture to go so far as this,
in a thing she knew to be utterly false; 
but, if we consider it seriously, she hazarded 

nothing by it: On the contrary,
this pretended Openness was the strongest
Confirmation of the Truth of what she
asserted. She knew very well, there could
be no more than our bare Words against
her's; and that, before a Judge as partial
to her as her Husband, there was no
danger but she should be believed. My
Father now saw every thing made clear
before him, the reason of all our Discontents
was no longer a Secret; he was
amazed at our Wickedness, and said, he
was sorry he had been the Cause of such
Creatures coming into the World; that
he would never see us more, then concluded
with a Compliment to Livia, on
her great Goodness, and wondered how it
was possible anything could be so bad, as to
abuse such Softness and Good-nature. On
which, Livia replied, she did not value
our Behaviour, nothing but Necessity
should have extorted from her what she
always intended to conceal; and, if she
might advise, he should see us again, separate
us from each other, and make no
noise in the World about such an Affair
as this. She well knew my Father's
Temper, and that his seeing she thus returned
Good for Evil, would only raise 

his Esteem the higher for her, and exasperate
him the more against us. 
My Aunt was astonished at our Wickedness,
and in the highest Admiration of
Livia's Virtue: from this Visit she came
directly home to us, with a Resolution
such Wretches should find no Harbour in
her House, and talked to us in the manner
already related. 
VALENTINE and I were like
Statues, on the hearing of all this, and it
was some time before we could recollect
ourselves enough to speak: This was
thought to be owing to our Guilt, and
the Shame of being detected, instead of
Amazement and Indignation at hearing
our Innocence thus falsely accused. It
was in vain for us to endeavour at clearing
ourselves, for my Aunt was a very
good sort of a Woman, as far as her Understanding
would give her leave; but
she had the misfortune of having such a
turned Head, that she was always in the
wrong, and there was never any Possibility
of convincing her of the contrary of
any thing she had once resolved to believe. 
She had run away warmly with
the Thoughts of the terrible Sin of Incest, 

and therefore we were to be condemned
unheard, and be thought guilty without
any Proof. 
“DAVID could contain himself no
longer, but looking at Camilla with an
Air of the greatest Compassion, cried
out, Good God! Madam, what have
you suffered! and how was you able
to bear up in the midst of all these Afflictions? 
I would rather go and live
in some Cave, where I may never see
any thing in a human Shape again,
than hear of another Livia; and how
could your Aunt be so barbarous, as
not to give you leave to justify yourselves?” 
So far from it, Sir, reply'd Camilla,
my Aunt would by no means suffer such
wicked Creatures, as she now believed
us, to remain under the same Roof with
her. Thus were we abandoned and destitute
of all means of Support, for we had
but one Guinea in the World; and Livia
took care to make the Story that we were
run from home, that we might have a
better Opportunity to carry on our Intrigues,
fly like Lightning through all
our Relations and Acquaintance. So that, 

altho' we tried to speak to several of them,
it was in vain, no one would admit us,
except one old Maiden Cousin, who, instead
of doing any thing for our Relief,
said all the ill-natured things (on the Report
she had heard of us) the utmost
Malice could think of. She had always
been very circumspect in her own Conduct,
and was rather a Devotee than otherwise; 
and I verily believe she was
glad of an Opportunity to vent her own
Spleen, while she was silly enough to
imagine she was exerting herself in the
Cause of Virtue. 
We knew not which way to turn ourselves; 
but, as we happened to be tolerably
dressed, we thought we might possibly
be admitted into a Lodging, where
we were not known: We happened on
that very House, Sir, where you found
us, and took that little Floor you afterwards
had; but what to do for Money
to pay for it, or to keep us, we could
not imagine. While we were in this
unhappy Situation, poor Valentine fell
into a violent Fever; this Misfortune
made me almost distracted: what to do
to support him, I could not tell; and
to see him want what was necessary for
him, was what I could not bear. Drove 

by this Necessity, and urged on by my
eager Desire to serve my Brother, I took
a Resolution of trying whether I could
raise Compassion enough in any one to induce
them to relieve me: I avoided all
Places where I was known, but went to
several Gentlemen's Houses; I told just
the Heads of my Story, concealing my
Name, and all those Circumstances which
might fix it on our Family; supposing
the Persons I told it to should have heard
any thing of my Father, or of our running
away. 
Amongst the People I went to, I
found some Gentlemen who had Good-nature
enough, as I then thought it, to
supply me so far, as to enable me to get
Valentine Necessaries. My Heart was
full of Gratitude towards them, and I
thought I could never enough acknowledge
the Obligation; but when I went
to them a second time, (for they bid
me come again, when that was gone)
they severally entertained me with the
Beauty of my Person, and began to talk
to me in a Style, which gave me to understand
they were not silly enough to part
with their Money for nothing. In short,
I found I had nothing farther to expect 

from them, unless I would pay a Price I
thought too dear for any thing they could
do for me. Here I was again disappointed,
and obliged to seek out new ways of
getting Bread for us both. By the Care I
had taken, I had got my Brother out of his
Fever; but it had left him so weak, he was
not able to stir out of his Bed. I could
not shew my Head amongst any of my
old Acquaintance, and I perceived all the
Ladies I applied to looked on me with
Disdain, tho' I knew not for what reason; 
and I found amongst the Men I
had but one way of getting any thing
from them. My Spirits were now quite
worn out, and I was drove to the last
Despair: I was almost ready to sink under
the Weight of my Afflictions, and I verily
believe should have done it, had it
not been for the Consideration I had for
Valentine. 
It came into my head one Morning,
as I was revolving in my Mind what Step
I should take next, to disguise myself in
such a manner, as that no one could be
under any Temptation from my Person. 
I made myself a Hump-back, dyed my
Skin in several places with great Spots of
Yellow; so that, when I look'd in the 

Glass, I was almost frighten'd at my own
Figure. I dress'd myself decently, and
was resolved to try what I could procure
this way. I now found there was not a
Man would hearken to me: If I began
to speak of my Misery, they laugh'd on
one another, and seem'd to think it was
no manner of Consequence what a Wretch
suffer'd, who had it not in her power to
give them any pleasure. The Women,
indeed, ceased their Disdain, and seem'd
to take Compassion on me; but it was a
very small Matter I got from them, for
they all told me, “They would serve
me, if it was in their power:” and
then sent me to somebody else, who they
said was immensely rich, and could afford
to give away Money; but when I came
to these rich People, all I heard from
them was “a Complaint of their Poverty,
and how sorry they were they could
not help me.” You must imagine it
could not be amongst Persons in very
High Life I went; for I had no means
of getting into their Houses; but amongst
those sort of People, where being dressed
like a Gentlewoman is Pass-port enough
for being seen and spoken to. The Figure
I had borrowed availed me as little
as that which Nature had given me. I 

began now to look on myself with Horror,
and to consider I was the Cause that
Valentine lay in such a Condition, without
any hopes of being restored to his Health
again; for his Weakness was so great, it
required much more than I was able to
procure for him to support him. I reflected,
that if I could have commanded
my Passions, to have borne my Father's
Slights, and Livia's ill Usage, with patience,
he might have had Necessaries,
tho' he would not have lived a pleasant
Life; and I had the inexpressible Torment
of thinking myself guilty of a
Crime, in bringing such Miseries on the
best of Brothers. This Consideration,
added to all my other Sufferings, had
very nigh got the better of me; and how
I was able to go through all this, I cannot
conceive. If I had had nothing but myself
to have taken care of, I certainly
should have sat down and been starved to
death, without making any Struggle to
have withstood my hard Fate; but when
I looked on Valentine, my Heart was ready
to burst, and my Head was full of
Schemes what way I should find out to
bring him Comfort. At last a Thought
came into my head, that I would put on
Rags, and go a begging. I immediately 

put this Scheme in execution, and accordingly
took my Stand at a Corner of
a Street, where I stood a whole Day, and
told as much of my Story, as they would
hear, to every Person that passed by. 
Numbers shook their Heads, and cried,
it was a shame so many Beggars were
suffered to be in the Streets, that People
could not go about their Business, without
being molested by them, and walked
on, without giving me any thing; but,
amongst the Crouds that passed by, a
good many threw me a Penny, or Half-penny,
till I found in the Evening my
Gains amounted to half a Crown. 
When it grew dark, I was going joyfully
home, and was very thankful for what little
I had got; but on a sudden I was surrounded
by three or four Fellows, who hustled me
amongst them, so that I had no way to
escape: one of them whispered me in the
Ear, “That if I made the least Noise,
I should be immediatley murdered.” I
have often since wondered how that Threat
could have any Terror to one in my Circumstances:
but I don't know how it
was, whether it was owing to the Timidity
of my Temper, or that I was stunned
with the Suddenness of the thing; I let 

them carry me where they would, without
daring to cry out. They took me
under the Arm, as if I had been of their
Company, and pulled me into a Room; 
where, the moment they had me fast,
they rifled my Bag, in which I had put
all my little Treasure, and took it every
Farthing from me, and then asked me,
“How I dared to stand begging in their
District, without their leave; they would
have me to know, that Street belonged
to them.” And saying this, they every
one struck me a Blow, and then led me
through such Windings and Turnings, it
was impossible I should find my way back
again, and left me in a Street I did not
know. But I enquired my way home; and,
as I was in my Rags and my borrowed
Ugliness, was not attacked in my way. 
I suppose it was owing to that Disguise,
that I escaped meeting with brutal Usage
of another kind from those Wretches. 
“DAVID shook with Horror at
that Thought; and, altho' he had never
cursed any body; yet, when he
reflected on Camilla's Sufferings, he
could hardly forbear cursing Livia; 
and said, no Punishment could be bad
enough for her: He was now afraid 

every time Camilla opened her Mouth,
what he should hear next; for he found
himself so strongly interested in every
thing that concerned her, that he felt
in his own Mind all the Misery she had
gone through, and he then asked her,
what she could possibly do in this unhappy
Situation.” To which she replied,
I knew not what to do, my Spirits were
depressed, and worn out with Fatigue,
and I felt the Effects of the rough Blow
those barbarous Creatures had given me. 
But this indeed was trifling, in comparison
of the Horror that filled my Mind,
when I saw Valentine faint, and hardly
able to speak for want of proper Nourishment,
and I had no Method of getting
him any. 
The Landlady of the House had been
already clamorous for her Money, but I
had, by Persuasions and Promises to get
it for her as soon as ever I could, pacified
her from time to time. I was afraid
the laying open our starving Condition to
her, would be the means of being turned
out of doors; and yet, desperate as this
Remedy appeared, I was forced to venture
at it. I therefore called her up, and begged
her to give me something to relieve 

the poor Wretch, whom she saw sick in
bed; for that I was in the utmost Distress
to get some Food for him. She fell a
scolding at me, and said, “She wondered
how I could think poor People
could live, and pay their Rent, if such
as I took their Lodgings, and had nothing
to pay for them; why did not I
work as well as other People, if I had
no other means of supporting myself. 
Sure! she did not understand what
People meant by setting up for Gentlefolks.” 
I told her, if she would be
so good to get me any Employment, I
would work my Fingers to the Bone, to
pay her what I owed her, and only begged
her to give me something for my present
Support. “Yes, answered she, that is
a likely matter truly! then I should
have the Work to answer for, and be
still a greater Loser; for I don't know
any body would trust any thing in the
Hands of Beggars.” 
“Good God! said David, have I
lived under the same Roof with such a
Monster, a Creature who could be so
barbarous as to upbraid, instead of
assisting her Fellow-Creatures, when
drove to such a Height of Misery.” 

Alas, Sir, said Camilla, there is no
Situation so deplorable, no Condition so
much to be pitied, as that of a Gentlewoman
in real Poverty. I mean by real
Poverty, not having sufficient to procure
us Necessaries; for good Sense will teach
People to moderate their Desires, and
lessen their way of living, and yet be
content. Birth, Family, and Education,
become Misfortunes, when we cannot attain
some Means of supporting ourselves
in the Station they throw us into; our
Friends and former Acquaintance look
on it as a Disgrace to own us. In my
Case, indeed, there was something peculiarly
unhappy; for my Loss of Reputation
gave my Relations some Excuse for
their Barbarity: tho' I am confident
they would have acted near the same part
without it. Men think our Circumstances
gives them a Liberty to shock our Ears
with Proposals ever so dishonourable; and
I am afraid there are Women, who do
not feel much Uneasiness, at seeing any
one who is used to be upon a Level with
themselves, thrown greatly below them. 
If we were to attempt getting our living
by any Trade, People in that Station
would think we were endeavouring to 

take their Bread out of their mouths, and
combine together against us; saying, we
must certainly deserve our Distress, or
our great Relations would support us. 
Men in very high Life are taken up
with such various Cares, that were they
ever so good-natured, they cannot hearken
to every body's Complaint, who applies
to them for Relief. And the lower
sort of People use a Person who was born
in a higher Station, and is thrown amongst
them by any Misfortune, just as I have
seen Cows in a Field use one another:
for, if by accident any of them falls into a
Ditch, the rest all kick against them,
and endeavour to keep them down, that
they may not get out again. They will
not suffer us to be equal with them, and
get our Bread as they do; if we cannot
be above them, they will have the pleasure
of casting us down infinitely below
them. In short, Persons who are so unfortunate
as to be in this Situation, are in
a World full of People, and yet are as
solitary as if they were in the wildest Desart; 
no body will allow them to be of
their Rank, nor admit them into their
Community. They see all the Blessings
which Nature deals out with such a lavish
Hand, to all her Creatures, without finding 

any Possibility of sharing the least
Part of them. This, Sir, was my miserable
Case, till your Bounty relieved me. 
The Raptures David felt at that Moment,
when Camilla had thus suddenly
turned his Thoughts on the Consideration
that he was the Cause she was relieved,
from that most miserable of all Conditions,
which she had just described, are
not to be expressed; and can only be
imagined by those People who are capable
of the same Actions. He could not
forbear crying out, “was he to live a
thousand Years, he could never meet with
another Pleasure equal to the Thought
of having served her: And said, if
she thought herself any way obliged to
him, the only Favour he had to ask of
her, in return, was never to mention
it more.” She was amazed at his Generosity,
however, took no further Notice
of it, but went on thus with her
Story. 
Whilst this hard-hearted Woman,
Sir, was talking in this Strain, a Neighbour
of her's, who accidentally came to
see her, hearing her Voice louder than
usual, (tho' she never spoke in a very 

low Key) came up to us, to know what
was the matter. I took hold of her the
moment she entered the Room, and as
soon as I could have an Opportunity (for
the Landlady would hardly give me leave
to speak) I told her my Case. The poor
Woman, tho' she worked for her Bread,
was so touched with what she heard, and
with my Brother's pale languid Look, that
she pulled out Six-pence, and gave it me; 
this enabled me to support him two Days,
for his Stomach was too weak to take any
thing but Biscuits. As to myself, I swallowed
nothing but dry Bread and Water, for I
would not rob him of a Farthing more
than just served to keep me alive. The
Mistress of the House, as soon as this our
Benefactress was gone, began again in her
old strain, and said, “she must send for
the proper Officers of the Parish to
which we belonged, and charge them
with us, for she could not venture to
bring any Expence on herself.” I begged
her, for God's sake, not to turn us
out in that Condition: and at last prevailed
so far on her Good-nature, that she consented
we should stay in her House, provided
we would go up into the Garret,
and be contented with one Room; for
“truly she could not spare more to such 

Creatures, and if we could not in a
Week find some Method of paying her,
she was resolved no longer to be imposed
on; because we had found out she
could not help being Compassionate,”— 
with many Hints, how happy we were
to have met with her: For there were
very few People in this hard-hearted
World, could arrive at such a Pitch of
Goodness. —To these Terms we were
forced to submit, and get up stairs into
that Hole, which you found us in. She
did not fail coming up once a day, to inform
us how much she wanted her Money,
altho' she knew it was impossible for
us to pay her. 
The poor Woman who had relieved
us last, spared us one Six-pence more; 
but she happened to get a Service, and go
into the Country, so that now all our
Hopes were lost. I have really several
times, during this dreadful Week, wish'd
Valentine dead, that I might not see him
thus languish away in Misery, before my
face. I sat up with him the whole Time. 
I will not shock a Nature so tender as
your's, Sir, with the Repetition of what
Horrors passed in my Mind, between my
then present Sufferings, and the Expectation 

of seeing my dear Brother, in his miserable
Condition, soon turn'd into the Street. The
time was just expired, and she was come
up with a Resolution of turning us out of
doors, when the Noise she made brought
you up to see, and relieve our Misery. 
What little things there were in that dismal
Room when first we went up, she
by degrees took away, under the pretence
of wanting them for some Use or
other, till she left us nothing at all; and
a poor Creature ill, as Valentine was,
could not get even the coarsest Clothes to
cover him. I had managed the little that
good Woman spared me, from her own
Labour, in such a manner, he had been
but one Day totally without any Sustenance; 
but for my part, it was above
two Days that I had had nothing but
cold Water: And we must both have
perished in that deplorable Misery, had
not you opportunely come to save us, and
restore us to Life and Plenty. 
CAMILLA ceased speaking, and
David after looking at her with Amazement,
was going to make some Observations
on the various Scenes of Wretchedness
she had gone through, when Valentine
entering the Room, made them turn 

the Conversation on more indifferent Subjects,
they passed the Evening very agreeably
together. And with Camilla's Story,
till she met with David, I shall conclude
this Chapter. 



Which treats of some remarkable Discourse,
that passed between Passengers
in a Stage-Coach. 
The next Conversation David had
with Camilla, after some Observations
on her own Story, he was naturally
led into a Discourse on Cynthia. 
The moment Camilla heard her Name,
(from a Suspicion that she was her former
Companion) she shewed the utmost Eagerness
in her Inquiries concerning her,
which opened David's Eyes; and he immediately
fancied, she was the Person
whom Cynthia had mentioned in so advantageous
a Light: Which, considering
what he then felt for Camilla, gave
him a pleasure much easier felt then described; 
and which can only be imagined 

by those People, who know what it is to
have a Passion, and yet cannot be easy
unless the Object of it deserves their
Esteem. 
DAVID was too much concerned while
Camilla was telling her own Story, with
the Part she herself bore in it, to observe
what she said of any other Person, and
over-looked the Circumstance of her
Friend's going abroad with a Lady of
Fashion, who had taken a fancy to her: 
But now they were both soon convinced,
that she was the very Person whom Camilla
had been so fond of. 
DAVID therefore told her Cynthia's
Story; the Distresses of which, moved Camilla
in such a manner, she could not
refrain from weeping. David was melted
into Tenderness at the sight of her
Tears; and yet, inwardly, rejoiced at the
Thoughts of her being capable of shedding
them on so just an Occasion. He
then said, he thought it would be proper
to acquaint Valentine with the Hopes
she had of seeing her Friend again. 
Camilla, with a Sigh, replied, she never
concealed any thing from her Brother,
which gave her pleasure. This Sigh, he
thought, arose from reflecting on Cynthia's 

Misfortunes; but in reality something
that more nearly concerned her, was at
the bottom of it. For she remembered
enough of Valentine's Behaviour to Cynthia
before she went abroad, to be well
assured he could not hear of any Probability
of seeing her again, without great
Perturbation of Mind: However, the
next time they met, she by degrees opened
to him, what David had told her. 
But the Paleness of his Countenance, and
the Anxiety that appeared in his Looks,
while she was speaking, cannot be expressed. 
David, who, from his own
Goodness of Heart, required the strongest
proofs to convince him of any Ill in another,
from the same Goodness easily
perceived all the Emotions which arise in
the Mind from Tenderness; and consequently,
was not long in suspense at Valentine's
extraordinary Behaviour on this
Occasion. 
CAMILLA had acted with great
Honour; for altho' she had told David,
as her Benefactor and Friend, the whole
History of her own Life, she had said
no more of her Brother than what was
necessary; thinking she had no Right, on 

any account to discover his Secrets, unless
by his Permission. 
VALENTINE, after several
Changes of Countenance, and being in
such a Situation he could not utter his
Words, at last recovered himself enough
to beg David to tell him all he knew of
Cynthia, which he generously complied
with, even so far as to inform him of her
Adventure with my Lord &wblank;, and
her Refusal of himself; but as I think it
equally as unnecessary as it is difficult to
attempt any Description of what Valentine
felt during David's Narration, I shall
leave that to my Reader's own Imagination. 
The Result of this Conversation, was
Valentine's earnest Request to his Sister
immediately to write to Cynthia; she
knew where Cynthia's Cousin lived, and
as she was perfectly a Stranger to the refusing
her Brother any thing he desired,
it was no sooner asked than complied
with; but when David, Valentine, and
Camilla separated that Night to go to
bed, various were their Reflections, various
were their Situations. Camilla's
Mind was on the Rack, at the Consideration, 

that David had offered himself to
Cynthia–––he was pleasing himself with the
Thoughts of the other's refusing him,
since he now knew Camilla––and Valentine
spent the whole Night in being tossed
about between Hopes and Fears. Cynthia's
Refusal of my Lord &wblank;, and David
—sometimes gave him the utmost
Pleasure, in flattering his Hopes that he
might be the Cause of it; but the higher
his Joy was raised on this account, the
greater was his Torment, when he feared
some Man she had met with, since he
saw her, might possess her Heart. In
short, the great Earnestness with which
he wished to be remembered by her,
made him but the more diffident in believing
he was so; and his Pains and
Pleasures were increased or lessened every
moment by his own Imagination, as
much as Objects are to the natural Eye,
by alternately looking through a magnifying
Glass, and the other End of the
Perspective. But here I must leave him
to his own Reflections, to look after the
Object of them, and see what became of
Cynthia since her leaving David. 
On her Arrival in the Country, where
she proposed to herself the enjoying a
Pleasure in seeing her old Acquaintance, 

and a little to recruit her sunk Spirits,
after all the Uneasiness she had suffered; 
the first News she heard, was, that her
Cousin had been buried a Week, having
lost her Mother half a Year before. 
However, she went into the House, where
she was informed that the young Woman
had left all the little she was worth, amounting
to the Sum of thirty Pounds a
Year, to a Cousin of her's, who was
gone abroad with a Woman of Fashion. 
Cynthia soon found by the Circumstances,
that this Cousin was herself: This, instead
of lessening, increased her Affliction
for her Death; for the Consideration,
that neither Time nor Absence could
drive from the poor young Creature's
Memory the small Kindnesses she had
received from her formerly, made the
good-natured Cynthia but the more sensible
of her Loss. 
She could bear the House no longer
than was just necessary to settle her Affairs,
and then took a Place in the Stage-Coach,
with a Resolution of returning to
London; being, like People in a burning
Fever, who, from finding themselves
continually uneasy, are in hopes by every
Change of Place to find Relief. 

Three Gentlemen were her Fellow-Travellers; 
it was dark when they set
out, and the various Thoughts in Cynthia's
Mind prevented her entering into
any Conversation, or even so much as
hearing what her Companions said; till at
the Dawn of Day a grave Gentleman,
who sat opposite to her, broke forth in so
fine an Exclamation on the Beauties of the
Creation, and made such Observations on
seeing the rising Sun, as awakened all her
Attention, and gave her hopes of meeting
with both Improvement and Pleasure
in her Journey. The two other Gentlemen
employed themselves, the one in
groaning out a Disapprobation,—and the
other in yawning,—from a Weariness at
every Word the third spoke. At last he
that yawned, from a desire of putting an
end to what he undoubtedly thought the
dullest Stuff he ever heard, turned about
to Cynthia, and swearing he never studied
any other Beauties of Nature, but those
possessed by the Fair Sex, went to take
her by the Hand; but she knew enough
of the World to repulse such Impertinence,
without any great difficulty; and,
by her Behaviour, made that Spark very 

civil to her, the remainder of the Time
she was obliged to be with him. 
The very Looks and Dresses of the three
Men were sufficient to let her into their
different Characters: The grave Man,
whose Discourse she had been so pleased
with, was drest in the plainest, tho' in
the neatest manner; and, by the Chearfulness
of his Countenance, plainly showed
a Mind filled with Tranquillity and Pleasure. 
The Gentleman who sat next him
was as dirty as if he had sat up two or
three Nights together in the same Clothes
he then had on; one Side of his Face
was beat black and blue, by Falls he had
had in his Drink, and Skirmishes he had
met with by rambling about. In short,
every thing without was an Indication of
the Confusion within, and he was a perfect
Object of Horror. The Spark who
admired nothing but the Ladies, had his
Hair pinned up in blue Papers, a laced
Waistcoat, and every thing which is necessary
to shew an Attention to adorn the
Person, and yet at the same time with an
Appearance of Carelessness. 
The first Stage they alighted at to
breakfast, the two last-mentioned Gentlemen 

made it their business to find out
who the third was; and, as he was very
well known in that Country, having lived
there some Years, they soon discovered
he was a Clergyman. For the future
therefore I shall distinguish these three
Persons by the Names of the Clergyman,
–––the Atheist–––and the Butterfly–––for,
as the latter had neither Profession nor
Characteristick, I know not what other
Name to give him. 
As soon as they got into the Coach
again, the Atheist having recruited his
Spirits with his usual Morning-Draught,
accosted the Clergyman in the following
abrupt and rude manner: —Come on,
Mr. Parson—now I am for you; I was
not able to speak this Morning, when
you fancied you was going on with all
that Eloquence, to prove there must be
an infinite Wisdom concerned in this
Creation. As he spoke these Words,
there happened to be so violent a Jolt of
the Coach, they could hardly keep their
Seats. Ay!—there—continued he— 
with a sort of Triumph in his Countenance,
Accident has proved to my hand,
that Accident is the Cause of every thing,
otherwise I would fain know how the 

Roads should become so very rugged,
one cannot go from one place to another,
without being almost dislocated. (Indeed,
to have judged by his Looks, any one
would have thought the least Motion
would have shook him to pieces.) For
my part, considering the numberless
Evils there are in the World, it is amazing
to me how any one can have the
Assurance to talk of the Deity; especially
when I consider those very Men,
who thus want to persuade us out of our
Senses, at the same time take our Money,
and are paid for talking in that manner. 
I am sure now, whilst I am speaking,
I feel such Pains in my Head, and such
Disorders all over me, as is a sufficient
Proof that there was no Wisdom concerned
in the forming us. It is true indeed,
that I have sat up whole Nights,
and drank very hard lately: But if a good
Being, who really loved his Creatures,
had been the Cause of our coming into
this World, undoubtedly we should have
been made in such a manner, that we
should neither have had Temptations, nor
Power to injure ourselves: The whole
thing appears to me so very absurd, and
notwithstanding all our boasting of superior
Reason to the rest of the Creation, in 

my opinion we are such low groveling
Creatures, that I can easily conceive we
were made by Chance. It is certainly
the Clergy's Interest to endeavour to govern
us, but I am resolved I will never
be Priest-rid–––whatever other Folly I
give into. In this Style he went on a great
while, and when he thought it time to
conclude, that is, when the Spirit of the
Liquor he had drank was evaporated, he
stared the Clergyman full in the Face,
with a Resolution, as he saw he was a
modest Man, that if he could not get the
better of him by his Arguments, he would
put him out of Countenance by his Impudence. 
The Butterfly, who had been silent,
and hearkened with the utmost Attention
while the other was speaking, now began
to open his Mouth; he was full as irreligious
as the Atheist, altho' the Cause
of it was very different: for as the latter,
from a natural Propensity to Vice, and a
Resolution to suffer all the Consequences
of it, rather than deny himself any thing
he liked, drove all serious Thoughts as
much as possible from his Mind, and endeavoured
to make use of all the Fallacies
he could think on, to impose on his 

own Understanding; so the former, who
was naturally disposed to lead a regular
Life, and whose Inclinations prompted
him to nothing, which he might not have
been allowed in any Religion whatever,
put on all the Appearance of Viciousness
he could, because he was silly enough to
imagine it proved his Sense. And, as he
could not think deep enough to consult
on which side Truth lay, he never considered
farther than what would give him
the best Opportunity of displaying his Wit. 
He openly professed himself a great Lover
of Ridicule, and thought no Subject so
fit to exercise it on, as Religion and the
Clergy: he therefore, as soon as the other
had done speaking, ran through all the trite
things that ever were said on that head; 
such as the Pride of Priests—their being
greedy after their Tythes, &c. —This
he spoke with an Air, which at once
proved his Folly, and the strong Opinion
he had of his own Wisdom. 
The Clergyman heard all the Atheist's
Arguments, and the Butterfly's Jests,
without once offering to interrupt them; 
and, had they talked such Nonsense on
any other Subject, he would not have
taken the pains to answer them; but he 

thought the Duty of his Profession in this
case called upon him to endeavour, at
least, to convince them of their Error. 
His good Sense easily saw that to go too
deep would be only talking what they did
not understand, and consequently throwing
away his own Labour; he therefore
kept on the Surface of things, and to the
Atheist only proved that the Unevenness
of the Roads, or a Man's having the
Head-ach after a Debauch, (which were
the two Points he had insisted on) were
no Arguments against the Existence of a
Deity; and then had Good-nature enough
to try to bring him off from the Course
of Life he saw he was in, by shewing
him how easy it would be for him to
attain Health and Ease, if he would only
do what was in his own power, i. e. lead
a regular Life, for the sake of enjoying
those Benefits: and that then he would
find as much Cause to be thankful to the
Author of his Being, as he now fancied
he had to complain of him. 
To the Butterfly, (whose Disposition
was not hard, for a Man who knew the
World, to find out) he did nothing more
than shew him how very little Wit there
was in a repetition of what had been said 

a hundred times before; and, for his Encouragement,
to alter his way of thinking,
(or rather of talking) assured him,
that he might learn much more real Wit,
on the other side of the question, and
repeat it with less danger of having the
Theft found out. 
Every Word this Gentleman spoke,
and his Manner of speaking, convinced
Cynthia he was not endeavouring to shew
his own Parts, but acting from the true
Christian Principle of desiring to do good. 
She was perfectly silent the whole time
he was speaking; but, when he had concluded,
could not forbear rallying the
Butterfly, on his strong Desire of having
Wit; and told him, she knew several
Subjects he could talk on, so much better
than Religion, that she would advise him
to leave that intirely off, and take up with
those he was much fitter for, such as Gallantry
—Gaming—Dressing, &c. — 
This drew a loud Laughter from both
the Atheist and Butterfly. The latter replied,
Ay! Ay!—I warrant you—I
never knew an Instance when the Parsons
did not get the Women on their side; with
several coarse Jests not worth repeating. 
And now they had nothing to do, but to 

roar and make a noise; resolving, if they
could not confute their Adversaries, to
persecute them, by putting their Ears on
the rack, in hopes, by that means, for
the sake of Quietness, to extort a Confession
from them, of whatever they
pleased. In this Confusion of Noise— 
and Nonsense—they were obliged to continue,
till they arrived at the Inn in the
Evening, when Cynthia and the Clergyman,
on the pretence of being weary and
indisposed, left them, and retired to their
separate Rooms. 
The Atheist had been forming a
Scheme in his Mind, from the time he
first saw Cynthia, in what manner he
should address her; for, as he had persuaded
himself there was no such thing as
any one Virtue in the World, he was under
no Apprehension of being disappointed
in his hopes. Cynthia's Contempt of the
Butterfly was a convincing Proof to him
of her Understanding, and consequently
encouraged him to believe, that she must
be pleased with him. The only Difficulty
that he feared he should meet with, was
the finding an Opportunity of speaking to
her alone; but while he was perplexing his
Brains how he should accomplish his Designs, 

Accident threw that in his way,
which he knew not how to bring about
for himself. 
It was a fine Moon-light Night; and,
as the various things labouring in Cynthia's
Mind inclined her to be pensive and melancholy,
when she fancied the two Gentlemen
were safe at their Bottle for that
Evening, she went down a pair of Backstairs
into a little Garden belonging to the
House, in which was an Arbour. Here
she sat down, wandering in her own
Fancy through all the past Scenes of her
Life, the Usage she had met with from
almost all her Acquaintance; and their
different Behaviour, according to her different
Circumstances, gave her but an uneasy
Sensation: but by giving way to the
Bent of her Mind, at length all unpleasing
Thoughts were exhausted, and her
Imagination began to indulge her with
more agreeable Ideas. But, as if it had
been impossible for her to enjoy one moment's
Pleasure, no sooner had her
Thoughts taken this turn, than she saw
the Atheist, who softly, and unperceived by
her, (so fix'd was she in her own Contemplations)
was come near enough to sit
down by her. He had drank his Companion
to sleep; and, as it was not his 

usual time of going to bed, (which he
seldom did till four or five in the Morning)
accidentally roved into the Garden. 
Cynthia at first was startled, but endeavoured
as much as possible to conceal her
Fear, thinking that the Appearance of
Courage and Resolution, was the best
means she could make use of in her present
Situation. 
He began at first with talking to her
of indifferent things, but soon fell on the
Subject of his own Happiness, in thus
meeting with her alone. She immediately
rose up, and would have left him; but
he swore she should hear him out, and
promised her, if she would but attend
with Patience to what he had to say, she
should be at liberty to do as she pleased. 
He then began to compliment her on her
Understanding–––insisted that it was impossible
for a Woman of her Sense to be
tied down by the common Forms of
Custom–––which were only complied with
by Fools—then ran through all the Arguments
he could think of, to prove
that Pleasure is Pleasure—and that it is
better to be pleased than displeased. — 
Talked of Epicurus's saying, Pleasure is 

the chief Good, from which he very
wisely concluded, that Vice is the greatest
Pleasure. —In short, his Head naturally
not being very clear, and being
always confused with Liquor when it
came to be Night, he made such a medley
between Pleasure—and Pain—Virtue
—and Vice—that it was impossible
to distinguish what he had a mind to
prove. 
CYNTHIA could not help smiling,
to see a Man endeavouring to persuade
her, that she might follow her Inclinations
without a Crime, while she knew
that nothing could so much oppose her
gratifying him, as her pleasing herself. 
However, she thought it her wisest way
to be civil to him; for altho' she was not
far from the House, yet nothing could
have shocked her more, than to have
been obliged to make a noise. She therefore
told him, she did not doubt but
what he had said might be very reasonable,
but she had not Time now to consider
of it, being very ill, and therefore
begged she might go in for that Night,
and she would talk more to him the next
day. The Atheist was so much pleased
to think she gave any Attention to what 

he said, that for fear of disobliging her,
he left her at liberty to retire; which she
did with the utmost Joy. 



In which is plainly proved, that it is
possible for a Woman to be so strongly
fix'd in her Affection for one Man,
as to take no pleasure in hearing
Love from any other. 
The next Morning, Cynthia and
the Clergyman, who had neither of
them any Fumes arising from Intemperance
to sleep off, got into the Coach
with Cheerfulness and good Humour; 
they had all the Conversation to themselves
the first Stage, for the Atheist and
Butterfly both slept all the way till they
came to breakfast. There, with Hands
shaking in such a manner, that it was
with difficulty they could carry the Liquor
to their Mouths, they at last contrived
to revive their drooping Spirits, and began
to be as noisy as ever. The Atheist
looked at Cynthia with an assured Air, as
if he did not doubt of Success, till he often 

put her out of Countenance. But the
Butterfly paid her the greatest Respect
imaginable; being convinced, that as she
would not suffer any Familiarity from
him, she must be one of the most virtuous
Women that ever was born. The Clergyman
was so tired with their Impertinence,
he certainly would have got out
of the Coach, and walked afoot, had it
not been for his Consideration for Cynthia; 
for she had no Relief but in his Conversation. 
In this manner they went on, till
they came to the Place where they were
to dine, when the Postilion giddily
taking too little Compass, overturned the
Coach; and as it was on a Flat, they
were all in great danger of being killed,
or breaking their Limbs. However, they
were all taken out safe, except the Atheist,
who had stupified his Senses in such a
manner by the Breakfast he chose to drink,
that he had no Command of his Limbs,
and broke his Leg under him in the Fall. 
CYNTHIA was terribly frightned,
and begged the Clergyman to be so good
as to contrive some Method of having
the poor Wretch taken care of, and the 

Bone set again. Her Caution was perfectly
unnecessary; for from the Moment
the good Man saw the Accident, he was
considering which would be the best Method
of taking care of him. He presently
inquired for the best Surgeon in the
Town; and luckily there was one lived
the very next door, who was both a
Surgeon and an Apothecary. To his
House therefore he had him carried; he
went with him, and staid with him while
the Operation was performing; during
which time he alternately prayed—and
cursed—which struck the Clergyman with
the utmost Horror. However, he carried
his Christianity and Compassion so far,
as to enquire, whether he had any Money
in his Pocket to defray his Expences,
while he was confined there; and on being
answered in the Negative, offered to
leave him what was necessary. But on
the Apothecary's assuring him, that he
knew him very well, and would take
the utmost care of him, he returned to
Cynthia, who rejoiced to hear the poor
Creature was in such good hands. 
The Butterfly, whose Journey was at
an end, he being to go no farther, took
his Leave of them, humming the end of 

an Italian Song, without once enquiring
what was become of the poor Man, with
whose Sentiments he had so heartily concurred
the whole Way. 
They were now about sixteen Miles
from London. The Clergyman had wished
from the first Morning for an Opportunity
of being alone with Cynthia; but the
Hurries which attend Travelling in a
Stage-Coach, with his own Inexperience
in all Affairs of Gallantry, and his great
Fear of offending, had prevented his gratifying
that Wish: And now that Accident
had thrown what he desired in his
Way, his great Modesty, Distrust of himself,
and his Esteem for Cynthia, rendered
him almost incapable of speaking to her; 
he went on two or three Miles in the
greatest Fright imaginable, for every Step
the Horses took, he condemned himself
for losing his Time, and yet could not
bring himself to make use of it. At last,
he fell into a Discourse on Love; all his
Sentiments were so delicate, and the
Thoughts he expressed so refined, that
Cynthia not only agreed with him, but
could not forbear shewing by her Smiles,
and Good-humour, that she was greatly
pleased to meet with a Person who had so 

much her own Way of thinking. This
encouraged the Gentleman to speak, and
from talking of Love in general, he began
to be more particular: He begged
Pardon for being so abrupt; for which he
alledged as an Excuse the short Time he
had before he should lose Sight of her for
ever, unless she would be so good to inform
him where she lived. 
CYNTHIA was greatly surprized
at this Declaration, which she neither expected,
or wished; the Clergyman's Behaviour
for the short time she had in a
manner lived with him, had given her
great Reason to esteem him, and his Conversation
would have been a great Pleasure
to her on any Terms, but that of being
her Lover; but her Heart was already so
fixed, that she resolved never to suffer any
other Man to make Love to her; and she
would on no Account have endeavoured
to encrease the Affection of a Man of
Merit, with a View of making him uneasy. 
She therefore very seriously told
him, “that she was infinitely obliged to
him for the Affection he had expressed
for her; but, that as in her Circumstances
it was utterly impossible she
could ever return it; she must be excused 

from letting him know where she
lived, as the conversing with her, if he
had really an Inclination for her, would
only make him unhappy.” She spoke
this with such an Air of Sincerity, that the
Clergyman, who had no Deceit in himself,
nor was he apt to suspect others of it, resolved
to believe her, and whatever he
suffered, not to say any thing that might
give her Pain; and from that Moment
was silent on that Head: They soon arrived
in Town, where they parted. 
CYNTHIA took a Lodging, for
she knew not at present what to do with
herself: The Clergyman's having put
things on such a footing, that she could
not converse with him, made her very
uneasy; for she was in hopes before he
spoke to her of Love, that he would have
been a great Comfort to her, when she
came to Town. She almost made a Resolution
never to speak to any Man again,
beginning to think it impossible for a Man
to be civil to a Woman, unless he has
some Design upon her. But now having
brought Cynthia to Town, I think it
Time to take Leave of her for the present,
and look after my Hero. 




Containing an Account of several extraordinary
Transactions. 
The Morning after David had informed
Valentine and his Sister, of
what he knew concerning Cynthia, he
perceived a Melancholy in them both; 
which, although he imputed Camilla's
Thoughtfulness to her Love for her Brother,
and was not ignorant what it was,
sat so heavy on his Mind, as gave him great
Uneasiness: for he felt all the Pains of
his Friends to a much greater Degree
than he did his own. He therefore did all
he could to comfort Valentine, told him,
he did not doubt but Cynthia would immediately
answer Camilla's Letter, with
some Hints, that he himself might be the
Cause of her refusing all Offers; and
assured him, if his Fortune could any
way conduce to his Happiness, whatever
share of it was necessary for him, should
be intirely at his Service. 

VALENTINE was struck dumb
with this Generosity. Tenderness and Gratitude
for such uncommon Benevolence,
was to be answered no other way, but by
flowing Tears. David saw his Confusion,
and begged him not to fancy he was under
any Obligation to him, for that he
should think his Life and Fortune well
spent in the Service of a Man, whom
both Nature and Goodness had so nearly
allied to Camilla. Valentine at last with
much difficulty found a vent for his
Words, and swore no Passion of his
should ever make him a greater Burden
than he already was to such a Friend. 
Camilla, between the Concern for her
Brother, and the Pleasure David's Words
gave her, was quite overcome. But as
Tenderness, when it is come to the height,
is not to be described, I shall pass over
the rest of this Scene in Silence. 
VALENTINE's Impatience encreased
every Day to hear from Cynthia; 
a Week passed over, and no News of her: 
At last, one day as David was walking
through Westminster, he heard a Voice
which called him by his Name; and when 

he looked up, he saw Cynthia looking
out at an Upper-window; he immediately
ran into the House, and great were
his Raptures at the Thoughts of the Pleasure
he should carry home to his Friends. 
When he was seated, he began to tell
Cynthia, that he had met with Camilla
and Valentine: He had no sooner mentioned
their Names, than she asked him a
thousand Questions concerning them; 
which quite puzzled him, and he knew
not what to answer. This Confusion she
imputed to his having heard the Story of
their running away together, in an infamous
manner, which she had been told
at her first Arrival in Town with my Lady 
&wblank;but had never spoke of it to David,
as she was unwilling to spread the Report. 
At last she cryed out: “Sir, I beg, if
you have any Compassion for me, tell
me what you know of my Camilla, (she
spoke not a Word of Valentine) for there
is nothing I so much long to know,
as whether she is innocent of what she
is accused of; for if she is, how hard
is her Fate, and what must she have
suffered by lying under such an Imputation!” 

DAVID desired her to have a little
Patience, and he would tell her all: He
had not time then to repeat all Camilla's
Story, but said enough to clear her Innocence. 
Cynthia knew so much of the
World, she easily observed by his manner
of talking of her, that he was in love
with her. This gave her the greatest
Pleasure she could have received, as it
was the strongest Proof he could not think
her guilty. And when she was farther informed
in what manner they lived together,
and David (who was always contriving
Methods to give pleasure) invited
her to go home with him, and told her
there was room for her in the same
House; it is impossible to describe her Raptures: 
She immediately paid her Lodgings,
put her things into a Hackney-Coach,
and then they sat out together,
to find all that either of them valued in
this World. 
VALENTINE's Joy was greater
than he could bear, and almost overcame
his Senses. The Extacy thus suddenly
viewing Cynthia before him, threw him
into, almost made him forget the Respect
he had always paid her; and it was as 

much as he could do to forbear flying and
catching her in his Arms. Camilla, although
she could no ways blame Cynthia
for her Behaviour, and really loved
her with a sincere Affection; yet such is
human Frailty, that the first Sight of her
struck her with the Idea of David's having
liked her; and this Thought, in
spite of herself, was a great damp to the
Pleasure of meeting with her Friend. 
But Cynthia's Thoughts were so much
employed, she did not perceive it; she
ran and embraced her, and expressed the
utmost Joy to see her: she addressed most
of her Conversation to Camilla, but her
Eyes were fixed on Valentine; and I question
whether David had not more Joy
than either of them, as his Goodness
made him feel the Pleasures of all the
other three at once. 
That Evening, and all the ensuing
Day, they spent in informing each other
of every Accident that had befallen them
since their Separation; and, on the Day
following, Cynthia proposed at Breakfast
the taking a Coach, and riding thro'
all the Parts of this great Metropolis, to
view the various Countenances of the different
sorts of People that inhabit it. David 

said nothing could be more agreeable
to him, if Camilla approved of it: for,
as he had travelled through it in a more
attentive manner, than what was proposed
at present, he should be the better Judge
of People's Thoughts by their Manners
and Faces. Valentine had no Objection
to any thing proposed by Cynthia, on
which they called a Coach; and this
agreeable Party, and such another I
believe is not easily to be found, got
into it. 
They had no occasion to make the
Coach heavy, by loading it with Provisions,
there being many hospitable Houses
by the way open for their Entertainment; 
tho' I did once see a Coach, which set
out from the Tower, stop in the middle
of St. James's-street, and the Company
that were in it take a small Repaste of
Ham and cold Chicken; but that perhaps
was owing to a Weakness in some of
the Stomachs of the Passengers, which
disabled them from fasting above an Hour
at a time. 
As David and his Company passed
through the polite Parts of the Town
early in the Morning, they saw but few 

People worthy their Observation; all
there was hushed and still, as at the dead
of Night; but, when they came to the
more trading Part of the Town, the
Hurry there was equal to the Stillness they
had before observed. 
As they drove through Covent-Garden,
they saw a Company of Men reeling along,
as if they in a manner had lost the use of
their Legs; each of them had something
in his Right-hand, which he had picked
up in the Market; some had Hop-tops,
—others Flowers—others Cabbages— 
and some chose for Nosegays, a Bunch of
Onions or Garlick; but all their Hands
shook, as if it was with difficulty they
could hold any thing in them. As soon
as they saw the Coach, they ran, or rather
tumbled up to it, with the utmost Speed
their Condition would admit them, and
stammered out a Desire, that the Ladies
would accept of their Garlands. 
Poor Camilla was frighted; but Cynthia,
who had seen more of the World,
and perceived they were Gentlemen, (tho'
they had, as Shakespear says, “put that
into their Mouths, which had stolen
away their Brains”) took a Bunch of 

Flowers from a very young Fellow who
was foremost, and thanked him for her
Flowery Garland; after which they all
staggered away again—hallooing her
for her Good-humour. 
DAVID called to a Man who was
passing by, and asked him, if he knew any
of those Gentlemen, for that he thought it
pity somebody should not take care of them
home, for fear they should come to any
Mischief. Alack! Sir!––replied the Man,
there is no danger of them drunken Men
and Children—you know the Proverb
—I have kept a Shop in that Street
these twenty Years; and it is very few
Mornings, unless it be very bitter cold
Weather, but that a parcel of them pass
by: That young Gentleman who went
first, I am told, would make a very fine
Gentleman, if he did not drink so hard,–– 
and I had it from very good hands, for I
am acquainted with his Mother's Chambermaid,
and she must know to be sure. — 
And then that Hatchet-face Man who
came next,–––I think he had better take
care of his Wife and Children,–––than run
about spending his Money in such a manner,
he owes me a Bill of one Pound
three Shillings and two-pence: —But no 

wonder he can't pay his Debts, while he
leads such a sort of Life—That short
Man that walks by his Side, to my certain
Knowledge was arrested last Week; 
and I was told, if some of his rakish Companions
had not bailed him, he would
have found it a difficult matter to have
got out of the Bailiff's hands—for
faith and troth, Master,—if once they lay
hold of any one,—it is not an easy matter
to get from them again. —He is but poor
—I don't believe he is much richer than
one of we, that do keep Shops to get
our Livelihood;—and yet, they say, his
elder Brother rides in his Coach and Six. 
I think he might relieve him, when he is
in Distress;—indeed it is nothing to me,— 
and I never trouble my head about other
Folks Business. –––There is a Man lives in
that House yonder,––he pretends to set up
for a Gentleman, and yet I don't hear he
has any Estate; forsooth, he must have
Servants—though he can't tell where to
get Money to pay them—but they serve
him as he deserves, they won't over-work
themselves, I warrant them. –––But it is
time for me to go home, for I have enough
to do; besides, I hate gossiping,
and never talk of my Neighbours. He
spoke all this so fast, he would not give 

himself time to breathe, and kept his
Hand on the Coach-Door the whole time,
as if he was afraid it would drive away
from him. When he ceased speaking,
Cynthia applauded him for minding his
own Business, and not troubling himself
about other People; on which, he was
going to begin again, but Valentine bid
the Coachman drive on, and so left
him 
They went on some time musing,
without speaking one Word, till at last
Cynthia said, she should be glad to know
what they were all so thoughtful about,
and fancied it would be no ill Entertainment,
if every one of them were to tell
their Thoughts to the rest of the Company. 
They all liked the Proposal, and desired
Cynthia to begin first. 
She said, she was considering, amongst
the variety of Shops she saw, how very
few of them dealt in Things which were
really necessary to preserve Life or Health; 
and yet that those things which appeared
most useless, contributed to the general
Welfare: for whilst there was such a
thing as Property in the World, unless it
could be equally distributed, those People 

who have little or no share of it, must
find out Methods of getting what they
want, from those whose Lot it is to have
more than is necessary for them; and,
except all the World was so generous, as
to be willing to part with what they think
they have a right to, only for the pleasure
of helping others; the way to obtain
any thing from them is to apply to
their Passions: As, for instance, when a
Woman of Fashion goes home with her
Coach loaded with Jewels and Trinkets,
which, from Custom, she is brought to
think she cannot do without, and is indulging
her Vanity with the Thoughts of
out-shining some other Lady at the next
Ball––––the Tradesman who receives her
Money in Exchange for those things
which appear so trifling, to that Vanity perhaps
owes his own and his Family's Support. 
Here Cynthia ceased, and called
on Camilla to tell what it was her Mind
was so earnestly fixed on. 
She said she did not know whether
she ought not to be ashamed to own her
present Reflections, for she was not sure
they did not arise from Ill-nature; for
she was thinking, in all that number of
Houses they passed, how many miserable 

Creatures there were tearing one another
to-pieces, from Envy and Folly; how
many Mothers-in-Law, working underhand
with their Husbands, to make them
turn their Children out of Doors to Beggary
and Misery: She could not but own
the pleasing Sensations she felt, for being
delivered herself from those Misfortunes,
more than over-balanced her Sorrow for
her Fellow-Creatures; and she desired
David to tell her his Sentiments, whether
this was not in some measure triumphing
over them. I should have trembled
in some Companies at such a Question,
for fear the Eagerness to decide it
should prevent the hearing any one
Person's speaking at a time for half an
Hour together, but here it was otherwise; 
and David, after a little Consideration,
replied, 
Nothing can be more worthy of Admiration,
than to observe a young Woman
thus fearful of giving way to any
Frailty; but what you now express, I believe
has been felt by every Mortal. To
rejoice indeed at the Sufferings of any Individual,
would be a Sign of great Malignity; 
or to see another in Misery, and be
insensible of it, would be a Proof of the 

want of that Tenderness I so much admire:
but to comfort ourselves in any
Affliction, by the Consideration that it is
only the common Fate of Men, and that
we are not marked out as the peculiar
Objects of our Creator's Displeasure, is
certainly very reasonable. This is what
Shakespear calls, “bearing our own Misfortunes
on the Back of such, as have
before endured the like.” On the
other hand, to rejoice with Thankfulness,
when we escape any Misery, which generally
attends our Species, with a Mixture
of Compassion for their Sufferings, is rather
laudable than blameable. Camilla
was happy to find David did not condemn
her Thoughts, and then desired him to
tell what his were. 
I was musing, said he, on the Scene
we saw, and what that Man told us in
Covent-Garden, with the Oddness of his
Character; he seemed to take such a pleasure
in telling us the Faults of his Neighbours,
and yet looked with such a good-humoured
Countenance, as if railing
would be the last thing he could delight
in. Cynthia replied, it was very likely he
was a good Man, but that there is in
some Natures a prodigious Love of talking; 

and, from a want of any Ideas of
their own, they are obliged to fall on the
Actions of their Neighbours; and as, it
is to be feared, they often find more Ill
than Good in their Acquaintance, that
Love of talking naturally leads them into
Scandal. She then turned to Valentine,
and desired to know what had taken up
his Thoughts in such a manner as to make
him so silent. Valentine answered, he
was revolving in his Thoughts the miserable
Situation the Man was in, who was
in love with a Woman, whom his Circumstances
in Life debarred him from all
hopes of its ever being reasonable for him
to let her know it. While he spoke this,
he fixed his Eyes stedfastly on Cynthia; 
she observing it, blushed, and made him
no Answer. 
While they were discoursing in
this manner, David observed a Woman
behind a Counter, in a little Shop, sobbing
and crying as if her Heart would break; 
he had a Curiosity to know what was the
matter with her, and proposed the going
in, under the pretence of buying something
in the Shop, and by that means inquiring
into the Cause of all this terrible
Grief. The Woman did not seem at all 

shy of talking to them of her Misfortunes; 
but said, her Husband was the
most barbarous Man in the World. They
all began to pity her, and asked if he had
beat or abused her. No, no,––she said, much
worse than that;––she could sooner have
forgiven some Blows, than the Cruelty he
had been guilty of towards her. —At last
with the Interruption of many Tears, it
came out, that all this complaining was for
nothing more, than that her Husband having
received a Sum of Money, had chose
to pay his Debts with it, instead of buying
her and her Daughter some new Clothes. 
And sure, said she, there is Neighbour
such-a-one (pointing to a very handsome
young Woman, who sat in a Shop opposite
her) can have every thing new, as
often as she pleases; and I am sure her
Husband is more in debt than mine. I
think a Man ought to take care of his
own Wife and Children, before he pays
his Money to Strangers. Cynthia could
not forbear bursting into a loud Laughter,
when she heard the Cause of this Tragedy. 
The Woman seeing that, fancied
she made Sport of her; and turned her
melancholy Tone into a scolding one. She
was not very young, and the Wrinkles
in her Face were filled with drops of 

Water which had fallen from her Eyes; 
which, with the Yellowness of her Complexion,
made a Figure not unlike a Field
in the decline of the Year, when Harvest
is gathered in, and a smart Shower of
Rain has filled the Furrows with Water. 
Her Voice was so shrill, they all jumped
into the Coach as fast as they could, and
drove from the Door. 
CYNTHIA and Valentine talked of
this Accident in a ridiculous Light; but
David, in his usual way, was for enquiring
into the Cause of this Woman's Passions; 
and wondered how it was possible,
for such Trifles to discompose any one in
such a Manner. Camilla had lately, I
don't pretend to say from what Motive,
been very apt to enter into David's way
of Conversation, and looked very grave. 
CYNTHIA said, she was at no loss
to find out the Reason of the Scene, they
had just now been Witnesses of; for she
knew the common Cause of most Evils,
i. e. Envy was at the bottom of it. The
old Woman would have been contented
with her old Clothes, had not her handsome
Neighbour had new ones; for she,
no doubt, had observed this young Woman 

was taken most notice of, and from
a strong Resolution not to impute it to
her own Age, or any Defect in her Person,
flattered herself it was owing to the
other's being better dressed: For I have
known, continued Cynthia, something
very like this, in People of a much higher
Station. I remember once, I was with a
Lady who was trying on her Gown, her
Shape was but indifferent, for she was
something awry; she scolded at her
Manteau-Maker two hours, because she
did not look so streight and genteel as
another Lady of her Acquaintance, who
had one of the finest Shapes that ever was
seen. And yet this Woman in other
things did not want Sense, but she would
not see any Defect in her own Person, and
consequently resolved to throw the blame
on any thing else that came first in her
way. 
This little Set of Company, passed the
Remainder of that Day in amusing themselves
with every Incident that happened,
with their Observations on them; and as
they were all disposed in their own Minds
to be pleased, every Trifle was an addition
to their Pleasure. When they returned
home in the Evening, they were 

weary with their Jaunt, and finding
themselves inclined to Rest, retired to
Bed: Where I will leave them to their
Repose, and keep the next Day's Adventures
for a subsequent Chapter. 



Which introduces a Lady of Cynthia's
Acquaintance to the Company. 
Cynthia, who had been accustomed
for many Years to be
startled from her Sleep at every Morning's
Dawn, with all the uneasy Reflections of
the several Insults and Indignities, Ill-nature
and a Love of Tyranny had barbarously
made her suffer the day before,
was at present in so different a Situation,
that the returning Light, which used to
be her greatest Enemy, now as her best
Friend brought back to her Remembrance,
all those pleasing Ideas her present
Companions continually inspired her with. 
Therefore instead of endeavouring to
compose herself again to slumber, (the
usual method of the Unfortunate, in order 

to lose the Sense of their Sorrows)
the chearfulness of her Mind induced her
to leave her Bed, and indulge herself with
all those various Flights of Fancy, which
are generally the Reward of Temperance,
and Innocence. She stole softly into Camilla's Room, that if she was awake, she
might increase her own Pleasures by
sharing them with her Friend; but finding
her fast asleep, was again returning to
her own Chamber, when by a Servant's
opening the Door of an Apartment, by
which she was obliged to pass, she had
a transient View of a young Lady, with
whom she fancied she was very well acquainted,
but could not recollect where,
or by what Means she had seen her. 
This raised so great a Curiosity in Cynthia,
to know who she was, that she
could not forbear immediately inquiring
of the Maid of the House, who lodged
in that Apartment. The Maid replied,
“Truly she did not know
who she was, for she had not been
there above a Fortnight,—she was very
handsome,—but she believed a very
stupid kind of a Body—for that she
never dressed fine, or visited like other
Ladies, but sat moping by herself all
Day: but, continued she, there is no 

Reason to complain of her. I think
she is very honest, for she don't seem to
want for Money to pay for any thing she
has a mind to have; she goes by the
Name of Isabelle, and they say she is
a French Woman.” 
The Moment Cynthia heard her
Name, she remembered it to be the same
with that of the Marquis de Stainville's
Sister, whom she knew very well when
she was in France with my Lady &wblank;But
then she could not imagine what Accident
or Turn of Affairs could possibly have
brought her into that House, and have
caused so great an Alteration in her Temper,
as from a gay sprightly Girl, to fall
into so melancholy a Disposition. 
When David and his Companions
met at breakfast, Cynthia told them all
that had passed, and by what means she
had discovered an Acquaintance in that
House; and said she should be very glad
of this Opportunity of waiting on Isabelle; 
but that she feared by the retired
Life she seemed to chuse, Company
would be troublesome to her. 

DAVID immediately fancied, it must
be some terrible Distress, which had thus
thrown this young Lady into a settled
Melancholy; therefore begged Cynthia
with the utmost Eagerness to visit her,
and find out, if possible, if there was any
Method could be thought on for her Relief; 
and it was agreed by them all, that
after breakfast, Cynthia should send to
know, if she would admit of a Visit from
her. 
In the mean time the whole Conversation
was taken up in Conjectures on
Isabelle's Circumstances. Camilla could
not forbear enquiring of Cynthia, if this
young Lady had not a Father alive, and
whether it was not probable his marrying
a second Wife might be the cause of her
Misfortunes: But before there was time
for an Answer, David said, “I think,
Madam, you mentioned her Brother; 
he possibly may have treated her in such
a manner, as to make her hate her own
Country, and endeavour to change
the Scene, in hopes to abate her Misery.” 
In short, every one guessed at
some Reason or other, for a Woman
of Isabelle's Quality leading a Life so 

unsuitable to the Station Fortune had
placed her in. 
The Marquis de Stainville's Sister,
although at this time she would have
made it greatly her Choice to have been
quite alone; yet, as she had always had
a great liking to Cynthia's Company,
would not refuse to see her. Their
Conversation turned chiefly on indifferent
things; for Cynthia would not so far
transgress the Rules of Good Breeding, as
to ask her any Questions concerning her
own Affairs; but in the midst of their
Discourse, she often observed Tears to
flow from Isabelle's Eyes, though she used
her utmost Endeavours to conceal them. 
DAVID waited with great Impatience
while Cynthia was with Isabelle, in hopes
at her Return to learn, whether or no
it would be in his power to gratify his
favourite Passion (of doing Good) on this
Occasion: but when Cynthia informed
him, it was impossible as yet, without exceeding
all Bounds of Good Manners, to
know any Occurrences that had happened
to Isabelle; he grew very uneasy, and
could not forbear reflecting on the Tyranny
of Custom, which often subjects 

the Unfortunate to bear their Miseries; 
because her severe Laws will neither suffer
them to lay open their Distresses, without
being thought forward and impertinent; 
nor let even those People who
would relieve them, enquire into their
Misery, without being called by the World
madly curious, or ridiculously meddling. 
Whereas he thought, that to see another
uneasy, was a sufficient Reason for any of
the same Species to endeavour to know,
and remove the Cause of it. 
CYNTHIA on reflection was convinced,
that what on some Occasions would
be transgressing the Laws of Decency, in
this Case would be only the Effect of a
generous Compassion. She therefore
sought all Opportunities of conversing
with Isabelle, till at length by her amiable
and tender Behaviour she prevailed with
her to let her introduce her to David and
his Company. They were all surprized
at the Grandeur of her Air and Manner,
and the perfect Symmetry of her Features,
as much as they were concerned
at the Dejectedness of her Countenance,
and the fixed Melancholy which visibly
appeared in every thing she said, or did. 
For several Days they made it their whole 

Business to endeavour to divert her; but
(as is usually the Case where Grief is really
and unaffectedly rooted in the Heart) she
sighed at every thing, which at another
time would have given her pleasure. And
the Behaviour of this Company seemed
only to make her regret the more something
she had irrecoverably lost. She
begged to be left to her own private
Thoughts whatever they were, rather
than disturb the Felicity of such Minds as
she easily perceived theirs to be. 
But David would not, nor indeed
would any of the Company suffer her to
leave them, without informing them, whether
or no they could do any thing to
serve her. As to her saying, she perceived
by the Tenderness of their Dispositions,
she should only make them feel her Afflictions,
without any possibility of relieving
them; they looked on that to be
the common Reflection of every generous
Mind weighed down with present Grief. 
At last, by their continual Importunities,
and the Uneasiness she was convinced she
gave to People, who so much deserved
her Esteem, she resolved, whatever Pain
it would occasion her, to comply with their
Requests, and relate the History of her 

Life; which she accordingly began, as
follows: 
I was bred up from five Years of
Age in a Nunnery; nothing remarkable
happened to me during my Stay
there: but I spent my Time sometimes
with my Companions in innocent Amusements
and childish Pleasures, sometimes
in learning such things as were
thought by my Governess to be most
for my Improvement. At Fourteen, my
Father sent for me home, and indulged
me, in bringing with me a young Lady,
named Juliè, for whom I had taken a
great fancy. I had not been long there,
before a Gentleman, who often visited
and dined with my Father, made him
a Proposal of marrying me. He soon
informed me of it; and although he did
not absolutely command me to receive
him as my Lover, yet I plainly saw he
was very much inclined to the Match. 
This was the first time I had any Opportunity
of acting; or that I had ever
considered of any thing farther than how
to spend my time most agreeably from
one Hour to another. I immediately ran
and told my Companion what had passed,
in order to consult with her in what 

Method I had best act; but was very
much surprized, when I saw her, from
the Moment I mentioned the Gentleman's
Name, alternately blush and turn pale; 
and when she endeavoured to speak, her
Voice faultered, and she could not utter
her Words. When she was a little recovered,
she begged me to call for a
Glass of Water, for she was suddenly
taken very ill. I was in the utmost Confusion,
and knew not what to say; but
was resolved however for the present
not to begin again on a Subject that had
shocked her so much. We both endeavoured
to turn the Conversation on indifferent
things; but were so perplexed
in our own Thoughts, that it was impossible
for us to continue long together
without running into a Discourse on what
we were both so full of. I therefore soon
made some trifling Excuse, and left her; 
and I believe this Separation at that
time was the most agreeable thing that
could have happened to her. 
The Moment I was alone, and had
an Opportunity to reflect on the foregoing
Scene; young as I then was, I
could not avoid seeing the Cause of Juliè's
Behaviour: it appeared very odd 

to me, that a Girl of her Sense should
in so short a time be thus violently attached
to a Man; and had it not appeared
so very visibly, the Improbability
of it would have made me overlook it. 
For my own part, I neither liked or
disliked the Gentleman, but was perfectly
averse to Marriage, unless I had
a tender Regard for the Man I was to live
with as a Husband. But I began now to
think, that a Man who was capable of
making such a Conquest, without even endeavouring
at it, must have something
very uncommon in him; and was resolved
therefore to observe him more narrowly
for the future. I begged my Father
would give me leave to converse with
him a little while longer, without being
thought for that reason engaged in Honour
to live with him for ever: for
certainly it is very unreasonable that any
Person should be obliged immediately to
determine a Point of such great Importance. 
JULIE, now avoided me, as much
as formerly she used to contrive all ways
of being with me; and whenever we
were together, her downcast Eyes, and
anxious Looks, sufficiently declared her 

Uneasiness at my having discovered a Secret
she would willingly have concealed
within her own Bosom. 
My Lover being now admitted to converse
with me, seemed to make no doubt
but that he should soon gain my Affections,
and grew every day more and
more particular to me. I don't know
what was the Reason of it, (for he was
far from being a disagreeable Man) but
now he looked on himself as an accepted
Lover, my Indifference turned into a
perfect Aversion to him. I believe the
seeing poor Juliè's continual Unhappiness,
was one Cause that I could not bear him
to come near me. Besides, I fancied
that he saw her Love, (notwithstanding
all her Endeavours to conceal it)
and did not treat her in the manner a
good-natured Man would have done in
that Case. In short, I soon resolved to
declare to my Father, that nothing could
make me so unhappy as the marrying
this Gentleman, and to desire his Permission
to refuse him. But before I took
this Step, I was willing to talk to Juliè
about it; for as I saw her unhappy Situation,
I dreaded doing any thing that
might make her more miserable. I was 

very much perplexed, in what manner
I could bring about a Conversation on a
Subject, the very mentioning of which
had so violent an Effect on her. But one
Day, as we were sitting together, it came
into my Head to tell her a Story parallel
to our Case; where a young Woman, by
an obstinate concealing from her Friends
that she was in love with her Lover,
let her go on entirely to deprive her of
him for ever, and brought herself into
the most deplorable Condition imaginable. 
JULIE immediately understood my
Meaning, and after several Sighs and
Struggles with herself, burst out into the
following Expressions: “Oh, Isabelle,
what fresh Obligations are you every
Minute loading me with! The generous
Care you take of my future Peace, is
so much beyond my Expectation, that
it is impossible for me to thank you
in any Words adequate to the strong
Idea I have of your Goodness. I am
satisfied, most Women in your Case
would hate me as a Rival, although
they despised the Man contended for. 
I must own to you, from the time I
first saw Monsieur Le Buisson, I always 

liked him; and I flattered myself, that
he treated me with a peculiar Air of
Gallantry, which I fondly imputed to
a growing Passion. If ever I accidentally
met him walking in the Garden, or in
any other Place, he seemed to seek
Occasions to keep me with him. But
alas! I have since found out, that it
was his Love for you, which made
him endeavour to be acquainted with
me, as he saw we were generally together: 
If you like him, I will go and
bemoan my own wretched Fate in any
Corner of the Earth, rather than be
the least Obstacle to your Happiness.” 
Here she ceased, the swelling Tears
stood ready to start from her Eyes, and
she seemed almost choaked for want of
Utterance. I really pitied her, but knew
not which way to relieve her: To tell
Monsieur Le Buisson of her Passion, did not
appear to me, by what I could observe of
his Disposition, to be a likely Means of
succeeding. I tried all manner of ways, to
find if there was a possibility of making
her easy, in case there should be any unconquerable
Obstacle to the gratifying her
Inclination: but when at last I found she
would hearken with pleasure, to nothing 

but the talking of Methods to make
Monsieur Le Buisson in love with her, I
began to think seriously which way I could
bring it about. I imagined, if I kept
him on without any determinate Answer
what I would do, that I might by a disagreeable
Behaviour, joined to Juliè's
Good-nature and Softness, make him turn
his Affections on her. But it was some
time before I could bring myself to this; 
I thought it was not acting a sincere part,
and I abhorred nothing so much as Dissimulation. 
But then, when I considered
on the other side, that it would be making
my Friend happy, and doing no injury
to Monsieur Le Buisson, as it would
be the means of his having the best of
Wives, I overcame all my Scruples, and
engaged heartily in it. Every time I had
used him ill enough to work him into a
Rage, Juliè purposely threw herself in
his way, and by all the mild and gentle
Methods she could think on, endeavour'd
to calm his Mind, and bring him into
Good-humour again: In short, we did
this so often, that at last we succeeded to
our wish; I got rid of my Lover, and
Juliè engaged the Man, whose Love was
the only thing she thought could make
her happy. 

The Match was soon concluded, for
her Friends all greatly approved of it: I
was forced to tell my Father the whole
Truth, to prevent his thinking himself
injured by his Friend. He chid me at
first, for not informing him of it sooner; 
but as he always looked with a favourable
Eye on what I did, he soon forgave me. 
My Friend and I, both thought ourselves
now quite happy; Juliè in the Completion
of her Wishes, and I in having been
instrumental in bringing them about. 
But alas! better had it been for us both,
had she for ever shut herself from the
World, and spent her time in conquering,
instead of endeavouring to gratify and indulge
her Passion: for Monsieur Le Buisson,
in a very short time, grew quite
tired of her. For as she had never been
really his Inclination, and it was only by
working on the different Turns of his Passion,
that he was at first engaged to marry
her, he could not keep himself from falling.
at least, into a cold Indifference: 
However, as he was a polite Man, it
was some time before he could bring himself
to break through the Rules of good
Breeding, and he treated her with the
Respect and Civility he thought due to a 

Woman. This, however, did not prevent
her being very miserable; for the
great Tenderness she felt for him, required
all that Delicacy and soft Sensations in
his Behaviour, which only could have
completed the Happiness of such a Heart
as her's; but which it is impossible ever
to attain, where the Love is not perfectly
mutual. 
I denied myself the Pleasure of ever
seeing her, lest I should be the Cause of
any Disturbance between them, but my
Caution was all in vain; for she, poor
Soul, endeavoured to raise his Gratitude
and increase his Love, by continually reminding
him of her long and faithful Passion,
even from her first Acquaintance
with him, till at last, by these Means,
she put it into his head, that my Love
for my Friend, was the Cause of my
refusing and treating him ill. This
Thought rouzed a Fury in his Breast; 
all Decency and Ceremony gave way to
Rage, and from thinking her Fondness
had been his Curse, by preventing his
having the Woman he liked, she soon
became the Object of his Hatred rather
than his Love; and he could not forbear
venting continual Reproaches against her, 

for having thus gained him. Poor Juliè
did not long survive this Usage, but languished
a short time in greater Misery
than I can express, and then lost her
Life, and the Sense of her Misfortunes
together. 
This was the first real Affliction I had
ever felt; I had loved Juliè from her Infancy,
and I now looked upon myself to
have been the Cause of all her Sorrows; 
nor could I help in some measure blaming
my own Actions, for I had always dreaded
the Consequence of thus in a manner betraying
a Man into Matrimony. And altho'
perhaps it may be something a more
excusable Frailty, yet it certainly is as
much a Failure in point of Virtue, and as
great a want of Resolution, to indulge
the Inclination of our Friends to their
Ruin, as it is to gratify our own: or, to
speak more properly, to People who are
capable of Friendship, it is only a more
exquisite and refined way of giving themselves
Pleasure. But I will not attempt to
repeat all I endured on that occasion, and
shall only tell you, that Monsieur Le
Buisson, on the Death of his Wife, thinking
now all Obstacles were removed between
us, would again have been my 

Lover; but his Usage of my poor Juliè
had raised in me such an Indignation
against him, that I resolved never to see
him more. 
But here, at the Period of my first
Misfortune, I must cease; for I think nothing
but the strong Desire I have to
oblige this Company, could possibly have
supported my sunk and weak Spirits to
have talked so long at one time. 
The whole Company begged her
not to tire herself, and expressed their
hearty Thanks for what she had already
done. She insisted now on retiring
to her own Apartment, and promised
the next Day, if her Health would give
her leave, to continue her Story, in order
to satisfy their Curiosity; or rather to
convince them, that their Compassion in
her Case, must be rendered perfectly
fruitless, by the invincible Obstinacy of
her Misfortunes. 
After Isabelle had left them, they spent
the remainder of the Day in Remarks on
that part of her Story she had already imparted
to them. David could not help 

expressing the utmost Indignation against
Monsieur Le Buisson for his barbarous
and ungrateful Treatment of Juliè; he
desired Cynthia to engage Isabelle as early
as it was possible the next Morning, that
she might reassume her Story; which he
said must have something very extraordinary
in it; as the Death of her first
Friend, and that in so shocking a manner,
seemed to be but the Prologue to her
increasing Miseries. Had not Cynthia's
own Inclinations exactly agreed with his,
she would have been easily prevailed on,
to have obliged the Man who had generously
saved Valentine's Life, and was
the only Cause of her present happy Situation. 
In short, as soon as Isabelle was
stirring the following Day, she was persuaded
to join the Company, and after
Breakfast went on with her Story, as
follows. 




The Continuation of the History of Isabelle. 
After the Death of my favourite
Companion, I had an Aversion to
the Thoughts of all Lovers, and altho'
my Father had several Proposals for me,
yet I utterly rejected them, and begged
him, as the only means to make me go
through Life with any tolerable Ease,
that I might be permitted to spend my
Time at his Villa in Solitude and Retirement. 
His Fondness for me prevailed on
him to comply with my Request, and
Time began to make my late Affliction
subside. I had besides a Dawn of Comfort
in the Company of my Brother, who,
notwithstanding his Youth, and being a
Frenchman, was of so grave and philosophical
a Temper, that he having now finished
his Studies, like me preferred the
enjoying his own Thoughts in Ease and
Quiet, to all the gay Amusements and
noisy Pomp which were to be met with
in Paris. Tho' we had never been bred 

together, yet the present Sympathy of
our Tempers (for I was become as grave
from the late Accident which had befallen
me, as he was from Nature) led us
to contract the strictest Friendship for
each other. All Sprightliness was now
vanished, and I had no other Pleasure
but in my Brother's indulging me to
converse with him on serious Subjects: 
With this Amusement I began to be contented,
and to find returning Ease flow
in upon my Mind; but this was more
than I was long permitted to enjoy, for
whilst I was in this Situation, one Evening,
as my Father was coming from
Paris, he got a Fall from his Horse, by
which Accident he bruised his Side in such
a manner, that it threw him into a Pleurisy,
of which he died. Thus was I only
to be cured of the Sense of one Misery,
by the Birth of another; he had always
been to me a most indulgent Parent, and
the Horror I felt at the Loss of him,
rendered me for some time inconsolable; 
nor do I think any thing could have ever
made me overcome my Grief, but that
my Brother, now Marquis de Stainville,
notwithstanding I am certain he felt the
Loss equal with me, had Greatness of
Mind enough to enable him to stifle all 

his own Sorrows, in order to comfort and
support me under mine; till at length I
was ashamed to see so much Goodness
thrown away upon me, and I was resolved
(at least in appearance) to shake
off my Melancholy, that I might no longer
be a Burthen to such a Brother. This
Consideration, and the Agreeableness of
his Conversation, assisted me by degrees
to calm my Mind, and again return into
a State of Tranquillity: He often used to
entertain me with Stories of what had
happened to him at School, with his Remarks
(which were generally very judicious)
on them. One Evening, as we
were talking of Friendship, he related to
me the following Instance of a Boy's unusual
Attachment to him, which I will
give you in his own Words. 
“When I was at School, I contracted
a warm Friendship with the young
Chevalier Dumont: indeed it was impossible
for me to avoid it, for the
Sympathy of our Tempers was so very
strong, that Nature seemed to have
pointed us out as Companions to each
other. It is usual amongst every
number of Boys, for each of them to
single out some one or other with 

whom they more particularly converse
than with the rest; but we not only
loved one another better than all our
other School-fellows, but I verily believe,
if we had had our Choice
throughout the whole World, we neither
of us could have met with a
Friend to whom we could have been
so sincerely attached. Notwithstanding
our Youth, and the general Levity of
our Nation, we were both so fond of
Reading and Study, that we became
the Contempt of all the School; the
Boys used to laugh at us, calling us
Book-worms, and shun us, as unfit for
their Society: This was the most agreeable
thing that could have happened to
us, as it gave us an Opportunity to enjoy
each other's Company undisturbed,
and get Improvement by continually
reading together. In short, we spent
our Time, till we went to the Academy,
as pleasantly as I think it possible
to do in this World; there all
our Scenes of Pleasure were destroy'd
by the Villainy of a young Man, (one
Monsieur Le Neuf) whose Father was
so penurious, that he would not allow
him Money enough to be on a footing
with the rest of the young Gentlemen. 

This put him on all manner of Stratagems
to supply his Expences, which as
much exceeded the Bounds of common
Discretion, as his Father's Allowance fell
short of what was necessary. He soon
found out that I had great plenty of
Money, and therefore resolved some
way or other to get an Intimacy with
me: He affected the same Love of
Learning, and Taste for Study, with
the Chevalier and myself; till at last,
by his continual endeavouring to oblige
us, we were prevailed on often to admit
him into our Company. He saw
I had no great fondness for Money,
and was willing to share what I had
with my Friends; this put it into his
head to try if he could make a Quarrel
between Dumont and me, that he might
possess me wholly himself: And you
must know, Isabelle, notwithstanding
the present Calmness that appears in
my Temper, I am naturally excessively
passionate, and have such a Warmth
in my Disposition, that the least Suspicion
of being ill used by my Friends,
sets my whole Soul in a flame, and
enrages me to madness. Now the
sort of Mind in the World best suited
for Villainy to work its own Ends out 

of, is this. Le Neuf would often take
Opportunities to tell Stories of false
Friends; of People, who under the
pretence of Love, had betrayed, and
made their own Advantage of the
undesigning and artless, and would always
conclude with some Remarks on
the Folly of People's confiding too
strongly in others, unless a long Experience
had convinced them of their
Sincerity. We neither of us had the
least Suspicion of his Aim; and, as he
had an entertaining manner of telling
Stories, used to hearken to him with
the utmost Attention. 
“There was a Boy belonging to
the Academy, who had a Voice so like
Dumont's, that in another Room it was
very difficult to distinguish them from
each other. Le Neuf one day got
this Lad into a Chamber adjoining to
mine, and, when he had given him
his Lesson, began to talk very loud,
and mentioned my Name with such an
Eagerness, as gave me a Curiosity to
hear what they were talking of: But
what was my Surprize, when I heard
Dumont, (as I then thought) use me
with great Contempt; swear he would 

never have had any thing to say to
such a Fool, if my Command of Money
had not put it in his power to make a
proper use of me—And then endeavoured
to inveigle Le Neuf, that they two
might join together, in order to make
me the greater Dupe; but said, he must
still keep up the appearance of Generosity,
and Unwillingness to take any
thing from me, lest I should suspect
him! Le Neuf immediately answered,
that he would not for the World deceive
me—but would let me know
what a Friend I had in Dumont, if it
was not for fear that he would have
Art enough to make him appear only
a Mischief-maker—and still impose the
more on me. But, continued he, I
will endeavour all the ways I can to
open his Eyes, and let him see the regard
you have for him. 
“I had now heard enough, and was
going hastily to break open the Door,
but found it locked. Le Neuf well
knew who it was, and sent the Boy out
at another Door, down a Pair of Back-Stairs,
and then let me in. The Fury
of my Looks sufficiently declared that
I had been witness of all that had 

passed between him and the fancied
Dumont. I stared wildly about the
Room, in hopes to find him, but in
vain. Le Neuf was in the highest Satisfaction
imaginable at this Success of
his vile Scheme, and said, That by
my Actions and Manner, he was convinced,
Accident had undeceived me
with regard to my Opinion of Dumont; 
that indeed he had a long time
been thinking of a Method to let me
know the Truth; but was always afraid
my fixed Love for my Friend,
would have put it in his power, to
blind my Eyes enough to make him
appear the only guilty Person. You
may remember, Sir, continued he,
how much my Conversation has turn'd,
ever since I have had the Pleasure of
knowing you, on the great Caution
that is necessary (if we would preserve
our own Peace) before we intirely place
a Confidence in any Man. What you
have now over-heard, will prove this
to you better than all I could say: But
let me add another piece of Advice,
which is no less proper for you upon
this Occasion: Break off your Friendship
with Dumont by degrees, without
ever telling him the real Cause; that 

would only produce a Quarrel between
you, which might have bad Consequences; 
and when the Subject of it
comes to be known in the World, it
might bring some Disgrace upon you,
for having been duped by him so long,
and give you the Air of a Bubble. It
is therefore much more prudent to let
your Connection with him quietly
drop, than to come to any disagreeable
and publick Explanations upon this
Affair. 
“Thus did this artful Villain endeavour
to guard against any Eclaircissement
between me and my Friend,
which might produce a Discovery of the
Trick he had played; and had my Temper
been cooler, he would have succeeded; 
but I was then quite incapable of
attending to any Considerations of Prudence: 
And, in the height of my Rage,
ran down stairs to seek Satisfaction of
the injured Dumont, for the Wrongs I
falsly imagined he had done me. 
Upon inquiry I found he was gone
out through the Garden into a Field,
the properest place in the World for
my present Purpose. He was alone,
out of either the hearing or sight of 

any Mortal. The Moment I came
near enough to be heard, I drew my
Sword, and called on him to defend
himself; it was in this Instant that
Dumont (notwithstanding the Surprize
he must undoubtedly be in) collected
all his Resolution, and exerted the
highest Friendship, to prevent the happening
of an Accident so fatal, as must
either have cost me my Life, or destroyed
all my future Peace. In short,
all the opprobrious Language I could
give him could not provoke him to
draw his Sword; but with the warmest
Entreaties he begged me to put up
mine, till we could come to some Eclaircissement. 
“I now began to think he added
Cowardice to Treachery, and in my
Rage had not Command enough of
myself to forbear adding the Name of
Coward to the rest of my Reproaches. 
Still he bore it all: At last he swore,
If I would but have Patience till he
knew what it was that had thrown me
into this Passion, if he could not clear
himself, he would not refuse to fight with
me, whenever I pleased. These Words a
little abated my Fury, and I put up my 

Sword, and then told him all I thought
I had over-heard between him and Le
Neuf. It is impossible to describe his
Amazement at hearing this; I thought
there was something so innocent in his
Looks, that all my former Love returned
for him, and I began to fancy
I had been in a Dream: He at length
got so far the better of me, that I
consented to make a stricter Enquiry
into this Affair before we proceeded
any farther. 
“We walked some time together,
but every Word Dumont spoke put me
so much in mind of that Wretch's
Voice who had deceived me, that I
could hardly keep myself from bursting
into fresh Passions every Moment:
he perceived it, and kindly bore all
my Infirmities. 
“As soon as we came home, we called
Le Neuf; and the Chevalier asked him
what Villainy he could have contrived
to impose so much on my Understanding,
as to make me believe he
had ever mentioned my Name but with
the greatest Respect and Friendship; 
he was too much hardened in his 

Wickedness to recede from what he
had begun; and said, I was the best
Judge whether I knew Dumont's Voice
or no: and then pretended to be in
the greatest Astonishment, that a Man
could in so short a time deny his own
Words, to the face of the very Person
to whom he had spoke them. We all
three stood looking at one another in
great Perplexity; and, for my part,
I knew not which way to come at the
Truth. At last Dumont begged me to
have Patience till the next Day, and,
by that time, he did not doubt but
he should make every thing clear before
me; to which, with much Persuasion,
I at last consented. 
“The Chevalier knew Le Neuf used
to go every Night to walk in a solitary
Place, in order, as he supposed, to
plot the Mischiefs he intended to perpetrate; 
thither he followed him a
little after Sun-set, and catching hold
of him by the Collar, swore, that Moment
should be his last, unless he confessed
who it was that he had bribed to
speak in his Voice, in order to impose
upon me. The Villain had not the
Courage to draw his Sword, but falling
down on his Knees, confessed the 

whole, and shewed the Baseness of his
Nature no less in begging Pardon,
than he had done in committing the
Crime. But Dumont refused to forgive
him, unless on condition of his going
with him to me, and repeating the
same Confession, to which the mean
Creature submitted. 
“Think, my Isabelle, (continued my
Brother) what I must feel, when I
found I had wrong'd the Man, who
was capable of acting in the generous
and uncommon manner the Chevalier
had done; he saw my Confusion, and
kindly flew to my Relief. Now, said
he, I hope my dear Friend is convinced
of my Innocence; and at the
same time embracing me, assured me
he would impute the Violence of my
Passion to the Vehemence of my
Love, and never mention this Accident
more. 
“LE NEUF begged we would
keep this Affair a Secret, but that we
could not consent to, for the sake of
others. We asked him how it was
possible, that at his Age he could think
of such Villainy, for the sake of a 

little Money; to which he replied,
that he had been from his Infancy bred
up with a Father, who had amassed
great Wealth, by never sticking at any
thing, from which he could gain any
Advantage; and altho' indeed, contrary
to his Father, he loved to spend
it, yet he had always laid it down as a
Maxim, that all Considerations were to
be sacrificed to the getting it. 
“We made him produce the Boy he
had employed, and he really spoke so
like the Chevalier, we could not distinguish
one Voice from the other; on
which the good-natured Dumont told
me, I ought not to be angry with myself
for not avoiding an Imposition,
which must have deceived all the
World: This was Generosity—this
was being a true Friend—for the Man
who will bear another's Frailties, in
my Opinion, is the only Person who deserves
that Name. Those People who
let their Pride intervene with their
Tenderness, enough to make them
quarrel with their Friends for their
Mistakes, may sometimes make an
appearance of loving another, but in
reality they never enter into Engagements 

from any other Motive than
Selfishness: and I think the Man who
forsakes his Friend, only because he is
not perfect, is much upon the same
footing with one who will be no
longer faithful to his Friend, than
while Fortune favours him. I have
told you this Story, Sister, only to let
you into the Character of the Man I so
deservedly esteem; that, as you are
my chief Companion, when I talk of
him, (as I am fond of doing) you may
not be an entire Stranger to him: I left
him at the Academy, where I have
since written to him, and am suprized
I have had no Answer. As to Le
Neuf, we published his Infamy, which
obliged him to leave the Academy.” 
Here my Brother ceased. 
As soon as Isabelle had related thus
much of her Story, Cynthia desired her to
rest herself before she proceeded: And,
in the mean time, David could not forbear
shewing his Indignation against Le
Neuf, and declaring his Approbation of
the Marquis de Stainville's Sentiments,
that nothing but finding some great Fault
in the Heart, can ever excuse us for abandoning
our Friends. The whole Company 

joined in their Admiration of the
Chevalier Dumont's Behaviour; but, perceiving
that turning the Conversation a
little on indifferent Subjects, would be the
best means of enabling Isabelle to relate
what remained, they endeavoured to amuse
her as much as lay in their power; 
and, as soon as she had a little recovered
herself, she went on, as will be seen in
the next Chapter. 




The Continuation of the History of
Isabelle. 
After my Brother had told me
this Story, his favourite Subject of
Conversation was the Chevalier Dumont; 
but this lasted not long, before the accidental
Sight of a young Lady at a Neighbour's
House turned all his Thoughts
another way; her Name was Dorimene,
Daughter to the Count de &wblank;. 
As the Marquis de Stainville never concealed
any thing from me, he immediately
told me the Admiration Dorimene
had inspired him with; his whole Soul
was so filled with her Idea, he could neither
think nor talk of any thing else; she
was to stay some time with the Gentleman's
Lady where my Brother saw her; 
and, as I had a small Acquaintance with
her, at his Request I went to wait on her,
in order to get an Opportunity to invite
Dorimene to our House. I was a little
surprized at the great and sudden Effect 

her Charms had had on my Brother; 
but at the first sight of her all my wonder
vanished; for the elegant Turn of her
whole Person, joined to the regular Beauties
of her Face, would rather have made
it matter of Astonishment, if a Man of
my Brother's Age could have seen her
without being in love with her. In short,
a very little Conversation with her quite
overcame him, and he thought of nothing
but marrying her. 
The Marquis de Stainville was in
the possession of so large a Fortune, that
he was a Match for Dorimene, which
there was no danger of her Friends refusing; 
and the Gentleman with whom
she then was, being very intimate with
her Father, immediately wrote him word
of the particular notice my Brother took
of his Daughter. On the receipt of this
Letter the Count de &wblank;came to his
Friend's House, under the pretence of fetching
Dorimene home, but in reality with a
Design of concluding the Match between
her and my Brother. She was very young,
had never had any other Engagement; 
and, as the Custom in France makes
most Ladies think a married Life most 

agreeable, she implicitly obeyed her Father. 
The Marquis de Stainville's Passion
for her was so violent, that it could not
bear any Delay. In a Month's time they
were married, with the Consent of all
Parties; and, in the possession of Dorimene,
my Brother's Happiness was compleat,
nor did he know a Wish beyond it. 
On her Request I continued to live with
them, and we spent our Time very agreeably,
for Dorimene was really an amiable
Companion; she was not of a Temper to be
ruffled with Trifles, and, as to the generality
of things, was very indifferent which
way they went. I never saw her but once
in a Passion, but then indeed she perfectly
frightned me; for she was quite furious,
and her Mind was agitated with much
more Violence than those that are easily
put into Disorder can ever be. My Brother
doated on her to Distraction, the
least Intimation of any Inclination of her's
was enough to make him fly to obey her; 
at her Desire we spent a few Months in
the Winter at Paris, but then she gave
no farther into the Gayeties of that Place
than her Husband approved of. 

The Count de &wblank;had a small Villa
about six Leagues from Paris, which was
as pleasantly situated as any in France; 
in this Place my Brother took a fancy to
spend the next Summer after he was married. 
In a little while after we had been
there, as my Sister and I were sitting one
day in a Grotto at the End of a Parterre,
we saw the Marquis de Stainville and
another Gentleman coming towards us; 
we rose up to meet them, and as soon as
we were near enough to join Companies,
my Brother took the Gentleman by the
Hand, and presented him to us under the
Name of the Chevalier Dumont. Dorimene
and I (for she had also heard his
History) were both rejoiced at thus meeting
with the Man my Brother had given
us so advantageous a Character of. She
politely said, “That nothing could be
more welcome to her than the Marquis
de Stainville's Friend.” We walked
some time in the Garden, but my Brother
observing the Chevalier grow faint,
proposed the going in; saying, “That
as he was but just recovered of a Fit of
Sickness, it would be adviseable for
him to be in the House.” And indeed
he looked so pale and thin, that it 

was rather wonderful how it was possible
for him to bear being out of his Bed, than
that Rest should be necessary for him: he
was in so weak a State of Health, that we
spent two or three Days together before
the Marquis would ask him any Particulars; 
but as soon as he thought he had
gained Strength enough, to enable him
to relate all that had happened to him,
from the time of their Separation, he eagerly
desired him not to let him remain
in ignorance of whatever had befallen
him during that Interval: which Request
both my Sister and I earnestly joined in,
and the Chevalier obligingly began, as
follows: 
“The Day, Sir, after you left the Academy,
when I was in the height of
my Melancholy for your Loss, to
compleat my Affliction, I received a
Letter from my Mother, “That my
Father was taken very ill, and desired
me to hasten Home, as I valued ever
seeing him again.” I did not delay
a Moment obeying his Commands; 
but immediately took Horse and rode
with full Speed till I reached his Villa:
he was yet alive, but so near his End,
that it was with difficulty he uttered 

his Words. The Moment I entered
his Chamber, and he was told by his
fond and afflicted Wife that I was there
to attend his Commands, he raised himself
up in his Bed, and seemed to keep
Life in him by Force, in order to give
me his last Blessing. He then desired
to be left some few Minutes with me
alone; and as I approached his Bedside,
he took me by the Hand, and
sighing said, “Oh! my Son, I have
ruined you and the best of Wives at
once, you know the long and faithful
Friendship I have had for Monsieur 
&wblank;and the great Obligations I
owe to him. After you was separated
from me, in order to follow your
Studies, he married a young and beautiful
Lady, whom he was so fond of,
he could deny her nothing. She was
one of those gay Ladies, who never
thought herself so happy, as when she
was lavishing her Husband's Fortune
on her own Extravagance; by this
Means she soon brought him into the
most distressed State imaginable; he
had a growing Family, and no Means
of supporting them. I could not bear
to see his Misery, and presently relieved
it: I did this once or twice; but 

he had so much Generosity, and so
strong a Resolution, that he absolutely
refused to drag me down to Ruin
and Perdition with him. He obstinately
persisted in what he thought
right, and I on the other hand was
as fully bent never to let him sink,
without sharing his Misfortunes. In
short, I by degrees underhand sold
almost every thing I was worth, and
convey'd it to him in such a manner,
that he never knew who it came from. 
If God had been pleased to have spared
my Life, I intended to have got you
a Post in the Army, and had a Scheme
in my Head, which I thought could
not fail to have made some Provision for
your Mother; but it is now at an end,
my Strength fails me, and I can no
more. Farewell for ever: As you are
young, if you can make any Struggle
in the World, cherish, and take care
of my Wife.” At these Words he ceased
speaking, and breathed his last in my
Arms.” 
At this Description Dorimene and
I both burst into Tears, in spite of our
utmost Endeavours to prevent it; which
stopt the Chevalier Dumont's Narration 

for a few Minutes, when on our earnest
Intreaties he thus proceeded. 
“I see I need not explain to these Ladies,
what I felt on this dreadful Occasion; 
they seem too sensible of the
Miseries that attend Human Kind, not
to imagine it all without my Assistance; 
nor will I shock the Tenderness of any
of this Company, with the Repetition
of my Mother's Grief; but shall only
say, it was as great as the softest Heart
could feel on the Loss of a Husband,
whom she had lived with, and tenderly
loved for Thirty Years together. Perhaps
as my Father had a Family, he
may be thought blameable for such a
Conduct; but for my part, notwithstanding
I am the Sufferer, I shall always
honour his Memory the more
for it; when I reflect that I have
often heard him say, that to the Gentleman's
Father (for whom he at last
ruined himself) he owed all that he had
in the World. 
“I was afraid of revealing to my
Mother, what my Father had told
me, and delayed it some time for no
other Reason but from want of Resolution 

to add to the Load of Afflictions
she was already burdened with; at last,
Necessity forced me to undertake the
Task, however uneasy it was to me:
for the Person who had bought the
House we were then in of my Father,
was to enter upon it the next Week. 
I really believe the Uneasiness the poor
Man suffered on that account, and
chiefly for his Wife's sake, hastened his
Death. When I disclosed to my Mother
the present Situation of our Affairs,
instead of burdening me with
Complaints and Lamentations, she at
first shewed a perfect Indifference, and
said, as she had lost her only Comfort
in losing my Father, she cared very
little what became of her; but then
looking at me with an Air of the
greatest Tenderness, she sighed, and
said, Why did I bring into the World
a Creature with your generous Sentiments!
who after being educated like
a Gentleman, must be thrown on the
wide World without any Means of
supporting that Station in Life. She
saw how much her Discourse affected
me, and therefore said no more. 

“As soon as I had time to reflect
by myself on the present Condition of
my Affairs, I began seriously to consider
what I should do; for I was resolved
in some shape or other to support
my Mother: My Thoughts immediately
turned on you, my dear
Marquis de Stainville, and I made no
doubt, but in your Friendship I should
meet with an Asylum from all my Cares
and Afflictions. I then wrote the Letter
I have already mentioned to you; 
it was not at all in the Style of a poor
Man to his Patron, but rather rejoicing
that I had an Opportunity of
giving you what I thought the highest
Pleasure in the World, that of relieving
your Friend from the greatest Distress
that could be imagined; that is, the
having a helpless and distressed Mother
upon my hands, without its being in
my power to help her. 
“When I had sent away my Letter,
I got Credit for a little House, where
I placed my Mother; but as soon as I
thought it possible for me to have an
Answer, I cannot describe the anxious
Hours I passed: every Moment seemed 

a thousand; day after day was I in
this Situation, and no Letter came to
comfort me. Forgive me, my dear
Friend; nothing could have given me
any Suspicion of you at another time:
but now every thing seemed so much
my Enemy, that I thought you so too. 
When I remembered our tender Parting,
Tears would start into my Eyes,
and I thought, to have you forsake me,
because I wanted Fortune, was more
than I could bear: Yet in the midst
of all this Trouble, I was obliged to
struggle and appear chearful, to keep
up my poor Mother's sinking Spirits. 
To tell you the Variety of Misery I
went through, would make my Story
tedious, and be shocking to your Natures: 
When I thought my Stainville
had forsaken me, the Neglect of all
my other professed Friends was trifling. 
The Insults of my Creditors
I could have supported with tolerable
Patience; but my Father's last Words,
Take care of my Wife, continually resounded
in my Ears; and I saw daily
before my Eyes, this Wife—this Mother
—and found myself utterly void
of any Power to save her from Destruction; 

and now fruitless Lamentations
were the only Refuge left me. 
“When I was almost drove to the
utmost Despair, at last often revolving
in my Mind various Schemes to extricate
myself out of the deplorable
Condition of seeing a tender Parent
languish away her little Remains of
Life in want of Necessaries, brought to
my Remembrance the young Duke de 
&wblank;who you know, Sir, left the
Academy about two Months after we
came to it. The little while he was
there with us, he was particularly civil
to me; and I resolved now as my last
Effort to write him my Case in the
most pathetick Terms I could think of,
and try if I could prevail on him to deliver
me out of my Misery. It was
some time before I obtained an Answer,
and when it came, it was perfectly
in the Style of a great Man to
his Dependant: However at the Bottom
he told me he had procured a
Place for me, which would bring in
about 50 Louis-d'ors a Year; if I
would accept this, I must come immediately
to Paris. 

“Though this was not a thing fit
to be offered a Gentleman; yet it was
not a Time for me to consider my Station
in Life; this would be some little
Support to my Mother, and I did not
fear bustling in the World for myself. 
I was going to Paris, when I was taken
ill of a violent Fever in the House
where you found me. I had but just
enough in my Pocket to have carried
me to my Journey's End; this was
soon spent in Sickness, and I was in a
Place where I was an utter Stranger,
confined to my Bed, without a Penny
to help myself: And though Death
would have been very welcome to me,
as it would have put an end to my
Misfortunes; yet when I considered
my Mother, I looked on it with great
Dread. 
“My Landlord happened to be a
very humane good-natured Man,
and on my telling him my helpless
Condition, desired me not to make
myself uneasy, for that he would for
the present bring me Necessaries, and
he did not doubt, but by the Representation
of my Circumstances, to a 

very charitable Gentleman, who was
lately come to the Count de &wblank;'s
he should get me some Relief. 
“My Distemper became so violent,
that I was hardly sensible; but by the
great Care that was taken of me, it
abated by Degrees; and as soon as I
came to recollect how long I had lain
there, I asked who was the generous
Benefactor to whom I owed the Preservation
of my Life; and was immediately
told by my Landlord, that he had
found a Method of making my Case
known to the Marquis de Stainville,
who had given strict Orders to have
the utmost Care taken of me, and sent
Money for that Purpose. At the
Sound of that Name I started up in my
Bed, and stared so wildly, that the
poor Man was quite frightned. At
last I cryed out, Are you sure it is the
Marquis de Stainville? Are you positive
you don't mistake the Name? 
No, no, Sir, replied the Man, I know
I am right in what I say, he married the
Count de &wblank;'s Daughter, and is
here at his House. I had lived so retired
from the time of my Father's
Death, and had been so little inquisitive 

about any thing that passed in the
World, that I had never so much as
heard of your Marriage: However,
on the Man's positive Assurance, that
he was not mistaken, I began to think
this Goodness was like the Nature of
my old Friend; but then it seemed
to me improbable, that a Man who was
capable of being so charitable to
Strangers, could abandon his Friend in
the highest Distress. This put it into my
Head, that possibly my Letter might
have miscarried, and you were yet ignorant
of all I had suffered. This Thought
infused such inexpressible and sudden
Joy all over me, it hastened my Recovery
so much, that in two Days
time I was able to walk about my
Room. 
“As I was sitting and considering with
myself which way I should bring about
an Interview with you, without directly
sending my Name, my Landlord said; 
Now, Sir, if you have a mind to see
your Benefactor, the Marquis de Stainville,
at that Window you may satisfy
your Curiosity, for he is coming this
way. I immediately placed myself in
such a Position, that it was impossible 

for you to pass by without seeing me: 
But how, Ladies, shall I describe my
Raptures, when I saw the Marquis de
Stainville start at the first Sight of me; 
fly in a moment back to the Door,
and run into my Arms, with all the
Joy which attends the unexpected
Meeting of a long absent Friend! 
This sudden Transport, with the
Shame I felt for having ever suspected
his Affection, joined to the great
Weakness of my Body, quite overcame
me, and it was some time before
my Words could find an Utterance:
but as soon as I was able to speak, I
asked him ten thousand Questions at
once, talked confusedly of a Letter; 
in short, we could not presently understand
one another: but at last I
found out, that all I had endured was
owing to accidentally directing my
Letter to the Marquis at Paris, when
he was at his Father's Villa, which occasioned
its being lost; nor did I ever
receive that my Friend wrote to me at
the Academy, having left that Place,
as I at first told you, the Day after we
were separated.” 

Here my Brother interrupted the
Chevalier Dumont, and said, there had
nothing more happened worth mentioning,
till they met us in the Garden; but
we were so pleased with this happy Meeting
of the two Friends, that we begged
to know every thing that had passed between
them; and, on our Request, the
Chevalier proceeded. 
“It is the Marquis's Generosity, Ladies,
which makes him willing that I
should stop here, as what remains is
a Proof that I owe him the greatest
Obligation imaginable. In our Walk
home, altho', as he saw me weak, he
would not enquire into more Particulars,
than he thought necessary to find
out in what manner he could best serve
me; yet his Impatience, to prove by
all ways how much he was my Friend,
led him to ask me by what means I
could have been brought into such a
Condition; and I in broken Sentences
explained myself so far to him, that,
with his Penetration, he found out,
that to send an immediate Relief to my
Mother, was the only thing that could 

give me Ease. This he has already
done.” 
The Marquis would by no means admit
him to go any farther; but said, I
beg, my dear Dumont, you will talk no
more of such Trifles, you shall share my
Fortune with me; and, from this time
forward, the only Favour I beg of you,
is to make my House your own, nor
shall you accept of that pitiful thing the
Duke de &wblank;designed for you. 
The Chevalier's Heart was too full to
make any Answer, and my Brother artfully
turned the Conversation another way. 
Politeness and Good-humour reigned
throughout this our little Company, and
the agreeable and lively manner in which
we spent our Time, joined to his being
convinced of the Sincerity of his Friend,
had such an immediate Effect on the
tender-hearted Dumont, that it is almost
incredible how soon he was restored to
perfect Health. This was by much the
happiest Part of my Life, and on this little
Period of Time, I wish I could for
ever fix my Thoughts: but our Tranquility
was soon disturbed, by an Accident 

which I must pause, and take breath
a while, before I relate. 
In the mean time, David and Valentine
both expressed their great Admiration
of the Marquis de Stainville and the Chevalier
Dumont's sincere and faithful Friendship,
and by their Looks and Gestures
plainly declared the inward Exultings of
their Minds, at the Thought that they had
met with the same Happiness in each
other. But Isabelle's last Words had raised
the Curiosity of the whole Company to
such a degree, that she was resolved she
would keep them no longer in suspense
than was necessary to enable her to gratify
them; and then proceeded, as will be
seen in the next Chapter. 