


Containing a brief Account of the Transaction of eleven Years. 
That David Simple, having been
for some Years retired from the
World, and when all his Transactions
had been so long buried in Oblivion,
should again appear on the Stage, is owing
to his having undergone a Variety of Accidents; 
and some as remarkable as any in his
former Story. I therefore doubt not, but
those Persons who were then pleased with
his Character, will be no less pleased with
knowing the Remainder of so very uncommon
a Life: and for those who are yet unacquainted
with our Hero, we hope his
Character will in the following Pages appear
strong enough to need no formal Description,
in the Beginning of this Book. 

A Man, actuated by neither Avarice nor
Ambition, his Mind moving on no other
Axis but that of Love, having obtained a
Wife his Judgment approves, and his Inclination
delights in; seeing, at the same time,
all his Friends chearful and pleased around
him, seems to be in a State of Happiness,
in comparison of which, every thing in this
World is trifling. And in this agreeable
Situation did David Simple and his Friends
continue (with the Exception only of some
pecuniary Losses, which could not destroy
Felicity so founded) for the space of eleven
Years: which Time I shall pass over with
as much Brevity as possible, so as to lead
my Reader to the Beginning of that Year,
in which David Simple began to be convinced
that although no Scheme for Happiness
could be built on a better Foundation than
his; although the Union of Hearts, which
subsisted in that happy Family, was sufficient
to compensate every common outward
Evil; yet there may be such a Concurrence
of Events, such heart-rending
Scenes, arising from this very friendly
Connection, as must undeniably prove the
Truth of that Observation, so common
both in the Writings and Conversations of
Mankind, namely, “That solid and lasting 

Happiness is not to be attained in this
World.” 
That a frequent Repetition of this Observation
is necessary, in order to remind
People of its Truth, appears but too plainly,
when we see, that notwithstanding the
universal Concurrence of Mankind, in all
Ages, in its favour, yet their Forgetfulness
of it may fairly be concluded from the various
and anxious Pursuits, in which they
are so universally employed. 
David Simple's Family, as we left them
in the second Volume, after the double
Marriage, consisted of himself and his Camilla,
Valentine and his Cynthia, and old
Mr. C&wblank;, the Father to Valentine and
Camilla, who had divided his Fortune equally
between them. 
This old Gentleman, naturally, was extremely
fond of both his Children, although
he had been wrought on by Livia, his Wife,
to treat them in a most cruel manner: yet,
as he had not that stubborn Pride of Mind,
which scorns to be forgiven, he was most
truly blessed by that affectionate Duty and
Regard, which they now exerted towards
him. So far, also, was he from being a 

Burthen or Restraint upon them, that it
gave them the highest Pleasure, to find how
much it was in their Power to contribute
towards their Father's Hppiness. Their
united Endeavours were, how to make the
Remainder of their Father's Days flow with
that Ease and Tranquillity, as might, in
some measure, obliterate the Remembrance
of those turbulent and uneasy Years, which
he had spent with an artful and wicked
Woman. A Woman, who was, in reality
(whilst he imagined her his greatest Pleasure)
the greatest Torment of his Life. 
This our happy Family, soon after their
Marriage, agreed to leave London, and, together
with the old Gentleman, to settle
themselves in some pleasant country Village,
out of the Reach of that Hurry and Bustle,
so very contrary to the Taste of our whole
Society. But they could not execute their
Purpose so soon as they intended, being kept
in Town on Business: for the Ten thousand
Pounds, which the old Gentleman had given
between his Son Valentine and his Daughter
Camilla (whether by the Roguery of his
Agent, or the Roguery of any other Person,
we think it little material to enquire)
was laid out on a bad Mortgage; and, after
spending about Five hundred Pounds, 

and being detained in London a whole Year,
they were convinced that the whole Money
was irretrievably lost. But this Misfortune
broke very little into the Tranquility of our
happy Society. It only obliged them to
change their Intentions of purchasing an
Estate; and they were contented to hire a
House, with a pretty Garden and all Conveniences
round it, in the pleasantest part
of Lincolnshire. 
During their Stay in London, Camilla was
brought to bed of a Daughter; and, as soon
as she was able to undertake the Journey,
the whole Society, together with the newborn
Camilla, set out for their House in the
Country, where they were soon settled, perfectly
to their Satisfaction. They passed
their Time in a Manner to be imitated by
those, who have any Relish for real Pleasure; 
and to be laughed at and scorned by such as
know not how to enjoy any Happiness themselves,
and are sure to make every thing
around them miserable. But was I to attempt
fully to describe the Happiness which
subsisted in this Society, where Chearfulness
and Good Humour were looked on as
the chief Ingredients for Conversation, I am
sensible how very short I should fall of my
intended Purpose. Those, therefore, of my 

Readers, who have a Relish for the same
kind of Conversation, will, I doubt not,
make use of their own Imaginations, in
drawing the Picture to the life: but to those,
who mistake bon-mots, insulting Raillery,
malicious Ridicule, and murtherous Slander
for the Attic Salt of Society, I write
not. Indeed, to such I cannot write, concerning
David, and his Company; as no
Words are equal to the raising in such
Minds, any true Image of the Pleasures of
our happy Society: for to them, Cynthia's
Spriteliness (wanting the Relish of biting
Jokes and tart Repartees) would appear
trifling Insipidity; and the chearful Softness
of the gentle Camilla, would, by
such, be termed Dullness and Want of
Sensibility. 
Cynthia and Camilla embraced every Opportunity
of directing their Family Affairs
when they could not have the Pleasure of
conversing with their Husbands. By the
Order and Regularity of their Table, of
their Servants, and every other domestic
Concern, it might easily have been imagined,
that their whole Time had been taken up
in what is called the Business of Housewifry:
yet David, Valentine, and the old Gentleman,
enjoyed so much of their amiable 

Conversation, that they could have almost
imagined every thing to have been done by
Enchantment, and that Houshold Management
had never employed their Thoughts; 
for no Noise or Bustle was ever heard, but
Peace, Calmness, Concord, and Harmony
reigned throughout the House. 
With so many Blessings as our Society enjoyed,
they could not deeply regret the Loss
of Fortune, as they were not reduced by it
to what they called Straitness of Circumstances:
for they were still possessed of
enough to gratify every innocent Desire, and
no extravagant Wishes did they ever entertain. 
Nay, David had yet the Power of
pursuing, in some degree, his favourite
Pleasure, of relieving his distressed Fellow-creatures,
and of preventing any of his
Neighbourhood from suffering extreme Indigence. 
But they had not been settled in this
agreeable Tranquility quite a Twelvemonth,
before their united Happiness was interrupted
by Cynthia's falling into a State of ill
Health; for which, a Physician, in the
Neighbourhood, advised her to go directly
to the Bath, and drink the Waters for one
whole Season. 

As soon as this was determined, the whole
Family intended to remove to the Bath, and
to leave only the little Camilla with a careful
Servant, in the Country. But the Morning
before they undertook their Journey,
David received a Letter from London, informing
him of an Affair, which was of
too much Consequence for him to neglect; 
that a Person had put in his Claim to
the Fortune, which, some Years ago, was
left him by his Uncle; and David, on his
Arrival in Town, found this Business of so
troublesome and intricate a Nature, that his
Attendance on it was, for some time, absolutely
necessary. Valentine and Cynthia,
therefore, pursued their Journey to the Bath. 
The old Gentleman, their Father, stayed
in London, with David and Camilla; for,
besides his Age and Infirmities, which made
him willingly decline a Journey, he was
so doatingly fond of his Daughter Camilla,
and her Care and Tenderness towards him
was so great, that he could not consent to
be separated from her. 
The Day after their Arrival in Town,
David Simple happened to meet a Gentleman,
whose Name was Ratcliff, with whom
he had some small Acquaintance before he 

went into the Country. Mr. Ratcliff seemed
overjoyed to meet him; and, on hearing
that Business was likely to detain him in
Town, insisted, that David, and his Wife,
and the old Gentleman, should quit their
Lodgings, and make his House their Home,
while they remained in London: and in this
Invitation Mrs. Ratcliff also politely concurred
with her Husband. 
As Mr. Ratcliff was a Man of Fortune,
and could easily admit of such an occasional
Addition to his Family, David, without
Hesitation, accepted his Offer: for a Mind
so ready as his was, to give Assistance or
Pleasure to his Friends, must be conscious,
that in the like Circumstances, he should
have rejoiced in the same Opportunity. 
And, therefore, instead of being alarmed
at the Thought of receiving an Obligation,
he found some Satisfaction in the Thought,
that, by accepting this Invitation, he should
give his Friend the Opportunity of enjoying
what was his own favourite Pleasure. 
Camilla was, at this time, so big with
Child, that they had, on that account, hastened
their intended Journey, in order that
she might have lain-in at Bath: this Circumstance
made Mr. Ratcliff and his Wife 

the more pressing for their immediate coming
to their House. And Mr. Ratcliff said,
that should the Child prove a Boy, he would
be his God-father, and adopt him for his
own Son; and Mrs. Ratcliff made the same
Offer, should the Child prove a Girl. 
In about three Weeks, Camilla was brought
to-bed of a Boy, and he was christened by
the name of Peter, after his God-father; 
for Camilla, although it would have been
her Choice, that her first Son should have
borne the Name of her much-loved Husband,
would not oppose Mr. Ratcliff's Request,
or even mention her own Choice,
whilst there was the least Probability, that
her Son's Interest might be forwarded by
complying with whatever Mr. Ratcliff
should in reason desire. 
David now began to find that the Business,
which called him to Town, was of a
more perplexing and troublesome Nature
than he at first imagined; and that he was
likely to be involved in a tedious and expensive
Law Suit: for the Person who had
made this pretended Claim to the Estate,
left to David by his Uncle, was a young
Fellow of a very large Fortune, but who
had, by his Father, been put Clerk to an 

Attorney, and, by that means, was very
learned in all the Tricks of the Law. David
Simple, therefore, when he considered
the superior Fortune of his Antagonist, and
that he must contend with one, who could
not, indeed, so properly be styled learned
in the Laws, as versed in the Knowledge of
every shuffling Art to evade their Force, and
to make them subservient to his own Purposes,
was convinced in his own Mind, that
he shou'd be much the least out of pocket,
by giving up at once the whole Money:
but this Purpose not one of his Friends
would suffer him to execute; and Mr. Ratcliff
pronounced him a Madman for the
Thought; but told him, if he would put
his Affairs into the hands of Mr. Parker,
his Attorney, his Cause would be carried
on with all due Expedition and Integrity:
and Mr. Ratcliff likewise hinted (but made
no absolute Promise) that he himself would
give him any Support that might be wanting,
to enable him to maintain his Right. 
After two Months Stay in London, David
began to find, that his personal Attendance
was not necessary towards carrying on
this Law Suit, in which, much against his
own Judgment, he was now engaged. Giving,
therefore, all proper Instructions to his 

Attorney, he determined to go, as soon as
possible, into the Country. And what confirmed
him in this Resolution, was the Hope
of meeting his Brother Valentine, from whom
he had just received the agreeable News, that
Cynthia had found from the Bath Waters all
the Benefit that could have been expected. 
David acquainted Valentine with the Difficulties
he had found, and which he was still
likely to encounter, from the Embarrassment
of a Chancery Suit, and they agreed to part
with their House in Lincolnshire, and to take
a small neat Tenement, which Valentine had
heard of, in a pleasant Village called Heddington,
about twenty Miles from the Bath,
and only a Mile out of the great London
Road. David himself took a Journey to
Lincolnshire, and brought back with him his
little Camilla, now near two Years old; 
and, taking leave of Mr. Ratcliff's Family,
with a Heart really overflowing with Gratitude
for their Civility and Kindness, he,
and his Camilla, the old Gentleman, and
the two Children, set out for their House
at Heddington, where they were met by Valentine
and Cynthia from the Bath. 
The Meeting of our Society might properly
be called a Meeting of Joy. It was 

a Reward for their Separation, and fully
compensated to them all the anxious
Thoughts they had suffered for each other,
in Absence. Cynthia, whose Temper and
Understanding not even ill Health could
impair or disturb (and who, in the weakly
State of her Body, could never properly be
called peevish, even by her Enemies, and
by her Friends could only be perceived to
be languid) had now recovered her usual
Vivacity, and enjoyed to the utmost, her
chief Delight, that of being able to communicate
Pleasure. The meeting of these
Friends was very unlike the common meeting
of Persons long absent. It was not a
Relation of trifling matters of Fact, collected
only to give the Relator the Pleasure of
talking; but it was a general Communication
of such things only as were of consequence
in their own Nature, or which were
made so by the Interest each Individual had
in whatever related to the whole, and by the
Power our Society possessed and exerted,
of rendering every Image agreeable. Nor
did they, this Evening, interrupt their
chearful Conversation by introducing the
disagreeable State of their Affairs by their
Law Suit, nor was any kind of what is
generally called Business once mentioned
amongst them. 

Some little time before David and his
Family last left London, he began to find
some small Alteration in Mr. Ratcliff's
Behaviour towards him; yet, in proportion
as friendly Actions decreased, friendly Professions
flowed the more largely; and his
absolute Promise to provide for his Godson
little Peter, and to adopt him as Heir
to his large Fortune, made both David
and his Camilla overlook many Slights,
and submit also to his authoritative manner
of directing them in all their Proceedings. 
When our happy Society had been settled
about a Week at Heddington, they received
a Message from Mr. Orgueil, and his Wife,
“That, if they saw Company, they would
wait on them.” 
David was greatly astonished at the Message,
and, indeed, not a little averse to the
Thought of renewing an Acquaintance with
a Man, of whose Principles he had so just
an Abhorrence. Yet, on the other hand,
when he reflected, that the only Account
he had received of Mr. Orgueil came from
Spatter, who never gave any one a good
Character (and whom, on further Acquaintance, 

he could not think an Object of his
Esteem) he hoped Orgueil might not be so
bad a Man as he had been represented. Besides,
as the being guilty of even the Appearance
of Rudeness or Ill-manners, was
repugnant to the Nature of any of this Society,
they could not but agree to return a
civil Message; but, although they would
not shun an offered Acquaintance, they intended,
as they saw Occasion, to avoid an
Intimacy. 
Mr. Orgueil had been settled in that Village
about a Year, having bought a large
Estate, with a very fine House on it: for
Mrs. Orgueil brought him a Fortune of
above Thirty thousand Pounds. In this
Visit they were both excessively civil to David
and his whole Family. Mr. Orgueil
seemed very assiduous to renew their former
Friendship; and, by his particular Civility
and obliging Behaviour to the old Gentleman,
who was greatly pleased with his polite
Address, he, in a manner, before they
were aware, drew them into a much greater
Intimacy than they at first intended. 
This Intimacy was now almost unavoidably
encreased by Mrs. Orgueil's being
brought to-bed of a Daughter, whom she 

called Henrietta-Cassandra; and, during her
lying-in, she affected such a Fondness for
Cynthia and Camilla, that she would hardly
ever be without the Company of one, if
not of both; and, as it was the Characteristic
of this Society, to suffer an Inconvenience
themselves, rather than to decline
giving Pleasure to those, for whom they professed
an Esteem, they could not refuse staying
with Mrs. Orgueil, at all such times as
their Convenience would possibly admit, till
she was again able to go abroad. 
Cynthia and Camilla had also each of them
a Daughter born, about three Months after
the Birth of Mrs. Orgueil's Henrietta-Cassandra. 
David called his Child Fanny, and Valentine
gave his Daughter the Name of his
beloved Wife. Cynthia's Constitution being
but weakly, her Husband would not suffer
her to attempt being a Nurse: and Mrs.
Dunster, Wife to the Farmer who rented
most part of Mr. Orgueil's Estate, having
just lost a fine Child, of two Months old,
(and being a very healthy, neat, honest,
good-humoured Woman) the little Cynthia
was committed to her Care. 
Farmer Dunster and his Wife were plain
well-meaning People, and, although they 

rented a very large Farm, yet they did not
affect to live above their Station. The Farmer
industriously and constantly attended
his Business: and his Wife, instead of dressing,
and imitating the Manners of a Lady,
was contented to be called Dame, and valued
herself upon the Goodness of her Butter
and the Beauty of her Poultry. Out of nine
Children, they had only one Girl left, who
was now ten Years old, and who, even at
that Age, was a Help and Assistant to her
Mother. This good Girl was so handy and
careful about the little Cynthia, that she seemed
to have almost as good a Claim as Mrs.
Dunster, to be called her Foster-mother. 
David and all his Family were exceedingly
fond of the Farmer and his Wife. The
Simplicity of their Manners was so effectual
a Recommendation to our Society, that
it gave a weight to whatever they said: and
as they related many humane Actions of Mr.
Orgueil, both towards themselves and others
of the Neighbourhood, David Simple was induced
once more to consider him as his
Friend. 
I would not be understood to mean, by
the Word Friend, a Person answering the
Idea of what David Simple, in the former 

part of his Life, made the Object of his
Pursuit. His Search in that respect was
happily ended; for in his Brother Valentine
and the amiable Cynthia, he enjoyed the
highest Happiness that Warmth of Friendship,
unassisted by any more tender or interesting
Connection, could give; and in
his Camilla he enjoyed the highest Pleasure
that even his Imagination could ever have
formed from the Union of two Hearts, capable
of receiving, and disposed to give,
reciprocal Delight. But this Friendship
with Mr. Orgueil was no more than what
is generally called by that Name; that
is to say, a greater Intimacy than subsists
among common Acquaintance. And whilst
Mr. Orgueil was civil to our whole Society; 
ready, on all Occasions, to do obliging
things; nay while they even promised David,
on understanding tha this Circumstances
were greatly reduced, to assist him with
his Fortune; they could not avoid giving,
to the great Importunity of both
Mr. Orgueil and his Wife, much more of
their Time and Conversation than was
agreeable to their Inclinations. Nevertheless,
if Cynthia had strenuously urged them
to have been guided by her Judgment, an
Intimacy between Persons whose Minds
were so utterly incapable of having the least 

Sympathy with each other, would soon have
been dropped, whatever might have been
the Consequence. 
It was now two Years since the happy
meeting of our Society at Heddington, when
Camilla was brought to-bed of her fourth
Child, which being a Girl, Mrs. Orgueil
desired to stand God-mother. This Request
was not likely to be refused, and they also
civilly paid her the Compliment of begging
her to give the Child a Name; and, according
to her Desire, the Child was christened
Joan. This Circumstance may appear
trifling, but yet was it of consequence
enough to give Mrs. Orgueil great Pleasure,
for she delighted as much in opposing the
Sound of Joan to Henrietta-Cassandra, as if
she could by that means have heightened or
lowered the real Value of the two Children:
but, could she have seen the Hearts of David
and his Camilla, she would have been
greatly disappointed, for they were much
better pleased than if she had given the Child
the romantic Name of her own Daughter; 
Cynthia too, often smiled, on observing the
Delight Mrs. Orgueil took, in immediately
introducing at full length, after asking for
little Joan, the Words,—my Henrietta-Cassandra. 

In two Years more, Camilla had another
Boy; and, as there was now no Objection
to her indulging herself in calling him by
the Name of her beloved Husband, he was
christened David. 
Just at this time, David Simple received
a Letter from Mr. Parker, his Lawyer, informing
him, that there was no likelyhood
of his Law Suit's being yet ended; but, at
the same time, desiring more Money, and
enpressing great Confidence of carrying the
Point at last. 
David was, indeed, satisfied of the Justice of
his Cause, and, on that account, would naturally
have been as little doubtful of Success
as Mr. Parker: but when he considered
that he had been above five Years already
kept in suspense, and when he reflected on all
the litigious Arts made use of by his Antagonist,
he durst not build his Hopes on any
such Foundation. He, therefore, once more
wrote to Mr. Ratcliff, declaring his Resolution
to give up the Affair, and to pay off
Mr. Parker's Bill, which was upwards of
Fourteen hundred Pounds, whilst yet it was
in his Power; lest he should not only be deprived
of the means of supporting his Family, 

but should be torn from them, by having
contracted a heavy Load of Debts, which
he could not answer. To this Mr. Ratcliff
answered, that now it was more Madness
than ever, to admit such a Thought; 
for the Case was so clear on his side, that
dropping his Suit, was the same thing as
giving away so much Money, already indisputably
in his own Possession. He then
again repeated his Promise of providing for
his Godson Peter; but added, that he should
not be pleased to have his adopted Son and
Heir the Brother to Beggars: and concluded
with observing, that he should be justified,
not only to himself, but to all the World,
in deserting a Man who wilfully deserted
himself, and the Interest of his whole Family. 
Now first was David Simple seized with
some Degree of that Timidity of Mind,
which he afterwards more fully experienced; 
and though in his own Opinion (and in that
of the whole Society) it appeared most prudent
to keep his Resolution, and drop his
Chancery Suit; yet he feared to lose the Favour
of a Man, who was so able, and who
declared himself so willing to provide amply
for his Son: he, therefore, after much
perplexing Deliberation, acquainted Mr. 

Ratcliff, that he would submit to his Judgment,
and leave his Cause to the Decision of
the Law. Mr. Orgueil also highly approved
Mr. Ratcliff's Advice in this Case, and
strenuously urged David's Acquiescence
with it; telling him that a Man of his peculiar
way of thinking, ought always, in
worldly Affairs, to be directed by Men of
Prudence and Experience; hinting, at the
same time, how liable he had been, in the
former art of his Life, to be imposed on
and deceived. 
And here, if I might be permitted a little
to depart from the Brevity I promised in
this first part of our History, I would detain
my Reader by some Observations on the
capricious Judgments that are shewn in
passing Sentence on the Words and Actions
of a Man, who is actuated by no other Motives
than the simple Dictates of an honest
Heart. 
If, from judging of others by himself,
such a Man is imposed on, by the false Colours
hung out to deceive him, and thereby
becomes the Sacrifice of his own Simplicity,
he is thought the proper Object for Ridicule,
and the Words simple and silly are immediately
made synonimous: but if, after some 

Experience of the World, he should, in
his future Transactions, be guided by that
Experience, to act consistently with it, and
should thereby avoid those Evils to which
his Inexperience rendered him liable, he is
suddenly metamorphosed into a cunning
Fellow; and those very Persons, who had
before laughed at his Folly, can now clearly
enough distinguish the Meaning of the
Word Simplicity, to blame him for his Want
of it; without considering the essential
Difference there is between the proper Caution
built on Experience, and that unjust
Suspicion of all Mankind, which often, if
not always, arises from the Knowledge of
harbouring in our own Bosoms a false and
malignant Heart. 
David's Situation, in point worldly
Affairs, was now made more untoward and
perplexing, from the Uncertainty of his
impending Suit, than it could have been
from the narrowest Circumstances: since
the latter could not so much have affected
the Minds of Persons, who practised, as far
as possible, the Lesson of being contented
in any Situation, and of submitting to every
outward Accident with Patience: for by
this Uncertainty he knew not what he was
worth, or whether he was not buying daily 

Bread with Money that he should hereafter
be called on to refund. 
Those who are blessed with Prosperity and
Affluence, and who have never experienced
a Perplexity of this kind, may, perhaps,
absolutely condemn David Simple, for not
instantly reducing his Expences to the very
Standard he must have done, had he already
lost his Cause. But from the Sentence of
such, I must beg leave to appeal to the
Judgment of others, who, with the like
beneficent Hearts, have been in the like
Circumstances: and if by them David Simple
be condemned for driving far off from his
Mind Despondency and absolute Despair of
Success; for still continuing (without an
exact provident Calculation) to afford his
Family and Friends the Comforts of Life,
without one of the Extravagancies; and for
still persisting to relieve any real Objects of
Distress, without clinching his Hand by
thinking on his Law Suit; I must submit; 
and will allow them to join with Orgueil and
Ratcliff in all the Reproaches they hereafter
bestow on David Simple, for his Imprudence. 
Two Years more passed, and still there
was no Determination of the Law Suit: 

but in the mean time Mr. Ratcliff continued
to write what are called friendly Letters
(though interpersed with that imperious
Advice which generally flows from Superiority
in point of Fortune) and desired, that
his God-son Peter, now near seven Years
old, might, at his Expence, be sent to
School; and he paid that Deference to David's
Judgment, as to leave the Choice of a
Master to him. 
Camilla was very desirous that the Boy
might be sent to some private School, as
dreading the Vices that are too frequently
contracted at public ones: and accordingly
little Peter was put under the Care of a
Gentleman, who never increased his Number
of Boys beyond the Power of his own
careful Eye. 
As sending the Child to School was Mr.
Ratcliff's Desire (or rather Command) they
did not care to dispute it; otherwise, it was
very evident, that in going from Home,
he quitted a Place of certain Improvement,
for the Chance only of being where he
barely might not learn less—more he could
not learn; for the chief Study and Employment
of our Society, was to improve the
Understandings, and meliorate the Dispositions 

of their Children; and never was
Labour (if such it might be styled) better
rewarded. 
Little Camilla, now eight Years old,
was a most amiable Child. In her Person
she was a complete Pattern of Elegance and
Beauty. She had that Lustre and Sweetness
in her Countenance, which must always
proceed from the strongest Understanding,
and the mildest Disposition. She already
shewed an uncommon Genius to Music and
Drawing, in the Improvement of which she
was indulged as far as was necessary to enable
her to make a Progress in both, by her
own Industry and Application. 
Young Peter was in his Person so like his
Father, that no one could see him without
crying out, “O! here comes little David.” 
And this Circumstance, trifling as it may
appear, often put the whole Family in
Tears. For the sweet little Boy's Sensibility
of Look, on the Mistake of his Name,
with a gentle Sigh, which seemed to shew
a Regret, that he was, by a strange Adoption,
in a Manner excluded from his Birth-right,
gave his Parents such a peculiar kind
of tender Sensation, as I cannot pretend
to give my Readers any Idea of, unless 

they will again assist me, by the Help of
their own Imaginations. 
Fanny and her Cousin Cynthia, born
within two Days of each other, now six
Years old, and both of them beautiful Girls,
were so exactly alike, that they were continually
mistaken for Twin Sisters: and it was
a frequent Diversion among them to see
Dame Dunster kiss and hug the little Fanny,
as thinking her to be her Nursing Cynthia. 
Mrs. Orgueil's God-daughter Joany, now
five Years old, was, to the great Joy of her
God-mother, not so completely beautiful
as her Sister's, and in Fairness of Skin, was
much inferior to her own Daughter Henrietta-Cassandra; 
for which Reason she grew
extremely fond of the Child, and seemed as
much pleased with contrasting their Complexions
as their Names. Though, in truth,
little Joan was a fine fresh coloured Girl, the
very Picture of Health and Good-humour,
and was so tall of her Age, that is occasioned
Mrs. Orgueil to be once asked, if Miss Joan
was not older than Miss Cassy; on which
Mrs. Orgueil took such Offence at the Child,
for having, although a Year younger, outstripped
her Daughter in Growth, that she
would never more suffer her to come within 

her Doors. Nay, the very Name that she
herself had given her, sounded (she said)
so very vulgar, that it increased her Aversion
to her; and frequently did Miss Cassy
upbraid the poor Child, that Joan was not
the Name of a Gentlewoman. 
Of little David, now only three Years
old, no more can be said, but that his
pleasing Smiles, and honest open Countenance,
promised every thing that it is possible
for an affectionate Parent to wish. 
Notwithstanding the untoward Situation
of Affairs before mentioned, still might our
Society be styled the happy Family. Such a
Union of Hearts, such a Harmony of Disposition; 
a Society, where the meaning of
the bad Passions of Malice and Envy could
not have been understood, had they never
conversed out of their own House, could
not be ruffled or discomposed, but by a
Separation, or seeing any one amongst them
afflicted with Sickness, or any other real
Calamity. And, indeed, little Peter's leaving
them, to be sent to School, caused, for the
present, a Scene of Grief amongst his young
Companions, that even a Command to them
from David and Valentine, not any longer
to indulge that Grief, was necessary towards 

restoring the Tranquility of the
Nursery. 
Such an increasing Family and decreasing
Fortune, would have been enough of itself
to have rendered some Minds miserable; 
but David and his Camilla (as they confined
not Happiness to any particular Station)
were fully convinced, that if they rooted
from their Children's Breasts all kind of
Malevolence, and instilled into their Minds
the Principles of true Religion, they should
give them the best Foundation for Felicity
this World can afford. And they likewise
considered a large Number of Children as a
larger Number of Chances for even worldly
Prosperity; since (as they observed) it seldom
happens, but out of so many, ONE will
be successful; and little indeed must their
Children have profited by the Precepts and
Example of such Parents, if the Prosperity
of ONE should not be the Prosperity of
ALL. 
Betty Dunster, from the time little Cynthia
was taken home from Nurse, had been so
frequently amongst the Children, and was
of so docile a Disposition, that she learned
many things, by attending to the Instructions
given them by Camilla. And Cynthia 

herself, seeing the Girl had a Capacity and
Understanding capable of Improvement,
had taught her to write and read. Little
Camilla had also learned from Betty Dunster
to knit and to spin Flax, and was so perfect
in both, that, before it was known she
could do either, she presented her Mother
with a pair of Stockings, spun and knit
by herself. 
Mrs. Orgueil began to be very uneasy at
Betty Dunster's being so much in David's
Family and therefore told her Mother, that
she wondered a Woman of her Prudence
would suffer her Daughter to be ruined by
being accustomed to nothing but Sloth and
Idleness, as must be the case while she threw
away all her Time amongst such a Set of
lazy extravagant People. 
“Indeed, Madam (says Mrs. Dunster)
I never upon going into the House found
them lazy or idle, since I have known
them; and I hope my Child won't be
ruined, for she tells me they be all very
kind to her; and Madam Cynthia herself
has taught her to write and read.” 
“Ay, Romances, I suppose (says Mrs.
Orgueil) fine reading, indeed, for a Country 

Wench! and you will find what a
pretty Figure she will make, when, after
she is married to some honest Farmer, she
is caught, instead of minding her Dairy,
poring over a Romance.” 
“I never heard her talk, Madam, of
such Books (says Mrs. Dunster) but she
tells me, that she often reads History and
the Bible to the Children.” 
“I tell you (says Mrs. Orgueil) that
Reading is not a proper Employment for
a Farmer's Daughter; and although you
are so infatuated, as not to see what will
be the Ruin of your own Child, I myself
have such a Love for the Girl, that I am
resolved to save her from Destruction,
by taking her into my own Family: and,
if she can be made to forget all the Stuff
Cynthia has taught her, and behaves well,
I will keep her as my Woman. Or, if
Miss Cassy should like her, she may be her
Maid. And she will find some Difference
between living in my House in any
Station, and herding with a Parcel of
beggarly Wits.” 
Mrs. Dunster, though she had but a moderate
Share of Understanding, yet from a 

good honest Heart, easily perceived the
Difference there would, indeed, be to her
poor Girl; but she durst not, by a Refusal,
disoblige Mrs. Orgueil, or seem displeased
with her Offer; and yet so little Joy did
she express for this Prospect of her Daughter's
Advancement, that Mrs. Orgueil bid
her be gone, for an ignorant ungrateful Fool,
and send her Husband thither directly. 
As soon as the Farmer arrived, Mrs.
Orgueil complained of the Insensibility of
his Wife, and repeated to him the Honour
she intended his Daughter. 
The Farmer, from a late Misfortune of
a Person's dying insolvent, who owed him
a large Sum of Money, was, at this time,
so far behind-hand in his Rent, that he lay
too much at Mr. Orgueil's Mercy to deny
any thing to him or his Lady; he therefore
said, he would immediately send the Girl
thither; who, as soon as she entered the
House, was strictly ordered by Mrs. Orgueil
never again to set her foot within David
Simple's Doors. 
Mrs. Orgueil did not want what is commonly
called Parts, or Understanding; but,
from the Malignity of her Heart, was always 

acting what should be the Characteristic
of a Fool, namely, destroying her own
Purposes. She set a high Value on her
own Understanding, and therefore Cynthia,
who, from a Spriteliness and Vivacity of
Temper, generally carried the Lead in Conversation,
soon became the Object of her
Envy, and from thence a most inveterate
Hatred of Cynthia took root in her Mind. 
She loved not Camilla, but would sometimes
pretend towards her (out of Opposition to
Cynthia) the highest degree of Affection. 
Although she had not Goodness or Simplicity
of Heart enough to really value the
amiable Qualities of Camilla, yet in the vain
hope of supplanting Cynthia in her Favour,
she was generally very assiduous and obliging
to her, and also to Cynthia; for she had Cunning
enough to know, that upon her Civility
to Cynthia depended her Acquaintance
with Camilla. Numberless were her Arts to
ingratiate herself by Flattery with Camilla,
but fruitless were all such Endeavours; for
so uncommon were the Characters of Cynthia
and Camilla, and so very extraordinary their
Friendship, that they had often talked over
the Difference of their Capacities and Dispositions
with the same Freedom as if they
had been mentioning the Difference of their
Height or Size. 

The true Source of all those Heart-burnings
and Uneasinesses, that Mankind are so
good as to bestow upon themselves, when
no outward Shocks attack them, seems to
be setting too high a Value on any Faculties
whatever of the Mind, or any Beauty
of the Person. Hence arises that Malice
and Envy, from which Families and Friends
often cause each others Misery, when they
might have it in their Power to be Blessings
to each other, would every one, like our
little Family, sit down contented with their
own Share of either mental or outward Qualifications. 
Cynthia did not put on a silly Affectation
of not knowing the Strength of her
own Understanding; but, on the other
hand, she knew its Value; she was sensible
she did not give it herself, nor was she ignorant
that it was according to the Use it
was made of, whether it was of any Value
at all; nay, she pursued this sort of Knowledge
so far, as to discover, that, by being
made an ill Use of, it would turn to her
Disadvantage. 
She could not but know that she was
possessed of something a larger Share of what 

is generally called Genius, or Parts, than
Camilla was; but the Comparison would
never once have come into her Thoughts,
if such Persons as Mrs. Orgueil had not
made it a Subject of their own Conversation. 
Insult to any one breathing never flowed
from Cynthia's Bosom; then where could
one Notion of insult to her Camilla find a
Place for Entrance? Goodness alone was
the Object of her Esteem; she sought a
Companion fraught with Innocence, and a
Mind free from Malice, the least Degree of
which venomous Quality peeping forth
from behind the most dazzling Wit and
entertaining Humour, had, in her Opinion,
destroyed the whole Pleasure. 
If Cynthia knew her Understanding, without
being proud of it, Camilla could acknowledge
it without Envy, and David
was sensible of it without abating one Tittle
of his Love for his Wife; or in the Person
of his Wife, desiring to pull down Cynthia. 
And every Advantage and Pleasure arising
from any Faculty of the Mind, was as much
shared in this Society, as any other Property
whatever. 
It is very strange that Mrs. Orgueil,
with an ample Fortune, without any real 

Misfortunes to afflict her, enjoying Plenty,
Health, and every Blessing that can be
thought on, in this World, made herself a
most miserable Woman, and perplexed and
tormented her own Mind about nothing; 
forgetting the Abundance she possessed, and
straining after an imaginary Good, she could
never possibly reach; whilst the Person,
concerning whom she thought proper thus
to torment herself (when any very shocking
Strokes did not attend her) possessed her own
Mind in quiet, and gave herself no Trouble
about the Schemes or Inventions of any
other Persons. 
And yet Mrs. Orgueil was forever throwing
out the Word Contempt; but with a
little serious Examination, she might have
made a Discovery of much more Benefit to
herself, than any of those she ever made of
Cynthia's Cunning, namely, that she despised
nobody but herself. For can any Contempt
in the World be so high, as to put it
in the Power of every Person you come near
to rack and torment your Mind? Even
Betty Dunster, if she but dropped a Word
accidentally, in Commendation of Cynthia's
Good Humour or Affability, or but shewed
a Remembrance of any thing she had
ever told her, could teaze Mrs. Orgueil as
much as if she had fallen under any real 

Misfortune, of which the following Instance
is a pretty strong Proof. 
One Morning Mrs. Orgueil came into the
Nursery, and found Betty Dunster telling
Henrietta-Cassandra a Story, to which the
Child seemed to hearken with more Attention
than she usually gave to any thing. 
Mrs. Orgueil, recollecting she had heard
Cynthia tell this Story, and having some
Suspicion that it was of her own Invention,
grew so out of Humour, that had any Person
been present, who had not been thoroughly
acquainted with Mrs. Orgueil, the
poor Girl must have appeared to have been
guilty of some great Crime; and yet her
Crossness only broke forth in Hints; for
she was so unhappy as to harbour in her
Breast what she did not chuse her Servant
should find out. But she desired, her Child
might not be poisoned with a parcel of nonsensical
Stories; for she had much rather,
she said, have found her diverting the Child
with some of her new Play-things. Then
she threw about all the stigmatizing Words
she could think on, such as Creatures,
Trollops, &c. till poor Betty Dunster was
put to flight, and durst not, for a long
time, approach her enraged Presence. 

But I shall not here any longer dwell on the
Behaviour of Mrs. Orgueil to our Society,
which was sometimes extremely civil, and
at other times over-bearing and insolent; 
and I shall also pass over the various ways
she practised to sow Dissention where there
was no Soil for it to grow: nor will I relate
the innumerable perverse and sly Tricks
of her Daughter Henrietta-Cassandra, or the
Patience and obliging Behaviour of all the
Children, to please and divert the wayward
Mind of a Girl, bred up in the very School
of Insolence; but will pass on to that Period
of Time (which was nine Years after our
Society left London) in which David received
a Letter from Mr. Parker, his Attorney,
acquainting him, that the Cause was given
against him; but that Mr. Ratcliff advised
him to appeal it to the House of Lords. 
Of this Advice, as it came not from Mr.
Ratcliff himself, David Simple took no Notice,
but ordered Mr. Parker to bring in
his Account; and after settling that, and
all his other Expences, he found himself
worth to the Value of One hundred Pounds,
and no more. 
David wrote directly to Mr. Ratcliff,
acquainting him with his Resolution of 

taking a very small House in the same
Village where they now lived; and that,
in Conformity to their reduced Circumstances,
they all intended to help towards the
Support of their Family by the Work of
their Hands. To this Mr. Ratcliff returned
an Answer, full of the warmest Professions
of Friendship; expressive of the most
poignant Grief for his Misfortunes; adding
the strongest Assurances of future Favour
to his God-son little Peter, and the
most hearty Wishes for his Success and
Prosperity. But not any Mention or Hint
was there to be found in this Letter, of the
least Intention to give any present Assistance
to the Distress of his dear Friend,
which (by his own Confession) he imagined
to be so very great, that he declared, “It
pierced his very Soul.” 
About a Week before David received Mr.
Parker's Letter, Mr. Orgueil and his Wife
were gone into Yorkshire, intending to stay
three Months; and in their Absence David
fixed the before-mentioned Resolution; and
no sooner was it fixed, than put in Execution. 
The small House was taken. The other
was quitted. All the unnecessary Furniture
was sold, to pay off the Rent; and every
Servant was discharged, but one honest 

Girl, who had lived with them ever since
their Marriage, and now begged to remain,
in order to assist in the most laborious Part
of their Houshold Work. 
Thus settled in their humble Cottage,
still might our Society retain the Name of
The happy Family. Little Camilla, now
eleven Years old, was more serviceable both
to her Parents and her Brothers and Sisters,
than many Girls of sixteen are either capable
or willing to be: and the old Gentleman
used to say, he would not change his two
little Handmaids, Fanny and little Cynthia,
for the best Waiting-maids in the King's
Dominions. Little David, by his Spriteliness
and engaging childish Play, gave them
continual Entertainment: and could any of
those People (if any such there are) who
cannot believe that Happiness can subsist
without Riches, have been Witnesses to the
Mirth and Chearfulness that every Day
passed in the thatched House of David
Simple, they would not have believed but
our Society were secretly possessed of some
locked-up hidden Treasure. A Treasure,
indeed they had; but locked up no-where,
but in their own clear Breasts. As they knew
not Guilt, they knew not gloomy Anguish
of Mind: and as they had suffered, as yet, 

no material Separation, so they had not
tasted of that temporary Sorrow, which,
though enough to embitter our Cup, is not
sufficient to subdue a Christian Mind, whose
Reliance on a future State is its only Foundation
for Happiness. 
Yet here must I pause. —And to those
People who can have any Idea of the Happiness
that still subsisted amongst our Society,
and can conceive, that, exclusive of
worldly Prosperity, they enjoyed the most
perfect Harmony, will I venture to say,
with Milton, 
“I now must change
“These Notes to tragic;
yet no 
“foul Distrust and Breach
“Disloyal on the Part of Man.”
For, like Job, David Simple patiently submitted
to the temporary Sufferings allotted
him: and, from a Dependance on his
Maker, acquired that Chearfulness and
Calmness of Mind, which is not in the
Power of the highest worldly Prosperity,
without such a Dependance, to bestow. 