
Talk. Then Talkative at first began
to blush, but recovering himself,

Thus he replyed, You come now to
Experience, to Conscience, and God:
and to appeals to him for justification
of what is spoken: This kind of discourse
I did not expect, nor am I disposed
to give an answer to such
questions, because, I count not my
self bound thereto, unless you take
upon you to be a Catechizer; and,
though you should so do, yet I may
refuse to make you my Judge: But I
pray will you tell me, why you ask
me such questions?
Faith. Because I saw you forward to
talk,The reasons why Faithful put to him that question. and because I knew not that you
had ought else but notion. Besides, to
tell you all Truth, I have heard of
you, that you are a Man whose Religion
lies in talk,Faithful's plain dealing to Talkative. and that your Conversation
gives this your Mouth-profession,
the lye. They say You are a spot among
Christians, and that Religion
fareth the worse for your ungodly conversation,
that some already have stumbled
at your wicked ways, and that
more are in danger of being destroyed
thereby; your Religion, and an Ale-House,
and Covetousness, and uncleanness,
and swearing, and lying, and vain
Company-keeping, &c. will stand together.

The proverb is true of you,
which is said of a Whore; to wit, That
she is a shame to all Women; so you
are a shame to all Professors.
Talk. Since you are ready to take
up reports,Talkative flings away from Faithful. and to judge so rashly
as you do; I cannot but conclude
you are some peevish, or melancholly
Man, not fit to be discoursed with;
and so adieu.
Chr. Then came up Christian, and
said to his Brother, I told you how it
would happen, your words and his
lusts could not agree; he had rather
leave your company, then reform
his life: but he is gone as I said,
let him go; the loss is no mans but
his own,A good ridance he has saved us the trouble
of going from him; for he continuing,
as I suppose he will do, as he is,
he would have been but a blot in our
Company: besides, the Apostle says,
From such withdraw thy self.
Faith. But I am glad we had this
little discourse with him, it may happen
that he will think of it again; however,
I have dealt plainly with him;
and so am clear of his blood, if he
perisheth.
Chr. You did well to talk so plainly

to him as you did, there is but
little of this faithful dealing with
men now a days; and that makes
Religion so stink in the nostrills of
many, as it doth: for they are these
Talkative Fools, whose Religion is
only in word, and are debauched and
vain in their Conversation, that (being
so much admitted into the Fellowship
of the Godly) do stumble
the World, blemish Christianity, and
grieve the Sincere. I wish that all
Men would deal with such, as you
have done, then should they either be
made more conformable to Religion,
or the company of Saints would be
too hot for them.

How Talkative at first lifts up his Plumes!
How bravely doth he speak! how he presumes
To drive down all before him! but so soon
As Faithful talks of Heart-work, like the Moon
That's past the full, into the wain he goes;
And so will all; but he that Heart-work knows.

Thus they went on talking of what
they had seen by the way; and so
made that way easie, which would
otherwise, no doubt, have been tedious
to them: for now they went
through a Wilderness.
Then I saw in my Dream, that
when they were got out of the Wilderness,
they presently saw a Town
before them, and the name of that
Town is Vanity; and at the Town
there is a Fair kept, called Vanity-Fair:
It is kept all the Year long, it
beareth the name of Vanity Fair, because
the Town where tis kept, is
lighter then Vanity;  and also, because
all that is there sold, or that cometh
thither, is Vanity. As is the saying
of the wise, All that cometh is vanity.
This Fair is no new erected business,
but a thing of Ancient standing;
I will shew you the original of it.
Almost five thousand years agone,The Antiquity of this Fair.
there were Pilgrims walking
to the Cœlestial City, as these two
honest persons are; and Beelzebub,
Apollyon, and Legion, with their
Companions, perceiving by the path
that the Pilgrims made, that their
way to the City lay through this

Town of Vanity, they contrived here
to set up a Fair; a Fair wherein
should be sold of all sorts of Vanity,
and that it should last all the year
long. Therefore at this Fair are
all such Merchandize sold. As Houses,The Merchandize of this Fair.
Lands, Trades, Places, Honours,
Preferments, Titles, Countreys, Kingdoms,
Lusts, Pleasures and Delights of
all sorts, as Whores, Bauds, Wives,
Husbands, Children, Masters, Servants,
Lives, Blood, Bodies, Souls,
Silver, Gold, Pearls, precious Stones,
and what not.
And moreover, at this Fair there is at
all times to be seen Juglings, Cheats,
Games, Plays, Fools, Apes, Knaves,
and Rogues, and that of all sorts.
Here are to be seen, and that for
nothing, Thefts, Murders, Adultries,
False-swearers, and that of a
blood-red colour.
And as in others fairs of less moment,
there are the several Rows and
Streets, under their proper names,
where such and such Wares are
vended: So here likewise, you have
the proper Places, Rows, Streets,
(viz. Countreys, and Kingdoms,)
where the Wares of this Fair are

soonest to be found:The Streets of this fair Here is the Brittain
Row, the French Row, the Italian
Row, the Spanish Row, the
German Row, where several sorts of
Vanities are to be sold. But as in other
fairs some one Commodity is
as the chief of all the fair, so the Ware
of Rome and her Merchandize is
greatly promoted in this fair: Only
our English Nation, with some others,
have taken a dislike thereat.
Now,  as I said, the way to the
Cælestial City lyes just thorow this
Town, where this lusty Fair is kept;
and he that will go to the City, and
yet not go thorow this Town, must
needs go out of the World. The Prince
of Princes himself, when here, went
through this Town to his own Countrey,
and that upon a Fair-day too:
Yea, and as I think, it was Beelzebub
the chief Lord of this Fair, 
that invited him to buy of his Vanities;
yea, would have made him
Lord of the Fair, would he but have
done him Reverence as he went
thorow the Town. Yea, because he
was such a person of Honour, Beelzebub
had him from Street to Street,
and shewed him all the Kingdoms of

the World in a little time, that he
might, if possible, alure that Blessed
One, to cheapen and buy some of his
Vanities.Christ bought nothing in this fair. But he had no mind to the
Merchandize, and therefore left the
Town, without laying out so much
as one Farthing upon these Vanities.
This Fair therefore is an Ancient
thing, of long standing, and a very
great Fair.
Now these Pilgrims, as I said, must
needs go thorow this fair: Well,The Pilgrims enter the fair so they
did; but behold, even as they entred
into the fair, all the people in the fair
were moved, and the Town it self as it
were in a Hubbub about them;The fair in a hubbub about them and
that for several reasons: For,
First, The Pilgrims were cloathed
with such kind of Raiment,The first cause of the hubbab. as was
diverse from the Raiment of any
that Traded in that fair. The people
therefore of the fair made a great
gazing upon them: Some said they
were Fools, some they were Bedlams,
and some they are Outlandish-men.
Secondly,  And as they wondred
at their Apparel, so they did likewise
at their Speech,2d Cause of the hubbub. for few could understand
what they said; they naturally
spoke the Language of Canaan,

but they that kept the fair, were the
men of this World: So that from
one end of the fair to the other, they
seemed Barbarians each to the other.
Thirdly, But that which did not
a little amuse the Merchandizers,
was that these Pilgrims set very light
by all their Wares, they cared not,
so much as to look upon them: and
if they called upon them to buy, they
would put their fingers in their ears,
and cry,  Turn away mine eyes from
beholding vanity; and look upwards,
  signifying that their Trade and Traffick
was in Heaven.
One chanced mockingly, beholding
the carriages of the men, to say
unto them, What will ye buy? but
they, looking gravely upon him, said,
We buy the Truth. At that, there was
  an occasion taken to despise the men
the more; some mocking, some taunting,
some speaking reproachfully,They are mocked.
and some calling upon others to smite
them.The fair in a hubbub. At last things came to an hubbub
and great stir in the fair, in so
much that all order was confounded.
Now was word presently brought to
the great one of the fair, who quickly
came down, and deputed some of

his most trusty friends to take these
men into examination,They are examined. about whom
the fair was almost overturned. So
the men were brought to examination;
and they that sat upon them,
asked them whence they came, whether
they went, and what they did
there in such an unusual Garb? The
men told them,They test who they are and whence they came. that they were Pilgrims
and Strangers in the World,
and that they were going to their
own Countrey, which was the Heavenly
Jerusalem; and that they had
given none occasion to the men of the
Town, nor yet to the Merchandizers,
thus to abuse them, and to let
them in their Journey. Except it was,
for that, when one asked them what
they would buy, they said they would
buy the Truth.They are not believed. But they that were
appointed to examine them, did not
believe them to be any other then
Bedlams and Mad, or else such as
came to put all things into a confusion
in the fair. Therefore they took them
and beat them,They are put in the Cage. and besmeared them
with dirt, and then put them into
the Cage, that they might be made
a Spectacle to all the men of the fair.
There therefore they lay for some

time, and were made the objects of
any mans sport, or malice, or revenge.
Their behaviour in the Cage. The great one of the fair
laughing still at all that befel them.
But the men being patient, and not
rendering railing for railing, but contrarywise
blessing, and giving good
words for bad, and kindness for injuries
done: Some men in the fair
that were more observing,The men of the fair do fall out among themselves about these two men. and less
prejudiced then the rest, began to
check and blame the baser sort for
their continual abuses done by them
to the men: They therefore in angry
manner let fly at them again, counting
them as bad as the men in the
Cage, and telling them that they
seemed confederates, and should be
made partakers of their misfortunes.
The other replied, That for ought
they could see, the men were quiet,
and sober, and intended no body any
harm; and that there were many
that Traded in their fair, that were
more worthy to be put into the Cage,
yea, and Pillory too, then were the
men that they had abused. Thus,
after divers words had passed on both
sides, (the men themselves behaving
themselves all the while very wisely

and soberly before them,) they fell
to some Blows, and did harm one to
another.They are made the authors of this disturbance. Then were these two poor
men brought before their Examiners
again, and there charged as being
guilty of the late Hubbub that had
been in the fair. So they beat them
pitifully,They are led up and down the fair in Chaines for a terror to others. and hanged Irons upon
them, and led them in Chaines, up
and down the fair, for an example
and a terror to others, lest any should
further speak in their behalf, or joyn
themselves unto them. But Christian
and Faithful behaved themselves yet
more wisely, and received the ignominy
and shame that was cast upon
them, with so much meekness and
patience,Some of the men of the fair won to them. that it won to their side
(though but few in comparison of the
rest) several of the men in the fair: This
put the other party yet into a greater
rage, insomuch that they concluded
the death of these two men. Wherefore
they threatned that the Cage nor
Irons should serve their turn,Their adversaries resolve to kill them. but that
they should die, for the abuse they
had done, and for deluding the men
of the fair.
Then were they remanded to the
Cage again until further order should

taken with them. So they put them
in,They are again put into the Cage and after brought to Tryal. and made their feet fast in the
Stocks. Then a convenient time being
appointed, they brought them
forth to their Tryal in order to their
Condemnation. When the time was
come, they were brought before their
Enemies and arraigned; the Judge's
name was Lord Hategood. Their Indictment
was one and the same in substance,
though somewhat varying
in form; the Contents whereof was
this.
That they were enemies to, and disturbers
of their Trade;Their Indictment. that they had made
Commotions and Divisions in the Town,
and had won a party to their own most
dangerous opinions, in contempt of the
Law of their Prince.
Then Faithful began to answer,
Faithfuls answer for himself. That he had only set himself against
that which had set it self against him
that is higher then the highest. And
said he, As for disturbance, I make
none, being my self a man of Peace;
the Party that were won to us, were
won by beholding our Truth and Innocence,
and they are only turned
from the worse to the better. And as
to the King you talk of, since he is

Beelzebub, the Enemy of our Lord,
I defie him and all his Angels.
Then Proclamation was made, that
they that had ought to say for their
Lord the King against the Prisoner at
the Bar, should forthwith appear and
give in their evidence. So there came
in three Witnesses, to wit, Envy, Superstition,
and Pickthank. They was
then asked, If they knew the Prisoner
at the Bar? and what they had
to say for their Lord the King against
him.
Then stood forth Envy, and said to
this effect, My Lord, I have known
this man a long time, and will attest
upon my Oath before this honourable
Bench, That he is &wblank;
Judge. Hold, give him his Oath;
So they sware him. Then he said, My
Lord, This man, notwithstanding his
plausible name, is one of the vilest
men in our Countrey; He neither
regardeth Prince nor People, Law
nor Custom: but doth all that he can
to possess all men with certain of his
disloyal notions, which he in the
general calls Principles of Faith and
Holiness. And in particular, I heard
him once my self affirm, That Christianity,

and the Customs of our Town
of Vanity, were Diametrically opposite,
and could not be reconciled. By which
saying, my Lord, he doth at once,
not only condemn all our laudable
doings, but us in the doing of them.
Judg. Then did the Judge say to
him, Hast thou any more to say?
Env. My Lord I could say much
more, only I would not be tedious
to the Court. Yet if need be, when
the other Gentlemen have given in
their Evidence, rather then any
thing shall be wanting that will dispatch
him, I will enlarge my Testimony
against him. So he was bid
stand by. Then they called Superstition,
and bid him look upon the Prisoner;
they also asked, What he
could say for their Lord the King against
him? Then they sware him, so
he began.
Super. My Lord, I have no great
acquaintance with this man, nor do
I desire to have further knowledge
of him; However this I know, that
he is a very pestilent fellow, from
some discourse that the other day I
had with him in this Town; for then
talking with him, I heard him say,

That our Religion was naught, and
such by which a man could by no
means please God; which sayings of
his, my Lord, your Lordship very
well knows, what necessarily thence
will follow, two wit, That we still do
worship in vain, are yet in our Sins,
and finally shall be damned; and
this is that which I have to say.
Then was Pickthank sworn, and
bid say what he knew, in behalf of
their Lord the King against the Prisoner
at the Bar.
Pick. My Lord,Pickthanks Testimony. and you Gentlemen
all, This fellow I have known of
a long time, and have heard him
speak things that ought not to be
spoke. For he hath railed on our
noble Prince Beelzebub, and hath
spoke contemptibly of his honourable
Friends,Sins are all Lords and Great ones. whose names are the Lord
Oldman, the Lord Carnal delight, the
Lord Luxurious, the Lord Desire of
Vain-glory, my old Lord Lechery, Sir
Having Greedy, with all the rest
of our Nobility; and he hath said
moreover, that if all men were of
his mind, if possible, there is not
one of these noble Men should have
any longer a being in this Town.

Besides, he hath not been afraid
to rail on you, my Lord, who are
now appointed to be his Judge,
calling you an ungodly Villain, with
many other such like vilifying terms,
by which he hath bespattered most of
the Gentry of our Town. When
this Pickthank had told his tale, the
Judge directed his speech to the Prisoner
at the Bar, saying, Thou Runagate,
Heretick, and Traitor, hast
Faithfuls defence of himself. thou heard what these honest Gentlemen
have witnessed against thee?
Faith. May I speak a few words in
my own defence?
Judg. Sirrah, Sirrah, thou deservest
to live no longer, but to be slain
immediately upon the place; yet that
all men may see our gentleness towards
thee, let us see what thou
hast to say.
Faith. 1. I say then in answer to what
Mr. Envy hath spoken, I never said
ought but this, That what Rule, or
Laws, or Custom, or People, were flat
against the Word of God, are diametrically
opposite to Christianity. If I
have said a miss in this, convince me
of my errour, and I am ready here
before you to make my recantation.

2. As to the second, to wit, Mr.
Superstition, and his charge against
me, I said only this, That in the worship
of God there is required a divine
Faith; but there can be no divine Faith,
without a divine Revelation of the will
of God: therefore whatever is thrust
into the worship of God, that is not agreeable
to a divine Revelation, cannot
be done but by an humane Faith, which
Faith will not profit to Eternal life.
3. As to what Mr. Pickthank hath
said, I say, (avoiding terms, as
that I am said to rail, and the like)
That the Prince of this Town, with
all the Rablement his Attendants,
by this Gentlemen named, are more
fit for a being in Hell, then in this
Town and Countrey; and so the
Lord have mercy upon me.
Then the Judge called to the JuryThe Judge his speech to the Jury.
(who all this while stood by, to hear
and observe) Gentlemen of the Jury,
you see this man about whom so
great an uproar hath been made in
this Town: you have also heard what
these worthy Gentlemen have witnessed
against him; also you have
heard his reply and confession: It
lieth now in your brests to hang him,

or save his life. But yet I think meet
to instruct you into our Law.
There was an Act made in the days
of Pharaoh the Great,  Servant to our
Prince, That lest those of a contrary
Religion should multiply and grow
too strong for him, their Males should
be thrown into the River. There was
also an Act made in the days of Nebuchadnezzar
the Great,  another of
his Servants, That whoever would
not fall down and worship his golden
Image, should be thrown into a
fiery Furnace. There was also an
Act made in the days of Darius, That
who so,  for some time, called upon
any God but his, should be cast into
the Lions Den. Now the substance
of these Laws this Rebel has broken,
not only in thought (which is not to
be born) but also in word and deed;
which must therefore needs be intollerable.
For that of Pharaoh, his Law was
made upon a supposition, to prevent
mischief, no Crime being yet apparent;
but here is a Crime apparent.
For the second and third, you
see he disputeth against our Religion;
and for the Treason he hath confessed,
he deserveth to die the death.

Then went the Jury out, whose
names were Mr. Blind-man, Mr. No-good,
Mr. Malice, Mr. Love-lust, Mr.
Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr. High-mind,
Mr. Enmity, Mr. Lyar, Mr. Cruelty,
Mr. Hate-light, and Mr. Implacable,
who every one gave in his private
Verdict against him among themselves,
and afterwards unanimously
concluded to bring him in guilty before
the Judge. And first Mr. Blind-man,
the foreman, said, I see clearly
that this man is an Heretick. Then
said Mr. No-good, Away with such a
fellow from the Earth. Ay, said Mr.
Malice, for I hate the very looks of
him. Then said Mr. Love-lust, I could
never indure him. Nor I, said Mr. Live-loose,
for he would alwayes be condemning
my way. Hang him, hang him,
said Mr. Heady. A sorry Scrub, said
Mr. High-mind. My heart riseth against
him, said Mr. Enmity. He is a
Rogue, said Mr. Lyar. Hanging is too
good for him, said Mr. Cruelty. Lets
dispatch him out of the way, said Mr.
Hate-light. Then said Mr. Implacable,
Might I have all the World given me,
I could not be reconciled to him, therefore
let us forthwith bring him in

guilty of death: And so they did, therefore
he was presently Condemned,
To be had from the place where he
was,The Cruel death of Faithful. to the place from whence he
came, and there to be put to the most
cruel death that could be invented.
They therefore brought him out to
do with him according to their Law;
and first they Scourged him, then they
Buffetted him, then they Lanced his
flesh with Knives; after that, they
Stoned him with Stones, then prickt
him with their Swords, and last of all
they burned him to Ashes at the Stake.
Thus came Faithful to his end. Now, I
saw that there stood behind the multitude,
a Chariot and a couple of Horses,
waiting for Faithful, who (so soon as
his adversaries had dispatched him)
was taken up into it, and straightway
was carried up through the
Clouds, with sound of Trumpet, the
nearest way to the Cœlestial Gate.
But as for Christian,Christian is still alive. he had some respit,
and was remanded back to prison,
so he there remained for a space:
But he that over-rules all things,
having the power of their rage in his
own hand, so wrought it about, that
Christian for that time escaped them,
and went his way.


Well, Faithful, thou hast faithfully profest
Unto thy Lord: with him thou shalt be blest;
When Faithless ones, with all their vain delights,
Are crying out under their hellish plights
Sing, Faithful, sing; and let thy name survive,
For though they kill'd thee, thou art yet alive.
Now I saw in may Dream, that
Christian went not forth alone, for
there was one whose name was Hopeful,Christian has another Companion.
(being made so by the beholding
of Christian and Faithful in their
words and behaviour, in their sufferings
at the fair) who joyned himself
unto him, and entering into a brotherly
covenant, told him that he
would be his Companion. Thus one
died to make Testimony to the Truth,
and another rises out of his Ashes to
be a Companion with Christian. This
Hopeful also told Christian,There is more of the men of the fair will follow that there
were many more of the men in the
fair that would take their time and
follow after.
So I saw that quickly after they
were got out of the fair, they overtook

one that was going before them,
whose name was By-ends; so they said
to him;They overtake By-ends. What Countrey-man, Sir?
and how far go you this way? He
told them, That he came from the
Town of Fair-speech, and he was going
to the Cœlestial City, (but told
them not his name.)
From Fair-speech, said Christian; is
there any that be good live there?
By-ends. Yes, said By-ends, I hope.
Chr. Pray Sir, what may I call you?
By-ends. I am a Stranger to you,
and you to me,By-ends loth to tell his name. if you be going this
way, I shall be glad of your Company;
if not, I must be content.
Chr. This Town of Fair-speech, I
have heard of it, and, as I remember,
they say its a Wealthy place.
Byends. Yes, I will assure you that
it is, and I have very many Rich
Kindred there.
Chr. Pray who are your Kindred
there, if a man may be so bold?
By-ends. To tell you Truth, I am a
Gentleman of good Quality; yet
my Great Grand-father was but a
Water-man, looking one way, and
Rowing another; and I got most of
my Estate by the same occupation.

Chr. Are you a Married man?
By-ends. Yes,The wife and Kindred of By-ends. and my Wife is a
very Virtuous woman, the Daughter
of a Virtuous woman: She was my
Lady Fainings Daughter, therefore
she came of a very Honourable Family,
and is arrived to such a pitch
of Breeding, that she knows how to
carry it to all, even to Prince and Peasant.
'Tis true,Where By-ends differs from others in Religion. we somewhat differ
in Religion from those of the stricter
sort, yet but in two small points:
First, we never strive against Wind
and Tide. Secondly, we are alwayes
most zealous when Religion goes in
his Silver Slippers; we love much to
walk with him in the Street, if the
Sun shines, and the people applaud
it.
Then Christian stept a little a to-side
to his Fellow Hopeful, saying,
It runs in my mind that this is one
By-ends of Fair-speech, and if it be he,
we have as very a Knave in our Company,
as dwelleth in all these parts.
Then said Hopeful, Ask him; methinks
he should not be ashamed of his
name. So Christian came up with him
again, and said, Sir, you talk as if
you knew something more then all

the World doth, and if I take not my
mark amiss, I deem I have half a guess
of you: Is not your name Mr. By-ends
of Fair-speech?
By-ends. That is not my name, but
indeed it is a Nick-name that is given
me by some that cannot abide me, and
I must be content to bear it as a reproach,
as other good men have born
theirs before me.
Chr. But did you never give an occasion
to men to call you by this name?
By-ends.How By-ends got his name. Never, never! The worst
that ever I did to give them an occasion
to give me this name, was,
That I had alwayes the luck to jump
in my Judgement with the present
way of the times, whatever it was,
and my chance was to get thereby;
but if things are thus cast upon me,
let me count them a blessing, but let
not the malicious load me therefore
with reproach.
Chr. I thought indeed that you was
the man that I had heard of, and to tell
you what I think, I fear this name belongs
to you more properly then you are willing
we should think it doth.
By-ends. Well, If you will thus imagine,
I cannot help it. You shall find

me a fair Company-keeper,He desires to keep Company with Christian. if you
will still admit me your associate.
Chr. If you will go with us, you must
go against Wind and Tide, the which,
I perceive, is against your opinion. You
must also own Religion in his Rags as
well as when in his Silver Slippers, and
stand by him too, when bound in Irons,
as well as when he walketh the Streets
with applause.
By-ends. You must not impose, nor
Lord it over my Faith; leave me to
my liberty, and let me go with you.
Chr. Not a step further, unless you
will do in what I propound, as we.
Then said By-ends, I shall never
desert my old Principles, since they
are harmless and profitable. If I may
not go with you, I must do as I did
before you overtook me, even go by
my self, untill some overtake me
that will be glad of my Company.
Then Christian and Hopeful out-went
him,The ease that Pilgrims have is but little in this life and went till they came
at a delicate Plain, called Ease, where
they went with much content; but
that plain was but narrow, so they
were quickly got over it. Now at the
further side of that plain,Lucre Hill a dangerous Hill. was a little
Hill called Lucre, and in that Hill

a Silver-Mine, which some of them
that had formerly gone that way,
because of the rarity of it, had turned
aside to see; but going too near
the brink of the pit, the ground being
deceitful under them, broke, and
they were slain; some also had been
maimed there, and could not to their
dying day be their own men again.
Then I saw in my Dream, that
a little on the road, over against the
Silver-Mine, stood Demas, (Gentleman-like,)
to call to Passengers to come
and see: Who said to Christian and
his Fellow; Ho, turn aside hither, and
I will shew you a thing.
Chr. What thing so deserving, as to
turn us out of the way?
De. Here is a Silver-Mine, and some
digging in it for Treasure; if you will
come, with a little paines you may
richly provide for your selves.
Hopef. Then said Hopeful, Let us
go see.Hopeful tempted to go, but Christian holds him back.
Chr. Not I, said Christian; I have
heard of this place before now, and
how many have there been slain; and
besides, that Treasure is a snare to
those that seek it, for it hindreth
them in their Pilgrimage. Then Christian

called to Demas, saying, Is not
the place dangerous?  hath it not hindred
many in their Pilgrimage?
De. Not very dangerous, except
to those that are careless: but withal,
he blushed as he spake.
Chr. Then said Christian to Hopeful,
Let us not stir a step, but still
keep on our way.
Hope. I will warrant you, when
By-ends comes up, if he hath the same
invitation as we, he will turn in thither
to see.
Chr. No doubt thereof, for his
principles lead him that way, and
a hundred to one but he dies there.
De. Then Demas called again,
saying, But will you not come over
and see?
Chr. Then Christian roundly answered,
saying, Demas,Christian roundeth up Demas. Thou art an
Enemy to the right ways of the
Lord of this way,  and hast been already
condemned for thine own turning
aside, by one of his Majesties
judges; and why seekest thou to
bring us into the like condemnation?
Besides, if we at all turn aside, our
Lord the King will certainly hear
thereof; and will there put us to

shame, where we would stand with
boldness before him.
Demas cried again, That he also
was one of their fraternity; and
that if they would tarry a little,
he also himself would walk with
them.
Chr. Then said Christian, What is
thy name? is it not it by the which I
have called thee?
Ce. Yes, my name is Demas, I am
the Son of Abraham.
Chr. I know you, Gehazi was
your Great Grandfather, and Judas
your Father,  and you have trod their
steps. It is but a devilish prank that
thou usest: Thy Father was hanged
for a Traitor, and thou deservest no
better reward. Assure thy self, that
when we come to the King, we will
do him word of this thy behaviour.
Thus they went their way.
By this time By-ends was come again
within sight,By-ends goes over to Demas. and he at the first
beck went over to Demas. Now whether
he fell into the Pit, by looking
over the brink thereof; or whether
he went down to dig, or whether he
was smothered in the bottom, by
the damps that commonly arise, of

these things I am not certain: But
this I observed, that he never was
seen again in the way.

By-ends and Silver-Demas both agree;
One calls, the other runs, that he may be,
A sharer in his Lucre: so these two
Take up in this World, and no further go.
I saw then,A River that they went on
their way to a pleasant River,  which
David the King called the River of
God, but John, The River of the water
of life: Now their way lay just upon
the bank of the River: here therefore
Christian and his Companion
walked with great delight; They
drank also of the water of the River,
which was pleasant and enlivening to
their weary Spirits: besides, on the
banks of this River on either side
were green Trees, that bore all manner
of Fruit,Trees by the River. The Fruit and leaves of the Trees and the leaves of the Trees
were good for Medicine; with the
Fruit of these Trees they were also
much delighted; and the leaves they
eat to prevent Surfeits, and other
Diseases that are incident to those

that heat their blood by Travels. On
either side of the River was also a
Meadow,A Meadow in which they lie down to sleep. curiously beautified with
Lilies; And it was green all the year
long. In this Meadow they lay down
and slept, for here they might lie
down safely.  When they awoke, they
gathered again of the Fruit of the
Trees, and drank again of the Water
of the River: and then lay down
again to sleep. Thus they did several
days and nights.

Behold ye how these Christal streams do glide
(To comfort Pilgrims) by the Highway side;
The Meadows green, besides their fragrant smell,
Yield dainties for them: And he that can tell
What pleasant Fruit, yea Leaves, these Trees do yield,
Will soon sell all, that he may buy this Field.
So when they were disposed to go
on (for they were not, as yet, at
their Journeys end) they eat and
drank, and departed.
Now I beheld in my Dream, that

they had not journied far, but the
River and the way, for a time, parted.
At which they were not a little
sorry, yet they durst not go out of
the way. Now the way from the
River was rough, and their feet tender
by reason of their Travels; So
the soul of the Pilgrims was much discouraged,
because of the way.  Wherefore
still as they went on, they wished
for better way. Now a little before
them, there was on the left hand of
the Road, a Meadow, and a Stile to go
over into it, and that Meadow is called
By-Path-Meadow. Then said Christian
to his fellow,By Path-Meadow. If this Meadow lieth
along by our way side, lets go over
into it.One temptation does make way for another Then he went to the Stile to
see, and behold a Path lay along by
the way on the other side of the
fence. 'Tis according to my wish
said Christian, here is the easiest going;
come good Hopeful, and lets us
go over.
Hop. But how if this Path should
lead us out of the way?Strong Christians may lead weak ones out of the way.
Chr. That's not like, said the other;
look, doth it not go along by
the way side? So Hopeful, being perswaded
by his fellow, went after him

over the Stile. When they were gone
over, and were got into the Path,
they found it very easie for their
feet; and withal, they looking before
them, espied a Man walking as
they did, (and his name was Vain-confidence)
so they called after him, and
asked him whither that way led? he
said, To the Cœlestial Gate. Look,
said Christian, did not I tell you so?
by this you may see we are right:
so they followed, and he went before
them. But behold the night came
on, and it grew very dark, so that
they that were behind, lost the sight
of him that went before.
He therefore that went before
(Vain-confidence by name) not seeing
the way before him, fell into a deep
Pit,  which was on purpose there
made by the Prince of those grounds,
to catch vain-glorious fools withall;
and was dashed in pieces with his
fall.
Now Christian and his fellow
heard him fall. So they called, to
know the matter, but there was
none to answer, only they heard a
groaning. Then said Hopeful, Where
are we now? Then was his fellow

silent, as mistrusting that he had led
him out of the way. And now it began
to rain, and thunder,Reasoning between Christian and Hopeful and lighten
in a very dreadful manner, and the
water rose amain.
Then Hopeful groaned in himself
saying, Oh that I had kept on my way!
Chr. Who could have thought that
this path should have led us out of
the way?
Hope. I was afraid on't at very first,
and therefore gave you that gentle caution.
I would have spoke plainer, but
that you are older then I.
Chr. Good Brother be not offended,
I am sorry I have brought theeChristians repentant for leading of his Brother out of the way.
out of the way, and that I have put
thee into such eminent danger; pray
my Brother forgive me, I did not do
it of an evil intent.
Hope. Be comforted my Brother for
I forgive thee; and believe too, that
this shall be for our good.
Chr. I am glad I have with me a
merciful Brother: But we must not
stand thus, let's try to go back again.
Hope. But good Brother let me go before.
Chr. No, if you please, let me go
first; that if there be any danger, I

may be first therein, because by my
means we are both gone out of the
way.
Hope. No, said Hopeful, you shall
not go first, for your mind being troubled,
may lead you out of the way again.
Then for their encouragement,
they heard the voice of one saying,
Let thine heart be towards the Highway,
even the way that thou wentest, 
turn again:They are in danger of drowning as they go back. But by this time the Waters
were greatly risen, by reason of
which, the way of going back was
very dangerous. (Then I thought that
it is easier going out of the way
when we are in, then going in when
we are out.) Yet they adventured to
go back; but it was so dark, and
the flood was so high, that in their
going back, they had like to have
been drowned nine or ten times.
Neither could they, with all the
skill they had, get again to the Stile
that night. Wherefore, at last, lighting
under a little shelter, they sat
down there till the day brake; but
being weary,They sleep in the grounds of Giant Despair. they fell asleep. Now
there was not far from the place
where they lay, a Castle, called Doubting-Castle,
the owner whereof was

Giant Despair, and it was in his
grounds they now were sleeping;
wherefore he getting up in the morning
early, and walking up and down
in his Fields, caught Christian and
Hopeful asleep in his grounds.He finds them in his ground, and carries them to Doubting Castle, Then
with a grim and surly voice he bid
them awake, and asked them whence
they were? and what they did in his
grounds? They told him, they were
Pilgrims, and that they had lost their
way. Then said the Giant, You have
this night trespassed on me, by
trampling in, and lying on my
grounds, and therefore you must go
along with me. So they were forced
to go, because he was stronger then
they. They also had but little to say,
for they knew themselves in a fault.
The Giant therefore drove them before
him, and put them into his Castle,The Grievousness of their Imprisonment
into a very dark Dungeon, nasty and
stinking to the spirit of these two
men: Here then they lay, from Wednesday
morning till Saturday night, 
without one bit of bread, or drop of
drink, or any light, or any to ask how
they did. They were therefore here
in evil case, and were far from friends
and acquaintace. Now in this place,

Christian had double sorrow, because
'twas through his unadvised haste that
they were brought into this distress.
Well, on Saturday about midnight
they began to pray, and continued in
Prayer till almost break of day.
Now a little before it was day,
good Christian, as one half amazed,
brake out in this passionate Speech,
What a fool, quoth he, am I thus to
lie in a stinking Dungeon,A Key in Christians bosom called Promise, opens any Lock in Doubting Castle. when I may
as well walk at liberty? I have a
Key in my bosom, called Promise, that
will, I am perswaded, open any Look
in Doubting Castle. Then said Hopeful,
That's good News; good Brother
pluck it out of thy bosom and try:
Then Christian pulled it out of his
bosom, and began to try at the Dungion
door, whose bolt (as he turned
the Key) gave back, and the door
flew open with ease, and Christian
and Hopeful both came out. Then he
went to the outward door that leads
into the Castle yard, and with his Key
opened the door also. After he went
to the Iron Gate, for that must be
opened too, but that Lock went
damnable hard, yet the Key did open
it; then they thrust open the Gate

to make their escape with speed, but
that Gate, as it opened, made such
a creaking, that it waked Giant Despair,
who hastily rising to pursue his
Prisoners, felt his Limbs to fail, so that
he could by no means go after them.
Then they went on, and came to the
Kings high way again, and so were
safe, because they were out of his
Jurisdiction.
Now when they were gone over
the Stile, they began to contrive with
themselves what they should do at
that Stile, to prevent those that should
come after, from falling into the
hands of Giant Despair. So they consented
to erect there a Pillar, and to
engrave upon the side thereof, Over
this Stile is the way to Doubting-Castle,
which is kept by Giant Despair, who
despiseth the King of the Cœlestial Countrey,
and seeks to destroy his holy Pilgrims.
Many therefore that followed after,
read what was written, and escaped
the danger. This done, they sang as
follows.

Out of the way we went, and then we found
What 'twas to tread upon forbidden ground:

And let them that come after have a cure,
Lest heedlesness makes them, as we, to fare:
Lest they, for trespassing, his prisoners are,
Whose Castle's Doubting, and whose name's Despair.
They went then, till they came
to the delectable Mountains, which
The delectable mountains Mountains belong to the Lord of that
Hill, of which we have spoken before;
so they went up to the Mountains,
to behold the Gardens and
Orchards,They are refreshed in the mountains. the Vineyards, and Fountains
of water, where also they drank,
and washed themselves, and did freely
eat of the Vineyards. Now there
was on the tops of these Mountains,
Shepherds feeding their flocks, and
they stood by the high-way side. The
Pilgrims therefore went to them, and
leaning upon their staves, (as is common
with weary Pilgrims, when
they stand to talk with any by the
way,) they asked, Whose delectable
Mountains are these? and whose be the
sheep that feed upon them?

Shep. These Mountains are Immanuels
Land, and they are within sight
of his City, and the sheep also are
his, and he laid down his life for
them. 
Chr. Is this the way to the Cœlestial
City?
Shep. You are just in your way.
Chr. How far is it thither?
Shep. Too far for any, but those
that shall get thither indeed.
Chr. Is the way safe, or dangerous?
Shep. Safe for those for whom it
is to be safe, but transgressors shall fall
therein. 
Chr. Is there in this place any relief
for Pilgrims that are weary and
faint in the way?
Shep. The Lord of these Mountains
hath given us a charge, Not to be
forgetful to entertain strangers:  Therefore
the good of the place is even
before you.
I saw also in my Dream, that
when the Shepherds perceived that
they were way-fairing men, they also
put questions to them, (to which they
made answer as in other places,) as,
Whence came you? and, How got you
into the way? and, By what means

have you so persevered therein? For
but few of them that begin to come
hither, do shew their face on these
Mountains. But when the Shepherds
heard their answers, being
pleased therewith, they looked very
lovingly upon them; and said, Welcome
to the delectable Mountains.
The Shepherds, I say, whose names
were, Knowledge, Experience, Watchful,
and Sincere, took them by the
hand, and had them to their Tents,
and made them partake of that
which was ready at present. They
said moreover, We would that you
should stay here a while, to acquaint
with us, and yet more to solace your
selves with the good of these delectable
Mountains. They told them,
That they were content to stay; and
so they went to their rest that night,
because it was very late.
Then I saw in my Dream, that
in the morning, the Shepherds called
up Christian and Hopeful to walk with
them upon the Mountains: So they
went forth with them, and walked a
while, having a pleasant prospect on
every side. Then said the Shepherds
one to another, Shall we shew these

Pilgrims some wonders? So when
they had concluded to do it, they
had them first to the top of an Hill
called Errour;The Mountain of Errour. which was very steep
on the furthest side, and bid them
look down to the bottom. So Christian
and Hopeful lookt down, and
saw at the bottom several men dashed
all to pieces by a fall that they
had from the top. Then said Christian,
What meaneth this? The
Shepherds answered; Have you
not heard of them that were made to
err, by harkening to Hymeneus,, and
Philetus, as concerning the Faith of
the Resurrection of the Body? They
answered, Yes. Then said the Shepherds,
Those that you see lie dashed
in pieces at the bottom of this
Mountain, are they: and they have
continued to this day unburied (as
you see) for an example to others to
take heed how they clamber too high,
or how they come too near the brink
of this Mountain.
Then I saw that they had them to
the top of another Mountain,Mount Caution and
the name of that is Caution; and bid
them look a far off. Which when
they did, they perceived as they

thought, several men walking up and
down among the Tombs that were
there. And they perceived that the
men were blind, because they stumbled
sometimes upon the Tombs, and
because they could not get out from
among them. Then said Christian,
What means this?
The Shepherds then answered,
Did you not see a little below these
Mountains a Stile that led into a
Meadow on the left hand of this
way? They answered, Yes. Then said
the Shepherds, From that Stile there
goes a Path that leads directly to
Doubting-Castle, which is kept by
Giant Despair; and these men (pointing
to them among the Tombs)
came once on Pilgrimage, as you do
now, even till they came to that
same Stile. And because the right way
was rough in that place, they chose
to go out of it into that Meadow,
and there were taken by Giant Despair,
and cast into Doubting-Castle;
where, after they had a while been
kept in the Dungeon, he at last did
put out their eyes, and led them among
those Tombs, where he has
left them to wander to this very day;

that the saying of the wise Man
might be fulfilled, He that wandereth
out of the way of understanding,  shall
remain in the Congregation of the dead.
Then Christian and Hopeful looked
one upon another, with tears gushing
out; but yet said nothing to the
Shepherds.
Then I saw in my Dream, that the
Shepherds had them to another place,
in a bottom, where was a door in
the side of an Hill; and they opened
the door, and bid them look in. They
looked in therefore, and saw that
within it was very dark, and smoaky;
they also thought that they heard
there a lumbring noise as of fire, and
a cry of some tormented, and that
they smelt the scent of Brimstone.
Then said Christian, What means this?
The Shepherds told them, saying,
This is a By-way to Hell,A by-way to Hell. a way that
Hypocrites go in at; namely, such as
sell their Birth-right, with Esau: such
as sell their Master, with Judas: such
as blaspheme the Gospel, with Alexander:
and that lie and dissemble,
with Ananius and Saphira his wife.
Hopef. Then said Hopeful to the
Shepherds, I perceive that these had

on them, even every one, a shew of Pilgrimage
as we have now; had they
not?
Shep. Yes, and held it a long time
too.
Hopef. How far might they go on
Pilgrimage in their day, since they notwithstanding
were thus miserably cast
away?
Shep. Some further, and some not
so far as these Mountains.
Then said the Pilgrims one to another,
We had need cry to the Strong for
strength.
Shep. Ay, and you will have need
to use it when you have it, too.
By this time the Pilgrims had a
desire to go forwards, and the Shepherds
a desire they should; so they
walked together towards the end of
the Mountains. Then said the Shepherds
one to another, Let us here
shew to the Pilgrims the Gates of the
Cœlestial City, if they have skill
to look through our Perspective
Glass. The Pilgrims then lovingly
accepted the motion: So they had
them to the top of an high Hill called
Clear, and gave them their Glass
to look. Then they essayed to look,

but the remembrance of that last
thing that the Shepheards had shewed
them, made their hand shake,
by means of which impediment,
they could not look steddily through
the Glass;The fruit of slavish fear. yet they thought they
saw somthing like the Gate, and also
some of the Glory of the place,

Thus by the Shepherds, Secrets are reveal'd,
Which from all other men are kept conceal'd:
Come to the Shepherds then, if you would see
Things deep, things hid, and that mysterious be.
When they were about to depart,
one of the Shepherds gave them a
note of the way, Another of them,
bid them beware of the flatterer, The
third, bid them take heed that they
sleep not upon the Inchanted Ground,
and the fourth, bid them God speed.
So I awoke from my Dream.
And I slept, and Dreamed again,
and saw the same two Pilgrims going
down the Mountains along the Highway
towards the City. Now a little

below these Mountains, on the left
hand,The Countrey of Conceit, out of which came Ignorance. lieth the Countrey of Conceit,
from which Countrey there comes
into the way in which the Pilgrims
walked, a little crooked Lane. Here
therefore they met with a very brisk
Lad, that came out of that Countrey;
and his name was Ignorance.
So Christian asked him, From what
parts he came? and whither he was
going?
Ign. Sir,Christian and Ignorance hath some talk. I was born in the Countrey
that lieth off there, a little on
the left hand; and I am going to the
Cœlestial City.
Chr. But how do you think to get in
at the Gate, for you may find some difficulty
there?
Ign. As other good People do, said
he.
Chr. But what have you to shew at
that Gate, that may cause that the
Gate should be opened to you?
Ign. I know my Lords will, and
I have been a good Liver, I pay every
man his own; I Pray, Fast, pay
Tithes, and give Alms, and have
left my Countrey, for whither I am
going.
Chr. But thou camest not in at the

Wicket-gate, that is at the head of
this way, thou camest in hither through
that same crooked Lane, and therefore
I fear, however thou mayest think of
thy self, when the reckoning day shall
come, thou wilt have laid to thy charge,
that thou art a Theif and a Robber, instead
of admitance into the City.
Ignor. Gentlemen,He saith to every one, that he is a fool. ye be utter
strangers to me, I know you not, be
content to follow the Religion of your
Countrey, and I will follow the Religion
of mine. I hope all will be well.
And as for the Gate that you talk of,
all the World knows that that is a
great way off of our Countrey. I cannot
think that any man in all our
parts doth so much as know the way
to it; nor need they matter whether
they do or no, since we have, as you
see, a fine pleasant green Lane,
that comes down from our Countrey
the next way into it.
When Christian saw that the man
was wise in his own conceit,  he said
to Hopeful, whisperingly, There is
more hopes of a fool then of him. And
said moreover, When he that is a
fool walketh by the way,  his wisdom
faileth him, and he saith to every one

that he is a fool.How to carry it to a fool. What, shall we talk
further with him? or out-go him at
present? and so leave him to think
of what he hath heard already; and
then stop again for him afterwards,
and see if by degrees we can do any
good of him?

Let Ignorance a little while now muse
On what is said, and let him not refuse
Good Counsel to imbrace, lest he remain
Still Ignorant of what's the chiefest gain.
God saith, Those that no understanding have,
(Although he made them) them he will not save.
Hop. It is not good, I think, to
say all to him at once, let us pass him
by, if you will, and talk to him anon,
even as he is able to hear it.
So they both went on, and Ignorance
he came after. Now when
they had passed him a little way,
they entered into a very dark Lane,
where they met a man whom seven
  Devils had bound with seven strong
Cords, and were carrying of him
back to the door that they saw in the
side of the Hill. Now good Christian

began to tremble, and so did Hopeful
his Companion: Yet as the Devils led
away the man, Christian looked to
see if he knew him, and he thought
it might be one Turn-away that dwelt
in the Town of Apostacy.The destruction of one Turn-away. But he
did not perfectly see his face, for
he did hang his head like a Thief
that is found: But being gone past,
Hopeful looked after him, and espied
on his back a Paper with this Inscription,
Wanton Professor, and damnable
Apostate.Christian telleth his Companion a story of Little-Faith. Then said Christian
to his Fellow, Now I call to remembrance
that which was told me of
a thing that happened to a good man
hereabout. The name of the man
was Little-Faith, but a good man,
and he dwelt in the Town of Sincere.
The thing was this; at the entering
in of this passage there comes down
from Broad-way-gateBroad-way gate. a Lane called
Dead-mans-lane;Dead mans Lane. so called, because
of the Murders that are commonly
done there. And this Little-Faith going
on Pilgrimage, as we do now,
chanced to sit down there and slept.
Now there happened, at that time to
come down that Lane from Broad-way-gate
three Sturdy Rogues, and

their names were Faint-heart, Mistrust,
and Guilt, (three brothers) and
they espying Little-faith where he was,
came galloping up with speed: Now
the good man was just awaked from
his sleep, and was getting up to go on
his Journey.Little-faith robbed by Faint-heart, Mistrust and Guilt. So they came all up to
him, and with threatning Language
bid him stand. At this, Little-faith lookt
as white as a Clout, and had neither
power to fight nor flie. Then said Faint-heart,
Deliver thy Purse; but he
making no haste to do it, (for he was
loth to lose his Money,) Mistrust
ran up to him, and thrusting his
hand into his Pocket, pull'd out
thence a bag of Silver. Then he cried
out,They got away his Silver, and knockt him down. Thieves, thieves. With that, Guilt
with a great Club that was in his
hand, strook Little-Faith on the
head, and with that blow fell'd him
flat to the ground, were he lay bleeding
as one that would bleed to death.
All this while the Thieves stood by:
But at last, they hearing that some
were upon the Road, and fearing lest
it should be one Great-grace that
dwells in the City of Good-confidence,
they betook themselves to their heels,
and left this good man to shift for

himself. Now after a while, Little-faith
came to himself, and getting
up, made shift to scrabble on his way.
This was the story.
Hopef. But did they take from him
all that ever he had?
Christ.Little-faith left not his best things. Not the place where his
Jewels were, they never ransak't, so
those he kept still; but as, I was told,
the good man was much afflicted for
his loss. For the Thieves got most of
his spending Money. That which
they got not (as I said) were Jewels,
also he had a little odd Money left,
but scarce enough to bring him to 
his Journeys end; nay, (if I was not
mis-informed) he was forced to begLittle-faith forced to beg to his Journeys end.
as he went, to keep himself alive,
(for his Jewels he might not sell.) But
beg, and do what he could, he went
(as we say) with many a hungry belly,
the most part of the rest of the
way.
Hopef. But is it not a wonder they got
not from him his Certificate, by which he
was to receive his admittance at the
Cœlestial gate?
Chr. No, they got not that:
though thy mist it not through any
good cunning of his, for he being

He kept not his best things by his own cunning. dismayed with their coming upon
him, had neither power nor skill to
hide any thing; so 'twas more by
good Providence then by his Indeavour,
 that they mist of that good
thing.
Hopef. But it must needs be a comfort
to him, that they got not this Jewel
from him.
Chr. It might have been great
comfort to him,  had he used it as he
should; but they that told me the
story, said, That he made but little
use of it all the rest of the way; and
that because of the dismay that he
had in their taking away his Money:
indeed he forgot it a great part of the
rest of the Journey; and besides,
when at any time, it came into his
mind, and he began to be comforted
therewith, then would fresh thoughts
of his loss come again upon him,
and those thoughts would swallow
up all.
Hope. Alas poor Man! this could
not but be a great grief unto him.
Chr. Grief! Ay, a grief indeed!
would it not a been so to any of us,He is pittied by both.
had we been used as he, to be Robbed
and wounded too, and that in a

strange place, as he was? 'Tis a
wonder he did not die with grief,
poor heart! I was told, that he scattered
almost all the rest of the way
with nothing but doleful and bitter
complaints. Telling also to all that
over-took him, or that he over-took
in the way as he went, where he was
Robbed, and how; who they were
that did it, and what he lost; how
he was wounded, and that he hardly
escaped with life.
Hope. But 'tis a wonder that his
necessities did not put him upon selling,
or pawning some of his Jewels, that he
might have wherewith to relieve himself
in his Journey.
Chr. Thou talkest like one upon
whose head is the Shell to this very
day: For what should he pawn them?Christian snibbeth his fellow for unadvised speaking.
or to whom should he sell them? In
all that Countrey where he was
Robbed, his Jewels were not accounted
of, nor did he want that relief
which could from thence be administred
to him; besides, had his Jewels
been missing at the Gate of the Cœlestial
City, he had (and that he
knew well enough) been excluded
from an Inheritance there; and that

would have been worse to him then
the appearance and villany of ten
thousand Thieves.
Hope. Why art thou so tart my Brother?
Esau sold his Birth-right, and
that for a mess of Pottage;  and that
Birth-right was his greatest Jewel: and
if he, why might not Little-Faith do so
too?
A discourse about Esau and Little-Faith. Chr. Esau did sell his Birth-right
indeed, and so do many besides; and
by so doing, exclude themselves from
the chief blessing, as also that Caytiff
did. But you must put a difference betwixt
Esau and Little-Faith, and
also betwixt their Estates. Esau's
Birth-right was Typical, but Little-faith's
Jewels were not so. Esau's belly
was his God, but Little-faith's belly
was not so. Esau's want lay in his
fleshly appetite, Little-faith's did not
so.Esau was ruled by his lusts. Besides, Esau could see no further
then to the fulfilling of his Lusts.
For I am at the point to dye, said he,
  And what good will this Birth-right do
me? But Little-faith, though it was
his lot to have but a little faith, was
by his little faith kept from such extravagancies;
and made to see and
prize his Jewels more, then to sell

them,Esau never had faith as Esau did his Birth-right.
You read not any where that Esau
had faith, no not so much as a little:
Therefore no marvel, if where the
flesh only bears sway (as it will in
that Man where no faith is to resist)
if he sells his Birth-right, and his
Soul and all, and that to the Devil of
Hell; for it is with such, as it is with
the Ass,  Who in her occasions cannot be
turned away. When their minds are
set upon their Lusts, they will have
them what ever they cost.Little-faith could not live upon Esaus Pottage. But Little-faith
was of another temper, his
mind was on things Divine; his
livelyhood was upon things that
were Spiritual, and from above;
Therefore to what end should he that
is of such a temper sell his Jewels,
(had there been any that would have
bought them) to fill his mind with
empty things? Will a man give a
penny to fill his belly with Hay?A comparison between the Turtle-dove and the Crow. or
can you perswade the Turtle-dove to
live upon Carrion, like the Crow?
Though faithless ones, can for carnal
Lusts, pawn, or morgage, or sell what
they have, and themselves out right
to boot; yet they that have faith,
saving faith, though but little of it,

cannot do so. Here therefore, my
Brother, is thy mistake.
Hopef. I acknowledge it; but yet
your severe reflection had almost made
me angry.
Chr. Why, I did but compare thee
to some of the Birds that are of the
brisker sort, who will run to and
fro in troden paths with the shell upon
their heads: but pass by that, and
consider the matter under debate,
and all shall be well betwixt thee and
me.
Hopef. But Christian, These three
fellows, I am perswaded in my heart, are
but a company of Cowards: would they
have run else, think you, as they did,
at the noise of one that was coming on
the road?Hopeful swaggers. Why did not Little-faith
pluck up a great heart? He might, methinks,
have stood one brush with them,
and have yielded when there had been
no remedy.
Chr. That they are Cowards, many
have said, but few have found it so
in the time of Trial.No great heart for God, where there is but little faith As for a great
heart, Little-faith had none; and I
perceive by thee, my Brother, hadst
thou been the Man concerned, thou
art but for a brush, and then to yield.

And verily,We have more courage when out, then when we are in since this is the height of
thy Stomach now they are at a
distance from us, should they appear
to thee, as they did to him, they
might put thee to second thoughts.
But consider again, they are but
Journey-men Thieves, they serve under
the King of the Bottomless pit;
who, if need be, will come in to their
aid himself,  and his voice is as the
roaring of a Lion.Christian tells his own experience in this case. I my self have
been Ingaged as this Little-faith was,
and I found it a terrible thing. These
three Villains set upon me, and I beginning
like a Christian to resist,
they gave but a call, and in came
their Master: I would, as the saying
is, have given my life for a penny;
but that, as God would have it,
I was cloathed with Armour of proof.
Ay, and yet though I was so harnessed,
I found it hard work to quit my
self like a man; no man can tell what
in that Combat attends us, but he
that hath been in the Battle himself.
Hopef. Well, but they ran you see,
when they did but suppose that one
Great-Grace was in the way.
Chr. True, they often fled, both
they and their Master, when Great-grace

hath but appeared,The Kings Champion. and no
marvel, for he is the Kings Champion:
But I tro, you will put some difference
between Little-faith and the
Kings Champion; all the Kings Subjects
are not his Champions: nor can
they, when tried, do such feats of
War as he. Is it meet to think that a
little child should handle Goliah as
David did? or that there should be
the strength of an Ox in a Wren?
Some are strong, some are weak,
some have great faith, some have little:
this man was one of the weak,
and therefore he went to the walls.
Hopef. I would it had been Great-grace,
for their sakes.
Chr. If it had been he, he might
have had his hands full: For I must
tell you, That though Great-grace is
excellent good at his Weapons, and
has and can, so long as he keeps
them at Swords point, do well enough
with them: yet if they get
within him, even Faint-heart, Mistrust,
or the other, it shall go hard
but they will throw up his heels. And
when a man is down, you know what
can he do.
Who so looks well upon Great-grace's

face, shall see those Scars and
Cuts there, that shall easily give demonstration
of what I say. Yea once
I heard he should say, (and that when
he was in the Combat) We despaired
even of life: How did these sturdy
Rogues and their Fellows make David
groan, mourn, and roar? Yea
Heman, and Hezekiah too, though
Champions in their day, were forced
to bestir them, when by these assaulted;
and yet, that notwithstanding,
they had their Coats soundly
brushed by them. Peter upon a time
would go try what he could do; but,
though some do say of him that he
is the Prince of the Apostles, they
handled him so, that they made him
at last afraid of a sorry Girle.
Besides, their King is at their
Whistle, he is never out of hearing;
and if at any time they be put to
the worst, he, if possible, comes in to
help them: And, of him it is said,
The Sword of him that layeth at him 
cannot hold the Spear, the Dart, nor the
Habergeon; he esteemeth Iron as Straw,
and Brass as rotten Wood.Leviathans sturdiness. The Arrow
cannot make him flie, Slingstones are
turned with him into stubble, Darts are

counted as stubble, he laugheth at the
shaking of a Spear. What can a man
do in this case? 'Tis true, if a man
could at every turn have Jobs Horse,
and had skill and courage to ride
him,The excellent mettle that is in Jobs Horse he might do notable things. For
his neck is clothed with Thunder, he
will not be afraid as the Grashoper, the
glory of his Nostrils is terrible, he
paweth in the Valley, rejoyceth in his
strength, and goeth out to meet the armed
men. He mocketh at fear, and is not
affrighted, neither turneth back from
the Sword. The quiver rattleth against
him, the glittering Spear, and the
shield. He swalloweth the ground with
fierceness and rage, neither believeth he
that it is the sound of the Trumpet. He
saith among the Trumpets,  Ha, ha; and
he smelleth the Battel a far off, the
thundring of the Captains, and the
shoutings.
But for such footmen as thee and I
are, let us never desire to meet with
an enemy, nor vaunt as if we could do
better, when we hear of others that
they have been foiled, nor be tickled
at the thoughts of our own manhood,
for such commonly come by the worst
when tried. Witness Peter, of whom I

made mention before. He would
swagger, Ay he would: He would, as
his vain mind prompted him to say,
do better, and stand more for his
Master, then all men: But who so
foiled, and run down with these Villains,
as he?
When therefore we hear that such
Robberies are done on the Kings
High-way, two things become us
to do: first to go out Harnessed, and
to be sure to take a Shield with us: For
it was for want of that, that he that
laid so lustily at Leviathan could not
make him yield. For indeed, if that
be wanting, he fears us not at all.
Therefore he that had skill, hath said,
Above all take the Shield of Faith, 
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked.
'Tis good also that we desire of the
King a Convoy,'Tis good to have a Convoy yea that he will go
with us himself. This made David
rejoyce when in the Valley of the
shaddows of death;  and Moses was
rather for dying where he stood, then
to go one step without his God. O
my Brother,  if he will but go along
with us, what need we be afraid of
ten thousands that shall set themselves

against us, but without him,
the proud helpers fall under the slain. 
I for my part have been in the fray
before now, and though (through the
goodness of him that is best) I am
as you see alive: yet I cannot boast
of my manhood. Glad shall I be, if I
meet with no more such brunts,
though I fear we are not got beyond
all danger. However, since the Lion
and the Bear hath not as yet devoured
me, I hope God will also deliver
us from the next uncircumcised
Philistine.

Poor Little-faith! Hast been among the Thieves!
Wast robb'd! Remember this, Who so believes
And gets more faith, shall then a Victor be
Over ten thousand, else scarce over three.
So they went on, and Ignorance followed.
They went then till they
came at a place where they saw a
way put it self into their way, and
seemed withal,A way, and away. to lie as straight as
the way which they should go; and

here they knew not which of the two
to take, for both seemed straight before
them, therefore here they stood
still to consider. And as they were
thinking about the way, behold a
man black of flesh, but covered with
a very light Robe, came to them and
asked them. Why they stood there?
They answered, They were going to
the Cœlestial City, but knew not
which of these ways to take. Follow
me, said the man, it is thither
that I am going. So they followed
him in the way that but now cameChristian and his fellow deluded.
into the road, which by degrees turned,
and turned them so from the
City that they desired to go to,
that in little time their faces were
turned away from it; yet they followed
him. But by and by, before
they were aware, he led them both
within the compass of a Net, in
which they were both so entangled
that they knew not what to do;They are taken in a Net. and
with that, the white Robe fell off the
black mans back; then they saw where
they were. Wherefore there they
lay crying sometime, for they could
not get themselves out.
Chr. Then said Christian to his fellow,

Now do I see my self in an
errour.They bewail their conditions. Did not the Shepherds bid
us beware of the flatterers? As is
the saying of the Wise man,  so we
have found it this day: A man that
flattereth his Neighbour, spreadeth a
Net for his feet.
Hopef. They also gave us a note
of directions about the way, for our
more sure finding thereof: but therein
we have also forgotten to read,
and have not kept our selves from
the Paths of the destroyer. Here
David was wiser then wee; for saith
he,  Concerning the works of men, by
the word of thy lips,A shining one comes to them with a whip in his hand. I have kept me
from the Paths of the destroyer. Thus
they lay bewailing themselves in the
Net. At last they espied a shining
One coming towards them, with a
whip of small cord in his hand. When
he was come to the place where they
were, He asked them whence they
came? and what they did there?
They told him, That they were poor
Pilgrims going to Sion, but were
led out of their way, by a black man,
cloathed in white, who bid us; said
they, follow him; for he was going
thither too. Then said he with the

Whip; it is Flatterer, a false Apostle, 
that hath transformed himself into an
Angel of light. So he rent the Net
and let the men out. Then said he
to them, Follow me, that I may set
you in your way again; so he led
them back to the way, which they
had left to follow the Flatterer. Then
he asked them, saying,They are examined, and convicted of forgetfulness. Where did
you lie the last night? They said, with
the Shepherds upon the delectable
Mountains. He asked them then,
If they had not of them Shepherds
a note of direction for the way? They
answered, Yes. But did you, said he,
when you was at a stand, pluck out
and read your note? They answered,
No. He asked them why?Deceivers fine spoken. They said
they forgot. He asked moreover,  If
the Shepherds did not bid them beware
of the Flatterer? They answered,
Yes: But we did not imagine, said
they, that this fine-spoken man had
been he.
Then I saw in my Dream, that he
commanded them to lie down;  which
when they did, he chastized them
sore, to teach them the good way
wherein they should walk;  and as
he chastized them, he said, As many

as I love,They are whipt, and sent on their way. I rebuke and chasten; be
zealous therefore, and repent. This
done, he bids them go on their way,
and take good heed to the other directions
of the Shepherds. So they
thanked him for all his kindness, and
went softly along the right way.

Come hither, you that walk along the way;
See how the Pilgrims fare, that go a stray!
They catched are in an intangling Net,
'Cause they good Counsel lightly did forget:
'Tis true, they rescu'd were, but yet you see
They're scourg'd to boot: Let this your caution be.
Now after a while, they perceived
afar off, one coming softly and alone,
all along the High-way to meet
them. Then said Christian to his
fellow, Yonder is a man with his
back toward Sion, and he is coming
to meet us.
Hopef. I see him, let us take heed
to our selves now, lest he should
prove a Flatterer also. So he drew

nearer and nearer, and at last came
up unto them. His name was Atheist,The Atheist meets them
and he asked them whether they
were going.
Chr. We are going to the Mount
Sion.
Then Atheist fell into a very great Laughter.He Laughs at them.
Chr. What is the meaning of your
Laughter?
Atheist. I Laugh to see what ignorant
persons you are, to take upon
you so tedious a Journey; and yet are
like to have nothing but your travel
for your paines.
Chr. Why man?They reason together: Do you think we
shall not be received?
Atheist. Received! There is no such
place as you Dream of, in all this
World.
Chr. But there is in the World to
come.
Atheist. When I was at home in
mine own Countrey, I heard as you
now affirm, and from that hearing
went out to see, and have been seeking
this City this twenty years: But
find no more of it,  then I did the first
day I set out.
Chr. We have both heard and believe

that there is such a place to be
found.
Atheist. Had not I, when at home,
believed, I had not come thus far to
seek: But finding none, (and yet I
should,The Atheist takes up his content in this World. had there been such a place
to be found, for I have gone to seek
it further then you) I am going back
again, and will seek to refresh my
self with the things that I then cast
away, for hopes of that which I now
see is not.
Christian proveth his Brother. Chr. Then said Christian to Hopeful
his Fellow, Is it true which this
man hath said?
Hopef. Take heed, he is one of the
Flatterers;Hopefuls gracious answer. remember what it hath
cost us once already for our harkning
to such kind of Fellows. What! no
Mount Sion! Did we not see from
the delectable Mountains the Gate
of the City?  Also, are we not now
to walk by Faith? Let us go on, said
Hopeful, lest the man with the Whip
overtakes us again.
You should have taught me that
Lesson, which I will round you in the
ears withall;  Cease, my Son, to hear the
Instruction that causeth to err from the
words of knowledge. I say my Brother,

cease to hear him, and let us believe
to the saving of the Soul.
Chr. My Brother, I did not put the
question to thee, for that I doubted of the
Truth of our belief my self: But to prove
thee,A fruit of an honest heart. and to fetch from thee a fruit of
the honesty of thy heart. As for this
man, I know that he is blinded by the god
of this World: Let thee and I go on,
knowing that we have belief of the
Truth,  and no lie is of the Truth.
Hopef. Now do I rejoyce in hope
of the Glory of God: So they turned
away from the man; and he, Laughing
at them, went his way.
I saw then in my Dream,They are come to the inchanted ground that they
went till they came into a certain
Countrey, whose Air naturally tended
to make one drowsie, if he
came a stranger into it. And here
Hopeful began to be very dull and
heavy of sleep, wherefore he said unto
Christian, I do now begin to grow
so drowsie,Hopeful begins to be drowsie that I can scarcely hold
up mine eyes; let us lie down here
and take one Nap.
Chr. By no means, said the other,Christian keeps him awake.
lest sleeping, we never awake more.
Hopef. Why my Brother? sleep is
sweet to the Labouring man; we

may be refreshed if we take a Nap.
Chr. Do you not remember that one
of the Shepherds bid us beware of the
Inchanted ground? He meant by that,
that we should beware of sleeping; wherefore
let us not sleep as do others,  but let
us watch and be sober.
He is thankful. Hopef. I acknowledge my self in
fault, and had I been here alone, I
had by sleeping run the danger of
of death. I see it is true that the wise
man saith,  Two are better then one.
Hitherto hath thy Company been my
mercy; and thou shalt have a good
reward for thy labour.
Chr. Now then,To prevent drowsiness they fall to good discourse. said Christian,
to prevent drowsiness in this place, let
let us fall into good discourse.
Hopef. With all my heart, said the
other.
Chr. Where shall we begin?Good discourse prevents drowsiness
Hopef. Where God began with us.
But do you begin, if you please.

When Saints do sleepy grow, let them come hither,
And hear how these two Pilgrims talk together:
Yea, let them learn of them, in any wise,
Thus to keep ope their drowsie slumbring eyes.

Saints fellowship, if it be manag'd well,
Keeps them awake, and that in spite of hell.
Chr. Then Christian began and said,
I will ask you a question. How came you
to think at first of doing as you do now?
Hopef. Do you mean, How came
I at first to look after the good of my
Soul?
Chr. Yes, that is my meaning.
Hopef. I continued a great while
in the delight of those things which
were seen and sold at our fair; things
which, as I believe now, would have
(had I continued in them still) drownded
me in perdition and destruction.
Chr. What things were they?
Hopef. All the Treasures and Riches
of the World. Also I delighted much in
Rioting, Revelling, Drinking, Swearing,
Lying, Uncleanness, Sabbath-breaking,
and what not, that tended
to destroy the Soul. But I found
at last, by hearing and considering of
things that are Divine, which indeed
I heard of you, as also of beloved
Faithful,  that was put to death for
his Faith and good-living in Vanity-fair,
That the end of these things is

death. And that for these things sake,
the wrath of God cometh upon the
children of disobedience.
Chr. And did you presently fall under
the power of this conviction?
Hopef. No, I was not willing presently
to know the evil of sin, nor the
damnation that follows upon the
commission of it, but endeavoured,
when my mind at first began to be
shaken with the word, to shut mine
eyes against the light thereof.
Chr. But what was the cause of your
carrying of it thus to the first workings
of Gods blessed Spirit upon you?
Hopef. The causes were, 1. I was
ignorant that this was the work of
God upon me. I never thought that
by awaknings for sin, God at first begins
the conversion of a sinner. 2. Sin
was yet very sweet to my flesh, and
I was loth to leave it. 3. I could not
tell how to part with mine old Companions,
their presence and actions
were so desirable unto me. 4. The
hours in which convictions were upon
me, were such troublesome and
such heart-affrighting hours, that
I could not bear, no not so much as the
remembrance of them upon my heart.

Chr. Then as it seems, sometimes you
got rid of your trouble.
Hopef. Yes verily, but it would
come into my mind again, and then I
should be as bad, nay worse, then I
was before.
Chr. Why, what was it that brought
your sins to mind again?
Hopef. Many things, As,
1. If I did but meet a good man in
the Streets; or,
2. If I have heard any read in the
Bible; or,
3. If mine Head did begin to Ake;
or,
4. I were told that some of my
Neighbours were sick; or,
5. If I heard the Bell Toull for
some that were dead; or,
6. If I thought of dying my self; or,
7. If I heard that suddain death
happened to others.
8. But especially, when I thought
of my self, that I must quickly come
to Judgement.
Chr. And could you at any time with
ease get off the guilt of sin, when by any
of these wayes it came upon you?
Hopef. No, not latterly, for then
they got faster hold of my Conscience

And then, if I did but think
of going back to sin (though my
mind was turned against it) it would
be double torment to me.
Chr. And how did you do then?
Hopef. I thought I must endeavour
to mend my life, for else
thought I, I am sure to be damned.
Chr. And did you indeavour to
mend?
Hopef. Yes, and fled from, not
only my sins, but sinful Company
too; and betook me to Religious
Duties, as Praying, Reading, weeping
for Sin, speaking Truth to my
Neighbours, &c. These things I did,
with many others, too much here to
relate.
Chr. And did you think your self well
then?
Hopef. Yes, for a while, but at the
last my trouble came tumbling upon
me again, and that over the neck of
all my Reformations.
Chr. How came that about, since
you was now Reformed?
Hopef. There were several things
brought it upon me, especially such
sayings as these; All our righteousnesses
are as filthy rags.  By the works of the

Law no man shall be justified. When
you have done all things,  say, We are unprofitable:
with many more the like.
From whence I began to reason with
my self thus: If all my righteousnesses
are filthy rags, if by the deeds
of the Law, no man can be justified;
And if, when we have done all, we
are yet unprofitable: Then tis but a
folly to think of Heaven by the Law.
I further thought thus: If a man runs
an 100l. into the Shop-keepers debt,
and after that shall pay for all that he
shall fetch, yet his old debt stands
still in the Book uncrossed; for the
which the Shop-keeper may sue him,
and cast him into Prison till he shall
pay the debt.
Chr. Well, and how did you apply
this to your self?
Hopef. Why, I thought thus with
my self; I have by my sins run a great
way into Gods Book, and that my
now reforming will not pay off that
score; therefore I should think still
under all my present amendments,
But how shall I be freed from that
damnation that I have brought my
self in danger of by my former transgressions?

Chr. A very good application: but
pray go on.
Hope Another thing that hath troubled
me, even since my late amendments,
is, that if I look narrowly into
the best of what I do now, I still see sin,
new sin, mixing it self with the best
of that I do. So that now I am forced
to conclude, that notwithstanding
my former fond conceits of my self
and duties, I have committed sin enough
in one duty to send me to Hell,
though my former life had been
faultless.
Chr. And what did you do then?
Hopef. Do! I could not tell what
to do, till I brake my mind to Faithful;
for he and I were well acquainted:
And he told me, That unless I
could obtain the righteousness of a
man that never had sinned, neither
mine own, nor all the righteousness
of the World could save me.
Chr. And did you think he spake
true?
Hopef. Had he told me so when
I was pleased and satisfied with
mine own amendments, I had called
him Fool for his pains: but now,
since I see my own infirmity, and

the sin that cleaves to my best performance,
I have been forceed to
be of his opinion.
Chr. But did you think, when at
first he suggested it to you, that there
was such a man to be found, of whom
it might justly be said, That he never
committed sin?
Hopef. I must confess the words at
first sounded strangely, but after a
little more talk and company with
him, I had full conviction about it.
Chr. And did you ask him what
man this was, and how you must be justified
by him?
Hopef. Yes, and he told me it was
the Lord Jesus,  that dwelleth on the
right hand of the most High: And
thus, said he, you must be justified by
him, even by trusting to what he
hath done by himself in the days of
his flesh, and suffered when he did
hang on the Tree. I asked him further,
How that mans righteousness
could be of that efficacy, to justifie
another before God? And he told
me, He was the mighty God, and did
what he did, and died the death also,
not for himself, but for us; to whom
his doings, and the worthiness of

them should be imputed, if I believed
on him.
Chr. And what did you do then?
Hope. I made my objections against
my believing, for that I thought he
was not willing to save me.
Chr. And what said Faithful to you
then?
Hopef He bid me go to him and
see: Then I said, It was presumption:
but he said,  No: for I was invited to
come. Then he gave me a Book of Jesus
his inditing, to incourage me the
more freely to come: And he said
concerning that Book, That every
jot and tittle thereof stood firmer
then Heaven and earth.  Then I asked
him, What I must do when I came?
and he told me, I must intreat upon
my knees with all my heart and soul, 
the Father to reveal him to me. Then
I asked him further, How I must
make my supplication to him? And
he said, Go, and thou shalt find him
upon a mercy-seat,  where he sits all
the year long, to give pardon and
forgiveness to them that come. I
told him that I knew not what to
say when I came: and he bid me say
to this effect, God be merciful to me a

sinner, and make me to know and believe
in Jesus Christ; for I see that if his
righteousness had not been, or I have not
faith in that righteousness, I am utterly
cast away: Lord, I have heard that thou
art a merciful God, and hast ordained
that thy Son Jesus Christ should be the
Saviour of the World; and moreover,
that thou art willing to bestow him upon
such a poor sinner as I am, (and I am
a sinner indeed) Lord take therefore
this opportunity, and magnifie thy grace
in the Salvation of my soul, through
thy Son Jesus Christ, Amen.
Chr. And did you do as you were
bidden?
Hopef. Yes, over, and over, and
over.
Chr. And did the Father reveal his
Son to you?
Hopef. Not at the first, nor second,
nor third, nor fourth, nor fifth,
no, nor at the sixth time neither.
Chr. What did you do then?
Hopef. What! why I could not
tell what to do.
Chr. Had you not thoughts of leaving
off praying?
Hopef. Yes, an hundred times, twice
told.

Chr. And what was the reason you
did not?
Hopef. I believed that that was
true which had been told me, to wit,
That without the righteousness of
this Christ, all the World could not
save me: And therefore thought I with
my self, If I leave off, I die; and I
can but die at the Throne of Grace.
And withall, this came into my
mind, If it tarry, wait for it, because
it will surely come,  and will not tarry. So
I continued Praying untill the Father
shewed me his Son.
Chr. And how was he revealed unto
you?
Hopef. I did not see him with my
bodily eyes,  but with the eyes of
mine understanding, and thus it was.
One day I was very sad, I think sader
then at any one time in my life; and
this sadness was through a fresh sight
of the greatness and vileness of my
sins: And as I was then looking for
nothing but Hell, and the everlasting
damnation of my Soul, suddenly,
as I thought, I saw the Lord Jesus
look down from Heaven upon me,
and saying, Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ,  and thou shall be saved.

But I replyed, Lord, I am a great,
a very great sinner; and he answered,
My grace is sufficient for thee.  Then I
said, But Lord, what is believing. And
then I saw from that saying, [He that
cometh to me shall never hunger, and he
that believeth on me shall never thirst]
That believing and coming was all
one, and that he that came, that
is, run out in his heart and affections
after salvation by Christ, he indeed
believed in Christ. Then the water
stood in mine eyes, and I asked further,
But Lord, may such a great
sinner as I am, be indeed accepted
of thee, and be saved by thee?  And
I heard him say, And him that cometh
to me, I will in no wise cast out. Then
I said, But how, Lord, must I consider
of thee in my coming to thee, that
my faith may be placed aright upon
thee? Then he said,  Christ Jesus came
into the World to save sinners. He is the
end of the Law for righteousness to every
one that believes. He died for
our sins, and rose again for our justification;
He loved us, and washed us
from our sins in his own blood: He is
Mediator between God and us, He
ever liveth to make intercession for us.

From all which I gathered, that I
must look for righteousness in his
person, and for satisfaction for my
sins by his blood; that what he did
in obedience to his Fathers Law,
and in submitting to the penalty
thereof, was not for himself, but for
him that will accept it for his Salvation,
and be thankful. And now was
my heart full of joy, mine eyes full
of tears, and mine affections running
over with love to the Name, People,
and Ways of Jesus Christ.
Chr. This was a Revelation of Christ to
your soul indeed: But tell me particularly
what effect this had upon your spirit.
Hopef. It made me see that all the
World, notwithstanding all the
righteousness thereof, is in a state
of condemnation. It made me see
that God the Father, though he be
just, can justly justifie the coming
sinner: It made me greatly ashamed
of the vileness of my former life,
and confounded me with the sence of
mine own Ignorance: for there never
came thought into mine heart before
now, that shewed me so the beauty
of Jesus Christ. It made me love a
holy life, and long to do something

for the Honour and Glory of the
name of the Lord Jesus. Yea I
thought, that had I now a thousand
gallons of blood in my body, I could
spill it all for the sake of the Lord
Jesus.
I then saw in my Dream, that
Hopeful looked back and saw Ignorance,
whom they had left behind,
coming after. Look, said he to Christian,
how far yonder Youngster loitereth
behind.
Chr. Ay, Ay. I see him, he careth
not for our Company.
Hopef. But I tro, it would not have
hurt him, had he kept pace with us
hitherto.
Chr. That's true, but I warrant
you he thinketh otherwise
Hope. That I think he doth, but
however let us tarry for him.Young Ignorance comes up again. So they
did.
Then Christian said to him, Come
away man, why do you stay so behind?
Igno. I take my pleasure in walkingTheir talk.
alone, even more a great deal
then in Company, unless I like it
the better.
Then said Christian to Hopeful (but
softly) Did I not tell you, he cared not

for our Company: But however, come
up, and let us talk away the time in this
solitary place. Then directing his
Speech to Ignorance, he said, Come,
how do you? how stands it between God
and your Soul now?
Ignor. I hope well, for I am always
full of good motions, that come
into my mind to comfort me as I
walk.
Chr. What good motions? pray tell
us.
Ignor. Why, I think of God and
Heaven.
Chr. So do the Devils and damned
Souls.
Ignor. But I think of them, and
desire them.
Chr. So do many that are never like
to come there: The Soul of the Sluggard
desires and hath nothing.
Ignor. But I think of them, and
leave all for them.
Chr. That I doubt, for leaving of
all is an hard matter, yea a harder
matter then many are aware of. But
why, or by what, art thou perswaded
that thou hast left all for God and
Heaven?
Ignor. My heart tells me so.

Chr. The wise man sayes, He that
trusts his own heart is a fool. 
Ignor. That is spoken of an evil
heart, but mine is a good one.
Chr. But how dost thou prove that?
Ignor. It comforts me in the hopes
of Heaven.
Chr. That may be, through its deceitfulness,
for a mans heart may minister
comfort to him in the hopes of that
thing, for which he yet has no ground to
hope.
Ignor. But my heart and life agree
together, and therefore my hope is
well grounded.
Chr. Who told thee that thy heart
and life agrees together?
Ignor. My heart tells me so.
Chr. Ask my Fellow if I be a Thief:
Thy heart tells thee so? Except the
word of God beareth witness in this matter,
other Testimony is of no value.
Ignor. But is it not a good heart
that has good thoughts? And is not
that a good life that is according to
Gods Commandments?
Chr. Yes, That is a good heart that
hath good thoughts, and that is a good
life that is according to Gods Commandments:
But it is one thing indeed to

have these, and another thing only to
think so.
Ignor. Pray what count you good
thoughts, and a life according to
Gods Commandments?
Chr. There are good thoughts of divers
kinds, some respecting our selves,
some God, some Christ, and some other
things.
Ignor. What be good thoughts respecting
our selves?
Chr. Such as agree with the Word of
God.
Ignor. When does our thoughts of
our selves agree with the Word of
God?
Chr. When we pass the same Judgement
upon our selves which the Word
passes: To explain my self. The Word
of God saith of persons in a natural condition,
There is none Righteous,
there is none that doth good. It saith
also,  That every imagination of the
heart of man is only evil, and that
continually. And again, The imagination
of mans heart is evil from his
Youth. Now then, when we think thus
of our selves, having sense thereof, then
are our thoughts good ones, because according
to the Word of God.

Ignor. I will never believe that my
heart is thus bad.
Chr. Therefore thou never hadst one
good thought concerning thy self in thy
life. But let me go on: As the Word
passeth a Judgement upon our HEART,
so it passeth a Judgement upon our
WAYS; and when our thoughts of our
HEARTS and WAYS agree
with the Judgment which the Word giveth
of both, then are both good, because
agreeing thereto.
Ignor. Make out your meaning.
Chr. Why, the Word of God saith,
That mans ways are crooked ways,  not
good, but perverse: It saith, They are
naturally out of the good way, that they
have not known it. Now when a man
thus thinketh of his ways, I say when
he doth sensibly, and with heart- humiliation
thus think, then hath he good
thoughts of his own ways, because his
thoughts now agree with the judgment
of the Word of God.
Ignor. What are good thoughts
concerning God?
Chr. Even (as I have said concerning
our selves) when our thoughts of
God do agree with what the Word saith
of him. And that is, when we think of

his Being and Attributes as the Word
hath taught: Of which I cannot now
discourse at large. But to speak of him
with reference to us, Then we have right
thoughts of God, when we think that he
knows us better then we know our selves,
and can see sin in us, when and where
we can see none in our selves; when we
think he knows our in-most thoughts,
and that our heart with all its depths
it alwayes open unto his eyes: Also
when we think that all our Righteousness
stinks in his Nostrils, and that
therefore he cannot abide to see us stand
before him in any confidence even of all
our best performances.
Ignor. Do you think that I am such
a fool, as to think God can see no
further then I? or that I would come
to God in the best of my performance?
Chr. Why, how dost thou think in
this matter?
Ignor. Why, to be short, I think
I must believe in Christ for Justification.
Chr. How! think thou must believe
in Christ, when thou seest not thy need of
him! Thou neither seest thy original, or
actual infirmities, but hast such an

opinion of thy self, and of what thou
doest, as plainly renders thee to be one
that did never see a necessity of Christs
personal righteousness to justifie thee
before God: How then dost thou say, I
believe in Christ?
Ignor. I believe well enough for
all that.
Chr. How doest thou believe?
Ignor. I believe that Christ died
for sinners, and that I shall be justified
before God from the curse,
through his gracious acceptance of
my obedience to his Law: Or thus,
Christ makes my Duties that are Religious,
acceptable to his Father by
vertue of his Merits; and so shall I
be justified.
Chr. Let me give an answer to this
confession of thy faith.
1. Thou believest with a Fantastical
Faith, for this faith is no where described
in the Word.
2. Thou believest with a False Faith,
because it taketh Justification from the
personal righteousness of Christ, and
applies it to thy own.
3. This faith maketh not Christ a
Justifier of thy person, but of thy actions;
and of thy person for thy actions sake,
which is false.

4. Therefore this faith is deceitful,
even such as will leave thee under wrath,
in the day of God Almighty. For true
Justifying Faith puts the soul (as sensible
of its lost condition by the Law) upon
flying for refuge unto Christs righteousness:
(Which righteousness of his, is
not an act of grace, by which he maketh
for Justification thy obedience accepted
with God, but his personal obedience to
the Law in doing and suffering for us,
what that required at our hands) This
righteousness, I say, true faith accepteth,
under the skirt of which, the soul being
shrouded, and by it presented as spotless
before God, it is accepted, and acquit
from condemnation.
Ignor. What! would you have us
trust to what Christ in his own person
has done without us! This conceit
would loosen the reines of our lust,
and tollerate us to live as we list: For
what matter how we live, if we may
be Justified by Christs personal righteousness
from all, when we believe
it?
Chr. Ignorance is thy name, and
as thy name is, so art thou; even this
thy answer demonstrateth what I say.
Ignorant thou art of what Justifying

righteousness is, and as ignorant how to
secure thy Soul through the faith of it,
from the heavy wrath of God. Yea,
thou also art ignorant of the true
effects of saving faith in this righteousness
of Christ, which is, to bow
and win over the heart to God in
Christ, to love his Name, his Word,
Ways, and People; and not as thou
ignorantly imaginest.
Hop. Ask him if ever he had Christ
revealed to him from Heaven?
Ignor! What you are a man for revelations!
I believe that what both you,
and all the rest of you say about that
matter, is but the fruit of distracted
braines.
Hop. Why man! Christ is so hid
in God from the natural apprehensions
of all flesh, that he cannot by
any man be savingly known, unless
God the Father reveals him to them.
Ignor. That is your faith, but not
mine; yet mine I doubt not, is as good
as yours: Though I have not in my head
so many whimzies as you.
Chr. Give me leave to put in a
word: You ought not so slightly to
speak of this matter: for this I will
boldly affirm (even as my good

  Companion hath done) that no man
can know Jesus Christ but by the Revelation
of the Father: yea, and
saith too, by which the soul layeth
hold upon Christ (if it be right) must
be wrought by the exceeding greatness
of his mighty power; the working
of which faith, I perceive, poor
Ignorance, thou art ignorant of. Be awakened
then, see thine own wretchedness,
and flie to the Lord Jesus;
and by his righteousness, which is
the righteousness of God, (for he
himself is God) thou shalt be delivered
from condemnation.
Igno. You go so fast, I cannot keep
pace with you;The talk brake up. do you go on before, I
must stay a while behind.

Well Ignorance, wilt thou yet foolish be,
To slight good Counsel, ten times given thee?
And if thou yet refuse it, thou shalt know
Ere long the evil of thy doing so:
Remember man in time, stoop, do not fear,
Good Counsel taken well, saves; therefore hear:
But if thou yet shalt slight it, thou will be
The loser (Ignorance) I'le warrant thee.

Chr. Well, come my good Hopeful,
I perceive that thou and I must
walk by our selves again.
So I saw in my Dream, that they
went on a pace before, and Ignorance
he came hobling after. Then said
Christian to his companion, It pities
me much for this poor man, it will certainly
go ill with him at last.
Hope. Alas, there are abundance
in our Town in his condition; whole
Families, yea, whole Streets, (and
that of Pilgrims too) and if there
be so many in our parts, how many
think you, must there be in the place
where he was born?
Chr Indeed the Word saith, He hath
blinded their eyes, lest they should see,
&c. But now we are by ourselves, what
do you think of such men? Have they
at no time, think you, convictions of sin,
and so consequently fears that their state
is dangerous?
Hopef. Nay, do you answer that
question your self, for you are the
elder man.
Chr. Then I say sometimes (as I
think) they may, but they being naturally
ignorant, understand not that such
convictions tend to their good; and

therefore they do desperately seek to
stifle them, and presumptuously continue
to flatter themselves in the way of
their own hearts.
Hopef. I do believe as you say, that
fear tends much to Mens good,The good use of fear and
to make them right, at their beginning
to go on Pilgrimage.
Chr. Without all doubt it doth,  if it
be right: for so says the word, The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom.
Hopef. How will you describe right
fear?
Chr. True,Right fear. or right fear, is discovered
by three things.
1. By its rise. It is caused by saving
convictions for sin.
2. It driveth the soul to lay fast
hold of Christ for Salvation.
3. It begetteth and continueth in
the soul a great reverence of God,
his word, and ways, keeping it
tender, and making it afraid to
turn from them, to the right hand,
or to the left, to any thing that may
dishonour God, break its peace, grieve
the Spirit, or cause the Enemy to
speak reproachfully.
Hopef. Well said, I believe you
have said the truth. Are we now

almost got past the Inchanted ground?
Chr. Why, are you weary of this
discourse?
Hopef. No verily, but that I would
know where we are.
Chr. We have not now above two
Miles further to go thereon. But let us
return to our matter. Now the Ignorant
know not that such convictions
that tend to put them in fear, are for
their good, and therefore they seek to
stifle them.
Hopef. How do they seek to stifle
them?
Chr. 1. They think that those fears
are wrought by the Devil (though
indeed they are wrought of God) and
thinking so, they resist them, as things
that directly tend to their overthrow.
2. They also think that these
fears tend to the spoiling of their
faith, (when alas for them, poor men
that they are! they have none at all)
and therefore they harden their
hearts against them. 3. They presume
they ought not to fear, and
therefore, in despite of them, wax presumptuously
confident. 4. They see
that these fears tend to take away
from them their pitiful old self-holiness,

and therefore they resist them
with all their might.
Hope. I know something of this
my self, for before I knew my self
it was so with me.
Chr. Well, we will leave at this
time our Neighbour Ignorance by himhimself,
and fall upon another profitable
question.
Hopef. With all my heart, but you
shall still begin.Talk about one Temporary.
Chr. Well then, Did you not know
about ten years ago,Where he dwelt. one Temporary in
your parts, who was a forward man in
Religion then?
Hope. Know him! Yes, he dwelt
in Graceless, a Town about two miles
off of Honesty, and he dwelt next door
to one Turn-back.
Chr. Right, he dwelt under the same
roof with him. Well, that man was
much awakened once; I believe that
then he had some sight of his sins, and
of the wages that was due thereto.
Hope. I am of your mind, for (my
House not being above three miles
from him) he would oft times come
to me, and that with many tears.
Truly I pitied the man, and was not
altogether without hope of him,

but one may see it is not every one
that cries, Lord, Lord.
Chr. He told me once. That he was
resolved to go on Pilgrimage as we go
now; but all of a sudden he grew acquainted
with one Save-self, and then
he became a stranger to me.
Hope. Now since we are talking
about him, let us a little enquire into
the reason of the sudden backsliding
of him and such others.
Chr. It may be very profitable, but
do you begin.
Hope. Well then, there are in my
judgement four reasons for it.
1. Though the Consciences of such
men are awakened, yet their minds
are not changed: therefore when
the power of guilt weareth away,
that which provoked them to be Religious,
ceaseth. Wherefore they naturally
turn to their own course again:
even as we see the Dog that
is sick of what he hath eaten, so
long as his sickness prevails, he remits
and casts up all; not that he
doth this of a free mind (if we may
say a Dog has a mind) but because
it troubleth his Stomach, but now
when his sickness is over, and so his

Stomach eased, his desires being not
at all alienate from his vomit, he
turns him about and licks up all. And
so it is true which is written, The Dog
is turned to his own vomit again. This
I say being hot for Heaven,  by virtue
only of the sense and fear of the torments
of Hell, as their sense of Hell,
and the fears of damnation chills
and cools, so their desires for Heaven
and Salvation cool also. So
then it comes to pass, that when
their guilt and fear is gone, their desires
for Heaven and Happiness die;
and they return to their course again. 
2ly. Another reason is, They have
slavish fears that do over-master
them. I speak now of the fears that
they have of men: For the fear of
man bringeth a snare. So then, though
they seem to be hot for Heaven, so
long as the flames of Hell are about
their ears, yet when that terrour is
a little over, they betake themselves
to second thoughts; namely, that
'tis good to be wise, and not to run
(for they know not what) the hazard
of loosing all, or at least, of
bringing themselves into unavoidable
and un-necessary troubles: and

so they fall in with the world again.
3ly. The shame that attends Religion,
lies also as a block in their
way; they are proud and haughty,
and Religion in their eye is low
and contemptible: Therefore when
they have lost their sense of Hell
and wrath to come, they return again
to their former course.
4ly. Guilt, and to meditate terrour,
are grievous to them, they
like not to see their misery before
they come into it. Though perhaps
the sight of it first, if they loved that
sight, might make them flie whither
the righteous flie and are safe; but
because they do, as I hinted before,
even shun the thoughts of guilt and
terrour, therefore, when once they
are rid of their awakenings about
the terrors and wrath of God, they
harden their hearts gladly, and chuse
such ways as will harden them more
and more.
Chr. You are pretty near the busine&esset;,
for the bottom of all is, for want of
a change in their mind and will. And
therefore they are but like the Fellon
that standeth before the Judge, he
quakes and trembles, and seems to repent

most heartily; but the bottom of
all is, the fear of the Halter, not of any
detestation of the offence; as is evident,
because, let but this man have his liberty,
and he will be a Thief, and so
a Rogue still; whereas, if his mind was
changed, he would be otherwise.
Hope. Now I have shewed you
the reasons of their going back, do
you shew me the manner thereof.
Chr. So I will willingly.
How the Apostate goes back.1. They draw off their thoughts
all that they may, from the remembrance
of God, Death, and Judgement
to come.
2. Then they cast off by degrees
private Duties, as Closet-Prayer,
curbing their lusts, watching, sorrow
for sin, and the like.
3. Then they shun the company
of lively and warm Christians.
4. After that, they grow cold to
publick Duty, as Hearing, Reading,
Godly Conference, and the like.
5. Then they begin to pick holes,
as we say, in the Coats of some of
the Godly, and that devilishly; that
they may have a seeming colour to
throw Religion (for the sake of some
infirmity they have spied in them) behind
their backs.

6. Then they begin to adhere to,
and associate themselves with carnal
loose and wanton men.
7. Then they give way to carnal
and wanton discourses in secret; and
glad are they if they can see such
things in any that are counted honest,
that they may the more boldly
do it through their example.
8. After this, they begin to play
with little sins openly.
9. And then, being hardened, they
shew themselves as they are. Thus
being lanched again into the gulf of
misery, unless a Miracle of Grace
prevent it, they everlastingly perish
in their own deceivings.
Now I saw in my Dream, that by
this time the Pilgrims were got over
the Inchanted Ground, and entering
in the Countrey of Beulah, whose
Air was very sweet and pleasant,  the
way lying directly through it, they
solaced themselves there for a season.
Yea, here they heard continually
the singing of Birds, and saw every
day the flowers appear in the earth:
and heard the voice of the Turtle in
the Land. In this Countrey the Sun
shineth night and day; wherefore

this was beyond the Valley of the
shadow of death, and also out of the
reach of Giant Despair; neither
could they from this place so much
as see Doubting-Castle. Here they
were within sight of the City they
were going to: also here met them
some of the Inhabitants thereof. For
Angelsin this Land the shining Ones commonly
walked, because it was upon
the Borders of Heaven. In this Land
also the contract between the Bride
and the Bridgroom was renewed:
Yea here,  as the Bridegroom rejoyceth
over the Bride, so did their God rejoyce
over them.  Here they had no want of
Corn and Wine; for in this place they
met with abundance of what they
had sought in all their Pilgrimage.
Here they heard voices from out of
the City, loud voices; saying, Say
ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold
thy Salvation cometh,  behold his reward
is with him. Here all the Inhabitants
of the Countrey called them,
The holy People,  The redeemed of the Lord, Sought out, &c.
Now as they walked in this Land,
they had more rejoycing then in
parts more remote from the Kingdom

to which they were bound, and
drawing near to the City, they had
yet a more perfect view thereof.
It was builded of Pearls and precious
Stones, also the Street thereof was
paved with Gold, so that by reason
of the natural glory of the City, and
the reflection of the Sun-beams
upon it, Christian, with desire fell
sick, Hopeful also had a fit or two
of the same Disease: Wherefore here
they lay by it a while, crying out because
of their pangs, If you see my
Beloved, tell him that I am sick of
love.
But being a little strengthened, and
better able to bear their sickness,
they walked on their way, and came
yet nearer and nearer, where were
Orchards, Vineyards and Gardens, and
their Gates opened into the Highway.
Now as they came up to these
places, behold the Gardener stood in
the way; to whom the Pilgrims said, 
Whose goodly Vineyards and Gardens
are these? He answered, They
are the Kings, and are planted here
for his own delights, and also for
the solace of Pilgrims. So the Gardiner
had them into the Vineyards,

and bid them refresh themselves
with the Dainties, he also shewed
them there the Kings walks, and the
Arbors where he delighted to be:
And here they tarried and slept.
Now I beheld in my Dream, that
they talked more in their sleep at
this time, then ever they did in all
their Journey; and being in a muse
there-about, the Gardiner said even
to me, Wherefore musest thou at
the matter? It is the nature of the
fruit of the Grapes of these Vineyards
to go down so sweetly, as to
cause the lips of them that are asleep
to speak.
So I saw that when they awoke
they addressed themselves to go up
to the City. But, as I said, the reflections
 of the Sun upon the City
(for the City was pure Gold) was so
extreamly glorious, that they could
not,  as yet, with open face behold
it, but through an Instrument made
for that purpose. So I saw, that as
they went on, there met them two
men, in Raiment that shone like
Gold, also, their faces shone as the
light.
These men asked the Pilgrims

whence they came? and they told
them; they also asked them, Where
they had lodg'd, what difficulties, and
dangers, what comforts and pleasures
they had met in the way? and
they told them. Then said the men
that met them, You have but two
difficulties more to meet with, and
then you are in the City.
Christian then and his Companion
asked the men to go along
with them, so they told them they
would; but, said they, you must
obtain it by your own faith. So I
saw in my Dream that they went
on together till they came within
sight of the Gate.
Now I further saw that betwixt
them and the Gate was a River,Death. but
there was no Bridge to go over, the
River was very deep; at the sight
therefore of this River, the Pilgrims
were much stounded, but the men
that went with them said.Death is not welcome to nature, though by it we pass out of this world into glory. You must
go through, or you cannot come at
the Gate.
The Pilgrims then, began to enquire
if there was no other way to
the Gate; to which they answered,
Yes, but there had not any, save

two, to wit, Enoch and Elijah, been
permitted to tread that path, since
the foundation of the World, nor
shall,  untill the last Trumpet shall
sound. The Pilgrims then, especially
Christian, began to dispond in his
mind, and looked this way and that,
but no way could be found by them,
by which they might escape the
River. Then they asked the men,
if the Waters were all of a depth.
They said, No; yet they could not
help them in that Case,Angels help us not comfortably through death. for said they:
You shall find it deeper or shallower,
as you believe in the King of the place.
They then addressed themselves to
the Water; and entring, Christian
began to sink, and crying out to his
good Friend Hopeful; he said, I sink
in deep Waters, the Billows go over
my head, all his Waves go over me,
Selah.
Then said the other, Be of good
chear, my Brother, I feel the bottom,
and it is good. Then said Christian,
Ah my friend,Christians conflict at the hour of death. the sorrows of
death have compassed me about,
I shall not see the Land that flows
with Milk and Honey. And with
that, a great darkness and horror

fell upon Christian, so that he could
not see before him; also here he
in great measure lost his senses, so
that he could neither remember nor
orderly talk of any of those sweet
refreshments that he had met with
in the way of his Pilgrimage. But
all the words that he spake, still
tended to discover that he had
horror of mind, and hearty fears
that he should die in that River, and
never obtain entrance in at the
Gate: here also, as they that stood
by, perceived, he was much in
the troublesome thoughts of the
sins that he had committed, both
since and before he began to be a
Pilgrim. 'Twas also observed, that
he was troubled with apparitions of
Hogoblins and Evil Spirits. For ever
and anon he would intimate so
much by words. Hopeful therefore
here had much adoe to keep his
Brothers head above water, yea
sometimes he would be quite gone
down, and then ere a while he would
rise up again half dead. Hopeful also
would endeavour to comfort him,
saying, Brother, I see the Gate, and
men standing by it to receive us.

But Christian would answer: 'Tis you,
'tis you they wait for, you have been
Hopeful ever since I knew you; and
so have you, said he to Christian. Ah
Brother, said he, surely if I was right,
he would now arise to help me; but
for my sins he hath brought me into
the snare, and hath left me. Then
said Hopeful, My Brother, you have
quite forgot the Text, where its said
of the wicked,  There is no hand in
their death, but their strength is firm,
they are not troubled as other men, neither
are they plagued like other men.
These troubles and distresses that you
go through in these Waters, are no
sign that God hath forsaken you, but
are sent to try you, whether you will
call to mind that which heretofore
you have received of his goodness,
and live upon him in your distresses.
Then I saw in my Dream, that
Christian was as in a muse a while;
To whom also Hopeful added this
word, Be of good chear, Jesus
Christ maketh thee whole:Christian delivered from his tears in death And with
that, Christian brake out with a loud
voice, Oh I see him again! and he
tells me, When thou passest through
the waters,  I will be with thee, and

through the Rivers, they shall not overflow
thee. Then they both took
courage, and the enemy was after
that as still as a stone, untill they
were gone over. Christian therefore
presently found ground to stand upon;
and so it followed that the rest
of the River was but shallow. Thus
they got over. Now upon the bank
of the River, on the other side, they
saw the two shining men again,
who there waited for them. Wherefore
being come up out of the River,
thy saluted them saying, We are ministring
Spirits,The Angels do wait for them so soon as they are passed out of this world. sent forth to minister
for those that shall be Heirs of Salvation.
Thus they went along towards
the Gate, now you must note that
the City stood upon a mighty hill,
but the Pilgrims went up that hill
with ease, because they had these two
men to lead them up by the Arms;
also they had left their Mortal GarmentsThey have put off mortality.
behind them in the River; for
though they went in with them, they
came out without them. They therefore
went up here with much agility
and speed, though the foundation
upon which the City was framed
was higher then the Clouds.

They therefore went up through the
Regions of the Air, sweetly talking
as they went, being comforted, because
they safely got over the River,
and had such glorious Companions
to attend them.
The talk they had with the shining
Ones, was about the Glory of the
place, who told them, that the beauty,
and glory of it was inexpressible.
There,  said they, is the Mount Sion,
the Heavenly Jerusalem, the inumerable
Company of Angels, and the
Spirits of Just men made perfect:
You are going now, said they,
to the Paradice of God, wherein
you shall see the Tree of Life, and
eat of the never-fading fruits thereof:
And when you come there you
shall have white Robes given you,
and your walk and talk shall be
every day with the King, even all
the days of Eternity. There you
shall not see again,  such things as
you saw when you were in the lower
Region upon the Earth, to wit, sorrow,
sickness, affliction, and death,
for the former things are passed away,
You are going now to Abraham,  to
Isaac, and Jacob, and to the Prophets;

men that God hath taken 
away from the evil to come, and that
are now resting upon their Beds,
each one walking in his righteousness.
The men then asked, What must we
do in the holy place? To whom it
was answered, You must there receive
the comfort of all your toil,
and have joy for all your sorrow;
you must reap what you have sown,
even the fruit of all your Prayers and
Tears, and sufferings for the King by
the way.  In that place you must
wear Crowns of Gold, and enjoy
the perpetual sight and Visions of the
Holy One,  for there you shall see him as
he is. There also you shall serve him
continually with praise, with shouting
and thanksgiving, whom you
desired to serve in the World, though
with much difficulty, because of the
infirmity of your flesh. There your
eyes shall be delighted with seeing,
and your ears with hearing, the
pleasant voice of the mighty One.
There you shall enjoy your friends
again, that are got thither before
you; and there you shall with Joy
receive, even every one that follows
into the Holy Place after you:

  There also you shall be cloathed
with Glory and Majesty, and put
into an equipage fit to ride out with
the King of Glory. When he shall
come with sound of Trumpet in the
Clouds, as upon the wings of the
Wind, you shall come with him; and
when he shall sit upon the Throne of
Judgement, you shall sit by him;
yea, and when he shall pass Sentence
upon all the workers of Iniquity, let
them be Angels or Men, you also
shall have a voice in that Judgement,
because they were his and your Enemies.
Also when he shall again
return to the City, you shall go too,
with sound of Trumpet, and be ever
with him
Now while they were thus drawing
towards the Gate, behold a company
of the Heavenly Host came
out to meet them: To whom it was
said, by the other two shining Ones,
These are the men that have loved
our Lord, when they were in the
World; and that have lost all for
his holy Name, and he hath sent us
to fetch them, and we have brought
them thus far on their desired Journey;
that they may go in and look

their Redeemer in the face with joy.
Then the Heavenly Host gave a
great shout, saying,  Blessed are they
that are called to the Marriage supper
of the Lamb: and thus they came up
to the Gate.
Now when they were come up to
the Gate, there was written over
it, in Letters of Gold,  Blessed are
they that do his commandments, that
they may have right to the Tree of life;
and may enter in through the Gates into
the City.
Then I saw in my Dream. that
the shining men bid them call at the
Gate, the which when they did,
some from above looked over the
Gate; to wit, Enoch, Moses, and
Elijah, &c. to whom it was said,
These Pilgrims, are come from the
City of Destruction, for the love that
they bear to the King of this place:
and then the Pilgrims gave in unto
them each man his Certificate, which
they had received in the beginning;
Those therefore were carried into the
King, who when he had read them,
said, Where are the men? to whom
it was answered, They are standing
without the Gate, the King then

commanded to open the Gate;  That
the righteous Nation, said he, that
keepeth Truth may enter in.
Now I saw in my Dream, that
these two men went in at the Gate;
and loe, as they entered, they were
transfigured, and they had Raiment
put on that shone like Gold. There
was also that met them with Harps
and Crowns, and gave them to them;
The Harp to praise withall, and the
Crowns in token of honour; Then
I heard in my Dream that all the Bells
in the City Rang for joy: and that
it was said unto them, Enter ye into the
joy of your Lord. I also heard the men
themselves, that they sang with a
loud voice,  saying, Blessing, Honour,
Glory and Power, be to him that sitteth
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for
ever and ever.
Now just as the Gates were opened
to let in the men, I looked in after
them; and behold, the City shone
like the Sun, the Streets also were
paved with Gold, and in them walked
many men, with Crowns on their
heads, Palms in their hands, and
golden Harps to sing praises withall.
There were also of them that had

wings, and they answered one another
without intermission, saying, Holy,
Holy, Holy, is the Lord. And after that,
they shut up the Gates: which when
I had seen, I wished my self among
them.
Now while I was gazing upon all
these things, I turned my head to
look back, and saw Ignorance come
up to the Riverside; but he soon got
over, and that without half that
difficulty which the other two men
met with. For it happened that there
was then in that place one Vain-hope a
Ferry-man, that with his Boat helped
him over: so he, as the other I saw,
did ascend the Hill to come up to
the Gate, only he came alone, neither
did any man meet him with
the least incouragement. When he
was come up to the Gate, he looked
up to the writing that was above;
and then began to knock, supposing
that entrance should have been
quickly administred to him: But he
was asked by the men that lookt over
the top of the Gate, Whence came
you? and what would you have? He
answered, I have eat and drank in
the presence of the King, and he has

taught in our Streets. Then they
asked him for his Certificate, that
they might go in and shew it to the
King. So he fumbled in his bosom
for one, and found none. Then said
they, Have you none? But the man
answered never a word. So they
told the King, but he would not
come down to see him; but commanded
the two shining Ones that
conducted Christian and Hopeful to
the City, to go out and take Ignorance
and bind him hand and foot,
and have him away. Then they took
him up, and carried him through the
air to the door that I saw in the side of
the Hill, and put him in there. Then I
saw that there was a way to Hell, even
from the Gates of Heaven as well
as from the City of Destruction. So
I awoke, and behold it was a Dream.