

SIR,– I am now to enter the true and real Caledonia, for the country on the north of the firth is alone called by that name, and was anciently known by no other. I went over the firth at the Queens-Ferry, a place mentioned before, seven miles west of Edinburgh; and, as he that gives an account of the country of Fife, must necessarily go round the coast, the most considerable places being to be seen on the sea-side, or near it; so I took that method, and began at the Queens-Ferry. A mile from hence, or something more, is the borough of Innerkeithin, an ancient walled town, with a spacious harbour, opening from the east part of the town into the Firth of Forth; the mouth of the harbour has a good depth of water, and ships of burthen may ride there with safety; but as there is not any great trade here, and consequently no use for shipping of burthen, the harbour has been much neglected. However, small vessels may come up to the quay, such as are sufficient for their business.
The town is large, and is still populous, but decayed, as to what it has formerly been; yet the market for linen not only remains, but is rather more considerable than formerly, by reason of the increase of that manufacture since the Union. The market for provisions is also very considerable here, the country round being very fruitful, and the families of gentlemen being also numerous in the neighbourhood.
Near Innerkeithin, a little within the land, stands the ancient town of Dumfermling, as I may say, in my Lord Rochester’s words, in its full perfection of decay; nay, the decay is threefold.
1. There is a decayed monastery, for before the Reformation here was a very large and famous abbey, but demolished at the Revolution; and saving, that part of the church was turned into a parochial church, the rest, and greatest part of that also lies in ruins, and with it the monuments of several kings and queens of Scotland.
2. Here is a decayed court or royal palace of the kings of Scotland. They do not tell us who built this palace, but we may tell them who suffers it to fall down; for it is now (as it was observed before all the royal houses are) sinking into its own ruins; the windows are gone, the roof fallen in, and part of the very walls mouldered away by the injury of time, and of the times. In this palace almost all King James the VIth’s children were born; as particularly King Charles I, and the Princess Elizabeth, afterwards Queen of Bohemia; and their mother, which was Queen Ann daughter of the Queen of Denmark, made this place her particular residence. The figure of the house remains, but as for the lodgings they are all, as I have said, in their decay, and we may now call it the monument of a court.
3. Here is a decayed town, and we need go no further for that part than the decay of the palace, which is irrecoverable; there might be something said here of what was done at this town, upon receiving the crowning King Charles II, by the Covenanters, &c. But this is matter of history, and besides, it seems to have something in it that is not, perhaps so well to be remembered as to be forgot.
The church has still a venerable face, and at a distance seems a mighty pile; the building being once vastly large, what is left appears too gross for the present dimensions.
The people hereabout are poor, but would be much poorer, if they had not the manufacture of linen for their support, which is here, and in most of the towns about, carried on with more hands than ordinary, especially for diaper, and the better sort of linen.
From hence, turning east, we see many seats of private gentlemen, and some of noblemen, as particularly one belonging to the said Marquess of Tweedale at Aberdour. The house is old, but magnificent, and the lands about it, as all must do, that come into the managing hands of the family of Tweedale, have been infinitely improved by planting and enclosing.
This house of Aberdour fronts the firth to the south, and the grounds belonging to it reach down to the shores of it. From this part of the firth, to the mouth of Innerkeithen harbour, is a very good road for ships, the water being deep and the ground good; but the western part, which they call St Margaret’s Bay, is a steep shore, and rocky, there being twenty fathom water within a ship’s length of the rocks. So that in case of a south east wind, and if it blow hard, it may be dangerous riding too near. But a south east wind blows so seldom, that the ships often venture it; and I have seen large ships ride there.
He that will view the country of Fife must, as I said before, go round the coast; and yet there are four or five places of note in the middle of the country which are superior to all the rest. And here, since I am upon generals, it may not be improper to mention, as a remark only, that however mean our thoughts in England have been of the Scots Court in those times, the kings of Scotland had more fine palaces than most princes in Europe, and, in particular, many more than the Crown of England has now; for example, we see nothing in England now of any notice but Hampton-Court, Windsor, Kensington, and St James’s.
Whereas the kings of Scotland had in King James the VIth’s time all in good repair, and in use, the several royal palaces of

The royal palace in the castle at Sterling.
Linlithgow.
Dumfermling.
Falkland.
Scoon.

Having seen Aberdour, I took a turn, at a friend’s invitation, to Lessly; but by the way stopped at Kinross, where we had a view of two things worth noting. The famous lake or lough, called Lough Leven, where, in an island, stands the old castle where Queen Mary, commonly known in England by the name of Queen of Scots, was confined by the first reformers, after she had quitted, or been forced to quit her favourite Bothwel, and put herself into the hands of her subjects. One would have thought this castle, standing as it were in the middle of the sea, for so it is in its kind, should have been sufficient to have held her, but she made shift to get out of their hands, whether by a silver key, or without a key, I believe is not fully known to this day.
At the west end of the lake, and the gardens reaching down to the very water’s edge, stands the most beautiful and regular piece of architecture, (for a private gentleman’s seat) in all Scotland, perhaps, in all Britain, I mean the house of Kinross. The town lies at a little distance from it, so as not to annoy the house, and yet so as to make it the more sociable; and at the town is a very good market, and the street tolerably well built.
The house is a picture, ’tis all beauty; the stone is white and fine, the order regular, the contrivance elegant, the workmanship exquisite. Sir William Bruce, the skilful builder, was the Surveyor-General of the Works, as we call it in England, or the Royal Architect, as in Scotland. In a word, he was the Kit Wren of North Britain; and his skill in the perfect decoration of building, has many testimonials left upon record for it. Sir William, according to the new and laudable method of all Scots gentlemen, has planted innumerable numbers of fir-trees upon the estate round his house, and the present possessor Mr Bruce, is as careful to improve as his predecessor. Posterity will find the sweet of this passion for planting, which is so happily spread among the people of the south-parts of Scotland, and which, if it goes on, will in time make Scotland a second Norway for fir; for the Lowlands, as well as the Highlands, will be overspread with timber.
From Kinross, I came to Lessley, where I had a full view of the palace of Rothess, both inside and outside, as I had before of that of Bruce. The magnificence of the inside at Lessly is unusually great; but what is very particular, is the long gallery, which is the full length of one side of the building, and is filled with paintings, but especially (as at Drumlanrig) of the great ancestors of the house of Rothes or Lessly at full lengths, and in their robes of office or habits of ceremony; particularly the late Duke of Rothess, who built the house, and who was Lord High Chancellor of Scotland. The town of Lessly is at a small distance west from the house or a little north-west. There is a good market, but otherwise it is not considerable. The house is the glory of the place, and indeed of the whole province of Fife.
From Lessly, we turned away south to the coast, and came to Bruntisland; this is a port upon the Firth of Forth, and lies opposite to Leith, so that there is a fair prospect as well of the road of Leith, and the ships riding there, as of the city and castle of Edinburgh. There is a very good harbour which enters as if it has been made by hand into the centre of the town; for the town is as it were built round it; and the ships lay their broad sides to the very houses. There is water enough at spring-tides, for ships of good burthen to come into the basin; but at low-water some of the ships lie a-ground. But want of trade renders all this useless; for what is the best harbour in the world without ships? And whence should ships be expected without a commerce to employ them; it is true, the ships of several other towns on the coast frequently put into this harbour, to lay up, as we call it, and to lie by in the winter. But this does not so much better the town as to make it be called a trading town; so that, indeed, the place is unhappy, and must decay yet farther, unless the trade revive, which, I confess, I do not yet foresee.
Here is, however, a manufacture of linen, as there is upon all the coast of Fife, and especially for that they call green-cloth, which is now in great demand in England for the printing-trade, in the room of calicoes, which were lately prohibited.
Next to this is Kinghorn upon the same coast, where, not the sea, but the manufacture upon land may be said to maintain the place; for here is a thread manufacture, which they make very good, and bleach or whiten it themselves. The women, indeed, chiefly carry on this trade, and the men are generally seamen upon all this coast, as high as the Queens-Ferry. Where I observed the men carried on an odd kind of trade, or sport rather (viz.) of shooting of porpoises, of which very great numbers are seen almost constantly in the firth; when they catch them thus, they bring them on shore, and boil the fat of them as they do of whales, into train-oil, and the like they do with several other great fish, which sometimes they find in the sea there; and sometimes they have grampusses, finn fish, and several species of the small whale kind which come up there, and which they always make the best of, if they can take them. One year in particular there came several such fish on shore, which they could find no name for; there was eight or nine of them, which I saw lying on the shore of Fife, from Kinghorn to the Easter Weems, some of which were twenty foot long and upward.
But this sort of fishing is but by accident, and the profit’s not certain; the firth affords a much more certain and profitable fishery lower down, of which in its place. The ferry, from Leith to the shore of Fife, is fixed in this town, though sometimes the boats in distress, and by force of wind and weather, are driven to run into Borunt Island. This constant going and coming of the ferry-boat, and passengers, is also a considerable benefit to the town of Kinghorn, and is a very great article in its commerce.
East of this town is Kirkcaldy, a larger, more populous, and better built town than the other, and indeed than any on this coast. Its situation is in length, in one street running along the shore, from east to west, for a long mile, and very well built, the streets clean and well paved; there are some small by streets or lanes, and it has some considerable merchants in it, I mean in the true sense of the word merchant. There are also several good ships belonging to the town. Also as Fife is a good corn country, here are some that deal very largely in corn, and export great quantities both to England and Holland. Here are great quantities of linen shipped off for England; and as these ships return freighted either from England or Holland, they bring all needful supplies of foreign goods; so that the traders in Kirkcaldy have really a very considerable traffic, both at home and abroad.
There are several coal-pits here, not only in the neighbourhood, but even close to the very sea, at the west end of the town, and where, one would think, the tide should make it impossible to work them. At the east end of the town is a convenient yard for building and repairing of ships, and farther east than that several salt-pans for the boiling and making of salt.
Dysert is next, a town in the full perfection of decay, and is, indeed, a most lamentable object of a miserable, dying corporation; the only support which, I think, preserves the name of a town to it, is, that here is, in the lands adjoining, an excellent vein of Scots coal, and the Lord Dysert, the landlord, has a good salt-work in the town; close to the sea there is a small pier or wharf for ships, to come and load both the salt and the coal. And this, I think, may be said to be the whole trade of the town, except some nailers and hardware workers, and they are but few.
I take the decay of all these sea-port towns, which ’tis evident have made a much better figure in former times, to be owing to the removing of the court and nobility of Scotland to England; for it is most certain, when the court was at home, they had a confluence of strangers, residence of foreign ministers, being of armies, &c. and consequently the nobility dwelt at home, spent the income of their estates, and the product of their country among their neighbours. The return of their coal and salt, and corn and fish, brought them in goods from abroad and, perhaps, money; they sent their linen and other goods to England, and received the returns in money; they made their own manufactures, and though not so good and cheap as from England, yet they were cheaper to the public stock, because their own poor were employed. Their wool, which they had over and above, went to France, and returned ready money. Their lead went to Holland, and their cattle and sheep to England, and brought back in that one article above 100,000l. sterling per ann.
Then it was the sea-port towns had a trade, their Court was magnificent, their nobility built fine houses and palaces which were richly furnished, and nobly finished within and without. They had infinitely more value went out than came back in goods, and therefore the balance was evidently on their side; whereas, now their Court is gone, their nobility and gentry spend their time, and consequently their estates in England; the Union opens the door to all English manufactures, and suppresses their own, prohibits their wool going abroad, and yet scarcely takes it off at home; if the cattle goes to England, the money is spent there too. The troops raised there are in English service, and Scotland receives no premio for the levies, as she might have done abroad, and as the Swiss and other nations do at this time.
It is true, Scotland would have an advantageous trade with England, and not the worst for the Union, were not the Court removed, and did not their nobility dwell abroad, and spend their estates abroad. Scotland has a plentiful product for exportation, and were the issue of that product returned and consumed at home, Scotland would flourish and grow rich, but as it is, I may venture to say, it is not to be expected.
All the product of Scotland which is sent abroad, and exported to foreign countries, and consumed there, is so much clear gain to the public stock, excepting only the cost of its manufacturing at home, or curing and sending out; and except so much as is brought back in goods of the growth, and manufacture of foreign countries, and is consumed in Scotland, which is not reckoned as gain, because consumed; if it is exported again, the article goes to the account of public gain again. Now to state the case briefly between the exportation and importation of goods in Scotland, that the difference, which is the balance of the trade, may appear.
The product of Scotland, which it exports into foreign countries, England included, for I am now considering Scotland as if not united, is as follows.


For all these exportations the returns are, or at least were before the Union:


N.B. All the English woollen and silk manufactures were prohibited upon the several penalties; so that the returns from England, in goods, were very small; the grand return from thence was in specie. And ’tis known, that above an hundred thousand pounds a year was paid into Scotland every year, for cattle only.




And all these put together, if I am rightly informed, do not balance the lead, coal, and salt, which they export every year. So that the balance of trade must stand greatly to the credit of the account in the Scots commerce. And what then, would not such an annual wealth in specie do for Scotland in a year, if there was not a gulf, into which it all runs as into a sink?
I know this is abundantly answered, by saying that Scotland is now established in a lasting tranquillity; the wars between the nations are at an end, the wastings and plunderings, the ravages and blood are all over; the lands in Scotland will now be improved, their estates doubled, the charges of defending her abroad and at home lies upon England; the taxes are easy and ascertained, and the West-India trade abundantly pours in wealth upon her; and this is all true; and, in the end, I am still of opinion Scotland will be gainer. But I must add, that her own nobility, would they be true patriots, should then put their helping hand to the rising advantages of their own country, and spend some of the large sums they get in England in applying to the improvement of their country, erecting manufactures, employing the poor, and propagating the trade at home, which they may see plainly has made their united neighbours of England so rich.
Why might not wool, which they send to England, be manufactured in Scotland? If they say they know not how to make the goods, or how to dispose of them when made, my answer is short; I know ’tis not the work of gentlemen to turn manufacturers and merchants: and I know also a number of projectors, that is to say, thieves and cheats, have teased and hanged about them, to draw them into manufacturing, only to bubble them of their wool and money.
But here is a plain scheme, let the Scots gentlemen set but their stewards to work to employ the poor people to spin the wool into yarn, and send the yarn into England; ’tis an easy manufacture, and what the Scots are very handy at, and this could never be difficult. They may have patterns of the yarn given them here, a price agreed on, and good security for payment. This can have no difficulty; the Irish are fallen into this way, to such a degree, that 40,000 packs of wool and worsted yarn are brought into England now every year, and sold here, where, about thirty years ago, not a pound of it was imported ready spun.
This, and many such advantages in trade, Scotland might find in her own bounds, her gentlemen assisting the poor only with their stocks of wool; by which means the poverty and sloth of the meaner people would be removed, and Scotland enriched. But I have done my part, and have not room to enlarge.
The decayed burghs being passed, we came to a village called the Weems, or by way of distinction, the Wester Weems, or Wemys. This is a small town, and no borough, belonging to the Earl of Weemys, whose house stands a little farther east, on the top of a high cliff, looking upon the sea.
From hence you pass through the East Weemys to another village, called Buckhaven, inhabited chiefly, if not only, by fishermen, whose business is wholly to catch fresh fish every day in the firth, and carry them to Leith and Edinburgh markets. And though this town be a miserable row of cottage-like buildings, and people altogether mere fishermen, as I have said, yet there is scarce a poor man in the town, and in general the town is rich.
Here we saw the shore of the sea covered with shrimps, like the ground covered with a thin snow; and as you rode among them they would rise like kind of dust, being scared by the footing of the horse, and hopping like grasshoppers.
Beyond this is the Methuel, a little town, but a very safe and good harbour, firmly built of stone, almost like the Cobb at Lime, though not wholly projecting into the sea, but standing within the land, and built out with two heads, and walls of thick strong stone. It stands a little on the west side of the mouth of the River Leven; the salmon of this river are esteemed the best in this part of Scotland.
Here my Lord Weemys brings his coal, which he digs above two miles off, on the banks of the River Leven, and here it is sold or shipped off; as also what salt he can make, which is not a great deal. Nor is the estate his lordship makes from the said coal-works equal to what it has been, the water having, after an immense charge to throw it off, broken in upon the works, and hindered their going on, at least to any considerable advantage.
The people who work in the coal mines in this country, what with the dejected countenances of the men, occasioned by their poverty and hard labour, and what with the colour or discolouring, which comes from the coal, both to their clothes and complexions, are indeed, frightful fellows at first sight. But I return to my progress from the Methuel; we have several small towns on the coast, as Criel or Crail, Pitten-Ween, Anstruther, or Anster, as ’tis usually called. These are all royal burghs, and send members to parliament, even still upon the new establishment, in consequence only that now they join three or four towns together to choose one or two members, whereas they chose every town for itself.
Over against this shore, and in the mouth of the Forth, opposite to the Isle of the Bass, lies the Isle of May, known to mariners by having a light-house upon it; the only constant inhabitant, is said to be the man maintained there by the Government, to take care of the fire in the light-house.
Here (you may observe) the French fleet lay with some assurance, when the Pretender was on board. And here the English four-a-clock-gun, on board their approaching squadron, unhappily gave them the alarm; so that they immediately weighed, got under sail, and made the best of their way, the English pursuing them in vain, except only that they took the Salisbury, which was a considerable way behind the fleet, and could not come up with the rest; the story is well known, so I need not repeat it.
The shore of the firth or frith ends here, and the aestuarium or mouth opening, the land of Fife falls off to the north, making a promontory of land, which the seamen call Fife-Ness, looking east to the German Ocean, after which the coast trends away north, and the first town we saw there was St Andrew’s, an ancient city, the seat of an archbishop, and an university.
As you must expect a great deal of antiquity in this country of Fife, so you must expect to find all those ancient pieces mourning their own decay, and drooping and sinking in ashes. Here it was, that old limb of St Lucifer, Cardinal Beaton, massacred and murthered that famous sufferer and martyr of the Scots Church, Mr William Wishart, whom he caused to be burnt in the parade of the castle, he himself sitting in his balcony to feed and glut his eyes with the sight of it. The old church here was a noble structure; it was longer than St Paul’s in London, by a considerable deal, I think, by six yards, or by twenty-five foot. This building is now sunk into a simple parish church, though there are many plain discoveries of what it has been, and a great deal of project and fancy may be employed to find out the ancient shape of it.
The city is not large, nor is it contemptibly small; there are some very good buildings in it, and the remains of many more. The colleges are handsome buildings, and well supplied with men of learning in all sciences, and who govern the youth they instruct with reputation; the students wear gowns here of a scarlet-like colour, but not in grain, and are very numerous. The university is very ancient as well as the city; the foundation was settled, and the public buildings appointed in the beginning of the fifteenth century by King James I.
There are three colleges in all; the most ancient, and which, they say, was the public school so long before, is called St Salvadore. How it was made to speak Portuguese, I know not, unless it might be that some Portuguese clergymen came over hither as the first professors or teachers. The building is ancient, but appears to have been very magnificent considering the times it was erected in, which was 1456. The gate is large, and has a handsome spire over it all of stone. Were this college supported by additional bounties and donations, as has been the case in England; and were sufficient funds appointed to repair and keep up the buildings, there would few colleges in England go beyond it for magnificence. But want of this, and other encouragements, causes the whole building to seem as if it was in its declining state, and looking into its grave. The truth is, the college wants nothing but a good fund to be honestly applied for the repair of the building, finishing the first design, and encouraging the scholars.
The story of St Andrew and of his bones being buried here; of the first stone of the cathedral church being laid upon one of St Andrew’s legs or thigh-bone, and of those bones being brought from Patras in the Morea, near the Gulph of Lepanto; these things are too ancient, and sound too much of the legend for me to meddle with.
In the second college, which is called St Leonard’s, is a principal, who must be a Doctor of Divinity by the foundation; but the present Church Government insisting upon the parity of the clergy, are pleased to dispense with that part.
The revenue of this college is larger than that of the old college; it has also more students. It was founded and endowed by the Earl of Lenox, being before that a religious house, of the Order of St Benedict. It is not so large and magnificent as St Salvador originally was; but ’tis kept in much better repair. It has but one court or square, but it is very large. The old building of the monastery remains entire, and makes the south side, and the old cells of the monks make now the chambers for the students. The chapel takes up the north side, and a large side of more modern apartments on the west, which are nevertheless old enough to be falling down; but they are now repairing them, and adding a great pile of building to complete the square, and join that side to the north where the chapel stands.
The new college, called St Mary’s, was founded by Cardinal Beaton Archbishop of St Andrew’s, and is very singular in its reserved and limited laws. Here are no scholars at all; but all those scholars who have passed their first studies, and gone through a course of philosophy in any of the other colleges, may enter themselves here to study Hebrew and the mathematics, history, or other parts of science.
It was in this college King Charles I held a parliament; the place is called the Parliament Room to this day, and is a very large, spacious room, able to receive 400 people, placed on seats to sit down; the form is reserved very plain, and the place, where the tables for the clerks and other officers were set, is to be seen.
In the new church in this city lies the body of the late Archbishop Sharp, who was assassinated upon a moor or heath, as he was coming in his coach home to this city from the Court. There is a fine monument of marble over his grave, with his statue kneeling on the upper part, and the manner of his murther is cut in brass relief below. This murther is matter of history, but is so foolishly, or so partially, or so imperfectly related by all that have yet written of it, that posterity will lose both the fact and the cause of it in a few years more. I shall only say here, that the archbishop had been a furious and merciless persecutor, and, indeed, murtherer of many of the innocent people, merely for their keeping up their field-meetings, and was charged in particular with two actions; which, if true will, though not justify, yet take off much of the black part, which the very murther itself leaves on the memory of the actors.
Now ’tis as certain that these men knew nothing of meeting with the archbishop at that time; but being themselves outlawed men, whom any man that met might kill, and who (if taken) would have been put to death. They always went armed, and were, at that time, looking for another man, when unexpectedly they saw the bishop coming towards them in his coach, when one of them says to the other, we have not found the person we looked for; but lo, God has delivered our enemy, and the murtherer of our brethren into our hands, against whom we cannot obtain justice by the law, which is perverted. But remember the words of the text, If ye let him go, thy life shall be required for his life.
In a word, they immediately resolved to fall upon him, and cut him in pieces; I say they resolved, all but one (viz.) Hackston of Rathellet, who was not willing to have his hand in the blood, though he acknowledged he deserved to die. So that when they attacked the bishop, Hackston went off, and stood at a distance. Nor did he hold their horses, as one has ignorantly published; for they attacked him all mounted; nor could they well have stopped a coach and six horses, if they had been on foot. I mention this part, because, however providence ordered it, so it was, that none of the murtherers ever fell into the hands of justice, but this Hackston of Rathelett, who was most cruelly tortured, and afterwards had his hands cut off, and was then executed at Edinburgh.
I have not time to give the rest of this story, though the particulars are very well worth relating, but it is remote from my purpose, and I must proceed. The city of St Andrew’s is, notwithstanding its many disasters; such as the ruin of the great church, the demolishing its castle, and the archbishop’s palace, and Oliver Cromwell’s citadel; yet, I say, it is still a handsome city, and well built, the streets straight and large, being three streets parallel to one another, all opening to the sea.
From St Andrew’s we came to Cowper, the shire town, (as it would be called in England) where the public business of the country is all done, where the sheriff keeps his Court. The Earl of Rothess is hereditary sheriff of the shire of Fife, and the Duke of Athol was chancellor of the university of St Andrew’s, in the times of the Episcopal Government; but that dignity seems now to be laid aside.
We now went away to the north east part of the county, to see the ruins of the famous monastery of Balmerinoch, of which Mr Cambden takes notice; but we saw nothing worth our trouble, the very ruins being almost eaten up by time.
Hence we came to the bank of another firth or frith, called the Firth of Tay, which, opening to a large breadth at its entrance, as the Firth of Edinburgh does, draws in afterwards as that does at the Queens-Ferry, and makes a ferry over at the breadth of two miles to the town of Dundee; and then the firth widening again just as that of the Forth does also, continues its breadth as four to six miles, till it comes almost to Perth, as the other does to Sterling.
This River Tay is, without exception, the greatest river in Scotland, and of the longest course, for its rises out of the mountains, on the edge of the Argyle Shire; and running first north into the shire of Bradalbin, there receiving other rivers, it spreads itself into a large lake, which is called Lough Tay, extending for forty miles in length, and traversing the very heart of Scotland, comes into the sea near this place. Now, as I design to keep in this part of my work to the east coast of the country, I must for the present quit the Tay itself, keeping a little on the hither side of it, and go back to that part of the country which lies to the south, and yet east of Dunbarton and Lenox shires; so drawing an imaginary line from Sterling Bridge, due north, through the heart of the country to Inverness, which I take to lie almost due north and south.
In this course then I moved from the ferry, mentioned above, to Perth, lying upon the same River Tay, but on the hither bank. It was formerly called St Johnston, or St John’s Town, from an old church, dedicated to the Evangelist, St John, part of which is still remaining, and is yet big enough to make two parochial churches, and serve the whole town for their public worship.
The chief business of this town is the linen manufacture; and it is so considerable here, all the neighbouring country being employed in it, that it is a wealth to the whole place. The Tay is navigable up to the town for ships of good burthen; and they ship off here so great a quantity of linen, (all for England) that all the rest of Scotland is said not to ship off so much more.
This town was unhappily for some time, the seat of the late rebellion; but I cannot say it was unhappy for the town. For the townsmen got so much money by both parties, that they are evidently enriched by it and it appears not only by the particular families and persons in the town, but by their public and private buildings which they have raised since that; as particularly a new Tolbooth or Town-hall. The salmon taken here, and all over the Tay, is extremely good, and the quantity prodigious. They carry it to Edinburgh, and to all the towns where they have no salmon, and they barrel up a great quantity for exportation. The merchants of this town have also a considerable trade to the Baltic, to Norway, and especially, since as above, they were enriched by the late rebellion. It seems a little enigmatic to us in the south, how a rebellion should enrich any place; but a few words will explain it. First, I must premise, that the Pretender and his troops lay near, or in this place a considerable time; now the bare consumption of victuals and drink, is a very considerable advantage in Scotland, and therefore ’tis frequent in Scotland for towns to petition the government to have regiments of soldiers quartered upon them, which in England would look monstrous, nothing being more terrible and uneasy to our towns in England.
The town was well built before, but now has almost a new face; (for as I said) here are abundance of new houses, and more of old houses new fitted and repaired, which look like new. The linen trade too, which is their main business, has mightily increased since the late Act of Parliament in England, for the suppressing the use and wearing of printed calicoes; so that the manufacture is greatly increased here, especially of that kind of cloth which they buy here and send to England to be printed, and which is so much used in England in the room of the calicoes, that the worsted and silk weavers in London seem to have very little benefit by the bill, but that the linen of Scotland and Ireland are, as it were, constituted in the room of the calicoes.
From Perth I went south to that part of the province of Fife, which they call Clackmanan, lying west from Dumfermling, and extending itself towards Sterling and Dumblain. From Perth to Sterling there lies a vale which they call Strathmore, and which is a fine level country, though surrounded with hills, and is esteemed the most fruitful in corn of all that part of the country. It lies extended on both sides the Tay, and is said to reach to Brechin north east, and almost to Sterling south west. Here are, as in all such pleasant soils you will find, a great many gentlemen’s seats; though on the north side of the Tay, and here in particular is the noble palace of Glames, the hereditary seat of the family of Lyon, Earls of Strathmore.
When the Pretender lodged here, for the Earl of Strathmore entertained him in his first passage to Perth with great magnificence, there were told three and forty furnished rooms on the first floor of the house; some beds, perhaps, were put up for the occasion, for they made eighty beds for them, and the whole retinue of the Pretender was received, the house being able to receive the court of a real reigning prince.
It would be endless to go about to describe the magnificent furniture, the family pictures, the gallery, the fine collection of original paintings, and the nobly painted ceilings of the chapel, where is an organ for the service after the manner of the Church of England. In a word, the house is as nobly furnished as most palaces in Scotland; but it was at the brink of destruction; for had the Earl not been killed, ’tis odds but it had been gutted by the army, which presently spread all the country; but it was enough, the Earl lost his life, and the present Earl enjoys it peaceably.
From hence I came away south west, and crossing the Tay below Perth, but above Dundee, came to Dumblain, a name made famous by the late battle fought between the army of King George, under the command of the Duke of Argyle, and the Pretender’s forces under the Earl of Marr, which was fought on Sheriff-Moor, between Sterling and Dumblain. The town is pleasantly situated, and tolerably well built, but out of all manner of trade; so that there is neither present prosperity upon it, or prospect of future.
Going from hence we took a full view of the field of battle, called Sheriff-Muir, and had time to contemplate how it was possible, that a rabble of Highlanders armed in haste, appearing in rebellion, and headed by a person never in arms before, nor of the least experience, should come so near to the overthrowing an army of regular, disciplined troops, and led on by experienced officers, and so great a general. But when the mistake appeared also, we blessed the good Protector of Great Britain, who, under a piece of the most mistaken conduct in the world, to say no worse of it, gave that important victory to King George’s troops, and prevented the ruin of Scotland from an army of Highlanders.
From this place of reflection I came forward in sight of Sterling bridge, but leaving it on the right hand, turned away east to Alloway, where the Earl of Marr has a noble seat, I should have said had a noble seat, and where the navigation of the Firth of Forth begins. The town is pleasant, well built, and full of trade; for the whole country has some business or other with them, and they have a better navigation than most of the towns on the Firth, for a ship of 300 ton may lie also at the very wharf; so that at Alloway a merchant may trade to all parts of the world, as well as at Leith or at Glasgow.
From Alloway, east, the country is called the shire of Clackmannan, and is known for yielding the best of coal, and the greatest quantity of it of any country in Scotland; so that it is carried, not to Edinburgh only, but to England, to Holland, and to France; and they tell us of new pits, or mines of coal now discovered, which will yield such quantities, and so easy to come at, as are never to be exhausted; though such great quantities should be sent to England, as the York-Buildings company boast of, namely, twenty thousand ton a year; which, however, I take it as it is, for a boast, or rather a pretence to persuade the world they have a demand for such a quantity; whereas, while the freight from Scotland is, as we know, so dear, and the tax in England continues so heavy, the price of these coals will always be so high at London, as will not fail to restrain the consumption; nor is it the interest of Scotland to send away so great a quantity of coal as shall either make a scarcity, or raise the price of them at home.
On this shore of the firth, farther down, stands the town of Culross, a neat and agreeable town, lying in length by the water side, like Kirkcaldy, and being likewise a trading town, as trade must be understood in Scotland. Here is a pretty market, a plentiful country behind it, and the navigable firth before it; the coal and the linen manufacture, and plenty of corn, such exportations will always keep something of trade alive upon this whole coast.
Having made this little excursion to the south from Perth, you may suppose me now returned northward again; and having given you my account of Perth, and its present circumstances, I now proceed that way, taking things as well in their ordinary situation as I can; we could not be at Perth and not have a desire to see that ancient seat of royal ceremony, for the Scots kings, I mean of Scone, where all the kings of Scotland were crowned.
Scone lies on the other side of the Tay, about a mile north west from Perth; it was famous for the old chair in which the kings of Scotland were crowned, and which Edward I, King of England, having pierced through the whole kingdom, and nothing being able to withstand him, brought away with him. It is now deposited in Westminster, and the kings of Scotland are still crowned in it, according to an old Scots prophecy, which they say, (mark it, I do but tell you they say so) was cut in the stone, which is enclosed in the lower part of the wooden chair in which the kings are crowned.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Inveniunt Lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
Englished thus;
Or Fates deceived, and Heaven decrees in vain,
Or where this Stone is found, the Scots shall reign.


This palace was in those days a great monastery, and famous on occasion of this stone in the chair; the monks appropriating to themselves not the custom only, but the right of having all the kings crowned on it, as if it had been a sacred right, and instituted in heaven; and that the kings would not prosper if they were crowned any where else.
But enough of fable, for this, I suppose, to be no other; yet, be it how it will, this is no fable, that here all the kings of Scotland were crowned, and all the kings of Great Britain have been since crowned on it, or in the chair, or near it ever since.
The palace of Scoon, though ancient, is not so much decayed as those I have already spoken of; and the Pretender found it very well in repair for his use. Here he lived and kept his court, a fatal court to the nobility and gentry of Scotland, who were deluded to appear for him; here I say, he kept his court in all the state and appearance of a sovereign, and received honours as such; so that he might say he reigned in Scotland, though not over Scotland, for a few days. But it was but a few (about twenty) till he and all his adherents were obliged to quit, not the place only, but the island, and that without fighting, though the royal army was not above ten thousand men.
From Scoon to Dunkel is so little a way we desired to see it, being the place where the first skirmish was fought between the forces of King William, after the Revolution, and the Laird of Claverhouse, after called Viscount Dundee, but Dundee’s men, though 5,000, were gallantly repulsed by a handful, even of new raised men.
Dundee being killed by an accidental shot after the fight, the resistance ended soon after; whereas, indeed, had that accident not happened, Dundee, who was a bold enterprising man, had certainly marched southward, and bid fair to have given King William a journey into the north, instead of a voyage to Ireland; but providence had better things in store for Great Britain.
But our determined route lay up the eastern shore, and through the shires, adjacent on that side, as particularly Angus, Mearns, Marr, Aberdeen, Buchan or Bucquhan, &c. so as I laid it out before to Inverness.
Mr Cambden tells us, that the Firth of Tay was the utmost bounds of the Roman Empire in Britain. That Julius Agricola, the best of generals under the worst of emperors, Domitian, though he pierced farther, and traversed by land into the heart of the Highlands, yet seeing no end of the barbarous country, and no advantage by the conquest of a few Barbarian mountaineers, withdrew and fixed the Roman eagles here. But our English Caesars have outgone the Romans; for Edward I as is said, passed the Tay, for he rifled the Abbey at Scoon; and, if we may believe history, penetrated into the remotest parts, which, however, I take to be only the remotest parts of what was then known to the English; for as to the Highlands, the mountains of Loquhaber, Ross, Murray, Sutherland, and Caithness, we read nothing of them. And from these retreats the Scots always returned, Antæus like, with double strength after every defeat.
Oliver Cromwell, indeed, rode through; he penetrated to the remotest part of the island, and that he might rule them with a rod of iron in the very letter of it, he built citadels and forts in all the angles and extremes, where he found it needful to place his stationary legions, just as the Romans did; as at Leith, at St Andrew’s, at Inverness, Irwin, Innerlochy, and several other places: and just now we find King George’s forces marching to the remotest corners, nay, ferrying over into the western, and north-western islands; but then this is not as a foreigner and conqueror, but as a sovereign, a lawful governor and father of the country, to deliver from, not entangle her in the chains of tyranny and usurpation.
We left Strathern therefore, with the little country of Mentieth, for our return, and went down into Angus, on the northern banks of Tay to Dundee, a pleasant, large, populous city, and well deserves the title of Bonny Dundee, so often given it in discourse, as well as in song (bonny, in Scots, signifying beautiful).
As it stands well for trade, so it is one of the best trading towns in Scotland, and that as well in foreign business as in manufacture and home trade. It has but an indifferent harbour, but the Tay is a large, safe, and good road, and there is deep water and very good anchor-hold almost all over it. It is exceedingly populous, full of stately houses, and large handsome streets; particularly it has four very good streets, with a large market-place in the middle, the largest and fairest in Scotland, except only that of Aberdeen. The inhabitants here appear like gentlemen, as well as men of business, and yet are real merchants too, and make good what we see so eminently in England, that true bred merchants are the best of gentlemen. They have a very good and large correspondence here with England, and ship off a great deal of linen thither, also a great quantity of corn is sent from hence, as well to England as to Holland. They have likewise a good share of the Norway trade; and as they are concerned in the herring-fishery, they consequently have some east country trade, viz. to Dantzick, Koningsberg, Riga, and the neighbouring parts. They send ships also to Sweden, and import iron, copper, tar, pitch, deals, &c. from the several trading ports of that kingdom.
The great church was formerly collegiate, being the cathedral of the place, and was a very large building; but part of it was demolished in the Civil War; the remainder is divided, like as others are at Edinburgh, Glasgow, &c. into three churches for the present use of the citizens. They have also a meeting-house or two for the episcopal worship; for you are to take it once for all, that north by Tay, there are far more of the episcopal persuasion than are to be found in the south; and the farther north, the more so, as we shall see in its order.
It is twenty Scots miles from Dundee to Montrose, the way pleasant, the country fruitful and bespangled, as the sky in a clear night with stars of the biggest magnitude, with gentlemen’s houses, thick as they can be supposed to stand with pleasure and conveniency. We did not find so kind a reception among the common people of Angus, and the other shires on this side the country, as the Scots usually give to strangers. But we found it was because we were English men; and we found that their aversion did not lie so much against us on account of the late successes at, and after the rebellion, and the forfeiture of the many noblemen’s and gentlemen’s estates among them as fell on that occasion, though that might add to the disgust. But it was on account of the Union, which they almost universally exclaimed against though sometimes against all manner of just reasoning.
This town of Montrose is a sea-port, and, in proportion to its number of inhabitants, has a considerable trade, and is tolerably well built, and capable of being made strong, only that it extends too far in length.
The French fleet made land at this port, when they had the Pretender on board, in the reign of Queen Ann, having overshot the mouth of the firth so far, whither they had first designed. But this mistake, which some thought a misfortune, was certainly a deliverance to them; for as this mistake gave time to the English fleet to come up with them, before they could enter the firth, so it left them time and room also to make their escape, which, if they had been gone up the firth, they could never have done, but must inevitably have been all burnt and destroyed, or taken by the British fleet under Sir George Bing, which was superior to them in force.
From Montrose the shore lies due north to Aberdeen: by the way is the castle of Dunnoter, a strong fortification, upon a high precipice of a rock, looking down on the sea, as on a thing infinitely below it. The castle is walled about with invincible walls, said the honest Scots man that showed us the road to it, having towers at proper distances, after the old way of fortifying towns. This was chiefly made use of as a prison for state-prisoners; and I have seen a black account of the cruel usage the unhappy prisoners have met with there; but those times are over with Scotland.
From hence there is nothing remarkable till we come to Aberdeen, a place so eminent, that it commands some stay upon it. Aberdeen is divided into two towns or cities, and stands at the mouth of two rivers; the towns are the new and the old Aberdeen, about a mile distant from one another, one situate on the River Don or Dune, the other on the River Dee, from whence it is supposed to take its name; for Aber, in the old British language, signifies a mouth, or opening of a river, the same which in Scotland is understood by a frith or firth. So that both these towns are described in the name, (viz.) Aberdee, the mouth of the River Dee, and Aberdeen, the mouth of the River Don.
Old Aberdeen is also on one side the county, and new Aberdeen on another, though both in that which is called in general the county of Marr. The extraordinaries of Aberdeen, take both cities together, are
1. The cathedral dedicated to St Machar, though none knows who that Saint was, is a large and ancient building; the building majestic, rather than curious, and yet not without its beauty in architecture; it appears to have been built at several times, and, perhaps, at the distance of many years, one part from another. The columns on which the great steeple stands are very artful, and the contrivance shows great judgement in the builder or director of the work. This church has been divided into several parts since the abolishing of episcopacy, as a government in the Church; (for it is not abolished in Aberdeen, as a principle, to this day) abundance of the people are still episcopal in their opinion; and they have, by the gentle government they live under, so much liberty still, as that they have a chapel for the public exercise of their worship, after the manner of the Church of England, besides several meetings for the episcopal dissenters, which are not so public.
2. The two colleges; one of these are in the old city, and the other in the new. (1) That in the old city is also the oldest college, being founded Anno 1500 by the famous Bishop Elphingstone, who lies buried in the chapel or college church, under a very magnificent and curious monument. The steeple of this church was the most artificial that I have seen in Scotland, and very beautiful, according to the draught of its building. But it is much more so now, having been injured, it not quite broken down by a furious tempest anno 1361; but rebuilt after the first model.
(2.) The new college, which is in the new city of Aberdeen, and is called the Marshallian or Marshal’s College, because founded by Keith Earl Marshal, in the year 1593. And though it was a magnificent building at first, and well endowed, yet the citizens have much beautified and enlarged it, and adjoined to it a noble library well stocked with books, as well by the citizens as by the benefactions of gentlemen, and lovers of learning; as also with the finest and best mathematical instruments.
Those two colleges form the university, and are so called, out they are independent on one another; they are famed for having bred many men of learning; but that is not to my purpose here.
3. The third article is the great market-place, which, indeed, is very beautiful and spacious; and the streets adjoining are very handsome and well built, the houses lofty and high; but not so as to be inconvenient, as in Edinburgh; or low, to be contemptible as in most other places. But the generality of the citizens’ houses are built of stone four story high, handsome sash-windows, and are very well furnished within, the citizens here being as gay, as genteel, and, perhaps, as rich, as in any city in Scotland.
4. The bridges; particularly that at Old Aberdeen, over the Don. It consists of one immense arch of stone, sprung from two rocks, one on each side, which serve as a buttment to the arch, so that it may be said to have no foundation, nor to need any. The workmanship is artful, and so firm, that it may possibly end with the conflagration only. The other bridge is upon the River Dee, about a mile west above New Aberdeen, and has seven very stately fine arches.
5. and 6. The commerce and the fishery.
The fishery is very particular; the salmon is a surprising thing, the quantity that is taken in both rivers, but especially in the Dee, is a kind of prodigy; the fishing, or property, is erected into a company, and divided into shares, and no person can enjoy above one share at a time; the profits are very considerable, for the quantity of fish taken is exceeding great, and they are sent abroad into several parts of the world, particularly into France, England, the Baltick, and several other parts. The herring-fishing is a common blessing too all this shore of Scotland, and is like the Indies at their door; the merchants of Aberdeen cannot omit the benefit.
They have a very good manufacture of linen, and also of worsted stockings, which they send to England in great quantities, and of which they make some so fine, that I have seen them sold for fourteen, and twenty shillings a pair. They also send them over to Holland, and into the north and east seas in large quantities.
They have also a particular export here of pork, pickled and packed up in barrels, which they chiefly sell to the Dutch for the victualling their East-India ships and their men of war, the Aberdeen pork having the reputation of being the best cured, for keeping on very long voyages, of any in Europe.
In a word, the people of Aberdeen are universal merchants, so far as trade of the northern part of the world will extend. They drive a very great trade to Holland, to France, to Hambrough, to Norway, to Gottenburgh, and to the Baltick; and it may, in a word, be esteemed as the third city in Scotland, that is to say, next after Edinburgh and Glasgow.
From Aberdeen the coast goes on to a point of land, which is the farthest north-east part of Britain, and is called by the sailors Buchanness, being in the shire or county of Buchan. It was to this point the French squadron, with the Pretender on board, in the reign of Queen Ann, kept their flight in sight of the shore, being thus far pursued by Sir George Bing with the English fleet; but from hence steering away north-east, as if for the Norway coast, and the English admiral seeing no probability of coming up with them, gave over the chase, when they, altering their course in the night, stood away south, and came back to Dunkirk where they set out.
Upon this part are several good towns; as particularly Peter-Head; a good market-town, and a port with a small harbour for fishing vessels, but no considerable trade, Aberdeen being so near. This country, however remote, is full of nobility and gentry, and their seats are seen even to the extremest shores. Nor does the remote situation hinder, but these gentlemen have the politest and brightest education and genius of any people so far north, perhaps, in the world, being always bred in travel abroad, and in the universities at home. The Lord Pitsligo, though unhappily drawn into the snare of the late insurrection, and forfeiting his estate with the rest, yet carries abroad with him, where-ever he goes, a bright genius, a head so full of learning and sound judgment, and a behaviour as polite, courtly, and full of all the good qualities that adorn a noble birth, as most persons of quality I ever saw.
From hence, the east shore of Scotland being at an end, the land trends away due west; and the shire of Bamf beginning, you see the towns of Bamf, Elgin, and the famous monastery of Kinloss, where the murthered body of King Duff was, after many years, dug up, and discovered to be the same by some tokens, which, it seems, were undoubted.
From Fifeness, which is the northermost point, or head land on the mouth of Edinburgh Firth, being the souther-most land of Fife, to this point of Buchan-Ness, the land lies due north and south, and the shore is the eastermost land of Scotland; the distance between them is thirty-three leagues one mile, that is just 100 miles; though the mariners say that measuring by the sea it is but twenty-eight; and from Winterton-Ness, near Yarmouth, to this point called Buchan-Ness, is just 300 miles.
The river, or Firth of Tay, opens into the sea, about four leagues north from Fife-Ness; and as there is a light-house on the Isle of May, in the mouth of the Firth of Forth of Edinburgh, a little south of this point called Fife-Ness; so there are two light-houses at the entrance of the Firth of Tay, being for the directions of the sailors, when they are bound into that river; and particularly for their avoiding and sailing between two sands or shoals, which lie off from the south side of the entrance.
This point of land, called Buchan-Ness, is generally the first land of Great Britain, which the ships make in their voyages home from Arch-Angel in Russia, or from their whale-fishing-voyages to Greenland and Spits-Berghen in the north seas; and near this point, namely, at Pitsligo, a great ship was cast away in Queen Elizabeth’s time, bound home from Arch-Angel, in which was the first ambassador, which the great Duke of Muscovy sent to any of the Christian princes of Europe, and who was commissioned to treat with Queen Elizabeth for a league of peace and commerce; and on board which was a most valuable present to the queen of rich and costly furs; such as sables, ermine, black fox skins, and such like, being in those days esteemed inestimable. The ambassadors, it seems, were saved and brought on shore by the help of the people of Pitsligo; but the ship and all the goods, and among them the rich furs, intended for the queen, were all lost, to her Majesty’s great disappointment; for the queen valued such fine things exceedingly.
From this point of easterly land all that great bay, or inlet of the sea, reaching quite to the north of Scotland, is called Murray Firth; and the northermost point is Dungsby Head, which is the east point of Caithness, and opens to Pentland Firth. By Pentland Firth you are to understand the passage of the sea beyond Caithness, that is to say between Scotland and the Isles of Orkney. This bay, called Murray-Firth, is not in the nature of a firth, as that of Edinburgh or Tay, being the mouths of rivers; as the Humber, or the mouth of Thames in England: but it is an open gulf or bay in the sea; as the Bay of Biscay, or the Gulph of Mexico are, and such-like : and though it may receive several rivers into it, as indeed it does, and as those bays do; yet itself is an open sea, and reaches from, as I have said, Peter-Head to Dungsby Head, opposite to the Orkneys; the distance upon the sea twenty-six leagues one mile, or seventy-nine miles.
This country of Buchan, is, indeed, more to be taken notice of from what is to be seen on the sea-shore than in the land; for the country is mountainous, poor, and more barren than its neighbours; but as we coasted along west, we came into a much better country, particularly the shires of Bamff, Elgin, and the country of Murray, from whence the bay, I just now mentioned, is called Murray Firth.
Murray is, indeed, a pleasant country, the soil fruitful, watered with fine rivers, and full of good towns, but especially of gentlemen’s seats, more and more remarkable than could, indeed, be expected by a stranger in so remote a part of the country.
The River Spey, passes through the middle of the country. All the country, on the west side of the Spey, is surprisingly agreeable, being a flat, level country, the land rich and fruitful, well peopled, and full of gentlemen’s seats. This country is a testimony how much the situation of the land is concerned in the goodness of the climate; for here the land being level and plain, for between twenty and thirty miles together, the soil is not only fruitful and rich, but the temperature of the air is softened, and made mild and suitable to the fruitfulness of the earth; for the harvest in this country, and in the vale of Strath-Bogy, and all the country to Inverness, is not only forward and early, as well as rich and strong; but ’tis more early than in Northumberland, nay, than it is in Darbyshire, and even than in some parts of the most southerly counties in England; as particularly in the east of Kent. Nor is the forwardness of the season the only testimony of the goodness of the soil here; but the crops are large, the straw strong and tall, and the ear full; and that which is still more the grain, and that particularly of the wheat, is as full, and the kind as fine, as any I have seen in England.
In this rich country is the city, or town rather, of Elgin; I say city, because in ancient time the monks claimed it for a city; and the cathedral shows, by its ruins, that it was a place of great magnificence. Nor must it be wondered at, if in so pleasant, so rich, and so agreeable a part of the country, all the rest being so differing from it, the clergy should seat themselves in a proportioned number, seeing we must do them the justice to say, that if there is any place richer and more fruitful, and pleasant than another, they seldom fail to find it out.
As the country is rich and pleasant, so here are a great many rich inhabitants, and in the town of Elgin in particular; for the gentlemen, as if this was the Edinburgh, or the court, for this part of the island, leave their Highland habitations in the winter and come and live here for the diversion of the place and plenty of provisions; and there is, on this account, a great variety of gentlemen for society, and that of all parties and of all opinions. This makes Elgin a very agreeable place to live in, notwithstanding its distance, being above 450 measured miles from London, and more, if we must go by Edinburgh.
This rich country continues with very little intermission, till we come to Strath-Nairn, that is the valley of Nairn, where it extends a little farther in breadth towards the mountains. Nor is Strath-Nairn behind any of the other in fruitfulness. From the western part of this country you may observe that the land goes away again to the north; and, as if you were to enter into another island beyond Britain, you find a large lake or inlet from the Sea of Murray, mentioned above, going on west, as if it were to cut through the island, for we could see no end of it; nor could some of the country people tell us how far it went, but that it reached to Loquabre : so that we thought, till our maps and farther inquiries informed us, it had joined to the western ocean.
After we had travelled about twelve miles, and descended from a rising ground, which we were then upon, we perceived the lake contracted in one particular place to the ordinary size of a river, as if designed by nature to give passage to the inhabitants to converse with the northern part; and then, as if that part had been sufficiently performed, it opened again to its former breadth, and continued in the form of a large lake, as before, for many more miles than we could see; both sides the pass, ’tis above thirty-five miles in length.
In the narrow pass (mentioned above over the lake) stands the town and fortress of Inner-Ness, that is a town on the inner bank of the River Ness. The situation of it, as I have said before, intimates that it is a place of strength; and accordingly it has a castle, founded in ancient times to command the pass. And some authors write that it was anciently a royal house for the kings of Scotland. Be that as it will, Oliver Cromwell thought it a place of such importance, that he built a strong citadel here, and kept a stated garrison always in it, and sometimes more than a garrison, finding it needful to have a large body of his old veteran troops posted here to preserve the peace of the country, and keep the Highlands in awe, which they did effectually all his time.
Here it is observed, that at the end of those troublesome days, when the troops on all sides came to be disbanded, and the men dispersed, abundance of the English soldiers settled in this fruitful and cheap part of the country, and two things are observed from it as the consequence.
1. That the English falling to husbandry, and cultivation of the earth after their own manner, were instrumental, with the help of a rich and fruitful soil, to bring all that part of the country into so good a method and management, as is observed to outdo all the rest of Scotland to this day; for as they reap early, so they sow early, and manure and help the soil by all the regular arts of husbandry, as is practised in England.
2. As Cromwell’s soldiers initiated them thus into the arts and industry of the husbandman, so they left them the English accent upon their tongues, and they preserve it also to this day; for they speak perfect English, even much better than in the most southerly provinces of Scotland; nay, some will say that they speak it as well as at London; though I do not grant that neither. It is certain they keep the southern accent very well, and speak very good English.
The fort, which was then built, and since demolished, has been restored since the revolution; and a garrison was always kept here by King William, for the better regulating the Highlands; and this post was of singular importance in the time of the late insurrection of the Lord Marr for the Pretender; when, though his party took it, they were driven out again by the country, with the assistance of the Earl of Sutherland, and several other of the nobility and gentry, who stood fast to the king’s interest.
Here is a stately stone bridge of seven large arches over the River Ness, where, as I said above, it grows narrow between the sea and the lake; small vessels may come up to the town, but larger ships, when such come thither, as they often do for corn, lie at some distance east from the town.
When you are over this bridge you enter that which we truly call the north of Scotland, and others the north Highlands; in which are several distinct shires, but cannot call for a distinct description, because it is all one undistinguished range of mountains and woods, overspread with vast, and almost uninhabited rocks and steeps filled with deer innumerable, and of a great many kinds; among which are some of those the ancients called harts and roebucks, with vast overgrown stags and hinds of the red deer kind, and with fallow-deer also.
And here, before I describe this frightful country, it is needful to observe that Scotland may be thus divided into four districts, or distinct quarters, which, however, I have not seen any of our geographers do before me, yet, I believe, may not be an improper measurement for such as would form a due idea of the whole in their minds, as follows:
1. The South Land, or that part of Scotland south of the River Tay, drawing a line from the Tay, about Perth, to Loch-Lomond, and down again to Dumbarton, and the bank of Clyde.
2. The Middle, or Midland, being all the country from the Tay and the Lough-Lomon, north to the Lake of Ness and the Aber, including a long slope to the south, taking in the western Highlands of Argyle and Lorn, and the isles of Isla and Jura.
3. The North Land, being all the country beyond Innerness and the Lough, or River Ness, north, drawing the line over the narrow space of Glangary, between the Ness and the Aber, and bounded by them both from the eastern to the western sea.
4. The islands, being all the western and northern islands (viz.) the Hebrides, the Skye, the Orkneys, and the Isles of Shetland.
Upon the foot of this division I am now, having passed the bridge over the Ness, entered upon the third division of Scotland, called the North Land; and it is of this country that, as I am saying, the mountains are so full of deer, harts, roebucks, &c. Here are also a great number of eagles which breed in the woods, and which prey upon the young fawns when they first fall. Some of these eagles are of a mighty large kind, such as are not to be seen again in those parts of the world. Here are also the best hawks of all the kinds for sport which are in the kingdom, and which the nobility and gentry of Scotland make great use of; for not this part of Scotland only, but all the rest of the country abounds with wild-fowl.
The rivers and lakes also in all this country are prodigiously full of salmon; it is hardly credible what the people relate of the quantity of salmon taken in these rivers, especially in the Spey, the Nairn, the Ness, and other rivers thereabout.
Innerness is a pleasant, clean, and well built town. There are some merchants in it, and some good share of trade. It consists of two parishes, and two large, handsome streets, but no public buildings of any note, except as above, the old castle and the bridge.
North of the mouth of this river is the famous Cromarty Bay,, or Cromarty Firth, noted for being the finest harbour, with the least business, of, perhaps, any in Britain; ’tis, doubtless, a harbour or port, able to receive the Royal Navy of Great Britain, and, like Milford-Haven in Wales, both the going in and out safe and secure. But as there is very little shipping employed in these parts, and little or no trade, except for corn, and in the season of it some fishing, so this noble harbour is left entirely useless in the world.
Our geographers seem to be almost as much at a loss in the description of this north part of Scotland, as the Romans were to conquer it; and they are obliged to fill it up with hills and mountains, as they do the inner parts of Africa, with lions and elephants, for want of knowing what else to place there. Yet this country is not of such difficult access, as to be passed undescribed, as if it were impenetrable.
All the country beyond this river, and the Loch flowing into it, is called Cathness, and extends to the northermost land in Scotland. Some people tell us they have both lead, copper, and iron in this part of Scotland, and I am very much inclined to believe it: but it seems reserved for a future, and more industrious age to search into; which, if it should happen to appear, especially the iron, they would no more have occasion to say, that nature furnished them with so much timber, and woods of such vast extent to no purpose, seeing it may be all little enough to supply the forges for working up the iron stone, and improving that useful product. And should a time come when these hidden treasures of the earth should be discovered and improved, this part of Scotland may no longer be called poor, for such a production would soon change the face of things, bring wealth and people, and commerce to it; fill their harbours full of ships, their towns full of people; and, by consuming the provisions, bring the soil to be cultivated, its fish cured, and its cattle consumed at home, and so a visible prosperity would show itself among them.
Nor are the inhabitants so wild and barbarous as, perhaps, they were in those times, or as our writers have pretended. We see every day the gentlemen born here; such as the Mackenzies, McLeans, Dundonalds, Gordons, McKays, and others, who are named among the clans as if they were barbarians, appear at court, and in our camps and armies, as polite, and as finished gentlemen as any from other countries, or even among our own; and, if I should say, outdoing our own in many things, especially in arms and gallantry, as well abroad as at home. But I am not writing panegyrics or satires here, my business is with the country.
Here are few towns, but the people live dispersed, the gentry leading the commons or vassals, as they are called, to dwell within the respective bounds of their several clans, where they are, as we may say, little monarchs, reigning in their own dominions; nor do the people know any other sovereign, at least many of them do not.
This occasions the people to live dispersed among the hills without any settled towns. Their employment is chiefly hunting, which is, as we may say, for their food; though they do also breed large quantities of black cattle, with which they pay their lairds or leaders the rent of the lands. And these are the cattle which, even from the remotest parts, as well as from other in the west and south, are driven annually to England to be sold, and are brought up even to London, especially into the countries of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex.
Having thus, as I say, few or no towns to describe north of Innerness, it must suffice that I thus give a just description of the country in general. For example, it is surrounded with the sea, and those two great inlets of water, mentioned above, called the Ness and the Abre. In a word, the great Northern Ocean surrounds this whole part of Scotland; that part of it to the east, mentioned just now, lies open to the sea without any cover; the west and north parts are, as it were, surrounded with out-works as defences, to break off the raging ocean from the north; for the western islands on one side, and the Orkneys on the other, lie as so many advanced fortifications or redoubts, to combat that enemy at a distance. I shall view them in their course.
From Dunrobin Castle, you have nothing of note offers itself, either by sea or land; but an extended shore lying north and south without towns and without harbours, and indeed, as there are none of the first, so there are wanting none of the last; for, as I said of Cromarty Bay, there is a noble harbour without ships or trade; so here nature, as if providentially foreseeing there was no room for trade, forbore giving herself the trouble to form harbours and creeks where they should be useless, and without people.
The land thus extended as above, lies north and south to Dungsby-Head, which is the utmost extent of the land on the east side of Britain, north, and is distant from Cromarty eighteen leagues north. Here the land bears away west, leaving a large strait or sea, which they call Pentland Firth, and which divides, between the island of Great Britain, and the isles of the Orkneys; a passage broad and fair, for ’tis not less than five leagues over, and with a great depth of water; so that any ships, or fleets of ships may go through it. But the tides are so fierce, so uncertain, and the gusts and sudden squalls of wind so frequent, that very few merchants-ships care to venture through it; and the Dutch East-India ships, which come north about, (as ’tis called) in their return from India, keep all farther off, and choose to come by Fair Isle, that is to say, in the passage between the islands of Orkney and Shetland. And here the Dutch send their squadron of men of war generally to meet them, because, as if it were in a narrow lane, they are sure to meet with them there.
In the passage, between the land’s end of Britain and the Orkneys, is a small island, which our mariners call Stroma, Mr Cambden and others Sowna; ’tis spoken much of as dangerous for ships. But I see no room to record any thing of that kind any more than that there are witches and spirits haunting it, which draw ships on shore to their misfortunes. Such things I leave to the people who are of the opinion the Devil has such retreats for doing mischief; for my own part I believe him employed in business of more moment.
As Dingsby-Head is the most northerly land of Great Britain, ’tis worth observing to you that here, in the month of June, we had so clear an uninterrupted day, that, though indeed the sun does set, that is to say, the horizon covers its whole body for some hours, yet you might see to read the smallest print, and to write distinctly, without the help of a candle, or any other light, and that all night long.
No wonder the ancient mariners, be they Phoenician or Carthaginian, or what else you please, who in those days knew nothing of the motion of the heavenly bodies, when they were driven thus far, were surprised at finding they had lost the steady rotation of day and night, which they thought had spread over the whole globe. No wonder they talked much of their Ultima Thule, and that the Elysian fields must lie this way; when they found that they were already come to everlasting day, they could no longer doubt but heaven lay that way, or at least that this was the high way to it; and accordingly, when they came home, and were to give an account of these things among their neighbours, they filled them with astonishment; and ’twas wonderful they did not really fit out ships for the discovery; for who would ever have gone so near heaven, and not ventured a little farther to see whether they could find it or no?
From hence west we go along the shore of the firth or passage, which they call Pentland; and here is the house so famous, called John a Grot’s house, where we set our horses’ feet into the sea, on the most northerly land, as the people say, of Britain, though, I think, Dungsby-Head is as far north. ’Tis certain, however, the difference is but very small, being either of them in the latitude of 59 1/6 north, and Shetland reaching above two degrees farther.
Here we found, however mountainous and wild the country appeared, the people were extremely well furnished with provisions; and especially they had four sorts of provisions in great plenty; and with a supply of which ’tis reasonable to say they could suffer no dangerous want.
1. Very good bread, as well oat bread as wheat, though the last not so cheap as the first.
2. Venison exceeding plentiful, and at all seasons, young or old, which they kill with their guns wherever they find it; for there is no restraint, but ’tis every man’s own that can kill it. By which means the Highlanders not only have all of them fire-arms, but they are all excellent marksmen.
3. Salmon in such plenty as is scarce credible, and so cheap, that to those who have any substance to buy with, it is not worth their while to catch it themselves. This they eat fresh in the season, and for other times they cure it by drying it in the sun, by which they preserve it all the year.
They have no want of cows and sheep, but the latter are so wild, that sometimes were they not, by their own disposition, used to flock together, they would be much harder to kill than the deer.
From hence to the west point of the passage to Orkney is near twenty miles, being what may be called the end of the island of Britain; and this part faces directly to the North Pole; the land, as it were, looking forward just against the Pole Star, and the Pole so elevated, that the tail of the Ursa Major, or the Great Bear, is seen just in the zenith, or over your head; and the day is said to be eighteen hours long, that is to say, the sun is so long above the horizon. But the rest of the light is so far beyond a twilight, by reason of the smallness of the arch of that circle, which the sun makes beneath the horizon, that it is clear and perfect day almost all the time; not forgetting withal, that the dark nights take their turn with them in their season, and it is just as long night in the winter.
Yet it is observable here, that they have more temperate winters here generally speaking, than we have to the most southerly part of the island, and particularly the water in some of the rivers as in the Ness, for example, never freezes, nor are their frosts ordinarily so lasting as they are in the most southerly climates, which is accounted for from the nearness of the sea, which filling the air with moist vapours, thickens the fluids and causes that they are not so easily penetrated by the severity of the cold.
On the most inland parts of this country, especially in the shire of Ross, they have vast woods of fir trees, not planted and set by men’s hands, as I have described in the southern part of Scotland, but growing wild and undirected, otherwise than as nature planted and nourished them up, by the additional help of time, nay of ages. Here are woods reaching from ten, to fifteen and twenty miles in length, and proportioned in breadth, in which there are firs, if we may believe the inhabitants, large enough to make masts for the biggest ships in the Navy Royal, and which are rendered of no use, merely for want of convenience of water carriage to bring them away; also they assure us there are a sufficient quantity of other timber for a supply to all Britain.
How far this may be true, that is to say, as to the quantity, that I do not undertake to determine. But I must add a needful memorandum to the Scots noblemen, &c. in whose estates these woods grow, that if they can not be made useful one way, they may be made so another, and if they cannot fell the timber, and cut it into masts and deals, and other useful things for bringing away, having no navigation; they may yet burn it, and draw from it vast quantities of pitch, tar, resin, turpentine, &c. which is of easier carriage, and may be carried on horses to the water’s edge, and then shipped for the use of the merchant, and this way their woods may be made profitable, whatever they might be before.
We were now in the particular county called Strathnaver, or the Vale on the Naver, the remotest part of all the island, though not the most barren or unfruitful; for here as well as on the eastern shore is good corn produced, and sufficient of it at least for the inhabitants; perhaps they do not send much abroad, though sometimes also they send it over to the Orkneys, and also to Shetland. This county belongs to the Earl of Sutherland whose eldest son bears the title of Lord Strathnaver.
And now leaving the northern prospect we pass the opposite point west from Dingsby-head, and which the people call Farrohead. From hence the vast western ocean appears, what name to give it the geographers themselves do not seem to agree, but it certainly makes a part of the great Atlantick Sea, and is to be called by no other name, for it has no land or country to derive from.
And now we were to turn our faces S. for the islands of this sea, which make the fourth division of Scotland as mentioned before. I may if I have room give as just a description of them as I can from authentic relations; for being on horseback and no convenience of shipping presenting itself here, I am to own that we did not go over to those islands personally, neither was it likely any person whose business was mere curiosity and diversion, should either be at the expense, or run the risk of such a hazardous passage where there was so little worth observation to be found.
We therefore turned our faces to the south, and with great satisfaction after so long and fatiguing a journey; and unless we had been assisted by the gentlemen of the country, and with very good guides, it had been next to an impossibility to have passed over this part of the country. I do confess if I was to recommend to any men whose curiosity tempted them to travel over this country, the best method for their journeying, it should be neither to seek towns, for it would be impossible to find such in proper stages for their journey; nor to make themselves always burthensome to the Highland chiefs, though there I can assure them they would always meet with good treatment, and great hospitality. But I would propose travelling with some company, and carrying tents with them, and so encamping every night as if they were an army.
It is true they would do well to have the countenance of the gentlemen, and chiefs as above, and to be recommended to them from their friends from one to another, as well for guides as for safety, otherwise I would not answer for what might happen. But if they are first well recommended as strangers, and have letters from one gentleman to another, they would want neither guides nor guards, nor indeed would any man touch them; but rather protect them if there was occasion in all places; and by this method they might in the summer time lodge, when, and wherever they pleased, with safety and pleasure; travelling no farther at a time, than they thought fit; and as for their provisions, they might supply themselves by their guns, with very great plenty of wild fowl, and their attendants and guides would find convenient places to furnish other things sufficient to carry with them.
Indeed in our attempt to come down to the southward by the coast of Tain, and the shire of Ross, we should have been extremely disappointed, and perhaps have been obliged to get a ship or bark, to have carried us round the Isle of Skye into Loquhaber, had it not been for the extraordinary courtesy of some of the gentlemen of the country. On the other hand we unexpectedly met here some English men, who were employed by merchants in the S. (whether at London or Edinburgh I do not now remember) to take and cure a large quantity of white fish, and afterwards herrings, on account of trade. Here we had not only the civility of their assistance and accommodation in our journey, but we had the pleasure of seeing what progress they made in their undertaking.
As for herrings indeed the quantity was prodigious, and we had the pleasure of seeing something of the prodigy, for I can call it no other; the shoal was as I might say beginning to come, or had sent their vant-couriers before them, when we first came to the head of Pentland Firth, and in a fortnight’s time more, the body of their numberless armies began to appear; but before we left the coast you would have ventured to say of the sea, as they do of the River Tibiscus, or Theisse in Hungary, that it was one third water, and two thirds fish; the operation of taking them, could hardly be called fishing, for they did little more than dip for them into the water and take them up.
Here we found the town of Tain, and some other villages tolerably well inhabited, and some trade also, occasioned principally by the communication with the western islands, and also by the herring fishing, the fishing boats from other parts often putting into these ports; for all their coast is full of loughs and rivers, and other openings which make very good harbours of shipping.
We could understand nothing on this side of what the people said, any more than if we had been in Morocco; and all the remedy we had was, that we found most of the gentlemen spoke French, and some few spoke broad Scots; we found it also much for our convenience to make the common people believe we were French.
Should we go about here to give you an account of the religion of the people in this country, it would be an unpleasant work, and perhaps scarce seem to deserve credit; you would hardly believe that in a Christian island, as this is said to be, there should be people found who know so little of religion, or of the custom of Christians, as not to know a Sunday, or Sabbath, from a working day, or the worship of God from an ordinary meeting, for conversation. I do not affirm that it is so, and I shall say no more of it here, because I would not publish what it is to be hoped may in time find redress; but I cannot but say that his Majesty’s gift of 1,000l. annually to the Assembly of Scotland, for sending ministers and missionaries for the propagating Christian knowledge in the Highlands, is certainly one of the most needful charities that could have been thought of, worthy of a king, and well suited to that occasion; and if prudently applied, as there is reason to believe it will be, may in time break in upon this horrible ignorance, that has so far spread over this unhappy part of the country.
On the other hand, what shall we say to the neglect, which for so many years past has been the occasion of this surprising darkness among the people, when the poor abandoned creatures have not so much as had the common instruction of Christianity, so much as to know whether there was any such thing as a God or no, much less how to worship him; and if at any time any glimpse of light had been infused into them, and they had been taught any knowledge of superior things, it has been by the diligence of the Popish clergy, who to do them justice, have shown more charity, and taken more pains that way, than some whose work it has been, and who it might much more have been expected from?
On this coast is the Isle of Skye, lying from the west north west, to the east south east, and bearing upon the main island, only separated by a narrow strait of water; something like as the Isle of Wight is separated from the county of Southampton. We left this on our right, and crossing the mountains, came with as little stay as we could to the lough of Abre, that is, the water which assists with Lough Ness, to separate the north land of Scotland from the middle part.
From this river or water of Abre, all that mountainous barren and frightful country, which lies south is called Loquabre. It is indeed a frightful country full of hideous desert mountains and unpassable, except to the Highlanders who possess the precipices. Here in spite of the most vigorous pursuit, the Highland robbers, such as the famous Rob Roy in the late disturbances, find such retreats as none can pretend to follow them into, nor could he be ever taken.
On this water of Abre, just at the entrance of the loch, was anciently a fort built, to curb the Highlanders, on either side. It was so situated, that though it might indeed be blocked up by land and be distressed by a siege, yet as it was open to the sea, it might always receive supplies by shipping, the government being supposed to be always masters of the sea. This fort the late King William caused to be rebuilt, or rather a new fort to be erected; where there was always a good garrison kept for curbing the Highlanders, which fort was for several years commanded by Lieutenant General Maitland, an old experienced general. This wise commander did more to gain the Highlanders, and keep them in peace, and in a due subjection to the British Government, by his winning and obliging behaviour, and yet by strict observance of his orders, and the duty of a governor, than any other before him had been able to do by force, and the sword.
At this place we take our leave of the third division, which I call the north land of Scotland, for this fort being on the south side of the Loch Abre is therefore called inner Lochy. To traverse the remaining part of this country, I must begin upon the upper Tay, where I left off when I turned away east; and here we have in especial manner the country of Brechin, the Blair as ’tis called of Athol, and the country of Bradalbin. This is a hilly country indeed, but as it is watered by the Tay, and many other pleasant rivers which fall into it, there are also several fruitful valleys, interspersed among the hills; nor are even the Highlands themselves, or the Highlanders the inhabitants any thing so wild, untaught, or untractable, as those whom I have been a describing in the north-land division, that is to say, in Strath-Naver, Ross, Tain, &c.
The Duke of Athol is lord, I was almost going to say king of this country, and has the greatest interest, or if you please, the greatest share of vassalage of any nobleman in this part of Scotland. His Grace was always an opposer of the Union in the Parliament holden at Edinburgh, for passing it into an Act; but he did not carry his opposition to the height of tumult and rebellion; if he had, as some were forward to have had done, he would have possibly bid fair, to have prevented the conclusion of it, at least at that time. But the hour was come, when the calamities of war, which had for so many hundred years vexed the two nations, were to have an end; and though the government was never weaker in power than at that time, I mean in Scotland, yet the affair was carried through with a high hand, all the little tumults and disorders of the rabble as well at Edinburgh as at Glasgow, and other places, being timely suppressed, and others by prudent management prevented.
The Grampian mountains, which are here said to cut through Scotland, as the Muscovites say of their Riphaean hills, that they are the girdle of the world. As is the country, so are the inhabitants, a fierce fighting and furious kind of men; but I must add that they are much changed, and civilized from what they were formerly. And though the country is the same, and the mountains as wild and desolate as ever, yet the people, by the good conduct of their chiefs and heads of clans, are much more civilized than they were in former times. As the men have the same vigour and spirit; but are under a better regulation of their manners, and more under government; so they make excellent soldiers, when they come abroad, or are listed in regular and disciplined troops.
The Duke of Athol, though he has not an estate equal to some of the nobility, yet he is master of more of these superiorities, as they are called there, than many of those who have twice his estate; and I have been told, that he can bring a body of above 6,000 men together in arms at very little warning. The pomp and state in which this noble person lives, is not to be imitated in Great Britain; for he is served like a prince, and maintains a greater equipage and retinue than five times his estate would support in another country.
This castle of Duplin, is a very beautiful seat, and the heads of the families having been pretty much used to live at home, the house has been adorned at several times, according to the genius and particular inclination of the persons, who then lived there; the present earl is not much in Scotland; being created a peer of Great Britain, in the reign of the late Queen Anne, and married into the family of Oxford.
From this place we went to Brechin, an ancient town with a castle finely situate; but the ancient grandeur of it not supported; the family of Penmure, to whom it belonged, having been in no extraordinary circumstances for some time past, and now their misfortunes being finished, it is under forfeiture, and sold among the spoils of the late rebellion.
We were now as it were landed again, being after a long mountain-ramble, come down to the low lands, and into a pleasant and agreeable country; but as we had yet another journey to take west, we had a like prospect of a rude and wild part of Scotland to go through.
The Highlands of Scotland are divided into two parts, and known so as two separate countries, (viz.) the West Highlands, and the North Highlands; the last, of which I have spoken at large, contain the countries or provinces of:



The West Highlands contain the shires or counties of:
Dunbritton or
Dunbarton,
Lenox,
Argyle,
Bute,
Lorn and Cantyre.

The Western Highlands are the only remaining part of Scotland, which as yet I have not touched upon. This is that particular country, which a late great man in King James the Second’s time, called the kingdom of Argyle; and upon which occasion it was a compliment upon King James, that he had conquered two kings, when he suppressed the rebellion of the Whigs; namely, the Duke of Monmouth, whom in derision they called the little king of Lime, and the Earl of Argyle whom they called with much more propriety, the great king of the Highlands.
It is true that the greatest part of these Western Highlands, may be said to be subject, or in some respect to belong to the House of Argyle, or to speak more properly, to the family or clan of the Campbells, of whom the Duke of Argyle is the chief; but then it should be noted too, that those western gentlemen are not so blindly to be led, or guided by their chiefs as those in the north; nor when led on, are they so apt for mischief and violence. But as many of them are touched with the Cameronian Whig, or at least the English Whig principles, they would venture to enquire what they were to do, and whom to fight against, at least before they dipped far in any hazardous undertaking.
Though the people of these countries are something more civilised than those of their brethren mountaineers in the north, yet the countries seem to be so near a kin that no strangers could know them asunder, nor is there any breach in the similitude that I could observe, except it be that in the north Highlands, there are such great woods of fir-trees, which I have taken notice of there, and which we do not see the like of here. Nor did we see so many or so large eagles in these western mountains as in the north, though the people assure us there are such too.
The quantity of deer are much the same, and the kinds too, and the black cattle are of the same kind, and rather more numerous; the people also dress after the same manner, in the plaid and the trews, go naked from below the knee to the mid thighs, wear the dirk and the pistol at their girdle, and the targe or target at their shoulder.
Some reckon the shire of Braidalbin to belong to these Western Highlands, all the reason that I could find they give for reckoning this country among the Western Highlands, is because they say one part of it is inhabited by the Campbells, whose clan, as I have observed, generally possesses all the West Highlands.
But if they will claim the country, they must claim the people too, who are, if I may give my opinion, some of the worst, most barbarous, and ill governed of all the Highlands of Scotland; they are desperate in fight, cruel in victory, fierce even in conversation, apt to quarrel, mischievous, and even murderers in their passion.
At the fight which happened at Gillekranky, in this part of Scotland, they tell us a story of a combat between an English soldier pressed hard by a Highlander, the regiment being in disorder, for the English had the worst of it; the English soldier was singled out in the pursuit by one particular Highlander, and found himself in great danger, he defended himself with the club of his musket as long as he was able, his shot being spent before, after which they came to their swords, the English man understood the backsword very well, but the Scots man received all the blows upon his targe; so that the English man could not come in with him, and at the same time he laid hard at the English man with his broadsword, and had cut him in two or three places, at which the English man enraged, rather than discouraged, cried out to him, you dog says he, come out from behind the door and fight like a man, meaning from behind his great target; but the Scots man though as brave as the other, knew better things than that, and laying hard at him had cut him down, and was just going to kill him, when some of the regiment that saw him distressed, came up to him and rescued him, and took the Highlander prisoner.
It is hard to distinguish too among those Highland men, who are the best soldiers. Foreigners give it to the northern men as the more hardy and the larger bodies; but I will not undertake to decide this controversy, either of them make very good soldiers, and all the world are fond of them; nor are they equalled in any part of the world that I have met with, if they are regimented by themselves, unmixed with other nations.
I am now to return to our progress. Leaving the country of Brechin, and the low lands of Strathearn, we went away west; but were presently interrupted by a vast inland sea, rather than a lake called Loch Lomond. It is indeed a sea, and looked like it from the hills from whence we first descried it; and its being a tempestuous day, I assure you it appeared all in a breach, rough and raging, like the sea in a storm. There are several islands in it, which from the hills we could plainly perceive were islands, but that they are a-drift, and float about the lake, that I take as I find it, for a story, namely, a story called a F—– as I do also that of the water of this loch, turning wood into stone.
This lake or loch is, without comparison, the greatest in Scotland, no other can be called half so big; for it is more than twenty miles long, and generally eight miles in breadth, though at the north end of it, ’tis not so broad by far. It receives many rivers into it, but empties itself into the Firth of Clyde, at one mouth; near the entrance of it into Clyde, stands the famous Dunbarton Castle, the most ancient, as well as the most important castle in Scotland; and the gate, as ’tis called, of the Highlands. It is now not much regarded, the whole country being, as it were, buried in peace, yet there is a garrison maintained in it; and the pass would be still of great import, were there any occasion of arms in time to come; ’tis exceeding strong by situation, being secured by the river on one side, the Firth of Clyde on the other, by an unpassable morass on the third side, and the fourth is a precipice.
Passing from Dunbarton castle, we enter the territory of Argyle. The west side of this country lies extended along the Irish Sea for a very great length, at least eighty miles (viz.) from the Mull of Cantyre to Dunstaffnage, and the Isle of Stackar and Listnoc, in the water of Loquhaber. On all this shore there is no town eminent for trade, no port or harbour, at least none made use of for shipping; nor are there any ships to require them, except fishing-barks and boats, which are in the season employed for catching herrings, of which the shoals that are found upon this coast in the season are incredible, especially in the Clyde, in Loch-Finn, and about the Isle of Arran, which lies in the mouth of Clyde.
From the Mull of Cantyre they see Ireland very plain, it being not above fifteen or sixteen miles from the point of land, which they call the Mull to the Fair Foreland, on the coast of Colrain, on the north of Ireland. In the mouth of this sea of Clyde lies a rock, somewhat like the Bass in the Firth of Forth, or of Edinburgh, not for shape, but for this particular, that here, as at the Bass, the Soland geese are pleased to come in the season of the fishery, and to breed and inhabit as they do at the Bass, and to go away and come again just at the same seasons, as at the Bass; this island is called the Ailze. Here are also the islands of Arran and of Bute; the first giving title of earl to the family of Hamilton, and the other the title of Duke of Rothsay to the eldest son of the crown of Scotland, who is called Duke of Rothsay, from the castle of Rothsay in this island; nor is there any thing else considerable to be said of either of the islands; for as for their present condition, which is what is my particular business in this book, they have nothing considerable in or about them, except it be a tumultuous and dangerous sea for sailors, espeially when a south-west wind blows hard, which brings the ea rolling in upon them in a frightful manner.
Off of the western shore of Argyle and Lorn there are abundance of islands, which all belong to the family of Argyle, or at least to its jurisdiction; as Isla, Jura, Tyrry, Mull, Lysmore, Coll, and several others of less note.
