

These noble Lovers having related
their different Adventures
to Publius, he engag'd them to
remain at his House, 'till the Return
of those Messengers he had sent to
Rome, to advertise the noble Fabius and
Lucullus touching the Imprisonment of
their Children, Fabius and Jemella, in Sardinia. 
He also sent Word to my Lord Marcellus
of his Son's being arriv'd at his House,
and to others of his Friends and Relations,
who were concern'd with these young Lovers,
or their Proceedings. 
In the mean Time, Cordialia being recover'd,
Scipiana accommodated her with all
Things necessary for a young Lady; and
so she augmented the Number of this happy
Company, her Beauty, and other Endowments,
giving her a Place in every
Body's Esteem; but especially that of Ismenus, 
who soon found the Difference between
her vertuous Charms, and the loose
Behaviour of his African Emilia. Where
Vertue is united to Beauty, the Heart of
the Lover is doubly ty'd, not only by Passion,
but Reason; the latter commonly
proving the more strong and lasting Bond; 
for if Vertue does not keep, as well as
Beauty take, the captivated Heart soon gets
its Liberty, as appears by Ismenus and Emilia:
But Cordiala's vertuous Mein and Actions
fasten'd his young Heart in the strong
Bonds of an unalterable Affection, which
he discover'd to her on all Occasions possible. 
Now it happen'd, that Libidinia, the
fair Widow, Clelia's Friend, was taken very
dangerously sick; wherefore she sent to
speak with Clelia. Marcellus being desirous
to justify himself in her Presence, who
was his Accuser, desir'd Leave to accompany
Clelia for that Purpose. At their Arrival
they found the Lady extreamly ill,
which dispos'd her to Repentance, and
owning her Crime; declaring, that it was
she that had made the Discord between
Clelia and Marcellus; for (said she) it was
I that stole the little Picture, and gave it
your Ladyship, with those cunning Insinuations,
as if he had return'd it in Contempt; 
and, on the other Side, impos'd upon
him, making him believe you unfaithful. 
This I did not out of Malice to either
of you, but too great Fondness of
Marcellus. You may believe I was push'd
on by a violent Passion, otherwise I would
not have engag'd myself in an Enterprize
so ill founded, and so easily overthrown; 
but I trusted in the Opposition of your Parents
on both Sides, the Disguise of Marcellus,
which hinder'd him from appearing
openly before you for his Justification, and
the Interest Jemella and her Friends had in
him, &c. Amongst all these troubled Waters
I hoped to fish out something to my
Advantage, if I could but form a little
Animosity between you; which I wickedly
accomplish'd, but am now sincerely
sorry, begging Pardon both of you and
Heaven. 
Marcellus and Clelia thank'd her for this
free Acknowledgment, which verify'd
what Marcellus had asserted. They begg'd
her to quiet her Mind, in Hopes the Gods
would pardon her as freely as they did,
and to compose herself to Rest, thereby to
facilitate her Recovery, that they might
have her Company at my Lord Publius Scipio's,
before they departed thence; so took
their Leave, recommending her to the Protection
of Heaven. 
They were but just return'd, when there
came Fabius, Jemella, Clodius, and Milena,
to the great Surprize and Astonishment of 
all the Company; in particular, to see Clodius
in such good Intelligence with the
others, insomuch, that Scipiana knew not
in what Manner to receive him, 'till Fabius
took her out of her Difficulty, by asking
Pardon for Clodius, desiring her to receive
him as a Friend, promising to inform
her the rest afterwards. The first Complements
and Civilities being over, Scipiana
presented Cordiala to Fabius, bidding him
behold his Man Almon become a fair Lady,
which was very surprizing to Fabius,
Clodius, and the rest; but, in particular, Clodius
was agitated in Mind, there to meet
the Person once design'd for his Wife; to
see her who had run through so many Difficulties
and Hazards, purely to avoid his
Love. He look'd on her with Veneration,
saying, she deserv'd to crown the Head
of some great Conqueror, who, like the
chase Daphne, chose to suffer any Metamorphosis,
rather than be united to so loose
a Liver as he had been; but Heaven, I
hope, will pardon, (as these noble Persons
Fabius and Jemella have done) and thou,
Cordiala, also receive me into Favour; for
thy Sake I can become (what I thought
impossible to my Nature) a constant Lover; 
and then I am sure I shall be as great a
Metamorphosis in Manners, as thou art in
Person; and since it was my loose Way of
living that caus'd your Scom, let that vertuous 
Life I now pretend to live, procure
your Kindness. Your loose Life (reply'd
Cordiala) was but one Obstacle; my low
Fortune was another, and that Cause not
being remov'd, the Effect must remain. 
This Discourse was put to a Period by the
coming in of Publius, to whom Clodius address'd
with profound Respect, begging him
to forgive what was past touching his
Daughter and Nephew, and to obtain the
same for him of the Senate; promising
him never to do anything unworthy of his
Pardon or Protection. To which Publius
reply'd, that he had receiv'd Letters from
Rome, which inform'd him, that the Lords
Fabius and Lucullus would be here shortly,
to whom you are to address yourself, as
Persons equally injur'd. In the mean Time,
I excuse and desire you to remain here
with this good Company. 
The approaching Night oblig'd these
happy Friends to a Cessation of their grateful
Entertainments, and to retire to their respective
Apartments. The Ladies attended
Jemella to her's, where they begg'd the
Favour of her to recite the Manner of her
Escape, and other Occurrences during her
Confinement in Sardinia. 

The Continuation of the History of Jemella.
Madam, said Jemella, (addressing her
Words to Scipiana) you may remember
how Clodius dispos'd us in different Cabbins,
I suppose, that he might make his
Court to us alternatively. He was in one
of his amorous Follies, when the Fire took
the Ship; which proving impossible to be
extinguish'd, made us betake ourselves to
the last miserable Means of Escape, and
so committed ourselves to the Sea, where
I floated a-while, but was soon taken by a
Sea-Monster, call'd a Syren, being a Fish
perfectly in Shape of a Man. This Monster
carry'd me into the Hollow of a Rock,
and there laid me on a Crag to drein and
come to myself; which I soon did, to behold
the greatest Horror that ever could
be presented to human View. I found my
self in the Custody of Monsters, in the
Hollow of a Rock, where was no Footing
but Water, except such Crags or Bosses
on which I was laid, and those all besmear'd 
with Blood, and strew'd with human
Bones, and by me lay a Body half
devour'd by this Monster, the other Part
stunk so as almost poison'd me. Here being
alone in this Station of Horror, I had
Time to reflect how justly the Gods punish'd
me for my Folly and Disobedience; 
I say, Disobedience in Will at least, tho'
not in Fact, in having so despis'd and abhorr'd
that Country Solitude with my
Grandmother, which was indeed a noble
magnificent Place, but distant from Rome,
the Original of Pride, Vanity, and Luxury; 
which engage the Hearts of too many
of our Country Ladies, who enjoy all
Things excellent in Nature, but undervalue
all, because not in a Place their wild
Fancies would chuse; of which I found my
self sufficiently sensible here, and severely
chastis'd. My Punishment was a Glass
wherein I saw my Crimes; and withal, the
Wisdom and Justice of the Gods, in having
thus adapted one to the other. I, who had
so ungratefully murmur'd at the happy Lot
the Gods had drawn for me in that vertuous
and honourable Station with my Grandmother,
was now reduc'd to the Distress ás
I told you, every Moment expecting the
Return of the Monster to devour me. Sometimes
I thought to throw myself into the
Sea, to disappoint his greedy Jaws; but
then I remember'd that was Self-Murder, 
which would intail upon me a miserable
Eternity; wherefore, I forc'd my Inclinations
to remain where he had laid me, in
Expectation of his Return to devour me. 
I lay as on an Altar, and there offer'd my
self to the Gods, begging them to receive
my immortal Part, when this Frame should
perish: But withal reflecting how much
more agreeable this Resignation would
have been to them, had it been before Necessity
compell'd me; for without Doubt,
the Offerings we make to Heaven out of a
Motive of Love, are much more acceptable
than those of Fear. As I lay in these
Thoughts, there came swimming into the
Rock a She-Monster, as I thought, for I
took it to be a Syren; but finding her
speak articulately and rationally in the
Roman Language, I understood this Creature
was really a Woman. She told me
her Husband had sent her to comfort and
assist me. I ask'd her who was her Husband? 
She told me, that it was her Husband that
had found me, and brought me thither; 
that he was an old He-Syren, and was worship'd
for a God by all the watery Kind; 
and that he had taken a great Liking to
me, and would not hurt me, if I would
submit to him. At which Words I was
more amaz'd than ever, and wish'd rather
to be a Prey to his Hunger than his Love. 
The Woman rais'd me from the Place 
whereon I lay, and help'd me to scramble
up some Craggs of the Rock, and pass'd
with me through a Cleft, and so got into
a pretty Kind of a Room, where was a
little Fire of Shells and Fish Bones, as
also some human Bones, Ribs, Sculls, and
the like, the Ensigns of Horror and Amazement. 
There was a little Bed, or Couch,
on which she laid me, and gave me some
good Liquor out of a Bottle; all which reviv'd
me, and put me in a little Condition
to examine her how she came and how
long she had liv'd there. She told me she
was the Daughter of a wealthy Citizen of
Rome, who had design'd to marry her to
a rich neighbouring Citizen; but she, like
many of her Age and Rank, thinking her
Wealth deserv'd something above her Quality,
kept a secret Intrigue with one of
the Gallants of the Town, a Man of Wit
and Quality: So, flattering herself with the
Hopes of being one Day his Lady, suffer'd
herself to be debauch'd by him; but was
so far from finding what her Folly expected,
that she became the Object of his Scorn
and Aversion; which is no more than common
in those Cases. Her Father finding
out what had happen'd, with the utmost
Anger turn'd her out of Doors, to find that
Misery her Crimes had sought. In this distress'd
Condition she wander'd, resolving,
if possible, to get into some far Country, 
there to hide her Shame; in order to which,
she made Acquaintance with some Sea-men,
who took her on Board, where she was diliver'd
of the Fruit of her Lewdness; and
not many Days after the Ship was cast
away, and she was taken up by the foremention'd
Sea-Monster, and liv'd with him
ever since as his Wife. In this I could not
but again admire the exact Justice of Heaven,
in thus punishing her Lewdness and
Disobedience to her Parents. She that refus'd
the honest Espousals provided by her
Father, became Wife to a Monster; she
that disgrac'd herself and her Friends by
unlawful Lust, was a Prostitute to a Fish:
Nor did I omit to make Reflections on my
self, in the Case of Marcellus. I ask'd her
how she did at first accommodate herself
to that strange Life? She said, it was with
much Difficulty; but Custom made it become
natural, insomuch, that now she believes
she could not bear dwelling on Land. 
The Syrenus, she said, had always been
very kind to her, and she very assistant to
him, in helping him to catch his Prey; for
she could swim and dive as well as he; but
principally she was beneficial to him in
bringing the half-drown'd Prey to Life in
this little Room; for he could not endure
so far from the Water, especially in this
Place where there was Fire, and he did not
love to eat the Bodies that were drown'd; 
and that was the Reason she had taken so
much Pains to bring me to Life; nevertheless,
(said she) be not afraid, be rul'd
by me, and you shall be happy; for I have
a Son (continu'd she) shall be your Husband,
and you shall live with me in this
Rock, which is the chief in all this Sea. 
In a little Time you will learn to swim
and dive, see all the Riches at the Bottom
of the Sea, the Groves of Samphire, and
pleasant Grotto's of Coral; rejoycé in the
Voices of the Syrens, and dance to the Musick
of the Tritons; every one striving to
do you Service, and be worship'd as a Goddess
by all the watery Kind; and what can
Ambition require more than to be Deify'd? 
All this Extravagance so distracted, frighted,
and amaz'd me, that I scarce knew what
to say: But as the Honour of the Gods
ought to concern one most, so I began to
reprimand her first on that Score, as affronting
and blaspheming their Divinities,
in setting up poor Mortals in their Place,
or making them Competitors. As I was
about to proceed, to make her know the
Affront she put upon human Kind in general,
and to me in particular, we heard a
Noise below, which she understood; for
the Monster she call'd Husband, had brought
in more Prey, so call'd to her to take it up,
in order to bring it to Life, if possible. 
It was a Man, in all Appearance dead; 
however, she laid him before the Fire, and
chaf'd him well with the Liquors she had
by her, and forc'd some down his Throat. 
In the mean Time, I knew not what I had
best to do, whether to assist her or not; for
I knew that the bringing him to Life, was
but to make him the more pleasing Prey
to the Monster; therefore thought him
happier to remain dead, as he appear'd. 
But then again, I thought the Gods expected
I should serve the present Necessity,
and leave the Event to their Providence; 
therefore, I arose from the Couch on which
I was laid, and join'd my Endeavours with
hers to bring him to Life. When I had
cleans'd his Face from the Froth and Filth
with which it was smear'd, I found this
Object of Misery was Clodius. I continu'd
my Endeavours to bring him to Life, neither
out of Malice nor Kindness, but out
of Duty to the Gods, and the natural Tie
of Humanity. At last we began to find
a Kind of reviving Warmth to overspread
him, and his Pulses began to move. We
continu'd our Endeavours 'till I thought
I saw him open his Eyes, then I call'd
him by his Name, to try if he had yet
any Sense. At my naming Clodius, the
Woman started and trembled, so that I
fear'd she would have fainted quite away,
I left Clodius, to address my Assistance to
her, who in a little Time recover'd, and 
said, the Gods had been extreamly just, to
bring him to Punishment, who had been
the Cause of her Ruin, and the Disgrace
of her Family. But now (said she) I shall
see that Flesh, whose Lust knew no Bounds,
devour'd with the Teath of a Sea-Monster; 
and that Tongue, whose Falshood betray'd
my Innocence, torn from its Root, and on
these Coals made an Offering to Pluto; and
many Things more she said to this Purpose. 
But Clodius coming to himself, told
her that she was to accuse herself of her
Ruin, forasmuch as she was not ignorant
of the World: She knew the Town, and
the Humour of the Times, and knew,
that young Men would say and swear any
Thing to gain their Ends on Girls, and
then abandon them to Ruin and Despair; 
for, said he, that young Girl that will carry
on secret Intrigues of Love, without the
Knowledge or Consent of her Parents, deserves
to be treated by her Gallant as you
have been by me; for how could you suppose
I would make you a Lady, or a Wife,
who could not keep yourself a vertuous
Maid, nor a dutiful Daughter? No, no,
(continu'd he) those who bridle not their
fond Desires with the Curb of Reason, or
filial Duty, are only fit to be Wives to
Monsters, or Mistresses to the last of Mankind; 
and such as will run to Balls Theatres,
and Treats, with young Men of the 
Town, cannot expect the Vows we make
are made to be kept, but to become the
broken Meat for lost Vertue to feed upon,
and be the miserable Support of a ruin'd
Reputation: Of all which you could not
be ignorant, at least my Character was
sufficiently known, to have inform'd you; 
therefore, it is yourself you are to reproach
for all your Misfortunes. 
As they were in this Discourse, the Monster
below made a Noise, which she understood,
and gave him down a great Fish
or two, the Blood being first squeez'd out,
as also a Bottle of good Liquor. She told
us he had ask'd her if either of us were so
well recover'd, as to be fit to be his Prey; 
but she had told him no, out of Kindness
to me, (as she worded it) and Malice to
Clodius; adding, that she design'd me for
her Son, who was in all Respects a Human
Creature, excepting that he could live
under Water. She ran on, saying many
Things in Praise of this her young Monster; 
which shews how blind we are towards
the Defects or Deformities of what
belongs to ourselves; for she represented
this young Monster as a Hero of the Ocean,
a principal Minister of State to Neptune,
and a young God of all the watry
Kind. As I was about to reprimand her
for her Extravagance, we heard a Noise
below, which was the worthy Monster her 
Son, who had brought with him a Woman,
so call'd, to his Mother to take her
up through the Cleft. As soon as we saw
her, we knew her to be Milena, Scipiana's
faithful Waiting-Gentlewoman. The poor
Girl was wet, fatigu'd, and faint, otherwise
alive and well; for the young Monster
had found her when she first fell into
the Water, and carry'd her to the Side of
a Rock, where he had entertain'd her with
the Sight of many Sea-Rarities, and the
Voices of Syrens, Creatures of his own
Kindred; and after perceiving her faint
and discompos'd, brought her here to his
Mother, to be reviv'd, he himself coming
along with her; so I had a Sight of my
pretended Lover, and was presented to him
by his Mother, as the Person she had
found him for his Wife: But the Monster
by Luck was so good-natur'd to refuse me,
telling his Mother, (in a strange squeaking
Tone) that he was desirous to have the
Woman he had found himself, having already
offer'd her his Love; and if that other
Woman wanted a Mate, she might
take that Man which was there with her,
he being resolv'd to keep to this Woman
he had found: Which Piece of Kindness
and Constancy serv'd only to augment
Milena's Fright and Consternation; and indeed
we had no Reason to be otherwise
in that miserable State to which we were 
reduc'd. However, Clodius was so far Master
of his Temper, as to make Use of the
Monster's Kindness, and began to flatter
him in it, and told him how extreamly
this Constancy in Love was esteem'd on
Land, and promis'd him if he would go
with them on Shore, he should find a much
happier Being than here at Sea, and there
he should have this Woman to himself,
and live together in a stately House, and
have many Servants to wait on them, and
there enjoy all that Sea and Land could
afford; which he easily believ'd, because
his Mother had told him such admirable
Stories of the Land, that he seem'd willing
to go with us, provided his Mother
would go; for he said he would not leave
her behind, she being one of the earthly
World, he would not abandon her alone
to the watry Kind; with other Things to
this Purpose, which he spake with such an
Air of Love and Tenderness, that we began
to be charm'd with the Creature, and
used what Arguments we could to perswade
him to go with us. In the mean Time,
Clodius perswaded the Woman, telling her
that she and her Son should live with him
in his Castle in Sardinia, and that he would
establish her Son in one of his Lordships
and so make her and him happy after all
the Affliction his Crimes had procur'd her. 
The wretched Creature was not hard to be 
persuaded, and accordingly persuaded her
Son; so by a general Consent we were all
to leave the Rock that Night; we only
stay'd till the Moon rose, which was not
long, it being a little past the Full. At
the Rise of the Moon the Syrens all began
to sing, and made the finest Harmony
possible; there were great Numbers dwelt
about that Rock, and other Rocks in that
Sea: They sung in perfect Concord, tho'
many and divers Sort of Voices, from the
highest Treble to the lowest Base, yet so
united, that one could scarce distinguish
whether it was not all one Voice: Then
they sung in Parts, and sometimes only a
particular Voice; but which Way soever
it was, it was most charming, and I perceiv'd
they sung in Honour of the rising
Moon, as being the chief Goddess of the
Ocean. Their Singing being over, they
threw up a great deal of Water, as an Offering
to the Moon, which they spouted
up in most curious Works, Curls, and
Branches to Admiration. This being done,
they retir'd to their Rest on the Sides of
the Rocks. Then it was that we were to
enterprize our Escape, which was to be
done with great Silence and soft Motions,
for fear of waking the old Syren who lay
snoaring below, and no Way to pass but
down by the same Cleft we ascended,
close by his rocky Bed. However, by 
the Help of the Woman and her Son, we
got safe down into the Water. At the Entrance
of the watery Cave lay a Plank of a
broken Ship; on this they put Clodius; and
the Woman taking me, and her Son Milena,
we all made our Escape to Shore in Sardinia. 
Here we stay'd a while to rest and
refresh our selves after our dangerous Fatigues; 
but our Companions grew soon indispos'd,
being out of their Element; for
the Woman had liv'd so long in the Water,
that it was become so natural to her, that
she could not bear the Air at Land, but
grew so ill, that we almost despair'd of her
Recovery, and her Son worse; so, upon
their earnest Desires, we help'd them both
into the Water again, being sorry that we
had no other Way to testify our Gratitude
for all their Kindness. 
Having a little recover'd our Fatigue,
Clodius hasted to convey us to his Castle,
which stood in the Midst of Sardinia, encompass'd
with many Lordships of his own:
A Place truly magnificent, having been in
former Times the Palace Royal of the
Kings of Sardinia. Here we had all Things
necessary for my Sex and Quality; but
the Thoughts of my being a Prisoner in the
Hands of the lewd Clodius, and the Loss of
my dear Friend Scipiana, together with
other sorrowful Reflexions, gave me a
perpetual Chagrin; which, together with 
the foul Air of Sardinia, depriv'd me of my
Health, that I was incapable of returning
into my own Country, if Clodius would have
permitted. Nevertheless I must do him
the Justice to own, that he not only assur'd
me in Words, of all Service, but also
perform'd in Fact; for there was nothing
wanting, that might conduce to the Recovery
of my Health; even he ceas'd to persecute
me with his Love, leaving me in
Repose with Milena and those other Women
he had given me for Attendance; for,
to say the Truth, Clodius is not ill-natur'd,
only his extravagant Conduct in some
Things has so far lost his Reputation, as
may be very hardly retriev'd. 
After many Weeks Sickness, I began at
last to recover. I walk'd into the Park
which join'd to the House, where there are
many Groves, Grotto's, and Fountains,
fine Walks of Trees, marble Statues, and
rare carv'd Work. At my first going out,
I went to a Fountain of Diana, a Place I
had before frequented, to implore the Protection
of this Deity. Approaching the
Place, (which is inviron'd and cover'd over
with Trees) I saw lying, as it were, at the
Feet of the Goddess, a gallant Person asleep,
who at the Noise of our Entry awak'd,
and seeming all surpriz'd, cast himself
at my Feet, saying, If you be the
Guardian Goddess of this Place, forgive my 
intruding into your Retirement, accept
of my Devotions, and favour me with
your divine Protection and Assistance. I
was surpriz'd at these his Expressions, and
stood in a little Pause what to answer. In
the mean Time, Milena looking well upon
him, knew him to be Fabius, and he as
soon knew her to be Milena, and ask'd her
for her Lady Scipiana, in Search of whom
he had left Italy, and was come into Sardinia,
in Hopes to hear News of her, or at
least to be reveng'd on Clodius for his having
assassinated him in the Streets of Rome. 
Whereupon Milena gave him a brief Account
how we had been carry'd away by
Clodius; and how we, together with Scipiana,
were forc'd on the Waves, by Means
of Fire taking the Ship: And as she
was about to proceed to the Means and
Manner of our getting thither, Clodius came,
I suppose thinking to congratulate my going
abroad. At the Sight of him, Fabius
was so transported, that he drew, and ran
violently upon him, saying, he would now
deliver the World of a Monster; so gave
him a very desperate Wound, before Clodius
could put himself in any Posture of
Defence: Which was a Rashness Fabius
would not have been guilty of, had he had
a generous vertuous Opposite; but the unworthy
Actions of Clodius had depriv'd him
of the Right of a fair Combat. This Accident 
forc'd a Passage to our Cries, and
immediately a Number of Clodius's Servants
came, and took their Master to his Bed,
and Fabius to Prison; his Man also, who
was on the other Side the Park-Wall, with
the Horses he brought to the Castle, to
serve his Master. Clodius's Wound confin'd
him long to his Bed, and was so bad, that
the Surgeons despair'd of his Recovery. 
Wherefore he sent for me, and begg'd my
Pardon for all that had pass'd; charg'd the
Master of his Houshold, that if he dy'd,
to see me convey'd safe to my Father, and
to give Fabius his Liberty, saying, that he
had well deserv'd what he had receiv'd
from him, even Death; and many other
Words, testifying Kindness to us, and sincere
Repentance for all his Crimes and
Follies. 
In the mean Time, Fabius, by Means of
his Imprisonment, and the ill Air of Sardinia,
fell sick; for which Clodius seem'd
very sorry, and engag'd me to go to him,
and assure him of all Kindness from Clodius,
and to conjure him, on his Behalf,
to neglect nothing that might conduce to
his Recovery. When I was with him, he
told me this Honour I did him, was capable
not only to cure, but even raise him
from the Dead; for I believe, continu'd he,
the chief Cause of my Sickness to proceed 
from the Want of your Presence. These
Words a little displeas'd me, as supposing
them unsuitable to our unhappy Circumstances; 
so that I was under a little Pause,
not knowing readily what to reply. Therefor
he added, 'Tis true, Madam, I have
not had one Moment's Repose since I first
saw you at the Fountain. Pardon, continu'd
he, this my abrupt Declaration,
which I should not have made, if Sickness
did not partly force me; for it is
such as I have Reason to think may take
me out of the World; and I shall die
much more satisfy'd, since you are informed
I die your most faithful and passionate
Lover. To which I reply'd, that I had
very hard Fortune to be the Object of
Courtship to all false and inconstant Pretenders. 
If (said I) there be no Truth in
your Sex, there ought to be Honour in
your Quality, or at least Respect to mine. 
Adieu, Sir, your Discourse is very displeasing. 
Being return'd to my own Apartment,
I reflected with Anger on what had pass'd,
examining my own Conduct and Behaviour,
but could find nothing that might
thus expose me to Courtship, and make
me the Mistress to so may false Pertenders. 
Marcellus, Clodius, and now Fabius,
who seem'd to me the most unpardonable, 
thus to abuse the Charms of the bright
Scipiana, and affront her in thus offering a
false Amour to me her Friend; and this
from Fabius, the worthy, noble, vertuous
Fabius, that he should be false to his Love,
false to the most vertuous of her Sex, and
his Kinswoman; and in so doing transgress
his Duty to his noble Parents, who authoriz'd
this Affection by their unanimous
Consent and Approbation. 
In these Kind of Thoughts I pass'd the
Night. Next Morning Almon his Man came
to speak with Milena, telling her how cruelly
his Master resented my severe Deportment; 
and therefore begg'd of her to
gain me, if possible, to come once more to
him, to give him Opportunity to beg my
Pardon. This she represented to me in a
Manner so touching, that I could not defend
my self from her Importunities. When
I enter'd his Chamber, I know not whether
by Means of his Weakness, or Surprize
of my Presence, but he fainted quite
away. After a while, being come to himself,
he said the Gods would not permit
him to leave this World, without asking
Pardon, though (continu'd he) I have little
Hopes of obtaining it, not being able
to repent; for it is less in my Power to
cease from loving you, than Heaven or my
own Happiness; therefore Pardon must proceed 
from your own Goodness, Be not cruel,
Madam, to your dying Lover; dying
not in Fancy, but in real Fact; pity the weak
State to which I am reduc'd by Sickness and
hard Fortune, and let that Pity excite
you to pardon the rash Declaration I made
of my Love, and abandon me not to your
Scorn and Anger. I know not what Answer
to make (reply'd I) in these your
weak Circumstances, only beg you to remember,
that Marcellus on my Part, and
Scipiana on yours, ought to be the chief
Object of our Affections, and Bound of all
our amorous Inclinations. The Gods, and
Scipiana herself, (were she here, reply'd
he) could witness, that our Love was rather
the Effect of Duty to our Parents, than
any essential Being it had in our Souls; 
nor was I ever sensible of its divine Authority,
'till your Eyes brought me in Subjection:
Not but that I have a true Veneration
for my Cousin Scipiana's Perfections,
and throughly convinc'd of the Excellence
of filial Duty; nevertheless, our Passions
not being in our Power, we cannot always
comply with our Parents Election. This
is an unseasonable Discourse, reply'd I, at
present; therefore beg you to defer it, at
least, 'till the Recovery of your Health
and our Liberty, and then we shall see
which Way Providence and our wise Parents 
will dispose Things. In the mean
Time, I beg you to quiet your Mind by a
true Resignation to the Will of the Gods; 
and, at present, give me Leave to retire,
for your weak State requires Repose. These
Words he receiv'd with some Satisfaction,
and endeavour'd to apply them to the Recovery
of his Health, in the mean Time
sending Almon frequently to entertain Milena
on the Subject of his Affection. 
When Clodius was a little recover'd of
his Wound, he came to visit Fabius, and
told him, that since Scipiana, the Object of
their Enmity was absent, he desir'd they
might be perfect Friends, forgiving each
other what was past, and living in good
Intelligence for the future; and as I shall
be ready to render you all Service, (continu'd
Clodius) so I hope to receive reciprocal
Obligations from you, in particular, in
what I am about to propose. 
Be pleas'd to know, that in Consideration
of you and Justice, I have overcome my
Passion for Scipiana, as belonging to you by
Right of her Father's Donation; that if
the Gods have spar'd her, I shall never
more dispute her with you, but shall for ever
direct all my Vows to the adorable Jemella,
and desire you to perswade her on my Behalf; 
for the Reputation you have acquir'd
of Virtue and Wisdom, may intitle you to 
be her Counsellor; and whatsoever you
shall assert to her of the Sincerity of my
Affection, or the Reformation of my Life,
I shall make good in Fact, for I profess I
begin to be weary of my loose dabauch'd
Way of living. I should think my self
happy (reply'd Fabius) to serve and join
with you in a mutual Friendship; but you
are mistaken in thinking the Object of our
Dispute absent in the Person of Scipiana; 
for I assure you, she has no other Share in
my Heart than that of a Friend or Relation; 
but Jemella is the only Beauty I do
or ever shall adore. Is it possible (reply'd
Clodius) that one of your Character, the
wise and virtuous Fabius, should be inconstant
in his Love; I know Fortune has
been liberal of her Favours of that Kind
towards me, but I little thought of finding
a Companion in you; nevertheless I love
you for it; but withal love my self so
well, as to secure you from doing me any
Injury. Wherefore he kept Fabius a closer
Prisoner than before, and prohibited all
Correspondence between Almon and Milena; 
in the mean Time perscuted me with his
Courtship, which was to me extremely displeasing. 
Fabius, no doubt, found himself
unhappy enough under this his strict Restraint; 
nor could we hope for an End of
this our Misfortune, it being impossible for 
us to advertise our Friends, or the Senate,
of this our Confinement. 
Fabius walking one Day in his Chamber,
reflecting on his Misfortune, he perceiv'd
the Floor in one Part to give a more hollow
Sound than the other; wherefore to
satisfy his Curiosity, Almon and he found
Means to get up those Planks, where they
found Steps, by which they descended a
great Depth into an arch'd Vault, which
led them far under Ground. As they pass'd
on, they came to a little Rivulet which
ran cross the Vault, whose Murmur made
a kind of strange and dreadful Noise as it
pass'd that hollow Cavity. At first, they
thought this Brook would have put a Period
to their Passage; but, upon Search, they
found it fordable, and the Vault to extend
it self a great Way beyond, 'till at last they
came to Steps, which mounted a vast
Height, but when they were got to the
Top, they were surpriz'd to find over their
Heads a flat Board; but after a little Obfervation,
they found the Board to give
Way, and lifted up in Manner of a Trap-Door. 
They entering, found themselves
in the midst of a vast Image of Hercules,
which is plac'd directly over the Altar in
his Temple. In the Back-Part of this monstrous
Figure was a Passage into the Priest's
Lodging, where they found him in his Bed 
fast asleep, it being Night when they undertook
this Enterprize. By this Adventure
they guess'd at the Cheat of those
Priests, who amus'd the People with their
own Frauds, making them pass for divine
Oracles: For this Castle of Clodius was formerly
the Palace Royal of the Kings of
Sardinia, and the Vault, no doubt, had been
a secret Passage for the Priest's to the King's
Closet, there to know of him what they
should make the Oracle deliver to the
People: But these Abuses being remov'd
by the Wisdom of our Roman Government,
the said Passage was forgot, at least
never known to Clodius. But to return
to Fabius and Almon. They, without Noise,
or waking the Priest, return'd quietly to
their Lodging, and there consider'd what
Use they might make of this Discovery. 
They resolv'd upon making an Escape; 
but seeing no Possibility of having me
with 'em, Fabius resolv'd to stay himself, and
only send Almon to try his Wits and Fortune
to get through the Priest's Lodgings,
which they put in Execution the first Opportunity:
Almon being to feign himself
Mercury, and sent from the Gods with
their Benediction to the Priest, with a little
Purse of Gold, as a Recompence of his
Devotion, or rather to pay his Passage
through his House; for the Golden Key 
can open all Locks, and break thro' all
Barriers. 
Three or four Days pass'd without any
Noise or Suspicion of what had happen'd. 
Then Clodius having been a Hunting, and
a little fatigu'd, return'd by the House of
the said Priest, where he went in a little
to refresh himself. The Priest being
full of Joy and Extasy, could not contain
from revealing to Clodius this extraordinary
Favour of the Gods: But Clodius having
more Wit than Devotion, interrogated
the Priest much about it; and by the
Description he gave, fancy'd it must needs
be Almon, escap'd by some Stratagem of
Fabius; and being impatient to know the
Truth, as soon as he got Home, went directly
to the Apartment of Fabius, where
missing Almon, he was convinc'd of what
before he suspected; but politickly dissembling
the same, said to Fabius, Notwithstanding
that you are my Rival, and in
my Possession, having Power to retain you
Prisoner, or put you to Death, nevertheless
I am willing to give you Liberty, not
doubting but that you will in Requital resign
to me Jemella. Fabius thank'd him for
the offer'd Kindness of his Liberty; but
withal assur'd him, that the principal Use
he would make of it, should be to the Service
of Jemella. Therefore (continu'd he) 
if you will render this Action truly generous,
give Jemella her Liberty also, and
then let us try whose Vows and Services
will be most acceptable. At that Rate,
reply'd Clodius, I shall be sure to be the
Loser. For that Reputation of Virtue
which the World has bestow'd on you,
will as surely give you that Advantage
against me, as Flattering the People gives
a Man the consular Dignity against a Person
of greater Merit. But 'tis no Matter
(continu'd he) if it be so, she is not the
first Mistress I have lost by an hundred,
and I hope will not be the last by a thousand; 
then let us go together to her, and
see if she will be content to go with us
into Italy. Thus they came to me, Clodius
making the agreeable Proposal, desiring
me to pardon what was pass'd, and be his
Advocate to my Father and the Senate. 
This generous good Offer I thought ought
not to be slighted, he being able to defend
himself against all the Power of Rome,
(at least a considerable Time) the whole
Country of Sardinia being at his Devotion,
or indeed at the Devotion of any one that
would deliver them from their Roman
Conquerors. So, not knowing what might
happen, or what Violence he might be
tempted to use upon us, when besieg'd,
distress'd, and hopeless of Pardon; wherefore 
I comply'd with this Profer, and in
Consideration of the handsome Treatment
I had receiv'd whilst I was there, promised
him any Act of Friendship in my
Power. Thus we came together, without
any considerable Adventure, 'till we arriv'd
at this Port, and became happy in
finding all this good Company. 
Jemella having finish'd her Discourse,
the Ladies return'd her Thanks, and all
address'd themselves to Night's Repose. 