

I hung over the unhappy wretch, whose emaciated form
and rueful features sufficiently bespoke that savage hands





had only completed that destruction which his miseries had
begun. He was mangled by the tomahawk in a shocking
manner, and there was little hope that human skill could
save his life.
I was sensible of nothing but compassion. I acted without
design, when seating myself on the floor I raised his
head and placed it on my knees. This movement awakened
his attention, and opening his eyes he fixed them on my
countenance. They testified neither insensibility, nor horror,
nor distraction. A faint emotion of surprise gave way to
an appearance of tranquillity. Having perceived these tokens
of a state less hopeless than I at first imagined, I spoke to
him; My friend! How do you feel? Can any thing be
done for you?
He answered me, in a tone more firm and with more
coherence of ideas than previous appearances had taught me
to expect. No, said he, thy kindness good youth, can avail
me nothing. The end of my existence here is at hand.
May my guilt be expiated by the miseries that I have suffered,
and my good deeds only attend me to the presence of
my divine judge.
I am waiting, not with trembling or dismay, for this close
of my sorrows. I breathed but one prayer, and that prayer
has been answered. I asked for an interview with thee,
young man, but feeling as I now feel, this interview, so much
desired, was beyond my hope. Now thou art come, in due
season, to hear the last words that I shall need to utter.
I wanted to assure thee that thy efforts for my benefit
were not useless. They have saved me from murdering
myself, a guilt more inexpiable than any which it was in my
power to commit.
I retired to the innermost recess of Norwalk, and gained
the summit of a hill, by subterranean paths. This hill I
knew to be on all sides inaccessible to human footsteps,
and the subterranean passages were closed up by stones.
Here I believed my solitude exempt from interruption and
my death, in consequence of famine, sure.
This persuasion was not taken away by your appearance
on the opposite steep. The chasm which severed us I knew
to be impassable. I withdrew from your sight.






Some time after, awakening from a long sleep, I found
victuals beside me. He that brought it was invisible. For
a time, I doubted whether some messenger of heaven
had not interposed for my salvation. How other than by
supernatural means, my retreat should be explored, I was
unable to conceive. The summit was encompassed by dizzy
and profound gulfs, and the subterranean passages were still
closed.
This opinion, though corrected by subsequent reflection,
tended to change the course of my desperate thoughts. My
hunger, thus importunately urged, would not abstain, and I
ate of the food that was provided. Henceforth I determined
to live, to resume the path of obscurity and labor, which I
had relinquished, and wait till my God should summon me
to retribution. To anticipate his call, is only to redouble our
guilt.
I designed not to return to Inglefield's service, but to choose
some other and remoter district. Meanwhile, I had left in
his possession, a treasure, which my determination to die,
had rendered of no value, but which, my change of resolution,
restored. Enclosed in a box at Inglefield's, were the
mmoirs of Euphemia Lorimer, by which in all my vicissitudes,
I had been hitherto accompanied, and from which I
consented to part only because I had refused to live. My
existence was now to be prolonged, and this manuscript was
once more to constitute the torment and the solace of my
being.
I hastened to Inglefield's by night. There was no need
to warn him of my purpose. I desired that my fate should
be an eternal secret to my ancient master and his neighbors.
The apartment, containing my box, was well known, and
easily accessible.
The box was found, but broken and rifled of its treasure.
My transports of astonishment, and indignation, and grief
yielded to the resumption of my fatal purpose. I hastened
back to the hill, and determined anew to perish.
This mood continued to the evening of the ensuing day.
Wandering over rocks and pits, I discovered the manuscript,
lying under a jutting precipice. The chance that brought
it hither was not less propitious and miraculous than that by
which I had been supplied with food. It produced a




similar effect upon my feelings, and, while in possession of this
manuscript I was reconciled to the means of life. I left the
mountain, and traversing the wilderness, stopped in Chetasco.
That kind of employment which I sought was instantly
procured; but my new vocation was scarcely assumed when
a band of savages invaded our security.
Rambling in the desert, by moonlight, I encountered
these foes. They rushed upon me, and after numerous
wounds which, for the present, neither killed nor disabled
me, they compelled me to keep pace with them in their
retreat. Some hours have passed since the troop was
overtaken, and my liberty redeemed. Hardships, and repeated
wounds, inflicted at the moment when the invaders
were surprised and slain, have brought me to my present
condition. I rejoice that my course is about to terminate.
Here the speaker was interrupted by the tumultuous entrance
of the party, by whom he had been brought hither.
Their astonishment at seeing me, sustaining the head of the
dying man, may be easily conceived. Their surprise was
more strongly excited by the disappearance of the captive
whom they had left in this apartment, bound hand and foot.
It now appeared that of the savage troop who had adventured
thus far in search of pillage and blood, all had been
destroyed but two, who, had been led hither as prisoners.
On their entrance into this house, one of the party had been
sent to Walcot's to summon Sarsefield to the aid of the
wounded man, while others had gone in search of cords to
secure the arms and legs of the captives, who had hitherto
been manacled imperfectly.
The cords were brought and one of them was bound, but
the other, before the same operation was begun upon him,
broke, by a sudden effort, the feeble ligatures by which he
was at present constrained, and seizing a musket that lay
near him, fired on his enemies, and then rushed out of doors.
All eagerly engaged in the pursuit. The savage was fleet
as a deer and finally eluded his pursuers.
While their attention was thus engaged abroad, he that
remained found means to extricate his wrists and ancles
from his bonds and betaking himself to the stairs, escaped,
as I before described, through the window of the room
which I had occupied. They pestered me with their




curiosity and wonder, for I was known to all of them; but waving
the discussion of my own concerns I entreated their assistance
to carry Clithero to the chamber and the bed which
I had just deserted.
I now in spite of pain, fatigue, and watchfulness, set out to
go to Walton's. Sarsefield was ready to receive me at the
door, and the kindness and compassion of the family were
active in my behalf. I was conducted to a chamber and
provided with suitable attendance and remedies.
I was not unmindful of the more deplorable condition of
Clithero. I incessantly meditated on the means for his relief.
His case stood in need of all the vigilance and skill of
a physician, and Sarsefield was the only one of that profession
whose aid could be seasonably administered. Sarsefield
therefore must be persuaded to bestow this aid.
There was but one mode of conquering his abhorrence
of this man. To prepossess my friend with the belief of the
innocence of Clithero, or to soothe him into pity by a picture
of remorse and suffering. This could best be done, and in
the manner most conformable to truth, by a simple recital
of the incidents that had befallen, and by repeating the confession
which had been extorted from Clithero.
I requested all but my friend to leave my chamber, and
then, soliciting a patient hearing, began the narrative of
Waldegrave's death! of the detection of Clithero beneath the
shade of the elm! of the suspicions which were thence produced;
and of the forest interview to which these suspicions
gave birth; I then repeated, without variation or addition,
the tale which was then told. I likewise mentioned my
subsequent transactions in Norwalk, so far as they illustrated
the destiny of Clithero.
During this recital, I fixed my eyes upon the countenance
of Sarsefield, and watched every emotion as it arose or
declined. With the progress of my tale, his indignation and
his fury grew less, and at length gave place to horror and
compassion.
His seat became uneasy, his pulse throbbed with new vehemence.
When I came to the motives which prompted
the unhappy man to visit the chamber of his mistress, he
started from his seat, and sometimes strode across the floor
in a troubled mood, and sometimes stood before me, with





his breath almost suspended in the eagerness of his attention.
When I mentioned the lifted dagger, the shriek from behind,
and the apparition that interposed, he shuddered and drew
back, as if a dagger had been aimed at his breast.
When the tale was done, some time elapsed in mutual
and profound silence. My friend's thoughts were involved
in a mournful and indefinable reverie. From this he at
length recovered and spoke.
It is true. A tale like this could never be the fruit of
invention, or be invented to deceive. He has done himself
injustice. His character was spotless and fair. All his
moral properties seemed to have resolved themselves into
gratitude, fidelity and honor.
We parted at the door, late in the evening, as he mentioned,
and he guessed truly that subsequent reflection
had induced me to return and to disclose the truth to Mrs.
Lorimer. Clarice, relieved by the sudden death of her
friend, and unexpectedly by all, arrived at the same hour.
These tidings astonished, afflicted, and delighted the lady.
Her brother's death had been long believed by all but herself.
To find her doubts verified, and his existence ascerrtained
was the dearest consolation that he ever could bestow.
She was afflicted at the proofs that had been noted of the
continuance of his depravity, but she dreaded no danger to
herself from his malignity or vengeance.
The ignorance and prepossessions of this woman were
remarkable. On this subject only she was perverse, headstrong,
obstinate. Her anxiety to benefit this arch-ruffian
occupied her whole thoughts, and allowed her no time to
reflect upon the reasonings or remonstrances of others.
She could not be prevailed on to deny herself to his visits,
and I parted from her in the utmost perplexity.
A messenger came to me at midnight entreating my immediate
presence. Some disaster had happened, but of
what kind the messenger was unable to tell. My fears
easily conjured up the image of Wiatte. Terror scarcely
allowed me to breathe. When I entered the house of Mrs.
Lorimer, I was conducted to her chamber. She lay upon
the bed in a state of stupefaction, that arose from some
mental cause. Clarice sat by her, wringing her hands, and




pouring forth her tears without intermission. Neither could
explain to me the nature of the scene. I made inquiries
of the servants and attendants. They merely said that the
family as usual had retired to rest, but their lady's bell rung
with great violence, and called them in haste to her chamber,
where they found her in a swoon upon the floor, and
the young lady in the utmost affright and perturbation.
Suitable means being used, Mrs. Lorimer had, at length,
recovered, but was still nearly insensible. I went to Clithero's
apartments, but he was not to be found, and the
domestics informed me that since he had gone with me, he
had not returned. The doors between this chamber and
the court were open; hence that some dreadful interview
had taken place, perhaps with Wiatte, was an unavoidable
conjecture. He had withdrawn, however, without committing
any personal injury.
I need not mention my reflections upon this scene. All
was tormenting doubt and suspense, till the morning arrived,
and tidings were received that Wiatte had been killed in the
streets. This event was antecedent to that which had occasioned
Mrs. Lorimer's distress and alarm. I now remembered
that fatal prepossession, by which the lady was
governed, and her frantic belief that her death and that of
her brother were to fall out at the same time. Could some
witness of his death have brought her tidings of it? Had
he penetrated, unexpected and unlicensed to her chamber,
and were these the effects produced by the intelligence?
Presently I knew that not only Wiatte was dead, but that
Clithero had killed him. Clithero had not been known to
return, and was no where to be found. He then was the
bearer of these tidings, for none but he could have found
access or egress without disturbing the servants.
These doubts were at length at an end. In a broken and
confused manner, and after the lapse of some days, the
monstrous and portentous truth was disclosed. After our
interview, the lady and her daughter had retired to the same
chamber; the former had withdrawn to her closet, and the
latter to bed. Some one's entrance alarmed the lady, and
coming forth after a moment's pause, the spectacle which
Clithero has too faithfully described, presented itself.






What could I think? A life of uniform hypocrisy, or a
sudden loss of reason, were the only suppositions to be
formed. Clithero was the parent of fury and abhorrence
in my heart. In either case I started at the name. I shuddered
at the image of the apostate or the maniac.
What? Kill the brother whose existence was interwoven
with that of his benefactress and his friend? Then hasten
to her chamber, and attempt her life? Lift a dagger to
destroy her who had been the author of his being and his
happiness?
He that could meditate a deed like this was no longer
man. An agent from hell had mastered his faculties. He
was become the engine of infernal malice, against whom it
was the duty of all mankind to rise up in arms and never to
desist till, by shattering it to atoms, its power to injure was
taken away.
All inquiries to discover the place of his retreat were vain.
No wonder, methought, the he wrapt himself in the folds
of impenetrable secrecy. Curbed, checked, baffled in the
midst of his career, no wonder that he shrunk into obscurity,
that he fled from justice and revenge, that he dared not
meet the rebukes of that eye, which, dissolving in tenderness
or flashing with disdain, had ever been irresistible.
But how shall I describe the lady's condition? Cilthero
she had cherished from his infancy. He was the stay, the
consolation, the pride of her life. His projected alliance
with her daughter, made him still more dear. Her eloquence
was never tired of expatiating on his purity and rectitude.
No wonder that she delighted in this theme, for he was her
own work. His virtues were the creatures of her bounty.
How hard to be endured was this sad reverse? She can
be tranquil, but never more will she be happy. To promote
her forgetfulness of him, I persuaded her to leave her country,
which contained a thousand memorials of past calamity,
and which was lapsing fast into civil broils. Clarice has
accompanied us, and time may effect the happiness of
others, by her means, though she can never remove the
melancholy of her mother.
I have listened to your tale, not without compassion.
What would you have me to do? To prolong his life,
would be merely to protract his misery.






He can never be regarded with complacency by my
wife. He can never be thought of without shuddering by
Clarice. Common ills are not without a cure less than
death, but here, all remedies are vain. Consciousness itself
is the malady; the pest; of which he only is cured who
ceases to think.
I could not but assent to this mournful conclusion; yet
though death was better to Clithero than life, could not some
of his mistakes be rectified? Euphemia Lorimer, contrary to
his belief, was still alive. He dreamed that she was dead,
and a thousand evils were imagined to flow from that death.
This death and its progeny of ills, haunted his fancy, and
added keenness to his remorse. Was it not our duty to
rectify this error?
Sarsefield reluctantly assented to the truth of my arguments
on this head. He consented to return, and afford
the dying man, the consolation of knowing that the being
whom he adored as a benefactor and parent, had not been
deprived of existence, though bereft of peace by his act.
During Sarsefield's absence my mind was busy in revolving
the incidents that had just occurred. I ruminated on the
last words of Clithero. There was somewhat in his narrative
that was obscure and contradictory. He had left the
manuscript, which he so much and so justly prized, in
his cabinet. He entered the chamber in my absence, and
found the cabinet unfastened and the manuscript gone. It
was I by whom the cabinet was opened, but the manuscript
supposed to be contained in it, was buried in the earth beneath
the elm. How should Clithero be unacquainted with its
situation, since none but Clithero could have dug for it this
grave?
This mystery vanished when I reflected on the history
of my own manuscript. Clithero had buried his treasure
with his own hands, as mine had been secreted by myself,
but both acts had been performed during sleep. The deed
was neither prompted by the will, nor noticed by the senses
of him, by whom it was done. Disastrous and humiliating
is the state of man! By his own hands, is constructed
the mass of misery and error in which his steps are forever
involved.






Thus it was with thy friend. Hurried on by phantoms
too indistinct to be now recalled, I wandered from my chamber
to the desert. I plunged into some unvisited cavern,
and easily proceeded till I reached the edge of a pit.
There my step was deceived, and I tumbled headlong from
the precipice. The fall bereaved me of sense, and I
continued breathless and motionless during the remainder of
the night and the ensuing day.
How little cognizance have men over the actions and
motives of each other? How total is our blindness with
regard to our own performances! Who would have sought
me in the bowels of this mountain? Ages might have passed
away, before my bones would be discovered in this tomb,
by some traveller whom curiosity had prompted to explore it.
I was roused from these reflections by Sarsefield's return.
Inquiring into Cilthero's condition; he answered that the
unhappy man was insensible, but that, notwithstanding numerous
and dreadful gashes, in different parts of his body, it
was possible, that by submitting to the necessary treatment,
he might recover.
Encouraged by this information, I endeavored to awaken
the zeal and compassion of my friend in Clithero's behalf.
He recoiled with involuntary shuddering from any task
which would confine him to the presence of this man.
Time and reflection, he said, might introduce different sentiments
and feelings, but at present he could not but regard
this person as a maniac, whose disease was irremediable,
and whose existence could not be protracted, but to his own
misery and the misery of others.
Finding him irreconcilably averse to any scheme, connected
with the welfare of Clithero, I began to think that
his assistance as a surgeon was by no means necessary. He
had declared that the sufferer needed nothing more than
common treatment, and to this the skill of a score of aged
women in this district, furnished with simples culled from
the forest, and pointed out, of old time, by Indian leeches
was no less adequate than that of Sarsefield. These women
were ready and officious in their charity, and none of them
were prepossessed against the sufferer by a knowledge of
his genuine story.






Sarsefield, meanwhile, was impatient for my removal to
Inglefield's habitation, and that venerable friend was no less
impatient to receive me. My hurts were superficial, and
my strength sufficiently repaired by a night's repose. Next
day I went thither, leaving Clithero to the care of his immediate
neighbors.
Sarsefield's engagements compelled him to prosecute his
journey into Virginia, from which he had somewhat deviated,
in order to visit Solebury. He proposed to return in
less than a month, and then to take me in his company to
New York. He has treated me with paternal tenderness,
and insists upon the privilege of consulting for my interest,
as if he were my real father. Meanwhile, these views
have been disclosed to Inglefield, and it is with him that I
am to remain, with my sisters, until his return.
My reflections have been various and tumultuous. They
have been busy in relation to you, to Weymouth, and especially
to Clithero. The latter, polluted with gore and
weakened by abstinence, fatigue, and the loss of blood,
appeared in my eyes, to be in a much more dangerous
condition than the event proved him to be. I was punctually
informed of the progress of his cure, and proposed in
a few days to visit him. The duty of explaining the truth,
respecting the present condition of Mrs. Lorimer, had devolved
upon me. By imparting this intelligence, I hoped
to work the most auspicious revolutions in his feelings, and
prepared, therefore, with alacrity, for an interview.
In this hope I was destined to be disappointed. On the
morning on which I intended to visit him, a messenger arrived
from the house in which he was entertained, and informed
us that the family on entering the sick man's apartment,
had found it deserted. It appeared that Clithero had,
during the night, risen from his bed, and gone secretly
forth. No traces of his flight have since been discovered.
But O! my friend, the death of Waldegrave, thy
brother, is at length divested of uncertainty and mystery.
Hitherto I had been able to form no conjecture respecting
it, but the solution was found shortly after this time.
Queen Mab, three days after my adventure, was seized
in her hut on suspicion of having aided and counselled her
countrymen, in their late depredations. She was not to be




awed or intimidated by the treatment she received, but
readily confessed and gloried in the mischief she had done;
and accounted for it by enumerating the injuries which she
had received from her neighbors.
These injuries consisted in contemptuous or neglectful
treatment, and in the rejection of groundless and absurd
claims. The people of Chetasco were less obsequious to
her humors than those of Solebury, her ancient neighborhood,
and her imagination brooded for a long time, over
nothing but schemes of revenge. She became sullen, irascible,
and spent more of her time in solitude than ever.
A troop of her countrymen at length visited her hut.
Their intentions being hostile, they concealed from the inhabitants
their presence in this quarter of the country.
Some motives induced them to withdraw and postpone, for
the present, the violence which they meditated. One of
them, however, more sanguinary and audacious than the
rest would not depart, without some gratification of his vengeance.
He left his associates and penetrated by night into
Solebury, resolving to attack the first human being whom he
should meet. It was the fate of thy unhappy brother to encounter
this ruffian, whose sagacity made him forbear to tear
away the usual trophy from the dead, lest he should afford
grounds for suspicion as to the authors of the evil.
Satisfied with this exploit, he rejoined his companions,
and after an interval of three weeks returned with a more
numerous party, to execute a more extensive project of destruction.
They were counselled and guided, in all their
movements, by Queen Mab, who now explained these particulars,
and boldly defied her oppressors. Her usual obstinacy
and infatuation induced her to remain in her ancient
dwelling and prepare to meet the consequences.
This disclosure awakened anew all the regrets and anguish
which flowed from that disaster. It has been productive,
however, of some benefit. Suspicions and doubts,
by which my soul was harassed, and which were injurious
to the innocent, are now at an end. It is likewise some imperfect
consolation to reflect, that the assassin has himself
been killed, and probably by my own hand. The shedder
of blood no longer lives to pursue his vocation, and justice
is satisfied.






Thus have I fulfilled my promise to compose a minute
relation of my sufferings. I remembered my duty to thee,
and as soon as I was able to hold a pen, employed it to inform
thee of my welfare. I could not at that time enter
into particulars, but reserved a more copious narrative till a
period of more health and leisure.
On looking back, I am surprised at the length to which my
story has run. I thought that a few days would suffice to
complete it, but one page has insensibly been added to
another, till I have consumed weeks and filled volumes.
Here I will draw to a close; I will send you what I have
written, and discuss with you in conversation, my other immediate
concerns, and my schemes for the future. As soon
as I have seen Sarsefield, I will visit you. Farewell.
E. H.
Solebury, November 10.



To Mr. Sarsefield.
Philadelphia.

I came hither but ten minutes ago, and write this letter
in the bar of the stage-house. I wish not to lose a moment
in informing you of what has happened. I cannot do justice
to my own feelings when I reflect upon the rashness of
which I have been guilty.
I will give you the particulars tomorrow. At present, I
shall only say that Clithero is alive, is apprized of your wife's
arrival and abode in New York, and has set out, with mysterious
intentions to visit her.
May heaven avert the consequences of such a design.
May you be enabled by some means, to prevent their meeting.
If you cannot prevent it—but I must not reason on
such an event, nor lengthen out this letter.

E. H.







To the Same.






I will now relate the particulars which I yesterday
promised to send you. You heard through your neice of
my arrival at Inglefield's in Solebury; my inquiries, you
may readily suppose, would turn upon the fate of my friend's
servant, Clithero, whose last disappearance was so strange
and abrupt, and of whom, since that time, I had heard nothing.
You are indifferent to his fate, and are anxious only
that his existence and misfortunes may be speedily forgotten.
I confess that it is somewhat otherwise with me. I pity
him; I wish to relieve him, and cannot admit the belief that
his misery is without a cure. I want to find him out. I
want to know his condition, and if possible to afford him
comfort and inspire him with courage and hope.
Inglefield replied to my questions. O yes! He has appeared.
The strange being is again upon the stage. Shortly
after he left his sick bed, I heard from Philip Beddington,
of Chetasco, that Deb's hut had found a new tenant. At
first, I imagined that the Scotsman who built it had returned,
but making closer inquiries, I found that the new tenant was
my servant. I had no inclination to visit him myself, but
frequently inquired respecting him of those, who lived or
passed that way, and find that he still lives there.
But how, said I, what is his mode of subsistence. The
winter has been no time for cultivation, and he found, I presume,
nothing in the ground.
Deb's hut, replied my friend, is his lodging and his place
of retirement, but food and clothing he procures by laboring
on a neighboring farm. This farm is next to that of
Beddington, who consequently knows something of his
present situation. I find little or no difference in his present
deportment, and those appearances which he assumed,
while living with me, except that he retires every night to
his hut, and holds as little intercourse as possible with the
rest of mankind. He dines at his employer's table, but his
supper, which is nothing but rye bread, he carries home with




him, and at all those times, when disengaged from employment,
he secludes himself in his hut, or wanders nobody
knows whither.
This was the substance of Inglefield's intelligence. I
gleaned from it some satisfaction. It proved the condition
of Clithero to be less deplorable and desperate than I had
previously imagined. His fatal and gloomy thoughts seemed
to have somewhat yielded to tranquillity.
In the course of my reflections, however, I could not but
perceive, that his condition, though eligible when compared
with what it once was, was likewise disastrous and humiliating,
compared with his youthful hopes and his actual merits.
For such a one to mope away his life in this unsocial and
savage state, was deeply to be deplored. It was my duty,
if possible, to prevail on him to relinquish his scheme. And
what would be requisite, for that end, but to inform him of
the truth?
The source of his dejection was the groundless belief that
he had occasioned the death of his benefactress. It was this
alone that could justly produce remorse or grief. It was a distempered
imagination both in him and in me, that had given
birth to this opinion, since the terms of his narrative, impartially
considered, were far from implying that catastrophe.
To him, however, the evidence which he possessed was incontestible.
No deductions from probability could overthrow
his belief. This could only be affected by similar and counter
evidence. To apprize him that she was now alive, in
possession of some degree of happiness, the wife of Sarsefield,
and an actual resident on this shore, would dissipate the
sanguinary apparition that haunted him; cure his diseased
intellects, and restore him to those vocations for which his
talents, and that rank in society for which his education had
qualified him. Influenced by these thoughts, I determined
to visit his retreat. Being obliged to leave Solebury the
next day, I resolved to set out the same afternoon, and stopping
in Chetasco, for the night, seek his habitation at the
hour when he had probably retired to it.
This was done. I arrived at Beddington's, at night-fall.
My inquiries respecting Clithero obtained for me the same
intelligence from him, which I had received from Inglefield.
Deb's hut was three miles from this habitation, and thither,




when the evening had somewhat advanced, I repaired. This
was the spot which had witnessed so many perils during the
last year, and my emotions, on approaching it, were awful.
With palpitating heart and quick steps I traversed the road,
skirted on each side by thickets, and the area before the
house. The dwelling was by no means in so ruinous a state
as when I last visited it. The crannies between the logs
had been filled up, and the light within was perceivable only
at a crevice in the door.
Looking through this crevice, I perceived a fire in the
chimney, but the object of my visit was no where to be seen.
I knocked and requested admission, but no answer was
made. At length I lifted the latch and entered. Nobody
was there.
It was obvious to suppose that Clithero had gone abroad
for a short time, and would speedily return, or perhaps some
engagement had detained him at his labor, later than usual.
I therefore seated myself on some straw near the fire, which,
with a woollen rug, appeared to constitute his only bed.
The rude bedstead which I formerly met with, was gone.
The slender furniture, likewise, which had then engaged my
attention, had disappeared. There was nothing capable of
human use, but a heap of faggots in the corner, which
seemed intended for fuel. How slender is the accommodation
which nature has provided for man, and how scanty is
the portion which our physical necessities require.
While ruminating upon this scene, and comparing past
events with the objects before me, the dull whistling of the
gale without gave place to the sound of footsteps. Presently
the door opened, and Clithero entered the apartment. His
aspect and guise were not essentially different from those
which he wore when an inhabitant of Solebury.
To find his hearth occupied by another, appeared to
create the deepest surprise. He looked at me without
any tokens of remembrance! His features assumed a more
austere expression, and after scowling on my person for a
moment, he withdrew his eyes, and placing in a corner, a
bundle which he bore in his hand, he turned and seemed
preparing to withdraw.
I was anxiously attentive to his demeanor, and as soon as
I perceived his purpose to depart, leaped on my feet to




prevent it. I took his hand, and affectionately pressing it,
said, do you not know me? Have you so soon forgotten
me who is truly your friend?
He looked at me with some attention, but again withdrew
his eyes, and placed himself in silence on the seat which
I had left. I seated myself near him, and a pause of mutual
silence ensued.
My mind was full of the purpose that brought me hither,
but I knew not in what manner to communicate my purpose.
Several times I opened my lips to speak, but my perplexity
continued, and suitable words refused to suggest themselves.
At length, I said, in a confused tone;
I came hither with a view to benefit a man, with whose
misfortunes his own lips have made me acquainted, and
who has awakened in my breast the deepest sympathy. I
know the cause and extent of his dejection. I know the
event which has given birth to horror and remorse in his
heart. He believes that, by his means, his patroness and
benefactress has found an untimely death.
These words produced a visible shock in my companion,
which evinced that I had at least engaged his attention. I
proceeded:
This unhappy lady was cursed with a wicked and unnatural
brother. She conceived a disproportionate affection
for this brother, and erroneously imagined that her
fate was blended with his; that their lives would necessarily
terminate at the same period, and that therefore, whoever
was the contriver of his death, was likewise, by a
fatal and invincible necessity, the author of her own.
Clithero was her servant, but was raised by her bounty,
to the station of her son and the rank of her friend. Clithero,
in self-defence, took away the life of that unnatural
brother, and, in that deed, falsely but cogently believed,
that he had perpetrated the destruction of his benefactress.
To ascertain the truth, he sought her presence. She
was found, the tidings of her brother's death were communicated,
and she sunk breathless at his feet.
At these words Clithero started from the ground, and
cast upon me looks of furious indignation.—And come you
hither, he muttered, for this end; to recount my offences,
and drive me again to despair?







No, answered I, with quickness, I come to outroot a
fatal, but powerful illusion. I come to assure you that the
woman, with whose destruction you charge yourself, is not
dead.
These words, uttered with the most emphatical solemnity,
merely produced looks in which contempt was mingled with
anger. He continued silent.
I perceive, resumed I, that my words are disregarded.
Would to Heaven I were able to conquer your incredulity,
could show you not only the truth, but the probability of my
tale. Can you not confide in me? that Euphemia Lorimer
is now alive, is happy, is the wife of Sarsefield; that her
brother is forgotten and his murderer regarded without
enmity or vengeance?
He looked at me with a strange expression of contempt.—
Come, said he, at length, make out thy assertion to be
true. Fall on thy knees and invoke the thunder of heaven
to light on thy head if thy words be false. Swear that Euphemia
Lorimer is alive; happy; forgetful of Wiatte and
compassionate of me. Swear that thou hast seen her;
talked with her; received from her own lips the confession
of her pity for him who aimed a dagger at her bosom.
Swear that she is Sarsefield's wife.
I put my hands together, and lifting my eyes to heaven,
exclaimed; I comply with your conditions; I call the omniscient
God to witness that Euphemia Lorimer is alive;
that I have seen her with these eyes; have talked with her;
have inhabited the same house for months.
These asseverations were listened to with shuddering. He
laid not aside, however, an air of incredulity and contempt.
Perhaps, said he, thou canst point out the place of her
abode. Canst guide me to the city, the street, the very
door of her habitation?
I can. She resides at this moment in the city of New
York; in Broadway; in a house contiguous to the..........
'Tis well, exclaimed my companion, in a tone, loud,
abrupt, and in the utmost degree, vehement. 'Tis well.
Rash and infatuated youth. Thou hast ratified, beyond
appeal or forgiveness, thy own doom. Thou hast once more
let loose my steps, and sent me on a fearful journey. Thou




hast furnished the means of detecting thy imposture. I
will fly to the spot which thou describest. I will ascertain
thy falsehood with my own eyes. If she be alive, then am
I reserved for the performance of a new crime. My evil
destiny will have it so. If she be dead, I shall make thee
expiate.
So saying, he darted through the door, and was gone in
a moment, beyond my sight and my reach. I ran to the
road, looked on every side, and called; but my calls were
repeated in vain. He had fled with the swiftness of a deer.
My own embarrassment, confusion, and terror were inexpressible.
His last words were incoherent. They denoted
the tumult and vehemence of phrenzy. They intimated his
resolution to seek the presence of your wife. I had furnished
a clue, which could not fail to conduct him to her
presence. What might not be dreaded from the interview?
Clithero is a maniac. This truth cannot be concealed.
Your wife can with difficulty preserve her tranquillity, when
his image occurs to her remembrance. What must it be
when he starts up before her in his neglected and ferocious
guise, and armed with purposes, perhaps as terrible as those,
which had formerly led him to her secret chamber, and her
bedside?
His meaning was obscurely conveyed. He talked of a
deed, for the performance of which his malignant fate had
reserved him; which was to ensue their meeting, and which
was to afford disastrous testimony of the infatuation which
had led me hither.
Heaven grant that some means may suggest themselves
to you of intercepting his approach. Yet I know not what
means can be conceived. Some miraculous chance may
befriend you; yet this is scarcely to be hoped. It is a visionary
and fantastic base on which to rest our security.
I cannot forget that my unfortunate temerity has created
this evil. Yet who could foresee this consequence of my
intelligence. I imagined that Clithero was merely a victim
of erroneous gratitude, a slave of the errors of his education,
and the prejudices of his rank, that his understanding
was deluded by phantoms in the mask of virtue and duty, and
not as you have strenuously maintained, utterly subverted.
I shall not escape your censure, but I shall, likewise, gain




your compassion. I have erred, not through sinister or
malignant intentions, but from the impulse of misguided, indeed,
but powerful benevolence.




To Edgar Huntly.
New York.
Edgar,

After the fatigues of the day, I returned home. As I
entered, my wife was breaking the seal of a letter, but, on
seeing me, she forbore, and presented the letter to me.
I saw, said she, by the superscription of this letter, who
the writer was. So agreeably to your wishes, I proceeded
to open it, but you have come just time enough to save me
the trouble.
This letter was from you. It contained information relative
to Clithero. See how imminent a chance it was that
saved my wife from a knowledge of its contents. It required
all my efforts to hide my perturbation from her, and
excuse myself from showing her the letter.
I know better than you the character of Clithero, and
the consequences of a meeting between him and my wife.
You may be sure that I would exert myself to prevent a
meeting.
The method for me to pursue was extremely obvious.
Clithero is a madman, whose liberty is dangerous, and who
requires to be fettered and imprisoned as the most atrocious
criminal.
I hastened to the chief magistrate, who is my friend, and
by proper representations, obtained from him authority to
seize Clithero wherever I should meet with him, and effectually
debar him from the perpetration of new mischiefs.
New York does not afford a place of confinement for
lunatics, as suitable to his case as Pennsylvania. I was
desirous of placing him as far as possible from the place of
my wife's residence. Fortunately there was a packet for
Philadelphia, on the point of setting out on her voyage.




This vessel I engaged to wait a day or two, for the purpose
of conveying him to Pennsylvania hospital. Meanwhile,
proper persons were stationed at Powles-hook, and at the
quays where the various stageboats from Jersey arrive.
These precautions were effectual. Not many hours after
the receipt of your intelligence, this unfortunate man applied
for a passage at Elizabethtown, was seized the moment he
set his foot on shore, and was forthwith conveyed to the
packet, which immediately set sail.
I designed that all these proceedings should be concealed
from the women, but unfortunately neglected to take suitable
measures for hindering the letter, which you gave me reason
to expect on the ensuing day, from coming into their hands.
It was delivered to my wife in my absence, and opened immediately
by her.
You know what is, at present, her personal condition.
You know what strong reasons I had to prevent any danger
or alarm from approaching her. Terror could not assume
a shape more ghastly than this. The effects have been what
might have been easily predicted. Her own life has been
imminently endangered, and an untimely birth has blasted
my fondest hope. Her infant, with whose future existence
so many pleasures were entwined, is dead.
I assure you, Edgar, my philosophy has not found itself
lightsome and active under this burden. I find it hard to
forbear commenting on your rashness in no very mild terms.
You acted in direct opposition to my counsel, and to the
plainest dictates of propriety. Be more circumspect and
more obsequious for the future.
You knew the liberty that would be taken of opening my
letters; you knew of my absence from home, during the
greatest part of the day, and the likelihood, therefore, that
your letters would fall into my wife's hands before they
came into mine. These considerations should have prompted
you to send them under cover to Whitworth or Harvey, with
directions to give them immediately to me.
Some of these events happened in my absence, for I determined
to accompany the packet myself, and see the madman
safely delivered to the care of the hospital.
I will not torture your sensibility by recounting the incidents
of his arrest and detention. You will imagine that




his strong, but perverted reason exclaimed loudly against
the injustice of his treatment. It was easy for him to outreason
his antagonist, and nothing but force could subdue
his opposition. On me devolved the province of his jailor
and his tyrant; a province which required a heart more
steeled by spectacles of suffering and the exercise of cruelty
than mine had been.
Scarcely had we passed The Narrows, when the lunatic,
being suffered to walk the deck, as no apprehensions were
entertained of his escape in such circumstances, threw
himself overboard, with a seeming intention to gain the
shore. The boat was immediately manned, the fugitive
was pursued, but at the moment, when his flight was overtaken,
he forced himself beneath the surface, and was seen
no more.
With the life of this wretch, let our regrets and our forebodings
terminate. He has saved himself from evils, for
which no time would have provided a remedy, from lingering
for years in the noisome dungeon of a hospital. Having
no reason to continue my voyage, I put myself on board a
coasting sloop, and regained this city in a few hours. I
persuade myself that my wife's indisposition will be temporary.
It was impossible to hide from her the death of Clithero,
and its circumstances. May this be the last arrow
in the quiver of adversity! Farewell.

