

My natal soil is Chester County. My father had a small
farm on which he has been able, by industry, to maintain himself
and a numerous family. He has had many children, but
some defect in the constitution of our mother has been fatal
to all of them but me. They died successively as they attained
the age of nineteen or twenty, and, since I have not
yet reached that age, I may reasonably look for the same
premature fate. In the spring of last year my mother followed
her fifth child to the grave, and three months afterwards
died herself.
My constitution has always been frail, and, till the death
of my mother, I enjoyed unlimited indulgence. I cheerfully
sustained my portion of labor, for that necessity prescribed;
but the intervals were always at my own disposal, and in
whatever manner I thought proper to employ them, my plans
were encouraged and assisted. Fond appellations, tones of
mildness, solicitous attendance when I was sick, deference
to my opinions, and veneration for my talents compose the





 image which I still retain of my mother, I had the thoughtlessness
and presumption of youth, and now that she is gone
my compunction is awakened by a thousand recollections of
my treatment of her. I was indeed guilty of no flagrant
acts of contempt or rebellion. Perhaps her deportment was
inevitably calculated to instil into me a froward and refractory
spirit. My faults, however, were speedily followed by
repentance, and in the midst of impatience and passion, a
look of tender upbraiding from her was always sufficient to
melt me into tears and make me ductile to her will. It
sorrow for her loss be an atonement for the offences which
I committed during her life, ample atonement has been
made.
My father is a man of slender capacity, but of a temper
easy and flexible. He was sober and industrious by habit.
He was content to be guided by the superior intelligence of
his wife. Under this guidance he prospered; but when
that was withdrawn, his affairs soon began to betray marks
of unskilfulness and negligence. My understanding, perhaps,
qualified me to counsel and assist my father, but I was
wholly unaccustomed to the task of superintendence. Besides,
gentleness and fortitude did not descend to me from
my mother, and these were indispensable attributes in a boy
who desires to dictate to his grey-headed parent. Time,
perhaps, might have conferred dexterity on me, or prudence
on him, had not a most unexpected event given a different
direction to my views.
Betty Lawrence was a wild girl from the pine forests of
New Jersey. At the age of ten years she became a bound
servant in this city, and, after the expiration of her time,
came into my father's neighborhood in search of employment.
She was hired in our family as milkmaid and market
woman. Her features were coarse, her frame robust, her
mind totally unlettered, and her morals defective in that
point in which female excellence is supposed chiefly to consist.
She possessed superabundant health and good humor,
and was quite a supportable companion in the hay field or
the barn yard.
On the death of my mother, she was exalted to a somewhat
higher station. The same tasks fell to her lot; but the




 time and manner of performing them were, in some degree,
submitted to her own choice. The cows and the dairy were
still her province; but in this no one interfered with her, or
pretended to prescribe her measures. For this province she
seemed not unqualified, and as long as my father was pleased
with her management, I had nothing to object.
This state of things continued, without material variation,
for several months. There were appearances in my father's
deportment to Betty, which excited my reflections, but not
my fears. The deference which was occasionally paid to the
advice or the claims of this girl, was accounted for by that
feebleness of mind which degraded my father, in whatever
scene he should be placed, to be the tool of others. I had
no conception that her claims extended beyond a temporary
or superficial gratification.
At length, however, a visible change took place in her manners.
A scornful affection and awkward dignity began to
be assumed. A greater attention was paid to dress, which
was of gayer hues and more fashionable texture. I rallied
her on these tokens of a sweetheart, and amused myself with
expatiating to her on the qualifications of her lover. A
clownish fellow was frequently her visitant. His attentions
did not appear to be discouraged. He therefore was readily
supposed to be the man. When pointed out as the favorite,
great resentment was expressed, and obscure insinuations
were made that her aim was not quite so low as that. These
denials I supposed to be customary on such occasions, and
considered the continuance of his visits as a sufficient confutation
of them.
I frequently spoke of Betty, her newly acquired dignity,
and of the probable cause of her change of manners to my
father. When this theme was started, a certain coldness
and reserve overspread his features. He dealt in monosyllables
and either labored to change the subject or made some
excuse for leaving me. This behaviour, though it occasioned
surprise, was never very deeply reflected on. My father
was old, and the mournful impressions which were made upon
him by the death of his wife, the lapse of almost half a year
seemed scarcely to have weakened. Betty had chosen her
partner, and I was in daily expectation of receiving a summons
to the wedding.






One afternoon this girl dressed herself in the gayest manner
and seemed making preparations for some momentous
ceremony. My father had directed me to put the horse to the
chaise. On my inquiring whither he was going, he answered
me, in general terms, that he had some business at a few
miles distance. I offered to go in his stead, but he said that
was impossible. I was proceeding to ascertain the possibility
of this when he left me to go to a field where his workmen
were busy, directing me to inform him when the chaise
was ready, to supply his place, while absent, in overlooking
the workmen.
This office was performed; but before I called him from
the field I exchanged a few words with the milkmaid, who
sat on a bench, in all the primness of expectation, and decked
with the most gaudy plumage. I rated her imaginary lover
for his tardiness, and vowed eternal hatred to them both for
not making me a bride's attendant. She listened to me with
an air in which embarrassment was mingled sometimes with
exultation, and sometimes with malice. I left her at length,
and returned to the house not till a late hour. As soon as I
entered, my father presented Betty to me as his wife, and
desired she might receive that treatment from me which was
due to a mother.
It was not till after repeated and solemn declarations from
both of them that I was prevailed upon to credit this event.
Its effect upon my feelings may be easily conceived. I
knew the woman to be rude, ignorant, and licentious. Had
I suspected this event I might have fortified my father's
weakness and enabled him to shun the gulf to which he was
tending; but my presumption had been careless of the danger.
To think that such a one should take the place of
my revered mother was intolerable.
To treat her in any way not squaring with her real merits;
to hinder anger and scorn from rising at the sight of her in
her new condition, was not in my power. To be degraded
to the rank of her servant, to become the sport of her malice
and her artifices was not to be endured. I had no independent
provision; but I was the only child of my father,
and had reasonably hoped to succeed to his patrimony. On
this hope I had built a thousand agreeable visions. I had
meditated innumerable projects which the possession of this




 estate would enable me to execute. I had no wish beyond
the trade of agriculture, and beyond the opulence which a
hundred acres would give.
These visions were now at an end. No doubt her own
interest would be, to this woman, the supreme law, and this
would be considered as irreconcilably hostile to mine. My
father would easily be moulded to her purpose, and that act
easily extorted from him which should reduce me to beggary.
She had a gross and perverse taste. She had a numerous
kindred, indigent and hungry. On these his substance
would speedily be lavished. Me she hated, because
she was conscious of having injured me, because she knew
that I held her in contempt, and because I had detected her
in an illicit intercourse with the son of a neighbor.
The house in which I lived was no longer my own, nor
even my father's. Hitherto I had thought and acted in it
with the freedom of a master, but now I was become, in
my own conceptions, an alien and an enemy to the roof under
which I was born. Every tie which had bound me to
it was dissolved or converted into something which repelled
me to a distance from it. I was a guest whose presence
was borne with anger and impatience.
I was fully impressed with the necessity of removal, but
I knew not whither to go, or what kind of subsistence to
seek. My father had been a Scottish emigrant, and had no
kindred on this side of the ocean. My mother's family
lived in New Hampshire, and long separation had extinguished
all the rights of relationship in her offspring. Tilling
the earth was my only profession, and to profit by my
skill in it, it would be necessary to become a day-laborer in
the service of strangers; but this was a destiny to which I,
who had so long enjoyed the pleasures of independence and
command, could not suddenly reconcile myself. It occurred
to me that the city might afford me an asylum. A short day's
journey would transport me into it. I had been there twice
or thrice in my life, but only for a few hours each time. I
knew not a human face, and was a stranger to its modes
and dangers. I was qualified for no employment, compatible
with a town life, but that of the pen. This, indeed,
had ever been a favorite tool with me, and though it may
appear somewhat strange, it is no less true that I had had




 nearly as much practice at the quill as at the mattock. But
the sum of my skill lay in tracing distinct characters. I had
used it merely to transcribe what others had written, or to
give form to my own conceptions. Whether the city would
afford me employment, as a mere copyist, sufficiently lucrative,
was a point on which I possessed no means of information.

My determination was hastened by the conduct of my
new mother. My conjectures as to the course she would
pursue with regard to me had not been erroneous. My
father's deportment, in a short time, grew sullen and austere.
Directions were given in a magisterial tone, and any remissness
in the execution of his orders, was rebuked with an
air of authority. At length these rebukes were followed by
certain intimations that I was now old enough to provide for
myself; that it was time to think of some employment by
which I might secure a livelihood; that it was a shame for
me to spend my youth in idleness; that what he had gained
was by his own labor; and I must be indebted for my living
to the same source.
These hints were easily understood. At first, they excited
indignation and grief. I knew the source whence they
sprung, and was merely able to suppress the utterance of
my feelings in her presence. My looks, however, were
abundantly significant, and my company became hourly
more insupportable. Abstracted from these considerations,
my father's remonstrances were not destitute of weight. He
gave me being, but sustenance ought surely to be my own
gift. In the use of that for which he had been indebted to
his own exertions, he might reasonably consult his own
choice. He assumed no control over me; he merely did
what he would with his own, and so far from fettering my
liberty, he exhorted me to use it for my own benefit, and to
make provision for myself.
I now reflected that there were other manual occupations
besides that of the plough. Among these none had fewer
disadvantages than that of carpenter or cabinet maker. I
had no knowledge of this art; but neither custom, nor law,
nor the impenetrableness of the mystery required me to
serve a seven years' apprenticeship to it. A master in this
trade might possibly be persuaded to take me under his




 tuition; two or three years would suffice to give me the
requisite skill. Meanwhile my father would, perhaps, consent
to bear the cost of my maintenance. Nobody could
live upon less than I was willing to do.
I mentioned these ideas to my father; but he merely commended
my intentions without offering to assist me in the
execution of them. He had full employment, he said, for
all the profits of his ground. No doubt if I would bind
myself to serve four or five years, my master would be at
the expense of my subsistence. Be that as it would, I
must look for nothing from him. I had shewn very little
regard for his happiness; I had refused all marks of respect
to a woman who was entitled to it from her relation to him.
He did not see why he should treat as a son one who refused
what was due to him as a father. He thought it right
that I should henceforth maintain myself. He did not want
my services on the farm, and the sooner I quitted his house
the better.
I retired from this conference with a resolution to follow
the advice that was given. I saw that henceforth I must be
my own protector, and wondered at the folly that detained me
so long under his roof. To leave it was now become indispensable,
and there could be no reason for delaying my departure
for a single hour. I determined to bend my course
to the city. The scheme foremost in my mind was to apprentice
myself to some mechanical trade. I did not overlook
the evils of constraint and the dubiousness as to the
character of the master I should choose. I was not without
hopes that accident would suggest a different expedient, and
enable me to procure an immediate subsistence without forfeiting
my liberty.
I determined to commence my journey the next morning.
No wonder the prospect of so considerable a change
in my condition should deprive me of sleep. I spent the
night ruminating on the future, and in painting to my fancy
the adventures which I should be likely to meet. The foresight
of man is in proportion to his knowledge. No wonder
that in my state of profound ignorance, not the faintest preconception
should be formed of the events that really befel
me. My temper was inquisitive, but there was nothing in
the scene to which I was going from which my curiosity




 expected to derive gratification. Discords and evil smells,
unsavory food, unwholesome labor, and irksome companions,
were, in my opinion, the unavoidable attendants of a city,
My best clothes were of the homliest texture and shape.
My whole stock of linen consisted of three check shirts.
Part of my winter evening's employment, since the death of
my mother, consisted in knitting my own stockings. Of these
I had three pair, one of which I put on, and the rest I formed,
together with two shirts, into a bundle. Three quarter dollar
pieces composed my whole fortune in money.
